 
 
 
Performance Audit  
on 
Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
for the year ended March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Civil) 
Report No. 7 of 2016 
(Performance Audit) 
  

 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project 
 
 i 
CONTENTS  
 
Index Page No.  
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v – ix 
Chapter-I Introduction 1 - 8 
Chapter-II Time for Passport Issuance 9 - 19 
Chapter-III Citizen Services 20 - 28 
Chapter-IV Implementation of Master Service Agreement and 
Governance Structure 
29 - 42 
 Annex 43 - 54 
 Glossary 55 - 56 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
 iii  
Preface 
The issue of passports to citizens is the sovereign function of the Ministry of 
External Affairs (Ministry). Passport Seva Project (PSP) is a Mission Mode Project 
undertaken on Public Private Partnership as part of the National e-Governance 
Plan.  The PSP was aimed to deliver all passport related services to the citizens in 
a timely, transparent, accessible, reliable manner and in a comfortable 
environment.   
This all India performance audit assesses the level of services provided at the 
national level specifically related to the citizen-centric services rendered by the 
Ministry. Despite many quantitative and qualitative improvements in the delivery 
of passport services, there were shortfalls which needed to be addressed by the 
Ministry. There were considerable delays in getting appointments at Passport 
Seva Kendras (PSKs), delay in police verification process and pendency at the 
postal and printing stages.  The Report also brings out inconsistencies in clauses 
of Master Service Agreement, weak project governance structure, deviations in 
SLA metrics with unjustified changes and overall weak monitoring, due to which 
normal and tatkaal passports could not be issued within the targeted time-frame.   
This Report is prepared for submission to the President under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the auditing standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 v 
Executive Summary 
Why did we select this subject for Audit?  
The Consular, Passport and Visa Division of the Ministry provide the passport 
services through Central Passport Organization (CPO) covering a network of 37 
Regional Passport Offices (RPOs).The Ministry reformed the passport issuance 
system by introducing a Mission Mode Project i.e., Passport Seva Project (PSP) 
under the National e-Governance Plan. The benefits to the citizens were defined 
service levels, closer and larger number of access points for services, availability 
of a portfolio of on-line services with real-time status tracking and enquiry 
including payment of fee online, an effective system of grievance redressal and a 
strict adherence to the ‘First in – First Out’ principle in rendering services. The 
new PSP involved outsourcing of front-end activities to a Service Provider (SP) 
and back-end activities like verification of documents and granting of passports 
by the Ministry. For implementing the project, a Master Service Agreement (MSA) 
was signed with the Service Provider in July 2008. After doing pilot launch in 
Bengaluru and Chandigarh, the Project was declared Go-live in June 2012. The 
CPO management was also expected to exercise effective control on all parts and 
activities of the organisation through a comprehensive Management Information 
System. 
In view of reforms in the issue of passports by introducing the new PSP, we 
decided to conduct this audit. The focus of this audit is on the areas affecting 
citizen services in the issue of passports and the service levels fulfilled by the SP. 
The period of coverage of this performance audit was from the inception of the 
project in June 2012 to August 2015. 
What were our audit objectives?  
The objectives of the performance audit were to verify whether:  
(i)  passport related services were delivered to the citizens within the 
prescribed time; 
(ii)  comfortable and transparent environment for passport related services 
was available to the citizens; 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 vi vi 
(iii)  implementation of the master services agreement and  related 
governance structure was efficient and effective.  
What did our performance audit reveal? 
Chapter-I provides information on PSP and our audit approach and methodology. 
Chapter-II provides audit findings with respect to time taken for issue of 
passports. Chapter-III provides audit findings with respect to citizen services. 
Chapter-IV deals with audit findings on the issues of implementation of the 
master service agreement and Governance Structure. The important findings of 
the performance audit are given below: 
Time for Passport Issuance 
There are various steps involved in the process of obtaining Passport such as 
getting online appointment, visiting a Passport Seva Kendra (PSK), police 
verification, printing and dispatch. We observed delays at all stages of the process 
which are enumerated below:  
• The appointment given to persons seeking issue of passport ranged from 
1 to 68 days.  The waiting period for giving an appointment ranged from 
0-3 days in 38 PSKs, 3-10 days in 12 PSKs, 11-30 days in 17 PSKs and more 
than 30 days in 12 PSKs. The average time taken for police verification 
process was 42 days at national level in 2014 against the prescribed ceiling 
of 21 days. Age-wise analysis of pending Police Verification Reports (PVRs) 
showed that as on 31 August 2015, out of total pending PVRs, 48 per cent  
were pending for more than the prescribed limit of 21 days. In seven 
States/UTs pendency of more than 100 days were noticed in clearance of 
police verification reports. The printing of passports contributed to further 
delays.  In few Regional Passport Offices (RPOs) pendency in printing 
ranged from three to eight days.  
• The final step in the passport application process is the delivery of 
passport to the applicant by the postal department.  The Ministry did not 
have status of delivery for 27.38 lakh dispatched passports. 
• Further, the analysis of data provided by Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) 
revealed that average time taken in 2014 to obtain passport in India was 
16 days as compared to 9 days in 2013 and only 21 per cent  of passports 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 vii 
under normal category were issued within the prescribed period of three 
working days. In respect of RPO Delhi, the average time taken in obtaining 
passport was 52 days (including waiting period of getting appointment 
and police verification time). This was far in excess of the prescribed time 
limit of 24 days. 
Citizen Services 
We noted that waiting time of applicant in the PSK seeking issue of passport was 
more than one hour while average time taken by the citizen in the PSK was 78 
minutes against the prescribed time limit of 25 minutes (from token issue time to 
exit time) in four PSKs under RPO Delhi leading to overcrowding inside the PSKs.  
As per data provided by the Ministry, 25 per cent  of total grievances received 
remained unattended till the end of the year. The age wise analysis of pending 
grievances revealed that 41 per cent  of grievances were more than 60 days old 
which showed slow pace of redressal of grievances. 
No refund option is provided to the applicants in PSP which resulted in collection 
of ` 78.46 crore from 5,42,168 applicants during October 2013 to December 
2014, who finally did not turn up for appointments. 
Implementation of Master Service Agreement and 
Governance Structure 
A Master Service Agreement (MSA) was signed between Ministry and service 
provider for running PSP. MSA prescribed governance structure (Empowered 
committee, Program Management Committee) for monitoring of PSP. We 
observed number of issues relating to implementation of MSA and weak 
governance structure which are enumerated below:  
• Certain clauses relating to terms of payment schedule of MSA were 
inconsistent and required modification.   
• An amount of ` 61.49 lakh was paid to service provider based on 
achievement of Service Level Agreement 1 (SLA) as per old norms of MSA, 
which was not justified in view of change of system (from walk in to walk 
in with ARN) by the Ministry, after signing of MSA.  Similarly, the 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 viii viii 
methodology of calculation of average time spent by citizen in PSK was 
changed in favour of service provider in respect of SLA 1 to 4 without 
proper justification.   
• We noted weak governance as the Empowered Committee  and 
Programme Management Committee were either not functioning or not 
involved in the function for which they were constituted.  As a result, 
important changes/deviations from the service level agreement were 
made without adequate justification and approvals.    
What do we recommend? 
The details of recommendations are in the relevant chapters of this Report.  
Following are some important recommendations: 
/head2right The Ministry may analyse the reasons for interstate variations in delay in 
Police Verification Report (PVR) and put in place a system for monitoring 
along with Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure that PVR is done within 21 
days as envisaged in the scheme. The Ministry may analyse the reasons 
for pendency at other stages of passport service process and take 
necessary steps to mitigate the same. 
/head2right The Ministry may examine the reasons for long waiting time at Passport 
Seva Kendras (PSKs) in Delhi and take effective measures to reduce it. It 
may also depict correct waiting time by including the waiting time 
between appointment time and token issue time while calculating the 
total time spent by citizen in PSK. The Ministry may also strengthen the 
mechanism of grievance redressal in a time bound manner.  
/head2right The Ministry may streamline the procedure related to refunds and 
publicise the same to all applicants.  
/head2right The Ministry may examine clauses of Master Service Agreement and 
take appropriate action to remove inconsistencies.  
/head2right The Ministry may review the mechanism of payment of reward to the SP 
in line with the change in the passport application system and ensure 
that revision in the performance parameters under Service Level 
Agreement should be with due justification.  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 ix 
/head2right Governance structures at the Ministry level may be strengthened by 
ensuring regular meetings of Empowered Committee an d Project 
Management Committee.  It should also be ensured that important 
decisions are taken at appropriate levels only. 
  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 1 
CHAPTER -I 
Introduction 
1.1 GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT THE AUDITEE 
Passport is the proof of citizenship which a sovereign country issues to its 
subjects. Under the Passport Act- 1967, any citizen of India travelling abroad 
should be in possession of a passport or travel doc ument issued by the 
Government of India. The Consular, Passport and Visa (CPV) Division of the MEA 
through the Central Passport Organisation (CPO) and the CPV wings of the Indian 
Missions abroad provide passport related services. CPO is the nodal unit for 
delivering Passport-related services in India and the Joint Secretary (CPV) heads 
CPO in the role of Chief Passport Officer. 
There are 37 Regional Passport Offices (RPOs) under the CPO in India as on 2014-
15. Each RPO is headed by a Passport Officer. Table below indicate significant 
increase in the number of passports issued over the last few years: 
Table 1.1: Passports issued by MEA 
 2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  
No. of 
passports 
issued  
(in lakhs) 
52.51 58.69 59.40 68.05 81.29 
Percentage 
increase over 
the previous 
period 
4.43 
1 11.76 1.20 14.56 19.45 
Source: Annual Reports of MEA and Published Annual Data of PSP 
1.2 Passport Seva Project 
Due to the rapid growth in the number of passport s eekers, a need was felt 
(2005-06) in MEA for improving the existing system of issuance of passports. To 
address this need, a Mission Mode Project (MMP) was identified (August 2007) 
under the National e-Governance Plan. The MMP on Passports named “Passport 
Seva Project” (PSP) aimed “To deliver all Passport-related services to the citizens 
in a timely, transparent, more accessible, reliable manner & in a comfortable 
                                                           
1 50.28 lakh passports issued in 2009. 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 2 
environment through streamlined processes and committed, trained & motivated 
workforce”. 
As a first step towards implementation of the project, MEA conducted a study 
through the National Institute for Smart Government (NISG). On receipt of a 
detailed report from NISG, the MEA obtained approval of the Union Cabinet (6th 
September 2007), inter alia  to: 
• Outsource the delivery of front –end passport services,  
• Establish passport seva kendras (PSKs) across the country, 
• Create a centralised IT system linking all PSKs, RPO/Pos, police and 
postal department and,  
• Permit the private partner to levy a service charge for each service. 
The proposed system was envisaged to be a citizen centric, fast and convenient 
mode of issue of passport in a streamlined manner with three distinct phases – 
the application, visit to the PSK and the backend processing before issue of the 
passport as represented in the diagram on the next page: 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 3 
Figure 1.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 4 
For implementing the project, a project management unit (PMU) was created 
under the Additional Secretary (CPV and Admn.). The  MEA invited bids for 
selection of a Service Provider (October 2007). M/s. Tata Consultancy Services 
Ltd. (M/s. TCS) was selected as the Service Provider in July 2008. A Master Service 
Agreement (MSA) was signed between MEA and M/s. TCS  in October 2008. The 
pilot project was launched in Bengaluru and Chandigarh in March 2010 and 
August 2010 respectively. After necessary standardisation and testing, the Project 
commenced for a period of six years i.e. from 12 June 2012 (the date of Go-Live) 
to 11 June 2018 as per terms of the MSA. At present, 77 PSKs are operational as 
given in the figure on the next page. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 5 
Figure 1.2: Location of Regional Passport Offices and Passport Seva Kendras 
 
Source: MEA website 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 6  
1.3  Progress under the Project  
The project was running in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode with M/s. TCS, 
the Service Provider through 77 Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs) under the 37 RPOs 
situated across India. A National Call Centre had been set up to provide real-time 
status and up-to-date information in 17 languages using a toll free number. The 
passport portal http://www. passportindia.gov.in was set up to provide upto date 
real-time information. Apart from these, an SMS alert facility was also provided 
to the citizens under PSP to enable citizens to receive alerts and updates 
regarding progress of their passport applications and pending actions. Since 2014, 
135 Passport Seva Camps had been organised by the M inistry with an aim of 
reaching out to people located far away from PSKs. 718 Passport Melas had been 
organised from January 2013 to August 2015 to meet the increased demand for 
passport services. 
1.4  Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the performance audit were to verify whether:  
(i)  passport related services were delivered to the citizens within the 
prescribed time; 
(ii)  comfortable and transparent environment for passport related services 
was available to the citizens; 
(iii)  implementation of the master services agreement and  related 
governance structure was efficient and effective.  
1.5  Scope and methodology  
The performance audit of the Passport Seva Project of the Ministry was 
conducted for a period from June 2012 to August 2015 wherein only published 
reports, fortnightly data trends and internal communications was made available 
to audit for the period from June 2012 to August 2015. Further, dashboard 2 data 
relating to 37 RPOs/77 PSKs was also made available to audit in June-August 
2015. Facts related to prior period have also been mentioned in the report 
wherever felt necessary. Information through an audit questionnaire was also 
                                                           
2 Dashboard data- Dashboard data of PSP shows the cu rrent position of that date depicting 
passport data of the previous days evening closing for the whole country. It is dynamic and keeps 
on changing every day. The reports coming in the dashboard has been designed for monitoring of 
the project by the Ministry. 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 7 
collected from 15 PSKs under six RPOs (New Delhi, Chennai, Patna, Surat, Cochin 
and Bhubaneswar) selected on a random sampling without replacement basis.  
The performance audit commenced with the entry conference on 9 March 2015 
with Joint Secretary (CPO & PSP) wherein audit methodology, scope, objectives 
and criteria were discussed. Exit conference was held on 28 October 2015 with 
Joint Secretary (CPO & PSP) wherein important audit  findings along-with 
recommendations were discussed. Response to the dra ft report as received  
on 17 November 2015 and 17 February 2016 were suita bly considered and 
incorporated in the report. 
1.6  Scope limitations 
 
The following information/records were not provided to audit :- 
(i) 
 Time taken across the RPOs for printing and dispatch of the passports, 
including an age-wise analysis for the year 2014. (Para 2.3 ) 
(ii)  Time taken for delivery of the passports by the postal department for 
the year 2014 across the RPOs. (Para 2.4 ) 
(iii)  Data related to application processing for the year 2014 to assess the 
performance of the PSKs against the laid down standards. (Para 3.3 ) 
(iv)  The actual time taken in redressal of grievances du ring 2014.  
(Para 3.5 ) 
(v)  Records on legacy data migration including physical files of approval 
on migrated/digitized data. (Para 4.4) 
In order to evaluate the time taken in 2014 across the RPOs for printing and 
dispatch of the passports and to conduct an age-wise analysis, we requested for 
data relating to printing and dispatch of passports for the year 2014.  But due to 
non-production of data for 2014, the audit points relating to printing and 
dispatch of passports were prepared by analysing data of current date using the 
dashboard facility. Similarly due to non-availability of age wise pendency of 
grievances for the year 2014, the audit para relating to grievances was prepared 
by analysing data of current date by using the dashboard facility.  We also 
requested for soft data of PSP for any one quarter in order to evaluate SLA 
parameters.  Due to non-provision of data by the Ministry, data on SLA metrics 
could not be verified to assess the performance of the PSKs against the laid down 
standards. Hence paras have been prepared based on data provided by M/s TCS 
Ltd and conclusion have been drawn on that basis.  
 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 8 
 
1.7  Sources of Audit Criteria 
The performance of the Passport Seva Project/Passport Seva Kendras was 
evaluated against the Audit Criteria from the following sources: 
• Request for Proposals; 
• Master Service Agreement; 
• Service Level Agreement; 
• Passport Act; 
• Passport Manual; 
• Rules prescribed by the Government; 
• Instructions/guidelines issued by Government from time to time; 
• Policy of the MEA; 
• IT Act 2000 (as amended till date) etc. 
1.8  Acknowledgement  
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation extended by Ministry of External 
Affairs during the audit process. 
 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 9 
CHAPTER-II 
Time for Passport Issuance 
The Ministry initiated a comprehensive reform of the Passport Issuance System 
with a view to curtail the time taken for issuance of passports significantly and 
equip the CPO to deal with the rapid growth in demand for passports in the 
coming years. 
Under Section 5(2) of the passport act, 1967, the Passport authority may make 
such inquiry, as deemed necessary, prior to the issue of passport. Hence issuance 
of passport is broadly classified under three categories of police verifications viz., 
no police verification, post police verification and pre-police verification cases. 
Cabinet approved the following timelines in rendering passport issuance services 
to citizens: 
• Issuance of new passport not requiring police verification- all services in 
three working days  
• Issuance of new passports requiring post police verification –all services in 
three working days  
• In cases requiring pre-police verification, services in three working days 
plus time taken for police verification 
• In case of Tatkaal or emergency passport service to be rendered on the 
day of application itself. 
The objectives of PSP (clause 3.2 of RFP vol.-I) and the desired service levels 
(clause 6.2 of RFP vol.-I and clause 2.1 (b) of MSA) reflected the approval of 
Cabinet in respect of the timelines in rendering passport issuance services to 
citizens. 
Specific audit findings related to time taken for the above services are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs: 
2.1 Delay in giving appointment at the PSKs 
As a first step in passport application, citizen fills-in his/her details in the website, 
http://www. passportindia.gov.in  and  chooses the preferred city and PSK location 
irrespective of his current/permanent address. Currently, while booking the 
appointment online, the next available date of appointment gets automatically 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 10  
displayed in the portal and the applicant selects that date to visit the PSK along 
with the Application Reference Number (ARN) print generated online. 
On scrutiny of published annual data of PSP ending for the year ended December 
2014, it was observed that the appointment availability to visit a PSK as on 
31 December 2014 varied from one day to 68 days. In  12 cases citizens had to 
wait for more than a month to visit a PSK as mentioned in the table below.  
Table 2.1 
Time taken for getting Appointment in PSKs 
Appointment Time No. of PSKs 
less than 3 days 38 
3-10 days 12 
11-30 days 17 
31-60 days 09 
more than 60 days 03 
 
The Ministry in its reply (November 2015) stated that the appointment availability 
as on 31 August 2015 was varying between 1 to 45 da ys. It further stated the 
current position i.e., as on 31 October 2015 is tha t out of 77 PSKs, the 
appointment availability at 73 PSKs is between 1-7 days, at 3 PSKs it was between 
8-15 days and at 1 PSK it was 19 days. 
Progress reported by the Ministry indicated that position had improved over a 
period of time, but it is yet to meet the standards set by the Ministry, i.e., 
complete the process of issue of passport in three working days’ time. Moreover 
at certain places like Imphal (30 days), Gangtok (24 days) and Varanasi (24 days), 
the waiting period for giving appointment was still very high.  
2.2 Police Verification Process 
Under Section 5(2) of the passport act, 1967, the Passport authority may make 
such inquiry, as deemed necessary, prior to the issue of passport as discussed 
above. As per Request for Proposal (RFP) and Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
instructions, Police verification report was required to be received within 21 days 
from the date of receipt of request for police verification. 
2.2.1 Average Police Verification time 
The chart given below depicts the state/UT wise average time taken for police 
verification, based on the published annual data of PSP for the year 2014. 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 11  
Chart 2.1 : Average time for Police Verification 
 
Source: Annual Data 2014  
Out of total 35 states/UT, in only seven states */UT, recorded average police 
verification time was less than prescribed 21 days and in 28 states/UTs this time 
was more than 21 days. Out of 28 states/UTs mentioned above, in seven states 
(Tripura, Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur and Assam) 
average police verification time was more than 100 days. Further, 100 per cent 
police verifications were not carried out in any State/UT within 21 days. The 
national average police verification time in 2014 was 42 days. The police 
verification time has shown a decrease of seven days over the national average 
of 2013. 
The Ministry stated that in states/UTs/districts where the electronic connectivity 
with the PSP existed, the delay in police verification report was less and in those 
states/UTs/districts where there was no electronic connectivity with the PSP, the 
delay in police verification report was more. It further stated (July 2015) that as 
per January to June 2015 data, the all India average for the number of days taken 
to complete police verification is 36 days as compared to 42 days in 2014 and 
                                                           
*  Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Goa, Haryana, Rajasthan and Telangana  (less than 21 days)  
 
12 
15 
16 
16 
17 
19 
20 
23 
24 
27 
28 
29 
32 
34 
47 
57 
57 
58 
64 
66 
66 
70 
71 
78 
79 
83 
90 
114 
115 
122 
154 
158 
221 
265 
Delhi 
Andhra Pradesh 
Goa 
Haryana 
Chandigarh 
Telangana 
Rajasthan 
Punjab 
Kerala 
Gujarat 
Puducherry 
Karnataka 
Tamilnadu 
Jharkand 
Dadar and Nagar Haveli 
Himachal Pradesh 
Uttar Pradesh 
Uttarakhand 
Maharashtra 
Chhatisgarh 
Madhya Pradesh 
Mizoram 
Bihar 
Orissa 
Daman and Diu 
Lakshadweep 
West Bengal 
Tripura 
Sikkim 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Meghalaya 
Nagaland 
Manipur 
Assam 
Average PV time in days 
D
a 
y
s 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 12  
49 days in 2013. The Ministry also informed that that online integration with 
police authorities have already been done up to district level/than a level. Out of 
730 police district, 673 districts have already been integrated online with PSP 
thus 98.05 per cent of police verification are now being submitted using online 
model of police verification. However, it did not reply to the specific points raised 
in para above regarding PVR pendency of more than 21 days and more than 180 
days in different states. Further, the pace of improvement of police verification 
time from 49 to 42 and from 42 to 36 days was still behind the prescribed level of 
21 days. 
2.2.2 Age-wise analysis of pending PVRs  
Audit also scrutinised the dashboard 1 data of PSP as on 31 August 2015 to assess 
current position of pending PVRs. Out of total 7,73,254 PVRs pending, 3,74,398 
PVRs (48 per cent) were shown as pending for clearance for more than  the 
prescribed limit of 21 days. The age-wise analysis of pending PVRs of more than 
21 days (3,74,398) is shown in the chart below. 
Chart 2.2: Age-wise analysis of pending PVRs  
 
 
                                                           
1  Dashboard data of PSP shows the current position of that date depicting passport data of the 
previous days evening closing for the whole country. It is dynamic and keeps on changing 
every day. The reports coming in the dashboard has been designed for monitoring of the 
project by the Ministry. 
22-45 days 
31% 
46-90 days 
22% 
91-180 days 
12% 
>180 days 
35% 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 13  
The chart 2.2 depicted that out of 3,74,398 pending PVRs (pending for more than 
21 days), 1,32,320 PVRs (35 per cent) were pending for more than 6 months. 
It is thus apparent that delay in police verification of the applicants was one of 
the key hurdles in realisation of the basic objective of the PSP to deliver passports 
to the citizens in time.  
The Ministry (November 2015) did not give any specific comment to the audit 
observation. 
Recommendation: The Ministry may analyse the reasons for interstate 
variations in delay and put in place a system for monitoring along with 
Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure that PVR is done within 21 days as 
envisaged in the scheme. 
2.3 Pendency in printing of passports at the passport offices 
As per norms, the service time taken by the MEA for  processing a normal 
passport application was three working days (excluding Police verification time) 
under the Passport Seva Project, which included processing of application, 
printing and lamination of passport and its dispatch. 
The printing, lamination and dispatch of the passports were done in RPOs with 
which the PSK was attached. Further, as per clause 6.3.1 (point 13 of Process “B”- 
back-end processing) of RFP Volume-I, Pendency at Passport offices were to be 
tracked and all the applications that were not processed within the defined 
service levels were to be automatically sent to central back office i.e. Central 
Passport Printing Facility (CPPF) situated in Delhi for printing, lamination and 
dispatch. 
We, however, noted that as per the practice adopted by the Ministry, on the 
basis of status of printing pendency at each passport office, printing slots were 
opened from time to time for printing of pending passports at CPPF as conveyed 
to the concerned passport offices. The Ministry advised the passport offices to 
forward pending passports to CPPF for printing as per available slots with them 
which meant that the printing of pending passports was undertaken in CPPF only 
when forwarded by the RPO.  
The Ministry was requested (March 2015) to provide data regarding time taken 
across the RPOs for printing and dispatch of the passports, including an age-wise 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 14  
analysis for the year 2014. However, this information was not provided by the 
Ministry. In its absence, printing pendency data obtained from centralised data 
for all the PSKs for the period 1 July 2015 to 9 July 2015 was culled from the MIS. 
A test check of the pending records for a period of  seven working days 
(01.07.2015 to 09.07.2015) indicated pendency for p rinting of passports in the 
RPOs Kolkata (eight days 2 load) Lucknow (four days), Cochin (six days), 
Ahmedabad (four days) and Delhi (three days) based on their installed capacity of 
printers. 
Without providing reasons and details of pendency pointed out in Audit, the 
Ministry stated (November 2015) that the current pendency position (31 October 
2015) was 58,800 in all RPOs, which was reckoned to be just 1.5 days’ load. The 
reply of the Ministry is not convincing because in some RPOs, pendency was 
higher than the 1.5 days’ load as mentioned above. 
Recommendation: The Ministry may analyse the reasons for pendency in 
certain RPOs and take necessary steps to mitigate them. 
2.4 Pendency in delivery of Passports by India Post department 
The final step in the passport application process was the delivery of passport to 
the applicant by the Postal Department. Information was called for from MEA 
(August 2015) regarding the time taken for delivery of the passports by the postal 
department for the year 2014 across the RPOs. However, this was not provided 
by the Ministry.  
In the absence of this information, data extracted from the MIS maintained under 
the PSP dashboard was test checked. As per the data available in the MIS as on 13 
August 2015, a total 62,26,516 passports were shown as dispatched for the year 
2015 under Passport SLA Parameter module while only 34,48,793 passports were 
shown as delivered to the concerned applicants. Out of 27,77,723 undelivered 
passports, the status of only 39,337 passports were shown in the dashboard of 
the Ministry. No information was available in respect of 27,38,386 passports 
which were dispatched but were neither shown as delivered nor shown as not 
delivered.  In absence of completed details, proper conclusion could not be 
drawn in Audit. 
                                                           
2  Working days load- means the printers capacity installed in the RPOs running at their 
maximum capacity in a day. 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 15  
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that after printing of passports, there were 
two more steps i.e. quality check and actual dispatch. As on 31 August 2015, the 
overall number of passports to be dispatched was 89 ,360, which is the 
culmination of 2.5 days of pendency at quality check and dispatch. It further 
stated that steps were being taken to update the pendency status in the system 
so that correct figures were reflected in the reports and continuous efforts were 
being made to improve it. 
The Ministry did not inform the present status of p endency in delivery of 
passports by the India Post Department, obtained from data of MIS and specific 
action initiated for cutting down on postal delays. Moreover, the fact remains 
that the Ministry did not have status of delivery for 27.38 lakh dispatched 
passports which is significant and is a matter of concern. 
2.5 Overall Delay in issue of Passports 
Passports are issued in two categories i.e., Normal and Tatkaal. Though the 
objective of PSP was to issue passport under the specified timelines, analysis 
revealed that the same was not achieved till now. Audit analysis of the published 
annual data of PSP for 2014 for normal and Tatkaal passport is given in the 
following paragraphs.  
2.5.1 Normal Passports 
Normal passports are issued under three categories, as shown below: 
Table 2.2 Categories in issue of Normal passports 
S.  
No. 
Issue of fresh  
Passports 
Examples  Prescribed time  
1.  No police 
verification 
 
Government servants if they 
produce identify certificates 
3 working days  
2.  Post Police 
Verification 
Re -issue of passports in 
which personal particulars 
are same 
3 working days  
3. Pre -Police 
Verification 
Other than the above  3 working days’ time 
+ time taken for police 
verification (21 days) 
Source: Request For Proposal (RFP)  

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 16  
Scrutiny of published annual data 2014 of PSP relating to the categories ‘No’ and 
‘Post’ Police verification revealed the time taken for the issue of normal Passports 
as shown in the chart: 
Chart 2.3: Time for issuance of Normal Passports  
 
Source: Annual Data 2014 provided by MEA 
The above chart depicted that only 21 per cent of passports were issued within 
the prescribed timeline of three working days while, 15 per cent of passports 
were issued beyond 30 days. Test check of the data also revealed that PSK at 
Kolkata took average passport issuance time of 28 days. 
Further, published annual data 2014 of PSP revealed the comparison in the issue 
of normal passports for the year 2013 and 2014 as shown in the chart below: 
within 3 
days, 21% 
4-7 days, 26% 
8-14 days 
17% 
15-21 days 
11% 
22-30 days 
10% 
beyond 30 days, 
15% 
within 3 days 4-7 days 8-14 days 15-21 days 22-30 days beyond 30 days 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 17  
Chart 2.4: Comparison of issue of normal passports  
 
 
The above chart depicted that in 2014, only 21 per cent of passport were issued 
within 3 days as compared to 26 per cent issued in 2013. Similarly in 2014, 25 per 
cent of passports were issued after 21 days as compared to seven per cent issued 
in 2013. Further scrutiny of published annual data (2014) revealed that the 
overall average time for issuance of passports had increased from nine days in 
2013 to 16 days in 2014. 
The Ministry in its reply (November 2015) stated that the average passport 
issuance time was 16 days in 2014, which improved to 13 days till 31 October 
2015. The fact remained that against the benchmark of three days Ministry was 
still taking 13 days. 
2.5.2  Analysis of Issuance time of Normal Passports in Delhi 
In order to find out the time taken by applicants to get a passport in Delhi, 
records of RPO Delhi were analysed. The appointment availability as of 31 March 
2015 of PSK Herald House was 24 days, PSK Gurgaon w as 24 days, PSK Shalimar 
Place was 31 days. Thus, an applicant had to wait nearly a month for getting an 
appointment at PSK. 
Test check of the archived database of RPO Delhi (PSKs-Herald House, Shalimar 
place and Gurgaon) for the period October 2014 to June 2015 revealed that the 
average time for issue of passports in Delhi was 52 days from the date of booking 
of appointment to the date of dispatch of passport. But, as per the Ministry’s 
published annual data for 2014 in respect of PSKs of Delhi, average passport 
26 21 
37 
26 
22 
17 
8
11 
7
25 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
2013 2014 
Percentage of passports issued 
Year 
More than 21 days 
15-21 days 
8-14 days 
4-7 days 
Within 3 days 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 18  
issuance time for normal passports was 21 days and average time for police 
verification was 15 days. Thus, total time taken in order to get passport in respect 
of Delhi was 36 days (21+15) in 2014 which was redu ced to 27 days (13+14) 
during January to June 2015. Audit further noticed that the difference in data was 
due to the fact that while working out the time taken, Ministry had excluded the 
time taken for getting an appointment in PSK. Exclusion of this period was not 
justified as ultimately time taken for getting appointment also delays the overall 
process of obtaining passport. 
The Ministry in its reply (November 2015) stated th at the inclusion of 
appointment wait time into the average passport issuance time was practically 
not feasible. The appointment was scheduled by the applicants based on their 
readiness such as documentation, convenience and travel urgency. 
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable because when the availability of 
appointment to PSK was only between 24-31 days, even if citizens were ready 
there was a compulsory waiting. Since the system allotted the next available 
appointment date automatically, there was no altern ative/option for the 
applicant to choose a particular date and time based on his convenience. 
2.5.3 Tatkaal Passports 
As per the RFP, Tatkaal passports had to be issued on the same day (only if the 
PSK was situated in a city which also has a RPO and the application is granted by 
one P.M. on that day). 
As per the published annual data of PSP, it was noticed that in case of passports 
issued under the Tatkaal category, the average issuance time in 2014 was 4 days. 
The total number of tatkaal passports issued in 2014 were 5,68,871. The details 
of time taken in issue of Tatkaal passports during 2014 are given in the table 
below:  
Table 2.3: Time taken for issuance of Tatkaal Passports 
Time taken for issue of passport  Percentage of passports issued 
Day of submission of application 28 per cent 
Within 1 day 60 per cent 
Within 3 days 99 per cent 
Within 30 days 100 per cent 
Source: Annual Data 2014 provided by MEA 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 19  
The table 2.3 depicts that 28 per cent of the tatkaal passports were issued on the 
day of submission of application and 60 (28+32) per cent passports were issued 
within a day. Thus, the objective of quick service and delivery of passports within 
one day was not fulfilled in 40 per cent cases. Further, scrutiny of published data 
of PSP showed that the average time taken in this category in 2014 increased in 8 
(Ranchi, Chandigarh, Visakhapatnam, Jaipur, Kolkata, Jammu, Ghaziabad and 
Guwahati) out of 37 RPOs as compared to 2013. The h ighest average passport 
issuance time of 36 days in this category was recorded by RPO; Ranchi followed 
by Chandigarh where the average time was 23 days. 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that the period of next day in Tatkaal 
passports is only the Key Performance Indicator (KPI) set by the Ministry in RFP. 
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as it was the laid down objective of 
PSP in the issuance of passports and included in the decision of the Cabinet. 
Conclusion 
 
Delivery of passport services to citizens in a time bound manner within the 
prescribed framework was one of the objectives of the passport issuance process. 
We observed that Ministry could not achieve the prescribed service standards for 
any of the stages of passport services i.e. from application of passport to delivery 
of passport. There were considerable delays in getting appointments at Passport 
Seva Kendras (PSKs), delay in police verification process and pendency at the 
postal and printing stages, which resulted in delay in issue of normal and Tatkaal 
passports. As a result, against the objective of issuing passport in 24 days (3+21), 
the national average for issue of normal passport was 71 days in 2014.  
 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 20  
CHAPTER-III 
Citizen Services 
The vision of the Passport Seva Project was to deliver passport services to Indian 
Citizens in a timely, convenient and transparent manner. As already explained in 
Chapter II, the time taken by an ordinary citizen to get a passport was 
inordinately long. In this chapter, Audit has examined whether the passport 
related services were being delivered in an accessible and comfortable 
environment to the citizen. Audit noticed that during visit to PSKs, a citizen has to 
deal with long waiting time, non-availability of family counters and absence of 
separate enquiry counters as discussed in the following paragraphs: 
3.1 Non-formulation of Citizens Charter 
A Citizen’s Charter is the expression of an understanding between citizens and 
the provider of a public service with respect to the quantity and quality of 
services the former receive in exchange for their taxes. It is essentially about the 
rights of the public and the obligations of the public servants. 
Clause 8.4 of RFP vol.-I stipulated preparation of Citizen Charter for informing all 
citizen-centric requirements relating to passport services to the citizens of India. 
Besides this, the Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances, 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions had also circulated Model 
Guidelines and General Structure Guidelines to all Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India to enable them to bring out focused and effective charters. 
We noted that the citizen charter was not prepared in respect of PSP. As a 
consequence citizens were not aware of the service levels including the 
prescribed time frame for issue of passports. 
The Ministry in its reply (June 2015) to audit observation confirmed that citizen 
charter had not yet been finalized. It further replied (February 2016) that Citizen 
Charter has now been approved. 
 
3.2 Delay in getting appointment 
A citizen during the online submission of application in the passport portal gets 
the next date of availability automatically displayed in the portal and applicant 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 21  
selects that date to visit the PSK along with the Application Reference Number 
printed generated online. 
As per the Ministry’s published annual data 2014 of PSP, the appointment 
availability to visit a PSK as on 31 December 2014 varied from one day to 68 days 
(average 13 days). The objective of timely service and delivery of passport was 
not fulfilled, if a citizen had to wait for more than a month to get appointment to 
visit any PSK (as detailed in Para 2.1 of Chapter II of this Report).  
3.3 Long waiting time at the PSKs in Delhi 
As per Service Level Agreement (SLA) entered with the service provider, average 
time spent by a citizen, who had applied online, at the PSK during peak hours 
(10.00 am to 12.00 pm) should be less than 25 minutes (wait time + service time) 
and during non-peak hours (all other hours) it should be less than 18 minutes. A 
citizen has to visit three counters i.e. Counter A (manned by TCS staff), Counter B 
(Govt. staff for verification of documents) and Counter C (Govt. Staff for grant of 
passport) in the PSK. In order to calculate 25 minutes and 18 minutes, wait time 
and service time of all the counters were added.  
In order to assess the performance of the PSKs against the laid down standards, 
data related to application processing for the year 2014 was called for from MEA, 
which was not provided to audit.  
A test check of the fortnightly data trends of PSP prepared by the Service Provider 
for the period January 2015 to April 2015 in respect of four 
1 PSKs under RPO 
Delhi was carried out. We observed that the average time taken by the citizens in 
the PSKs was on an average 78 minutes (Counter A-6.62 minutes waiting time, 
Counter B-36.71 minutes waiting time, Counter C-20.80 minutes waiting time + 
Service time-13.87 minutes) which was higher than the prescribed time of  
25 minutes during peak hours. The detailed data is in Annexe - I. Analysis for the 
delay beyond the given standards of service is outlined below:  
• In respect of Bhikaji Cama Place, Gurgaon and Shalimar Place PSKs, there 
was shortage of staff (as shown in Annexe - I) at all the counters. The 
shortage was more pronounced in case of Counter B and C, both manned 
by Government officials. It was clear from the Annex –I that the applicants 
had to wait for a long period at B & C counters. 
                                                           
1  Bhikaji Cama Place, Gurgaon, Herald-House ITO and Shalimar Place. 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 22  
• As per RFP, in a single day, more than 300 applications were to be 
processed in a large PSK. As per Annexe-I, in respect of PSK Herald House, 
1000-1500 applications were being processed every day and as a result 
wait time in PSK, Herald House ranged from 1-2 hours. Since higher 
waiting time was due to receipt of large number of applications as 
compared to capacity, the Ministry was required to consider opening 
another PSK. 
• Further, the average waiting time between the appointment time and the 
token issued time was about 1 hour 18 minutes in respect of PSKs under 
RPO Delhi. Thus, waiting time of more than one hour before entering into 
PSK was considerable which resulted in overcrowding outside the PSK 
causing inconvenience to public. 
The Ministry accepted (November 2015) the shortage of staff and stated that 
shortage of staff was short term and likely to be resolved as Ministry has 
indented for recruitment of LDCs and Assistants. It further stated that the 
calculation of total time spent by citizen in PSK was not feasible as it was 
reckoned as per RFP. But, the fact remained that there was considerable wait 
time inside and outside the PSKs as the desired service level was not achieved. 
Further, in PSK Herald House there was no shortage of staff in the counters B and 
C as per RFP, still waiting time inside the PSK was very high. 
Recommendation: The Ministry may examine the reasons for long waiting 
time in Delhi and take effective measures to reduce it. It may also depict 
correct waiting time by including the waiting time between appointment time 
and token issue time while calculating the total time spent by citizen in PSK. 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 23  
3.4 Inconvenience to the Citizens in Passport Seva Kendras 
The audit team visited PSKs located in Delhi & Gurgaon and following was 
observed:  
(i) As per clause 7.2 (d) of RFP, vol.-I, 
Reception counters were to be set up 
at each PSK to provide general enquiry 
and application form distribution 
service. However, it was noticed that 
no separate counter for enquiry 
existed in the PSK. The reception staff, 
who generated file themselves, was 
the person who attended to the task of 
enquiry too. Hence a citizen had to 
stand in a long queue to collect/make 
even a small piece of information/ 
enquiry. 
 
Picture-1 : Rush at enquiry counters in Herald 
House PSK 
The Ministry replied that all counters in the Pre Verification area were single 
window counters for optimum utilization of citizen’s time. However, according to 
RFP, enquiry counters were to be setup at the PSKs. Deviation from RFP resulted 
in inconvenience to the citizens, as the time taken in enquiry would be much 
shorter. 
(ii) As per clause 7.3.2 of RFP, vol-I, “To serve those applicants who do not apply 
online, the application forms together with information booklet (in three 
languages i.e. English, Hindi and one local language) will be distributed through 
PSK’s reception/ enquiry counter.” The SP was required to print an adequate no. 
of application forms & information booklets (minimum 500 on any given day) for 
sale to public at a fee of ` 10 only. However, it was observed that manual 
applications with information booklets in physical form were not available with 
the counters. 
The Ministry replied (May 2015) that manual application with information 
booklets in physical form were available at the PSK and provided to citizens on 
demand. However, citizens file their applications online, generate the ARNs and 
visit the PSK for processing. The reply is not acceptable as there were no 
instructions displayed in four PSKs of Delhi about availability of information 
booklet on demand. 


Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 24  
(iii) There was a kiosk facility in PSKs in 
Delhi but no indication of purpose or 
method of using it was found written 
anywhere.
 
 
Picture-2 : Kiosk facility in Herald House 
PSK  
The Ministry replied (May 2015) that signage “Information Kiosk” had been 
affixed near the facility provided in PSK. Kiosks were being used by citizens. A 
citizen could access the Passport Seva portal from the kiosk for various purposes 
i.e. enquiry regarding documents required – fees payable, appointment 
availability, and also to fill the application, pay the fees, check the status etc.  
The reply is not convincing as there were no instructions displayed in PSKs at 
Delhi about their usage. 
(iv) In two PSKs (Herald house and Gurgaon), the waiting area before the ‘C’ 
counter was insufficient and most of the citizens had to stand in a cramped 
space. 
The Ministry replied (May 2015) that the capacity in the waiting area had been 
planned based on process flow and volumes. However, if at any point of time it 
got overcrowded for some reasons, citizens were advised to wait in the ‘A’ 
waiting lounge. 
The reply of the Ministry is not convincing as in Herald House, the waiting area 
for the Government counters ‘B’ and ‘C’ is at the first floor and that of the ‘A’ 
counter is at the ground floor. The possibility of citizen to wait in ‘A’ lounge is not 
feasible as there is a considerable distance between the waiting area of ‘A’ 
counter and that of waiting area of ‘B’ and ‘C’ counters. 
(v) If a whole family had to apply for a passport, there was no facility available in 
the appointment system of PSP to avail same appointment slot for all members 
of the family so as to pass through the formalities at one go together. 
The Ministry replied (May 2015) that in such cases, members of the family were 
allowed to get their applications processed together irrespective of the 
appointment time.  


Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 25  
However, system (passport portal) had not provided any facility to avail same 
appointment slot for all members of the family. In the absence of any laid down 
or displayed guidelines, it totally depended upon the officers of respective PSK 
whether to entertain such requests. 
(vi) At counter ‘A’, the applicant 
signed the application after viewing 
and verifying entries on screen. As a 
copy of the signed application form 
was not provided to the applicant, in 
case of a dispute, it could not be 
verified whether the data was 
changed. 
  
Picture-3 : Counter-A staff in Herald House PSK  
The Ministry clarified that applicant signed copy is kept in the system as part of 
digital file of the applicant, which can be produced in case post-facto dispute. 
Hence providing an additional copy to the applicant would not add any value. 
However, since one of the main objectives of PSP was to deliver passports to 
citizens in a transparent atmosphere, a copy of the verified information had to 
be provided to the applicant for future reference. The Ministry may rectify the 
procedure by providing signed copy of the document to the applicant. 
(vii) In terms of Ministry’s letter dated 11 June 2013, SP was required to display 
that Value Added Service (SMS facility)2 charges were purely optional and not a 
part of passport fee. However, it was noticed that in PSKs situated in Delhi no 
such display was shown by the SP inside the PSK. Therefore, publicity in this 
regard was required to be made by the Service Provider. 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that optional SMS service had been 
displayed at the passport seva portal but now the Service Provider had been 
instructed to put requisite information on display in PSK also.  
Recommendation: The Ministry may ensure that minimu m facilities as 
envisaged in RFP are available at all PSKs.  
                                                           
2  The optional Value Added Service (VAS) of SMS facility was an additional facility charged by 
the Service Provider and the applicant had to pay the charge for the VAS at the PSK. This 
additional charge paid to the Service Provider by the citizen was apart from the passport fee 
and goes into the Service Provider’s account.  


Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 26  
3.5 Pendency in Grievance Redressal System 
As per clause 7.3.3 (d) of RFP (vol.-I), any citizen who was either unsatisfied with 
the passport related services or was facing issues after submission of passport 
application could raise a grievance against individual RPO/PSK and/or the CPV 
division of the MEA. As per data provided by the Ministry, total 8348212 
applications were received in 37 RPOs during the calendar year 2014, out of 
which 84647 grievances (1.03 per cent  of total application) were received. 63831 
grievances were addressed by the concerned RPOs, and balance, 20816 
grievances (25 per cent  of total grievances) remained unattended till the end of 
the year. Audit further, noticed that in six RPOs, the pendency of grievances was 
very high as compared to total number of grievances received in the RPOs like 
RPO Jaipur (48 per cent ), RPO Pune (44 per cent ), RPO Thane (42 per cent ), RPO 
Ahmedabad (41 per cent ), RPO Jalandhar (40 per cent ) and RPO Lucknow (39 per 
cent ) during the year 2014. 
The actual time taken in redressal of grievances was not provided to audit. 
Therefore, analysis of pendency was carried out by taking the pendency status of 
grievances as on 24 June 2015 from the dashboard of the Ministry. The pendency 
status of grievances upto 24 June 2015 showed that out of total 35,311 
grievances received during the period, 13,022 grievances were to be resolved by 
the passport authorities. The pendency is depicted below: 
Chart 3.1: Pendency Status of Grievances 
 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that public grievances logged in passport 
seva portal before December 2013 had been reviewed and only 530 grievances 
relating to different RPOs were pending for closure as on 31 October 2015. 
Similarly, out of 84,647 grievances logged in calendar year 2014, the numbers of 
<21 days 
3805, 29% 
21-30 days 
1082, 8% 
30-45 days 
1632, 13% 
45-60 days 
1220, 9% 
>60 days 
5283,41% 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 27  
grievances pending were 7,132 as on 31 October 2015. Further, out of 62,678 
grievances logged in calendar year 2015, the numbers of grievances pending 
were 13,061 as on 31 October 2015. This shows that on being pointed out by 
Audit, the Ministry had taken remedial measures to reduce the number of 
grievances. 
Recommendation: The Ministry may strengthen the mechanism of grievance 
redressal in a time bound manner.  
3.6 Absence of refund mechanism in PSP 
As per clause 10.10 of RFP Vol-I, refunds wherever applicable should be provided 
for. The refund process shall take into account constraint imposed by commercial 
practices such as card and fund transfer through bank account. However, it was 
noticed that if any applicant wants to withdraw his/her passport application after 
payment of passport fee due to shortage of any document or any other reason, 
there was no refund option provided to the applicants in the PSP. 
Test check of data pertaining to period from 1 October 2013 to 31 December 
2014 revealed that during this period 5,42,168 3 applicants had applied online for 
passport related services and had made online payment for those services.  
However, these applicants did not turn up at PSK after taking appointment for 
availing services. Since no refund mechanism is provided in the PSP for refund of 
online payments, the application money paid by these online applicants remained 
with the Government. We observed that during this period, ` 78.46 crore were 
retained by Government due to absence of refund mechanism in PSP. The 
applicants could not apply for the refund of fees paid as this mechanism was 
neither in built in the PSP nor any information related to refund procedure was 
provided to the online applicants. 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that statutory provisions with regard to 
refund of fee paid by the applicant were provided under Rule 10 of the Passport 
Rules 1980. Reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as under the present system 
though the passport fees is paid online and passport related services are provided 
at PSKs, the refund procedure is still manual and is processed at RPOs only which 
makes it difficult for the online applicant to obtain refund. Moreover, the present 
procedure of refund is not publicised by the Ministry on the website for 
information of applicants. 
                                                           
3  Data provided by  the National Operations Centre from the database of PSP 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 28  
Recommendation: The Ministry may streamline the procedure related to 
refunds and publicise the same to all applicants.  
Conclusion 
Analysis of published data of PSP revealed that waiting time for applicants 
seeking issue of passport was more than one hour as against the prescribed time 
limit of 25 minutes (From token issue time to Exit time) in four PSKs under RPO 
Delhi leading to overcrowding inside the PSKs. Enquiry counters were not setup 
at the PSKs in accordance with RFP conditions, which resulted in inconvenience to 
the citizens. There were no instructions about availability of information booklet 
on demand and usage of kiosk facilities. Provisions for refund were also not 
incorporated in the web-based portal in contravention of RFP. 
 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 29  
CHAPTER-IV 
Implementation of Master Service Agreement 
and Governance Structure 
Successful implementation of a government project on a PPP or outsourced basis 
required formulation of adequate service delivery standards and effective 
monitoring of the implementation of the project as per the standards laid down 
through an appropriate mechanism. 
4.1 Project Implementation Terms 
The Ministry invited bids for selection of a Service Provider (October 2007). Eight 
bids were received in the Ministry. A Tender Committee was constituted with the 
approval of External Affairs Minister for evaluation of bids. The Committee after 
evaluation of technical and financial bids selected the bid of L1 (July 2008), i.e., 
M/s Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. (M/s. TCS). A Master Service Agreement 
(MSA) was signed between MEA and M/s. TCS Ltd. (October 2008). 
As per clause 2.2 of RFP vol.-II, the project was planned to be implemented 
following the pilot approach where the PSK services would be first started at two 
pilot locations – Bangalore (3 PSK’s) and Chandigarh (2 PSK’s) and then after a 
test run of three months which had to be culminated on a positive certification by 
a third Party designated by MEA, the implementation had to be taken up at 
remaining locations. Further, the central facilities like Passport portal, Data 
Centre, Data Recovery Centre, Central Passport Printing Facility, Call Centre (for 
Citizen) and Helpdesk were to be established and certified by a third Party before 
the pilot test run could be started. According to this clause, the SP was 
responsible for the implementation of all the waves scheduled in the project 
implementation plan, on a turnkey basis, within the timelines as indicated in 
Section 3.2 of Volume II of the RFP, i.e., Schedule – IX of MSA.  
As per clause 10.4 of RFP vol.-I, Project Director had to undertake an exercise of 
Testing, Acceptance and Certification of Passport system through a third party, as 
soon as the SP declares the system to be ready for this purpose, before go-live. 
“Go-Live” date of the project had been defined in RFP as the date on which 
(i)  the Passport system was completely operational as per the requirements 
in the RFP  

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 30  
(ii)  All the acceptance tests were successfully concluded as per the 
satisfaction of CPV/MEA.  
(iii)  The system was certified by third Party in accordan ce with the 
requirements of the RFP and 
(iv)  The SLA compliance had reached a level of 80% at the least. 
Standardisation, Testing, & Quality Certification (STQC) which is an attached 
office of the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY), 
Government of India is the third Party Audit Agency for PSP. After certification of 
the project by STQC (Phase-II) in January 2011, the PSP was cleared for launch 
across the country. As per Schedule-IX of MSA, the scheduled date of Go-Live of 
PSP was 23 rd August 2011. As per clause 3.2 of Annexure – VI of RFP, vol.-II, MEA, 
shall undertake comprehensive application audits at regular intervals through a 
third party to ensure application functionality and integrity. STQC issued the Final 
Verification Report (Phase III) on 12 June 2012 and awarded the requisite Go-Live 
certification. Thereafter, the operation & maintenance Phase of the Project 
commenced for a period of six years i.e. from 12 June 2012 to 11 June 2018 as 
per terms of the MSA.  
4.2 MSA and Service Level Agreement terms 
The MSA meant the Agreement together with all the Schedules and the contents 
and specifications of all the volumes of the RFP. Schedule-VI of the MSA 
stipulated the terms of payment schedule. While Schedule-VIII was the Service 
Level Agreement (SLA) entered between MEA and the Service Provider (SP). The 
SP was expected to comply with a set of 27 parameters given in Service Level 
Metrics (Annexe-II) under the SLA. The SLA specified the expected levels of 
service to be provided by the SP to the various stakeholders of the Project. This 
expected level was called the baseline service level (baseline metrics). Payment of 
the Quarterly Transaction Charges (QTC) to the SP was linked to the compliance 
with the SLA metrics. As per clause 4.2(d) of RFP, the SP was to get 100 per cent  
of QTC if the baseline performance metrics are complied. The SP will get lesser 
payment in case of a lower performance as per the score specified in SLA. 
Specific audit findings related to MSA and SLAs are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 31  
4.2.1 Inconsistency in clauses of MSA 
Clause 2(c) of Schedule VI of MSA stipulated that “The entire remaining cost for 
implementing, operating and maintaining the Passport Seva system would be 
borne by the SP and recovered through the two types of Service Charges quoted 
by him in the commercial proposal and accepted by M EA, in respect of the 
following two categories of Services. 
i.  Passport services which required printing of a new passport booklet and  
ii.  All miscellaneous services; that did not require the printing of a new 
passport booklet. 
Clause 2(k) of Schedule VI of MSA stipulated that “The service provider shall be 
paid by MEA at the end of each quarter depending up on the number of 
transactions logged in that quarter for each of the categories of service and 
subject to SLA terms specified in the agreement between SP and MEA”. This 
clause shows that the service charges quoted by SP would be paid by the MEA. 
However, clause 2(e) of the agreement stipulated that “The service charges for 
the applicants, who apply online, for both the above categories of service, would 
be 75  per cent  of the basic service charges quoted above. This was to be done to 
encourage citizens to do transactions online.” Clause 2(j) of Schedule VI 
stipulated that citizens would be suitably notified about the schedule of service 
charges and Service Provider would provide appropriate publicity to this. These 
two clauses of MSA suggests that the service charges for implementing, operating 
and maintaining the Passport Seva system are to be paid by the applicants to the 
SP and the online applicants will get a discount of 25  per cent . However, as per 
the system adopted by the Ministry, the applicants pay Passport Fee to the 
government which is fixed (no discount available to online applicants) and it is the 
Ministry who pays service charges to the SP and Ministry gets discount of 25  per 
cent  in service charges for the online applicants.  
Thus, clause 2(e) and 2(j) are not consistent with clause 2(k). It was not clear 
whether the government had any intention to provide discount to the online 
applicants. This inconsistency among clauses of MSA needs to be removed. 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that if two or more clauses in any 
agreement are ambiguous or contrary to each other then interpretation of 
clauses should be in accordance with principle of harmonious interpretation. The 
reply of the Ministry is not convincing as the terms of the agreement indicated 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 32  
that the applicants, who apply online, would get a discount of 25 per cent  which 
was not envisaged in the scheme adopted by the Ministry. Also, there was no 
relevance for clause 2(j) to provide publicity to the service charges as the 
applicants were not required to pay these charges to the SP. 
Recommendation: The Ministry may examine clauses of MSA and take 
appropriate action to remove inconsistencies. 
4.2.2 Change in definition of Walk-in Applicant 
The MSA recognised two categories of applicants – Walk-in and On-line. The 
following rates (Table : 4.1) were applicable for providing Passport Services which 
require printing of a new passport booklet: 
Table : 4.1 
Walk-in and Online rates  
Walk-in applicants were those, who manually filled the application form in the 
PSK and counter operator assisted them in filling the application form and 
capturing the details in the system from the physical application form. After 
completing the data entry and after confirmation from the applicant, counter 
operator had to submit the application into the sys tem for obtaining 
appointment to visit desired PSK. As compared to this, on-line applicants were 
those who had already completed all those activities them self, before visiting the 
PSK on the appointment date and time. As in case of  walk-in-applicants in 
comparison with online applicants, more services were to be provided by the 
service provider, the service charge rates for the walk-in-applicants were higher 
than that of the online applicants. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the system of 100 per cent  online appointment was 
made applicable from 26 July 2012 due to change in definition of walk-in. Scrutiny 
of bills of Service Provider revealed that payment of walk-in applications @ ` 199 
per application were still in existence till May 2015.The Ministry had paid ` 81.30 
lakh (Annexe-III)  from inception of the project to May 2015 for walk-in applicants 
to M/S TCS. 
(i) Walk-in applicants `` `` 199 (if quarterly volume is less than 15 lakh) 
(ii) On-line applicants  `` `` 149.25 (if quarterly volume is less than 15 lakh) 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 33  
The Ministry clarified (November 2015) that the citizens who were seeking 
official/diplomatic passports visited PSKs without ARN 1 and the entire data was 
keyed in from physical application forms and were undertaken by Service 
Provider in ‘A’ zone of PSK and therefore payment of ` 199 per application for 
walk-in application was correct and not erroneous. 
This reply was not acceptable as audit noted from the annual data published for 
the year 2013 and 2014, that only 4086 applications for seeking official and 
diplomatic passport were undertaken by the service provider, whereas, the 
payment for 27198 applications amounting to ` 54.12 lakh was made on account 
of walk-in-application. Thus, the Ministry made an overpayment of ` 11.50 lakh 
2  
to the Service Provider, which needs to be recovered. 
4.2.3 Reward to service provider on peak hour terminology 
During the RFP stage, it was assumed that 80 per cent applicants would apply 
manually (walk-in) and 20 per cent would apply online. A concept of peak hour 
and non-peak hour was envisaged to handle the rush and volume and reward the 
SP to meet the target. However, as per Change Control Note (CCN) 0147 (July 
2012), the definition of walk-in was changed to walk-in with ARN which needed 
online filling of form before the visit to PSK. Thus, the reward related to the peak 
hour performance was required to be modified accordingly.  
Audit observed that for walk-in applicants, the baseline time for service rendering 
was less than 45 minutes, with penalty for more than or equal to 45 minutes and 
reward for less than 30 minutes. In case of on-line applicants the respective 
performance parameters were 25 minutes and 18 minutes respectively. Since all 
the applications are online now, the clause related to walk-in applicants is no 
longer relevant and the performance indicators of online applicants should have 
been applied to the applicants with ARN. Audit noted that an amount of ` 61.49 
lakh had been made to the service provider during September 2012 to May 2015 
on the basis of performance indicator related to walk-in applicants which was not 
justified.  
 
                                                           
1  ARN is Application Reference Number. It is a print-out of acknowledgement receipt after the 
citizen had filled-in online application. 
2   (Number of walk-in applications for which payment was made is 27198 
 @ ` 199 less number of applications actually for which services relating to official/diplomatic 
passports were rendered 4086) x ` 49.75  

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 34  
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that as per NISG recommendation entire 
day of PSK operation was to be treated as a peak hour day which would have 
costed Ministry additional payment of bonus/reward amounting to ` 2.00 crore 
per quarter. It further stated that now it had decided to regulate flow of citizens 
for passport related services through online appointments.  
 The reply is not convincing as after the change in the system, there was no 
concept of walk-in applicants where the PSK would require to do data entry of 
the application also. Hence, keeping the baseline time for service delivery in case 
of Walk-in applicants as 45 minutes and for payment of reward as less than 30 
minutes was not justifiable. 
 
Recommendations: Ministry may review the mechanism of payment of reward 
to the SP in line with the change in the system. 
4.2.4 Change in calculation of average time spent by citizens in PSK 
Payment was released to the service provider quarterly on the basis of quarterly 
data furnished by the SP. Payment of the quarterly transaction charges payable to 
SP was linked to the compliance with the SLA metrics laid down in the table 
provided in Appendix A to Schedule VIII of the MSA (Annexe-II). The table also 
specified the limits and metrics for lower/higher performance and breach levels. 
The SP would get 100 per cent  of quarterly transaction charges, if the baseline 
performance metrics were complied. The SP would get lesser payment in case of 
a lower performance/breach level and higher payment in case of a higher 
performance. The methodology for calculation of average time spent by the 
citizen in PSK given in SLA of MSA was revised as per the table 4.2 : 
  
Table 4.2 
Audit findings on deviations in SLAs 
SI. 
No. SLA as per MSA 
Revised 
methodology in 
SLAs 
 
Audit Findings 
 
1. According to SLA 1, 45 
minutes (baseline 
metrics) were meant 
for walk–in citizen and 
according to SLA 2, 25 
minutes (baseline 
metrics) were meant 
The system has 
become 100 per 
cent online w.e.f. 
July 2012 (CCN 
0147) wherein 
walk-in category 
has been changed 
In case of a walk-in citizen, 
personal particulars in the 
manual application had to 
be filled-in by the SP, but 
now since the system had 
become 100 per cent 
online, there is no 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 35  
SI. 
No. SLA as per MSA 
Revised 
methodology in 
SLAs 
 
Audit Findings 
 
for online citizen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SLA 1(Walk-in) - 
Average must be 
achieved with the time 
spent by 99 per cent  or 
more of the citizens in 
PSK being within 45 
minutes for the 
baseline metric score. 
to walk-in with 
ARN. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SLA1 (Walk-in with 
ARN) – Average 
service time of 90 
per cent  
citizens/tokens 
must be within 45 
minutes for the 
baseline metric 
score 
 
requirement of manual 
feeding of personal 
particulars by the SP in the 
category of walk-in with 
ARN. Hence payment to 
service provider on the 
basis of 45 minutes in case 
of walk-in with ARN was 
incorrect. 
 
 
Since quarterly payments 
to the service provider 
were based on this 
measurement, by reducing 
number of citizens from 99 
per cent  to 90 per cent  (SLA 
No. 1 and 2) and from 95 
per cent  to 90 per cent  (SLA 
No. 3 and 4) for calculating 
average time spent by the 
citizens in PSKs, the service 
provider is unduly 
benefitted by getting more 
baseline metric scores. As 
change in the methodology 
of calculation had direct 
impact on the payments 
being made to SP, change 
in favour of SP without 
justification was incorrect. 
 
2. SLA2 (Online) - Average 
must be achieved with 
the time spent by 99 
per cent  or more of the 
citizens in PSK being 
within 25 minutes for 
the baseline metric 
score.  
SLA2 (Online with 
appointment) - 
Average service 
time of 90 per cent  
citizens/tokens 
must be within 25 
minutes for the 
baseline metric 
score. 
3. SLA3 (Walk-in) - 
Average must be 
achieved with the time 
spent by 95 per cent  or 
more of the citizens in 
PSK being within 30 
minutes and the time 
Spent by 4 per cent  or 
less of the citizens 
being within 45 minutes 
for the baseline metric 
score. 
SLA3 (Walk-in with 
ARN) - Average 
service time of  
90 per cent  
citizens/tokens 
must be within 45 
minutes for the 
baseline metric 
score. 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 36  
SI. 
No. SLA as per MSA 
Revised 
methodology in 
SLAs 
 
Audit Findings 
 
4. SLA4 (Online)- Average 
must be achieved with 
the Time Spent by 95 
per cent  or more of the 
citizens in PSK being 
within 18 minutes and 
the time Spent by 4 per 
cent  or less of the 
citizens being within 25 
minutes for the 
baseline metric score. 
SLA4 (Online with 
appointment) - 
Average service 
time of 90 per cent  
citizens/tokens 
must be within 25 
minutes for the 
baseline metric 
score. 
5. In case of SLA 3, 
average time spent by 
citizen walk-in during 
non-peak hours was as 
under; 
Baseline Metric - < 30 
minutes 
Lower performance - >= 
30 minutes 
Breach - > 45 minutes  
 
Average time 
spent by citizen 
(walk-in with ARN) 
at PSK during Non-
Peak Hours 
 
Baseline Metric - < 
45 minutes 
Lower 
performance - >= 
45 minutes 
Breach - > 60 
minutes 
According to present 
system, walk-in with ARN 
applicant had to take 
online appointment by 
himself; therefore online 
time as given below should 
have been applicable to 
walk-in applicant. 
Baseline Metric -< 18 
minutes 
Lower performance - >= 18 
minutes 
Breach - > 25 minutes 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that SLA 1 to 4 as contained in RFP were 
recommended by National Institute of Smart Government and as per RFP, review 
of SLAs were required to be conducted at specific time interval. Therefore, SLA 1 
to 4 has been revised and NISG in its report also recommended that entire day of 
PSK operation might be treated as a peak hour day. The Ministry further stated 
(November 2015) that because of the social behaviour factors, 10 per cent  
citizens were not turning up at the counters after issue of tokens which was 
beyond the control of the Service Provider, therefore, care had been taken not to 
penalise the Service Provider.  
Reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as in case of SLA 1, the system of applying 
for passport related services was changed by the Ministry after entering into 
MSA. The change in the system led to considerable reduction in the time taken by 
the SP to process the applications as all the applications are now online 
applications. In respect of change in methodology due to social behaviour factors 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 37  
based on the report of NISG, it may be noted that the CCNs to make above 
changes were made in July 2012 which did not include any justification for the 
changes whereas the study report of NISG was given to the Ministry in November 
2012. Moreover, NISG, in its report had not given any quantitative analysis of 
social behaviour. No quantitative analysis supporting the argument that 10 per 
cent of citizens were not turning up at the counter after issue of tokens was made 
available to audit. 
Recommendation: The performance parameters for SLA 1 need revision in line 
with change in the system. Also, changes in methodology of calculation of 
SLAs should be based on adequate justification. 
4.3 Governance structure-deficiencies 
Clause 4.1 of Schedule-IV of the Master Service Agreement (MSA) of the Passport 
Seva Project prescribed the program governance structure to monitor the 
implementation of the project and provided guidance as required. The MSA 
envisaged a governance and implementation structure as given below: 
 
 
 
EMPOWERED EMPOWER  
   
The governance structure was to establish and maintain the processes for: 
• managing the relationship between the Ministry and the service provider; 
• defining the principles to be followed to ensure the delivery of the 
services, ensure the continued alignment of the interests of the parties; 
• ensure the relationship maintained at the correct level within each party; 
• create the flexibility to revise and maintain the relationship. 
As noted above, the MSA (RFP vol.-III) prescribed a governance structure with 
well-defined and clearly segregated roles for each level. However, it was seen 
that in actual implementation top level governance and monitoring was largely 
absent as detailed below: 
 
 
EMPOWERED COMMITTEE 
 
• Apex decision making body 
• All vision and policy level decisions 
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT 
COMMITTEE 
• Responsible for performance monitoring 
• Approving change management related 
issues 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 38  
4.3.1 Empowered Committee  
The Empowered Committee, constituted by MEA was responsible for taking all 
decisions related to overall vision and policy matters. MEA constituted 
Empowered Committee consisting of Foreign Secretary as chairman and AS (CPV), 
AS (FA), JS (PSP & CPO), JS (eG & IT), Secretary (DeitY)3 as members of the 
Committee. Director (PSP & Project Director) was assigned as convener of the 
Empowered Committee. The Empowered Committee was re quired to meet at 
least once in six months. 
Audit scrutiny of records showed that the Empowered Committee met only three 
times i.e. on 11 January 2007, 16 February 2007 and  09 July 2007, till August 
2015. Audit further noticed that policy decisions like compulsory online 
registration and definition of walk-in applicant were taken without the approval 
of the Empowered Committee (Para 4.2). 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that meeting of  the Empowered 
Committee was essential before finalisation of the RFP/MSA, signing of the 
contract with the successful bidder and it had played crucial role during 
finalisation of Detailed Project Report and Request for Proposal. Thereafter, the 
Programme Management Committee headed by AS (CPV) t ook the lead role in 
implementation of the Project. 
The Ministry’s reply is not acceptable, as proposal for compulsory online 
registration was also discussed in the Empowered Committee on PSP held on 09 
July 2007, and it was decided that system should provide both for walk-in 
applicants as well as for online registration. Later on, compulsory online 
registration was made without the concurrence of Empowered Committee. The 
fact remained that Empowered Committee had not met as prescribed and 
important policy matters were not approved by the Empowered Committee. 
Recommendation: Empowered Committee should meet once in six months and 
overall vision and policy matters should be routed through it as prescribed. 
4.3.2 Program Management Committee (PMC)  
MEA constituted PMC consisting of AS (CPV) as chairman and JS (PSP & CPO), 
Project Director, Director (Fin) as member. Representatives of SP and NISG, STQC, 
NIC, ISP Nashik and India Post could be called in the Committee meetings on need 
basis. Principal Consultant (Tech) was assigned as convener of the committee. 
                                                           
3DeitY - Department of electronics and technology 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 39  
The PMC was required to meet at least on monthly basis and cover the following 
items:  
(i)  consideration of monthly Performance Reports;  
(ii)  consideration of matters arising out of the Change Control Schedule; 
(iii)  matters to be brought before the PMC in accordance with the MSA and 
the Schedules; 
(iv)  any matter brought before the PMC by the Service Provider under this 
Article;  
(v)  any other issue which either Party wishes to add to the agenda.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that no meetings were conducted by the PMC. As a 
consequence of a non-working PMC, the following were noticed: 
• All Change Control Notes (CCNs) and changes in SLA were made without 
approval of the PMC. A total of 41 CCNs were carried out for which a 
payment of ` 11.59 crore (Annexe-IV) was made to TCS. In the absence of a 
working PMC, technical review of the CCNs were not made and the Ministry 
could not verify the need of the CCNs or their costing. 
• It was noticed that SLAs related to performance requirements by the 
vendor and breach metrics were revised. These changes always entailed a 
relaxation of the parameters in favour of the Service Provider.  
The basic purpose of formation of PMC i.e. consider ation of monthly 
performance reports, consideration of matter arising out of the Change Control 
Schedule, etc., stood defeated. 
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that AS (CPV), met frequently during the 
entire execution period and roll-out/post roll-out period and similarly JS (PSP & 
CPO) reviewed the progress of the project execution on a weekly basis and also 
met RPO’s on regional basis to sort out issues faced by them.  
The Ministry did not reply why PMC had not met as p rescribed and why 
important CCNs due to which payment of ` 11.59 crore had been paid to Service 
Provider and relaxation in SLA requirement had not been routed through the 
PMC. 
 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 40  
Recommendation: PMC should meet once in a month as prescribed and  
all-important CCNs and relaxation in SLA requirements should be routed 
through it.  
 
4.4 Non-submission of information to audit on legacy Data Migration 
As per Clause 12 of RFP vol.-I, the Service Provider was to perform the data 
digitization & migration from manual and/or the previous systems to the 
Database of new Passport system. The data digitization and migration had to be 
preceded by a data migration methodology, prepared by SP and approved by 
CPV/MEA. Following requirements were to be fulfilled at the time of data 
migration:- 
(a)  Provide checklist from the migrated data to Project Director for 
verification, including number of records, validations, highlight errors, 
abnormalities and deviations. 
(b)  A final approval of Project Director for migrated/digitized data. 
Audit requisitioned the data regarding migration methodology prepared by 
service provider and approved by the Ministry and approval of the Project 
Director for migrated/digitized data, which was not provided to audit.  
The Ministry stated (November 2015) that a document  on data migration 
methodology (Data Migration Rules Specification version 1.5) was prepared by 
the Service Provider and approved by the MEA and more than 70 million records 
were migrated as part of the base data migration process.  However, this 
document was not shared with Audit. 
 In the absence of production of any record relating to data migration despite 
several requests during audit and in the absence of production of any evidence 
with the reply (final approval of Project Director for migrated/digitized data), 
audit was not able to ascertain whether legacy data as maintained in PISON 
(previous system) was actually transferred to PRIDE (new system) or not. 
 
4.5 Internal controls related to reconciliation of receipts  
We examined the internal controls related to reconciliation of receipts (online as 
well as at PSKs) from passport services. We observed following: 
• Normal passport fee was collected online at the time of applying for 
passport. However Tatkaal fees and penalties were collected from the 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 41  
applicants in cash at PSKs and RPO. Scrutiny of records revealed that a 
bipartite agreement had been signed only between TCS and SBI with 
respect to banking arrangements on Passport Seva Project, whereas the 
Ministry which was responsible for transfer of its receipts to CFI was not 
even a party in the agreement.  
 
• Application fees received online is directly deposited in the SBI account. 
No periodic reconciliation of these receipts with online applications was 
done by the Ministry.  
 
The Ministry replied (February 2016) that tripartite agreement among 
accredited bank, service provider and Ministry was being finalised. It further 
stated that in respect of online receipt, test check was conducted on 6 
January 2016 and reconciliation was being carried out between SBI and TCS. 
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as no such reconciliation was done 
during the period covered under review. Moreover, reconciliation of online 
receipts needs to be done by the Ministry also.  
 
Conclusion 
The terms of MSA were not drafted by the Ministry carefully. Ministry also made 
payment of incentives as per the old system which was not justifiable. Further, 
deviation in the methodology of calculation i.e., by reducing number of citizens 
from 99 per cent to 90 per cent  and from 95 per cent  to 90 per cent  had direct 
impact on the payments being made to SP. PSP prescr ibed programme 
governance structure (Empowered Committee, Programm e Management 
Committee) to monitor the implementation of the Project and provide guidance. 
The prescribed meetings of Empowered Committee were not held and a number 
of policy decisions were carried out without its approval. As the Programme 
Management Committee was not met, all Change Control Notes relaxing SLA 
parameters were carried out without the approval of the PMC. In the absence of 
requisite meetings of governance level committees, programme governance was 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project 
 42  
 
weak. Internal controls related to reconciliation of online receipts were weak as 
no periodic reconciliation of these receipts with online applications was done by 
the Ministry. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex 
  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project 
 
 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex – I 
(Refer to Para No. 3.3)  
Waiting time at PSKs of Delhi 
 
Fortnight Name of PSK Category of 
PSK 
Average no. of 
Applications 
processed per 
day 
Counters A 
(RFP) 
Operational 
Counters 
(A) 
Shortage   
(-)/ 
Excess 
(+) 
Wait 
time A 
(in 
minutes) 
Counter 
B (RFP) 
Operational 
Counters 
(B) 
Shortage   
(-)/ Excess 
(+) 
Wait 
time B 
(in 
minutes) 
Counter 
C (RFP) 
Opera-
tional 
Counters 
(C) 
Shortage   
(-)/ 
Excess 
(+) 
Wait 
time C 
(in 
minutes) 
Total 
wait 
time 
A+B+C 
(in 
minutes) 
Jan 1 to Jan 
15 
Bhikaji Cama Place  Medium  250 20 7 -13 0.92 5 3 -2 20.54 3 2 -1 15.83 37.29 
Gurgaon Large 598 30 10 -20 7.09 8 3 -5 54.62 4 3 -1 13.28 74.99 
Herald House-ITO Large 1046 30 25 -5 7.96 8 10 2 54.57 4 7 3 14.79 77.32 
Shalimar Place Large 525 30 12 -18 4.57 8 4 -4 10.98 4 4 0 30.98 46.53 
Jan 16 to Jan 
31 
Bhikaji Cama Place Medium  248  20 8 -12 0.73 5 3 -2 15.3 3 2 -1 17.07 33.1 
Gurgaon Large 539 30 12 -18 6.51 8 4 -4 54.91 4 3 -1 11.01 72.43 
Herald House-ITO Large 947 30 28  -2 8.46 8 11 3 44.33 4 7 3 16.09 68.88  
Shalimar Place Large 509 30 14 -16 5.29 8 4 -4 10.2 4 4 0 34.73 50.22 
 Feb 1 to Feb 
15 
Bhikaji Cama Place Medium  326 20 9 -11 4.23 5 3 -2 13.76 3 2 -1 17.65 35.64 
Gurgaon Large 594 30 12 -18 6.65 8 4 -4 46.1 4 4 0 7.84 60.59 
Herald House-ITO Large 1104 30 28  -2 8.48+  8 12 4 40.84  4 7 3 14.35 63.67 
Shalimar Place Large 540 30 14 -16 6.51 8 4 -4 13.64 4 4 0 26.57 46.72 
 Feb 16 to 
Feb 28 
Bhikaji Cama Place Medium  394 20 9 -11 7.37 5 3 -2 23.64 3 2 -1 17.79 48.8  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
44  
 
  
Gurgaon  Large  655  30  12  -18  7.72  8 4 -4 52.56  4 4 0 8.53  68.81 
Herald House -ITO  Large  1273  30  28  -2 9.16  8 12  4 69.23  4 6 2 29.32  107.71 
Shalimar Place  Large  661  30  14  -16  7.87  8 4 -4 13.7  4 4 0 31.32  52.89 
March 1 to  
March 15 
Bhikaji Cama Place  Medium  323  20  9 -11  7.44  5 3 -2 18.5  3 2 -1 16.76  42.7 
Gurgaon  Large  518  30  12  -18  9.2  8 4 -4 43.78  4 4 0 9.58  62.56 
Herald House -ITO  Large  1114  30  28  -2 7.42  8 12  4 59.53  4 6 2 24.58  91.53 
Shalimar Place  Large  570  30  14  -16  5.23  8 4 -4 12.35  4 4 0 24.29  41.87 
March 15 to  
March 30 
Bhikaji Cama Place  Medium  296  20  8 -12  7.19  5 3 -2 20.12  3 2 -1 33.04  60.35 
Gurgaon  Large  543  30  11  -19  7.7  8 4 -4 60.94  4 3 -1 12.04  80.68 
Herald House -ITO  Large  1495  30  25  -5 8.76  8 10  2 61.1  4 6 2 33.73  103.59 
Shalimar Place  Large  577  30  13  -17  5.46  8 4 -4 13.4  4 3 -1 26.15  45.01 
April 1 to  
April 15 
Bhikaji Cama Place  Medium  282  20  8 -12  7.06  5 3 -2 20.41  3 3 0 26.3  53.77 
Gurgaon  Large  554  30  12  -18  7.27  8 4 -4 60.16  4 4 0 15.29  82.72 
Herald House -ITO  Large  1344  30  28  -2 6.68  8 12  4 66.24  4 8 4 27.39  100.31 
Shalimar Place  Large  595  30  14  -16  4.49  8 4 -4 18.85  4 3 -1 26.73  50.07 
April 16 to  
April 30 
BhikajiCama Place  Medium  326  20  8 -12  8.92  5 3 -2 24.58  3 3 0 21.48  54.98 
Gurgaon  Large  668  30  12  -18  7.03  8 5 -3 60.72  4 3 -1 13.37  81.12 
Herald House -ITO  Large  1436  30  27  -3 7.86  8 12  4 80.65  4 7 3 26.45  114.96 
Shalimar Place  Large  641  30  14  -16  4.73  8 4 -4 14.7  4 3 -1 21.53  40.96 
TOTAL    21491  880  485  -395  151.07  232  179  -53  1174.95  120  129  9 665.86  2052.77 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
 
45  
Annex-II 
(Refer to Para No. 4.2, 4.2.4) 
Service Level Metrics 
SLA 
No. SLA Parameter Baseline Metrics Lower Performance Higher 
Performance Breach Method of Measurement 
  Metric  Score  Metric  Score  Metric  Score  Metric   
I.  Efficiency Parameters  
IA. External Efficiency (Baseline Score = 30)  
1. Average Time Spent by citizen 
(walk-in) at PFC during Peak 
Hours (Wait time + Service 
Time)   
[Average must be achieved with 
the Time Spent by 99% or more 
of the citizens being within 45 
minutes] 
<45 
minutes 
8 >=45 
minutes 
4 <30 
minutes 
12 >60 
minutes 
1. Average for a quarter for each 
PFC 
 2. Measured from the time a 
token is issued to the time full 
set of services are completed  
3. PH for this metric will be a 
span of 2 hours to be identified 
by SP in consultation with MEA 
at the beginning of every year 
2. Average Time Spent by citizen 
(online) at PFC during Peak 
Hours (Wait time + Service 
Time)   
[Average must be achieved with 
the Time Spent by 99% or more 
of the citizens being within 25 
minutes] 
<25 
minutes 
4 >=25 
minutes 
2 <18 
minutes 
6 >35 
minutes 
1. Average for a quarter for each 
PFC.  
2. Measured from the time a 
token is issued to the time full 
set of services are completed  
3. PH for this metric will be a 
span of 2 hours to be identified 
by SP in consultation with MEA 
at the beginning of every year 
3. Average Time spent by citizen 
(walk-in) at PFC  
during Non-Peak Hours (Wait 
time + Service Time)   
[Average must be achieved with 
the Time Spent by 95% or more 
of the citizens being within 30 
minutes and the Time Spent by 
4% or less of the citizens being 
within 45 minutes] 
<30 
minutes 
7 >=30 
minutes 
3   >45 
minutes 
1. Average for a quarter for each 
PFC. 
2. Measured from the time a 
token is issued to the time full 
set of services are completed  
3. NPH for this metric will be all 
those hours not identified as PH 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
46  
SLA 
No. SLA Parameter Baseline Metrics Lower Performance Higher 
Performance Breach Method of Measurement 
4. Average Time spent by citizen 
(online) at PFC during Non-Peak 
Hours (Wait time + Service 
Time)   
[Average must be achieved with 
the Time Spent by 95% or more 
of the citizens being within 18 
minutes and the Time Spent by 
4% or less of the citizens being 
within 25 minutes] 
<18 
minutes 
3 >=18 
minutes 
2   >25 
minutes 
1. Average for a quarter for each 
PFC.  
2. Measured from the time a 
token is issued to the time full 
set of services are completed 
3. NPH for this metric will be all 
those hours not identified as PH 
5. Average Turnaround time of 
passport application related 
requests-
response cycle  
(except transactions involving 
document upload) including 
initial page loading during 
application process on Portal   
[Average must be achieved with 
maximum turnaround time for 
90% or more of the sample 
cases being within 5 seconds, 
and maximum turnaround time 
for 9% or less of the sample 
cases being within 8 seconds] 
<5 seconds 4 >=5 
seconds 
2 <2 
seconds 
5 >8 
seconds 
1. End-user measurement 
system (automated 
measurement as part of SLA 
tool) will be adopted and 
frequency of measurement shall 
be 4 test transactions per hour 
during 6 AM to 11PM and 1 
transaction per hour during 11 
PM to 6 AM.  
2. Measured as the elapsed time 
between the action link/button 
being clicked and its response 
appearing on portal.  
3. Measured over a leased 
circuit or equivalent of 64kb/s. 
4. Test data to be identified 
distinctly and path taken by test 
data to be similar to real 
transaction.  
5. Cache to be cleared before 
measuring  
6. DNS servers should simulate 
access by end user and not 
answered locally 
6. Average Turnaround time for 
transactions involving document 
<45 
seconds 
 
4 
>=45 
seconds 
2 <30 
seconds 
5 >60 
seconds 
1. End-user measurement 
system (automated 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
 
47  
SLA 
No. SLA Parameter Baseline Metrics Lower Performance Higher 
Performance Breach Method of Measurement 
upload on Portal   
[Average must be achieved with 
maximum turnaround time for 
90% or more of the sample 
cases being within 45 seconds, 
and maximum turnaround time 
for 9% or less of the sample 
cases being within 60 seconds] 
measurement as part of SLA 
tool) will be adopted and 
frequency of measurement shall 
be 1 test transaction per hour 
during 6 AM to 11 PM.  
2. Measured as the elapsed time 
between the action link/button 
being clicked and its response 
appearing on portal.  
3. Measured over a leased 
circuit or equivalent of 64kb/s 
with attachments of 300 Kb for 
each test case.  
4. Test data to be identified 
distinctly and path taken by test 
data to be similar to real 
transaction.  
5. DNS servers should simulate 
access by end user and not 
answered locally 
  IB. Internal Efficiency (Baseline Score = 15)  
7. Average request - response 
cycle time at PFC/PBO for 
workflow interaction 
<3 
seconds 
7 >=3 
seconds 
3   >6 seconds 1. Average of all cycles 
invoked for passport 
application in a quarter will be 
computed for measuring 
compliance.  
2. Measured as the elapsed 
time between the time an 
action link/button is clicked and 
the time its response appears. 
3. SLA measuring tool will 
capture the time taken data for 
all the clients across all the 
transactions for measuring this 
metric. 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
48  
SLA 
No. SLA Parameter Baseline Metrics Lower Performance Higher 
Performance Breach Method of Measurement 
8. Average response time at PFC/ 
PBO for interaction involving 
document download from 
Central Server 
<4 
seconds 
8 >=4 
seconds 
4   >6 seconds 1. Average of all cycles 
invoked for downloading an 
application and its attachments 
in a quarter will be computed 
for measuring compliance.  
2. Measured as the elapsed 
time between the time a 
request is submitted and the 
time the documents appear.  
3. SLA measuring tool will 
capture the time taken data for 
all the clients across all the 
transactions for measuring this 
metric. 
II. Effectiveness Parameters (Baseline Score = 35)  
IIA. External Effectiveness (Baseline Score = 14)  
9. Availability of ALL Services over 
Internet 
>99.9% 5 <=99.9% 2   <99% 1. The statistics from EMS, 
analysis of event log shall be 
used to determine availability 
of online services over the 
Internet (For this purpose the 
number of connection failures 
for the sessions initiated by the 
internal users shall also be 
considered).   
2. SP shall ensure that all such 
errors are logged and such 
logs should be accessible for 
Review/report through EMS.  
3. End-to-end loop back 
mechanism must be 
established for checking the 
availability of services. 4. Even 
one service being not available 
will mean no service being 
available. 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
 
49  
SLA 
No. SLA Parameter Baseline Metrics Lower Performance Higher 
Performance Breach Method of Measurement 
10 . Answering of call within 3 rings 
by the Call Centre 
>99.9% of 
all the 
calls 
2 <=99.9% 1   <95% Statistics from call logging and  
tracing system to be set up by 
SP 
11 . Resolution/closure of a service 
call by the Call Centre 
<2 
minutes 
2 >=2 
minutes 
1   >5 minutes 1. Records and logs 
maintained by SP  
2. PMU to check the above 
records every quarter  
3. PMU to conduct random 
surveys of citizen each quarter 
12 . Quality (error-free) Passport 
services, to the extent of SP’s 
responsibility 
100% 5 <100% 0   <99.999% Citizen Feedback Survey b y 
3rd Party 
 
  II B Internal Effectiveness (Baseline Score = 9)  
13 . Availability of ALL Services at 
ALL PFCs/ PBOs 
>99.9% 5 <=99.9% 2   <99% 1. The statistics from EMS, 
analysis of event log shall be 
used to determine availability 
of online services over the 
Internet (For this purpose the 
number of connection failures 
for the sessions initiated by the 
internal users shall also be 
considered).  
 2. SP shall ensure that all 
such errors are logged and 
such logs should be accessible 
for Review/report through 
EMS.  
3. End-to-end loop back 
mechanism must be 
established for checking the 
availability of services. 4. Even 
one service being not available 
will mean no service being 
available. 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
50  
SLA 
No. SLA Parameter Baseline Metrics Lower Performance Higher 
Performance Breach Method of Measurement 
14 . Submission of CCN to 
PMU/MEA, from the time of 
request for 
enhancement/change 
<15 days 1 >=15 
days 
0   >21 days Records maintained by 
MEA/CPV/PMU 
15 . Timeliness of implementation of 
Change from the date of 
approval of CCN/non - CCN, 
within the agreed time 
100% 1 <100% 0   <95% Records maintained by 
MEA/CPV/PMU 
16 . Employee satisfaction with SP’s 
services (PFC & PBO) 
>80% 2 <=80% 1    Employee Survey by PMU 
          
  II C Technical Effectiveness (Baseline Score = 12) 
17 . Availability of Passport System 
at each location (PFC & PBO) 
>99.9% 5 <=99.9% 2   <99% Measured from the logs 
generated by EMS Server. 
18 . Availability of ALL systems at 
DC & DRC 
>99.9% 5 <=99.9% -3   <99% Measured from the logs 
generated by EMS Server. 
19 . Availability of Security Solution 
at DC and DRC 
100% 2 <100% -2   <99.999% Measured using EMS. 
(24x7x365 days). 
III. Customer-friendliness Parameters (Baseline Score = 20) 
IIIA Environmental Parameters (Baseline Score = 10) 
20 . Cleanliness Index (rating) of 
PFCs 
100% 3 <100% 2   <90% Inspections by PMU 
21 . Operating the Air conditioners 
during business hours 
>99% 2 <=99% 1   <80% 1. Log of Power consumption 
2. Except for power outage 
hours 
22 . Wearing of Uniform by the SP 
personnel at PFCs 
100% 1 <100% 0    Inspections by PMU 
23 . Comfort, convenience and 
overall experience (including 
Ambience and Amenities) at 
PFC 
90% 4 <=90% 2    Citizen Feedback Survey by 
3rd Party 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
 
51  
SLA 
No. SLA Parameter Baseline Metrics Lower Performance Higher 
Performance Breach Method of Measurement 
IIIB Customer Relations (Baseline Score = 10) 
24 . Courtesy to citizens 90% 3 <=90% 1    Citizen Feedback Survey by 
3rd Party 
25 . Guidance & help to citizens   90% 3 <=90% 1    Citi zen Feedback Survey by 
3rd Party 
26 . Professionalism/ Relevant 
Knowledge/ Communication 
Skills of agents at PFC 
100% 2 <100% 1   <90% Inspection by PMU 
27 . Exception-handling capability 100% 2 <100% 1   <90%  Inspection by PMU 
Note:  1. If the measurement tool and/or data equiv alent to more than 5% of sample size is missing or unavailable for a particular SLA metric or if the t ool is found to 
be unreliable then the quarterly credit for that me tric would be counted as Zero. Further, if such lap ses occur in any of the consecutive quarters then t his 
would be treated as breach.  
2.  The SLA measurement tool designed & developed b y SP shall be tested and certified for its accuracy , reliability and completeness by a 3rd Party befor e it is 
deployed.  
3.  With respect to SLA metrics 1 to 4 in the above  table; the amounts payable to the SP towards servi ce charges shall be computed PFC-wise basing on the  
performance of each PFC against SLA. 
  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
52  
Annex-III 
(Refer to Para No. 4.2.2) 
Total Payment made towards Walk-in category 
Quarter Period 
Total 
Transactional 
Revenue SLA 
performance 
No. of service 
application walk-in 
mode 
Walk-in PCC 
Amount drawn 
Walk-in amount 
@ Rs. 199 PCC amount @Rs. 108.23 
1st  quarter 12.6.2012 to 31.8.2012 230420601 5121 105 1019079 11364 
2nd quarter 1.9.2012 to 30.11.2012 261231265 1045 2 207955 216 
3rd  quarter 1.12.2012 to 28.2.2013 293694260 1987 6 39 5413 649 
4 th  quarter 1.3.2013 to 31.5.2013 313960959 5958 3 1185642 325 
5th  quarter 1.6.2013 to 31.8.2013 276130176 5739 86 11 42061 9308 
6th  quarter 1.9.2013 to 30.11.2013 273500000 5461 460 1086739 49785.80 
7th  quarter 1.12.2013 to 28.2.2014 329039582 4198 458 835402 49569.34 
8 th  quarter 1.3.2014 to 31.5.2014 337451962 2064 1205 410736 130417.15 
9th  quarter 1.6.2014 to 31.8.2014 352290203 2409 1268 479391 137235.64 
10 th  quarter 1.9.2014 to 31.11.2014 371556368 1369 1003 272431 108554.69 
11 th  quarter 1.12.2014 to 28.2.2015 431134019 978 1142 194622 123598.66 
12 th  quarter 1.3.2015 to 31.5.2015 456315292 709 1286 141091 139183.78 
Total  7370562 760207.06 
Total Payment made towards Walk-in category 7370562+760207.06 = 8130769.06 
 
Quarter Period No. of service application walk-in mode Amount drawn 
4 th  quarter 1.3.2013 to 31.5.2013 5958 1185642 
5th  quarter 1.6.2013 to 31.8.2013 5739 1142061 
6th  quarter 1.9.2013 to 30.11.2013 5461 1086739 
7th  quarter 1.12.2013 to 28.2.2014 4198 835402 
8 th  quarter 1.3.2014 to 31.5.2014 2064 410736 
9th  quarter 1.6.2014 to 31.8.2014 2409 479391 
10 th  quarter 1.9.2014 to 31.11.2014 1369 272431 
Total  27198 5412402 
As per published annual data of 2013 and 2014, official and diplomatic services rendered = 4086 

Report No. 7 of 2016  
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
 
53  
Annex-IV 
(Refer to Para No. 4.3.2) 
Details of CCNs billed and paid to M/s Tata Consultancy Services Ltd  
SI. No. CCN No  Particulars  Bill Amount  S.Tax  
Total Amount 
(including 
S.tax) in Rs.  
Amount Paid 
(including 
S.tax) in Rs.  
1.   CCN 0048  Touch Screen Monitor  364960  251994  2290781  2290781  
2.   CCN 0139  Manual application submission at RPO in exceptional situation  1005952  
3.   CCN 0142  Additional functionality for PSK VO to send application directly to 
PBO,GO 
517875  
4.   CCN 0148  Bangalore Police Thana users training  150000  
5.   CCN 0156  Manpower Charges  20428571  2524971  22953542  22953542  
6.   CCN 0135  Separation of PSK &  PBO for Co -located sites” of Dehradun, 
Shimla and Raipur.  
12344484  1180883  13525367  13525367  
7.   CCN 0154  Design install and Display Public notice in 77 PSK  1155000  142758  1297758  1297758  
8.   CCN 157  Infrastructure Cost - PSP Mobile Application  24563  3036  27599  27599  
9.   CCN 0156 -II  Manpower Charges  5523810.00  682743  6206553  6206553  
10.   CCN 0135 -II  AMC for Hardware & software for co -located PSK  2492055  289145  2781200  2781200  
11.   CCN 0149  PSP Thana Integration  4113125  508382  4621507  7494713  
12.   CCN 0169  Shifting WAN link in Surat RPO  100000  12360  112360  
13.   CCN 0158  Supply of hardware and software for LSI on Passport booklet  2457143  303703  2760846  
14.   CCN 0156 -III  Manpower Charges  3,16,66,667  3914000  35580667  35580667  
15.   CCN 0181  Camp  1380199  170593  1550790  1550790  
16.   CCN 0181 -II  Camp during Apr'14 -Jul'14  277711  34325  312036  312036  
17.   CCN 0158 -II  AMC for LSI hardware & software  375315  46389  421704  421704  
18.   CCN -156  Manpower Charges  1071429  132429  1203858    
19.   CCN -156 -II  Manpower Charges  2809523  347257  3156780  
20.   CCN 0135 -II  RE Qtr -1 year 2  540000  66744  606744  606744  
21.   CCN 216   Grant Passport with validity in months and to till a specific date  1172619  144936  1317555  4741859  
22.   CCN 222  Changes in cancelled/rescheduled appointment opening. 35714  4414  40128  

Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 
54  
SI. No. CCN No  Particulars  Bill Amount  S.Tax  
Total Amount 
(including 
S.tax) in Rs.  
Amount Paid 
(including 
S.tax) in Rs.  
23.   CCN 227  Functionality to download lost/revoked passport data from PSP 
system for CBI INTERPOL’s users. 
827381  102264  929645  
24.   CCN 228  Changes in PSP system for new state ‘Telangana’  333333  41200  374533  
25.   CCN 229  Changes in Back office functionalities.  1851191  228807  2079998  
26.   CCN 0135 -III  RE Qtr -2 year 2  540000  66744  606744  606744  
27.   CCN -244  Facility for registering and tracking of the Consular Services  2601190  321507  2922697  2922697  
28.   CCN -220  Change in Formats related  to LoC  Permit Application  386905  47821  434726  9242948  
29.   CCN -236  Misc -Enhancement in PSP Back Office  1369048  169214  1538262  
30.   CCN -238  Introduction of Transgender & Orissa will be renamed to Odissa  2005952  247936  2253888  
31.   CCN -239  Misc  chages in Dash Board and MIS report  607143  75043  682186  
32.   CCN -247  Display PPT details to Immigration users  535714  66214  601928  
33.   CCN -248  Integration of devices  1482143  183193  1665336  
34.   CCN -249  Misc  chages in Diplomatic and Official PPT application  1029762  127279  1157041  
35.   CCN -250  Misc  enhancement in PSP online System  809524  100057  909581  
36.   CCN -245  Misc -Enhancement in PSP Back Office  886905  109621  996526  2253889  
37.   CCN -253  Special categ ory of appointment in PSK & Camps  1029762  127279  1157041  
38.   CCN -258  Changes in Police Module  89286  11036  100322  
39.   CCN -272  Software Setup & Support Service at Gulbarga PSLK  117772  21329  139101  139101  
40.   CCN -135  Resident Engineers Charges 3rd Quarter of Year 2  540000  66744  606744  606744  
41.   CCN -158  2nd   Year AMC for LSI  375315  46389  421704  421704  
  TOTAL      120345779  115985140  
 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 55 
Glossary 
Sl.No.  Abbreviation Full Form 
 A  
1. ARN Application Reference Number  
 C  
2. CCNs Change Control Notes 
3. CDAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
4. CPO Central Passport Organisation 
5. CPPF Central Passport Printing Facility 
6. CPV Consular Passport Visa 
7. CFI Consolidated Fund of India 
 D  
8. DIT Department of Information & Technology 
9. DC Data Centre 
10. DEITY Department of Electronics & Information Technology 
11. DRC Disaster Recovery Centre 
 E  
12. ECR Emigration Check Required 
 F  
13. FRRO Foreigners Regional Registration Office 
 G  
14 . GoI Government of India 
 I  
15. ISP India Security Press 
16. IT Information Technology 
 M  
17. MIS Management Information System 
18. MSA Master Service Agreement 
19. MMP Mission Mode Project 
20. MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
21. MRPs Machine Readable Printers  
22. MTNL Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited 
23. MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
 N  
24. NISG National Institute for Smart Government 
25. NIC National Information Centre 
 P  
26. PACCs  Passport Application Collection Centres  
27. PCC Police Clearance Certificate 
28. PSC Parliamentary Standing Committee 
29. PP Personal Particulars 
30. PPP Public Private Partnership  
31. PIA Passport Issuing Authority 
32. PVR  Police Verification Report 
33. PMU Project Management Unit  
34. PSLK Passport Seva Lagu Kendra 

Report No. 7 of 2016 
Performance Audit of Implementation of Passport Seva Project  
 56 
 
35. PMC Program Management Committee 
36. PSP Passport Seva Project 
37. PSK Passport Seva Kendra 
 R  
38. RPO Regional Passport Office 
39. RFP Request for Proposal 
 S  
40. SBI State Bank of India 
41. SLA Service Level Agreement 
42. SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
43 SP Service Provider 
44.    STQC Standardisation, Testing, & Quality Cer tification 
45.    SMS   Short Messaging Services 
 T  
46. TCS Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. 
 U  
47. UT Union Territory 
 V  
48. VC Verification Certificate 
49. VO-GO Verification Officer-Granting Officer 
50. VAS Value Added Service 