सत्यमेव जयते

Report on
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Union Government (Civil)
Report No. 8 of 2016


Report on
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended March 2015

Union Government (Civil)
Report No. 8 of 2016


Report No. 8 of 2016

Preface |

Executive Summary y-viii
Chapter -I | Introduction 1-4
Chapter - II | Social Audit Units and Resource Persons 5-11
Chapter - III | Planning and Execution of Social Audit 12-22
Chapter - IV | Follow up of Social Audit 23 - 25

Annexes 27 - 30

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011

(Social Audit Rules)

i


Report No. 8 of 2016

This report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India containing the
results of audit on Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011 (Social Audit Rules) has been prepared for
submission to the President of India under Article 151 of Constitution.

In last three years (2012-15), ₹ 1,14,155 crore was incurred on Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. To ensure the
optimum utilisation of fund and extent of the success of the implementation
of the Scheme for the benefit of the stakeholders, social audit mechanism
was institutionalised and notified in April 2011. With a view to review the
progress in implementation of Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011, we decided to
take up this audit.

The audit covered Social Audit Units and evaluation of Social Audits
conducted by the states during 2014-15. Field audit of relevant records of
the Ministry of Rural Development, State Governments and Districts, Blocks
and Panchayat level offices was conducted between April 2015 and August
2015.

The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

iii


Report No. 8 of 2016

Executive Summary

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme

Background

Rules, 2011 (Rules) were enacted with the objectives to promote transparency
and accountability in the implementation of programme, inform and educate
people about their rights and entitlements, provide platform for people to
express their needs and grievances, promote people’s participation in all stages
of the implementation and strengthening the scheme by deterring corruption
and improving implementation. Rules provide nature of infrastructure and
procedure to conduct the Social Audit.

The Audit ofimplementation of Rules was conducted to assess the establishment
of Social Audit Units, planning and conduct of Social Audit. For this purpose
we covered 1140 Gram Panchayats in 25 states where Social Audits were
conducted during 2014-15.

The important findings of the audit are given below:
Social Audit Unit and Resource Persons
+ Social Audit Units were not set up in Arunachal Pradesh, Goa,

Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, and
Uttarakhand.

(Para 2.1)
e In Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Punjab,
Rajasthan and West Bengal, Social Audit Units were functioning

as a cell within the department of Rural Development of the State
Governments.

(Para 2.1)
« In Madhya Pradesh, Manipur and Mizoram, though societies
have been set up as Social Audit Units but these were headed by

departmental officers as additional charge. In Odisha, post of
Director had been lying vacant since March 2014.

(Para 2.1)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

v


Report No. 8 of 2016

Shortage of resource persons to support and carry out Social Audits
was observed. In 14 states where independent Social Audit Units had
been established, the shortage of 43 (22 per cent) State Resource
Persons, 358 (24 per cent) District Resource Persons and 1957
(57 per cent) Block Resource Persons were observed. In five states
assessment of Village Resource Persons was not done whereas in nine
states, Village Resource Persons were adequately identified/deployed.

(Para 2.3.1)
States did not take the advantage of the Special Project launched by

the Ministry to support the conduct of Social Audit and also failed to
strengthen the resources for Social Audit.

(Para 2.5)

Planning and Execution of Social Audit

Annual Calendar to conduct the Social Audit was not prepared in
majority of States.

(Para 3.1.1)

Out of 2,34,594 GPs to be covered for Social Audit in 25 States
during 2014-15, only 1,20,841 GPs (51 per cent) were covered.
Audit selected 1124 GPs where Social Audit was conducted during
2014-15. In 368 GPs Social Audit was conducted twice whereas in
756 GPs once.

(Para 3.1.2) & (Para 3.2)

Instances of non-requisition/non-production of records in large number
of cases were noted. In some cases evidence in support of requisition/
verification of records were not enclosed with Social Audit Reports.

(Para 3.2.1)

In Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab, Tripura and
Uttar Pradesh, door to door visits were not carried out to meet
beneficiaries and share relevant information with them.

(Para 3.2.1)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011

(Social Audit Rules)

vi


.

Report No. 8 of 2016

Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh did
not have any evidence of physical verification of work sites. In Punjab
and Haryana, physical verification of work sites was not carried out.

(Para 3.2.1)

Instances of non-convening of Gram Sabha meetings, low participation
of village community, non-discussion of Social Audit findings, non-
preparation of Social Audit Reports in local language and prescribed
format, non-video recording and uploading of proceedings of Gram
Sabha and Social Audit Reports on website, etc. were observed.

(Para 3.3)

Follow up of Social Audit

.

In Assam, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Jnarkhand,
Karnataka, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and West Bengal, block
level public hearings were not held to discuss Social Audit findings
and to ensure that the orders were issued in open.

(Para 4.2)

Andhra Pradesh and Telangana did not constitute State
Employment Guarantee Council after April2013. In Gujarat, Haryana,
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab, State Employment Guarantee
Council did not monitor action taken by the State Governments on Social
Audit Reports.

(Para 4.4)
Summary of findings of the Social Audit was not submitted to
Comptroller and Auditor General of India by the States and action

taken on the Social Audit Reports was not incorporated in the annual
report to be laid before the State Legislature and Parliament.

(Para 4.5) & (Para 4.6)

Summary of Recommendations

Ministry may fix a time frame and impress upon the State
Governments to establish an independent SAU.

Ministry may impress upon the State Governments to ensure
availability of adequate trained resource persons at all levels.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011

(Social Audit Rules)

vii


Report No. 8 of 2016

e Effective steps may be taken to ensure the preparation of Annual
Calendar and its implementation shall also be monitored.

e Record management may be improved at all levels to facilitate
credibility of Social Audit.

e Social Audit Team may ensure verification of project sites and
conduct door to door visit in compliance with the extant provisions.

e Awareness amongst the stakeholders for full participation in the
Gram Sabha meetings on Social Audit may be ensured.

e Conducting of Social Audit meetings and reporting mechanism, as
per the provisions of Rules may be ensured.

e Follow up action at all levels as per provisions of the Rules may be
ensured.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

viii


Report No. 8 of 2016

CHAPTER-I

INTRODUCTION

Social Audit is an audit of a Scheme/Programme that is conducted jointly by
the Government functionaries and the people, especially by those people who
are affected by, or are the intended beneficiaries of such scheme. Hence,
Social Audit can be described as verification of the implementation of a
programme/scheme and its results by the community with active involvement
of the primary stakeholder. This is done by comparing official records
with actual ground realities, with the participation of the community in the
verification exercise and reading out the findings of the verification exercise
aloud in a public platform. Oral testimonies and facts are obtained from the
public and compared with the official records. The Social Audit process goes
beyond accounting for the money that has been spent to examine whether the
money was spent properly and has made a difference to people’s lives.

The major objectives of Social Audit are to promote transparency and
accountability in the implementation of programme, inform and educate
people about their rights and entitlements, provide a collective platform for
people to express their needs and grievances, promote people’s participation
in all stages of the implementation and strengthening the scheme by deterring
corruption and improving implementation.

1.1. Background

Section 17 of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
2005 (Act) states that the Gram Sabha would monitor the execution of works
within the Gram Panchayat (GP), conduct regular Social Audits of all the projects
under the scheme taken up within the GP. GP shall make available all relevant
records to the Gram Sabha for the purpose of conducting the Social Audit.

The Government of India, Ministry of Rural Development (Ministry), in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) under sub
section (1) of section 24 of the Act, has framed a set of Rules in April 2011
titled the “Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of
Scheme Rules-2011” (Rules).

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

1


Report No. 8 of 2016

The Rules inter-alia included Social Audit facilitation by the State Governments,
identification and creation of independent organization viz. Social Audit Unit
(SAU), process of conducting Social Audit and obligations of certain persons
in relation to Social Audit. As per 3 (1) of Rules, the State Government shall
facilitate conduct of Social Audit of the works taken up under the Act in every
GP at least once in six months in the manner prescribed under these Rules.
The Social Audit Unit (SAU), an independent organization, would facilitate
conduct of Social Audit by Gram Sabha with the help and support of Resource
Persons identified by State SAU at district and village levels. The Resource
Persons along with the primary stakeholders shall verify the records related to
payment, procurement of materials and other financial transactions, visit the
work sites, contact wage seekers, collate records and convene a Gram Sabha
to discuss the findings of the verification exercise and to review the compliance
on transparency and accountability, fulfilment of rights and entitlements of
labourers and proper utilization of funds. The Social Audit Report (SAR) shall
be prepared in local language based on their findings to be read out to the Gram
Sabha . The Gram Sabha will deliberate on the findings and the implementing
agencies have to respond to the report presented in the Gram Sabha .

1.2 Audit Objectives

The audit was conducted to assess:-

e Whether independent SAU were established with adequate resources
in each state;

e Whether planning of Social Audit was effective and Social Audits
conducted during 2014-15 were in accordance with extant orders.

e Whether follow up mechanism by State Employment Guarantee
Council (SEGC), Central Employment Guarantee Council (CEGC)
and Ministry of Rural Development (Ministry), etc. was adequate.

1.3. Audit Scope and Methodology

The audit covered 29 States to review the establishment of Social Audit
Unit, availability of resources persons and planning process. However, the
audit of the execution of Social Audit was restricted to 1140? GPs of 290
Districts in 25 States as in the remaining four states viz. Arunachal Pradesh,

1. Except Delhi as MGNERGS is not applicable.
2 Assam (49), Goa (20), Himachal Pradesh (23), Meghalaya (48), Mizoram, (28) Uttrakhand (32),
West Bengal (40) and in other States 50 GPs each

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

2


Report No. 8 of 2016

Kerala, Manipur and Nagaland, Social Audit was not done as per the
Rules. In each state, the GPs were selected from the randomized list of all
Social Audits done across the state during 2014-15 using by Simple Random
Sampling without Replacement (SRSWR) method.

An entry conference was held on 27 April 2015 with Ministry of Rural
Development (Ministry) to discuss audit methodology, scope, objectives
and criteria. In addition, entry conferences were also held by the
Pr. Accountants General/Accountants General with the State Government
before commencement of audit at State level. Audit included examination
of records of Ministry, State Government department responsible for
implementing Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme (MGNREGS), SAU Headquarters; District Programme Coordinators
(DPC) and Programme Officers (PO). Audit teams also visited selected GPs
for evaluation of the SAR and also POs/DPCs of selected GPs for evaluating
their support to Social Audit and follow up action on SAR taken by them.

Exit conference was held at the State level by the Pr. Accountant General/
Accountant General with the State Government, where state-specific findings
were discussed. After the conclusion of audit and consolidation and analysis
of audit findings, an exit conference was held with Ministry on 17 November
2015 wherein audit findings and recommendations were discussed. Replies
received from the Ministry (December 2015) have been suitably incorporated
in the Report.

1.4 Audit Criteria:

Audit criteria were derived from:
e Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005;

e Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of
Scheme Rules, 2011;

e Instructions issued by the Ministry and rules issued by State
Government and SAU from time to time in this regard;

e MGNREGA Operational Guidelines 2013 and Amendment thereon.
1.5 Structure of the Report

The audit issues have been analysed from an all-India perspective and the
layout of the Report is as under:

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

3


Report No. 8 of 2016
e Chapter 2 gives the status of SAUs, resource persons and their
capacity building.
e Chapter 3 deals with the planning and execution of Social Audit.
e Chapter 4 deals with the follow up action on SARs.

1.6 Acknowledgement

We wish to acknowledge the cooperation received from Ministry of Rural
Development, State Governments, SAUs, and MGNREGS implementing
departments in the States during the audit process.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

4


Report No. 8 of 2016

CHAPTER-II

SOCIAL AUDIT UNIT AND RESOURCE PERSONS

Section 4 of the Rules stipulates that State Government shall identify or
establish an independent organisation referred (to) as SAU to facilitate
conduct of Social Audit by Gram Sabha. This SAU may either be a Society
or a Directorate, independent of the implementing departments/agencies. The
Director/Chief Executive Officer of the Society/Directorate shall be a person
who has worked in the social sector for the rights of the people for not less than
ten years. The work may also be outsourced to an outside agency preferably
possessing adequate experience in rights and entitlement based programme.
The SAU shall have an independent staff structure comprising State Resource
Persons (SRP) and thematic experts, District Resource Persons (DRP), Block
Resource Persons (BRP) and Village Resource Persons (VRP). The SAU is
responsible for the following:

e build capacities of the Gram Sabha for conducting Social Audit
and towards this purpose identify, train and deploy suitable resourc-
es at village, block, district and state level, drawing from primary
stakeholder, civil society organisations having knowledge and experi-
ence of working for the rights of people;

° prepare Social Audit reporting formats, resource material, guidelines
and manuals for Social Audit process;

e create awareness amongst labourers about their rights and
entitlements under the Rules;

e facilitate verification of records with primary stakeholders and work
sites;

e facilitate smooth conduct of Social Audit Gram Sabha for reading out
and finalizing decisions after due discussions;

e host SARs including Action Taken Reports (ATRs) in the public
domain.

Further, as per Section 7 (6) of the Rules, cost of establishing the SAU
and conducting Social Audit shall be met by the Central Government as
central assistance in accordance with the instructions issued in this regard.
Ministry issued instruction/clarification (August 2012/April 2013) that the

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

5


Report No. 8 of 2016

cost of establishing SAU and conducting Social Audit in the States shall be
met from within the ‘Administrative Charges’ under MGNREGS. The States
may spend up to one per cent on SAU within the six per cent permissible
limit under this head.

2.1. Establishment of SAUs

Section 4 of the Rules stipulates that State Government shall identify or
establish an independent SAU to facilitate conduct of Social Audit by Gram
Sabha. This SAU may either be a Society or a Directorate, independent of
the implementing departments/agencies. Audit observed that in seven states’,
SAU was not established till date (Dec 2015). Of these, in five states i.e. Goa,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand and Uttrakhand, the
implementing agency is conducting the Social Audit in violation of provision
of Section 4 of Rules. In Kerala, Social Audit was being conducted by Social
Audit cell established in December 2010 under the provision of guidelines
issued in October 2007. In Arunachal Pradesh, the department of Rural
Development had engaged a private firm to conduct Social Audit in the
state. As per agreement (January 2014), Social Audit for 2013-14 was to be
completed within 12 months. No SAR had been submitted by the firm (July
2015) and only basic information of GPs was submitted. However, payment
of = 103.82 lakh had been made to the firm without completing the Social
Audit work.

In other States, we noted that;

e In eight statest SAUs were functioning as a cell within the department
of Rural Development of the State Governments. In all these states,
officers of the department of Rural Development had been given
additional charge as head of the SAUs.

e In four states’ though an independent SAUs was established, these
were headed by the officers of the Rural Development Departments. In
Odisha, the post of Director was lying vacant since March 2014.
Further, out of these four states, SAU in Odisha did not have its own
bank account.

3 Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, and
Uttarakhand.

4 Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan and West Bengal

5 Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram and Odisha

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

6


Report No. 8 of 2016

e In 10 88०४०, Societies/NGOs were functioning as independent SAUs
with full time Director as their head. In Gujarat, independent SAU
(NGO) was functioning up to January 2015 and establishment of new
SAU was in progress. In Meghalaya, SAU started functioning from
April 2015. Further, out of these 10 states, SAU in Tripura did not
have its own bank account.

From the above it is evident that even after four years of promulgation of
the Rules, independent SAU could not be established in 15 states and out
of 14 states where independent SAU was established, four states had the
independent SAU being headed by departmental officers. This adversely
affects the effective roll-out of Social Audits.

The issue of not-setting up of independent SAU was also taken up with
Ministry. Ministry stated (June 2015) that it had not given any time frame
for establishing the independent SAU to the State Governments. However,
in every Performance Review Committee and Review Meeting, State
Governments were advised to comply with the provisions of the Rules.

Ministry further replied (December 2015) that it had given the necessary
direction to the concerned states to set up independent SAU within three
months and to have a separate bank account of the SAU where one per
cent of the allocated budget for MGNREGS for the state could be directly
transferred at the beginning of the year.

2.2 Transparency in Recruitment Process

Norms of recruitment of staff of independent SAU issued by Ministry
(August 2014) stipulate that post of Director shall be filled by a social activist
experienced for not less than 10 years in conduct of Social Audit and right
based activities. Further, if retired government official is appointed by the
State for the position of Director, SAU, only officials who have not served
in any Government position for the last five years shall be eligible. We,
however, observed deviations viz.:

e In Meghalaya, the Director was appointed in April 2015 who was
superannuated in February 2015 by relaxing the prescribed criteria.

e In West Bengal, State Government appointed (April 2015) a retired
government official as Director, SAU despite knowing about his part

6 Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Meghalaya, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
Telangana and Uttar Pradesh

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

7


Report No. 8 of 2016

time association as Secretary with a NGO implementing programme
funded by West Bengal State Rural Livelihood Mission, Nation
Rural Livelihood Mission and MGNREGS. This violated the basic
requirement of separation of Social Audit personnel from the
implementing agencies of MGNREGS. Further, we also noted that
the weightage criteria prescribed by Ministry was not followed for
short-listing the DRPs.

Such deviations affect the independence of SAU.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that concerned states would be asked to
submit their response in writing.

2.3. Resource Persons for Social Audit

The SAU should have an independent staff structure comprising of State
Resource persons (SRPs) with the responsibility to evaluate the Social
Audit process and research and data analysis on the finding of Social Audit
and thematic experts, District Resource Persons (DRPs) responsible for
identification and training of Village Resource Persons (VRPs) and anchor
the Social Audit Team at district level, Block Resource Persons (BRPs) for
identifying and train GP level resource person and guide them during the
Social Audit verification process and Village Resource Persons (VRPs) to
conduct the Social Audit at field level. As per Ministry’s norms (July 2012),
the requirement of state team monitor in each state was fixed from seven
to 10 persons, district resource person from one to two persons for each
district, block resource person from two to three persons for each block and
village resource person from four to five persons for each GP depending on
the size of the State/District. Further, Section 4 of the Rules provides that
SAU shall identify and train appropriate number of SRPs, DRPs and VRPs
to facilitate the Gram Sabha in conducting Social Audit.

2.3.1 Availability of Resource Persons for Social Audit
The details of availability and shortage of Resource Persons for Social Audit
in respect of 29 states are shown in Annex-I. We noted that:
State Level Resource Person
e In 15 states, there was shortfall of 65 SRPs and no assessment was
made in six states. Appointment of resource persons in Assam and

Rajasthan is under process. No shortfall of resource persons was
noted in remaining six states.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

8


Report No. 8 of 2016

District Level Resource Person

e In 16 states, there was shortage of 481 DRPs, no assessment was
made in six states. Appointment of resource persons in Rajasthan
was under process. No shortfall of resource persons was noted in
remaining six states.

Block Level Resource Person

e In nine states, there was shortage of 2091 BRPs and no
assessment was made in 16 states. Appointment of resource persons in
Maharashtra was under process. No shortfall of resource persons
was noticed in three states.

Village Level Resource Person

e In three states, VRPs were not identified adequately by the State
Governments to carry out the social audit of GPs once in six month
as stipulated in the Rules. In 15 states, requirement of VRPs were
not assessed and identified. Requirement of VRPs were adequately
identified only in 11 states.

Further, even in 14 states where independent SAU was established, the
shortage of 43 (22 per cent) SRPs, 358 (24 per cent) DRPs and 1,957 (57
per cent) BRPs was observed. In five states, assessment of requirement of
VRPs was not done whereas in nine states, VRPs were adequately identified/
deployed.

Thus, shortage/inadequacy in deployment of independent resource persons
hampered the effective conduct of Social Audit.

Ministry accepted the observation and stated (December 2015) that directions
would be issued to all the states to ensure the deployment of resource persons
within a specified time frame.

2.4 Training of Resource Persons
As per section 4 of the Rules, SAU shall identify and train appropriate number
of SRPs, DRPs, BRPs and VRPs to facilitate the Gram Sabha in conducting

Social Audit. Training is inculcation of knowledge and professional skill for
the performance of Social Audit. We noted that:

e In Gujarat, there was shortfall of 22 to 27 per cent in
imparting training to Taluka (Block) Resources Group (BRPs) during
2012-15.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

9


Report No. 8 of 2016

e In Tripura, selection of VRPs and imparting training for facilitation
of Social Audit was not done.

e In Madhya Pradesh, 245 Village Social Animators (VSA) were trained
to facilitate Gram Samparicha Samiti in conducting Social Audit.
However, format for audit report were not filled properly by them.

* In West Bengal, various discrepancies were noted in finalizing SAR
due to insufficient training.

e In Assam, SAU has not adopted any mechanism to assess the
performance of its resources persons as well as to monitor the
inadequacies of its resources persons at different levels. Moreover,
SAU did not have any mechanism of briefing pre and post Social
Audit work except the basic training at the time of induction.

e In other states where Social Audit was conducted, the information
regarding training of resource persons was not furnished.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that it was in the process of developing
a standardized training module on Social Audit with Tata Institute of Social
Sciences for resource personnel and preparing a comprehensive calendar to
train them in phased manner.

2.4.1 Non Utilization of Funds for Training for Social Audit

Ministry, in March 2014, released ₹ 23.50 crore to National Institute of
Rural Development (NIRD) to implement a project on training of trainers/
capacity building of staff in the field of Social Audit. We however noted that
NIRD, at the instance of Ministry utilized = 20.39 crore towards Intensive
Participatory Planning Exercise (₹ 18.89 crore) and Sansad Aadrsh Gram
Yojana (र 1.50 crore) instead of Social Audit training. The reasons for non-
utilization of fund for training of Social Audit were not found on record. The
non-utilization of fund meant for capacity building for Social Audit diluted
its importance.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that steps would be taken for proper
utilisation of funds for training of Social Audit.

2.5 Special Project

In order to provide additional support to the States to conduct the Social

Audit as laid down under the Rules, Ministry decided (June 2014) to provide
technical assistance under a special project that would be in operation till

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

10


Report No. 8 of 2016

2017. Under this, the cost of engaging Social Audit resource persons at the
State and District level was to be reimbursed to the States/UT subject to
setting up of SAU, conduct of Social Audit and follow-up as prescribed by
the Ministry. The release to the States was to be made in two instalments
subject to certain conditions.

Ministry, in March 2015, released 79.20 lakh to the eight States’ under this
project. Of these, Nagaland and Punjab, despite not having independent
SAU, received ₹ 17.16 lakh under special project. In response to the audit
query, Ministry stated that no progress report had been received from the
States. Thus, even with the special project for provision of funds, Social
Audit could not be strengthened.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that it was taking the necessary steps to
ensure that funds for the special project were released to all concerned states.

2.6 Conclusion

The establishment of SAU as stipulated in Section 4 of the Rules was still not
completed in 15 states even after four years of promulgation of the Rules.
In the remaining 14 states where independent SAU was established, four
states, the independent SAU being headed by Departmental officers. Further,
there was a shortage in the availability of Resource Persons in most of the
States. Even in the 14 states where independent SAU was established, the
percentage of shortfall was 22 to 57 per cent. Capacity building was also not
ensured in states. States also did not take advantage of the Special Project
launched by the Ministry to support the conduct of Social Audit and also
failed to strengthen the resources for Social Audit.

2.7 Recommendations :

(i) Ministry may fix a time frame and impress upon the State
Governments to establish an independent SAU.

(ii) Ministry may impress upon the State Governments to ensure
availability of adequate trained resource persons at all levels.

7 Andhra Pradesh (€ 9.90 lakh), Chhattisgarh (€13.86 lakh), Gujarat (11.22 lakh), Nagaland (₹ 7.26
lakh), Punjab (₹ 9.90 lakh), Sikkim (% 5.94 lakh), Tamil Nadu (₹ 15.18 lakh) and Tripura (रे 5.94
lakh).

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

11


Report No. 8 of 2016

CHAPTER-III

PLANNING AND EXECUTION OF SOCIAL AUDIT

3.1. Planning

Section 6(1) of the Rules provides that each Social Audit Unit (SAU) shall
at the beginning of the year, frame an annual calendar to conduct at least
one Social Audit in each GP every six months. A copy of the calendar shall
be sent to all the DPCs for making necessary arrangements. The calendar
should lay out the sequence and dates of Gram Sabha and Social Audit public
hearing for all the GPs of the State. Any change in the actual conduct of
Social Audit vis-a-vis the Social Audit calendar approved, is to be considered
as a violation of the process and can take place only with the approval of
Director, SAU and Principal Secretary, Rural Development Department.

3.1.1 Calendar of Social Audit

In five states* annual calendar to conduct Social Audit of GPs was prepared
and in 14 states®, no annual calendar was prepared. Six states!° have not
furnished the information.

Thus, annual calendar to conduct Social Audit in each GP was not prepared
in majority of states.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that direction would be issued to all the
states to ensure the notification of the calendar for Social Audit with in a
specified time frame.

3.1.2 Shortfall in achieving Social Audit coverage
Out of 2,34,594 GPs to be covered for Social Audit in 25 States during

2014-15, only 1,20,841 (51 per cent) GPs were covered and in 1,13,753 GPs,
no Social Audit was conducted. The state-wise details are given in Annex-II.

३.2. Evaluation of Social Audit process

To assess the effectiveness of the Social Audit, we selected 1140 GPs!!

* Chhattisgarh (prepared in November 2014), Karnataka, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Sikkim

° Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Telangana, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal

10 Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Tripura

"Independent SAU- 448 GPs; Headed by officer of Rural Development Department - 178 GPs; Cell
within Deptt.-339 GPs and No SAU-175 GPs

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

12


Report No. 8 of 2016

(using SRSWR method) in 25 states! where in ₹ 414.89 crore’? was incurred
on MGNREGS works and Social Audit was stated to have been conducted
during 2014-15.We noted that in 16 GPs in six states’, State Government has
informed that Social Audit was conducted, however, it was observed during
field visit that Social Audit was actually not conducted which implied that
reliable data on Social Audit was not available with the State Governments.

Further, Section 3 (1) of the Rules stipulates that Social Audit should be
conducted in each GP at least twice a year. However, during 2014-15, Social
Audit was conducted in 1124 GPs, out of which in 368 GPs, Social Audits
were conducted twice and once in 756 GPs. Thus, 1492 Social Audits were
conducted instead of 2248 (1124 x2) as stipulated in the said provision and
there was a short fall of 756 (34 per cent) Social Audits. The state-wise
details are given in Annex-II.

Findings on the Social Audit conducted are detailed below:
3.2.1 Availability of records

Section 5 of the Rules and provisions of para 13 of Operational Guidelines
2013(OG) stipulate that Programme Officer shall ensure that all the records
and information of the implementing agencies including Action Taken Report
(ATR) on the previous Social Audit are properly collated and provided along
with photocopies to the SAU for facilitating conduct of Social Audit at least
15 days in advance of the scheduled date of meeting of the Gram Sabha
conducting Social Audit. The SAU teams shall conduct door to door visit
to meet beneficiaries of the MGNREGS and share relevant information with
them. These teams shall also visit project sites and physically verify whether
completed projects match the information contained in the records of the
implementing agencies.

In states where SAUs were working independently, we noted that:

e In Chhattisgarh, Gujarat and Meghalaya, evidence to ensure
availability of Measurement Book, Muster Roll, and Stock
Register, etc. was not on record. In Sikkim, in 12 GPs out of 50 GPs,
51 records pertaining to Stock Register, Work files, Measurement
Book, Asset Register and Photographs were not made available to
SAU team.

12. Except Arunachal Pradesh, Kerala, Manipur and Nagaland
13 In Gujarat expenditure on MGNREGS was made available only on 29 GPs out of 50 GPs.
14 Haryana (1), Jammu and Kashmir (8), Jharkhand (4), Punjab (1), Telangana (1) and Uttarakhand (1)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

13


Report No. 8 of 2016

In Tripura, neither the implementing agencies nor the SAU sought
any record/information from district/block/GP level as required
under the Rules. Therefore, there was little assurance of examination
of records by the SAU relating to execution of works and expenditure
incurred thereon.

In Karnataka, no communication was made by SAU to DPC/PO
seeking of records to be produced. In the test-checked GPs, few
cases of non-production of records were observed. The SAU had not
put in place any monitoring mechanism for production of records and
action taken thereon.

In Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, SAU sent intimation for
conducting Social Audit 4 to 13 days in advance by email instead of
the prescribed 15 days. Consequently, records relating to complete
expenditure were not made available for Social Audit.

In Tamil Nadu, all information and records obtained and examined
by SAU teams.

In 50 test checked GPs, in Uttar Pradesh, records were not provided
15 days in advance in 45 (90 per cent) GPs. In 13 (26 per cent) GPs,
records were provided on same day of Gram Sabha meeting. In five!’
out of 50 test-checked GPs, the line departments did not furnish
record of executed works to SAU team. In other GPs, the status of
executed works was not ascertained by POs.

Out of 497 GPs where Social Audit was conducted during 2014-15, in
197 6757९, door-to-door visit to meet beneficiaries of the MGNREGS
and share relevant information with them was not done.

In four states!’, there was no evidence of physical verification of
project sites.

In state, where independent SAU is headed by officer of Rural Development

Department/Panchayati Raj Department, we noted that:

16
17

(1) Charwa, block Chayal, district Kaushambi (2) GosaPrayagpur, block GanjMuradabad, district
Unnao (364) Laxmanpurmatahi, and Matiha block Balha districts Bahraich (5) Satijore block
Nababgaj district Bahraich
Gujarat (50), Meghalaya (48), Tripura (49) and Uttar Pradesh (50)

Chhattisgarh (33), Gujarat (50), Tripura (50) and Uttar Pradesh (50)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011

(Social Audit Rules)

14


Report No. 8 of 2016

e In Madhya Pradesh and Odisha, evidence of list of records being ex-
amined by SAU teams was not found on record, door-to-door visit was
not carried out to meet beneficiaries of the MGNREGS and share
relevant information with them and in Odisha, SAU teams did not
verify the project sites. In Madhya Pradesh, SAU teams partially
verified the project sites.

In states, where SAUs working as a cell within the department, we noted
that:

e In 48 GPs out of 49 test checked GPs of Assam, social auditor failed
to collect information and check the issues pertaining to maintenance
and collection of records. In 9 to 25 GPs records like, Job Card
Register, Asset Registers, Material Registers at work site, complaint
register though not maintained/updated but stated to be maintained in
SARs. Besides this, in 14 to 47 GPs, mis-match of figure of num-
ber of works executed, expenditure incurred, number of job card
holders, etc. was noticed in SARs. There was no evidence of door-
to-door visit to meet beneficiaries of the MGNREGS and physical
verification of work sites.

e In 34 out of 50 test checked GPs of Bihar, evidence in
support of verification of records such as copies of documents
were not enclosed with SARs. In another 14 GPs, SARs were not
available. There was no evidence of physical verification of work
sites, door-to-door visit to meet beneficiaries of the MGNREGS and
share relevant information with them.

e SAU teams in Haryana were collecting records on the date of Gram
Sabha meeting for Social Audit. There was no evidence of physical
verification of work sites and door-to-door visit to meet beneficiaries
of the MGNREGS and share relevant information with them.

e SARs in Maharashtra were filled up perfunctorily making it difficult
to ascertain the verification status. In Jawhar block, record of line
department was not made available to Social Audit Team. There was
no evidence of physical verification of work sites.

e In 40 out of 50 test checked GPs in Punjab, POs did not make
necessary arrangement for submission of records to SAU teams 15
days prior to commencement of Gram Sabha meeting for Social
Audit. There was no evidence of physical verification of work sites

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

15


Report No. 8 of 2016

and door-to-door visit to meet beneficiaries of the MGNREGS and
share relevant information with them.

e In 13 GPs of Rajasthan, records were provided after a delay of 5 to
11 days. Also, out of 43,163 beneficiaries in 50 GPs, interaction was
done with only 162 beneficiaries of 25 GPs during door to door visit.
Further, only two per cent of the works were physically verified.

e Door-to-door visit was not undertaken in 32 GPs in West Bengal.

Non-requisition/production of records in large number of cases indicates
non-compliance with the laid down provisions. Besides, the mechanism in
place in conducting Social Audit was also seriously eroded in the absence of
complete documentation and appropriate verification procedure.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that it would urge the states to notify
tules ensuring timely provision of records to Social Audit teams and nature
of punitive action to be taken for non-provision of the records. In respect
of verification of all job card holder and worksites, Ministry replied that it
would take active efforts in ensuring that SAU resource persons comply with
the same.

3.2.2 Awareness among stakeholders about Social Audit meeting

Section 4 (2) (c) of Rules and para 13.3.2 of OG provides that the labourers
and the village community shall be informed about the Gram Sabha conducting
Social Audit by the resource persons as well as the Programme Officers to
ensure full participation. We noted that

e In 91 GPs (three states’), labourers and village community were not
informed about the Gram Sabha .

e In 45 out of 50 test checked GPs of Chhattisgarh, no documentary
evidence regarding intimation of Social Audit by Gram Sabha to
labourers and village community was produced to audit. However,
in two? GPs it was stated that labourers and village community were
informed through Munadi” by kotwar'.

‘8 Himachal Pradesh (4), Odisha (37) and Tripura (50)

© Sheri and Domhara

Munadiis a process of intimation by announcement for conduct of Social Audit Gram Sabha
2% Kotwaris a person who announces intimation of Social Audit Gram Sabha

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

16


Report No. 8 of 2016

e In 27 out of 50 test checked GPs of Madhya Pradesh, all the
residents of the respective villages were informed through Munadi.
In other 23 GPs”, records of Munadi orders were not produced to
audit for verification.

e In 45 GPs of Assam, interaction with 363 Job card holders, on
random basis, was done to assess the awareness on Social Audit and
their involvement in the process. 9 to 67 per cent villagers expressed
their ignorance about the process of Social Audit. Similarly, 58
per cent stated that they were not aware of Gram Sabha for Social
Audit. The Director, SIRD also stated that only 10 to 25 per cent
people could be involved during Gram Sabha for Social Audit.

e In all the test checked GPs (except Dumri and Jhakhra Sheikh) of
Bihar, there was no evidence to verify whether the labourers and
village community were informed about the Social Audit by Gram
Sabha .

e In Jammu & Kashmir and West Bengal, the labourers and
village community was not informed about the Gram Sabha conducting
Social Audit to ensure full participation.

e In remaining 16 states*, labourers and village community were
informed about the Gram Sabha conducting the Social Audit.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that it would ensure the awareness among
stakeholders about the Social Audit process and Gram Sabha through constant
IEC activities.

3.3. Social Audit by Gram Sabha

As per Para 13.3.5 of OG, to conduct the Social Audit process, a Gram
Sabha shall be convened to discuss the findings of the verification exercise
and also to review the compliance on transparency and accountability,
fulfilment of the rights and entitlements of labourers and proper utilisation of
funds. The Gram Sabha shall be convened in a neutral public space and in
any case not in the hamlet/village of the head of the panchayat. The meeting
shall be chaired by an elderly villager who is not a part of Panchayat or

22 Boda, Banspur, Bamhni, Bangai, Bandhibodalkachar, Bodalkachar, Bhikewara, Chhapra
Dauriyakheda, Delakhari,Dudgaonbasti, Fattepur, Harrakachar, Jamundonga, Jagantola(M),
Khapasani, Kumhadi, Khulsan, Muttair, Patehra, Sirsod, Sitakamath and Sivanpat

23 Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

17


Report No. 8 of 2016

any implementing agency. Decisions and resolutions will be put to voting.
However, dissenting opinion must be recorded in the minutes. Action Taken
Reports on the previous Social Audit must be read out at the beginning of the
meeting. All the officials responsible for implementation must be present in
the meeting to answer queries from the members of the Gram Sabha .

As per Section 6(7) of the Rules, the District Programme Coordinator shall
attend the Gram Sabha meeting or nominate an official of appropriate level
for smooth conduct of the Gram Sabha.

As per para 13.3.11 of OG, the proceeding of the Social Audit Gram Sabha
shall be video recorded, compressed using latest compression techniques
(to reduce space occupied by it) and uploaded on website, www.nrega.nic.
in without editing. The video recording will also be stored in the custody of
DPC.

As per para 13.3.4 (vii) of OG, for facilitating conduct of Social Audit by
Gram Sabha, the resource persons deployed by Social Audit Unit, along
with primary stakeholders shall verify that the wall painting showing details
of money paid to all job card holders have been done using the prescribed
format and the details contained therein are a true reflection of the records
as they obtain in www.nrega.nic.in and at the block and panchayat office.

As per para 13.3.12 of OG, the SARs shall be prepared in local language
by the SAU. The SARs must be counter-signed by the chairperson of that
particular Social Audit Gram Sabha. A copy of the report must be displayed
on the notice board of the GP for at least seven days.

As per Section 4(2) (f) of the Rules, the SAU shall be responsible for the
hosting of the SAR including Action Taken Report in the public domain.

Holding and reporting mechanism by Gram Sabha in 1124 GPs test checked
in audit for 25 out of the 29 states showed the following:

(6) Convening of Gram Sabha Meeting

In 135 (12 per cent) GPs (11 States’), Gram Sabha meetings were
not held to discuss the findings of Social Audit.

24 Andhra Pradesh (7), Assam (1), Bihar(2), Goa(18), Haryana(36), Maharashtra (10), Meghalaya
(7), Odisha (13), Telangana (9), Tripura (12) and Uttarakhand (20)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

18


(ii)

(iii)

(0)

6)

(vi)

Report No. 8 of 2016

Gram Sabha meeting at neutral public space

In 241(21 per cent) GPs (11 states*), Gram Sabha meetings were not
held at neutral place.

Gram Sabha meeting chaired by an elderly villager

In 560 (50 per cent) GPs (20 states**), Gram Sabha meetings were
not chaired by an elderly person. In Chhattisgarh, Sikkim, Tamil
Nadu and Uttar Pradesh, elderly villager chaired the Gram Sabha
meetings. In Assam, no evidence regarding Gram Sabha meeting
chaired by elderly person was available in the SARs.

Decision and resolutions of the Gram Sabha not put to vote

In 453 (40 per cent) GPs (12 states)’, decisions of the Gram Sabha
were not put to vote.

Discussion on ATR on the previous SARs

In 567 (50 per cent) GPs (15 states”*), ATRs on the previous Social

Audits were not discussed in the Gram Sabha meetings. In Madhya
Pradesh, Social Audit was conducted first time during 2014-15.

Countersign of chairperson on the SAR
In 534 (48 per cent) GPs (16 states”), SARs were not countersigned

by the chairperson of the Gram Sabha . In Punjab, no information
was provided. No SAR was prepared in Goa.

(vii) SARs not prepared

25

26

27

28

29

During 2014-15, out of 1492 SARs to be prepared in 25 states, 1270
SARs were prepared in test checked GPs in 25 states. In case of 10

Andhra Pradesh (50), Goa (2), Himachal Pradesh (1), Karnataka (42), Maharashtra (37),

Mizoram(5), Punjab (01), Tamil Nadu(3), Telangana (49), Tripura(18) and West Bengal (33)
Andhra Pradesh (50), Bihar(50), Goa (01), Gujarat (48), Haryana (17), Himachal Pradesh (12),
Jammu and Kashmir (26), Jharkhand (30), Karnataka (47), Madhya Pradesh (20), Maharashtra
(25), Meghalaya (12), Mizoram(2), Odisha (27), Punjab (30), Rajasthan (50), Telangana (49),
Tripura(17), Uttarakhand (8) and west Bengal (39)
Andhra Pradesh(50), Bihar(48), Goa(10), Himachal Pradesh(8), Madhya Pradesh(43),
Maharashtra(50), Mizoram(5), Odisha(S0), Telangana(49), Tripura(50), Uttar Pradesh(S0) and
West Bengal(40)
Andhra Pradesh(50), Assam(48), Bihar(48), Chhattisgarh(50), Gujarat(15), Himachal Pradesh
(5), Jharkhand (46), Maharashtra(50), Meghalaya (15), Mizoram (2), Odisha(50), Punjab(49),
Telangana (49), Tripura(50) and West Bengal(40)

Bihar(47), Chhattisgarh (8), Gujarat (26), Himachal Pradesh(7), Jammu and Kashmir(26),
Jharkhand (18), Madhya Pradesh (30), Maharashtra(50), Meghalaya (48), Mizoram (28), Odisha
(37), Tamil Nadu (50), Tripura(50), Uttarakhand (31), Uttar Pradesh (50) and West Bengal (28)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011

(Social Audit Rules)

19


Report No. 8 of 2016

states**, out of 557 Social Audit conducted, 222 SARs (40 per cent)
were not prepared. In 15 states*', 935 Social Audit conducted, SARs
were prepared and there was no shortfall in preparation of SARs.

(viii) Standard format of SARs

(ix)

(x)

(४)

30

31

32

33
34

35

36

Out of 1270 SARs prepared in test checked GPs during the year 2014-
15, 364 (29 per cent) SARs (11 states) were not prepared in standard
format as prescribed by SAU/Ministry. States wise details are given
in Annex-III.

Hosting of SARs on the website

Out of 1270 SARs prepared during 2014-15, 177 (14 per cent) SAR®
were uploaded on Ministry website by six states (includes 50 SARs*
uploaded on states website). Sikkim uploaded 50 SARs on State web-
site only. States wise details where uploading of SARs was not done,
is given in Annex-III.

SARs not in local language and displayed on the notice board of the
GP

In 335 (30 per cent) GPs (nine states,*), SARs were not prepared in
local language. In 577 (51 per cent) GPs (15 states*), SARs were not
displayed on the notice board.

Wall painting to display the money paid to job card holders

In 881 (78 per cent) GPs (21 states*), there was no wall painting to
display details of money paid to job cardholders.

Assam (01), Bihar (16), Goa(21), Gujarat(23), Haryana (53), Himachal Pradesh (8), Jammu

and Kashmir (17), Mizoram (27), Punjab (52) and West Bengal (04)
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Meghalaya, Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttarakhand and Uttar
Pradesh

Himachal Pradesh (14), Jammu & Kashmir (12), Meghalaya (12), Odisha (43), Punjab (46) and
Uttar Pradesh (50)

Himachal Pradesh (14) and Uttar Pradesh (36)

Assam(48), Himachal Pradesh (5), Jammu and Kashmir (26), Maharashtra(50), Meghalaya(28),
Mizoram(28), Odisha(S0), Sikkim (50) and Tripura (50)

Andhra Pradesh(50), Assam (48), Bihar(48), Chhattisgarh(50), Gujarat (6), Haryana (49),
Himachal Pradesh (5), Jammu and Kashmir (26), Maharashtra (50), Meghalaya (29), Telangana(49),
Tripura(47), Uttarakhand (31), Uttar Pradesh (50) and West Bengal (39)

Andhra Pradesh(50), Assam (25), Bihar(48), Chhattisgarh(50), Gujarat(S0), Haryana(49),
Himachal Pradesh (7), Jammu and Kashmir (42), Jharkhand (38), Karnataka (26),
Madhya Pradesh(49), Mizoram(28), Odisha(50), Punjab (49), Sikkim(S0), Tamil Nadu(50),
Telangana(49), Tripura (50), Uttarakhand(31), Uttar Pradesh(50) and West Bengal(40)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011

(Social Audit Rules)

20


Report No. 8 of 2016

(xii) Video recording of the proceeding of the Gram Sabha and uploading

on web-site

In 924 (82 per cent) GPs (24 states*’), proceedings of Gram
Sabha were not video recorded. In 200 GPs, video recording of
proceedings were done but in 160** GPs the same were not uploaded
on the website.

(xiii) Presence of DPC or Nominated Officer

In 649 (58 per cent) GPs (19 88657), neither the DPC nor member
nominated by him had attended the Gram Sabha meeting.

(xiv) Participation by Village Community

3.4

In 657 (58 per cent) GPs (20 states’), Gram Sabha meetings were
held with less than 10 per cent of participation by village community.
No information was provided in Mizoram.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that efforts would be taken to train
resource persons to ensure the compliance of the provisions of the
Social Audit Rules. Ministry also stated that a State Level Technical
Team would be put in place for conducting periodic test audits on a
sample of GPs already audited by the SAUs.

Conclusion

Deficiencies in planning and execution of Social Audit such as non-preparation
of annual calendar for Social Audit, poor documentation, non-verification of

work sites, lack of awareness amongst stake holders, non-convening of Gram
Sabha meetings, not putting decision and resolution of the Gram Sabha to
vote, non-preparation of SARs, non-video recording of proceedings of Gram

37

38

39

40

Andhra Pradesh (50), Assam(48), Bihar(38), Chhattisgarh(50), Goa(20), Gujarat(50),

Haryana(49), Himachal Pradesh(05), Jammu and Kashmir(42), Jharkhand(46), Karnataka(32),
Madhya Pradesh(43), Maharashtra(31), Meghalaya(41), Mizoram(28), Odisha (50), Punjab(36),
Rajasthan(23), Sikkim(50), Tripura(50), Telangana(49), Uttarakhand(31), Uttar Pradesh(46) and
West Bengal(16)

Bihar (12), Karnataka(18), Madhya Pradesh(7), Maharashtra(9), Punjab(13), Rajasthan(27),
Tamil Nadu(50) and West Bengal(24)

Andhra Pradesh(44), Assam (48), Bihar (33), Chhattisgarh (50), Gujarat (32), Haryana (25),
Himachal Pradesh (20), Jammu and Kashmir (42), Jharkhand (46), Madhya Pradesh (6),
Maharashtra (8), Odisha(50), Punjab(34), Rajasthan (8), Tamil Nadu (29), Telangana (49),
Tripura (50), Uttar Pradesh (40) and West Bengal (35)

Andhra Pradesh(48), Bihar (48), Chhattisgarh (39), Goa (2), Gujarat (48), Haryana (13),
Himachal Pradesh(1), JammuandKashmir (42), Jnarkhand (30), Karnataka(50), MadhyaPradesh(44),
Maharashtra (40), Odisha(37), Rajasthan (31), Tamil Nadu (07), Telangana (49), Tripura (27),
Uttarakhand (11), Uttar Pradesh (50) and West Bengal (40)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

21


Report No. 8 of 2016

Sabha, etc. were noticed. SAUs failed to provide adequate support mechanism
like availability of records, reporting and follow-up of Social Audits to ensure
its efficacy. District Programme Coordinators and Programme Officers also
failed to provide effective and adequate support to conduct of Social Audit.
3.5 Recommendations:

(i) Effective steps may be taken to ensure the preparation of Annual
Calendar and its implementation shall also be monitored.

(ii) Record management may be improved at all levels to facilitate
credibility of Social Audit.

(iii) Social Audit Team may ensure verification of project sites and
conduct door to door visit in compliance with the extant provisions.

(iv) Awareness amongst the stakeholders for full participation in the Gram
Sabha meetings on Social Audit may be ensured.

(v) Conducting of Social Audit meetings and reporting mechanism, as per
the provisions of Rules may be ensured.

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

22


Report No. 8 of 2016

CHAPTER-IV

FOLLOW UP OF SOCIAL AUDIT

4.1 Follow up

Social Audit would not be complete unless there is a time bound follow
up action on the grievances that were identified. Time bound follow up
is the responsibility of the State Government towards all the people who
have participated in the Social Audit in the State. Section 7 (4) of the Rules
provides that State Government shall be responsible to take follow up action
on the findings of Social Audit.

4.2 Follow up at District and Block level

Para 25 (c) (vii) Schedule I of Section 4(3) of MGNREGS Act 2005 and
Para 13.3.15 OG provides that after Gram Sabha meeting, a Social Audit
public hearing should be held in the block headquarter in the presence of
MGNREGS workers, elected representatives and officials to discuss the
Social Audit findings and ensure that orders are issued in open on Social
Audit findings. Further, on conclusion of the Social Audit public hearing at
the block level, district level consultations may be organized for Pramukh
and members of Block Panchayat for reviewing the follow up on grievances
raised.

We, however, noted that in 11 states’ public hearing after Social Audit was
not held at block level. Further,

e In Sikkim, out of 1053 issues pointed out by the Social Audit for
2014-15, 584 issues were resolved by POs and DPCs.

e In Uttar Pradesh, in seven cases First Information Report (FIR)
were lodged while 444 cases in 16 test check districts were pending
as on March 2015. No punitive action was taken in these cases.

e In Odisha, out of 88 public hearing meetings to be conducted in 44
blocks test checked during 2014-15, only 45 meetings were conducted.

e In Maharashtra, in five test checked districts” where public hearing
was held, no action was taken on ATRs submitted by the blocks.

Non- holding of the public hearing at block level after conduct of Social
Audit to discuss the follow-up action and not resolving the issue and lack of
monitoring of action taken on Social Audit at district level was detrimental
to the objectives of Social Audit.

41 Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Punjab, Tamil Nadu,

Tripura, West Bengal and in other state information was not available
42 Nagpur, Nanded, Nashik, Palghar and Wardha

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

23


Report No. 8 of 2016

Ministry replied (December 2015) that it would issue model rules on action
to be taken based on findings of Social Audit.

4.3 Recovery of misappropriated amount

Section 7(3) (c) of the Rules provides that every DPC or any official on
his behalf shall take steps to recover the amount embezzled or improperly
utilised and maintain a separate bank account for the amounts so recovered.

We, however, noted that significant portion of the misappropriated amount
pointed out in Social Audit, as tabulated below, was yet to be recovered:

(सा crore)

Amount Amount percentage
State Balance
misappro-priated recovered of rec ‘y
1. | Andhra Pradesh 54.41 19.55 34.86 36
. | Telangana 54.01 16.35 37.66 30
3. | Uttar Pradesh 3.44 0.03 3.41 1

Further, no separate bank account for amount so recovered was maintained.

4.4. Follow up at State Level

Section 7(4) of the Rules provides that the State Government shall be
responsible to take follow up action on the findings of the Social Audit.
Further, as per section 7(5) of the Rules, the State Employment Guarantee
Council (SEGC) shall monitor the action taken by the State Government and
incorporate in the Annual Report to be laid before the State Legislature by
the State Government.

We noted that out of 25 states reviewed, SEGC was not constituted in five states*.

SEGC, though constituted in 18 states, did not monitor the action taken
by the State Governments on SARs and only in two states viz. Rajasthan
and Sikkim, SEGC duly monitored the follow up on the SAR by the State
Government.

This indicated poor monitoring of action taken on SARs at state level.

4.5 Submission of summary of findings of Social Audit to C&AG
Section 3(2) of the Rules provides that summary of findings of Social
Audit conducting during the financial year shall be submitted by the State
Government to the C&AG.

We noted that in all selected States summary of findings of the Social Audit
was not submitted to C&AG.

43 Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh and Telangana.

44 Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Odisha, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

24


Report No. 8 of 2016

4.6 Submission of Action Taken Report on Social Audit to the State
Legislature and Parliament

Para 13.4.5 and 13.4.7 of the OG provides that action taken on the SARs shall
be incorporated in the Annual Report to be laid before the State Legislature
and Parliament. We, however, noted that action taken on the SARs was not
incorporated in the Annual Report to be laid before the State Legislature and
Parliament.

Ministry replied (December 2015) that States would be asked for strict
compliance of the provisions of Rules. However, Ministry remained silent
about incorporation of ATR in Annual Report to be laid before the Parliament.

4.7 Conclusion

Social Audit block level public hearings were not organized to take follow up
actions. District Programme Coordinators did not review the action taken on
SARs. State Employment Guarantee Council did not monitor the action taken
on SARs. State Governments also failed to submit the summary of findings
of SARs to Comptroller and Auditor General of India. Neither the State
Governments nor the Central Government incorporated the action taken on
SARs in the Annual Reports to be laid before respective State Legislature
and Parliament.

4.8 Recommendation

Follow up action at all levels as per provisions of the Rules may be

ensured.
New Delhi (MUKESH P! 7 SINGH)
Dated: 04 March 2016 Director General of Audit
Central Expenditure
Countersigned
New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
Dated: 04 March 2016 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

25


Annexes


Report No. 8 of 2016

Annex-I
(Refer to Para no. 2.3.1)
Availability of Resource Persons for Social Audit

Shortfall in Resource Persons No. of states No. of states Remarks
s where no where no
Particular Requirement Deployment mo shortfall _ assessment
- was made
6 6 2
~ 15! 222 157 65 Gujarat, Bihar, Assam
Sikkim, Arunachal __| (Rajasthan-
Mizoram, Pradesh, Goa, | appointment
Tamil Nadu, | Jharkhand, | of SRP is
Tripura and | Kerala, under
Nagaland Uttarakhand | Process),
6 6 1
~ 167 1618 1137 : Gujarat, Bihar (Rajasthan-
Sikkim, Arunachal | appointment
J&K, Pradesh, of DRP is
Tripura, Goa, under
West Bengal | Kerala, Process),
and Assam | Jharkhand,
Uttarakhand
3 | | + 1
Block # 3562 1471 2091 | Assam Maharashtra
Gujarat
Tripura
Village 35 | | | -- | | -+ | 116 157

Andhra Pradesh (6), Chhattisgarh (5), Haryana (4), Himachal Pradesh (3), Jammu and
Kashmir (5), Karnataka (3), Madhya Pradesh (11), Maharashtra (2), Manipur (3), Meghalaya (2),
Odisha(7), Punjab (2), Telangana (3), Uttar Pradesh (3) and West Bengal (6),

Andhra Pradesh (76), Chhattisgarh (32), Haryana(21), Himachal Pradesh (21), Karnataka
(7), Madhya Pradesh(82), Maharashtra (38), Manipur(4), Meghalaya (11), Mizoram (26),
Nagaland(19), Odisha (32), Punjab (24), Tamil Nadu (9), Telangana (75) and Uttar Pradesh (4)

Chhattisgarh (295), Haryana (126), Karnataka(322), Madhya Pradesh (626), Manipur (2),
Nagaland (8), Odisha (314), Tamil Nadu (226) and Uttar Pradesh (172)

Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Telangana, Uttarakhand
and West Bengal

Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra

Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Odisha,
Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh

Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand and West Bengal

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011

(Social Audit Rules)

27


Report No. 8 of 2016

110८ ‘say eusyg Jo upny sajueIeny JusuAojdwug jemy [euONeN typueyH vuneyeyy

(seny upny [श००8)

TI-7X8

payonpuos
jou yIpny
Tepog Jo

sequiny, [ए)०ा,

OT 1०0
+X 61०0;

payonpuoy
Hpny [ePog
Jo zoquinyy
[ev],

SI-p10z
utmp ३9७०
payonpuos
upny [ePog
a9 Sa
Jo xaquinyy
‘g uumjod.
Jo 110

ST-PIO7

Surnp
201M}
payonpuos
upny [Epos
au9y Sa
Jo xaquinyy
“g uumjod
३०10

शना0ट८
हणजाए

payonpuos
pny
Tepog
>ग्प्‌७& ID
jo saquiny
5 uumjod
Jomo

sd
ypay
389} Jo
sequmy
“()
uumyjo3,
jo mo

Trepsoys
Jo ade
-qua2s8d

Trey
-7०प५

शना0८
surnp
payonp
“109 sea
pny
Tepos
जाजपुर
sd) Jo
sequin

JIpNy [एुए०६ Jo uoTenyeay pue >8ए494०3
(Z’€ pue ८1६ ‘OU BAe 0} J2Joy)

T-xeuny

ST-P107

Sup
som.
NOW 4q
pes9409
sd 3०
soquiny
Teo],

a7RIS ग्पा
wr sd Jo
sequiny,

Teo],

गण om
jo auey,

T 66 T 6r os os or 68५ ८70५ 1६9५ 1६9५ Bier |

6 ६8 6 LE oF os oP CLIT IS@Z etre etrr एफ्ण्पञाष्प | 01
गण्पपष्ष्भ्र

छः by or ‘4 wh 0५ 09 घ्घ्छ्ट 9991 66४ 667४ a7 Te?
ysopeig

4 4 0T € x4 घ्ट 61 119 14324 epee ETE TeqoeunH | 8

SE ६9 SE Las 6P os (44 6८६1 19 Orig Orig ५५७५४: | “1

0 001 0 os os os ig 9६६ 918६1 ISTP ISTP rere(ny | “9

61 हट 6 10 0्ट 0ट a <4 6ST 181 061 ४०० | ५

os 0५ os 0 os os 68 8198 9501 7६66 10601 yressmeyy | #

0५ os os 0 os os 6 TLIB SET LOv8 LOv8 reyld | ६

67 id 67 0 67 67 0 0 10tZ 11044 11044 एाए5ए | ८
ysoperg

Ly ६५ ly € os os 9 S18 89771 ६80६1 14424 छापएएप | 1

a IL or 6 8 L 9 5 v € 4 I 0

28


Report No. 8 of 2016

(saimy upny [ए:ु००5)
TIOZ ‘saqny aurayog 1० upny seyuereny juowAojdurg jeny yeuoNeN rypuey euneyeyy

(49 9 क्यू २०१५ puD STD 1 Ul a91M) “STD EP UI aU 4nOJ-(s1sDq Kj4ajsvNb ४० payanpuod Sujaq २०० Npny 10208) ८61 PjInpuod jipnv Vj0}) — - 5,

OSL 14012 OSL 89६ yell OvIT 8h ESLell | [8071 POSHET €909b7 TeIoL,
Gg 8L z 8६ Or Ov 1४ StL 12442 67६६ 67६६ yesuag 1०/७ | “SZ

ysopetg
0५ os 0५ 0 0५ os 09 LOTIE | PhB07 Iles 11054 wenn | कट
61 3४ 6 4s 1६ 144 v Lo 8LOL SOLL SOLL puewpyereny) | घट
0 10५ 0 os os os 0 0 SII शत शत ध्यावीय], | टूट
Lb 1५ Ly 6 6b 0s €1 141 19६ 66L8 9676 vuedurla, | पट
0५ os os 0 0५ os 16 T6€IT oan €TST1 TST npeN [wel | “OT
0५ os 0५ 0 os 0५ 8h 8 961 961 प्याजजा& | “61
0s 05 05 0 05 05 9 87S 6798 LLIO LLI6 ueyisefey | “81
0 86 0 6b 6b os 0 0 166721 16671 16671 qefung | “LT
0 001 0 os os os T £8 15५19 vETo ETD PYSIPO | 91
87 87 87 0 87 87 96 OLL 87 86L 86L wRIOZI | “ST
07 9५ Ov 8 8h 8b ५६ 14144 ६६घक्ः LI L179 eaereyzon | का
os os os 0 os os 66 00681 ण्ट 08161 90087 enysereye | धा

ysopetg
0५ os 0५ 0 0५ os 96 14.14 1६6 घ्द्ध्ट्ट घ्द्ध्ट्ट AUR | दा
a IT or 6 8 L 9 s v ६ 4 T 0

झका05
जका0८ ज्ञका0८.. झका0८
(or १०0 ST-p10z Surnp Surnp Suznp
Suzmp ३9७० 201M} == payompuos = sa एगजए. Suyanp
IT-7x8 +TX 61०00)... Parenpuos = payonpuos = pny yay -uoo sea SOT

Mpny [EPs HPNY [eEPOS — POS —_—489} JO wpny = -NOIW 4q
panpuos —paymnpuoy = asa Sd «BUSY SAH ay AD equnN, Tepog — ए.३१००. गष्प$ ग्पा
jouypny ypnyyepog ३० जञपृष्णाए_ [० जम्पृ्णा'ए_ ३० JaqumnN “() Trey320y4s aroy. Sd jo ul sq) Jo
Tepog 1०. jorequmy = ‘g uumjoy = ‘g ण्णा[०0.. ५ uUMJoy UUMjoy _jo ade sd Jo equ = equim «—-aeIg ग्पा
JequINN [30J, TRIO, Jo 109 ३० ॥0 Jom Jo —_FUada0g woqunn [R70], TIO], jo गण

29


Report No. 8 of 2016

Annexure-III
(Refer to Para no. 3.3 (VIII and IX)
Standard format and Hosting of SARs

Name of the Total Out of Out of Out of Column 4,
State Number of Column Column 3, Number of SAR up-
Social Audit 2, Total Number of loaded on the website

Conducted Number of SAR not
Social Audit prepared as

Report per standard State Ministry
prepared format Website Website
<a 1 2 3 4 5 | 6 |
1. | Andhra Pradesh 53 53 | ०९ | | ०0 | | ०0 |
2. | Assam | 49 | | 48 | | 0 | jo | | 0 |
३. | Bihar 50 34 29 fo | | 0 |
[4 | Chhattisgarh 50 50 | 98 | [०0 | | 8 |
5. [0048 21 | 0 | | 0 | | 0 | jo |
| 6. | Gujarat 100 77 18 | 0 | jo |
7. | Haryana 63 10 ; oo | | 60 | | ० |
|| Himachal 26 | | 8 | | 8 ; * | | * |
Pradesh
| Jammu & 44 27 27 |? | 12
Kashmir
| 10. | Jharkhand 83 83 | 0 | jo | | - |
11. | Karnataka | 9 | | 9 | 2 | 0 | | 0 |
12. | Madhya Pradesh 50 50 | _ ९ | | 0 | | ९ |
13. | Maharashtra 50 50 | ०0४ | | 0 | | ०0 |
14. | Meghalaya 56 56 38 | 0 | 12
15. | Mizoram | 28 1 1 | 0 | | 0 |
[ 16. | Odisha 100 | 100" | 76 | 0 | 43
17. | Punjab | 98 | | 46 | | 0 | | 46 |
| 18. | Rajasthan 50 50 5 | 0 | jo |
| 19. | Sikkim 50 50 ; 0 | 50 | 0 |
20. | Tamil Nadu 50 50 50 | 0 | | 0 |
21. | Telangana 51 51 [0 | | 0 | | 0 |
22. | Tripura 100° 100 100 | 0 | jo |
23. | Uttarakhand 43 43 | 0४ | | 0 | | 0 |
24. | Uttar Pradesh 50 50 | _ 0 | 36 50
25. | West Bengal 78 74 jo | | 0 | | 0 |
1492 1270 364 100 177

* 0 represent Nil Value
# ~~ (total audit conducted 192 (Social Audit are being conducted on quarterly basis)-Four time in
43 GPs, twice in one GPs and thrice in six GPs)

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Scheme Rules, 2011
(Social Audit Rules)

30


©COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in