Audit on the 
Preparedness for Implementation of 
National Food Security Act, 2013
for the year ended March, 2015
(Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution)
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Union Government (Civil)
Report No. 54 of 2015

i
Report No. 54 of 2015
Subject Pages
Preface iii
Executive Summary and Recommendations v
Chapter -1 Introduction 
1.1 Background 1
1.2 Salient features or provisions of the National 
Food Security Act, 2013
3
1.3 Comparison of features of TPDS vis-à-vis 
NFSA
4
1.4 Implications of switching over to NFSA 6
1.5 Requirements/preparedness for implement -
ing NFSA 
7
1.6 PDS (Control) Orders 8
1.7 Timeframe for implementation of NFSA 8
Chapter-2 Audit Approach and Methodology
2.1 Audit Objectives 10
2.2 Scope of Audit and Audit Sampling 10
2.3 Sources of Audit criteria 11
2.4 Audit methodology and response of the 
Ministry
11
2.5 Acknowledgement 12
Chapter- 3 Identification of beneficiaries and issuance of ration cards
3.1 State-wise coverage of population 13
3.2 Status of identification 14
3.3 Delay in implementation of NFSA by  
non-implementing States/UTs
15
3.4 Irregular extension of time for identification 
of beneficiaries
17
3.5 Coverage in the selected States 18
3.6 Issue of Ration Cards to identified  
households
22
3.7 Implementation of provisions relating to 
Maternity benefits and Supplementary  
Nutrition
24
Conclusion 25
Contents

ii
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chapter- 4 Preparedness in Logistics: Allocation, Movement and 
Storage of Foodgrains
4.1 Allocation of foodgrains 27
4.2 Movement of foodgrains 27
4.3 Storage capacity for foodgrains 29
Conclusion 32
Chapter- 5 Reforms in Targeted Public Distribution System
5.1 Introduction 34
5.2 Doorstep Delivery of foodgrains 34
5.3 End-to-End Computerization of TPDS 36
Conclusion 40
Chapter- 6 Grievance Redressal Mechanism and Monitoring
6.1 Introduction 41
6.2 State-wise status 41
6.3 Vigilance Committees 44
6.4 Monitoring by the States 45
6.5 Role of the Ministry 46
Conclusion 47
Annexes 51-54
Glossary 55

iii
Report No. 54 of 2015
   Preface
Attaining food security is a matter of prime importance for India where more than 
a third of the population is estimated to be poor. Government of India has been 
distributing foodgrains through the Public Distribution System, in one name or the 
other, for the last seven decades. National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) was 
enacted on September 10, 2013 by the Parliament with the objective of providing 
adequate quantity of quality food at affordable prices to people to live a life with 
dignity. The mission of making India food secure has now been changed from an 
entitlement-based to a right-based approach by giving it a legal mandate.
As NFSA envisaged the use of the existing platform of Targeted Public Distribu-
tion System, it called for certain crucial steps to be taken such as identification of 
beneficiaries and issue of fresh ration cards in one year’s time frame, computeri-
sation of TPDS operations, creating sufficient and scientific storage capacity and 
doorstep delivery of foodgrains to the fair price shops by the states. Only 11 states 
claimed implementation at an all India level within the year and by October 2015, 
18 states reported implementation of NFSA.
We examined the state of implementation of the NFSA to assess the preparedness 
in nine selected States/UTs on the above crucial components. Identification of 
beneficiaries was one key milestone to be achieved within a year, but most of the 
early implementers (Himachal Pradesh, Delhi and Maharashtra) recycled the old 
system and re-branded it as NFSA compliant. There were repeated extensions of 
timelines by the Central Government for identification of beneficiaries for which 
there was no provision in NFSA. The Report brings out that preparedness for 
implementation of NFSA was deficient in several states even after two years of 
its enactment. 
Since distribution of foodgrains through NFSA is an important social security 
programme of the Government, more systematic approach is needed to bring in 
structural changes and efficient delivery of foodgrains.
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
This report has been prepared for submission to the Parliament under Article 151 
of the Constitution of India.
iii
Report No. 54 of 2015

v
Report No. 54 of 2015
  Executive Summary
Article 21 of the Constitution of India provides the right to life to all the citizens 
of India. Article 47 of the Constitution provides that the State shall regard raising 
the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement 
of public health as among its primary duties.
National Food Security Act, 2013 (NFSA) which came into effect from July 5, 
2013 aimed to provide foodgrains to 81.34 crore beneficiaries at highly subsidized 
rates. One of the major implications of NFSA is that the identified beneficiaries 
have the right to get subsidized foodgrains. The NFSA also sought to bring about 
changes in the public distribution system which suffered from several deficiencies 
such as errors in targeting, inefficient delivery mechanisms resulting in high 
leakages and lack of transparency in its operations. 
Up to 75 per cent of the rural and 50 per cent of urban population as per Census 
2011 at all India level were to be covered under NFSA and the States/UT (Union 
Territory) shall be allocated foodgrains as specified for the above coverage. The 
annual allocation of the state were to be protected in case the allocation under 
NFSA was less than the average annual off take of food grains for last three years. 
The implementation of NFSA implies an additional subsidy of ` 26,780 crore per 
year. Before implementation of the NFSA, certain crucial steps were to be taken 
up by the states as preparatory measures.  
In the above background, we decided to evaluate the preparedness of the States/
UTs for implementation of the NFSA. Chapter 1 and 2 of this report provide 
background information on NFSA and our audit approach. Chapters 3, 4, 5 and 
6 provide audit findings on identification of beneficiaries and issuance of ration 
cards, preparedness in logistics, reforms in Targeted Public Distribution System 
(TPDS) and grievance redressal mechanism and monitoring respectively.
The important findings of the audit are given below:
Identification of beneficiaries and issuance of ration cards
	 Eleven States/UTs reported identification of eligible households within 
the stipulated timeline of 365 days whereas seven States/UTs reported 
identification of eligible households under NFSA during June-October 
2015 taking the figure of implementing States/UTs to 18. Only 51 per 
cent of the eligible beneficiaries had been identified and 49 per cent 
beneficiaries were yet to be identified in all the States/UTs. 
(Para 3.2)
v
Report No. 54 of 2015

vi
Report No. 54 of 2015
	 The reasons for delay in implementation of NF SA by non-implementing 
States/UTs were non-finalization of figures under Socio Economic Caste 
Census, lack of infrastructural facilities, insufficient funds and manpower. 
Ministry extended the timeline for implementation thrice, latest being till 
September, 2015, though there was no such provision under NFSA. 
(Para 3.3, 3.4)
	 Most of the implementing States did not identify the Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana (AAY) and priority household’s beneficiaries as per the provisions 
of the NFSA but used the old database of beneficiaries for extending the 
benefits.
(Para 3.5) 
	 In Himachal Pradesh, 6.9 lakh old ration cards were stamped as priority 
household and AAY households and re-issued as NFSA compliant.  In 
Karnataka, 8.90 lakh bogus and ineligible ration cards were found (June 
2015) in the existing system during seeding of Elector’s Photo Identity 
Card details. However, instead of cancelling these bogus or ineligible 
ration cards, State Government continued to issue foodgrains to them. In 
Maharashtra, the ration cards were revalidated by merely affixing stamps 
on the existing ration cards under different categories.
(Para 3.6) 
 Preparedness in Logistics: Allocation, Movement and Storage of Foodgrains
	 National Foodgrains Movement Plan was not prepared despite being 
decided in the year 2012.
(Para 4.2.1) 
	 In the test checked States the storage capacity of foodgrains was not 
adequate for holding three months requirement and the condition of 
existing storage capacity with the States/UTs needed upgradation. 
(Para 4.3) 
Reforms in Targeted Public Distribution System
	 Doorstep delivery of foodgrains was not implemented in Assam, whereas 
in Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra it was implemented partially. In 
Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka, doorstep delivery was being done by 
FPS dealers themselves against the provision of NFSA.
(Para 5.2.1) 
	 Computerization of TPDS operations was not completed in the selected 
States/UTs and was at different stages of implementation. 
(Para 5.3.2) 
vi
Report No. 54 of 2015

vii
Report No. 54 of 2015
	 Unavailability of required computer application and hardware were the 
limiting factors in the selected States/UTs. Inadequate digitization of the 
identified beneficiaries’ data was observed in the States/UTs.
(Para 5.3.3) 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism and Monitoring
	 The grievance redressal system was constituted in most of the states, 
albeit not till the last tier. Though, six out of nine selected States/UTs were 
found to have put in place the grievance redressal mechanism, these were 
not fully functional. Vigilance committees at all the four levels were not 
in existence in any of the selected States\UTs.  Ministry did not have the 
information on grievance redressal mechanism and vigilance committee, 
and was not in position to monitor the implementation.  Similarly, 
monitoring done by the States was inadequate and there were shortfalls in 
inspections. 
(Para 6.2, 6.3)
Recommendations
1. Ministry may issue, in consultation with state governments, guidelines on 
identification of beneficiaries to maintain transparency.
2. Ministry must assure itself of the actual identification of beneficiaries by 
the States/UTs by following transparent processes before allowing them 
revised/enhanced entitlements.
3. As there is no enabling provision in the NFSA, Ministry should obtain 
approval of the Parliament for extending the timeline laid down for the 
implementation of NFSA.
4. National Foodgrains Movement Plan should be prepared by the 
Ministry and implemented for ensuring timely delivery of foodgrains as 
contemplated in the NFSA.
5. Ministry may expedite action to augment the storage capacity for 
foodgrains and upgrade the existing storage facilities.
6. Ministry may take steps to address the bottlenecks in computerization of 
TPDS operations in all States/UTs for efficient implementation of NFSA.
7. The Ministry may put suitable mechanism in place to ensure that States 
comply with provisions of the NFSA with regard to the grievance redressal 
mechanism and vigilance committees at various levels and ensure their 
effective functioning. It may also ensure compliance of the TPDS (C) 
Order, 2015 by collecting quarterly reports from the States/UTs.
***
vii
Report No. 54 of 2015

1
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Background
Food is the fulcrum of existence for every living organism. Food Security means 
ensuring availability of adequate foodgrains to the people at affordable prices. 
Eradicating extreme poverty and hunger was one of the goals under the Millennium 
Development Goals of the United Nations. The Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights and International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural Rights, to 
which India is a signatory, also cast responsibilities on all States to recognize the 
right of its citizens to adequate food.  
Article 21 of the Constitution of India provides the right to life to all the citizens 
of India. Article 47 of the Constitution provides that the State shall regard raising 
the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the improvement 
of public health as among its primary duties.
The Government of India (through Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution) fulfills the objective of food security jointly with state governments 
by distributing subsidized food to eligible beneficiaries through the Public 
Distribution System (PDS). The PDS evolved from need based to a right based 
approach over seven decades as detailed in Table 1.
Table 1: Evolution of Public Distribution System
Public 
Distribution 
System  
(1942-1992)
Public Distribution of essential commodities had been in 
existence in India during the inter-World War period. PDS, 
with its focus on distribution of foodgrains in urban scarcity 
areas, had emanated from the critical food shortages of 1960. 
PDS had substantially contributed to the containment of rise 
in foodgrains prices and ensured access of food to urban 
consumers. As the national agricultural production grew 
in the aftermath of Green Revolution, the outreach of PDS 
was extended to tribal blocks and areas of high incidence of 
poverty in the 1970s and 1980s.

2
Report No. 54 of 2015
Revamped 
Public 
Distribution 
System 
The Revamped Public Distribution System (RPDS) was 
launched in June, 1992, with a view to strengthen and 
streamline the PDS as well as to improve its reach in the far-
flung, hilly, remote and inaccessible areas where a substantial 
section of the poor live. It covered area specific programmes 
such as the Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP), 
Integrated Tribal Development Project (ITDP), Desert 
Development Programme (DDP) and certain Designated 
Hill Area (DHA) with respect to improvement of the PDS 
infrastructure. Foodgrains for distribution in RPDS areas 
were issued to the States at 50 paise below the Central Issue 
Price. The scale of issue was up to 20 kg per Ration card.
Targeted Public 
Distribution 
System 
In June 1997, the Government streamlined the system into 
a Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS), by issuing 
special cards to the Below Poverty Line (BPL) families and 
providing foodgrains to them at specially subsidized prices. 
TPDS also covered Above Poverty Line (APL) population, 
although the price for APL beneficiaries was kept higher 
than BPL beneficiaries. In order to reduce hunger among the 
poorest segments of the population, the Government launched 
the Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) in December 2000 and to 
make PDS benefits more substantial in terms of both quantity 
and nutrition for this section of the population.
National Food 
Security Act, 
2013 (NFSA) 
NFSA provides a statutory basis for a framework which 
assures food security for nearly two-thirds of the population 
and seeks to make the right to food a legal entitlement by 
providing subsidized foodgrains on the existing TPDS.  Up to 
75 per cent of the rural and 50 per cent of urban population as 
per Census 2011 at all India level is envisaged to be covered 
under NFSA and the States shall be allocated foodgrains as 
specified for the above coverage.  The State-wise percentage 
coverage has been determined by the Planning Commission, 
based on 2011-12 National Sample Survey Organization 
(NSSO) survey on consumption expenditure. Since coverage 
under NFSA has been delinked from poverty estimates, the 
hitherto followed system of APL and BPL beneficiaries would 
no longer be relevant.
Source: Records of the Ministry

3
Report No. 54 of 2015
1.2 The salient features or provisions of the National Food Security Act, 
2013
•	 Identification of beneficiaries under NFSA to be completed in one 
year’s time i.e. by 4 July 2014.
•	 Within the coverage determined for each State, the State Governments 
were to identify the AAY and the Priority Households; Entitlement of 
existing AAY households to be protected at 35 kg per household per 
month, while each member of such priority household to get 5 kg of 
foodgrains per month. 
•	 Subsidized prices- `3, `2, `1 per kg for rice, wheat and coarse 
grain respectively fixed for a period of 3 years from the date of 
commencement of NFSA and is to be suitably linked to the Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) thereafter.
•	 Protection of annual average off-take of foodgrains for last the three 
years under normal TPDS in case annual allocation of foodgrains 
under NFSA to any State was less than their average annual off-take 
of foodgrains.
•	 Pregnant women and lactating mothers are entitled to meals and 
maternity benefit of not less than ` 6,000 per delivery.
•	 Children in the age group of 6 months to 14 years are entitled to meals 
under Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) and Mid Day 
Meal (MDM) schemes being implemented by Ministry of Women and 
Child Development and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
respectively.
•	 Eldest woman of the household of 18 years or above is to be treated as 
the head of the household for the purpose of issuing ration cards.
•	 Provisions for food security allowance to entitled beneficiaries in case 
of non-supply of foodgrains as per their entitlement.
•	 Establishment of Grievance Redressal Mechanism at the district 
and state levels, with states having the flexibility to use the existing 
machinery or set up separate mechanism.
•	 Central Government to provide assistance to the State in meeting the 
expenditure incurred by it towards intra-state movement, handling of 
foodgrains and margins paid to the fair price shop (FPS) dealers.

4
Report No. 54 of 2015
•	 Provisions for transparency and accountability by placing TPDS related 
records in public domain, Social Audit and Vigilance Committees.
•	 Provision for penalty on public servant or authority, to be imposed by 
the State Food Commission, in case of failure to comply with relief 
recommended by the District Grievance Redressal Officer.
•	 In case of short supply of foodgrains from the central pool to a State, 
the Central Government shall provide funds to the extent of short 
supply to the State Government.
1.3  Comparison of features of TPDS vis-à-vis NFSA
The NFSA relies on the existing TPDS.  However, in order to remove the 
deficiencies in the existing TPDS and to ensure food security to intended 
beneficiaries, certain new features have been incorporated in the TPDS under 
NFSA.  The following table compares the features of the earlier TPDS with those 
of the NFSA:
Table 2: Comparison of features of TPDS vis-à-vis NFSA
Attribute TPDS NFSA
Implication of 
right for food
No legal backing Statutory backing
Coverage 99.221 crore beneficiar -
ies i.e. 18.04 crore house -
holds x 5.5 (average mem-
bers in a household as on 
01.03.2000)
Upto 75 per cent  of rural and 
upto 50 per cent of urban popu -
lation i.e. about 81.34 crore ben-
eficiaries as per Census 2011
Categories AAY , BPL and APL AAY and priority households 
i.e., households identified by 
States based on guidelines/crite -
ria formulated by them
Entitlements 
of beneficiaries 
(category-wise)
AAY and BPL: 35 Kg/
family/ month
APL: 15-35 Kg/family/ 
month
AAY: 35 Kg/family/ month
priority households: 5 Kg/per -
son/month
Prices of 
foodgrains
AAY: ` 3/Kg for rice, ` 2/
Kg for wheat. 
BPL and APL categories: 
Prices differ across the 
States 
AAY and priority households: ` 
3/Kg for rice, ` 2/Kg for wheat 
and `1/Kg for coarse grains
1 99.22 Crore include 63.22 Crore APL beneficiaries. Under NFSA, the coverage is more towards reducing 
the unintended beneficiaries. 

5
Report No. 54 of 2015
Attribute TPDS NFSA
Identification of 
beneficiaries
Centre: 
Releases state-wise esti -
mates of population to be 
covered under TPDS
State:
Identify eligible house -
holds
Centre:
Releases state-wise estimates of 
population to be covered under 
NFSA
State:
AAY: identify beneficiaries 
in accordance with the AAY 
scheme guidelines issued by 
Central Government
Priority Households: Identify 
beneficiaries in accordance with 
such guidelines as the State 
Government may specify
Centre-State  
responsibility
Centre: Procurement of 
foodgrains through Food 
Corporation of India 
(FCI), state-wise alloca -
tion, transportation of 
foodgrains upto designat -
ed depots of FCI
State: Takes delivery of 
foodgrains from FCI go -
down to State Storage 
depot (cost of transporta -
tion borne by the State), 
from State storage depots 
to Fair price shops (cost 
of transportation either 
passed on to the benefi -
ciaries except AAY ben -
eficiaries or borne by the 
State Government).
Centre: Same as current system
State: Takes delivery of 
foodgrains from FCI Depots to 
State Storage depots, Delivery 
of foodgrains from State stor -
age depots to Fair price shops 
through door-step delivery (cost 
of transportation to be shared by 
Central and State Governments 
in the ratio of 50:50 in respect of 
23 States and 75:25 in respect of 
132 states).
2 Seven States of North East, Sikkim, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, UTs of  Lakshadweep, A&N 
Islands

6
Report No. 54 of 2015
Attribute TPDS NFSA
Grievance 
redressal 
mechanism
State governments respon-
sible for ensuring moni -
toring; Vigilance Commit-
tees to be set up at State, 
district, block and FPS 
levels
State governments responsible 
for ensuring monitoring; ap -
points district grievance redres -
sal officers, establishment of 
State Food Commission for re -
view and implementation of the 
NFSA, Vigilance Committees to 
be set up at State, district, block 
and FPS levels
Non-supply of 
foodgrains by 
the Centre to 
State
No provision In case of short supply of 
foodgrains from the central pool 
to a State, the Central Govern -
ment shall provide funds to the 
extent of short supply to the State 
Government.
Food Security 
Allowance
No provision In case of non-supply of entitled 
quantities of foodgrains or meals 
to entitled persons, such persons 
shall be entitled to receive food 
security allowance from the con-
cerned State Government to be 
paid to each person as may be 
prescribed by the Central Gov -
ernment.
1.4 Implications of switching over to NFSA
•	 Additional Subsidy burden for Central Government - The 
estimated food subsidy was ` 1,00,953 crore under TPDS before 
implementation of NFSA against the allocation of 563.70 lakh MT 
under TPDS and Other Welfare Scheme. Corresponding to the total 
estimated annual foodgrains requirement of 614.30 lakh MT under 
NFSA, the estimated subsidy requirement3 is about ` 1,27,733 crore.  
Hence, it implies an additional outlay of   ` 26,780 crore per year on 
implementation of NFSA. (Annex-1.1)
•	 Financial implication for State Governments- State/UT 
Governments are required to bear additional expenditure on grievance 
redressal bodies at District and State levels included in NFSA.
3 Based on economic cost for the year 2013-14

7
Report No. 54 of 2015
•	 Sharing of expenditure by Central and States Governments-  The 
Central and the State/UT Governments are to share expenditure on 
intra-State movement of foodgrains, handling and fair price shop 
dealers’ margin.  The Ministry has notified rules for bifurcation of 
expenditure in August 2015. As per provisions of NFSA, payment of 
` 6,000 per delivery, as maternity benefit to pregnant and lactating 
women is to be shared between Central and State Governments in 
accordance with scheme to be formulated. 
Chart 1: Procurement and Distribution of foodgrains
1.5 Requirements/preparedness for implementing NFSA 
To start allocation under NFSA to the States/UTs, the Ministry on 19 August 2013 
instructed the States/UTs to certify, through a proforma, their preparedness with 
regard to the following measures:
•	 Identification of eligible households/beneficiaries – finalization and 
notification of guidelines for identification of eligible households; and 
actual identification of households as per the guidelines.
•	 Issue of ration cards - States are to issue fresh ration cards incorporating 
the provisions relating to women empowerment. 
•	 Doorstep Delivery of foodgrains - To prevent last mile leakages, NFSA 
provides for delivery of foodgrains up to the fair price shop.
•	 Sufficient and scientific storage capacity - States are required to create 
sufficient storage capacity so as to meet the food requirements. 
Farmer
Centre (FCI)
Centre & State Agencies
State Government 
State Government
Fair Price Shop 
Beneficiary
Procurement at MSP
Storage
Allocation at CIP 
Movement by Centre 
Distribution 
Sale of grains at CIP

8
Report No. 54 of 2015
•	 Internal Grievance Redressal Mechanism  - Call centre, helpline, 
designation of nodal officers are to be set up.
•	 District Grievance Redressal Officers- DGROs to be appointed for each 
district in the State/ UTs.
•	 State Food Commission- State food commission to be set up in States/
UTs.
Ministry also stipulated that the above preparatory works be certified by each 
State/UT in a manner to withstand legal scrutiny. Further, in July 2014, the 
Ministry instructed the States to certify their preparedness in completion of 
computerization of TPDS operations such as, digitization of beneficiaries, 
computerization of supply chain management, transparency portal etc.
1.6 PDS (Control) Orders 
The Ministry notified the Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 on 
31 August 2001 to maintain supplies and secure availability and distribution of 
essential commodities under the TPDS which was amended on 29 June 2004. In 
order to bring the PDS(C) Order, 2001 in consonance with NFSA, the Ministry 
notified on 20 March 2015 the Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) 
Order, 2015 in supersession of the Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 
2001 for maintaining supplies and securing availability and distribution of 
essential commodity, namely, foodgrains under the TPDS. The new Order 
contained further provisions for identification of beneficiaries, transparency and 
accountability, redressal grievance mechanism and digitization of beneficiary, 
ration card and other database. Under Clause 3 of the TPDS (C) Order, 2015 
the State-wise percentage coverage of eligible households under the NFSA in 
rural and urban areas respectively for receiving subsidized foodgrains under the 
Targeted Public Distribution System was specified.
1.7  Timeframe for implementation of NFSA
State Governments were to identify the eligible households within one year from 
the commencement of the NFSA i.e. upto 4 July 2014. The Ministry later extended 
this timeframe in June 2014 by three months. It was subsequently extended for 
a period of another six months and then again by six months up to 30 September 
2015.
As of October 2015, 18 States/UTs were reported to have implemented the NFSA 
by covering 41.57 crore (51 per cent) beneficiaries against the total 81.34 crore 
beneficiaries to be covered in all 36 States/UTs. As given in the map below (green 
area indicates states implementing NFSA):

9
Report No. 54 of 2015
Figure 1: States/UTs implementing NFSA


10
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chapter 2
Audit Approach and Methodology
2.1 Audit Objectives
This audit assesses the status of preparedness for implementation of NFSA with 
reference to following specific objectives:
i) Whether the States/UTs identified the eligible households and issued 
ration cards to all the identified eligible beneficiaries.
ii) Whether the States/UTs had the requisite infrastructure and were 
augmenting the same for increased requirement in transportation and 
storage capacity. 
iii) Whether the States initiated reforms in the Targeted Public Distribution 
System with regard to doorstep delivery and computerization.
iv) Whether the States/UTs had put in place a grievance redressal system 
including Food Security Allowance as per the provisions of NFSA and 
whether an effective monitoring mechanism was put in place.
2.2  Scope of Audit and Audit Sampling
The proposed audit covered the period from July 2013 to March 2015 and 
involved scrutiny of Cabinet notes and other records and other evidence in the 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and the corresponding 
department in selected States.  Eight States and one Union Territory were selected 
considering location and status of preparedness as detailed below:4 56
Fully implemented4 Partially implemented5 Not implemented
Chhattisgarh Delhi Assam
Karnataka Bihar Jharkhand6
Maharashtra Himachal Pradesh Uttar Pradesh
The following statistical framework was used for selection of sample:
•	 Each selected State was divided into regions on the basis of geographical 
contiguity.
4 States/UTs that have claimed to have identified all the beneficiaries are considered as fully implemented 
States/UTs.
5 States/UTs that have not identified all the beneficiaries are considered as partially implemented States/
UTs. 
6 Jharkhand Government has started implementing NFSA w.e.f October 2015.

11
Report No. 54 of 2015
•	 20 per cent of the districts subject to a minimum of two districts were 
chosen using Probability Proportionate to Size Without Replacement 
(PPSWOR) method independently from various regions with size measure 
as the total quantity of foodgrains (in100 tonne) released to respective 
District during the year 2013-14.
•	 In each sample district, two blocks/circles/talukas were selected using 
Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR).
•	 In each sample block/circle/taluka, four Fair Price Shops (FPSs) were 
selected again using SRSWOR. 
Thus, in each selected district, two blocks/circles/talukas and 8 FPSs were audited.  
In all, 42 districts, 84 Blocks and 336 FPSs were selected for audit.  Details of 
sample selection are given in Annex 2.1.
2.3 Sources of Audit criteria
The implementation of various preparatory works was audited with reference to 
the criteria derived from the following sources of documents:
i. Cabinet Notes.
ii. National Food Security Act, 2013.
iii. Public Distribution System (Control) Orders of 2001 and 2015
iv. Scheme Guidelines of End-to-End Computerisation of TPDS operations
v. Instructions issued by the Ministry to State/UT Governments.
vi. Recommendations of Standing Committee of Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution. 
vii. Instructions issued by the State/UT Governments for implementation 
from time to time. 
viii. Correspondence of Ministry with States/UT Governments.
2.4 Audit methodology and response of the Ministry
The performance audit commenced with an Entry Conference with the Ministry on 
18 May 2015 where the audit objectives, scope and methodology were explained.  
Entry conferences were also held at the State level.
The audit teams scrutinized the records relating to the implementation of NFSA at 

12
Report No. 54 of 2015
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, districts, blocks 
and fair price shops in nine selected States/UTs.  After the completion of audit, 
Exit conferences were held in the States during September 2015 to November 
2015, while it was held in the Ministry on 9 November 2015. The draft Audit 
Report was issued to the Ministry on 30 October 2015. The reply of the Ministry 
was received on 26 November 2015.  The replies received from the Ministry 
and States have been considered and suitably incorporated while preparing this 
Report.  
The Report contains six chapters. Chapter 1 and 2 of this report provide 
background information on NFSA and our audit approach. Chapters 3, 4, 5 and 
6 provide audit findings on identification of beneficiaries and issuance of ration 
cards, preparedness in logistics, reforms in TPDS, grievance redressal mechanism 
and monitoring respectively. 
2.5 Acknowledgement
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the Ministry, 
State Departments/agencies and their officials during conduct of this audit.

13
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chapter 3
Identification of beneficiaries  
and issuance of ration cards
3.1 State-wise coverage of population
As per Section 10 (1) (b) of NFSA, identification of eligible households/units 
was to be completed by the State within 365 days of commencement of NFSA. 
AAY Households were to be identified by States/UTs in accordance with the 
guidelines applicable to the scheme and remaining households as priority 
households in accordance with the guidelines framed by the respective State/
UT Governments. NFSA provides for coverage of 75 per cent and 50 per cent of 
the rural and urban population at the all India level, corresponding to which the 
State-wise coverage was determined by the Planning Commission.
The following chart illustrates coverage of rural and urban population and 
identification of beneficiaries in the categories of Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
(AAY) and priority households in accordance with the guidelines of Central 
Government and State Governments: 
Chart 2-Coverage of population and its identification under NFSA
Total Population as per census 2011=121.03 crore
Coverage under NFSA 81.34 crore 
(62.48 Cr Rural+18.86 Cr Urban)
12.50 Cr AAY beneficiaries 68.84 Cr Priority Households beneficiaries 
Identification as per Central Government 
guidelines for AAY issued in the year 
2000, 2003, 2004 and 2009
Identification on the basis of guidelines pre-
pared by respective State/UT Government

14
Report No. 54 of 2015
3.2 Status of identification 
The following Table lists the States/UTs which were allocated foodgrains under 
NFSA based on their reported completion of identification of beneficiaries and 
other preparatory activities;
Table 3: Status of NFSA Compliance by States (October 2015)
S. No. Name of the State/UT Implementation started from the 
month of
1. Haryana September, 2013
2. Rajasthan October, 2013
3. Delhi October, 2013
4. Himachal Pradesh October, 2013
5. Punjab December, 2013
6. Karnataka January, 2014
7. Chhattisgarh January, 2014
8. Maharashtra February, 2014
9. Chandigarh February, 2014
10. Madhya Pradesh March, 2014
11. Bihar March, 2014
12. West Bengal June, 2015
13. Lakshadweep August, 2015
14. Tripura September, 2015
15. Puducherry September, 2015
16. Uttarakhand October, 2015
17. Jharkhand October, 2015
18. Telangana October, 2015
Source:  Information furnished by Ministry
 Audit noted the following:
As per the NFSA, the States/UTs were required to identify the eligible households 
within 365 days. NFSA further stipulated that the State Government would 
continue to receive the allocation of foodgrains from the Central Government 
under the TPDS, till the completion of identification of such households. It was 
observed that out of the total 36 States/UTs, 
•	 Only 117 States/UTs reported identification of eligible households within 
the stipulated timeline of 365 days and were getting foodgrains under 
7 Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maha-
rashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan.

15
Report No. 54 of 2015
NFSA during September 2013 - March 2014; 
•	 Seven8 more States/UTs reported identification of eligible households 
under NFSA during June-October 2015 taking the figure of implementing 
States/UTs to 18. 
•	 In effect, only 51 per cent of 
the eligible beneficiaries had 
been identified and 49 per cent 
beneficiaries were yet to be 
identified in the country (Annex 
3.1) as indicated in Chart 3.
It was further noted that out of the 
above 18 States, eight States/UTs9 fully 
completed the identification as per 
coverage under NFSA. However, it was noted that in case 10 States/UTs10 NFSA 
was implemented even though these States did not complete identification of 
required number of beneficiaries under NFSA. In these 10 States/UTs, as against 
the total 2621.29 lakh beneficiaries, only 2077.88 lakh were identified.  This 
resulted in benefit of subsidized foodgrains under NFSA not reaching 543.41 lakh 
remaining unidentified of the targeted beneficiaries. 
For 18 States/UTs which had not reported completion of the identification, Ministry 
extended the timeline for implementation thrice latest being till September, 2015. 
Ministry stated that NFSA did not bar implementation of the NFSA in a State/UT 
with incomplete identification of beneficiaries. By allowing partial coverage in 
such States, at least those identified persons came under the purview of the NFSA 
and availed of the benefit of the NFSA sooner.
However, audit noted that under Section 10(1) (b) of NFSA, the State Government 
shall continue to receive the allocation of foodgrains from the Central Government 
under the existing Targeted Public Distribution System, till the identification of 
such households is complete. Hence NFSA clearly stipulates that identification is 
necessary for receiving foodgrains under NFSA.
3.3  Delay in implementation of NFSA by non-implementing States/UTs
An analysis was made in audit in order to ascertain the reasons which led to delay 
8 Tripura, West Bengal, Uttrakhand, Jharkhand, Telangana, Puducherry, Lakshadweep. 
9 Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Karnataka, Lakshadweep, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttrakhand.
10 Bihar, Chandigarh, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Telangana, 
Tripura, Puducherry.


16
Report No. 54 of 2015
in implementation of NFSA.  Test check of records revealed the following reasons 
for non-implementation of NFSA in the States not qualifying for allocation under 
NFSA:
i) Ministry had indicated that the States/UTs may use the Socio Economic 
Caste Census (SECC) data in the category of priority households, if they 
so desire. This provision was made keeping in view the ongoing SECC 
being coordinated by Ministry of Rural Development since 2011 for 
determining eligibility and entitlements of rural and urban households for 
different Central Government programmes and Schemes. However, work 
of survey of rural and urban areas under SECC 2011 was not completed 
till July 2013. The SECC survey report was yet to be finalized (November 
2015). It was noted that Uttar Pradesh and Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
mentioned that delay was due to non-finalization of figures under SECC.
ii) Gujarat cited variations in SECC data and total population of the State as 
per census 2011 as a reason for delay in implementation of NFSA. 
iii) Delay in getting National Population Register data was cited as a reason 
by Odisha.
iv) Due to lack of infrastructural facilities, insufficient funds and manpower, 
NFSA could not be implemented in Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Manipur, Mizoram, Sikkim and Nagaland. These issues were raised by 
States with the Ministry at various stages during the formulation of the 
bill and after the enactment of NFSA. However, these issues still remained 
unresolved.  
v) Andhra Pradesh stated bifurcation of the State as a factor for delay.
vi) Daman & Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala 
and Tamil Nadu informed that preparatory measures were underway.
vii)  Audit noted that non-completion of digitization of eligible beneficiaries 
contributed to the delay in implementation in Assam. 
Ministry stated that the onus of identification rested with the States. The complete 
responsibility for evolving the criteria for identification of priority households was 
with the State Governments. It was not linked to SECC or any other guidelines of 
the Central Government.  Once the criteria are evolved by a State, it has to carry 
out exercise of actual identification of priority households as per criteria finalized 

17
Report No. 54 of 2015
by it. It is free to use SECC or any other reliable data for this purpose. 
Audit noted that prior to enactment of the NFSA in 2011 many states had raised 
the issue of identification of beneficiaries as one of the major constraints. Ministry 
had clarified that data collected under SECC will have information of a number 
of socio-economic indicators. Ministry also indicated that Ministry of Rural 
Development and Planning Commission in consultation with states, experts and 
civil societies will arrive at a consensus on the methodology, consistent with 
provisions of Food Security Bill, to ensure that no poor household is excluded 
from coverage under Government programmes. However, Ministry finally 
decided to allow the States/UTs to formulate their own guidelines/criteria for 
identification of priority households. This contributed to delay in implementation 
as many States were still waiting for the completion of SECC. 
3.4   Irregular extension of time for identification of beneficiaries
As per Section 10 (1) of the NFSA, State Governments were to identify the 
eligible households within one year from the commencement of the NFSA 
i.e. upto 4 July 2014. However, it was noted that only 11 States/UTs reported 
completion of this preparatory work within the stipulated one year. The Ministry 
later extended this timeframe in June 2014 by three months. Since no other states 
had reported completion of identification of the beneficiaries during the extended 
period, it was further extended for a period of another six months and then again 
by six months up to 30 September 2015.
Audit noted that without any enabling provision in the NFSA, the Ministry 
extended the time frame for identification of beneficiaries which was irregular. 
Ministry stated that States/UTs highlighted delays in identification of eligible 
households due to various reasons such as non-availability of complete data, time 
being taken to conduct survey/verification, completion of requisite preparatory 
activities for implementation of NFSA, and so on, hence a decision was taken to 
extend the time limit for identification of eligible beneficiaries under NFSA and 
satisfactory completion of other preparatory activities by the State Governments.
Ministry further stated that as of November 2015, the NFSA was being 
implemented in 23 States/UTs, and considering that a long time had passed since 
the NFSA came into force, it had now been decided not to extend the time period 
further so that complete responsibility for any further delay in implementing the 
NFSA was borne by the respective State/UT.

18
Report No. 54 of 2015
NFSA had no provision for extension of time. However, Section 42 (1) of the 
NFSA, stipulated that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions 
of the NFSA, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions, for removing the difficulty, within two years from 
the commencement of the NFSA. Every such order was to be laid before the each 
House of the Parliament.  
Audit noted that the Ministry did not take recourse to resolve the problems faced 
by the states in identification of eligible households. Instead, it extended the time 
limit of 365 days laid down in the NFSA thrice, despite no such provision for 
extension available under NFSA. 
3.5 Coverage in the selected States
Details of coverage of beneficiaries against the total beneficiaries as per NFSA in 
the selected implementing States/UTs as of October 2015 are given in the chart 
below:
Chart 4: Coverage of population in implementing States
Source: Ministry’s records
Test check of records in selected States/UTs revealed that identification of 
beneficiaries was not done as per NFSA as given below:
Bihar: State Government did not carry out fresh exercise for identification of 
AAY households and instead included the existing AAY households under 
NFSA. It framed the guidelines for identification of eligible priority households 
that included both inclusion and exclusion criterion. It was noted that as per the 
guidelines, households having any member as regular employee of Central/State 
Government or Public Sector or Local Body or Autonomous Institutions were 

19
Report No. 54 of 2015
to be excluded. However, to meet the shortfall in coverage of beneficiaries, the 
State Government modified the guidelines in December, 2014 and decided to 
include regular Group IV/D employee from SC/ST category working with State 
Government. Audit noted that the State may have resorted to include such criteria 
in order to meet the target of beneficiaries. 
Ministry maintained that the criteria framed by the states were the prerogative 
of the states. However, though the framing of criteria were the prerogative of the 
states, in the absence of any guidelines by the Ministry, the states resorted to their 
own criteria in order to fill up the gap in the number of eligible beneficiaries and 
the ceiling of coverage prescribed by the NFSA. 
Chhattisgarh: State Government implemented Chhattisgarh Food Security 
Act, 2012 (CGFSA) in September 2013. For implementation of CGFSA State 
Government took necessary steps as envisaged and the salient features of the 
CGFSA were same as that of NFSA. State adopted its own criterion and completed 
implementation before enactment of NFSA. On notification of NFSA, the State 
informed the Ministry of the existing efforts and the Ministry allowed them to be 
considered as NFSA compliant from January 2014.
Delhi: Delhi Government initially selected 1.04 lakh as AAY households and 
5.25 lakh as priority households from the existing 6.29 lakh households under 
BPL, AAY , Jhuggi Ration Cards and Resettlement Colony Ration Cards for 
giving benefit under the NFSA from September 2013.  Delhi Government notified 
the guidelines for identification of eligible AAY and priority households under 
NFSA in July 2013.  Later, during the process of actual identification, 2.20 
lakh households (0.30 lakh AAY and 1.90 lakh priority households) out of 6.29 
lakh identified initially, were deleted in April 2014 since there were duplicate 
and ineligible beneficiaries which meant that the State Government supplied 
subsidized foodgrains to 2.20 lakh ineligible households from September 2013 
to March 2014.
Further as per the guidelines, households having total annual income of less than 
` 1.00 lakh were eligible for inclusion under priority households. It was noted that 
1.55 lakh ineligible households having annual income of more than ` One lakh, 
whom the Delhi Government had previously issued Unstamped APL Cards but 
were not issued subsidized foodgrains under TPDS, were included under priority 
households. Thus, 1.55 lakh such ineligible households were given benefit under 
NFSA. 
Ministry stated that monthly allocation of foodgrains to Delhi under NFSA was 
revised from the month of October, 2013 to October, 2014. It was also decided 
to adjust the excess quantity lifted in excess of revised allocation against the 
allocation in subsequent months. 

20
Report No. 54 of 2015
However, audit noted significant variation in number of beneficiaries which 
was indicative of risk of errors in exclusion and inclusion in list of identified 
beneficiaries.
Himachal Pradesh : Though the State Government framed the guidelines for 
identification under NFSA, it did not carry out fresh exercise for identification 
of AAY and priority households. It took AAY and priority households from the 
existing BPL, AAY and Primary households. Further, it was noted that State 
government identified and extended benefit to 31.06 lakh beneficiaries under the 
NFSA, however the Ministry released foodgrains for 26.78 lakh initially identified 
beneficiaries by the State due to the reason that digitization of beneficiaries was 
not completed in the State. 
Karnataka: The State Government did not carry out fresh exercise for identification 
of AAY households but carried forward the existing AAY households under NFSA. 
Further, the State Government did not frame any guidelines to identify households 
as priority households but included the existing 403.25 lakh BPL families against 
required 359.81 lakh as priority household beneficiaries thus giving benefits of 
NFSA to additional 43.44 lakh beneficiaries from own resources.
It was also noted that State Government had launched a scheme namely Anna 
Bhagya Scheme (ABS), aimed at ensuring food security to BPL families across 
the State since July 2013.  Under the Scheme, a single person family is eligible 
for 10 kg rice, two person’s family for 20 kg rice and a family with three and 
more number of persons for 30 kg rice per month. Even after implementation of 
NFSA, State Government continued to follow the scale of issue of foodgrains 
that was fixed under ABS, which was higher than the entitlement eligible under 
NFSA. Consequently, State Government had to procure excess foodgrains from 
the market to meet the requirement and the subsidy burden of ` 2,070.46 crore 
had to be borne by the State exchequer.
Maharashtra: The State Government did not carry out fresh identification 
exercise and carried forward existing AAY , BPL & APL card holders to identify 
AAY and priority households.
Assam: Instead of carrying out fresh exercise for identification of AAY 
households State Government issued instructions to include all the existing 
AAY households under TPDS. Against the ceiling of 7.04 lakh AAY households 
the State Government identified 6.56 lakh.  The State Government framed the 
guidelines for identification of priority households. State was to cover the targeted 
population of 252.08 lakh by September 2014 but as of March 2015, they could 
cover 249.87 lakh thus, there was shortfall in coverage of 2.21 lakh. 
It was noted the State Government superimposed the target at uniform rate of 

21
Report No. 54 of 2015
84.17 per cent of the Census population for each of the blocks in the rural areas 
and 60.35 per cent in each of the Municipality Boards/Town Committees in the 
urban areas.
It was further noted, in two out of five test checked districts11, that while preparing 
the ration cards for issue to the identified eligible households, the district authorities 
reduced the number of members of the 41 priority households from 347 to 174 
without any recorded reason. The reduction of members of the households ranged 
from two to ten members against the total family members though the particulars 
and supporting documents of all the members were furnished by the applicants 
along with the application form.
It was noted that in Sonitpur district, 1656 households consisting of 10,170 
labourers working in Tea estates having annual income below the prescribed 
benchmark of `1.00 lakh by the State Government for inclusion under AAY , were 
not covered under NFSA. In two test checked districts 12, it was revealed that 52 
households having government servant as family member were selected against 
the criteria set by the State Government that no government servant would be 
entitled for the benefit under NFSA. Further, in Dhubri district it was noted 
that income of 50 AAY households was more than that of the selected priority 
households indicating improper selection of beneficiaries.
Jharkhand: In October 2014, the State Government decided to use SECC data for 
selection of beneficiaries and in March 2015 it prescribed stepwise activities for 
selection. State Government implemented NFSA with effect from October 2015 
based on draft SECC 2011 data for identification of AAY and priority households. 
Thus, there was delay in decision making at various levels.
Uttar Pradesh: There was delay in finalization of criteria for identification 
of priority households as the State Government finalized the criteria only in 
October 2014 and notified in December 2014 which was followed by survey for 
identification which was incomplete as of March 2015. State Government did 
not carry out fresh exercise for identification of AAY households but included 
the existing 40.94 lakh AAY families under TPDS as AAY households that too 
without any survey/verification.
Ministry contended that it was not necessary to undertake fresh identification 
exercise, as the AAY was an ongoing scheme and the number of AAY households 
as well as the criteria for their identification was already specified for each State. 
For priority households, the States already had a universe of population comprising 
of BPL, AAY and APL households under the erstwhile TPDS. The States were 
11 Sonitpur, Nagaon.
12 Baksa, Sonitpur.

22
Report No. 54 of 2015
required to evolve guidelines/criteria for identifying priority households within 
the number determined for it.
However, audit noted that the Section 10 of NFSA used the word ‘identify’ 
which denoted that a process of identification is required. Further, the Ministry’s 
instructions to the States/UTs of 17 July 2013 clearly indicated that fresh 
identification exercise was to be carried out.
3.6 Issue of Ration Cards to identified households
As per the directions, relating to necessary preparatory action for implementation 
of NFSA, issued by the Central Government (17 July 2013) new ration cards 
were required to be issued with eldest women as head of the household by the 
States/UTs. A test check of records at the field level revealed the following:
Himachal Pradesh: 6.9 lakh old ration cards were stamped as priority household 
and AAY households and re-issued as NFSA compliant as shown here. 
Bihar: Against 1.42 crore priority households ration cards to be issued, 5.49 
lakh ration cards were not 
distributed by the State. 
In test checked Districts, 
the distribution of the card 
was withheld to avoid issue 
of two cards to a single 
household due to death, 
migration of beneficiaries 
and printing mistakes.  
Chhattisgarh: As against 
the total number of 29.97 
lakh households as per 
Census 2011, ration cards 
were issued to 38.54 lakh 
households and 33.82 lakh 
ration cards were found 
functional as of May 2015 
after cancellation of ration 
cards. Thus, 3.84 lakh excess ration cards had not been cancelled.
On this being pointed out in Audit (May 2015),  State government stated (June 
2015) that as the time limit for receipt of application and issuing of Ration Cards 
was very short therefore it was not possible to verify all the application. Due to 
this entries of ineligible and bogus application have also been done which were 
cancelled after conducting verification campaign of Ration Cards.
Figure 2: Old card reissued as NFSA  
compliant in Himachal Pradesh


23
Report No. 54 of 2015
The facts remains that the issuing of new ration cards without any proper survey 
and verification was irregular.
Delhi: Though the State had identified 72.64 lakh beneficiaries under NFSA, 
information relating to distribution of new rations cards under priority households 
and AAY was not furnished to audit and thus the actual number of ration cards 
issued could not be ascertained.
Karnataka: State Government issued 113.23 lakh ration cards for AAY and 
priority households against 445.36 lakh beneficiaries identified by them. As of 
June 2015, 8.90 lakh bogus and ineligible ration cards were found in the existing 
system during seeding of Elector’s Photo Identity Card (EPIC) details. However, 
instead of cancelling these bogus or ineligible ration cards, State Government 
continued to issue foodgrains to them. 
Maharashtra: As in the case of Himachal Pradesh, the ration cards were 
revalidated by merely affixing stamps on the existing ration cards under different 
categories.
Assam: State Government got 59.92 lakh ration cards printed against the 
requirement of 56.21 lakh households eligible for issue of ration cards. Further, 
State Government issued 57.09 lakh ration cards to all the districts for onward 
distribution during January and February 2014 and balance undistributed 2.83 lakh 
ration cards were lying at the Directorate of Food, Civil Supply and Consumer 
Affairs due to printing of cards without proper assessment of the requirement.
Uttar Pradesh: Beneficiaries under NFSA were not finalized, and thus no fresh 
ration cards were issued. However, the validity of existing ration cards was 
extended until implementation of NFSA.
3.6.1 Implementation of provisions relating to women empowerment in the 
ration cards
Aiming at women empowerment, Section 13(1) of NFSA, 2013 provides that in 
every eligible household, the eldest woman not below 18 years of age was to be 
recognised as head of the household for the purpose of the issue of ration cards. 
Where a household at any time, did not have a woman or a woman of eighteen 
years of age or above, only then the ration cards could be issued to male member 
of the household and even in such cases the female member, on attaining the age 
of eighteen years, would become the head of the household. The ration cards 
under NFSA were also to be compliant with the entitlement norms on per person 
basis. A test check of records at the field level revealed the following observations.

24
Report No. 54 of 2015
In Himachal Pradesh it was noted that existing old ration cards, which did not 
specially identify the eldest women as head of household, were being used. 
In Karnataka, it was noted that the State Government issued 21.14 lakh ration 
cards with male member as head of family despite having a female member of 
18 years and above.  The State Government replied that while issuing new online 
ration cards to these families, eldest women would be made head of household. 
In Assam, the situation was similar. Though there were women member in the 
households, 207 ration cards were prepared in the name of male member. Cases 
were noticed in which, the ration cards were prepared in the name of women 
member other than the eldest women of the households. 
In Maharashtra, the provision of NFSA aimed at empowerment of women was 
not complied with, as fresh ration cards were not issued and existing cards were 
revalidated.
Ministry accepted the fact and stated that States were being pursued for responses, 
and that Assam had informed that action had been taken to prepare ration card in 
the name of the eldest women member of the household.
3.7 Implementation of provisions relating to Maternity benefits and 
Supplementary Nutrition
3.7.1 Maternity benefits provided under NFSA not extended across the 
country
As per Section 4 (b) of NFSA, subject to such schemes as may be framed by 
the Central Government, every pregnant woman and lactating mother shall be 
entitled to maternity benefit of not less that rupees six thousand in such instalments 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The Ministry of Women and 
Child Development (MWCD) has been implementing Conditional Cash Transfer 
scheme, namely, Indira Gandhi Matritva Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY), for Pregnant 
and Lactating (P&L) women, on pilot basis in 53 districts across the country since 
October, 2010.
After the implementation of NFSA, maternity benefit was revised from ` 4,000 to 
` 6,000 from 5 July 2013 under the scheme. However, it was noted that the scheme 
was being implemented only in the 53 pilot districts as the cost sharing pattern 
between Central Government and State/UT Governments was not finalized by 
Ministry of Finance.
The MWCD stated (December, 2015) the cost sharing pattern for IGMSY was 

25
Report No. 54 of 2015
decided by Ministry of Finance in October, 2015. MWCD further added that it 
initiated the action for obtaining approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs for expansion of the IGMSY to all districts of the country.
Thus the maternity benefit, though made mandatory through NFSA, were yet to 
be extended to pregnant woman and lactating mothers in the country and was 
available to a few chosen districts. 
3.7.2 Supplementary Nutrition (under the ICDS) Rules, 2015. 
As per Section 5 (1) of NFSA, in the case of children in the age group of six 
months to six years, appropriate meal, free of charge, was to be provided through 
the local Anganwadi Centre (AWC) so as to meet the nutritional standards 
specified in NFSA.
Ministry of Women and Child Development, in consultation with the State 
Governments, made the Supplementary Nutrition (under the Integrated Child 
Development Services Scheme) Rules 2015. However, no provision was made in 
the Rules for the payment of food security allowance to the beneficiaries of the 
AWCs which were required under Section 8 of the NFSA.
Conclusion
After two and half years since NFSA came into force in July 2013, only 18 
States/UTs reported to have started implementation of NFSA . In many of the 
States/UTs, though the identification of beneficiaries was not fully completed, 
Ministry allotted them the revised allocation of foodgrains. As many of the 
States/UTs had not reported status of their preparedness, Ministry extended the 
timeline for implementation of NFSA thrice. The extension of time schedule for 
implementation of NFSA without the approval of Parliament, as there was no 
enabling provision in NFSA was irregular. Ministry also failed to resolve several 
issues raised by the States during the formulation phase and also after enactment 
of NFSA which contributed to delay in implementation in several States/UTs. 
The identification of beneficiaries was not carried out in a systematic and scientific 
manner in any of the test checked states.  Some states merely re-stamped their 
old ration cards as NFSA compliant and that too without providing for women 
empowerment as laid down in NFSA.  Identification of beneficiaries was a critical 
milestone to be achieved in order to omit the errors of inclusion and exclusion. 
However, what had effectively been adopted in the States was the old system, 
re-christened for projecting themselves as NFSA compliant. Resultantly, the 
states had failed to prepare themselves towards fulfilment of the objective of the 
NFSA to provide food security to all the needy. The intended use of tool of gender 
empowerment for achieving food security was also largely not met. 

26
Report No. 54 of 2015
  Recommendations 
i) Ministry may issue, in consultation with State Governments, guidelines 
on identification of beneficiaries to maintain transparency.
ii) Ministry must assure itself of the actual identification of beneficiaries by 
the States/UTs by following transparent processes before allowing them 
revised enhanced entitlements. 
iii) As there is no enabling provision in the NFSA, Ministry should obtain 
approval of the Parliament for extending the timeline laid down for the 
implementation of NFSA. 

27
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chapter 4
Preparedness in Logistics: Allocation, 
Movement and Storage of Foodgrains
4.1 Allocation of foodgrains
As per Section 22(1) of NFSA, the Central Government shall, for ensuring the 
regular supply of foodgrains to persons belonging to eligible households, allocate 
from the central pool the required quantity of foodgrains to the State Governments 
under the TPDS. 
For allocation of foodgrains, States/UTs were required to certify their preparedness 
for implementation of NFSA through a proforma devised by the Ministry, as 
referred to in Para 1.5.
After examining the proforma furnished by the States/UTs, Ministry started 
allocating wheat and rice at ` 2 per kg and ` 3 per kg respectively to them.  The 
Ministry allocated wheat and rice to the rest of the non-implementing States at the 
central issue prices under the normal TPDS. 
4.2 Movement of foodgrains
As per Section 22(4) (e) of NFSA, the Central Government shall provide for 
transportation of foodgrains, as per allocation, to the depots by the Central 
Government in each State/UT. Distribution of foodgrains under TPDS and Other 
Welfare Schemes (OWS) is carried out on the basis of monthly allocation made 
by the GOI and off-take of foodgrains from the Central Pool by various states. 
Stock of foodgrains is also to be moved to consuming states irrespective of 
consumption requirement to create buffer stocks as a measure of food security.  
The position of inter-state movement of foodgrains by rail and road during the 
period 2011-12 to 2014-15 was as under:
Table 4: Movement of foodgrains by the rail and road by FCI
(Quantity in lakh MT)
Particulars 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Overall 
Movement
Rail 303.23 321.33 369.35 389.32
Road 24.54 27.85 25.37 19.12
Total 327.27 349.18 394.72 408.44
Source: FCI Website
On full implementation of NFSA, the quantity of foodgrains required to be 
moved from procuring States to consuming States would increase considerably 

28
Report No. 54 of 2015
and requirement of rakes would also increase by about 20 per cent as noted by 
the Standing Committee. 
The information relating to requirement of rakes by FCI for transportation of 
foodgrains and making available of the same by the Railways during the years 
2010-11 to 2014-15 is given in Chart 5:
Chart 5: Availability of rakes against requirement 
Source: Data furnished by Ministry
The above chart shows that there was shortfall in the range of 13 per cent to 
18 per cent in arranging the rakes by the Railways. On this being pointed out, 
Ministry stated in October, 2015 that variation in rakes planned vis-à-vis actual 
dispatch is mainly due to inadequate availability of rakes by the railways and 
heavy traffic and sometimes also due to operational constraints of FCI like non-
availability of vacant space at recipient depots, less lifting by State Governments 
and increase in procurement in consuming regions etc.
Ministry stated that there is no shortage of supply of food grains for TDPS/OWS 
(other welfare schemes) due to movement of foodgrains in the states. However, 
the fact remains that the availability of rakes were short of requirement.
4.2.1 Non-preparation of National Foodgrains Movement Plan
The Ministry (in October, 2012) while submitting information to Standing 
Committee on National Food Security Bill, had informed that a National 
Foodgrains Movement Plan to address the road movement related problem in the 
North Eastern States, mechanization of FCI godowns to reduce rake handling time, 
priority good sheds for development of basic facilities by railways, etc. supply 
of rakes, levying of demurrage charges movement by the Railways, upgradation 
of infrastructure at unloading railway stations was under preparation and a study 
was entrusted to M/s Pricewaterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. by FCI for this purpose.

29
Report No. 54 of 2015
The Ministry stated (November, 2015) that study report of M/s Pricewaterhouse 
Coopers Pvt. Ltd.  on Supply Chain Management has been received.  Report 
has been taken into account by FCI for improving the movement of foodgrains.  
Ministry further stated that there was no major bottleneck in the movement of food 
grains, as sufficient food grains are available in different states for distribution in 
TDPS/OWS/NFSA. 
However, the Ministry neither indicated the specific steps taken by FCI to address 
the above issues nor provided any evidence of consideration of the Report by 
FCI/Ministry and action taken
4.3 Storage capacity for foodgrains 
As per Section 22(4) (e), the Central Government shall create and maintain 
required modern and scientific storage facilities at various locations.  Further, in 
terms of obligation of state government for Food Security, Section 24(5) (a) of 
NFSA provides that every State Government shall create and maintain required 
number of modern and scientific storage facilities at various levels, being sufficient 
to accommodate foodgrains required under the TPDS, For ensuring uninterrupted 
supply of foodgrains to the entitled beneficiaries, the state would require storage 
of sufficient foodgrains.  However, NFSA did not fix any timeline for upgradation 
of storage facilities nor were any instructions issued by the Ministry in this regard.
4.3.1 Shortfall in storage capacity with FCI for the Central Pool stock
Audit observed that with the increasing foodgrains stock in the central pool held 
by FCI and State Government Agencies {excluding foodgrains procured by 
Decentralized procurement (DCP) states}, the storage gap with FCI during the 
period 2010-2015 was as given in Table 5:
Table 5: Gap in storage capacity with FCI
 (Quantity in lakh MT)
Sl. No. Stock of food 
grain in the 
Central Pool 
as on 1st June
Foodgrains 
procurement 
by DCP states
Net stock of 
Foodgrains with 
FCI
(Central Pool 
stock minus stock 
procured by DCP 
state)
Total storage 
capacity available 
(owned and hired) 
with FCI as on 31st 
march
Gap in 
storage 
capacity 
with FCI
Percentage 
shortfall 
in storage 
capacity
1 2 3 4 (2-3) 5 6 (4-5) 7
2010 544.82 129.45 415.37 288.36 127.01 30.57
2011 581.94 155.59 426.35 316.10 110.25 25.85
2012 729.59 211.53 518.06 336.04 182.02 35.13
2013 676.59 197.79 478.80 377.35 101.45 21.18
2014 622.31 216.88 405.43 368.90 36.53 9.01
2015 568.34 236.84 331.50 356.63 -25.13 -7.58
Source: Data furnished by the Ministry

30
Report No. 54 of 2015
As could be seen from the above, there was shortfall in the storage capacity with 
the FCI in the range of 9 to 35 per cent during the years 2010-2014 except in the 
year 2015, in which the stock of foodgrains in the central pool was less due to 
increase in procurement by DCP states and less foodgrains in the central pool.
Chart 6: Gap in storage capacity with FCI
4.3.2 State specific cases
A test check of records at the field level revealed deficiencies in storage capacities 
in the selected States as detailed below:
Assam: Considering the monthly allocation of foodgrains of 1.33 lakh MT for 
the State under NFSA, the state was to have storage capacity of 3.99 lakh MT for 
three months. Audit noted that the state had storage capacity of 2.84 lakh MT, out 
of which 1.16 lakh MT was not fit for storage of food grains. Physical verification 
of FPS and godowns of the selected districts revealed that the seven out of 40 
selected FPSs stored foodgrains in living cum bed rooms. The condition of the 
rooms was found damp.
Bihar: The State Government 
sent information (January 
2014) to the Director (NFSA) 
of the Ministry that sufficient 
and scientific storage capacity 
had been created at various 
levels in the State for storage 
of foodgrains under NFSA. 
As per allotment, monthly 
 Figure 3: Foodgrains stored in bed cum living room 
at Amrit Ali FPS, Bilashipara, Dhubri, Assam

31
Report No. 54 of 2015
required capacity was 4.095 lakh MT whereas available capacity was only 3.302 
lakh MT (80.63 per cent) as on March 2015 leaving a shortfall of 19.37 per cent.
Himachal Pradesh: Against the average monthly allocation of 0.59 lakh MT of 
foodgrains under TPDS and OWS, the total capacity in the State was only 0.54 
lakh MT. 
Jharkhand: The State decided that storage capacity of foodgrains in districts 
should be two times of monthly requirements of foodgrains, as against the standard 
requirement of three months. It was observed that State had storage capacity for 
0.66 lakh MT of foodgrains whereas requirement for storage for two months 
was 3.10 lakh MT. It was also noted that to meet the storage requirements, State 
Government decided to create 1.71 lakh MT storage capacities during 2010-11 to 
2014-15.  During the test check in sampled four districts13 it was noted that State 
Government sanctioned 71 godowns of varied capacity. Out of 53 constructed 
godowns, six godowns having 0.03 lakh MT capacity were found unfit for use 
either due to remote location without any approach road or damaged condition. 
Figure 4: Spoiled rice in Chaibasa Sadar 
Block Campus  
Figure 5: Wet foodgrains in Pakur Block 
godown
Maharashtra: During the period 2011-15 the State Government approved 
construction of 233 godowns with storage capacity of 3.24 lakh MT. It was 
informed that tendering/estimation process was in progress in respect of 18 
godowns, work in respect of 105 godowns was in progress while construction of 
only 93 godowns was completed. (October2015).
Uttar Pradesh: It was noted that the storage facility for foodgrains allocated 
under existing TPDS was inadequate in 406 blocks out of 817 blocks in the State 
13 Giridih, Gumla, Pakur & West Singhbhum.

32
Report No. 54 of 2015
resulting in storage of foodgrains in open area. As the allocation of foodgrains 
to State would increase by 46 per cent on implementation of NFSA, it will put 
further pressure on the storage facility in the already deficient blocks, and the 
State was not prepared to receive enhanced allocation. 
Ministry stated that on the overall, there was sufficient capacity for stocking the 
Central Pool foodgrains. 
However the contention of the Ministry that 792.48 lakh MT of storage capacity 
was available in the country was not correct as the shortfall in the total storage 
capacity of FCI for the central pool stock was 9 to 35 per cent during the years 
2010-2014. Mere availability of storage capacity in the country as stated by the 
Ministry was not a correct assessment of the preparedness unless additional 
storage capacity was identified and arranged by FCI state-wise.
Ministry further stated that storage capacities are less than the ideal situation of 
three months requirement in some states. In these states, plan scheme to augment 
the capacities are under implementation. 
The reply is non-specific as Audit noted inadequate and inappropriate storages in 
many states 
Conclusion
The States were largely unprepared for handling the logistics of allocation, 
movement and storage of foodgrains which was necessary for efficient and 
successful implementation of the NFSA. The Ministry did not make any 
preparation with regard to removal of bottlenecks in the movement of foodgrains 
as it could not ensure preparation and finalisation of the National Foodgrains 
Movement Plan. Further, the storage capacity with the FCI was insufficient 
considering the increased allocation for several States/UTs.  The storage capacity 
was not adequate even for three months requirement of foodgrains in the test 
checked States. The condition of existing storage capacities with the States also 
needed up gradation and improvement.
Thus, there were no substantial improvement post notifications of NFSA. There 
were no concerted efforts to formulate a nationwide plan for creating scientific 
and modern storage facilities.  The problem may get compounded in future, as the 
requirement for movement become increasingly heavy. 

33
Report No. 54 of 2015
  Recommendations 
i) National foodgrains Movement Plan should be finalized by the 
Ministry and implemented for ensuring timely delivery of foodgrains as 
contemplated in the NFSA.
ii) Ministry may expedite action to augment the storage capacity for 
foodgrains and upgrade the existing storage facilities

34
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chapter 5
Reforms in Targeted Public  
Distribution System
5.1 Introduction
As per Section 12 of NFSA, the Central and State Governments shall endeavour 
progressively to undertake necessary reforms in the TPDS. The areas of reforms 
identified included doorstep delivery of foodgrains to the TPDS outlets for 
ensuring supply to entitled persons, application of information and communication 
technology tools including end-to-end computerization in order to ensure 
transparent recording of transactions at all levels and to prevent diversion and 
ensuring full transparency. While NFSA provides for other reforms too such as 
leveraging ‘Aadhaar’ for unique identification, preference to public institutions/
bodies in licensing of FPS etc., Ministry, to begin with, concentrated more on the 
critical reforms. 
5.2 Doorstep Delivery of foodgrains
As per Section 24 (2) of NFSA, it shall be the duty of the State Government to 
•	 Take delivery of foodgrains from the designated depots of the Central 
Government in the State, at the prices specified in Schedule I of NFSA; 
•	 Organise intra-state allocations for delivery of the allocated foodgrains 
through their authorised agencies at the doorstep of each fair price shop; 
and 
•	 Ensure actual delivery or supply of the foodgrains to the entitled persons.
Further, as per Clause 7(12) of TPDS (Control) Order 2015, the State Government 
shall furnish a report regarding doorstep delivery on quarterly basis to the Central 
Government. The Ministry based on the information obtained prior to the 
notification of TPDS (C) Order 2015 informed that it had received reports from 
27 states/UTs only. Further, an online system for getting information has been 
introduced since September 2015.
5.2.1 State specific cases
The level of preparedness as noted from the test check of records in the selected 
States is detailed below:

35
Report No. 54 of 2015
Assam: Doorstep delivery was not implemented in the State. Only bidding 
process for selection of transporters was completed (October 2015).
Bihar: Bihar Government started the doorstep delivery of food-grains to the 
FPSs under e-PDS. Under this scheme, foodgrains were to be electronically 
weighed and lifted from the godowns and delivered to FPSs through pre- selected 
transporters using GPS-enabled vehicles.
Audit noted that there were inconsistencies in the reports generated through 
e-PDS. In the reports obtained from the offices of the District Managers 14, Bihar 
State Food Corporation (DMs, BSFC) about the quantity of foodgrains issued to 
different FPSs, it was seen that against one Store Issue Order (SIO) same quantity 
of foodgrains was shown as issued twice. During test check of eight blocks15, audit 
noted that against SIO of 37931.31 MT foodgrains, though the same quantity of 
food grains was issued for FPSs but in the report of DMs, BSFC 75862.62 MT 
(double the quantity) foodgrains was shown as issued. In another case, scrutiny 
revealed that 756.092 MT foodgrains supplied were not received by FPS dealers. 
In reply DMs BSFC stated that when SIO quantity was more than the capacity of 
one vehicle, it was sent by more than one vehicle but due to software problem of 
the system integrator, dual entry of quantity was shown against one SIO. Thus, 
the doorstep delivery model was not followed properly. 
Physical verification of FPSs in Chewara, Minapur, Kharik, Sabour and 
Sheikhpura blocks revealed that in 88 cases involving supply of 481.59 MT 
foodgrains there was difference between date of supply as per records of Bihar 
State Food Corporation and actual date of supply to FPSs. This was due to inability 
of system integrator to do simultaneous entry of outgoing foodgrains because of 
poor connectivity or less charging of battery, as replied by the Corporation.
Delhi: Scrutiny of records revealed that doorstep delivery of foodgrains was 
being done in all 2300 FPSs.  However, due to absence of monitoring of real-time 
movement of foodgrains with the help of GPS-enabled devices and load sensors 
fixed to vehicles, audit could not ascertain the effectiveness of the doorstep 
delivery.
Karnataka & Himachal Pradesh:  It was noted that the FPS dealers were 
transporting foodgrains from the godowns to their shops and expenditure incurred 
14 Bhagalpur, Saran, Muzaffarpur , Sheikhpura
15 Amnour , Minapur, Moosahri, Marhowrai, Naugachia, Sheikhpura, Sabour

36
Report No. 54 of 2015
by the dealers were being reimbursed by the State Government. However as the 
transportation of foodgrains to FPSs was to be done by the State as per the NFSA, 
the practice of transportation by FPS dealers themselves was inappropriate. 
Maharashtra: Only in the tribal and drought prone areas, foodgrains were 
distributed to the FPSs through Government owned/hired vehicles and in rest of 
the State, foodgrains were transported to FPSs by the FPSs’ dealers themselves.
Uttar Pradesh: Only in 15 out of 75 districts in the State, door-step-delivery was 
being implemented by engaging contractors.
5.3 End-to-End Computerization of TPDS
The Ministry launched in December, 2012 a plan scheme on ‘end-to-end 
Computerization of TPDS’ for implementation during 12th five year plan period.  
The Scheme had two components; Component I comprised digitization of 
ration cards/beneficiaries and other database, computerization of supply chain 
management, setting up of transparency portal and grievance redressal mechanism 
and Component II included FPS automation which involved installation of Point 
of Sale (PoS) devices at FPS for authentication of beneficiaries, recording of sales 
to beneficiaries at the FPS and uploading of transaction data in central server.
Central Government issued directions in July 2014 that States/UTs intending to 
implement NFSA will be required to certify completion of component I of the 
end to end Computerisation. Central Government approved ` 884.07 crore out of 
which Government of India share was ` 489.37 crore and States/UTs share was 
` 394.70 crore.  The timelines stipulated for implementation of digitization of 
beneficiaries and other database and computerization of supply chain management 
were March 2013 and October 2013 respectively.
5.3.1 Utilization of funds by States/UTs 
The Ministry released funds amounting to ` 261.51 crore to 28 States/UTs during 
the years 2012-13 to 2015-16 (June, 2015). Status of utilization of funds by the 
States/UTs as per Ministry’s records is given below:

37
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chart 7 : Expenditure by States/UTs against Funds released by GOI


38
Report No. 54 of 2015
5.3.2 Slow progress of Scheme by States
After a lapse of 2 years from the stipulated date of completion, most of the States 
were yet to computerize their TPDS operations. Chart 8 illustrates the status of 
computerization in all the States/UTs in five different activities. It could be seen 
that only 72 per cent of the States/UTs completed the ration card digitization, 38 
per cent States completed online allocation, 22 per cent supply chain management, 
72 per cent completed transparency portal and 58 per cent of the States completed 
online grievance. 
5.3.3 State specific cases
Assam: Test check in the state revealed that GoI released ` 19.72 crore as first 
instalment during January- May 2014. The State Government released the amount 
to executing agency in February 2015 after a lapse of nine months. Procurement 
of computer hardware was under process as of October, 2015. However, as per 
Ministry records only Rs.4.00 crore had been utilised.
It was noted that against the targeted 56.21 lakh ration cards, the department 
could digitise 45.73 lakh (81.36 per cent) as of March 2015. Digitised records 
of the three test checked districts 16 showed that data of 1563 households were 
digitized without ration card number indicating that the digitization was without 
allotment of ration card. In 1619 cases, ration card of selected households were 
digitized five to ten times against a single household without cancelling duplicate 
entries with incorrect details of the members of the households. 
Implementation of online supply chain management was also incomplete as 
of October, 2015. Further the transparency portal was though developed, the 
16 Karimganj, Baksa, Sonitpur.
Chart 8 : Activity-wise progress of all States in 
computerization of PDS operations

39
Report No. 54 of 2015
digitized data was not fully uploaded and grievance redressal module was not 
made functional.
Bihar: Computerization of supply chain management of foodgrains was 
implemented. It was noted that Store Issue Orders (SIOs) were generated after 
online entry of district/ block/FPS-wise allocation, deposit of money by FPS 
dealer and final reconciliation of payment. However, online entry of SIOs could 
not be checked at all godowns due to non-availability of system/laptop, internet 
and electricity connection at godown level which shows lack of preparedness in 
so far as implementation of end to end computerization is concerned.
Delhi: Scrutiny of household-wise allocation of foodgrains of three selected 
FPSs showed that data of 170 households was not completely digitized as 
names, addresses and contact numbers of the beneficiaries were found blank in 
the allocation sheet.  Delhi Government did not however provide the requisite 
information for detailed analysis by audit. 
Himachal Pradesh: GoI released (November 2013) ` 4.24 crore as first installment 
to the State Government. The State Government also released (February 2014) 
` 4.01 crore out of its share of ` 7.07 crore.  However, of total available funds 
of Rs 8.25 crore (including State share) the State spent only ` 1.51 crore and  
` 6.74 crore was lying unspent in the savings bank account (March 2015). The 
digitization of ration cards/beneficiaries was not done in the State and the software 
for real time reporting of movement of foodgrains at different levels and stock 
of foodgrains at the storage facility centres had not been prepared due to delay 
in development of modules. The Director, Food Civil Supplies and Consumer 
Affairs stated (April 2015) that two modules were still at the development stage 
by the National Informatics Centre (NIC).
Good Practice: Chhattisgarh
Computerization of supply chain management was successfully implemented 
in Chhattisgarh in 2007-08. The system has been fully operational in the State 
since January 2008 and stocking of TPDS commodities in 10883 FPSs was 
being closely and effectively monitored since then. 
Jharkhand: Digitization of beneficiaries was reported as done in the State. It 
was noted that online allocation of foodgrains from state to districts and further 
to blocks/FPS started from December 2014. 
Good Practice: Karnataka
The state had already completed computerization of supply chain management 
from State level up to TPDS whole sale points during 2011-12 before GoI initiated 
the scheme. Digitization of beneficiaries was completed and transparency 
portal was also in place.

40
Report No. 54 of 2015
Uttar Pradesh: Ministry released first installment of ` 28.33 crore in June 2013. 
The State Government sanctioned its share and released a budget of ` 56.66 crore. 
However, only ` 29.07 crore (51.31 per cent) was utilized upto March, 2015.  In test 
checked districts Bulandshahr, Gorakhpur and Jhansi, computers worth ` 47.40 
lakh, ` 43.15 lakh and ` 25.40 lakh respectively were purchased during 2014-15. 
However, computers had not been installed in the office/block godowns. Further, 
no software was installed to provide real time reports pertaining to movement of 
food grains at different levels, including stock contained in the storage facilities 
and food grains delivered to FPSs. In Lucknow district, the computers were not 
purchased during 2013-15.
It was noted that in case of AAY , 42.46 lakh cards (103.70 per cent) were digitized 
against 40.94 lakh existing cards.  Other activities of computerization of TPDS 
operation were not implemented.
Maharashtra: State Government digitized 2.71 crore ration cards but 
computerization of supply chain was done only in two pilot districts17. Transparency 
portal and online facility for grievance redressal were found in place.
In reply, Ministry stated (November 2015) that as a result of efforts made by 
it, some improvement in the status of computerization in different activities has 
taken place.
Conclusion
Computerization of TPDS operations was at different stages of implementation 
in the States/UTs. Cases of unavailability of required computer application and 
hardware were found to be the limiting factors in some of the selected States/
UTs. Digitized data of beneficiaries was not uploaded on the States/UTs portal. 
Doorstep delivery of foodgrains was found to be implemented in Uttar Pradesh 
on only pilot basis.  In Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka, doorstep delivery was 
being done by FPS dealers themselves and not by the State Governments. With 
regard to the status on doorstep delivery, the Ministry instituted an online system 
of monitoring only in September 2015. 
17 Sindhudurg and Raigarh.
  Recommendation
Ministry may take steps to address the bottlenecks in computerisation of TPDS 
operations in all States/UTs for efficient implementation of NFSA.

41
Report No. 54 of 2015
Chapter 6
Grievance Redressal Mechanism and 
Monitoring
6.1 Introduction
As per NFSA, the following system has been evolved to monitor and redress 
grievances.
i) As per Section 14 of the NFSA, every State Government shall put in place 
an internal grievance redressal mechanism which may include toll free 
call centres, State web portal, help lines, designation of nodal officers or 
such other mechanism as may be prescribed. 
ii) As per Section 15 of the NFSA, the State Government shall appoint or 
designate an officer to be District Grievance Redressal Officer (DGRO) 
for each district for expeditious and effective redressal of grievances of the 
aggrieved persons in matters relating to distribution of entitled foodgrains 
under TPDS and prescribe the qualification, power, terms and conditions 
of the office of the DGROs.  
iii) As per Section 16 of NFSA, for the purpose of monitoring and review of 
implementation of NFSA, every State shall, by notification, constitute a 
State Food Commission (SFC). Further as per sub-Clause 8 under Clause 
11 of TPDS (Control) Order, 2015 an appeal against the order of the 
DGRO shall be preferred before the SFC constituted under NFSA.
6.2 State-wise status
A test check of the records in the sample States indicated that the States were at 
varied levels of preparedness in implementing provisions of NFSA relating to 
grievance redressal mechanisms, as shown in Table 6 :

42
Report No. 54 of 2015
Table 6: State-wise position of Internal Grievance Redressal, appointment of District 
Grievance Redressal Officers and Constitution of State Food Commission
State Internal Grievance 
Redressal
District Grievance 
Redressal Officer
State Food 
Commission
Assam The State Government 
reported about launch -
ing of toll free numbers. 
However, the numbers 
were not found to be 
active. Similarly online 
registration of com -
plaint and SMS alerts 
were not found to be 
active.
The State Government  
designated the Additional 
Deputy Commissioners 
(Development) of the dis -
tricts as DGROs in Febru-
ary 2014 for all districts 
of the State. However, 
the qualification, power, 
terms and conditions of 
the office of the DGROs 
and allowances had not 
been prescribed in the no -
tification.
The State Government 
designated (February 
2014) the Assam State 
Woman Commission as 
SFC as an interim meas-
ure and a regular SFC 
was yet to be constituted 
as of June 2015.
Bihar Toll Free number has 
been operationalized 
for registering com -
plaints. However, the 
details of complaints 
received and addressed 
were not made avail -
able to audit. SMS fa -
cility was not started. 
Appointment of nodal 
officer was notified but 
no work was observed 
to have been done.
Additional District Magis-
trates (ADMs) were desig-
nated as DGRO (February 
2014).Posts of its support 
staff were created in April 
2015.
The State Government 
constituted State Food 
Commission in January 
2014. However, it was 
not functioning as posts 
of its support staffs were 
created in April 2015.
Chhattisgarh Internal Grievance re -
dressal mechanism 
was in existence. Dur -
ing the period 2010-11 
to 2014-15, the State 
Government received 
7170 complaints out of 
which 1218 complaints 
were pending for three 
months to five years. 
The State Govt. desig -
nated Collector of every 
district as a DGRO. How-
ever, the rules and regula -
tions regarding function -
ing of DGRO were not 
notified.
The State Government 
designated the Chhat -
tisgarh State Consumer 
Dispute Redressal Com -
mission to exercise the 
powers and perform the 
functions of the State 
Food Commission. 
However, the appoint -
ment of members of the 
State Food Commis -
sion was not done (June 
2015).

43
Report No. 54 of 2015
State Internal Grievance 
Redressal
District Grievance 
Redressal Officer
State Food 
Commission
Delhi Toll Free number has 
been operationalized 
for registering com -
plaints 
In one of the two test 
checked districts, District 
Grievance Redressal Of -
ficer was not appointed till 
June 2015.
The State Government 
designated (July 2013) 
Public Grievance Com -
mission (PGC) as State 
Food Commission as an 
interim measure.  Regu -
lar SFC was yet to be 
constituted as of June 
2015. However, no work 
related to functioning of 
State Food Commission 
was observed to have 
been done in the state.
Himachal  
Pradesh
Toll Free numbers have 
been operationalized 
for registering com -
plaints 
The State Govt. had ap -
pointed a DGRO in each 
district.
SFC had not been con -
stituted in the State as of 
October 2015. 
Jharkhand Toll Free number has 
been operationalized 
for registering com -
plaints. Facility to 
lodge complaint was 
available in portal 
with auto escalation of 
grievances. 
The State Government 
nominated Additional 
Collector of the district 
as District Grievance Re -
dressal Officer in May 
2015 but no work related 
to grievance redressal was 
observed in district and 
block levels in the sample 
districts.
State Food Commission 
was not constituted in 
the State as of July 2015.
Karnataka Toll Free number has 
been operationalized 
for registering com -
plaints 
DGROs have not been ap-
pointed by the State. 
The State Government 
constituted (May 2014) 
an SFC. However, no 
work related to function-
ing of State Food Com -
mission was observed 
to have been done in the 
State.
Maharashtra Toll Free number has 
been operationalized 
for registering com -
plaints 
Government of Maharash-
tra designated (January 
2014) the District Collec -
tor as the DGRO of the 
respective districts.  
The State Government 
decided (January 2014) 
to establish a commit -
tee headed by Secretary, 
Food, Civil Supply and 
Consumer Protection 
Department. 
Uttar Pradesh Toll Free number has 
been operationalized 
for registering com -
plaints. However, unre-
solved complaints were 
not escalated to higher 
authority for redressal. 
Appointment of DGRO 
was yet to be made.
State Food Commission 
was not constituted as of 
May 2015.

44
Report No. 54 of 2015
6.3 Vigilance Committees
As per Section 29(1) of the NFSA, for ensuring transparency and proper functioning 
of the TPDS and accountability of the functionaries in such system, every State 
Government was to set up Vigilance Committees (VCs) at the State, District, 
Block and FPS levels.  Further, this has also been mentioned in Sub-clause (6) 
under Clause 11 of TPDS (Control) Order 2015. The State Governments had to 
send a report annually to the Central Government on the functioning of vigilance 
committees. The status of vigilance committees is given in Table 7].
Table 7: State wise status of Vigilance Committee
States Status of Vigilance Committee
Assam The State Government has constituted State level vigilance 
committee and vigilance and monitoring committee at district/
block and circle level in August 2014. However details of 
irregularities detected and observations made by the vigilance 
committees were not found on records in the test checked 
districts. 
Bihar Records showed that State level vigilance committee was 
constituted and only one meeting was held up to March 2015. 
In test checked districts, district level VC was constituted only 
in Muzaffarpur district and in two blocks, but no meeting was 
held. The VC was not constituted in any panchayat/ward level 
in all test checked blocks. 
Chhattisgarh Though the order for constitution of VC was issued, records 
relating to minutes of meetings of the VC were not found 
maintained. 
Delhi State level Vigilance Committee was not set up and two 
committees constituted at the district level were found to be 
non-functional.  
Himachal 
Pradesh
Vigilance Committees at the State level and in all the 12 
districts of the State were formed.  No meeting of VC was, 
however, convened at the State level between September 2013 
and March 2015. However, such committees in 77 blocks as 
per the norms of NFSA had not been constituted as of June 
2015.  

45
Report No. 54 of 2015
States Status of Vigilance Committee
Jharkhand District level Vigilance Committee was formed in Giridih 
district only and in only 18 out of 49 Block level Vigilance 
Committees were formed.
Karnataka Set up in 14 out of 30 districts. However, copy of the minutes 
of meetings was not furnished to audit and hence their 
effectiveness in discharging the duties could not be verified 
in audit.
Maharashtra State level committee was set up but only two state-level 
meetings of Vigilance Committee were conducted during 
2013-15. 
Uttar Pradesh Vigilance committees were not set up at any level.
It was observed that no state government had submitted annual reports to the 
Ministry under the aforesaid Control Order. It was also noted that Ministry issued 
online formats to States for submission in September 2015 only. 
Ministry stated the information from most of the States/UTs on functioning of 
vigilance committees was awaited in the prescribed format under the TPDS 
(Control) Order, 2015.
6.4   Monitoring by the States
As per Clause 8 of the TPDS (Control) Order, 2001 read with paragraph 6 of 
the annexure, the State Governments shall ensure regular inspections of fair 
price shops not less than once in six months by the designated authority. State 
Governments may issue orders specifying the inspection schedule, list of check 
points and the authority responsible for ensuring compliance with the said orders. 
State wise status is as under:
Table 8: Status of monitoring in the States
State Status
 Bihar Records indicated that the frequency of physical verification 
by State Government departments responsible for food and 
civil supplies were not as per prescribed schedule under TPDS 
Control Order but was occasional.

46
Report No. 54 of 2015
State Status
Chhattisgarh As per the prescribed procedure, a Truck Challan (TC) 
generated by the system containeed a Panchnama a format 
for reporting that the delivery of correct quantity and quality 
of foodgrains had reached the FPS. The date of receipt to 
FPS is to be written and attested by the members of Vigilance 
Committee (VC) on Panchnama. However it was found that 
the date of receipt of foodgrains on Panchnama and signature 
of members of VC were missing in several cases.
Jharkhand For proper monitoring, inspection by an officer at each level 
was fixed (February 2013) by the department. In sampled 
districts, inspection was not carried out by District Supply 
Officer (DSO) as no records regarding inspections were 
available in the office. In reply, it was stated by the DSOs 
that the due to shortage of Block Supply Officers/Marketing 
Officers the required inspections were not carried out.
Maharashtra Government directed (April 2001) that the district officials 
from Supply Inspector to Additional Collector were required to 
inspect FPSs in six months. In seven out of eight test checked 
units18 the shortfall in inspection of FPSs ranged between 2.39 
percent (Mumbai Region) and 73.09 percent (DSO, Pune) 
during the period 2012-15. Further as per the Government 
orders of April 2005, Supply Inspectors were to verify at least 
50 ration cards along with FPS inspections  by calling the 
beneficiary or by conducting home visit. Verification of the 
stipulated minimum of 50 ration cards was not done in any of 
the eight tests checked units. 
6.5 Role of the Ministry
Under18Clause 11 of TPDS (Control) Order, 2015, the Ministry monitored the 
grievance redressal mechanism by requiring the States/UTs to report at the end of 
each quarter the number of unsettled/outstanding grievances at the level of call 
centres, State portal and DGRO. 
A test checks of records at the level of the Ministry it was observed that no State/
UT submitted quarterly report to the Ministry under aforesaid Control Order. It 
was also noted that Ministry had initiated online formats to be furnished by the 
States only in September 2015.  
18 DSO Aurangabad, Nagpur, Thane, Pune, Pune, FDO Pune and Dy. Controller of Rationing F 
Region Thane

47
Report No. 54 of 2015
  Recommendation
The Ministry may put suitable mechanism in place to ensure that States comply 
with provisions of the NFSA with regard to the grievance redressal mechanism 
and vigilance committees at various levels and ensure their effective function-
ing. It may also ensure compliance of the TPDS (C) Order 2015 by collecting 
quarterly reports from the States/UTs..
Ministry stated that information related to handling of grievance redressal 
mechanism had been received from 4 State/UTs and remaining states were yet to 
submit the same. 
Conclusion
The grievance redressal system was constituted in most of the states, albeit not 
till the last tier. Though, six out of nine selected States/UTs were found to have 
put in place the grievance redressal mechanism, these were not fully functional. 
Vigilance committees were found to be constituted only at few districts/blocks 
in the selected States/UTs . Further, due to non-availability of information on 
grievance redressal mechanism and vigilance committees, Ministry was not 
in position to monitor the implementation of the same in all the States/UTs.   
Monitoring done by the States was not found to be satisfactory as either there 
were no inspections or less than targeted inspections. 
New Delhi
Dated: 23 DEC 2015
(MUKESH PRASAD SINGH)
Director General of Audit
Central Expenditure
Countersigned
New Delhi
Dated: 23 DEC 2015
(SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Annexes

51
Report No. 54 of 2015
Annex-1.1
(Refer to Para No. 1.4)
Estimated foodgrains requirement and food subsidy under TPDS and Other 
Welfare Schemes
Existing TPDS (including other welfare schemes) 
Wheat Rice Total
Foodgrains Requirement (in lakh 
tons)
262.7 301.0 563.7
Estimated Subsidy  (` in crore) 39475.8 61476.9 100952.7
 As per NFSA, 75 per cent  and 50 per cent  coverage in Rural/urban areas at 
all India level and State-wise coverage based on inclusion ratios provided by 
Planning Commission
Foodgrains Requirement (in lakh tons)
Wheat Rice Total
Total requirement at the rate of 5 kg per per -
son under priority households
219.6 268.4 488.0
Additional for protecting allocation of 2.50 
crore AAY households at the rate of 35 kg per 
household
13.5 16.5 30.0
Additional tide over allocation for protecting 
the average annual offtake of States
14.1 17.2 31.3
Estimated requirement for OWS 29.2 35.8 65.0
Total Estimated Requirement 276.4 337.9 614.3
Estimated Subsidy (` in crore)
For beneficiaries under priority households 39752.4 62902.5 102654.9
Additional for protecting allocation of AAY 
households
2443.8 3867.0    6310.8
Additional for ‘tide over’ allocation 1972.2 3122.1    5094.3
For Other Welfare Schemes 5294.9 8378.4 13673.3
Total Estimated Subsidy under NFSA 49463.3 78270.0 127733.3

52
Report No. 54 of 2015
Annex-2.1
(Refer to Para No. 2.2)
Sample Selection
Sl. 
No.
State District No. of 
Block
No. of FPS
1 Assam Baksa 10 40
Sonitpur
Nagaon
Dhubri
Karimganj
2 Bihar Muzaffarpur 8 32
Sitamarhi
Nalanda
Patna
3 Chhattisgarh Bastar 10 40
Bilaspur
Durg
Raipur
Surajpur
4 Delhi North 4 16
South West
5 Himachal Pradesh Kinnaur 8 32
Mandi
Shimla
Solan
6 Jharkhand Giridih 8 32
Gumla
Pakur
West Singhbhum
7 Karnataka Bangalore Urban 12 48
Bellary
Haveri
Mysore 
Ramanagana
Raichur

53
Report No. 54 of 2015
Sl. 
No.
State District No. of 
Block
No. of FPS
8 Maharashtra Amravati 16 64
Aurangabad
Mumbai
Nashik
Nagpur
Pune
Raigad
Thane
9 Uttar Pradesh Bulandshahar 8 32
Gorakhpur
Jhansi
Lucknow
Total :42 84 336

54
Report No. 54 of 2015
Annex-3.1  
(Refer to Para No. 3.2)
Population/Beneficiaries as of October 2015
S. 
No. States/ UTs
Popu-
lation 
(Census 
2011)
Percentage Cover-
age
Accepted No. of persons 
under NFSA No. of families/persons identified under NFSA
Rural Urban Rural Urban Total Antyodaya Anna Yo-
jana (AAY)
priority Total 
identified 
persons 
(10+11)
Percent-
age of 
total 
coverageNo. of 
families 
No. of 
persons 
No. of 
persons
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m)
1 Bihar 1038.05 85.12 74.53 783.74 87.42 871.16 25.01 116.55 740.57 857.12 98.39
2 Chhattisgarh 255.4 84.25 59.98 165.16 35.61 200.77 7.19 20.42 180.35 200.77 100.00
3 Delhi 167.53 37.69 43.59 1.58 71.2 72.78 0.78 2.92 69.72 72.64 99.81
4 Haryana 253.53 54.61 41.05 90.28 36.21 126.49 2.68 11.35 115.14 126.49 100.00
5 Himachal Pradesh 68.57 56.23 30.99 34.68 2.14 36.82 1.97 9.57 17.21 26.78 72.73
6 Karnataka 611.31 76.04 49.36 285.55 116.38 401.93 10.97 43.91 358.02 401.93 100.00
7 Madhya Pradesh 752.98 80.1 62.61 420.83 125.59 546.42 15.82 59.78 449.74 509.52 93.25
8 Maharashtra 1123.73 76.32 45.34 469.72 230.45 700.17 25.05 108.01 592.16 700.17 100.00
9 Punjab 277.04 54.79 44.83 94.88 46.57 141.45 1.79 7.71 133.74 141.45 100.00
10 Rajasthan 686.21 69.09 53 356.09 90.53 446.62 9.32 37 409.62 446.62 100.00
11 Tripura 36.71 74.75 49.54 20.26 4.76 25.02 1.08 4.81 17.26 22.07 88.21
12 West Bengal 913.48 74.47 47.55 463.31 138.53 601.84 3.93 11.44 147.33 158.77 26.38
13 Lakshadweep 0.64 35.30 33.56 0.05 0.17 0.22 0.01 0.04 0.18 0.22 100.00
14 Uttarakhand 101.17 65.26 52.05 45.85 16.09 61.94 1.84 7.92 54.02 61.94 100.00
15 Jharkhand 329.66 86.48 60.20 216.52 47.73 264.25 9.18 37.38 196.03 233.41 88.33
16 Telangana 352.89 60.96 41.14 143.08 48.62 191.70 5.67 15.29 176.33 191.62 99.96
17 Chandigarh 10.55 38.54 47.26 0.11 4.85 4.96 0.00056 0.003 1.78 1.78 35.95
18 Puducherry 12.44 59.68 46.94 2.35 3.99 6.34 0.18 0.52 3.65 4.17 65.77
Total 6991.89 - - 3594.04 1106.84 4700.88 122.47056 494.623 3662.85 4157.47 -

55
Report No. 54 of 2015
Glossary
AAY Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
ABS Anna Bhagya Scheme 
APL Above Poverty Line 
AWC Anganwadi Centre 
BPL Below Poverty Line 
BSFC Bihar State Food Corporation
CGFSA Chhattisgarh Food Security Act, 2012 
DDP Desert Development Programme 
DGRO District Grievance Redressal Officer 
DHA Designated Hill Area 
DPAP Drought Prone Area Programme
DSO District Supply Officer 
EPIC Elector’s Photo Identity Card
FCI Food Corporation of India
FPS fair price shop 
ICDS Child Development Services 
IGMSY Indira Gandhi Matritva Sahyog Yojana
ITDP Integrated Tribal Development Project 
MDM Mid Day Meal
MSP Minimum Support Price 
NFSA National Food Security Act, 2013
NSSO National Sample Survey Organization 
OWS Other Welfare Scheme
PDS Public Distribution System
PDS (C) Order Public Distribution System (Control) Order
PGC Public Grievance Commission 
RPDS Revamped Public Distribution System 
SECC Socio Economic Caste Census 
SFC State Food Commission 
SIO Store Issue Order 
TPDS Targeted Public Distribution System
TPDS (C) Order Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) Order
UT Union Territory