PREFACE

The Report for the year ended March 2010 containing the results of the
performance audit of business of civil construction has been prepared for
submission to the President under Article 151(1) of the Constitution of India.

The audit of Revenue Receipts - Direct Taxes of the Union Government is
conducted under Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.

Our findings are based on mainly test audit conducted during the year 2010.
Some findings of audit conducted in earlier years, but could not be covered in
previous reports, have also been included.

iii


The construction industry has emerged as an important driver of India’s
economic growth - both in terms of its share of GDP and its contribution towards
employment generation. A number of tax concessions are given to entities in
this sector. An earlier performance audit conducted during the year 2002-03 by
us revealed systemic and compliance deficiencies and several irregularities in
assessment of entities in the sector.

The main objectives of our study were to ascertain whether the Income Tax
Department has made significant efforts to widen and deepen the tax base in this
potential area and ensured proper compliance of the provisions of the Act by the
entities engaged in this sector.

An overview of the specific audit findings and key recommendations included in
this Report is as follows:

Audit Findings

Although Section 80IB(10) was introduced to incentivize building of housing for
low and middle income groups, the Act did not provide for the conditions
defining the low and middle income groups. Our analysis in West Bengal and
Tamil Nadu charges indicated that residential construction projects targeting
HIGs were availing the tax incentive, thereby frustrating the legislative intent
behind it.

We noticed that a number of entities assessed in construction business were
registered as firms/AOP with their turnover and profits comparable to some
companies in the same sector. However, the provisions of MAT being applicable
only to Companies, favoured the firms who could get away by paying nil or
minimal tax.

Builders/developers are using Transfer of Development Rights (TDRs) for
constructing extra floor space index (FSI) or selling them to other developers. In
absence of TDS provisions, the department could not levy TDS on TDR
transactions.



Builders/developers are paying compensation on commercial consideration on
surrender of booked flat/commercial space/tenancy right or on vacating
premises for redevelopment or as part of contract/mobilization advances. In
absence of proper mechanism on these payments there was material risk of the
related receipts not being offered to tax.

Section 80(IB) allows deduction of profits to undertakings engaged in developing
and building housing projects. This Section, however, does not disallow claims
on conditions of non-deduction of TDS on certain payments unlike Section
40(a)(ia). Consequently, disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) is nullified when
deduction claimed for the same transaction is allowed under Section 80(IB).

We found lack of clarity/uniformity on deduction/treatment of certain elements
of income and expenditure like interest towards borrowed fund, income derived
from leasing of properties held in stock in trade, sale of parking space and
allowing TDS credit on mobilization advances etc.

Key Audit recommendations

We recommend that

= A cap linked to Housing Pricing Index on the sale value of the flats
constructed by the builders/contractors may be considered as a condition
for claiming deduction under section 80IB(10) so that legislative intent of
providing affordable housing is met.

" The purview of Section 115]B i.e MAT may be extended to Firms/AOP who
are taking advantage of deductions available in the Act.

CBDT may consider introducing suitable mechanism in the statute to
reduce tax evasion in cases of TDR transactions and payments of
compensation on commercial consideration on surrender of booked
flat/commercial space/tenancy right or on vacating premises for
redevelopment or as part of contract/ mobilization advances to safeguard
the interest of revenue.

= CBDT may issue necessary instructions for uniform treatment of income
derived from leasing of properties held in stock in trade, income from sale
of parking space and expenses on ‘Interest on borrowed funds’ and
‘Directors’ meeting fee/project management fee’.

vi


Audit Findings

The Department does not have a proper database of the assessees engaged in the
business of civil construction. Non filers could not be identified by cross linking
the records of the Department with that from third party sources as PAN details
of the contractors engaged in the works departments were not available in most
cases. The input controls on data capture of business codes in the central AST
database of taxpayers were found to be weak, thereby hindering sectoral
analysis and planning.

The bulk of the information collected by the CIB from third party sources were
not being collated and disseminated to user levels. Further, there was no
mechanism to ascertain the extent of use of disseminated data by the AOs.

We found that the Department was not initiating action against the erring
statutory auditors for incorrect certification in their tax audit report.

Key Audit recommendations

We recommend that

™" The Department may prepare a complete and accurate database of
assessees in the sector. It may also ensure that the data received by CIB is
sorted out and disseminated promptly, enabling effective scrutiny and
widening of the tax net.

CBDT may devise a system to monitor compliance with the existing
rules/instructions so that the department may initiate action against the
erring statutory auditors.

Audit Findings

Information and records on related assessees were found to be rarely shared
and cross verified by the concerned AOs. In 15 cases, in absence of cross
verification of records available with the AOs, income of % 49.26 crore escaped
assessment.

vii


We found 256 cases involving tax effect of 83.54 crore in which income in the
hands of TDS deductees escaped assessment due to short/non accountal of
contract receipts, in their profit and loss accounts.

We noticed 220 cases of inadmissible claims involving tax effect of ¥ 469.10
crore on which TDS was not deducted or where deducted, was not remitted to
the Government.

Key Audit recommendations

We recommend that

न CBDT may issue necessary instructions for sharing of information
regarding high value transactions among the concerned AOs to prevent
leakage of revenue.

= CBDT may ensure that no TDS credits are allowed without quoting PAN of
the deductee.

™" CBDT may devise an appropriate control mechanism with clearly defined
responsibilities to ensure that provisions of the Act are complied with.

Audit Findings

Deductions admissible for housing projects under section 80IB(10) and for
infrastructure development under section 80IA(4) were allowed even in cases
where though the assessees were not eligible to claim deductions as they were
not fulfilling the conditions provided in the Act. We noticed mistakes in 142
cases involving tax effect of ¥ 326.38 crore indicating poor monitoring and lack
of internal controls in assessments leading to inadmissible deductions.

Mistakes in assessments of Public Private Partnership projects were noticed in
seven cases involving tax effect of ¥ 43.72 crore relating to depreciation on
Government leased assets, expenses against exempt income, escapement of
income for not following regular method of accounting.

We also noticed 67 cases involving tax effect of ¥ 140.59 crore where revenue
was not recognized by applying the percentage completion method as
Accounting Standard 7 as revised with effect from 2003.

viii


Key Audit recommendations

We recommend that

™ CBDT may issue necessary instructions to monitor the deductions allowed

for housing and infrastructure projects by providing suitable checks
through internal audit.

Assessing Officers may ensure that accounting treatment for ongoing
construction projects commenced after April 2003 conform to Accounting
Standard 7 as revised

Audit Findings

We noticed mistakes relating to computation of business income, capital gains,
income under MAT provisions, incorrect allowance of depreciation or setting off
past losses, incorrect allowance of provision/liability, incorrect allowance of
capital expenditure/non business expenditure, and incorrect valuation of closing
stock etc. These mistakes involved aggregate tax effect of ¥ 642.44 crore in 675
cases.

Key Audit recommendations

We recommend that

=" CBDT may devise an appropriate control mechanism with clearly defined

responsibilities to ensure that provisions of the Act are complied with.
Wherever it is felt necessary the Department may also explore the
possibility of capacity building for reducing the incidence of mistakes.



e Why we chose the topic

e Legal Provisions

Objectives of the review

Scope of audit

Acknowledgement


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

HAPTER 1

1.1 India has emerged as the second fastest growing economy in the
world.! The civil construction industry is not only an integral part of the
economy but also a powerful

INTRODUCTION

engine of growth influencing Fig 1.1: GDP at factor cost relating to
the development path. It is construction sector
poised for growth on account (@in crore)

of industrialization,

urbanization, economic

development गाते. people's | 5000000

rising expectations for | 4000000
improved quality of living. In | 3000000
India, construction is the | 2000000
second largest economic | 100000
हे ० Tal ;

activity? after agriculture in
terms of employment
generation. The Eleventh Plan
document set the investment target on construction to nine percent of GDP
by the end of the plan period. The total turnover in residential, commercial
and infrastructure construction sector increased? from %32,49,130 crore
during 2005-06 to % 44,64,081 crore during 2009-10 registering compound
annual growth rate of seven per cent over the period.

2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10

1.2. Why we chose the topic

e There has been steady growth in construction activity since 2005-06 in
spite of a brief slowdown in the housing sector in 2008-09.

e Anumber of tax concessions are given to entities in this sector.

e An earlier performance audit conducted by us for the year ending
March 2003 highlighted absence of data base of civil contractors, the
ineffective use of surveys to broaden the tax base, deficiencies in the
‘Project Completion Method’ of accounting adopted by the construction
entities and several irregularities in assessments of civil contractors
and builders. Since the review, the sector has grown manifold and
much of the concerns pointed out by us continue to exist.

e There has been a rapid urbanization in India and upgradation of city
infrastructure by regional and local governments.

Thus, the subject merited a performance evaluation.

' Finance Minister’s Budget Speech 2009.
> Source: Report of the Working Group on construction, 11 Five Year Plan
_2Centre for monitoring ofIndian Economy  ्््््म््-्-- -ः

1


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

1.3 Legal Provisions

Income tax assessment of entities engaged in civil construction are governed
by general provisions for computation of income from business and specific
provisions relating to deductions/ exemptions etc as laid out in the Income
Tax Act 1961. The relevant provisions are summarized in Table 1 below:

Table:1 Relevant sections of the Income Tax Act

General Provisions Provisions specific to civil construction

Section Brief Section Brief

28to32 Computation ofincome 44AD Special provision for computing
from profits and gains profits and gains of business of
of business or civil construction etc,
profession.

36 & 37 Allowable deductions. 44AB Audit of accounts of certain
persons carrying on business or

profession
40(a)(ia) Amounts not 80IA(4) Deduction in respect of profits
deductible and gains from _ industrial

undertaking or enterprises
engaged in infrastructure

development
40A(3) Expenses or payments 8088 Deductions in respect of profits
॥ deductible in and gains by an undertaking or
certain circumstances enterprise engaged in
development of Special Economic
Zone
50C Special provision for 80IB(10) Deduction in respect of profits
full value of and gains from _ industrial
consideration in undertaking or enterprises
certain cases engaged in developing and

building housing projects
1.4 Objectives of the review

The objectives of the review were to seek an assurance that:-
° All registered contractors including builders, who are liable to pay taxes
are on the records of the Income Tax Department.
¢ The Income Tax Department has made significant efforts to widen and
deepen the tax base in this potential area specifically to examine the
effective utilization of information collected from transaction returns like
the Annual Information Returns that are filed separately with the
Department by different agencies.
¢ The Department has ensured proper compliance of the provisions of the
Income Tax Act by the contractors/ builders/developers.
¢ The Department has been able to identify and plug lacunae or deficiencies
in the administration of law or policy related to the above subject.



Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

1.5 Scope of audit
1.5.1 Coverage

The review covered the assessments completed between financial years
2006-07 and 2009-10 and up to June 2010.

1.5.2 Sample

For audit coverage we selected 50 percent of the assessment units which are
company circles and 30 percent of units other than Company Circles in
metro charges. In non-Metro charges, we chose 30 percent of the company
circles and 10 percent of other assessment units for audit scrutiny. Within a
selected unit, all cases of scrutiny assessments were selected for
examination. In case of assessments completed in a summary manner five
percent of these were selected in audit at Metro charges and 10 percent in
non Metro charges. In absence of assessment charge-wise database, we
identified assesses engaged in the business of civil construction from the
(Assessment Information System) AST‘ data maintained by the DG (Systems)
of the Department by selecting the relevant codes. We requisitioned 15,045
assessment records from the assessment units of the Department located all
over India. However, the Department could produce 11,476 assessment
records to us.

1.5.3 Constraints

The Department failed to provide 3,569 assessment records which were
about 24 percent of records requisitioned by audit. The level of non
production ranged from 31 percent to 51 percent in Uttar Pradesh, Orissa,
Jammu & Kashmir and Maharashtra charges. Thus, our selection of assesses
for study remained confined to the limited assessee data. Non production of
records by certain charges despite repeated requests was a matter of
concern,

1.6 Acknowledgment

1.6.1 An entry conference was held with CBDT on 19 March 2010. The audit
objectives, scope and the main focus areas of audit examination were
explained in the meeting. The Indian Audit and Accounts Department
acknowledges the cooperation of the Income Tax Department in facilitating
the audit.

1.6.2 The exit conference was held (June 2011) with the Ministry/Board
wherein the Report was discussed. The views expressed by the
Ministry/Board in the exit conference have been suitably incorporated in
this Report.

One of the modules of the applications software used by the IT department for assessment of income tax returns of
assessee. The process starts with entering the returns received from assesses into the system,

3


e Admissibility of fiscal incentives

e Non applicability of MAT on Firms/AOPs

e Absence of TDS provision on compensation paid
e Transfer of Development Rights (TDR)

e TDS on payment of mobilization advances

e Inconsistency in provisions

e Lack of clarity in provisions

e Assessment of Housing Development Authorities /
Boards

e Recommendations


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

CHAPTER 2

LEGAL FRAMEWORK

Following inconsistencies in the Act have been discussed in this chapter.

.

The objective of introduction of the benefits under section 80IB(10)
was to build housing for low and middle income groups. The Act did
not provide for the conditions defining the low and middle income
groups for the purpose of allowing the deduction under section
80IB(10). We observed that in West Bengal charge, in three housing
projects, more than 50 percent units were earmarked for HIG whereas
in Tamil Nadu charge, in four projects, around 50 percent flats
measuring less than 1500 square feet were sold for हैं 40 lakh or more.
Thus, the legislative intent behind introduction of the scheme has not
been achieved.

MAT was introduced to ensure that the registered companies earning
huge profits and declaring substantial dividends to its shareholders
but not contributing to the Government by way of corporate tax, pay at
least certain percentage of book profit as MAT. We noticed that a
number of entities assessed in construction business were registered
as firms/AOP with their turnover and profits being comparable to
some companies in the same sector got away by paying nil or minimal
tax as MAT provisions are not applicable to them.

Builders/developers are using Transfer of Development Rights (TDRs)
for constructing extra Floor Space Index (FSI)5 or selling these TDRs to
any other persons. In absence of TDS provisions, the department could
not levy TDS on TDR transactions.

Builders/developers are paying compensation on commercial
consideration on surrender of booked flat/commercial space/tenancy
right or on vacating premises for redevelopment or as part of
contract/payment of mobilization advances. There is no provision in
the Act to collect TDS on these payments leaving the risk of the related
receipt not being offered to tax.

Section 80(IB) allows deduction of profits to undertakings engaged in
developing and building housing projects. This Section, however, does
not provide for any disallowance of corresponding amount that is
disallowed under Section 40(a)(ia) when TDS is not deducted against
certain payments. Consequently, disallowance under section 40(a)(ia)
is nullified when deduction claimed for the same transaction is allowed

5 Ratio of the total 100 area of buildings to the size of the land.

5


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

under Section 80(IB), thereby defeating the purpose of the
introduction of the former section.

¢ We found lack of clarity on deduction/treatment of certain elements of
income and expenditure like interest towards Borrowed Fund, income
derived from leasing of properties held in stock in trade, sale of
parking space & allowing TDS credit on mobilization advances etc.

e Exemption allowed to Housing Development Authorities under section
10(20A) was withdrawn with effect from 1April 2003. We noticed that
these entities were trying to avoid tax by claiming exemptions
incorrectly.

2.1 1115 essential that the legal framework governing the computation of
income and eligibility for deductions/exemptions from business of civil
construction ensures that correct income from business is brought to tax.
The Income Tax Act lays down certain responsibilities in terms of
declarations and audited statements that are to be submitted by the assessees
along with the returns. During the course of the review, we found certain
gaps and inconsistencies in the legal framework that needed to be addressed
to ensure that income from business of civil construction is properly brought
to tax. These inconsistencies have been discussed in this Chapter.

2.2 Admissibility of fiscal incentives

The objective of introduction of the benefits under section 801B(10) in 1999
was to build housing stock for low and middle income groups. While
conditions for admissibility of special deductions from income assessed were
laid down in terms of size of built up property, proportion of commercial
area, size of plot etc., the Act, however, did not provide for the conditions
defining the low and middle income groups for the purpose of allowing the
deduction under section 801B(10).

Our small sample analysis revealed that in West Bengal charge, in three
housing projects that availed of tax benefits, more than 50 percent units were
earmarked for HIG whereas in Tamil Nadu charge, in four projects, around 50
percent flats measuring less than 1500 square feet were sold for हैं 40 lakh or
more. Thus, the legislative intent behind introduction of the special
provisions was not being met.

2.3. Non applicability of MAT on Firms/AOPs

2.3.1 The concept of MAT was introduced under section 115]B of the Income
Tax Act to ensure that companies having huge profits and declaring
substantial dividends to its shareholders but not contributing to the
Government by way of corporate tax by taking advantage of various
exemptions and deductions provided in the Act, pay at least certain



Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

percentage of book profit as MAT. However, the said provision is not
applicable for Firms/AOPs.

2.3.2 We noticed that a number of construction entities were registered as
firms®/ AOPs and the turnover and profits of some of these entities were
comparable to Companies of similar size. However, the MAT provisions being
inapplicable to these entities, the revenue collected from their business was
low. A comparison between the firms and Companies test checked in Mumbai
is given in Table 2 below:

(® in crore)
Table:2 Cases of non applicability of MAT on Firms

कण | Compan

Name / Net profit Taxpaid Tax that Name/ Net Tax due Tax
AY as per Under would AY profit as per paid
P&L normal have been as per normal as per
account provision due as per P&L provision MAT
MAT account
M/s Dosti 14.60 0 1.64 M/s Lavina 15.37 0 1.75
Associates Estates Pvt
2007-08 Ltd
2007-08
M/s Jain 10.74 0.08 1.20 M/s 8.69 0 0.97
Associates Emerald
2007-08 Realtors Pvt
Ltd
2007-08

2.3.3 We found in Mumbai charge that deductions under section 801B(10)
aggregating ~ 295.37 crore were allowed in case of assessments of 66
partnership firms/AOP (Joint Ventures). As these deductions formed a major
portion of taxable income of these firms, they got away by paying nil or
minimal tax and Government could not collect revenue from them despite
comparable profits from their business. The revenue implication of non
applicability of MAT provisions to firms amounted to ¥ 24.87 crore.

2.4 Absence of TDS provision on compensation paid

Under TDS provisions, collection of tax is effected at source when income
arises or accrues. The builders/developers are paying compensation on
commercial consideration on surrender of booked flat/commercial
space/tenancy right or on vacating premises for redevelopment or as part of
contract. Such compensation is paid over and above refunds of any money
paid by the concerned allottees/tenants, etc in view of more lucrative
propositions. There is no provision in the Act to collect TDS on these
payments leaving the risk of the related receipt not being offered to tax.

“Section 4 of The Indian Partnership Act 1932 defines ‘partnership’ in a commercial entity. It has limited legal identity
for the purpose of tax law.

7


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

We noticed 12 cases of the above nature during test check of records at
various charges. These included seven cases in Mumbai where compensation
of ¥ 445.52 crore was paid on account of redevelopment. In absence of TDS
provision on these transactions potential tax of ¥ 46.18 crore could not be
realized. An illustration is given below:

2.4.1 Charge: CIT-IX Mumbai, AY 2007-08

M/s Agromach Spares Corporation booked commercial premises on part
payment of % 3.05 crore in a building proposed to be developed by M/s Axis
Realty Pvt. Ltd. The developer, in view of a better offer by a different party
requested the assessee Company to surrender its allotment rights in the said
property. As per agreement (January 2006), the assessee agreed to surrender
its rights in the above property and the developer M/s Axis Realty Pvt. Ltd
paid ₹ 3.60 crore to the assessee as compensation over and above the refund
of booking amount as per agreement. We verified the records of the assessee,
M/s Agromach Spares Corporation and found that the commercial
compensation received from M/s Axis Realty was not accounted for in its
accounts resulting in escapement of income involving tax effect of हैं 1.21
crore.

2.5 Transfer of Development Rights (TDR)

When land is acquired for public amenities like roads, gardens, schools,
markets, etc. by Municipal Corporations, the owner of the land is often
granted a Development Rights Certificate (DRC) instead of monetary
compensation. This DRC is transferable and can be sold in the market and
such transactions are commonly referred to as TDR’. The plot where TDR is
created is called the ‘originating plot’ and the plot where the TDR is actually
used is called the ‘receivable plot’. It indicates the FSI credit in square meter
of the built-up area to which the owner or lessee of the reserved plot is
entitled, the place and user zone in which the development rights are earned,
and the areas in which they may be utilised. TDR can be utilised by the
original recipients or transferred to any other person. When the DRC holder
intends to transfer it to another individual, he must submit the DRC to the
Municipal Commissioner with an appropriate application for endorsement of
the new holder’s name on the certificate, without such an endorsement, the
transfer will be invalid and the certificate will continue to be in the name of
the original holder. A TDR transaction is entered into by the concerned
parties at a mutually agreed price. Presently, there is no provision of TDS on
TDR transactions.

7 Under a transfer development rights system, a landowner whose propert ricted to open space is assigned
development rights in proportion to some overall desirable density for the jurisdiction. The landowner may either
utilize the rights or sell them in the open market to landowners in other locations who are allowed to develop their
properties. The rights may be used to develop additional structures on the tricted properties. in this way,
restricted areas may he maintained as apen space without completely destroying the development value of the
properties.

8


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

The builders/developers are using TDRs for constructing extra floor space
index (FSI)8. However, the state authorities (sub-registrars) have refrained
till date from determining the fair market value of TDR units. As no ready
reckoner rates (division wise) were available, the genuineness of values
declared on TDR transactions could not be ascertained.

It was also difficult to know whether the corresponding income was being
offered by the TDR transferor/seller as there was no provision for TDS on
TDR transaction.

2.5.1 We noticed eight cases in Mumbai charge where expenditure
aggregating ~ 128.93 crore on account of TDR was allowed. The department
could not levy "09१ of र₹ 2.57 crore in absence of TDS provision for TDR
Transaction. An illustration is given below:

2.5.2 Charge: CIT, Central II, Mumbai, AY 2007-08

M/s K. Raheja Corporation Pvt. Ltd. was allowed expenditure of 76.45
crore on account of cost of TDR. Due to absence of provision of TDS on TDR,
tax of f 1.53 crore (calculated at the minimum TDS rate of 2%) in the hands of
the transferers of development rights could not be realized.

2.6 TDS on payment of mobilization advances

The Board? had prescribed that credit of tax deducted at source from
advance rent will be allowed in proportion in which such income is offered
for taxation for different assessment years based on a single certificate
furnished for tax deduction. However no such clarification has been issued
for similar transaction of tax deducted on mobilization advances" given to
contractors. Tax credit shall not be given on mobilization advances as these
do not form part of income. We noticed 3 cases of incorrect credit allowed for
mobilization advances involving tax effect of ¥ 16.12 crore.

An illustration is given below:
2.6.1 Charge: CIT V Mumbai, AYs 2005-06 to 2007-08

M/s Essar Construction Ltd claimed and was allowed TDS credit of हैं 14.33
crore on mobilization advance/progressive payments incorrectly as the
corresponding income was not offered to tax during the assessment years
under consideration. Further, interest of ¥ 0.75 crore granted on above TDS
credit was also not in order. This resulted in tax effect of = 15.08 crore.

+ Ratio of the total fluor area of buildings to the size of the land,

+ TDS has heen worked out at the minimum rate of 2%.

४० Circular No.5 dated 2 March 2001

11 Advances given to contractors ta make arrangements for mobi
site,

and machinery at the project

9


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

2.7. Inconsistency in provisions

As per Section 40(a)(ia) of the Act, certain payments, in respect of which TDS
was not deducted/remitted, shall not be allowed as deduction when
computing the income chargeable under the head ‘profits and gains of
business or profession’. Section 80(IB) of the Act, on the other hand, allows
hundred per cent deduction of profits to undertakings engaged in developing
and building housing projects under certain conditions. This Section,
however, does not provide for any disallowance of corresponding amount
that is disallowed under section 40(a)(ia) when TDS is not deducted against
certain payments. Consequently, disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) is
nullified when deduction claimed for the same transaction is allowed under
section 80(IB), thereby defeating the purpose of the introduction of the
former section.

We noticed two cases relating to this inconsistency in provisions mentioned
above involving tax effect of 8.50 crore. An illustration is given below:

2.7.1 Charge: CIT III, Chennai AY 2006-07

In the assessment of M/s. Shriram Properties Ltd., we found out that
र₹ 23.79 crore was disallowed under section 40a(ia) and added back to the
income. Deduction under section 80 IB (10) was, however, allowed to the
corresponding extent of ~ 23.79 crore involving potential revenue impact of
र₹ 8.01 crore.

2.8 Lack of clarity in provisions

We noticed that there was lack of clarity in instructions relating to treatment
of certain elements of income and expenditure for the purpose of allowing
deductions/exemptions. As a result we found similar issues being treated
differently by Assessing Officers.

2.8.1 Income derived from leasing of properties held in stock in trade

We noticed four cases in
Mumbai charge of the
above nature with

consequent
underassessment of
income of %8.52 crore
with tax effect of %2.98
crore. Two illustrations
indicating divergent views
taken by the department
are given below:

The properties held in stock in trade by the
builders and developers were being given on
rent and rental income was being classified
under the head income from house property to
get benefit of additional deduction of 30 per cent.
The treatment was incorrect as the income was
being derived from properties held in stock in
trade, a business asset and resulted in excess
allowance of deduction of 30 per cent.

10


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

2.8.1.1 Charge: CIT (Central) Il, Mumbai, AYs 2005-06 to 2008-09

M/s K. Raheja Pvt Ltd offered income from leasing of buildings constructed
by him and shown in the closing stock as income from house property and
claimed 30 per cent deduction available under provisions of house property
income. Lease rent from stock in trade properties was not treated as business
income resulting in underassessment of income of %4.35 crore involving
short levy of tax of ¥ 1.53 crore.

2.8.1.2 Charge: CIT (Central) 1, Mumbai, AY 2007-08

M/s Rockfort Estate Development offered income from leasing of buildings
constructed by him and shown in the closing stock, as income from house
property and claimed 30 per cent deduction available under provisions of
house property income. The Department assessed the income as income
from business. However, in earlier year, said income was assessed as income
from house property. This resulted in underassessment of income of = 1.82
crore involving short levy of tax of € 0.64 crore.

2.8.2 Income from sale of parking space

Parking space does not form part of either the maximum The Act is silent on

built up area of the residential unit or the permissible the allowance or
commercial establishment for allowing prescribed | ‘isallowance of this
condition for allowing deduction under section deduction towards
80IB(10). sale of parking space.

2.8.2.1 We noticed seven cases in Goa, Mumbai, Pune and Thane charges
where AOs allowed deduction in four cases and disallowed in remaining three
cases against sale of parking space. Thus, there was no uniformity in
treatment of such income. An illustration is given below:

2.8.2.2 Charge: CIT Goa, AY 2007-08

M/s Devashri Real Estate Developers was allowed deduction of हैं 67.90
lakh under section 801B(10) towards sale of space for car parking. Since the
sale of car parking with profit motive amounts to commercial activities,
deduction allowed under section 808 (10) was incorrect involving short levy
of tax of € 0.23 crore.

2.8.3 Treatment of certain expenses

Due to lack of clarity on treatment of expenses on ‘Interest towards the
Borrowed Fund’ and ‘Directors’ Meeting Fee’, we found different treatment of
claims of the same assessee in Delhi charge in two consecutive assessment
years. Two cases are illustrated below:

11


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

2.8.3.1 Charge: CIT Central-I Delhi, AY 2007-08

In the assessment of M/s Ansal Properties and Infrastructure Ltd., the
expenses on ‘Interest towards the Borrowed Fund’ and ‘Directors’ Meeting
Fee’ were proportionately disallowed and debited to the Profit and Loss
account of the project eligible for deduction u/s 801B(10). This reduced the
profit eligible for deduction. However, this treatment was not followed in the
earlier assessment year 2006-07, for the same assessee.

2.8.3.2 Charge: CIT IV Delhi, AY 2007-08

The instructions on treatment of project ) In the assessment of M/: s Gulab
management fees were found to be | Farms Pvt. Ltd, the AO disallowed

%159 crore booked as ‘Project
Management Fees’, treating it as
expenditure of capital nature. We
found that the expenditure under same head with same contents was allowed
by another Assessing Officer of Circle-7(1) under CIT III charge, in the case of
M/s Sweat Peas Farms Pvt. Ltd., in the same assessment year.

ambiguous resulting in different
treatment by AOs.

2.9 Assessments of Housing Development Authorities/Boards

Exemption allowed to an Authority constituted for the purpose of providing
housing accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or
improvement of cities, towns under section 10(20A) was withdrawn with
effect from 1 April 2003. One of the major implications of this amendment
was that all entities covered under the erstwhile Section 10(20A) would be
required not only to pay Income Tax but also to file returns, be subject to tax
audit u/s 44AB and to maintain proper books of accounts as stipulated in
Section 44AA.

Test check of 22 cases of Housing Developing Authorities/Boards revealed
that there was no uniformity in the assessments of Housing Development
Authorities. Four illustrations are given in Table 3 below:

(@incrore)
Table:3 Assessments of Housing Development Authorities/Boards

Name of Status of i Audit comments
Housing claim after
Authority/ of ad y under
CIT charge section 10(20) with

effect from 2003.
Delhi 2003-04 to Assessee applied for Department neither
Development 2007-08 exemption as a went in for further
Authority charitable trust in March appeal against ITAT
Trust Circle 2003 which was denied decision nor finalized
Il Delhi by DIT (Exemption) but assessment

‘on appeal before ITAT, proceeding. In

the same was allowed in December 2008, the
January 2006 with department sought a

12


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

retrospective effect from special audit of the
01 April 2002. accounts of the DDA
under section 142(2A)
of the Act due to
complexities of
accounts. The High
Court issued a stay

order.

2 Chandigarh 2004-05to The assessee claimed AQ did not levy 38.40
Housing 2008-09 exemption under surcharge correctly
Board Section 10(20) but AO
Chandigarh I denied the status of local

authority as per present
provision and assessed
income as AOP.

3 Varanasi 2007-08 Exemption claimed as The entity did not 3.84
Development trust and was fulfill the necessary
Authority incorrectly granted by condition for grant of
Varanasi AO, exemption and

therefore certificate
was not issued by CIT.
Besides incorrect
exemption, the
assessee had shown
हैं, 9.10 crore as
accrued income
against stamp fees in
the Balance Sheet
under "Sundry
Debtors" which was
not taken as income.

4 Silchar 2006-07 to Exemption granted The AO (ACIT, TDS 0.05
Development 2009-10 under Section 10(20) Silchar) in May 2010
Authority contrary, to the accepted incorrect
Shillong provisions of the Act exemption granted

2.10 Recommendations
We recommend that

e A cap linked to Housing Pricing Index on the sale value of the flats
constructed by the builders/contractors may be considered as a condition
for claiming deduction under section 80IB(10) so that legislative intent of
providing affordable housing is met.

(Para no. 2.2)

The CBDT stated (June 2011) that the provisions of section 801B(10) are
being phased out as the last date for approval for housing projects have
expired on 31.03.2008 and no further extension has been granted to the
same in the latest Finance Bill 2011.

© The purview of section 115]B ie MAT may be extended to Firms/AOP who
are taking advantage of deduction or incentive available in the Act.
(Para no. 2.3)

13


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

The CBDT stated (June 2011) that Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs),
which are business entities similar to partnership firms have been
recently proposed to be brought under the purview of alternate
minimum tax (similar to MAT for corporate) through the insertion of a
new Chapter in the Income Tax Act, vide Finance Bill 2011. The issue will
be further examined for including other entities while finalizing the DTC.
However, as majority of Firms/AOPs are in the unorganized and
Small/Medium Enterprise Sector, imposing MAT may hamper this sector.

* Suitable provisions for assessment and collection of tax on TDR
transactions and payment of compensation on commercial consideration on
surrender of booked flat/commercial space/tenancy right or on vacating
premises for redevelopment or as part of contract/mobilization advances
may be introduced to safeguard the interest of revenue.

(Para nos. 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6)

The CBDT stated (June 2011) that as the sale and purchase of TDR and
surrender of premises takes place between organized entities, there is
negligible chance of non reporting of transactions by the concerned
parties and introduction of TDS provision for such transaction will only
increase the compliance burden on the tax payers. CBDT accepted the
recommendation on payment of TDS on mobilization advances.

We are of the view that in case the TDS provisions are not feasible in
respect of sale & purchase of TDR and surrender of premises, CBDT may
consider introducing other suitable mechanism to reduce tax evasion in
such cases.

° The inconsistency between Section 80(IB) and Section 40a(ia) may be
removed by making admissibility of deductions under Section 80(IB)
conditional to admissibility under section 40a(ia).

(Para no. 2.7)

The CBDT stated (June 2011) that in view of the DTC Bill providing for
phasing out of profit linked incentives, no further action seems necessary
on the issue.

e¢ CBDT may issue necessary instructions for uniform treatment of income
derived from leasing of properties held in stock in trade, income from sale of
parking space and expenses on ‘Interest on borrowed funds’ and 'Directors'
meeting fee/project management fee’.

(Para nos. 2.8 & 2.9)

The CBDT (June 2011) accepted the recommendation.

14


Database of assessees and the Central
Information Branch

Selection for scrutiny

Incorrect Certification by Chartered
Accountants

Recommendations


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

CHAPTER 3
INTERNAL CONTROLS
¢ Department does not have proper database of the assessees Sie at

the business of civil construction. Business codes appearing in the ce!
AST database of taxpayers maintained by the DGIT (System) are often
captured incorrectly.

¢ We could not identify non filers by cross linking the records of the
Department as PAN details of the contractors registered with the works
departments were not available.

e¢ Information collected by the CIB from third party sources were not
being collated and disseminated to users defeating the very purpose of the
scheme.

e We noticed a number of cases which were not selected for compulsory
scrutiny as per CBDT norms.

e We found that the Department was not initiating action Bares ae

erring statutory auditors for incorrect certification in their tax audit rep

3.1 The primary role of tax administration is to ensure that all entities that
are due to pay tax under extant legislation are adequately covered under the
tax net, and assessees filing returns are offering correct income to tax. Ina
tax system which is increasingly reliant on voluntary compliance through
self assessments, it is imperative for the Department to put in place proper
control mechanisms to ensure collection of information on transactions
made by the concerned entities from third party sources, and on organising
and dissemination of this information to enable follow up action by
concerned Assessing Officers (AOs). The Department should also ensure
adequate controls on the scrutiny process for efficient and effective tax
administration.

3.2 Database of assessees and the Central Information Branch

3.2.1 With a view to identifying potential taxpayers, the CBDT had made it
mandatory for every person to quote PAN in all documents pertaining to sale
or purchase of any immovable property valued at हैं 5 lakh or more.
As per CBDT instructions, the Central Information Branch (CIB) functioning
under DGIT (Inv) would collect information from specified source heads in
appropriate formats on a regular basis. Sec 285BA of the Act, effective from
1st April 2005 requires certain specified persons/entities to file an annual
information report (AIR) on specified financial transactions with the
Director General (CIB). For instance, information on immovable properties
valued ₹ै 30 lakh or more and registered on or after Ist April 2004 is to be
furnished by the Registrar/Sub Registrar appointed under the Registration
Act 1908, as per form 61A. Further, internal instructions of the Department

15


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

require collection of information relating to immovable property from the
records of Urban Development Authority, Municipal Authorities, Panchayats
etc in appropriate formats enabling comparison with data on returns. After
collection of information, all the data for the whole year are sorted by the CIB
address wise and range wise. The sorted CIB data is transmitted annually to
the jurisdictional assessing officers to facilitate identification of non-filers
and taking necessary action.

A flow chart depicting the process on information transfer is given below:

DGIT (INVESTIGATION)

|

Information from

source heads Concerned Concerned
regarding पंशी >| cits > | Additional CIT/
construction Joint CIT

t |
Ra"

3.2.2 As per procedure, where information from source heads contains
PAN, the sorted output is uploaded on the Income Tax Department (ITD)
application and sent directly to the AO having jurisdiction over the PAN
holder. When PAN information is unavailable, the transaction information is
sorted as per address and sent to jurisdictional additional CIT/JCIT. The
DIT(CIB) informed that the information collected under the relevant source
code!2 from builders, contractors, housing cooperative societies was being
uploaded on the Regional Computer Centre (RCC) server.

3.2.3 Adequacy of data

We found in audit that basic data on assessees engaged in civil construction
was not available with the concerned CITs. To examine the validity and
completeness of information on construction entities available with the
Department, we obtained data on entities engaged in construction from the
Works Departments, Municipal Corporations and Sub Registry Offices etc.
We found that the registration particulars of the contractors/firms available
with the agencies did not carry PAN details in most cases. The information,
therefore, could not be cross linked with the records of the Department to
identify non filers. Moreover, the Department could not match the names of
the contractors vis-a-vis records available with them. The finding echoed a
similar observation made by us in our earlier report of 2004 on the Sector.

12 Code No. 018 & 019 in the Revised source codes

16


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

3.2.4 Dissemination of Information by the CIB

We also ascertained from various charges that the extent of dissemination of
information available with CIB was low. We found in Delhi and Kolkata that
data available with CIB was not being properly collated and information was
being sent only on cases selected for scrutiny. Uploading of data on the
system had been initiated only in February 2010. In Mumbai, the DIT (CIB)
stated that substantial information! relating to assessment years 2005-06 to
2008-09 collected/received by the DIT (CIB) Mumbai could not be
disseminated to the assessment charges due to technical problems. This
invariably resulted in non identification of non filers by the AOs defeating
very purpose of the exercise.

3.2.5 Use of AIR data

Data from third party sources would have been useful in verifying
declarations made by individual assesses. We found that for the data
disseminated, no formal monitoring mechanism had been established to
ascertain the extent of use of this data by the AOs.

3.2.6 Business codes in AST database

Section 44AB of the Income Tax Act!4, 1961 requires every assessee engaged
in business activities to furnish a statement of particulars in prescribed
format (Form 3CD) which, inter alia, includes declaration on method of
accounting, valuation of closing stock, amounts not credited to profit and
loss account and nature of business as per specified codes. In case of
construction entities separate codes (viz. 0401, 0402, 0403, 0501 etc) are
prescribed as per classification of business as Builder, Property developer,
Civil Contractor and Estate agent. Such information is obtained to facilitate
sectoral analysis of assessees.

3.2.6.1 Our analysis of the central AST database maintained by the
DGIT (Systems) for the assessment years 2006-07 to 2009-10 revealed
inaccuracies!® in the business codes and actual business of the assessees. In
Delhi, we found nine construction entities filing returns who were not
figuring in the AST database at all. Further, we noticed assessees engaged in
businesses other than civil construction had filed income tax returns under
codes meant for construction entities. A test check of records in Goa revealed
that out of 4131 assessees engaged in construction, business codes in 164
cases were not filled in correctly. We found that the correctness of codes
mentioned by the assessees in the 3CD Form was not being ascertained by the
Department. The discrepancies in codes impeded sectoral analysis on tax and
raised questions about the authenticity of the data.

"3 10.45 crore pieces of information was collected by/ received at CIB Mumbai between 2005-06 and 2008-09,
35 Part 8 of the Annexure 1 of Form 3CD
15 Appendix -1

17


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

3.3 Selection for scrutiny

The CBDT issues instructions every year which lay down the procedure for
selection of assessments for compulsory scrutiny under various categories.
As per the Board’s norms for compulsory scrutiny and Computer Aided
Selection for Scrutiny (CASS) norms, the returns of all the builders following
project completion method are required to be selected for compulsory
scrutiny. Besides, wherever an assessee claimed deduction under section 80
IA or 808 of the Act for the first time or the deduction claimed by the
assessee under Chapter VI A of the Act exceeded a threshold limit, the case
has to be selected for scrutiny. Further, in case of corporate assessees,
where turnover exceeded %2 crore, and net profits shown were below 5
percent the case had to be selected for scrutiny.

Out of the sample of summary assessments made available for scrutiny we
noticed 58 cases which were not selected for compulsory scrutiny in
deviation from prescribed norms. Out of these, 28 cases involved tax effect
of % 5.55 crore that went unnoticed. An illustration is given below:

3.3.1 Charge: CIT-IV, Kolkata, AY 2005-06

M/s SENBO Engineering 10१76 was allowed a deduction of % 6.76 crore
under section 801A. We noticed that in the previous year, 1.6 for the
assessment year 2004-05, no deduction under section 8018 was allowed by
the Department as the assessee was a works contractor. Although the status
of the assesssee remained unchanged in assessment year 2005-06, due to
non-selection of the case for scrutiny, the assessee was allowed inadmissible
deduction under Section 8018 having a revenue impact of % 2.01 crore. The
Department stated in reply that a notice under section 148 had already been
issued to the assessee on 30 April 2010 for reopening the case.

3.4 Incorrect Certification by Chartered Accountants:

As per Rule 18 BBB of Income Tax Rules, 1962 deductions under Sections
8018, 808 and 8016 shall not be admissible unless the accounts for which
the deduction claimed have been audited and audit report in the prescribed
Form No.10 CCB duly signed and verified by a chartered accountant, along
with the profit and loss account and balance sheet is enclosed with the
return. Further, Section 142A(3) of the Act provides that the AO may require
a Valuation officer to make an estimate of such value and report the same to
him. On receipt of the same from the Valuation officer, AO may, after giving
the assessee an opportunity of being heard, take into account such report in
making such assessment or reassessment.

We found significant inconsistencies in expenses shown in accounts and
deductions claimed as certified by chartered accountants as compared to
valuations made by Departmental valuation Officers (DVO) when cases were
referred to them. An illustration is given below:

16 The case was completed after summary in January 2007.

18


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

3.4.1 In Pune and Thane charges, 32 cases’” involving deduction claims of
24.55 crore under section 80IB(10) were referred by the concerned 805 to
the DVOs. The DVOs found the claims of assesses to be inadmissible in 25
cases and were so treated by the AOs. In 15 of them, the claimants had
exceeded the maximum area permissible for claiming deductions and the
concerned statutory auditors had wrongly certified that the claims of
deductions of € 6.83 crore under section 801B(10) were allowable. As the
facts certified by the statutory auditors were found to be incorrect, the said
auditors attracted action under the provisions of the Act. However, the
Department had not initiated any action against the erring statutory
auditors.

3.4.2 We also checked 84 other cases involving claims of ¥ 1023 crore which
were admitted by the AOs without referring them to the DVOs. Given the
propensity of incorrect certification by statutory auditors there was high
probability of ineligible deduction claims being allowed.

3.5 Recommendations
We recommend that

© The Department may devise proper controls to ensure that the data
received hy CIB is sorted and disseminated promptly, enabling effective
scrutiny and widening of the tax net. Further, a feedback mechanism may be
evolved to determine the extent of use of this data by the AOs while making
assessments,

(Para 3.2.4)

The CBDT stated (June 2011) that data uploading on the system has been
initiated only in February 2010. There would be improvement in the
system as it gains experience. The recommendation has been accepted.

« In view of incorrect certification by statutory auditors of deduction
claims of assessees engaged in civil construction, the Department may
consider putting provision for sample verification of claims by Departmental
Valuation Officers.

(Para 3.4)

The CBDT stated (June 2011) that the AO has necessary powers to refer
cases to the valuation cell during the course of assessment proceedings
and therefore no further provision is required to be brought in the statute
in this regard. As regards incorrect certification also necessary provisions
are there for disciplinary action.

We are of the opinion that CBDT needs to ensure compliance with the
existing rules/instructions.

17 Appendix 2

19


e Information sharing and cross verification

e Lack of cross verification

e Recommendations


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

CHAPTER 4

INFORMATION SHARING AND SCRUTINY

e Information and records on related assessees were found to be
rarely shared and cross verified by the concerned AOs. We found
that income of ¥ 49.26 crore in 15 cases escaped assessment due to
lack of cross verification of records available with the AOs.

¢ We found 256 cases involving tax effect of ¥ 83.54 crore in which
income escaped assessment due to short/non accountal of contract
receipts, in profit and loss account.

*¢ We also noticed 220 cases involving tax effect of ¥ 469.10 crore of
non deduction/remittance of TDS or delay in remittance of TDS to
the Government.

4.1 Information sharing and cross verification:

The Act provides that the Assessing Officers shall complete the assessment
correctly after verifying all the necessary records, documents and accounts of
the assessee.

We noticed 15 cases in Mumbai, Chennai, Delhi, Kanpur and Rajahmundry
charges involving revenue impact of ¥ 49.26 crore where income escaped
assessment either due to non sharing of information among AOs or due to
lack of cross verification of records available with the AOs. Five illustrations
involving tax effect of ¥ 46.26 crore are given in Table 4 below:

(® in crore)
Tabl Cases on information sharing and cross verification

Name of the | AY x
N ssessee/ Description effect
CIT chary

M/sAbode 2007-08 M/s Abode Builders and M/s Vaman Estate
Builders developed a project “Trans Residency” in joint 15.38

CIT-Xx, venture. The AO disallowed the deduction under

Mumbai section 80IB(10) to the former for non-fulfillment
of conditions prescribed. However, the latter was

M/s Vaman irregularly allowed the same due to non passing of

Estate the related information on breach of

CIT-XXI conditionality to the AO concerned. We verified

Mumbai that M/s Vaman Estate was irregularly allowed
deduction of € 34.20 crore.

2. M/s EVP 2004-05 During assessment proceedings followed by 18.67
Groupand to search and seizure, the assessees accepted the
M/s S&P 2008-09 actual sale considerations of developed properties
Foundation along with ‘on money payments’ made to different
Group parties for purchase of land that were not shown
cITI in their accounts and also paid related tax liability.
Chennai We found that the actual sale consideration was

mentioned in the sale agreements entered
21



Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

between the assessees and the sellers of the land.
The information on the land transactions readily
available with the department was not
transmitted to the AOs having jurisdiction over
the entities who had received the payments and
were liable to pay taxes on the ‘On money’
received. The income escaping assessment
involved revenue impact of = 56.57 crore.
3. M/s Ansal 2006-07 ‘The assessee included project expenses of € 82.74 11.39

Buildwell crore in respect of work in progress of Sushant
Ltd Lok-III transferred by Ansal Properties and
Central Infrastructure Ltd. However, as per accounts of
Circle I Ansal Properties and Infrastructure Ltd., the
Delhi project cost of Sushant Lok- III was only ₹ै 57.29
crore.
4 M/s MCL- 2006-07 The assessee returned ¥ 43.90 lakh for sale of 9 0.32
RSR (JV) flats as against हें 53.09 lakh as per records of Sub
दा Registrar office thereby understating income of
Rajahmundry 9.19 lakh. Besides, assessee claimed sub
Andhra contract payments of हैं 11.86 crore to R. Subba
Pradesh Raju, Firm. We cross checked and found that it

credited only ₹ 10.94 crore. AO failed to detect the
irregularity though the firm's records were also
available with him in the same charge.

5.  M/sKanpur 2007-08 The assessee made payments of %1.48 crore to 0.50

Development M/s Kanpur Electric Supply Co. and Shri Ram
Authority Kishan Kushvaha in Kanpur charge without
CITI quoting PAN. On cross verification we found that
Kanpur deductees neither offered the income for taxation

nor claimed credit for TDS.
4.2 Lack of cross verification of TDS

In order to facilitate correct assessment by the AO, section 44AB provides a
role to the tax auditor who would undertake verification of the accounts and
records of the assessee to ensure compliance to TDS provisions. The tax
auditor gives his report in the prescribed form (3CD). We noticed cases
where the tax auditor, instead of making a detailed verification of compliance
to TDS provisions gave qualified statements such as, “due to voluminous
nature of transactions, the compliance with TDS provisions could not be
verified but the same was done on test check basis’. In such cases the
Department neither disallowed the claims made by the assessee nor issued
suitable instructions to the tax auditors. This resulted into allowing huge
expenses without verifying compliance with TDS provision.

4.2.1 Escapement of income due to short accountal of TDS receipts

Section 199 of Income Tax Act, 1961 provides that any tax deducted at source
shall be treated as payment of tax on behalf of the tax deductee and credit
shall be given to him for the amount so deducted in respect of the assessment
year for which income is assessable. The related receipt from which the tax
was deducted has to be taken into account while computing the total income
of the tax deductee.

22


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

We found 256 cases where the contract receipts on which TDS was made as
shown in Form 16A were either not accounted for or short accounted by
contractors (tax deductees) in their profit and loss account. These cases
involved tax effect of ¥ 83.54 crore. Three illustrations are given below:

4.2.1.1 Charge: CIT-IV, Delhi, AY 2006-07

M/s IRCON International Ltd.18 had shown contract receipts of = 1042.30
crore as against contract receipts of ¥ 1068.37 crore as per TDS certificates on
which TDS was claimed by the assessee. Hence, contract receipts of = 26.07
crore were short accounted by the assessee. Besides, the assessee also did
not account for the receipts of हैं 44.37 crore from countries covered under
DTAA which were taxed in those countries but deducted the same from
computation of the income. These mistakes resulted in short levy of tax of
% 32 crore including interest applicable.

4.2.1.2 Charge: CIT Bhubaneswar, AYs 2005-06 &2006-07

M/s ARSS Infrastructure Projects Pvt Ltd had shown gross receipt of
% 29.58 crore and % 60.25 crore in Profit and loss account during the above
two AYs as against हैं 29.77 crore and % 65.76 crore shown in TDS certificates
respectively. Hence, gross receipts of = 5.70 crore were short accounted for
by the assessee involving short levy of tax of € 2.53 crore.

4.2.2 Allowing expenses without deducting/remitting TDS

Section 40(a)(ia) of the Act provides that any interest, commission or
brokerage, fees for professional services or fees for technical services payable
to a resident, or amounts payable to a contractor or sub-contractor, being
resident, for carrying out any work on which tax is deductible at source and
such tax has not been deducted or after deduction, has not been paid within
prescribed period then such amounts shall not be deducted in computing the
income chargeable under the head “profit and gains of business or
profession”.

We noticed 220 cases of inadmissible expenditure on which TDS was not
deducted or where deducted, was not remitted to the Government. The
mistakes involved tax effect of $469.10 crore. Three cases are illustrated
below:

4.2.2.1 Charge: CIT- VIII Mumbai, AY 2007-08

M/s Aamby Valley Ltd debited an expenditure of ¥ 648.11 crore in profit and
loss account on account of interest which was payable after two years and
TDS on it was not deducted. As such the same was required to be disallowed
in view of provisions of section 40(a)(ia) of the Act. Besides, the assessee

38 Assessment was completed atter scrutiny in December 2008

23



Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

credited an amount of %190.92 crore from sales of plots and debited
expenditure of ¥ 161.72 crore as cost of the sales. We noticed that the
assessee had sold plots as well as villas for a consideration of € 361.71 crore.
Thus, the sale consideration was understated to the extent of 170.79 crore.
These mistakes resulted in aggregate tax effect of ¥ 285.47 crore.

4.2.2.2 Charge: CIT-V, Mumbai, AYs 2006-078&2007-08

M/s. Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation Ltd was granted
deduction towards interest of %155.56 crore accrued but not due on
secured/unsecured loan. As the interest was not due for payment and TDS
thereon was not deducted, deduction granted towards payment of interest of
% 155.56 crore was not in order and should have been disallowed. The
mistake resulted in under assessment of income to that extent involving
potential tax effect of € 52.36 crore.

4.2.2.3 Charge: CIT-II Hyderabad, AY 2005-06

M/s IVRCL Infrastructures and Projects Ltd recovered TDS of € 93.24 crore
every month during the year in respect of sub contract payment but failed to
remit the tax deducted at source within the prescribed period. The same was
required to be disallowed in terms of provision of section 40(a)(ia). The
omission involved tax effect of ¥ 42.65 crore.

4.3. Recommendations
We recommend that

¢ CBDT may issue necessary instruction for sharing of information
regarding high value transactions among the concerned AOs to prevent

leakage of revenue.
(Para no. 4.1)

CBDT stated (June 2011) that the AOs are expected to cross verify and
counter check such transactions. They would issue instructions with a
view to sensitize the AOs on the issue as also to tighten the monitoring
mechanism to prevent such lapses.

° CBDT may issue necessary instructions that no TDS credits shall be
allowed without quoting PAN of the deductees.
(Para no. 4.2)

CBDT stated (June 2011) that the issue has been addressed with the
implementation of the New System of mandatory furnishing of PAN wef
01-04-2010 by the deductor of tax at source, which is required to be
matched with the income tax return of the deductee.

24


Deductions for Housing / Infrastructure
projects

Deduction for developing housing projects
under section 80 IB (10)

Deduction for infrastructure development
under section 80 IA

Deduction for development of Special
Economic Zone (SEZ)

Mistakes in assessments of Public Private
Partnership Projects

Accounting issues

Recommendations


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

CHAPTER 5

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR CIVIL CONSTRUCTION

Deductions admissible for housing projects under section 80 [B(10) and
for infrastructure development under section 801A(4) were allowed
even though assessees were not eligible to claim deductions as they did
not fulfill the conditions provided in the Act. We noticed mistakes in
142 cases involving tax effect of ¥ 326.38 crore due to lack of proper
monitoring of deductions granted for developing housing projects/
infrastructure.

¢ Mistakes in assessments of Public Private Partnership projects were
noticed in seven cases involving tax effect of हैं 43.72 crore relating to
depreciation on Government leased assets, expenses against exempt
income, escapement of income for not following regular method of
accounting.

e We noticed 67 cases involving tax effect of ¥ 140.59 crore where

revenue was not recognized by applying the percentage completion
method as per Accounting Standard 7 as revised with effect from 2003.

5.1 Deductions for Housing/Infrastructure projects

The assessees engaged in the business of ~ रा - >)
civil construction availed irregular Geto cg rGe star

हें है हि Tax effect (@ in crore)
deductions falling in five major
categories, namely; for development of

4372 है for housing under
housing projects under section 80IB(10) ey ct)
and infrastructure under section 8010 as 1 for nrastructure
well as for development of Special oa
Economic Zone (SEZ) under section 1 for special economic
80IAB and the deductions allowed in # aS
absence of audit report by the chartered 1 for PP? projects

accountant involving tax impact of
% 326.38 crore in 142 cases.

5.2 Deduction for developing housing projects under section
80IB(10)

The A ides hundred We observed 92 cases involving tax
@ Act provides hundred per cent) effect of %242.66 crore where

deduction to profits of an ti
undertaking derived from the deductions were allowed even though

developing and building housing | @SSessees had not fulfilled either of the

projects approved before, conditions as provided in the Act.
31.03.2008 subject to fulfillment of Different categories of inadmissible
certain conditions. deductions are discussed below:

25


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

5.2.1 Housing projects having excess commercial area

Charge: CIT-IV Delhi, AY 2007-08

M/s Eldeco Infrastructure and
Properties Ltd. was allowed a
deduction of %51.88 crore
against a project with total built
up commercial area of 15450
square feet!? in deviation of the
condition stated above. The
mistake resulted in short levy of
tax of € 23.23 crore.

As per conditions of admissibility,
deduction under section 801B(10) shall be
admissible only if the built up area of the
shops and other commercial
establishments is not more than five per
cent of the aggregate built up area of the
housing project or 2000 square feet
whichever is less.

5.2.2 Housing projects having excess built up area

Charge: CIT-II, Ahmedabad AYs 2006-07 & 2007-08

M/s Ganesh Housing
For claiming deduction under section Corporation Ltd. (GHCL) was
801B(10), a residential unit must have built allowed deductions of % 34.40
up area not exceeding 1000 square feet and crore under section 80IB(10).
1500 square feet for Metro and non Metro Audit examination revealed that
cities respectively. Further, built up the built up residential area
includes balconies and projections but does being 1677.76 sq feet exceeded
not include the common areas shared with the maximum permissible limit.
other residential units. Moreover, GHCL did not include
the area of balconies and
projections including covered independent parking for working out the built
up area. Thus, the deduction was inadmissible. The mistake resulted in short
levy of tax of 714.55 crore. The Department has initiated action (July 2010)
to reopen the assessments.

5.2.3 Filing return after due date

5.2.3.1 Charge: CIT-VI, Delhi, AY 2008-09

Section 80AC of Income Tax Act, 1961, ) M/s Unitech Ltd.2° was
provides that deduction under section 8018 allowed deduction of हैं 30.14
shall not be allowed to an assessee unless he | crore under section 808 (10)
furnishes a return of his income for such which was not admissible at
assessment year on or before the due date

a ५ 7 all as the assessee filed the
specified under sub-section (1) of section 139.

return on 02 April 2009,i.e
after due date of filing return on 30 September 2008. The mistake resulted in
short levy of tax of ¥ 13.12 crore including interest.

© Used in the name of shopping mall, Arcadia
29 Assessment was completed under section 143(3) 1:05. U/s 153A in December 2008

26



Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

Department replied (February 2011) that the observation appeared to be
correct and remedial action was being taken.

5.2.3.2 Charge: CIT- I, Hyderabad, AYs 2004-05 to 2008-09

Andhra Pradesh Housing Board, Hyderabad awarded work on a integrated
township project with world class facilities?! to M/s Cesma International
Private Ltd, at a project cost of = 186.68 crore. The Return for 2005-06 was
filed late. We found that AO did not charge the interest of € 11.30 crore for
delay in filing return of income. Besides, penalty of हैं 1lakh for delay in
getting the accounts audited and delay in implementing the appellate orders
by 9 months was also not levied.

5.3 Deduction for infrastructure development under section 801A

Section 80IA(4) provides that where total income of an assessee includes
profit and gains of an undertaking from eligible business, the assessee shall
be eligible for specified deduction for specified period subject to fulfillment of
certain conditions.

Mistakes in application of the above provision resulted in incorrect admission
of deduction under section 80 IA (4) in 48 cases involving revenue impact of
%79.65 crore. Different categories of inadmissible deductions are discussed
below:

5.3.1 Irregular allowance of deduction under Section 80IA against
works contract

Charge: CIT-I, Coimbatore, AYs 2004-05 &2005-06

M/s Chettinadu Lignite
Explanation below section 80IA(13) Transport Services Ltd. was
introduced by the Finance Act, 2007 in disallowed deduction of %12.03
May 2007 with retrospective effect from 1 di tion 8010 for AY
April 2000 provides that deduction under 2004-05 which was upheld by

section 80-IA shall not be admissible to a T
contractor in respect of a works contract | CIT (Appeal) but allowed by the

entered into with the undertaking or ITAT in July 2007. Similarly
enterprise, as the case may be. deduction हैं 12.26 crore for AY
2005-06, initially disallowed by
the AO, was allowed by CIT(Appeal) in March 2008, following the ITAT
decision for the earlier AY. The assessee, being only a sub contractor
executing a contract on behalf of others, was covered by the Explanation
below section 80IA(13) introduced by Finance Act, 2007 in May 2007 and
was not eligible for the said deduction. Non consideration of the Explanation
brought out in the Act by the Finance Act 2007 resulted in irregular allowance

#1 Named Singapore Sanskruthi Township at Pocharam village, Ghatkesar Mandal, RR District

27


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

of deduction aggregating ~ 24.29 crore involving short levy of tax of % 8.80
crore.

5.4 Deduction for development of Special Economic Zone (SEZ)

We found two cases
The section 80188 provides that deduction at one

hundred percent shall be admissible to an undertaking involving tax effect
from any profits and gains derived from the business of of %4.07 crore as
developing a Special Economic Zone (SEZ), notified on or | illustrated below:
after 1 April, 2005 under the SEZ Act, 2005.

5.4.1 Charge:CIT-IIl, Anmedabad, AY 2007-08

M/s Mundra Port & Special Economic Zone Ltd. (MPSEZ) engaged in port
operations and logistics had been allowed an expenditure of ¥ 120.39 crore
which included a sum of % 6.81 crore as a provision for “demurrage charges”,
which were neither accrued nor known liabilities. Since the said provision
was not laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of
business for the year under consideration, this was required to be added back
for the purpose of computation of business income and chargeable to tax.
This resulted in short levy of tax of % 2.29 crore.

5.4.2 Charge: CIT-VI Mumbai, AYs 2006-07 & 2007-08

M/s. Mahindra Gesco Developers Ltd. was allowed deduction of हैं 0.24
crore and % 3.73 crore respectively under section 80188 for developing an
Export Processing Zone approved in September 2004, prior to April 2005
and hence, the deduction allowed was not in order. The mistake resulted in
under assessment of income aggregating * 3.97 crore involving short levy of
tax amounting to % 1.78 crore. Department stated in its reply that notice u/s
148 was issued to assessee in respect of assessment year 2006-07.

5.5 Mistakes In Assessments Of Public Private Partnership Projects

5.5.1 To encourage private investment in infrastructure, Governments have
entered into PPP projects where a variety of fiscal concessions like tax
incentives, revenue retention for a fixed lease period, etc. are being given. In
order to identify revenue risks arising from assessments of incomes from
these projects we test checked the assessment records pertaining to a few
PPP projects. We found mistakes in the nature of depreciation on
Government leased assets, expenses against exempt income, escapement of
income for not following regular method of accounting involving tax effect of
र₹ 43.72 crore in seven cases.

28


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

5.5.2 Depreciation on Government leased assets

In Andhra Pradesh
we found four
cases where the
assessees claimed
depreciation on
roads/ bridges/toll
ways, developed
under PPP mode.
As the assets
belong to
Government and no commercial operations were involved, allowing claims of
depreciation on these assets were not correct. These omissions resulted in
incorrect allowance of depreciation involving tax effect of ¥ 31.41 crore. An
illustration is given below:

The Act provides that owner of the asset is entitled to
depreciation if the asset is used in the business. However,
accounting standard AS 19 effective from 2001 requires
finance leases to be capitalised in the books of lessee.
CBDT has clarified that AS 19 will have no implication on
the allowance of depreciation under the Act. The lessee
will capitalize and depreciate the asset for accounting
purposes and legal owner will continue to avail
depreciation u/s 32.

5.5.2.1 Charge: CIT-III, Hyderabad, AY 2005-06

M/s Swarna Tollway Pvt Limited claimed depreciation of हैं 63.54 crore on
leased Government assets developed under PPP mode. As the said assets
belonged to the Government, claim of depreciation was not correct. Omission
to disallow the same resulted in incorrect allowance of depreciation with a
potential tax of = 23.25 crore.

5.5.3 Expenses against exempt income.

We found a case where
Government entities were
forming joint venture

Section 148 of the Act provides for disallowance
of expenditure incurred in relation to income
not includible in total income. Further, Section . बे .
115JB requires companies to prepare their | Companies with private
profit and loss account in accordance with the developers and certain
provisions of Parts II and III of Schedule VI to expenses unrelated to total
the Companies Act, 1956. income offered for tax were
being incorrectly allowed for

deduction as illustrated below:
5.5.3.1 Charge: CIT-II Hyderabad AY 2007-08

M/s EMAAR Hills Township Pvt Ltd (EHTPL), a special purpose vehicle
formed by the Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation (APIIC),
with Emaar Properties PJSC, Dubai for development of world class Golf course
with integrated township projects was allotted land by APIIC on 66 years
lease in AY 2007-08 in return of 26 percent equity holding. The agreement
mentioned that the accounting for the project would be to the mutual
satisfaction of both the parties. EHTPL entered into another development
agreement with Emaar-MGF Land Holdings Pvt. Ltd, for construction of villas,
luxurious apartments etc on the leased land without permission of

29


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

Government of Andhra Pradesh thereby, violating conditions of PPP
agreement. Against total sales of 5.36 crore, EHTPL offered a total loss of
र 4.40 crore adjusting other expenses of ¢ 15.74 crore. As the project was not
developed by EHTPL and was ultimately entrusted to another company, the
entire income of = 5.36 crore received from Emmar-MGF Land Holdings Pvt
Ltd should have been treated as sales commission received from sub
contractor and brought to tax by disallowing the expenses of % 15.74 crore.
The omission resulted in entire income of % 5.36 crore escaping assessment
involving tax effect of 1.80 crore.

5.5.4 Escapement of income

We found two cases of
Income under the head ‘profits and gains of

busi aye income escaping
usiness or profession’ is computed in accordance A A

with the method of accounting regularly adopted assessment involving tax
by the assessee. Where the assessee follows the effect of € 12.74 crore as
mercantile system of accounting, the profits and | illustrated below:

gains are worked out on due or accrued basis.

5.5.4.1 Charges:CIT-IV Hyderabad & CIT-III Hyderabad, AY 2004-05

M/s PVR Industries Ltd (PVRIL) claimed हैं 6.01 crore payable towards sub
contract to M/s Associated Engineering Enterprises (AEE) whereas AEE
admitted ~ 3.82 crore as receivable from PVRIL for the same period which
shows variation of ¥ 2.19 crore. Both the assessees had followed mercantile
system of accounting. Hence, the difference, being excess claim of % 2.19
crore needed to be disallowed. The mistake involved tax effect of €0.79
crore.

5.5.4.2 Charge:CIT- VI, Mumbai, AY 2007-08

M/s Ideal Road Builders Pvt. Ltd worked out surplus income of = 26.70
crore pertaining to prior period after allowing certain deductions like
amortization, maintenance expenses on Build Operate and Transfer (BOT)
project. However, the Department did not consider the surplus as income.
Omission resulted in underassessment of income by % 26.70 crore with
consequent short levy of tax of 11.95 crore.

5.6 Accounting issues:

The Section 145(2) of the Act provides that Central Government may notify
accounting standards to be followed by any class of assessees or in respect of
any class of income. Since civil construction projects take time, the business
transactions spill over many accounting periods, leading to accounting
problems. Our earlier report pointed out that there was a tendency among the
entities engaged in civil construction to misuse the ‘Project Completion
Method’ of accounting by postponing accountal of profits and thereby taxes
indefinitely. We recommended that the stage of project completion be
30



Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

defined for identifying proportional completion and accounting. The
Accounting Standard on construction contracts (AS-7) was revised in 2003
which laid down that revenue from such ongoing contracts shall be
recognised year after year on the basis of Percentage of Completion of such
contracts.

The assessing officer is empowered”? to reject the accounts of the assessee if
the same have not been prepared in accordance with the prescribed
accounting standards and may proceed to determine the income on best
judgment basis.

We noticed 67 cases involving tax effect of ¥ 140.59 crore where revenue was
not recognised by applying the percentage completion method though
advances were received from customers against sale of immovable properties
as against work-in-progress/closing stock. Three cases are illustrated below:

5.6.1 Charge: CIT-III Kolkata, AYs 2006-07 & 2007-08

M/s Bengal Park Chambers Development Ltd commenced a housing
project (Sunrise point) in August 2005 with likely completion by August
2008. Our analysis revealed that percentage of actual expenditure to
estimated cost of the project was 18.27 and 51.51 upto March 2006 and
March 2007 respectively. However the assessee did not recognize revenue as
per AS 7. Asa result, there was underassessment of income during above AYs
having a revenue impact of ¥ 2.16 crore.

5.6.2 Charge: CIT-II Delhi, AYs 2004-05 & 2005-06

M/s Malibu Estates Pvt. Ltd. received full payment of %62.25 crore and
% 24.40 crore in the above AYs respectively against 392 and 234 properties
ready for transfer in favour of customers. However, no revenue was
recognised against these properties in the said assessment years. The
omission to do so resulted in underassessment of income aggregating ¢ 86.65
crore involving short levy of tax of ¥ 41.49 crore.

5.6.3 Charge: CIT-IV Delhi, AYs 2005-06 & 2007-08

M/s DLF Commercial Developers Ltd. completed 66.74 per cent of its
Hyderabad project under percentage completion method during 2007-08 and
recognized revenue of ¢ 329.47 crore in the profit and loss account under the
head ‘Revenue from constructed properties’. The correct percentage of
completion was 72.58 percent instead of 66.74 percent worked out by the
assessee. In doing so, revenue of % 28.83 crore from this project was short
recognized as income of the assessee.

2 Section 145 (3) of the Act

31


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

Besides, the assessee purchased land valuing हैं 185.77 crore and transferred
land costing हैं 68.69 crore to fixed assets. However, assessee claimed
¥ 144.97 crore expenses of land as against है 117.08 crore. Further, during AY
2005-06, the assessee had shown % 49.81 crore in transfer from work in
progress as against closing stock of ~ 43.83 crore during earlier assessment
year. The mistakes involved tax aggregating हैं 31.42 crore.

5.7 Recommendations

We recommend that

* CBDT may issue necessary instructions to monitor the deductions allowed
for housing and infrastructure projects by providing suitable checks

through internal audit.
(Para nos. 5.1 to 5.5)

CBDT stated (June 2011) that necessary instructions have been included
in their Internal Audit Manual of 2011. They have assured further
sensitization.

e Assessing Officers may ensure that accounting treatment for ongoing
construction projects commenced after April 2003 conform to
Accounting Standard 7 as revised.

(Para no. 5.6)

CBDT accepted (June 2011) the recommendation.

32


e Mistakes in computation of business income
e Mistakes in computation of capital gains

¢ Mistakes in computation of income under
MAT provision

e Mistakes in computation, set off and carry
forward of depreciation

e Mistakes in carry forward and set off losses
e Incorrect allowance of provision / liability

° Incorrect allowance of capital/non business
expenditure

e Income not assessed
e Valuation of work in progress

e Conditions for computation of income under
section 44 AD

e Recommendations


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

CHAPTER 6

OMISSIONS IN ASSESSMENTS

We noticed mistakes relating to computation of business income, capital
gain, income under MAT provisions, incorrect allowance of depreciation
and set off of past losses, incorrect allowance of capital expenditure/non
business expenditure and incorrect valuation of closing stock etc.

6.1 As the provisions of { Fig: 6.1: Nature of mistakes
the Act were not followed Tax effect (% in crore)
correctly, we noticed 675
cases relating to mistakes
with a tax effect of ¥ 642.44
crore. Categorywise details
are depicted in pie chart
and illustrations are given
below:

= Computation of business income
= Computation of capital gains
‘= Compuation under MAT
= Depreciation
off of losses

© Capital/non business expenditure
= Income not assessed
Valuation of closing stock
Computation under section 44AD
Other mistakes

6.2 Mistakes in computation of business income

We noticed 118 cases of mistakes in computation of business income
involving tax effect ०1२ 339.82 crore. Five cases are illustrated below:

6.2.1 Charge: CIT-IV, Kolkata, AY 2007-08

M/s. Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd received a specific grant of
% 164.03 crore from Government of India in March 2007 for the purpose of
payment of old income tax liability for the assessment year 2000-01.
However, assessee did not include this specific grant as its income though it
should have been treated as revenue receipt. Omission resulted in over
assessment of loss by हैं 71,82 crore and underassessment of income by
र₹ 92.21 crore with revenue impact of 55.21 crore.

6.2.2 Charge: CIT-II Jaipur, AY 2005-06

In the assessments of M/s Rajasthan Housing Board Corporation Ltd,
income of € 60.50 crore on account of sale of plots was not included in total
income. Instead the expenditure on cost of land, cost of construction etc were
debited to expenditure on properties (works) and amount received out of
sale of residential houses, shop and plots was reduced there from. The
remaining balances have been shown in balance sheet. Thus revenue receipt
of = 60.50 crore was not accounted for in revenue account involving tax effect
of = 24.85 crore.

33


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

6.2.3 Charge: CIT-I Delhi, AY 2007-08

M/s Anant Raj Industries Ltd.23 engaged in the business of Sale/Purchase of
Land, Building and Structures etc had forfeited the Earnest Deposit/Advance
Money received from the sale of roof rights of the building and shown under
the head ‘Sale of Investment’ in the Profit and Loss account and the same was
reduced from the computation of income. We observed that the
money/benefit arisen to the assessee pertained to trading/business activity
and therefore, it was a trading receipt and should have been taxed
accordingly. The mistake resulted in under assessment of income of हैं 45
crore, involving short levy of tax of ¥ 20.14 crore including interest.

6.2.4 Charge: CIT-IV Delhi, AYs 2005-06 and 2007-08

We noticed that in the AY 2005-
Expenditure in the nature of capital is | 96, M/s Ircon International
disallowable under section 37 of the Act. Ltd.24 debited %8.27 crore to
Further, Section 32 of the Act provides for profit and loss account as

depreciation on technical knowhow being technical know-how which being

an intangible asset. capital in nature (intangible asset)
should have been disallowed (after
allowing depreciation @ 25 per cent). The mistake resulted in

underassessment of income of 6.20 crore. Further, amounts of % 16 crore
and ~ 11.17 crore shown on account of Foreign Projects Reserve were not
utilised by the assessee and in the AY 2007-08, interest of 1.91 crore under
section 234D was not charged by the Department on refund amount. These
mistakes involved aggregate tax effect of ¥ 17.71 crore including interest.

6.2.5 Charge: CIT-I Patna, AY 2005-06

M/s Aparna Housing Construction Pvt. Ltd, invested ₹ 75 lakh on account
of purchase of land which was not included in determining the income.
Further, the closing stock of goods in transit (vehicle & spares) amounting to
र₹ 1.60 crore shown in balance sheet under the head inventories was not
shown in P&L account. Both mistakes resulted in short levy of tax of 1.15
crore.

6.3 Mistakes in computation of capital gains

We noticed 30 cases

As per section 2(47)(ii) and (v) of the Act, transfer, in involving tax effect of

relation to a capital asset includes the extinguishment
हि है हि हि %69.03 crore where

of any rights therein, or any transaction allowing capital -

possession of any immovable property to be taken or ‘apital gain ee not

retained by any other person in part performance of a offered to tax. wo

contract, of the nature referred to in Section 53A of the Illustrations are given

Transfer of Property Act, would attract Capital Gains. below:

23 Scrutiny assessment was completed in December 2009 determining income of Rs.92.02 crore,

7 Scrutiny ments were completed in December 2007 & 2009 cespectively.

34



Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

6.3.1 Charge: CIT-III Chennai, AY 2006-07

Shri Sheriff Dyan & Sherdan Games Parks and Holidays Pvt. Ltd received
built up area worth हैं 40.30 crore and हैं 30.65 crore respectively in lieu of the
land transferred. No capital gain was offered on the above transactions
involving tax effect of ¥ 23.91 crore.

6.3.2 Charge: CIT-II Coimbatore, AYs 2006-07 & 2007-08

M/s Prime Textiles*5allowed possession and take over of immovable
property to M/s Prime Developers, a Partnership Firm, for a consideration
involving capital gain of * 32.86 crore. However, no tax on capital gain was

offered which had a revenue impact of ¥ 10.83 crore.

6.4 Mistakes in Computation of Income under MAT provision

Section 115 JB provides for levy of MAT at the \ We found incorrect /non
rate of 7.5 per cent of the book profit if the tax application of MAT
payable on total income under the normal provisions in 10 cases
provisions is less than 7.5 per cent of the book involving tax effect of
profit arrived at after certain additions and % 20.17

ti 4 crore. An
deletions as prescribed.

illustration is given below:

6.4.1 Charge: CIT-X, Mumbai, AY 2007-08

Department did not consider revised return filed by the M/s Shivshahi
Punarvasan Prakalp Ltd while computing the income under MAT provision
of the Act which resulted in underassessment of income by % 13.68 crore
involving non levy of tax of ¥ 1.54 crore.

Department has accepted the objection (March 2010).

6.5 Mistakes in computation, set off and carry forward of
depreciation

है है के We noticed 69 cases in which
Section 32 provides for depreciation on the mistakes were committed in

cost or written down value of assets ifsuch | ajjgwance of depreciation/set off
assets are owned by the assessee and used | of and carry forward of losses
for the purpose of business during relevant involving revenue impact of
previous year. %35.10 crore. An illustration is
given below:

25 ssessmment was completed after serutiny (December 2008)

35


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

6.5.1 Charge: CIT, Central, Hyderabad, AYs 2006-07 & 2007-08

M/s Madhucon Projects (P) Limited was allowed depreciation on vehicles
@ 25 percent instead of allowable rate of 15 percent which resulted in excess
claim of € 1.86 crore in AY 2006-07. Further, due to incorrect adoption of
WDYV, depreciation was allowed in excess of हैं 19.24 crore in AY 2007-08.
This resulted in under assessment of income of % 21.10 crore involving
aggregate tax effect of ¥ 9.38 crore.

6.6 Mistakes in carry forward and set off of losses

We noticed 13 cases
involving tax effect of ¥ 26.69
crore due to mistakes in carry
forward and set off of losses.
An illustration is given below:

Section 43A provides for deduction of loss on
account of fluctuation in the rate of exchange of
foreign currency, provided that the loss arrived
at is backed by actual remittance.

6.6.1 Charge: CIT- V, Delhi, AY 2007-08

M/s National Building Construction Corporation Ltd debited to its profit
and loss accounts foreign exchange fluctuation loss of 42.35 crore. The AO
allowed the loss although it was not backed by actual remittance. This
resulted in short levy of tax of ¥ 18.66 crore.

6.7. Incorrect allowance of provision/liability

, . | We noticed 37 cases
Section 43B of the Act provides for certain involving short levy of

deductions against the payments (i.e. tax, duty, cess, %18.76 crore having
bonus, leave-encashment etc.) in the year in which mistakes in allowance
the payments are actually made by the assessee. of  provision/liability.
Further, the Act does not provide for deduction One case is illustrated
against any provision made in the accounts though below:

fixed liabilities are allowed as deduction.

6.7.1 Charge: CIT -I, Lucknow, AY 2006-07,

M/s Jai Prakash Enterprises debited हैं 36.28 crore towards employee's
remuneration and benefits in profit and loss account. In the balance sheet an
amount of हैं 2.89 crore towards provision for gratuity and %1.50 crore
towards leave encashment was shown under the head “provisions”, which
was not incurred during the year as mentioned in Auditor's Report. Further,
र₹ 1.38 crore towards bonus and हें 1.37 crore towards incentive was not paid
up to the date of filing the return. Thus allowance of inadmissible expenses of
= 6.84 crore resulted in short levy of 3.06 crore.

36


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

6.8 Incorrect allowance of Capital/non business expenditure

Section 37(1) of the Act provides that any expenditure We noticed 18 cases
not being expenditure of the nature prescribed in | involving tax effect of

section 30 to 36 and not being in the nature of capital | %14.62 crore of
expenditure or personal expenses of the assessee, laid mistakes in allowance
out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of capital/ non

of business or profession shall be allowed in computing business expenditure.
the income chargeable under the head “profits and

A f ५ One case is illustrated
gains of business or profession.

below:

6.8.1. Charge: CIT- X, Mumbai, AYs 2005-6 & 2007-08

M/s Shivshahi Punarvasan Prakalp Ltd claimed and was allowed deduction
of 18.50 crore and %8.52 crore during AY 2005-06 and 2007-08
respectively on account of ‘Interest on a Project’ under ‘One time settlement
scheme (OTS)’. As these expenditures were related to work in progress of a
specific project, the same were required to be capitalised. Omission to
disallow capital expenditures resulted in underassessment of income by
र₹ 27.02 crore in respective years involving short levy of tax of = 9.66 crore.

6.9 Income not assessed

Section 5 of the Act provides that if the assessee We found 72 cases
follows the mercantile system of accounting, the | involving tax effect of
income received, accrued or is deemed to accrue %19.55 crore where
or arise to the assessee in any previous year is to income was not offered to
be included in the income of the assessee in such | tax. An illustration is given

pele below:

6.9.1 Charge: CIT-I, Lucknow, AY 2006-07

M/s Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam followed mercantile system of
accounting and had shown in the balance sheet under current assets % 3.08
crore on account of income accrued but not received. The samewas required
to be included in the total income of the assessee. Further, an amount of
¥ 53.75 lakh was debited to profit and loss account towards leave encashment
and again reduced ₹ 5.45 crore towards leave encashment at the time of
computation. The mistake resulted in under assessment of income of = 8.53
crore involving short levy of tax of € 3.82 crore.

The Department (November 2010) accepted the observation partly.

37


Report No. 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

6.10 Valuation of work-in-progress

We noticed 77 cases
Section 145 A prescribes that the valuation of involving tax effect of
inventory for the purpose of determining the income
“ हि ₹ 15.55 crore where
chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of 1 f k i
business or profession” shall be in accordance with value or wor. in
the method of accounting regularly employed by the progress/closing stock
assessee. The closing stock exhibited in the Profit was not adopted

and Loss Account include value of work- in- progress, correctly. An
besides value of raw materials, finished products etc. illustration is given
below:

6.10.1 Charge: CIT- 1, Lucknow, AY 2007-08

M/s Bhola Singh Jai Prakash Construction Ltd had shown value of = 10.83
lakh in profit and loss account as against हैं 6.62 crore in balance sheet.
Besides, closing stock of work in progress was taken at ¥ 10.83 lakh as against
actual amount of हैं 14.83 lakh as stated by the Auditor in its report. Thus,
short accountal of inventories and work in progress resulted in short
computation of income of % 6.56 crore involving short levy of tax of % 2.74
crore.

6.11 Conditions for computation of income under section 44AD

We noticed 29

As per Section 44AD, an assessee whose gross receipts from cases _ involving

business of civil construction does not exceed % 40 lakh, tax effect of € 1.43
income is to be adopted at 8 percent of the gross receipts crore where the
paid or payable to an assessee. If the gross contract receipt said provision
of an assessee exceeds 40 lakh, the assessee is required to was not complied
get his accounts audited and furnish an audit report in the with. One
prescribed form under section 44AB of the Income Tax Act. illustration is

given below:
6.11.1 Charge: CIT-I, Bangalore, AYs 2004-05 & 2005-06

The assessments of a firm, M/s. Mahima Developers, were completed under
summary in August 2006 determining income on estimate basis at 8 percent
of gross receipt. We observed from the receipt/payment statement attached
with the return that the firm received gross contract receipt of ¥ 3.94 crore
and % 3.23 crore but neither maintained and kept accounts as required under
section 44AA nor got the accounts audited as required under section 44AB.
The Department, however, accepted the return without audited accounts
irregularly as the provision of section 44AD declaring 8 percent income on
estimate basis applies where the gross receipt does not exceed % 40 lakh.

Department accepted the observation stating that the penalty under section
271A would be levied.

38


Report No, 12 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit)

6.12 Other cases

6.12.1 We also noticed various types of mistakes such as incorrect adoption
of figures, short /non levy of interest, mistake in estimation of gross receipts,
incorrect allowance of deduction against house property & over assessment
of income etc in 203 cases involving tax effect of ¥ 81.72 crore.

6.13 Recommendations
We recommend that

e The CBDT may devise an appropriate control mechanism with clearly
defined responsibilities to ensure that provisions of the Act are complied
with. Wherever it is felt necessary the Department may also explore the
possibility of capacity building for reducing the incidence of mistakes.

(Para nos. 6.1 to 6.12)

CBDT accepted (June 2011) the occurrence of omissions/mistakes in
assessments. They stated that implementation of their Central Action Plan for
the year 2011-12 and monitoring by supervisory officers would improve
the quality ofassessments.

Ube <b

New Delhi (MEENAKSHI GUPTA)
Dated Director General (Direct Taxes)

Countersigned

\v h

New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated Comptroller and Auditor General of India

39


Report No. 12 of 2011-12(Performance Audit)

Appendix 1
(Refer par a no. 3.2.6.1)
Database of assessee showing business codes pertaining to civil construction

SI
No.

State

Assessees
collected
from
different
sources
including
DGIT
(Systems)

Assessees
confirmed
by the
Dept

Assessees
not in the
tax net of
the Dept

Cases
where
codes
were not
filled in
by the
assessees

Cases
where
codes
filled in
incorrectly

Remarks

Assam

688

24

24 contractors executing
construction works under
the Municipal _ Board,
Silchar during _ financial
years 2008-09 and 2009-10
were not in the taxnet.

Delhi

3542

9 companies did not figure
in data base for AY 2009-
10. In one case code was
written as ‘505’ different
from business of civil
construction.

Goa

2308

1270

164

164 cases were given
incorrect codes

Gujarat

20

20 cases were given
incorrect codes, In 2 cases
no codes were filled in.

Maharashtra

3223

11

Codes left blank in 3223
cases in the list provided by
DG (System). 11 assessees
engaged in the business of
civil construction were not
included in that list. One
banking company was
given business code of civil
construction.

Orissa

2939

2122

817

Out of 2939 assesses,
executing construction
work, identified by audit,
department could furnish
jurisdictional details of
2122 assesses __ only,
though their addresses
were provided.

West Bengal

Department could not
arrest the codes of the
assesses correctly. In two
cases wrong codes were
given in Form 3CD filed
along with the return.

Note: In respect of remaining states, no database on business of civil construction was available.

41


Report No .12 of 2011-12(Performance Audit)

Appendix 2

(Refer para no.3.4.1)
Incorrect certification by Chartered Accountants

Deduction under section 801B(10) disallowed on the basis of reference made to Local Authority
जि Name of the assessee CIT Assessment | Claim | Reasons on the basic of
No. Charge Year disallowed | Report of — DVO/Govt.
Rs. in lakh) | approved valuer
1___| M/s. Aaradya Developers Pune V 2005-06 54.38 | Exceeding the permissible limit
2__ | Asabove 2006-07 0.3 | As above
3 | M/s. }.K.Builders 2005-06 32.1 | As above
4 | Asabove 2006-07 124.08 | As above
5 Asaove 2007-08 16.04 | As above
6 |M/s.  Khandge Mehta 2006-07 6.99 | As above
Associates
7 __| Asabove 2007-08 18.09 | As above
[8 M/s. Pharande Developers 2004-05 2.24 | Area is less then 1 acre
9 | Asabove 2005-06 65.26 | Exceeding the permissible limit
10__ Asabove 2006-07 63.39 | As above
11_| M/s Namrata Developers 2007-08 51.61 | As above
12 [M/s Rohan Engineering 2005-06 144 | As above
Construction
13 | Asabove 2006-07 28.06 | As above
14 [M/s D B 5 Developers & 2006-07 82.91 | Commercial area is more than
Promotors 1000 Sq Ft.
15__| Asabove 2007-08 123.29 | As above
16 | M/s Sarjan Construction 2004-05 18.91 | Plot of area is less than 1 acre
17_| As above 2005-06 17.65 | As above
18__| As above 2006-07 28.7 | As above
19__| Asabove 2007-08 143,28 | As above
20 | M/s HA Developers 2003-04 125.21 | As above
21_| Asabove 2005-06 18 | As above
22 1 As above 2006-07 330.32 | As above
23 1 Asabove 2007-08 117.53 | As above
24 1 M/s Kohli construction 2004-05 22.23 | As above
25 | Asabove 2005-06 9.74 | As above
26 | M/s Vikram Builders Thane 2006-07 28.37 | All Buildings approved by local
पा authority as a single plan.
However, building “C’ was not
completed
27_| Asabove 2005-06 33.35 | As above
28 | M/s Royal construction co. 2003-04 9.52 | Project not completed on or
before 31-3-08
29__| Asabove 2004-05 12.68 | As above
30_ Asabove 2005-06 5.11 | As above
अर | M/s SB Developers 2006-07 215.86 | As above
32__| Asabove 2007-08 634.94 | As above
Grand total 2454.54

42