 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
General and Social Sector 
 
 
 
For the year ended March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No.1 of the year 2016 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
i 
Table of Contents 
 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Preface  vii 
Chapter-I : Introduction 
About this report 1.1 1 
Auditee profile 1.2 1 
Authority for conducting Audit 1.3 2 
Organisational structur e of the Office of the 
Principal Accountant General (G&SSA), Karnataka,  
Bengaluru 
1.4 3 
Planning and conduct of Audit 1.5 3 
Significant audit observations 1.6 3 
Performance audits of programmes/activities/ 
Departments 
1.6.1 3 
Information Systems audit 1.6.2 5 
Compliance audit 1.6.3 6 
Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 1.7 9 
Outstanding inspection reports  1.7.1 9 
Response of Departments to the draft paragraphs 1.7.2 9 
Follow-up action on Audit Reports 1.7.3 10 
Paragraphs to be discussed by the Public 
Accounts Committee 
1.7.4 10 
Chapter-II : Performance Audit 
Department of Health and Family Welfare/ 
Department of Medical Education 
Health care facilities in  State Sector Hospitals 
including Autonomous and Teaching Hospitals 
2.1 13 
Department of Higher Education 
Engineering Education in Karnataka 2.2 43 
Chapter-III  :  Information Systems Audit 
Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms 
e-Procurement  3.1 73 
Chapter-IV : Compliance Audit 
Department of Home 
Follow up audit on Internal Control System in 
the Department of Prisons 
4.1 93 
Department of Women and Child Development 
Implementation of Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 4.2 104 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
ii 
 Paragraph 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Department of Urban Development  
Investments made by the Bangalore 
Development Authority in Mutual Funds 
4.3 122 
Department of Education  
(Primary and Secondary Education) 
Laxity in implementation of a scheme 4.4 148 
Department of Health and Family Welfare   
(Medical Education) 
Unproductive Investment 4.5 150 
Department of Home 
Loss of Central assistance 4.6 152 
Department of Housing 
Irregular extension of salary benefits 4.7 154 
Wasteful expenditure on housing scheme 4.8 155 
Department of Labour 
Avoidable payment of income tax and penal 
interest 
4.9 157 
Department of Urban Development 
Non-revision of water rates for domestic 
connections 
4.10 158 
Avoidable expenditure on debt servicing 4.11 160 
Excess payment of compensation 4.12 161 
Undue benefit to an agency 4.13 165 
 
 
   

Table of contents 
iii 
List of Appendices 
 
Details Appendix 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Year-wise breakup of Inspection Reports and 
Paragraphs outstanding in respect of Revenue 
Department 
1.1 171 
Details of Departmental Notes pending as of 
30.10.2015 (Excluding General and Statistical 
Paragraphs) 
1.2 172 
Paragraphs (excluding Gene ral and Statistical) yet 
to be discussed by PAC as of  30.10.2015 
1.3 173 
List of hospitals selected for test-check 2.1 174 
Availability of Specialisation in Taluk and District 
Hospitals 
2.2 175 
Percentage of expired blood  2.3 176 
Statement showing the details of number of beds in 
the burns wards, exclusive manpower available and 
number of patients admitted, discharged and died 
during the period 2010-15 
2.4 177 
Details of staff sanctioned in Trauma care centre 2.5 178 
Role of organisations on Engineering Education in 
Karnataka 
2.6 179 
List of test-checked engineering colleges 2.7 180 
Statement of division-wise analysis for CET intake 
and admission data 
2.8 181 
Status of NBA Accreditation of VTU Autonomous 
Colleges 
2.9 182 
Quality parameters of autonomous colleges 2.10 184 
Availability of teaching faculty in test-checked 
colleges 
2.11 185 
Availability of laboratory facilities in test-checked 
colleges 
2.12 186 
Availability of Library facilities in sampled 
Colleges 
2.13 188 
Illustrative cases of ambi guous disclosure in goods 
tender supplier selection 
3.1 189 
Status of working of equipment 4.1 190 
Details of the source where articles were seized 4.2 191 
Entry of prohibited articles into prison 4.3 192 
Production of undertrials befo re Courts through VC 
system vis-à-vis through escorts 
4.4 193 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
iv 
Details Appendix 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Statement showing the list of test-checked 
institutions 
4.5 194 
Statement Showing Juvenile Delinquency 4.6 195 
Statement showing the release of grants to 
Institutions not registered under the JJ Act 
4.7 196 
List of Child Care Institutions where no 
Management Committee was formed 
4.8 197 
Incumbency in the post of Commissioner and 
Finance Member of BD A during the period 1999-
2014 
4.9 198 
Statement showing details  of Collection Accounts 
of IOB and Canara Bank not disclosed in Annual 
Accounts of BDA 
4.10(a) 199 
Statement showing year-wise details of Bank 
Accounts not disclosed in annual accounts during 
1999-2014 
4.10(b) 201 
Statement showing details of investment and 
redemption of Term Deposit made by debiting CA 
1787 
4.11 203 
Outflow of funds from main  CA directly to Mutual 
Fund 
4.12(a) 205 
Outflow of funds from ma in CA to Mutual Funds 
through unauthorised accounts 
4.12(b) 206 
Outflow of funds from main CA to Mutual funds by 
crediting Term Deposit proceeds to unauthorised 
accounts 
4.12(c) 207 
Mutual Fund redemptions credited directly to main 
CA 
4.13(a) 208 
Mutual Fund redemption amount credited to 
unauthorised account and s ubsequently transferred 
to main CA 239 
4.13(b) 208 
Mutual Fund redemptions cr edited to unauthorised 
accounts and again re-invested in Mutual Funds 
4.13(c) 209 
Term Deposits made out of Mutual Fund 
redemption credited to unauthorised account and 
subsequently transferred to main CA 
4.13(d) 209 
Fake Term Deposits record ed in books of BDA at 
the time of transfer of funds from main account 
4.14 210 
Case study on the concealment of unauthorised 
transaction in CA 1562 disclosed in the accounts of 
BDA 
4.15 213 

Table of contents 
v 
Details Appendix 
Number 
Page 
Number 
Statement showing the excess payment made to the 
NGOs against the recommendations of the taluk 
level committees 
4.16 215 
Statement showing irregular payments made to the 
NGOs 
4.17 217 
Details of irregular salary benefits 4.18 218 
Excess payment of compensation for construction 
of road on land not acquired 
4.19 219 
Excess payment of compensation towards 
construction of road on land deleted from final 
notification 
4.20 220 
Liability of the Authority towards payment of 
compensation 
4.21 221 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
vii 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and A uditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2015 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of 
Karnataka under Article 151 of the Cons titution for being laid  on the table of 
the Legislature of the State. 
The report contains significant resu lts of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the Departments a nd Autonomous Bodies of Departments 
of the Government of Karnataka unde r the General and Social Services 
including Departments of Education, Health & Family Welfare, Home, 
Housing, Labour, Personnel and Administrative Reforms, Urban Development 
and Women & Child Development. 
The instances mentioned in this report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 2014-15 as well as those which came to 
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports.  
Instances relating to period subsequent  to 2014-15 have also been included, 
wherever found necessary.  
The audit has been conducted in conf ormity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
Chapter-I 
 
Introduction 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Aud itor General of India (C&AG) relates 
to matters arising from performan ce audit of selected programmes and 
activities and compliance audit of Government Departments and Autonomous 
Bodies. 
Compliance audit refers to examination of the transactions of the audited 
entities to ascertain whether the provi sions of the Constitution of India, 
applicable laws, rules, regulations and various orders and in structions issued 
by competent authorities are being complied with. On the other hand, 
performance audit, besides conducting a compliance audit, also examines 
whether the objectives of the progra mme/activity/Department are achieved 
economically and efficiently. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State 
Legislature, important results of audit.   Auditing Standard s require that the 
materiality level for reporting should be commensurate with the nature, 
volume and magnitude of transactions.  The audit findings are expected to 
enable the Executive to take corrective actions as also to frame policies and 
issue directives that will lead to im proved management of the organisations, 
thus, contributing to better governance. 
This chapter, in addition to explaini ng the planning and extent of audit, 
provides a synopsis of the significant deficiencies and achievements in 
implementation of selected schemes, significant audit ob servations made 
during the compliance audit and follow-up on previous Audit Reports. 
Chapter-II of this report contains findi ngs arising out of performance audit of 
selected programmes/activities/Departmen ts. Chapter-III contains findings 
arising out of information systems aud it in selected Government audit and 
Autonomous Bodies. Chapter-IV cont ains observations arising out of 
compliance audit in Government Departments and Autonomous Bodies. 
1.2 Auditee Profile 
The Principal Accountant General (G eneral & Social Sector Audit), 
Karnataka, Bengaluru conducts audit of  the expenditure under the General 
and Social Services incurred by 66 Departments in the State and  
11 Autonomous Bodies. The Departments are headed by Additional Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secret aries, who are assi sted by Directors/ 
Commissioners and subordinate officers working under them. 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
2 
The summary of fiscal transactions of  the Government of Karnataka during 
the year 2013-14 and 2014-15 is given in Table-1 below. 
Table-1: Summary of fiscal transactions in 2014-15 
 (` in crore) 
Receipts Disbursements 
 2013-14 2014-15  2013-14 2014-15 
Section-A Revenue    Total Non Plan Plan  
Revenue receipts 89,542.53 1,04,142.15 Revenue Expenditure 89,189.57 69,783.10 33,831.19 1,03,614.29 
Tax revenue 62,603.53 70,180.21 General services 24,954.41 28,024.39 240.88 28,265.27 
Non-tax revenue 4,031.90 4,688.24 Social  services 32,621.89 19,204.97 20,161.28 39,366.25 
Share of Union 
taxes/duties 
13,808.28 
 
14,654.25 Economic services 26,592.83 18,748.23 11,223.08 29,971,31 
Grants in aid and 
contributions from GOI 
9,098.82 14,619.45 Grants-in-aid and  
contributions 
5,020.44 3,805.51 2,205.95 6,011.46 
Section – B: Capital and others: 
Misc. Capital receipts 87.94 10.14 Ca pital outlay 16,946.86 277.35 19,344.95 19,622.30 
   General services 500.74 29.85 588.61 618.46 
   Social services 3,052.68 98.11 4,082.78 4,180.89 
   Economic services 13,393.44 149.39 14,673.56 14,822.95 
Recoveries of loans 
And advances 
109.28 83.82 Loans and advances 
disbursed 
695.43 12.04 564.11 576.15 
Public debt receipts** 17,286.81 21,874.63 Repayment of public 
debt** 
3,816.84 4,812.23 -- 4,812.23 
Contingency Fund -- -- Contingency Fund -- -- -- -- 
Public Account 
Receipts 
1,21,842.37 1,40,229.39 Public Account  
Disbursements 
1,12,971.74 -- -- 1,29,573.99 
Opening cash balance 10,511.24 15,759.73 Cl osing cash balance 15,759.73   23,900.90 
Total 2,39,380.17 2,82,099.86 Total 2,39,380.17   2,82,099.86 
(Source: Finance Accounts 2014-15) 
*  Tax Revenue include `1,215.07 crore, being the book adjustment relating to  
M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,  Bengaluru (HAL) for `1,211.67 treating the same 
as waiver, `3.05 crore being the waiver of tax and interest dues pertaining to utensil 
dealers and `0.35 crore being the waiver of tax and interest dues pertaining to Arecanut 
dealers. 
 **  Excluding net transactions under ways and means advances and overdraft 
1.3 Authority for conducting Audit 
The authority for conducting audit by th e C&AG is derived from Articles 149 
and 151 of the Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor 
General's (Duties, Powers and Cond itions of Service) (DPC) Act, 1971. 
C&AG conducts audit of expenditure of the Departments of Government of 
Karnataka under Section 13
1 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. C&AG is the sole 
auditor in respect of 11 Autonomous Bodies which are audited under Sections 
19(2)2 and 19(3) 3 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act.  In addition, C&AG also 
conducts audit of 298 other Aut onomous Bodies, under Section 14 4 of 
C&AG's (DPC) Act, which are subs tantially funded by the Government. 
Principles and methodologies for various audits are prescribed in the Auditing 
                                                            
1 Audit of (i) all transactions from the Consolid ated Fund of the State,  (ii) all transactions 
relating to the Contingency Fund and Public Ac counts and (iii) all tr ading, manufacturing,  
profit & loss accounts, balance sheets & other subsidiary accounts. 
2 Audit of the accounts of Corporations (not being Companies) established by or under law 
made by the Parliament in accordance with the provisions of the respective legislations. 
3 Audit of accounts of Corporations established by law made by the State Legislature on the 
request of the Governor.  
4  Audit of (i) all receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by grants 
or loans from the Consolidated  Fund of the State and (ii) all receipts and expenditure of 
anybody or authority where the grants or loans to such body or authority from the 
Consolidated fund of the State in a financial year is not less than 
` one crore. 

Chapter-I 
3 
Standards and the Regulations on A udit and Accounts, 2007 issued by the 
C&AG. 
1.4 Organisational structure of the Office of the Principal 
Accountant General (G&SSA), Karnataka, Bengaluru 
Under the directions of the C&AG, the Office of the Principal Accountant 
General (General & Social Sector Aud it), Karnataka, Bengaluru conducts the 
audit of Government Departments/O ffices/Autonomous Bodies/Institutions 
under the General and Social Sector whic h are spread all over the State. The 
Principal Accountant General (General & So cial Sector Audit) is assisted by 
three Group Officers and various subordinate officers. 
1.5 Planning and conduct of Audit 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various Departments 
of Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of 
activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal 
controls and concerns of  stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also 
considered in this exercise. Based on this risk assessment, the frequency and 
extent of audit are decided.   
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports containing audit 
findings are issued to the heads of th e Departments.  The Departments are 
requested to furnish replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of 
the Inspection Reports. Whenever rep lies are received, audit findings are 
either settled or further action for co mpliance is advised. The important audit 
observations arising out of these In spection Reports are processed for 
inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of State 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of Indi a for being laid on the table of the 
State Legislature. 
During 2014-15, in the General & Social Sector Audit Wing, 6,700 party days 
were used to carry out audit of 45 7 units and to conduct two performance 
audits and one information system audit. 
1.6 Significant audit observations 
In the last few years, Audit has reported  on several significant deficiencies in 
implementation of various programmes/ac tivities through performance audits, 
as well as on the quality of internal controls in selected Departments which 
impact the success of programmes and functioning of the Departments. 
Similarly, the deficiencies noticed during compliance audit of the Government 
Departments/Organisations were also reported upon. 
1.6.1 Performance audits of pr ogrammes/activities/Departments 
The present report contains two perfor mance audits. The highlights are given 
in the following paragraphs: 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
4 
1.6.1.1 Health care facilities in St ate Sector Hospitals including 
Autonomous and Teaching Hospitals 
Healthcare facilities in the State are provided through a three tier system viz., 
primary, secondary and tertiary level of  healthcare.  A performance audit of 
the ‘Healthcare facilities in the State Sector Hospitals including Autonomous 
and Teaching Hospitals’ under the Secondary  and Tertiary level of healthcare 
was conducted covering the period 2010- 15.  There were inadequacies in 
creation of infrastructure as well as in  providing healthcare services in terms 
of availability of services as well as quality care which is brought out below: 
 Out of 113 taluk hospitals, which were upgraded as 100 bedded hospitals 
in 2006-07, only 63 were functional with the bed strength of 100 and the 
remaining 50 continued to function with bed strength less than 100. 
 In the 28 test-checked hospitals we observed that most of the hospitals had 
not obtained statutory compliance from the fire authorities; Atomic Energy 
Regulation Board for X-ray and CT scan units; State Pollution Control 
Board for biomedical waste management; excise permit for storing spirit 
and license for blood bank /authorisation for storage of blood etc.   
 Seventy five per cent  of hospitals had less sanc tioned strength than that 
prescribed under the IPHS guidelines with regard to specialists, staff 
nurses and laboratory technicians which hampered health services. 
 While 50 per cent of the General/District Hosp itals did not have services 
of General Medicine as well as  Ophthalmology; General Surgery, 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology and Paediatric s services were not available in 
35, 21 and 41 per cent of the General/District Hospitals respectively. 
 In some of the hospitals te st-checked, though equipment viz., Scanners,  
X-ray machines, Treadmill, Echocardiogram, etc., were available, but due 
to shortage of technicians, the equipment remained unutilised. 
 Sixty eight per cent  of the hospitals test-checked had not got their 
laboratory results validated through external laboratories.  
 Insufficient equipment in Intensive Care Units and Operation Theatres 
affected the quality of vital health services. 
 There were shortcomings in support services under laundry and disposal of 
medical waste in terms of providing adequate laundry facilities and regular 
disposal of biomedical waste. 
 Special initiatives taken by Government to create/establish Burns Wards 
and Trauma care centres were not  functioning effectively due to 
inadequate release of funds as well as lack of manpower. 
(Paragraph 2.1) 
1.6.1.2 Engineering Education in Karnataka 
Engineering Education in the State is available in 216 Engineering Colleges 
affiliated to Visvesvaraya Technol ogical University (VTU)/Bangalore 
University which included National Institute of Tec hnology, Suratkal and 
colleges under deemed univers ities.  It is under the administrative control of 
the Department of Higher Education and a range of other organisations also 

Chapter-I 
5 
play a role in engineer ing education.  A performa nce audit of ‘Engineering 
Education in Karnataka’ during 2010-15 showed the following: 
 Majority of engineering colleges opened in the State were mainly 
concentrated in Bengaluru which led to regional disparity and there was 
no engineering college in K oppal district though approved by 
Government in 2011. Thus, expansion of engineering colleges continued 
without addressing the issues of regional imbalance.  
 There was a declining trend in the enrolment of SC/ST students, 
differently-abled students, students fr om kannada medium and rural area 
to the engineering stream.  
 Affiliation procedure was not completed prior to the commencement of 
admission of students to the college  seeking affiliation, which ranged 
between 26 and 155 colleges during the period 2011-15.   
 Since permanent affiliation was not mandatory, only 48 out of 162 
colleges had permanent affiliation for their courses. 
 Recommendations of VTU with respect to intake capacity were overruled 
by Government, resulting in large scale vacant seats which rendered the 
affiliation process a mere formality. 
 Though accreditation was mandatory, VTU as well as many of its 
affiliated colleges were yet to secure accreditation from National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council as well as National Board of 
Accreditation.  This indicated that the quality of education being imparted 
by VTU as well as engineering college s was not of requisite standards 
required for the above accreditations.  
 Marks were changed in over 90 per cent of answer papers for which re-
evaluation was sought, which was indicative of poor quality of 
evaluation.  
 VTU did not ensure continuous sup port to e-Vidya, EDUSAT in the e-
learning projects initiated by it which rendered the projects unproductive.  
 VTU had failed to ensure minimum st andards prescribed by AICTE in 
respect of colleges affiliated to it as  the colleges had deficiencies in 
teaching faculty, library, laboratory facilities, etc., which indicated poor 
monitoring by the VTU. 
 VTU had failed to receive recognition from UGC even after 17 years of 
its existence as it had not met minimum standards required for 
recognition.  Hence, it did not act as a good role model for the institutions 
affiliated to it.  
(Paragraph 2.2) 
1.6.2   Information Systems audit  
The present report contains one Inform ation Systems audit and the significant 
audit findings are given below. 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
6 
1.6.2.1  e-Procurement 
Delay and poor implementation led to the government not deriving full benefit 
of the unified e-Procurement soluti on. The off-the-shelf e-Procurement 
application was not adequately customised to suit the specific user 
requirements and KTPP provisions. Opport unities for using IT for improving 
efficiencies has not been utilised fully. Inadequate testing had led to 
incomplete supplier history, incorrect management information system 
reports. The application suffered from four out of the Top Ten security 
vulnerabilities. 
Although the Government had intende d to implement an end-to-end 
procurement solution with benefits of transparency and smart governance, the 
e-Procurement portal had no information about contracts concluded, works in 
progress, works completed, goods supplies done, expenditure progress, 
abandoned works, letters of  intent and works yet to  be started.  Thus, the 
project failed in achieving its intended benefits of transparency and smart 
governance, leading to a situati on where the envisaged end-to-end 
procurement solution for Government of  Karnataka was used only as a tender 
processing website even after eight years of its implementation.  
(Paragraph 3.1) 
1.6.3 Compliance audit  
Audit has also reported on se veral significant deficien cies in critical areas 
which impact the effective functioni ng of the Government Departments/ 
Organisations.  Some significant audit findings are as under: 
1.6.3.1 Follow up audit on Internal Co ntrol System in Department of 
 Prisons 
After discussing the Report of the Comptroller and A uditor General of India 
(Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2004, the Public Accounts Committee had 
given detailed recommendations (December 2009) in its Fifth Report. Even 
though more than five years have elapsed,  the current audit findings indicate 
that though the Government had taken certain initiatives to implement the 
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, the measures taken were 
inadequate and much more act ion needs to be taken to ensure that the internal 
control systems in the Prisons are made effective.  
With a view to ensure more effectiv e implementation, Government needs to 
update and revise the Karnataka Prisons  Manual, 1978, to keep it valid for all 
times; issue detailed guidelines for the upkeep and usage of the sophisticated 
electronic equipment purchased and ensure  their effective use; ensure strict 
adherence to the guidelines for checking of prohibited articles and ensure that 
equipment such as CCTV cameras and jammers are maintained properly to 
ensure proper functioning. There is n eed to encourage the usage of Video 
Conferencing facilities w ith regard to producing undertrials before courts, 
maximise the benefits from Lok Adalats,  and also provide adequate medical 
services/counselling by ensuring availabil ity of adequate numbers of doctors, 
counsellors etc. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 

Chapter-I 
7 
1.6.3.2 Implementation of Juve nile Justice Act, 2000 
The objective of the Juvenile Justice Act (JJ Act) is to protect children and 
bring about improvements in their c ondition. However the way this act is 
being implemented gives rise to serious concerns. The first requirement for 
effective implementation is to first identify children at risk and who are living 
in difficult circumstances, so that timely care and protection may be given, and 
hence identification of such children through a need based assessment survey 
is essential. It was, however, observed that out of 30 districts in Karnataka, 
such a survey had not been carried out in nine districts, and in 21 districts, the 
survey though carried out was still pending approval and hence not finalised. 
In the absence of a reliable database, the number of children who require care 
and protection could not be ascertained. 
There was also inordinate delay in the clearance of the cases referred to the 
Juvenile Justice Board as well as Child Welfare Committees, which resulted in 
huge pendencies. Many CCIs continued to  run without regi stration which was 
mandatory. Further, 103 CCIs whose regi stration had been rejected by the 
Department of Women and Child Deve lopment, for not complying with 
standards continued to operate, indicating lack of Government control. 
While, the JJ Act stipulated for separa te homes for Juvenile delinquents and 
children who required care and protection, in some of the test-checked CCIs, it 
was observed that both were put up in th e same place, which was in violation 
of the Act. Most of the CCIs also faile d to provide the minimum standard of 
care in terms of physical infrastructure, sanitation and hygiene, medicinal care, 
education etc., as required under JJ Rules, 2010. Except for one paramedical 
staff available, services of doctor, counsellor and house mother/father were not 
provided in a Special Home in Ballari  which housed 50 mentally retarded 
children.  
The non-functioning of the State Advisory Board and Management Committee 
and lack of inspection by District In spection Committee also contributed to 
poor monitoring and effective impleme ntation, which contributed to the 
deficiencies in implementation of the JJ Act. 
In view of these serious deficiencies, Governments needs to review the current 
way the act is being implemented so as to enable it to effectively deal with its 
deficiencies and ensure that the children who require and deserve care and 
protection are truly provided the same. 
(Paragraph 4.2) 
1.6.3.3 Investments made by the Ban galore Development Authority in 
Mutual Funds 
A special audit was conducted on the investments made by the Bangalore 
Development Authority (BDA) in mutu al funds during th e period 1999-2014. 
The highlights of the special audit are given below: 
BDA had no investment policy to manage  its surplus funds.  An investment 
committee constituted had no guidelines to work with.  The three Finance 
Members during the period 1999-2014 had viol ated all principles of financial 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
8 
propriety, failed to maintain financia l records as per th e provisions of 
Karnataka Financial Code and to conduc t internal audit, and also did not 
ensure proper checks and balances through segregation of duties of staff in the 
finance wing. The Second Division Cler k, banks and brokerage firms aided, 
abetted and participated in committing various financial irregularities.   
The BDA’s funds were diverted to Mu tual Funds and transferred to other 
organisations by opening and operating unauthorised bank ac counts, creation 
of fake Term Deposits, suppressing of  facts, falsification of records, 
preparation of misleading financial statem ents and destroying the trail of all 
transactions. 
The unauthorised transfer of funds for investment in Mutual Funds and also to 
other organisations that audit was able to track resulted in financial loss of 
`205.85 crore to the BDA.  The unauthoris ed transfer of funds aggregating 
`6.17 crore to BMRCL, Coffee Board and Karnataka Backward Classes 
Department Buildings Constructi on Society represented cases of 
misappropriation of BDA’s funds.  
 (Paragraph 4.3) 
1.6.3.4 Other audit observations 
Deficiencies in implementation of the scheme on ‘Inclusive Education of the 
Disabled at the Secondary Stage’ by the State Government and also 
disregarding of guidelines issued by the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development resulted in loss of central grants of `18.93 crore for the year 
2009-11, and excess payment of `1.79 crore besides resu lting in children and 
young persons with disabilities being depr ived of the educa tional facilities 
which were envisaged for them. 
(Paragraph 4.4) 
Purchase of commercial off-the-shel f package software ‘Campus Resource 
Management’ of a private software co mpany by various medical institutions, 
without study of user specification or understanding of business needs, 
resulted in non-utilisatio n of software procured a nd also rendered the amount 
of `2.68 crore invested on the software unproductive. 
(Paragraph 4.5) 
Non-compliance to the guidelines issued  by Ministry of Home Affairs with 
regard to utilisation of  funds released to the State under the Scheme 
Modernisation of Police Forces resulted in loss of Central assistance of `79.16 
crore during 2013-15.  
(Paragraph 4.6) 
Non-availing of exemption under the Income Tax Act, 1961 by the Karnataka 
Building and Other Construction Wo rkers’ Welfare Board resulted in 
avoidable payment of `42.83 crore towards income tax and ` three crore 
towards penal interest. 
(Paragraph 4.9) 
 

Chapter-I 
9 
The Bangalore Development Authority did not follow various procedures 
prescribed in the Bangalo re Development Authority Act, 1976 for acquisition 
of land for developmental schemes. This resulted in utilisation of land without 
acquisition and also excess payment of compensation of `46.93 crore. 
 (Paragraph 4.12)  
Due to ambiguity in various clauses on price adjustment in the bid document 
of a project floated by the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board 
(Board), the Board could not operate the contract properly which led to 
extending undue benefit of `6.17 crore to the agency. 
(Paragraph 4.13) 
1.7 Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit  
 
1.7.1 Outstanding inspection reports  
The Hand Book of Instructions for Spee dy Settlement of Audit Observations 
issued by the Finance Department in 2001 provides for prompt response by the 
Executive to the Inspection Reports (IR s) issued by the Accountant General 
(AG) to ensure rectificatory action in compliance with the prescribed rules and 
procedures and accountability for the deficiencies, lapses, etc., noticed during 
the inspections. The Heads of Offices a nd next higher authorities are required 
to comply with the observations containe d in the IRs, rectify the defects and 
omissions promptly and report their co mpliance to the AG, who forwards a 
half yearly report of pending IRs to th e Secretaries of the Departments to 
facilitate monitoring of the audit observations.   
As of 31 March 2015, 394 IRs (1994 paragraphs) were outstanding against the 
Higher Education Department. Year-wis e details of IRs and paragraphs 
outstanding are detailed in Appendix-1.1. 
A review of the pending IRs, issued  upto March 2015 showed that the Heads 
of Offices had not sent even the initia l replies in respect of 11 IRs containing 
100 paragraphs issued between September 2014 to March 2015 though all IRs 
were required to be replied to within a period of one month from the date of 
their receipt. 
1.7.2 Response of Departments to the draft paragraphs  
The Draft paragraphs and Performan ce audit reports were forwarded  
demi-officially to the Principal Secret aries/Secretaries of the Departments 
concerned between June and October 2015 to send their responses within six 
weeks.  Government replies have b een received for both the Performance 
Audits, Information Systems audit and 10 out of 12 paragraphs featured in this 
Report.  The replies, wherever received, have been suitably incorporated in the 
Report. 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
10 
1.7.3 Follow-up action on Audit Reports  
The Hand Book and the Rules of Procedure (Internal Working), 1999 of the 
Public Accounts Committee provide for furnishing by all the departments of 
Government, detailed explanations in the form of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
to the audit observations included in A udit Reports, within four months of 
their being laid on the Table of Legi slature to the Karnataka Legislature 
Secretariat with copies thereof to Audit Office.  
The administrative departments did not co mply with these instructions and 16 
departments as detailed in Appendix-1.2 had not submitted ATNs for 57 
paragraphs for the period 1996-97 to 2013-14 even as of 30 November 2015.  
1.7.4 Paragraphs to be discussed by the Public Accounts Committee 
Details of paragraphs (excluding Gene ral and Statistical) pending discussion 
by the Public Accounts Committee as of November 2015 are detailed in 
Appendix-1.3. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-II 
Performance Audit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
13 
Chapter-II 
 
Performance Audit 
 
Department of Health and Family Welfare/ 
Department of Medical Education 
 
2.1 Health care facilities in Stat e Sector Hospitals including 
Autonomous and Teaching Hospitals 
Executive Summary 
Healthcare facilities in the State are provided through a three tier system viz., 
primary, secondary and tertiary level of  healthcare.  A performance audit of 
the ‘Healthcare facilities in the State Sector Hospitals including Autonomous 
and Teaching Hospitals’ under the Secondary  and Tertiary level of healthcare 
was conducted covering the period 2010- 15.  There were inadequacies in 
creation of infrastructure as well as in  providing healthcare services in terms 
of availability of services as well as quality care which is brought out below: 
 Out of 113 taluk hospitals, which were  upgraded as 100 be dded hospitals 
in 2006-07, only 63 were functional with  the bed strength of 100 and the 
remaining 50 continued to function with bed strength less than 100. 
 In the 28 test-checked hospitals we observed that most of the hospitals 
had not obtained statutory compliance fr om the fire authorities; Atomic 
Energy Regulation Board for X-ray and CT scan units; State Pollution 
Control Board for biomedical waste management; excise permit for 
storing spirit and license for blood bank/authorisation for storage of blood 
etc.   
 Seventy five per cent of hospitals had less sanctioned strength than that 
prescribed under the IPHS guidelines with regard to specialists, staff 
nurses and laboratory technicians which hampered health services. 
 While 50 per cent of the General/District Hospitals did not have services 
of General Medicine as well as  Ophthalmology; General Surgery, 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology and Paediatric s services were not available in 
35, 21 and 41 per cent of the General/District Hospitals respectively. 
 In some of the hospitals test-checked, though equipment viz., Scanners,  
X-ray machines, Treadmill, Echocardiogram, etc., were available, but due 
to shortage of technicians, the equipment remained unutilised. 
 Sixty eight per cent  of the hospitals test-c hecked had not got their 
laboratory results validated through external laboratories.  
 Insufficient equipment in Intensive Care Units and Operation Theatres 
affected the quality of vital health services. 
 There were shortcomings in support services under laundry and disposal 
of medical waste in terms of providi ng adequate laundry facilities and 
regular disposal of biomedical waste. 
 Special initiatives taken by Government to create/establish Burns Wards 
and Trauma care centres were not  functioning effectively due to 
inadequate release of funds as well as lack of manpower. 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
14 
2.1.1 Introduction 
Health care facilities generally consist of curative, preventive, promotive and 
rehabilitation services.  Under the cons titution, health is a State subject and 
Karnataka has developed its own health care delivery system based on the 
guidelines issued by the Government of India (GoI) from time to time. 
During 2014-15, the State has expended `2,013.70 crore towards health, which 
as a percentage of total Government expenditure was 5.95 per cent. 
2.1.2 Organisational Set-up 
The State Sector Hospitals work under two departments, the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare (HFW) and the Department of Medical Education 
(ME). These two departments are headed  by Principal Secretaries.  The 
Commissioner, HFW, and the Director, ME , assist their respective Principal 
Secretaries and are the overall administ rative heads of their Department.  
There are 20 District Hospitals (DHs ) and 122 Taluk or General Hospitals 
(GHs) in the State which come unde r the jurisdiction of HFW and 29 
Autonomous hospitals which come under the jurisdiction of ME. While 
Medical Superintendents/District Surg eons are in-charge of the DHs, the 
Directors are in-charge of Teaching and Autonomous hospitals in the State. 
2.1.3 Health care set-up  
Health care services in the State are provided through a three tier system viz., 
primary, secondary and tertiary level of health care. 
Primary health 
care services 
Provided through Primary Health Centr es (PHCs) and Sub-centres (SC). The 
PHC is the cornerstone of rural health services.  
Secondary 
health care 
services 
Essentially includes Community Health Centres (CHCs), Taluk Hospitals and 
District Hospitals.  The CHCs are designed to provide referral as well as 
specialist health care to the rural popul ation. The Taluk Hospitals act as First 
Referral Units for the Taluk /block popu lation in which they are geographically 
located.  They are also referred as Gene ral Hospitals (GHs). Specialist Services 
are provided through these hospitals.  Th ey form a link between SC, PHC and 
CHC on one end and DH on the other end.  The District Health care system is 
the fundamental basis for implementing various health policies, delivery of 
health care and management of health services for a defined geographic area.  It 
provides curative, preventive and promotiv e health care services to the people in 
the district.  
Tertiary health 
care services 
It comprises of Teaching and Autonomous hospitals which provide specialised 
health care services. 
Infrastructure facilities available in the State during 2014-15 are as follows. 
Healthcare facility In numbers 
Teaching Hospitals and Autonomous hospitals 29 
District hospitals 20 
Taluk hospitals or General Hospitals 158 
Community Health Centres 206 
Primary Health Centres 2,353 
Sub-centres 8,871 

Chapter-II 
15 
2.1.4 Audit objectives 
The performance audit was conducted to analyse: 
 Adequacy of existing healthcare facilities in the State Sector Hospitals ie., 
Taluk and District Hospitals, in cluding Autonomous and Teaching 
Hospitals. 
 Its impact on delivery of quality health care to patients. 
2.1.5 Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked agai nst the criteria sourced from the 
following: 
 State Integrated Health Policy 
 Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS)-Guidelines for DHs 
 Medical Council of Indi a Standards – norms for tertiary health care 
facilities 
 Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, and Rules, 1945 
 National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers 
(NABH) Standards 
 Biomedical Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 
 Orders, instructions, circulars issued  by GoI and State Government from 
time to time 
Since, the State Govern ment has not formulated any norms/standards for 
infrastructure, service delivery and e quipment, Audit has adopted IPHS and 
MCI guidelines as the benchmark for asse ssing healthcare facilities in the 
hospitals.  While the IPHS guidelines stipulate the essential and desirable 
services that are to be provided by the DHs and GHs, the MCI stipulates the 
services that are to be provided by the Teaching and Autonomous Hospitals. 
2.1.6 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The performance audit cove red healthcare facilities in the State Sector 
hospitals, viz., DHs, Taluk Hospitals also called General Hospitals (GHs), and 
Teaching and Autonomous Hospitals.  The performance audit commenced 
with an Entry Conference held (April 2015) with the Principal Secretary, 
HFW and ME in which audit scope a nd methodology was explained.  Audit 
was conducted during January to July  2015 covering th e period 2010-15 
through test-check of records of the S ecretariat, Commissi onerate of HFW, 
and Directorate of ME.  The methodol ogy adopted for audit included scrutiny 
of files and documents, collection of da ta through issue of audit enquiries/ 
questionnaires/proforma and examination of records.  Besides, joint inspection 
along with Medical Superi ntendent/District Surgeon/Chief Medical Officer 
was conducted to ascertain working of DHs, GHs, teaching and Autonomous 
hospitals. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
16 
Probability proportional to size sampling without replacement was adopted for 
selecting ten 5 districts covering fo ur revenue divisions of the State.  In 
addition to 26 hospitals se lected for detailed study across ten districts, two 
super speciality hospitals and on e hospital during pilot study were  
test-checked.  List of hospita ls selected are detailed in Appendix-2.1. Audit 
findings were discussed with the Princi pal Secretary, HFW and ME in an Exit 
Conference held on 20 October 2015.  
Audit findings 
 
2.1.7 Karnataka State Integrated Health Policy 
The Government of Karnataka formul ated (February 2004) the Karnataka 
State Integrated Health Policy (Po licy), which amongst other objectives, 
aimed to provide improved access to good quality healthcare. It also 
endeavoured to provide quality healthcar e with equity. The health care policy 
also aimed to ensure adequate availabi lity of personnel with  specialisation in 
public health to discharge public health re sponsibilities in th e state. It also 
involved providing a credible and sust ainable referral system, encouraging 
greater Public-Private Partnership (PPP) for providing quality healthcare to the 
underserved areas, strengthening Health Infrastructure etc. 
The subsequent paragraphs in the report bring out the adequacies or 
inadequacies of the steps taken by th e State Government towards achieving 
the main objectives of the policy of providing health care services in the State. 
2.1.8 Secondary level health care services 
Apart from CHCs, secondary level hea lth care services are provided through 
GHs and DHs. The GHs are placed belo w the district and above the block 
level (CHC) hospitals and act as th e First Referral Units for the Taluk 
population in which they are geographically located.  The DH covers a defined 
geographical area, containing a defined population. Its objective is to provide 
comprehensive secondary health care services to the people in the district at an 
acceptable level of quality and be res ponsive and sensitive to the needs of 
people and referring centres.  
2.1.8.1 Non-upgradation of General Hospitals 
The State Government upgraded 113 GHs (50 and 63 in January 2006 and 
January 2007 respectively) from the existing 30/50 beds to 100 beds with 
additional manpower.  We observed that only 63 hos pitals were handed over 
(July 2015) by the Zilla Panchayats to the State sector and functioning with 
the bed strength of 100 beds.  Even afte r a lapse of eight years, the other 50 
hospitals continued to function as 30/ 50 bed hospitals.  We  observed that out 
of the said 50 hospitals, though building was completed in respect of five 
hospitals, they continued to  function as 30/50 bed hospi tals.  In respect of six 
                                                            
5 Belagavi, Bidar, Chitradurga, Kalaburagi, Karwar, Madikeri, Mangaluru, Mysuru, 
Shivamogga and Vijayapura 

Chapter-II 
17 
hospitals, proposal for construction was sent (February 2015) to the 
Government.  While, the status of cons truction in respect of 17 hospitals was 
not available with the department, 60 to 90 per cent  of construction was 
completed in respect of balance 22 hosp itals. Hence, delay in upgradation of 
50 hospitals resulted in the hospitals continuing to function with inadequate 
bed strength thereby failing to provide  comprehensive secondary health care 
services at the district level. 
The Government replied (November  2015) that many of the upgraded 
hospitals were still under the administration of Zilla Panchayats and a proposal 
to transfer the administration of the said  hospitals to the State Sector had been 
submitted (February 2015) to the Government.  The reply is not satisfactory as 
the Government should have taken timely action to get the hos pitals upgraded 
and transferred the same to the Government. 
2.1.8.2 Inadequacies in Physical infrastructure 
Development of infrastructure facilities in public health institutions is essential 
for providing quality medical services.  The essential items of infrastructure 
facilities were mostly provided in the GHs, DHs, Teaching and Autonomous 
hospitals as per the standardisation norms. However, joint inspection of the 
28
6 hospitals test-checked revealed certa in deficiencies which are discussed 
below: 
 There was overcrowding of wards and hence patients were 
accommodated in floor beds and beds in passages in six 7 hospitals (two 
teaching hospitals, two DHs and two GHs). 
 
(Floor beds in Cheluvamba Hospital, Mysuru) 
 
(Floor beds in maternity ward in GH, Sirsi) 
 
(Beds placed in corridors in Lady Goschen Hospital, Mangaluru) 
                                                            
6 KR Hospital and Cheluvamba Hospital in Mysuru and Lady Goschen Hospital and 
Wenlock Hospital in Mangaluru are to be treated as single hospital in each district.  For the 
purpose of adequacy with respect to infrastr ucture, however, the hospitals are considered 
as separate hospitals. 
7 KIMS – Hubballi, Cheluvamba-Mysuru, DH-Ch itradurga and Lady Goschen, Mangaluru; 
GH-Sirsi and Puttur 


Report No.1 of the year 2016 
18 
 Wards were unhygienic due to seepage of water and formation of fungus 
in four8 hospitals (two teaching hospitals, one DH and one GH). 
 There were no separate wards for ma les and females in DH-Vijayapura, 
and GH-KR Nagar.  
 Overcrowding of ICU was found in almost all the 28 hospitals  
test-checked. 
 
[Intensive Care Unit (Crowded with attendants) in DH, Kalaburagi] 
 There were no proper facilities in Gynaecology Outpatient Department 
(OPD) of Belagavi Institute of Medical Sciences (BIMS), Belagavi. 
 There was also absence of screen facility for privacy of patients, 
shortage of linen, non-availability of potable water and absence of toilets 
and seating for attendants.  
Audit findings in respect of creation of physical infrastructure in the  
test-checked hospitals are discussed below: 
(a) Idle infrastructure 
 Construction of a 500 bedded hospita l at DH - Kalaburagi old hospital 
scheduled to be completed by Janu ary 2008 was completed during June 
2013 at a total cost of `53.23 crore, but it was yet to be handed over to the 
District Surgeon (July 2015). We observed that out of equipment 
purchased worth `1.28 crore during the peri od August and November 
2014, equipment worth `77.49 lakh was utilised in the existing old hospital 
at Kalaburagi, the balance equipment which were installed in the new 
hospital were lying idle.  Further, th e construction of the hospital building 
was not as per the norms prescribed by IPHS viz., the operat ion theatre 
(OT) has to be dust and moisture proof .  The entry to the OT was open to 
sky and hence could not be made dus t/moisture proof.  Also, there was no 
provision for disposal/dirty zone.  Be sides, the new building did not have 
fire safety exit, centralised oxyge n facility, centralised AC for OT, 
radiation safety measures and launder ette, all of which are mandatory for 
the proper functioning of a hospital.  The Government replied (November 
2015) that action had been initiated to  provide all facilities as per IPHS 
standards. 
 The Geriatric ward in DH, Chitradurga, was completed during November 
2013 at a cost of 
`45 lakh, it was not put to use. 
                                                            
8 KR Hospital and Cheluvamba Hospital –Mysuru;  DH – Wenlock hospital, Mangaluru; GH-Puttur 


Chapter-II 
19 
(b) Incomplete infrastructure 
The construction of Mother and Child hospital in the Karnataka Institute of 
Medical Sciences (KIMS), Hubballi to accommodate Obstetrics, Gynaecology 
(OBG) and Pediatric services which wa s slated to be completed by October 
2012 was still under construction (November  2015).  Therefore the OBG and 
Pediatric wards of the existing hospita l had become overcrowded, and beds 
were placed in the corridors of the hospital to accommodate post 
operative/post delivery cases. 
 
Mother and Child Hospital Building under 
construction 
 
Beds accommodated in corridors 
(c) Non-compliance to statutory requirements 
IPHS guidelines stipulated statutor y compliances such as no objection 
certificate from competent fire author ity, authorisation from Atomic Energy 
Regulation Board (AERB), type and site  approval from AERB for X-ray, CT 
Scan unit, etc.,  that should be complied with by the DHs.  We observed that 
none of the 28 test-checked hospitals ha d clearance from the fire authorities, 
and only five hospitals ha d obtained authorisation from AERB for X-ray and 
CT scan units.  Only seven hospitals had obtained the na rcotic drug license 
and nine, twelve and five hospitals did not have authorisation from the State 
Pollution Control Board for biomedical waste management, excise permit for 
storing spirit and license for blood ba nk/authorisation for storage of blood 
respectively. Thus, non-compliance by DHs is indicative of lack of quality 
health care facilities. 
2.1.9 Services in General, District and Teaching hospitals 
GHs are also the First Referral Units for providing emergency obstetrics care 
and neonatal care.  The services to be provided at a GH are grouped as 
Essential (Minimum Assured Services) a nd Desirable (which it should aspire 
to achieve). Besides basic speciality services, due importance is to be  given to 
Newborn Care, Family Planning, Psychi atric services, Physical Medicine, 
Rehabilitation services, Geriatric Services, Accident and Trauma Services and 
Integrated Counselling and Testing. 
Services that a DH provides are also gr ouped as ‘Essential’ and ‘Desirable’.  
Besides, the basic specialty services, due importance is also given to Newborn 
Care, Psychiatric services, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation services, 
Accident and Trauma Services, Dialysis  services, Anti-retroviral therapy and 
Patient Safety and Infection control norms. Hence, a DH should be in a 


Report No.1 of the year 2016 
20 
position not only to provide all basic sp eciality services but should aim to 
develop super-specialty serv ices gradually. Further, a DH is also required to 
be ready to handle epidemics and disa ster management at all times. In 
addition, it should provide facilities for sk ill based training for different levels 
of health care workers. 
A teaching hospital provides tertiary hea lthcare services in the state.  In 
addition, it provides clinical educati on and training to medical students 
throughout their period of ma triculation, and especially during their internship 
years. 
The services available in test-ch ecked hospitals are brought out in  
Chart-2.1 below. 
Chart-2.1: Services available in the test-checked hospitals 
 
*Essential for only District Hospital         #Essential for only Teaching Hospital 
Note:  Three GHs performing as District level hospitals have been considered as DHs for analysing 
services provided. 
The audit observations on various services  in the test-checked hospitals are 
brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.  
Adequate manpower in medical services  is a critical component having a 
direct bearing on patient care.  Howe ver, we observed that there was no 
periodic assessment for revision of manpower in the State. The Government of 
Karnataka had approved norms for staff for various categories of medical 
institutions in the State in October 1980 which was revised only in July 2014. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
General Medicine
General Surgery
OBG
Paediatrics
Emergency
Anaesthesia
Opthalmology
ENT
Orthopaedics
Radiology & Imaging
Dental
Blood Storage^/Blood Bank
Laboratory services
Critical care (ICU)*
Psychiatry*
Geriatrics*
Dermatology#
Radio Therapy#
Available in General Hospital Not available in General Hospital
Available in District Hospital Not available in District Hospital
Available in Teaching Hospital Not available in Teaching Hospital

Chapter-II 
21 
The staff pattern prescribed by the St ate Government for GHs and DHs was 
compared with the IPHS guidelines a nd the results of the comparison are 
indicated in Table-2.1.   
Table-2.1: Comparison of staff pattern between IPHS and State 
Government 
Cadre 
No. of hospitals where 
sanctioned strength was as 
per IPHS norms 
No. of hospitals where 
sanctioned strength was 
less than IPHS norms 
Specialists 03 18 (86%) 
Staff nurse 02 19 (90%) 
Pharmacist 08 13 (62%) 
Lab Technician 05 16 (76%) 
Radiology Technician 09 12 (57%) 
(Source: IPHS norms and details as furnished by the Commissionerate office) 
As can be seen from the table, 75 per cent  of hospitals ha d less sanctioned 
strength in terms of IPHS guidelines with regard to Specialists, Staff nurse and 
Lab technician cadres. While the lack of specialists not only has a direct 
bearing on the quality of care administered to patients, it also indicates  
non-availability of services in some cases. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that at present the Government had 
prescribed the requirement of doctors on the basis of bed strength and hence 
was not following the IPHS norms fo r sanctioning manpower  to hospitals. 
However, no norms of the Government were made available to audit, and the 
reply also did not address the issue regarding shortage of doctors. 
2.1.9.1 General Specialities Services 
The standardisation norms provided by IPHS specify essential general 
specialisation services such as Genera l Medicine, General Surgery, Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology, Paediatrics, Ophthalmology etc. that should be available in 
hospitals.  We observed that out of 20 DH  and 146 GH in the State, more than 
50 per cent  of the hospitals did not have General Medicine as well as 
Ophthalmology. The much required spec ialisation services in General 
Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynaecology and Paediatrics were not available in 35, 
21 and 41 per cent  of the hospitals respectively.  Dermatology, a desirable 
service was not available in 75 per cent of the hospitals.  The details of lack of 
other essential general specialisation services are indicated in Appendix-2.2. 
The lack of essential general services c ould be attributed to critical vacancies
9 
in the hospitals.  We observed that only 73 out of 166 hospitals (20-DHs and 
146-GHs) had the combination of all the three specialists (OBG, Anaesthesia 
and Paediatrics). This indicated that 93 hospitals suffered from critical 
vacancies. 
                                                            
9 Critical vacancies – One of the norms for defi ning critical vacancy is  absence of one or 
more Specialists among the team of three Specialists, viz., OBG, Pediatrician, Anesthetist 
who are very essential for providing proper care to mother and child health in a Government 
Hospital or Government Institution. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
22 
Further, in addition to th e Specialists, support of other staff is essential for 
efficient and effective functioning of the hospital. The status of staff nurse and 
para clinical staff available in the hos pitals test-checked are detailed in  
Table-2.2. 
Table-2.2 : Status of staff nurse and other para clinical staff available 
in the hospitals test-checked 
Cadre No. of hospitals where vacancy is in excess of 50 per cent 
Staff nurse 03 
Pharmacist 10 
Laboratory Technician 06 
Radiology Technician 02 
(Source: Details furnished by the Commissionerate office) 
Thus, there was acute shor tage of staff which hamp ered functioning of the 
hospitals.  Further, as per IPHS norms, the nurse to bed ratio for DHs was 0.45 
and for GHs was 0.35. We observed that th e ratio was less than the prescribed 
norms in all the hospitals test-checked.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that action has been initiated to 
appoint 1,401 doctors in various fields.   
The audit observations on general speciality services in the hospitals  
test-checked are as follows: 
 In six hospitals (four GHs, one DH and one Teaching hospital) 10, though 
Ophthalmology had an operation theatre as well as an Ophthalmic 
Surgeon, patients were referred to other hospitals or eye camps conducted 
by private hospitals due to non-availability of equipment/equipment under 
repair. 
 In GH, Anekal, although there was an  Ophthalmic Surgeon as well as 
equipment, patients were referre d to other hospitals due to  
non-availability of operation theatre.   
 As per IPHS guidelines, Radiothe rapy was a desirable service which 
should be available in all hospitals.  This facility is available only in two 
hospitals i.e., in Victoria Hospital, Benga luru and Kidwai Memorial 
Institute of Oncology (KMIO) whic h were operational since 1965 and 
1986, respectively. Presently, the waiting time for cancer treatment is 
about two/three months on an average in KMIO.  Hence there is need to 
upgrade the Department of Radiothera py in Victoria Hospital and open 
many such hospitals in other distri cts to reduce the burden on existing 
hospitals.  
Availability/sufficiency issues regarding manpower in the hospitals  
test-checked which hamper ed the delivery of health  services are brought out 
below: 
 The Radiologist of Sir C.V.Raman GH, Indiranagar, Bengaluru was 
attached with additional duty in two other GHs. 
                                                            
10 GH Shikaripura, GH Puttur,  GH Bailahongal, GH KR Nagar, DH Karwar and SIMS  
Shivamogga 

Ultraso
 DH, V i
patients
 DH, Ka
ward (2
one sta
hand, w
Paediat
 GH, Sir
for the 
 GH, Na
with de
one A n
emerge
 GHs, A
hospita
 GH, H i
cases e
were av
Recommen
hospitals.  
regard to re
2.1.9.2 C
(a) Imag
While X-ra
providing q
a DH. The 
in the hosp
Chart-2.2
# Essential on
Note: Three 
analysi
0
X-ray
ound Scan
CT#
MRI#
ijayapura –
s in a month
arwar - Dur
20 beds) w a
ff nurse in 
we noticed 
trics etc., wh
rsi - Durin g
entire hospi
anjanagudu
ental equipm
naesthetist 
ncy obstetri
Aland and C
ls, the drug
iriyur – In 
etc., were r e
vailable in th
ndation-1: 
It should 
equirement,
Clinical Ser
ging service
ay and Ultra
quality med
position of 
itals test-ch
2: Availabi
nly for Teachi
GHs perfor m
ing services p
11
71
36
33
5
– There wa s
h on an aver
ring joint in
as full and m
each who w
that there 
hich had no
g the night 
ital to take c
– Against 
ment which
who was 
ic care.   
Chincholi –
s were allow
the absen c
eferred to D
he hospital.
Governme
also perio d
 and initiate
rvices 
es 
a Sound Sca
dical care to
f availability
hecked are in
ility of imag
ing Hospital.
ming as Distr i
provided. 
3
9
9
51
10 15
23 
s one Gyn a
rage. 
nspection, w
male surgic
was caterin
were mo r
o patients. 
only three 
care of patie
two dentist
h was corro d
not qualif i
In the abs e
wed to expi
ce of Gen e
DH, Chitra d
.  
nt should 
dically rev i
e action for 
anners are e
o patients, C
y of X-ray, 
ndicated in 
ging servic
ict level hos p
6
6
20
aecologist w
we noticed t
cal wards ( 2
ng to these 
re staff nu r
staff nurse
ents. 
ts, one de n
ded.  In ad d
ied for th e
ence of the 
re.  
eral physic i
durga eve n
ensure ad e
iew the m a
recruitment
essential dia
CT scan is d
Ultra Sound
Chart-2.2.
ces in the ho
pitals have b e
25 30
who was t o
that the fem
20 beds) w e
patients.  O
rses in wa r
s were bei n
ntal chair w
dition, the h
e post but 
pharmacist
ian, snake b
n though th e
equacy of 
anpower p o
t thereon.  
agnostic eq
desirable eq
d Scanner a
 
ospitals tes
een consider e
Available in
Not availab
Not installe
use in GH
Available in
Not availab
Available in
Hospital
Not availab
Teaching H
Chapter-I
o attend 36 0
male surgica
ere full wit h
On the othe r
rds such a s
ng deployed
as available
hospital had
trained fo r
t in both th e
bite, poiso n
e medicine s
staff in a l
osition wit h
quipment for
quipment for
and CT scan
t-checked
ed as DHs f o
n GH
ble in GH
ed/not put to 
n DH
ble in DH
n Teaching 
ble in 
Hospital
II 
0 
al 
h 
r 
s 
d 
e 
d 
r 
e 
n 
s 
ll 
h 
r 
r 
n 
 
or 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
24 
While all the hospitals te st-checked had X-ray faci lities, Ultra sound scanner 
facility was also available except in one hospital.  In 11 hospitals, 18 out of 49 
X-ray machines of various specifications  were not functional at the time of 
audit visit.  In three11 hospitals (one DH and two GH) one X-ray machine each 
was yet to be installed. The Government replied (November 2015) that action 
has been taken to maintain the equipm ent in functional st atus by creating an 
Equipment Maintenance Cell. 
In eight hospitals, nine out of 14 Ultrasound scanners  were not functional.  
This included two scanners which remained uninstalled in GHs, Nanjanagudu 
and Chincholi and three scanners wh ich were installed in GHs, Hiriyur, 
Shivamogga Institute of Medical Sciences (SIMS), Shivamogga and KIMS, 
Hubballi were not put to use. In three
12 hospitals (one DH and two Teaching 
Hospitals) the ultrasound scanner was ke pt idle for want of a Radiologist/ 
technician. 
As regards the CT scanner, which wa s desirable for DH and mandatory for 
Teaching hospitals, a joint inspection reve aled that seven hospitals (six DH 
and one Teaching Hospital) did not have the same. Spiral CT supplied to 
BIMS, Belagavi in November 2014 and in stalled was yet to be put to use for 
want of AERB Report.  CT scanner av ailable at BRIMS, Bidar was also not 
put to use for want of a technician.  In KIMS, Hubballi, the Head of the 
Department of Radiology stated that th e available CT Scan Dual Slice was 
totally outdated and did not  cater to the various i nvestigations, numbers and 
requirements of the teaching hospital.  Further, the MRI Scan required as per 
MCI standards was available only in th ree out of seven te aching hospitals.  
The Government replied (November 2015)  that the Department of HFW has 
initiated Tele-radiology service to bridge the gap of lack of radiologists. 
(b) Radiation Safety Measures 
We noticed that the technicians manni ng the X-ray units in  15 hospitals test-
checked were not provided with Thermo Luminescence Dosimeter (TLD) film 
badges to indicate levels of exposure to radiation.  The Government replied 
(November 2015) that TLD badges would be  procured and supplied to all the 
technicians and supporting staff.   
(c) Other Diagnostics services 
Besides imaging facilities, dia gnostic services, Echocardiogram 
(ECG) and 
Endoscopy are essential in a DH.  The position of faciliti es like diagnostic 
facilities in the hospitals test-checked are indicated in the Chart-2.3. 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
11 Sir CV Raman GH, Indiranagar; DH Madikeri and GH Humnabad 
12 DH Vijayapura; OBG department of KIMS, Hubballi; SIMS Shivamogga 

Chapter-II 
25 
Chart-2.3: Availability of diagnostic services in the hospitals test-checked 
 
Note:  Three GHs performing as District level hospitals have been considered as DHs for analysing services provided. 
In four13 hospitals, equipment such as Treadmill, EMG and Echocardiogram 
were not utilised on account of non-avai lability of technicians.  In DH – 
Chitradurga, Endoscopy was not utilised due to lack of technician. 
(d) Laboratory services 
The IPHS guidelines stipulate that extern al validation of labo ratory reports to 
be done on a regular basis. We, howev er, observed that 19 out of the 28 
hospitals test-checked had not got their laboratory results validated by external 
laboratories.  Validation of results of laboratory reports is an important 
requirement to ensure that the patien ts were given accurate reports on which 
treatment by Doctors would be base d.  Thus non-validation weakens the 
assurance for proper diagnos is of patients.  The avai lability of the laboratory 
services such as clinical pathology,  pathology, microbiology, serology and 
biochemistry in the hospitals test-checked are indicated in Chart-2.4.    
Chart-2.4: Availability of laboratory services in the hospitals test-checked 
 
Note:  Three GHs performing as District level hospitals have been considered as DHs for analysing services provided. 
The joint inspection of the 28 hospitals  test-checked re vealed that the 
laboratories were not adequately equipped and some of the existing equipment 
was not in working cond ition, thereby depriving the patients of quality 
laboratory facilities.  Some audit observations are discussed below: 
                                                            
13 GH Shikaripura, DH – Chitradurga, Vijayapura and BRIMS-Bidar 
74 9
27
6
6
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
ECG
Endoscopy
Available GH
Not available GH
Available in DH
Not available in DH
Availabe in Teaching Hospital 
Not availabe in Teaching 
Hospital 
2
1
4
9
3
1
11
7
7
10
1
1
1
1
5
4
1
1
9
4
5
8
9
1
2
3
1
1
1
1
6
4
3
6
6
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Clinical Pathology
Pathology
Microbiology
Serology
Biochemistry
Available in GH
Not available in GH
Partial available in GH
Available in DH
Not available in DH
Partial available in DH
Available in Teaching 
hospital 
Not available in Teaching 
hospital 
Partially available in 
Teaching hospital

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
26 
 There was no timely supply of re-agents which hampered usage of 
analysers in Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru; BRIMS, Bidar; DH 
Chitradurga and GH – Bailahongal and Nanjanagudu. 
 The Flow Cytometer Electro process and PT-APTT machines placed in 
Pathology Laboratory (Can cer related detection machines) of KR 
Hospital, Mysuru remained un-utilised.  At the time of inspection, it was 
stated these machines were not in us e for more than a decade and that 
Electro process and PT-APTT could not be used for want of chemicals. 
 In KIMS, Hubballi, many equipment were not in working condition.   
 In BIMS, Belagavi, one Automatic B OD Incubator and one incubator in 
the Microbiology laboratory were not functional for the past one year.   
 The equipment supplied through Commissionerate, HFW in DH, 
Madikeri were not put to use. 
 The laboratory of DH Vijayapura was in need of equipment viz., fully 
automatic Bio-chemistry analyser , Haemoglobin automated analyser, 
ESR analyser, HbA1c analyser and Hormonal analyser (Thyroid testing 
machine). 
 In DH Karwar, while one out of th ree cell counters available in the 
haematology/pathology laboratory a nd one semi auto analyser in 
Biochemistry laboratory were not functioning, one Elisa-5 machine was 
not put to use.   
 In GH, Shikaripura, Automated Analyser Etachi 902 used for carrying out 
LFT, RFT blood sugar tests as well as  Serum Electrolyte Analyser used 
for testing Potassium, Sodium and Chlori ne levels in respect of Dialysis 
patients was defunct. 
 The agency having AMC with GH, Sirsi failed to attend to periodic 
maintenance as well as breakdown of equipment. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that action would be taken to 
obtain laboratory results valid ated externally.  Further, it was replied that the 
observations of audit were noted and all necessary equipment would be 
procured /repaired and made functional. 
(e) Blood Bank 
Blood banks/storage centres are an essential element in the functioning of 
hospitals. License issued by the Drugs C ontroller (DC) is mandatory to run a 
blood bank. Audit noticed the following in the 28 hospitals: 
 In Sir CV Raman GH, Bengaluru, bl ood bank equipment was not put to 
use for want of space.  
 in KC General Hospital, Bengaluru, the equipment was not installed due to 
non-completion of civil works.  
 In Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru and DH, Karwar, the equipment available 
in the blood bank were not working. 

Chapter-II 
27 
 In two14 Teaching Hospitals, two 15 DHs and four 16 GHs, equipment was 
not put to use due to lack of tr ained manpower/essential equipment/want 
of license. 
 In three17 GHs, only storage facilities were  available and these were also 
not put to use. 
 The blood bank at GH, Shikaripura requi red blood bag sealer in order to 
avoid wastage and contamination of blood. 
Due to non-working of blood banks in th e hospitals, in all the above cases 
patients had to depend on private blood banks for obtaining blood. 
 As per National AIDS Control Orga nisation (NACO) Guidelines and 
Drugs and Cosmetic Act 1940, for effec tive utilisation of this scarce 
resource, blood collected was to be preserved in CPDA solution (Citrate-
Phosphate-Dextrose-Adenine solution) at temperatures between 4°C and 
6°C and utilised within 35 days of its collection. Further, blood banks have 
to maintain the details of the blood stock, like collect ion from donors, 
issues to the needy and balance in stock along with the details of discarded 
blood. In addition, availability of bl ood in stock has to be prominently 
displayed.   
In all the hospitals test-checked, we  observed that dur ing 2010-15 expiry 
of blood was the major factor for blood to be discarded.  In 11 hospitals, 
the percentage of expired blood range d between 10 to 82 of the discarded 
blood during the review period (Appendix-2.3).  The reasons attributed for 
expiry were non-availability/non-in stallation of blood component 
separator, failure of the refrigerator s/storage units and collection of blood 
in excess of requirement in mega camps. 
Thus, due to above inadequacies, the bl ood which is very scarce, was not used 
for intended purpose.  The Government  replied (November 2015) that all the 
audit observations were noted and were being complied with. 
(f) Accident and Emergency services 
The IPHS guidelines stipulated 24x7 operational emergency with dedicated 
emergency room to be available in the hospital with adequate man power.  
Further, it also stated that the em ergency block should have equipment like 
ECG, Pulse Oxymeter, Cardiac Monito r with Defibrillator, Multi parameter 
Monitor and also ventilator along with st retcher, wheelchair and trolley at the 
entrance of the emergency.   
The availability of all the required equipm ent and facilities in the 28 hospitals 
test-checked is indicated in Chart-2.5. 
 
 
                                                            
14 BRIMS, Bidar; KIMS Hubballi 
15 DH Kalaburagi, Vijayapura 
16 GH Puttur, Virajpet, Sirsi, Hiriyur 
17 GH Humnabad, Aland, KR Nagar 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
28 
Chart-2.5: Availability of facilities in Emergency room of hospitals  
test-checked 
 
Note:  Three GHs performing as District level hospitals have  been considered as DHs for analysing services provided. 
In addition, DH hospital Lady Gosh en-Mangaluru and Wenlock Hospital  Mangaluru as well as Teaching 
hospitals K R Hospital Mysuru and Ch eluvamba Hospital Mysuru are treated  as separate hospitals for the 
purpose of availability of emergency rooms. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that: 
 Due to acute vacancies in the post of anaesthetists, high end equipment 
such as ventilators etc., are not installed in all hospitals. 
 Multi-parameters and defibrillators ha ve been equipped in ICUs of the 
DHs. 
 Necessary steps would be taken to pr ovide basic facilities such as wheel 
chair, trolleys, stretcher etc., in the casualty and emergency wards. 
(g) Intensive Care Unit 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) is an essentia l requirement that should be available 
in all DHs.  This unit looks after critically ill patients requiring highly skilled 
life saving medical and nursing care.  As per IPHS norms, an ICU should not 
have less than 4 beds or more than 12 beds. The number of beds, however, 
may be restricted to five per cent  of the total bed strength initially and that 
could be expanded to 10 per cent gradually. Further, an ICU should be located 
in close proximity to the OT and other essential departments, such as, X-ray 
and pathology so that the staff and anci llaries could be shared. This unit also 
needs all the specialised services, such  as, piped suction and medical gases, 
uninterrupted electric supply, heating, ventilation, central air conditioning and 
efficient life services.   In additi on each ICU bed is required to have 
equipment such as high end monitor, ventilator, infusion pumps etc. 
We observed that out of 20 DHs and five 
district level hospitals
18 in the State, three 
DHs19 and three GHs (District level 
hospitals)20 did not have an ICU facility.  
We, however, observed that between 
November 2012 and October 2014 
equipment worth 
`65.22 lakh that was supplied for establishing the ICUs 
                                                            
18  These are General Hospitals providing services of DH 
19 DH Gadag, Ramanagara and Yadgir 
 
20 Sir C V Raman GH, Indiranagar; GH, Shikaripura; GH, Virajpet 
10
1
7
1
7
4
3
10
2
10
8
7
4
6 1
3
0 1 02 03 0
Dedicated 24 x 7 operational emergency room with
adequate man power.
Availability of ECG, Pulse Oxymeter, Cardiac Monitor
with Etc.
Availability of Stretcher, wheelchair and trolley at the
designated area.
Available in GH Not Available  in GH Partially available in GH
Available in DH Not available in DH Partially available in DH
Available in Teaching Hospitals Not available in Teaching Hospitals Partially available in Teaching Hospitals


Chapter-II 
29 
remained idle.  Generally, we observed that in almost all the hospitals, the ICU 
was crowded and lacked sufficient vent ilators, air conditi oners as well as 
warmers in the Pediatric ICU.  Due to less number of warmers in the hospitals, 
multiple new born children were being accommodated in a single warmer.  
Due to non-conformity with IPHS norms,  these children would be exposed to 
a higher degree of risk/infection etc., thereby endangering their health.  
The joint inspections of 28 hospitals te st-checked revealed that while many 
intensive care units required equipment,  equipment already existing needed to 
be made functional.  The individual observations are detailed below: 
Victoria 
Hospital, 
Bengaluru 
: Out of the 24 Ventilators provided to ICU, while four 
Ventilators were found to be defunct, six were under repair 
and only the balance 14 Ventilators were working. 
SIMS, 
Shivamogga 
: Hospital did not have SICU 21. Of the five Cardiac Monitors 
in ICCU, two were non-functional.  Further, one out of the 
four ventilators available in MICU was not working. We 
also noticed seepage of water in the walls of NICU.  
KR Hospital, 
Mysuru 
: In the MICU of the hospital, while the Cardiac monitors 
were not functioning properly, four out of 15 ventilators 
were not functioning. 
Cheluvamba 
Hospital, 
Mysuru 
: Although NICU-1 had 12 warmers, it required additional 
warmers as more than one new born were being 
accommodated in a single warmer.   
KIMS, 
Hubballi 
: The OICU, NICU, PICU and SNCU of the hospital did not 
have air conditioning facility. The ICU, as well as GICU 
and PICU required additional equipment. Some of the 
warmers in PICU were not working.  
DH, Karwar : Two out of seven warmers in SNCU were not functioning 
resulting in accommodating two newborns in one warmer.  
In addition, two ventilators costing `27 lakh received by 
the hospital during November 2014 were not put to use for 
want of Anaesthesia personnel. 
DH, Kodagu : Incubators supplied to SNCU were not functioning. The 
unit was not supported by a ventilator and did not have a 
Central Oxygen Suction facility. The unit was not 
supported by a proper power backup facility. Staff Nurse 
stated that in case of power failure, newborns kept in the 
warmers were put to hardship. 
DH, 
Chitradurga 
: While two ventilators were not put to use for want of 
required staff, compressors supplied for central oxygen and 
suction were also not installed.   
GH, Sirsi : Two out of four warmers in NICU were not functioning. 
 
                                                            
21 GICU-Gynaecology Intensive care unit; ICU-  Intensive care unit ; ICCU – Intensive 
Coronary care unit; MICU-Medical Intensive care unit; NICU - Neonatal Intensive care 
unit; OICU – Obstetric Intensive care unit; PICU-Pediatric Intensive care unit; SICU- 
Surgical Intensive care unit; SNCU – Sick newborn care unit 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
30 
Sir C V Raman 
GH, Bengaluru 
: Three ventilators supplied between November 2012 and 
October 2014 and costing `37.17 lakh were yet to be 
installed and made operational. 
GH, 
Shikaripura 
: ICU equipment such as Ven tilators and CCU beds were 
lying idle since July 2013. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that steps have been taken during 
2015-16 to strengthen 17 DHs with add itional equipment and that it would 
take action to appoint additional manpower  to utilise the equipment installed.  
In addition, it also replied that action has been taken to get the warmers. 
Recommendation-2: Government should put in pl ace a review mechanism to 
ensure physical infrastructure as well as  equipment is fully utilised by posting 
qualified staff/technicians/ nurse/doctors/specialists etc., in order to provide 
required quality healthcare facilities. 
(h) Operation Theatres 
Operation Theatres (OT) are an essen tial component of a ny major hospital. 
IPHS Guidelines read with Standard s prescribed for the operation theatre 
complex require hospitals to have appropr iate zoning to keep the theatres free 
from micro organisms. Zoning wa s defined on varying degree of 
cleanliness/asepsis, namely, Protective Zone, Clean Zone, Aseptic or Sterile 
Zone, and Disposal Zone. The guidelines/s tandards further prescribed that the 
OT be dustproof and moisture proof a nd have equipment such as shadow-less 
light and Boyle’s apparatus in work ing condition. Also, Infection Control 
Practices had to be followed in high risk areas like OT, ICU etc.  
We, however, observed during joint inspec tion that none of the test-checked 
hospitals had these well-defined zones.  We further observed the following: 
 Lack of anesthetists/technicians or shortage of staff nurse and attenders in 
two22 teaching hospitals. 
 Equipment such as shadow-less lights/colonoscopy and operative 
microscope/endoscopy equipment/Boyle’ s apparatus/vent ilators/electro 
cautery machine/ophthalmic microscope etc., were not av ailable in five 23 
hospitals (three Teaching Hospitals and two GHs). 
 Air conditioners were not available in six 24 (two GHs, two DHs and two 
Teaching Hospitals). 
 OT tables were not available in three 25 hospitals (one GH, one DH and 
one Teaching). 
 There were leakages in OT or steril e zone of OT like pre-operative area, 
OT corridor and doctor’s room in GH, Nanjanagudu and K R Hospital, 
Mysuru26, which require immediate attention. 
                                                            
22 Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru; KIMS, Hubballi 
23 KIMS Hubballi; GH Nanjanagudu; Cheluvamba Hospital, Mysuru; SIMS Shivamogga; 
GH Bailahongal 
24 GH-Nanjanagudu, Cheluvamba Hospital-Mysuru, Wenlock Hospital-Mangaluru, GH-
Shikaripura, DH Madikeri, BRIMS-Bidar 
25 KIMS Hubballi; GH Nanjanagudu; DH Kalaburagi 
26 GH Nanjanagudu; KR Hospital Mysuru 

Chapter-II 
31 
Un-hygienic conditions in corridors of OT 
in KR Hospital, Mysuru 
Un-hygienic conditions in Sterile area of OT 
in KR Hospital, Mysuru 
The above deficiencies affected the qua lity of OT servi ces in terms of 
cleanliness, efficiency and controlling of infections. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that action is be ing initiated for 
upliftment of all 20 DHs under ‘Kayakalpa ’ programme of GoI.  Further, it 
has been stated that action has been ta ken to fill up the posts of Specialists, 
Dentist, Staff Nurse, Lab technicians and also Group D. 
Recommendation-3: Government should review the availability of equipment 
as well as maintenance of existing equipment in all hospitals and take 
immediate action to fill the gaps which are substantial.  
2.1.9.3 Support Services 
IPHS guidelines stipulate requi rement of support services viz., Hospital 
Transport, Dietary, Hospital Laundry, Mortuary, Waste Disposal System etc., 
for effective functioning of a hospital.   The availability of support services in 
the hospitals test-checked is indicated in Chart-2.6 and audit observations on 
some of the important services are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
Chart-2.6: Availability of support services in hospitals test-checked 
 
Note: Three GHs performing as District level hospitals have been considered as DHs for analysing 
services provided. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Ambulance
Diet
Laundry
Security
Central Sterile Service Department
Waste management
Medico legal/postmortem
Hospital Infection Control
Available in TH Not available in TH
Available in DH Not available in DH
Available in Teaching Hospital Not available in Teaching hospital

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
32 
(a) Ambulance Services 
IPHS guidelines stipulated that hosp itals have well equipped Basic Life 
Support and desirably one Advanced Life Support ambulance which should 
have a communication system. 
Out of the available 90 ambulances in  28 hospitals te st-checked, 24 
ambulances were off road due to repair s, lack of drivers and non-registration 
of vehicle. Further, we observed that none of the ambulances had a 
communication system. 
In addition, the State Government  had initiated ‘Arogya Kavacha’–108 
Emergency Services (November 2008) unde r Public Private Partnership with 
Emergency Management Research In stitute, Secunderabad to provide 
Comprehensive Emergency Response Servi ces to the people of Karnataka.  
The project has completed six years of  its operation and at present has 711 
ambulances spread across different lo cations of the State catering to 
emergencies. The ambulances are ma nned by a trained Emergency Medical 
Technician (EMT) and a trained driver (Pilot).The average number of trips per 
ambulance per day is 2.8 as of June 2015. The number of emergency calls 
attended to increased from 3,147 (November 2008) to 70,035 calls (June 
2015) and medical emergencies attende d to increased fr om 2,080 (November 
2008) to 58,163 (June 2015).  The 108 Emergency services have so far catered 
to 39.67 lakh medical emergencies since the inception of the service. 
While the Arogya Kavacha–108 Emergency Services are doing good job, but 
the 24 ambulances being off road is a matter of concern. 
 (b) Laundry Services 
IPHS Guidelines stipulate hospital la undry to be provided with necessary 
facilities for drying, pressing and stor age of soiled and cleaned linens. 
Laundering of hospital linen has to satis fy two basic consid erations, namely, 
cleanliness and disinfection.  
In the 28 hospitals test-checked we observed the following: 
 Five hospitals27 (three GHs and two DHs) did not have power laundry and 
hence washing of linen was done manually in an unclean environment.  
 Two hospitals, BRIMS, Bidar, and DH, Kalaburagi, had shortage of linen. 
 In most of the hospitals, linen was dried in the open and in some in un-
hygienic atmosphere.  
                                                            
27 Sir C V Raman GH, Indiranagar; DH Karwar ; DH Madikeri; GH Puttur; GH KR Nagar 

Chapter-II 
33 
Drying of linen in open in DH, Madikeri 
 
Drying of linen on the floor of laundry in Victoria 
Hospital 
 Though facilities for washing, drying a nd pressing were provided for in 
six28 hospitals (one GH and five T eaching Hospital), on account of  
non-functioning equipment, laundry was done manually. 
Lack of adequate facilities deprived the patients of clean and disinfected linen, 
thereby increasing the risk of infection. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that based on the availability of 
funds, it was in the process of establishing high-end electric laundry in a 
phased manner in all hospitals.   
 (c) Management of Biomedical Waste 
As per Biomedical Waste (Managemen t and Handling) Rules, 1998, it is the 
duty of every occupier of an institution
29 generating biomedi cal waste to take 
all steps to ensure that such waste is  handled without any adverse effect to 
human health and the environment.  Fu rther, no untreated biomedical waste 
should be stored beyond a period of 48 hours.   
Audit observations on the management of biomedical waste in the 28 hospitals 
test-checked are detailed below: 
 All the hospitals test-checked except for GH Aland and GH Chincholi 
were disposing biomedical waste thr ough an authorised agency and had a 
Memorandum of Understanding  with the same. 
 While there was no segregation of the biomedical waste in three 30 
hospitals (two GHs and one DH), it was partial in seven 31 hospitals (four 
DHs and three Teaching Hospitals).  In DH Kalaburagi, the biomedical 
waste was stored in passages, handled  without proper safety precautions 
like gloves/mask/shoes and some of th e wastes such as gloves, cotton, 
used syringes etc., were burnt on the hospital premises along with other 
general waste.   
                                                            
28 KIMS Hubballi; Cheluvamba Hospital, Mysuru; KR Hospital, Mysuru; SIMS 
Shivamogga; Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru; GH Sirsi 
29 Includes a hospital, nursing home, clinic, dispensary, veterinary institution, animal house, 
pathological laboratory and blood bank 
30  GH-Puttur, DH-Madikeri& GH-KR Nagar 
31 BRIMS-Bidar, Victoria Ho spital-Bengaluru, DH-Kalabur agi, DH-Chitradurga,  
DH-Vijayapura, DH-Karwar and KIMS-Hubballi 


Report No.1 of the year 2016 
34 
 
Burning of Biomedical waste in DH, 
Kalaburagi Premises 
 
Disposal of biomedical waste in GH, 
Chincholi 
 There was no central storage facility within the hospital premises in  
19 hospitals. 
 
Biomedical storage in DH, Madikeri Biomedical storage in DH, Karwar 
 The disposal of biomedical waste wa s daily in respect of 17 hospitals, 
alternate in four GHs 32, once in three days in  one hospital (General 
Hospital-Shikaripura), weekly twice in four hospitals, once  a week in one 
hospital (District Hospital-Madikeri) and not consistent in one  hospital 
(KR Hospital-Mysuru).  Further, in GH Hiriyur, the placenta was not 
removed for the last one month. 
 Immunisation was partial in eleven
33 hospitals (four GHs, five DHs and 
two Teaching hospitals) and not provided in six 34 hospitals (three GHs, 
one DH and two Teaching hospitals).  Similarly, awareness and training 
for staff was not conducted in thre e hospitals (GH-Anekal, GH-Aland, 
GH-Chincholi) and was partial in three hospitals (DH-Karwar, KIMS-
Hubballi, DH-Vijayapura). 
 In contravention to the Biomedical  Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 1998, Wenlock Hospital, Mangalu ru sold the used  syringes, IV 
bottles to an external agency by calling tenders.  On the day of joint 
inspection, we observed that huge qua ntities of used syringes and IV 
bottles were stored in the hospital premises. 
                                                            
32 GH-Bailahongal, GH-Gokak, GH-Sirsi, GH-Karwar 
33 GH-Anekal, DH-Kalaburagi, SIMS-Shivamogga, GH-Shikaripura, Wenlock Hospital-
Mangaluru, GH-Puttur, DH-Madikeri, DH-Kar war, DH-Chitradurga, GH Hiriyur, KIMS-
Hubballi 
34 CV Raman GH-Bengaluru, BRIMS-Bidar, Lady Goschen-Mangaluru, GH-KR Nagara, 
GH-Nanjanagudu and Cheluvamba Hospital-Mysuru 


Chapter-II 
35 
 
Un-disposed used syringes in the hospital 
premises 
Un-disposed used IV bottles in the hospital 
premises 
From the above, it is evident that biomedical waste was not managed properly. 
Besides, affecting the environment, th is would also affect the persons who 
handled the waste as well as the people in and around the hospital. 
The Government in its reply (November 2015) stated that: 
 The two hospitals which earlier did not  have a contract agreement with 
any authorised agency, had now entered into an agreement for disposal of 
biomedical waste. 
 Training for segregation of waste has been conducted during October 
2015.  It further stated that segreg ation would be ensured by the nodal 
officers of the district. 
 General circular regarding burning of waste would be issued. 
 Action to procure personal protec tive equipment for the personnel 
handling biomedical waste has been in itiated and training to use the same 
would be conducted. 
 Action would be taken to construct central storage facility for waste in the 
premises of hospitals. 
 In case of non-lifting of biomedical waste for more than 48 hours, the said 
waste was to be disposed of in deep burial pits which were provided in all 
hospitals.   
The action taken by the State Government towards management of biomedical 
waste is well appreciated.  However, t hough it has been stated that deep burial 
pits are provided, it was observed that they were not  being used even though 
biomedical waste was not disposed for more than 48 hours.  
Recommendation-4: Regular monitoring of the di sposal of biomedical waste 
as per the contract entered into with ex ternal agencies needs to be ensured. In 
addition, stringent penal action should be taken for non-adherence to the 
conditions given in the contract. 
(d) Hospital Infection Control 
Each hospital is required to devel op a well-designed, comprehensive and 
coordinated Hospital Infection Preven tion and Control programme aimed at 
reducing/eliminating risks to patients, vis itors and providers of care.  In this 
direction, each organisation has to cons titute an Infection Control Committee 
(ICC).  


Report No.1 of the year 2016 
36 
We observed that two of the seven DHs  had not constituted an ICC (DHs, 
Karwar and Kodagu). Wenlock Hosp ital, Mangaluru and BRIMS, Bidar 
constituted an ICC subsequent to our joint inspection.  Fu rther, we observed 
that though BIMS, Belagavi, had constitu ted an ICC during February 2015, it 
remained nonfunctional till date (August 2015).  Moreover, none of the 
hospitals test-checked had assessed the rate of Hospital Associated Infections.  
Besides, we observed that except fo r Lady Goschen Hospital, Mangaluru, 
none of the other hospitals had provided training to the staff associated with 
infection control. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that a manual on Hospital Infection 
Control (HIC) Committee has been prepar ed and the activities of HIC are 
covered under the Kayakalp Programme. 
Recommendation-5: Training to staff in respect of Hospital Infection Control 
should be extended to all hospitals. 
(e) Sewage/Effluent Treatment Plant 
Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) is essent ial to manage the amount of sewerage 
generated in a hospital so that it does not pollute the neighbouring areas of the 
hospital. In the hospitals test-checked we observed the following: 
 In DH, Kalaburagi we observed that  though it had STP, no provision was 
made for its upkeep and operation.  
 In Cheluvamba hospital, Mysuru, we observed the STP was under repair, 
consequently, the sewage waste was let out in an open drain.   
 We also observed the same in GH, Shikaripura and GH, Gokak, which 
did not have STP. 
2.1.10 Referral Services 
One of the health policy goals envisaged was to establish a credible and 
sustainable referral system. The State Government, however, had not 
developed any policy regarding a system of referrals even after a decade since 
adopting the State Health Policy.  The St ate has a three tier  system of public 
health care–Primary Health Care (S Cs, PHCs,), Secondary Health Care 
(CHCs, GHs, DHs), and Tertiary Hea lth Care (Teaching Hospitals, Super 
Speciality Hospitals) and the system of referrals should be as indicated in 
Chart-2.7 considering the fact that the majority of the patients who visit the 
Government hospitals are either poor or economically weaker. 
Chart-2.7:  Ideal referral system 
 
SCs/PHCs CHCs/Taluk Hospitals District 
Hospitals
Teaching Hospitals / 
Super Speciality Hospitals

Chapter-II 
37 
We observed from the scrutiny of the r ecords that the GHs invariably referred 
the patients only to DHs/Teaching Hospita ls. However, a test-check of a few 
cases of referrals from GHs referred to DHs revealed the following: 
 Only four cases out of 15 test-check ed cases referred from GH, Aland to 
DH, Kalaburagi had actually visited the DH. 
 10 out of 24 test-checked cases re ferred from GH, K.R.Nagar to KR 
Hospital, Mysuru had actually visited the hospital. Similarly 11 out of 17 
test-checked cases referred to Cheluvamba Hospital, Mysuru actually 
visited the hospital. 
 In respect of cases referred from GH, Nanjanagudu to Cheluvamba 
Hospital, Mysuru, only 12 out of 22 test-checked cases had visited the 
hospital. 
 None of the 29 test-checked cases referred from GH, Nanjanagudu to KR 
Hospital, Mysuru had visited the hos pital as per the records of KR 
Hospital. 
 Only 20 out of 105 test-checked case s referred from GH, Bailahongal to 
BIMS, Belagavi had actually visited the hospital. 
From the above, we noticed that the perc entage of referred patients actually 
visiting the Referral hospital was on the lower side which indicated the 
patients preferred private hospitals over Government Hospitals. 
Further, we also observed that the s econdary healthcare institutions were 
referring patients to other hospitals viz., Government hospitals, private 
hospitals, Government higher centre or hi gher centre.  However, the reference 
letters did not indicate the name of th e institution to which the patients were 
being referred to, but only mentioned as ‘referred to higher centre/major 
hospital’. In the absence of the details of the institution to which the patients 
were referred to, it was not possible to  ascertain whether the patients were 
provided with healthcare facilities in the Government hospitals.   
Similarly in a teaching hospital (BRIMS, Bidar) we observed that the patients 
were being referred to Government hospitals in Karnataka, as well as 
Telangana and private hospitals of Karn ataka, Telangana a nd Maharashtra.  
However, due to non-maintenance of refe rral details, the number of patients 
who availed healthcare facilities thr ough Government hospitals could not be 
ascertained.  
Hence, the goal of establis hing a credible and sustainable referral system in 
the State health policy was not achieved. 
The Government admitted (November 2015) that due to shortage of specialists 
and equipment, people preferred priv ate hospitals other than referred 
Government hospitals. 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
38 
2.1.11 Special Services initiated by GoI/State Government 
2.1.11.1 Burns Ward 
The main purpose of a burns unit in a Hosp ital is to minimise the incidence of 
infection among burn patients and to provide comprehensive burn care. Hence, 
the State Government along with dialys is unit had ordere d (October 2008 and 
September 2009) the establishment of 12 burns wards and had also created  
10 posts for the burns ward in each hospital. 
We observed that except for DH, Vija yapura, none of the other hospitals  
test-checked had dedicated staff for burns  ward.  The details of the number of 
beds in the burns wards, exclusive manpower available and number of patients 
admitted, discharged and died in the sanctioned hospitals are indicated in 
Appendix-2.4
35.  
The observations of the joint inspections of the burns ward in the hospitals 
test-checked are detailed below: 
 Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru – There were 50 beds in the burns ward of 
the hospital located in a separate building. The hospital had a separate 
Burns OT.  The Head of the Department (HoD) stated that the Staff 
Nurses working in the burns ward  were not trained to handle the 
ventilator provided in the ward. He al so stated that in the absence of a 
dedicated Medical Officer to attend to Medico Legal Cases, regular 
surgeons were over burdened to that extent.  
 KIMS, Hubballi - No separate burns ward existed in the hospital though it 
was a tertiary care centre.   Temp orary arrangements, however, were 
being made for patients with burns , by accommodating them in General 
Surgery wards or the Or tho ward.  The HoD st ated that dedicated 
manpower was essential for taking care of these burns patients.  We 
further observed that the constructi on of the burns ward taken up by the 
Institution during October 2011 at a tendered cost of 
`3.79 crore was still 
under progress.   
 KR Hospital, Mysuru - Burns ward had five bedded ICU facility. Burns 
OT, however, available at the first floor of the Burns ward was not 
utilised since 10 years. Further, Boyle’s Apparatus available in Burns OT 
was also kept Idle.  
 DH, Karwar - As on the date of inspection, there were no patients in the 
burns ward.  The District Surgeon stated that the burns ward was not 
functioning effectively in the absence of a Plastic Surgeon.  He further 
stated that patients with only minor burns were being attended to by the 
General Surgeons and all other burn cases were being referred to other 
hospitals. 
Recommendation-6: For effective functioni ng of the burns wards, 
Government should ensure availability of qualified and dedicated staff for 
these wards.  
                                                            
35 Apart from 12 hospitals where Government orde r has been issued, teaching hospitals have 
been test-checked where burns wards exist. 

Chapter-II 
39 
2.1.11.2 Telemedicine 
The Government of Karnataka introdu ced (2004) a telemedicine programme 
with the basic intention to make available specialist/super specialist services to 
rural poor patients at their door step i.e., at DH/GH through satellite 
connectivity.  The programme was impleme nted in the State in three phases 
covering 27 hospitals as detailed in Table-2.3 below: 
Table-2.3: Details of telemedicine programme implemented in the State 
Phase Number of DHs No. of GHs Total 
I (2004) 07* 3 10 
II (2008-09) 12 2 14 
III (2014-15) 03 0 03 
Total 22 5 27 
*Two DHs, Belagavi and Mandya have been converted into Teaching Hospitals 
(Source: Details provided by the Commissionerate Office) 
The programme was initially started under ISRO Telemedicine programme 
through V-SAT connectivity and on its connectivity failure (September 2010) 
it was re-operationalised through KE ONICS (KSWAN conn ectivity) during 
November 2014.   
For effective implementation and monito ring of the telemedicine system, a 
Karnataka Telemedicine Trust was formed in April 2006. However, we 
observed that the trust wa s yet to be established physically (August 2015).   
Scrutiny of the files/statement of expend iture made available to audit revealed 
that an amount of  `163.77 lakh  including interest continue to remain invested 
in Fixed Deposits since 2009-10 out of an amount of `331.70 lakh released by 
the State Government for the progr amme during the period 2008-09 to  
2014-15. We also observed that an amount of `1.25 crore was paid to 
KEONICS for purchase of equipment. The management of Telemedicine 
system was dependent on data available in Server, maintained by KEONICS. 
The Principal Secretary, observing the poor utilisation of the telemedicine 
facility, issued (September 2014) certai n instructions whic h were yet to be 
complied with by the Department.  The Department had set a monthly target 
of 200 tele-consultations for each telemedi cine centre. From the data of the 
number of telemedicine patients treated each month, we observed that as at the 
end of March 2015, the telemedicine pr ogramme was functioning effectively 
in eight hospitals, partly effective in four hospitals and not effective in 14 
hospitals.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that action would be taken to 
improve the functioning of the teleme dicine programme by fixing targets, 
conducting video conferences and motivating the serving doctors. 
2.1.11.3 Trauma Care 
An accepted strategy of Trauma care is  basic life support, first aid and 
replacement of fluids that could be arrang ed within first hour of the injury.  In 
this regard, the Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare, GoI initiated the first 
definitive step towards building an incl usive Trauma Care System across the 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
40 
country by launching  a scheme Devel oping Trauma Care Centres (TCCs) in 
GHs in and around National and State highways.  In the State, eight36 hospitals 
(which covered three hospita ls test-checked) were selected for upgradation of 
TCCs for which GoI released (betw een 2008 and 2011) an amount of  
`19.38 crore against `48.10 crore sanctioned. 
On scrutiny of records, we observed that seven out of the eight TCCs were not 
fully operational as on August 2015 on account of non-completion of civil 
works or non-procurement of equipmen t or required man power not put in 
place. 
 The scheme had envisaged renovation of the existing hospital building for 
Trauma Care. Audit observed  that an expenditure of `32.83 lakh was  
spent in GH, Sira on repair and reno vation of hospital building instead of 
on TCC. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that the amount was utilised 
based on the decision of Arogya Raksha Samithi and permission of the 
Department of HFW. The reply, howev er, is not acceptable, as the GoI 
guidelines specifically states that the grants should be utilised only towards 
construction of TCC. 
 The DH Chitradurga utilised 
`80 lakh towards constr uction of a TCC in 
2010-11. However the constructed TCC wa s utilised as an orthopaedic 
ward and OT.   
 Audit scrutiny revealed that the equi pment purchased was not installed in 
the TCCs as the same were not constructed as per norms stipulated by GoI.  
As such, equipment were being used in ICUs and OTs.  The Government 
replied that due to lack of space in the TCC, some of the equipment was 
being utilised in ICU and OT.  The reply is not acceptable since the TCCs 
are constructed as per the norms s tipulated by GoI wherein space for all 
equipment is taken into consideratio n for placing the equipment procured 
for TCCs. 
 GoI had released 
`two lakh for each TCC for establishing communication 
linkage between mobile units, highway location and designated TCCs.  We 
observed that in six 37 out of eight hospitals, the required communication 
linkages had not been established. 
 As per the scheme guidelines, Go I had to meet th e expenditure on 
manpower of TCCs during the first five years of it s existence.  
Accordingly, GoI had released `3.62 crore during 2010-13. Though the 
State Government had to finalise the required manpower within the 
stipulated period of 30 days from the da te of sanction of the grant, it took 
action in respect of five TCCs only in July 2012.  In respect of three TCCs, 
though GoI sanction was received in 2008, the State Government was yet 
to sanction staff. In BIMS, Belagavi  due to non-sanction of posts by the 
State, no staff was exclusively posted to the TCC.  Further, we observed 
that six out of eight hospitals did not  have a General Surgeon (trained in 
Neuro Surgery), three hospitals did not  have an Orthopedic Surgeon, four 
                                                            
36 KIMS-Hubballi, DH-Chitradurga, BIMS-Belag avi, DH-Chikkaballapur, DH-Davanagere, 
DH-Haveri, DH-Tumakuru and GH-Sira 
37 KIMS-Hubballi, DH-Chitradurga, BIMS-Belagavi, DH-Chikkaballapur, DH-Davanagere 
and DH-Tumakuru 

Chapter-II 
41 
hospitals did not have an Anesthetis t, seven hospitals did not have a 
Casualty Medical Officer, three hosp itals did not have staff nurse, five 
hospitals did not have OT technician s, and five hospitals did not have 
Radiographers.  Besides, we observed that none of the ei ght hospitals had 
deployed staff nurses who had undergone  one year programme of trauma 
care.  The details of staff sanctioned are detailed in Appendix-2.5. 
Thus, Government’s failure in planning, sanction of manpower and 
monitoring not only resulted in under ut ilisation of the grants released, but 
also non-compliance to stipulations under the scheme guidelines. This resulted 
in non-release of balance grant of `28.72 crore and also non-achievement of 
the objective of the scheme. 
Recommendation-7: Government needs to fully operationalise the already 
launched TCCs by completing civil works, procuring necessary equipment and 
providing the required manpower.  
2.1.12 Super Speciality Hospitals 
The Super Speciality Hospitals form part of tertiary health care services and 
provide specialisation servic es in a particular field viz., cardiology, nephro-
urology, ophthalmology, orthopedic etc.  Audit test-checked the Institute of 
Nephro-Urology and Pradhan Mantri Swastha Suraksha Yojana Super 
Speciality Hospital in Bengaluru and the audit observations are discussed in 
the following paragraphs. 
2.1.12.1  Institute of Nephro-Urology  
The Institute of Nephro-Urology an exclusive autonomous institute located in 
the campus of Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru, provides health care services in 
the field of nephrology and urology.  The Institute was established with 
theobjective ofproviding relief from Nephro-Urology diseases; providing 
advanced treatment and comprehens ive care to Nephro-Urology patients; 
promoting, supporting and encouraging study, research and training 
programmes relating to prev ention, diagnosis and treatment in the field of 
Nephro-Urology diseases and providing treatment for th e diseases related to 
Kidney Failure & Renal Transplant. 
The audit observations on the functioning of the institute are discussed below: 
 The institute which had procured (September 2012) 25 Haemodialysis  
Machines at a total cost of 
`1.64 crore had installed 19 units during 
September – November 2012.  Balance six machines were not installed 
due to non-availability of space. 
 Presently, around 200 tests were bei ng carried out by the Institute’s 
Biochemistry/Microbiology section.  It used Open Channel system of 
testing, wherein the turnaround time
38 is usually 2-3 days. In order to 
reduce the turnaround time and for timel y submission of reports to the 
patients, the department needed a Fully Automatic “Chemiluminescence” 
Analyser.  
                                                            
38 Turnaround time is the total time taken between the submission of a programme/ 
process for execution (sample co llection) and the return of the complete output to the 
customer/user (delivery of reports). 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
42 
In compliance with the observations of th e joint inspection, the Institute stated 
(August 2015) that the remaining Haem odialysis units have now been 
installed, process for purchase of ChemiluminescenceAnalyser has been 
initiated.   
2.1.12.2 Pradhana Mantri Swastha Suraksha Yojana Super Speciality 
Hospital 
The State has a Government Super Sp eciality Hospital established (2012) 
under the Pradhana Mantri Swastha Suraksha Yojana. The Hospital has 
speciality services viz., Neurology, Neurosurgery, Plastic Surgery, Cardiology, 
Pediatric Surgery, Anaesthesia, Surgical  Gastroenterology & Liver Transplant 
to cater to the needs of the patients and reduce the burden on National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences  (NIMHANS) and Jayadeva Institute of 
Cardiology and Cardiovascular Sciences. 
Audit observed that patients were not be ing referred to this  hospital by other 
Government hospitals as the hospital is working to about 56 per cent  of 
occupancy during 2014-15.  In this re gard, Government replied (November 
2015) that action would be taken to  conduct awareness camps and issue 
Government circulars. 
Recommendation-8: Government needs to cr eate awareness among public 
about the Pradhana Mantri  Swastha Suraksha Yojana  in order to provide 
quality healthcare to the common people. 
2.1.13 Conclusion 
The Health care services suffered in Karn ataka due to inade quacy of requisite 
health, human resources and infrastructure.  Super speciality services, where 
provided, had state-of-the-a rt equipment, highly qualified professionals and 
maintained a very high quality of services.  The taluk level hospitals, however, 
were unable to deliver quality services as envisaged due to various reasons. 
Seventy five per cent of the hospitals had less sa nctioned strength than those 
prescribed under IPHS guidelines with regard to specialists, staff nurses and 
laboratory technicians which hampered healthcare services in terms of patient 
care as well as availability of services . In many hospitals, available equipment 
remained unutilised due to shortage of technical manpower. Most of the 
clinical laboratories in the hospitals  were not fully equipped and in many 
instances, the existing equipment wa s not in working condition, thereby 
depriving patients of qualit y laboratory facilities.  Patients had to depend on 
private blood banks for obtaining bl ood due to non-working of its blood 
banks. All the 28 hospitals test-checked  did not follow required zoning as per 
IPHS guidelines, thereby affecting its e fficacy with regard to  cleanliness and 
controlling of infections.  
The Special Services initiated by the State/GoI viz., establishment of Burns 
Ward and Trauma Care Centres did not take off as envisaged.  
 

Chapter-II 
43 
Department of Higher Education 
 
2.2 Engineering Education in Karnataka 
Executive summary 
Engineering Education in the State is available in 216 Engineering Colleges 
affiliated to Visvesvaraya Technol ogical University (VTU)/Bangalore 
University which included National Institute of Tec hnology, Suratkal and 
colleges under deemed univers ities.  It is under the administrative control of 
the Department of Higher Education and a range of other organisations also 
play a role in engineer ing education.  A performa nce audit of ‘Engineering 
Education in Karnataka’ during 2010-15 showed the following: 
 Majority of engineering colleges opened in the State were mainly 
concentrated in Bengaluru which led to regional disparity and there was 
no engineering college in K oppal district though approved by 
Government in 2011. Thus, expansion of engineering colleges continued 
without addressing the issues of regional imbalance.  
 There was a declining trend in the enrolment of SC/ST students, 
differently-abled students, students fr om kannada medium and rural area 
to the engineering stream.  
 Affiliation procedure was not completed prior to the commencement of 
admission of students to the college  seeking affiliation, which ranged 
between 26 and 155 colleges during the period 2011-15.   
 Since permanent affiliation was not mandatory, only 48 out of 162 
colleges had permanent affiliation for their courses. 
 Recommendations of VTU with respect to intake capacity were overruled 
by Government, resulting in large scale vacant seats which rendered the 
affiliation process a mere formality. 
 Though accreditation was mandatory, VTU as well as many of its 
affiliated colleges were yet to secure accreditation from National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council as well as National Board of 
Accreditation.  This indicated that the quality of education being imparted 
by VTU as well as engineering college s was not of requisite standards 
required for the above accreditations.  
 Marks were changed in over 90 per cent  of answer papers for which  
re-evaluation was sought, which wa s indicative of poor quality of 
evaluation.  
 VTU did not ensure continuous support to e-Vidya, EDUSAT in the  
e-learning projects initiated by  it which rendered the projects 
unproductive.  
 VTU had failed to ensure minimum st andards prescribed by AICTE in 
respect of colleges affiliated to it as  the colleges had deficiencies in 
teaching faculty, library, laboratory facilities, etc., which indicated poor 
monitoring by the VTU. 
 VTU had failed to receive recognition from UGC even after 17 years of 
its existence as it had not met minimum standards required for 
recognition.  Hence, it did not act as a good role model for the institutions 
affiliated to it.  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
44 
2.2.1 Introduction 
Higher education is crucial for the economic and social development of any 
State and is a concurrent responsibi lity of the Central and the State 
Governments.  The Technical Education s ector in the State is governed by the 
policies of the State Government as we ll as the All India Council of Technical 
Education (AICTE). 
Engineering Education in the State is  available in the colleges that are 
affiliated to the Visvesvaraya Technol ogical University (VTU), University 
Visvesvaraya College of Engineering (UVCE) of Bangalore University and 
the National Institute of Technology, Karn ataka (NITK) Suratkal.  It is  
co-financed by the Central as well as the State Government.  As of 2015, 
Karnataka has a total of 216
39 Engineering Colleges which includes 11 
Government colleges, 12 Government aided private colleges, 177 un-aided 
private colleges and 14 deemed colleges. Apart from the Central and State 
Government, a range of other organisa tions play a role in engineering 
education as shown in Appendix-2.6. 
2.2.2 Organisational setup  
Engineering education is under the ad ministrative jurisdiction of the 
Department of Higher Education head ed by the Principal Secretary. The 
Universities of Technical Education f unction in accordance with the acts and 
statutes framed thereunder.  Director ate of Technical Education assists the 
Department of Higher Education with  regard to the management of 
government colleges and the regulation of  grant-in-aid to the private aided 
engineering colleges.  The Project Dire ctor, State Project Facilitation Unit, 
assists the State Government in the implementation of the World Bank aided 
Technology Education Quality Improvement Project (TEQIP).  The Karnataka 
Examination Authority (KEA) is respons ible for conducting the examinations 
for the enrolment of students to the engineering institutions. 
2.2.3 Audit objectives 
This Performance Audit was conducted with the objective of  
 Assessing the extent to which g overnment achieved the goals of 
expansion, equitable participati on and excellence in engineering 
education. 
 Assessing the adequacy of infrastruc ture for teaching and learning in 
engineering institutions and thei r bearing on student progression and 
achievement. 
 
 
 
                                                            
39 Includes one NITK, Suratkal and one engineering college under Bengaluru University – 
UVCE and six colleges providing only post graduation courses. 

Chapter-II 
45 
2.2.4 Audit criteria 
The criteria for this performance audit were based on the following sources: 
 VTU Act, 1994, and Statutes /Regulations issued from time to time 
 AICTE Approval Process Handbook 
 VTU Vision 2020 document  
 UGC Regulations  
 Second Expenditure Reforms Commission Report of Karnataka 
2.2.5 Audit scop e and methodology 
The performance audit covered engin eering colleges coming under VTU and 
UVCE, Bengaluru.  The audit commenced with an Entry Conference held on 
23 April 2015 with the Principal Secr etary, Higher Education Department. 
Audit was conducted during March 2015 to August 2015, covering the period 
2010-15 through a test-check of records of the Higher Education Secretariat 
and VTU and an analysis of data in respect of two government colleges, two 
aided colleges and 29 unaided colleges.  We selected the colleges on the basis 
of simple random sampling covering two revenue divisions, viz., Bengaluru 
and Kalaburagi for detailed examinati on. Additionally, five colleges having 
the highest admissions and five colleges  having the lowest admission were 
also examined (Appendix-2.7). 
Audit findings were discussed with th e Principal Secretary, Higher Education, 
in an Exit Conference held on 18 November 2015.  
Audit findings 
 
2.2.6 Planning for expansion,  equitable participation and 
excellence in engineering education 
In order to promote planned and su stainable development of technical 
education, consistent with the state and national policies, VTU was established 
(1998) by the Government of Karnatak a.  The mission statement of VTU 
included encouraging engineering and technical education among women and 
the differently-abled and introducing new programmes in engineering areas 
consistent with the needs of the i ndustry and society. Further, the Higher 
Education Vision 2020 document has id entified certain focus areas which 
include establishment of Institutes of Higher Education, especially in rural and 
backward areas.  In addition to the above objective and vision, the principal 
objectives, goals and strategies of th e University Grants Commission (UGC) 
during the 12th Five year plan include providing equal opportunities for quality 
higher education, correcting regional, se ctoral and social imbalances, and 
achieving international benc hmarks of excellence a nd extending the frontiers 
of knowledge. 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
46 
2.2.6.1 Expansion of Engineering Education 
(a) Expansion leading to regional imbalances 
The challenge of keeping pace with the ever growing number of students and 
the demand for higher education results in the expansion of intake capacity 
and new institutions.  The expansion is not just about making room for ever-
higher numbers; it is also about directi ng these numbers in the right stream 
and sectors.  Much of this expansion should also cover marginalised sections 
of society, backward regions and villag es. This would mean that the creation 
of new institutions should also be focused in regions and districts where 
student enrolment and institutional density is low. 
We observed that though there has been  three fold expansion since 1998, the 
State Government did not have a docume nted strategy for facilitating orderly 
and equitable expansion of engineeri ng education.  We also observed that 
VTU did not have an institutional mech anism to analyse regional demand as 
well as requirements of various sect ors of the economy. The density of 
population of 18 to 23 years old per colleg e in each district of the State is 
shown in Chart-2.8. 
Chart-2.8: Density of population per college  
 
(Number of colleges in brackets)


Chapter-II 
47 
From the chart we observed that out of  the 30 districts, while one district 
(Koppal) with 1.92 lakh population (of 18 to  23 years old) did not have any 
college for engineering education, seven 40 districts with population less than 
that of Koppal had colleges in the range of two to five per district.  In two 
districts (Bengaluru and Dakshina Ka nnada), we, however, observed that the 
density of population of 18 to 23 year old per college was less than 15,000.  
This indicated that the State Govern ment concentrated expansion in few 
districts only. 
To address the regional imbalance, th e Expenditure Reforms Commission in 
its second report (February 2011) ha d also recommended  that n ew private 
technical colleges that can provide for adequate faculty and infrastructure 
could be permitted, with required clearance from AICTE, particularly in 
districts where there were no or very fe w colleges for technical education.  
We, however, observed that during 2010-11, 78 per cent  of the institutions 
having 79 per cent  of the total undergraduate (UG) intake capacity were 
established in Bengaluru and Mysuru region. These regions continued to add 
more number of colleges in comparison to the Belagavi and Kalaburagi 
regions during 2010-15. 
In four colleges test-checked on the basi s of lowest percentage for admissions 
(established after 2010), we observed that the vacant seats ranged between 50 
and 92 per cent . This indicated that the colleges were established in these 
regions without adequate demand.   
The Government replied (December 2015) that the expansion of colleges in 
Bengaluru and Mysuru regions was on account of the Trusts/Societies 
preferring  to establish new engineering colleges in already developed regions, 
students preferring to enroll themselves in these regions, majority of industries 
were located around Bengaluru and Mysuru  and hence increase in opportunity 
of placements. The reply, however, is not acceptable despite the reasons given, 
there were substantial vacancies in the new colleges established in Bengaluru 
and Mysuru. In the absence of any policy/guidelines issued by the State 
Government was not able to control th e mushrooming of ma jority of such 
colleges at Bengaluru and Mysuru only. 
Recommendation-1: In accordance with the recommendations of the 
Expenditure Reforms Commission, the Government may consider giving 
permission for opening of new engineering colleges after due consideration to 
the requirements of deficit regions/districts. 
(b) Engineering colleges yet to be established 
The Government approved (November 2011) the establishment of two 
engineering colleges - one for Koppa l district which did not have any 
engineering college, and one for Ch ikkamagalur district which had one 
engineering college.  Thes e districts had high dema nd from the year 2012-13 
and 2013-14 respectively.  However, we observed that as of July 2015, the 
colleges were yet to be established. The Government replied (December 2015) 
                                                            
40 Chamrajanagar (1.19 lakh), Chikkaballapur (1.58 lakh), Gadag (1.36 lakh), Kodagu (0.58 
lakh), Ramanagara (1.28 lakh), Udupi (1.25 lakh) and Uttara Kannada (1.58 lakh) 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
48 
that due to paucity of funds, the work was yet to commence.  Since the 
government itself had approved the establ ishment of these two colleges in 
2011, adequate provision of funds should have been made. 
(c) Seats remaining vacant on the increasing trend 
Data on students who had passed out of Pre-University in the science stream 
in Karnataka, and had selected  engineering is provided in Table-2.4.  The 
intake capacity of engineering colleges and the vacant seats (all through CET) 
during 2010-14 is also depicted in Table-2.4.  
Table-2.4: Data on students passed in PUC Science, intake capacity and 
vacant seats in engineering colleges during 2010-14 
 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
Students passed in PUC science 94,097 1,06,915 1,25,288 1,28,387 
Students who selected engineering 
through CET (per cent) 
40,378 
(43) 
42,690 
(40) 
47,922 
(38) 
49,886 
(39) 
Intake capacity of engineering college 54,937 57,769 62,764 65,679 
Vacant CET seats in engineering colleges 14,559 15,079 14,842 15,793 
(Source: Information furnished by the Pre-university Board & VTU) 
From the table, it is clear that there was an overall decreasing trend in 
percentage terms of the number of st udents opting for technical education 
through CET 41.  It was further observed that though the students opting for 
engineering was less than 50,000 in  any of the years during 2010-14, 
increasing intake capacity of engi neering colleges/establishing more 
engineering colleges than required result ed in seats remaining vacant in 63 to 
81 per cent of colleges during 2010-14. 
Further analysis of the above data, division-wise, for the year 2014-15 
(Appendix-2.8) revealed that the demand in Belagavi and Kalaburagi 
divisions did not match with the Government’s intake capacity.   
This indicates that there are no clear  parameters put in place by the State 
Government for opening of new colleges.  Thus, due to lack of any control 
mechanism with the Government, ther e has been unbridled expansion of 
colleges in Bengaluru and Mysuru resul ting in many seats remaining vacant.  
Similarly, due to lack of active role by the Government, the existing colleges 
in Belagavi and Kalaburagi divisions could not meet the growing demand for 
engineering education.  The Government  replied (December 2015) that due to 
relaxation in policy of AICTE with rega rd to ceiling on intake capacity, many 
colleges applied for increase in its intake, which resulted in creation of vacant 
seats. The reply, however, is not accep table as the VTU was responsible for 
recommending the number of students for intake and the Government was the 
final authority for approving the same.  Hence, increase in intake without 
actual demand created more vacancies.  Thus, the State Government failed to 
perform its assigned task in this regard.  
 
                                                            
41 The intake capacity and actual admission in the performance audit confines only to the CET admission 
process.  In the State, admission to E ngineering is mainly through three methods viz., Common 
Entrance Test (CET) only for students of Karnataka, where the Government reserves 100 per cent seat 
in Government colleges, 95 per cent seats in Government aided colleges and 45 per cent in private 
colleges; COMED-K conducted by consortium of pr ivate colleges for students from all over the 
country and lastly through management quota. 

Chapter-II 
49 
(d) Expansion without adequate analys is of needs of industry/society 
The objective and vision of VTU include d supply of manpower of appropriate 
kind and quality to meet the needs of society as well as national development 
plans and to contribute to the smooth a nd effective transfer  of technology to 
the agencies that require them in the community.  
Further, the report of the Karnataka Manufacturing Taskforce formed by the 
Government to study the manufacturi ng sector in Karnataka suggested 
(November 2013) interventions to drive gr owth in the sector in a sustainable 
and holistic manner. It highlighted defe nce, aerospace, textile and garments, 
food processing, biotech and pharmaceuticals, automotive and engineering, 
machine tools etc., as some of the emerging areas. 
We, however, observed that though the State already ha d courses in some of 
the areas such as textile and garments, biotech, aerospace etc., it required to 
create more awareness of the availability  of these courses.  Also, we observed 
that VTU did not have any instit utional mechanism to analyse the 
requirements of various sectors of the economy and was yet to determine the 
gaps in supply of manpower in the above mentioned emerging areas. 
The Government replied (December 2015) th at VTU had sent circular to all 
the engineering colleges to conduct survey and study the requirement of the 
society and suggest new courses to be introduced.  The reply is not acceptable 
as the decision to introduce new cour ses was the responsibility of both VTU 
and the Government and not of individual colleges. 
Recommendation-2: VTU may consider setting up an institutional 
mechanism to analyse requirements of various sectors of the economy to 
address the needs of industry and society. 
2.2.6.2 Equitable participation 
The mission statement of VTU incl uded encouraging engineering and 
technical education among women and the physically impaired.  Further, in 
order to achieve the goals of equity and inclusion, during the 12 th five year 
plan, the UGC also envisaged buildi ng of capacity and improvement of 
infrastructure to attract and facilitate the retention of students from rural and 
backward areas as well as women and th e differently-abled. It  also envisaged  
pro-active measures such as proper im plementation of the reservation policy 
for students belonging to SC/ST/OBC a nd the disadvantaged and increasing 
the incentives offered to differently-abl ed students as well as those from the 
marginalised sections so that they can participate in higher education. 
Data of KEA regarding intake capacity and actual intake for the years 2010-15 
is given in Table-2.5. 
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
50 
Table-2.5:  Intake capacity and actual intake of engineering seats with 
regard to SC/ST/differently-abled, women etc. 
Year 
Intake capacity Admissions 
SC ST Differently 
abled 
Kannada 
Medium 
Rural 
Area SC ST Differently 
abled 
Kannada 
Medium 
Rural 
Area Women 
2010-11 6,039 1,213 120 2,035 6,085 3,888 1,015 117 1,508 4,403 NA 
2011-12 5,976 1,190 73 2,047 6,111 3,459 874 72 1,333 3,895 NA 
2012-13 6,306 1,256 1,319 2,114 6,303 3,848 871 63 1,401 4,107 17,795 
2013-14 6,681 1,336 1,395 2,256 6,680 3,969 804 57 1,338 3,868 20,130 
2014-15 6,122 1,218 1,465 2,062 6,125 3,841 756 56 1,201 3,444 23,167 
(Source: Information furnished by Karnataka Examination Authority) 
From the above table it may be seen th at though the participation of women in 
technical education had increased modera tely, there was stag nancy/decline in 
the admission of SC/ST during 2010-15. It was also observed that the 
admission of students who were differe ntly-abled, had studied in Kannada 
medium, and who were from rural areas, showed a declining trend.  
Though UGC had envisaged providing appr opriate infrastructure and other 
support facilities, such as development of suitable technologies and textual 
material for differently-abled students, we observed that the State Government 
had not made adequate efforts in this regard.  In addition, UGC in XII Plan 
Guidelines for its developmental assistance has allocated separate grants for 
schemes meant for equal opportunities, viz., Equal Opportunity Cell, Remedial 
coaching for SC/ST/OBC/Other Minorities, Schemes for Persons with 
Disabilities etc., for the Universities/Institutions recognised by them.  The 
VTU as well as its affiliated institutions  are not eligible for the said grants 
since they are not recognised by UGC.  Further, any additional efforts made 
towards providing equitable participation were not evident from the records of 
VTU as well as Government. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that in line with the UGC 
guidelines, the VTU had established a cell during 2014-15 in  the University 
not only to look into the implementation of reservation policy at VTU but also 
to undertake all possible measures to in crease enrolment of SC/ST students in 
engineering stream.  Howe ver, since there was a declining trend not only in 
enrolment of SC/ST, but also in diffe rently-abled students, students from 
Kannada medium and also from rural area, action in these area was also 
required. 
Recommendation-3:  Government needs to addr ess the declining trend in 
admissions of students from SC/ST cat egory, differently-abled students, 
students from Kannada medium and al so from rural area through a policy 
intervention. 
2.2.6.3 Excellence in Engineering Education 
Increased access to higher education is  not sufficient unle ss quality education 
is provided.  In order to provide quality education, the standard of the colleges 
needs to be increased. In this regard, the measures taken by the State 
Government and the audit observations are mentioned below. 
 

Chapter-II 
51 
(a) Affiliation of colleges 
The affiliation process offers an opportuni ty for VTU to evaluate and monitor 
the institutions. An institut e proposing to offer technical education has to first 
seek affiliation from the university befo re starting academic ac tivities.  In the 
first instance, the programmes under th e newly established institutions are 
given temporary affiliations on an annual ba sis.  On completion of five years, 
these institutions become eligible for permanent affiliation, which is granted 
for a period of six years at a time.  Further, VTU has to ensure mandatory 
accreditation of the technical coll eges by National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council (NAAC) and th eir programmes by National Board of 
Accreditation (NBA) as per relevant regulations of UGC as amended from 
time to time. On scrutiny of the data, we observed as under: 
 Delay in completion of the temporary affiliation process 
The process for affiliation of institutes to VTU involves various procedures 
which are required to be completed prior to the commencement of the 
admission process every year.  The procedures involve:  
 colleges applying for affiliation submitting their application to VTU. 
 appointing Local Inquiry Committee (LIC) by the Executive council for 
making inquiry and recording the results of such inquiry. 
 submission of application along with  proceedings of the Academic 
Senate and the Executive Council to the State Government by the 
Registrar. 
 State Government recommending for the grant of the affiliation based on 
such inquiry as may appear to be necessary. 
 issue of affiliation orders by VTU based on the recommendations of the 
State Government. 
Though the entire affiliation process is time bound, we obs erved that during 
2011-15, VTU had not completed the aff iliation procedur e prior to the 
commencement of the admission of student s to the college se eking affiliation. 
We also observed that inspite of th e local inspection t eam pointing out  
non-compliance to the AICTE norms by the colleges who had applied for 
affiliation with regard to infrastr ucture, teaching, learning facilities etc., every 
year, the admission process was completed even before the colleges complied 
with the observations and received affiliation.  The number of colleges which 
received affiliation after commencemen t of the academic year is given in 
Table-2.6 below: 
Table-2.6: Number of colleges where admissions took place prior to 
affiliation 
Year Number of 
colleges 
Delay in receipt of affiliation42 
1 month 2-5 
months 
6 -11 
months 
1 
year 
>1  
year 
2011-12 26 4 7 12 0 3 
2012-13 148 71 39 35 1 2 
2013-14 155 122 31 2 0 0 
2014-15 37 29 6 2 0 0 
(Source: Information furnished by VTU) 
                                                            
42  Delay has been calculated from the re-openi ng of the academic year i.e., from August 
onwards. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
52 
Due to this delay in affiliation process, it could not be ruled out that the 
admission of students was done in college s without affiliation or to courses 
without affiliation. The Government re plied (December 2015) that the VTU 
had started the process of granting a ffiliation for the academic year 2016-17 
and would complete the process by January 2016.  The reply is not acceptable, 
as Government/VTU has yet to put in place a permanent mechanism for 
granting temporary affiliation before  admissions. Thus, Government/VTU 
allowed engineering colleges to carry on their activities, though they were not 
fulfilling minimum benchmarks for their continuation.  
 Recommendations of VTU overruled by the Government 
After noticing deviations from the prescribed norms by the colleges, the 
Executive Council of VTU had recomm ended closure of programmes/ 
reduction of intake. We, however, observe d that the Government disregarding 
the recommendations had approved higher intake and also continuation of 
programmes. Further, it was also obs erved that before overruling the 
recommendations of VTU, the Government had not conducted any additional 
enquiries on its own.  During 2010-15, the intake recommended by VTU and 
the Government is given in Table-2.7. 
Table-2.7: Comparison of intake recommended by VTU and State 
Government during 2010-15 
Year No. of 
Colleges 
Intake recommended 
By VTU By State Government 
2010-11 52 1,926 5,218 
2011-12 48 2,397 5,458 
2012-13 45 1,782 4,546 
2013-14 31 1,446 3,384 
2014-15 82 5,200 11,856 
(Source: Information furnished by VTU) 
VTU had recommended a reduction of intake based on the local inspection 
committee report which reported deficiencies in the colleges, mainly regarding 
infrastructure and teacher-student ratio.  However, the Government took a 
divergent view without any recorded reasons and increased the intake capacity 
in spite of the issues with student-teacher ratio and inadequacy of 
infrastructure, thereby impacting the st andard of education.  This reduced 
affiliation to a mere formality rather  than a monitoring mechanism for 
enhancing quality in education.  Thus , Government is responsible for large 
number of engineering seats remaining vacant. 
 Withdrawal of affiliation 
As per VTU Act, the Executive Council of VTU inspects colleges based on 
the returns/reports submitted to the Regist rar by the colleges in order to judge 
the efficiency of the college/instituti on.  VTU can withdraw or modify the 
rights conferred on a college as a constituent college of VTU, if any college 
fails to comply with the provisions ma de or failed to observe any of the 
conditions of affiliation. 
We, however, observed that though the local inspection committee had 
observed non-compliance to the pres cribed norms during granting of 

Chapter-II 
53 
temporary affiliation in respect of colleges, there was no follow up action by 
VTU for ensuring the compliance during the course of the academic year.  
Hence, non-compliance to the norms pers isted year after y ear, resulting in 
poor quality education in th e colleges which were gi ven temporary affiliation. 
Also, VTU took no action to withdraw a ffiliation of such colleges except in 
the case of seven colleges during 2014- 15.  Also, we observed that there was 
no criterion fixed for granting/withdrawing of affiliation. 
 Non-recognition under Section 2(f) and 12(B) of UGC Act, 1956 
In order to ensure base level quality across institutions of higher education, the 
UGC had mandated universities and colle ges to be recognised under Section 
2(f) and 12(B) of the UGC Act, 1956, in order to receive development grants.  
The minimum norms and standards prescrib ed under the said sections were in 
the areas of physical facilities, infrastru cture, human resources, particularly 
teachers, and financial viability.  
We observed that VTU’s request (September 2011) for its inclusion under 
Section 12(B) of the UGC Act, 1956 was rejected by UGC because VTU did 
not meet minimum standards under teachin g as it had shortage of faculty.  
Thus, VTU has not been recognised by the UGC even after 17 years of its 
existence.  Hence, VTU was unable to get developmental grant meant to 
improve its infrastructure and basic facilities in the VTU along with 
enhancement of quality in education.  In addition, it also lost grants to promote 
equity, which has already been discusse d in earlier paragr aphs.  Thus, the 
Government needs to address the issue on priority as the VTU as a University 
is yet to be recognised by UGC even after its existence of 17 years.  
Further, we also observed that out of  200 engineering colleges affiliated to 
VTU, only 14 private colleges were rec ognised under Sectio n 2(f) and 12(B) 
of the UGC Act, 1956, which is a matter of concern from the view point of 
quality education.  
From the above, it has been observed that the university as well as its affiliated 
colleges did not provide the minimum st andards as per UGC requirements in 
respect of infrastructure, human resources, etc., thereby not ensuring quality 
education and also not qualifying for UGC grants. 
 Shortfall in permanent affiliation 
UG and post graduate (PG) Programmes at  colleges are eligible for permanent 
affiliation provided they have been temporarily affiliated by the University for 
a minimum continuous period of five y ears and have satisfied all additional 
requirements specified in the VTU Statutes on Permanent Affiliation of 
colleges, 2011.  We, however, observed that out of 162 colleges that were 
eligible to apply for permanent a ffiliation, only 48 colleges had permanent 
affiliation for its courses. Since acquiring permanent affiliation was not made 
mandatory in the VTU Act, all the affiliated colleges continued to have 
temporary affiliation for long periods.  In addition, the affiliated colleges 
failed to achieve and impart high standard education.   
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
54 
 Permanent affiliation granted without ensuring eligibility 
The VTU statutes on Permanent Affiliation of Colleges, 2011, stipulate 
various eligibility criteria which in clude recognition of the colleges under 
Section 2(f) of UGC Act, 1956, for granting permanent affiliation.  Scrutiny of 
the 48 institutions whose courses were granted permanent affiliation revealed 
that 32 colleges did not have recogn ition under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act, 
1956.  Thus, VTU had granted permanent affiliation without ensuring the 
eligibility of those colleges, which indicated lapses in the affiliation process. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that VTU had taken measures to 
verify the status under 2(f) under UGC  Act, 1956 before granting permanent 
affiliation. The reply is not satisfactory, as Government as well as VTU needs 
to encourage the engineering colleges to apply for recognition under 2(f) and 
12(b) under UGC Act, 1956 as well as for permanent affiliation. 
Recommendation-4:  VTU should have a relook in to its practice of granting 
temporary affiliation for an indefinite period without making it mandatory to 
get permanent affiliation. 
 Operation of Extension Centres in affiliated colleges and private 
companies 
The UGC guidelines on uni versity courses being run by private agencies state 
that a university can conduct courses through its  own department, its 
constituent colleges or th rough its affiliated colleges .  In addition, the AICTE 
Act stipulates that institutions should  not have a collaborative arrangement 
with any University for conducting a ny non-technical/techni cal course other 
than those approved by the AICTE. We, however, observed that VTU, 
disregarding the provisions, was opera ting eight extension centres and 13 
Quality Improvement Programmes Ex tension Centres through affiliated 
colleges and seven extension centres in private companies which was 
irregular.  Further, none of the affiliated colleges had obtained approval of the 
AICTE in this regard. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that at present VTU has not started 
any new extension centres in its affiliated colleges as well as in companies. 
(b) Granting of autonomy 
Academic autonomy refers to the freedom  granted by VTU to a college in all 
aspects of conducting its academic program me for promoting excellence.  In 
this regard, VTU has brought out the VTU Autonomous College Statute, 2006, 
with the objective of meeting the twenty  first century challenges faced by the 
technical education system in the country. 
We observed that as at the end of March 2015, VTU had granted autonomy to 
its 21 affiliated engineering colleges out of which two
43have been declared as 
Deemed Universities.  In this regard, we observed the following: 
                                                            
43 Sri Siddhartha Institute of Technology, Tu makuru and BVB College of Engineering and 
Technology, Hubballi 

Chapter-II 
55 
 The UGC guidelines as well as the VTU Statutes on Autonomous Colleges 
(Amended), 2011, stipulate that the aut onomous status should be at the 
institutional level, covering all progr ammes offered by the colleges at the 
time of conferment of autonomous stat us.  We, however, observed that in 
seven colleges, while autonomy was gran ted in respect of UG courses, PG 
courses continued to be non-autonom ous, which was not in conformity 
with the UGC guidelines as well as provisions under the VTU 
Autonomous College Statute. 
 According to the VTU Statutes on Autonomous Colleges (Amended), 
2011, the autonomous colleges were to get their programmes accredited by 
the NBA within a period of two years from the date of conferment or 
extension of autonomous status.  We observed that out of 19 autonomous 
colleges, 15 colleges with 204 program mes were eligible to obtain NBA 
accreditation.  Out of this, while only 29 programmes in six colleges were 
NBA accredited as at the end of March 2015, 84 programmes accredited 
earlier failed to renew their accreditation after expiry and 91 eligible 
programmes had never secured accreditation (Appendix-2.9). 
 In order to promote excellence in  technical education VTU granted 
autonomous status to 19 of its affiliate d colleges.  In order to maintain and 
improve the standard of education, tw o external evaluations were to be 
conducted at the end of the 4
th and 6 th year.  The later evaluation would 
determine the continuance or revocatio n of the autonomous status of the 
institution.  We, however, observed that  no external evaluations had been 
done at the end of the 4 th year, as required.  Furt her, we observed that 
though reports of the review conducte d (2015) by VTU with respect to 
these autonomous colleges showed deficiencies in some areas, viz., design 
of curriculum, learner centric initiatives, examination practices etc., which 
suggests  that none of the colleges gr anted autonomous status was meeting 
the high specified standard for autonomous colleges, they were 
recommended for extension of autonomy. The details of colleges are given 
in Appendix-2.10. Action taken by VTU to enhance the level of 
performance of these autonomous colleges was not forthcoming from the 
records. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that VTU would take all possible 
measures to implement the UGC guidelin es while granting autonomous status 
to its affiliated colleges. It furthe r replied that VTU would instruct all 
autonomous colleges to renew their NB A accreditation and also enhance their 
level of performance.  The reply is not acceptable, as VTU in addition to 
issuing instructions, had to ensure that its statutes were implemented by the 
colleges affiliated in order to monitor the performance level of the 
autonomous colleges. 
(c) Accreditation of courses  
Accreditation is a process of quality  assurance whereby an institution or 
course in an institution is critically a ppraised to verify whether they continue 
to meet or exceed the norms and standards prescribed.  There are two central 
bodies empowered to grant accreditation viz., NAAC and NBA in India. While 
NAAC has been set up by the UGC for institutional accreditation, NBA has 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
56 
been set up by the AICTE for accreditat ion of technical programmes.  On 
scrutiny of records, we observed the following: 
 NAAC accredits all institutions of higher education and grades them on 
the basis of their academics, governance, physical facilities and 
infrastructure.  Further, UGC (Mandatory Assessment and Accreditation of 
Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2012, stipulate that all higher 
educational institutions which have completed six years of existence 
obtain accreditation mandatorily by  June 2013.  We, however, observed 
that VTU was yet to obtain NAAC accreditation.   
 In addition, all higher educational ins titutions, having a record of at least 
two batches of students graduated or ha ve been in existence for six years, 
were eligible to apply for NAAC accreditation i.e., all institutions offering 
BE/B.Tech and having completed five  years and institutions offering 
ME/M.Tech and having completed three years as of 2013-14 were eligible 
for NAAC accreditation.  We, however, observed that till date, out of 162 
institutions eligible for NAAC accr editation, only six institutions had 
obtained accreditation. This indi cated low commitment by these 
institutions towards quality and excellence.   
 NBA operates a two-tier system of accreditation to programmes, viz.,  
Tier-I and Tier-II.  While Tier-I accreditation is for the engineering 
programmes offered by autonomous inst itutions, Tier-II accreditation is 
for non-autonomous institutions affiliated to a university.  The parameters 
adopted by NBA for accreditation of  programmes are based on initial 
capabilities, competence, skill etc.  We, however, observed that VTU had 
not made any efforts to obtain NBA accreditation for any of its 
programmes, which indicated lack of commitment towards quality and 
excellence in delivery of technical edu cation.  The accreditation status of 
its affiliated institutions as at the end of March 2015 is detailed in  
Table-2.8 below. 
Table-2.8: Status of NBA accreditation of VTU affiliated institutions 
Type of 
accreditation 
No. of 
colleges 
eligible 
Total no. of 
programmes 
No. of colleges 
received 
accreditation 
Total no. of 
programmes 
Percentage of 
programmes 
which received 
accreditation 
Tier I 15 298 2 15 5.03 
Tier II 162 1,164 8 37 3.18 
(Source: Information furnished by VTU & collected from NBA website) 
 Further analysis of Tier  II accreditation revealed that against 111 eligible 
institutions for Tier II accreditation during 2010-11, 44 institutions had 
Tier II accreditation.  Though the eligible colleges for accreditation 
increased steadily and was 162 during 2014-15, the colleges which 
received accreditation was inversely proportional and decreased to eight in 
2014-15, which is brought out in Table-2.9. This indicated that the 
institutes were not according due priority to improvement of their 
programmes. 
 
 
 

Chapter-II 
57 
Table-2.9: Status of Tier II accreditation during 2010-15 
Year 
No of colleges 
eligible for 
accreditation 
Total No. 
of courses 
No. of colleges 
having 
accreditation 
No. of 
courses 
Percentage of 
courses with 
accreditation 
2010-11 111 761 44 234 30.75 
2011-12 115 804 18 76 9.45 
2012-13 132 897 9 40 4.46 
2013-14 147 1,007 8 40 3.97 
2014-15 162 1,164 8 37 3.18 
(Source: Information furnished by VTU & collected from NBA website) 
The colleges with Tier-II accredi tation sharply decreased from 30.75 per cent 
(2010-11) to 3.18 per cent (2014-15). This indicates that the colleges could not 
provide the requisite facilities, viz., infrastructure supporting teaching-learning 
process like library, laboratories etc., thereby indicating lowering of standards 
in higher education.  
Recommendation-5:  VTU needs to devise an institutional mechanism to 
monitor the basic infrastructural faciliti es at regular intervals and forecast 
minimum investment needs to upgrade th e facilities.  This  would go a long 
way in enabling the State to  realise its vision for 100 per cent  NAAC and 
NBA accreditation for all its engineering colleges by 2020. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that the fourth and fifth 
recommendations would be implemented. 
2.2.6.4 Inadequate student support services 
The purpose of the student support services  is to retain and graduate students 
from diverse and disadvantaged backgr ounds at the highest possible rate and 
to foster an academically focused climate supportive of the success of 
students. 
(a) Graduation completion rate  
The programme for UG engineering course s is for a period of four years and, 
according to the University rules, the maximum period allowed for completing 
the course is eight years.  The completion rate indicates the performance of the 
college as well as the s upport extended by the management to the students.  
Analysis of seven batches of student s who completed the course during  
2008-14 revealed the following. 
 Out of 3.00 lakh students enrolled (2004-2010) under 24 programmes, 
only 2.07 lakh students (69 per cent) had completed the course within the 
prescribed course period of four years. We also observed that the 
percentage of students who completed th e course within the period of four 
years was on an average around 73 per cent during 2010-14 as indicated in 
Table-2.10. 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
58 
Table-2.10: Data regarding students who completed the course 
within the prescribed period 
Year in which 
student 
enrolled 
No. of 
students 
enrolled 
No. of students completed 
course within prescribed 
period of four years 
Percentage of 
students passed 
2007-08 40,703 29,267 72 
2008-09 44,243 32,773 74 
2009-10 44,177 32,689 74 
2010-11 50,091 36,061 72 
(Source: Information furnished by VTU) 
 During 2011-14, the number of students who had passed the course after 
the prescribed period of four years but within the maximum period of eight 
years constituted 8 per cent  of the total students enrolled during that 
period. Also, only 31 per cent of the students who were to complete the 
course within eight years had complete d the course as on 31 March 2015.  
Detailed information regarding this is given in Table-2.11 below. 
Table-2.11: Data on students who passed after the prescribed period 
Year 
in which 
students 
enrolled 
No. of students passed within 
prescribed 
period of four 
years 
>4 years 
<=5 years 
>5 years <= 6 
years 
>6 years <=7 
Years 
>7 years <=8 
years 
2007-08 29,267 4,096 1,645 778 Data being 
compiled by 
VTU 
2008-09 32,773 3,828 1,426 Data Not 
Available 
Not Applicable 
2009-10 32,689 3,395 1 Not Applicable 
2010-11 36,061 Data being 
compiled by 
VTU 
Not Applicable 
(Source: Information furnished by VTU) 
The Government while (December 2015) citing various reasons for 
students not completing the engineeri ng education in the extended period 
of eight years, also stated that lack of infrastructure facilities as well as  
non-availability of qualifi ed faculty in few colleges was the other two 
main reasons for the same. 
 During 2004-08, a total of 26,866 st udents had enrolled under lateral 
entry44. Out of this, we observed that while only 46 per cent of the students 
had completed the course within the pr escribed period of three years, 34 
per cent  of the total students enrolled completed the course within the 
maximum limit of seven years.  Hence, 20 per cent  of the lateral entry 
students did not complete the course even within the seven-year period. 
Further analysis revealed that the hi gh failure rate among the lateral entry 
students was in two additional mathematics subjects which were mandatory 
for them.  During 2010-15, we observed that the failure rate in the third 
semester mathematics subject and fourth semester mathematics subject ranged 
between 69 to 96 per cent and 59 to 83 per cent respectively, which indicates 
that the lateral entry students required additional support in these subjects.   
                                                            
44A lateral entry student is one who directly ente rs into the second year of engineering after 
completing the diploma or equivalent qualification as recognised by the university in the 
respective branch. 

Chapter-II 
59 
Further, absenteeism in examination ranged between 24 to 41 per cent and 27 
to 37 per cent in the third and fourth semesters respectively.  We observed that 
out of 55 colleges (which included 43 te st-checked), only 30 colleges had the 
necessary faculty strength in the said subject.   
The Government replied (December 2015) that the colleges concerned would 
be instructed to conduct additional cla sses in the said subject.  Though this 
would partly address the problem, action to  recruit faculty in the said subject 
was required as only 30 of the 55 colleges had the necessary faculty strength 
in the said subject. 
Recommendation-6: Faculty strength in mathematics needs to be increased in 
order to give additional support to the students enrolled under lateral entry. 
(b) Examination 
The UGC guidelines on student entitle ments specify various rights of the 
students with respect to admission, quality  of teaching, fees and financial aid 
etc.  The right to quality of teaching and learning includes conducting timely 
examinations and declaration of results. 
In this regard, VTU had entrusted ex amination related workflows, including 
delivery of question papers, scanni ng and indexing of answer sheets, 
evaluation, tabulation, encoding and decoding answer scripts etc., to a service 
provider.  The service provider had to  implement an end-to-end software 
solution for the said examination management and provide infrastructure45, set 
up examination data centres in all colle ges, connect the data centres to the 
nodal centre, set up digitisation centres etc. 
In this regard, audit observed the following: 
 Preparatory works such as system requirement study, feasibility study, 
cost benefit analysis etc., were not carried out before inviting tenders. 
 A detailed project report as well as cost estimate was not prepared prior to 
entrustment of the project. 
 The complete cost component of the project was fully loaded on a single 
item of work, namely processing of answer sheets. 
 Highly sensitive data such as online examination application, online 
generation of admission tickets, onlin e submission of internal marks, 
delivery and printing of question pa pers, digital scanning of answer 
sheets, digital valuati on, online re-evaluation etc., were being processed 
by the service provider in an infrastruc ture environment not accessible to 
VTU.  Hence audit could not ascertain the security of the data processed.  
 Ownership of the IT infrastructure provided was not taken over by VTU. 
 VTU had not obtained deta ils of software modules implemented, third 
party software in use, back-up and security infrastructure in place, and 
acceptance test reports on implementation of project by the service 
provider. 
                                                            
45Software, hardware, network connectivity, backup and its maintenance 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
60 
 VTU had not conducted any inspecti on of the premises where the 
infrastructure was provided, including the data centres. 
Thus, in the absence of acceptance of th e project by VTU and due to all the 
above lapses, the quality of the ex amination procedure could not be 
ascertained by audit.  The Government replied (December 2015) that from the 
next examination process, Examination Management System would be shifted 
to Government sourcing Examination Management. 
(c) Evaluation and Re-evaluation 
The Registrar (Evaluation) oversees exam inations of all engineering colleges 
affiliated to VTU through a network of five regional centres46.  The candidates 
are permitted to apply for a copy of thei r answer scripts, re-evaluation and 
review of re-evaluation on payment of specified fees.  The details of answer 
scripts submitted for re-evaluation by  the candidates during 2011-15 and their 
outcome is detailed in Table-2.12. 
Table-2.12: Details of outcome of answer scripts submitted for re-
evaluation during 2011-15 
Particulars of answer 
sheets 
Year of Examination 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Jan-11 Jul-11 Jan-12 Jul-12 Jan-13 Jul-13 Jan-14 Jul-14 
Total number of answer 
sheets originally evaluated  
for the examination 
1273270 1219104 1362333 1311757 1459330 1393368 1587376 1523161 
Number of answer sheets 
revaluated  
146027 141606 142943 151389 153662 162340 181729 218720 
Total Number of answer 
sheets where marks 
increased on re-evaluation  
74097 75053 72777 77347 78334 85714 90875 111916 
Number of answer  sheets 
where there was no change 
in marks on  re-valuation 
9300 8443 7994 8821 8424 8808 10112 12840 
Number of answer-sheets 
where marks decreased on 
re-evaluation 
62630 58110 62172 65221 66904 67818 80742 93964 
From the details, we observed that  
 Re-evaluation requests were re ceived in respect of 10-14 per cent  of 
papers evaluated.  The trend was the same throughout the review period in 
all the examinations. 
 While the percentage of papers where the marks increased upon  
re-evaluation ranged between 50 to 53 per cent, the percentage of papers 
where the marks decreased upon re-evaluation ranged between 41 to 44 
per cent . This indicated that over 90 per cent  of the papers which were  
re-evaluated had the marks increased /decreased on re-evaluation. Thus, 
quality of evaluation was not of appropriate standard. 
 On an average, 31 per cent of the answer sheets applied for re-evaluation 
and where marks was increased, had passed the examination (originally 
failed). 
 Further, on improvement of marks by more than 15 which results in a 
student passing the s ubject, an amount of 
`250 (part of fee for  
                                                            
46 Belagavi, Bengaluru, Kalaburagi, Mysuru and Mangaluru 

Chapter-II 
61 
re-evaluation) is requir ed to be refunded to the student.  We, however, 
observed that there was a delay in re fund of the amount to the students.  
Scrutiny of details of re-evaluation for the year 2014 revealed that though 
13,451 students were eligible for refund, the refund amount, which worked 
out to 
`44.38 lakh, was yet to be refunded to the students.  Also, we 
observed that VTU had not mainta ined any data for tracking the 
disbursement of the refund amount to the students and hence audit could 
not ascertain the actual undisbursed amount for the review period. 
The Government replied (December 2015)  that action would be taken to 
refund the re-evaluation fee immediately. 
(d) Disbursement of scholarship 
The cost of engineering education is recovered mainly through various types 
of fees from the students. This has a bearing on the issue of equity of access to 
engineering education, especially for the newly emerging beneficiaries from 
the economically weaker sections of society. The Government has 
implemented various schemes for providi ng financial assist ance to students 
from different categories pursuing engineering education in the State as 
detailed in Table-2.13. 
Table-2.13: Scholarships implemented during 2010-15 
(` in lakh) 
Name of the 
scholarship scheme 
Administered 
by Particulars 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Scholarship to SC/ST 
students  
Director of 
Technical 
Education 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
9,545 1,109 2,979 10,472 5,304 
Amount 
disbursed 
2,299.96 239.97 659.83  3,064.20 1,795.97 
Scholarships for the 
children of defence 
personnel 
Director of 
Technical 
Education 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
1,877 1702 705 238 246 
Amount 
disbursed 
461.80 470.43 200.90 74.95 78.10 
(Source: Information furnished by Directorate of Technical Education) 
Timely disbursement of the scholarship amount is important for supporting 
students in an effective manner.  Ho wever, it was observed that there was 
delay in disbursement of over 76 per cent of SC/ST Scholarships and over 59 
per cent Defence Scholarships.   These dela ys ranged from one to over four 
years as shown in Table-2.14. 
Table-2.14: Delay in disbursement of scholarships 
Name of the 
scholarship 
scheme 
Total 
beneficiaries 
during 2010-15 
Number  of beneficiaries who received the scholarships 
within the 
academic 
year 
with delay 
of one year 
with delay 
of two years 
with delay 
of three 
years 
delay of 
more than 
four years 
Scholarship to 
SC/ST students  
29,409 6,891 
 
7,656 9,903 4,959 0 
Defence 
Scholarships 
4,768 1,964 1,320 1,072 305 107 
(Source: Information furnished by Directorate of Technical Education) 
It was also observed that though the G overnment had a system of scholarships 
to financially support students from SC/ST/OBC/Minority category, most of 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
62 
the scholarships were not disbursed in  a timely manner.  This resulted in 
hardships to beneficiaries who did not receive their scholarship in time.  
Recommendation-7:  In order to reduce delay at various levels, Government 
needs to minimise the levels in tran sfer of funds as also should explore 
possibility of transfer of scholarships directly to the beneficiary. 
2.2.6.5 Non-implementation of Unive rsity Grants Commission (UGC) 
guidelines 
The UGC, with a view to discouraging th e forced retention of students in the 
higher educational institutions, issued  (April 2007) instru ctions directing 
higher educational institutions not to retain the original certificates of the 
students in the colleges. Hence, afte r verification, the institutions were 
required to return the original certificates to the students.  We, however, 
observed that in violation of the above  instructions, the VTU PG centres and 
affiliated colleges had retained the original certificates of the students. 
Further, though UGC had issued guidelin es for prevention of discrimination 
based on caste, gender, creed, colour, race, religion etc. for protecting students 
from sexual harassment/ragging, we obser ved that VTU was yet to implement 
the above guidelines. Also, measures for ensuring prevention of ragging which 
was to be monitored closely by VTU as well State Government was deficient, 
as there was no monitoring mechanism put in place to check ragging. 
The Government replied (December 2015) th at VTU had issued circular to all 
the college affiliated to return the origin al certificate on verification.  It also 
stated that a mechanism to monitor sexual harassment/ ragging would be put 
in force. 
2.2.7 Research Activities 
Research and development activities co nstitute critical components of an 
academic institution.   The Vision 2020 document as well as objectives of the 
VTU Act highlight the importance of res earch activities in the development of 
engineering education.  Since VTU coul d not attract any sponsored research 
funding either from the Central or State Government or industries, it instituted 
its own ‘Research Grants Scheme’ out of its own funds in order to harness and 
nurture research talent available in its affiliated institutions.  The expenditure 
incurred against research  activities undertaken duri ng 2010-15 is detailed in 
Table-2.15. 
Table-2.15: Funding towards research activities during 2010-15 
(` in crore) 
Year Expenditure 
incurred 
No of projects taken up during 
the year 
2010-11 2.31 70 
2011-12 3.33 35 
2012-13 2.99 01 
2013-14 1.00 00 
2014-15 0.03 00 
(Source: Information furnished by VTU) 

Chapter-II 
63 
From the table, it is evident that there was decline in expenditure and projects 
taken up during 2010-15.  The other observa tions in respect of  grants allotted 
are detailed below. 
 The research projects were undertaken  with probable date of completion 
ranging from one to four years.  We observed that VTU had no mechanism 
to monitor the progress of projects, a nd that it had not maintained project-
wise data manually or el ectronically such as name  of project, scheduled 
date of completion, progress of proj ect, actual date of completion, 
extension of time granted etc. 
 We also observed that there were no institutional visits by the experts of 
VTU, no monitors were appointed by the research panel of the VTU for 
each project, and no half yearly progr ess report was received for each 
project as mandated in the guidelines of the scheme. 
 Since the projects were re viewed only annua lly for the release of grants, 
the projects with slow progress were  further delayed due to delay in 
release of grants. Out of the 21 proj ects test-checked, we observed that 
only 10 projects were completed and none  of the projects were completed 
on schedule. The slow progress was attri buted to delay in release of funds 
in many cases. 
 The scheme guidelines had provided fo r release of funds in instalments 
during the project period.  We observed that in respect of 65 projects, after 
releasing `4.12 crore, VTU had not released subsequent instalments.  It 
had also discontinued follow-up on these projects.  Thus, the amount 
already invested was rendered unfruitful. 
 The equipment/surplus stores procured during the project period as per the 
guidelines of the scheme, were th e property of VT U. We observed, 
however, that VTU had not maintain ed any inventor y of equipment 
procured under the scheme and had also  not made any efforts to ascertain 
its continued productive utilisation.  Test -check of nine projects out of 74 
completed projects revealed that  out of total expenditure of 
`58.67 lakh, 
`41.27 lakh was towards equipment, remaining without any specified 
purpose. 
 Further, we observed that VTU ha d not maintained any data on the 
publications of the research, citati ons received on these publications, etc.  
We also observed that no patents were generated out of the research.  
Enhancing research publication, research  outputs and patents from all the 
Universities in the State was set as a target in the Vision 2020 document.  We, 
however, as brought out in the previous paragraph, observed that the research 
activities of VTU were neither completed nor coordinated.  
Recommendation-8: VTU may consider increasi ng funding towards research 
activities and ensure effective monitoring of progress of projects/research etc., 
in order to achieve the target of increase of 60 per cent  in research 
publications, research outputs and patents. 
The Government agreed (Decem ber 2015) to implement above 
recommendations. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
64 
2.2.8 Information and Communication Technology Activities 
2.2.8.1 EDUSAT 
VTU initiated the ‘EDUSAT’ programme to be implemented in several phases 
as part of its e-governance initiatives to supplement the conventional mode of 
education, through satellite based teach ing and learning with the technical 
support of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) in the initial 
phases. VTU provided Satellite Interac tive Terminals (SIT) to 189 affiliated 
colleges and 04 VTU Post Graduation Ce ntres for imparting training through 
EDUSAT. 
We, however, observed that out of 83 colleges supplied with EDUSAT 
terminals by VTU, the terminals in 42 colleges were not functional. We also 
observed that VTU except for conducting survey (April 2015) of the working 
status of the hardware  provided before enteri ng into an AMC had not 
conducted evaluation of the EDUSAT Programme by obtaining feedback from 
the users to assess the eff ectiveness of the Programme. The usage statistics of 
the programme were not collected a nd reviewed by VTU for assessing the 
level of utilisation from time to time before scaling up the programme to the 
next phase.  As a result, VTU could not ensure the effective utilisation of the 
project.   
VTU replied (September 2015) that a surv ey has been initiat ed to assess the 
condition of the terminals supplied.  However, the survey report conducted 
revealed that 55 colleges were not util ising the facility since its installation, 
and in most of the colleges, the facility was not in working condition. 
2.2.8.2 e-Vidya 
The e-Vidya project was initiated (2009-10) by VTU to record and digitise the 
lectures of subject experts
47 into video format 48to be deployed on a local high 
capacity server installed in each colleg e campus.  The project also envisaged 
that VTU would continue to develop videos of various courses and make them 
available to the affiliated colleges in subsequent years so that the students 
could access these lectures any time th rough desktop, laptop, tablet or mobile 
phones. 
In order to implement the project, VTU procured (2009-10) “Sun streaming 
servers” for 60 affiliated colleges at a cost of 
`2.97 crore.  In this regard, we 
observed the following: 
 The procurement was made without call ing for any tenders, thus violating 
the requirements of Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Act.   
 The servers were supplied to private affiliated colleges and the 
procurement cost was borne by the University.  
                                                            
47 120 courses developed by the National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning 
(NPTEL) and 50 courses developed by VTU. 
48 MP4 format using high speed streaming server managed by content management software. 

Chapter-II 
65 
 There was no formal understanding between VTU and the colleges on the 
one hand and the supplier on the ot her hand for implementation, support 
and problem resolution during the curre ncy of the project. Instead, the 
procurement conditions for the servers specified that only online support 
would be provided and on-site suppor t would be charged based on actuals. 
Thus, implementation and support cost was left undefined.  
 VTU unilaterally decided the project in frastructure requirements, procured 
and supplied them to the affiliated pr ivate colleges without deciding how 
the infrastructure would be maintained by the colleges.  
 The affiliated private colleges reported various difficulties such as server 
shutdowns, lack of technical suppor t, non-availability of passwords etc., 
while using the infrastructure made available to them. 
 National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL) 
informed that courses developed by th em were available free of cost only 
to Government institutions and at 
`0.50 lakh to each private institutions.  
Hence, private institutions were requir ed to enter into an agreement with 
NPTEL for the use of the courses developed by them .  We, however, 
observed that VTU did not have any arrangement with the NPTEL 
regarding making available of videos to affiliated private colleges. 
 There was no formal agreement with regard to updation of  content of the 
videos supplied during 2009-10. 
 The Vice chancellor of VTU, while discontinuing the project in September 
2010, ordered the e-learning center of VTU to submit a report on the 
utilisation of the servers.  We, howe ver, observed that no such data on 
utilisation of servers was collected from the affiliated colleges. It was 
observed that the project remained discontinued as on September 2015. 
Thus, VTU, by not facilitating technical  support, or assessing the continued 
relevance of videos supplied during 2009-10 in view of revision of curriculum, 
and by not ensuring proper maintenance and effective utilisation of the servers 
rendered the investment of 
`2.97 crore on the project unproductive. We, 
however, observed that as of Septem ber 2015, 41 of the 60 servers supplied 
were not working, and hence the object ive of enhancing/supplementing level 
of education through technology was not achieved.  
Recommendation-9: VTU needs to arrange for an AMC and on-site support 
for all the colleges where EDUSAT/e-Vi dya has been implem ented.  It also 
needs to institute an automated system for obtaining feedback with regard to 
utilisation of both EDUSAT and e-Vidya which would in turn help in 
evaluating the effectiveness of the pr ogrammes. It further needs to make 
arrangement for updation of content of  programmes supplied in line with 
updation of syllabus of the VTU. 
The Government agreed (Decem ber 2015) to implement above 
recommendation. 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
66 
2.2.9 Teaching and Learning Infrastructure 
AICTE is a national level apex adviso ry body with the mission of developing 
and promoting quality technical education in the country. As a regulator, 
AICTE has an objective to weed out all institutions not fulfilling norms and 
standards for quality edu cation. Further, VTU also  fixed various norms for 
granting affiliation to technical colle ges. The norms prescribed by the 
AICTE/VTU with regard to basic parameters, viz., instructional area, 
amenities, administrative area and com puter facilities and the actual 
availability in the test-checked colleges are indicated in Chart-2.9 and  
Chart-2.10.  
 Availability of Instructional area compared to norms in test-checked 
Colleges  
 
 
Note: Three colleges which have not completed five years of its existence have not been 
included for analysing the availability of infrastructure.  
From the above chart, we observed that the availability of instructional areas 
was less than 50 per cent  in workshop (Government colleges) and seminar 
halls (Government aided colleges and Privat e unaided colleges).  In respect of 
one Government college test-checked (Rai chur), we observed that it lacked in 
all the parameters of the instructional area.  
 Availability of administrative area compared to norms in colleges  
test-checked 
In the colleges test-checked, it is observed that there was deficiency in 
availability of department office a nd faculty rooms across all colleges.  
Further, we observed that one Governme nt college (Raichur) lacked in all 
basic parameters in administrative area.  
 Availability of computer facilities 
The norms for computers specify computer to student ratio for UG courses and 
PG courses to be 1:4 and 1:2 respec tively, with a minimum of 20 PCs in a 
college. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
UG class rooms
Tutorial rooms
Laboratory (UG)
Workshop
Computer Centre
Drawing Hall
Library & Reading Room
Seminar Halls
Chart-2.9:  Availability of Instructional Area
100% 1% to 99% 0%
100% 1% to 99% 0%
100% 1% to 99% 0%
Government Colleges 
Aided Colleges 
Unaided Private colleges 

Chapter-II 
67 
 
 
Note: Colleges which have completed five years of its existence have been compiled for analysis for 
analysing the availability of infrastructure.  
From the chart, we observed that all the Government colleges test-checked 
lacked computer facilities. However, in  respect of aided and unaided colleges 
test-checked, we observed that while aided colleges had provided computers 
as per norms, only 75 per cent of the unaided private colleges had provided 
computer facilities. 
It was observed that during 2010-15, the Government had allocated  
`41.30 crore towards procurement of infr astructural facilities which also 
included purchase of computer for al l Government colleges.  We observed 
against the said alloca tion, an expenditure of `24.68 crore was incurred and 
the balance amount had lapsed as the Di rector of Technical Education could 
not procure the items in a timely manner and funds were released only towards 
the end of the year. 
Detailed study of the availability of the basic parameters in the test-checked 
colleges is brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.  
2.2.9.1 Teaching faculty –student ratio 
The AICTE norms for faculty–student ratio have been prescribed at 1:15 with 
separate strength for Principal/Director , Professor, Associate Professor and 
Assistant Professor. Analysis of the st aff strength in the test-checked colleges 
revealed that there was shortage of faculty in the majority of the programmes 
available in the colleges.  We observed that with regard to professors and 
associate professors, there was 100 per cent shortage in more than 25 per cent 
of colleges test-checked.  The status of shortage of the teaching faculty in four 
basic courses, viz., computer science, civil engineering, electronics & 
communication engineering, and mechani cal engineering are detailed in 
Appendix-2.11. 
Further analysis of the database of the faculty available in the affiliated 
colleges showed that faculty members working in one college were also 
shown to be working in other affiliated  colleges.  This indicates that some 
faculty members were being shown as working in multiple colleges in order to 
secure compliance with the AICTE norms. 
0 1 02 03 04 0
No of PCs 
No of PCs connected with LAN & Internet
Printers
Legal System S/W
Legal Application S/W
Internet Bandwidth in MBPS
Chart-2.10: Availability of Computer Facilities
100% 1% to 99% 0%
100% 1% to 99% 0%
100% 1% to 99% 0%
Government Colleges 
Aided Colleges 
Unaided Private colleges 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
68 
2.2.9.2 Laboratory facilities 
The AICTE norms stipulate that the laboratories should have appropriate 
equipment for experiments suitable for the requirements of the affiliating 
University/Board’s curriculum. Further, it has been stated that the desirable 
number of experiment set ups be so a rranged that a maximum of four students 
could work on one set. 
Based on the curriculum of each progr amme and as per the requirements 
specified for each laboratory by the co lleges, we observed that there were 
shortages in laboratory facili ties in most of the disciplines in the test-checked 
colleges.  In test-checked colleges, the av ailability of laboratory facilities in 
the three major branches is summarised below: 
 Seven out of 23 test-checked colleg es under Mechanical Engineering did 
not have all the required equipment.  
 Fifteen out of 23 colleges test -checked under Electronics and 
Communication Engineering had more than 25 per cent deficiency. 
 Sixteen out of 23 colleges test-checked under Civil Engineering had more 
than 25 per cent deficiency.  
The status of laboratory facilities in  test-checked colleges is given in 
Appendix-2.12.  
2.2.9.3 Library facilities 
The AICTE norms specify the number of tit les, volumes and journals that are 
to be provided in the library of a college. They also specify the seating 
capacity and the number of personal com puters required in a library based on 
a percentage of the student strength in the college. 
In the test-checked colleges, we observed that while there was shortage in the 
number of titles provided in the civil engineering library, the deficiency was 
less pronounced in computer science engi neering.  The status of the shortage 
is brought out in Appendix-2.13. 
2.2.9.4 Non-teaching faculty ratio 
The norms specified for non-teaching faculty are as under: Foreman/ 
Supervisor, one per course; Instructor /Mechanic/Helper, one  per laboratory; 
system analyst and programmer, one and four per computer centre. We, 
however, observed that there was s hortage of non-teaching staff in the 
majority of the test-checked colleges.  The status of shortage of non-teaching 
faculty in the test-checked colleges is indicated in Chart-2.11. 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-II 
69 
Chart-2.11: Availability of non-teaching staff 
 
From the above, we observed that many of  the test-checked colleges suffered 
from inadequate teacher-student ratio, deficient laboratory facilities, poor 
computer-student ratio, instructional area etc. This was not only indicative of 
the lack of quality of th e education provided by thes e institutes, but also the 
deficiency in monitoring by VTU as well  as AICTE.  This not only resulted in 
these institutes being recognised by AICTE but also being affiliated by VTU. 
Recommendation-10: VTU needs to develop a mechanism which helps in 
conducting inspection periodically in order to monitor the quality of the 
institutions which would help VT U while extending affiliation of the 
institutions. 
The Government agreed (Decembe r 2015) to implement the above 
recommendation. 
2.2.10 Conclusion 
In the absence of any policy/guidelines  to address regional imbalances, the 
Government of Karnataka was unable to correct regional and sectoral 
imbalances. This facilitated creation of  many engineering colleges which are 
concentrated mainly in the Bengaluru region. Also, increase in intake capacity/ 
establishment of colleges without dema nd resulted in seats being vacant in 
almost all the regions. 
There was delay in completion of the temporary affiliation process by VTU, as 
a result, the admission process was completed prior to granting of affiliation.  
The recommendation of VTU with respect to intake capacity was overruled by 
Government, which rendered the affiliation process a mere formality and also 
hampered the quality of educati on. There was no fixed criterion for 
granting/withdrawal of affiliation.  Hence, institutions were granted temporary 
affiliation year after year with deficiencies being pointed out by VTU and not 
being complied with by the institutions. This prompted the institutions to 
continue with temporary affiliation for a long period rather than aspire for 
permanent affiliation which required additional requirements to be satisfied by 
the institutions. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Foreman/Supervisor
Instructor/Asst Instructor/Mechanic
Helper/Attender
System Analyst
Programmer
100% 1% to 99% 0% 100% 1% to 99% 0% 100% 1% to 99% 0%

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
70 
Though accreditation was mandatory, VTU as  well as many of its affiliated 
colleges were yet to secure NAAC as well as NBA accreditation. In addition, 
the Government as well as VTU fa iled to ensure minimum standards 
prescribed by the AICTE regarding quality  in education as majority of the 
colleges had deficiencies in teaching faculty, library facilities, laboratory 
facilities etc.   
Further, VTU had not provi ded sufficient attention towards the promotion of 
research. VTU by not ensuring conti nuous support to the e-Learning projects 
initiated by it, viz., EDUSAT and e-Vidya, rendered the projects unproductive. 
Thus, while the Government is having indifferent attitude towards engineering 
education, the Directorate of Technical  Education and VTU was not fulfilling 
the role envisaged for them viz., allowing admissions to  engineering colleges 
prior to granting of affiliation, not having a system to get colleges to seek 
permanent affiliation, not encouraging the colleges to accredit themselves 
through NBA or NAAC and al so not effectively monitoring the colleges on 
infrastructure, faculty, performance etc., which are essential for quality 
education.  Moreover, VTU has not ma de adequate efforts to get itself 
recognised/accredited and he nce did not lend itself as a role model for the 
institutions affiliated to it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
Information Systems Audit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
73 
Chapter-III 
 
Information Systems Audit 
 
Department Personnel and Administrative Reforms 
 
3.1 e-Procurement 
 
3.1.1 Introduction 
Government of Karnataka (GoK) envisa ged a project to provide unified  
end-to-end e-Procurement solution to cover all procurement processes from 
preparation of estimate/indents to final payment of bills to the contractors.  
The main objective of the e-Procurement project (project) was smart 
governance, improvement of efficiency, cost saving, ensuring consistency in 
cost of goods, providing fair competitiv e platform, arresting cartel formation 
of suppliers/ contractors/bidders etc.  
All the departments of the State Government whose tender value is more than 
` five lakh are mandated to float tenders  through the e-Procurement portal.  
The work relating to e-Procuremen t was awarded (December 2006) to  
M/s. Hewlett Packard Sales India Private Ltd (Partner) as Application Service 
Provider adopting Public Private Partnership model where the bidder pays for 
using the services.  The revenue earned is shared between the Partner and the 
Centre for e-Governance, Department  of Personnel and Administrative 
Reforms (DPAR), the implementing agency as per agreed rates .  The project 
went live during March 2011. The project consisted of the following modules. 
1. Supplier Registration  6.  e-Auctions 
2. Indent Management 7.  e-Payments  
3. e-Tendering 8.  Accounting 
4. Contract Management 9. Mana gement Information System 
5. Catalogue Management  
The Secretary to Government, DPAR is the head of the department and is 
assisted by the Additional Secretar y to Government. There are two 
subordinate organisations under DPAR: the Centre for e-Governance (CEG) 
and the Directorate of Electronic Delivery  of Citizen Services.  The CEG is a 
society which implements various projects relating to DPAR (e-Governance).  
The e-Procurement project is administered by CEO, e-Governance. 
3.1.2 Audit Objectives 
The audit of e-Procurement was undertaken to ascertain whether: 
 The project had achieved its intended objectives of transparency, 
efficiency, smart governance and co st savings through increased 
competition in public procurement. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
74 
 The overall control of the applicati on and database were adequate to 
ensure security, reliability and integrity of data and the system. 
 Mapping of business rules into the system was provided. 
3.1.3 Audit criteria 
The criteria for audit were: 
 Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Act, 1999 (KTPP Act) 
 Karnataka Transparency in Publ ic Procurement Rules, 2000 (KTPP 
Rules) 
 Government orders, circulars and guidelines issued by the State 
Government relating to procurement. 
 eSAFE-GD220-Assessment Guidelines Ver 1.0 issued by the Department 
of Information Technology, Government of India. 
 Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) – Top Ten. This 
represents a broad international consensus about the most critical web 
application security flaws. 
3.1.4 Audit Scope and Methodology 
Entry conference for the audit was he ld in March 2015 and exit conference 
was held in November 2015.  The audit was conducted during December 
2014 to June 2015.   
The methodology adopted included analysis of data and testing of application 
interface.  Dump of the data provi ded (from March 2007 to December 2014) 
by the CEG was analysed using Mysql. 
The e-Procurement portal consists of several components such as the database 
server, the databases, various objects in  the database, the web application and 
the operating system.  The configuration/ content of each of these components 
decides the behaviour and functionality  of the e-Procurement portal.   
Documentation on configuration management
49, its baselining and change 
control was not produced to audit.  Also, the database  provided did not 
contain information on the uploads by departmental officers as well as 
suppliers.  The scope of the audit enquiry was therefore limited to data 
analysis of the database and testing of the portal interface.  The audit was 
concentrated on the Indent Manageme nt, Supplier Registration, e-Tendering 
and Contract Management modules.   
 
 
 
                                                            
49 Configuration Management refers to the process for recording and updating information 
that is related to the IT infrastructure. 

Chapter-III 
75 
3.1.5 Audit findings 
3.1.5.1 Transparency objectives not met 
(a) Tender evaluation reports not published in the portal 
Section 14 of KTPP Act, 1999 read with  Rule 26 of the KTPP Rules, 2000 
states that Evaluation Report of the te nder has to be published in the Tender 
Bulletin.   
Audit, however, observed that the system had not ensured that such 
information is made available in the portal.  For instance, audit found that 
when the tender submitted by a bidder was rejected, the system, except for 
showing the status of the bid of the bi dder as rejected, did not display reason 
for rejection.  Thus, the system lacks transparency.   
The Government replied (November  2015) that e-Procurement portal 
provides option to upload the proceedi ngs of tender evaluation which could 
be viewed by the participating bidders.  Since the upload option was not made 
mandatory, the e-procurement portal did not display the tender evaluation and 
hence the bidder was unaware of the reasons for his rejection.  It is seen that 
some of the appeals arising could be attr ibuted to this which could have been 
avoided by suo motu disclosures.  This is discussed in paragraph 3.1.5.4.  
(b) Incomplete/Incorrect Status of tenders  
The life cycle of a tender starts with its publishing and ends with completion 
of the procurement process.  The stat us of tenders at various stages was 
extracted by Audit from the portal.  Th e data revealed inconsistencies.  For 
e.g.  the number of tenders which we re under evaluation as on February 2015 
was shown as 22,279.  An analysis of thes e tenders showed that the earliest 
tenders were of Feb 2009 which cannot be the case, as the bid validity period 
of these tenders has expired.  This inco rrect status has a cascading effect on 
the data regarding the number of te nders for which evaluation has been 
completed and the number of tenders which have been awarded.  
 
Audit observed that the tender inviting au thorities had not u pdated the status 
of the tenders after the evaluation of the tenders was completed which has led 
to incorrect/incomplete status being depi cted in the portal.  The Government 
had not insisted that the tender invitin g authorities update the status of the 
tenders.  As a result, the information about the works completed or the works 
in progress could not be ascertained from the portal. Hence, no reliable 
database on goods, services, works and contractors was available from the 
portal.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that periodic dire ctions to user 
departments were being issued to utilise the e-Procurement portal for 
completion of all the tender activities which would result in automatically 
updating status of tenders.  The reply is not acceptable as instructions will not 
be effective unless government makes it mandatory for all user departments 
to use the downstream workflows.  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
76 
(c) Incorrect disclosure of goods tenders 
The e-Procurement portal provides an inte rface to view the details in respect 
of bidder selected for the purpose of transparency and availability of pertinent 
information.  In respect of goods tende rs, however, it was seen that the 
information presented by the portal about  the bidders selected was incorrect 
and ambiguous.   A few illustrative instances are detailed in Appendix-3.1. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that the audi t observation was 
noted and would be placed before Change Management Committee for 
implementation. 
(d) Area wise information regarding tender not available 
While inviting tenders through the portal, the District and Ta luk fields were 
not made mandatory, thereby giving a choice to the tender inviting authorities 
to either type in the same or not. This resulted in a possibility of the tender 
inviting authority not filling this data, th ereby leading to insufficient data to 
provide information about ongoing works or  completed works in a particular 
district/ taluk.  Hence the district wise search in the portal was non functional.  
The user had to browse acr oss all the departments a nd subordinate offices to 
filter all the tenders called for in a part icular area.  This resulted in lack of 
provision for viewing and for searching tenders area wise.   
The Government replied (November 2015) that since the works could pertain 
to several districts/taluks , capturing of data was made  optional.  The reply is 
not acceptable as the system could have been designed to capture multiple 
districts. 
3.1.5.2 Efficiency and Smart gover nance objectives not met 
Smart governance aids in increased tran sparency, monitoring and control of 
procurement processes.  Issues of efficiency and smar t governance arising 
due to failure to map business rules in the system are discussed separately 
under paragraph 3.1.5.4.  
(a) Contractors misleading the Go vernment on tender capacity  
The KTPP Rules, 2000, provides for pre- qualification of tenders on the basis 
of financial status and capacity.  In addition, the State Government in its 
circular and guidelines (December 2002 and October 2008) had laid down the 
method of calculation of Assessed Available Tender Capacity which involved 
value of completed works, existing commitments and ongoing works. 
In order to assess the financial status and capacity of the bidder, a statement 
on existing commitments and ongoing works was made part of the bid 
document by the tender inviting authority.  Also, functionality was provided 
in e-Procurement to assist the tender inviting authority to verify the tender 
capacity.  Audit, however, observed that these functionalities were ineffective 
for the following reasons: 

Chapter-III 
77 
 The supplier history information in the e-Procurement merely 
displayed details of supplier such as  tender number, tender status, bid 
value and evaluation completion date.  It did not show information on 
final bid amount, anticipated date of  completion, stipulated date of 
completion, actual date of completi on, quantity of work completed, 
status of work etc.  In the absence of this vital information, the system 
could not calculate existing commit ments, ongoing works or value of 
completed works of a contractor/supplier. Hence, the statement 
provided by the bidder was accepted as true. 
 Regarding financial turnover of th e bidder, the portal required the 
bidder to upload scanned documents supporting his financial turnover. 
The portal did not capture the financ ial turnover information in fields 
designed for that purpose.  Since portal did not provide for appropriate 
fields which are inputs to calculate the financial turnover or the tender 
capacity, the eligibility with respect to financial capacity had to be 
worked out manually by the Tender Inviting Authorities.   
 On account of not making th e qualification criteria viz., tender 
capacity and past performance mand atory in the syst em, the tender 
inviting authorities did not consistently incorporate these requirements 
in their notice inviting tenders. 
All the above, resulted in the works being awarded to ineligible supplier/ 
contractors. It is obser ved that out of 2,69,652 te nders that have been 
processed by the portal and out of 67,883 suppliers in the system, financial 
turnover of only 291 suppliers were available. 
Thus, the incomplete and contextually inadequate information in the system 
would provide an opportunity fo r the bidder to suppress existing 
commitments and enhance his tender cap acity, which ultimately would rule 
out new competition.  Audit undertook a tim e consuming exercise of viewing 
web page after web page and downloading the scanned images uploaded by 
the bidders and identified a case of suppression of information and resultant 
award of tender to the ineligible contractor as shown below. 
A contractor had  submitted a bid (28 January 2013) for Tender notification 
KPWD/2012-13/RD/WORK_INDENT13589 which was decided in his 
favour.  As part of the bid documents uploaded, the contractor had disclosed 
that he had already submitted a bid for a work for 
`3.75 crore. On the 
contrary, Audit observed from the databa se of the e-Procurement portal that 
as on that date (28-Jan-2013), the said contractor had at least six bids  
(Table-3.1) which were under consideration amounting to a total Estimated 
Value of more than `52 crore.  The contractor , however, had not disclosed 
about other bids. All the six bids were submitted between 17 December 2012 
and 23 January 2013 which are listed below.   Out of these, the contractor had 
won five works estimated over `44 crore (Sl.No. 1, 2, 3, 5 & 6). 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
78 
Table-3.1 : Details of bids 
Sl. 
No. Tender notification Estimated 
Value in ` Bid submission date Bid 
number 
Whether 
disclosed 
1 KRRDA/2012-13/KS 22-10 11,70,87,401 2013-01-23 14:09:11 B530897 No 
2 KRRDA/2012-13/KS 21-10 10,73,64,134 2013-01-23 14:07:41 B527544 No 
3 KRRDA/2012-13/KS 21-06 10,57,03,719 2013-01-23 12:27:39 B531120 No 
4 KRRDA/2012-13/KS 26-08 8,03,46,823 2013-01-23 12:26:46 B531200 No 
5 KRRDA/2012-13/KS 26-05 7,78,04,701 2013-01-23 12:25:39 B531142 No 
6 KPWD/2012-13/RD/ 
WORK_INDENT12307 
3,75,26,075 2012-12-17 10:38:18 B494572 Yes 
(Source: e-Procurement database) 
Calculations shown below reveal that his bid for tenders amounting to  
`20.10 crore had to be rejected as his turnover was not sufficient to meet the 
requirements of the tenders.   
The turnover of the contractor as per information available in the portal is 
shown in Table-3.2: 
Table-3.2: Turnover of the contractor 
Year Turnover (`)  Year Turnover (`) 
2006-07 3,91,73,246  2009-10 20,03,12,601 
2007-08 9,84,92,131  2010-11 28,71,37,532 
2008-09 11,57,32,965  2011-12 24,74,93,502 
Maximum turnover during these years  28,71,37,532 
(Source: e-Procurement portal) 
The actual turnover requirement of the contractor is shown in Table-3.3 
Table-3.3: Actual turnover requirement for the tenders 
Tender number Estimated cost 
(`) Finalisation date 
Final turn over 
requirement  in 
rupees (`) 
Cumulative 
requirement 
(`) 
Eligibility 
KPWD/2012-
13/RD/WORK_INDENT12307 
3,75,26,075 23/02/2013 03:59 
PM 
7,50,52,000 7,50,52,000 Yes 
KRRDA/2012-13/KS 21-06 10,57,03,719 25/02/2013 03:44 
PM 
7,92,77,790 15,43,29,790 Yes 
KRRDA/2012-13/KS 21-10 10,73,64,134 25/02/2013 03:52 
PM 
8,05,23,101 23,48,52,891 Yes 
KRRDA/2012-13/KS 22-10*    11,70,87,401 25/02/2013 04:28 
PM 
8,78,15,551 32,26,68,442 No 
KRRDA/2012-13/KS 26-05*     7,78,04,701 25/02/2013 04:37 
PM 
5,83,53,526 38,10,21,968 No 
KPWD/2012-13/RD/ 
WORK_INDENT13589* 
      64,63,299 21/03/2013 
15:26:21 PM 
67,40,000 38,77,61,968 No 
* works awarded in excess of 
eligibility    `20.10 crore 
(Source: e-Procurement database) 
It can be seen that the cont ractor was awarded works worth `20.10 crore in 
excess of his financial capacity. 
Thus, despite e-Procurement being in  possession of all the information 
indicating that the tenderer is ineligible, these works were awarded to the 
ineligible contractor.  This is because the e-Procurement system is ineffective 
in implementing the business rules of GoK.   

Chapter-III 
79 
For every tender awarded to an ineligible contractor in excess of his capacity, 
a deserving contractor was denied the opportunity and government lost its 
chance to increase the br eadth of its contractor  pool. This prevented  
e-Procurement from helping the Governme nt achieve its objectives of cost 
savings through higher competition as competition is prevented from 
growing.    
This is indicative of ineffective re quirements gathering and requirements 
communication, inadequate customisati on of the software to meet the 
business rules of GoK, and poor testing of the system.  This impacts the 
objective of smart governance in implementing e-Procurement. 
The Government replied (November 2015)  that the above lapse would be 
taken care in the envisaged e-GP 2.0
50. 
(b) Management of password 
One of the objectives of the e-Proc urement project was bringing about 
transactional effectiveness by elimin ating or automating non-value adding 
steps within the procurement to enable efficient and effective processes. 
We observed that about 900 to 1,200 re quests for change of password per 
year had taken place between the stak eholders and the management due to 
users request or password being forgotten.   
The service provider, however, had not taken steps to overcome this 
deficiency in the portal using altern ative channels built into the online 
platform.  This would have reduced the correspondence regarding resetting of 
password to a large extent  and also ensured achievement of the envisaged 
objective mentioned above.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that management of password by 
using Mobile One facility was being considered. 
(c) Non-creation of centralised catalogue 
The catalogue management module in e- Procurement has to ensure the best 
price of goods and services across all de partments to achieve the objective of 
internal arbitrage. However, it was seen that the design of tables relating to 
the catalogue management module did not have the flexibility to permit this, 
as each department had a different cat alogue organised hierarchically based 
on the items created under that department. Also, this defect in the design 
resulted in the system not being able  to automatically display the last 
purchase rate of the item which was intended to be purchased by any entity 
presently.  This was due to the same item being identified by different item 
codes and IDs in different catalogues by different departments.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that centralised item code 
catalogue management was noted to be implemented in e-GP 2.0. 
                                                            
50  e-GP 2.0 is the next generation e-Government Procurement System 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
80 
(d) Submission of Earnest Money Deposit by way of Financial 
Instruments 
The KTPP Rules, 2000, defines Earn est Money Deposit (EMD) as amount 
required to be deposited by a tenderer along with his tender indicating his 
willingness to implement the contract.  Further, the EMD could be submitted 
in full cash or partly by cash and part ly by instruments such as Bank 
Guarantee, Demand Draft, Savings Certificate etc.   
When the EMD is collected partly by cash and balance through other 
instruments, the tenderer has to make online payment of the cash portion and 
attach scanned copies of financial instrument which has to be submitted to the 
tender inviting authority in original later. 
Audit, however, observed that there wa s no uniform timeline prescribed for 
submission of EMD by means of financial instrument (original).  Hence, each 
tender inviting authority prescribed different periods viz., on or before the last 
date and time of bid submission, before  the date of openi ng technical bid and 
at the time of opening technical bid. 
On analysis of data, we observed that there were cases where a tenderer did 
not submit original bank guarantee in as many as 37 times and the EMDs 
were not forfeited. 
 
The above scenario did not ensure ade quate control with the tender inviting 
authority, and these weaknesses were misused by some of the tenderers by 
not submitting original bank guarantees.  The Government replied (November 
2015) that the issue was discussed in  various Steering Committee Meetings 
and also stated that the CEG intends to develop a system required for 
implementation of electronic Performance Bank Guarantee (ePBG) in  
e-Procurement system. 
(e) Work queue and prioritisation of tasks 
The dashboard of the e-Procurement portal displays a chronological list of 
pending tasks pertaining to the user of a department who has logged in.  
Generally, the tasks are grouped into Indent, Notice inviting tender/Detailed 
tender schedule/ Addendum/Corrigendum, Purchase request, Purchase order, 
Contract Management-Bill approval, Contract Management – Contract 
approval etc.  We observed that the user coul d attend to the tasks in any order 
in the pending list.   
The Government replied (November  2015) that though each task was 
classified and placed chronologically, there was no hard and fast rule to 
dispose the task in the same chronological  order.  The reply is not acceptable 
as there was no exception report to monitor cases where tasks were disposed 
out of turn ahead of other pending task s.  Thus there was no way to monitor 
tasks disposed out of turn. 
 
 

Chapter-III 
81 
(f) Management of Ea rnest Money Deposit 
The bidders along with bid documents, make payment towards tender 
processing and also EMD. In case of successful submission of bid through  
e-Procurement portal, EMD is retained till tender is awarded to successful 
bidder, and the EMDs in respect of unsuccessful bidders are to be refunded.  
An analysis of the database pertai ning to e-Procurement revealed the 
following: 
 There were 7,371 cases where contract ors had not completed submission 
of their bids. Since the system allows the users to make payments prior to 
submission, the system had accepted both the payments towards tender 
processing fee and EMD in all the a bove cases.  The EMD with respect 
to the said cases worked out to 
`93.60 crore.  Since the system had not 
been incorporated with automatic refund of EMD in such cases, the 
refund had to be initiated by the tend er inviting authority.  Due to delay 
in initiation of refund, as on December 2014, there were 5,858 cases 
pending with EMD amounting to 
`63.52 crore. 
 Further, we observed th at as of July 2014, there was EMD amounting to 
`1,123 crore with the CEG which was to be refunded to the unsuccessful 
bidders (1,37,415 bids). Year-wise brea kup of such bids is detailed in 
Table-3.4. 
Table-3.4: Year wise breakup of unsuccessful bids 
Year No of bids  Year No. of bids 
2008 101  2012 8,340 
2009 810  2013 29,589 
2010 2,848  2014 86,550 
2011 8,356  Without date 821 
(Source: Database provided by CEG) 
The system, however, was not designed to issue any alert to the tender 
inviting authority about the pendency position. 
 Analysis of the data in respect of refunds already made  showed that in 
respect of 1,48,731 cases, the refund ranged between 10 to 2,099 days.  
In addition to the above, there was delay of 10 to 1,644 days in 7,508 
cases from the date of instructi on received for refund by the respective 
department and the actual date of refund. 
The Government replied (November 2015) that CEG has taken action to 
inform the departments regarding pendency of refund of EMD.  The reply is 
not satisfactory, as the CEG could consider automation of refund of EMD. 
Recommendation-1:Scope for automatic refund of EMD should be 
explored to overcome the delay in the process. 
3.1.5.3 Security and Integrity   
(a) Bidder’s identity disclosed prior to closing of tender date-Application 
did not implement security 
Rule 15 to 19 of the KTPP Rules, 2000 sp ecifies procedures for receipt and 
opening of tenders wherein it states that  the bidder’s identity should not be 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
82 
disclosed prior to the date of opening of tender.  However, e-Procurement has 
not ensured free and fearless participat ion of bidder and participation with 
anonymity as envisaged in the KTPP rules. 
Audit observed that it was possible to know the identities of bidders (such as 
name, address and phone number) who were participating in the tender, prior 
to closing of the tender.  This was due  to insecure coding practices in the 
application. 
Instances where the audit could ascertain  the identity of the bidders when 
bids were still open are brought out in Table-3.5. 
Table-3.5: Instances where identity of the bidders were disclosed 
prior to closing date 
Tender Number and name Tender 
Closing time 
Date and time when audit 
penetrated the system and 
accessed the bidder 
information 
KPWD/2015-16/OW/WORK_INDENT20311 
Improvements & Widening of Baloba cross to Khadaklat Kothali 
Shantigiri Chinchani road from Km No, 13.65 to 15.25, ( Kothali 
to SH-18) 16.20 to 18.95  ( Shantigiri X to Shantigiri) & 19.30 to 
21.10  (Kuppanwadi to kuppanwadi X) In Chikodi taluka of 
Belagavi Dist under HoA:5054-Plan-MDR-Imp-2014-15-App-E 
25/06/2015 
16:00:00 
24/06/2015 
16:57 
CEG/12/Sec-Lan/2015 
Procurement of SPAM Filtering Software 
30/06/2015 
17:00:00 
24/06/2015 
12.45  
CEG/15/SEMT/2015 
ICMS PMU High Court of Karnataka 
06/07/2015 
17:00:00 
24/06/2015 
12.43 pm 
(Source: e-Procurement portal) 
The Government replied (November 2015)  that the CEG has taken steps to 
rectify the problem during November 2015. 
(b) Improper implementatio n of digital signature 
According to the ‘Guidelines for Usage of Digital Signatures in e-
Governance’ Version 1.0 (December 2010), Government of India, a digital 
signature is an electronic signature that can be used to authenticate the 
identity of the sender of a message or  the signatory of a document, and to 
ensure that the original content of the message or document that has been sent 
is unchanged.  Thus, digital signatur es provide message authentication, 
message integrity and message non repudiation.   
Analysis of the working of the portal showed that for each form various 
decisions were involved by various us er categories. Illustrative forms are 
listed in Table-3.6. 
Table 3.6: Decisions involved in various forms 
Form User category Decision involved 
Project Approval Decision  Departmental 
officer  
Approve/Reject/Send back for 
clarifications/Delegate 
Letter of intent acceptance or rejection  Contractor Accepted / Rejected / Clarification  
Performance Guarantee Submission  Contractor  Accepted / Seek clarification 
Contract approval page  Departmental 
officer 
Approve/Reject/Send back for 
clarifications/Delegate 
Review performance guarantee submission  Departmental 
officer Accepted / rejected  
(Source: e-Procurement portal) 

Chapter-III 
83 
We however observed that the interface allowed the user to sign the form 
even prior to selecting the decision and thus the signature did not contain and 
bind the decision to the signer.   Hence, all the data compiled from such forms 
suffered from uncertainty about messa ge integrity and non repudiation was 
not captured reliably.   
The Government replied (November 2015) that matter with respect to works 
tender was addressed and action would be initiated with respect to Goods and 
services tenders.   
(c) Security risk due to defec tive implementation of two factor 
authentication  
The e-Procurement portal has the option to enforce two factor authentication 
by way of user-id and password followed by digital signature of the user.   
The two factor authentication is used to prevent access to further application 
functionality such as menus  or links that could be used by the authenticated 
users only.     Audit, however, noticed that due to defective implementation of 
the two factor authentication system, th e user was able to access application 
functionality bypassing the two factor di gital signature au thentication. This 
posed a security risk as the application was trusting the browser and not 
validating the browser requests at server side.    
This occurred due to improper session
51 management 52 for authentication.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that issue was fixed by the Partner 
in July 2015. 
(d) System vulnerable to hacking by hijacking tasks 
The e-Procurement portal has implemen ted workflows for various items of 
work or actions to be performed by different users viz., all Government 
officials and contractors.  Activities su ch as initiation, forwarding approval, 
acceptance, rejection, appeal etc., are presented to the users in the form of a 
dash-board, when they login to the sy stem, which acts as a logical “in-tray” 
for the users.   
Audit observed that the ta sks lying in the dashboard  of a user could be 
removed by any other user (attacker) and the task ge ts transferred to the 
attacker’s control.  A security we akness in the e-Procurement workflow 
engine, availability of task reference (Task-Ids identifying the tasks are 
serially numbered and available in the URLs
53), and inconsistency in 
authorisation checks in e-Pr ocurement application enabled attackers to hijack 
tasks belonging to other users. The app lication was not consistently verifying 
whether the user requesting a resource is authorised to access it, thereby 
violating the standard of security
54.  
                                                            
51 The user interacts with the web application by way of Hyper Text Transfer Protocol 
requests and responses.  This is termed as a session  
52  A3 Broken authentication and session management 
53  Uniform resource locaters  
54  OWASP 2013 A4 Insecure Direct Object Reference  and A7 Function level access control 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
84 
This weakness breached confidentiality, made tasks vulnerable to attacks, and 
affected the integrity and reliability of  the system.  This arose because the 
system generated the web pages with  menus to execute only authorised 
functions but did not perform appropriate server side validation.   
The attack was   demonstrated by aud it to the Department.  After the issue 
was pointed out in audit, the Government replied (November 2015) that issue 
was fixed by the Partner. 
(e) System vulnerable to hacking through session hijacking 
Sessions provide the application the ab ility to establish access rights that 
apply to each and every interaction a user has with the web application for the 
duration of the session. Each session is identified by a session_id.  In this 
regard, Audit observed that the system was not protecting user sessions and 
was permitting scripts to be injected in the system. This allowed the attacker 
to remotely collect the session_id of th e victim, and enter into his session.  
Hence, the system was open to session hijacking which constituted a serious 
vulnerability.  The vulnerability could be used to impersonate the victim, 
terminate their sessions, view their activities and menus, etc. In short, it 
compromised confidentiality as well as security in the system.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that issue was fixed by the Partner 
after audit observation was issued. 
Recommendation-2: Periodic security  reviews should be conducted to 
plug security weaknesses in the system. 
(f) Digital signatures not appended to the communications 
All the correspondence in the portal had to be digitally signed by the Tender 
Inviting Authority as defined in Re quest for Proposal under Public Key 
Infrastructure Digital Signature Certif icate.  We observed that none of the 
communications issued by the tender inviti ng authority were digitally signed.  
They were either unauthenticated plai n Word or Portable Document Format 
(PDF) files which were neither em bedded with digital signatures nor 
accompanied by digital signatures.  Hen ce, these unauthenticated documents 
did not bind the issuer to the documents issued.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that some of the documents 
provided by the department could be used by the bidder s without changing 
the format or content.  It also stated that at any point of time the correctness 
of the documents could be verified fr om those available in e-Procurement 
portal.  The reply is not acceptable as all the documents available in the portal 
were not digitally protected and hence were susceptible for alteration during 
transit. 
(g) Disaster Recovery: Non-availabi lity of disaster recovery site 
Business continuity planning refers to wo rking out how to stay in business in 
the event of a disruption.  Disaster re covery is a critical component of 
business continuity planning. In respect of e-Procurement, though the disaster 

Chapter-III 
85 
recovery site has been envisaged to be set up at Suvarna Soudha, Belagavi, it 
is yet to be created.  Instead, site rep lication is carried out at another storage 
system at State Data Centre, Bengaluru for faster retrieval of data in the event 
of a storage failure.  However, this doe s not ensure continuity of business in 
the event of a disaster affecting the State Data Centre in Bangalore. 
3.1.5.4 Mapping of business rules 
(a) Poor implementation of Co ntract Management Module 
The Contract Management module deals with the processes involved between 
the issuance of the work order and the final payment of bills to the contractor. 
The implementation of this module would inter alia, enable the Government 
to maintain an overview of works in progress and build a repository of 
information that could be used to measure the performance of a contractor. 
The data generated by the contract mana gement module is also used in the e-
tendering module during the technical bids evaluation where bid capacity is to 
be assessed.   
Analysis of e-Procurement data showed the following: 
Total number of works tenders floated through the portal55 1,47,168 tenders 
Number of tenders where the contractor selection has been 
completed.  1,28,453 tenders 
Number of works whose contract management is handled in e-
Procurement.  41 tenders 
Thus, against 1,28,453 works where contract or selection has been completed, 
the contract management information was available in e-Procurement only in 
respect of 41 works. This indicated  poor implementation of contract 
management module.  Poor availability  of contract management information 
had cascading impacts on tender evaluation processes as the latter requires 
contract management data for technical evaluation processes. 
The Government in reply (November 2015) stated the following: 
 The Contract Management Module was dependent on (i) treasury system 
to integrate with e-Tendering modules , (ii) banks to integrate with  
e-Payment system, (iii) capacity of contractor to enter milestones,  
(iv) availability of  Information Technology (IT) and network 
infrastructure in all locations etc., and hence could not implement the said 
module.  The reply, however, is not acceptable.  From the proceedings of 
the Tenth meeting of Steering Committ ee (March 2015) it is evident that 
the Contract Management Module wa s not used due to bugs in the 
application and that the Partner was unwilling to make changes to the 
software as required by the departments (business rules) but tried to 
enforce existing version of the softwa re on the users.  Further, it was 
noticed that there was negligible training in the area of Contract 
Management Module. 
                                                            
55 Tenders in “Published’, “Closed”, “Under_Evaluation” or “Evaluation_completed” status 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
86 
 Government has also conceded the poor uptake of Contract Management 
module and stated that a three memb er committee has been constituted to 
analyse the root cause for the poor uptake. 
Recommendation-3: Government shou ld ensure incorporation of the 
business rules relating to contract management processes and enforce the 
implementation and utilisation of the Contract Management Module to 
optimise the functioning of the tender process. 
(b) Appeals pending 
The KTPP Act, 2000, read with KTPP Rule s provide for appellate authorities 
to hear appeal from any tenderer aggr ieved by an order passed by the tender 
accepting authority. The authorities shall as far as possible dispose of the 
appeal within thirty days from the date of filing. 
Analysis of the database of the portal showed the following: 
 As at the end of December 2014, out of 1,665 appeals submitted by 
different tenderers, decision was ta ken only in respect of 431 cases. 
There was no response from the appe llate authorities in respect of 
balance 1,234 cases.  The appeals pending during the period December 
2008 to December 2014 are indicated in Table-3.7 below: 
Table-3.7: Period of appeals pending 
Year from which appeal pending Number of appeals pending 
2008 1 
2009 21 
2010 62 
2011 126 
2012 235 
2013 299 
2014 490 
(Source: Database provided by centre for e-Governance) 
 One of the reasons for appeals pendi ng was due to appellate authorities 
not logging into the portal.  The portal however, wa s not designed to 
alert the user automatically after completion of the period prescribed.  As 
at the end of December 2014, agains t 634 appellate authorities, while 
166 had never logged into the portal,  332 appellate aut horities had not 
logged into the portal for over three months.   
 The second reason for appeals pendi ng was wrong mapping of appellate 
authorities in the portal.  According to KTPP Rules, the Head of the 
Department was the Appellate Author ity in case of tender accepting 
authority being subordinate to the H ead of the Department. In case of 
tender accepting authority being Head of the Department, local authority, 
State Government Undertaking, Boar d, Body Corporate or any other 
authority owned or controlled by th e Government, Government was the 
appellate authority. In this conn ection, we observed that in the  
e-Procurement system, the appellate authority role was assigned to the 
Government, irrespective of the tender accepting authority, which was 
contrary to the rules specified. 

Chapter-III 
87 
 Review of appeals showed that the interface does not provide for 
categorisation of appeals and most of the reviewed cases are seeking 
reasons for rejection which could ha ve been addressed by publishing the 
tender evaluation reports in the portal  which has already been discussed 
in paragraph 3.1.5.1(a) above.  
The Government replied (November 2015) that the portal was designed as per 
the specifications under KTPP Act and the concerned departments had to 
ensure its utilisation.   
Recommendation-4: Government sh ould conduct training programmes 
for higher authorities to sensitise them to the importance of using the 
portal 
(c) Blacklisting of Contractors 
During the period 2012-14, eight contra ctors were blacklisted by various 
departments.  Analysis of the supplier data in the portal, however, showed no 
such contractors to have been blackliste d.  By not creating such facility in the 
portal, there was a risk of entrusting the works to blacklisted contractors.   
The Government replied (November  2015) that various modalities of 
blacklisting contractors are being cons idered by them.  The reply is not 
acceptable as the blacklisted suppliers are not shown as such in the portal.   
(d) Work flow for handling short term tenders 
The KTPP Rules, 2000, states that the te nder inviting authority had to ensure 
that sufficient time is provided for submission of tenders. The minimum 
period for tenders up to ` two crore in value is thirty days and in excess of 
` two crore in value is sixty days.  Fu rther, any reduction in time is to be 
specifically authorised by an authority superior to the Tender Inviting 
Authority and the reason for such reducti on has to be recorded.  Thus there is 
a difference between the approval workfl ows of short term tenders and full 
term tenders as the reasons for reduced tender period have to be specifically 
captured.   
From the data, we observed that between November 2007 and December 
2014, of the 2,69,941 tenders being floate d through the portal, period in 
respect of 2,26,849 tenders was less than  the minimum period prescribed in 
the KTPP Act, 1999.  In this regard, we observed that: 
 The system did not apply minimum default tender periods for tenders 
based on their estimated cost; 
 The workflow did not mandatorily reco rd reasons for calling tenders with 
less than the minimum period prescribed in the KTPP Act, 1999. 
As the reasons for resorting to short term tendering were not consistently 
recorded, the objectives of transparenc y, increase in competition and smart 
governance were adversely affected. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
88 
The Government replied (November  2015) that long duration for bid 
submission did not ensure more partic ipation. It further stated that e-
Procurement portal was designed in acco rdance with functional requirements 
of KTPP Act, 1999.  The reply was not acc eptable as the provision under the 
said Act was envisaged to ensure more  participation.  Further, since the 
reasons for calling tenders with less th an the minimum period prescribed in 
the KTPP Act, 1999 was not recorded  mandatorily, the portal was not 
designed completely in accordance with the functional requirements of KTPP 
Act, 1999. 
3.1.5.5 Inadequate testing 
(a) Uploaded documents could not be viewed 
Various documents such as technical proposals, corrigendum issued by the 
departments, addendums to the technical propos als called for etc., are 
uploaded by tender inviting authorities.   Similarly, documents are uploaded 
by bidders, which are to be viewed by the tender accepting authorities. Audit, 
however, observed that these documents could not be viewed by the bidders/ 
department and hence resulted in inco mplete information being available in 
the portal. 
The Government replied (November 2015)  that the issue was at the local 
computer and e-Procurement did not have control over local computer.  It 
also stated that all bid documents signed and submitted by bidders were 
visible by the concerned departments.  The reply is not acceptable as the issue 
was related only with respect to corrigendum, addendums and the like and 
hence it was not a local personal computer issue. 
(b) Incorrect supplier history 
Information on the supplier history is provided in the e-Procurement portal 
and we observed that the informa tion so provided was incorrect and 
misleading. Instances are brought out below: 
 The portal displays the supplier M/s. Tata Motors had been selected in 
respect of 73 tenders under one repr esentative of the company, while it 
displays the same supplier to have  been selected in 20 tenders under 
another identity.  Since both the indivi duals represent the same supplier, 
the information provided by the portal was incorrect and misleading. 
 The portal also gives incorrect inform ation with respec t to individual 
suppliers.  The portal allowed an individual to have more than one 
account.  
On carrying out a test-che ck of the database, we  observed that such 
inconsistent data existe d in the e-Procurement system in respect of 329 
contractors.  This defect in the desi gn of the application not only provided 
incorrect and misleading in formation, it also indicated that the testing had 
been ineffective. 

Chapter-III 
89 
The Government replied (November 2015)  that the audit observation would 
be placed before the Change Management Committee for approval so that the 
entire list of tenders against a comp any would be displayed to the Tender 
Evaluating Authority. 
(c) Incorrect Management Information System Report 
The Management Information System (M IS) is a critical component, which 
collects, records, stores and processes data from all the departments in an 
integrated manner.  It also provides  a feature known as MIS Reports from 
where the user can extract details of tenders.  It has an option to filter the data 
on parameters such as tender status, da te of publishing of tender, amount of 
tender etc.  All such information with respect to the report are drawn from the 
table “mis_tender_details”.  Analysis of this table showed that in 34,185 cases 
pertaining to 133 departments for th e period from 2008 to 2014 were 
published even before Detailed Tende r Schedules were approved.  Audit 
further noticed that the table was used  as input for two more MIS reports 
namely Tender Item Details Report and Prequalification Tender Details 
Report.  The prevalence of such incorrect data led to unreliable MIS reports.  
The Government replied (November 2015 ) that the Partner had fixed the 
issues. 
3.1.5.6 Other observations 
(a) Managerial Controls: IT Governance 
IT Governance integrates and instituti onalises optimal ways of planning and 
organising, acquiring and implementi ng, delivering and supporting, and 
monitoring IT performance.  
We observed that the project was in tended to go live in six months  
(June 2007) but failed to do so until 2011.   
The project was to undergo third party a udit and security audit biannually for 
acceptability and security of the project respectively. We, however, observed 
that the third party which was to asse ss and certify the acceptability of  
e-Procurement system failed to complete the audit within six months 
(December 2007).  The guidelines for the audit were not firmed up until April 
2009 and hence the audit was not completed until 2010.  This prevented the 
platform from going live until 2011.  Also, we observed that the security audit 
was not conducted during the last four y ears.  This resulted in the portal 
running with inherent security weaknesses in its design.  
(b) Non-availability of System Requirement Specification 
A properly documented System Requirement Specification (SRS) by the 
software development team ensures that the needs of the users of the system 
have been taken care of and the software developed meets the business 
requirement.   
As per the Master Services Agreemen t and Project Engagement Definition 
Document (PEDD), the responsibilities of  the Partner included submission of 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
90 
detailed documentation on the TO BE processes for each of the departments 
or organisations and getting sign-off on them.  
These TO BE processes formed the basis for designing the SRS and 
developing the e-Procurement system . Further, the Partner was also 
responsible for getting sign-off on SRS processes from the departments or 
organisations. The said documentation was also to be updated as and when 
changes/ enhancements/bug fixing were  made to the system.  Thus, the 
updated SRS would have documented all the processes as implemented in e-
Procurement.  Without such documentation, the software cannot be developed 
nor maintained in a professional manner.   In the current case, the narration 
/explanation/expansion/elucidation of the processes being followed and to be 
followed is the property of Government.   
Audit, however, observed that the SRS was not available with the 
Government.   
The Government replied (November 2015) that SRS was a detailed technical 
document typically not well understood by non-technical resources and hence 
sign-off on the SRS by departments woul d have caused delay in rolling out 
the software.   The reply is not satisfact ory as in the absence of detailed user 
requirements documentation, the SRS was the only document which could be 
used as the basis to ascertain whether the users requirements were elicited and 
incorporated in the appli cation.  In this regard, th e Government stated that 
action would be taken to ensure all the required documentation of the existing 
system is obtained from the Partner at  the time of Exit Management in order 
to avoid duplication of efforts in the proposed e-GP 2.0. 
3.1.6 Conclusion 
Delay and poor implementation led to the government not deriving full 
benefit of the unified e-Procurement solution. The off-the-shelf  
e-Procurement application was not adequately customised to suit the specific 
user requirements and KTPP provisi ons. Opportunities for using IT for 
improving efficiencies has not been utilis ed fully. Inadequate testing had lead 
to incomplete supplier history and inco rrect management information system 
reports.  The application suffered fro m four out of the OWASP Top Ten
56 
security vulnerabilities. 
Although the Government had intende d to implement an end-to-end 
procurement solution with benefits of transparency and smart governance, the 
e-Procurement portal had no information about contracts concluded, works in 
progress, works completed, goods suppl ies done, expenditure progress, 
abandoned works, letters of intent and works yet to be started.  Thus, the 
project failed in achieving its intended benefits of transparency and smart 
governance, leading to a situation where the envisaged end-to-end 
procurement solution for Government of Karnataka was used only as a tender 
processing website even after eight years of its implementation.  
 
                                                            
56   A2, A3, A4 and A7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-IV 
Compliance Audit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 

 
93 
 
Chapter-IV 
 
Compliance Audit 
 
Department of Home 
4.1 Follow up audit on Internal Control System in Department of 
Prisons 
 
4.1.1 Introduction 
The objective of this audit was to determine whether corrective action has 
been taken to address the audit findings and implement the recommendations 
made in the Comptroller and Auditor Ge neral of India Repor t (Civil) for the 
year ended 31 March 2004 - ‘Evaluation of Internal Control System and 
Internal Audit in Department of  Prisons (Previous Report) and 
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) on the above said 
report which was placed in the Legislative Assembly during December 2009 
(Report of PAC).  The ear lier audit was undertaken to assess the extent of 
compliance with the financial and opera tional controls in relation to the 
physical verification of pris oners at the time of entry and exit, segregation of 
prisoners, producing undertrial s in courts, transfer and release of prisoners, 
etc., as prescribed in the relevant Acts, Rules and Manuals.  
The Department of Prisons is under the administrative control of the Principal 
Secretary to Government, Home Department (Department), and is headed by 
the Additional Director General of Po lice and Inspector General of Prisons 
(ADGP&IGP), assisted by the Deputy Insp ector General of Prisons (DIG).  
There are 102 prisons, classified as Cent ral Prisons (eight), district prisons 
(19), special sub-jails (two), Taluk sub- jails (70), open-air jail (one), juvenile 
jail (one) and borstal school (one). 
The follow up audit covering the period 2010-15 was conducted during 
February to June 2015 by te st-check of record s maintained in the Secretariat, 
Home Department, Office of the ADGP & IGP, six Central Prisons, five 
district prisons and three sub-jails 57.  All the field units covered in the follow 
up audit were the same as in the previous audit. 
4.1.2 Results of Audit 
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India of 2004 had three 
recommendations each on custody of prisone rs, security of prisoners and the 
monitoring system. The PAC report, however, had suggested seven 
recommendations relating to custody, secu rity, facilities available in prisons,  
                                                            
57 Central Prisons – Ballari, Belagavi, Bengaluru, Dharwad, Mysuru and Tumakuru (Women) 
 District Prisons – Chikkaballapur, Kolar, Shivamogga, Tumakuru and Ramanagara 
 Taluk Sub-jails – Arasikere, Gokak and Tiptur 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
94 
and monitoring.  In the follow up a udit, we observed that the State 
Government had taken some corre ctive actions to implement the 
recommendations in the previous Audit Report as well as the PAC’s 
recommendations. The adequacy of the corrective action taken by the 
Government on audit findings, audit recommendations and PAC’s 
recommendations is discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
4.1.2.1 Prevention of entry of proh ibited articles into prison 
The Government of India Prisons Manua l, 2004 specifies various norms on 
issues relating to security and custody in prisons. The norms include: 
 a system of thorough searches of a ll incoming and outgoing prisoners, 
articles and vehicles; 
 daily searches and periodical surprise searches of all prison sections and 
equipment; 
 monitoring from a central point, for controlling the movement of 
prisoners; 
 installation of close circuit television systems and other electronic gadgets 
for effective monitoring and maintaining a close watch to avoid any 
breach of security inside the prisons; 
 construction of watch towers, provis ion of searchlights and binoculars, 
wherever necessary, to keep vigil both inside and outside of the prisons; 
 installing power fences on the walls of prisons wherever necessary to 
prevent escapes, and 
 a system of thorough searches for unearthing explos ives, narcotic 
substances, electronic gadgetry etc. 
The Karnataka Prison Manual, came into  force in 1978.  Afte r that, it has not 
been revised. The manual except for s tipulating powers and duties of a Gate 
Keeper, does not cover other aspects of security.  The manual specifies that 
the Gate Keeper is required to prev ent introduction of un- authorised articles 
such as Ganja, opium, tobacco, narcotic s, liquors and drugs or any articles 
which would abet and assist the escape of prisoners  and also not to allow any 
article outside the prison gate without pr oper authority.  Further, it states that 
he should be in-charge of the main gate of the prison and also maintain a gate 
register in this regard. 
Audit finding: The possession of prohibited articles by prisoners indicated 
that the procedure followed for physical check of prisoners was not effective. 
Audit recommendation : System of physical check of prisoners during 
entry/exit should be made more effec tive by installing sophisticated gadgets 
and deploying trained staff. 
PAC recommendation : PAC suggested five recommendations, viz., 
adherence by the Jailor and subordinate  staff to the guidelines on physical 
check of the prisoners at the time of admission and also on every subsequent 
occasion of entry and exit of the prisone rs and any other persons entering the 
prisons; conducting surprise inspections of the jail premises and installing 
CCTV cameras; installing mobile jammers; initiating action against Jailor/ 

Chapter-IV 
95 
 
Subordinate staff in case of non-a dherence to the guidelines issued on 
prevention of entry of prohibited articl es into the prisons and minimising the 
number of visitors visiting the prisoners. 
Findings of follow-up Audit:  Government initiated action with respect to 
recommendations of the PAC.  The audit findings on its adequacies are 
discussed below: 
(a) Physical check of prisoners an d other persons entering prisons 
Electronic equipment such as hand held  metal detectors, door frame metal 
detectors, deep search metal detectors, baggage scanners, etc.; are essential for 
surveillance and for detection/prevention of entry of prohibited articles into 
the prisons. Though the Government has pr ocured this electronic equipment, 
guidelines were not issued by the Governme nt for its use.  In the units test-
checked, we observed the following: 
 Many electronic equipment procured were not in working condition and 
no action had been initiated to get them repaired (Appendix-4.1). 
 In the Central Prison, Belagavi, except  for lunch boxes/bags of the prison 
staff, no other items was being subjected to scanning.  
 No system was put in place to scan or check the vehicles that carried food 
articles, raw materials for manufactur ing departments in the prisons. 
Similarly, all the articles manufactured 58 in the prison such as Agarbattis 
in three59 prisons, and bakery products in  Central Prison, Bengaluru were 
moved out of the prison without issue of a gate pass or an entry in the 
gate register, as was required in the manual. 
Further, it was also observed that during th e period 2010-15, various 
prohibited articles, viz., mobile phones (4,437), sim cards (3,116), mobile 
chargers (1,211), batteries (3,307) and drugs (43.778 kgs) were seized in test-
checked prisons during the course of rou tine checks and  surprise inspections. 
The non-functioning of devices proc ured, including CCTV cameras and 
jammers are discussed in detail in s ubsequent paragrap hs. All the above 
instances/observations not only indicate laxity in the management of the 
security system but also non-adherence to the guidelines s tipulated in the 
manual.  
The Government replied (December 2015) that an assessment would be made 
to repair and re-use the non-functi onal equipment, and for catering to 
additional requirements. It further repl ied that action was taken to obtain 
Annual Maintenance for security equipment and also that all the heads of the 
prisons had been instructed to subm it reports on maintena nce of security 
equipment and also to conduct physical checks using this security equipment. 
 
                                                            
58  Prisoners are to work in prison as a means of furthering their rehabilitation. The 
manufactured articles are removed from the prison on a pass issued by the Superintendent 
and also on making necessary entries at the Gate. 
59 Mysuru, Tumakuru and Ramanagara 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
96 
Recommendation-1: Government is required not only to issue detailed 
guidelines in support of pr ovisions already existing wi th regard to physical 
check of persons/vehicles entering the prison but ensure their implementation 
as well. 
Recommendation-2: Government needs to update the Karnataka Prison 
Manual, 1978, duly incorporating provi sions relating to new technology 
equipment  procured for security of the prison. 
(b) Conducting surprise inspection 
The Government issued (March 20 10 and November 2011) two guidelines 
which made surprise inspections a nd search of premises by dog squads 
mandatory.  As per these guidelines, the Department had to conduct surprise 
inspection in co-ordination with th e Police Department, and search of 
premises by dog squads once in every 15 days.  We, however, observed that 
against the required 1248 surprise checks
60 and 76861 searches by dog squad in 
the 13 units test-checked, only 130 and 138 respectively had been conducted.  
Further, the Government of India (Go I) had suggested (May 2010) steps to be 
taken for detecting drugs and inmates with drug addiction. In the units  
test-checked, we observed that the Department had, however, not followed the 
steps suggested by the GOI, and in three Central Prisons about 44 kgs of 
Ganja were recovered during 2010-15.  Apart from this, as already indicated in 
the previous paragraph, mobiles, sims, chargers etc., were also recovered 
during 2010-15.  The details of the sources from where they were seized are 
indicated in Appendix-4.2.  We observed that the major source for entry of 
prohibited articles was at the time of interview granted to visitors and the 
preferred hiding place for the prohibited  articles was the toilet.  The fact, 
however, remains that the prohibited arti cles could enter the prison. All these 
indicated lack of controls in detecting drugs at the entry as well as insufficient 
checks at the premises. 
In this connection, the PAC had reco mmended the initiation of disciplinary 
action against officers/staff for derelicti on of duty in such instances.  We, 
however, observed that during 2010-15, inve stigation was initiated in only 20 
cases across the State. Out of these 20 cases, disciplinary action had been 
taken in 14 cases, four cases were closed  due to lack of proper evidence and 2 
cases are under investigation. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that due to shortage of staff there 
was shortfall in conducting inspections.  It  further stated that the Government 
had approved (May 2015) the deployment of Karnataka State Industrial 
Security Force in the four major pris ons which would not only strengthen the 
security but also prevent the entry of prohibited items into these prisons. 
(c) Installation of CCTV cameras 
The PAC recommended installation of  CCTV cameras for round the clock 
surveillance and also to serve as a mean s of identification of individuals and 
                                                            
60 10 units test-checked x 2 x 12 x 5 years  +1 unit in Tumakuru (Women)  x 2 x 12 x 2 years 
61 10 units test-checked x 2 x 12 x 3 years  + 1 unit in Tumakuru (Women) x 2 x 12 x 2years 

Chapter-IV 
97 
 
articles, etc. They could help to keep strict vigil on the movements of the 
prisoners, which would put an end to prohibited articles entering the prison. 
Though the recommendation for installi ng CCTV cameras was given by the 
PAC in 2009, the Government took action to implement this recommendation 
between 2013-15, by approving installa tion of 406 CCTV cameras in eight 
central prisons at a total cost of `17.87 crore.  We observed that in the six  
test-checked central prisons, the Government had procured 351 CCTV 
cameras and all were commissioned in 2014.  Further, we observed in the 
units test-checked that prior to 2014, only three prisons had CCTV cameras.  
Out of the 58 cameras installed in these prisons, 47 were not working of which 
43 were irreparable. Hence, all the pr isons test-checked did not have video 
surveillance facility till 2014. From the details of the entry of prohibited 
articles given in Appendix-4.3, it has been seen that there is a drastic 
reduction on the entry of prohibited arti cles into the prisons on account of the 
introduction of video surveillance, which is  appreciable but strict vigil is still 
required to keep the system in working order to get desired results.  
Recommendation 3:  Installation of CCTV cameras needs to be extended to 
all the prisons and their maintenance ensured by regular follow up. 
(d) Installation of Mobile Jammers 
Subsequent to the recommendation of the PAC, during 2009, the Department 
proposed to install 66 cell phone jammer s in six central prisons and one 
district prison (Mangalu ru) at a total cost of `28.28 crore. While the jammers 
have been installed in four central prisons, work in two central prisons 
(Belagavi and Kalaburagi) and one district  prison was in progress.  In the test-
checked central prisons, we however, observed the following: 
 The performance of four 2G jammer s since installation (December 2009) 
in Mysuru prison was unsatisfactory as  they did not cover the specified 
area.  Despite several correspondences  requesting speedy remedial action, 
the supplier was unsuccessful in rectif ying the defects to block the mobile 
signals to the satisfaction of the jail authorities. Even though the 2G 
jammers were upgraded as 3G jamme rs, the system did not function 
satisfactorily. Since May 2012, the syst ems were found to be completely 
out of order and not in usable condition.  The total expenditure incurred for 
the purchase of these systems was 
`86.05 lakh. 
 In three other prisons (Dharwar , Ballari and Bengaluru) network 
connectivity was reported to be available inside the prison in certain areas. 
Further, we observed that the supplier in his communication (July 2014) to the 
Department had indicated the followi ng reasons for non-functioning of the 
jammers: 
 telecom service providers pumping more power which countered the 
jammer power; 
 irregular power supply/variation in  voltage and non-availability of 
continuous power supply; 
 limiting of radio frequency signal generated by jammer to jail premises; 
 non-availability of dedicated personnel to operate jammers, etc.  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
98 
From the above it can be seen that it  was a serious chal lenge to precisely 
control the radio frequency signals of the jammers due to technical reasons 
and that the installation of jammers wa s not a solution for unauthorised usage 
of mobiles in the prison by the prisoners.  This rendered a sum of `28.28 crore 
incurred on installing the jammers largely unfruitful. 
From the above findings it is seen that  the Department had not done adequate 
background study to ensure that all requireme nts were fulfilled so as to ensure 
that jammers when installed would carry out their function effectively. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that efforts were being made to 
effectively operationalise the existing system.  
Recommendation 4 : Issues relating to the effectiveness of the working of 
mobile jammers needs to be sorted out by in-depth examination of the problem 
before replicating the same in all prisons  in the State, besides rectifying the 
defects in the existing equipment. 
4.1.2.2 Producing undertrial prisoners in courts 
According to Rule 149 of the Karnataka Prisons Rules, 1974, on receipt of an 
order requiring the appearance of a pris oner in a competent court to give 
evidence or to answer a charge, it is th e responsibility of th e officer-in-charge 
of a prison to act in accor dance therewith and to ensure safety of a prisoner 
during his absence from the prison. 
Audit findings : All the undertrial prisoners required to be produced on a 
particular date were not produced on th at date but were produced on second/ 
subsequent occasions in a staggered manner.  Monthly statement indicating 
details of undertrial prisoners whose cas es were pending in courts for more 
than three months and statement indicat ing undertrial prisoners who might be 
eligible for bail were not furnished to courts. 
Audit recommendation: The system of providing escorts to undertrials when 
they are taken to courts should be st reamlined and monthly reports regarding 
undertrials submitted to courts regularly. 
PAC recommendation : In order to bring down the delay in producing the 
undertrial to court, the PAC s uggested eight recommendations, viz., recruiting 
of police personnel as police escort; coordinating with Karnataka Legal 
Services Authority to conduct more Lok Adalat camps,  establishing courts in 
premises of jails; forming State level committee to review and dispose of cases 
pending for more than six months; furnis hing periodical statements to courts 
on time; and conducting quarterly review of pending cases  at the Government 
level.   
Findings of follow up audit:  Action had been initiate d by the Government 
on some of the recommendations which were reviewed by audit. The 
observations in this regard are brought out in the subsequent paragraphs: 
 

Chapter-IV 
99 
 
(a) Lok Adalat camps 
In order to ensure speedy and effec tive disposal of cases, the PAC had 
recommended to the Department to co-ordinate with Karnataka Legal Services 
Authority for conducting Lok Adalat cam ps.  It had also recommended for 
fixation of annual targets for disposal of cases through Lok Adalats. 
In the units test-checked, we observe d that seven Lok Adalat camps were 
organised during the period  2010-15 in th ree central prisons and two district 
prisons. We observed that against 3,283 cases pending for more than three 
months, only 448 cases were referred to  the Lok Adalat, of which 257 cases 
were disposed of.  In addition, we obse rved that no targets were fixed for each 
of the prisons to refer cases to the Lok Adalatas prescr ibed by the PAC.  
Further, in respect of other units test -checked, we observed that Lok Adalat 
Camps had not been conducted.   
The Government replied (December 2015) that the matter would be brought to 
the notice of District Judges concerned who are members of the Legal Aid
62 of 
the concerned jails. 
Recommendation-5:  Targets of cases for each prison for referring to the Lok 
Adalat need to be fixed based on the cases pending in each prison so as to 
maximise clearance of backlog. 
(b) Producing undertrials through video conference 
With a view to dispense with the ne ed for physically producing the undertrials 
in court, the Department introduced video conferencing (April 2004). In the 
State, the video conference system has b een provided in 29 jails only.  In the 
units test-checked, except in Bengaluru, where 43 per cent of prisoners were 
produced through video conference, we observed that the undertrials produced 
through video conference was less comp ared to undertrials produced through 
police escort (Appendix-4.4).  Further, we observed that in three prisons63, the 
video conference system was non-functional. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that the department has represented 
to the Technical Committ ee of the Honourable High Court of Karnataka for 
utilising the video conference system on a large scale.  It has been further 
stated that the Honourable High Court ha s issued directions to the concerned 
District and Session Judges in this regard. 
Recommendation-6: Awareness on the advantages of producing undertrials in 
courts through video conf erence should be created in order to encourage 
utilisation of video conf erence equipment. There should be coordination 
between Government and judiciary in this regard. 
 
                                                            
62   Legal aid is one of the services given by KLSA for economically weaker section of people.  
The District Judge who heads KLSA is also member of Legal Aid. 
63   Dharwar, Belagavi and Shivamogga 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
100 
4.1.2.3 Escape of prisoners from custody 
Prison authorities are required to ensure  safe custody and security of prisoners 
through effective watch/surveillance ove r their movement, verification during 
exit from or entry into barracks a nd cells and confining in iron where 
warranted (Paragraph 251, 253 and 265 of  Prison Manual, 1978 and Rule 119 
of Karnataka Prison Rules). 
Audit findings:  Recurring feature of prisone rs escaping from jails indicated 
non-compliance with controls  prescribed for ensuring safe custody / safety of 
prisoners. 
PAC  recommendations:  In order to prevent  prisoners from escaping, PAC 
recommended increased vigilance thr ough patrolling; installation of CCTV 
cameras; increasing the height of prison wa lls;  establishing courts in highly 
populated prisons;  investigating and ta king action against the officers/staff 
responsible for escape of prisoners; and conducting qua rterly review at the 
Government level; and initiating action to recapture escaped prisoners. 
Findings of follow-up audit: Government initiated action in respect of two 
recommendations given by the PAC.  The inadequacy of these actions is 
discussed below. 
(a) To increase the height of prison walls 
During 2010-15, though private security personnel and home guards were 
appointed to guard the prisons, 95 pr isoners had escaped across Karnataka.  
Out of 95, while 45 prisoners had escaped  from custody of various prisons, 50 
prisoners had escaped while being esco rted by the police for being produced 
before the courts.  It was observed that  in none of the 14 te st-checked prison 
units, the height of the wall had been increased. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that since most of the prisons in the 
State are old and were stru cturally not strong, hence, based on the availability 
of budgetary allocation and also wherever  it was technically and structurally 
possible, action is be ing taken to increase the height of prison wall to 18 feet. 
In addition, Government stated that installation of barbed wire fencing on the 
main compound wall of the five central prisons and three di strict prisons has 
been undertaken. 
Though action to enhance security of th e prison was laudable, however, as per 
provisions laid down in paragraph 679 and 680 of the Karnataka Prison 
Manual, 1978, a detailed investigation was required to be conducted in each 
case of escape and disciplinary action taken against persons responsible for the 
escape. The Government, in its action taken report to the PAC 
recommendations, stated that disciplin ary action was being initiated against 
persons responsible for the escape of prisoners. 
Recommendation-7:  Necessary action may be taken to increase the height of 
the wall and to the desired level at th e earliest, besides taking disciplinary 
action against defaulting officials responsible for the escape of prisoners. 

Chapter-IV 
101 
 
(b) Conducting quarterly review meeting at the Government level 
A Committee under the chairmanship of Pr incipal Secretary, with five other 
members, was constituted (February 2013) to review the action to be taken to 
recapture the prisoners who had escaped from various prisons across the State.  
Though the committee was constituted in 2013 itself, it had not even met once 
until December 2015. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that meetings would be conducted 
henceforth.  Thus, there is need for qua rterly review meeting at Government 
level in this regard.  
4.1.2.4 Medical Facilities 
Section 4 of the Karnataka Prisons Act, 1963, stipulates that a Medical Officer 
of the rank of Assistant Surgeon may be appointed in a Central Prison, District 
Prison and Borstal School to attend to the health and cleanliness of prisoners, 
treatment of the sick, hygiene of the prisons, etc., and all other matters 
connected with the health of the staff and inmates of the prison.  The post of 
Medical Officer was to be filled up through deputation from the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare Services (HFW). 
Audit findings :  Medical records such as Medical Treatment Register, 
Hospital Roll and Prescription Book, Case Book etc., in respect of medical 
history of the prisoners were not maintained. 
Audit recommendation :  To appoint doctors and specialists in order to 
provide adequate medical facilities to prisoners. 
Findings of follow-up audit:  According to the statutory provisions laid down 
in the Karnataka Prisons Act, 1963, the Department was to have a sanctioned 
strength of 28 Medical Officers.  The Department, however, had only 18 
sanctioned posts against which 12 posts remained vacant.  In addition, the  
Karnataka Prisons Manual, 1978, provided for attendance of Visiting Medical 
Officers, and the All India Committee on Jail Reforms in its report 
recommended for a psychiatrist in each Central and District Prison as well as 
hospital accommodation for five per cent  of the daily average inmate 
population. In this connection, we observed  that against the requirement of 27 
psychiatrists, only two po sts were sanctioned which were vacant for the past 
three years.  
We observed the following in the units test-checked: 
 While regular doctors were posted in  three central pr isons, a doctor on 
consolidated payment basis was working in one
64 central prison. 
 During 2014-15, doctors appointed for the implementation of the 
telemedicine project were attending  to general outpatient cases of one 65 
central prison. 
 In four out of five dist rict prisons test-checked , government doctors from 
District Hospitals were visiting the pr ison once a week.  In three sub-jails 
                                                            
64 Mysuru 
65 Belagavi 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
102 
test-checked, however, no doctors we re visiting despite requests by the 
prison authorities.   
 Posts of doctors were not sanctioned in four66 out of five district prisons or 
sub-jails. 
 There was no lady Medical Officer in any of the prisons test-checked. 
 With regard to provision of hospital accommodation, against requirement 
of a total of 85 beds for seven out of  the 11 Central/District prisons test-
checked, there were no beds in any of  the prisons except District Prison, 
Shivamogga, which had one bed.  In the balance four prisons, there was a 
shortfall of 44 per cent of the required bed strength. 
The Government replied (December 2015) that the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare had been requested for filling up the posts of Medical 
Officers.   
Recommendation-8:  Government should ensure adequate bed strength, and 
posting of Doctors as prescribed for the Prison Hospitals to cater to the 
requirements of the prisoners. 
4.1.2.5 Constitution of Board of Visitors 
A Board of visitors is required to be constituted for each prison. It has to 
inspect the prison once a w eek to ensure that the ma nagement of the prison 
and prisoners is  carried out in accordance with the prescribed rules and 
procedures.  The Board is required to meet once in a quarter. 
Audit findings:  The Board of Visitors was not constituted. 
Audit recommendation :  Immediate action is necessary to constitute the 
Board of Visitors. 
PAC recommendation:  Immediate action to be taken to constitute the Board 
of Visitors. 
Findings of follow-up audit:   
We observed that in two prisons te st-checked (Kolar and Tumakuru) 
(Women), the Board of Visitors had not  been constituted.  In the remaining 
nine prisons, although the Board of Vis itors were constituted, as against 180 
meetings due (quarterly meetings requi red by each Board), only 14 meetings 
were conducted.  Prison authorities attr ibuted the shortfall to non nomination 
of non-official members by the respectiv e District Commissioners and further 
stated that efforts would be made to convene meetings in consultation with the 
concerned District Commissioners.  
The Government (December 2015) replie d that action would be taken to 
constitute the Board acro ss all prisons after obtain ing a list of non-official 
members from the districts. 
                                                            
66  Chikkaballapura, Kolar, Ramanagara and Tumakuru 

Chapter-IV 
103 
 
4.1.3 Conclusion  
The PAC after discussing the Report of  the Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India (Civil) for the year e nded 31 March 2004, gave detailed 
recommendations (December 2009) in it s Fifth Report. Even though more 
than five years have elapsed, the above  findings indicate that the Government 
had taken certain initiatives to implement the recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee, however, the measures taken were inadequate and much 
more action needs to be taken to ensure that the internal control systems in the 
Prisons are made effective.  
In this regard, to ensure more effective implementation, Government needs to 
update and revise the Karnataka Prisons Manual, 1978, to keep it valid for the 
present times; issue detailed guidelines for the upkeep and usage of the 
sophisticated electronic equipment purchas ed, and ensure their effective use; 
ensure strict adherence to the guidelines for checking of prohibited articles and 
also ensure that equipment such as CCTV cameras and jammers are 
maintained to ensure proper functio ning. Usage of video conferencing 
facilities with regard to producing undert rials to courts should be encouraged; 
and for speedy disposal and reduction in pendency of cases, the benefits from 
Lok Adalats should be maximised. Th e Government should also provide 
adequate medical services/counsel ling for the prisoners by ensuring 
availability of adequate  numbers of doctors, medical staff and counsellors. 
Only then will the security, health and safety aspects required be taken care of, 
and also progress made by speedy disposal and clearance of pending cases.  
 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
104 
Department of Women and Child Development 
 
4.2 Implementation of Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 
 
4.2.1 Introduction 
Children represent 39 percent of the total population of  the country and their 
nurture and well-being are the Nation’s responsibility. Hence, the Constitution 
of India recognises the vulnerable pos ition of children and their right to 
protection. Article 15 of the Constitution guarantees special attention to 
children through necessary and special laws and policies that safeguard their 
rights.  In this regard, India has adopt ed a number of laws and formulated a 
range of policies to ensure children’s protection and improve their condition 
which include the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act  
(JJ Act), 2000. 
With 4.39 per cent  of the population of childre n in the country, Karnataka 
stands 10
th in the state-wise distribution of children population.  Following the 
JJ Act, 2000, which was amended in 2006, the State Government framed (June 
2010) the Juvenile Justice (Care a nd Protection of Children) Rules  
(JJ Rules), 2010. 
The JJ Act, 2000, was enacted to consolid ate and amend the laws relating to 
two categories of children viz., children in conflict with the law and children in 
need of care and protection.  It also e nvisaged better treatment of children and 
catering to their development needs, by adopting a child-friendly approach in 
the adjudication and disposition of matters to the best interest of children and 
for their ultimate rehabilitation through various institutions67 established under 
this enactment. 
Children in need of care and protecti on are produced before Child Welfare 
Committees (CWC) by any Police officer, any public servant, child line, social 
worker, public spirited citi zen and by the child on thei r own, are kept in the 
Reception Unit pending enquiry by the CWC.  After enquiry the child is either 
reintegrated with family or is sent to Children Homes for rehabilitation. 
Children in conflict with the law are pr oduced before Juvenile Justice Boards 
(JJBs) by the Police and are kept in Observation Homes or sent on bail, 
pending enquiry.  After enquiry, the child is  either acquitted or kept in Special 
Homes for rehabilitation.   Children di scharged from Children Homes/ Special 
Homes are sent to After Care Centres for higher education, ITI training, etc. 
The Compliance Audit covering th e period 2010-15 wa s conducted during 
February to June 2015 to assess complia nce with the provisions contained in 
the JJ Act, 2000, and JJ Rules, 2010, and also the working of Child Care 
Institutions towards protection, welf are and rehabilita tion of neglected 
children and children in conflict with the law. The methodology adopted for 
                                                            
67 Child care institutions (CCI) viz., Observation Homes, Children Homes, Special Homes, 
After Care Centres, Fit Institutions and Shelter Homes. 

Chapter-IV 
105 
 
audit included scrutiny of files and documents, issue of audit enquiries/ 
questionnaires, examination of records,  discussion with officers/officials at 
various levels and joint inspections of Child Care Institutions (CCI) along with 
the Officers of the Department.  Pr obability proportional to size without 
replacement method was adopted for selection of five 68 out of 30 districts in 
Karnataka.  In order to assess the working of CCIs, 16 CCIs run by the 
Government and 12 CCIs managed by Non-Government Organisations 
(NGOs) in the five districts test-checked (Appendix-4.5) were visited. 
Audit findings 
 
4.2.2 Implementation of JJ Act, 2000 
For the effective implementation of JJ Act, 2000, the Karnataka State 
Integrated Child Protection Society (Soc iety) and State Child Protection Unit 
(SCPU) at the State level and the Dist rict Child Protection Unit (DCPU) in 
each district have been constituted (Feb ruary 2011).  The Principal Secretary, 
Women and Child Development Department (Department), is the Chairman of 
the Society and exercises overall control.   The Director of the Department is 
the Member Secretary of the Society a nd is responsible for administration of 
the JJ Act, 2000, and JJ Rules, 2010, and is assisted by the Project Director in 
the Directorate and 30 DCPUs in the Dist rict. The observations  in this regard 
are brought out in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.2.2.1 Karnataka Children’s Fund 
Section 61 of JJ Act, 2000 read with  Rule 90 of JJ Rules, 2010, specifies 
creation of a Fund known as ‘Karnataka Children’s Fund’ at the State level by 
the State Government for the development and rehabilitation of the juvenile or 
the child dealt with under the provisions  of the Act.  Besides donations, 
contributions and subscriptions, the Central Government also has to contribute 
to the Fund. The Fund was to be applied for implementing programmes for the 
welfare, rehabilitation of juven iles/Children, providing medical aid, 
scholarships/fees for higher education etc. We observed that though Karnataka 
Children’s fund was created (September 2011) with the initial deposit of  
` one lakh, no guidelines have been issued for utilisation of the fund amount.  
Hence, as at the end of Marc h 2015, the fund had a balance of `34.31 lakh 
without any utilisation toward s welfare of juvenile or children in need of care 
and protection.  
4.2.2.2 Juvenile Delinquency 
As per data compiled by the State Cr ime Records Bureau, during 2010-13, the 
number of crimes committed by Juve niles in Karnataka was 1,168. Of these, 
the largest number of juveniles indulged was in theft (25.86 percent), followed 
by burglary (14.21 per cent ), hurt (9.25 per cent ), murder (7.71 per cent ), 
attempt to murder (5.05 per cent) and robbery and rape (4.54 per cent).  From 
2010 to 2013, the number of juveniles apprehended, especially those 
                                                            
68 Bengaluru, Ballari, Mysuru, Shivamogga and Vijayapura 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
106 
belonging to the age groups 13-16 and 17-18, increased significantly 
(Appendix-4.6).   
4.2.2.3 Non-assessment and non-creation of database of children in need 
of care and protection and in difficult circumstances 
Rule 86 of the JJ rules, 2010 specifies various functions of the DCPUs. The 
functions included identifyi ng children at risk, childre n in need of care and 
protection, assessment of the number of children in difficult circumstances and 
creation of a district specific database .  In the State, the Department of 
Sociology of various Universities conduc ted a need assessment survey on 
behalf of DCPU.  Out of 30 DCPUs in the State, Aud it observed that while a 
need assessment survey was not carried out in nine districts, the need 
assessment survey carried out in 21 districts was pending approval and follow 
up action by the Department of Women and Child Development. 
Further,  as per the terms of reference for the preparation of need assessment 
survey, the survey had to contain detail s of various categories of children in 
need of care and protection viz., children living with a single parent, children 
living on the street, children involved in begging, HIV infected and affected 
children, abused child ren, child labour etc.  Scrutiny of th e need assessment 
survey in the test-checked five district s revealed that none of the surveys had 
details as per terms of reference. 
4.2.2.4 Inadequate services provided to  children in need of care and 
protection 
The need assessment survey of the test-checked five districts revealed that the 
Department had provided care and protection services to only 15.63 per cent 
of the children identified, which included both institutionalised
69 and non-
institutionalised70 children. The number of child ren who were provided with 
care and protection services in the test-ch ecked five districts in the last five 
years are detailed in Table-4.1. 
Table-4.1: Number of children who were provided with care and 
protection during 2010-15 
District Children in need of care 
and protection 
Children provided with care 
and protection services Percentage
Bengaluru Survey not conducted 11,385 -- 
Ballari 15,707 1,573 10 
Mysuru 14,275 2,856 20 
Shivamogga 5,332 1,090 20 
Vijayapura Survey not conducted 1,530 -- 
(Source: Information provided by the Department) 
 
  
                                                            
69 Includes placement of children in children homes, observation homes, open shelters and fit 
institutions. 
70 Includes foster care, adoption, s ponsorship and placement with parents. 

Chapter-IV 
107 
 
4.2.3 Functioning of Juvenile Justice Board (JJB) and Child 
Welfare Committees (CWC) 
4.2.3.1 Juvenile Justice Board 
Section 4 of the JJ Act, 2000, read with Rule 8 of  JJ Rules, 2010 specifies 
constitution of a JJB in each district for exercising powers and discharging the 
duties conferred or imposed on JJBs in re lation to juveniles in conflict with 
law and that the JJB should hold its sitti ngs in the premises of an Observation 
Home having jurisdiction over that dist rict, and in no circumstances should it 
operate from within any court premises. Also, the rules specify that every 
enquiry by the JJB in relation to a child in conflict with the law has to be 
completed within a period of four mont hs and only in exceptional cases, the 
period may be extended by two months.  Fu rther, it also specified that delay 
beyond six months except where the natu re of the alleged crime was serious, 
led to termination of the proceedings. 
In this regard, we observed the following: 
 In 14 districts, Observation Homes ha ve not been set up and the JJBs in 
these districts were functioning from the premises of Children Homes. 
The Government, while accepting a udit observations (December 2015), 
stated that action would be taken to  construct Observation Homes based 
on availability of space. 
 Out of the five districts test-checked, while the JJBs at Mysuru and 
Vijayapura held their sittings in the o ffice of the Superint endent as there 
were no separate rooms available for the JJBs in Observation Homes, the 
JJB at Ballari held its sitting on the c ourt premises as no infrastructure 
was available in the Observation Home of the said district. 
 The records of the societ y revealed that at th e end of March 2015, there 
were 2,350 cases pending for more than four months with JJBs.  Out of 
2,350 cases, 1,567 cases pertained to the five districts te st-checked. On 
scrutiny of these 1,567 cases, we obser ved that 819 cases were pending at 
the enquiry stage, out of which 599 cases were pending for the period 
ranging from one to 20 years.  Rema ining 748 cases were pending with 
JJB, and out of these, 616 cases were  pending for a period ranging from 
one to 15 years.  Further, out of 1,567 cases pending, 359 cases related to 
non-serious crimes. 
The Government attributed (December 2015) the delay for clearing the 
cases to non-receipt of charge sheet/First Information Report,  
non-appearance of the juveniles who were granted bail, witnesses not 
coming forward etc. 
 The free legal service to be extended as per rules under JJ Rules, 2010, by 
the legal officer in the SCPU/Distr ict Legal Service Authority to the 
juvenile for defending his case was not provided in any of the five 
districts test-checked except in Bengaluru (Urban). 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
108 
4.2.3.2 Child Welfare Committee (CWC) 
Section 29 of the JJ Act, 2000, read with  JJ Rules, 2010, specifies constitution 
of a CWC in each district and the CWC should hold its sittings in the premises 
of a Children Home by rotati on in any of the Children’s Home in the district.  
Further, it specifies that the Children Homes should have two rooms of 300 sq 
ft each, with one room to be used for sitting and the other as waiting room for 
children and their families. Also, the rules specify that when a child is 
presented before the Committee, it shoul d assign the case to a social worker/ 
case worker/child welfare officer/officer-i n charge as the case may be, of the 
institution for conducting the enquiry and submitting a report containing an 
individual care and rehabilitation plan.  Further, it specifies the enquiry to be 
completed within four months unless special circumstances do not permit that. 
In the five districts test-checked we observed the following: 
 While two CWCs in Shivamogga and Ballari had their sittings in the 
premises of the Children Home, the space consisted of only one room. 
There was no waiting room for children and their parents.  The CWC of 
Bengaluru (Urban) had a waiting room, but the space was less than the 
mandatory 300 sq ft and did not have the necessary furniture. 
 Further, records of the Society revealed that there were 565 cases pending 
disposal, of which 196 cases pertained to  the five districts test-checked.  
We observed that 41 cases were pendi ng for more than one year in the 
test-checked districts, thereby keep ing the children out of the individual 
care and rehabilitation plan. 
4.2.4 Working of Child Care Institutions 
4.2.4.1 Child Care Institutions running without registration 
Section 19 of the JJ Amendment Act, 2006, stipulated all CCIs, whether run 
by the Government or a Non Governme nt Organisation (NGO), to register 
themselves within six months from the date on which the above act came into 
effect. Further, the Honourable Supreme Court of India, in its order on Writ 
Petition (Crl) No 102 of 2007, in the ma tter of exploitati on of children in 
Juvenile orphanages in the State of Ta mil Nadu vs Union of  India and others, 
directed (February 2013) all CCIs to get registered under the JJ Act, 2000.  
Also, the Ministry of Women and Child Development directed (July 2014) all 
the State Governments to conduct a survey at the district level to identify CCIs 
not yet registered and urge them to get registered under the JJ Act. 
However, surveys as per the directi ons of Ministry of Women and Child 
Development were yet to be conducted in the State by the Department of 
Women and Child. 
In the five districts test-checked, we observed the following: 
 Out of 329 CCIs who had applied for registration with the Department of 
Women and Child, 117 applications were  approved, applications from 109 

Chapter-IV 
109 
 
CCIs were pending71 for approval and applica tions pertaining to 103 CCIs 
were rejected for not complying with  standards.  However, we observed 
that all the 212 CCIs whose applications  were either pending approval or 
were not approved, were running without registration. 
 Further, the Society had re leased grant amounting to `74.61 lakh during 
2010-15 to six CCIs run by NGOs not registered under the JJ Act, 2000 
(Appendix-4.7). 
4.2.4.2 Homes for children with special needs 
As per rule 39 of the JJ Rules, 2010, the State Government needs to establish a 
home for destitute, mentally challenged children and children with disability.  
The home for these children should be a comprehensive care and rehabilitation 
center with infrastructure and other facilities sensitive to their needs. 
We observed that, while the State Gove rnment had established four children 
homes for mentally retarded childr en and extended a grant to one NGO 
running a children’s home for mentally  retarded children, no children homes 
were established for children with othe r severe disabilities and children 
affected and infected with HIV. 
Review of records of one
72 out of two children’s hom e for mentally retarded 
children in the five districts test-checked, revealed the following: 
 Except for one paramedical staff taki ng care of 50 mentally retarded 
children in the said children home, no house mother or house father was 
appointed, as was mandatorily required. 
 Further, rule 48 of JJ Rules, 2010, speci fies a mental health care plan to 
be developed for each child by the so cial worker or case worker, in 
consultation with mental health experts associated with the CCI, and their 
recommendation being integrated with the individual care plan of the 
child.  However, no such care plans were prepared and hence submission 
of the care plans to the Management Committee and CWC did not arise. 
 As the post of trained counsellor rema ined vacant and also as there was 
no collaboration with external agen cies, no specialised and regular 
individual therapy was given to the children in the CCI. 
 There was no tie-up with local Prim ary Health Centres, Government 
Hospitals and other hospitals, Medical colleges, Mental health Institutes 
for regular visits by their doctors, students, clinical psychologists and 
psychiatrists for holding periodic health camps within the CCI. 
The Government, while accepting (December 2015) the lacunae, stated that 
they would take measures to comply w ith the same. Further, the Government 
stated that a pilot project for rehabilitation of mentally retarded children was 
underway at Children Homes for mentally retarded Children, Bengaluru. After 
examining the results of the programme, it would be extended to other Homes.  
                                                            
71 Out of 109 cases, 63 cases were pending for more than one year and less than five years, 
and eight cases were pending for more than six months but less than one year. 
72  Children’s home for mentally retarded children (boys), Ballari 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
110 
4.2.4.3 Non observance of procedure for admission and release of children 
The JJ Rules, 2010, specify that any pers on/organisation authorised to receive 
a child in need of care and protecti on should produce the child before the 
CWC with the report on the circumstan ces under which the child came to his/ 
their notice. After completion of the enquiry, the CWC should make 
appropriate order for the placement of  child with the Children Home/Fit 
Institution/Fit persons. 
In the five districts test-checked, we  however observed th at during 2010-15, 
1,025 children of four
73 CCIs were admitted and released without the orders of 
the CWC. 
4.2.4.4 Segregation of children in CCI 
According to Rule 42(2) of JJ Rules,  2010, homes for juve niles in conflict 
with the law and children in need of care and protection are to function from 
separate premises. 
Out of five districts test-checked, in  one Observation Home in Vijayapura, 
children in need of care and protection were housed along with juveniles in 
conflict with law. 
Further, Rule 14 and 15 of JJ Rules, 2010, state that Observation Homes as 
well as Special Homes should have separa te residential faci lities (for both 
boys and girls), in accordance with the degree of offence and age. 
However, in the five districts test-checked, it was observed that in four74 out of 
six Special/Observation Homes, no segr egation of juveniles in accordance 
with above mentioned rules were carried ou t, and all the children were kept in 
a single dormitory. 
Government replied (December 2015) that such isolation amounted to 
imprisoning of children and hence were allowed to mingle with each other 
during the day. The reply was not accepta ble as the rule mandated separate 
residential facility based on the offence and age. 
4.2.4.5 Children’s participation 
Rule 59 of JJ Rules, 2010, specify the setting up of a Children’s Committee by 
the officer-in-charge of a CCI for three different age groups viz., 6-10 years, 
10-15 years and 15-18 years.  The offi cer-in-charge has to encourage the 
Committee to participate in improving the conditions of institutions, review 
standard of care followed, report abuse and exploitation by peers/care givers 
and also participate in the management of institution. 
                                                            
73 Bosco Yuvodaya Open Shelter, Bengaluru; YMCA Open Shelter, Bengaluru; 
Bijayalakshmi Education and Welfare Society, Vijayapura and Anatha Shishu Nivasa, 
Bengaluru 
74 Observation Homes,  Shivamogga, Ballari  and  Mysuru; Special Home, Bengaluru 

Chapter-IV 
111 
 
In the five districts test-checked, we  however, observed that eight out of 16 
Government run institutions and six out of 12 NGO run institutions had not 
constituted a children’s committee. This prevented the children from 
participating in the improvement of the conditions of the institution, reviewing 
the standard of care provided at the institution, being involved in the 
management of the institution, expressing their views creatively etc. 
4.2.4.6 Death of juvenile or child 
Rule 62 of the JJ Rules, 2010, state that, in  the event of the death or suicide of 
a juvenile or child in an institution, the institution should  ensure that an 
inquest and post-mortem examination is he ld at the earliest.  Further, in the 
case of natural death or death due to illness of a juvenile or child, the officer in 
charge should obtain a report of the medi cal officer stating the cause of death 
and a written intimation of the death has to be given immediately to the 
nearest police station, the board or  committee, the State Human Rights 
Commission, the State Commission for pr otection of Child Rights, the SCPU 
and the parents or guardians of the juvenile or child. 
In the five districts test-checke d, we observed that during 2010-15, though 
three children from three Children Homes
75 for boys had expired, this was not 
reported to the police station, the State Human Rights Commission and the 
State Commission for Protection of Child Rights. Further, the cause of death 
of a juvenile in a Children Home for boys in Bengaluru, was yet to be 
ascertained even after expiry of one and half years. Government replied 
(December 2015) that efforts are being ma de to get the forensic report. The 
death of a juvenile in a Children Home for boys in Mysuru was however, due 
to delay in hospitalisation. 
4.2.4.7 Leave or absence of a juvenile or child 
Rule 65 of the JJ Rules, 2010, prescribe a maximum of 15 days of leave to a 
juvenile or child in a CCI for examin ation or admission, special occasions like 
marriage, event of death or accident or se rious illness in the family.  On their 
non-return to the institution on expiry of the sanctioned leave, the Board or 
Committee has to refer the case to the pol ice to bring the juvenile or child to 
the institution. 
In the five districts test-checked, it was observed that during 2010-15, 21 
children of two
76 Children Homes who went on le ave did not return to their 
respective homes and the Committee of the respective Children Home did not 
refer the case to the police as envisaged in  the rules, nor initiated any action to 
bring the children back to the Ch ildren Homes. Government replied 
(December 2015) that it would initiate action to conduct social investigation of 
children who have not returned after completion of leave. 
 
                                                            
75 Children Home for boys, Bengaluru ; Children Home for boys, Mysuru and Children 
Home for boys, Shivamogga 
76 Children Home for boys  and girls, Vijayapura 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
112 
4.2.4.8 Escape of Children from Government run Child Care Institution 
Rule 19(2) of the JJ Rules, 2010, specify  that in the event of escape of a 
juvenile or a child, the officer-in-char ge should lodge a complaint in the 
jurisdictional police stati on or special juvenile po lice unit immediately with a 
copy to the Board and other authorities  concerned, besides conducting search 
of the child and intimating the parents/ guardians. Further, the case worker has 
to specify the security lapses, if any, a nd take action in this regard, as well as 
analyse the reasons for the escape a nd suggest a suitable programme to the 
officer in charge for prevention of such incidents. 
On scrutiny of the records of the five  districts test-ch ecked, it was observed 
that during 2010-15, 224 child ren had escaped from nine Government run 
CCIs and out of 224, only 109 children were traced with 115 children yet to be 
traced.  Further, review of record s of the Government Home for boys, 
Bengaluru, where maximum number of escapes was reported revealed the 
following: 
 Out of 92 children who escaped from the institution, 66 children remained 
untraced till date. 
 Further, though transfer of  juveniles to the place nearest to their native 
place was ordered in respect of 13 ch ildren who belonged to other states 
between 17 January 2014 and 26 December 2014, the orders were not 
implemented.   All the 13 children escaped from the institution on a single 
day (29 December 2014) out of whom 11 were traced and two untraced.   
 The children had escaped using hacksa w blades and metal cutters, which 
are restricted items inside the Childr en Homes as per the provisions under 
the JJ Act/rules. 
 No other security measures were in place except for security guards 
engaged through a private security agency. 
The institution did not make any report on the security lapses and also did not 
carry out an analysis of the reasons for the escape. 
4.2.4.9 Abuse or exploitation of a juvenile or child 
Rule 63 of the JJ Rules, 2010, specify that every CCI should have a system to 
ensure that there is no abuse, neglect or  maltreatment, and in the event of any 
abuse, the officer in charge should  report the same to the Management 
Committee, JJB, CWC who in turn has to order a special investigation.  
Further, if the complaint is  against the staff of the institution, such staff is 
required to be suspended pending inquiry. 
The records of the Karnataka State Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
revealed that 17 cases of child rights  violation were re ported during 2010-15 
viz., physical and sexual abus e, and neglect and maltr eatment of children.  
However, no action was taken and further,  it was observed, that in many cases 
the violation was committed by the members/staff of institution/JJBs/CWCs 
themselves.   

Chapter-IV 
113 
 
Government replied (December 2015) that  in a few cases, action to suspend 
the offenders had been initiated and furt her stated that th e State Government 
or NGO were protected under Section 67 of  the JJ Act, which stated that no 
suit or legal proceedings could be initi ated against the State Government or 
NGOs running the home or any officer and the staff of such institutions in 
respect of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith.  The 
reply, however, is not acceptable as the violence, abuse, neglect and 
maltreatment reported are criminal/cruel  acts and are not acts of good faith. 
Hence action under section 23 supercedes section 67 of JJ Act which relates to 
punishment for cruelty to juvenile or child, and action shou ld be considered 
accordingly. 
4.2.5 Findings of Joint Inspection of CCIs 
The JJ Act, 2000, provides for institutional mechanisms, viz., Children Homes, 
Fit Institutions and Shelter Homes, for extending care and protection to 
children in need of them.  Further, the JJ Act as well as JJ Rules prescribes 
minimum standards of care for all the CCIs. 
In the five districts test-checked, audit visited 16 Government run CCIs and 12 
NGO run CCIs. The audit findings are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.2.5.1 Basic Infrastructure 
Rule 42 of the JJ Rules, 2010, specify providing sufficient and safe 
accommodation for classroom, kitchen, dormitories etc., with sufficient cross 
ventilation and sunlight.  It also stat ed that the CCIs should be child friendly 
and they should not look like a jail or lock up.  Joint verification, however, 
revealed the following: 
 The Children Home for boys (senior),  Vijayapura functioned from an 
abandoned jail constructed during 1920 and the dormitories were in 
dilapidated condition without proper doors, windows, adequate lighting 
and ventilation facilities. 
 The Observation Home, Ballari, had one dormitory without any other 
facilities and the children were kept locked up almost around the clock. 
 The Observation Home, Mysuru, was run from a rented building which 
had a dormitory area of 120 sq ft for 25 children.  
 The basic infrastructure of one NGO run institute in Bengaluru was 
inadequate as it accommodated 89 children against the sanctioned capacity 
of 50. 
 The status of CCIs (both Government and NGO run) with respect to basic 
infrastructure is indicated in Chart-4.1. 
 
 
 
 

Si
Recr
Couns
Fire Safe
Board/Com
Cha
Dormitorie
Class room
ick / First aid room
Kitche
Dining Ha
Bath Room
Toil
Play groun
Gov
Yes
0
reation Room
Store
Library
selling Room
fety measures
Work shop
Office room
mmittee room
Governm
Yes
 Y
Report No.1 o
Ch
4.2.5.2 O
The finding
store, librar
art-4.2: Oth
Governmen
to assess th
address the
4.2.5.3 Sa
The JJ Rul
water filte r
mosquito c
 
 
05
es
m
m
en
all
m
et
nd
vernment run
Yes but not ade
5 1
ment run CCI
Yes but not adequ
of the year 20
art-4.1: Sta
Other infrast
gs regarding
ry, fire safet
her infrastr
nt replied (D
he status of 
e inadequaci
anitation an
es, 2010, p
rs, proper d
ontrol etc.
10 15
n CCIs
equate
 No
101 5
Is
uate
 No
16 
atus of basi
 
tructure 
g status of 
ty measures
ructure in b
December 2
infrastructu
ies in CCIs.
nd Hygiene
rovide for e
drainage sy
20
20
B
114 
ic infrastru
other infras
s etc. are ind
both Gover
2015) that n
ure and a pla
. 
e 
every CCI t
stems, arra
Dorm
Clas
Sick /First Ai
Din
Ba
Play
Recreation 
L
Counselling 
Fire Safety me
Wor
Offfice
Board/Committee 
ucture in th
structure su
dicated in C
rnment run
necessary ac
an of action
to have su f
ngement f o
0
mitories
ss Room
id Room
Kitchen
ing Hall
athroom
Toilet
y ground
NGO
Yes
 Yes but
0
Room
Store
Library
Room
easures
rkshop
e room
Room
CCIs run
Y
he CCIs vis
uch as recr e
Chart-4.2. 
n and NGO
ction would
n would be 
fficient treat
or disposal 
5
O run CCIs
t not adequate
5
n by NGO
Yes
 No
sited 
eation room
O run CCI
d be initiated
drawn up to
ted drinking
of garbag e
10 15
No
10 1 5
m, 
d 
o 
g 
e, 
5

C
    
Chart-4.3: Sa
C
Water for ba
Garbag
An
anitation an
CCIs run by
Drinking wate
athing and cleanin
Drainage System
ge Disposal system
Mosquito n
nnual Pest Contro
Provided
 
The findin
below. 
nd Hygiene p
y Governme
Governmen
to assess th
inadequacie
Though t h
Governmen
only `2,402
March 201
purpose, c
o
Governmen
taken to pro
4.2.6 I n
The JJ Act
as well as 
O
the five test
Table-4.2
Sl. 
No. 
1 Sup e
2 Cou n
3 Cas e
4 Pro b
5 Hou s
6 Tea c
7 Art &
Teac
8 PT c
9 Doc t
10 Para
11 Coo k
12 Acc o
13 Hel p
14 Gua r
 Tota
(Source: Infor
05
er
ng
m
m
et
ol
Not prov
gs in the v
provided by 
ent 
nt replied (D
he status of i
es in CCIs.
he Depart m
nt Homes, 
2.10 lakh an
5. Thus, the
ould not ex t
nt replied ( D
ocure sites a
nadequate
, 2000, and
Observation
t-checked d
: Sanctione
Name of the
erintendent 
nsellor 
eworker 
bation Officer 
se Mother/Fath
cher 
& Craft cum M
cher 
cum Yoga Instru
tor 
medical Staff 
k 
ountant 
pers 
rd/ Sweeper 
al 
rmation provid
10 15
vided
visited CC I
the Ch a
December 2
infrastructu
ment had r e
for Fit Ins t
nd there wa
e Departmen
tend even t
December 2
and constru
e manpowe
d JJ Rules 2
n Homes.  T
districts are 
ed and wor
the five t
e Post 
her 
Music 
uctor 
ded by the Dep
20
Wa
115 
Is are depi c
art-4.4: Sani
2015) that n
ure and an a
eceived `3,
titutions a n
as a balance
nt, by not u
he basic fa c
2015) that d
uct buildings
er 
010, prescr
The staff po
details in T
rking streng
est-checked
Staff Strengt
as per the
1
6
6
6
13
6
3
3
3
3
6
3
6
6
78
artment) 
Drink
ater for bathing an
Draina
Garbage Dispo
M
Annual P
cted in Cha
itation and H
CCIs run b
necessary ac
ction plan d
,475.55 la k
nd Open S h
 of `1,073.4
utilising the 
cilities adeq
during the c
s. 
ribe a staffin
osition of G
Table-4.2. 
gth of Gove
d districts 
th required 
e JJ Act 
16 
66 
66 
66 
32 
66 
35 
35 
35 
35 
66 
35 
66 
66 
85 
0
king Water
nd cleaning
age System
osal System
osquito net
est Control
Provided
art-4.3 an d
Hygiene pro
by NGOs 
ction would
drawn up to
kh for con s
helters, it h
45 lakh as a
grants for t
quately to t
current year
ng pattern f
overnment 
ernment ru
Sanctioned 
Strength 
16 
08 
01 
24 
33 
48 
12 
02 
14 
19 
22 
25 
32 
33 
289 
5
Not Provided
Chapter-IV
d Chart-4.4
ovided by th
d be initiated
o address the
struction o
had release d
at the end o
the intended
the children
r action wa s
for Children
run CCIs in
un CCIs in 
Working 
Strength 
07 
06 
01 
15 
22 
15 
03 
03 
06 
15 
17 
23 
32 
29 
194 
10 15
d
V 
4 
he 
d 
e 
f 
d 
f 
d 
n. 
s 
n 
n 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
116 
From the table, it is seen that in almost all the posts, working strength is much 
less than the sanctioned strength. We further observed that the sanctioned 
strength was less than the staff strength prescribed in the JJ Act.  This resulted 
in poor/non-implementation of the act  as prescribed. The deficiencies 
observed are as follow: 
 The Probation Officer as per JJ Rules,  2010, is required to periodically 
visit the family or the place of stay of the juvenile or child for a period of 
three years to assess the impact of th e rehabilitation programme.  Further, 
he is also required to assess the charact er of the juvenile, relationship with 
family members, and behaviour w ith the community, fortnightly.  
However, we observed that the post of POs were not sanctioned in four out 
of 16 test-checked Government run CCIs.  Further, the 15 POs were posted 
only in nine test-checked Governme nt run CCIs. Hence, assessment of 
rehabilitation programme was not  conducted in six test-checked 
Government run CCIs. The Governme nt replied (December 2015) that 
instructions have been issued to submit the report on assessment in time.  
It was, however, silent on the issue of non-sanction of the posts, as well as 
non-recruitment of POs. 
 Every CCI has to facilitate useful vocational training under the guidance of 
a trained instructor as prescribed in the JJ Rules, 2010.  However, we 
observed that against 35 instructor s required as per norms of the 
Government of India, in the 16 vi sited CCIs run by Government, only 12 
posts were sanctioned and against whic h only three were filled. However, 
vocational training was not impart ed in all the CCIs run by the 
Government. Government replied (December 2015) that it was not 
possible to give training with one instru ctor as he would be expert in only 
one single field.  It further stated that it proposed to impart vocational 
training for the children with various aptitudes with the help of outside 
professionals. 
 The daily routine of a child in the Children Home as per JJ Rules, 2010, 
includes educational classes as well as moral education in the Children 
Home.  We, however, observed that in  the 16 visited Government run 
CCIs there were only 15 teachers agai nst the sanction for 48 teachers.  
Government replied (December 2015) th at the children in the CCIs were 
sent to the regular schools in order to mainstream them with the other 
regular children and the teachers a ppointed were imparting additional 
classes to the children of CCIs. 
 Due to non-filling up of eight posts  of doctors and four posts of 
paramedical staff, neither monthly medical check-up nor medical records 
were maintained in 10 out of 16 visi ted Government run CCIs.  Also, no 
staff of 14 out of 16 Government run CCIs visited were trained for first 
aid.  Government replied (December 2015) that Government Order fixing 
honorarium for visiting Medical Officer s was issued during September 
2015 and also it was proposed to place before the Executive Committee of 
the Society a proposal to increase the said honorarium.  
 Against requirement of 66 counsellors  in the 16 Government run CCIs 
visited, only eight posts were sanctioned, against which six were filled.  
Hence, professional counselling wa s not provided in 10 out of 16 
Government run CCIs. 

Chapter-IV 
117 
 
Thus, from the above it is evident that  lack of adequate  manpower hampered 
in providing care and protection servic es.  Government replied (December 
2015) that Government had appointed 12 Superintendents in the five  
test-checked districts and also had posted four Firs t Division Clerks and 19 
Second Division Clerks in the CCIs of the fi ve test-checked districts.  Further, 
it also stated that action was initiated to fill up posts of House Father and 
Mother.  In addition, directions were i ssued to all the Deputy Directors of the 
districts to appoint cooks, guards, pe ons and sweepers.  Also, the Society 
stated that necessary steps would be taken to comply with all other audit 
observations. 
4.2.7 Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration 
The rehabilitation and social reintegration of a child begins during its stay in a 
children’s home or special home.  The rehabilitation and social reintegration 
of children is carried out by adoption, fo ster care, sponsorship and sending the 
child to an after-care organisation. 
4.2.7.1 Adoption 
According to section 41(2) of the JJ Act (Amended), 2006, adoption should be 
carried out through institutional and non-institutional mechanisms for the 
rehabilitation of children who are or phaned, abandoned, neglect ed or abused.  
Further, Rule 35 of JJ Ru les, 2010, prescribes that for all matters relating to 
adoption, the guidelines issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority 
(CARA) apply. A study of the mechanism for the adoption of children showed 
the following deficiencies: 
 The JJ Amended Act, 2006, prescribed the State Government to recognise 
one or more of its institutions or vol untary organisations in each district as 
specialised adoption agencies (SAA).   
No adoption agencies, however, had been recognised in nine 77 out of thirty 
districts in the State.  Government  replied (December 2015) that DCPUs 
were instructed to identify suitable CCIs to function as SAAs. 
 The CARA guidelines prescribe that the adoption order be obtained from 
the competent Court within a maximum period of two months from placing 
the child for pre-adoptive foster care.  It also specifies that after issue of the 
adoption order, the preparation of the adoption deed and its registration is 
the responsibility of the SAA concerned.  Further, in accordance with the 
directions of the Honourable Suprem e Court of India in the case of 
L.K.Pandey vs Union of India (WP No 1171 of 1982), the competent court 
is required to dispose of the case wi thin a maximum period of two months 
from the date of filing.  Also it has been stated in the said guidelines that for 
the best interests of the child, the competent court may, to the extent 
possible, dispose of the case in the first hearing itself. 
                                                            
77 Chitradurga, Chamarajanagara, Chickkaballapura, Kolar, Koppal, Kodagu, Raichur, 
Shivamogga and Yadgir 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
118 
In respect of 18 children of four 78 SAAs in the five te st-checked districts, 
though action was taken by the SAAs to file the case, the competent court 
was yet to call for a hearing even afte r expiry of the prescribed period.  
Further, in respect of 14 children of two
79 SAAs, we observed that though 
adoption orders were issued, action to get the adoption deed registered was 
not taken by the SAAs. Hence, the ri ghts and privileges of adopted children 
were not ensured.  Government replied (December 2015) that now all the 
18 cases had been cleared by the Court.  Further, it stated that CWCs and 
CARA would take up the issue with the Honourable Hi gh Court and the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development respectively. 
 The CARA guidelines state that all rest oration efforts to trace the parents/ 
biological family of the abandoned child are to be made by the SAA. In this 
regard, notification in one leadin g national newspaper along with one 
regional newspaper has to be made in cas e of child less than two years; and 
for child more than two years, in a ddition to notification in newspapers, 
announcement in television or radio has to be made.  Further, in case of 
both abandoned as well as surrendered  children, a child can be declared 
legally free for adoption only after expiry of 60 days.   
However, in the five districts test -checked, we obser ved that though 
notification was made in the local newspaper, none of the SAAs had made a 
notification in a national newspaper.  Further, 27 children who were 
abandoned in respect of four
80 adoption agencies, and one child who was 
surrendered, were declared legally free for adoption before expiry of the  
60 days waiting period and reconsideration period (in respect of 
surrendered child). This was in vi olation of the said guidelines.  
Government replied (December 2015) that  a notice would be issued to all 
SAAs to strictly adhere to CARA  guidelines. According to CARA 
guidelines, home study of the Prosp ective Adoptive Parents (PAPs), which 
is mandatory, has to be conducted within two months from the date of 
registration by the professional soci al worker authorised by the SAA 
nearest to their current place of residence. 
On review of records of SAAs in th e five test-checked  districts, we 
observed that out of 163 PAPs on th e waiting list for adoption (February 
2015), home study with respect to 72 PA Ps who were registered between 
March 2008 and November 2014 was yet to be conducted. 
 The CARA guidelines specify pre-adop tive counselling to the PAPs by the 
concerned SAA in order to facilitate them to take appropriate decisions. 
In the five districts test-checked , we observed that during 2010-15,  
pre-adoptive counselling was not given in two
81 Government run SAAs 
and one82 NGO run SAA as the post of couns ellor was not sanctioned, and 
where sanctioned, the post had not been filled.  We observed that 151 
                                                            
78 Sidheswara Vatsalya Adoption Agency, Vijayapura; Government Shishu Gruha, Ballari; 
Bapuji Children Home, Mysuru and Government Shishu Gruha, Bengaluru. 
79 Bapuji Children Home, Mysuru, Nirmala Shishu Bhavan, Bengaluru 
80 Government Shishu Gruha, Bengaluru; Bapuji Children Home, Mysuru; Sidheswara 
Vatsalya Adoption Home, Vijayapura and  Government Shishu Gruha,  Ballari 
81 Government Shishu Gruha, Bengaluru and Ballari 
82 Sidheswara Vatsalya Adoption Home, Vijayapura 

Chapter-IV 
119 
 
children were given for adoption without pre-adoptive counselling in these 
three institutions. 
4.2.7.2 Sponsorship programme 
Section 43 of the JJ Act, 2000, envisages a sponsorship programme to provide 
supplementary support to families, children’s homes and special homes for 
meeting the medical, educational and othe r needs of the children with a view 
to improving their quality of life.  Further, Rule 38 of the JJ Rules, 2010, 
states that the State Government in co-ordination with NGOs has to identify 
families and children at risk and recommend to the JJBs/CWCs to provide 
necessary support services to the pa rents or guardian in the form of 
sponsorship.  After such identifi cation, the JJBs/CWCs are to issue 
instructions for sponsor ship support which is to be disbursed through 
Observation/Children’s homes. 
In two districts of the five districts te st-checked, audit could not ascertain the 
adequacy of the coverage of the sponsorship programme as the need 
assessment survey had not been conducted.  In the other thr ee districts, Audit 
observed that against the need assessment of 35,314, only 1,898 children  
(5.4 per cent ) were covered under the spon sorship programme which is 
meagre. Government cited (December 2015) budget constraints for not 
covering all the children identified.   
4.2.7.3 After-care organisation 
Section 44 of the JJ Act, 2000, provides fo r an after-care or ganisation to take 
care of juveniles or children after th ey leave special homes and children’s 
homes to enable them to lead honest, industrious and useful lives. Further, as 
per this section, separate after-care ho mes should be set up for boys and girls 
between 18 and 21 years of age. 
On scrutiny of the records, we ob served that in 329 CCIs (applied for 
registration with the Department of Women and Child Development), no after-
care organisation has been constituted. Reasons for not establishing after-care 
organisations were not evident from th e records. Non establishment of after-
care organisations not only deprived  the children from facilities, viz., 
accommodation, maintenance, educational and vocational guidance, 
employment opportunities, all round pe rsonality development, but also 
protection from abuse and exploitation.  Government replied (December 2015) 
that girls and boys who were in need of after-care serv ices were transferred to 
State Homes run by the Department of  Women and Child Development and 
the Department of Social Welfare for further guidance and development. The 
fact, however, remains that Government has not established After-care Homes.  
4.2.8 Monitoring and Evaluation 
The JJ Act, 2000, and the JJ Rules, 2010, provide for the constitution of a 
State Advisory Board and Management  Committee, inspection by District 
Inspection Committee and CWC/JJB, So cial Audit and Annual Performance 
Review of the implementation of the JJ Act which help in monitoring as well 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
120 
as evaluating the implementation of the JJ  Act.   On scrutiny, we observed the 
following: 
 The State Advisory Board which was to  advise the Government on matters 
relating to the establishment and main tenance of homes, mobilisation of 
resources, training and rehabilitation of children in need of care and 
protection, and juveniles in  conflict with the law etc., had not met even 
once though it had been constituted (August 2011) and headed by the 
Honourable Minister of Women and Child Development.  Government 
replied (December 2015) that the State Advisory Board had been 
reconstituted (June 2015) and that the first meeti ng had been held during 
August 2015. 
 In the five districts test-checked, in nine out of the 16 CCIs run by the 
Government ( Appendix-4.8), no Management Committee had been 
constituted to review the standard of care being followed in the institutions.  
Government replied (December 2015) that steps would be taken to 
constitute a Management Committee in all CCIs. 
 Inspections were not conducted by th e District Inspection Committee in 
nine out of 30 districts, which incl uded two of the five  districts test-
checked. In the remaining 21 districts, only 377 inspections were conducted 
against the requirement of 2,200
83 inspections during 2010-15.  These 
District Inspection Committees we re to be constituted under the 
chairmanship of the Deputy Commissioners  of the Districts to review the 
standard of care and protection being fo llowed in the CCIs and also to look 
into the functioning of the Management Committees and Children’s 
Committees and give appropriate directions. 
 CWCs/JJBs are required to visit CCIs  once in three months and suggest 
necessary action wherever required.  We, however, observed in the five 
districts test-checked, that against the requ irement of 1,496
84 inspections, 
only 68 were made by the CWCs.  Government replied (December 2015) 
that action in this regard has been initiated.  
 The State Government needs to conduct Social Audit annually in order to 
monitor and evaluate the implementation of the JJ Act by reviewing matters 
concerning the establishment of Boards or Committees, and functioning of 
CCIs and its staff etc.  This has to be carried  out with the support and 
involvement of organisations working in  the field of mental health, child 
care and protection, etc.  Also, an annual Performance Review in respect of 
the functioning of the Children’s Homes in the State has to be conducted.  
We observed that neither the Social Audit nor the Performance Review had 
been conducted by the State Government .  Government replied (December 
2015) that action would be initiated to conduct a Social Audit. 
The absence of the constitution of these monitoring mechanisms as envisaged 
in the JJ Act and JJ Rules, resulted in deficiencies in the implementation of the 
JJ Act. 
 
                                                            
83 5 years*4 per year*110 institutions 
84 374 institution* 4 per year 

Chapter-IV 
121 
 
4.2.9 Conclusion 
The objective of the JJ Act is to protect children and bring about 
improvements in their condition. However, the way this act is being 
implemented gives rise to serious concerns. The first requirement for effective 
implementation is to first identify children at risk and who are living in 
difficult circumstances, so that care a nd protection may be given in time, and 
hence identification of such children through a need assessment survey is 
essential.  It was, however, observed that  out of the 30 districts in Karnataka, 
such a survey had not been carried out in nine districts, and in 21 districts, the 
survey though carried out was still pending approval and hence not finalised. 
In the absence of a reliable database, the number of children who require care 
and protection could not be ascertained. 
There was also inordinate delay in the clearance of the cases referred to the 
Juvenile Justice Board as well as Child Welfare Committees, which resulted in 
huge pendencies. Many CCIs continued to run without re gistration, even 
though registration was mandatory. Furthe r, 103 CCIs whose registration had 
been rejected by the Department of Women and Child Development, for not 
complying with standards continued to operate, indicating lack of Government 
control. 
While, the JJ Act stipulated for separa te homes for Juvenile delinquents and 
children who required care and protection, in some of the CCIs test-checked, it 
was observed that both were put up in th e same place, which was in violation 
of the Act. There were several inadequacies in terms of physical infrastructure, 
sanitation and hygiene, me dicinal care, education etc., in the CCIs when 
compared to the norms set in the JJ Rules, 2010. Except for one paramedical 
staff available, services of doctor, counsellor and house mother/father were not 
provided in a Special Home in Ballari  which housed 50 mentally retarded 
children.  
The non-functioning of the State Advisory Board and Management Committee 
and lack of inspection by District In spection Committee also contributed to 
poor monitoring and effective impleme ntation, which contributed to the 
deficiencies in implementation of the JJ Act. 
In view of these serious deficienci es, Governments needs to review the 
manner in which the act is being implemented at present so as to enable it to 
effectively deal with its deficiencies and ensure that the children who require 
and deserve care and protection are truly provided the same. 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
122 
4.3 Investments made by the Bangalore Development Authority 
in Mutual Funds 
4.3.1 Introduction 
The present Report contains the findings of a special audit of the investments 
made by the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) in Mutual Funds 
during the period 1999-2014. The Government  of Karnataka (GoK) requested 
(November 2014) the Principal Account ant General (G&SSA), Karnataka, 
Bengaluru, for a special audit of the I nvestment of the BDA funds in Mutual 
Funds during the period 1999-2014 on the basis of a report (November 2014) 
of the Karnataka Institute of Public Auditors (KIPA) that the different Finance 
Members (FMs) of the BDA had unauthorisedly opened bank accounts and 
diverted the BDA’s funds for investme nt in Mutual Funds through these 
accounts. The BDA had, initially, requested the KIPA to investigate the matter 
on the basis of the communication (Jul y 2014) of the Principal Accountant 
General (Economic and Revenue Sector A udit), Karnataka to the Chairman of 
the BDA in respect of unauthorised diversion of BDA’ s funds to the 
Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL). 
The State Government had also ordered (December 2014) a parallel 
investigation into the in vestments made by the BDA in Mutual Funds by the 
State Criminal Investigation Department  (CID), GoK. The investigation was 
in progress in January  2016. The special audit by the Principal Accountant 
General (G&SSA) commenced in Decembe r 2014 and was completed in June 
2015. The special audit report containing detailed findings was sent to the 
State Government in August 2015 by the Principal Accountant General 
(G&SSA), Karnataka, Bengaluru.  The Go K’s reply to the special audit report 
was received in December 2015. 
4.3.2 Organisational set-up 
While the BDA was headed by a Chairm an, the Commissioner was its Chief 
Executive and Administrative Officer. The Commissioner was vested with 
powers to operate the accounts of the BDA and was responsible for 
maintaining its accounts, besides exercising supervision and control in matters 
concerning accounts and records of the BDA. The Commissioner was assisted 
by a FM, responsible for advising the BDA and the Commissioner on all 
financial matters. In relation to the management of bank accounts and 
compilation of the accounts, the FM was assisted by a Chief Accounts Officer 
(CAO), two Accounts Officers and two A udit Officers who were assisted by 
Superintendents, First and Second Division Assistants (FDA/SDA).  
 
 
 

Chapter-IV 
123 
 
The organisational chart of BDA relating to Finance is as shown below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
* The post of Financial Assistant was renamed as Chief Accounts Officer on 6 May 2005. 
The incumbency to the post of Commissioners and FM are brought out in 
Appendix-4.9. 
4.3.3 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of Audit were designed to examine: 
 the functioning of the internal control mechanism of the BDA during 
1999-2014 to ascertain whether the inte rnal controls of  the BDA were 
adequate to mitigate unacceptable risks with regard to management of 
bank accounts and investment of funds;  
 how the internal controls pertaining  to these areas had been overlooked, 
bypassed or overruled to divert the B DA’s moneys to Mutual Funds and 
other organisations; and  
 loss, if any, to the BDA due to diversion of mone y and also to  ascertain 
whether the BDA’s funds had been misappropriated.  
4.3.4 Audit Scope & Methodology 
The audit covered the investment made  by the BDA in Mutual Funds during 
1999-2014. The general audit scrutiny included review of cash books, 
investment files and regist ers, Statements of Acc ounts of BDA.  Documents 
were obtained from the Mutual F und Houses, pass sheets and other 
information was obtained from the ba nks. Assistance and help of CID was 
also taken in accessing the records of Mutual Fund Houses and banks and 
certain records in BDA.  Specific audit scrutiny focused on tracing the trail of 
Chief Accounts Officer* 
Audit Officer (Cash) 
Accounts Officer 
(Establishment/ Credit 
verification) 
Accounts Officer 
(Compilation)
Accounts Superintendent 
assisted by one FDA and one 
SDA 
Accounts Superintendent – 
Internal Audit (from July 
1998) 
Two Accounts 
Superintendents for credit 
verification
Accounts Superintendent – 
Compilation and  
Accounts Superintendent - 
Internal Audit 
Audit Officer 
(Compilation)
Finance Member
Commissioner

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
124 
funds from the BDA’s bank accounts to various Mutual Funds to the crediting 
of the redemption payout cheques issu ed by the Mutual Funds to the BDA’s 
bank accounts.  
As the special audit covered very old periods, complete information/ 
documents could not be obtained from banks in respect of the following: 
 Term Deposits made and redeemed from time to time and pass sheets of 
the bank accounts prior to 2006-07 from Canara Bank;  
 Confirmations given to the BDA ev ery year during 1999-2014 in respect 
of Term Deposits outstanding in their books as of March; 
 Pass sheets of all th e collection accounts ope rated by the BDA with 
various branches of Canara Bank for the period 1999-2006 and Indian 
Overseas Bank for the period 1999-2003. 
The report emanates from the scru tiny of information and documents 
pertaining to the investments obtained ex ternally by audit from Mutual Funds, 
Registrars and Transfer Agen ts of Mutual Funds, Banks etc., as no 
information/documents relating to th e investments in Mutual Funds was 
available with the BDA.  The audit reconstructed the bank accounts on the 
basis of information/documents furnished by the banks and collated the results 
with the information furnished by the various Mutual Fund Houses. 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the CID, the current 
management of the Banks, Mutual Fund Houses and BDA in securing 
documents/information essential for conducting the audit. 
4.3.5 Audit findings 
The important findings from the special audit are discussed below: 
4.3.5.1 Disregarding of Internal Control Framework 
Internal Control is a means for achi eving the organisation’s objectives and 
mission. In order to ensure  effective operations, safe guard resources, ensure 
adherence to laws/regulations and main tain reliable financial and management 
data, a sound internal control system is required to be established. 
(a) Risk Assessment 
The risk management activities genera lly commence with an organisational 
risk assessment. This means that the or ganisation formally identifies its risks 
within the context of its organisational  activities. These risks would then be 
evaluated and sourced to activities or functions. The BDA was responsible for 
setting appropriate policies on internal controls and to assure itself that 
processes were functioning effectivel y to monitor the risks to which 
organisation was exposed. It was expected to ensure that the system of internal 
control was effective in re ducing risk. The absence of such risk assessment 
and identification indicated weak cont rols in the BDA which have been 
discussed below: 

Chapter-IV 
125 
 
 No risk assessment done in relation to the management of bank accounts 
During 1999-2014, transactions relating to receipts ranging from  
`363.57 crore to `1,458.26 crore and expenditures ranging from `243.21 crore 
to `1,110.04 crore were conducted through bank accounts operated by the 
BDA with various banks. The audit, however, observed that the BDA had not 
adopted any approach to assess risk in relation to the management of bank 
accounts. It also did not have any po licy or guidelines on operation of bank 
accounts such as when a bank account should be opened, who is authorised to 
open and operate the bank acc ounts, or entering into service agreements with 
the bankers for banking services. Furthe r, audit observed th at there were no 
guidelines as to whether any committee was to periodically oversee the 
implementation of the banking requirement s. Audit also obs erved that though 
the number of bank accounts had multiplied during 1999-2014, no review had 
been conducted to know about the continued need for these multiple bank 
accounts. 
It was further seen that all the interb ank transfers as well  as transfers among 
various bank accounts within the bank had been affected by banks on the basis 
of oral instructions of FM during 1999-2014. There was no record available in 
the BDA authorising these banks to transfer funds to other banks or among the 
various current accounts within a bank. The interbank transfers during the said 
period ranged from 
`59.27 crore (1999-2000) to `1,324.45 crore (2004-05). 
 Multiple bank accounts had been opened and operated without the 
approval of the Commissioner/BDA 
The BDA Act stipulated that the Commissioner was to operate BDA’s 
accounts and was responsible for maintain ing its accounts besides exercising 
supervision and control in matters con cerning accounts and records. Also, the 
banking regulations required an order authorising an officer to open and 
operate the accounts from the Head of the Organisation. However, we 
observed that the Commissioner had not  delegated the power of opening a 
bank account to any senior official including the FM. While defining the 
duties and responsibilities of the Finan ce Wing through a circular issued in 
June 1985 under Section 13.2 (e) and (f) of the BDA Act, the Commissioner 
fixed the responsibility for all financia l activities of the BDA entirely on the 
FM who was to be assisted by A udit/Accounts officers and Financial 
Assistant. However, this circular di d not delegate the power of opening bank 
accounts to the FM. Thus, only the Comm issioner was mandated to authorise 
the opening of bank accounts.  
Scrutiny of records showed that the B DA did not have any record of the bank 
accounts (including collection accounts) opened, operated and closed from 
time to time during 1999-2014. No files containing the orders of the 
Commissioner for opening these accounts we re furnished to audit. A central 
register recording the bank accounts opened from time to time and signatories 
of these bank accounts had not been maintained by the BDA.  Audit, however, 
obtained information from the banks which showed that multiple Current 
Accounts (CAs) as shown in Table-4.3 had been opened, operated and closed 
during 1999-2014, in favour of the BDA.  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
126 
Table-4.3: Current accounts operated by the BDA during 1999-2014 
Name of the Bank 
No. of 
accounts 
operated 
No. of accounts 
closed/ 
remaining 
dormant 
No. of accounts 
currently 
operative 
No. of accounts 
without requisite 
signed account 
opening forms as 
confirmed by banks 
Indian Overseas Bank 
(IOB), Kumara Park 
West, Bengaluru 
18 13 5 16 
Canara Bank, BDA 
Complex, Bengaluru 
30 15 15 15 
Canara Bank, Kumara 
Park West, Bengaluru 
12 12 Nil 12 
Corporation Bank, 
Kumara Park West, 
Bengaluru 
2 1 1 Nil 
(Source: Information furnished by respective banks) 
Of these, the main current accounts of the BDA which were operative are 
shown in Table-4.4.  
Table-4.4: Main current accounts of the BDA during 1999-2014 
(Source: Information collected from Annual Accounts of BDA) 
The FM and the CAO were the authorised signatories for each of these 
accounts. Thus, multiple bank accounts opened and operated evidently without 
the approval of the Commissioner showed that lack of guidance on 
management of bank accounts by the BDA/Commissioner and non-existence 
of any oversight mechanism to periodi cally review implementation of the 
banking arrangements resulted in the banking activities being conducted over 
a long period of time during 1999-2014 in an uncontrolled environment. 
 Collection Accounts opened without following the prescribed procedures 
In addition to the main accounts menti oned above, the BDA had authorised a 
number of branches of IOB, Canara  Bank and Corporation Bank to receive 
applications, registration fees and in itial deposit amounts from applicants 
while issuing notificatio ns during 1999-2014. The amounts credited to the 
collection accounts at the authorised branch es of the banks were to be 
transferred to the designated main acc ounts of the BDA after the last date 
fixed for receipt of applications. A collection account permits only crediting of 
the receipts and transfer of the recei pts so credited to the designated main 
current account. No other transaction is permissible in a collection account. In 
this regard, it was observed that the BDA had not assessed the number of 
collection accounts required to be operated at the authorised branches. 
Name of the bank Current Account 
Number Opened on 
Canara Bank, BDA Complex, 
Bengaluru.  
2001 01 January 1991
IOB, Kumara Park West, Bengaluru 239 17 February 1998
Corporation Bank, Kumara Park West, 
Bengaluru 
150 12 October 2010

Chapter-IV 
127 
 
BDA did not have any service agreemen ts with the banks specifying, amongst 
other things, the mode and frequency of transmission of receipts in the 
collection account to the main account and of providing periodic reports to 
BDA.  Though BDA entered into ag reement with the Corporation Bank, 
Kumara Park West branch in Oct ober 2010, even it did not have service 
agreement to this level. 
Hence, in the absence of any service agreements, the BDA did not have any 
legally valid document to make the banks accountable for lapses, if any, on 
their part and claim damages wherever ap propriate. Since the pass sheets of 
the collection accounts were not availa ble with the BDA, audit obtained the 
same from the banks and the scrutiny of the pass sheets showed the following 
irregularities: 
(a) Balances in collection 
accounts invested in 
Term Deposits at 
respective branches 
An amount aggregating `1,712.88 crore had been invested in 
term deposits at 156 branches of IOB, Corporation Bank and 
Canara Bank during December 2001 to June 2004 without 
authorisation from the Commissioner/FM but were brought 
to accounts during those periods. 
Though there was no actual transfer of amounts to the main 
bank account, BDA operated a ‘inter-bank transfers’ account 
and recorded the collection amount as receipts in the cash 
book.  The debits to these inter-bank transfers were 
subsequently cleared by transferring the balances to 
investments. 
(b) Balance in collection 
accounts transferred to 
other branches for 
investment in Term 
Deposits 
An amount aggregating to 
`23.75 crore was transferred (on 
29.8.2000, 29.11.2000, 9.5.2001 and 16.7.2002) from two 
collection accounts of IOB to its nine branches across 
Bengaluru without the written approval of the BDA for 
investment in 
Term Deposit . Further, an amount of 
`23.52 crore collected (as of 4 November 2003) in three 
different branches of IOB had been transferred to other 
branches, the details of which were not forthcoming. 
An amount of `70 crore had been transferred from CA 1587 
to 14 branches of IOB during November 2003. Maturity 
proceeds of `317.07 crore had also been credited to this 
account (February 2004 and March 2005).  In the absence of 
relevant details from the branches concerned, Audit could 
not match the outflow of funds with the inflow of proceeds 
credited. 
 This implied that the redemption proceeds included 
proceeds of other term deposits not invested out of funds 
transferred from this account. 
(c) Balance in collection 
accounts partially 
transferred to main 
account  
In three out of 46 test-checked  collection accounts and four 
bank accounts other than collection accounts of Canara 
Bank, amounts collected were partially transferred to its 
main designated account.  
(d) Balance in collection 
accounts transferred at 
different intervals  
The BDA had not issued any instructions to the banks 
prescribing the periodicity for transfer of balances in the 
collection accounts to the main designated account. In the 
absence of mandated time frame, different branches had 
transferred funds at different intervals. Out of the collections 
made during March to June 2014 in two branches, an 
amount of 
`1.17 crore had not been transferred to main 
account as of D ecember 2014 and `2.04 crore had been 
transferred to the main account only on 30th June 2014. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
128 
(e) Transfers among 
collection accounts 
within branch 
Out of the receipts collected in CA 5004 of Canara Bank, 
`0.36 crore had been transferred to another collection 
account of Canara Bank viz., CA 5007 on 30.12.06. 
Similarly, 
`0.16 crore had been transferred from CA 5007 to 
CA 5004 during March 2006 to February 2007. 
(f) Balance held in 
collection accounts not 
disclosed in main 
accounts  
Following amounts were not reflected in the books of 
accounts: 
 An amount of 
`0.36 crore during March 2004 and 
`11.53 crore during March 2014 at IOB. 
 Amount ranging from `0.07 crore to `8.03 crore during 
2005-06 to 2013-14 at Canara Bank. 
The absence of service agreements and failure of FMs to monitor collection 
accounts resulted in the funds either be ing unnecessarily parked or invested 
from the collection acc ounts without proper aut horisation. There was no 
information available to the BDA of th e overall financial position leading to 
adhoc and subjective investment decisions.   
Due to non-availability of pass sheets of all collection accounts for the period 
1999-2014, audit could not verify whether all the moneys in the collection 
account had been transferred in full to the main CA of BDA.  As a result, audit 
could not verify the correctness of Te rm Deposits recorded in investment 
register. 
 Large number of bank accounts not disclosed in the annual accounts 
The Management of an organisation is responsible for the preparation and 
presentation of financial statements in accordance with the Accounting 
Standards and also for putting in place a sound internal control mechanism to 
enable preparation of financial statem ents that are free from material 
misstatements, whether due to fraud or  error. The definition of financial 
statements includes all n ecessary disclosures which comprise explanatory or 
descriptive information in the financial statements, information in the related 
notes, etc. It was seen that a large num ber of bank accounts, including 
collection accounts, operated by the BDA had not been disclosed in the annual 
financial statements during 1999-2014 and details of which are indicated in 
Appendix-4.10 (a) and Appendix-4.10(b) . As such, these accounts had not 
been subjected to audit during 1999-2014. Failure to disclose a large number 
of bank accounts year after year resulted in a larg e number of transactions 
being kept out of the audit process, besides facilitating concealment of the 
diversion of huge funds to Mutual Funds year after year and their  
non-detection as discussed in the report subsequently. 
 Absence of investment policy 
There was no investment policy in place approved by the BDA till 13 August 
2008, despite being pointed out by audi t during certificati on of the annual 
accounts for the years 2002-2005. Till A ugust 2008, investments in Term 
Deposits had been made on the basis of  individual approvals given without 
taking a holistic approach. The Commissione r then constituted an Investment 
Committee headed by himself and consisting of the FM, Secretary and CAO 
as the members. Thus, the FM was res ponsible for submission of investment 

Chapter-IV 
129 
 
proposals to the Investment Committee/Commissioner. Though the Investment 
Committee had been constituted, no guidelines detailing its scope and 
functioning had been framed by the Comm issioner. The total investments in 
term deposits including their re newal, during 1999-2014 as per annual 
accounts was 
`18,222.50 crore. Scrutiny of the investment files relating to this 
period showed that: 
 Investments amounting to `14,759.47 crore were made in Term Deposits 
prior to August 2008. Out of the sa id investment, approval of the 
Commissioner had been obtained for only `1,911 crore (13 per cent ). 
Further, the investment of `101.42 crore was approved only by the FM and 
`23.70 crore was invested by the FM by st ating that oral orders of the 
Commissioner had been obtai ned.  However, we obs erved that there were 
no ratification by the Commissioner for the said oral orders and hence 
could be construed as unauthoris ed. Balance investment of  
`12,723.35 crore in Term Deposits (70 per cent) did not have approval of 
any kind which was also unauthorised. 
Also, audit observed that `150.45 crore had been i nvested (July 2008) in 
six Term Deposits in order to ma tch six fictitious Term Deposits 
outstanding in the Investment Register . This investment had apparently 
been made by the SDA as the post of FM remained vacant from 1 July 
2008 to 9 November 2008. We, however, observed that there were no 
records available authorising the bank to carry out these transactions. The 
trail of these Term Deposits is indicated in Appendix-4.11. 
 Subsequent to the constitution of Investment Committee, investment 
amounting to 
`591.85 crore and `121.19 crore in Term Deposits had been 
approved by the Commissioner and FM respectively without 
recommendation of the Committee. In addition, an investment of  
`200 crore in Term Deposit was made by the FM stating that oral orders of 
the Commissioner had been obtained.  These unauthorised investments 
constituted 26 per cent of the total investment made after constitution of 
the Investment Committee. 
 With regard to premature closure of term deposits, audit observed from the 
entries made in the Investment Register that although, Term Deposits had 
been prematurely closed on a large scale from time to time, no written 
approval for premature closure had been obtained from any authority 
during the period 1999-2008 (except for 
` five crore approved by the FM 
during 1999-2001). The FM approved pre-closure of investments 
aggregating `411.09 crore during 2008-15 without  the approval of the 
Investment Committee/Commissione r. Similarly during 2009-15, the 
Commissioner had approved premat ure closure of Term Deposits 
amounting to `577.86 crore without referring th e matter to the Investment 
Committee. 
 It was further observed that ther e was also no system of physical 
verification of the original term deposit certificates either at periodical 
intervals during the year or at the end of the year. This facilitated in 
concealing the continued unauthorised diversion of funds as Term 
Deposits in the accounts. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
130 
Thus, all the observations brought out in th e previous paragraphs indicate that 
the Finance Wing of the BDA had not  produced effective and timely 
operational reports that included actual and budget cash balances which were 
compared to forecasts and targets. No operational report comparing the year 
to-date totals of interest earned against a pre-determined target had been 
prepared. As these reports had not been prepared, there was no regular 
appraisal of BDA’s finances, includ ing bank accounts and investment of 
surplus moneys, to the Management. In the absence of this information, the 
management lacked sufficient knowledge to make informed decisions on the 
performance of the banking and cash management functions. 
(b) Control activities 
Control activities refer to that group of  specific controls which are within an 
effective control structure to mitiga te unacceptable risks to assist the 
achievement of business objectives. An effective framework includes both 
preventive and detective controls th at minimise the impact of risks and 
contributes to the efficient and effective delivery of quality outcomes. 
Audit, however, observed that both pr eventive and detective controls were 
either not in place or were not f unctional during 1999-2014.  Specific audit 
findings in this regard are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
 Controls for maintenance of cash book overruled 
The Article 329 of the Karnataka Financ ial Code (KFC) pres cribes that all 
monetary transactions should be ente red in the cash book as soon as they 
occur and attested by the head of the office in token of check exercised by 
him. The cash book should be closed at the end of each day and the balance 
struck. The Head of the office should verify the totals of the cash book or have 
this done by some responsible subordinate  official other than the writer of the 
cash book and initial it as correct. At the end of  the month, the cash book 
should be closed. 
All banking transactions viz., receipts remitted into the bank accounts,  
inter-bank transfers, investments a nd their redemption, and bank balances 
including drawing up abstracts in th e cash book at the end of every month 
were written by the SDA. While the entries written on expenditure side of cash 
book were partially attested by the Fi nancial Assistant during 2000-02 and by 
the Audit Officer during the remaining period, none of the entries written by 
the SDA had been attested by anyone during 1999-2014. The cash book had 
not been closed at the end of each day.  However, at the end of the month, the 
cash book had been signed by the Audit Officer. Thereafter, the cash book had 
not been submitted to any higher official such as CAO/FM.  
Thus, no oversight mechanism existed in the BDA to ensure that the cash book 
had been written as per rules and the tr ansactions recorded therein were free 
from material misstatements, whether due to fraud or error. 
 
 

Chapter-IV 
131 
 
 Non-segregation of duties and responsibilities  
The best practices require that no single  invidual or section should control all 
key stages of a transaction or event.  Rather, duties and responsibilities should 
be assigned systematically to a number of  individuals to ensure that effective 
checks and balances exist.    
The FM, however, did not adequately se parate job responsib ilities related to 
banking and investment activities and made the SDA responsible for: 
 All banking activities in cluding investment of moneys in Term Deposits 
and their redemption; 
 Writing of cash book; 
 Maintenance of Investment Regist er including physical custody of 
original Term Deposit Receipts; and 
 Bank reconciliation 
As a result we observed that: 
 The SDA had been handling all banki ng activities of th e BDA since 1999 
including initiating proposals for i nvestment of surplus funds, their 
redemption including pre-closure, etc. The SDA had been allowed to write 
all the banking transactions in the cash book prior to November 2009 also 
though as per the order of July 1998, th e work of maintenance of the cash 
book had been assigned to the FDA.  
 Though the responsibility for maintain ing the Investment Register and 
physical custody of instruments repr esenting investments had not been 
formally allocated to anyone in the Finance Wing, the SDA had been 
writing the Investment Register. It was seen that the individual entries in 
the Investment Register had not been attested by anyone during the period 
1999-2014.  The individual entries relati ng to investments carried forward 
at the beginning of the year had also not been attested by the Audit Officer 
who, however, had attested the cu mulative opening balance carried 
forward for the period April 2003 to March 2012. The closing of the 
register at the end of the month had been signed by the Audit Officer for 
the period 2003-2012 only. For the peri od 2012-14, the closing of the 
register at the end of every month had not been signed by anyone. Audit 
found from the investment files that during the period May 2001 and 
September 2004, the Investment Register  had not been written up-to-date 
though the Financial Assistant had brought  it to the notice of the Finance 
Member. 
 The Investment Register had not been submitted to any higher officer viz., 
Accounts Officer, CAO or FM during the period 1999-2014. Though 
`18,222.50 crore had been shown in the accounts as invested in Term 
Deposits during 1999-2014 and proceeds of `17,981.12 crore had been 
shown as realised from such invest ments during this period, the entries 
relating to investment and redemption ha d not been attested either in the 
cash book or Investment Re gister during this peri od. No review of the 
investment activity at any level had been conducted comparing the interest 
payments received from Term Deposits analysing the reasons for breaking 
and pre-closure of Term Deposits etc. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
132 
 The SDA was also entrusted with the duty of bank reconciliation.  It was 
seen from the files produced to audit that the bank reconciliation had been 
confined to analysing the unpaid che ques at the end of every month and 
reconciliation of receipts and other transactions reflected as transfers in the 
pass sheets of bank accounts had not been  done. Further, no reconciliation 
statement, or certificate signed by th e SDA, and his supervisory officers 
was available in the BDA.  
The job allocation in the Cash section was so skewed that it facilitated the 
SDA to control a banking process from start to finish and to transfer the 
BDA’s funds unauthorisedly to Mutual F unds persistently over a period of 
time. Further, banking activity was not re viewed on regular intervals to ensure 
that transactions were properly recorded in the accounts though this is the best 
practice in banking controls for detecting irregularities in a timely manner.  
 Inadequate Internal Audit  
Internal Auditing is an independent, objective assurance and consulting 
activity designed to add value and impr ove an organisation’s operations. The 
internal audit activity helps an organisation accomplish its objectives by 
bringing a systematic, di sciplined approach to evaluate and improve the 
effectiveness of risk management, control and governance processes. 
Generally, the Internal Audit is expected to verify the existence of assets and 
recommend proper safeguards for their pr otection; evaluate the adequacy of 
the system of internal controls an d recommend any improvements; assess 
compliance with policies and procedures, sound business practices, laws and 
contractual obligations and investig ate reported occurrences of fraud, 
embezzlement, theft, waste, etc. 
In accordance with the order issued by Commissi oner (June 1985), the FM 
was to function as an internal auditor.  The FMs of the BDA, however, did not 
prescribe or put in place a ny system of internal aud it procedures. The internal 
audit activity in the Finance Wi ng covered only the BDA’s various 
divisions/offices outside its  Headquarters and no internal audit of either the 
Finance Wing or the other wings like Land Acquisition, Engineering, Site 
Allotment, Administration etc., at the Headquarters of the BDA had ever been 
done. In addition, the Investment Regi ster and the monthly accounts of the 
BDA had never been subjected to internal audit during 1999-2014.   
Though the inadequate internal audit m echanism had been repeatedly brought 
to the notice of the BDA through Sepa rate Audit Reports/Management letters 
issued by audit, the BDA had not subj ected any of its wings including the 
Finance Wing to internal audit.  As a result, there was no in-house mechanism 
to evaluate and improve the effectiven ess of risk management, control and 
governance processes, particularly in  the Finance Wing.  Consequently, the 
main detective control did not operate in the BDA, resulting in continued 
diversion of BDA’s funds to Mutual Fund through falsification of records. 
 Failure of Chartered Accountants to discharge their role 
The BDA had appointed Chartere d Accountants during 1999-2014 for 
conducting detailed study and suggest  improvements to the existing 

Chapter-IV 
133 
 
accounting systems, study of internal  controls/checks/procedures and 
identifying short comings thereon, o ngoing recommendations and suggestions 
for improving the internal control system s.  The scope of work also included 
verification of books of accounts, review of financial statements etc.  
The audit, however, observed that though the Chartered Accountants were 
responsible for studying the system of  accounts which also included regular 
checking of the books of accounts including the bank accounts, evaluating the 
internal control system, they had faile d in discharging both the functions.  
Also, the Chartered Accountants had not highlighted any shortcomings/ 
deficiencies in the management of multiple bank accounts by the Finance 
Wing/BDA.   
Thus, while a formal internal audit m echanism did not exist in the BDA, the 
Chartered Accountants whose scope of work inter alia included monthly audit 
of accounts of the BDA had failed to dete ct the continued diversion of BDA’s 
funds for investment in Mutual Funds. 
 Monitoring of activities 
Monitoring and review is the final compone nt of an effective control structure 
which provides an on-going check on th e effectiveness of the control 
mechanism in the organisation. 
As already brought out in the earlier paragraphs, due to absence of any kind of 
monitoring and review mechanism in  BDA, multiple bank accounts were 
being opened and operated, collecti on accounts were opened without 
following prescribed procedures, check of cash books not being conducted, 
etc.  In addition, bank accounts had been operated and investment of surplus 
funds had been made by the BDA during 1999-2014 in an uncontrolled 
environment which is discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
4.3.5.2 Unauthorised investments in Mutual Funds by FMs 
The BDA had not approved any investment policy permitting investment of 
money in Mutual Funds.  All the three FMs as mentioned in Appendix-4.9 
flouted rules and unauthorisedly divert ed BDA’s funds to Mutual Funds by 
falsifying the investments as Term Deposits. 
(a) Modus operandi adopted for unautho rised diversion of BDA’s funds 
It was noticed that the three FMs along with the SDA of th e Cash Section, 
IOB, and the brokers, unauthorisedly r outed BDA’s funds to several Mutual 
Funds.  A simplistic diagram to illustrate the modus operandi is given below. 
The actual modus operandi, however, wa s much more complex which is 
described in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.  
 
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
134 
In BDA Records Actual Transactions 
 
 (i) How BDA’s funds were transf erred from its bank accounts 
Outgo to Mutual 
Funds from the 
main CAs 
Several banker's cheques were  obtained through written and 
oral directions to the banks by  the FMs in favour of several 
Mutual Funds by debiting the main CAs.  Illustrative cases 
have been given in Appendix-4.12(a).  
Outgo to Mutual 
Funds through 
unauthorised 
accounts 
Funds were transferred from time to time from the main CA to 
unauthorised accounts.  Several banker's cheques were then 
obtained through written and oral directions by the FMs in 
favour of Mutual Funds by debiting the unauthorised current 
accounts. Illustrative cases have been given in 
Appendix-4.12(b). 
Proceeds of Term 
Deposits made 
from main current 
accounts 
Surplus funds in the main current account of IOB were 
regularly invested in Term Deposits by the BDA.  Proceeds of 
many such Term Deposits were , however, credited to other 
current accounts including unauthorised current accounts and 
used for diversion to Mutual Funds. Illustrative cases have 
been given in Appendix-4.12(c). 
(ii) How redeemed Mutual Funds were treated 
Redemptions 
directly credited 
to main CA 
The payout cheques obtained from Mutual Funds were credited 
either directly to the main CA or credited to unauthorised 
accounts. Illustrative cases have been given in 
Appendix-4.13(a). 
Redemptions 
credited through 
unauthorised 
accounts  
The redemptions from mutual funds were initially credited to 
unauthorised accounts, from where the amounts were transferred 
to  
 Main CA to match the fic titious Term Deposits already 
created in the books of accounts. Illustrative cases have been 
given in Appendix-4.13(b). 
 Fresh Mutual Fund investments. Illustrative cases have been 
given in Appendix-4.13(c). 
 Unauthorised Term Deposits which were subsequently 
transferred to main CA. Illustrative cases have been given in 
Appendix-4.13(d). 
Redemption on maturity 
Redemption 
payout cheques 
Amounts 
transferred as per 
oral instructions 
Amounts 
transferred as per 
oral instructions 
Investments Amounts equal to 
the maturity value 
of FDs 
Authorised bank 
Account IOB 239 FDs
Authorised bank 
Account IOB 239
(1)
Unauthorised bank 
Account IOB 1518 & 1562 
(2)
Investment in 
Mutual Funds  
(3)
Unauthorised bank 
Account IOB 1518 & 1562
(4)

Chapter-IV 
135 
 
(iii) How the accounts records were falsified to ensure continued  
non-detection of unauthorised diversion of funds 
Step 1: 
By creating fictitious 
Term Deposits in the 
BDA’s records 
Whenever the banks debited the main  current accounts at the time of 
issuing Banker's cheques or transferring funds to the unauthorised 
accounts, such debits were recorded in the Cash Book and Investment 
Register as Term Deposits, mostly short-term, by assigning fictitious 
numbers.  Illustrative cases of fa ke deposits are brought out in 
Appendix-4.14. 
The position of fake deposits incl uded in the Annual Accounts as at 
the end of March 2015 is shown below. 
 (
` in crore) 
Date of Deposit and 
TDR Nos. 
Amount shown 
as invested 
Date of 
maturity 
Interest 
accrued 
10.07.13/ 603 17.79 10.07.14 1.16 
10.07.13/ 604 17.70 10.07.14 1.16 
10.07.13/ 605 32.73 10.07.14 2.14 
30.11.13/1005 9.77 30.11.14 0.30 
01.01.14/6 10.90 01.10.15 0.25 
20.01.14/34 10.00 20.01.15 0.17 
Total 98.89  5.18 
The fake Term Deposits were show n as renewed from time to time in 
the Investment Register.  
Step 2: 
Bank confirmation 
letters were 
fabricated by using 
fake letter heads 
The SDA used fake letter heads and seals of the bank to prepare 
certificates confirming the Term Deposits to match with the 
investments outstanding in the books of accounts in each financial 
year and played a major role in the preparation of fake confirmation 
letters by using these letterheads whenever felt necessary, either for 
audit purposes or otherwise. 
This was established when the copy of the confirmation certificate 
purported to have been issued by the bank was referred (March 2015) 
to the bank by audit for verifica tion of its genuineness.  The bank 
authorities confirmed (April 2015) that  the Bank’s letterhead and seal 
were presently not in use and that the signature affixed on the 
confirmation letter sent by audit was not that of the Manager of the 
Bank.  Similarly, on another o ccasion, the FM who had taken over 
charge (2 August 2014) had sought  confirmation from bank for Term 
Deposits amounting to 
`190.67 crore outstanding in the Investment 
Register. The BDA had on its file  two confirmation letters, one 
genuine letter issued by the Bank confirming the balance as 
`160 crore only and another fake confirmation letter, created by the 
SDA for `190.67 crore. 
Audit also found in the custody of the SDA, the blank letterheads of 
IOB and Canara Bank.  This was traced by the BDA when they broke 
open (February 2015) the almirah in the presence of police authorities. 
Step 3: 
Removal of fake 
Term Deposits from 
the accounts 
When funds were transferred to th e main current accounts either by 
crediting the payout cheques of Mutual Funds or by transferring funds 
from the unauthorised accounts, or by crediting the proceeds of Term 
Deposits made from unauthorised acc ounts, the receipts in the pass 
sheet were recorded in the cash book as proceeds of Term Deposits 
and the outstanding fake Term Deposits were removed from the 
Investment Register as detailed in Appendix-4.14. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
136 
(b) Collusion by banks  
Detailed study of bank records obta ined by audit showed that the major 
portion of BDA’s funds had been diverted for investment in Mutual Funds 
from the CA with IOB.  Further analys is of the IOB transactions by the audit 
showed the following: 
Bank acted upon the 
request of  
FM for diversion of 
funds 
Banking rules and regulations di d not permit conducting business 
on the basis of oral directions.   
We, however, observed that the banks had acted upon the letter 
written (20 June 2000) by FM to th e Senior Manager of the bank.  
The letter authorised the bank to issue Banker’s cheques on the 
basis of oral instructions given over phone by debiting various 
current accounts and also transfer funds between the various 
accounts of the BDA maintained with the bank.  
Though operation of the CAs required authorisation from both FM 
and CAO, the bank had issued Banker’s cheques in favour of 
several Mutual Funds during 1999- 2014 by debiting the CA based 
on the written request of FM alone. 
Bank disregarded rules 
for Term Deposit 
accounts 
Bank had failed to follow the prescribed rules for opening Term 
Deposit accounts in favour of the BDA.  It irregularly opened Term 
Deposit accounts without a written request, renewed these Term 
Deposits without proper authorisation, pre-closed these accounts 
without a formal request, and credited the proceeds of Term 
Deposits to several current accounts without authorisation. 
Bank did not indicate the 
transaction details in the 
pass sheets 
When funds were either transferred to unauthorised current 
accounts or when Banker’s cheques were issued directly from the 
main current account, IOB had suppressed the transaction details in 
the pass sheets of the current accounts by recording the narration as 
only Trf, meaning transfer. Similarly, when funds were transferred 
back to the main current account from the unauthorised accounts, 
these transactions were indi cated in the pass sheet as Trf without 
disclosing the source. 
This facilitated in classification of  such transfers as Term Deposits 
in the cash book without being detected. 
Bank allowed current 
account operated by 
BDA for collection of 
receipts from public for 
diversion of funds to 
mutual funds 
Purpose of a collection account is to park money remitted by 
general public temporarily before it is transferred to designated 
main current account of BDA. The collection account is designed 
to provide for only a one-way traffic of collection and transfer of 
moneys to designated main account and cannot be used for any 
other purpose.  
Bank had, however, allowed current account operated for 
collection purposes for diversion of funds to mutual funds.  
Bank facilitated 
concealment of 
unauthorised 
transactions in a current 
account disclosed in the 
accounts 
Though funds from a current account  disclosed in the accounts had 
been transferred to Mutual Funds and redemption payouts from 
Mutual Funds had been credited to  this account, these transactions 
had not been disclosed in th e accounts.  IOB facilitated the 
concealment of these transactions by manipulating the monthly 
closing balance in this account so as to agree with the closing 
balance as per accounts. The manipulation was done either by 
writing back the available balance to Sundry Creditors or by 
partially crediting the payout cheques presented for encashment 
through this account. A case study has been brought out in 
Appendix-4.15. 

Chapter-IV 
137 
 
Bank facilitated 
transactions without 
routing through the pass 
sheets 
Audit observed instances wherein – 
 The bank had issued banker’s cheque directly from the sundry 
creditor’s account
85 without crediting the customer’s account. 
 A single cheque received for clearance had been broken into 
two parts and credit afforded to two different accounts. 
 In respect of amount cleared against a single cheque, credit to 
the customer account had been afforded on different dates, by 
splitting the amount of the clearance cheque. 
 Amount standing at the credit of BDA’s account had been 
written back to sundry creditors to facilitate manipulation of 
balances in that CA. 
Bank falsified the details 
of transactions recorded 
in the pass sheet 
When funds were transferred back  to the main current account 
from the unauthorised account, the transfers were recorded as 
proceeds of Term Deposits (which were fake) outstanding in the 
Investment Register, thereby creating the impression that the 
receipts represented proceeds from genuine Term Deposits. 
In short, the bank frequently transf erred huge funds amongs t various current 
accounts without obtaining confirmation from  the authorised signatories after 
carrying out the transacti ons. The redemption payout cheques received from 
the Mutual Funds were credited to various CAs, not always to the CAs from 
which Banker’s cheques in favour of th e Mutual Funds had been initially 
issued.  Thus, IOB had violated the banking rules by carrying out unauthorised 
transfer of moneys among the CAs and issuing Banker’s cheques in favour of 
Mutual Funds without the knowledge of the second authorised signatory.  
Audit observed an instance, wherein a redemption cheque was encashed at a 
Bank without having an account.  Scru tiny showed that ING Vysya Bank 
operated ‘Wash Account’ similar to Sundr y creditors account.  A redemption 
payout cheque issued by a Mutual Fund House was di rectly presented at the 
ING Vysya Bank where BDA did not have any account.  The Bank had 
cleared the cheque through the wash account and invested the same in five 
Term Deposits in favour of BDA for six months.  Subsequently, the Term 
Deposits had been pre-closed and matur ity proceeds were credited to an un-
authorised account at Corporation Bank.  . 
(c) Funds transferred out of BDA to other organisations  
Apart from the funds diverted to Mutual Funds, audit noticed that 
`10.67 crore 
had been transferred on four occasions  to other organisations which did not 
have any business connection with th e BDA.  These misappropriation cases 
are discussed below: 
 Coffee Board, Karnataka 
Detailed scrutiny of bank records of IOB revealed that BDA’s bank account 
had been debited by `4.50 crore on 28 March 2002 and the amount had been 
transferred to another account with th e same branch which was operated by 
the Coffee Board, Karnataka.  In order to verify whether the said amount had 
                                                            
85  Sundry creditors is operated  by banks for clearance of cheques presented.  When a cheque 
was received for clearance, su ndry creditor was credited by debiting clearance account.  
On clearance, Sundry creditors account was debited and customer account was credited.  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
138 
subsequently been returned to the BDA, the transactions in these two accounts 
were scrutinised and we observed that 
 The amount had been retu rned (3 April 2002) in directly by investing 
Coffee Board’s fund of `4.50 crore in Mutual Fund in favour of BDA. 
 The redemption payout cheque for `4,55,11,644 was presented for 
clearance by the Coffee Board.  The bank credited  a partial amount of 
`5,11,644 to Coffee Board’s bank account and issued banker’s cheque for 
the balance `4.50 crore for investment in Mutual Fund in favour of BDA.   
The bank facilitated concealment of this transaction in the BDA’s pass 
sheet by operating sundry creditors account. 
The transfer of `4.50 crore from the main CA during March 2002 had falsely 
been recorded in the investment regist er as Term Deposit.  This fake deposit 
had been cleared during July 2002 by redeeming an investment earlier made in 
Birla Sunlife Mutual Fund by BDA. 
On another occasion, BDA submitte d (25 November 2002) a redemption 
payout cheque for 
`1.04 crore for clearance.  It was noticed that without 
crediting this amount to its account, the bank issued a banker’s cheque in 
favour of a Mutual Fund which was inve sted in the name of Director of 
Finance, Coffee Board.  This trans action was also routed through sundry 
creditors account by the bank. Though Coffee Board had redeemed the 
investment and realised the money, it ha d not returned the amount apart from 
interest of 
`1.68 crore to BDA as of now (November 2015) even after 13 
years. 
It was further observed that the bank  account of both BDA and Coffee Board 
had been maintained at the same branch  of IOB and the same brokerage firm 
handled the Mutual Fund investments.  Thus, the said misappropriation was 
aided and abetted by the banker who was same for both the offices.  
 Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited 
It was observed that the FM had obtained a Banker’s cheque for ` three crore 
on 14 June 2007 in favour of Principa l Mutual Fund by debiting the main 
account and transferring the same to an  unauthorised bank account operated 
by him at IOB.  However, this Banker’s  cheque had been used to invest  
` three crore in Principal Mu tual Fund in favour of BMRCL instead of  BDA.  
BMRCL redeemed the investment and realised ` three crore.  However, 
BDA’s principal of ` three crore along with interest of `3.07 crore has not 
been returned by BMRCL so far (November 2015). 
It was further observed that  a transfer of funds from the main CA to BMRCL 
had been falsely recorded as a Term Deposit for 91 days in the investment 
register.  This fictitious Term De posit had been cleared during September 
2007 by transferring the requi site fund from another main CA through an 
unauthorised account. 
Mention was made in Paragraph 4.16 of  the Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (Commercial)-Government of Karnataka for the year 
2008-09 regarding the improper investment  of funds of BMRCL in Principal 

Chapter-IV 
139 
 
Mutual Fund by its Executive Director (Finance) without th e approval of the 
Board and the resultant lo ss to the company. As pe r the records of BMRCL, 
Principal Mutual Fund had issued (June  2007) additional units in favour of 
BMRCL for ` three crore upon remittance of ` three crore by the broker on his 
own volition to compensate the company for the loss sustained.  
It is pertinent to mention here that BDA’s funds of ` three crore had been 
unauthorisedly diverted from one of its bank accounts to Principal Mutual 
Fund for issue of additional units in favour of BMRCL. 
 Karnataka Backward Classes Department Buildings Construction 
Society 
The FM obtained two Banker’s cheques, one for ` two crore drawn on 26 June 
2006 in favour of HSBC Opportunities Fund by debiting unauthorised bank 
account in Corporation Bank and the other for `12.68 lakh drawn on 30 June 
2006 in favour of HSBC Cash Fund by debi ting another unauthorised account 
in IOB.  However, these Banker’s cheques had been used to invest the funds in 
Mutual Fund in favour of Karnataka B ackward Classes Department Buildings 
Construction Society (Society) instead of the BDA.  Though the Society had 
redeemed the investments and realised  the money, it has not returned the 
amount apart from interest of `2.54 crore to the BDA as of now (November 
2015). 
It is relevant to mention here that au dit is neither equipped nor empowered to 
investigate the transfer of such funds from a criminal or forensic point of view 
by collecting evidence externally. The cr iminal investigation by the State CID 
is, however, expected to throw light on the linkage between these unauthorised 
transfer of funds to inexplicable destinations and the FMs concerned.  
(d)  Summary of unauthorised financial transactions  
Audit compiled the information of funds transferred unauthorisedly from the 
CAs including the Term Deposit account s and funds subsequently brought 
back into the main CAs through different  routes on the basis of information 
furnished by the banks and Mutual Funds.  The details of funds diverted from 
the main account for investment in Mutual funds, funds brought back through 
redemption pay outs and the net loss/profit have been shown in Table-4.5. 
Table-4.5: Funds unautho risedly transferred out of the BDA’s accounts 
and subsequently brought back 
(` in crore) 
Diversion during 
the tenure of 
Funds 
diverted 
Funds 
brought 
back later 
Excess (+) 
/Deficit (-) 
Aggregate86
investments in 
Mutual Funds 
Redemption 
payouts credited to 
current accounts 
Profit (+)/ 
Loss (-) from 
Mutual Funds 
Sri Sandeep Dash 3,439.64 3,478.24 (+) 38.60 2,202.90 2,241.51 (+)38.61 
Sri M.N.Seshappa 531.24 489.35 (-)41.89 567.55 530.79 (-)36.76 
Sri B.Ganganna 75.57 75.30 (-)0.27 133.00 132.75 (-)0.25 
(Source: Compiled on the basis of information collected from banks and mutual fund houses) 
                                                            
 
86 Aggregate investment – The sum total of individual investment made during the tenure of 
each FM 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
140 
(e)  Loss to BDA due to inve stment in mutual funds  
The cumulative loss to the BDA till July 2015 due to unauthorised investments 
in Mutual Funds by the three FMs during their tenure worked out to `192.41 
crore, as shown in Table-4.6. 
Table-4.6: Cumulative loss to the BDA 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the FM Loss at the end 
of their tenure 
Cumulative loss 
as of July 2015 
1 Sri Sandeep Dash 15.55 36.38 
2 Sri M N Seshappa 72.43 141.39 
3 Loss of interest on `3.08 crore not ploughed back 
by Sri.M N Seshappa to the main CA 
0 0.91 
4 Sri B Ganganna 10.47 13.18 
5 Loss of interest on `5.21 crore not ploughed back 
by Sri B Ganganna to the main CA 
0 0.55 
 Total 98.45 192.4187 
4.3.5.3 Analysis of investments in Mutual Funds 
A mutual fund is a professionally mana ged trust that pools the savings of 
many investors and invests them in s ecurities like stocks, bonds, short-term 
money market instruments and commodities such as precious metals. A 
mutual fund is set up in the form of a trust that has a Sponsor, Trustees and 
Asset Management Company (AMC).  I nvestors get units of the mutual fund 
allotted according to the amount  they invest. As mutual  funds are invested in 
different securities like stocks or fixed income securities, depending upon the 
fund’s objectives, different schemes ha ve different risks depending on the 
underlying portfolio. The value of an inve stment may fluctuate over a period 
of time because of economic alterations or  other events that affect the overall 
market. Mutual fund products are sold to investors through two main channels: 
by AMCs directly (investor service centers/Branch offices/internet) and by 
entities variously known as distribu tors/agents/brokers. Mutual funds 
compensate the distributors from funds  collected by way of entry load, exit 
load and annual recurring expenses paid out of the scheme assets. The 
distributors receive both upfront commission and trail commission. 
 
                                                            
87 While working out interest loss, Audit examined the interest earnings of the amounts that 
had been invested in Mutual Funds, had the said amounts been invested from time to time in 
Term Deposits in the normal course with nationalised banks. This methodology had been 
adopted by Audit to find out the alternative use of the capital as the Government 
departments including the BDA were mandated to invest their surplus funds only in Term 
Deposits with nationalised banks. While working out the interest, Audit retained the same 
dates of outflow of funds from the bank accounts and the subsequent inflow into them. The 
higher rate of interest, prevailing in the calendar year, as furnished by the Canara Bank, was 
adopted by Audit for working out the interest. The interest rate was applied on each outflow 
upto the date of next inflow. At this stage, the residual outflow of funds was calculated after 
deducting the inflow and taken forward. The interest rate was again applied on the residual 
outflow as well as on each of the subsequent out flows till the next date of inflow of funds. 
This process was repeated till the last inflow of funds into the BDA’s main bank accounts. It 
is relevant to mention that there are other methods to calculate the interest and assess the 
loss.
 

Chapter-IV 
141 
 
(a) Investments in  Mutual Funds 
The Mutual Fund-wise details of in vestments and redemptions during 1999-
2014 have been shown in Table-4.7. 
Table-4.7: Investments made in Mutu al Funds and the amounts received 
  on redemption 
(` in crore) 
Name of Mutual Fund Amount 
invested 
Switches* made Amount paid on 
redemption 
Net loss (-) / 
Net profit In Out 
Birla Sun Life, ING and 
Alliance Mutual Funds 
1,576.00 1,883 1,883 1,573.73 (-) 2.27 
HDFC , Zurich and Morgan 
Stanley Mutual Funds 
559.00 1,134 1,134 574.26 15.26 
HSBC Mutual Fund 204.30 463 463 197.45 (-)6.85 
Principal Mutual Fund 194.65 322 322 190.77 (-)3.88 
BNP Paribas and ABN 
Amro Mutual Funds 
93.00 25 25 94.69 1.69 
Tata Mutual Fund 75.00 79 79 78.94 3.94 
L&T and DBS Chola 
Mutual Funds 
75.00 274 274 66.83 (-)8.17 
Sundaram Mutual Fund 50.00 21 21 51.44 1.44 
JM Mutual Fund 20.00 - - 20.60 0.60 
SBI Mutual Fund 25.00 53 53 24.68 (-)0.32 
Taurus Mutual Fund 10.00 5 5 9.43 (-)0.57 
Deutsche Mutual Fund 20.00 - - 20.58 0.58 
UTI 1.50 - - 1.65 0.15 
Total 2,903.45 4,259 4,259 2,905.05 1.60 
(Source: Information obtained from mutual fund houses) 
*Moving either the whole or part of the investment in the Mutual Fund scheme to another 
Mutual Fund scheme within the fund family is called switching of Mutual Funds. 
Investment in Birla Sun Life Mutual Fund (into which ING Vysya and 
Alliance Mutual Funds had been merged ) was the highest and constituted 54 
per cent . Other Mutual Funds where substantial investments had been made 
were HDFC (including Zuri ch and Morgan Stanley)–19 per cent;  HSBC–
seven per cent; PMF – seven per cent, followed by others. While investments 
in seven Mutual Funds yiel ded aggregate profit of `23.66 crore, the other six 
Mutual Funds returned an aggregate loss of `22.60 crore, reducing the net 
profit to just `1.60 crore.  
(b)  Falsification of addres s and e-mail id of BDA 
Scrutiny of copies of applications fo r investments, switches and redemptions 
obtained from Mutual Fund Houses showed that the applications had been 
signed by the respective FMs,  implying that they were responsible for the 
investments. 
Most of the investments by the three F Ms had been made in open-ended, high 
risk equity schemes. Equities exhibit very sharp volatilitie s and carry lot of 
risk even to the extent of losing one’s  entire corpus. This was the reason why 
investments in six Mutual Funds registered heavy losses. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
142 
Though all investments had been made in favour of the BDA, different 
addresses other than the official addr ess of the BDA had been given on many 
application forms. Some of the addresses given were as under: 
 FM, BDA, Sankey Road, Bengaluru- 20; 
 BDA, FM , #6, II Floor, Above State Bank of Hyderabad, Nehru Road, 
Kammanahalli, Bengaluru-84; 
 BDA, No. 229, 8th E Main, I Block, HSBC Layout, Kalyan Nagar, 
Bengaluru-43 
 BDA, No. 229, 8th 5 Main, I Block, HRBR Layout, Kalyan Nagar, 
Bengaluru-43 
This implied that the FMs had deliberatel y given different addresses to ensure 
that no correspondence regarding Mutual Funds was received at the official 
address of the BDA and confidentiality of the unauthorised investments would 
be maintained. 
For the same reason, different e-mail a ddresses as mentioned below had been 
furnished in the application forms. 
 fin_vsa@hotmail.com; 
 investmentbda@rediffmail.com; 
 vassanth31@gmail.com; 
 vasanth31@gmail.com and  
 fin_member2012@hotmail.com 
(c) Mutual Fund investments ro uted through brokerage firms 
Investments in mutual funds had been done through the broker’s route, barring 
a few stray cases. The brokerage firms through which the investments 
including switches and redemptions had been routed were as under: 
 Green Homes India; 
 GS Financial Services; 
 RG Financial Advisory Services; 
 Investquest Advisors Private Limited 
 SGR Investment Consultants;  
 G.R.Financial Advisors; 
 GS Investment Solutions; and  
 Way 2 Wealth 
It was noticed by audit that all these fi rms with the exception of the last two 
belonged to a single family consisting of Sri M.Narayana Rao, his son  
Sri M.Gururaj and grandson Sri M.Rahul. Different firms had been flouted in 
the names of different members of the same family for tax purposes but these 
firms represented a single source for routing funds to the Mutual Funds. It is 
interesting to note that all the three FMs preferred only these brokerage firms 
for investing in Mutual Funds, indicat ing their collusion with such firms 
belonging to a family for remaining in constant touch with them in the given 
scheme of things. 
The volume of purchases routed th rough these brokerage firms during 1999-
2014 has been shown in Table-4.8. 

Chapter-IV 
143 
 
Table-4.8: Investments routed through brokerage firms 
(` in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of the brokerage firm Purchases routed through the firm 
1 Green Homes India 811.80 
2 GS Financial Services 1,363.25 
3 RG Financial Advisory Services 52.00 
4 GS Investment Solutions 275.00 
5 SGR Investment Consultants 23.00 
6 G.R.Financial Advisors 309.40 
7 Investquest Advisors Private Ltd 30.00 
8 Way 2 Wealth 2.00 
9 Direct 37.00 
 Total 2,903.45 
(Source:Information obtained from mutual fund houses) 
(d) Heavy churning of investments in Mutual Funds  
Moving either the whole or part of th e investment from one mutual fund 
scheme to another mutual fund scheme within the fund fa mily is called 
switching of mutual funds. For instance,  moving some or all the units from 
HDFC Top 200 to HDFC Balanced Fund would be considered switching. A 
switch from one fund (source) to another fund (target) is a combination of two 
transactions.  
 Redemption of units in the source or the scheme from where it is switched 
out; and  
 Fresh purchase of units in the target or the scheme into which it is being 
switched.  
A majority of the investments had been made in equities which offered higher 
commission to the brokers. The modus ope randi in investment of funds by the 
three FMs was to invest in the mutual fund schemes initially and to move from 
one fund to another frequently with a view to increase the amount of 
commission through switches. Over-trans action and indiscriminate churning 
of Mutual Fund investments through switches to earn higher commissions 
were also observed.   
The commission paid by various Mutual Funds has been shown in Table-4.9 
Table-4.9 Commission paid to the brokerage firms 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Mutual Fund 
Commission 
paid for initial 
purchases 
Commission 
paid for 
switches 
Total 
commission 
paid to the 
brokerage 
firms 
Percentage of 
Commission for 
switches to 
total 
commission 
1 BSL 8.70 19.25 27.95 69 
2 HDFC 1.29 7.04 8.33 85 
3 HSBC 1.74 3.32 5.06 66 
4 L & T 0.01 2.32 2.33 100 
5 TATA 0.02 0.37 0.39 95 
6 BNP  1.85 0.16 2.01 8 
7 PMF 3.01 1.16 4.17 28 
8 SBI 0 0.38 0.38 100 
9 Taurus 0.09 0 0.09 - 
 Total 16.71 34.00 50.71 67 
(Source: Information obtained from mutual fund houses) 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
144 
Thus, commission of `50.71 crore was paid by vari ous Fund Houses to the 
brokerage firms. Out of these commissions, `34 crore (67 per cent of the total 
commission) had been paid for the switc hes. Birla Sun Life  (including ING 
Vysya and Alliance) Mutual Fund paid the highest commission of  
`27.95 crore (55 per cent  of the total commissi on paid by all the Fund 
Houses). A scrutiny of the trail fees paid in respect  of investments made by 
Birla Sun Life Mutual Fund showed that the investments under various 
schemes had been switched indiscriminately  at very short intervals of time to 
maximise the commission. The details have been shown in Table-4.10. 
Table-4.10: Indiscriminate churning of investments in Birla Sun Life 
Mutual Fund 
(` in crore) 
Number of days the investments 
were retained under various 
schemes 
Investment transferred 
through switches 
No. of occasions 
such transfers had 
been made 
1 to 5 252.58 30 
6 to 10 326.74 37 
11 to 15 389.21 54 
16 to 20 553.81 63 
21 to 31 2,857.61 476 
32 to 60 617.02 76 
61 to 91 657.53 125 
(Source: Information obtained from mutual fund houses) 
Though the commission was paid by the Fund Houses directly to the 
brokerage firms, the churning of invest ments had been done by the three FMs. 
As multiple transactions through churning was beneficial only to the 
brokerage firms as it fetched them hi gher commission, it was evident that the 
FMs would not have resorted to unjustif ied and frequent ch urning to promote 
the interests of the brokerage firms unless they had a stake in the commission.  
Audit is neither in a position nor em powered to investigate whether the 
commission earned by the brokerage firm s had been passed on to the FMs or 
their benami sources in some form or othe r. The parallel investigation 
entrusted to the State Criminal Investig ation Department could throw light on 
this issue and identify the ultimate beneficiaries of the commission paid by the 
Fund Houses.  
(e) Injudicious investment of moneys  available in Pension Fund in 
Mutual Funds 
The BDA in its Board meeting held on 23 June 2008 resolved to establish a 
separate Pension Trust a nd introduce a Pension Scheme  for the benefit of its 
regular/permanent employees. Accordingl y, a separate Trust was established 
and the trust deed was registered on 15 May 2009 under the name of the 
Bangalore Development Authority Employees Pension Trust Fund.  
As per the trust deed, the Trust head ed by the FM was to function as an 
independent body to oversee the manageme nt of Pension Fund contributed by 
the BDA.  The Fund was to be operate d and managed by the Trust and the 
Trustees were to invest/deposit all th e moneys not immediately required for 

Chapter-IV 
145 
 
the purposes of the fund only in the St ate Bank of India or Nationalised 
Banks/Government Securities with the approval of the Commissioner.   
The BDA made an initial contribution of `50 crore to the Pension Fund (April 
2010), which was invested in Term Deposits with Canara Bank.  During 
February 2013, it was resolved by the Trust to invest a further sum of  
`50 crore in Income Fund Scheme of  nationalised banks which was in 
violation of the trust deed. 
Initially, `10 crore was invested in SB I Magnum Income Fund on 3rd May 
2013. As the interest earned was higher compared to interest offered by 
Nationalised banks, it was d ecided to invest additional `40 crore in SBI 
Magnum Income Fund on 5 June 2013. On 10 September 2014, the investment 
was redeemed and `50.91 crore was realised and credited to the Trust account. 
The brokerage paid on account of this transaction was `60.48 lakh and the 
transaction was routed through the same brokers, who had executed the mutual 
fund transactions of BDA. 
Thus, the Trust disregarded the guidelin es of the trust deed and invested  
`50 crore in Mutual Fund. As a result, the investment in Mutual Fund returned 
a profit of only `0.91 crore, as against `6.44 crore that could have been earned 
as of September 2014 had the amount been invested in Term Deposits. Taking 
the interest loss further till July 2015, th e interest loss to the BDA aggregated 
`9.50 crore.  
4.3.6 Reply of the Government 
In reply to the Special Audit Report issued in August 2015 by the Principal 
Accountant General (G&SSA), Karn ataka, the Government admitted 
(December 2015) that though the investments in Mutual Funds were per-se 
unauthorised, the FMs had not disclosed th ese investments in the accounts. It 
was also admitted that the BDA did not ha ve any records (central register of 
bank accounts, authorisation etc.,) of bank accounts opened, operated and 
closed during 1999-2014, and as pointed ou t by audit, several bank accounts 
had not been disclosed in the accounts as these accounts had been opened 
without authorisation and had been operated exclusively for di version of the 
BDA’s funds to Mutual Funds. 
The Government further accepted the fact  that the SDA of the BDA misused 
the responsibility entrusted to him to control the banking process and diverted 
BDA’s funds and that ther e was a lacuna in the wo rk allocation, whereby all 
banking transactions, maintenance of im portant registers and possession of 
documents were vested with the SDA. It was also admitted that the SDA and 
IOB were involved in fabricating conf irmation letters and that criminal 
investigation was being undertaken by the State CID. 
The Government further admitted that  no written communications had been 
sent to the banks for inter and intra- bank transfer of funds during 1999-2014 
and that the approval of the Commi ssioner had not been obtained by the 
authorised branches for investment of moneys in Term Deposits in respective 
branches. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
146 
The Government replied that the banks were also major players in the scam as 
they acted upon the oral in structions of the FMs wh ich facilitated not only 
persistent diversion of BDA’s funds, but also non-detection of such diversion 
over a long period of time. Further, it was accepted that the Chartered 
Accountant who was responsible for conduc ting internal audit did not point 
out any shortcomings in the accounts and the illegal diversion of BDA’s funds 
in mutual funds. 
The Government did not offer any co mments on audit observations about 
investment of funds in Mutual funds, but agreed that the records were falsified 
and transfer of money to unauthorised bank accounts and to Mutual Funds was 
camouflaged as Term Deposits both in the Cash book and Investment register. 
It was also stated that a civil suit would be filed to recover the loss from the 
FMs and SDA concerned. 
4.3.7 Conclusion 
The BDA had no investment policy to  manage its surplus funds.  An 
investment committee constituted had no guidelines to work with.  The three 
FMs during the period 1999-2014 had viol ated all principles of financial 
propriety, failed to maintain financial records as per the provisions of KFC 
and to conduct internal audit, did not  ensure proper checks and balances 
through segregation of duties of staff in the finance wing. The SDA, banks and 
brokerage firms aided, abetted and participated in committing various 
financial irregularities.   
The BDA’s funds were diverted to Mu tual Funds and transferred to other 
organisations by opening and operating unauthorised bank ac counts, creation 
of fake Term Deposits, suppressing of  facts, falsification of records, 
preparation of misleading financial statem ents and destroying the trail of all 
transactions. 
The unauthorised transfer of funds for investment in Mutual Funds and also to 
other organisations that audit was able to track resulted in financial loss of 
`205.85 crore to the BDA.  The unauthoris ed transfer of funds aggregating 
`6.17 crore to BMRCL, Coffee Board and Karnataka Backward Classes 
Department Buildings Constructi on Society represented cases of 
misappropriation of BDA’s funds.  
4.3.8 Recommendations 
 BDA should identify its risks in the context of its activity, particularly 
banking arrangements. BDA should prepare a documented framework 
that identifies, analyses and assesses key risks. This framework including 
the fraud control plan will provide useful tools for effective 
organisational risk management. 
 BDA should ensure that the control framework for agency banking is 
supported by its Chief Executive's instructions, rela ted policies and 
procedures, and short and long term investment strategies. 

Chapter-IV 
147 
 
 BDA should carry out bank account ra tionalisation by undertaking a 
cost-benefit analysis to identify  an appropriate balance between 
administrative efficiency in transaction and reconciliation processes, and 
facilitate better cash management. 
 BDA should enhance its systems and processes for the collection of 
information on future cash requirement so that it can maximise the 
opportunity to invest surplus funds.  
 BDA should include monitoring and review of performance 
measurement activity as a tool to improve banking and cash management 
functions.  
 The trail of all Term Deposits recorded in the Investment Register during 
1999-2014, including those made from collection accounts, should be 
traced from the date of investment to the date of redemption to ensure 
that there are no fake Term Deposits  other than the ones detected by 
audit. This is essential as audit co nfined itself to identifying the fake 
Term Deposits only in respect of funds diverted for investments in 
Mutual Funds.  
 BDA should improve efficiency a nd effectiveness of its banking 
arrangements through implementation of management controls that are 
appropriately designed to monitor speci fic control activity, particularly 
the timely completion and review of bank reconciliations.  
 The key tasks and responsibilities among various employees and  
sub-units of the organisation should be segregated so that no single 
individual should be able to contro l all key aspects of transactions/ 
events. 
 An independent Internal Audit wing  should be established immediately 
to bring about a systematic, discip lined approach to evaluate and 
improve the effectiveness of risk management, control and governance 
processes. The Internal Audit ac tivity should extend not only to the 
Finance Wing but also to all other wings of the BDA. 
 Besides recovering the loss, responsibi lity may be fixed and appropriate 
action taken so as to discourage any such attempt in future. 
The Government accepted (December 2015)  the recommendations made by 
Audit. It further stated that it would require time to  implement some of the 
recommendations and would submit status report at periodical intervals. In 
addition, Government stated that base d on the recommendations, a separate 
independent wing for bank reconcilia tion, compilation of monthly accounts 
and internal audit has been establishe d in the Finance Wing of the BDA and 
the job responsibilities in cash section of the BDA have been segregated. 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
148 
Department of Education  
(Primary and Secondary Education) 
 
4.4 Laxity in implementation of a scheme 
 
Deficiencies in implementation of th e scheme on ‘Inclusive Education of 
the Disabled at the Secondary Stage’ by the State Government and also 
disregarding of guidelines issued by the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development resulted in loss of central grants of `18.93 crore for the year 
2009-12, and excess payment of `1.85 crore besides resulting in children 
and young persons with disabilities be ing deprived of the facilities in 
education which were envisaged for them. 
Government of India envisaged a sche me of ‘Inclusive Education of the 
Disabled at the Secondary Stage’ (Schem e) to enable all children and young 
persons with disabilities to have access to secondary educati on (classes IX to 
XII) and to improve their enrolment, retention and achievements in the general 
education system. The scheme whic h was implemented during 2009-10 
covered all children of 14 plus age group studying at  secondary schools in 
Government, Local Body and Government aided schools with one or more 
disabilities
88 as defined under the Person s with Disabilities (Equal 
Opportunities, Protection of  Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 and the 
National Trust Act, 1999. 
The scheme which is in the form of assistance for the two components 89 viz., 
Student Oriented component and other components, was to be implemented 
through the Education Department of the State Government directly.  Further, 
it could involve Non Government Organi sations (NGOs) having experience in 
the field of education a nd rehabilitation of the disabled.  In the State, 
Directorate of Urdu a nd Other Minority Langua ge Schools under the 
Department of Education was the impl ementing agency with the help of 
NGOs.  
On scrutiny of the records with regard to implementation of the scheme, we 
observed the following: 
 State had to set up a co-ordination committee at various levels and an 
Administrative cell to help in pl anning, implementation, monitoring and 
evaluation of the scheme.  During 2009-14, there, however, was neither 
co-ordination committee set up at State, district or sub di strict level nor 
Administrative cell set up to monitor and evaluate the scheme. 
                                                            
88 Disabilities namely, blindness, low vision, leprosy  cured, hearing impairment, locomotors 
disabilities, mental retardation, mental illne ss, autism and cerebral palsy are eligible for 
coverage under the scheme. 
89 Student Oriented Component such as, for medical and educational assessment, books and 
stationery, uniforms, transport allowance, reader allowance, stipend for girls, support 
services, assistive devices, boarding and lodg ing facility, therapeutic services, teaching 
learning materials etc. 
 Other Components, such as appointment of special education teachers, allowances for 
normal teachers for teaching such children,  teacher training, or ientation to school 
administrators, provision of resource room, provision for barrier free environment etc. 

Chapter-IV 
149 
 
 There was no evidence to indicate transparency in selection of NGOs.   
 The State Government had to collect the quantitative data and prepare state 
specific report and forward the same to Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (MHRD).  The State, however, except for forwarding the 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) received from the NGOs had not prepared 
any state specific report. 
 Though UCs for the years 2009-12 were forwarded as detailed in  
Table-4.11 to the MHRD, the funds were  not released in view of 
complaints received from certain voluntary organisations regarding 
impropriety in implementation of the scheme.  In this regard, the MHRD 
constituted (April 2012) a committee to study the implementation of the 
scheme in the State.  The committee after visiting three districts
90 reported 
(October 2012) that the scheme wa s being implemented by NGOs without 
involvement of State Government which was contradictory to the 
guidelines issued by MHRD.  It was also observed that no model schools 
had been set up to develop good replicab le practices in inclusive education 
and that many of the NGOs involved in implementing the scheme were not 
aware of the provisions of the sche me and covered only students with 
specific disability which was against the spirit of the scheme.  It further 
observed that teachers recruited were not qualified as specified in the 
scheme guidelines, most schools lack ed access facilities as well as 
resource rooms for the students with disabilities, no proper assessment of 
educational needs of children and eac h child had not been provided with 
learning material as per their needs.  Further, recommenda tions for better 
implementation of the scheme in the State were also given. 
Table-4.11: Details of UCs forwarded and amount received 
(`  in crore) 
Year Amount 
utilised 
UC forwarded to 
MHRD on 
Amount 
received 
Date of receipt of 
amount from MHRD 
2009-10 3.95 6/2010, 11/2010 and 
2/2011 
1.70 6/2014 
2010-11 11.89 Proposal not approved 
2011-12 21.49 6/2014 16.70 6/2014 
 Subsequent to the report of th e committee constituted by MHRD, the 
Director of the implementing agency  constituted (January 2013) a three 
Member Committee at the Taluk level headed by the Block Education 
Officer to examine the claims and evaluate the implementation of the 
scheme.  In test-check cases ( Appendix-4.16), we observed that though 
the committee had explicitly  declared the claim of 
`1.85 crore by the 
NGOs doubtful, the Department had honoured the claim and made 
payment. 
 Further, in four test-checked cases (Appendix-4.17), though the procedure 
prescribed for admitting the claims  were not followed, payment of  
`0.33 crore was made to the NGOs which was irregular. 
 Meanwhile, the Honourable High Cour t while disposing (April 2014) the 
writ petition filed by the Karnataka State NGOs Federation seeking release 
of funds which was overdue, directed  the MHRD to verify the UCs and 
release the payments.  Consequently, MHRD restricted the funds for the 
                                                            
90 Bengaluru, Kolar and Tumakuru 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
150 
year 2009-10 and 2011-12 to `1.70 crore and `16.70 crore respectively.  
Further, claim for the year 2010-11 amounting to `11.89 crore was not 
approved as the required information was not furnished by the State 
Government. 
 On account of rejection of proposal of the State for the year 2012-13 by 
the MHRD, the implementing agency did not compile the data for the said 
year.  
While replying to above observations, the Government stated (December 
2015) that the department issued circ ulars regarding selection of NGOs.  
However, it was observed in audit th at there was no evidence to indicate 
transparency in the selection process.  Government also confirmed that no 
model schools, for replica tion throughout the State we re established.  It was 
also stated that various NGOs have been told to reimburse the excess amounts 
claimed and also that cases have been  initiated for booking of criminal cases 
against defaulting NGOs. 
Thus, various deficiencies in the imple mentation of the scheme by the State 
Government and disregard for guidelines issued by the MHRD, resulted in 
children and young persons with disabilities being deprived of the facilities in 
education which were envisaged for them, besides resulting in loss of 
Government of India grants of 
`18.93 crore for the year 2009-12.  Further, 
due to lack of mon itoring, it incurred an excess payment of `1.85 crore and 
irregular payment of `0.33 crore. 
Department of Health and Family Welfare 
(Medical Education) 
 
4.5 Unproductive Investment 
 
Purchase of commercial off-the-s helf package software ‘Campus 
Resource Management’ of a private software company by various 
medical institutions, without study of  user specification or understanding 
of business needs, resulted in non- utilisation of software procured and 
also rendered the amount of `2.68 crore invested on the software 
unproductive. 
The norm for most organisations is to  purchase commercial off-the-shelf 
package software which is either modified or extended to suit their business 
needs.  The adaptive approach which is one of the main approaches to procure 
package based software involves the following four constituent activities: 
 Specification of requirements 
 Understanding the available packages 
 Assessment of package compatib ility (with respect to the 
requirements) 
 Selection of the best available package. 
The various medical institutions across the State gave opportunity (2008 and 
2009) to M/s. VAPS Technosoft (Pvt.) Li mited, a private software company 
(VAPS) for demonstrating its software on Campus Resource Management and 

Chapter-IV 
151 
 
Hi-End Technologies on the recomme ndation (August 2008) of Honourable 
Minister for Medical Education.  In c ontinuation, the Honourable Minister for 
Medical Education directed (February 2009) the medical institutions to make 
necessary arrangements to procure the technology by following procedures for 
procurement. 
Government Dental College and Resear ch Institute (Institute), Bengaluru 
based on the above direction, invited tenders (March 201 0) in two cover 
system for Configuration, Installati on and Implementation of Enterprise 
Resource Planning based Business Solution for Campus Management 
Software and supply and installation of  associated hardware and software 
(project).  The work involved: 
- Supply and installation of associated hardware  and software  
- Implementation of customisation of readily available Campus 
Management Software. 
In response to tenders, only two compan ies participated in the tender process 
and the proposal of VAPS was reco mmended (May 2010) by the Technical 
Expert who in his Technical evaluation report stated that  the tenderer had 
quoted for all the modules and had also implemented similar projects in 
Mysore Medical College, Mysuru and Bela gavi Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Belagavi.   Based on the approval (M ay 2010) given by the Tender Scrutiny 
Committee, the work was entrusted (M ay 2010) to VAPS at a cost of  
`70.18 lakh.  In this regard, audit observed the following: 
 Existing business practices of the Institution was not studied and a user 
requirement specification was not finalised before inviting tenders. 
 Technical specifications of the tende r documents issued by the Institute 
included all the modules of the VAPS so ftware, and as a result, only the 
bid of VAPS qualified and bid of the other participant was rejected. 
 The Financial Committee in its meeti ng (June 2009) had initially decided 
not to go ahead with the project c iting that the Institute was a small 
organisation and implementation of the project was financially not viable.  
The decision was however revised in the Administrative Council meeting 
(August 2009) chaired under the H onourable Minister of Medical 
Education which decided on the computerisation. 
 The technical expert in his techni cal evaluation report (May 2010) while 
recommending VAPS stated that the tenderer had already implemented 
similar project in Mysore Medical College and Belagavi Institute of 
Medical Sciences which was found to  be factually in correct as the 
implementation of the software in My sore Medical College was still in 
progress and work order in Belagavi Institute of Medical Sciences was 
issued only in April 2010. 
 Further, though the Government had directed (December 2009) the 
Institute to take assistance of technical advisory panel of e-governance for 
finalising the requirement specifi cation, it was turned down by the 
Honourable Minister of Me dical Education stating th at the Directorate of 
Electronic Delivery of Citizens Se rvices had already communicated 
regarding non-availabili ty of resources for such activity on earlier 
occasions. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
152 
 The Institute had made a total payment of `52.50 lakh towards the 
project. However, the institute was unable to utilise the project as the 
software installed was not functioning. 
 The Honourable Minister of Medical Education directed (January 2012) 
Principal Secretary to Government , Medical Education for making 
necessary arrangements for a third party inspection (by a private 
company) towards satisfactory implementation of the project.  
 Honourable High Court while disposi ng the writ petition filed by VAPS 
against the Government order (May  2012) issued towards third party 
inspection recommended for joint in spection, if desired, by both the 
respondents.  However, the Institute is yet to  take action on the High 
Court’s order. 
Scrutiny of records of four
91 other medical instituti ons that had awarded the 
project to VAPS revealed th at the chronology of events was similar to that of 
Government Dental College and Research  Institute, Bengaluru and the project 
was not functional in all the four medical institutions.  The medical institutions 
and Government in its reply (between  January 2015 and June 2015) accepted 
that the project was not utilised .  Hence, the total payment of `2.68 crore 
towards the project in test-checked five medical institutions remained 
unproductive. 
Thus, procurement of a software w ithout assessing and understanding the 
business requirements or study of user specification and without confirming 
the suitability of software, resulted in unproductive investment of 
`2.68 crore. 
The matter was referred to Government  in June 2015; reply is awaited 
(November 2015). 
Department of Home 
 
4.6 Loss of Central assistance  
 
Non-compliance with the guidelines is sued by Ministry of Home Affairs 
with regard to utilisation of funds released to the Stat e under the Scheme 
for Modernisation of Police Forces resulted in loss of Central assistance of 
`79.16 crore during 2013-15.  
Government of India, Ministry of Ho me Affairs (Ministry) while approving 
(February 2013) continuation of Scheme  for Modernisation of State Police 
Force (Scheme), for further period of  five years from 2012-17 laid down 
guidelines for implementation of th e scheme. The scheme aimed at 
modernising police forces in term s of mobility, weaponry, communication 
systems, training, Forensic Scien ce Laboratory/Finger Printing Bureau, 
Equipments and Buildings.  As per th e guidelines, the funds were to be 
                                                            
91 Mysore Medical college and Research Institute, Mysuru – `52.71 lakh;  Raichur Institute 
of Medical Sciences, Raichur- `47 lakh , Belagavi Institute of Medical Sciences, Belagavi 
– `49.25 lakh and Vijayanagar Institute of Medical Sciences, Ballari- `66.75 lakh. 

Chapter-IV 
153 
 
released partly under non- Plan and partly under Plan.  The State was eligible 
for financial assistance on 60:40 Centre-Sta te sharing basis.  In addition, the 
guidelines stipulated that: 
 Funds not released due to unspent balanc es in the States, as at the end of 
December were to be pooled and rele ased to better performing States 
which have a faster pace of expenditure. 
 Utilisation certificate (UC) at the end of each financial year was to be 
submitted.  In the additional instru ction issued (September 2014) by 
Ministry, it was emphasised that un less UCs were available for the full 
amount released, no further releases  shall be made to the State 
Government. 
On scrutiny of records, we observe d that against the releases of `83.01 crore, 
`53.37 crore and `19.49 crore during 2010-13, the State had utilised  
`75.58 crore, `50.23 crore and `11.61 crore respectively leaving a balance of 
`7.43 crore, `3.14 crore and `7.88 crore unspent as at th e end of March 2014.  
As a result, though `54.96 crore and `35.56 crore was allocated during  
2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively, to the State under the non-Plan, no grants92 
were released.  Subsequent to the a dditional instructions issued by the 
Ministry,   the Additional Director General of Police (ADGP), Communication 
Logistics and Modernisation whil e reviewing (September 2014) the 
implementation of the scheme, directed the unit offices to expedite the 
procurement process.  However, the utilis ation certificates issued as at the end 
of March 2015, indicated un-utilised amount for the years 2010-13 as  
`9.22 crore.   
Non-utilisation of the grants released  towards Modernisation of Police Force 
during 2010-13 by the variou s units of police force is as detailed in  
Table-4.12. 
Table-4.12: Non-utilisation of grants  released towards Modernisation of 
   Police Force 
(Amount : ` in crore) 
Unit Name Amount 
Released 
Amount 
Utilised Balance Reason for non-utilisation 
ADGP, Intelligence 5.74 4.63 1.11 Cancellation of tender process. 
Inspector General of 
Police, 
Headquarters 
7.30 0 7.30 Proposal for procurement of weaponry was 
sent to the Ministry during August 2011.  
Inspite of several reminders, no 
communication was received.  During April 
2015, the State was advised to contact 
Central Reserve Police Force for 
procurement of weaponry. 
Crime Investigation 
Department 
2.09 1.28 0.81 Election code of conduct resulted in delay 
for tendering and cancellation of tender 
process.
Further, we also observed that while approving annual action plan of the State 
every year, the Ministry had made obse rvations on the un-utilised amount and 
had also warned the State with regard to  deductions in release of grants.   
However, due to reasons indicated in the table above, the amount released 
                                                            
92 Except for `6.23 crore and `5.13 crore, which was released by the Ministry directly to 
Ordinance Factory Board, Kolkata during 2013-15 under the head weaponry. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
154 
during 2010-13 for procurement of e quipments and weaponry remained  
un-utilised.  In reply, Government st ated (August 2015) that the delay in 
utilisation of funds was due to technical  reasons and would be  utilised in the 
current year.  The fact, however, remains that due to delay in utilisation of 
funds, the State lost central grants for 2013-15. 
Thus, non-compliance with the guidelines issued by the Ministry deprived the 
State of central assistance to the extent of 
`79.16 crore during 2013-15. 
Department of Housing 
 
4.7 Irregular extension of salary benefits 
The Karnataka Slum Development Board by extending salary benefits to 
the graduate officials in a lower cadre based on Court’s order in respect 
of officials in a higher cadre was irregular which resulted in excess 
expenditure of `1.08 crore. 
According to Rule 5 of Karnataka Sl um Clearance Board (Board) Services 
(Cadre and Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1999, all rules 
applicable to Government servants re lating to recruitment and conditions of 
service including Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulati on of promotion, 
Pay and Pension) Act, 1978 shall mutatis mutandis be applicable to the Board 
employees. 
The Board, based on the Honourable High Court’s order, granted (February 
2003) time scale of pay of First Divi sion Assistants (FDA) to graduate 
officials who were initially appointed on daily wage basis and later regularised 
in the same cadre.  The Board while gr anting the above bene fit, extended the 
same benefit to another 21 graduate officials who were appointed in the cadres 
of Second Division Assistants, Typist s, Data Entry Operators and Work 
Inspectors who continued to officiate in  the same cadres, although these posts 
carried lower scales of pay.  Further,  the Board in its office memorandum 
(November 2003) allowed higher time scal e of pay to be granted from their 
respective date of appointment and the financial benefits were granted from 
the date of issue of office memorandum. 
Granting of higher time scale of pay to o fficials officiating in the lower cadre 
based on the Honourable High Court’s orde r pertaining to a different context 
was not in order. The Board had also not  obtained sanction of the Government 
for extending such benefits and hence granting of such higher pay was 
irregular.   
Scrutiny of the Service Registers of the 21 graduate officials
93 
(Appendix-4.18) who were extended the above said  irregular benefit revealed 
that there was an excess payment of `92.60 lakh and `14.93 lakh by way of 
Pay/Dearness allowance and pensionary benefits between November 2003 and 
                                                            
93 10 Graduate officials in serv ice, five graduate officials retired between April 2012 and 
August 2014 and six officials who were given benefit erroneously. 

Chapter-IV 
155 
 
December 2014 respectively. Thus, the ir regular extension of benefits had 
resulted in anomalies as well as additional expenditure to the Board. 
The Board replied (May 2015) that th e benefits were extended to other 
graduate officials based on the direc tions of the Honourable High Court of 
Karnataka94 and Government’s confirmation (September 1999). The 
Government while endorsing (August 2015)  the above reply, also requested 
for humanitarian considerat ion, since many of the offi cials were on the verge 
of retirement.  The reply was not accepta ble as the directions of Honourable 
High Court of Karnataka and the State Government’s confirmation were only 
regarding granting of higher time scale of pay to the graduate officials initially 
appointed in the FDA cadre on daily wage  basis and later regularised in the 
same cadre.  Extension of same benefits to other graduate officials officiating 
in lower cadres which result ed in excess expenditure of `1.08 crore to the 
Board was irregular.  The Board, presentl y, needs to take corrective action by 
re-fixing the pay of existing officials as  per rules thereby reducing its further 
excess expenditure. 
4.8 Wasteful expenditure on housing scheme 
 
The Karnataka Housing Board acquired land in villages for a housing 
project, and went ahead with constr uction works, when response to 
demand survey was poor and also wh en it was known that these lands 
were prone to floods, and rehabilitation of  the villages in its vicinity were 
under consideration of the Government. The shelving of the project 
resulted in wasteful expenditure of `2.56 crore. 
The Karnataka Housing Board Act,  1962 and Rules made thereunder, 
empower the Board to formulate and im plement housing schemes to cater to 
the housing needs of the State populat ion.  Before embarking on a housing 
scheme, the Board is to conduct a de mand survey to ascertain the likely 
response to the proposed scheme, identif y the land required for the purpose 
after examining the on-site and off-site facilities, prepare a feasibility report 
and obtain the sanction of the Government to the scheme.  
Bypassing the above procedure, the Karnataka Housing Board (KHB) 
envisaged (March 2006) a housing project in Ramdurg taluk, Belagavi district 
and acquired (May 2006) 15 acres 19 gunt as of land of Kankanawadi village 
at a total cost of 
`47.50 lakh.  The project consisting of 249 residential sites of 
various dimensions was taken up under the Suvarna Karnataka Housing 
Scheme at a total cost of `4.10 crore.   
On scrutiny of the records, we observed that the project wa s held to be not 
feasible by several officers as indicated below: 
 Letters addressed to the Chief Minister of Karnataka, Deputy 
Commissioner, Belagavi and Executive Engineer, KHB, by the local 
Member of Legislative Assembly  (June 2006, July 2006 and August 
2006) stated that the land was unsuita ble for housing proj ect as the land 
                                                            
94 Issued between February 1999 and October 2002 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
156 
was prone to floods due to its close proximity to the Malaprabha river and 
left bank canal and had requested to shelve the project on the said land.   
 The Assistant Commissioner, Baila hongal Sub-Division in his letter 
addressed to the Deputy  Commissioner, Belagavi (August 2006), copy of 
which was endorsed to KHB on the viabil ity of the site specified that the 
land was prone to floods and also reha bilitation of the villages in the 
vicinity was under consideration by the State Government.   
 The Special Land Acquisition Officer  based on the report of the Sub-
divisional officer informed (Septe mber 2006) the Executive Engineer 
about unsuitability of the land. 
 The report of the Assistant Executiv e Engineer, Karnataka Neeravari 
Nigam Limited, Sub-division 2, Nav ilutheertha indicated that the 
reservoir had reached its full capacity even during August 2006 and 
August 2007. 
 The Joint Director of KHB in his letter (August 2007) ad dressed to the 
Executive Engineer indicated that it had received only 18 applications for 
the demand survey conducted on th e project and requested for a 
feasibility report. 
Despite knowing about the above facts and circumstances, we observed that 
KHB went ahead with the project a nd appointed an Architectural and 
Engineering firm (January 2010) and a Project Management Consultant 
(January 2011) for preparing Deta iled Project Report and Contract 
Management and Construction supervis ion, respectively. Th e developmental 
works of the project were  entrusted (November 2010) to a contractor on the 
basis of lumpsum, fixe d price at a cost of 
`2.72 crore. After a lapse of two 
months, the KHB handed over (January  2011) the site to the contractor. 
However, during September 2011, due to incessant rain and release of water 
from the reservoir upstream, the work site was submerged and the 
developmental works were stopped. In this regard, the Commissioner 
constituted (December 2011) a task force which was headed by 
Superintendent Engineer, KHB and Additional Director, KHB.  The task force 
in its report (January 2012) confirmed that the area was prone to flood and was 
flooded on three occasions in the last 10 years.  Hence, the Board of KHB in 
its 442
nd meeting resolved (July 2012) to shel ve the project, settle the claims 
of the contractor, initiate departmental  enquiry against the delinquent officers 
and to black list the Architectural  and Engineering firm and Project 
Management Consultant.  The total expe nditure incurred towards the project 
was `2.56 crore. 
Government replied (October 2015) that action would be taken to dispose the 
land without any financial loss to the Board.  However, this reply does not 
explain as to why a contract was awar ded for developmental works on land 
which was known to be unsuitable and flood prone and as to why the report 
that there was negligible demand for the project was blat antly ignored.   
Moreover, reply was silent on action ag ainst delinquent officers and firm.   
Also, prospect of disposal of the land located in a flood prone area does not 
appear to be bright.  Thus, overlooki ng of prescribed procedures by the KHB 
before embarking on an unsuitable housing scheme resulted in wasteful 
expenditure of 
`2.56 crore. 

Chapter-IV 
157 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR 
 
4.9 Avoidable payment of in come tax and penal interest 
Non-availing of exemption under the Income Tax Act, 1961 by the 
Karnataka Building and Other Cons truction Workers’ Welfare Board 
resulted in avoidable payment of `42.83 crore towards income tax and  
` three crore towards penal interest. 
The provisions of section 11 to 13 of  the Income Tax Act, 1961 (IT Act) 
prescribe several conditions to be sa tisfied by the entities registered under 
section 12A of the IT Act, to make th em eligible for exempting their income 
from income tax.  Further, the specia l provisions of law under section 197 of 
the IT Act, read with Rule 28 AB of th e IT Rules, enable the charitable and 
religious entities claiming exemption under section 11 or 12 to seek exemption 
from Tax Deduction at Source (TDS). 
The Karnataka Building and Other C onstruction Workers’ Welfare Board 
(Board) was constituted (January 2007) by Government of Karnataka under 
Building and Other Construction Worker s’ (Regulation of Employment and 
Condition of Service) Act, 1996 for prov iding social security schemes and 
welfare measures for the construction wo rkers. In order to provide the welfare 
activities, cess at the rate of one per cent is levied and collected as deduction 
at source in relation to building or other c onstruction work of a 
Government/Public Sector Undertaking or advance collection through a local 
authority where an approval of such building or other construction work by 
such local authority is required. Un spent cess amounts so collected were 
deposited in various Nationalised Bank as fixed deposits. 
On scrutiny of records, we observed that the Board which was registered 
(September 2008) as ‘Charitable Trust’  under section 12A read with section 
12AA (1)(b)(i) of the IT Act had subm itted Form 15 H under section 197 A 
(1A) of the IT Act to the banks and had requested not to effect TDS from 
interest earned out of fixed deposits.  We, however, observed that Income Tax 
Department had served notices (September and October 2013) to the banks for 
non-deduction of income tax on interest payments made to the Board for the 
financial years 2011-13.  The appeal made by the banks against the demand 
notice was dismissed (March 2014) by the Commissioner of Income tax based 
on the fact that the banks had exceeded their authority as a tax deductor under 
the IT Act.  Subsequently, the banks recovered TDS for the financial years 
2011-13.  In continuation, banks deducted TDS for the financial years 2013-15 
also and the total TDS deducted by banks are detailed in Table-4.13 below. 
Table-4.13: Tax deducted at Source by various Banks 
(` in crore) 
Sl.No. Financial 
Year 
Fixed 
Deposits 
Cess 
collected 
Tax Deducted at 
Source 
1 2011-12 1,177.61 360.62 3.45 
2 2012-13 1,752.10 483.58 6.59 
3 2013-14 2,290.30 476.10 17.41 
4 2014-15 Yet to be received from Board 15.38 
 Total   42.83 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
158 
Further, we observed that the registration as ‘Chari table Trust’ under section 
12 A by the Department of IT was conditional and the Board had to fulfill the 
following conditions for tax exemption: 
 The Board had to furnish the return of  income every year as required by 
the IT Act. 
 The availability of tax exemption had to be granted by the Assessing 
Officer of the IT Department subject to fulfillment of conditions laid 
down in sections 11 and 13 of the IT Act. 
The Board, however, had filed its annual income tax returns for the financial 
years 2008-13 belatedly and was yet to f ile the returns for the year 2013-14.  
Also, the Board had not made any applic ation to the Department of IT under 
various sections of IT Act for exemp ting their income from tax.  Thus, the 
Board did not make use of the enabling provisions available in the IT Act for 
availing tax exemption which resulted in payment of tax of 
`42.83 crore on its 
income95 during 2011-15. 
Apart from the above, the Department of IT, under section 201 (1A) of IT Act, 
levied banks with ` three crore as pena l interest.  The said penal interest was 
however, recovered by the Banks out of the interest receipts of the Board on 
the deposits with them.  Since, the Bo ard had not produced a certificate of 
exemption under section 197 (1) of IT Act,  as per section 1 94A of IT Act, it 
was mandatory on the part of the Banks to effect TDS.  Also, the Board had 
submitted Form 15 H to the Banks without being eligible.  Hence, levy of 
penal interest was attributable not onl y on the failure of Banks but also on 
failure of the Board, which was avoidable. 
Government stated in reply (October 2015)  that action has b een initiated to 
obtain tax exemption certificate from the aut horities of IT.  It also stated that 
the Banks will be directed to file an appeal against levy of penal interest.  
Thus, non-adherence to required pro cedures and inaction by the Board 
resulted in avoidable payment of 
`42.83 crore towards income tax and ` three 
crore as penal interest. 
Department of Urban Development 
 
4.10 Non-revision of water rate s for domestic connections 
 
In spite of the State Government revising the water tariff in July 2011, the 
Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board continued to 
provide water supply at pre-revised rates to Kolar Gold Fields City 
Municipal Council which  resulted in loss of revenue of `1.18 crore. 
The Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board (KUWS&DB) 
supplies water to all the urban areas of  the State except Bengaluru city for 
domestic, non-domestic and commercia l/industrial purposes.  The various 
provisions for supply of water under KUWS&DB Act, 1973 are as under: 
                                                            
95 Interest earned out of fixed deposits. 

Chapter-IV 
159 
 
Section 
17(1)(a) 
The Board shall perform at the in stance of the Government or a 
Local Authority or s uo motu  investigating the nature and type of 
the scheme that can be implemen ted in the area of any local 
authority for provision of drinking water, execute such scheme 
under phased programme. 
Section 
28(A)(1) 
The Government may, by order direct the KUWS&DB to 
undertake operation and maintena nce of all water supply schemes 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified. 
In order to provide satisfactory water s upply and drainage services and also to 
minimise availing of Government grants /loans, Government opined that local 
bodies had to increase its revenue through user charges.  Further, as overheads 
on maintenance of potable water supply such as salary of the maintenance 
staff, power charges, cost of chemicals, repair charges, etc., had increased 
exorbitantly, Government revised the wa ter tariff in July 2011 which were to 
be implemented with immediate effect. While revising the rates, the 
Government prescribed the local bodies to conclude Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with KUWS&DB afte r verifying all the aspects of the 
order. All the revisions in the said order were based on the study report jointly 
conducted by KUWS&DB and Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development 
and Finance Corporation (KUIDFC). 
Scrutiny of records of maintenance of water supply scheme for the Kolar Gold 
Fields City Municipal Council (CMC) showed the following: 
 Water supply scheme for the CMC was being undertaken by the 
KUWS&DB since its inception without any specific directions from the 
Government and was adopting the wa ter rates and other charges as 
specified by the Government from time to time. 
 The KUWS&DB had not entered into any MOU with the concerned local 
body as being specified in the Govern ment Orders issued from time to 
time in respect of revision of rates. 
 Even though the State Government ha d revised water ta riff in July 2011 
with the water tariff for non-metered domestic connections in municipal 
areas being revised from 
`90 to `120 per connection, the KUWS&DB 
continued to supply water at the pre-revised lower rate. The loss of 
revenue as on March 2015 in the said CMC worked out to 
`1.18 crore96. 
Government stated (November 2015) that  water supply to the KGF had dried 
up and water was being supplied through bor ewells. It further attributed the 
non-revision to less freque ncy of water supply to the city.  The reply was not 
acceptable as the Government order had re vised the rate based on the increase 
in overheads on maintenance cost of the potable water supply which was 
applicable to borewells also.  Also in  any case, if the Government Order for 
increasing the water rates was to be waived, there should have been a proposal 
for waiving and Government’s acceptan ce of the same, and the Government 
                                                            
96 
 No. of 
connections 
No. of 
months 
Difference in rate  
(` Per month) Total (`) 
As on April 2011 8,548 44 30 1,12,83,360 
2011-12 246 36 30 2,65,680 
2012-13 217 24 30 1,56,240 
2013-14 274 12 30 98,640 
Total    1,18,03,920  
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
160 
Order rescinded, which was not s o.  Further, the KUWS&DB has 
implemented the revision of water tariff from September 2015 in the said city.  
Thus, failure of the KUWS&DB to revise  the water rates as per the revised 
rates resulted in loss of revenue of `1.18 crore.  
4.11 Avoidable expenditure on debt servicing 
 
Non-utilisation of the option given by  Reserve Bank of India to switch 
over to Base Rate System from Benchmark Prime Lending Rate by the 
Karnataka Urban Water Suppl y and Drainage Board in respect of loans 
availed from banks, resulted in avoidable interest payment of  
`1.98 crore. 
Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Dr ainage Board (Board) had ongoing 15 
urban water supply schemes and six underground drainage schemes during 
2008-09.  In this regard, the St ate Government had allocated `155 crore in its 
budget for the year 2008-09 and had also made provision to raise loan of 
`150 crore from different Financial Institutions under Internal Extra Budgetary 
Resources. The State Government approved (July 2009) proposal of the Board 
to avail loan of `74.36 crore and `75.64 crore from Syndicate Bank and 
Corporation Bank respectively and extende d its guarantee for the said loan.  
Accordingly, the Board entered into an agreement (July and August 2009) for 
drawing loans from the above banks.  
Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) introduced (April 2010) the Base 
Rate System (BRS) of lending which replaced the Benchmark Prime Lending 
Rate (BPLR) System from 1 July 20 10. The BRS was applicable for all new 
loans and also for old loans that came up for renewal. In addition, the 
borrowers of the existing loans had the option to switch over to the new 
system, on mutually agreed terms with the banks and the banks were not to 
charge any fees for the sw itch-over.  In the case of switch-over, the interest 
rates were to be recalculated based on the base rate and the floating rate varied 
with reference to the base rate from the date of switch-over. 
On scrutiny of records of the Board, we  observed that the lending rate of the 
loans raised by the Board was based on BPLR and it had not made any 
assessment with regard to the option of switch-over to BRS.  On comparing 
the interest rates charged for the above  loans under BPLR system with the 
rates payable under the BRS from the da te of implementation of BRS, Audit 
observed that the rates payable under BRS were less than the rates payable 
under BPLR system which is detailed in the Table-4.14 below: 
Table-4.14: Comparison of interest rates under BPLR system and BRS 
(Rate of interest in percentage) 
Period 
Syndicate bank Corporation bank 
Rate of interest 
under BPLR 
Rate of interest 
under BRS 
Rate of interest 
under BPLR 
Rate of interest 
under BRS 
2010-11 9 to 10.75 9 to 10.25 9 to 10.60 9 to 10.65 
2011-12 10.75 to 12 10.25 to 11 10.60 to 12 10.65 to 11.90 
2012-13 12 to 11.50 11 to 11.50 12 11.90 to 11.50 
2013-14 11.50 11 12 11.50 
2014-15 11.50 11 12 11.50 

Chapter-IV 
161 
 
The extra expenditure incurred by the Board by way of interest payment 
during 2010-15 due to non-switching ove r from BPLR system to BRS 
amounted to `1.98 crore97.  Further, after a delay of  more than four years the 
Board requested (December 2014) the Co rporation Bank to regularise its 
interest rate by equating it to the base rate from the date of its introduction.  
On not hearing from the bank, the Boar d made no further efforts to get the 
interest rate recalculated  based on BRS but continued to pay the interest rate 
under the earlier system.   
Thus, the Board failed to effectively manage its debt servicing and by not 
taking action to switch over to BRS result ed in avoidable interest payment of  
`1.98 crore in respect of two loans. The Government replied (November 2015) 
that it was not aware of the RBI guidelines and would pursue the matter with 
the banks.  Accordingly, the Board has corresponded with both Corporation as 
well as Syndicate Bank from which no positive response has been received. 
4.12  Excess payment of compensation 
 
The Bangalore Development Authority did not follow various procedures 
prescribed in the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 for 
acquisition of land for developmental sc hemes. This resulted in utilisation 
of land without acquisition and also excess payment of compensation of 
`46.93 crore. 
Section 15 of the Bangalore Develo pment Authority (Authority) Act, 1976 
(BDA Act) empowers the Authority to undertake developmental schemes 98 
with the previous approval of the Gove rnment.  The procedur es laid down in 
BDA Act to acquire land for developmental schemes are given below: 
Section 17: 
 
When a development scheme has been prepared, the Authority has to 
draw up a notification (preliminary notification) specifying, 
inter alia, the lands which are being proposed for acquisition. 
Section 18: The Authority shall subm it the scheme to the Government for 
sanction. 
Section 19: Upon sanction of the scheme, the Government shall publish in the 
official Gazette a declaration (final notification) stating the fact of 
such sanction and requirement of land for public purpose. 
Section 35: Subject to the provisions of the BDA Act and with the previous 
approval of the Government, the Authority may enter into an 
agreement with the owner of any land for purchase of such land. 
Section 36: The acquisition of land under the BDA Act including payment of 
compensation shall be regulated by the provisions, as far as they are 
applicable, of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
On test-check of 11 payments of co mpensation by the Authority, we observed 
that BDA had utilised lands for deve lopmental schemes, without acquisition 
disregarding all the above provisi ons of the BDA Act laid down for 
acquisition of land.  The compensation for such non acquired lands was 
                                                            
97  Corporation Bank –`1.12 crore and Syndicate Bank – `0.86 crore 
98 Development scheme include acquisition of land for execution of scheme, laying and  
re-laying of land, construction of buildings, fo rmation and alteration of streets, drainage, 
water supply and electricity. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
162 
through allotment of developed sites free of cost. The financial implications on 
such lapses of the Authority are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
 Construction of road on land not acquired 
The Authority had issued preliminary no tification (PN) followed with final 
notification (FN) for acquiring land in various villages for formation of 
layouts as detailed in Table-4.15 below: 
Table-4.15:  Details in respect of notifications issued 
(Extent of land in acres – guntas) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the Layout 
Extent of land notified 
in Name of the 
Village 
Sy. No. excluded in 
both PN/FN 
Extent of land 
utilised for 
road99 PN FN 
1 Sir M Vishveswaraiah 
Layout 
75-08 39-29 Kengeri 212 02-30 
2 708-00 552-15 Ullalu 169/1 00-06.32 
3 Sir M Vishveswaraiah 
Layout – Further 
extension 
324-26 240-37 Gidada 
Konenahalli 
27 00-22 
4 23 00-06.50 
5 330-02 178-39 Mallathahalli 83 
Resurvey no. 83/1A 
00-33 
6 Gnanabharathi Layout 354-31 320- 16 Nagadevenahalli 53 00-11.98 
The Authority though had not acquired the said lands, but had utilised these 
lands to the extent indicated thereagainst for formation of roads.  All the land 
owners had represented to the Authority for compensation in the form of 
developed land and the Authority in its various Board meetings had resolved 
to allot developed sites to the extent of 50 per cent of the land acquired free of 
cost in the same layout or subsequent layouts to be formed as compensation.  
The sites were allotted based on the choice of the land owners and in one case, 
the sites were allotted in layouts formed by the Authority much earlier. 
Subsequent to the Authority  allotting (April 2010) 50 per cent of land utilised 
as compensation in respect of Sl.No.1 i ndicated in the table above, the land 
owner filed writ petition before the Honourable High Court with a plea that he 
may be compensated to the extent of 100 per cent of the land utilised.  The 
Honourable High Court disposed the petit ion (July 2012) with the directions 
that the value of the alte rnative land proposed to be  allotted as compensation 
should be equivalent to the value of the land lost.  Complying with the High 
Court’s directions, the Authority allo tted balance land to the land owner 
during June 2014. 
Total compensation of 
`32.99 crore was paid by the Authority to all 
landowners by way of allotment of al ternative sites as detailed in  
Appendix-4.19. 
 Construction of road on land deleted from final notification 
The Authority had issued PN and FN fo r acquiring land in various villages for 
formation of layouts as detailed in Table-4.16 below: 
 
 
 
                                                            
99  1 acre = 40 guntas=43,560 sq ft or 4,047 sq mtr 

Chapter-IV 
163 
 
Table-4.16:  Details in respect of notifications issued 
(Extent of land in acres – guntas) 
Sl.
No. Name of the Layout Name of the 
Village 
Survey No. 
included 
Extent of land notified in Extent of land 
utilised for road PN FN 
1 Sir M Vishveswaraiah 
Layout 
Ramasandra 29/1 10-30 09-00 0-12.40 
2 Sir M Vishveswaraiah 
Layout, II Stage 
Manganahalli 35 04-18 04-08 0-20.00 
3 Sir M Vishveswaraiah 
Layout 
Sonenahalli 14 05-24 03-24 0-05.50 
4 Kengeri 209 09-36 05-10 0-08.25 
The Authority while issuing FN had notified land less than that was notified in 
the PN.  The Authority, however, had uti lised unauthorisedly part of the land 
left out while issuing FN for formation of roads. The utilisation was confirmed 
by the Executive Engineers of the respective divisions. 
The Authority though had not acquired the said lands but had utilised land to 
the extent indicated thereagainst for form ation of roads.   All the land owners 
represented to the Authority for compen sation in the form of developed land 
and the Authority in its various Boar d meetings had resolved to allot 
developed site to the extent of 50 per cent of the land acquired free of cost in 
the same layout or subsequent layout as compensation.  The sites were allotted 
based on the choice of the land owners.  Total compensation of `5.96 crore 
was paid by the Authority to the land owners by way of allotment of sites as 
detailed in Appendix-4.20. 
 Construction of road on land notified and subsequently denotified 
The Authority issued (Ja nuary 1994) FN for formation of Gnanabharathi 
Layout which included 320 acres and 16 gunt as of land in Nagadevanahalli, 
Bengaluru.  Based on the representation of the land owner, the Government 
denotified (January 2001) part of land acquired in  Nagadevanahalli which 
included 2 acre 30 guntas in survey N o. 10/5 of Nagadevanahalli.  This 
denotification was based on the report of the Land Acquisition Officer 
(November 2000) which indicated that  the possession of land was not yet 
taken and hence could be denotified.  
Meanwhile, the Authority utilised ( 2001-02) unauthorisedly land measuring 
18 guntas in survey No. 10/5 of Nagadevanahalli towards construction of outer 
ring road.  The said land formed part of the land denotified earlier. The land 
owner represented to the Authority (August 2007) for compensation.  Based 
on the joint inspection report of the Additional Land Acquisition Officer and 
Executive Engineer, West Division who confirmed utilisation of 18 guntas of 
land for formation of road, the Board re solved (January 2012) to allot 50 per 
cent of land utilised free of cost to the land owner.  Further, the Authority 
based on the land ow ner’s choice of land (Novem ber 2012), allotted (April 
2013) 1,028.61 sq mtrs of land in the same layout.   
The payment of compensation by the Authority was 
`2.45 crore100. 
                                                            
100 Cost to the Authority if 18 guntas were acquired:  `1.47 lakh @ `3.26 lakh/acre 
 Cost of compensation for 9 guntas of land : `245.02 lakh @ 2,500 / sq. ft. 
 Loss to the Authority : `243.55 lakh 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
164 
 Erroneous survey leading to formation of layout on land not acquired 
The Authority issued (November 2002)  PN for formation of ‘Further 
extension of Banashankari VI Stage’  which included 367 acres of land in 
Gubbalala village. This included 3 ac res 30 guntas of land in survey number 
39 which belonged to three land owners 101.  The Authority, however, while 
issuing (September 2003) FN, notified 2 acre 20 guntas of land in survey 
numbers 39/1 and 39/3. 
The Surveyor while preparing (December 2003) the award sketch had depicted 
survey number 39/3 as area not notified and survey number 39/2 as notified in 
the FN which was contradictory to the ac tual FN issued.  The said sketch was 
submitted to both Land Acquisition Officer  as well as Engineering Division 
for determining the award and taking possession of land for formation of 
layout respectively.  Based on the said survey report, the Authority formed 
sites and also constructed road unauthor isedly on land (survey number 39/2) 
not acquired. 
Meanwhile, the landowner of Survey  number 39/2 filed a writ petition 
challenging the acquisition proceedings .  Though the said writ petition was 
disposed of, it allowed the petitioner to  move the court for appropriate relief 
for the land utilised by the Authority. The land owner represented  
(August 2006) to the Authority for allotting him an alternative land measuring 
1 acre 10 guntas. The Authority resolved (November 2011) to allot  
50 per cent  of the land utilised for constr uction of road and formation of 
layout.  Since, the Authority is yet to allot 50 per cent of land utilised, it has a 
liability of payment of compensation of 
`5.99 crore102. 
In this regard, audit observed the following: 
 Section 15 of the BDA Act em powers the Authority to frame 
developmental schemes and with the previous permission of the 
Government to execute the scheme.  While section 16 enumerates the 
particulars to be provided in such sc heme, section 17 allows the authority 
to draw up a notification furnishing the particul ars of the scheme and 
allowing 30 days for submitting any objections from the public.  On 
completion of 30 days and after cons idering the objectio ns, if any, the 
scheme is submitted to Government for sanction, with modifications, if 
any, together with plan, estimates a nd other particulars. Upon sanction, 
under section 19, FN is published declar ing that the lands are required for 
public purpose.  These are the formal ities which are to be completed by 
the Authority before proceeding to execute the scheme.  From the above, 
it is evident that the Au thority would be in the possession of scheme plan 
prior to its execution, in which case, the Authority had complete details of 
land required and extent to which required for execution of the scheme.  
                                                            
101 Survey number 39/1, 39/2 and 39/3 each measuring 1 acre and 10 guntas. 
102 Land utilised = 1 acre 10 guntas or 54,450 sq ft 
 Payment of compensation on acquisition @ `8.80 lakh/acre = `16.01 lakh including   
solatium and interest 
 Payment of compensation (50 per cent) through allotment of land @`2,200/sq ft =  
 `598.95 lakh 
 Excess payment = `5.83 crore 

Chapter-IV 
165 
 
The action of the Author ity not to initiate ac quisition proceedings or 
exclusion of entire survey number of  land at the time of FN was in 
violation of provisions of BDA Act in connection with land acquisition. 
 Section 35 and 36 of the BDA Act govern payment of compensation by 
the Authority on acquiring land for a developmental scheme.  Hence, the 
Authority resorting to allotment of 50 per cent of developed land in lieu 
of land acquired was irregular.   
 There was lack of co-ordination am ong the land acquisition section, town 
planning section and engineering sec tion of the Authority.  Hence, land 
acquisition by the Authority was not as per the plan sanctioned by the 
Government. Also, from the above cases, it was apparent that the 
engineering section had commenced work prior to handing over of land 
acquired by the land acquisition secti on which resulted in utilisation of 
land without acquisition.  
 The Authority did not have any mechan ism to verify the final plan with 
the land acquired before execution.  Hence, the sketch of the surveyor 
was taken as final in a case which resulted in utilisation of land excluded 
from acquisition. 
 Further, in all the cases brought out in the above paragraphs, based on the 
Honourable High Court’s order (Jul y 2012), many of the land owners 
filed writ petition asking for 100 per cent  compensation for the land 
utilised.  In all the cases, the Cour t while disposing the case has ordered 
to follow the procedures laid down in the earlier judgement
103 (July 
2012). Hence, the Authority, in addition to the excess payment of 
compensation of 
`46.93 crore, has a liability of  allotting balance land in 
all the above cases.  This liability of  the Authority in the test-checked 
cases works out to `16.42 crore (Appendix-4.21). 
Thus, by not following the procedures laid down for acquisition of land for its 
developmental schemes in its BDA Act, by the Authority resulted in excess 
payment of compensation of `46.93 crore. 
The matter was referred to Government  in June 2015; reply was awaited 
(November 2015). 
 
4.13 Undue benefit to an agency  
 
Ambiguity between various clauses on price adjustment in the bid 
document of a project floated by the Karnataka Urban Water Supply and 
Drainage Board (Board) resulted in the Board not operating the clause.  
This led to extending undue benefit of `6.17 crore to the agency. 
Government of Karnataka in their guidelines 104 (November 2004) for 
regulating price adjustment on account of changes in cost mandated inclusion 
                                                            
103 That the value of the alternative land propos ed to be allotted as compensation should be 
 equivalent to the value of the land lost.   
104 The State Government vide its Order No. FD 59 PRO.CELL 2004, Bangalore dated 26 th 
November 2004 prescribed that price adjustment clause was mandatory for all work 
contracts whose estimated cost put to tender was `100.00 lakh or more and the period of 
completion being 12 months or more.  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
166 
of price adjustment clause in respect of work contracts where the estimated 
cost put to tender was ` one crore or above and th e period of completion was 
12 months or more. 
The Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board (Board) invited 
(December 2007) tenders for the Combin ed Water Supply Scheme to Kolar 
city, Bangarpet and Malur towns and 45 enroute villages (project) under the 
Centrally sponsored scheme ‘Urban In frastructure Development Scheme for 
Small and Medium Towns’. The work was awarded (January 2009) to an 
agency at a cost of `88.89 crore with a stipulated  period of 18 months 
including monsoon.  As of March 2015, the Board had paid the agency  
`65.46 crore for the work done and work wa s in progress.  On scrutiny of the 
records including the bid document, we noticed the following: 
 The project which was scheduled to  be completed by August 2010, was 
still in progress. The reasons for non-c ompletion of the project was mainly 
on account of delay in handing over of sites by the Board/ local bodies and 
delay in grant of permission by the Railway Department.  The Report of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, No.2-Civil for the year 
ended 31 March 2010 (paragraph 3.4.6) included observation on the huge 
investment on the project without a dependable water source. We observed 
from the proceedings of the meeting (December 2014) regarding progress 
of the project, that some components of the project remained incomplete 
due to non-availability of water in Yargol dam. 
 The bid document which formed part  of the agreement entered into 
(January 2009) by the Board with th e agency contained clauses on price 
adjustment as detailed in Table-4.17 below: 
Table-4.17: Ambiguity in the bid document 
Chapter 1: Instructions to Bidders 
 Clause 15.5 The clause stated that  the rates and prices quoted by the bidder shall be fixed for 
the duration of the Contract and shall not be subject to adjustment on any 
account unless otherwise provided for in the Special Conditions of Contract.  
However, the price variation in the cost of structural steel is admissible as per 
clause 15.1 of Chapter 3. 
Chapter 2: General conditions of Contract 
Clause 70 Though Price variation clause not included, price adjustment clause for works 
contract included under clause 70.1. 
 
Chapter 3: Special conditions of Contract 
Clause 15 Though price variation was deleted under clause 15, clause 15.1 stated ‘Price 
variation as per clause 70 of chapter 2 was applicable.  The rates and prices 
quoted by the Bidder shall be fixed for the entire duration of the Contract.  The 
bidder shall be responsible to include adequate provisions in his lump-sum 
prices to cover any contingencies in the rise or fall of costs during the Contract 
period’.  It further stated that the pri ce adjustment as per clause 70.1 of Chapter 
2 was applicable.   
Clause 28 Price adjustment calculated in accordan ce with clause 70.1 to 70.7 of Chapter 2 
is not applicable for payment for works under this contract.  It further stated that 
the bidder had to make adequate provisi ons to cover any contingencies in the 
rise or fall of costs during the contract period. 

Chapter-IV 
167 
The said ambiguity in the bid docum ent was discussed (November 2008) in 
the pre-bid meeting, wherein the Board cl arified to the bidders that the price 
adjustment clause was applicable for the said contract. 
Since the decisions and clarifications of the pre-bid meeting formed part of the 
bid document, the Board was required to operate the price adjustment clause. 
However, we observed that though there was a decline in pri ce of steel during 
the contract period, the Board failed to operate the price adjustment clause and 
did not recover `6.17 crore from the agency fo r the work executed between 
January 2009 and March 2010.  The Board justified (October 2010) 
non-operation of the price adjustment cl ause on the ground that the main 
clause on price variation was delete d and the price ad justment provision 
described in the sub-clause was no longer relevant. 
The action of the Board was not justifiable as the G overnment order on price 
adjustment formed part of the bid document and the bidders had been clarified 
on the applicability of the price adjust ment clause in its pre-bid meeting. 
Thus, the ambiguity between the clause s in the bid document resulted in 
non-operation of the price adjustment clause and extension of undue benefit of 
`6.17 crore to the agency. The Governme nt replied (November 2015) that the 
price adjustment clause was applicable and the recovery for `6.17 crore as 
worked out by audit was correct, and further necessary action would be taken. 
Bengaluru       (L.Anga
m Chand Singh) 
The   Principal Accountant General  
     General and Social Sector Audit 
Karnataka 
Countersigned 
New Delhi                (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
The       Comptroller and Auditor Gen
eral of India 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
171 
Appendix-1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.7.1, Page-9) 
Year-wise breakup of Inspection Reports and  
Paragraphs outstanding in respect of Revenue Department  
(up to 31 March 2015) 
 
Year 
Technical Education 
Department 
Higher (Collegiate 
Education Department Total 
Number of 
IRs 
Number  
of paras 
Number  
of IRs 
Number  
of paras 
Number 
of IRs 
Number 
of paras 
Upto 
2005-06 
11 40 106 370 117 410 
2006-07 10 19 19 48 29 67 
2007-08 01 03 19 67 20 70 
2008-09 05 09 14 38 19 47 
2009-10 13 46 31 93 44 139 
2010-11 02 06 09 22 11 28 
2011-12 09 46 13 70 22 116 
2012-13 05 24 19 182 24 206 
2013-14 15 105 30 314 45 419 
2014-15 41 281 22 211 63 492 
Total 112 579 282 1,415 394 1,994 
 
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
172 
Appendix-1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.7.3, Page-10) 
Details of Departmental Notes pending as of 30 November 2015 (Excluding General and Statistical Paragraphs) 
 
Sl. 
No. Department 95-
96 
96-
97 
97-
98 
98-
99 
99-
00 
00-
01 
01-
02 
02-
03 
03-
04 
04-
05 
05-
06 
06-
07 
07-
08 
08-
09 
09-
10 
10-
11 
11-
12 12-13 13-
14 Total 
1 Agriculture - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  
- - 01 - 01 
2 Education - - - - - - - - - - - - - 03 - - - 01 04 08 
3 e-governance                  01 - 01 
4 Finance - - - - - 01 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 
5  H o r t i c u l t u r e                    0 1  0 1  
6 Housing - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 - 01+01 
KHB 02 05 
7 Information, Tourism, Kannada & 
Culture - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  
01 - - 01 02 
8 Labour - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 01  02 
9 Revenue - - 01 - - - - - - - - - - 01 - - 04 04 01 11 
10 Social Welfare - - 01 01 - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  02 
11 Urban Development - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 09 09 18 
12 Youth Services and Sports - - - - 01 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 
13 Agriculture, Forest, Home  & 
Transport - 01 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
 - - - 01 
14 Department of Minority Welfare - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 01 
15 Health and Family Welfare 
Department ( Medical Education) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  01 01 
16 Department of Revenue and UDD - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 01 
Total - 01 02 01 01 01 - - - - -  - 04 - 02 05 19 21 57 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
173 
Appendix-1.3 
(Reference: Paragraph-1.7.4, Page-10) 
Paragraphs (excluding General and Statistical) ye t to be discussed by PA C as of 30 November 2015 
Sl.
No Department 92-
93 
93-
94 
94-
95 
95-
96 
96-
97 
97-
98 
98-
99 
99-
00 
00-
01 
01-
02 
02-
03 
03-
04 
04-
05 
05-
06 
06-
07 
07-
08 
08-
09 
09-
10 
10-
11 11-12 12-
13 
13-
14 Total 
1. Agriculture  - - - - 2 - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 - 04 
2. Animal Husbandry and  
Veterinary Services - - - - - 3 1 1 2 - - - 1 - - - - 1 - 1  - 10 
3. Education 2 1 4 5 1 - 1 2 2 1 1 1 - 2 2 1 3 2 - - 1 4 36 
4. e-governance                     1 - 01 
5. Finance  - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 - 1 - - - - - - 03 
6. Health and Family Welfare 3 - 1 4 4 1 2 2 1 - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 # - - 20 
7. Home - 2 2 - 2 - - 2 - 2 - - - - - - - - 2 - 2 3 17 
8. Horticulture - - - - 1 1 - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - 1 04 
9. Housing - - - 2 - - - - - - - - 1 1 1 - - - 1 - 3 ^ 2 11 
10. Information, Tourism,  
Kannada and Culture - - - - - - 3 1 - - - - 1 - - - - - 1 - - 1 07 
11. Labour - - - - - - - - - 1 - 1 - - 1 - 1 - - 1 1 - 06 
12. Legislature Secretariat - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 
13. Revenue - - - 1 1 1 - 1 - - - - 1 1 - - 1 - - 4 4 1 16 
14. Social Welfare - - - 2 - 3 3 1 1 - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - 11 
15. Urban Development - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 4 06+1* 9 10 32 
16. Women & Child 
Development - - - - 1 - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 02 
17. Youth Services and Sports - - - - - 2 - 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 04 
18. Agriculture, Forest,  
Home & Transport - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 
19. H&FW, PWD, & RDPR - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - 01 
20. Forest, Ecology 
&Environment,  
Urban Development and 
H&FW 
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - 01 
21. Department of Minority 
Welfare - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 01 01 
22. Department of Medical 
Education - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 02 01 03 
Total 5 3 7 14 13 11 10 13 7 4 3 2 4 6 6 4 6 4 8 14 24 24 192 
* Stand alone report on “Denotifi cation and allotment of land by Bangalore Development Authority” is partially discussed by PAC 
 ^ includes Stand alone report – Performance Audit of Acquisition and Development of land allotment of sites /houses/flats by Karnataka Housing Board for the year ended 31 March 2013. 
 #  Para 2.1 of Report No 2 of the year 2013- “Procurement a nd Distribution of drugs and chemicals” is under discussion by PAC. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
174 
Appendix-2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.1.6, Page-16) 
List of hospitals selected for test-check 
District Hospitals 
1.  Chitradurga 
2.  Dakshina Kannada (Wenlock Hospital, Mangaluru)
Dakshina Kannada (Lady Goschen Hospital, Mangaluru) 
3.  Kalaburagi 
4.  Karwar 
5.  Kodagu 
6.  Vijayapura 
Teaching Hospitals 
7.  Belgaum Institute of Medical Sciences (BIMS) 
8.  Bidar Institute of Medical Sciences (BRIMS) 
9.  Karnataka Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS) 
10.  KR Hospital, Mysuru 
Cheluvamba Hospital, Mysuru 
11.  Shivamogga Institute of Medical Sciences (SIMS) 
12.  Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru 
General/Taluk Hospitals 
13.  Aland 
14.  Anekal 
15.  Bailahongal 
16.  Chincholi 
17.  Gokak 
18.  Hiriyur 
19.  Humnabad 
20.  K.R.Nagar 
21.  Nanjanagudu 
22.  Puttur 
23.  Shikaripura 
24.  Sirsi 
25.  Virajpet* 
26.  Sir CV Raman General Hospital, Indiranagar, Bengaluru * 
27.  KC General Hospital, Bengaluru (Pilot Study) * 
Super Speciality Hospitals 
28.  Institute of Nephro-Urology (INU), Bengaluru 
29.  Pradhan Mantri Swastha Suraksha Yojana Super Speciality Hospital (PMSSY SSH), 
Bengaluru 
 
Note (1)* Three General Hospitals have been included under the category of Taluk 
Hospitals for all other purposes exce pt in health services. Since these 
general hospitals render services as distri ct level hospitals, while analysing 
for services, these three hospitals ha ve been included under District 
Hospitals.   
Note (2) KR Hospital and Cheluvamba Ho spital in Mysuru and Lady Goschen 
Hospital and Wenlock Hospital in Manga luru are to be treated as single 
hospital in each district.  For the pur pose of adequacy with respect to 
infrastructure, however, the hospitals are considered as separate hospitals. 
 

Appendices 
175 
Appendix-2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.1.9.1, Page-21) 
Availability of Specialisation in Taluk and District Hospitals 
Name of the 
Specialisation 
No. of Hospitals where 
post not sanctioned 
No. of hospitals where post 
sanctioned but no men in 
position 
Total no. of hospitals where 
specialisation not available 
Percentage of 
hospitals where 
specialisation not 
available TH DH TH DH TH DH 
General Medicine 4 0 85 3 89 3 55 
General Surgery 8 0 49 1 57 1 35 
Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
 
0 0 
 
33 2 
 
33 2 21 
Anaesthesia 4 0 41 2 45 2 28 
Paediatrics 3 0 62 3 65 3 41 
Ophthalmology 6 0 73 5 79 5 51 
ENT 11 2 65 2 76 4 48 
Orthopaedics 4 0 49 2 53 2 33 
Dermatology 54 5 61 5 115 10 75 
Dental 4 0 22 1 26 1 16 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
176 
Appendix-2.3 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.1.9.2(e), Page-27) 
Percentage of expired blood  
Name of the Hospital 
Total units 
of 
discarded 
blood 
Number of 
units of 
expired blood 
Percentage of expired 
blood (Range of 
expired blood during 
the period 2010-11 to 
2014-15)
District Hospital, Karwar  192  158  82 (76-88) 
District Hospital, Madikeri  239  157  66 (46-76) 
KC General Hospital, Bengaluru  750  460  61 (14-85) 
Karnataka Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Hubballi 
3,043  1306  43 (15-56) 
Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru  3,293  1141  35 (15-65) 
Belagavi Institute of Medical 
Sciences 
723  206  28 (22-39) 
Shivamogga Institute of Medical 
Sciences 
1,041  237  23 (1-39) 
District Hospital, Kalaburagi  431  83  19 (14-25) 
Pandit General Hospital, Sirsi  177  25  14 (3-27) 
Wenlock Hospital, Mangaluru  679  79  12 (1-30) 
Bidar Institute of Medical 
Sciences 
1,354  140  10 (4-22) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
177 
Appendix-2.4 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.1.11.1, Page-38) 
Statement showing the details of number of beds in the burns wards, exclusive manpower available 
and number of patients admitted, discharged and died during the period 2010-15 
Name of the Hospital No. of beds in 
burns ward 
Details of 
exclusive/dedicated staff 
for burns ward 
Total number of 
patients admitted 
during the period 
2010-11 to 2014-15 
Number of 
patients 
discharged after 
treatment 
No. of 
death 
cases 
Remarks, if any Percentage of 
death cases  
District Hospital, Kalaburagi 16 01 Staff Nurse 1,663 1,102 561  34 
District Hospital, Vijayapura 12 02 Doctors, 03 Staff 
Nurse, 03 Group D 
597 373 224  38 
District Hospital, Tumakuru 10 NIL 1,271 736 183  14 
District Hospital, Bagalakote 7 03 Staff Nurse, 02 Group 
D 
260 163 98  38 
Wenlock Hospital, Mangaluru 7 03 Staff Nurse 655 369 286  44 
District Hospital, Dharwad 8 01 Plastic/General 
Surgeon, 03 Staff Nurse 
298 219 11  4 
District Hospital, Davanagere 12 No exclusive staff 1,620 899 721  45 
District Hospital, Karwar 5 01 SN, 01 Group D 45 27 1  2 
District Hospital, 
Chamarajanagar 
10 02 Plastic/General 
Surgeon, 03 Staff Nurse 
188 188 0  0 
SIMS, Shivamogga 10 Plastic Surgeon 1,140 864 276  24 
HIMS, Hassan Information not furnished  
BRIMS, Bidar Information not furnished  
Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru 50 No exclusive staff. 8889 4,797 4,092  46 
KIMS, Hubbali  No exclusive st aff. 1257 714 543 No separate burns 
ward 
43 
District Hospital, Chitradurga 6  161 136 25 Separate burns 
ward not 
sanctioned 
16 
KR Hospital, Mysuru 32 Plastic Surgeon-2 
Staff nurse-9 
Technician-1 
Group ‘D’-3 
3,384 2,080 1,252 ICU present but no 
ventilator, No 
central oxygen,  
No physiotherapy 
facility 
37 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
178 
Appendix-2.5 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.1.11.3, Page-41) 
Details of staff sanctioned in Trauma care centre 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
hospital 
TCC 
level 
Sanctioned 
strength 
GOI 
Sanctioned 
strength 
GOK 
Doctors Nursing Staff Paramedics Working strength Total 
Working 
strength Regular Outsourced Regular Outsourced Regular Outsourced Regular Outsourced 
1. District Hospital, 
Chikkaballapur 
III 75 16 1 2 0 6 0 0 1 8 9 
2. General Hospital, 
Sira 
III 75 16 1 0 2 3 0 7 3 10 13 
3. District Hospital, 
Tumakuru 
III 75 16 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 
4. Chigateri District 
Hospital, 
Davanagere 
III 75 0 0 0 0 25 0 0 0 25 25 
5. BIMS, Belagavi III 75 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
6. District Hospital, 
Haveri 
III 75 16 2 0 0 0 1 0 3 0 3 
7. District Hospital, 
Chitradurga 
II 84 16 2 0 5 0 1 3 8 3 11 
8. KIMS, Hubballi II 84 0 0 17 11 45 2 24 13 86 99 
Total  618 80 7 19 18 79 4 34 29 132 161 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
179 
Appendix-2.6 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.1, Page-44) 
Role of organisations on Engineering Education in Karnataka 
Name of the organisation Role of the Organisation 
University Grants 
Commission (UGC) 
Promotion and co-ordination of  University education and 
for the determination and maintenance of standards of 
teaching, examination and research in Universities. 
All India Council for 
Technical Education 
(AICTE) 
Planning and co-ordinated development of the technical 
education system throughout the country, Promotion of 
qualitative improvements and regulation and proper 
maintenance of norms and standards in the technical 
education system. 
National Assessment  
and Accreditation Council 
(NAAC) 
Assessment and accreditat ion of higher education 
institutions in the country through a combination of self and 
external quality evaluati on, promotion and sustenance 
initiatives. 
National Board of 
Accreditation (NBA) 
Assessment and accreditation of professional programmes 
offered at various levels by th e technical institutions on the 
basis of specified norms. 
Karnataka State Higher 
Education Council 
(KSHEC) 
Establishment of a synergic relationship among 
Government, Universities and regulatory bodies by 
promoting academic excellence and social justice by the 
Government in policy formulation and perspective 
planning, (ii) ensuring the autonomy, accountability and co-
ordination among all institutions of higher education in the 
State, and (iii) guiding the harmonious growth of higher 
education in accordance with the socio-economic 
requirements of the State 
Directorate of Technical 
Education 
Ensuring planned development of technical education in the 
State consistent with the policies of the State and the 
Nation 
State Project Facilitation 
Unit (SPFU) 
Implementation of the Tec hnical Education Quality 
Improvement Program (TEQIP). The prime focus of the 
project will be broadl y on Improving Quality and 
Relevance of Engineering Education by incorporating 
Faculty Development and Capacity Building, Monitoring & 
Evaluation and Project Mana gement, by emphasising on 
training as well as monitoring and evaluation techniques. 
Visvesvaraya 
Technological University 
Established as a University exclusively for  promoting 
engineering education in the State with an objective of 
supplying the required manpowe r of appropriate kind and 
quality to meet the need s of society and national 
development plans, to advan ce frontiers of knowledge by 
research, innovation, invention and product improvement 
etc. 
Affiliated 
Colleges/Autonomous 
Colleges/Extension  
Centres etc. 
Delivery of curriculum to the students in various 
engineering branches, maintenance of teaching and learning 
infrastructure as per standa rds, promotion of faculty 
research etc. 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
180 
Appendix-2.7 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.5, Page-45) 
List of test-checked engineering colleges 
Government colleges 
1. Government Engineering College, Ramanagara 
2. Government Engineering College, Raichur 
Aided colleges 
3. PDA College of Engineering, Kalaburagi 
4. BMS Evening College of Engineering, Bengaluru 
Colleges on the basis of highest admission percentage  
5. New Horizon College of Engineering, Bengaluru    
6. Government Engineering College, Hassan    
7. BMS Institute of Technology, Bengaluru     
8. GSSS Institute of Engineering & Technology for women, Mysuru  
9. MS Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bengaluru    
Colleges on the basis of lowest admission percentage  
10. Adarsha Institute of Technology, Bengaluru    
11. Achutha Institute of Technology, Bengaluru    
12. Bengaluru College of Engineering & Technology, Bengaluru  
13. Sri Vidya Vinayaka Institute of Technology, Bengaluru   
14. East Point College of Engineering and Technology for Women    
Bengaluru   
Unaided colleges 
15. Acharya Institute of Technology 
16. Akshaya Institute of Technology, Tumakuru 
17. Amrutha Institute, (AIMS), Bengaluru 
18. Bangalore Technical Institute, Bengaluru 
19. Bapuji IET, Davangere 
20. Brindavan Engineering College, Bengaluru 
21. BTL Institute of Technology, Bengaluru 
22. C Byregowda Institute of Technology, Bengaluru 
23. Dr.ShivakumaraSwamy College of Engineering, Bengaluru 
24. Dr.Thimmaiah Institute of Technology, KGF 
25. GTTC Bengaluru 
26. Impact College, Bengaluru 
27. Islamiah Institute of Technology, Bengaluru 
28. Jain Institute of Technology, Davangere 
29. JnanaVikas Institute of Technology, Bengaluru 
30. JNNCE, Shivamoga 
31. KNS Institute of Technology, Bengaluru 
32. MS Engineering College, Bengaluru 
33. MVJCE, Bengaluru 
34. PNS Institute of Technology, Bengaluru 
35. Shirdi Sai Engineering College, Bengaluru 
36. SJC Institute of Technology, Chikkaballapura 
37. Sri Channabasaveshwara Institute of Technology, Gubbi 
38. YDIT Bengaluru 
39. Bheemanna Khandre Institute of Technology, Bhalki 
40. KCT Gulbarga 
41. Proudadevaraya Institute of Technology, Hospet 
42. Rao Bahadur Engineering College, Ballari 
43. Cambridge Institute, Bengaluru 

Appendices 
181 
Appendix-2.8 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.6.1(c), Page-48) 
Statement of division-wise analysis for CET intake and admission data 
Name of the 
division 
Name of the 
District 
CET Engineering 
intake capacity 
CET Exam 
2014 applied 
Total No. of 
Rank 
Holders in 
Engg 
Total 
candidates 
who selected 
Engg seats 
Belagavi 
Belagavi 2,159 6,866 4,523 2,095 
Karwar 777 2,339 1,912 1,010 
Bagalakot 780 4,133 2,836 1,450 
Vijayapura 556 3,574 2,159 1,020 
Dharwad 1,287 6,714 4,964 2,543 
Haveri 552 1,378 919 453 
Gadag 556 1,662 927 410 
Kalaburagi 
Kalaburagi 1,505 5,532 4,224 2,203 
Bidar 1,018 4,744 3,066 1,585 
Ballari 1,282 4,826 3,219 1,723 
Raichur 626 1,657 926 482 
Koppal 0 776 439 204 
Yadagir 150 1,082 792 361 
Mysuru 
Chikkamagalur 300 1,649 2,406 1,316 
Mangaluru 5,110 10,712 9,579 4,922 
Hassan 1,252 3,266 1,971 1,060 
Chitradurga 194 2,587 1,451 806 
Davanagere 1,329 5,763 3,986 2,314 
Mandya 1,307 3,109 1,801 1,041 
Madikeri 462 861 702 355 
Chamarajanagara 402 925 569 282 
Mysuru 2,696 7,968 5,660 3,000 
Shivamogga 630 4,571 3,481 1,817 
Udupi 390 3,893 3,475 1,827 
Bengaluru 
Tumakuru 1,665 5,398 3,543 1,891 
Chikkaballapura 720 3,382 1,277 642 
Ramanagara 702 1,339 868 516 
Bengaluru 24,914 36,434 27,034 14,858 
Kolar 488 3,356 2,296 1,394 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
182 
Appendix-2.9 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.6.3(b), Page-55) 
Status of NBA Accreditation of VTU Autonomous Colleges 
Sl. 
No. Name of the College Period of Autonomous 
Status granted by VTU 
Due time to get 
accreditation from 
NBA in 
Eligible No of courses 
for NBA 
Accreditation Status 
(Number of Courses 
– UG & PG and 
period) 
NBA Tier I & Tier II Accreditation Status (Number 
of Courses – UG & PG and period) 
NBA Tier II 
Accreditation 
Status (Number 
of Courses-which 
could not be 
renewed) 
Autonomous 
Colleges 
could not get 
the NBA 
Accreditation 
till date 
1 BMS College of Engineering, 
Bengaluru 
Since 2008-09 (UG Courses) 2010-11  
(UG courses) 
13 UG courses  Tier I - (6 courses (UG) 2014-15, 5 courses (UG) 
2014-18) 
Tier II - (5 courses (UG) -2014-19, 6 courses (UG) –
2014-16 
4 courses (PG) -2013-16)* 
Some courses are common in Tier I and Tier II (Total 
11 UG Courses 
UG Courses-1 
PG Courses-1* 
--- 2 NITTE Meenakshi Institute of 
Technology, Bengaluru 
Since 2007-08 (UG Courses) 2009-10  
(UG Courses) 
6 UG courses Tier I - 4 courses (UG) 2014-15 
Tier II - 4 courses (UG) 2014-16 
Courses are common in Tier I & Tier II 
UG Courses-1 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
3 MS Ramaiah Institute of 
Technology, Bengaluru 
Since 2007-08 (UG & PG) 2009-10  
(UG & PG) 
13 UG Courses  
9 PG Courses 
Tier II – 2 courses (UG) – 2010-15, 1 course (UG) - 
2013-15,       1 course (PG) – 2013-16 
UG Courses-9 
PG Courses-3 
--- 
4 NMAM Institute of 
Technology, Nitte 
Since 2007-08 (UG & PG) 2009-10  
(UG & PG) 
7 UG Courses 
5 PG Courses 
Tier II - 4 course (UG) – 2012-15, 1 course (UG) – 
2012-17 
UG Courses-2 
PG Courses-1 
--- 
5 Malnad College of 
Engineering, Hassan 
Since 2007-08 (UG Courses) 2009-10 (UG Courses) 9 UG Courses Tier II - 1 course (PG) – 2013-16* UG Courses-8 
PG Courses-1* 
--- 
6 Dr.Ambedkar Institute of 
Technology, Bengaluru 
Since 2008-09 (UG Courses) 2010-11 (UG Courses) 10 UG Courses Tier II - 1 courses (UG) –2012-17, 4 courses (UG) –
2013-15 
UG Courses-5 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
7 PES Institute of Technology, 
Bengaluru 
Since 2007-08 (UG Courses) Since 2009-10 (UG 
Courses) 
7 UG Courses Nil UG Courses-5 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
8 SDM College of Engineering 
& Technology, Dharwad 
Since 2007-08 (UG Courses) 2009-10 (UG Courses) 7 UG Courses Nil UG Courses-6 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
9 Basaveshwara Engineering 
College, Bagalkote 
Since 2007-08 (UG & PG) 2009-10 (UG & PG) 10 UG Courses 
8 PG Courses
Nil UG Courses-7 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
10 Siddaganga Institute of 
Technology, Tumakuru 
Since 2007-08 (UG Courses)  
Since  2008-09 (PG Courses) 
2009-10 (UG Courses)  
2010-11 (PG Courses) 
12 UG Courses 
8 PG Courses 
Nil UG Courses-6 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
11 RV College of Engineering, 
Bengaluru 
Since 2007-08 (UG Courses) 2009-10 (UG Courses) 12 UG Courses Nil UG Courses-6 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
12 PDA College of Engineering, 
Gulbarga 
Since 2007-08 (UG & PG) 2009-10 (UG & PG) 11 UG Courses 
8 PG Courses 
Nil UG Courses-8 
PG Courses-0 
--- 
13 Sri Jayachamarajendra 
College of Engineering, 
Mysuru 
 
Since 2007-08 (UG Courses)  
Since  2008-09 (PG Courses) 
2009-10 (UG Courses)  
2010-11 (PG Courses) 
12 UG Courses 
13 PG Courses 
Nil UG Courses 8 
PG Courses 0 
--- 

Appendices 
183 
Sl. 
No. Name of the College Period of Autonomous 
Status granted by VTU 
Due time to get 
accreditation from 
NBA in 
Eligible No of courses 
for NBA 
Accreditation Status 
(Number of Courses 
– UG & PG and 
period) 
NBA Tier I & Tier II Accreditation Status (Number 
of Courses – UG & PG and period) 
NBA Tier II 
Accreditation 
Status (Number 
of Courses-which 
could not be 
renewed) 
Autonomous 
Colleges 
could not get 
the NBA 
Accreditation 
till date 
14 National Institute of 
Engineering, Mysuru 
Since 2007-08 (UG & PG) 2009-10 (UG & PG) 7 UG Courses 
6 PG Courses 
Nil  Yes 
15 PES College of Engineering, 
Mandya 
Since 2008-09 (UG & PG) 2010-11 (UG & PG) 8 UG Courses 
3 PG Courses 
Nil 8 UG Courses Yes 
16 KLS Gogte Institute of 
Technology, Belagavi 
Since 2015-16 (UG & PG) 2017-18 NA as of March - 
2015 
NOT Applicable 
17 Dayanand Sagar College of 
Engineering, Bengaluru 
Since 2015-16 (UG & PG) 2017-18 NA as of March - 
2015 
18 New Horizon College of 
Engineering, Bengaluru 
Since 2015-16 (UG & PG) 2017-18 NA as of March - 
2015 
19 Nagarjuna College of 
Engineering and Technology, 
Bengaluru 
Since 2015-16 (UG & PG) 2017-18 NA as of March - 
2015 
Total 144 UG Courses 
60 PG Courses 
28 UG Courses 
1 PG Courses 
80 UG Courses 
4 PG Courses  
 * These were not considered as autonomy was not granted 
 
 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
184 
Appendix-2.10 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.6.3(b), Page-55) 
Quality parameters of autonomous colleges 
Item Sub Item 
Number of 
Autonomous 
Colleges 
No of 
Colleges for 
which 
Information 
not 
applicable 
No of 
Colleges for 
which 
Information 
not 
available 
Information 
Available/ 
Applicable 
Colleges 
with 
Deficiency 
% of 
colleges 
with 
deficiency 
1)UG Curriculum design 
based on VTU 
guidelines? If Yes: 
a) Electives in 
New/Emerging topics, 
OK? 
16 0 0 16 8 
50.00 
b) Frequency of revisions, 
OK? 16 0 0 16 9 56.25 
2) PG Curriculum 
Guidelines based on 
VTU Guidelines 
a) Electives in 
New/Emerging topics, 
OK? 
16 7 0 9 4 
44.44 
b) Design Problems /Lab 
work /IT 
applications/Project, OK? 
16 7 0 9 5 
55.56 
3) Teaching and course 
delivery as per modern 
practices 
a) Coursework beyond the 
prescribed syllabi, OK? 16 0 0 16 7 43.75 
b) Getting students’ 
feedback and using it, OK? 16 0 0 16 6 37.50 
4) Learner Centric 
initiatives taken? If yes 
a) Broadband 
Intra/Internet/Wifi access 
on campus, OK? 
16 0 0 16 8 
50.00 
5) UG Examinations by 
following VTU 
Guidelines? If Yes 
a) CIE question papers 
quality/standard, OK? 16 0 1 15 7 46.67 
b) SEE question papers 
quality/standard, OK? 16 0 1 15 8 53.33 
6) PG Examination by 
following VTU 
Guidelines? If Yes 
a) SEE question papers 
quality/standard, OK? 16 7 1 8 3 
37.50 
 

Appendices 
185 
Appendix-2.11 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.9.1, Page-67) 
Availability of teaching faculty in test-checked colleges 
Name of Course Designation of Faculty 
Number of Colleges having 
Deficiency in % 
Sampled 
Colleges 
for which 
data 
available 
and 
applicable 
0% 1% to 
25% 
26% 
to 
50% 
51% 
to 
75% 
76% 
to 
99% 
100% 
Computer Science 
Overall Faculty 20 7 8 3 1 0 39 
Professor 15 0 6 0 0 18 39 
Associate Professor 2 2 2 3 3 27 39 
Assistant Professor 28 5 3 2 1 0 39 
Civil Engineering   
Overall Faculty 13 5 5 6 0 1 30 
Professor 18 0 3 0 0 9 30 
Associate Professor 2 1 3 2 3 19 30 
Assistant Professor 17 6 5 1 0 1 30 
Electronics & 
Communication 
Engineering   
Overall Faculty 20 9 7 3 0 0 39 
Professor 18 0 4 0 0 17 39 
Associate Professor 2 1 3 7 3 23 39 
Assistant Professor 29 5 3 2 0 0 39 
Mechanical 
Engineering   
Overall Faculty 23 7 5 2 0 0 37 
Professor 25 0 2 0 0 10 37 
Associate Professor 4 1 7 3 2 20 37 
Assistant Professor 28 5 3 1 0 0 37 
Common Subjects 
for all courses 
Physics Overall 
Faculty 24 3 7 2 0 4 40 
Chemistry Overall 
Faculty 23 5 5 3 0 4 40 
Mathematics Overall 
Faculty 23 7 2 6 0 2 40 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
186 
Appendix-2.12 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.9.2, Page-68) 
Availability of laboratory facilities in test-checked colleges 
Mechanical Engineering 
Name of laboratories 
Required No of 
Equipment as 
per syllabi 
Number of Colleges having  
Deficiency in % No of 
Sampled 
Colleges 0% 
1% 
to 
25% 
26% 
to 
50% 
51% 
to 
75% 
76% 
to 
99% 
100% 
Machine Shop 6 16 1 1 0 1 4 23 
Equipment Hydraulic and 
Hydraulic Machinery 
Laboratory 
12 8 10 1 1 0 3 23 
Others 11 3 5 10 1 1 3 23 
Computer Laboratory 
Software 
3 14 0 4 1 0 4 23 
Mechanical Measurement 
and Metrology Lab 
15 10 9 3 0 0 1 23 
Foundry and Forging Lab 6 12 3 4 0 1 3 23 
Energy Conversion Lab 9 8 7 3 2 1 2 23 
Design Lab 6 13 6 1 0 0 3 23 
OVERALL 68 0 16 3 2 2 0 23 
 
 
 
Electronics and Communication Engineering 
Name of laboratories 
Required No 
of Equipment 
as per syllabi 
Number of Colleges having  
Deficiency in % No of 
Sampled 
Colleges 0% 
1% 
to 
25% 
26% 
to 
50% 
51% 
to 
75% 
76% 
to 
99% 
100% 
Analog Electronics 
Laboratory 17 1 11 9 2 0 0 23 
Logic Design Laboratory 7 3 7 9 4 0 0 23 
HDL Laboratory 3 12 0 6 2 0 3 23 
Microcontroller 
Laboratory 8 2 8 7 6 0 0 23 
Analog Communications 
Laboratory 9 3 15 3 2 0 0 23 
Digital Signal Processing 
Laboratory 7 5 8 7 3 0 0 23 
Micro Processor 
Laboratory 5 12 4 3 1 1 2 23 
Power Electronics 
Laboratory 22 1 12 5 2 1 2 23 
VLSI Laboratory 1 12 0 0 0 0 11 23 
Advanced Communication 
Laboratory 14 0 13 8 2 0 0 23 
Others 6 5 4 5 2 3 4 23 
Computer Laboratory 
Softwares 12 1 7 6 1 4 4 23 
Overall 111 0 8 12 3 0 0 23 

Appendices 
187 
Civil Engineering 
Name of laboratories 
Required No 
of Equipment 
as per syllabi 
Number of Colleges having  
Deficiency in % No of 
Sampled 
Colleges 0% 
1% 
to 
25% 
26% 
to 
50% 
51% 
to 
75% 
76% 
to 
99% 
100% 
Highway Testing Materials 
Laboratory 39 0 9 6 3 4 1 23 
Geo-Technical Laboratory 31 0 8 6 3 5 1 23 
Basic Materials Testing 
Laboratory 9 6 9 2 0 3 3 23 
Surveying Laboratory 13 3 12 5 3 0 0 23 
Computer Aided Design and 
Drawing Laboratory 5 2 2 5 3 5 6 23 
Environmental Engineering 
Laboratory 10 7 8 2 2 2 2 23 
OVERALL 107 0 7 9 4 3 0 23 
 
 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
188 
Appendix-2.13 
(Reference: Paragraph-2.2.9.3, Page-68) 
Availability of Library facilities in sampled Colleges 
Civil Engineering 
Semester 
Required 
No of Titles 
as per 
syllabi 
Number of Colleges having  
Deficiency in % No of 
Sampled 
Colleges 0% 
1% 
to 
25% 
26% 
to 
50% 
51% 
to 
75% 
76% 
to 
99% 
100% 
Semester 3 55 1 0 14 11 1 0 27 
Semester 4 32 1 6 14 5 1 0 27 
Semester 5 56 1 4 11 7 4 0 27 
Semester 6 83 1 1 5 13 6 1 27 
Semester 7 115 1 1 4 9 10 2 27 
Semester 8 115 1 0 3 8 13 2 27 
Overall 456 1 0 5 14 7 0 27 
 
Computer Science Engineering 
Semester 
Required 
No of Titles 
as per 
syllabi 
Number of Colleges having  
Deficiency in % No of 
Sampled 
Colleges 0% 
1% 
to 
25% 
26% 
to 
50% 
51% 
to 
75% 
76% 
to 
99% 
100% 
Semester 3 23 5 10 7 4 1 0 27 
Semester 4 24 4 11 8 4 0 0 27 
Semester 5 23 4 12 7 3 1 0 27 
Semester 6 41 4 9 5 9 0 0 27 
Semester 7 61 2 7 13 4 1 0 27 
Semester 8 53 2 4 5 11 5 0 27 
Overall 225 1 8 10 8 0 0 27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
189 
Appendix-3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-3.1.5.1(c), Page-76) 
Illustrative cases of ambiguous disclosure in goods tender supplier 
selection 
Tender No. & 
Department 
Tender Title Total number 
of items 
Disclosure regarding selection in 
the portal 
BMTC/2013/012 
Bangalore 
Metropolitan 
Transport 
Corporation 
(BMTC) 
Procurement of 
Electrical Items. 
11 Three different bidders are shown as 
selected for the same items at 
different rates.  It is not clear which 
items were awarded to which 
tenderer. Further it conveys the 
meaning that the quantities 
purchased were double or thrice the 
quantities tendered. 
KSRTC/2013-
14/A-28-13 
Karnataka State 
Road Transport 
Corporation 
(KSRTC) 
Fuel Filter 
Elements 
19 Three Items out of the 19 items are 
shown to have been selected to two 
contractors at different rates.  This 
leads the viewer to conclude that the 
department procured twice the 
required items floated in the tender 
at different rates from different 
tenderers.   Several items are shown 
as awarded to bidders at zero rates. 
DMA/2014-
15/IND2258 
Directorate of 
Municipal 
Administration 
Supplying of 
submersible 
Motor Pump, GI 
Pipe and Cable 
from 2013-14 
SFC Special 
Grant 
8 Two bidders are shown as selected 
against all the 8 items at different 
rates.  This leads the viewer to 
conclude that the department 
procured two times the required 
items floated in the tender at 
different rates from the two tenders.   
KPTCL//2013-
14/IND226 
Karnataka Power 
Transmission 
Corporation Ltd. 
(KPTCL) 
Supplying of 
T&P Materials to 
Tr (W&M)Circle, 
KPTCL, Belgaum 
on Total Turnkey 
Basis. 
26 Different bidders are shown as 
selected for the same items at 
different rates.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
190 
Appendix-4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.1.2.1(a), Page-95) 
Status of working of equipment 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
equipment 
Number 
 Working 
Not working (District) Whether AMC 
entered 
Yes/No Belagavi Mysuru Tumakuru Bengaluru Shivamogga Ballari Dharwad Ramanagara 
1 CCTV 309 304 - 01 03 - - - - - No 
2 Door Frame Metal 
detector 59 18 04 02 03 20 05 05 - 02 No 
3 Hand Metal detector 105 45 10 05 01 24 08 10 02 - No 
4 Deep Search Metal 
detector 5 5 - - - - - - - - No 
5 X-ray baggage scanner 6 5 - - - - - - - 01 No 
6 Walki - Talky 274 240 - 10 10 - 04 10 - - No 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
191 
Appendix-4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.1.2.1(b), Page-96) 
Details of the source where articles were seized 
Year 
Searches 
by prison 
staff 
Number of 
cases 
booked 
Number of cases 
(source from 
which articles 
seized mentioned 
in the book) 
Details of source from which articles seized 
Interview Toilet Inside 
TV Wall Gate Factory Waste 
box 
2010-11 858 798 193 71 44 11 48 14 5 0 
2011-12 842 940 232 87 57 22 47 18 1 0 
2012-13 739 892 185 56 63 07 32 24 1 2 
2013-14 213 137 91 07 51 18 10 05 0 0 
2014-15 108 26 22 0 01 0 20 01 0 0 
Total 2,760 2,793 723 221 216 58 157 62 7 2 
 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
192 
Appendix-4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.1.2.1(c), Page-97) 
Entry of prohibited articles into prison 
Year 
Search by 
Prison 
Staff 
Number 
of cases 
booked 
Number of 
cases where 
articles are 
seized 
Seizure of prohibited articles 
Mobiles SIMs Chargers Batteries 
2010-11 858 798 193 940 850 375 880 
2011-12 842 940 232 542 439 205 514 
2012-13 739 892 185 1,280 1,104 214 1,007 
2013-14 213 137 91 258 172 33 225 
2014-15 108 26 22 25 13 0 24 
Total 2,760 2,793 723 3,045 2,578 827 2,650 
 
 
 
  

Appendices 
193 
Appendix-4.4 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.1.2.2(b), Page-99) 
Production of undertrials before Courts through VC system vis-à-vis 
through escort  
 
Name of the Prison 
Total Number of 
prisoners to be 
produced to court 
Escort 
sought 
Number of 
prisoners 
produced before 
courts through 
escort 
Number of prisoners 
produced before 
courts through video 
conferencing 
Dharwad* 26,410 26,410 19,561 93 
Belagavi 47,064 47,064 22,704 281 
Mysuru 81,092 81,092 58,542 6,448 
Ballari 38,093 38,093 18,477 984 
Kolar* 18,782 18,782 16,309 03 
Chikkaballapura 13, 776 13,776 12,445 - 
Gokak  3,741 3,741 1,869 - 
Bengaluru 4,61,704 2,61, 553 1,06,013 2,00,151 
Shivamogga* 32,721 32,721 23,925 893 
Arasikere 4,819 4,819 4,819 - 
Tipaturu 1,797 1,797 1,797 - 
Ramanagara 19,965 19,965 12,340 265 
Tumakuru^ 45,592 45,592 37,148 783 
Total  7,95,556 5,95,405 3,35,949 2,09,901 
*  VC system was under repair since 2012-13 
^  VC was under repair up to 2013-14 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
194 
Appendix-4.5 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.2.1, Page-105) 
Statement showing the list of test-checked institutions 
Sl.No. Name of the Institutions Type of 
Organisation 
1 Children  Home for Boys, Marigow da Road, Bengaluru Government 
2 Govt. Shishu Mandir, Marigowda  Road, Bengaluru Government 
3 Children  Home for Boys, Mysuru Government 
4 Children Home for Girls, Mysuru Government 
5 Juvenile Home for Boys, Ca ntonment, Ballari Government 
6 Children Home for Mentally Retarded Children, 
Cantonment, Ballari 
Government 
7 Children Home for Girls, Ballari Government 
8 Government Certified School (Senior) Boys, 
Vijayapura 
Government 
9 Children Home for Girls, Sangoli Rayana Colony, 
Vijayapura 
Government 
10 Children Home for Boys, 100 Feet Road, Halakola, 
Shivamogga 
Government 
11 Observation Home for Boys, Madivala, Bengaluru. Government 
12 Observation Home for Boys,  Mysuru. Government 
13 Observation Home for Boys, Ballari Government 
14 Observation Home for Boys, Aphjalpor Takke Road, 
Vijayapura 
Government 
15 Observation Home for Boys, 100 Feet Road, Halakola, 
Shivamogga 
Government 
16 Govt. Shishu Gruha (S AA),Ballari Government 
17 Special Home, Sumanahalli, Bengaluru. NGO 
18 Basco Yuvodaya Open Shelter, Magdi Road, Bengaluru NGO 
19 YMCA Open Shelter, KG Halli, Bengaluru NGO 
20 Bijayalaxmi Education and Social Welfare 
Society(Open Shelter),Vivekanagar, Vijayapura 
NGO 
21 Surabhi Mahila Mandali (O pen Shelter),Shivamogga NGO 
22 Anatha Shishu Nivasa (Fit Institution), Bull Temple 
Road, Basavangudi, Bengaluru. 
NGO 
23 Canara Bank Relief and Welfare Society(Fit 
Institution), Banashankari 2nd Stage, Bengaluru 
NGO 
24 Bapuji Children Home(Fit Institution), Gokulam, 
Mysuru 
NGO 
25 Vijayapura Orphanages(F it Institutions),Bagalkote 
Road, Vijayapura 
NGO 
26 Auxilum Navajeevana Society(Fit Institution) 
Chamrajpet, Bengaluru 
NGO 
27 Nirmala ShishuBhavana  (SAA), Lingarajapuram, 
Bengaluru 
NGO 
28 Sri Sidheswara Vatsalya Adoption Centre, Ganesh 
Nagar, Vijayapura 
NGO 
 

Appendices 
195 
Appendix-4.6 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.2.2.2, Page-106) 
Statement Showing Juvenile Delinquency 
Year 
Total 
cognizable 
crimes 
Juvenile 
crimes 
under IPC 
Percentage of 
Juvenile 
crimes total 
crimes 
Juvenile Apprehended under 
IPC & Specialised and Local 
laws 
No. of Major crimes  
       7-12 13-16 17-18 Theft Burglary Hurt Murder Attempt to 
murder Robbery Rape 
2010 1,42,322 161 0.11 34 78 68 65 27 9 10 5 1 6 
2011 1,37,600 281 0.2 36 105 226 43 51 14 26 8 6 18 
2012 1,34,021 323 0.24 8 111 337 86 35 36 32 28 9 12 
2013 1,36,689 403 0.29 12 159 359 108 53 49 22 18 37 17 
2014   Information yet to be compiled by the State Crime Record Bureau 
Total 5,50,632 1,168   90 453 990 302 166 108 90 59 53 53 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
196 
Appendix-4.7 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.2.4.1, Page-109) 
Statement showing the release of grants to Institutions not registered 
under the JJ Act 
  
(`in lakh) 
Sl.No. Name of the Institution Grants 
Released 
1 Sri Danamma Devi Women Education & Service 
Organisation 
12.88 
2 Thirumala Education And Social Welfare Society 13.54 
3 Vijayapura Orphanage 12.07 
4 Bidyarayana Sikshana Abhi bruddhi Samsthe, Yelahanka 14.46 
5 Snehabharathi Sikshana Abhibrudhi Samsthe 14.46 
6 Bidyarayana Sikshana Abhibruddhi Samsthe, 
Krishnarajapuram 
7.20 
 Total 74.61 
 
  

Appendices 
197 
Appendix-4.8 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.2.8, Page-120) 
List of Child Care Institutions where no Management Committee was 
formed 
Sl. No. Name 
1 Children Home for Boys, Bengaluru 
2 Govt. Shishu Mandira, Bengaluru 
3 Children Home for Boys, Mysuru 
4 Observation Home for Boys, Mysuru 
5 Observation Home for Boys, Ballari 
6 Govt. Shishu Gruha, Ballari 
7 Govt. Certified School (Senior) for Boys, Vijayapura 
8 Children Home for Girls, Vijayapura 
9 Observation Home for Girls, Vijayapura 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
198 
Appendix 4.9 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.2, Page No.123) 
Incumbency in the post of Commissioner and Finance Member of BDA during 
the period 1999-2014 
 
Sl.No. Name 
(Sri/Smt) From To 
 Commissioner   
1 Lakshmi Venkatachalam 19-06-1995 25-10-1999 
2 Jayakar Jerome 25-10-1999 02-07-2004 
3 A K Agarwal 05-07-2004 12-07-2004 
4 M N Vidyashankar 12-07-2004 05-05-2006 
5 M K Shankaralinge Gowda 05-05-2006 17-03-2008 
6 Siddaiah 17-03-2008 01-07-2010 
7 Bharat Lal Meena 01-07-2010 04-06-2012 
8 Pradeep Singh Kharola 04-06-2012 29-08-2012 
9 T. Sham Bhat 29-08-2012 till date 
 Finance Member   
1 Sandeep Dash 12-05-1997 10-05-2005 
2 M N Seshappa 12-05-2005 30-06-2008 
(date of 
superannuation) 
3 L Narasimha Murthy, CAO (Incharge) 01-07-2008 10-11-2008 
4 R  Maheshwarappa 10-11-2008 19-07-2011 
5 L Narasimha Murthy, CAO (Incharge) 20-07-2011 07-12-2011 
6 Ganganna 08-12-2011 30-06-2014 
(date of 
superannuation) 
 
After his tenure was over as FM in B DA, Sri Sandeep Dash was appointed as 
Executive Director (Finance) BMRCL on deputation with effect from 11 May 
2005. 
Bank accounts operated by the FMs 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2, Page No.133) 
Name of the FM Current Accounts operated Remarks 
Sri. Sandeep Dash 
 
CA No 239,1518,1549 and 1562 
at Indian Overseas Bank, 
Kumara Park West, Bengaluru 
Though these current accounts 
(except CA 1549) had been in 
operation for other purposes, they 
were nevertheless operated for 
diverting funds to Mutual Funds. 
CA No 2001 and 2108 at 
Canara Bank, BDA Complex, 
Bengaluru 
Sri. M.N.Seshappa 
 
CA No 239, 1680 and 1787 at 
Indian Overseas Bank, Kumara 
Park West, Bengaluru 
CA 1680, 1787 and 42 had been 
unauthorisedly opened by Sri 
M.N.Seshappa at the respective 
banks on 17.02.2006, 07.05.2008 
and 08.05.2006 respectively. 
CA No 42 at Corporation Bank, 
Kumara Park West, Bengaluru 
Sri. B.Ganganna 
 
CA No 239, and 1787 at Indian 
Overseas Bank, Kumara Park 
West, Bengaluru. 
Sri B.Ganganna continued to 
operate CA 1787 which had not 
been closed by Sri M.N.Seshappa 
(Source: Information collected from respective banks and BDA) 
  

Appendices 
199 
Appendix-4.10(a) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.1(a), Page No.128) 
Statement showing details of Collection Accounts of IOB and Canara Bank not 
disclosed in Annual Accounts of BDA 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Indian Overseas Bank Sl. 
No. 
Indian Overseas Bank 
Branch Account No Branch Account No 
1 BSK II Stage 422 48 HSR Layout 111 
2 BSK II Stage 420 49 HSR Layout 555 
3 BSK II Stage 465 50 Bannerghatta Road 1100 
4 Cantonment 5022 51 Bannerghatta Road 1101 
5 Cantonment 6839 52 Bannerghatta Road 1102 
6 Malleshwaram 1382 53 Bannerghatta Road 340 
7 Malleshwaram 11452 54 Mahalakshmipuram 10001 
8 Residency Road 1899 55 Mahalakshmipuram 10002 
9 Bangalore City  20088 56 Mahalakshmipuram 10003 
10 Bangalore City  22221 57 Vidyaranyapuram 100 
11 Bangalore City  22220 58 Vidyaranyapuram 101 
12 Bangalore City  20087 59 Vidyaranyapuram 102 
13 Bangalore City  22223 60 Nagashettihally 10000 
14 Bangalore City  20089 61 Nagashettihally 10001 
15 Shanthi Nagar 4444 62 J P Nagar 2001 
16 Shanthi Nagar 6666 63 J P Nagar 2002 
17 Indira Nagar 4002 64 J P Nagar 2003 
18 Indira Nagar 4003 65 Shanthinagar 2280 
19 Indira Nagar 4001 66 Shanthinagar 2281 
20 Bilekahally 444 67 Shanthinagar 2282 
21 Bilekahally 445 68 Cantonment 7219 
22 Koramangala 1112 69 Cantonment 7220 
23 Koramangala 1113 70 Cantonment 7221 
24 Koramangala 1114 71 Bommanahalli 875 
25 Koramangala 2002 72 Bommanahalli 876 
26 Koramangala 2003 73 Koramangala 3333 
27 Koramangala 2001 74 Bangalore City 22222 
28 HRBR Layout 200 75 Chikkabidarakallu 352 
29 HRBR Layout 300 76 HSR Layout 222 
30 HRBR Layout 400   
31 Jayanagar 5010   
32 Jayanagar 5020   
33 Kanakapura Road 5002   
34 Kanakapura Road 5001   
35 Kanakapura Road 5004   
36 Kanakapura Road 5005   
37 Koramangala 1111   
38 Koramangala 2222   
39 Malleswaram 11453   
40 Malleswaram 10001   
41 Malleswaram 10002   
42 Malleswaram 10003   
43 Yelahanka 2000   
44 Yelahanka 2001   
45 Yelahanka 2002   
46 Chikkabidarakallu 350   
47 Chikkabidarakallu 351   

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
200 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. Canara Bank Sl. 
No. Canara Bank Sl. 
No. Canara Bank Sl. 
No. Canara Bank 
1.  0403201001630 52.  0448201001647 103. 0681201002821 154.  1812201000753 
2.  0403201002105 53.  0471201200386 104. 0681201002822 155.  1812201000754 
3.  0403201002106 54.  0471201200387 105. 0690201001143 156.  1821201000821 
4.  0403201002112 55.  0471201200388 106. 0768201011856 157.  1821201000822 
5.  0403201003101 56.  0472201001184 107. 0768201011857 158.  1821201000823 
6.  0403201003102 57.  0473201001784 108. 0768201011858 159.  2433201000967 
7.  0403201003103 58.  0473201001785 109. 0791201006790 160.  2433201000968 
8.  0404201012057 59.  0473201001786 110. 0791201006791 161.  2433201000969 
9.  0404201012058 60.  0479201001857 111. 0791201006792 162.  2456201001015 
10.  0404201012059 61.  0479201001858 112. 0797201000853 163.  2456201001016 
11.  0405201002130 62.  0479201001859 113. 0797201000854 164.  2456201001017 
12.  0405201002131 63.  0487201001236 114. 0883201001463 165.  2513106006359 
13.  0405201002134 64.  0487201001237 115. 0883201001464 166.  2513106006360 
14.  0406101000053 65.  0487201001238 116. 0883201001465 167.  2513106006361 
15.  0406101000054 66.  0502201001963 117. 0884201001589 168.  2513201001258 
16.  0407201000158 67.  0502201001964 118. 0884201001590 169.  2615201000298 
17.  0407201001190 68.  0502201001965 119. 0884201001591 170.  2615201000299 
18.  0407201001191 69.  0507201000981 120. 0885201000293 171.  2615201000300 
19.  0407201001192 70.  0507201000982 121. 0885201000856 172.  2673201003603 
20.  0408201001909 71.  0507201000983 122. 0885201000857 173.  2673201003715 
21.  0408201002768 72.  0513201002667 123. 0885201000858 174.  2673201003716 
22.  0408201003070 73.  0513201002668 124. 0885201001915 175.  2673201003717 
23.  0408201003825 74.  0513201002669 125. 0885201001916 176.  2753201050525 
24.  0409201004415 75.  0515201006180 126. 0885201001917 177.  2753201050526 
25.  0409201004537 76.  0515201006181 127. 0886201101955 178.  2753201050527 
26.  0409201004538 77.  0515201006182 128. 1146201007252 179.  2760201000109 
27.  0409201004539 78.  0516201002190 129. 1146201007862 180.  2760201000110 
28.  0411201004455 79.  0516201002191 130. 1146201007863 181.  2760201000111 
29.  0411201004456 80.  0516201002192 131. 1146201007864 182.  2812201000256 
30.  0411201004457 81.  0522201001639 132. 1147201000958 183.  2827201001164 
31.  0417201007247 82.  0522201001640 133. 1147201001284 184.  2850201000329 
32.  0417201007248 83.  0522201001641 134. 1147201001428 185.  2850201000330 
33.  0417201007249 84.  0523201001958 135. 1147201001429 186.  2850201000332 
34.  0425201001318 85.  0523201001959 136. 1147201001430 187.  2907201000220 
35.  0425201024708 86.  0523201001960 137. 1174201001034 188.  2907201000221 
36.  0425201024709 87.  0531201006233 138. 1333201006400 189.  2907201000222 
37.  0425201024710 88.  0531201006234 139. 1333201006401 190.  3006201000154 
38.  0430201011605 89.  0531201006235 140. 1333201006402 191.  3006201000155 
39.  0430201011610 90.  0538201001152 141. 1370201006575 192.  3006201000156 
40.  0430201011694 91.  0538201001153 142. 1370201006576 193.  3219201000317 
41.  0430201011937 92.  0538201001154 143. 1370201006577 194.  3219201000318 
42.  0430201012089 93.  0539201001346 144. 1371201002041 195.  3219201000319 
43.  0430201012299 94.  0539201001347 145. 1371201002042 196.  3246201000155 
44.  0430201012300 95.  0539201001348 146. 1371201002043 197.  3246201000156 
45.  0430201012301 96.  0546201002110 147. 1420201100247 198.  3246201000157 
46.  0432201005618 97.  0546201002111 148. 1420201100248 199.  8509201005204 
47.  0445201000904 98.  0546201002112 149. 1420201100249 200.  8509201005205 
48.  0445201000905 99.  0593201001193 150. 1425201000700 201.  8509201005206 
49.  0445201000906 100.  0593201001194 151. 1425201000701   
50.  0448201001645 101.  0593201001195 152. 1425201000702   
51.  0448201001646 102.  0681201002820 153. 1812201000752   

Appendices 
201 
Appendix-4.10(b) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.1 (a), Page No.128) 
Statement showing year-wise details of Bank Accounts not disclosed in annual 
accounts during 1999-2014  
Year Account Number 
Indian Overseas Bank Canara Bank Corporation Bank 
1999-2000 CA 1489 CA 2006 
 Account not opened / 
operated during this 
period 
  
2000-2001 
CA 1489  
CA 1504 
CA 1518  
CA 958 
2001-2002 
CA 1518  
CA 1549 
CA 1550 
CA 958 
2002-2003 CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 958 
  
2003-2004 
CA 1518 
CA 1549 
CA 1550 
CA 1554 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1584 
CA 1587 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
2004-2005 
CA 1518 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1584 
CA 1587 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 5007 
2005-2006 
CA 1518 
CA 1549 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1584 
CA 1587 
CA 2001 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
2006-2007 Nil 
 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 5014 
CA 5015 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
CA 42 
 
2007-2008 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1587 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
CA 42 
 
2008-2009 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1587 
CA 1787 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
CA 42 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
202 
Year Account Number 
Indian Overseas Bank Canara Bank Corporation Bank 
2009-2010 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1587 
CA 1787 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
 No account operated 
during this period 
  
2010-2011 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1587 
CA 1787 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
2011-2012 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1587 
CA 1787 
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
2012-2013 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1587 
CA 1787 
  
CA 5001 
CA 5002 
CA 5003 
CA 5004 
CA 5069 
CA 5070 
CA 5071 
CA 5072 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
2013-2014 
CA 1559 
CA 1560 
CA 1583 
CA 1587 
CA 1787 
CA1988 
CA 50004 
CA 50005 
CA 958 
 
  

Appendices 
203 
Appendix-4.11 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.1(a), Page No.129) 
Statement showing details of investment and redemption of Term Deposit made 
by debiting CA 1787 
(Amount in `) 
Date of 
investment 
Original TDR 
Nos Period Amount Remarks 
9.7.08 500800344 12 months 
& 1 day 
17,35,24,669   
500800345   28,79,03,286   
500800346   25,97,16,297   
500800347   26,05,16,136   
500800348   26,11,71,605   
500800349   26,16,75,066   
Total   150,45,07,059   
The maturity proceeds of the above TDs amounting to ` 166,52,05,530 were invested in 188 TDs and 
reinvested for one year and one day from 11.7.09 as detailed below 
11.7.09 500900506 to 526 12 months 
& 1 day 
18,90,00,000 90 lakh each (21 nos) 
500900527   30,60,355   
500900528 to 562   31,50,00,000 90 lakh each (35 nos) 
500900563   36,56,750   
500900564 to 594   27,90,00,000 90 lakh each (31 nos) 
500900595   84,58,863   
500900596 to 626   27,90,00,000 90 lakh each (31 nos) 
500900627   93,33,072   
500900628 to 659   28,80,00,000 90 lakh each (32 nos) 
500900660   10,69,625   
500900661 to 692   28,80,00,000 90 lakh each (32 nos) 
500900693   16,26,865   
On maturity, the proceeds of the above 188 TDs together with amount invested under TDR 500900475 to 505 
on 10.7.09 were merged and made into a single deposit for ` 208,55,36,236 as shown below 
20.7.10 501000297   208,55,36,236   
On maturity, the proceeds of ` 208,55,36,236 were bifurcated into seven deposits as shown below 
11.7.11 50100300   31,12,64,470   
50100301   31,06,65,600   
50100302   20,64,08,907 
Closed pre-maturely on 21.8.10 & 
credited to CA 239 
50100303   30,98,74,019   
50100304 
  
30,89,34,499 Closed pre-maturely on 22.11.10 & 
credited to CA 239 
50100305   34,24,63,136   
50100306 
  
29,59,25,605 Closed pre-maturely on 21.8.10 & 
credited to CA 239 
After pre-maturely closing three TDs, the remaining four TDs were renewed as follows 
18.7.11 501100959 6 months 33,24,85,486   
501100960   33,18,45,787   
501100961   33,10,00,239   
501100962   36,58,11,177   
Upon maturity, the proceeds of ` 142,73,31,250 was reinvested under four TDs on 20.1.12 as detailed below 
20.1.12 501200026 6 months 34,86,53,325 Premature part withdrawal of  
` 10,07,58,618/- on 9.2.12.  The balance 
amount of ` 25 crore was invested in five 
deposits bearing TDR numbers 
501200083 to 87 each for ` five crore for 
one year.   
 501200027   34,79,82,519 Closed on 20.3.12 & ` 35,29,82,027 
credited to CA 239 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
204 
Date of 
investment 
Original TDR 
Nos Period Amount Remarks 
501200028   34,70,95,855 Closed on 18.2.12 &  
` 34,98,42,192 credited to CA 239 
501200025   38,35,99,551 Closed on 28.4.12 &  
` 39,12,99,119 credited to CA 239 
9.2.12 501200083 Prematurely closed on 24.2.12 and credited to CA 1787 
501200084 Prematurely closed on 24.2.12 and credited to CA 1787 
501200085 Prematurely closed on 03.3.12 and credited to CA 1787 
501200086 Prematurely closed on 03.3.12 and credited to CA 1787 
501200087 Prematurely closed on 13.2.12 and credited to CA 1787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

Appendices 
205 
Appendix-4.12(a) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a) (i), Page 134) 
Outflow of funds from main CA directly to Mutual Fund 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No. 
Main CA 
debited Amount  debited Date of debit Name of  the Mutual 
fund invested 
Date of 
trading 
1 239 20,00,00,000 12/08/2000 HDFC 11/09/2000 
2 239 5,00,00,000 01/08/2001 HDFC 01/08/2001 
3 239 10,00,00,000 07/12/2001 HDFC 07/12/2001 
4 239 1,50,00,000 01/06/2000 UTI 01/06/2000 
5 239 10,00,00,000 10/12/2003 DEUTSCHE 10/12/2003 
  
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
206 
Appendix-4.12(b) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a) (i), Page 134) 
Outflow of funds from main CA to Mutual Funds through unauthorised accounts 
 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No. 
Main CA 
debited 
Amount  
debited Date of debit Unauthorised account to 
which amount credited Date of credit 
Name of  the 
Mututal fund 
invested 
Value of 
purchase 
Date of 
trading 
1 239 3,00,00,000 14/06/2007 1680 of IOB 14/06/2007 PMF 3,00,00,000 14/06/2007 
2 2001 10,00,00,000 18/05/2006 42 of Corporation Bank 18/05/2006 BSL 10,00,00,000 23/05/2006 
3 2001 25,00,00,000 20/06/2006 42 of Corporation Bank 20/06/2006 BSL 
HSBC 
10,00,00,000 
14,00,00,000
26/06/2006 
4 239 25,00,00,000 09/10/2007 42 of Corporation Bank 09/10/2007 L &T 
BSL 
10,00,00,000 
15,00,00,000
11/10/2007 
5 239 20,00,00,000 23/11/2004 1518 of IOB 23/11/2004 PMF 20,00,00,000 14/12/2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
207 
Appendix-4.12(c) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a) (i), Page 134) 
Outflow of funds from main CA to Mutual funds by crediting Term Deposit proceeds to unauthorised accounts 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No. 
Main CA 
debited 
Amount 
invested TDR No. Date of 
debit 
Unauthorised account 
to which TD proceeds 
were credited 
Date of 
credit 
Name of  the 
Mututal fund 
invested 
Value of 
purchase 
Date of 
trading 
1 239 20,00,00,000 90-94 05/07/2003 1518 31/03/2004 HDFC 20,00,00,000 13/04/2004 
2 239 25,00,00,000 381-82 
430-31 
06/10/2004 
30/10/2004 
1518 30/11/2004 PMF 20,00,00,000 14/12/2004 
3 239 70,00,00,000 383-88 
455-56 
08/10/2004 
13/11/2004 
1518 31/12/2004 PMF 30,00,00,000 05/01/2005 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
208 
Appendix-4.13(a) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a)(ii), Page 134) 
Mutual Fund redemptions credited directly to main CA 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No. Main CA no Amount 
credited 
Date of 
credit 
Name of  the 
Mutual fund 
invested 
Date of 
redemption 
1 239 2,04,85,200 10/11/2005 HDFC 08/05/2005 
2 239 9,50,00,000 11/12/2002 HDFC 09/12/2002 
3 239 5,00,81,667 12/02/2001 BSL 08/02/2001 
 
 
 
Appendix-4.13(b) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a)(ii), Page 134) 
Mutual Fund redemption amount credited to unauthorised account and subsequently transferred to main CA 239 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Mutual Fund 
Redemption 
Amount 
Date of 
Redemption 
Unauthorised account 
to which redemption  
was credited 
Amount transferred 
to main  current 
account 
Date of 
transfer 
1 PMF 20,00,48,541 18/05/2004 
27/08/2004 
03/09/2004 
14/09/2004 
1518 15,09,53,425 14/09/2004 
2 L&T 19,90,00,000 25/09/2007 
21/06/2007 
07/06/2007 
23/05/2007 
42 16,73,20,592 22/10/2007 
3 HSBC 3,00,00,000 07/08/2012 1787 2,05,66,524 28/09/2012 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
209 
Appendix-4.13(c) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a)(ii), Page 134) 
Mutual Fund redemptions credited to unauthorised accounts and again re-invested in Mutual Funds 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No.
Name of 
Mutual 
Fund 
Redemption 
Amount 
Date of 
Redemption 
Unauthorised 
account to which 
redemption  was 
credited 
Name of the 
Mutual Fund in 
which 
reinvested 
Value of 
purchase 
Date of 
trading 
1 L&T 10,64,09,046 30/06/2008 1787 HSBC 10,00,00,000 08/08/2012 
2 HSBC 9,80,14,671 24/04/2006 1680 HSBC 4,50,00,000 04/05/2006 
3 BSL 24,91,16,177 18/09/2006 42 PMF 5,00,00,000 22/09/2006 
 
 
Appendix-4.13(d) 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a)(ii), Page 134) 
Term Deposits made out of Mutual Fund redemption credited to unauthorised account and subsequently transferred to main CA 
(Amount in `) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Mutual 
Fund 
Redemption 
Amount 
Date of 
Redemption 
Unauthorised account 
to which redemption  
were credited 
Amount 
invested in 
Term Deposits 
TDR No Date of 
investment Date of credit to main CA 
1 HSBC 5,00,00,000 
3,00,00,000 
30/06/2008 1787 1,50,45,07,059 344-349 (part) 09/07/2008 These Term Deposits had 
been renewed from time to 
time and the proceeds were 
finally credited at different 
intervals between August 
2010 and March 2015 
2 BSL 5,11,23,384 30/06/2008 1787 Redemptions formed part of this investment 
3 L&T 1,17,30,663 03/07/2008 1787 
4 L&T 1,11,59,129 03/07/2008 1787 
5 L&T 2,62,58,194 03/07/2008 1787 
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
210 
Appendix-4.14 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(a)(iii), Page 135) 
Fake Term Deposits recorded in books of BDA at the time of transfer of funds from main account 
(Amount in `)  
Date of 
transfer Amount  Transferred 
from 
Details of initial 
TD recorded 
Details of further renewals 
and withdrawals 
Credit of proceeds 
Date Amount  
Account to which 
amounts were 
credited 
Source from which 
amounts were 
transferred 
17.02.2006 100000000 CA 239  TDR No.Nil  Withdr awn on 24.3.2006 25.03.2006 100443836 CA 239  CA 1680 
21.02.2006 100000000 CA 239   TDR No.Nil  Withdr awn on 29.3.2006 29.03.2006 100456165 CA 239  CA 1680 
05.04.2006 100000000 CA 239   TDR 92  Withdrawn on 20.05.2006  20.05.2006 100724658 CA 239  CA 1680 
12.04.2006 200000000 CA 239 TDRs 93 & 94  Withdraw n on 07.06.2006  07.06.2006 201449314 CA 239  CA 1680 
14.06.2007 30000000 CA 239  TDR 176  Withdrawn on 14.06.2007  14.09.2007 30448770 CA 239  CA 1680 
22.10.2007 250000000 CA 239  TDR 70153 
Renewed as TDRs 70228 / 279 
/ 348 / 628 to 660 / 301/ 960 / 
27 and withdrawn on 20.3.12 
20.03.2012 352982027 CA 239  CA 1787 
03.11.2007 250000000 CA 239 TDR 70161 
Renewed as TDRs 70229 / 271 
/ 347 / 596 to 627 / 303 / 961 / 
28 and withdrawn on 18.2.2012 
18.02.2012 349842192 CA 239  CA 1787 
26.11.2007 250000000 CA 239 TDR 70177 
Renewed as TDR 70242 / 302 / 
346 / 564 / 304  and withdrawn 
on 22.11.2010 
22.11.2010 310628233 CA 239  CA 1787 
29.04.2003 200000000 CA 239 TDRs 176-179   Withdr awn on 16.09.2003  16.09.2003 204410959 CA 239  CA 1518 
23.09.2003 250000000 CA 239 TDRs 378-79 Withdraw n on 19.12.2003 19.12.2003 252650685 CA 239  CA 1518 
26.09.2003 250000000 CA 239 TDR 380 Withdrawn on 24.12.2003 24.12.2003 252773973 CA 239  CA 1518 
30.10.2003 200000000 CA 239 TDRs 410-411  Withdrawn on 16.01.2004  16.01.2004 
504869863 CA 239  CA 1518 30.10.2003 100000000 CA 239 TDR 409 Withdrawn on 16.01.2004  16.01.2004 
30.10.2003 200000000 CA 239 TDRs 412-13  Withdrawn on 16.01.2004  16.01.2004 
28.11.2003 250000000 CA 239 TDR 471  Withdrawn on 28.01.2004  28.01.2004 251910959 CA 239  CA 1518 
28.01.2004 250000000 CA 239 TDRs 86-87  Withdrawn on 26.03.2004 26.03.2004 503606164 CA 239  CA 1518 29.01.2004 250000000 CA 239 TDR 88-89  Withdrawn on 26.03.2004 26.03.2004 
26.03.2004 400000000 CA 239 TDR 152  Withdrawn on 09.08.2004  09.08.2004 406756164 CA 239  CA 1518 
30.04.2004 400000000 CA 239 TDRs 177-181 Withdraw n on 12.08.2004  12.08.2004 455159589 CA 239  CA 1518 
28.05.2004 400000000 CA 239 TDR 216-217  Withdrawn on 04.09.2004  04.09.2004 404882191 CA 239  CA 1518 
28.08.2004 100000000 CA 239 TDR 249-250  Withdrawn on 11.10.2004  11.10.2004 100493151 CA 239  CA 1518 
29.11.2004 250000000 CA 239 TDR 471-73  Withdrawn on 04.01.2005  04.01.2005 251203767 CA 239  CA 1518 
14.12.2004 250000000 CA 239 TDR 480 Withdrawn on 02.02.2005 02.02.2005 251691781 CA 239  CA 1518 
12.05.2006 150000000 CA 2001 TDR 980773  Renewed as TDRs 930860 / 21.08.2010 206756692 CA 239  CA 1787 

Appendices 
211 
Date of 
transfer Amount  Transferred 
from 
Details of initial 
TD recorded 
Details of further renewals 
and withdrawals 
Credit of proceeds 
Date Amount  
Account to which 
amounts were 
credited 
Source from which 
amounts were 
transferred 
06/81 / 70032 / 70062 / 70131 / 
70216 / 70215 / 237 / 344 / 
506-527 / 302  and withdrawn 
on 21.8.2010  
18.05.2006 100000000 CA 2001 TDR 984785  
Renewed as TDRs 930873 / 
06/84 / 70033 / 70063 / 70135 / 
70217 / 70219 / 256 / 350 / 
1091-1105 / 296 / 930 / 534 / 
603 and TD was not adjusted, 
but remained outstanding 
- - - - 
20.06.2006 250000000 CA 2001 TDR 06/55  
Renewed as TDRs 06/71 / 
70014 / nil / 70068 / nil / 70229 
/ 70228 / 274 / 345 / 528-563 / 
305 / 962 / 25 and withdrawn 
on 28.4.12 
28.04.2012 391299119 CA 239  CA 1787 
18.12.2006 100000000 CA 2001 TDR 07/71  Withdraw n on 08.1.2007 08.01.2007 100208220 CA 2001 CA 42 
29.08.2003 170000000 CA 239 TDR 344-346   Withdraw n on 04.12.2003  04.12.2003 172053973 CA 239  CA 1518 
27.11.2003 240000000 CA 239 TDR 470  Withdrawn on 22.01.2004  22.01.2004 241686575 CA 239  CA 1518 
04.12.2003 200000000 CA 239 TDR 474-475  Withdrawn on 29.01.2004  29.01.2004 201405480 CA 239  CA 1518 
05.12.2003 200000000 CA 239 TDR 476-477  Withdraw n on 05.02.2004 05.02.2004 201553425 CA 239  CA 1518 
19.12.2003 250000000 CA 239 TDR 500-504  Withdrawn on 05.02.2004  05.02.2004 251510274 CA 239  CA 1518 
29.12.2003 360000000 CA 239 TDR 506-509  Withdrawn on 30.04.2004  30.04.2004 365503562 CA 239  CA 1518 
30.12.2003 250000000 CA 239 TDR 510-514  Withdraw n on 05.05.2004 05.05.2004 253945205 CA 239  CA 1518 
05.02.2004 450000000 CA 239 
TDR 95 for `20 
crore and TDR 
96 for `25 crore 
Withdrawn on 08.04.2004 08.04.2004 453495205 CA 239  CA 1518 
13.02.2004 50000000 CA 239 TDR 110  Withdrawn on 19.05.2004 19.05.2004 50591781 CA 239  CA 1518 
19.03.2004 500000000 CA 239 TDR 141-142  Withdrawn on 28.05.2004  28.05.2004 504315068 CA 239  CA 1518 
26.03.2004 200000000 CA 239 TDR 151  Withdrawn on 09.08.2004  09.08.2004 203378082 CA 239  CA 1518 
10.04.2004 500000000 CA 239 TDR 171-175  Withdraw n on 10.08.2004 10.08.2004 507705479 CA 239  CA 1518 
30.04.2004 50000000 CA 239 TDR 190  Withdrawn on 12.08.2004  12.08.2004 455159589 CA 239  CA 1518 
06.05.2004 250000000 CA 239 TDR 190-192  Withdrawn on 03.09.2004  03.09.2004 253698630 CA 239  CA 1518 
28.05.2004 350000000 CA 239 TDR 215  Withdrawn on 03.09.2004  03.09.2004 354228767 CA 239  CA 1518 
28.05.2004 400000000 CA 239 TDR 216-217  Withdrawn on 04.09.2004  04.09.2004 404882191 CA 239  CA 1518 
09.08.2004 250000000 CA 239 TDR 226-230  Withdrawn on 16.09.2004  16.09.2004 251068493 CA 239  CA 1518 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
212 
Date of 
transfer Amount  Transferred 
from 
Details of initial 
TD recorded 
Details of further renewals 
and withdrawals 
Credit of proceeds 
Date Amount  
Account to which 
amounts were 
credited 
Source from which 
amounts were 
transferred 
09.08.2004 400000000 CA 239 TDRs 311-314  Withdraw n on 29.09.2004  29.09.2004 402279452 CA 239  CA 1518 
10.08.2004 500000000 CA 239 TDRs 235-239  Withdraw n on 08.10.2004  08.10.2004 503287671 CA 239  CA 1518 
10.08.2004 200000000 CA 239 TDRs 231-234  Withdr awn on 01.10.2004 01.10.2004 201161644 CA 239  CA 1518 
13.08.2004 150000000 CA 239 TDRS 242-244  Withdraw n on 11.10.2004  11.10.2004 150986301 CA 239  CA 1518 
31.08.2004 180000000 CA 239 TDRs 253-255  Withdr awn on 12.10.2004 12.10.2004 180848219 CA 239  CA 1518 
04.09.2004 200000000 CA 239 TDR 333-334  Withdraw n on 04.11.2004 04.11.2004 201358904 CA 239  CA 1518 
03.09.2004 600000000 CA 239 TDRs 327 to 332  
TDR 327-328 w/d on 15.10.04 / 
TDR 329-330 w/d on 20.10.04 / 
TDR 331-332 w/d on 28.10.04  
15.10.2004 / 
20.10.2004 / 
28.10.2004 
200942466 / 
201052055 / 
201227397 
CA 239  CA 1518 
23.11.2005 200000000 CA 239 TDR 469-470  Withdrawn on 03.01.2005  03.01.2005 201093151 CA 239  CA 1518 
04.01.2005 250000000 CA 239 TDR 03 Withdrawn on 21.04.2005 21.04.2005 253546233 CA 239  CA 1518 
05.01.2005 250000000 CA 239 TDR 04  Withdrawn on 23.04.2005 23.04.2005 253546233 CA 239  CA 1518 
02.02.2005 250000000 CA 239 TDR 76  Withdrawn on 23.04.2005  23.04.2005 252667808 CA 239  CA 1518 
08.02.2005 50000000 CA 239 TDR 84  Withdrawn on 21.04.2005  21.04.2005 50481507 CA 239  CA 1518 
01.03.2005 50000000 CA 239 TDR 108  Withdrawn on 21.04.2005 21.04.2005 50338356 CA 239  CA 1518 
23.04.2005 350000000 CA 239 TDR 191  Withdrawn on 06.05.2005  06.05.2005 350865411 CA 239  CA 1518 
23.04.2005 250000000 CA 239 TDR 192  Withdrawn on 12.05.2005  12.05.2005 250618150 CA 239  CA 1518 
25.04.2005 250000000 CA 239 TDR 199  Withdrawn on 12.05.2005  12.05.2005 250553082 CA 239  CA 1518 
30.04.2005 800000000 CA 239 TDRs 210-217  Withdraw n on 30.06.2005  30.06.2005 806142472 CA 239  CA 1518 
19.07.2004 150000000 CA 1562 TDR No. Nil  Withdrawn on 14.09.2004  14.09.2004 150953425 CA 239  CA 1518 
23.11.2004 200000000 CA 1562 TDRs 469-70,  Withdraw n on 3.1.05  03.01.2005 201093151 CA 239  CA 1518 
 

Appendices 
 
213 
Appendix-4.15 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.5.2(b), Page 136) 
Case study on the concealment of unauthorised transaction in CA 
1562 disclosed in the accounts of BDA 
CA 1562 which had been opened on 30 D ecember 2002 for making payments related 
to land acquisition and closed on 29 April 2006 had been disclosed in the accounts. 
Cheque book facility had been availed of for this account. This account had been 
opened by transferring  `10,000 and `70 crore on 30 December 2002 from the main 
current account with IOB viz. CA 239.   
As this account had been disclosed in  the annual accounts, all the transactions 
reflected in the pass sheet of this account should be recorded in the accounts.  Though 
funds from this account had been transf erred to Mutual Funds and redemption 
payouts from Mutual Funds had also been credited to this account, these transactions 
had been kept out of the accounts by manipulating the monthly closing balance in this 
account to agree with the closing balance as per accounts as illustrated in Table-A. 
Table : A: Manipulation of monthly closing balance  
(Amount in `)  
Month Opening 
balance Debits Credits Closing balance 
January 2003 70,00,10,000.00 75,02,35,301.23 75,02,35,301.23 70,00,10,000.00 
February 2003 70,00,10,000.00 50,00,04,424.26 50,00,04,424.26 70,00,10,000.00 
March 2003 70,00,10,000.00 60,00,00,000.00 60,00,00,000.00 70,00,10,000.00 
April 2003 70,00,10,000.00 70,00,00,000.00 70,00,00,000.00 70,00,10,000.00 
May 2003 70,00,10,000.00 60,00,00,000.00 60,00,00,000.00 70,00,10,000.00 
June 2003 70,00,10,000.00 70,00,00,000.00 70,00,00,000.00 70,00,10,000.00 
As the totals of debits and credits matche d, all the transactions in CA 1562 during the 
month had not been disclosed in the accounts. 
Such manipulation continued till December  2004. The manipulation to match the 
closing balance was done either by transferring funds from CA 239 which had been 
falsely recorded as TDs in accounts or by transferring funds from CA 1518 to the 
required extent. IOB facilitated in manipula ting the closing balance as illustrated in 
Table-B.  
 
Table- B: Manipulation of monthly closing balance  
(Amount in `)  
Month Opening Balance Debit Credit Closing balance Remarks 
January 2003 
January 2003 70,00,10,000.00    Payout cheque of  
`29,97,64,698.77 was 
credited on 30th 
January .  The 
differential amount of 
`2,35,301.23 required 
to maintain the closing 
balance at 
`70,00,10,000 was 
transferred from CA 
385 without any 
authorisation. 
`2,35,301.23 was 
recouped to CA 385 
after crediting another 
payout cheque 
 
January 7 To Trf  25,00,00,000.00   
January 9 To Trf  25,00,00 ,000.00 25,00,00,000.00  
January 10 To 
Trf 
 25,00,00,000.00   
January 29 By 
Clg 
  20,00,00,000.00  
January 30 By 
CA 385 
  2,35,301.23  
By clearing   29,97,64,698.77  
January 31 To 
Trf CA 385 
 2,35,301.23   
By clearing   2,35,301.23 70,00,10,000.00 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
214 
Month Opening Balance Debit Credit Closing balance Remarks 
February 2003
February 2003 70,00,10,000.00. 00    After affording a 
credit of 
`30,00,04,424.26 to 
CA 1562, the bank 
transferred  `4,424.26 
back to Sundry 
Creditors to maintain 
the closing balance at  
`70,00,10,000. 
February 5  To 
Trf 
 50,00,00,000.00   
February 26  By 
Clg 
  20,00,00,000.00  
February 27 By 
Clg 
  30,00,04,424.26  
February 27 To 
Amount 
transferred to 
Sundry Creditor 
account 
 4,424.26  70,00,10,000.00.00 
March 2003 
March 2003 70,00,10,000.00    Though the 
redemption cheque 
was for 
`30,06,05,808.06 the 
bank credited partial 
amount of `30 crore 
on 19 March and the 
balance was retained 
in Sundry Creditors. 
The balance amount 
was credited on 25 
March along with 
three other 
instruments received 
on different dates. 
Details of these 
transactions are 
indicated in the table- 
C below 
Thus the closing 
balance of the account 
remained at the same 
level. 
March 4    To 
Trf 
 60,00,00,000.00   
March 19    By 
Trf 
  30,00,00,000.00  
March 21    By 
Trf 
  8,85,08,925.65  
March 21    By 
Trf 
  19,14,91,074.35  
March 25    By 
Trf 
  2,00,00,000.00 70,00,10,000.00 
Table C -Details of amounts retained in Sundry Creditors by IOB 
Details for the credit for `two crore Amount (`) 
Date on which the 
cheque had been 
initially cleared 
Redemption payout cheque from Birla Sun Life Mutual Fund 1,07,57,298.24 25 March 2003 
 
Against the cheque amount of   `9,71,41,395.09 only 
`8,85,08,925.65 was credited on 21.3.2003.  The balance amount 
retained in Sundry Creditors was released on 25.3.2003 
86,32,469.44 21 March 2003 
Amount retained in Sundry Creditors as discussed now credited 6,05,808.06 19 March 2003 
Amount written back to Sundry Creditors on 27 February 2003 as 
discussed earlier now credited 
4,424.26 27 February 2003 
Thus, IOB unjustifiably retained the amounts of the cheques in Sundry Creditors after 
they had been cleared and the amounts so retained were credited to CA 1562 as and 
when found necessary to match the closing balance of  `70,00,10,000.00.  
Further, this manipulation compromised transparency as it destroyed the trail of 
transactions.   When Audit tried to trace th e redemption payout cheques issued by the 
Fund Houses to CA 1562, it was impossible to match the cheque amount with the 
credit afforded in the pass sh eet.  Only after collecting the credit details from IOB, 
Audit could match the cheques with the credits. 

Appendices 
 
215 
Appendix-4.16 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.4, Page-149) 
Statement showing the excess payment made to the NGOs against the recommendations of the taluk level committees 
(Amount in `.) 
 
 
Sl. 
No Name of the NGO Year 
Releases by GOI Amount actually paid to NGOs including 
Student component 
Amount payable to NGOs as per Proforma 
submitted by Taluk level Committee Excess 
payment Number 
of 
teachers 
Amount Student 
component Total Teacher 
component 
Student 
component Total 
Number 
of 
teachers 
Teacher 
component 
Student 
component Total 
1 Sri Lakshmi 
Narasimhaswamy Mahila 
Vidys Samsthe, Koratagere 
2011-12 5 750192 54300 804492 750192 10400 760597 1 150038 10400 160438 600159 
2 Sri Rajatadri Parivarthana 
Education  and welfare 
Association, Bellary  
2009-10 2 246222 16400 262622* 246222 10000 256222 0 0 0 0 256222 
3 Sri Ajjeswara Seva 
Samithi, Ron, Gadag 2011-12 10 1635810 142000 1578500* 1457500 121000 1578500 9 1338390 121000 1459390 119110 
4 Sri Viswabharati 
Shikshana Samsthe, 
Raichur 
2011-12 39 6700846 686250 7387096 6700846 656650 7357496 25 4295500  656650 4952150 2405346 
5 Kalikamba Vidyasamsthe, 
Soraba Taluk, Shivamogga 2011-12 5 1778662 69500 986568*   1802662 10 1486000 24000 1486000 316662 
6 Naradamuni Seva Samsthe, 
Davanagere 2009-10 12 651000 16400 262222* 520800 12960 533760 2 260400 12960 273360 260400 
7 Gnanasangama Rural and 
urban development 
organisation, Honnali 
2011-12 19 2825490 217600 3043090 2349760 59200 2408960 6 892260 59200 951460 1457500 
8 Sri Mayammadevi Rural 
vidyasamsthe, Davangere 2011-12 17 2934116 169000 3103116 1898543 83137 1981680 8 1380800 83137 1463937 517743 
9 Karnataka rural 
development society, 
Chikkodi 
 
2011-12 24 3569040 343276 3912316* 3569040 343276 3912316 8 1189680 343476 1532956 2379360 
10 
 
Vinayaka Sikshana 
Samsthe, Bijapur 2011-12 16 2379360 244900 2624260 2379360 284000 2597760 
49   7286790 614000 7900790 3877245 Vinayaka sikshanasamsthe, 
Bijapur 2011-12 49 9034656 630000 9664656 8850275 330000 9180275 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
216 
   * Though the Government of India had restricted the grants, the State Government released excess amount of `13.33 lakh to the NGOs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No Name of the NGO Year 
Releases by GOI Amount actually paid to NGOs including 
Student component 
Amount payable to NGOs as per Proforma 
submitted by Taluk level Committee Excess 
payment Number 
of 
teachers 
Amount Student 
component Total Teacher 
component 
Student 
component Total 
Number 
of 
teachers 
Teacher 
component 
Student 
component Total 
11 Nava vasantha Association 
for rehabilitation of 
disabled, Bhadravathi 
2009-10 3 390600 48512 439112* 260400 24056 284456 1 130200 24056 154256 130200 
12  
Sri Lakshmi 
Narasimhaswamy, Mahila 
Samsthe, Koratagere 
2009-10 5 631000 51000 682000* - - 645600 4 122500 33100 155600 490000 
13 Spandana Grameena 
Abhivriddhi Samsthe, 
Holehonnur, Shimoga 
2011-12 9 1514580 119350 1633930 1009720 24000 1033720 4 673147 24000 697147 336573 
14 Sinchana Rural and Urban 
development Society, 
Gadag, Belgaum branch 
 
2011-12 118 17547780 1571600 19119380 13532610 21690 13554300 69 10260990 21690 10282680 3271620 
15 Chetana Sikshana 
Samsthe, Bangalore  
 
2011-12 26 5532000 
 531429 6063429* 5532000 531500 6063430 21 4468149 531500 4999649 1063781 
16 Arunodaya Education 
Society, Bangarpet, Kolar 2009-10 3 382600 15200 397800* 382600 20800 397800 1 127533 78000 205533 197867 
17 Sri Anukarane 
VidyaSamsthe, 
Sakelshapura, Hassan. 
2011-12 2 301400 36550 337950*   337950 1 150043 29000 179043 158907 
18 Sri Mayammadevi Rural 
vidyasamsthe, Davangere 2009-10 6 781200 61510 842710* 781200 13100 794300 1 130200 13100 143300 651000 
Total excess payment 18489695 

Appendices 
 
217 
Appendix-4.17 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.4, Page-149) 
Statement showing irregular payments made to the NGOs 
Name of the NGO Total payments made to the 
NGO (` in lakh) Remarks 
Panchajanya Seva Samasthe, 
Jevargi 
19.32 As against the recommendation of the three men 
committee that no grants may be released, 
payments were made on a separate set of 
recommendation in which details such as date of 
inspection, the name of inspection team 
members etc. were not recorded 
Association for Rehabilitation 
of Disabled, Gangavathi 
8.10 The committee without actu al verification of the 
activities of the NGO, permitted the release 
based only on the certificat e of the principal of 
the school. 
Vernekar Education Society, 
BTS Layout, Bangalore 
0.69 The reimbursement was made even though the 
committee had not visited the schools and 
certified the conduct of activities by the NGO 
Sangram Education Society, 
Bidar 
5.33 
Total 33.44  
 
 
 

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
218 
 
Appendix-4.18 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.7, Page-154) 
Details of irregular salary benefits 
 
Cadre 
Number of 
persons granted 
higher scale 
Period from 
which 
higher scale 
granted 
Time scale 
of pay 
drawn 
Higher time 
scale of pay 
granted 
Second 
Division Clerk 
2 1975-76 90-200 130-290 
3 1979-80 300-700 400-900 
1 1989-90 810-1,310 1,190-2,200 
Typist 1 1984-85 490-950 630-1,200 
8 1989-93 960-1,760 1,190-2,200 
Junior Works 
Inspector 
1 1980-81 300-700 400-900 
5 1982-84 490-950 630-1,200 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
219 
Appendix-4.19 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12, Page-162) 
Excess payment of compensation for construction of road on land not acquired 
(Extent of land in Sq metres; Amount: ` in lakh) 
Sl.No. in 
Tab-1 
Extent of land 
utilised (in sq 
m) 
Date of 
allotment 
Extent of land 
allotted as 
compensation 
(in sq metres) 
Compensation  
to be paid if 
land was 
acquired 
Cost to the 
Authority in 
respect of 
compensation 
through allotment 
Loss to the 
Authority 
 
Remarks 
1 11,129.25 April 
2010 and 
July 2014 
8,784.00 17.40 2,269.12 2251.72 Value of  
alternative land allotted is equal 
to value of land lost 
2 639.42 June 2013 324.00  1.00 82.59 81.59 Value for excess land of 4.29 sq 
m allotted was paid by the 
allottee 
3 2,225.85 April 
2013 
1,114.80 3.48 287.50 284.02 Value for 1.88 sq m of land was 
paid by allottee 
4 657.63 July 2012 360 1.02 77.74 76.72 Value for excess land of 31.19 sq 
m allotted was paid by the 
allottee 
5 3,338.77 June 2013 1,621.86 5.22 418.97 413.75  
6 1,212.42 June 2013 640.14 0.97 163.15 162.18 Value for excess land of 33.93 sq 
m allotted was paid by the 
allottee 
 Total   29.09 3,299.07 3,269.98  
 
  

Report No.1 of the year 2016 
220 
Appendix 4.20 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12, Page-163) 
Excess payment of compensation towards construction of road on land deleted from final notification 
 
(Extent of land in sq metres; `in lakh) 
Sl. No. in 
Tab-2 
Extent of 
land utilised 
(in sq m) 
Date of 
allotment 
Extent of land 
allotted as 
compensation 
(in sq metres) 
Compensation  
to be paid if 
entire land 
utilised was 
acquired 
Cost to the 
Authority in 
respect of 
compensation 
through allotment 
Loss to the 
Authority Remarks 
1 627.28 March 2013 648.00 1.96 162.04 160.8 Excess allotment of land 
measuring 20.72 sq m was paid 
by the land owner. 
2 1,011.75 August 2012 1,080.00 3.26 261.36 258.10 Excess allotment of land 
measuring 68.25 sq m was paid 
by the land owner. 
3 556.46 November 
2012 
360.00 0.89 71.89 71.00 Excess allotment of land 
measuring 81.77 sq m was paid 
by the land owner. 
4 834.69 April-May 
2012 
468 1.30 107.77 106.47 Excess allotment of land 
measuring 50.66 sq m was paid 
by the land owner. 
 Total  2,556 7.41 603.06 596.37  
 
  

Appendices 
221 
Appendix-4.21 
(Reference: Paragraph-4.12, Page-165) 
Liability of the Authority towards payment of compensation 
(Amount in `; area of land in sft) 
Area and Survey No. 
Date of 
Board 
Resolution 
Guidance Value  
(`/Sft) Ratio 
Total area 
utilised by 
the 
Authority 
Area to be 
allotted as 
per ratio 
Land 
already 
allotted  
Balance 
land to 
be 
allotted 
present 
guidance 
value 
Cost to the 
Board BDA DC 
Converted 
Giddada Konenahalli - 27 2012 1200 1000 0. 8333 23958.00 19965.00 11979.00 2508.07 2400 19166400 
Mallathahalli-83 2011 1300 1000 0.7692 35937. 00 27643.85 17456.93 15664.85 2400 24448598.8 
Ullalu-169/1 2008 900 950 1.0556 6882.48 7264.84 3441.24 3823.60 2400 9176640 
Giddada Konenahalli - 23 2008 800 800 1. 0000 7078.50 7078.50 3539.25 3539.25 2400 8494200 
Nagadevanahalli-53 2010 1000 800 0.8000 13050.00 10440.00 6525.00 3915.00 2500 9787500 
Ramasandra-29/1 2010 800 600 0.7500 13503. 60 10127.70 6751.80 3375.90 2400 8102160 
Manganahalli-35 2008 700 550 0.7857 21780. 00 17112.86 10890.00 6222.86 2400 14934857.1 
Sonenahalli-14 2008 900 700 0.7778 5989.50 4658.50 2994.75 1663.75 2400 3993000 
Kengeri-209 2008 1000 800 0.8000 8984. 25 7187.40 4492.12 2695.28 2400 6468672 
Nagadevanahalli-10/5 2008 1000 800 0.8000  19602.00 15681.60 9801.00 5880.60 2500 14701500 
Gubbalala 39/2 2006 800 700 0.8750 54450. 00 47643.75 27225.00 20418.75 2200 44921250 
Total                   164194778 
 
 