  iii iii 
PREFACE 
 
 
This Report (No.14 of 2011-12- Performance Audit for the year ended 31 March 
2010) has been prepared for submission to  the President unde r Article 151 (1) of 
the Constitution of India.  The report cont ains results of the review of Security 
Management in Indian Railways.   
The observations included in  this Report have been ba sed on the findings of the 
test-audit conducted during 2009-10 as well as  the results of audit conducted in 
earlier years, which could not be included in the previous Reports. 
. 
 
 
  

 iv iv 
Abbreviations used in the Report 
 
 
IR Indian Railways 
CR Central Railway 
ER Eastern Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
ECoR East Coast Railway 
NR Northern Railway 
NCR North Central Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NFR Northeast Frontier Railway 
NWR North Western Railway 
SR Southern Railway 
SCR South Central Railway 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SECR South East Central Railway 
SWR South Western Railway 
WR Western Railway 
WCR West Central Railway 
RPU Railway Production Units 
FIR First Information Report 
RPF Railway Protection Force 
GRP Government Railway Police 
 
 

  iii iii 
PREFACE 
 
 
This Report (No.14 of 2011-12- Performance Audit for the year ended 31 March 
2010) has been prepared for submission to  the President unde r Article 151 (1) of 
the Constitution of India.  The report cont ains results of the review of Security 
Management in Indian Railways.   
The observations included in  this Report have been ba sed on the findings of the 
test-audit conducted during 2009-10 as well as  the results of audit conducted in 
earlier years, which could not be included in the previous Reports. 
. 
 
 
  

Security Management in Indian Railway 
 
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) v v 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
I Security Scenario on Indian Railways 
Incidents of sabotage on the Indian Railways (IR) have increased in frequency 
and intensity in the last five years. This  along with frequent disruptions in rail 
traffic during agitations has seriously affected the public’s faith in the Railway 
system to provide basic security to its passengers. The rail network spread 
over 64015 route kilometres with 7030 stations traverses both dense urban 
areas and sparsely populated rural area s and forest which are difficult to 
secure.  The expenditure per passenger on security worked out to only `2.86 
approximately for 2009-10. 
Traditionally, the Railway Protection Force has been responsible for the 
security of railway assets and the state government for the enforcement of law 
and order. They are responsible for the security of passengers and their 
belongings as also that of trains, tracks, bridges and railway premises against 
sabotage. The state government is repr esented by the Government Railway 
Police in stations and trains and by the state police outside the station 
premises. The security of passengers and passenger area was also entrusted to 
the Railway Protection Force in 2003 through an amendment. The main 
purpose behind the amendment of the RPF Act was to supplement the efforts 
of the state governments for ensuring security of passengers. 
II Why did we take  up this Audit? 
The terrorist attack at Mumbai Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminal (Mumbai CST) 
in November 2008 and a couple of major incidents of sabotage in the recent 
past including the derailment of the Jnaneswari Express in May 2010 (which 
resulted in the death of 150 passengers) highlight the problems of railway 
security. The number of accidents on Indian Railways attributed to sabotage 
increased from six in 2005-06 to fourteen in 2009-10.  In view of the increased 
security threat, Audit felt it necessary to assess the security concerns of Indian 
Railways. 
Security Management in Indian Railways was earlier reviewed by Audit and 
results included in Paragraph 2.2 of Report No.9 of 2000 (Railways) of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India.  In this report, Audit had 
highlighted the need to evolve a unified overseeing arrangement which is 
absent as RPF, an armed force under the control of the Railways was mainly 
concerned with protection of railway properties.  On the other hand the State 
Government is responsible for maintaining law and order. The Report 
emphasised that the system of coordination that existed on paper between RPF 
and GRP at the operating level and between the Railway Administration and 
state governments at headquarters level has been weak in implementation. The 
current Report reveals that many of the issues pointed in the earlier Audit 
Report still persist. 

Security Management in Indian Railway 
 
Report No.14 of 2011-12 (Railways) vi vi vi 
 
III Current Report  
This Performance Audit was aimed at evaluating the existing system for 
securing passengers and Railway property viz. tracks, bridges as well as other 
fixed structures including office buildi ngs, stations etc. This Performance 
Audit also analyses the strategy to cont rol crimes at railway stations and in 
running trains. It also assesses the preparedness of the Indian Railways to 
handle the enhanced threat environment. 
This Performance Audit revealed that co-ordination between the RPF and the 
State Government is inadequate leading to large gaps in the security system of 
the Railways.  The issue of inter-agency coordination had also been 
highlighted in earlier Audit Report on Security management.     
There is a distinct lack of security consciousness on the part of the Railway 
Administration, despite recommendations of the High Level Committee on 
Composite Security Plan. Adequate efforts have not been made to control 
access to railway stations and to decongest even sensitive high risk station, 
unnecessarily increasing the security risk as in almost all the 74 stations test 
checked entry into the station premises was unrestricted because of multiple 
entry/exit points.  The Integrated Security System (ISS) formulated in July 
2008 still remains to be implemented in any of the zones (March 2011).  
Progress on installation of state of the art electronic surveillance system viz 
Door Frame Metal Detectors (DFMDs) and baggage scanners, has been slow 
and not up to international standards.  Majority of trains were run without 
escort and in a number of cases the escort party was unarmed.   
Crime against passengers has  increased by 15 per cent during the last five 
years. Further, registration of crime committed on moving trains is plagued by 
number of problems. FIR forms were still not available with coach attendants, 
conductors and guards of several trains.  Further, non registration of cases 
received from other State GRPs, general reluctance to take up investigations 
and considerable overlap of functions existing between the RPF and the State 
Government agencies handling Railway security has made it difficult to 
complete the legal formalities besides adding to victim’s problems 
Indian Railways has also failed to formulate any composite plan in 
consultation with the State Governments for ensuring security of its assets.  
Crime rate witnessed a distinct rise in the last five years.  Deployment of RPF 
at Railway Stations, trains and Goods shed/Yards has not been modified 
despite a considerable increase in crime rate at these places.   
Railway tracks are one of the most important Railway assets and their security 
is of prime importance for securing rail tr affic.  Security of tracks and bridges 
is the responsibility of State Governments.  As a precautionary measure the 
Railway Administration carries out patrolling of track in sabotage prone 
areas.  However, patrolling of track was being carried out sporadically on the 
basis of threat perception and availabi lity of manpower.  The State Police 
have been frequently unsuccessful in preventing large scale disruption to rail 

Security Management in Indian Railway 
 
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) vii vii 
traffic during the periods of agitation by specific groups like the Gujjar 
agitation and the recent Jat agitation.   
Security related crisis on the railways call for better co-ordinating 
arrangement with other agencies for their expertise to deal with disaster like 
situation.  Control rooms with communication facilities remained to be 
provided (June 2010) in all divisions of three zones (NR, ER and WR).   
There was shortage of manpower to the extent of 13.16 per cent in security 
forces.  The IR failed to redeploy man power prioritizing core operations 
which could have reduced the requirement of additional manpower. Both the 
IR and the State Governments did not respond promptly in filling up the 
existing vacancies for meeting the chal lenge of increased security threat.  
Railways were reluctant to outsource security even in non core areas to 
private agencies. The existing training facilities were frequently underutilized.   
This Performance Audit revealed the low priority attached to security by IR as 
per passenger expenditure on security is only `` 2.86.  
IV Major A udit Findings 
¾ Audit conducted across the zones indicated that the issues regarding 
inter-agency co-ordination (between the RPF and the GRP and /or 
state police) pointed out by audit in its earlier Audit Report are still 
persisting, despite remedial action taken by the Railways. The increase 
in the number of accidents due to sabotage and the recent successful 
Rail Roko agitations indicate the need for greater cooperation and 
coordination between the IR and the State Governments. 
(Para 2.3.1) 
¾ There were large gaps in the security system formulated for ensuring 
passenger security at stations. The Integrated Security System (ISS) 
formulated in July 2008 for ensuring passenger security at stations had 
large gaps. Boundary walls/fencing of railway stations and provision 
of adequate lighting at stations was excluded from its purview. The ISS 
was to be implemented on 137 station by March 2010 but still remains 
to be implemented in any of the zones (March 2011).  
(Paras 3.2.1, 3.2.3 and 3.2.5) 
¾ In the context of enlarging dimensions of terrorist threat to IR’s 
network, Security management on the IR requires a paradigm shift in 
attitude. No effort has been made to control access to stations. The 
unauthorised and/ or multiple entry /exit points on railway stations 
have not been closed. Thus, railway stations remain easily accessible 
to passengers and non-passengers alike. Even sensitive high risk 
stations, have not been decongested, unnecessarily increasing security 
risk. A test check in audit revealed that 30 per cent of the authorised 
entry points on the 74 stations checked in Audit were not guarded by 
security personnel.  Further, installation of state of the art electronic 
surveillance system had been slow and not up to international 
standards.  DFMDs and baggage scanners had not been installed at a 

Security Management in Indian Railway 
 
Report No.14 of 2011-12 (Railways) viii viii viii 
large number of exit/entry points at even the high risk stations checked 
by audit.  
(Para 3.2) 
¾ For protection of railway passengers the IR provides escorts to various 
trains. However, train escort was provided to only thirty-two per cent 
of the train services provided per day. A test check by audit revealed 
that a number of prestigious trains  like the Mumbai Rajdhani etc. and 
even some trains passing through naxalite affected/dacoity prone areas 
were unescorted. Audit observed th at even the escorted trains ran 
unprotected at several intervals. No  norms /guidelines were framed 
regarding the size of the escort party, whether it should be armed and 
which trains were to be escorted. The local Railway Administration 
decided the trains to be escorted  based on manpower availability, 
threat perception, and importance of the train.  
(Para 3.3.4) 
¾ The present mechanism for handling passenger related crime on a 
moving train is not effective as the jurisdiction of occurrence of the 
crime is not identifiable leading to problems in registering of cases. 
Despite orders of 1997, FIR forms ar e still not available with coach 
attendants, conductors and guards of several trains.  
(Paras 3.3.2) 
¾ Study conducted across the zones indicated that total crime rate has 
more than doubled in the last five years. Railway Stations, trains and 
Goods shed/Yards were found to be  most vulnerable to crime.  
However the Railway Administration failed to redeploy the RPF in 
accordance with the increase in crime rates.  
(Para 4.4.1)  
¾ Indian Railways has not formulated any composite plan in consultation 
with the state governments for ensuring safety and security of its assets 
especially tracks and bridges and Over Head Equipment (OHE).  
Instructions introducing patrolling in sabotage prone areas (February 
2003) in co-ordination with the State Government were not being 
uniformly implemented.  Further, the State Police have been frequently 
unsuccessful in preventing large scale disruption to rail traffic during 
periods of agitation.  From April to December 2010, there have been 
115 cases of ‘rail roko’ agitations, a few of which were spread over a 
period of three weeks leading to cancellation /diversion or 
rescheduling of several passenger and freight trains besides loss of 
revenue.  
(Paras 4.1.1 and 4.3) 
¾ Security related crisis on the railways calls for a better co-ordinating 
arrangement with other agencies for their expertise to handle disaster 
like situations. Audit scrutiny revealed that  full scale disaster 

Security Management in Indian Railway 
 
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) ix ix 
management exercise was not conducted in SER during 2008-10 
except once each at Hatia- Muri section and Rourkela.   
(Para 5.1) 
¾ The shortage of staff in all cate gories of railway security forces 
declined from nineteen to eleven percent during the period 2005-10.  
However, shortages in the GRP increased from six to sixteen per cent 
during the same period. Though, the number of vacancies remained 
large, no effort was made to reorganise available manpower 
prioritizing core areas. The existing training facilities were frequently 
incomplete and consequently remained underutilized.  Upgrading the 
training facilities was not given serious thought.  
(Para 5.3.1 and 5.4.2) 
V Gist of Recommendations 
¾ Indian Railways needs to evolve mechanism for effective co-ordination 
between the agencies handling Railway Security viz Railway Protection 
Force, Government Railway Police and State police. 
¾ Since the State Government is responsible for maintenance for law and 
order, an institutional mechanism need s to be evolved to ensure greater 
cooperation and coordination with the State Governments.   
¾ Urgent steps need to be taken to decongest railway stations especially 
those in sabotage prone areas and large cities. Stations need to be 
properly secured by constructing boundary wall /fencing, and restricting 
unauthorised entry.  IR needs to ensure time bound implementation of 
Integrated Security System (ISS) 
¾ An effective arrangement needs to be worked out by the Railway 
Administration with the State Gove rnment Authorities regarding the 
following issues:- 
• For handling railway related crime an effective mechanism needs to 
be worked out especially where the jurisdiction of crime is not 
identifiable.  
• To ensure that a larger number of trains are escorted, better 
coordination between the RPF and GRP is required. Coordination 
between GRP authorities in neighbouring states also needs to be 
improved to ensure that trains run continuously with escort.  
¾ It is essential that IR work out an arrangement with the State 
Government Authorities for adequate steps to intensify track patrolling 
and institutionalise the co-ordination mechanism with the State 
Government authorities to ensure security of passengers and running of 
trains in sabotage prone areas.  
¾ The Indian Railways needs to integrate railway disaster management 
infrastructure with those of civil authorities, armed forces etc. The 

Security Management in Indian Railway 
 
Report No.14 of 2011-12 (Railways) x x x 
current arrangement of co-ordination for rescue and relief operations 
with civil authorities need to be further strengthened.  Better use needs 
to be made of infrastructure available with the armed forces like use of 
hover craft etc.  
¾ A paradigm shift in the approach towards security by IR is required.  
Simple low cost measures like closure of unauthorized entry/exit points 
need to be emphasized. Serious efforts are required to be made for 
securing entry /exit points and proper maintenance of the existing 
security equipments installed at the stations to ensure secured rail 
operations 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 1
Chapter 1 Introduction
1.1 Terrorist attacks on the Indian Railway system have increased in 
frequency and intensity in the last five years. Despite a decline in the number 
of accidents on the IR between 2005 and 2010, the number of accidents 
attributed to sabotage has increased.  These accidents resulted in death of 67 
passengers and injuries to another 253 in 2010 itself.  
Systems of surface transportation like buses and trains are systems of mass 
public transportation and hence need to remain easily accessible, convenient, 
and inexpensive for the traveling public. Railways have several unique features 
making them inherently vulnerable to attack. Railway facilities rely on open 
architecture and easy movement of passengers in the railway stations and to 
and from trains. Due to large number of passengers, the number of entry and 
exit points in a railway station is also large. In addition, the railway networks 
traverse through high density urban areas that offer easy accessibility for attack 
and easy escape as well as vast rural and forest areas that are difficult to patrol 
and secure. Disruption in the transportation of freight can lead to a dislocation 
of supplies in a particular area as well as environmental problems in case of 
sabotage of rakes used to transport hazardous materials. Features used to secure 
airports and airplanes like passenger screening, and the elaborate deployments 
of metal detectors, X-ray machines, ex plosives sniffers, hand searchers, and 
armed guards cannot be transferred easily to railway stations. 
A large number of casualties along with dis ruptions to transit seriously impact 
the public’s faith in the government’s ability to provide basic protection to its 
citizens. No security system can stop determined terrorists from attacking 
public places. Nevertheless, good security measures can make terrorist 
operations more difficult, increase the terrorists’ likelihood of being detected 
and identified and keep casualties and disruptions to a minimum.  
1.2 Security Issues on Indian Railways 
An Indian railway station is typically overcrowded and easy to penetrate and 
attack. Substantial casualties can easily be inflicted with a Bomb attack. 
Further the railway track passes through vast stretches of forests and rural 
areas. These areas are difficult to patrol and provide protection to. Being a 
symbol of the central government, the Indian Railways (IR) are the focus of  
acts of vandalism and are an easy target of a number of agitations against the 
government –whether the state or the central government. Rail Roko agitations 
are an integral part of the protest movement of a number of agitations. 
Terrorists/ agitators perceive substantial psychological benefits in attacking 
Rail property and passengers.  An attack is likely to leave passengers reluctant, 
however temporarily, to travel on the Railways. Providing security adds both to 
cost and travel time.   
The IR carry around 19 million passengers and around 2.28 million tonnes of 
freight traffic daily on a network spread over 64015 route kilometres with 7030 
stations. It is one of the largest carriers of passengers and freight in the world. 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)2
There is a substantial heightened threat perception to the Indian Railways due 
to increase in frequency of incidents of sabotage on railway tracks by 
terrorist/naxalite especially in Northeast Frontier/Jammu & Kashmir and Left 
Wing extremist affected states and numerous acts of agitators to deliberately 
disrupt rail traffic and hold governments to ransom.  A couple of major 
accidents in the recent past including the derailment of the Rajdhani Express in 
Bihar  in March 2010 due to a bomb explosion and  the derailment of the 
Jnaneswari Express and collision with a goods train running on the opposite 
track in May 2010  highlight the problems of railway security.  
1.3 Security Management System on Indian Railways 
Security on the IR is the joint responsibility of three agencies –  
i) Railway Protection Force (RPF) and the Railway Protection Special 
Force (RPSF- a specialized armed wing). Both these forces are under the 
administrative control of the Railway authorities. The RPF and RPSF 
primarily deal with the protection of railway property. Since the year 
2003, security of passengers and passenger area has also been entrusted to 
the RPF.  
ii) Government Railway Police (GRP) which is under the administrative 
control of the respective State Governments. This is a wing of the State 
Police which exclusively deals with prevention and detection of crime 
and maintenance of law and order  on station premises/passenger areas 
and trains. 
iii) The State Police under the respective State Governments. The state police 
deal with the security of tracks and bridges over the Indian Railways and 
the law and order problems beyond the outer signals of the railway 
stations. 
Thus active co-operation and co-ordination between the IR and the State 
Governments is essential to ensure safety and security on Indian Railways. 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 3
ORGANISATIONAL CHART 
    
1.4 Other Reports /Studies
Standing Committee on Railways of the 11 th Lok Sabha had noted in its report 
(No.3 of 1996-97) that neglect of safety and security in the trains had been of 
great concern to the commuting passengers and that there was hardly any co-
ordination among different agencies. 
The Standing Committee on Railways (2009-10) of the 15
th Lok Sabha in its 
Eighth Report presented to the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha in August 2010 
observed that the issue of protection and security of Railway property and 
passengers was of crucial concern and needed urgent coordinated action. The 
report further stated that utmost priority should be accorded for the protection 
and security of Railway property and passengers to enable the Railways to 
achieve the targets they themselves have set, and compete with the best 
globally so as to provide world class railway services. It recommended that 
steps be taken to ensure safety of staff and passengers. The report assumes 
significance in the wake of heightened security scenario in the country, 
particularly with Terrorists and Maoist guerrillas repeatedly targeting trains. 
Headquarter level 
Zonal Rly level 
Divisional Rly. level 
State level 
District level 
Chief Security Commissioner
Director General /RPF
Inspector  General HQ
Additional Director General /RPF
Inspector General 
/Railway Security 
Deputy Superintendents of Police
Inspector General of Police
Superintendents of Police
Member Staff
Inspector General /RPSF 
Additional Chief Security Commissioner
Divisional Security Commissioner
Railway Protection Force
Government
Railway Police 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)4
1.5 Previous Audit Report 
Security Management in Indian Railways was earlier reviewed by Audit and 
results included in Paragraph 2.2 of Report No.9 of 2000 (Railways) of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India.  In this report Audit had 
highlighted following weaknesses in the security system of the Railways:-  
¾ The Performance Audit pointed out the need to evolve a strong unified 
overseeing arrangement which is absent as two distinct agencies are 
responsible for security on IR. RPF, an armed force under the control of the 
Railways is mainly concerned with protection of railway properties 
including booked consignments.  On the other hand the state police 
including the GRP, is responsible for the security of passengers and their 
belongings as also that of the trains, tracks, bridges and railway premises. 
¾ The Report highlighted that despite orders issued by IR that First 
Information Report’s (FIR) forms are made available on trains; these were 
not available in over 75 per cent of the checked cases.  
¾ The Performance Audit highlighted the decline in detection of cases 
involving loss of property.  So far as compensation claims cases in respect 
of booked consignment were concerned, only eight per cent of such cases 
were registered with RPF for investigation.  There was an overall decline in 
cases registered for dacoity /robbery but a sharp rise in the cases of murder 
and theft of passenger belongings.  
¾ Implementation of scheme for modernization of RPF involving 
procurement of metal detectors, wireless communication system, bullet 
proof jackets, mobile HF sets etc. had made  little progress.   
In their Action Taken Note on this report, Ministry of Railways stated that by 
and large, the Security System on the Railways was functioning smoothly.  
Ministry further added the following:- 
¾ Registration, prevention and investigation of crime cases are the 
responsibility of GRP. Ministry brought out that regular meetings are held 
between GRP and RPF authorities. The progress of investigation/ 
prosecution and the disposal of the cases of dacoity/ robbery, murder 
registered by the GRP is not reported to IR.  
¾ It was brought out that running staff like Coach Attendants, guards, 
RPF/GRP conduct checks regarding availability of FIR forms on trains in 
coordination with the commercial branch over all zones. 
¾ Decline in detection of cases involving loss of property was attributed to 
deterioration in law and order situation.  They added that the percentage of 
detection of cases has improved in the last five years. 
¾ Regarding modernisation of security forces, the Ministry stated that 
procurement of new weapons, new gadgets like bomb disposal kit, wireless 
communication system and electronic devices is an ongoing process. The 
training curriculum of RPF personnel has also been revised and updated to 
impart new professional skills.   

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 5
1.6 Budget Allotment and Expenditure 
The final grant and actual expenditure in respect of the Security Department for 
the period 2005-06 to 2009-10 was as follows: 
      (Figures in crore of rupees) 
Year Final Grant Actual
Expenditure
Savings Percentage 
of savings 
2005-06 1014.56 959.28 55.28 5.45 
2006-07 1029.42 936.47 92.95 9.03 
2007-08 1217.98 1099.45 118.53 9.73
2008-09 1820.92 1592.68 228.24 12.53
2009-10 2138.60 2110.73 27.87 1.30 
Total 7221.48 6698.61 522.87 7.24 
Figures supplied by Zonal Railways 
The priority accorded to security in the IR can be inferred from the fact that 
over the last five years only ` 6698.61 crore has been spent. This includes 
salary expenditure of `5882 crore (89 per cent of total expenditure).  It is seen 
that expenditure incurred on security was more than double in 2009-10 as 
compared to the expenditure of 2005-06 with the steepest increase occurring in 
the last two years. Nevertheless, this expenditure comprised only 2.55 per cent 
of the total expenditure of Indian Railways during the year 2009-10. The 
expenditure per passenger on sec urity worked out to only `2.86 approximately 
for 2009-10. Further, the Security Department surrendered funds ranging from 
1.30 to 12.53 per cent of allotted funds during 2005-10. 
1.7 Audit Objectives 
Security is the degree of protection against danger, damage, loss and criminal 
activity. There are structures and processes that provide or improve security. 
This performance audit covers issues pertaining to security of railway 
passengers and railway property and covers a period of 5 years from 2005-06 
to 2009-10. Audit has attempted an analysis and evaluation of the existing 
security system, the protection objectives a nd upgrades required in the security 
environment. The objectives of the performance audit were to evaluate the 
security system set up by the IR to obtain reasonable assurance regarding:- 
¾ Adequacy of the follow-up action on the earlier Audit Report; and 
examination of the legal provisions governing security on IR. 
¾ Protection of passengers and their belong ings including strategy to control 
crimes at stations and in running trains. 
¾ Safety of Railway property viz. tracks, bridges as well as other fixed 
structures including office buildings, yards, workshops and Production 
units 
¾ Preparedness of Indian Railways to handle the enhanced threat environment  
1.8 Audit coverage of the issue 
This Performance Audit covers a period of five years from 2005-06 to 2009-10. 
This performance audit covers issues pertaining to security of railway 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)6
passengers and railway property. Details of the methodology followed and 
period covered has been indicated in Annexure I
1.9 Sample selection 
While the overall position was reviewed for the Indian Railways as a whole 
(zone-wise), detailed study was restricted to two/three divisions in each zone as 
indicated in Annexure II.  Details of sample selected is summarised below:- 
¾ Records of a total of 33 divisions were reviewed. Security arrangements 
provided, such as escorts by armed security personnel in moving trains, 
arrangement of registering passenger complaints etc., in 10 trains in each 
zone (total 164 trains) involving mainly night journey were also reviewed.
¾  Progress of implementation of Integrated Security System has been 
analyzed in respect of 41 out of 202 stations.   
¾ In addition, a detailed study of security arrangements at 74 important 
stations on Indian Railways, such as provision of access control system, 
provision of adequate DFMDs, deployment of security personnel, provision 
of CCTV etc., was also done.  
¾ Security arrangements at one workshop (19 workshops), GM’s Office (15 
GM’s offices), hospital (17 hospitals), PRS servers (8 PRS servers) and 
yard (22 yards) in each zone were reviewed.
1.10 Acknowledgement  
The audit objectives, scope of study and methodology were discussed with 
Director General /Railway Protection Force, Adviser /Finance at Railway 
Board as well as with General Managers /concerned departmental heads in the 
zones by the Principal Directors of Audit during entry conferences. The inputs 
provided on various aspects including the suggestions on sample selection and 
the cooperation extended by railways is acknowledged with thanks.  The audit 
findings and recommendations were discussed with Director General RPF in an 
exit conference held in July 2011 in Railway Board.  Similar exit conferences 
were also held by the Principal Directors of Audit in the zones, with concerned 
zonal authorities. 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 7
Chapter 2 Adequacy of the Follow-up action on 
the Audit Report and legal provisions 
governing the security agencies 
Government of India is responsible for the Railway system as the Railways are 
included in the Union List of the Constitution of India. However, item 1 and 2 
of the State list in Schedule VII of the Constitution of India makes the State 
Government responsible for maintenance for law and order on IR.  
Traditionally, the RPF has been responsible for the security of railway assets 
and the State Government for maintaining law and order.  The responsibility 
for maintaining law and order within the station premises and on trains is 
handled by the Government Railway Police (GRP) under the control of the 
State Police.  Law and order outside the station premises is the responsibility of 
the State Police. 
The State Governments share the cost of the GRP equally with the Railways. 
Thus active co-operation and co-ordination between the IR and the State 
Governments is essential for the safety and security of Indian Railways. This 
cooperation is inherent with numerous risks and lack of proper coordination 
between the concerned agencies.  RPF has no control over the functioning of 
GRP as GRP is controlled by State Government. 
2.1 Role of RPF 
RPF {including its specialized armed wing Railway Protection Special Force 
(RPSF)} under the administrative control of Railway authorities primarily 
deals with the protection of railway property. The RPF was constituted under 
the Railway Protection Force Act 1957 as amended from time to time. The 
RPF is empowered under the Railway Act, 1989 to deal with offences such as 
alarm chain pulling, roof top travelling, touting, ticketless travel, unlawful 
possession of railway property etc. The RPF Act and the Railway Act were 
modified by Parliament vide Act 52 of 2003 which entrusted RPF with the 
following additional duties: 
i) To protect and safeguard railway property, passenger area and 
passengers. 
ii) To remove any obstruction in the movement of Railway property or 
passengers  and 
iii) To do any other act conducive to the better protection and security of 
railway property, passenger area and passengers. 
The main purpose of the amendment was to empower the RPF to deal with 
minor offences which directly relate to the Railways and to supplement the 
efforts of the state governments to reinforce the security of the passengers and 
passenger area on the IR. The RPF has now been empowered to arrest, 
investigate and prosecute for offences covered under the Railway Property 
(Unlawful Possession) Act and the Railway Act. The RPF is also empowered 
to arrest any person without an order from a magistrate and without an arrest 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)8
warrant. However, under section 12 of the RPF Act, the person so arrested has 
to be handed over to a police officer/police station with a detailed report of the 
circumstances leading to the arrest.   
Besides the above duties the salient features of the mission statement and 
objectives of RPF towards security include:- 
¾ Act as a bridge between the Government Railway Police/local police and 
the IR.  
¾ Adopt proactively all modern technology, best human rights practices, 
management techniques and special measures for protection of female and 
elderly passengers and the children, in pursuit of these objectives. 
2.2 Role of GRP /District Police 
The role and responsibilities of the security forces under the State Government 
consisting of both GRP and District Police are divided as follows: 
¾ The District Police is responsible for the law and order problems beyond 
the outer signals of railway stations.  They are also responsible for 
protecting trains, track, bridges and Railway premises against sabotage.  
¾ The GRP is responsible for the law and order problems between the outer 
signals of the stations and prevention and detection of crime [not covered 
by the Railway Property {Unlawful Possession} Act and the Railway Act] 
on the station premises and on trains. This includes control of passenger 
and vehicular traffic in station precinc ts; maintenance of order in passenger 
trains.  In addition GRP is also required to enquire into accidents on 
railways. 
2.3 Coordination between Railways and the State Government 
The Performance Audit on Security Management in Indian Railways included 
in Paragraph 2.2 of Report No.9 of 2000 (Railways) of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General (CAG) of India had highlighted the need to evolve a unified 
overseeing arrangement which is absent as RPF, an armed force under the 
control of the Railways was mainly concerned with protection of railway 
properties including booked consignments.  On the other hand the GRP which 
is functioning under the control of the respective State Governments is 
responsible for the security of passengers and their belongings as also that of 
the trains, tracks, bridges and railway premises. The Report emphasised that 
the system that exists on paper for coordination between RPF and GRP at 
operating levels and between the IR and state governments at headquarters 
level has been weak in implementation. 
In their action take note on this report, Ministry of Railways stated that regular 
meetings were held between GRP and RPF authorities.  It added that the cases 
of crime on the IR were registered and investigated by the GRP which 
functions under the concerned State Government. The progress of 
investigation/prosecution and the disposal of the cases of dacoity/ robbery, 
murders registered by the GRP were however, not reported to IR.  

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 9
The current Performance Audit examines the coordination between the IR and 
the State Government and its agencies. These issues are discussed in the 
following paragraphs:-  
2.3.1 Coordination between RPF and GRP
The existing mechanism of policing is not effective in handling railway related 
crime, where the affected party (passenger) and the offender are both mobile.  
Problems exist especially in passenger security as a train passes through many 
state boundaries in a short time leading to changes in jurisdiction of the GRP 
and state police and consequent problems in registration of cases and 
investigation of crime. The RPF being centrally organised does not have any 
problem of jurisdiction but has no authority in handling security of passengers. 
Thus the mechanism for handling passenger related crime in a moving train is 
not effective as jurisdiction of occurrence of the crime is generally not 
identifiable.  
The previous Audit Report on Security Management had pointed that FIR 
forms were not available on trai ns in many cases. Audit observed that this 
problem was still continuing. This issue is discussed in detail in Para 3.3.1.  
As per the guidelines of IR, meetings at regular intervals are to be held between 
RPF and GRP to coordinate their efforts in providing security to passengers. 
The Action Taken Note of the Ministry of Railways on the previous Audit 
Report had stated that regular meetings between RPF and GRP were being 
held. Audit however, observed that in NWR, meetings between RPF and GRP 
were not held during the last five years. In other zones, though the meetings 
were being held regularly, minutes of all meetings were not drawn indicating a 
relaxed attitude towards co-ordination.  
Further, there is continued lack of coordination between the GRP and RPF on 
many issues especially regarding escorting of trains leading to duplicity of 
manpower deployed.  In trains escorted only by the GRP, problem of inter-state 
jurisdiction arises leading to large gaps in train escort function of the GRP. 
This issue has been discussed in detail at Para 3.3.4.
Due to overlapping functions there is considerable duplicity in manpower 
deployment as both deploy independently clerks, guards etc. Audit observed 
that at major railway stations both the RPF and GRP have their police stations 
(thanas)). In a test check it was seen that at 525 stations in 15 zones both these 
forces have their respective thanas. Though, both the RPF and GRP have 
distinctive functions, to remove confusion and harassment of complainants, 
only one agency should be made responsible for registration of cases. This will 
also result in saving of public money to some extent which is being spent on 
maintenance of double establishments. 
In spite of the fact, that 50 per cent of the cost of GRP is reimbursed by the 
Railways to the concerned State Government, the IR has no control over the 
functioning of GRP. This indicates a distinct need to evolve a strong unified 
overseeing arrangement. 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)10
IR in its reply stated that coordination mechanism exists for regular meeting 
between GRP & RPF at the Station, Divisional, Zonal and Board level. Visiting 
officers of RPF from Board/Zonal Railways hold interaction with State Police 
Authorities. Issues relating to deployment of Police personnel, security of 
tracks etc. are discussed during such meetings and follow up actions taken 
though it may not be possible to issue minutes on all such occasions.  
Coordination mechanism with GRP/State Police Authorities and Central 
Intelligence Agencies has been stepped up with nomination of permanent 
representative from RPF to attend meetings of Multi Agency Centre (MAC) at 
central level and State Multi Agency Centre (SMAC) at state level.  
Regarding escorting of trains, keeping in view the vulnerability of section, 
threat perception and other local factors, Zonal Railways, in consultation with 
concerned GRP authorities have demarcated trains for escorting by RPF and 
GRP. The trains are either escorted by RPF or GRP in any particular section. 
Duplicity of resources on this account has been avoided to ensure optimum 
utilization of available manpower. IR also stated that the worst affected trains 
are generally escorted by RPF and GRP jointly in vulnerable area which is 
contrary to what is stated above.  
2.3.2 Coordination between RPF and State Government
Cooperation and coordination between the state governments and Railways is 
essential to ensure obstruction free movement of trains. The previous Audit 
Report on Security management had highlighted the weakness in coordination 
between the IR and the State Governme nts. Audit observed that instructions 
regarding patrolling of railway tracks and bridges issued by Railway Board in 
February 2003 in sabotage prone areas directed the Zonal Railways to set up 
suitable machinery at the Divisional level for institutionalising the co-
ordination mechanism with the State Government authorities. These 
instructions were unevenly implemented even in sensitive areas. Further the 
large number of successful Rail Roko agitations indicates the dependency of 
the IR on the State Government to ensure secure rail operations. This in turn 
points to a need for a greater specification of the responsibility of the State 
Governments. These issues are discussed in detail at paras 4.1.1 and 4.3
respectively. 
Deposing in front of the Standing Committee (2006-07-Fourteenth Lok Sabha), 
Ministry of Railways stated that clear demarcation of the duties between the 
various security agencies is still one issue that remains to be decided.  
However, in the present security scenario viz. terrorist activities in Jammu & 
Kashmir, Terrorist attack in Mumbai and ULFA affected area in Northeast, 
Railways is getting help from the State machinery.   
IR stated that as part of the long term security plan they are considering an 
amendment to the RPF Act to enable them to take over the responsibilities of 
the GRP. Amendment in the RPF Act proposed by the Ministry of Railways 
has been concurred by the Ministry of Law & Justice and the matter is 
presently under examination with the Ministry of Home Affairs. The proposed 
bill seeks to empower the RPF officer of and above the rank of Sub-inspectors 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 11
The High Level Committee on Composite 
Security Plan for Indian Railways (set up on 
recommendation of Committee of 
Secretaries in January 2007) had also 
recommended that since most of the 
Railway security systems in the developed 
world have active cooperative mechanism 
between Railway security personnel, Police 
and Intelligence agencies, such operational 
mechanism needs to be developed for the 
Indian Railways. 
to exercise powers of an officer-in-charge of a police station in the passenger 
area. 
IR replied (July 2011) that security of railway tracks, bridges & tunnels is the 
responsibility of respective state governments in terms of Ministry of Home 
Affairs letter No. D2-65/X dated 13.09.1965 circulated vide No. 27/1/72-Poll.II 
dated 11.02.1972. 
Board’s instructions issued in the year 2003 was only an interim and temporary 
arrangement for patrolling of track in sabotage prone areas. In the year 2004 all 
the Chief Security Commissioners were advised by Security Directorate of the 
Railway Board to inform Director Generals of Police of concerned states to 
deploy State Police for protection of tracks & bridges under their jurisdiction.  
IR’s reply contains nothing about monit oring the implementation of the 
instructions for securing tracks and bridges.   
2.4  Co-ordination with other Security Agencies 
The 15th Lok Sabha Standing Committee on Railways recommended that the 
Railways should study the feasibility of launching their own intelligence wing 
as part of the RPF.  
The Railway Board in 
March 2010 stated that one 
officer from RPF is 
regularly attending the 
meeting of Multi Agency 
Centre (MAC) held by 
Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Government of India. These 
meetings are also attended 
by the officials from 
Intelligence Bureau, 
Defence and other para- 
military forces. Intelligence received from field units is shared /discussed. 
Similarly at zonal level, the RPF attends the state MAC.  
It was observed from the records made available to Audit that RPF was alerting 
the concerned agencies in the field such as local police, local administration 
etc. about the alert calls received from MAC, intelligence bureau of the Central 
and State Governments.  Presently RPF have 02 Intelligence Wings namely: 
Crime Wing (or Crime Intelligence Branch) and Special Wing (or the Special 
Intelligence Branch). Both the above wings have separate structure from field 
up to Board level. 
2.5 Dues of RPF deployed on election duties 
RPF personnel are deployed for election duties whenever necessary. Cost of 
such deployment is to be recovered from the Ministry of Home Affairs by the 
concerned Railway. It was observed that an amount of ` 20.55  crore was 
outstanding for the period from 2005-06 to 2008-09 in respect of 12 zones and 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)12
one production unit1. It was also noticed that bills were not raised by ECR for 
the deployment and in SER no record regarding recovery of claimed amount 
could be produced by Accounts /Security departments.  In NCR the records of 
claims raised were not made available to Audit. 
2.6 Dues of GRP payable by Railways 
As per para 856 and 857 of Indian Railway Financial Code Volume I, the cost 
of GRP would be shared between the State Governments concerned and the 
Railways on 50:50 basis, provided that the strength of GRP was determined 
with the approval of the IR. This was again reiterated by the Railway Board 
vide its instructions of July 1993. A review of the details of dues payable to the 
GRP revealed that an amount of ` 138.38 crore was outstanding in nine2 out of 
16 zones for the period 2005-06 to 2009-10. This includes an amount of ` 0.58 
crore claimed by Government of West Bengal which was pending with SER 
due to excess operation of 31 posts of GRP.  In respect of six zones and Metro 
Railway, Kolkata no dues are outstanding while in Northern Railway, no 
information on this was provided. Keeping huge dues as outstanding could 
affect the deployment of GRP as most of the State Governments are under 
severe fund shortage. 
IR stated (July 2011) that railway security is presently looked after by 3 
agencies viz. Government Railway Police (GRP), District Police and Railway 
Protection Force (RPF), and in view of the fact that 50 per cent of the budget of 
concerned GRPs is being shared by railways with State Governments, inclusion 
of the functioning of GRP within the ambit of Performance Audit on Security 
Management will help a great deal in assessing the future security requirement 
of the railways.  
2.7 Conclusion 
It is observed that the issues regarding inter-agency coordination pointed out by 
audit in its earlier Audit Report on Security management still persist, in spite of 
the remedial action taken by the Railways. Considerable overlap of functions 
exists between the RPF and the State Government and/or agencies handling 
Railway security. Despite directions from the Ministry of Home Affairs and the 
Railway Board, co-ordination between the RPF and the State Government is 
not effective leading to large gaps in the security system of the Railways.  
Though the High Level Committee on Composite Security Plan for Indian 
Railways had recommended Security system with an effective co-ordination 
mechanism with the state security /intelligence agencies similar to system 
existing in developed countries, but IR is yet to achieve that standard.   
A meeting of Home Secretaries of States held at Delhi in January 2010 with the 
IR, also highlighted the problem of non registration of cases received from 
other State GRPs and general reluctance to take up investigations citing reasons 
of non fixation of place of occurrence of crime or victim’s apathy to complete 
1 SWR-`20.97 lakh, NER-`3.16 crore, NWR-`1.33 crore, ECoR-`1.32 crore, SECR-`6.01 
lakh, CR-`,2.57 crore  SCR-`1.93 crore, ER-`6.12 crore, WR-`1.74 crore, NFR-`52.16 lakh, 
WCR-`75.36 lakh, NR-`0.57 lakh, CLW-`5.55 lakh. 
2 SR-`16.86 crore, SWR-`2.61 crore, NWR-`1.02 crore, SER-`0.58 crroe, CR-` 77.47 crore, 
NCR-`0.02 crore, SCR-`17.11 crore, WR-`21.83 crore, NFR-`0.86 crore. 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 13
legal formalities.  The problems relating to extremist activities, attacks on 
railway property during agitations were also discussed. 
Recommendations 
x Indian Railways needs to evolve mechanism for effective co-ordination 
between the agencies handling Railway Security viz RPF, GRP and State 
Police.   
x Since the State Government is responsible for maintenance for law and 
order, an institutional mechanism needs to be evolved to ensure greater 
cooperation and coordination with the State Government. 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)14
Chapter 3 Protection of Passengers and their 
belongings including Strategy to 
Control Crime 
The most important aspect of any security strategy is to ensure the safety and 
security of its passengers. The Railways are the most preferred mode of 
transport in India and are spread over a vast geographical area of over 64015 
route kilometres and 7030 number of stations.  The Citizen Charter of Indian 
Railways spells out the railways commitment to provide safe and dependable 
train services to passengers.  
3.1 Security of Passengers 
The security of railway passengers is interlinked with the security and safety of 
railway assets used by the passengers viz the railway stations and trains.  The 
GRP by virtue of being a wing of the State Police is responsible for the 
prevention and detection of crime and maintenance of law and order on station 
premises /circulating areas and trains. The RPF was responsible for the security 
of Railway property. The security of passengers and passenger area was also 
entrusted to the Railway Protection Force in 2003 through an amendment in the 
RPF Act. 
To fix yard sticks /norms for the procurement of security related equipments 
for use of RPF /RPSF personnel, the IR set up a Norms Committee in 
December 2006.  The norms for procurement of security related equipment 
were issued in September 2007.  Consequently the Railways spent a sum of  
` 67 crore on procurement of these equipments during 2007-08.   
Increasing traffic density and the increase in the threat perception to the Indian 
Railways called for a paradigm shift from the existing level of ad-hoc 
preparedness to a readiness to handle any disastrous situation triggered by a 
security lapse. The norms committee merely fixed the yardsticks for the 
procurement of security related equipment. No cohesive plan for ensuring 
passenger safety had been devised and put in place.  Thus, the Railways 
continued to be perceived as a soft target in the domestic arena.  Being a state 
owned asset railways is also a ready target for any terrorist /agitator or 
extremist desirous of making his presence felt.  

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 15
Recommendations of High Level Committee
x Installation of state of the art Electronic 
Surveillance System of International standards 
covering entry/exit points, Platforms, Waiting 
Halls, Concourse area, Circulating area, Parking 
area and vital installations at the Railway 
Stations. 
x A comprehensive communication network with 
one walkie talkie set for every RPF personnel on 
duty along with a control room at divisional level 
for better co-ordination.
x Access control solutions for railway stations for 
filtering out bonafide passengers from potential 
miscreants and saboteurs w ith judicious use of 
HHMDs, DFMDs and X-ray baggage scanners 
for random checking in passenger area in 
adequate numbers. 
x Minimise security hazard, a need to decongest 
the station was emphasised. This included 
closing of all unauthorised entry/exit points. 
The Committee of Secretaries decided in January 2007 that the Ministry of 
Railways needs to prepare a Composite Security Plan .  A High Level 
Committee on Composite 
security plan for the Indian 
Railways (Committee) was 
constituted (May 2007) under 
the chairmanship of Additional 
Director General /RPF to study 
the requirements of a security 
system and to formulate a 
composite plan for the 
railways. The Committee 
submitted its recommendations 
in January 2008. The 
Committee while analysing the 
vulnerability of Railway assets 
classified railway stations as 
the most vulnerable of Railway 
assets, followed by trains- both 
passenger and goods and then 
railway tracks connecting 
railway stations including 
bridges and crossings.  The Committee identified 202 stations all over the 
country and Metro, Kolkata as sensitive for terrorist/insurgent attack.  
3.2 Securing Railway Stations 
In the aftermath of terrorist attack on 26 th November 2008 at Mumbai 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminal (CST) station of CR, the top priority before the 
IR is to secure their railway stations. Both RPF and GRP are required to be 
present at railway stations. Most of the large railway stations serve as shelters 
for homeless and destitute people. The entry of unauthorised coolies, vendors 
and large number of visitors lead to unmanageable crowds on railway 
platforms. Security threats are further compounded by the existence of 
unmanned multi entry and exit points at stations.  Low ratios of security 
personnel to passengers make it difficult for them to provide security. Both 
GRP and the RPF are involved in this exercise.  
Audit conducted a sample check of 74 stations. This sample included 41 
stations identified by the High Level Committee as sensitive for 
terrorist/naxalite attack. The macro view emerging out of the check of these 74 
stations is indicated in following table. 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)16
Number 
of stations 
Number 
of entry 
/exit 
points 
Number of 
authorised 
entry points 
guarded 
Number of 
entry (other 
than in 
column 
2)points 
guarded
Number of 
DFMDs 
installed 
Number 
of
CCTVs 
Number 
of
baggage 
scanners 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
41 High 
risk
stations 
249 177 (71 %) 34 (35%)  108 (43 %) 26 5
33 other 
stations 
87 54 (62%) 16 (21%) 23 (26%) 12 1
The detailed position as emerging in zones is shown below:- 
(i) Entry poin ts into station premises have been designed with a view to 
check ticket-less travel. In almost all the 74 stations examined, entry into 
the station premises is unrestricted as there are multiple entry/exit points.  
Out of the total 338 authorised entry/exit points at these stations, only 231 
(70 per cent) were guarded. Out of the 74 stations test checked, no guards 
were provided at any of the authorised entry points at 19 stations.  This 
included stations like Kanpur, Siliguri and New Jalpaiguri. 
(ii) Apart from authorised entry/exit points, there were 175 unauthorised 
entry/exit points (52 per cent of the authorised entry/exit points). Of these 
only 28 per cent were guarded.      
Unrestricted entry-Hazrat Nizamuddin, NR Unrestricted entry-Sealdah Station , ER
In ECoR, NCR and SCR of the four stations each checked, only three out 
of the 38 unauthorised entry points were guarded.  In WCR , at the four 
stations test checked there were 19 unauthorised entry points, of which 
only three were guarded.   
(iii) Persons entering parcel offices have easy access to platforms. At present 
parcel offices are located adjoining the platform having entry from 
outside as well as from the platform. These are potential entry points for 
miscreants into stations unchecked and pose a grave security risk. 


Rep
(iv
(v)
(vi
Unman
port No. 14 of 
v) The No r
Detector 
A test c
(DFMDs
of the au
t
Even at 
Hazrat N
with DFM
In 28 of 
installed.
Lucknow
working 
making 
t
the DFM
any chec
) Closed C
of the 7
emerging
images.  
) X-Ray l u
noticed th
stations i
in WR, fo
were prov
ned DFMD at H
2011-12 (Railw
rms Commi
(DFMD) be
check, how e
) were provi
thorised entr
the most v
Nizamuddin, 
MDs.
the stations
.  T h i s  i n c lu
w.  It was a
properly. Fu
their presenc
MDs through 
k
Circuit Telev
74 stations 
g in the CC T
uggage sca n
hat none of t
in ECR, 10 
our stations 
vided with lu
Hazrat Nizamud
Se
lways) 
ttee had re
e provided a
ever, revea l
ided at only 
ry points.  
vulnerable s
 Borivali e t
s checked n o
uded statio n
also observ e
urther, a lar
ce irrelevant.
which any 
vision (CCTV
test check e
TVs was po o
nners were p
the four stati
stations in N
in NCR, fou
uggage scan
din station
ecurityMan
commended
at all author i
led that D o
131 entry p
tations like 
tc. all the e n
one of the e
ns like Bhu b
ed that ma n
ge number o
. There were
person could
V) cameras w
ed.  Howe v
or making i t
provided o n
ions on SER
NFR, four s t
ur stations in
nners.  
Gaps
nagementin
d that a D o
ised entry p o
oor Frame 
points compr
Mumbai C
ntry points w
entry points 
baneswar, P u
ny of the D
of DFMDs w
e also huge g
d enter the p
were provid
ver, the qu
t very diffic u
nly at seve n
R, seven stati
tations in S W
n SCR and fo
s near DFMD at
nIndianRail
oor Frame M
oints /exit p
Metal Det e
rising 39 per
CST, New D
were not se
had any D F
uri, Danap u
DFMDs we r
were not m a
gaps along si
platforms wi
ded at only 3
ality of pi c
ult to identi f
n stations. I t
ions in NER
WR, four st a
our stations i
t Church Gate (
lways
17
Metal 
oints.  
ectors 
r cent 
Delhi,
cured 
FMDs 
ur and 
re not 
anned 
ide of 
ithout
38 out 
ctures 
fy the 
t was 
R, four 
ations
in NR 
(WR)

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)18
3.2.1 Integrated Security System (ISS) 
As a follow up to the recommendations of the Committee, the Railway Board 
decided in July 2008 to implement an Integrated Security System (ISS) over 
Indian Railways for augmenting the existing security system of the Railways at 
the identified high risk stations. The ISS consists of four broad areas –  
(i) Internet Protocol (IP) based Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) 
surveillance system for watching the movement of people on the 
platforms. 
(ii) Access Control solutions for filtering out bonafide passengers.  
(iii) Personal and baggage screening system such as DFMDs, HHMDs, x-ray 
baggage scanners etc.,  
(iv) Bomb Detection and Disposal System (BDDS).  
In October 2009, The ISS scheme was slightly modified and separate short 
term and long term plans were formulated for strengthening the security cover 
over Indian Railways.  
The short term plan was to be implemented over all the zones by March 2010. 
The Zonal Railways were to provide (i) CCTV surveillance system, (ii) Access 
control systems (iii) Personal baggage screening system, (iv) Bomb detection 
and disposal system (BDDS), (iv) Country wide E-networking up to the level 
of important RPF posts to ensure smooth and speedy flow of information/data 
in the organization. The scheme included Door Frame Metal Detectors 
(DFMD), Hand Held Metal Detectors (HHMD), Night vision devices, Walkie-
talkie sets, VHF sets. 
This plan was to be implemented in two phases. In phase-I, the ISS was to be 
implemented over 66 stations of 16 zones during 2008-09 and phase-II was to 
cover 71 stations over 16 zones during 2009-10. 
Railway Board in September 2008 circulated the detailed programme for 
implementation. The Railways were instructed to forward detailed proposals to 
the Railway Board for necessary re-appropriation from passenger amenity head 
for 2008-09 for implementing phase-I. Railway Board in June 2009 revised 
their earlier decision and directed the concerned zones to submit detailed 
proposals of the ISS for inclusion in the works programme of 2009-10.   
3.2.2 Bomb Detection and Disposal squad (BDDS) 
Railway Board issued (March 2006) directions to all Zonal Railways to acquire 
Bomb Detection and Disposal Equipments and form Bomb Disposal Squads in 
each division as the zones /divisions were dependent on local police and army 
sources. Railway Board further directed that willing staff be used for the 
purpose.  Further, in Western Railway, 28 officials were trained for this 
purpose though no squad has yet been formed (March 2011). The Chief 
Security Commissioner (CSCs) procured equipment valuing Rs 2.24 crore 
which were distributed to its divisions.  The material is, however, lying unused 
in stores.  In Central Railway, seven secu rity personnel were trained for bomb 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 19
detection.  A BDDS has been set up at Pune (GRP) and one BDDS is planned 
to be set up at Mumbai (RPF).  Other Railways are yet to set up any BDDSs. 
3.2.3 Dog Squads 
As part of the Integrated Security System, it was envisaged that dog squads be 
formed and adequate sniffer dogs be provided at recommended railway 
stations. Sniffer dogs are utilised at important Railway stations for anti-
sabotage checks and detection of explosives in trains, reservation offices and 
platforms. RPF sniffer dogs are also rendering assistance to GRP for anti-
sabotage checking and other important works whenever required. 
Audit observed the following: 
¾ Though dog squads had been provided at all Zonal Railways and Metro 
Railway, Kolkata the actual strength was only 292 dogs as against the 
sanctioned strength of 405 dogs. Ther e was a vacancy of 113 dogs (about 
28 per cent).  
¾ Records available in respect of dog squads revealed that though dogs were 
used for patrolling at stations, in trains and yards and other important 
places, no records relating to the results of such patrolling have been made 
available. From the monthly reports of dog squads in SCR, it was observed 
that there were no cases of crime detected by dogs during 2005-10, casting 
doubts about their effectiveness. 
¾ In WR it was noticed that 12 dogs have been hired by Senior Divisional 
Security Commissioner, Mumbai Central for stations at Churchgate, 
Mumbai Central, Borivali, Surat and Virar incurring an expenditure of 
`48.13 lakh upto March 2010. Further, Records of Chief Security 
Sniffer Dog at Churchgate Station, WR 


Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)20
Commissioner/WR indicated that the hired dogs were unable to locate 
and identify gunpowder, explosives etc. as they had no training in 
detecting explosives.  IR, however, stated that Chief Security 
Commissioner/RPF Western Railway has already been advised to ensure 
immediate purchase and training of RPF dogs and to stop the outsourcing 
of dogs. 
A review of implementation of the ISS revealed the following:-  
¾ The ISS envisaged covering only 137 stations in both the phases. Even 
phase I of the short-term plan (covering 66 stations by March 2009) has 
not yet been implemented in any zone. 
¾ No expenditure has been incurred other than the tender processing cost as 
of March 2010.   
¾ Audit scrutiny revealed that DFMDs had not been installed at a large 
number of exit/entry points at even the high risk stations checked by 
audit.  
¾ Though setting up of BDDS and dog squads was part of the ISS, no 
action was taken within the scheme to ensure their proper 
implementation.  
Regarding communication facilities, as of now IR have provided Closed User 
Group (CUG) phones only to officers and supervisors in the field so that the 
same can be used for rescue and relief work in case of accident /disaster.  IR is 
still in the process of providing other modern telecom facilities to its security 
staff.
Review in Audit revealed that 18937 nos of walkie talkies and 1248 nos. of 
VHF sets provided to the security personnel in zones were not evenly 
distributed.  The zones had walkie talkie sets ranging between three to 20 per 
cent (NR- 20 per cent and ECoR-3 per cent) of the total.  Similar uneven 
distribution of VHF sets was seen over zones ranging between two to 12 per 
cent. Similarly, the distribution of bullet proof jackets was uneven.  Whereas in 
four zones there was shortage of bullet proof jackets, these are in excess in two 
zones.  
Thus, a scheme which was to be implemented at 137 stations by March 2010 is 
still at the preliminary stage. IR stated (May and July 2011) that under the 
Works Programme 2009-10, civil works in the zones have been approved at an 
estimated budget of `353 crore. They added that tenders have been awarded in 
SR, SCR, NR (Delhi Area Stations) and Kolkatta Metro. The system is under 
various stages of tendering in the remaining Zonal Railways. 
Further, the procurement of DFMDs, HHMDs etc. is still under process and 
orders placed for night vision devices, Walkie- talkie sets etc costing ` 67 crore 
are nearing completion. They also stated that the scheme was to be 
implemented over all the 202 high risk stations identified by the High Level 
Committee on security. 
3.2.4 Implementing the Long Term Security Plan 
The Committee had recommended a long term action plan for security. It 
recommended the following:- 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 21
A. Legal empowerment of RPF  
B. RPF to act as single security agency for railway security 
C. Up-gradation of training facilities in various training institutes  
D. Multi skill training to all RPF/RPSF personnel.  
Issues A & B have been dealt with in Paras 2.1 and 2.3.1  respectively and 
issues C & D have been discussed in Paras 5.4.2 and 5.4.3 respectively.  
3.2.5 Construction of Boundary Walls 
Many of the stations were not secured with either boundary wall or fencing, 
which gives easy access to miscreants and other unauthorised persons to enter 
the platform unchecked. Alarmed by the increase in number of track crossings 
and encroachment cases, Railway Board in September 2008 instructed all 
Zonal Railways to construct boundary walls along the tracks. Initially the work 
of construction of boundary wall was included in the Integrated Security 
System. However, this item was later deleted from the scheme and funds 
required were to be assessed separately. General Managers were advised by the 
Railway Board to ensure construction of boundary walls based on threat 
perception and vulnerability, as assessed by the Zonal Railways. 
Open area with no boundary wall at Santragachi 
station in SER
Open area with no boundary wall at Chennai 
station in SR
Audit review of the records in Zonal Railways revealed that the works have 
been completed in ECoR only. In NR, work has been completed only in one 
Division (Moradabad) while in another Division (Ambala) the same is in 
progress. In other five zones (NWR, CR, ECR, SCR, SER) works are in 
progress. In eight
3 zones no work has been undertaken so far. It is seen from 
the progress of work that the zones have not taken up the work compromising 
the security at stations.  IR has intimated (July 2011) that fund constraint is 
being faced in providing boundary wall in all the sensitive stations. 
3 SR, SWR, NER, NCR, ER, SECR, WR, NFR, WCR. 


Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)22
3.2.6 Deployment of Security Personnel 
On an average one to ten GRP personnel are deployed at each important 
railway station to maintain law and order. While the passengers originating 
were 5725 millions in 2005-06 which increased to 7379.94 millions in 2009-10 
(increase of 28.90 per cent), the deployment of GRP personnel was 31259 in 
2005-06 which increased to 32312 in 2009-10 (increase of 3.37 per cent). This 
indicates that deployment of GRP personnel were not adequate.  
A test check on the deployment of security personnel at New Delhi and 
Mumbai CST, two of the busiest and sensitive stations in the country revealed 
the following: 
¾ At New Delhi railway station du ring the year 2009-10 about 114 
mail/express trains originated/terminated and about 1.86 lakh passengers 
originated daily besides the passengers disembarking whose figures could 
not be collected in Audit. As against such huge volume of passenger 
movements only 375 security personnel (249 RPF and 126 GRP) were 
deployed to maintain the security at the station. 
¾ Similarly in Mumbai CST, 1258 trains (including suburban trains) 
originated/terminated daily and the number of passengers originating 
daily during 2009-10 was 2.40 lakh. As against this the security personnel 
deployed daily were only 159 (110 RPF and 49 GRP).  
The above deployment of security personnel seems to be grossly inadequate 
for high risk stations like New Delhi and Mumbai CST. The above exercise 
indicates the need for increasing the deployment of security personnel in 
improving the security provided for passengers and passenger area.  
The 15
th Lok Sabha Standing Committee on Railways was dismayed to find 
that the Integrated Security System has not been effectively put in place. 
Except for an odd baggage scanner, door frame metal detectors (DFMDs) and 
the presence of a handful of RPF personnel in the stations, the Committee did 
not find any noticeable change in the way the security system functions.   
The above audit indicates a distinct lack of consciousness on the part of the IR 
in controlling access to railway stations.  Further no action has been taken to 
rationalise the arrival/departure of trains at important/major stations and to 
reduce the congregation of passengers.   
IR in its reply (May 2011) stated the following:- 
¾ Decongestion in station premises/circulating area require involvement of 
concerned municipal authorities, state police, GRP and other state 
agencies.  At present measures like extra deployment of security staff and 
stopping the sale of platform ticket etc. are adopted to decongest stations 
during specific periods.   
¾ Construction of boundary wall in sensitive/vulnerable stations has been 
taken up in consultation with finance Directorate of Railway Board. 
¾ Integrated Security System under implementation over Zonal railways 
envisages surveillance system of international standard over 202 sensitive 
stations.  

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 23
¾ Formation of BD&DS at important and sensitive Railway stations has 
been taken up under “Integrated Security Scheme”.  Till this is finalized, 
assistance of BD&DS of the concerned States and Army is taken as and 
when required. 
¾ In July 2011, IR added that as the system (ISS) of this scale is being 
implemented for the first time in Indian Railways, Zonal Railways are 
facing problems with regard to availability of eligible vendors, inspection 
of equipment by competent authorities and availability of fund etc.  
Reply of the IR is not conclusive as sufficient measures have not been initiated 
to decongest stations. Even entry to stations has not been restricted to ticket 
holders only. Existence of several unauthorised entry points and unguarded as 
well as sparsely equipped (with modern security gadgets) authorised entry 
points has rendered the stations vulnerable to attack.  Further, ISS has not been 
implemented in any of the zones.  Construction of boundary wall is proceeding 
very slowly. 
No time line has been drawn for completing the action initiated despite IR 
being aware of the increased threat perception. No fresh targets have been fixed 
for implementation of the ISS nor is an effective monitoring mechanism in 
place for ensuring its timely implementation.  
3.3 Managing Security on Trains
The maintenance and security of trains is a major area of concern as Railways 
have a linear territory, traversing inter-state lines. The GRP are responsible 
generally for the prevention and detection of crime on the Railways within 
their respective state jurisdictions. This includes maintenance of law and order 
within Railway premises and on running trains, registration of cases and their 
investigation. Their duties include prevention of offences against the travelling 
public and their belongings by patrolling of the platforms and escorting trains. 
3.3.1 Reporting of crime 
The crime reported against passengers for the period 2005 to 2009 was as 
follows:
Source:- GRP Records 
Despite under reporting of crime, the above figures indicate an increase in all 
types of crime during 2009 as compared to the previous years.  Crime against 
passengers has increased by 15 per cent during the last five years.
Reports of drugging of passengers and looting of their belongings in trains and 
at Railway premises have increased.  To tackle this menace the DG/RPF 
Year Murder Attempt 
to
murder 
Dacoity Robbery Drugging Theft of 
Passenger
belongings 
Total 
2005 232 68 126 325 509 10846 12106 
2006 240 71 156 359 477 10103 11406 
2007 217 78 111 305 649 10939 12299 
2008 213 81 98 274 608 11497 12771 
2009 245 86 112 392 670 12403 13908 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)24
(November 2009) nominated NR as the nodal office for coordinating with the 
CSC’s of the concerned zones (NCR, NWR, WCR and ECR). As a result, joint 
Anti Drugging Teams were formed for escorting the affected trains and sharing 
of intelligence between different. Zones has resulted in reduction in cases or 
drugging of passengers. It was reported that due to the deployment of joint 
team, incidents of drugging in those trains have been controlled. However, 
figures available in the above table indicate an increase in drugging cases in 
2009.
3.3.2 Problems in Reporting of Crime on trains 
The reporting of crime committed on trains is a serious problem. Crimes are 
generally discovered/ reported only when the passengers reach their 
destination. Even if a crime is discovered early, the report can only be made at 
the next station. Here too only serious cases are reported as the victim has little 
time to file the First Information Report (FIR) with the GRP. Thus there is a 
tendency for under reporting of crime cases in trains. In most cases the FIR is 
lodged only at the final destination of the passenger and has to be transferred to 
the Thana having jurisdiction over the crime. This causes considerable delay in 
registration and investigation of crime. 
The Railway Board in August 1997 issued instructions that FIR forms should 
be made available with coach attendants, conductors and guards and they 
should hand over the filled in FIR forms to the GRP for registration of cases. 
The earlier report (No. 9 of 2000) highlighted that despite orders issued by IR 
that First Information Report’s (FIR) forms are made available on trains; these 
were not available in over 75 per cent of the checked cases.  In the recent 
review conducted it was observed in Audit that, while display boards indicate 
that FIR forms are available with guards and coach attendants, in many 
instances the forms were not available with the coach attendants. Passengers 
were forced to approach the guards or get down for making complaints. It was 
further seen that in NCR and SWR forms were not available with the 
concerned staff.  In Northern Railway, FIR forms were available with coach 
attendants, conductors and guards only in one division (Delhi).    
IR in its reply (May 2011) stated that the RPF provides necessary assistance to 
the victim passengers to lodge FIR with the GRP and guidelines for availability 
of FIR forms and registration of the case with GRP already exist.  It was 
further stated that Commercial Directorate is being requested to re-iterate the 
instructions for strict compliance. 
The fact remains that it remains difficult for passengers to register an FIR due 
to non-availability of FIR forms and problems of establishing the jurisdiction 
of occurrence of crime. 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 25
Recommendations of High Level Committee
¾ Increasing the number of uniformed police presence in 
trains proportionate to the number of compartments.  
¾ Providing appropriate weapons and security gadgets to 
train escorts, 
¾ Provision of some basic rescue equipments in each train, 
¾ Introduction of public address system in all trains to 
caution the passengers in case of any eventuality 
3.3.3 Security Arrangements in Trains 
The increase in the incidence of crime and threat from naxalites/terrorists has 
led to increased requirement of security arrangements in trains. Effective 
security arrangements on board trains, requires adequate deployment of staff, 
provision of security equipments to the escort personnel and efficient co-
ordination between the RPF, GRP and the commercial staff on board the trains. 
3.3.4 Train Escorting 
Train Escorting is the primary responsibility of the GRP. However, with the 
amendment of RPF Act in 2003, the mandate of the RPF now includes 
protection of railway property, passenger area and passengers. The RPF  is also 
escorting trains now both to augment the security in trains and for ensuring 
passenger safety.  
Audit examined the security arrangements provided in ten trains in each zone. 
The results are as follows: 
¾ Out of the 12709 train services per day (including suburban services) as 
of 2009-10 a total of 4019 trains (32 per cent) only were provided with 
escort. 
¾ Out of the 161 trains examined 32 trains were escorted by GRP and 66 by 
RPF.  
¾ In 28 trains (17 per cent of the test checked trains) both GRP and RPF 
were escorting the trains.  
¾ The GRP guards were found armed only in 46 trains whereas the RPF 
guards were found armed in 89 trains.  
¾ 35 out of 161 trains examined were not found escorted either by RPF or 
GRP personnel.  These included prestigious trains like Trivandrum –
Hazrat Nizamuddin Rajdhani, Mumbai – New Delhi Rajdhani, August 
Kranti Rajdhani, Mysore –Chennai shatabdi, Patna Garibrath and five 
other trains passing through the naxalite affected area and those prone to 
dacoity. 
¾ As against the total 155 GRP personnel deployed, RPF deployed 523 
personnel for escort in these trains. Further, in a number of cases the GRP 
personnel were disembarking at the end of their State jurisdiction and the 
fresh set of GRP did not board immediately. For instance in SECR, there 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)26
were 33 trains in which GRP escorts of adjoining states did not board the 
trains immediately after the GRP of the previous state disembarked after 
completion of their duty.  During this interregnum, the trains remain 
unescorted.  Thus the trains are running unprotected at several intervals 
making it vulnerable for the passengers as many cases of looting and 
dacoity are reported when the trains are not escorted by security 
personnel. 
¾ In SECR, the GRP personnel were withdrawn from train escorting duties 
by the Chattisgarh and Maharashtra State Governments. The reasons for 
the same are not known to Audit.  
¾ Rajdhani and Shatabdi trains in Southern Railway are not being escorted 
by security personnel. Further, though the Security Department directed 
that the security personnel on escort duty report to the train Guard before 
taking charge, this order was not followed in seven out of ten trains test 
checked. Further, two of the train crew reported that they had not seen the 
security staff.  
Audit observed that with the increase in the risk perception in their area, both 
SER and ECR have increased the strength of escort parties by redeploying staff 
from less sensitive areas. They are also being better equipped with bullet proof 
jackets/helmets, sophisticated weapons, walkie-talkies, mobile phones etc. The 
strength of escort parties varies with the vulnerability of trains/section and 
availability of manpower.  
In other zones also escort parties/armed guards are being constituted keeping in 
view the importance of trains to be escorted, vulnerability of route and the law 
and order situation of the areas and man-power availability.  
Audit observed that despite increased sensitivity to security, many important 
trains were unescorted and the escorts were unarmed. The size of the escort 
party varied from zone to zone and frequently the escort party was unarmed. 
Even trains were left unescorted due to problems of jurisdiction.
IR in its reply (July 2011) stated the following:- 
¾ The strength of train escort party cannot be specified by the Railway 
Board. It has to be decided by the local authorities considering the crime 
position. 
¾ As far as RPF is concerned, the strength of RPF escort party should not 
be less than 1+3. The strength of GRP is decided by GRP authorities. 
However, the crime rate at stations and trains has increased over the last five 
years. Thus it is essential that a larger number of trains be escorted and the 
basic norms of size of party and arms to be carried need to be specified. 
3.3.5 Impact of Train Escorting 
The number of crimes cases in the unescorted trains is likely to be more than 
that in escorted trains.  In fact, the number of crimes registered an increase in 
non escorted trains (4797 in 2007-08 to 6072 in 2009-10), while the number of 
crimes registered in escorted trains declined  from 2781 in 2007-08 to 2571 in 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 27
2009-10. This indicates that escorting of trains by security guards has a positive 
effect in reducing crime. 
Despite intensive escort duty being introduced, in August 2010, three cases of 
dacoity were reported in Danapur Division of ECR in three passenger trains in 
which passengers’ belongings were looted.  However it was noticed that only 
one train (No.3111 Up) was being escorted by security personnel. Besides 
these, several cases of dacoity, theft and molestation were reported recently 
from these areas, including the looting of Sealdah-New Delhi Lal Quila express 
in August 2010.  In the Lal Quila Express though GRP personnel were 
escorting the train, they were unarmed and were not able to resist the armed 
dacoits. This shows that adequate security is not ensured for the passengers 
travelling in trains especially in crime prone areas.
Above incidents indicate that despite the reported increase in escorting of 
trains, and other security arrangements, cases of crime against passengers are 
on the increase. The action, therefore, taken by the security agencies in beefing 
up security of passengers appears to be grossly inadequate. The 15
th Lok Sabha 
Standing Committee had also directed that the Railways should ensure that 
adequate armed RPF personnel should be located in trains passing through 
sensitive areas.  
3.4 Mass Rapid Transit System at Chennai 
The Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS) at Chennai which runs from Chennai 
Beach to Velachery covering 17 stations was introduced to decongest traffic 
within Chennai city. In all 14 station buildings were constructed in two phases 
with a total floor area of 2,11,099 Sq. m.  and the remaining station buildings 
are still under construction though  opened for train services.
Due to poor patronage during off peak hours the stations were generally empty 
posing serious threat to the passe ngers from anti social elements.  Reports of 
murder, chain snatching and harassment of elderly and women passengers were 


288
Sec
fre
add
the
ina
3.5
In
sec
sur
pas
of
un
s
Th
asp
in
mo
Sim
lug
curity Manage
quent. Thou
dition to th e
e number o f
adequate con
5 Opini o
order to hav
curity arran g
rvey. A fee d
ssengers ran
the passenge
safe.    
he chart ab o
pects in trai n
the opinio n
oving, 47 per
milarly 64 p
ggage checki
ement in India
ugh there wa
e existing 4 6
f RPF pers o
nsidering the
on of Passen
ve first hand
gements in 
dback form c
ndomly. In a
ers felt that 
ove shows o
n travelling. 
n survey fo u
r cent stated 
per cent pas
ing by the se
an Railways
as a proposal
6 posts of R
onnel to 80 
e cases of cri
ngers
information
Trains an d
containing a
all 1870 pas s
a train journ
opinion of p
While 46 p
und that the 
that the secu
sengers sta t
ecurity perso
Re
l for creation
RPF, only 3 4
for the en t
ime reported
n from the tra
d stations A
a questionna
sengers in 1
ney was safe
passengers 
per cent of p
security p e
urity personn
ted that the y
onnel at the e
eport No.14  of
n of 58 posts
4 posts wer e
tire route, w
d.
avelling pas
Audit cond u
ire was circ u
6 zones res p
e while 17 pe
on some i m
passengers w
ersonnel in t
nel were not
y have not s
enroute stati
f 2011-12 (Rai
s for the MR
e created tot a
which are g r
sengers abou
ucted an o p
ulated amon
ponded. Maj
er cent felt i
mportant se c
which partici
trains were 
t alert.  
seen any ra n
ons.
ilways)
RTS in 
alling 
rossly 
ut the 
pinion 
ng the 
ajority 
it was 
curity 
ipated
alert/ 
ndom 


SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 29
3.6 Conclusion 
Despite being aware of the heightened threat perception, Indian Railways has 
not been able to implement several measures recommended by the High Level 
Committee for providing security to railway passengers at stations as well as in 
trains.  There were large gaps in the security system formulated for ensuring 
passenger safety—both at the stations and on the trains.  The security 
arrangements at stations test checked were found to be inadequate. No effort 
has been made to control access to railway stations and to decongest even 
sensitive high risk stations. Further, installation of state of the art electronic 
surveillance system has been slow and not up to international standards. The 
camera surveillance system installed was unsatisfactory. Care was not taken to 
install cameras at points which would ensure good visibility 
Implementation of ISS on IR should have been viewed in the context of 
enlarging dimensions of terrorist threat to the railway network.  Despite the 
magnitude of unprecedented terrorist attack on Mumbai CST station in 
Mumbai, implementation of the formulated plan viz. the Integrated Security 
System was slow. The ISS was to be implemented by March 2010 and is still to 
be implemented in any of the zones (March 2011).  Boundary walls/ fencing of 
railway stations were excluded from the purview of the formulated plan viz. the 
Integrated Security System.  Further, good lighting which is essential to deter 
crime of all types and facilitates surveillance was not considered for inclusion 
in the ISS.  
Opinion of the passengers regarding security issues indicates that the IR need 
to ensure a more proactive role of the security forces in ensuring the security of 
its passengers.  
The IR failed to frame any guidelines/norms regarding size of the escort party, 
whether it should be armed or not and which trains need to be escorted. The
trains to be escorted were left to the local IR to decide based on manpower 
availability, threat perception of area and importance of the train. Further, there 
was no clear demarcation of the trains to be escorted by RPF and GRP staff 
respectively or whether they are to be escorted by both. In a number of cases 
the GRP personnel were disembarking at the end of their State jurisdiction and 
the fresh escort of GRP did not board immediately. Thus the trains are running 
unprotected at several intervals making it vulnerable to miscreants.  In a 
number of cases the escort party was unarmed making them vulnerable to 
attack. 
There were numerous problems in the registration of crime committed on 
moving trains. Despite existing orders FIR forms were not available in a large 
number of trains. 
Recommendations 
¾ Urgent steps need to be taken to decongest railway stations especially 
those in sabotage prone areas and large cities. Stations need to be 
properly secured by constructing boundary wall /fencing, and restricting 
unauthorised entry.  IR needs to ensure time bound implementation of 
ISS.

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)30
¾ The Electronic Surveillance System provided at many stations are out 
dated and do not cover the entire passenger area of the station.  Systems 
of international standards need to be implemented at selected sensitive 
stations. 
¾ Railways need to take necessary action to make available the FIR forms 
to all coach attendants and ensure that passenger complaints are 
registered with GRP and properly investigated.  
¾ An effective coordinating mechanism needs to be worked out by the IR 
with the civil authorities regarding following issues:- 
x For handling railway related crime an effective mechanism needs to 
be worked out especially where the jurisdiction of crime is not 
identifiable.  
x To ensure that a larger number of trains are escorted, better 
coordination between the RPF and GRP is required. Coordination 
between GRP authorities in neighbouring states also needs to be 
improved to ensure that trains run continuously with escort.  
x It is essential that the IR either forms BD&DS of their own or 
coordinate with the State Authorities/Army to ensure availability of 
BD&DS at all stations.  
¾ The IR needs to consider framing guidelines/norms regarding size of the 
train escort party as well as the criteria for escorting of trains with 
armed guards based on threat perception of the area and importance of 
the train. 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 31
Chapter 4 Safety of Railway property viz. track, 
bridges as well as other fixed structures 
including office buildings, yards, 
workshops and production units 
Indian Railways is the largest organisation in the country with mostly open, 
easily accessible and unguarded assets. These include equipments such as 
signalling, track, open line installations, overhead wires, yards, towers etc.. 
Control of criminal activity on railway premises and of railway property is 
important in view of the increasing movement of passengers and freight on 
Indian Railways. During the past five years the incidence of sabotage on 
railway tracks by terrorist/naxalites has increased. In 2009 there were 26 
incidents of blowing up of rail tracks. 
 The High Level Committee on security had classified rail tracks as one of the 
most important railway asset whose security was of great importance. The 
Committee however failed to give any comprehensive suggestions regarding 
security of rail tracks and Over Head Equipment. 
4.1 Security of Tracks 
Rail tracks traverse both dense urban areas and vast rural areas and forests and 
are typically difficult to monitor and patrol. Maintenance of track is essential to 
ensure smooth running of trains and is covered under the Railways Way & 
Works manual.  This manual provides for routine patrolling by gang men and 
patrolling during monsoon and heavy rainfall.  As an exceptional measure 
Security patrolling is to be provided during periods of civil disturbances.  The 
primary duty in this case is to protect trains against any condition of danger 
such as tampering of tracks or obstruction. 
Protection of rail track against tampering or obstructions is the primary 
responsibility of the state government. The Ministry of Home Affairs clarified 
in 1965 that the primary responsibility for patrolling of tracks and guarding of 
railway bridges, vests with the State Government/Union Territories and 
guarding of other vulnerable installations would be undertaken by RPF. This 
order has been reiterated from time to time. In March 2010, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs again issued an advisory to all states to increase patrolling along 
railway tracks.  
4.1.1 Sabotage Patrolling 
In February 2003, the Railway Board issued instructions to 11 zones 4 to 
introduce patrolling in sabotage prone areas as a new domain. These 
instructions were issued as an interim measure to tackle unforeseen situations 
by undertaking a precautionary step. These instructions directed the Zonal 
Railways to set up suitable machinery at the Divisional level for 
4 CR, ER, ECR, NR, NER, NFR, NWR, SR, SCR, SER and WR 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)32
institutionalising the co-ordination m echanism with the State Government to 
ensure safety of passengers and running of trains in sabotage prone areas. 
These instructions included formation of a Standing Committee in each 
division consisting of ADRM 5 (as Presiding Officer), Sr.DSC 6 (as Convener), 
Sr.DEN7/Co-ordination (as Member) and Sr.DOM 8/IC (as Member). This 
committee was to meet frequently and identify sabotage prone areas. They 
were to coordinate with the State Government and request them to provide 
patrolling in these areas and also supplement their efforts. Further, surprise 
mobile patrolling teams (consisting of both RPF and gangmen) were to be 
formed in each division. In addition, measures such as reduction of train speed, 
running of pilot engine ahead of certain trains, running of goods trains ahead of 
certain trains/group of trains, etc. were to be implemented whenever required.
Audit observed the following: 
¾ Standing Committees had been formed in all divisions of CR, NR, SCR, 
SR, SER, NER and NFR.  In ECR the same had been formed in three out 
of five divisions.  In ER out of the two divisions test checked the 
Standing Committee had been formed only in one division. No Standing 
Committees have been formed in NCR and NWR. While regular 
meetings were being held in SR, SER, NR and NFR, the same were not 
being held regularly in ECR.  
¾ Regarding patrolling, it is seen that the instructions issued by the Railway 
Board were not being uniformly implemented. Though joint patrolling 
was being carried out on the bas is of threat perception availability of 
manpower. 
¾ Joint patrolling is being carried out only in Chunar – Chopan section of 
Allahabad division of NCR, as it has been identified as sabotage prone 
area.    
¾ In NR, joint patrolling of the sabotage prone area is being done in one 
division only and in CR it is being done in two divisions.   
¾ In SCR, the same is being done wherever necessary based on the 
intelligence wing output.   
¾ Instructions have been issued by WR administration to introduce track 
patrolling along with the engineering staff in the sabotage prone area.  As 
a precautionary measure, joint patrolling is done in Mhow-Khandwa 
section and Meghnagar – Dahod section by the joint team of Engineering, 
RPF and Signalling & Telecommunication departments.  Coordination 
Committee is functioning in Ratlam and Bhavnagar divisions. 
¾ It was noticed that in ECR, NFR surprise night track patrolling was not 
being done on regular basis due to shortage of staff.  In ER, the gang-men 
5 ADRM-Additional Divisional Railway Manager 
6 Sr. DSC – Senior Divisional Security Commissioner 
7 Sr. DEN-Senior Divisional Engineer 
8 Sr. DOM-Senior Divisional Operating Manager 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 33
of engineering department conduct night track patrolling in vulnerable 
areas.  In exigencies, special patrol trains rush to the area immediately. 
¾ In ECoR, patrolling is being done as and when required. 
¾ In SER, patrolling by gang men has however been intensified but no 
surprise patrolling is being carried out by security personnel as sabotage 
in Maoist infested areas was normally not in the form of thefts/tampering 
of railway track fittings/signal gears etc. Track sabotage, normally 
occurred during pre- announced bandh-calls/protests etc. 
4.1.2 Limitations of Track Patrolling 
Given the gigantic size of the rail network of the Indian Railways, physical 
patrolling in motorised trolleys and on foot can be possible only in selective 
sensitive stretches.  Technical solutions for monitor ring railway tracks over a 
much larger area need to be resorted to in sensitive areas.   
4.2 Impact on Safety 
Despite the above measures, the incidence of sabotage has increased in the past 
one year. Railway accidents due to sabotage have increased from 5 in 2005-06 
to 14 during 2009-10.  
Railways have indicated that there were 26 incidents of blowing of railway 
track etc. in 2009 as against 11 in 2008. The revenue loss in goods traffic in 
Eastern Railway alone was ` 25.38 crore during the period 2008-09 to 
November 2010 due to naxalite/maoist activities.  
Two major incidents of train derai lment occurred in 2010. The Rajdhani 
Express was derailed in Bihar’s Gaya district in March 2010. The 
Commissioner of Railway Safety, Eastern Circle, Kolkata concluded that the 
derailment was due to explosion of bomb on the track. 
In another case, the Jnaneswari Express derailed and collided with a goods 
train running in the opposite direction on the adjacent track on 28 May 2010. 
150 passengers (including four staff) died while 168 passengers and two staff 
were injured in this accident. Complete rail traffic was stopped for two days in 
the section. The Railway Safety Commissioner (CRS) confirmed that the 
accident on the Jnaneswari Express was caused by tampering of track and 
attributed the cause as sabotage.  
Examination of records revealed that the Railway Board on 24
th and 25 th May 
2010, had advised the Zonal Railways to take adequate precaution to protect 
Railway property against any subversive activities in view of the Maoist’s call 
for observance of Kala Saptaha from 28 May to 2 June 2010. Further, specific 
intelligence reports regarding possible attack on railway property were also 
received. It appears that the IR had not taken any action to secure the track 
other than imposing a speed restriction of 75 kmph as a precautionary measure.   
Despite there being a temporary speed restriction of 75 kmph in the section, the 
train was running at a speed of 96 kmph. A pilot engine was not run on this 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)34
track, though a convoy of trains had passed on this track less than an hour 
earlier.  
The Railways have incurred an expenditure of ` 5.60 crore towards ex-gratia 
payment to the relatives of identified dead and injured passengers, besides the 
loss of revenue due to stoppage of traffic on this section for more than 48 
hours.
4.3 Rail Roko Agitations 
The Indian Railways is a symbol of the central government and hence is the 
target of many agitators who have a grievance against the state/ central 
government. They are frequently successful in halting train movements- both 
passenger and freight for long periods. This not only leads to loss of revenue to 
the railways but also holds the local popu lation to ransom due to problems in 
commuting and shortage of supplies.  During the past one year there have been 
a number of agitations which have targeted the railways and led to disruption 
of rail traffic for long periods. This includes cancellation\ diversion of trains 
leading to loss of substantial revenue. 
The State Police have been frequently unsuccessful in preventing large scale 
disruption to rail traffic during the periods of agitation by specific groups like 
Jnaneswari Express Accident and collision with Goods Train


SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 35
the Gujjar agitation and the recent Jat agitation.  From April to December 2010, 
there had been 115 cases of ‘rail roko’ agitations few of which were spread 
over a period of three weeks.  More than 1500 passenger trains had to be 
cancelled, and another 1500 diverted over longer routes and more than 3500 re-
scheduled on account of such disruptions.  During 2010 the railways have lost 
about ` 504.62 crores on account of these agitations.  
IR in its reply in May 2010 stated that it is the statutory responsibility of the 
State Government concerned to ensure smooth and safe running of trains.  
Further, IR also brought out that Standing Committees consisting of ADRM, 
Sr.DSC, Sr. DEN & Sr. DOM are functioning at Divisional level of the Zonal 
Railways.  IR stated (July 2011) that presently, security of tracks, bridges and 
tunnels in the Jammu & Kashmir and affected sections of Northeast Frontier 
Region and Left Wing extremist affected area is undertaken by respective state 
governments.
Audit observed that the secured running of trains is not being ensured at all 
times indicating a greater need for cooperation with the state governments.  
Further, Audit observed that Standing Committees have not been set up in all 
the divisions in ECR, ER, NCR and NWR.
4.4 Security in Railway Establishments
With the heightened threat perspective in Indian Railways, all Railway 
establishments are also vulnerable to terrorist attacks. A review in Audit of the 
security arrangements in some of the important establishments like General 
Manager (GM)’s office, Railway Hospitals, Workshops, Yards, Passenger 
Reservation System (PRS) servers etc. of th e Zonal Railways revealed the 
following: 
¾ Out of 15 General Manager’s offices checked, security guards were 
posted at all the entry points in only ten
9  zones and Metro Kolkata.  In 
the remaining zones all the entry points were not guarded.  Armed guards 
were posted only at four zones (SR, NER, CR & ER) and Metro Railway.  
Private security guards were provided at three zones (SECR, SCR & 
NCR).  In SCR both private security and RPF guards were deployed at 
the GM’s office building.  No proper screening of visitors was taking 
place as DFMDs were provided only at five zones (NER, CR, SCR, NFR 
& NR) and Metro Kolkata. 
¾ No guards were deployed in five zones (SWR, NER, NWR, WR & ECR) 
out of 17 Railway hospitals examined.  Security guards were not armed in 
any zone except in NFR.  Though private security guards were deployed 
in six zones (ECoR, SECR, NCR, SCR, WCR & NR), they were not 
armed. In NR the Central Hospital at New Delhi was being guarded by 
both private security and RPF. 
9 SR, NER, SER, SECR, SCR, ER, ECR, NFR, WCR, NR. 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)36
¾ Similarly in 19 workshops and 22 yards in the Zonal Railways examined 
by audit it was noticed that though RPF guards were deployed, in most of 
the places they were found unarmed.   
Further, some yards were found open from all sides with no fencing and 
boundary wall at all. 
4.4.1 Criminal cases on Railway Premises
As per the RPF Act the protection and safeguarding railway property and 
railway premises is entrusted to RPF.  The table below gives the position of the 
crime reported on railway premises. 
From the above table it seen that the total crime rate has more than doubled in 
the last five years. The places most vulnerable to crime are Railway Stations 
and Goods shed/Yards. However the deployment of RPF at these places has not 
been modified in accordance with the increase in crime rates. The deployment 
at workshops and production units was 2366 in 2005-06 and was only slightly 
Year Work 
shop/ 
Prod. 
Units 
Yard/ 
Goods 
Shed 
Constru
ction 
sites 
Cash
Duty 
Railway 
Stations 
Admin. 
Buildings 
Resident
ial 
colonies 
Others Total
2005-06 280 1972 1 14 5368 16 11 18295 25957 
2006-07 162 1500 16 4 7348 13 7 24256 33306 
2007-08 153 2108 31 11 8998 18 17 34156 45492 
2008-09 140 1867 31 9 8852 22 6 36455 47382 
2009-10 96 1748 5 7 9201 8 15 42924 54081 
Source:-Figures furnished by Zonal Railway 
Ghorpuri Yard, Pune open from all sides


SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 37
reduced to 2279 in 2009-10 (reduction of only four per cent), while the crime 
rate in workshops and production units declined by 65 per cent in 2009-10.   
Similarly the crime rate at Railway stations increased from 5368 in 2005-06 to 
9201 in 2009-10 (increase of 71 per cent), whereas the deployment of RPF at 
stations was 9345 in 2005-06 which increased to only 10687 in 2009-10 
(increased by 14 per cent only).  
Though the RPF is empowered to investigate and raid the suspect’s premises 
and arrest culprits, the detection of theft/pilferage cases is not very satisfactory. 
The details of theft cases and their detection available in fifteen zones (ER, SR, 
SCR, NFR, NWR, ECoR, WCR, NCR, NER, NR, SWR, WR, ECR, SER and 
CR) and Metro/Kolkata for the last five years are as follows: 
It is seen from the above table that the percentage of detection of cases ranged 
only between 58 per cent and 76 per cent. A further review revealed that the 
percentage of detection of cases had never gone beyond 39 per cent in ER in 
the last five years.  Similarly full value of the property could not be recovered 
in any of the years. 
4.5 Compensation Claims 
As per the Railways Act, 1989, the IR is responsible for the loss/destruction, or 
non-delivery of animals or goods delivered to the administration for carriage by 
railway. Their loss/destruction not only involves claims for compensation but 
also results in loss of public goodwill. Audit observed that all cases lodged 
with the Railway Claim offices were not registered with the RPF. Out of 81834 
claim cases lodged with Railway  claim offices in nine
10 zones only 1341 cases 
(1.64 per cent) were finally registered with the RPF and the same were 
investigated. In other zones the position of cases registered with RPF were not 
made available. It is evident from the above figures that all the claim cases 
were not registered with the RPF. The reasons for not registering all the claims 
lodged with the RPF are not clear. 
As per Para 2101 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual, reduction in claims 
is one of the indices of efficiency of the Railways and every efforts should be 
made to reduce the Railway claims bill. The compensation paid by Railways 
10 SR, SWR, SER, SECR, CR, NCR, SCR, WR, NFR. 
Sl.No. Year No. of 
cases
registered 
No. of 
cases
detected 
Percentage of 
detection on 
cases
registered 
Value of 
property 
stolen (in 
crores of 
`)
Value of 
property 
recovered 
(in crores 
of `)
1 2005-06 9214 5334 57.89 3.33 2.35
2 2006-07 7846 5409 68.93 4.05 3.00 
3 2007-08 8142 5489 67.42 3.43 2.42 
4 2008-09 7317 4990 68.20 5.39 3.47 
5 2009-10 5540 4018 75.53 3.66 2.64

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)38
during the period 2005-10 for death and injury in train accidents as well as for 
the damage /theft of goods carried by it is indicated below.  
(` in crore) 
Year Compensation paid by Railways for 
Death  /Injury in train accidents Loss of goods carried 
2005-06 2.22 17.59 
2006-07 5.01 14.71 
2007-08 1.21 9.85 
2008-09 2.66 6.40 
2009-10 4.85 13.99 
Source:-Year Book Indian Railways 
It is seen that the compensation paid by Railways has been fluctuating widely. 
During 2009-10 payment of compensation increased substantially for both 
death/injury cases and loss of goods carried indicating a decline in one of their 
efficiency indices. 
4.6 Disposal of empty cartridges 
Railway Board issued guidelines in September 2006 elaborating the procedure 
for disposal of empty fired cartridges lying with RPF. The empty cartridges 
were to be disposed off with the approval of standing committee consisting of 
Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer, Controller of Stores/Chief 
Materials Manager and CSC/RPF. The review of records revealed that in four 
zones
11 a total quantity of 36640.53 kgs and in eight zones 12 and two 
production units a quantity of 6380904 Nos of empty cartridges had not been 
disposed. Delay in disposal leads to non realisation of revenue on scrap and 
also unnecessary expenditure on security and custody of the scrap. 
4.7 Conclusion  
The Standing Committee on Railways of the 15 th Lok Sabha had observed 
(August 2010) that the Indian Railways is the lifeline of the nation, but when 
the life of passengers and the property of the Railways themselves become a 
casualty in the wake of accidents etc. it is a cause of worry which warrants 
serious introspection. 
The IR’s primary responsibility is to ensure safe and smooth running of trains –
both passenger and freight. For this a secure and obstruction free rail track is 
essential. High Level Committee had also recommended that technological 
solutions need to be found for ensuring better surveillance of tracks in sensitive 
areas.  However, it has been observed that the IR has not formulated any 
composite plan in consultation with the state governments for ensuring safety 
and security of its assets especially tracks and bridges and Over Head 
Equipment (OHE). 
11 SR-17393.08kg, SCR-6706.02kg, ER-9374.44kg, NR-3167kg. 
12 NER-238390 Nos., ECoR-328284 Nos,SER-1777788 Nos., SECR-102513 Nos., CR-  
1320715 Nos., WR-1310062 Nos., ECR-492317 Nos., NFR-648208 Nos., CLW-154969 Nos., 
DLW-7658 Nos. 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 39
Controlling of crime on railway premises/of railway property is the 
responsibility of the RPF.   In the last five years there has been a distinct rise in 
the total crime rate at railway premises indicating that the RPF needs to 
upgrade the level of security provided at railway premises. 
Recommendations 
¾ It is essential that the IR work out an arrangement with the State 
Government Authorities for adequate steps to intensify track patrolling 
and institutionalise the co-ordination mechanism with the State 
Government authorities to ensure security of passengers and running of 
trains in sabotage prone areas.  
¾ Railways should register all claim cases with the RPF for proper 
investigation and apprehension of culprits. 
¾ With the rise in the crime in railway premises, it is essential that RPF 
upgrade the level of security provided.

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)40
Chapter 5 Preparedness of Indian Railways to 
handle the enhanced threat environment
Security is the degree of protection against danger, damage, loss and criminal 
activity. A security system leads to a high-performance system.  When used 
together it is sufficient to ensure adequate levels of protection and is capable of 
handling disasters in the minimum possible time frame and least number of 
causalities. Another important aspect is the reduction of disruption to the 
systems of rail transportation ie the time taken for the railway system to start 
operating again.  
5.1 Preparedness for Crisis Management 
Crisis management is the process by which an organization deals with a major 
event that threatens to harm an organization or its stake holders. It consists of 
skills and techniques to handle a situation after it occurs to the point that 
recovery starts. Crisis management in the context of the railways would focus 
on minimising the loss of life and reduction in disruption in the operation of the 
Railways. 
Crisis /Disasters confronting the Indian Railways can be classified into four 
main types: 
¾ National level crisis which is specific to railways and is required to be 
managed with the help of other Ministries 
¾ National level crisis which affects the country including the railways and 
different ministries have to help each other viz Earthquake, Cyclone etc.  
The Ministry of Home Affairs will assist railways in security related 
crisis situation like sabotage, bomb blast etc. 
¾ Crisis situation which is not a national level crisis and is required to be 
managed with the help of other Ministries.  Chemical explosions, fire in 
trains etc are covered under this type.  
¾ Crisis situation which is not a national level crisis and can be managed 
with the help of internal resources of the railways. 
For security related national level crisis, the Ministry of Home Affairs plays the 
lead role.  For other crisis, railways are required to prepare its own crisis 
management plans.  To deal with a crisis  situation, the following Committees 
become activated. 
(i) National Crisis Management Committee (NCMC)–Apex body of 
Government of India to deliberate on national crisis. For security related 
crisis member Staff and Member Traffic are members. 
(ii) Crisis Management Group- This is the executive authority responsible for 
handling the crisis and will work under the broad directives issued by 
NCMC and will co-ordinate with the zonal management group.  For 
security related crisis DG /RPF is the convenor. 

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 41
(iii) Zonal Management Group –This group is the same for all crisis and is 
established at the zonal level.  This group is convened by the Additional 
General Managers and includes the representatives from safety, security 
and Engineering departments. 
During any security related crisis, the railways may need the help of other 
agencies for their expertise.  In these cases the instructions contained in the 
Railway accident manual /Disaster Management plan become applicable.  The 
disaster management plan at the zonal level plays an important role and has to 
be dovetailed with the disaster manageme nt plan of the State Government and 
District Administration. In cases of sabotage the GRP and the State Police play 
an important role as they investigate the criminal cases relating to sabotage 
/explosion. 
Chapter 1 of report No. 8 of 2008 of the C&AG of India (Railways) on 
Disaster Management on Indian Railways had reviewed emergency 
preparedness across Indian Railways in handling disasters.  While verifying the 
action taken note of the Ministry of R ailways it was observed that full scale 
disaster management exercise was not conducted in SER during 2008-10 
except once each at Hatia- Muri sectio n and Rourkela.  IR stated (July 2011) 
that since there is a lot of traffic and accidents in SER and actual full scale 
disaster management exercise takes place very often so there was no need to 
conduct mock disaster management exercise during the period.  
The Public Accounts Committee of 15
th Lok Sabha in its Sixteenth Report
(2009-10) on Disaster Management, noted that achieving rapid access to the 
accident sites still remains a major hurdle as rescue operation during the 
Golden Hour cannot be achieved with conventional provision of Accident 
Relief Train (ART), Accident Relief Medical Van (ARMV) and Self Propelled 
Accident Relief Train (SPART) etc.  In this context, Public Accounts 
Committee (PAC) stated that the Indian Railways require a paradigm shift  in 
their approach and integration of railway disaster management infrastructure 
with those of civil authorities, armed forces etc.   
5.2 Restoration of Commercial Traffic 
An analysis of restarting of movement of trains after an accident was done by 
the safety directorate in Railway Board. It observed that after the track is 
declared fit there are considerable delays in restoring the movement of 
commercial trains after the restoration subsequent to an accident.  Restoration 
of commercial traffic after “Track Fit
13’ took time ranging from one hour to 20 
hours in 171 cases, whereas restoration after ‘OHE Fit’ took 13 minutes to four 
hours in 25 cases. 
5.3 Man Power Management 
Manpower management focuses on the accurate identification of human 
resource requirements (in terms of both quantity and quality) necessary to 
13 Track fit condition is the state when track is declared fit for running trains after carrying out 
repair to the damage caused due to accident /sabotage 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)42
perform specific tasks and in which they will be most efficiently and 
economically used. 
5.3.1 Man power shortage 
The manpower position as of 1 st April for the period 2005-06 to 2009-10 is 
given in Annexure-III. It is seen that in all the five years there was a shortage 
of staff in all the categories. The combined vacancies of the railway security 
forces declined from 19 to 11 per cent during the period 2005-10. In GRP, the 
vacancy position increased from seven per cent in 2005-06 to sixteen per cent 
in 2009-10.  The shortfall in manpower in RPF, RPSF and GRP is depicted 
below: 
In the aftermath of the bomb blasts in trains in Mumbai during July 2006, the 
Railway Board in August 2006 called for comprehensive proposals for creation 
of additional posts so as to strengthen the security in Zonal Railways. In 
response to this the Railways (including Metro/Kolkata) sent their proposals 
for additional man power totalling to 23655 personnel
14.
Audit observed that in South Central Railway, the assessment of requirement 
for additional man power was defective. In July 2006 it was decided that Zonal 
Railways should not deploy RPF at goods sheds, train examination points etc. 
which had either been closed or reduced. However, SCR continued deployment 
of RPF in these areas and the deployment was disproportionately higher than 
the requirement. RPF personnel were also deployed as safaiwalas and cooks 
despite the decision that such works be outsourced.  The requirement was also 
worked out without taking into account the deployment made by GRP for train 
escorting. This position is likely to be persisting in other zones also.  It is thus 
14 SR-2008, SWR-1171, NER-1298, NWR-2671, SER-731, SECR-294, CR- 2638, NCR-737, 
SCR-1136, ER- 827, WR-5072, ECR-2879, NFR-367, NR-1532, ECoR-150, Metro-.144 
11189
9806
7005 6896 7174
2173 2617 2349
4052
6335
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
2005Ͳ06 2006 Ͳ07 2007 Ͳ08 2008 Ͳ09 2009 Ͳ10
Shortage Total RPF & RPSF Shortage GRP
Man power shortage

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 43
essential that the sanctioned strength be re-estimated in all zones based on the 
above directions issued by Railway Board.   
Railway Board instructed the zones to outsource the security duties of non-core 
activities to private parties. Out of 16 zones, Metro Railway and six production 
units, only in 9 zones 15 and one production unit the security of some sections 
(Dongaposi section of SER) administrative buildings, hospitals etc. was 
outsourced. Out of this, in SCR security of GM Building and in NR security of 
Central Hospital, New Delhi was being guarded done by both RPF and private 
security personnel.  
Thus it is evident that Railways are reluctant to outsource security even in non 
core areas to private agencies. Audit attempted a comparison of cost of security 
arrangements provided by RPF in Carriage Workshop, Perambur (SR) with the 
cost of engaging private security at Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) Terminal, 
Korukkupet, Chennai. It was noticed that the average cost per RPF personnel 
was `24273 whereas the average cost per private personnel at IOC terminal 
was only `13970. This shows that if the Railways had engaged private security 
personnel at non core areas they could have saved substantial amounts, besides 
utilising the RPF personnel for core areas. 
Though the manpower position shows that there were a large number of 
vacancies in the RPF/RPSF, it is felt that if available manpower had been 
reorganized prioritizing core operations the assessed staff strength required 
may have declined. Despite proposals for creating more than 25,000 posts, the 
creation of posts was slow. The use of efficiency multipliers like DFMD’s etc. 
also needs to be factored in before assessing the staff strength required.  
The proposals for creation of additional posts were sent to Railway Board 
during the period 2006 to 2009.  The Security Directorate of Railway Board 
informed Audit in January 2011 that 5134 posts had been created and the 
recruitment process is underway. Though threat perspective had increased from 
every angle - terrorist attack or naxalite/maoist attack - the Railways and the 
State Governments appear to be very slow in filling up the existing vacancies 
or redeploying man power for meeting the challenge of increased threat.  
5.4 Training and Capacity Building 
5.4.1 Training facilities 
The High Level Committee on security for Indian Railways recommended that 
training and capacity building in terms of Man – Machine and procedures to 
counter anti social/extremist activities are required. The Committee brought out 
the following requirements: 
¾ General sensitization of 100 per cent staff on Composite Security Plan to 
inculcate a professional attitude/ an instinctive response to threat 
assessment, response skills and post event execution through booklets, 
Capsule/Short term and specialized courses in a phased manner.  
15 NWR, ECoR, SER, SECR, NCR, SCR, ECR, WCR, NR and DLW Varanasi. 

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)44
¾ Facilities at Zonal RPF Training centres to be suitably upgraded to meet 
the requirements and each zone should have at least one training centre as 
each zone had its own peculiar problems.  
¾ Every CSC should have his own independent training apparatus and 
curriculum. 
Continuous training to upgrade knowledge levels to handle improved security 
systems, arms and ammunition is essential. The 15 th Lok Sabha Standing 
Committee on Railways had also recommended that the officers and staff 
should be provided intensive training at regular intervals followed by refresher 
courses.  There are 13 training centres for imparting training to RPF/RPSF staff 
over Indian Railways. 
Audit reviewed the training programmes conducted in 15 zones (except NFR 
where the records were not made available). Audit examination revealed that 
4112 training programmes were conducted for the officers and staff of RPF 
during the period 2005-10. Out of the 32622 staff nominated for the training 
programmes, 1122 staff did not attend the trainings due to various reasons. It 
was further observed that out of 302 officers in the rank of DSC/ASC 
nominated, 56 did not attend due to administrative reasons. Since training is an 
integral part of duties non-attendance on the ground of administrative reasons 
is not justified.  
5.4.2 Up-gradation of training facilities
The Railway planned to upgrade the training facilities provided at the 10 
recognised training centres of RPF over various Zonal Railways and to 
transform the Centralised Training Institute (CTI) at Lucknow in to a World 
Class training centre.  They also planned to add three more training centres at 
Kanchrapara (ER), Nasik Road and Chinkhill (CR).  
Audit observed that the existing training facilities were frequently incomplete 
and consequently remained underutilised. Regarding upgradation of training 
facilities at RPF training centres a budgetary allocation of ` 11 crore has been 
made. However, no expenditure has been incurred and no time frame has also 
been given for upgrading the training facilities. Thus, even after three years of 
submission of report by the committee its recommendation remains largely 
unimplemented.   IR stated (July 2011) that phase wise up gradation of training 
centres is being done. 
5.4.3 Multi skill training to all RPF /RPSF personnel 
The IR planned to provide training to RPF /RPSF personnel in unarmed 
combat, disaster management and commando training at par with other para-
military forces like CRPF, BSF etc.  IR stated that slots have been allocated for 
RPF at NISA Hyderabad for training of trainer’s course in disaster 
management, counter insurgency and jungle warfare for gazetted officers and 
subordinate officers at SSB/GWALDUM, and Police commando instructor 
course at NSG.  Efforts are being made to get further slots in reputed training 
centres for specialised courses.  

SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 45
IR mentioned (May 2010) that RPF staff were/are being sent for Training of 
Trainers of Disaster Management at NISA, CISF, Hyderabad & Military 
Engineering College, Pune from time to time.  Besides, Disaster Management 
courses are also conducted at JR/RPF/Academy to tackle the emergent 
situation.  IR’s contention is not acceptable as existing training facilities 
remained underutilised.   Further training programmes were not attended by 
many of the security personnel on the ground of administrative reasons. 
Thus, it is seen that the long term action plan for improvement in the security 
system of the Railways has not yet been implemented.  In some of the cases 
even though action has been initiated no concrete results are yet visible.   
5.5 Conclusion 
In some of the zones in Railways full scale disaster management exercise was 
not conducted and the control rooms with communication facilities also 
remained to be provided.  IR was neither able to rapidly access the disaster 
sites nor could they provide orga nised rescue and relief during the Golden 
Hour with the conventional ART, ARMV and SPART etc.  Further, 
considerable delays were observed in restoring the movement of commercial 
trains after “Track Fit /OHE Fit. 
Despite the fact that threat perspective had increased from every angle - 
terrorist attack or naxalite/maoist  attack - the Railways and the State 
Governments did not respond promptly in fill ing up the existing vacancies or 
redeploying man power for meeting the challenge of increased threat.   
The existing training facilities were frequently incomplete .and consequently 
remained underutilised.   Further non-attendance of training programmes on the 
ground of administrative reasons was indicative of casual approach of security 
personnel towards their duties. 
Even though action has been initiated for implementing long term action plan 
no concrete results are yet visible. 
Recommendations 
¾ The Indian Railways needs to integrate railway disaster management 
infrastructure with those of civil authorities, armed forces etc. The 
current arrangement of co-ordination for rescue and relief operations 
with civil authorities need to be further strengthened.  Better use needs to 
be made of infrastructure available with the armed forces like use of 
hover craft etc. 
¾ In view of the huge additional staff required for discharging their duties it 
is essential that the IR re-assesses the st aff required for manning its core 
operations taking into account all efficiency multipliers.   
¾ To handle the substantially enhanced risk environment, the competence of 
the departments handling disaster management needs a substantial 
upgrade.   A comprehensive training programme needs to be framed to 
synergise the security forces and improve their response capabilities.   

Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)46
Chapter 6 State of Preparation of Indian 
Railways 
6.1 Surprise Inspection of High Risk Railway Stations 
With a view to examine the preparedness and alertness of security staff and the 
security equipments provided at railway stations, Audit conducted surprise 
check at one station categorised as high risk in each zone on one day in 
collaboration with officers of RPF in January/ February 2011.  The surprise 
check of 15 stations revealed the following: 
¾ Out of 137 authorised gates there were 41 gates without any DFMDs 
installed. Out of these 41 gates only 59 per cent were found to be manned 
by RPF /GRP personnel.  Checking of passengers was being carried out 
in only 3 stations. 
¾ There were 106 unauthorised entry points at these 15 stations. No security 
personnel were deployed at these entrances except at Sealdah where 10 
personnel were deployed against 50 entrances. 
¾ Out of a total of 96 DFMDs provided over 15 stations, 32 per cent were 
found to be non-functional.  
¾ Baggage scanners were provided at only 5 stations  
¾ Out of a total of 470 CCTVs /Cameras /monitors provided at stations, 76 
(16 per cent) were not found to be in working condition. Further, no 
CCTVs were found provided in 2 stations. 
Position checked on some of the important stations is indicated below:- 
¾ Sealdah Station of Eastern Railway was inspected on 24-1-2011. Nearly 
68 per cent of the DFMDs provided were not working. Against 50 
unauthorised entries at this station, only 10 security personnel were 
deployed.   
Unrestricted entry point at Sealdah station in ER Entry without DFMD and Baggage scanner at 
Sealdah station in ER


SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 47
¾ Jharsuguda Station of SE Railway (lies in Maoist affected territory) was 
inspected on 31-1-2011 has several unauthorised entry points.  There 
were no DFMDs installed since the two provided became out of order 
and were sent for repair in November 2010. There were no baggage 
scanners or CCTVs at this station. 
¾ Mumbai CST station of Central Railway, which was targeted by terrorists 
in November 2008 was inspected on 28-01-2011.  This station still has 7 
unauthorised unguarded entry points.  Though it has 28 DFMDs installed, 
there are only two baggage scanners. 
Unrestricted open entry at Jharsugda station  in SER 
Unrestricted entry at Mumbai station in CR 


Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)48
¾ The Chennai Egmore station of Southern Railway inspected on  
24-1-2011, has five unauthorised and unguarded entry points and three 
gates without DFMDs, out of which only one was manned by security 
personnel but no frisking was done on that gate too.  It was also found 
that out of 29 CCTV cameras provided at the station, 12 were not 
working. The TV scanners were also not placed correctly. 
¾ Inspection of Surat station in WR on 27-01-2011 revealed that no 
DFMDs or Baggage Scanners were provided at the entrances.  At this 
station, there were six authorised and six unauthorised entry points, none 
of which was manned by security personnel.  Further, 20 of the 46 
CCTV/Cameras/Monitors provided at the station were not working.   
Surveillance Camera obstructed by Advertisement Monitor at Chennai 
station in SR 
Unrestricted entry at Surat station in WR


SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 49
¾ At Patna station of ECR which was inspected on 28-01-2011 there was 
no luggage scanner and none of the six DFMDs provided were working.  
Further 29 of the 48 CCTV/Cameras/Monitors provided at the station 
were not working. 
No baggage scanner at entry point at Patna station in 
ECR
Gap near DFMD at Patna station in ECR 
¾ Hyderabad station in SCR was inspected on 01-2-2011.  It was seen that 
one out of four DFMDs was not functioning and the station had no 
baggage scanner installed on it.  Further, six gates on this station were not 
equipped with DFMDs and were not even guarded by the security 
personnel. 
Non functional DFMD and gaps near DFMD at Hyderabad station in SCR 


Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)50
¾ Allahabad station of NCR which was inspected on 25-01-2011, had no 
baggage scanner and DFMD installed and the five unauthorised entry 
points were not even manned by the security personnel.  
Unguarded entry at Allahabad station in NCR Unguarded/ unauthorized entry at Allahabad station in 
NCR
¾ Bhubaneswar station in ECoR was inspected on 25-01-2011.  The station 
has four unauthorised and unguarded entry points.  At two gates there 
were no guards or DFMDs.  The only DFMD provided at one gate was 
not working.  Further, the station has no CCTV/Cameras/Monitors 
installed on it. 
Entry point without DFMD and baggage 
scanner at Bhubaneswar station in ECoR 
Unrestricted entry at Bhubaneswar station 
in ECoR 


SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 51
¾ At Jammu Tawi station of NR (inspected on 01-02-2011), two out of four 
baggage scanners available at the stations were not working.  Two out of 
three DFMDs provided at the station were found switched off at the time 
of inspection.  
¾ Guwahati station in NFR which was inspected on 25-01-2011, had one 
out of four DFMDs and two out of 16 CCTVs not working.  There were 
two unauthorised entry points which were not even guarded.  
Unguarded entry point at Guwahati in NEFR 
Non functional DFMD at Jammu station in NR 


Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)52
¾ Ajmer station in NWR was inspected on 24-01-2011 and it was seen that 
there was no baggage scanner at the station and one out of two DFMDs 
provided at station was not working.  This station was found to be having 
five unauthorised entry points which were not even guarded by security 
personnel.  
Unauthorised entry point at Ajmer Station in NWR Unauthorised entry point at Ajmer Station in NWR
¾ Raipur station of SECR was inspected on 24-1-2011. All the five DFMDs 
provided were not working. Against two unauthorised entry points at this 
station, no security personnel were deployed.  There were no baggage 
scanners available. 
¾ In SWR, at Bangalore station (inspected on 25-01-2011) three out of five 
DFMDs installed were not working.  Further, no baggage scanner was 
installed at the station and five out of the 40 CCTVs were not working.  
Entry point without DFMD and Baggage 
scanner at Raipur station in SECR  
Unguarded entry to platform at Raipur station in 
SECR 


SecurityManagementinIndianRailways
Report No. 14 of 2011-12 (Railways) 53
The station had 17 unauthorised entry points and the same were found to 
be unguarded.  
This inspection indicates the lack of seriousness in the approach of the Indian 
Railways towards security of its passengers. No attempt has been made by 
Entry point without DFMD at Bangalore in SWR  (DFMD sent for repair) 
Some of the CCTVs not working at Bangalore in SWR 


Security Management in Indian Railways
Report No.14  of 2011-12 (Railways)54
them to control access to even high risk stations which are the first step 
towards ensuring security. The surveillance equipment installed is either faulty 
or incorrectly placed resulting in gaps in the system. 
IR in its reply (July 2011) stated that security along with other concerns is one 
of the priority areas of Railways for strengthening and up gradation. Short 
Term and Long Term plans have been formulated for infrastructural 
strengthening and legal empowerment of RPF. Concrete steps have been taken 
as enshrined in Vision 2020 of Indian Railways for synchronization of 
technology and human resource to provide effective security over Indian 
Railways.  It further added that the security of passengers is one of the primary 
concerns of railways and all out efforts are being taken for optimum utilization 
of available resources to provide adequate security to passengers. 
However, keeping in view the results of surprise check, IR need to take 
concrete steps to plug the loop holes in its security system. 
Recommendation 
A paradigm shift in the approach towards security by IR is required.  Simple 
low cost measures like closure of unauthorized entry/exit points need to be 
emphasized. Serious efforts are required to be made for securing entry /exit 
points and proper maintenance of the existing security equipments installed at 
the stations in order to ensure safe and secure rail operations. 
   (T.K. SANYAL) 
New Delhi   Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: 
Countersigned 
    (VINOD RAI) 
New Delhi   Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Dated: 

Security Management in Indian Railways 
 
 Report No.     of 2011-12 (Railways) 55 55 
Annexure I  
(Para No. 1.8) 
Audit scope and methodology 
 
This Performance Audit covers a period of 5 years from 2005-06 to 2009-10. This 
performance audit covers issues pertaini ng to security of railway passengers and 
railway property. The Security related issues and the measures taken by the 
Railways for the period beyond 2009-10 were also checked wherever possible to 
make the observations current.  The methodology followed included the 
following:- 
• The Performance Audit programme commenced with an entry conference in 
June 2010 with the Security Directorate at Railway Board level. At the zonal 
level a separate entry conference was held with the Chief Security 
Commissioners of the Zonal Railways . The audit Objectives, Scope etc. 
were discussed in the entry conference. 
• The records of Security Department in the offices of Railway Board, Chief 
Security Commissioners, Divisional S ecurity Commissioners and outposts 
of RPF were examined. 
• In addition, the position of deployment of GRP, the crime reports of GRP 
and the records relating to payments to State Governments for GRP were 
reviewed.  
• Before undertaking the Performan ce Audit, a pilot study was also 
undertaken in two zones – Central Railw ay and South Central Railway – to 
gather information on the security arrangements and the preparedness of the 
Railways to meet the present day security challenges. 
• Based on the results of the pilot study and information collected at the 
Railway Board level, guidelines were prepared and circulated to all 
Principal Directors of Audit at the z onal level. The Performance Audit was 
conducted based on the guidelines in a ll zones and at the Railway Board 
level. 
• An attempt has also been made to assess the preparedness of the railways in 
handling the crisis /disaster occurring due to the extremist /terrorist attack. 
• Surprise check of one station in each zone was also conducted in 
collaboration with security officers to assess the alertness of security 
personnel and equipments installed.
 
 
 
  

Security Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No.     of 2011-12 (Railways) 56 
 
Annexure II 
(Para No. 1.9) 
 
Sample size 
 
Details of Sample selection done by the zones 
Zone Divisions Stations Workshop Hospital Yard Trains PRS 
server 
GM Office 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
CR Mumbai, Nagpur, 
Pune 
CSTM, Kalyan, 
Nagpur, Wardha, 
Pune 
Matunga Byculla Hospital Trombay, 
Ajni, 
Ghorpuri 
2167, 1027, 2105, 1093, 1057, 
1017, 2322, 1015, 2141, 2163 
CSTM 
PRS 
GM Office, 
CSTM 
ER Howrah, Sealdah Howrah, 
Brdwan, Sealdah, 
Naihati 
Liluah B.R.Singh 
Hospital 
Bandel 
Yard 
2305, 2303, 2321, 2311, 2019, 
3071, 2351, 3049, 3051, 3153 
PRS 
Kolkata 
GM Office, 
Fairlie Place 
NR Delhi, Moradabad Morabad, 
Dehradun, New 
Delhi, 
H.Nizamuddin 
CB Workshop Central Hospital, 
New Delhi 
TKD 2425, 2032, 2137, 2230, 1078, 
1449, 4041, 4553, 5013, 9106 
Delhi GM Office, New 
Delhi 
SR Chennai, Salem Chennai Central, 
Jolarpettai, 
Coimbatore, 
Erode 
Golden Rock Hqrs Hospital, 
Perambur 
Jolarpettai 2431, 2008, 2621, 2323, 2686, 
2633, 2672, 6525, 6222, 1028 
Chennai GM Office, 
Chennai 
WR Mumbai Central, 
Ahmedabad 
Borivali, Vapi, 
Ahmedabad, 
Viramgam 
Sabarmati Railway 
Hospital, Valsad 
Mahim 
Scrap Yard 
2951, 2953, 2955, 2961, 9143, 
4708, 9017, 9115, 2480, 9131 
Nil GM Office, 
Churchgate 
SCR Secunderabad, 
Hyderabad 
Kazipet, 
Vikarabad, 
Kachiguda, 
Nizamabad 
Lallaguda Central Hospital, 
Lallaguda 
Ramagunda
m Yard 
2429, 2703, 2728, 2737, 2797, 
2763, 7002, 7057, 8463, 7604 
  
SER Kharagpur, 
Chakradharpur 
Kharagpur, 
Santragachi, 
Tatanagar, 
Jharsuguda 
Kharagpur Central Hopsital, 
Garden Reach 
Nimpura, 
Tatanagar 
2443, 2022, 8615, 2020, 2860, 
2833, 2703, 2815, 315, 2884 
Nil GM Office, 
Garden Rach 

Security Management in Indian Railways 
 
 Report No.     of 2011-12 (Railways) 57 57 
NER Lucknow (LKO), 
Izatnagar (IZN) 
LKO, GKP, 
CPR, Gonda, 
Kathgodam 
Izatnagar Badshahnagar Gonda 2541, 2555, 2534, 2511, 5014, 
5008, 5308, 5009, 5004, 2559 
Nil GM Office, GKP 
NFR Lumding, Katihar Guwahati, 
Lumding, New 
Jalpaiguri, 
Katihar 
New 
Bongaigaon 
Central Hospital, 
Maligaon 
Marshalling 
Yard, NJP 
5604, 4056, 2424, 5691, 5959, 
2506, 2344,2345, 2502, 5610 
Guwahati GM Office, 
Maligaon 
NCR Allahabad (ALD), 
Agra Cantt(AGC) 
ALD, CNB, 
AGC, MTJ 
Jhansi Central Hospital, 
ALD 
Govind Puri 
Yard 
2001, 2137, 1077, 2724, 2616, 
2417, 2398, 2354, 2424, 2427. 
Nil GM Office, ALD 
ECR Sonepur, Danapur Patna, Danapur, 
Sonepur, Barauni 
SPJ Workshop Divisional 
Hospital, 
Danapur 
Rajendra 
Nagar 
Terminal 
2309, 3201, 2296, 2150, 2948, 
2352, 2360, 3288, 3330, 8623, 
2355, 2142, 8184, 8450 
Patna  
ECoR Kurda Road, 
Sambalpur 
Bhubaneswar, 
Puri, Sambalpur, 
Titlagarh 
Mancheswar Central Hospital, 
Mancheswar 
Cuttack 
Station 
Yard 
2840, 2801, 2838, 2841, 2863, 
2443, 8377, 8410, 8452, 1019 
BBS GM Office, BBS 
SECR Bilaspur, Raipur Durg, Champa Raipur Central Hospital, 
Bilaspur 
Bilaspur 2833, 2807, 2853, 2809, 8239, 
6327, 8207, 8203, 405, 8236 
Nil GM Office, 
Bilaspur 
SWR Hubli, Bangalore UBL, VSG, 
SBC, HUP 
UBL UBL RCD Yard, 
SBC 
2429, 2627,2629,  2780, 6221,  
6517, 6590, 6592, 7415, 7416, 
Nil GM Office, UBL 
WCR Jabalpur, Bhopal JBP, Katni, 
Bhopal, Bina 
Kota Central Hospital, 
JBP 
Scrap Yard, 
Kota 
2121, 2412, 2001, 2156, 2189, 
2191, 1472, 8233, 5010, 2181 
JBP GM Office, JBP 
NWR Jaipur, Jodhpur Jaipur, Rewari, 
Jodhpur, Merta 
Road 
Jodhpur Jaipur Kanakpura 2464, 2965, 2980, 0234, 2983, 
9781, 2462, 2974, 2976, 2968 
Nil GM Office, Jaipur 
RPU/
Metro 
Nil Dum Dum, 
Mahanayak 
Uttamkumar 
CLW & 
DLW, Metro 
workshop 
Noapara 
Metro Hospital, 
Tollygunge 
Nil Nil Nil GM Office, Metro 
Bhavan, Kolkata 
 

Security Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No.     of 2011-12 (Railways) 58 
Annexure-III 
(Para No. 5.3.1) 
(Man power position) 
 
 
 
Year Sanctioned Strength Shortage (per cent)
RPF RPSF Total 
RPF & 
RPSF 
GRP RPF RPSF Total RPF 
& RPSF 
GRP 
2005-06 52515 7500 60015 33432 8811 
(16.78) 
2378 
(31.71) 
11189 
(18.64) 
2173 
(6.50) 
2006-07 53658 8377 62035 33489 7373 
(13.74) 
2433 
(29.04) 
9806 
(15.81) 
2617 
(7.81) 
2007-08 53990 8375 62365 33610 5703 
(10.56) 
1302 
(15.55) 
7005 
(11.23) 
2349 
(6.99) 
2008-09 54568 8880 63448 36662 6108 
(11.19) 
788 
(8.87) 
6896 
(10.87) 
4052 
(11.05) 
2009-10 54902 9128 64030 38647 6358 
(11.58) 
816 
(8.94) 
7174 
(11.20) 
6335 
(16.39) 

 iv iv 
Abbreviations used in the Report 
 
 
IR Indian Railways 
CR Central Railway 
ER Eastern Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
ECoR East Coast Railway 
NR Northern Railway 
NCR North Central Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NFR Northeast Frontier Railway 
NWR North Western Railway 
SR Southern Railway 
SCR South Central Railway 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SECR South East Central Railway 
SWR South Western Railway 
WR Western Railway 
WCR West Central Railway 
RPU Railway Production Units 
FIR First Information Report 
RPF Railway Protection Force 
GRP Government Railway Police 
 
 