Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 
 (iii)
 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2011 has been prepared for submission 
to the President of India under Article 151(1) of the Constitution of India. 
Audit of Revenue Receipts – Indirect Taxes of the Union Government is 
conducted under the Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.  The Report 
presents the results of audit reviews and appraisals of receipts under indirect 
taxes (Central Excise and Service Tax). 
The observations included in this Repor t have been selected from the findings 
of performance audit carried out during the year 2010-11.  The results of our 
audit alongwith recommendations are contained in this Report. 
 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We conducted a performance audit on working of Commissionerates, 
Divisions and Ranges.  Our sample comprised 46 commissionerates, 95 
divisions and 204 ranges.  We evaluated whether the measures to broaden the 
service tax base, the monitoring mechan ism for registration of assessees, the 
receipt and scrutiny of returns, the internal audit process, the issue of show 
cause notices and the review of call book cases were adequate and adhered to 
by the department.   
Our key findings and related recommendations are given below: - 
¾ We were informed by 17 out of 35 test checked commissionerates that 
they had not carried out the procedures as prescribed by DGST in its 
action plan for broadening the tax base .  We found that different practices 
were being followed by different commissionerates.  We recommended 
that the Board should issue comprehensive guidelines to remove 
ambiguities.  We also recommended that as a long term measure, the 
Board may identify sources from where information can be imported 
electronically into ACES, to form an intelligence gathering system to 
identify potential taxpayers. 
(Paragraph 2.2) 
¾ We had identified 1959 service providers in the last five years 
Performance Audit Reports, who were unr egistered, but prima facie, were 
liable to register and pay service tax.  We found that the department had 
verified only 337 and consequently, 151 service providers were made to 
register.  We recommended that the verification and follow up action may 
be ensured in the remaining cases in a time bound manner. 
(Paragraph 2.2) 
¾ We observed delays in issuing registration certificates and in acceptance of 
surrender certificates. We recomme nded that suitable monitoring 
mechanisms may be put in place to prevent such delays. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
¾ We found delays in the post facto verifications of registration and 
recommended that the department may monitor the time taken for post 
facto verification of registration applications.   
(Paragraph 3.3.1) 
¾ The process of preliminary scrutiny has been automated as one of the 
modules of the ACES system.  We recommended some MIS reports that 
may be generated by the ACES system to monitor the process. 
(Paragraph 4.2.2) 


Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 2
¾ We found that detailed scrutiny of Central Excise and Service Tax Returns 
were being done only in very few ranges or divisions. We recommended 
that detailed scrutiny of returns (selected on prescribed risk parameters) by 
ranges and of high monetary value by AC/DC/JC/ADC be ensured. 
(Paragraph 4.3) 
¾ We observed that the work of maintena nce of assessee master file had not 
been completed by the audit wings of  most of the commissionerates. We 
recommend that the preparation of Assessee Master Files for each assessee 
may be completed in a time bound manner. 
(Paragraph 5.2) 
¾ We found that the non-mandatory units were selected, by and large, only 
on the basis of revenue collected and recommended that the ACES module 
for internal audit, which is operational, may be implemented in a time 
bound manner so that multiple parameters can be used for the risk based 
selection of non-mandatory units. 
(Paragraph 5.3) 
¾ We found that in ten commissionerates, non-mandatory units were audited 
at the cost of mandatory units. We recommended that this practice may be 
curtailed and reduction in audit cove rage due to staff shortages may be 
distributed across mandatory and non-mandatory units. 
(Paragraph 5.5.2) 
¾ On test check of 46 commissionerates for central excise and service tax, 
we observed that there was no centralised record of all the cases which 
required issue of SCN and recommended that centralised record of all 
cases where SCNs are likely to be issued, may be maintained and 
monitored by the commissionerates to ensure that SCNs are actually issued 
wherever required.  
(Paragraph 6.2) 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 3
CHAPTER I - 
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Introduction 
The levy, assessment and collection of central excise duties and service tax are 
administered by the Central Board of Excise & Customs (CBEC), which is a 
part of Department of Revenue, under Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India.  
The total central excise and service tax collections in the last three years 
(2007-08 to 2009-10) were ` 3,35,215 crore and ` 1,70,663 crore respectively. 
The Central Excise Department has 98 central excise commissionerates and 
seven
1 exclusive service tax commissionerates which report to Chief 
Commissioners heading 23 zones. Most of the central excise 
commissionerates also deal with work relating to service tax in their 
jurisdiction.  
Each commissionerate is headed by a Commissioner, who is assissted by 
Additional /Joint commissioners and Deputy/Assistant commissioners, whose 
duties and functions include internal audit of the assessee units through the 
internal audit parties, adjudication of cases corresponding to their monetary 
limit and monitoring the collection and assessment functions of the divisions 
and ranges. The Divisional officers of the rank of AC/DC perform the function 
of granting registration, adjudication upto their monetary limit and supervision 
and control of assessment done by range s.  The function of the lowest level 
office, headed by Range Officer (Superintendent) are scrutiny of assessments, 
taking steps towards broadening of tax base in co-ordination with divisions, 
drafting show cause notices,   registration functions etc.  The range officers are 
assisted by inspectors. In this perfo rmance audit, we have examined the 
control mechanisms in ranges, divisions and commissionerates, pertaining to 
five critical areas of functioning.  
1.2 Audit objectives 
The performance audit was conducted to seek assurance that:    
(i) the prescribed mechanism to broaden the tax base, by identifying 
service tax providers and bringing them under the tax net, was being 
complied with 
(ii) the registration certificates were being issued in a timely manner and 
prescribed verification checks were being carried out   
(iii) control over assessments was being exercised by conducting prescribed 
scrutiny of returns 
                                                 
1 One Mumbai ST commissionerate was bifurcated into two commissionerates Mumbai ST-I 
and Mumbai ST-II with effect from 1 March 2010 taking the total of exclusive service tax 
commissionerate to seven. 


Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 4
(iv) the Internal Audit process was in conformity with the prescribed 
norms/guidelines  
(v) issue of show cause notices and review of call book cases were being 
done in a timely manner 
1.3 Scope and Coverage 
For conducting the performance audit, we selected 46 commissionerates, 95 
divisions functioning under the select ed commissionerates and 204 ranges 
functioning under the selected divisions. Our selection included 28 
commissionerates where both central excise and service tax records were 
examined, 11 commissionerates where only central excise records were 
examined and seven Commissionerates where only service tax records were 
examined.  In effect, we covered 39 commissionerates while auditing central 
excise records and 35 commissionerates while auditing service tax records. 
Similarly, out of 95 divisions, we examined both central excise and service tax 
records in 35 divisions, only central excise records in 36 divisions and only 
service tax records in 24 divisions.  In  effect we covered 71 divisions while 
auditing central excise records and 59 divisions while auditing service tax 
records. 
In the similar manner, out of 204 ranges, we examined both central excise and 
service tax records in 39 ranges, only ce ntral excise records in 97 ranges and 
only service tax records in 68 ranges.  In effect we covered 136 ranges while 
auditing central excise records and 107 ranges while auditing service tax 
records. 
1.4 Acknowledgement 
We had an entry conference with the officers of Ministry of Finance and 
CBEC on 29 December 2010 where the audit objectives and scope of the 
performance audit were discussed. Th e audit recommendations and some of 
the audit findings were discussed in an exit conference held on 25 November 
2011 with the officers of the Ministry.  We acknowledge the cooperation 
extended by the Ministry of Finance and the field formations in providing the 
necessary information and records during the conduct of this audit.   
1.5 Areas covered in the review 
In this review, we had covered five areas of examination and the review was 
conducted to seek assurance on the adequacy of and adherence to the internal 
control system in the selected five areas.  Accordingly the review has been 
structured giving a separate chapter for each of these five areas. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 5
CHAPTER II - 
BROADENING OF TAX BASE
2.1 Introduction 
Broadening of tax base is necessary to ensure growth of revenue.  With 
increasing reliance on voluntary compliance, it becomes important for the 
department to put in place an effective mechanism for collecting information 
from various sources to identify persons who were liable to pay tax but had 
avoided to pay so as to bring them into the tax net thereby broadening the tax 
base.  This is especially applicable for service tax, where new services are 
regularly being brought under the tax net.   
An action plan was drawn by the Director General of Service Tax
2 and 
circulated to Chief Commissioners on 26 May 2003, under which the field 
formations were required to obtain information: -  
(a) on unregistered service tax providers from yellow pages, service 
providers’ associations, newspaper advertisements, regional registration 
authorities and websites like Indiamart.com. 
(b) from Banks about property which may be covered under 
architectural/consulting engineer services. 
(c) from Municipal corporations and major assessees including PSUs and 
private sector organisations regarding va rious services being availed by them 
and to obtain details of such services providers including their addresses. 
(d) from major hotels, auditorium, banquet halls, conference hall about 
convention services and event management service providers. 
(e) by making discrete market enquiries. 
(f) by collecting intelligence and conducting field surveys. 
As these instructions clearly outlined the various items of work required to be 
performed by field formations, we used them as criteria while examining the 
efforts for broadening the tax base. 
2.2 Efforts for broadening the tax base 
We enquired as to what measures ha d been taken by the commissionerates 
towards broadening of tax base of serv ice tax assessees in pursuance of the 
specific items of DGST action plan.  It was informed by 17 commissionerates 3 
out of 35 test checked commissionerates that they had not carried out these 
procedures for broadening the tax base. 
                                                
 
2 The Directorate General of Service Tax was constituted in 1997 to ensure that proper 
establishment and infrastructure could be created under different central excise and service tax 
commissionerates to monitor the assessment and collection of service tax.  
3 Ahmedabad ST, Patna, Ahmedabad III, Panchkula, Bangalore ST, Kolkata ST, Nagpur, 
Bhopal, Mumbai ST, Delhi ST, Bhubaneshwar I, Bhubaneshwar II, Jaipur II, Jaipur I, 
Guwahati, Goa and Jamshedpur 


Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 6
Six commissionerates4 intimated that the items of work prescribed by DGST 
were carried out. However, they intimated that the results of such efforts were 
not available with them.  Visakhapatnam I Commissionerate stated that items 
of works prescribed by DGST for broade ning the tax base were being carried 
out but it was difficult to co-relate number of registrations made with any 
particular measure.  However, the total number of registrations achieved, from 
a combined application of these measures, was also not furnished. 
The remaining eleven commissionerates
5 stated that items of work prescribed 
by DGST were carried out, as a result of which 1412 new assessees were 
registered. 
The reply given by some commissionerates for not doing items of works 
prescribed by DGST were as follows: -  
Mysore Commissionerate stated that the work of survey and intelligence to 
broaden the tax base were conducted mainly by the Preventive Wing of the 
Division.  Delhi ST and Pondicherry Commissionerates intimated that 
department organised Melas to spread awareness among the new assessees. 
The replies did not appear to be correct  as the measures prescribed by DGST 
were different from anti-evasion and spreading awareness. 
Delhi ST Commissionerate and ST division, Jaipur, under Jaipur I 
commissionerate stated that the DGST instructions were no longer applicable.  
The Cochin Commissionerate intimated that the functions and duties of 
service tax officers were standardised  vide CBEC instructions of July 2007 
and broadening of tax base was not a part of the work assigned to the Ranges 
and it was the Divisions' responsibility to carry out surveys and identify third 
party sources etc. Kolkata ST commissionerate intimated (June 2011) that 
action had been initiated by them in this direction from February 2011. 
The replies indicate lack of clarity  about measures to be taken by the 
Commissionerates.  The measures prescribed by DGST had not been 
rescinded till date. Moreover, in the exit conference for a previous 
performance audit
6, the Board intimated (June 2011) about a set of measures 
that are being taken by Commissioners to identify unregistered service 
providers. They coincided closely with the measures that had been prescribed 
by DGST in 2003.  Therefore, there appeared to be varying interpretations of 
the exact role of the commissionerates in identifying unregistered assessees.  
The matter was required to be clarified by the Board. 
While conducting audits in the past, we had used similar procedures as 
prescribed by the DGST in its action plan and additionally gathered 
information from the income tax returns.  We could identify 4503 service 
providers, who were not registered.  These findings had been incorporated in 
                                                
 
4 Hyderabad II, Hyderabad III, Raipur, Pune III, Chennai ST and Noida 
5 Dibrugarh, Vadodara II, Mysore, Cochin, Indore, Chandigarh I, Coimbatore, Pondicherry, 
Lucknow, Meerut I and Ludhiana 
6 Performance Audit on Service tax on Banking and other Financial Services (March 2010) 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 7
earlier performance audit 7 reports. We had reported that prima facie, they 
appear to be unregistered assessees and had recommended that the department 
verify these cases.   
A total of 1959 out of 4503 unregistered service providers identified in the 
earlier PA reports were in the jurisdiction of some of the selected divisions 
and ranges of 35 commissionerates, where we conducted this review.  We 
asked the commissionerates to indicate the action taken to verify these 1959 
cases.  Compilation of the information furnished by the commissionerates 
showed that only 337 cases (17 per cent) were verified and 151 assessees of 
the verified ones (45 per cent) were registered.  The action taken on the 
remaining 1622 cases (83 per cent) was not indicated.  Cochin, Delhi ST, 
Chandigarh-I and Mumbai ST Commissionerates did not provide requisite 
information regarding verifications carried out.   
The success rate of 45 per cent showed that these measures had a good 
potential to identify more assessees but were being largely neglected.  
2.3 Fixation of targets by co mmissionerates and monitoring 
through submission of reports 
The DGST instructions provided for submission of a fortnightly report by the 
divisional offices to the Commissioners and by the Commissioners to the 
Chief Commissioners regarding efforts made for increasing the tax base. The 
report had to specially cover areas su ch as surveys conducted and outcome 
thereof, data base maintenance, meetings with the service provider 
associations etc. 
The selected commissionerates reported that no fortnightly reports were being 
submitted regarding efforts to broaden the tax base.  The selected 
commissionerates also reported that no targets were fixed for the measures 
required to be taken for broadening the assessee base. 
2.4 Response to earlier audit recommendations 
In our earlier Performance Report on  Service tax on Business Auxiliary 
Services (March 2008), we had recommended that inter-governmental and 
inter-departmental co-ordination was requi red to be strengthened to ensure 
that the registered assessees providing services pay the applicable service tax.  
Agreeing in principle to these recommendations, the Board had stated 
(November 2008) that a number of steps had been taken to streamline and 
strengthen the procedure for conducting surveys including constitution of a 
                                                
 
7 (i) Manpower Recruitment Agency’s Serv ices and Security Agency’s Services  
(March 2005) 
(ii) Management Consultant’s Services, Scientific or Technical Consultancy Services, 
Technical Testing and Analysis Services and Technical Inspection and Certification 
Services (March 2006) 
(iii) Rent-a-cab Scheme Operators’ Services, Photography Services and Health Club and 
Fitness Centre Services (March 2007) 
(iv) Business Auxiliary Services (March 2008) and  
(v) Construction Services (March 2009). 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 8
committee to identify third party sources, directions to its field formations to 
identify and locate the unregistered se rvice providers from internet sites, 
setting up of help centres and issue of modus-operandi circulars to disseminate 
relevant knowledge to the field formations.  It had also stated that inter-
governmental and inter-departmental co-ordination was achieved through 
regular interactions with Income Tax and State Sales Tax departments through 
Regional Economic Intelligence Committee meetings. We examined the 
implementation of these measures in the test checked commissionerates. 
2.4.1 Setting up of help centres 
While the Board had intimated that help centres would be set up, as explained 
in the previous paragraph, we observed that they were set up only in thirteen
8 
out of 35 commissionerates.  We sought this information from Mumbai ST 
Commissionerate in February 2011 and again reminded in April 2011 but it 
did not intimate the action taken. 
2.4.2 Intergovernmental and interdepartmental co-ordination through 
regional economic intelligence committee meetings 
We observed that Regional Economic Intelligence Committee meetings were 
not held in eight commissionerates
9.  The committee was not even set up in 
four10 of these eight commissionerates.  Mumbai ST commissionerate did not 
provide the requisite information.  Such meetings were held in the 26 
remaining selected commissionerates.  Out of these 26, seven 
commissionerates11 stated that REIC meetings did not have broadening of tax 
base on their agenda.  Another 11 commissionerates12 did not indicate whether 
this issue had featured in the discussions of the REIC.  Only eight 
commissionerates13 indicated that following measures relating to broadening 
of tax base were taken up because of these meetings: -  
¾ Five service providers were identifi ed by Income Tax department for 
having unaccounted income.  Based on this information, the central excise 
department (preventive wing) wrote to field formations, to verify whether 
they fell in the category of service tax assessees or not. 
¾ Details were sought from the Income Tax Department, of persons who had 
received brokerage and commission in land deals. 
¾ Cross linking of details of service tax returns in respect of commercial 
coaching & education institutions for the year 2007-08 & 2008-09 with 
details in Income Tax department. 
¾ Cases of service tax on coaching and training institutes reviewed. 
These efforts were in line with the instruction issued by the Board and were 
required to be replicated in other commissionerates. 
                                                 
8 Jaipur-I, Jaipur II, Kolkata ST, Cochin, Bhubaneshwar I, Chandigarh I, Ludhiana, Chennai, 
Coimbatore, Pondicherry, Panchkula, Meeut I and Ahmedabad-III 
9 Dibrugarh, Guwahati, Nagpur, Jamshedpur, Mysore, Goa, Pune III and Coimbatore 
10 Dibrugarh, Guwahati, Goa and Cochin 
11 Chennai ST, Kolkata ST, Lucknow, Noida, Meerut I, Jaipur I and Bhopal 
12 Ludhiana, Hyderabad III, Visakhapatnam I, Bhubaneshwar I, Bhubaneshwar II, Ahmedabad 
III, Vadodara II, Ahmedabad ST, Panchkula, Patna and Hyderabad II 
13 Raipur, Indore, Jaipur II, Cochin, Bangalore ST, Pondicherry, Delhi ST and Chandigarh-I 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 9
2.5 Conclusions 
We found that there was lack of clarity about who had the primary 
responsibility for doing this work, the ranges, the divisions or the preventive 
wings in the commissionerates.  We had pointed out in our five earlier 
performance audit reports that identification of potential assessees required a 
more focused approach. The Board had indicated in exit conferences for 
earlier performance audits that staff sh ortages in service tax wing was one of 
the primary causes for not taking up this work in a more intensive manner. 
However, even with shortages, the available manpower could be utilised to 
work on smaller samples. But this initiative was virtually not being taken up at 
all.  The commissionerates had not even verified the cases where we had 
pointed out entities who, prima facie, appeared to be potential assessees as 
there was a high percentage of confirmation in the few cases that were 
checked. 
Recommendation No. 1 
¾ The Board may prescribe a deadline fo r commissionerates to verify cases 
already pointed out by us in the earlier Performance Audit Reports.  It 
may also fix targets for doing such verifications and issue comprehensive 
guidelines for this work to remove ambiguities and contradictions. 
The Board stated in the exit conference that it had directed the field formations 
to ensure that the verifications are done expeditiously.  To monitor this, each 
Chief Commissioner would give a status report on extent of compliance in 
their Zone by first week of March 2012 to DG (Service Tax) who would 
submit a report to the Board by end March 2012. It was also stated that the 
Board was directing the field formations that similar verifications in future 
may be completed by Commissioners within eight weeks of receipt of 
intimation/DRs/PARs. 
Recommendation No. 2 
¾ As a long term measure, the Board may identify sources from where 
information can be imported electronically into ACES, to form an 
intelligence gathering system on potential taxpayers.   
The Board stated in the exit conferen ce that as of now, there was no 
mechanism in ACES whereby information/data could be imported 
electronically, from external databases, into ACES. Therefore, other 
mechanisms would continue to be used by field formations as intelligence 
gathering tools on potential tax payers.  We reiterate that this may be 
considered as a long term goal and examined again, as and when the ACES 
system becomes fully operational. 
Recommendation No. 3 
¾ The Board may prescribe an effective monitoring mechanism to identify 
potential assessees and get them registered.  
The Board stated in the exit conference that it had issued comprehensive 
instructions for broadening of tax base, including creation of a special cell in 
each commissionerate to identify potential assessees. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 10
CHAPTER III - 
REGISTRATION
3.1 Introduction  
Section 6 of the Central Excise Act, 1944, read with Rule 9 of the Central 
Excise Rules, 2002 provides that any person who is engaged in manufacture or 
production of any specified goods included in the first and second schedule to 
the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 shall get himself registered. The 
application for registration, in Form A1, has to be submitted in duplicate to the 
jurisdictional divisional officer.   
Similarly, Section 69(1) of the Finance Act, 1994 and Rule 4 of the Service 
Tax Rules cover registration of service providers. The application for 
registration is required to be made in Form ST-1 to the jurisdictional 
superintendent of central excise/service tax within 30 days of levy of service 
tax on such service or in case of an existing taxable service, within 30 days of 
the commencement of provision of such service.   
For both central excise and service tax, the registration certification has to be 
granted by the department within seven days of filing of an application.  These 
processes are carried out through a centralised, web based software application 
known as Automation of Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES).  This 
application is connected through MPLS 14 network which automates various 
processes of central excise and service tax and gives complete end to end 
solution under various modules.  Any assessee can register with the 
Department online, can file online returns, claims, permissions & intimations. 
The system tracks its status and the assessee gets online messages.   
Online applications for registration ar e processed by the divisions/ ranges and 
registration certificates are issued through the system. In the case of central 
excise registrations, the divisional officers (AC/DC) mark the cases on-line for 
post facto physical verification of pr emises and other details given in 
application, by the concerned Range Officers.  
We scrutinised 2817 central excise registration cases in 69 divisions under 39 
commissionerates and 7584 service tax registration cases in 58 divisions under 
35 commissionerates.  
We observed instances of delays in issuing registration certificates and 
conducting post-verification, non-conve rsion of temporary registration 
numbers and delays/ shortcomings in the processing of applications for 
surrender of registrations such as non-a vailability of verification reports and 
lack of monitoring. Detailed findings are given below: -  
                                                
 
14 Multiprotocol Label Switching  ( MPLS) is a mechanism in  high-performance 
telecommunications networks that directs data from one network node to the next based on 
short path labels rather than long network addresses, avoiding complex lookups in a routing 
table. The labels identify virtual links ( paths) between distant nodes rather than endpoints. 
MPLS can encapsulate packets of various network protocols.   


Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 11
3.2 Delay in issuing registration certificates 
We observed that in 700 (25 per cent) out of 2817 cases in 35 central excise 
commissionerates, there were delays in issuing registration certificates. The 
delays are depicted below: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The top five commissionerates where delays in grant of central excise 
registration certificates we re noticed were Noida: 80 (out of 169), Indore: 74 
(out of 159); Ludhiana: 63 (out of 200) , Bhubaneshwar I: 33 (out of 93) and 
Pune III: 29 (out of 238). 
We also observed delays in issue of service tax registration certificates in 1473 
(19 per cent) out of 7583 in 28 commissionerates, as depicted below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The top five Commissionerates where delay in grant of service tax registration 
certificates were noticed were Chandigarh  I: 477 (out of 739); Patna: 230 (out 
of 233); Raipur: 80 (out of 191); Bhubaneshwar II: 67 (out of 157) and 
Ahmedabad ST: 57 (out of 261). 
 
Delay in issue of Registration Certificate (CX)
410
156
120
14
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
1  - 15 16 - 30 31 - 180 More than
181
Period of delay (in days)
No. of cases
 
Delay in issue of Registration Certificate (ST)
909
234
314
16
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1  - 15 16 - 30 31 - 180 More than
181
Period of delay (in days)
No. of cases

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 12
The department stated that delays occurred due to improper functioning of 
ACES system, non-submission/ delayed submission of complete records by 
the assessees, delay in verification of assessees’ premises, heavy workload, 
connectivity failures and other administrative reasons. While the 
administrative and operational constraints cited could cause some delays, they 
did not explain the cases where delays were in terms of months. 
3.3 Post facto verification 
In the case of central excise assessees, after the issue of registration certificate, 
post facto verification is to be conducte d by range officers to check that the 
premises mentioned in the application for registration are genuine and 
intended for purposes for which the application has been made. As per 
provisions, the range has to do the verification within five working days of the 
receipt of the duplicate copy of the application for registration.  
3.3.1 Delays and omissions 
We observed that ACES was not generating a report showing the date of 
forwarding the duplicate copy of the application from the division to the range 
for post facto verification and date of receipt of verification report, which 
would enable the divisions to monitor delays.  For our sample of 2817 cases, 
we ascertained the delays in post facto verification from the manual records.  
We found 1080 cases in 29 commissionerates where, there were delays in the 
post facto verifications.  The details are depicted below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The divisions stated that the delays were due to late submission of required 
documents by the assessees, submission of illegible documents, documents not 
signed by the authorised persons and unavailability of assessee to verify the 
premises when the range officers were visiting. While such operational 
problems would always cause some delays, they could not explain the 
substantial number of cases where the delays were in terms of months. We 
also observed that in 68 cases in nine commissionerates
15, the post facto 
                                                 
15 Guwahati-7, Raipur-6, Indore-1, Ludhiana-11, Jaipur I-8, Gurgaon-12, Patna-16, Lucknow-
6 and Noida-1 
 
Delay in post facto verification
582
181
288
29
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1  - 15 16 - 30 31 - 180 More than 181
Period of delay (in days)
No. of cases

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 13
verifications were not done. Another si xteen cases in three commissionerate 16 
were not sent by the divisional officers to concerned ranges for post facto 
verification. The reasons for not conduc ting the post facto verifications had 
not been intimated (November 2011), though called for. 
3.3.2 Negative verification reports 
We scrutinised the action taken by the divisional offices on the negative 
verification reports sent by the range offices.  
3.3.2.1 We found in one case in Balasore division under Bhubaneswar I 
commissionerate, the range Superintendent had stated in his verification report 
that the assessee was operating from two separate premises which were part of 
the same factory but separated by a public road.  This required the approval of 
the Commissioner. 
When we pointed this out (March 2011), the department replied that assessee 
resubmitted the ground plan which showed the factory premises as continuous 
and not separated by any road or canal. Thus, approval of Commissioner was 
not required. 
The reply of the department is confus ing. The resubmitted ground plan which 
was forwarded to us is only for plot 650, which was mentioned as one of the 
two premises separated by a road.  Thus, plot 650 is continuous but the reply 
does not mention the other part of the factory which is separated from plot 650 
by a road. The reply is not consistent  with the verification report and the 
matter has to be examined further. 
3.3.2.2 In another case, the range officer st ated in his post verification report 
that some machinery had not been installed and it was recorded that the 
registration certificate should be deferred.  The division did not initiate any 
action on the negative verification report. 
The Jaipur II Commissionerate replied (October 2011) that since the assessee 
started using its machinery later on, no ac tion was taken regarding registration 
already generated by the system. The reply did not explain why the 
registration was not deferred initially, on receipt of negative report. 
3.3.2.3 In two cases in Division VIII under Delhi II Commissionerate, 
negative verification reports were submitted by the range offices and 
subsequently after issue of SCN, Registration Certificates were cancelled, on 
file.  However, the cancelled registrations remained active in ACES.  During 
the Exit Conference, the Department agreed that the cancellations had not 
been updated on ACES. 
A suitable reporting mechanism may be developed to monitor whether action 
is taken on negative verification reports. 
3.4 Conversion of temporary registration numbers to PAN 
based registration numbers 
We scrutinised whether the temporary registration numbers, allotted to 
registrants when they did not have PAN numbers, had been converted to 15 
                                                 
16 Patna: 9, Ahmedabad III: 1 and Jamshedpur: 6 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 14
digit PAN based registration numbers as per departmental instructions.  We 
noticed from the database of registered service providers that in Patna 
Commissionerate 2283 (18 per cent) out of 12887 service providers were 
issued temporary registration, which were  still to be converted into 15 digit 
PAN based Registration Numbers.  In another four commisionerates 17, 47 
temporary central excise registrations were not converted to PAN based 
registration numbers.  Similarly, 348 temporary service tax registration 
numbers were not converted to PAN based numbers in six 
commissionerates
18.   
Since most of the commissionerates had completed the process, the remaining 
cases were required to be converted to PAN based numbers, on priority. 
3.5 Surrender of Registration Certificates 
As per notification No. 35/2001 (NT), dated 26 June 2001 and Rule 4 (7) of 
Service Tax Rules, 1994, every registered person, who ceases to carry on the 
operation for which he is registered, shall de-register himself by making a 
declaration in the specified form and deposit his registration certificate (RC) 
with the Superintendent of central excise. While applying for surrender of 
registration, a declaration has to be furnished by the registered person to the 
effect that there are no government dues or demands pending against him as 
on the date of surrendering the registration.  The Superintendent of central 
excise has to ensure that the assessee has paid all amounts due to the Central 
Government under the provisions of the Act, and the rules and the notification 
issued there under, and thereupon cancel the registration. Our scrutiny of the 
applications for surrender of centra l excise and service tax registration 
certificates, revealed shortcomings which are detailed below: 
3.5.1 Central Excise 
3.5.1.1 We found that in four certificates in Jalandhar division under 
Ludhiana Commissionerate, the verification reports on clearance of pending 
demands and/ or ‘no dues certificates’ were not found in the relevant files. 
Therefore, there was no assurance that certificates had been approved for 
surrender after verifying that the surrendering assessees had paid up all their 
dues. 
The Ludhiana Commissioneate intimated (October 2011) that verification in 
one case was earlier conducted by ra nge office but the report had been 
received now.  As regards the other uni ts, jurisdictional range officers have 
reported that verification had been do ne and no dues were pending against the 
units. 
The reply did not explain whether such verification reports were available and 
if so, why were they not placed in the files concerned. 
3.5.1.2 In Bangalore III Commissionerate, we observed that all the 
applications submitted by assessee s for surrender of RCs under ACES, had 
been kept pending since November 2009. The department did not take any 
action for disposal of the applications . We also observed that although DC 
                                                
 
17 Patna, Pondicherry, J & K and Bangalore III 
18 Mysore, Raipur, Panchkula, Bhubaneshwar II, Chennai ST and Pondicherry 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 15
(Audit) was directed to take up the audit before cancellation of RC, the 
verifications had not been completed even after the expiry of 17 months. 
3.5.1.3 In Raipur division under Raipur Commissionerate, we could not 
ascertain the position of surrendered RCs as division was not able to produce 
any centralised record used by them to monitor such cases.  In reply, the 
Divisional Officer stated that the position could not be ascertained as ACES 
system was not generating any MIS reports related to surrendered 
registrations.  Same reply was given by the Deputy Commissioner of Rourkela 
II Division in Bhubaneshwar II Commissionerate. These divisions were 
required to monitor surrendered cases, if necessary, manually, as done by 
other divisions till such time that th e requisite MIS reports were provided in 
ACES. 
3.5.2 Service Tax 
3.5.2.1 Out of fourteen application of su rrender of registration received in 
Service Tax Division, Jaipur in Ja ipur I Commissionrate, ten surrender 
application received during April 2009 to January 2010 were still pending for 
verification even after lapse of two year s and in remaining four applications, 
department stated that e fforts were being made to trace the record (October 
2011). 
3.5.2.2 In Division-III of Kolkata ST Co mmissionerate, applications for 
surrender of registration certificates  were accepted in 180 cases during 2009-
10 on the basis of reports from ranges. However, the range reports did not give 
any details of the extent and nature of the verification. In Division-I under the 
same commissionerate, no records rela ting to surrender of registration 
certificates were produced to us. 
The department stated (June 2011) that as no in-depth verification of dues was 
possible, they only examined whether any SCN was pending against assessees.  
Such a verification process was quite inadequate and there was risk that 
tax/duty could remain unpaid for busine ss transactions carried out in the 
periods before and immediately after surrendering the certificates. 
3.5.2.3 In Delhi ST Commissionerate, 56 assessees applied for surrender of 
Registration Certificates, with requisite documents, in their respective ranges 
between March 2009 and March 2010. However no action had been taken on 
these applications. Di vision III of Delhi ST Commissionerate stated that 
(February/March 2011) the applications had not been processed because the 
assesssees had not furnished the documents till date.  It was also stated that the 
process of verification for any pending demand is carried out only after print 
out of the surrender application filed on line is received. During the Exit 
Conference, the department stated that the surrender applications were 
accepted, only if these were filed through ACES; the assessees who had 
submitted applications manually, had to apply through ACES and e-mails had 
been sent to all the applicants whose surrender applications were pending in 
the ranges for acceptance. The replies were not acceptable. The applications 
were lying unprocessed for more than one year and could not be kept pending 
indefinitely. They had to be finalised so that recoveries, if any, could be made 
from the assessees. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 16
3.5.2.4 In Pune III Commissionerate, the department had not accepted all the 
1649 surrender applications received between 2008-09 and January 2011 for 
want of verification of pending demands. The department is required to carry 
out the requisite verifications and issue demands, if any. Further delays could 
lead to demands becoming time barred.  
3.5.2.5 In Bangalore ST and Mysore Commissionerates, we sought the 
number and details of assessees, who ha d applied for surrender of RCs during 
the period of audit. The commissionerates were unable to ascertain the figures 
from the ACES as MIS report had not yet been designed and they had not kept 
manual records either. Therefore, there was no monitoring mechanism for the 
receipts and disposals of the applications. 
Recommendation No. 4 
¾ Suitable control mechanisms may be put in place so as to prevent delays in 
granting registration certificates and accepting surrender of registration 
certificates. 
The Board stated in the exit conference that it had instructed Commissioners 
for periodical monitoring of these areas of work and for the Chief 
Commissioners to take stock of the actions taken. 
Recommendation No. 5 
¾ The department may monitor the time taken for post facto verification of 
registration applications.  Appropriate  MIS report may be generated in 
ACES.  
The Board stated in the exit conference that it would be instructing field 
formations for periodical monitoring of this area of work so that delay, if any, 
would not be on account of any slack in departmental actions/functioning.  It 
also stated that a comprehensive MI S to assist senior officers was under 
development by Systems Directorate and would include appropriate reports. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 17
CHAPTER IV - 
SCRUTINY OF RETURNS
4.1 Introduction 
The CBEC introduced self assessment in respect of central excise in 1996 and 
in respect of service tax in 2001.  With the introduction of self assessment, the 
department also provided for a strong compliance verification mechanism with 
three important prongs—Scrutiny of Ret urns/ Assessments, Audit and Anti-
Evasion. The crucial role of scrutiny of assessments was highlighted in the 
Report of the Task force on Indirect Taxes, 2002, which stated that "It is the 
view that assessment should be the primary function of the Central Excise 
Officers. Self assessment on the part of the taxpayer is only a facility and 
cannot and must not be treated as a dilu tion of the statutory responsibility of 
the Central Excise Officers in ensuring correctness of duty payment. No doubt 
audit and anti-evasion have their roles to play, but assessment or confirmation 
of assessment should remain the primary responsibility of the Central Excise 
Officers". 
In the exercise of powers conferred under Rule 12(3) of Central Excise Rules, 
2002 and Rule 5A of the Service Tax Rules, 1994, the Board has laid down 
detailed guidelines for scrutiny of returns as contained in the two return 
scrutiny manuals both for Central Exci se returns (ER1 and ER3) and Service 
Tax returns (ST3).The scrutiny of returns is in two stages: The purpose of 
preliminary scrutiny of returns is to ensure arithmetic accuracy of the duty 
computation, completeness (permanent account number, description of the 
item, registration details of the unit etc) timeliness (timely submission of the 
return and timely payment of duty) and identification of stop filers and non 
filers.  The detailed scrutiny of assess ment is done for selected returns on the 
basis of risk parameters to ensure the correctness of assessment (correctness of 
classification, valuation and Cenvat credit). The preliminary scrutiny has been 
largely automated through the  Automation in Central Excise and Service Tax 
(ACES) system and according to the  Manual for Scrutiny of Service Tax 
Returns, 2009 (Para 1.2B), this would release manpower for detailed manual 
scrutiny which then would become the core function of the range.  
4.2 Preliminary scrutiny 
Before implementation of ACES system, all the returns received by the 
Superintendent are to be scrutinized within three months of the date of receipt 
of returns. Under ACES, filing of returns and preliminary scrutiny is done by 
the system and discrepancies are marked for review and correction on an 
observation sheet generated by the system. The returns marked for review are 
to be validated in consultation with the assessee and re-entered into the 
system. 
 
 


Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 18
4.2.1 Implementation and functioning of ACES  
We ascertained the degree of implementation of ACES in the 
commissionerates so as to ascertain whether  automated preliminary scrutiny 
through ACES would free up time for the ranges to attend to other important 
items of work, as envisaged. The test checked 46 commissionerates intimated 
that ACES had been implemented in all their subordinate ranges except for six 
ranges under Dibrugarh Commissionerate, one range (Kamptee) under Nagpur 
Commissionerate and one range (Begusarai) under Patna Commissionerate 
where implementation is being delayed due to non-receipt of Broadband from 
BSNL and other technical problems.   
We found that out of the 196 test checked ranges where ACES was 
implemented, there were functional problems in 112 ranges.  The problems 
cited by various ranges included inte rruption in connection (Bankipur-I range 
and Darbhanga range in Patna Commissionerate, 10 ranges under Jaipur I & II 
commissionerates and 3 ranges of Raipur Commisionerate), lack of 
infrastructure including absence of power backup (3 ranges in Raipur 
Commissionerate), non-allotment of use r-id and password (Service Tax Cell 
Nagpur), frequent link failure (12 ranges in Kolkata III, IV and V and 4 ranges 
in Kolkata ST Commissionerate), slow system response time (8 ranges in 
Delhi II Commissionerate), power supply of insufficient capacity (four ranges 
in Bangalore ST commissionerate), non-in stallation of hardware (four ranges 
in Bangalore III & Mysore Commissionerates), etc. 
The Deputy Commissioner, ST Cell, Nagpur  stated (October 2011), that user-
id and password had been allotted to the concerned group superintendent and 
operations would start shortly. 
The Kolkata IV, V and ST commissionerate accepted that there were frequent 
link failures. 
The Range Superintendent (Begusarai) stated (May 2011) that persuasive 
effort was being made to ensure Broadband connectivity at the earliest. 
4.2.2 Preliminary scrutiny using ACES 
The ACES system has to carry out the checks prescribed for preliminary 
scrutiny and to prepare an observation sheet in which all the returns having 
errors are listed, with details of errors  and are marked for further review and 
correction by the range superintendents.  
We found that the ACES was not generating MIS Reports of returns submitted 
with delay and statement of assessees who had delayed the payment of duty. 
These two shortcomings were also not  being indicated in the observation 
sheets being generated for review and correction. 
4.2.2.1 Identification of delayed Returns and delayed payment of duty 
We observed, through manual scrutiny, that in three ranges under Pondicherry 
Commissionerate, 41 per cent of 435 returns had been filed belatedly. We also 
found substantive delays (extending up to 303 days) in returns filing in  three 
ranges in Goa Commissionerate, three ranges in Nagpur Commissionerate and 
one range in Bhubaneshwar II Commissionerate.  

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 19
In three ranges in Nagpur Commissionerate, in Vadodara-II Commissionerate-
Group VIII and in Ahmedabad-ST Commissionerate-Range XII, we found 
delayed payment of duty in 17 returns on which interest was due.  Ranges at 
Nagpur intimated that it had recovered the interest in two cases.  After 
introduction of online filing, the cases of belated filing can be identified by 
ACES through a suitable MIS report, so that the ranges could take suitable 
action on these cases. 
4.2.2.2 Non-filers 
In response to our recommendations in earlier Audit Reports,  the Ministry had 
stated that identification of non- filers and stop filers of returns would be 
implemented through the ACES project. 
We found that any report showing list of non-filers was not being generated by 
ACES (September 2011).  We did not find evidence that detection of stop 
filers by investigating the non-filers was taken up as a concerted effort. 
4.2.3 Preliminary scrutiny of returns done manually 
In 45 ranges although ACES was implemented, preliminary scrutiny was done 
manually and we found the following shortcomings: 
4.2.3.1 Three Central Excise ranges in Meerut I, three ranges in Lucknow, 
three ranges in Nagpur, three ranges in Noida Commissionerates, four service 
tax Ranges in Guwahati and Dibrugarh Commissionerate, four ranges in 
Meerut I and Noida Commissionerate and four groups in Chennai ST 
Commissionerate intimated that the preliminary scrutiny of returns had been 
done. However, we found that the check list prescribed
19 were either not 
attached with the scrutinized returns or were not signed by range officers.  The 
unsigned checklists did not have any obs ervations.  Thus, we were unable to 
get adequate assurance that the returns had actually been checked.  Lucknow 
and Nagpur Commissionerates intimated (March and April 2011) that returns 
were scrutinized but not signed due to oversight.  This implied that nobody 
could be held accountable if any errors were found in the process of scrutiny. 
4.2.3.2 We found that Panchkula Commissionerate had not conducted 
manual scrutiny of returns according to the Manual for Scrutiny of Service 
Tax Returns, 2009 and similarly Delhi III Gurgaon and Delhi IV Faridabad 
Commissionerates had not done the scrutiny according to Manual for Scrutiny 
of Central Excise Returns, 2008. 
The Panchkula Commissionerate admitted (June 2011) the audit observation 
and stated that on receipt of Manual in October 2010 proforma of monthly 
reports have been changed as per the manual. 
The Faridabad Commissionerate stated (June 2011) that manual scrutiny was 
carried out before implementation of ACES.   
The Gurgaon Commissionerate stated (January 2011) that preliminary scrutiny 
was being carried out as per convention al method.  It further stated (June 
2011) that the erstwhile instructions applicable to scrutiny of Manual Returns 
are not applicable in respect of returns filed under ACES.  The replies were 
not correct as revised method of preliminary scrutiny was introduced by the 
                                                
 
19 in Annexure 2.1 of the Manual for the scrutiny of Central Excise returns 2008 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 20
Manual for Scrutiny of Central Excise Returns, 2008 and was operational 
during the period covered under review.  The scrutiny under ACES has also 
been derived from this manual.  Therefore, the commissionerates were 
required to do the scrutiny either manually as per revised manual or under 
ACES.  However, they were doing neither and following the manual scrutiny 
that was operational before introduction of the revised Manual for Scrutiny of 
Central Excise Returns, 2008. 
4.2.3.3 In four ranges in Bangalore ST Commissionerate, although ACES 
was functional, preliminary scrutiny was being done manually. The returns 
were being filed online but the observation sheets generated by ACES were 
not being reviewed and action was not being taken. 
4.2.3.4 In four ranges in Patna Commissionerate, only about 19 per cent ST-
3 returns were scrutinized against the norm of 100 per cent. 
4.2.3.5 In four ranges in Jamshedpur Commissionerate, two ranges in Raipur 
Commissionerate and two ranges in Chandigarh I Commissionerate, 
preliminary scrutiny of ST returns was not done at all.   
4.2.4 Monthly report on returns received and scrutinised 
As per the manuals for the scrutiny of central excise and service tax returns, a 
monthly report has to be submitted by the Range Officer to the jurisdictional 
Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of the Division regarding the number of 
returns received and scrutinized. 
We ascertained that in 42 ranges under 12 commissionerates no monthly 
reports were submitted by range officers of central excise and in 49 ranges in 
16 commissionerates no monthly reports were submitted by range officers, in 
service tax. The information on retu rns scrutinized was also not being 
submitted in any other form. Therefore, this work was not being monitored 
through this prescribed report in these ranges. 
In 35 central excise ranges in 12 commissionerates and 21 service tax ranges 
in nine commissionerates, while the pr escribed report was not prepared, the 
information relating to preliminary scrutiny was submitted through MTR. 
Under ACES, the range Superintendents have to fill up observation sheets 
depicting the action taken on the returns, marked by the system for review and 
correction.  An appropriate MIS report was required to be generated by ACES 
to enable the monitoring of the action taken by the Superintendents.  Such a 
report would serve the same purpose as the monthly reports being submitted 
manually at present.   
4.2.5 Scrutiny of returns for whic h preliminary scrutiny was done by 
department 
4.2.5.1 Central Excise 
Out of 22601 returns scrutinised by the department, we test checked 1421 
returns and found errors in 88 returns (6 per cent). These errors were not 
detected by the department. They included returns with incomplete challan 
numbers, date and BSR
 (code indicating bank branch) codes not mentioned, 
abstract of current account not filled or wrongly filled, invoices issued during 
the month not mentioned, wrong accounting code on challan for duty and cess, 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 21
challan not enclosed, column of cenvat credit availed & utilised not filled 
properly, non-payment of interest on di fferential duty, non-reversal of Cenvat 
credit etc. Illustrative examples are given below: 
i) In Begusarai range, we observed that an assessee (M/s Carbon 
Resources Pvt. Ltd.) had submitted two manual returns for the month of 
October 2009 signed by two different persons/authorities. Figures of 
productions and closing balance of final product in those returns did not 
match. The two returns did not carry any comments to explain the reasons for 
submission of two returns. 
ii) In one range under Bhubaneswar I Commissionerate, M/s Tata Steel 
Ltd., Chrome ore beneficiation Plant, Sukinda Chromite Mines deposited  
` 4.35 crore as duty towards short shipme nt of goods cleared for export.  The 
interest leviable on delay in payment was neither paid by the assessee nor 
demanded by the Department. In reply, the Range Superintendent reiterated 
that duty of ` 4.35 crore was paid due to short shipment but did not explain 
why interest was not paid. 
4.2.5.2 Service Tax 
We test checked 938 service tax returns already scrutinized and found 44 
errors (5 per cent) undetected by the department. The errors included use of 
incorrect accounting heads on challans, non imposition of penalty for delayed 
filing of returns and challans not available with ST-3 returns. Two illustrative 
examples are given below:  
i) M/s Orbit Motors (P) Ltd, an auth orised service station in Rourkela 
service tax Range availed and utilised cenvat credit of ` 1.73 lakh during 
October 2009 to March 2010 on service tax paid on transportation charges 
during the relevant period. Since the input service credit was not in relation to 
providing output service, credit so availed and utilised was irregular. Range 
Superintendent stated that action would be taken after verification. 
ii) Test check of 20 ST-3 returns already checked by range II of 
Panchkula Division revealed that challans amounting to ` 6.69 lakh were not 
found attached with ST-3 returns of 11 assessees.  
4.3 Detailed scrutiny 
4.3.1 Detailed scrutiny by Ranges 
As per Board’s circular dated 11 May 2009, once ACES is implemented, 
returns would be automatically listed in descending order of risk and 
submitted to Commissioner for selection.   
This function was not found operational and the system was not selecting any 
returns for detailed scrutiny as per Board’s circular.  To a query raised by us, 
only 12 ranges 20  out of 136 reported that detailed scrutiny of central excise 
                                                 
20 Mallapur and Nacharam – II in Hyderabad III Commissionerate, Range-II, Bilaspur in 
Raipur Commissionerate, Division III, AR-I  of Vapi Commissionerate, Rajgangpur in 
Bhubaneshwar II Commissionerate, CE R-II,  LDH-I and CE R-III, JLD in Ludhiana 
Commissionerate, IA, IB and IIIA in Pondicherry Commissionerate, Chinhat II and Aliganj in 
Lucknow Commissionerate. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 22
returns was being done.   Similarly, only nine ranges21 out of 107 reported that 
the detailed scrutiny of service tax returns was being done. 
In eight ranges, we examined 28 ST-3 returns which had already been 
scrutinised by the department but did not find any deviations.  Range III D of 
Pondicherry Commissionerate intimated that they had done detailed scrutiny 
of 390 returns but provided only four cases for our scrutiny.  While comparing 
the ST3 returns with the financial statements (as prescribed in the scrutiny 
manual), we found prima facie evidence of understatement of value of services 
provided in all the four cases which resulted in short payment of service tax of 
` 25.79 lakh. The details are tabulated below: 
Table No. 1 
(Amount in lakh of rupees) 
Name of 
Assessee 
Taxable 
Service 
Gross 
receipt as 
per 
Financial 
statements 
Gross  
Receipt as 
per ST 3 
return 
Difference 
in taxable 
value 
Service tax 
short paid 
M/s Magic 
Hour Films 
Private Ltd 
Photography 
Service 
155 Nil 155 16 
M/s 
Manakular 
Motors- 
Service 
Authorised 
Service 
Station 
Services 
223 205 18 02 
M/s Mertho 
Constructions 
Works 
Contract 
Services 
974 815 159 07 
Shri 
A.Srinivasa 
Rao 
Audit & 
Consultation 
Fees Services 
153 140 13 01 
For the case enumerated at Sl. No. 1 in the above table, the department have 
intimated (April 2011) recovery of service tax of ` 52.41 lakh alongwith 
interest of ` 4.52 lakh for the financial years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11. 
We observed that very few cases were subjected to detailed scrutiny and it was 
a matter of concern that one range was unable to find all the errors even in 
these small samples. Appropriate corrective action was required to be taken. 
4.3.2 Detailed Scrutiny by AC/DC/JC/Addl. Commissioner 
As per para 2.1A.10 and 2.1A.11 of Manual for the Scrutiny of Central Excise 
Returns, 2008, every six months, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner in 
charge of the Division has to scrutinise the returns of units paying annual PLA 
revenue between ` 1 crore to ` 5 crore and the Additional/Joint Commissioner 
has to scrutinise the returns of units paying annual PLA revenue of over ` 5 
crore.  Wherever necessary, they can requisition the concerned documents 
from the assessee.  The report on the scrutiny shall be sent to the 
Commissioner latest by the 15th of the next month. 
                                                 
21 Service Tax Group I, Service Tax Group II and Service Tax Group V in Hyderabad III 
Commissionerate, Group-VIII in Vadodara II Co mmissionerate, Group X in Mumbai ST-I 
Commissionerate, STR I Jalandhar in Ludhiana Commissionerate, Rajgangpur and Rourkela 
ST in Bhubaneshwar II Commissionerates, Range IIID of Pondicherry Commissionerate. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 23
The AC/DC of only seven 22 out of 71 divisions reported that the returns of 
units paying annual PLA revenue in the range of ` 1 crore to ` 5 crore were 
being scrutinised.  However, we found 23 that largely it was done only on the 
basis of the returns without calling for any additional information/records from 
the concerned assessees. Therefore, it was akin to preliminary scrutiny. The 
Hyderabad III Commissionerate did not furnish any information in this regard. 
The Additional/Joint commissioners in three 24 out of 39 commissionerates 
reported that the returns of units  paying annual PLA revenue above ` 5 crore 
were being scrutinised and only in one case the additional commissioner of 
Raipur Commissionerate found a discrepancy and took action. 
4.4 Test check of returns not scrutinised by the department 
We scrutinised 960 returns in central excise and 500 returns in service tax 
where the department had not done either preliminary or detailed scrutiny and 
found errors in 208 and 195 returns respectively. The errors included instances 
of misclassification, wrong adjustment of tax/duty, non-reversal of cenvat on 
clearances of exempted goods, excess/incorrect availing of cenvat credit, 
incorrect availing of input service credit , non-payment of interest on reversal 
of cenvat credit, incorrect accounting of secondary and higher education cess 
etc. Some illustrative cases are given below: 
4.4.1 M/s Morarjee Textiles Ltd, Butibori under Nagpur Commissionerate 
was engaged in manufacturing of textiles fabrics falling under chapters 52 and 
53 of the Central Excise Tariff. During de tailed scrutiny of its return for the 
period October 2009 to March 2010, the service tax credit details were called 
for.  We found that the assessee had reversed cenvat credit of ` 27.68 lakh 
vide entry No. ST/1239 dated 1 November, 2009 against CERA observation 
raised in September, 2009 for “Non-payment of amount equivalent to the 
Cenvat credit attributable to input services used in manufacture of exempted 
goods”.  Thereafter, the assessee availed credit of equivalent amount vide 
entry No.1833 dated 19 March 2010 under the narration “Amount Credited on 
A/c of Stock declaration which is debited vide entry No.1239 dated 1 January 
2009”. It was evident that the assessee had wilfully quoted a wrong date and 
given a misleading and factually incorrect narration to hide the fact that it was 
availing credit which had been reversed against a previous audit objection of 
CERA. On this being pointed out (March 2011), the Range Superintendent 
accepted the observation (March 2011) and reported recovery of amount of ` 
27.68 lakh. However, penal action was awaited (November 2011) for making 
false entries to avail inadmissible credit. 
The same assessee had received input services and paid the service tax on 
these input services using cenvat credit account which was not permissible.  
Thereafter, it availed cenvat credit for the amounts paid out of cenvat credit, 
which was also irregular.  The department had objected to the irregular 
payment from cenvat credit account and issued SCNs. Demand of ` 61.93 
lakh had been confirmed and one demand of ` 21.19 lakh raised in July 2010 
                                                
 
22 Hyderabad H, Bilaspur, Raipur, Ludhiana I, Jalandhar, Lucknow II and Noida Division V 
23 In Bilaspur & Raipur divisions 
24 Raipur, Ahmedabad III & Ludhiana 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 24
was pending adjudication.  However, the department had not objected to the 
irregular availing of credit which was required to be reversed, with interest. 
Reply of the department was awaited (November 2011). 
4.4.2 In Darbhanga range in Patna Commisionerate, an assessee (M/s Hazi 
Umal Biri Udyog) had made delayed payment of excise duty for the months of 
October 2009, November 2009 and March 2010. The accounting codes of duty 
and cess mentioned in GAR-7 challans were also not correct.  
In reply, the department stated that objection was related to a small biri 
manufacturer who was hardly literate and prone to such mistakes.  However, 
the concerned assessee has been requested for compliance (August 2011).   
4.4.3 In Bettiah range in Patna Commissionerate, M/s Tirpuati Sugar Ltd., 
cleared 86409 quintal of sugar in November 2009 and paid sugar cess, 
education cess and secondary and higher education cess of ` 13.45 lakh 
against ` 23.20 lakh payable. This resulted in short payment of cess 
amounting to ` 9.75 lakh.   
In reply, the department stated that the matter is being looked into and steps 
for recovery of duty will be taken if objection was found correct (July 2011). 
4.4.4 We scrutinised  120 returns in Pune-III and ST Mumbai-I 
Commissionerates that had been marked for review and correction by ACES 
but had not been reviewed by the ranges. We found discrepancies in 26 
returns. Nine of these returns involved delayed filing of return and four returns 
involved delayed payment of duty. We also found short payment of duty in six 
returns of Pune III involving ` 17.36 lakh and seven returns of ST Mumbai I 
involving ` 9.94 crore.  In Pune III commissionerate out of short payment of  
` 17.36 lakhs, department intimated the recovery of ` 8.22 lakh.  Some 
illustrative cases are mentioned below:- 
4.4.4.1 Scrutiny of ST3 returns of M/s India Bulls Real Estate Co. P Ltd (for 
April to September 2010) and M/s Gammon Infrastructure Projects Ltd (for 
April to September 2010) in Mumbai ST I Commissionerate revealed that they 
received ` 34.73 crore and ` 12.21 crore respectively for providing exempted 
services but had not maintained separate accounts of inputs (as declared in 
column 5A(c) of their returns). Hence, they were liable to pay amount equal to 
6 per cent of the value of exempted services i.e. ` 2.08 crore and ` 73.23 lakh 
respectively as per provisions of Rule 6(3) of Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004. 
4.4.4.2 In two returns of M/s Gammon India Ltd and M/s Rediffusion Dentsu 
Young & Rubicam Pvt. Ltd. (for April to September 2010) in Mumbai ST I 
Commissionerate, it was observed that there was mismatch of service tax 
payable of ` 30.45 crore and the service tax paid of ` 23.35 crore, as per 
figures shown in the ST 3 returns.  The large difference of ` 7.10 crore was 
not examined by the department although the returns had been marked for 
review and correction. We pointed it  out in April 2011. Reply was awaited 
(November 2011). 
4.4.5 In Patna Commissionerate, under Bankipur-I range, we detected  
short payment of ` 26.25 lakh due to wrong calculation of service tax at the 
rate of 10 per cent instead of applic able rate of 12 per cent, during the  

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 25
scrutiny of ST-3 return of M/s Scorpion Express Pvt. Ltd., Patna, for the 
period October 2009 to March 2010.  
4.4.6 The service tax return for the period from October 2009 to March 
2010, of M/s Seeta Sponge Iron Ltd., registered under GTA service in 
Kalunga –I Range in Bhubaneshwar II Commissionerate, did not have any 
challans enclosed for tax paid and the column for details of service tax was 
also left blank. It was not possible to know whether service tax of ` 4.27 lakh 
had been paid or not. This omission wa s not detected by the range. On being 
pointed out by us, the range superintendent replied that the matter would be 
investigated.  
4.4.7 The Bangalore ST Commissionerate had not carried out any detailed 
scrutiny. We called for records, as specified in the Service Tax Returns 
scrutiny manual and carried out the detailed scrutiny for 148 returns of 74 
assessees. We detected errors in returns of 30 assessees amounting to ` 4.13 
crore. Two illustrative cases are given below. 
4.4.7.1 Rule 3 of the Service Tax (Determination of Value) Rules provides 
that the value of taxable service shall include non-money consideration where 
such consideration is received. 
M/s Digicomp Complete Solution Ltd, in Bangalore ST Commissionerate, 
providing  services to a foreign firm, M/s Compel Electronics, imports 
material that is supplied free of cost by M/s Compel. The assessee treats these 
free imports as inputs and takes cenvat credit of CVD paid. Since they are 
received free of cost from the service receiver, they are in the nature of 
additional non-money consideration and their value should be added to the 
valuation of taxable service as provided in Rule 3 of the Service Tax 
(Determination of Value) Rules.  N on-inclusion of the value of the free 
imports has resulted in under valuation leading to short payment of service tax 
of ` 17.15 lakh (2008-09 & 2009-10), which is recoverable alongwith interest.  
Department is also required to assess the short payment in earlier years. 
4.4.7.2 M/s Globe Detective agency under Bangalore ST Commissionerate,  
is rendering security services in Indi a to foreign clients. The income from 
providing these is classified as “Edu cational Testing Income (ETS") in the 
financial statements. The assessee has not been paying service tax on ETS, 
treating it as Export of service. This is irregular as the services are being 
provided within the country and service tax is payable. The non-payment of 
service tax works out to ` 7.36 lakh for the year 2009-10 which is recoverable 
with interest. When we pointed this out, the department issued (May 2011) a 
show cause notice assessing the short payment of ` 34.88 lakh for 2009-10 
and earlier periods.   
The illustrative cases related above involve revenue implication of  
` 14.92 crore.  They underline the importance of carrying out preliminary and 
detailed scrutiny in the prescribed manner to detect and correct discrepancies 
and errors in the returns. 
 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 26
4.5 Reconciliation of payment of Central Excise Duty and 
Service Tax indicated in Returns 
Since the duty/ tax is paid at banks and the returns are submitted to the ranges, 
the payment details shown in returns are required to be reconciled with the 
payments received at banks, to guard against the risk of fraudulent declaration 
of payment of tax and to ensure correct accounting. Upto March 2007, the 
Chief Accounts Officers (CAO) in the commissionerates did the reconciliation 
of tax / duty paid.  They received assessee-wise payment details from 
divisions, who in turn compiled them from the details prepared by their 
subordinate ranges from the returns submitted. The CAO would also receive 
soft copy of assessee-wise payment details from the Pay and Accounts Officer 
(PAO). Thereafter, the CAO had to reconcile the payment details submitted by 
the divisions with the details furnished by the PAO. 
CBEC implemented the “Electronic Accounting System in Excise and Service 
Tax (EASIEST)” from 1 April 2007. Under this system, the assessees pay 
central excise / service tax at banks through challans and the banks enter 
payment details on EASIEST. The payment data generated by the banks is 
maintained by NSDL (under an MOU with CBEC), who transfer the data to 
the CBEC servers. EASIEST data is also sent to Pay and Accounts Officers 
(PAO) for reconciliation of payments. The system is administered by the 
Director General (System), CBEC, New Delhi, who is assisted by the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC). 
While filing returns, assessees give details of challan numbers through which 
they pay tax / duty. As per circulars dated 13 March 2007 and 31 August 
2009, the manual reconciliation by the CAO was done away with and the 
ranges are supposed to reconcile the payments by linking the challan numbers 
listed in the returns with the challan numbers of the payments actually 
received in banks and uploaded on the CBEC server.  
We ascertained that in 92 ranges, reconciliation was not done either through 
the ACES and EASIEST i.e. electronically.  In 26 ranges it was done 
manually, as per the earlier practice. Only in 66 ranges the reconciliation was 
done electronically. 
We did a test check of the challans attached to a sample of 20 returns in the 
ranges where the reconciliation was done  through EASIEST. We observed 
that there were no discrepancies except in Pondicherry Commissionerate 
where 18 out of 20 test checked challans had been accounted wrongly by 
showing different duties clubbed under a single head and in Jaipur I 
Commissionerate, where 68 challans could not be found on EASIEST system. 
Where reconciliation was not done , we test checked 20 returns of central 
excise and 20 returns of service tax by reconciling the challans with the 
challan details available from EA SIEST on the CBEC server at 
https://cbec.nsdl.com/EST/. The errors detected as described below, 
underlined the requirement of carrying out the reconciliation of challans for 
proper accounting of revenue. 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 27
4.5.1 Central excise 
4.5.1.1 In Bettiah range under Patna Commis sionerate, details of 16 challans 
for the month of February 2010, amounting to ` 74.87 lakh, of M/s M. P. 
Chini Industries were not found on EASIEST. 
In reply, the department intimated (July 2011) that the matter was under 
examination and in case of fraud or non-payment is detected, action would be 
initiated to safeguard the Government revenue. 
4.5.1.2 In Faridabad Commissionerate 66 challans were checked and the 
details of 12 challans amounting to ` 47.04 lakh were not found. In five 
challans involving an amount of ` 5.34 lakh, details such as Bank branch code, 
Challan number and date of deposit etc. were neither recorded in the challan 
nor in ER-I returns. Therefore, they could not be matched on EASIEST. 
4.5.1.3 In Gurgaon Commmissionerate, 53 challans were checked and the 
details of eight challans amounting to ` 15.20 lakh were not found. In another 
27 challans amounting to ` 39.19 lakh, Bank branch code was not recorded. 
Therefore, the challans were not traceable on the EASIEST system. 
4.5.1.4 In Jajpur Road I range under Bhubaneswar I Commissionerate, one 
challan was not found in EASIEST. 
4.5.1.5 In one range in Pondicherry Commissionerate, we observed that in 12 
challans, payment was made clubbing different duties under one single head 
which resulted in wrong accounting. 
4.5.2 Service Tax
 
4.5.2.1 In Division I of Mumbai ST I Commissionerate, details of nine 
challans of two assessees were not ava ilable in EASIEST.  When we pointed 
this out, the department replied that the tax amount has been paid by the 
assessees as verified from physical challans. 
4.5.2.2 In Raipur Commissionerate, out of 40 challans, details of four 
challans were not available in EASIEST. 
4.5.2.3 In three ranges (Jajpur road-I, Dh enkanal-II and Balasore service tax) 
under Bhubaneswar-I Commissionerate de tails of 12 challans were not 
available in EASIEST. Similarly in Kuarmunda range under Bhubaneswar-II 
Commissionerate, details of six challa ns were not available in EASIEST.  
Superintendents, Dhenkana l-II, Jajpur road-I and Kuarmunda replied that 
reconciliation of challan would be made and intimated to audit. 
4.5.2.4 In Pondicherry Commissionerate, in one Service Tax Group, out of 
total population of 1199 challans a Sample of 30 cases was taken up and it was 
noticed that in 20 remittances, payment made was shown in one head instead 
of exhibiting separately under ST, EC, SHE Cess. 
Recommendation No. 6 
¾ The following MIS reports may be generated by ACES and corrective 
action taken: 
•  list of non-filers - which may be investigated to detect stop filers 
• returns submitted with delay – suitable penalty may be imposed 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 28
• assessees who had delayed the payment of duty  - prescribed interest 
may be imposed 
• details of returns marked by the system for review and correction but 
corrective action not taken. 
The Board stated in the exit conference that the Systems Directorate had 
informed that in ACES there is a functionality to generate a report called 
‘assessee-wise detailed report’, both in Central Excise and Service Tax, giving 
information whether assessee is filing retu r n  i n  A C E S  o r  n o t .   I t  a l s o  s t a t e d  
that the comprehensive MIS, under development in ACES, would generate 
reports suggested by us.   
Recommendation No. 7 
¾ The function of detailed scrutiny may be implemented in all the ranges. 
Till such time that ACES does not do the sample selections of returns, the 
samples may be selected manually, as prescribed in the scrutiny manuals. 
It may also be ensured that AC/DC/JC/ADC may conduct the detailed 
scrutiny of high monetary value returns as prescribed in the returns 
manual.  
The Board stated in the exit conference that it was reiterating extant 
instructions and directing the Commissioners to monitor implementation of 
this area of work. The Chief Commissioners were being asked to take stock of 
the actions taken. 
Recommendation No. 8 
¾ The challan details submitted online and manual returns may be 
reconciled with the challan details captured through EASIEST. Such a 
process would become fully automated when all returns are submitted 
through ACES. 
The Board stated in the exit conference that with effect from 1 October 2011, 
all the CE and ST returns are mandatorily to be filed electronically.  It was 
also stated that even otherwise, the Range Officer had to verify TR-6 challans 
with data of actual payment as per serial No. 27 of Annex 4.1 of Manual of 
Scrutiny of Central Excise return. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 29
CHAPTER V - 
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE 
INTERNAL AUDIT PROCESS
5.1 Introduction  
Internal audit is one of the main compliance verification mechanism in the 
department, which involves selection of assessee units on the basis of risk 
parameters and scrutiny of records of the assessee to ascertain the level of 
compliance with the prescribed rules and regulations. Internal Audit is 
empowered, under Central Excise and Service Tax Rules, to access the records 
of the assessees at their registered premises.  Every commissionerate has an 
Audit cell, manned by an Assistant/Deputy Commissioner and auditors and 
headed by an Additional/Joint Commissioner and this cell prepares co-
ordinates and monitors the audit plan.  The audit is done by a set of internal 
audit parties (IAP) consisting of Superintendents and Inspectors. 
The Board has laid down detailed guidelines in the form of Audit manuals for 
audit of central excise and service tax units, which prescribe detailed processes 
for conduct of audit. We evaluated five main processes prescribed in the 
manuals. 
5.2 Maintenance of A ssessee Master File 
Risk-based audit requires a comprehensive data base for profiling each 
taxpayer, so that risk factors relevant to a taxpayer may be identified in a 
scientific manner and audit planned and executed accordingly.  A 
comprehensive data base of assessees is an essential pre-requisite for selection 
of units as well as for undertaking preliminary Desk Review, for effective 
conduct of audit.  As per the audit manuals, this information has to be 
collected and kept in a separate file for each assessee called Assessee Master 
File.  As per chapter 9 of Central Excise Audit Manual, 2008 and para 6.1 of 
the Service Tax Manual, 2003, the Assessee Master File is to be prepared and 
updated by the Audit cell in the commissionerate.  A list of documents as 
indicated in Annexure A (Registration app lication, copies of past three years 
returns, copy of past three years audits, cost audit/tax audit report and financial 
statements of past three years) & An nexure B (Details of goods manufactured 
and exempted, production details, duty payment and issue of SCN of past 
three years and details of litigation) of the manual is to be kept in each 
assessee master file.  
We observed that this work had not been completed by most of the 
commissionerates and the information related to Assessee Master Files was 
not reflected in the monthly reports submitted by the Audit Cell to the 
Commissioner.  The details are given below:-  
 
 
 


Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 30
5.2.1 Central Excise 
Fifteen25 out of 39 test checked commissionerates reported that the master 
files were created for all assessees.  We test checked 20 assessee master files 
in each of the 15 commissionerates (300 files) and found that in eight 
commissionerates
26, the test checked files were kept according to manual.  In 
the remaining seven commissionerates 27, 117 out of 140 files were found 
incomplete as items such as organisational chart of the unit, copy of 
declaration of the latest list of the records furnished by assessee, cost audit/tax 
audit reports etc. were missing.  The absence of these records hamper the 
selection process of the units for audi t and the desk review processes where 
the units have already been selected for audit. 
Coimbatore, Pondicherry, Bhubaneshwar II, Cochin and Lucknow 
Commissionerates reported that they had created master files for all the 
mandatory units (to be audited every year) and some of the non-mandatory 
units.  We test checked 20 assessee master files each in four commissionerates 
and seven files that were produced by Bhubaneshwar II Commissionerate.  We 
found that in Coimbatore Commissionerate, the test checked files were kept 
according to manual.  In the other four commissionerates, 48 out of 67 files 
were found incomplete. 
Fourteen commissionerates
28 reported that the assessee master files were not 
created even for all mandatory units.  We requisitioned, for test check, 20 
assessee master files, from each commissionerate from amongst the files that 
were created.  We found that in three commissionerates (Indore, Pune III & 
Thane II), the test checked files were prepared according to manual. However 
in nine commissionerates 145 out of 180 files were found incomplete.  
Bhubaneshwar I Commissionerate produced only 5 files instead of 20 and all 
of them were incomplete.  Bhopal Commissionerate did not produce any files 
for scrutiny so we were unable to verify quality of maintenance of files. Patna 
and Goa Commissionerates reported that assessee master files had not been 
created.  Kolkata III, IV and V Commissio nerates reported that a register was 
maintained for recording the names of assessees and revenue paid by each of 
them.  This register was considered as ‘assessee master file/profile’ and used 
for selecting units to be audited a nd also for conducting preliminary desk 
review.  Separate files were not maintained for each assessee. 
Kolkata V commissionerate intimated (June 2011) that on being pointed out 
by us, it had initiated action in this regard.  However Kolkata III and Kolkata 
IV Commissionerate stated (June 2011) th at it was not practically possible to 
maintain the master files. This was not consistent with our findings. Many of 
the test checked commissionerates had already created a large bank of master 
files which showed that the task was practically feasible. 
 
                                                
 
25 Hyderabad II & III, Visakhapatnam I, Dibrugarh, Delhi II, Jamshedpur, Bangalore III, 
Mysore, Ahmedabad III, Vadodara II, Vapi, Chandigarh I, Ludhiana, Jaipur I & II 
26 Hyderabad II & III, Visakhapatnam I, Delhi II, Mysore, Ahmedabad III, Vadodara II and 
Vapi 
27 Dibrugarh, Jamshedpur, Bangalore III, Jaipur I & II, Chandigarh I and Ludhiana 
28 Indore, Pune III, Thane II, Raipur, Nagpur, J & K, Belapur, Meerut I, Noida, Faridabad, 
Gurgaon, Bhubaneshwar I, Bhopal and Guwahati 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 31
5.2.2 Service Tax 
Twelve commissionerates out of 35 test checked reported that the master files 
were created for each assessee.  We test checked 20 assessee master files in 
each commissionerate (240 assessee files) and found that in eight 
commissionerates
29 the test checked files were kept according to manual.  In 
four commissionerates30, 79 out of 80 assessee files were found incomplete as 
items such as copy of the list of accounts maintained by the taxpayer, copy of 
service specific profile, cost audit/tax audit reports etc. were missing. 
Seven commissionerates 31 reported that they had created master files for all 
the mandatory units and some of the non-mandatory units.  We did a test 
check of 20 assessee master files in each commissionerate (140 assessee files) 
and found that in Coimbatore Commissi onerate the test checked files were 
prepared according to manual. In Cochin and Panchkula Commissionerate all 
40 files were found incomplete.  In Bhubaneshwar II Commissionerate three 
files were found incomplete and anothe r 17 files requisitioned by us had 
actually not been created.  Lucknow, Indore and Bhopal Commissionerates did 
not produce any files so we were unable to verify the maintenance of files. 
Ten commissionerates
32, reported that the assessee master files were not 
created even for all mandatory units.  We requisitioned, for test check, 20 
assessee master files, from each commissionerate from amongst the files that 
were created.  We found that in Pune  III commissionerate, the test checked 
files were kept according to manual.  In Delhi ST Commissionerate, four out 
of 20 files were found incomplete.  Bhubaneshwar I Commissionerate and 
Bangalore ST Commissionerate produced three and five files respectively 
instead of 20 files and all the files produced were found incomplete.   In 
Pondicherry Commissionerate 19 out of 20 requisitioned files were not 
created. In remaining five commis sionerates, all 100 files were found 
incomplete. Mumbai ST Commissionerate did not produce any file for 
examination. 
In Patna, Nagpur, Chandigarh I, Kolkata ST and Goa Commissionerates, no 
assessee master files were created. 
The Kolkata ST Commissionerate stated (June 2011) that henceforth assessee 
master files would be maintained for top 100 assessees. 
Our findings showed that 463 (59 per cent) out of 780 files of Central Excise 
and 442 (66 per cent) out of 665 test checked files of Service Tax were either 
not created or were maintained in an incomplete manner.  We also observed 
that the status of creation of assessee master files was not included in the MTR 
(Monthly Technical Report) or any other reports submitted to the 
commissioner.  Therefore, this activity was not being properly monitored.  
Consequently, the selection of units for internal audit was not being done on 
various risk parameters as prescribed in the manuals. 
                                                
 
29 Hyderabad II & III, Visakhapatnam I, Ahmedabad ST, Ahmedabad III, Vadodara II, 
Ludhiana and Mysore 
30 Dibrugarh, Chennai ST and Jaipur I & II 
31 Coimbatore, Bhubaneshwar-II, Cochin, Lucknow, Bhopal, Panchkula and Indore 
32 Bangalore ST, Jamshedpur, Delhi ST, Pune III, Mumbai ST, Pondicherry, Meerut I, Noida, 
Bhubaneshwar I and Guwahati 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 32
5.3 Selection of units for audit 
As per para 10.1.1 and 10.1.2 of Central Excise Audit Manual, 2008 and as 
per para 5.1.4 of Service Tax Audit Manual, 2003, the audit cell of each 
commissionerate is to maintain an updated list of all registered assessees. The 
list is segregated into two categorie s - mandatory units and non-mandatory 
units.  The units in the non-mandatory category are to be selected for audit on 
the basis of risk assessment using prescribed criteria. 
While an elaborate selection procedur e was prescribed in the manual, we 
found that in actual practice, the non-mandatory units were selected, by and 
large, only on the basis of revenue collected.  Details are furnished below: 
5.3.1 Central Excise 
As per para 10.1.2 of Central Excise Audit Manual, 2008, DG (Audit) is to 
compute the risk for all the non- mandatory units in a centralised manner, 
called rupee risk, every year and circulate the list of assessees in each slab of 
non-mandatory category by 15 th April. On the basis of this list, the Audit Cell 
is to prepare an annual list of assessees to be audited during the year.  
It was reported by 39 test checked commissionerates of central excise, that 
none of them received the list of assessees from DG (Audit). 
As per para 10.1.3 of Central Excise Audit Manual, 2008, while selecting the 
units, local risk parameters provided as per para 3.1.7 of the Central Excise 
Audit Manual are to be applied and the units rearranged accordingly.  The 
reasons for such rearrangement are to be  recorded. The selection of units for 
audit is done by Deputy/Assistant Co mmissioner (Audit), which is approved 
by Additional/Joint Commissioner (Audit). 
In nine commissionerates,33 the data/information for local risk parameters was 
maintained as per the manual and also applied in arranging the audit priority 
of the units.  Cochin Commissionerate did not furnish any information in this 
regard.  In remaining 29 commissionerates the selection was done primarily on 
the basis of revenue with one or two addi tional criteria and not in the detailed 
manner as envisaged in para 3.1.7 of the Central Excise Audit Manual. 
5.3.2 Service Tax 
As per para 5.1.3 of the Service Tax Audit Manual, 2003, the units in the non-
mandatory category are to be selected for audit on the basis of risk assessment 
taking into account local risk parameters prescribed in para 5.1.5 and 5.1.4 of 
the manual, ibid. 
In 13 commissionerates 34 the data/information for local risk parameters was 
maintained as per the manual and also applied in arranging the audit priority 
of the units.  The Cochin and Kolkata ST Commissionerates did not 
maintain/furnish any information in this regard.  Mumbai ST and Bangalore 
ST Commissionerates reported that they could not audit all mandatory units, 
hence no non-mandatory units were audited and the need to apply these risk 
                                                
 
33 Guwahati, Dibrugarh , Nagpur, Indore, Jaipur  I, Meerut-I, Ahmedabad III, Coimbatore and 
Pondicherry 
34 Guwahati, Dibrugarh, Nagpur, Mysore, Meerut I, Bhubaneshwar II, Ahmedabad ST, 
Vadodara II, Ahmedabad III, Chandigarh I, Ludhiana, Jaipur I and Pondicherry 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 33
factors did not arise.  In remaining 18 commissionerates 35 the selection was 
done primarily on the basis of revenue with one or two additional criteria and 
not in the detailed manner as envisaged in para 5.1.4 of the Service Tax Audit 
Manual. 
5.4 Audit Planning 
As per para 10.1.5 of Central Excise A udit Manual, 2008 and 5.2.1 of Service 
Tax Audit Manual, 2003, the quarterly sc hedule of allocation of units to each 
audit party is done with the approva l of Additional Commissioner/Joint 
Commissioner (Audit). 
5.4.1 We found that in central excise as well as service tax, majority of the 
commissionerates prepared quarterly schedules with the approval of proper 
authority.  In some cases the schedules were approved with different 
periodicity.  
5.4.2 Prior to actual conduct of audit, the IAPs are required to   
¾ gather as much information about the assessee as possible and analyse this 
information which is called “Desk-Review” and the same should be 
submitted to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner (Audit) for approval. 
This is provided in para 10.4.1 of Central Excise Audit Manual, 2008 and 
6.2 of Service Tax Audit Manual, 2003, 
¾ prepare an “Audit Plan” approved by Additional Commissioner/Joint 
Commissioner, containing the exact formulation of issues selected for 
detailed examination in respect of every assessee. This is to be prepared in 
the form of Annexure H & F as per para 10.4.14 of Central Excise Audit 
Manual, 2008 and 6.4 of Service Tax Audit Manual, 2003 
¾ prepare a “Verification Paper”, as prescribed in Annexure I & E of the 
respective manuals, outlining the audit checks in the Audit Plan, 
verification done on each check and auditor’s observations in brief.   
To assess the compliance to these three procedures, we did a test check of 20 
assessee audit files each in 37 commissionerates of central excise and seven 
and eleven files produced by Bhubaneshwar I and Lucknow 
Commissionerates respectively (total 758 fi les).  Similarly, in service tax, we 
did a test check of 20 assessee audit files each in 33 commissionerates and five 
files that were produced by Bhubaneshwar I Commissionerate (total 665 files).  
Lucknow Commissionerate did not furnish any files in respect of service tax. 
We observed that  
¾ for 60 central excise audits (eight per cent) and for 78 service tax audits 
(12 per cent), the desk review papers were not prepared.   
¾ For six central excise audits (0.8 per cent) and for 43 service tax audits (six 
per cent), the audit plan was not prepared.   
¾ For 115 central excise audits (15 per cent) and for 144 service tax audits 
(22 per cent), the verification papers were not prepared.  
                                                
 
35 Hyderabad II, Hyderabad III, Visakhapatnam I, Lucknow, Noida, Chennai ST, Coimbatore, 
Patna, Goa, Raipur, Pune III, Bhopal, Indore, Bhubaneshwar I, Jamshedpur, Jaipur II, 
Panchkula and Delhi ST 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 34
5.5 Execution of audit plan 
5.5.1 Audit Plan Registers  
As per para 12.3.1 of Central Excise Manual, 2008, and para 9.5.1 of Service 
Tax Audit Manual, 2003, a register of un its planned for audit in the prescribed 
format is to be maintained to monitor the different stages of execution of the 
audit and ensure that all units allotted to an Audit Group have been audited 
and wherever audit has been completed, the Audit Reports have been issued 
on time. 
We observed that the Audit Plan Registers were not maintained according to 
manual and did not reflect whether all planned units had been audited and 
whether audit reports had been issued timely. 
In 11 commissionerates, 36 the register was maintained according to manual. 
However, in 28 commissionerates 37, it was not maintained according to 
manual and entries such as date of submission of IAR to audit cell, Audit 
Report No and date of issue of IAR were not filled up. Consequently, it was 
not possible to monitor, from these registers, whether the audit reports were 
issued on time. In Bangalore III,  Cochin and Kolkata III, IV & V 
Commissionerates we observed that APR contained details of only those units 
which were actually audited.  Consequently, it was not possible to monitor, 
through the register whether all units allotted to a particular group had actually 
been audited.  The APR was not produced for examination by Jamshedpur 
Commissionerate. 
The department admitted the facts in Goa, J & K, Pondicherry, Bangalore III, 
Lucknow, Meerut I and Noida Commissionerates and stated that it was noted 
for future compliance.  The reply was awaited from the remaining 
commissionerates (November 2011). 
Similarly, in service tax in 12 commissionerates 38 the register was maintained 
according to manual. However, in 21 commissionerates 39 it was not 
maintained according to manual and entries such as date of submission of IAR 
to audit cell, Audit Report No, date of issue of IAR were not filled up.  The 
APRs were not produced for examination by Jamshedpur and Delhi ST 
Commissionerates. 
The department admitted the facts in Goa, Pune III, Pondicherry, Lucknow, 
Meerut I and Noida Commissionerates and stated that it was noted for future 
compliance.  Kolkata ST Commissionerate informed that they had taken 
rectificatory measures.  The repl y was awaited from the remaining 
commissionerates (November 2011). 
                                                 
36 Ahmedabad III, Bhubaneshwar II, Coimbatore, Delhi II, Dibrugarh, Guwahati, Jaipur I & II, 
Mysore, Vadodara II and Vapi 
37 Bangalore III, Belapur, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar I, Chandigarh I, Cochin, Faridabad, Goa, 
Gurgaon, Jamshedpur, Hyderabad II & III, Indore, J & K, Kolkata III, IV & V, Lucknow, 
Ludhiana, Meerut I, Nagpur, Noida, Patna, Pondicherry, Pune III, Raipur, Thane II & 
Visakhapatnam I 
38 Ahmedabad III, Vadodara II, Ahmedabad ST, Bangalore ST, Mysore, Jaipur I & II, 
Panchkula, Guwahati, Dibrugarh, Bhubaneshwar II & Coimbatore 
39 Nagpur, Kolkata ST, Cochin, Lucknow, Noida, Meerut I, Chandigarh I, Bhubaneshwar I, 
Mumbai ST, Pune III, Patna, Chennai ST, Pondicherry, Hyderabad II & III, Visakhapatnam I, 
Raipur, Bhopal, Indore, Ludhiana and Goa 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 35
5.5.2 Audit Coverage 
We found that in ten commissionerates,  non-mandatory units were audited at 
the cost of mandatory units. This situation prevailed for both central excise 
and service tax. 
5.5.2.1 Central Excise 
Of the 39 test checked commissionerates, 34 commissionerates furnished 
figures of the units due, planned, audi ted and the shortfall during 2009-10, as 
depicted below:- 
Table No. 2 
 
Categorisation of 
unit 
Slab of 
annual  duty 
(PLA + 
Cenvat) 
Total 
number 
of units 
Number of 
units due for 
internal 
audit as per 
the 
frequency 
prescribed 
Number 
of units 
planned 
Number 
of units 
audited 
Shortfall Short 
fall in 
per 
centage 
Category A 
(mandatory) 100 
per cent to be 
audited 
More than ` 3 
Crore  
3809 3809 3785 3110 675 17.8 
Category B (non-
mandatory) 50 
per cent to be 
audited 
Between ` 1 
Crore to 3 
Crore 
4032 2016 2164 1879 285 13.1 
Category C (non-
mandatory) 20 
per cent to be 
audited 
Between ` 50 
lakh to ` 1 
Crore 
3846 769 1046 943 103 9.8 
Category D (non-
mandatory) 10 
per cent to be 
audited 
Less than ` 50 
lakh 
25025 2503 2125 1669 456 21.5 
Total  36712 9097 9120 7601 1519 16.7 
The remaining five commissionerates 40 did not furnish the details.  The 
foregoing table reveals that the short fall percentage is higher in the case of 
mandatory units compared to category B & C (non-mandatory) units.  Number 
of non-mandatory units planned was greater than units due in category B & C, 
whereas for mandatory units it was lower than the requirement.  
Instances where greater emphasis placed on the audit of non-mandatory units 
at the cost of mandatory units are depicted below:- 
(a) In Belapur Commissionerate 191 mandatory units were planned and 
only 83 units (43 per cent) were audited.  At the same time the 
Commissionerate planned 177 non-mandatory units and audited 166 units (93 
per cent) thereby giving priority to audit of non-mandatory units. 
 
                                                 
40 Goa, J&K, Thane II, Jamshedpur and Cochin 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 36
(b) In Pune III Commissionerate 254 mandatory units were planned and 
only 65 (26 per cent) were audited whereas against 172 non-mandatory units 
planned, 120 units (70 per cent) were audited.  
(c) In Thane II Commissionerate 111 mandatory units were planned and 
90 units audited (81 per cent ) whereas 235 units of Category C & D were 
audited against 199 units due.  
(d) In Jamshedpur Commissionerate out of 65 mandatory units, only 31 
(48 per cent) were audited whereas 81 non-mandatory units of D category 
were audited against only 42 units due.  Thus, non-mandatory units were 
audited at the cost of mandatory units. The Commissionerates, in their replies 
stated that shortfall in audit was due to (i) non-receipt of relevant documents 
from the assessees for desk review, (ii) request of the units for postponement 
of audit, (iii) seizure of documents by preventive wing, (iv) closure of units, 
(v) shortage in man power. 
The reasons furnished in the replies could not justify large shortfalls in audit 
cited above.  For items (i) to (iv), the parties can be redeployed for auditing 
other assessees, which were due but could not be planned because of shortage 
of man power.  Giving shortage of man power as a reason for short fall in 
audit was against the concept of audit planning, where units would be planned 
for audit based on man power. 
5.5.2.2 Service Tax 
Of the 35 test checked commissionerates, 30 Commissionerates furnished 
figure of units due, planned, audited an d shortfall during 2009-10, as depicted 
below:- 
Table No. 3 
 
Categorisation of 
unit 
Slab of 
annual  
duty 
(PLA + 
Cenvat) 
Total 
number 
of units 
Number of 
units due for 
internal 
audit as per 
the 
frequency 
prescribed 
Number 
of units 
planned 
Number 
of units 
audited 
Shortfall Short fall 
as per 
centage 
of units 
planned 
Category A 
(mandatory) 100 
per cent to be 
audited 
More than 
` 50 lakh  
5148 5148 3441 2589 852 24.7 
Category B (non-
mandatory) 50 
per cent to be 
audited 
Between 
` 25 lakh 
to 50 lakh 
4434 2217 1158 944 214 18.5 
Category C (non-
mandatory) 20 
per cent to be 
audited 
Between 
` 10 lakh 
to ` 25 
lakh 
 
12260 2452 1453 1210 243 16.7 
Category D 
(non-mandatory) 
two per cent to 
be audited 
Less than 
`  10 lakh 
306847 6137 2868 2183 685 23.8 
Total  328689 15954 8920 6926 1994 22.4 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 37
The remaining five commissionerates 41 did not furnish the details. The 
foregoing table reveals overall shortfall of 22.4 per cent. The short fall 
percentage was highest in the case of mandatory units. Only 67 per cent of 
mandatory units were planned out of which 24.7 per cent of units remained 
unaudited which meant that effectively only 50.3 per cent of mandatory units 
were audited.  
We found that seven Commissionerates42 placed greater emphasis on the audit 
of non-mandatory units at the cost of mandatory units. Three cases are detailed 
below:-  
a) In Jamshedpur Commissionerate, only 10 (20 per cent) mandatory 
units were audited against 51 due where as 167 units of category D were 
audited, although only 42 were due.  
b) In Chandigarh I Commissionerate, 92 mandatory units were planned 
and only 59 (63 per cent) were audite d whereas in category B & C, 167 units 
were planned against only 117 units due and 160 were audited.   
c) In Nagpur Commissionerate, 39 category A units were planned 
against 102 units due and only 10 (10 per cent of due) were audited. While 
only 48 non-mandatory units were due in category B &C, 114 were planned 
and only 22 units (45.8 per cent of due) were audited. Therefore, both during 
planning and execution, greater preference was given to coverage of non-
mandatory units. 
We also observed that there was scope for rationalization in the deployment of 
personnel. For example, Bangalore ST Commissionerate was not able to 
conduct audit of all mandatory units  while Mysore Commissionerate was 
auditing even the non-mandatory units much beyond the units due as per 
frequency norms.  Similarly, Chennai ST Commissionerate was not able to 
include all mandatory units in audit plan whereas Coimbatore and Pondicherry 
Commissionerates were auditing non-mandatory units beyond frequency 
norms.  
The Commissionerates, stated in reply that shortfall in audit was due to (i) 
non-receipt of relevant documents from the assessees for desk review, (ii) 
request of the units for postponement of audit, (iii) assessees not available, (iv) 
closure of units, (v) shortage in man power. 
The reasons furnished in the replies could not justify large shortfalls in audit 
cited above.  For items (i) to (iv), the parties can be redeployed for auditing 
other assessees, which for due but could not be planned because of shortage of 
man power.  Giving shortage of man power  as a reason for short fall in audit 
goes against the basis concept of audit planning where units should be planned 
for audit based on man power. 
 
                                                 
41 Goa, Kolkata ST, Delhi ST, Jamshedpur & Cochin 
42 Jamshedpur, Cochin, Bhubaneshwar I, Nagpur, Chandigarh I, Chennai ST and Ahmedabad 
ST 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 38
5.6 Reporting 
5.6.1 Monitoring Committee Meetings 
As per para 12.2.2 and 12.2.3 of Central Excise Manual, 2008, and as per para 
9.2.1, 9.2.2 and 9.3.1 of Service Tax Audit Manual, 2003 all draft audit reports 
are to be discussed and approved by the Monitoring Committee headed by the 
Commissioner.  We found that the monitoring committee meetings were held 
on a regular basis and all reports ha d been issued after approval by the 
committee. 
5.6.2 Nil Reports 
We observed that in 15 central excise commissionerates and 11 service tax 
commissionerates, the nil reports were substantially above the average for the 
test checked commissionerates.  
5.6.2.1 Central Excise 
The test checked commissionerates reported that the total number of reports 
issued in 2009-10 were 9420 out of which 1280 (14 per cent) were nil reports.  
Out of these 1280 reports 262 related to mandatory units and 939 related to 
non-mandatory units.  The position in respect of 79 reports could not be 
ascertained. 
In 25 commissionerates, the percentage of Nil report was between 2 and 15 
per cent, in four commissionerates
43 it was between 16 and 25 per cent and in 
10 commissionerates,44 it was between 26 and 49 per cent. 
5.6.2.2 Service Tax 
We ascertained that the total number of reports issued in 2009-10 were 9110 
out of which 1241 (14 per cent) were nil reports.  Out of these 1098 reports, 
233 related to mandatory units and 798 related to non-mandatory units.  The 
position in respect of 67 reports could not be ascertained. 
In 21 commissionerates 45 the nil report percentage was between one and 
fifteen per cent.  In ten commissionerates46 it was between 17 and 29 per cent. 
The statistics given above showed that the nil reports averaged at 14 per cent 
in both central excise and service tax.  They were above the average in 15 
central excise commissionerates and 11 service tax commissionerates. The 
high variations were required to be analysed by the department. 
In paragraph 5.3, we have pointed out that selection of non-mandatory units 
was being done only on revenue basis and not on other risk parameters as 
prescribed in paragraph 10.1.3 of Centr al Excise Audit Manual and paragraph 
5.1.3 of Service Tax Audit manual.  This could be a contributory factor for the 
large number of nil reports for non-mandatory units. 
                                                
 
43 Raipur, Kolkata IV, Delhi II & Cochin 
44 Patna, Mysore, Lucknow, Kolkata III, Dibrugarh, Goa, Guwahati, Chandigarh I, J & K and 
Hyderabad II 
45 Chennai ST, Jaipur I, Nagpur, Hyderabad II, Hyderabad III, Guwahati, Indore, Ahmedabad 
III, Visakhapatnam I, Raipur, Noida, Kolkata ST, Delhi ST, Panchkulan, Goa, Pune III, 
Bhubaneshwar I, Bangalore ST, Jaipur II, Cochin and Ahmedabad ST 
46 Meerut I, Lucknow, Mysore , Vadodara II, Chandigarh I, Bhubaneshwar II, Bhopal, 
Jamshedpur, Dibrugarh and Coimbatore 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 39
Recommendation No. 9 
¾ We recommend that the preparation of Assessee Master Files for each 
assessee may be completed in a time bound manner. The timelines may be 
monitored by Commissioners through monthly reports submitted by the 
Audit Cells 
The Board stated in the exit conference that it agreed with the 
recommendation and intimated that the Director General (Audit) would 
examine the matter and prepare a co mprehensive report for the Board’s 
consideration. 
Recommendation No. 10 
¾ We recommend that the ACES module for internal audit, which is 
operational, may be implemented in a time bound manner so that multiple 
parameters can be used for the risk based selection of non-mandatory 
units. 
The Board stated in the exit conference that the DG, Systems and DG, Audit 
would examine the matter and report jointly, by 31 January 2012, on the 
quantum of work involved and the reasonable time frame by which the 
operational module can be implemented in central excise and service tax 
formations. Based on this, and other relevant considerations, Board would 
issue appropriate instructions. 
Recommendation No. 11 
¾ We recommend that MIS reports may be designed in ACES in the format of 
the Audit Plan Registers to monitor whether all planned units had been 
audited and whether audit reports had been issued timely.  
The Board stated in the exit conference that the comprehensive MIS being 
developed by Systems Directorate would include such information. 
Recommendation No. 12 
¾ We recommend that the reduction in audit coverage due to staff shortages 
may be distributed evenly across mandatory and non-mandatory units. The 
practice of auditing larger number of non-mandatory units at the cost of 
mandatory units may be curtailed. 
The Board stated in the exit conference that the DG, Audit had addressed a 
letter dated 22 November 2011 to Chief Commissioners drawing their 
attention to the prescribed norms for audit of mandatory and non-mandatory 
units as well as to the observations of the Audit and similar findings in the 
Department’s Quality Assurance Review of Commissionerates for the year 
2010-11. The Chief Commissioners had been asked to ensure that the audit of 
such type of units was conducted as prescribed. 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 40
CHAPTER VI - 
SHOW CAUSE NOTICES AND 
CALL BOOK CASES
6.1 Introduction 
Section 11A of Central Excise Act, 1944 for Central Excise and Section 73 of 
the Finance Act, 1994 for Service Tax provide for issue of Show Cause Notice 
(SCN) when any duty of excise/ service tax has not been levied or has been 
short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded. 
6.2 Maintenance and updating  of SCN control register 
We observed that there was no uniform practice of maintaining a centralised 
record to monitor issue of SCNs and their follow up.  
On our test check of 46 commissionerates for central excise and service tax, 
we noticed that there was no centralised record of all the cases which required 
issue of SCN. Once issued, SCNs we re monitored through different records 
such as 335J Register, Draft SCN Register, SCN movement register, SCN 
issue register etc. Consequently, there was a monitoring system once SCNs 
were issued but nothing to ensure that SCNs had been issued in every case of 
detection of non-levy, short-levy etc. wherever required. Since there was no 
centralised record, we  had to restrict our examination to ascertaining whether 
SCNs were being issued in all cases, as  required by the instructions of the 
Board, in respect of the observations raised by audit parties (CERA) of the 
CAG during 2008-09. We found instances where SCNs were not issued and 
reasons for not doing so were not found on record, as detailed below. 
6.2.1 In Patna Commissionerate, we observed that Bettiah central excise 
range did not initiate the process to issue SCN in one CERA observation 
(involving ` 1.07 lakh) relating to M/s Harinagar Sugar Mills Limited.  
Similarly, the service tax range I, Bankipur did not initiate the process of 
issuing SCNs in one para relating to M/s Neelkamal Steel Pvt. Ltd., Patna and 
three paras relating to M/s Bharti Airtel Ltd., Patna involving a total amount of 
` 58.93 lakh, pointed out by CERA.   
In reply the department intimated (August 2011) that SCN of ` 1.07 lakh and 
` 1.50 lakh had now been issued in respect of M/s. Harinagar Sugar Mills 
Limited and M/s. Neelkamal Steel Pvt. Ltd., respectively.  On the three 
paragraphs of ` 57.43 lakh related to M/s. Bharati Airtel Ltd., it was intimated 
(August 2011) that the amounts involved in the three cases were included in 
SCNs issued during January 2010 to March 2010.  
6.2.2 In four selected central  excise ranges under Nagpur 
Commissionerate, out of 93 paras issued by CERA, action was taken only in 
43 paras either by way of issue of SCN or otherwise and in remaining 50 
paras, no action was taken.  In respect of service tax, we observed that SCN 


Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 41
had not been issued from eight months to twenty months in nine cases 
detected by CERA/ IAP/ Preventive Branch. 
6.2.3 In two selected divisions under Bhubaneswar II Commissionerate, 
against 23 CERA objections involving ` 14.78 crore, SCNs were issued only 
in two cases.  
6.3 Call Book cases 
The Board’s circular dated 14 December 1995 provides that the following four 
types of cases that are pending adjudication are to be transferred to the Call 
Book. 
¾ Cases in which the Department has gone in appeal to a quasi judicial or a 
judicial authority. 
¾ Cases where injunction has been issued by Supreme Court/ High Court etc. 
¾ Cases where audit objections are contested. 
¾ Cases where the Board has specifically ordered the same to be kept 
pending and to be entered into the call book. 
Once transferred to the Call Book, the cases are not to be included in  the list 
of cases pending adjudication. The cases in the call book are to be reviewed 
every month to identify any cases that are to be taken out of the call book and 
adjudicated. We found instances where these provisions were not adhered to, 
as detailed below: 
6.3.1 Cochin Commissionerate issued four  show cause notices to an export 
oriented unit, DC Mills, Alapuzha, during 2005 to 2009, based on an internal 
audit objection for non-payment of jute cess amounting to ` 49.56 lakh. The 
commissionerate sought clarification from the Board and transferred these 
cases to the call book. The Comissionerate did not received any reply from the 
board (November 2011). As these SCNs did not fall in any of the four 
categories of cases mentioned in Circular dated 14 December 1995, the 
transfer of the cases to call book was not in order. They were required to be 
taken out of the call book and added to the list of cases pending adjudication. 
6.3.2 During scrutiny of cases transferred to call book in central excise 
Division, Alwar, we observed that SCN No V (85)01/Dem./2009 and SCN 
No. V (76 &74)13/Dem/09 were issued on the basis of observations of CERA. 
The Department agreed to both the objections. However, both the cases were 
transferred to call book in the month of January 2010, without the approval of 
the competent authority i.e. the Commissioner. The reasons for the 
unauthorized transfers to the call book were not intimated to us (November 
2011). 
6.3.3 In Belapur Commissionerate, we found four instances, where cases 
were not taken out of Call Book leading to long delays in adjudication. The 
cases are described below: 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 42
a. A SCN issued to M/s IOC Ltd. in April 2000, on the basis of CERA 
objection, was kept pending in Call Book even after the observation 
was closed by us in November 2005. It was taken out of Call Book and 
adjudicated only in October 2009.   
b. A SCN issued to M/s Singh Scrap Pr ocessors was taken out from Call 
Book (April 2008), three years after decision of CESTAT (February 
2005) and adjudicated after another year (June 2009). There was a total 
delay of more than four years after the CESTAT judgment. 
c. A SCN issued (February 1998) to M/s. Joglekar Refabrication and 
Ceramic Pvt. Ltd. was removed from the Call Book (February 2009), 
ten years after the acceptance of CEGAT order (September 1999). 
d. A SCN issued (February 2000) to M/s Balmer Laurie & Co. was kept 
pending in call book for more than four years even after the decision of 
Supreme Court in 2005.  
6.4 Cases remanded by Commissioner (Appeals) 
The Finance Act, 2001, amended Section 35A (3) of Central Excise Act, 1944, 
relating to the powers of Commissioner (Appeals). It provided that “The 
Commissioner (Appeals) shall after making such further enquiry as may be 
necessary pass such order as he thinks fit just and proper, confirming, 
modifying or annulling the decision or order appealed against”. The Supreme 
Court, in its decision in the case of MIL India Limited, held that the power of 
the Commissioner (Appeals) to remand had been taken away by the 
amendment in Finance Act, 2001.  On the basis of the above judgment, the 
Board, in its Circular dated 25 July 2008, affirmed that the powers had been 
withdrawn to speed up adjudication process because on remand, cases were 
pushed back to the starting point. 
We observed that even after the issue of the above circular by the Board, six 
cases had been remanded back by Commissioner (Appeals), Cochin. In all 
these cases, the decisions were accepted by the Cochin Commissionerate 
during review. As the remand orders were  in contravention of the provisions 
and instructions of the Board, the department could have filed appeals against 
them instead of allowing the adjudicati on process to revert to the starting 
point. The reasons for non-compliance with the provisions had not been 
intimated to us (November 2011). 
Recommendation No. 13 
¾ A centralised record of all cases where SCNs are likely to be issued, may 
be maintained and monitored by the commissionerates to ensure that SCNs 
are actually issued. In the automated environment of ACES, the same 
record could be used to monitor subsequent stages of action taken. 
The Board stated in the exit conference that all cases detected need not 
necessarily lead to issuance of show cause notice but it was important that 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 43
every detection either results in timel y issue of SCN or other appropriate 
action, as deemed fit by the competent authority.  In this regard, it was stated 
that the Board was consulting field formations on the extant monitoring 
mechanisms and based on feedback, would take the appropriate action. 
New Delhi (SUBIR MALLICK) 
Dated :                 Principal Director  
(Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 
Countersigned 
New Delhi (VINOD RAI) 
Dated : Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 45
Glossary of terms and abbreviations 
Abbreviated form Expanded form 
AC Assistant Commissioner 
ACES Automation of Central Excise and Service Tax 
ADC Additional Commissioner 
APR Audit planning register 
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
BSR Basic statistical return 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CAO Chief Accounts Officer 
CBEC Central Board of Excise and Customs 
CEGAT Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate 
Tribunal 
Cenvat Central value added tax 
CERA Central excise receipt audit 
CESTAT Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate 
Tribunal 
CVD Countervailing duty 
DC Deputy Commissioner 
DGST Director General of Service Tax 
DR Draft Report 
EASIEST Electronic Accounting System in Excise and 
Service Tax 
EC Education cess 
E-MAIL Electronic mail 
ETS Education testing service 
GTA Goods Transport Agency 
IAP Internal audit party 
IAR Internal audit report 
JC Joint Commissioner 
Ltd. Limited 
MIS Management information system 
MOU Memorandum of understanding 
MPLIS Multiprotocol label switching 

Report No. 25 of 2011-12 (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) 
 46
Abbreviated form Expanded form 
MTR Monthly technical report 
NT Non-tariff 
PAN Permanent account number 
PAO Pay and Accounts Officer 
PAR Performance Audit report 
PLA Personal ledger account 
Pvt. Private 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RC Registration certificate 
REIC Regional economic intelligence committee 
SCN Show cause-cum-demand notice/Show cause notice 
SHE Secondary and higher education 
ST Service Tax 
 
 
 
 