Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      v
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2009 
containing the results of the Performance Audit of the ‘Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in 
India’, a unit under Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) has been 
prepared for submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution.
The Performance Audit was conducted between June 2008 to December 2008 and January 2010 
to March 2010 through test check of records relating to tea development, tea marketing and 
promotion, tea research, regulatory activities of Tea Board and other functions of Tea Board. 
The results of our audit, recommendations and response of the management to our 
recommendations are contained in this Report. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      vii
Executive Summary 
Why did we decide to examine this issue? 
Tea Board of India was established in 1954 under section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 as a statutory 
body under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MOC&I). The functions of Tea Board can be 
grouped into regulatory, developmental, research, marketing and promotional activities. We 
conducted a Performance Audit of Tea Board in view of the following: 
x Declining productivity of tea in India,  
x Comparative decline in the prices of Indian tea,
x Increased cost of production for Indian tea, and
x Decline in India’s production and export share.
What were our audit objectives?
In order to assess the performance of Tea Board, we framed the following audit objectives: 
1. Whether Tea Board performed its regulatory role effectively; 
2. Whether developmental activities  undertaken by Tea Board had an impact on enhancing 
productivity of tea in India;  
3. Whether developmental activities  undertaken by Tea Board had an impact on improving
quality of tea in India;
4. Whether developmental activities undertaken by Tea Board had an impact on reducing cost 
of production of tea in India; 
5. Whether research activities  undertaken by Tea Board or financed by Tea Board were 
effective in delivering results for effective tea development;  
6. Whether adequate and effective steps were undertaken for marketing and promotion  of 
Indian Tea to improve its position in world as well as domestic market; and
7. Whether an effective financial management and internal control mechanism existed in Tea 
Board.
What did our Performance Audit reveal? 
Regulatory role The Tea Board has failed to discharge even its basic regulatory role effectively. 
More than 80 per cent of small growers in India continued to remain outside 
the ambit of regulations by the Tea Board. The system of inspection for 
regulating the activities of various stakeholders was weak and non-transparent. 
The Board was not able to ensure submission of business information by 
stakeholders so as to exercise effective control on their activities.  
(Chapter 3)
Enhancing
productivity 
The increasing trend of commercially unproductive bushes which constituted 
57 per cent of total bushes at the end of 2008 is a serious threat to the tea 
industry and unless appropriate and timely interventions are made for 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      viii
arresting this trend, there could be serious implications on productivity of tea. 
Efforts by Tea Board to increase productivity by replantation of commercially 
unproductive bushes were grossly inadequate and ineffective both in terms of 
area covered as well financial support provided. The targets for 
replanting/replacement planting were set very low. The backlog for replanting 
up to 2008 would take 149 years to clear at the present pace of 
implementation.
(Chapter 4)
Improving
Quality 
Indian tea realised prices lower than the tea of other countries. This was due to 
its inferior quality and adverse product mix. The production of orthodox tea fell 
substantially below the targets set despite a subsidy scheme being in place for  
more than five years.
(Chapter 5)
Reducing Cost India has the highest cost of production among major tea-producing countries 
of the world. Tea Board failed to identify areas of cost reduction to ensure 
long-term sustainability for the tea industry. It undertook no major initiatives 
to improve labour productivity by way of training or incentivisation.
(Chapter 6)
Research Research activities were not fruitful as neither any deliverables were 
transferred for the use of the tea industry nor were any patents filed. The Tea 
Board failed to adequately support research activities by not providing 
sufficient funds, or adequate number of staff, nor in ensuring completion of 
research projects. No controls were put in place to evaluate and monitor 
research activities undertaken by external entities supported by Tea Board.
(Chapter 7)
Marketing and 
Promotion
The Export Incentive Scheme for assistance to tea exporters was implemented 
in an ineffective manner. No benchmarks in terms of quantity of export were 
defined for exporters to make them eligible for grant of subsidy, nor for 
assessing the outcome of promotional activities related to the export of tea. 
As such, Tea Board is not in a position to co-relate the impact of the grant of 
subsidy to exporters on the quantum of increase in exports.  
(Chapter 8)
Financial
management
and internal 
control
Financial management and internal controls in Tea Board were weak. Cess 
levied by the government was not transferred to the Tea Fund since 2005-06 
and rates of cess were revised at varying intervals ranging from nearly three 
years to more than 14 years. Internal audit was also not commensurate with 
the extent of activities undertaken by the Board.
(Chapter 9)

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      ix
What do we recommend? 
x Tea Board may evolve a mechanism to ensure registration of all small tea-growers and 
ensure that all the stakeholders in tea business furnish requisite and complete information 
on time which can be used by Tea Board for better regulation under the provisions of Tea 
Act.  Tea Board may plan and conduct regular inspections for exercising effective control 
and ensuring fair practices in tea. 
x The Government needs to take a holistic view of critical situation of declining productivity 
of tea in India and take major structural and strategic decisions like redesigning of 
programmes, schemes, delivery mechanisms and much higher financial outlays.
x Tea Board needs to strengthen the monitoring mechanism for implementation of the 
quality upgradation scheme to ensure the augmentation of processing capabilities of 
orthodox tea. A mechanism may be devised to analyse the reasons for decline in quality 
even after payment of subsidy for remedial measures.  
x Tea Board needs to adopt an appropriate system of cost studies for identifying areas for 
cost reduction and effectively address those areas to ensure the long term sustainability.
x Tea Board may provide adequate scientific manpower and other resources for tea 
research, while ensuring effectiveness in terms of papers published along with Impact 
Factor of the papers and technology developed/ transferred/ commercialised and 
patented. Tea Board may evolve an effective mechanism to ensure accountability of the 
money spent by external research entities.  
x Tea Board may fix quantifiable benchmark for increase in exports for exporters to become 
eligible for any incentive/support and assess the impact/outcome of the support activities. 
The Board may evaluate the impact and effectiveness of all its marketing and promotion 
activities on tea promotion in international and domestic markets by fixing appropriate 
criteria/ benchmarks.  
x Tea Board may strengthen internal audit to make it commensurate with the level of 
activities of the organisation. The Government needs to consider periodical revision of the 
rates of cess.
What was the response of Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Tea Board to our 
recommendations?
Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Tea Board accepted most of the recommendations 
suggested by us. Recognising the criticality of the issues reported in the Performance Audit, Tea 
Board has submitted details of action already taken and action proposed to be taken on our 
recommendations. We are of the view that the response of Tea Board and the action proposed 
to our recommendations may not be sufficient enough to increase the impact of Tea Board in 
the areas of regulation, development, research, marketing and promotion unless the 
Government considers redesigning its programmes, schemes, delivery mechanisms and 
allocates higher financial outlays to effectively address the problems that plague the tea 
industry in India.  
Ministry finally intimated us that the suggestions made by us would be taken up in earnest 
spirit and modifications would be brought in while finalising the Twelfth Five Year Plan subject 
to the financial outlay. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      1
Camellia Sinensis
1 Green tea is not fermented. The leaves are either lightly pan-fried and tossed in a wok-like metal pan for half an 
hour or more, or steamed after plucking to prevent oxidation. 
2 Oolong tea is semi-fermented. The leaves are withered, pan fried and then rolled and twisted, which gives more 
flavor than flat leaves.  
3 White tea is produced from mature buds of a rare tea bush found only in Fujian, China. It is neither oxidised nor 
rolled.
Chapter 1 Introduction 
About Tea 1.1    The botanical name for tea is Camellia Sinensis , a shrub with leathery 
green and 
shiny
serrated 
leaves. It is a 
hardy plant 
that grows 
from mean 
sea level to 
6000 feet 
and above - 
from
temperate to 
tropical
climates, 
wherever the 
soil is slightly 
acidic with 
well
distributed
rainfall and 
good drainage. If left to grow 
naturally, it can grow up to 15 
meters or more, but for ease of harvest, it is pruned at 18 to 28 inches every 
few years, which assures an explosion of young flushes of two leaves and a 
bud.
1.2 Harvesting is largely done by hand, which requires both skill and dexterity 
and care is taken to pluck only the fully developed two leaves and a bud and 
not the stalk. Majority of tea leaf pluckers are women. An experienced plucker 
can gather up to 45 to 90 kgs of leaves in one day.  Although the newly planted 
tea plant becomes ready for its first harvest in its second year, the regular 
commercial yield can be obtained only after the formative prune, which is done 
after 4 to 5 years from planting. 
1.3 Tea can be classified based on the type of manufacture and most 
commonly, it is differentiated as green 1, oolong 2, black and white 3.  The 
processing of tea of various types can be seen in the figure below: 

                   
4 Black tea 
processing
methods o
f
palms with
edges and 
orthodox t
e
5 A special 
allowed to 
6 Blocks of w
7 Large leaf
8 Figure for 
Wor
M
                     
is of two ty p
(i.e. witheri n
f rolling. In th
 gentle pres s
rotating at h
ea since the e
tea processe
sit and yellow
whole or finel
fed tea from t
2011 not ava
Bla
Gr
Or
the
1.4
suc
Pu
etc
rld Tea 
Market
1.5
co
ex
        Role of T
pes - CTC and 
ng, rolling, fe r
e case of orth
sure.  In case 
igh speed. T h
ntire leaf is tw
d similarly t o
w.
ly ground tea 
he Yunnan pr
ilable in Tea B
ack Tea is t h
een Tea h o
rthodox Tea
e world ma
4   Other f o
ch as Insta n
er tea7, Org
c.
5 India, Chi
untries in t
port share i
Tea Board in T
Orthodox. Th
rmentation, d
hodox, Tea th
of CTC, the l
hus, the part i
wisted and mo
o green tea, b
leaves packed
ovince in Chin
Board. 
he most po
olds the bal
a and CTC ( c
rket is 44 pe
orms of tea 
nt Tea, Tea 
ganic Tea, D
na, Kenya, 
he world. D
in the year 
Bla
Tea Developm
hough the ra w
drying and so r
e leaf is rolled
leaf is passe d
icle size of C T
ostly remains 
but with a sl o
d in molds an
na. 
opular and a
ance 17 pe
cut, tear an
er cent, wh
traded incl
Bags, Spec
Decaffeinat
Sri Lanka a
Details of th
2010 is det
ack Tea- CTC an
ment in India
w material (i.
rting) are sa m
d simulating a
d through a s e
TC tea is sm a
intact.
ower drying p
d pressed into
accounts fo
er cent shar
nd crush) Te
ereas for CT
ude Value A
cialty Tea li k
ted tea, Fla v
and Indones
he area cov
ailed below
nd Orthodox an
Re
    
e. green leaf )
me for both, t
a process as if
et of three p
aller and the 
hase, where 
o block form. 
or 83 per ce
re. Black Te
ea. The sha
TC, it is 39 p
Added Tea 
ke Yellow t e
voured Tea
sia are the 
ered, produ
w:
d Green Tea 
port No. 10 
), and the ba s
the differenc e
f it is rolled b
airs of roller s
same is larg e
the damp te a
ent of world
a is of two 
re of Orth o
per cent.
and Conve
ea5, Compr
, Spiced Te
largest tea
uction and 
of 2011-12
2
sic stages of 
e lies in the 
etween two 
s with sharp 
er in case of 
a leaves are 
d tea trade. 
types4 viz. 
odox Tea in 
nience Tea 
essed tea6,
a, Iced Tea 
 producing 
estimated8


Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      3
9 Tea Planter’s Associations formulate policies and initiate action towards the development and growth of the 
Industry, facilitate liaison with the Tea Board, Government and other related bodies. 
10 Tea Auctioneers’ Associations have been set up with an objective of promoting and safeguarding the interests of 
tea auctioneers. 
11 Tea Traders Associations have been constituted with a view to bring buyers, sellers and brokers of tea to a 
common forum and to provide an institutional framework for the conduct of the public tea auctions. 
12 Tea grower means any person, firm, company or body corporate or cooperative society engaged in cultivation of 
tea plants.   
13 Manufacturer means any person, firm, company, corporate body, co-operative society etc., who manufactures 
tea made from the leaves of Camellia Sinensis, (including green and instant tea), which includes Estate Factories, 
Bought Leaf Factories and Co-operative Factories or who produces value added products commercially such as 
packet tea, tea bags, flavoured tea and quick brewing black tea. 
14 Exporter/ Distributor means a person, firm, company, corporate body, co-operative society engaged in the 
business of export of tea (including export of imported tea outside India) / distribution of imported tea. 
15 Buyer means any person, firm, company, corporate body, cooperative society etc., including a consignee or 
commission agent, who receives tea by way of stock transfer from the manufacturer, with a place of business in tea 
in India, engaged in purchasing or procuring tea either from public tea auctions or directly from manufacturers of 
tea.
16 Broker means any person, firm, company, corporate body, cooperative society etc., engaged in the business of 
brokering in tea through the licensed auction systems. 
17 Bought leaf tea factory means a tea factory which sources not less than two-third of its tea leaf requirement from 
other tea growers during any calendar year for the purpose of manufacture of tea. 
18 Government owned factories buying leaf from small growers. 
19 Organised sector with estates and associated processing units.  Sometimes, they may also buy leaf from small 
growers.
20 The Tea Research Association (TRA) is a registered co-operative society dedicated to scientific research 
and extension for improvement in productivity and quality of tea in the North East (NE) India. 
21 UPASI is an apex body of planters of tea, coffee, rubber, pepper and cardamom in the Southern States of India 
viz., Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka and engaged in activities such as, research, welfare schemes for workers, 
sports etc. 
Table 1–Data about major tea producing countries in the world 
Country Area covered  
(lakh hectares) 
Production  
(million kgs) 
Export share 
(per cent)
China 18.49 1370.00 17.45 
India 5.79 966.40 11.15
Indonesia 1.27 129.20 5.03 
Kenya 1.58 399.01 25.44 
Sri Lanka 1.88 329.38 17.23 
Source: Information received from Tea Board  
About the 
Indian Tea 
Industry 
1.6 Other than Central and State Governments which formulate legislations 
on tea, the major players in the Tea Industry are Tea Planters’ Associations 9,
Tea Auctioneers Association 10, Tea Traders Association 11, Tea growers 12,
manufacturers13, exporters and distributors 14, buyers 15, brokers 16, owners of 
bought leaf factories17, owners of co-operative factories18, owners of corporate 
processing sector 19, Tea Research Association (TRA) 20, United Planters’ 
Association of Southern India 21(UPASI) and Tea Board of India.  The map given 
below depicts the tea growing areas in various states in India viz., Assam, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Mizoram, Nagaland, Manipur, Meghalaya, West 
Bengal, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and 
Orissa covering an estimated  area of 5.79 lakh hectares as of January 2009.  

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      4
Tea Board – 
Functions and 
Organisational
Structure
1.7 Tea Board of India was established in 1954 under section 4 of the Tea Act, 
1953 as a statutory body under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
(MOC&I). The Board is responsible for the following important functions as per 
Para 10 of the Chapter II of the Tea Act, 1953: 
Functions of Tea Board 
x Regulating the production and extent of cultivation of tea; 
x Improving the quality of tea; 
x Promoting co-operative efforts among growers and manufacturers of tea; 
x Undertaking, assisting or encouraging scientific, technological and economic 
research and maintaining or assisting in the maintenance of demonstration 
farms and manufacturing stations; 
x Assisting in the control of insects and other pests and diseases affecting tea; 
x Regulating the sale and export of tea; 
x Training in tea testing and fixing grade standards of tea; 
x Increasing the consumption  of tea in India and elsewhere and carrying on 
Map showing tea growing area in India 

                   
22 New Delh
                     
hi, Siliguri, Mu
1.8
Ch
(De
the
Gu
reg
an
Ex
Coo
        Role of T
umbai, Cochin
promo
x Registe
person
x Improv
x Subscr
other
promo
of tea i
x Collect
person
publica
therefr
x Securin
amenit
8   T e a  B
hairperson,
evelopmen
eir Headqua
uwahati an d
gional offic
d Moscow.
xecutive Director 
onoor, Guwahat
Tea Board in T
n, Chennai, Silc
tional activit
ering and lic
ns engaged in
ving the mar
ibing to th e
arrangemen
ting the dev
in India or el
ting tea stati
ns as may b e
ation of st a
rom; and  
ng better 
ties and ince
Board is h
Secretary,
t), Director
arters at K o
d Coonoor
es22. The B
The Organi
i
Oversas Offi
London, Dub
Moscow
Orga
Tea Developm
char, Kottaya
ties for that 
ensing of m
n the busines
keting of tea
e Share Cap
nt with any 
elopment of
sewhere; 
stics from gr
e prescribe d
atistics so 
working c
entives for w
headed by 
Financial A
r (Promotion
olkata.  Be s
headed b y
oard also h
isational Str
Cha
ice at 
bai & 
w
Financia
& Chief 
Of
Deputy
Chairperson
anisationa
ment in India
m, Agartala, J
purpose; 
anufacturers
ss of blendin
a in India and
ital of or e n
other bod y
f Tea industr
rowers, man
d on any m a
collected o
onditions a
orkers.
Chairperso
Advisor & C
n & Market
sides, the B
y Executiv e
has three o v
ructure of T
airperson
al Advisor 
Accounts
fficer
De
n
 Secreta
al Structu
Re
    
orhat, Tezpur
s, brokers, t e
ng tea; 
d elsewhere;
ntering into 
y Corporate
y or for prom
ufactures, d
atter relatin g
or portions 
and provis i
on who is 
Chief Acco u
ting), Joint 
oard has it s
e Directors 
verseas off
Tea Board is
Director
velopment
 P
ary
ure of Tea 
port No. 10 
r, Kurseong an
ea waste d e
;
any arrang e
 for the p u
motion and m
ealers and s
g to tea ind u
thereof or 
ion/improve
assisted b
unts Offic e
Director (Li
s two Zona
and 12 re g
ices at Lon d
s as follows
Director
Promotoion & 
Marketing
Board
of 2011-12
5
nd Palampur
ealers and 
ement or 
urpose of 
marketing 
uch other 
ustry; the 
extracts 
ment of 
by Deputy 
er, Director 
censing) at 
l Offices at 
gional/sub-
don, Dubai 
:
Joint Director
Licensing

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      6
1.9   The Board functions as a statutory body of the Central Government under 
MoC&I and has 31 members (including Chairperson) drawn from Members of 
Parliament, tea producers, tea traders, tea brokers, consumers and 
representatives of Governments from the principal tea producing states and 
trade unions. The Board is reconstituted every three years and guided by four 
standing committees dealing with administrative matters, export promotion of 
tea, developmental activities and labour welfare activities.
Activities of Tea 
Board
1.10 The activities of Tea Board can be grouped into the following areas: 
a)   Regulatory Activities,  which include according permission for growing tea 
to big and small growers and registration & licensing of various stakeholders in 
Tea Industry as per Tea Act, 1953. The functions of Tea Board in respect to 
regulating the production and extent of cultivation of tea, regulating the sale 
and export of tea, registering and licensing of manufacturers, brokers, tea 
waste dealers and persons engaged in the business of blending tea and 
collecting tea statistics from grower, manufactures, dealers and such other 
persons and publication of statistic so collected fall under the Regulatory 
Activities. 
b)  Developmental Activities,  which include various loan and subsidy schemes 
undertaken by Tea Board for providing impetus to various developmental 
activities such as enhancement of productivity, improvement of tea quality and 
reducing the cost of tea production. Functions of Tea Board including 
improving the quality of tea, promoting co-operative efforts among growers 
and manufacturers of tea and securing better working conditions and 
provision/improvement of amenities and incentives for workers are part of 
Developmental Activities. 
c)   Research Activities,  which include various research activities conducted by 
Tea Board’s own Tea Research Centre for Darjeeling tea at Kurseong and 
industry-backed Tea Research Centers which are financed by Tea Board. 
Undertaking, assisting or encouraging scientific, technological and economic 
research and maintaining or assisting in the maintenance of demonstration 
farms and manufacturing stations and assisting in the control of insects and 
other pests and diseases affecting tea form part of Research Activities. 
d)   Marketing and Promotional Activities,  which include various schemes and 
other activities undertaken by Tea Board for overseas and domestic promotion. 
Increasing the consumption in India and elsewhere of tea and carrying on 
propaganda for that purpose, improving the marketing of tea in India and 
elsewhere, subscribing to the Share Capital of or entering into any 
arrangement or other arrangement with any other body Corporate for the 
purpose of promoting the development of Tea industry or for promotion and 
marketing of tea in India or elsewhere form part of Marketing and Promotional 
Activities of Tea Board.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      7
Chapter 2 Scope of Audit 
Our Scope 2.1    The scope of our audit was to examine whether the activities undertaken 
by Tea Board during 2002-03 to 2008-09, which were directed towards 
increasing tea production and productivity, catalysing co-operative efforts, 
backing up of research and development, labour welfare, market 
development and export promotion and regulatory functions, were adequate 
and effective. We studied and reviewed the regulatory, developmental, 
research, marketing and promotion activities undertaken by Tea Board and 
financial management aspects during course of the Performance Audit.
Why we took up 
this audit 
2.2   We took up this study in view of the following:  
Declining productivity of tea - The productivity of tea in India has declined 
over the years from 1865 kg/hectare in 1997 to 1693 kg/hectare  in 2008. A 
tea bush is commercially productive for 40 years. Almost 42 per cent
23 of tea 
bushes in India aged more than 40 years, which has a direct impact on the 
productivity of tea bushes. Supporting activities of replanting/replacement 
planting and other related activities for enhancement of productivity is, thus, 
a major thrust area for Tea Board. 
Decline in the prices of tea - Over the last decade there has been a steady 
decline in the prices fetched by the Indian tea as compared to countries like 
Sri Lanka and Mauritius. Tea Board has been supporting activities for quality 
improvement by providing subsidy to tea factories for augmentation and 
upgradation of machineries etc. To cater to the needs of world market, where 
there is a high demand for orthodox tea (44 per cent of the total tea market), 
Tea Board has been providing subsidy to tea manufacturers for diversifying 
production and growing more orthodox tea. 
Increase in the cost of production - India has the highest cost of production 
amongst tea-producing countries in the world and India is the only tea 
producing country where cost of sales is above the auction realisation.  The 
cost of labour within India varies from 32 per cent  to 50 per cent  in North 
India and 43 per cent in South India. Tea Board provides financial help by 
funding welfare activities in tea estates and gardens and providing 
professional training to persons related to tea industry, with a view to 
facilitate cost reduction and improve efficiency. 
International Market scenario - India’s production share has declined from 
41 per cent in 1950 to 26 per cent in 2008. India’s export share has declined 
from 48 per cent in 1950 to 12 per cent in 2008. Import of tea has gone up 
from 1.37 million kg in 1992-93 to 25 million kg in 2009.  
Thus, ageing of tea bushes is leading to decline in quality and productivity 
which has further resulted in the cost of production of Indian tea becoming 
the highest among major tea producing countries in the world. Effective and 
23As of 31st December 1997. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      8
efficient implementation of the activities aimed towards enhancing the 
productivity, improving the quality, reducing the cost of production and 
increasing the export share in the world market and achievement of scheme 
objectives have a direct bearing on addressing these issues. The effectiveness 
and efficiency with which Tea Board performs its role as a Regulator also has 
a direct bearing on the health and prosperity of the tea industry.
Objectives of the 
Performance
Audit
2.3    The detailed objectives for our examination were:
1. Whether Tea Board performed its regulatory role effectively; 
2. Whether developmental activities  undertaken by Tea Board had an 
impact on enhancing productivity of tea in India;  
3. Whether developmental activities  undertaken by Tea Board had an 
impact on improving quality of tea in India;
4. Whether developmental activities  undertaken by Tea Board had an 
impact on reducing cost of production of tea in India; 
5. Whether research activities undertaken by Tea Board or financed by Tea 
Board were effective in delivering results for effective tea development;  
6. Whether adequate and effective steps were undertaken for marketing
and promotion of Indian Tea to improve its position in world as well as 
domestic market; and 
7. Whether an effective financial management  and internal control 
mechanism existed in Tea Board.
Audit Criteria 2.4   Audit criteria were mainly derived from the instructions, procedures, 
rules and practices put in place by the Tea Board. Apart from these, decisions 
and recommendations of various committees were used to arrive at 
appropriate criteria for various issues. The following are some of the sources 
of criteria used to assess the performance of Tea Board: 
x Tea Act, 1953 and Rules made there under, other relevant acts and 
orders.
x Rules and instructions issued by MOC&I, Government of India from 
time to time. 
x Recommendations of different independent agencies appointed and 
approved by Tea Board.
x Documents and records pertaining to schemes, projects and other 
activities.
x Tea Statistics and Tea Digest published by Tea Board and Statistics of 
Indian Tea Association, UPASI and TRA. 
x International best practices and trends. 
Audit
Methodology
2.5    We discussed our audit objectives with the auditee in an Entry 
Conference with Tea Board in Kolkata on 2nd July 2008. Tea Board agreed with 
the objectives and methodology adopted in this Performance Audit. We 
conducted scrutiny of records relating to tea development, tea marketing and 
promotion, tea research, regulatory activities of Tea Board and other 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      9
functions of Tea Board during June to December 2008. Our audit teams 
visited Tea Board Head Quarters at Kolkata, two Zonal offices at Guwahati 
and Coonoor, Tea Centre at Mumbai and Darjeeling Tea Research and 
Development Centre in Kurseong for study of records and collection of 
information. Preliminary audit findings were communicated to appropriate 
authorities for confirmation of facts. The replies of Tea Board/Ministry of 
Commerce have been considered while arriving at audit conclusions. The Exit 
Conference was held on 30 October 2009. Our audit team again visited Tea 
Board, Head Office at Kolkata between January and March 2010 to 
supplement the information collected earlier. Tea Board has accepted our 
audit recommendations and has proposed an action plan with timelines for 
implementation of these recommendations. 
We issued the final report after considering the replies of the Ministry of 
Commerce on 24 December 2010 and held another exit meeting with the 
Ministry on 03 March 2011. The Ministry furnished final responses to the 
conclusions in Chapter 10 of this report which have been considered by us 
and included in that chapter.
Audit Sample 2.6 In Regulatory Activities,  we reviewed functions of Tea Board as laid 
down in the Tea Act, 1953 and other orders such as Tea (Marketing) Control 
Order, Tea (Distribution and Export) Control Order and Tea Waste Control 
Order. We studied records relating to registration of growers, licenses given 
to exporters/distributors/ manufacturers, returns submitted by different 
stakeholders and scheme for rehabilitation of closed tea gardens. 
Under Developmental Activities,  we reviewed the schemes viz., Tea 
Plantation Development Scheme, Special Purpose Tea Fund, Orthodox 
Subsidy Scheme, Quality Upgradation and Product Diversification Scheme and 
Crash Scheme related to the elements like productivity and quality of tea for 
which the Board disbursed subsidy. We studied Human Resource 
Development Scheme from where subsidy was disbursed to meet the cost of 
welfare activities and to impart training to plantation workers which were 
related to the element ‘cost of production’. We also reviewed another 
scheme which was introduced to provide support to small growers’ viz., Price 
Subsidy Scheme. Different Schemes (implemented during 2002-09) wise audit 
samples are indicated in Annexure I.
In Research Activities, we examined subsidy disbursed for research activities 
and reviewed 50 per cent  ( `58.53 crore of `116.72 crore) of the total 
expenditure incurred by Tea Board during the period 2002-09, including 
expenditure on completed research projects, grants to various research 
institutions and expenditure on IT Portal project.  
Under Marketing and Promotional activities, we reviewed 46 per cent 
(`62.31 crore of `135.53 crore) of total expenditure incurred on Marketing 
and Promotional Activities during 2002-09, which included expenditure on 
various schemes for export promotion, overseas and domestic promotion and 
implementation of recommendations of Medium Term Export Strategy. The 
total Plan Outlay for various schemes under the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      10
Plan was `496.25 crore and `806.43 crore respectively. 
Acknowledge-
ment
2.7   We acknowledge the cooperation of Tea Board and its Zonal Offices 
during the course of audit.
Our detailed 
findings 
2.8 Our detailed findings with regard to regulatory, developmental, marketing 
and promotional activities and financial management are discussed in the 
chapters that follow. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      11
24 A small grower is one who holds tea cultivated land up to 10.12 hectares. 
25 A big grower is one who holds tea cultivated land more than10.12 hectares. 
26 Data was not available in Tea Board after 2008. 
Chapter 3 Regulatory Activities 
Objective 1: Whether Tea Board performed its regulatory role effectively 
 3.1  One of the primary functions of the Tea Board is to regulate the activities 
of the various stakeholders in the cultivation of tea and its business in 
accordance with the provisions of the Tea Act and orders issued thereunder. 
The effectiveness of Regulatory functions also aid in the effective discharge of 
other functions like Developmental Activities, Marketing & Promotional 
Activities and Research Activities.  
In this context, we reviewed regulatory functions of Tea Board as laid down in 
the Tea Act, 1953 and other orders such as Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 
Tea (Distribution and Export) Control Order and Tea Waste Control Order. We 
studied records relating to registration of growers, licenses given to 
exporters/distributors/manufacturers, returns submitted by different 
stakeholders and scheme for rehabilitation of closed tea gardens. 
  The Licensing Branch of the Board has been given the following powers: 
Regulatory Powers of Tea Board 
x Granting permission to small growers 24 and big growers 25 for tea 
cultivation; 
x Issuing license to exporters, tea distributors;  
x Issuing tea waste license; 
x Registrations of tea manufacturing units, auction organisers/ auction 
brokers, buyers; and 
x Taking action on closed gardens.
x Impose penalties on stakeholders
 Permission to 
tea growers 
3.2   As per Tea Act 1953, no one shall plant tea on any land not previously 
planted with tea, on the date of commencement of this Act unless permission 
has been granted to him in writing by or on behalf of Tea Board.   
With regard to powers of Tea Board in respect of granting permission to tea 
growers, our audit findings are discussed below. 
Low percentage 
of small growers 
registered with 
Tea Board 
3.3    As on 1st January 2004 the total number of big and small growers in 
India were 1661 and 127366 respectively. During the period 2004-08 26, 25 big 
growers and 30,138 small growers started the activity of planting tea thereby 
increasing the total number of big and small growers to 1,686 and 1,57,504.   
According to the information furnished by Tea Board as of December 2010, all 
1,686 big growers were registered with Tea Board. However, we observed 
that only 32,288 out of 1,57,504 small growers (a mere 20 per cent) could be 
registered by Tea Board.  The Board was not able to furnish information in 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      12
February 2010 relating to how many small growers were registered out of the 
30,138 small growers who started activity during the period 2004 to 2009.
We further observed that Tea Board did not have year-wise data (February 
2010) for registration of small growers.  In the absence of such data we could 
not ascertain the number of applications received, permissions granted, 
permissions pending, permissions denied, reasons for denying permissions 
etc.  Tea Board, however, compiled yearwise figures of registration and 
furnished the same in May 2011. 
The state-wise data in respect of small growers is given in the table below:
Table 2 – State-wise number of Small Growers registered with Tea Board 
State Estimated total number (2008) Registered with Tea Board (2010)
Assam 64597 4561 
West Bengal 9990 1032 
Tripura 1410 3378 
Arunachal Pradesh 36 57
Manipur 427 490 
Sikkim 3 0
Nagaland 1451 3354 
Meghalaya 1013 72
Mizoram 269 1360 
Uttarakhand 70 0
Himachal Pradesh 3695 0
Bihar 980 154 
Total - North India 83941 14458 
Tamil Nadu 68147 10404 
Kerala 5402 7412 
Karnataka 14 14
Total - South India 73563 17830 
Total - All India 157504* 32288 
*Source: Tea Board 
Tea Garden of a small grower

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      13
From the table it can be seen that: 
x None of the small growers in the state of Sikkim, Uttarakhand and  
Himachal Pradesh were registered. 
x The percentage of small growers not registered in Assam, West 
Bengal, and Tamil Nadu was as high as 93 per cent, 90 per cent and 85 
per cent respectively.
Thus, 125216 growers constituting about 80 per cent  of the total small 
growers are continuing tea cultivation as of 2010 without the requisite 
permissions of Tea Board under the provisions of Tea Act 1953. It is indeed a 
matter of concern that even after more than fifty-six years of its existence, 
Tea Board has not been able to even bring all the small growers into its 
folds.
The Ministry agreed in October 2009 that there was a need for complete 
census of both small and big growers. It stated that steps were being taken in 
co-ordination with the State Governments to ensure coverage of small tea 
growers under the provision of Tea Act, 1953 and that they had extended 
funds to State Government of West Bengal and Assam to conduct census 
activities. However, the fact remains that failure to regulate the activity of 
small growers even after more than five decades was adversely impacting the 
effectiveness of its other functions as discussed in succeeding chapters. 
Process of 
granting
registration to 
plant tea
3.4   Tea Board grants permission for planting tea, extension planting, 
replacement planting or establishment of new tea area as well as 
identification of tea area along with its ownership. The conditions for granting 
permission to plant tea are given below. 
Conditions for granting registration 
Tea Board has the powers to grant permission to plant tea as per the 
provisions of Rule 30A of Tea Rules. For getting the permission applied for, 
the owner needs to submit records in support of: 
x His ownership/grant/lease of the land, 
x His ability to finance the undertaking including erection of a factory, 
where necessary, 
x Suitability of the land in terms of the nature of the soil and climatic 
conditions  
Further, the tea estate owner to whom the permit is issued is required to 
submit a return on 31 st March of each year, showing the area planted up to 
that date in pursuance of the permit, the reasons for non-utilisation of any 
area that may not have been planted and the programme for planting tea for 
the next two years.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      14
27 Tea Act read with Tea (Marketing) Control Order (TMCO) 2003, Tea (Distribution and Export) Control Order 2005 
and Tea Waste (Control) Order 1959. 
Granting
permission
without
following
procedures
3.5 We test checked the process of granting permission to plant tea in 
respect of six big growers and 10 small growers (permission granted during 
August 2003 to February 2010) and observed that: 
x In 15 out of 16 cases, soil report did not contain the required certificate 
from the authorised laboratories stating that the land was suitable for 
planting tea. In four cases, Tea Board granted permission for cultivation 
of tea despite deficiencies of certain chemical properties of soil 
recorded in the soil reports.  
x No returns were submitted by the owners of the Tea Estates, though the 
same were required to be submitted to Tea Board after permission to 
plant tea was granted. 
x In three cases, Tea Board granted permission though the notarised copy 
of the sale deed was not submitted by the owners of the Tea Estates at 
the time of submitting the applications, whereby the fact of ownership 
could not be verified.   
Thus, the procedure for granting permission to the growers (small and big) 
did not appear to be transparent and fair.
 Regulating Tea 
Business
3.6   Tea Board is empowered27 to regulate activities of different stakeholders 
in the tea industry like exporters, distributors, manufacturers, buyers, brokers 
and those dealing with tea waste. A few of the important regulatory functions 
are given below: 
Regulation of activities of various stakeholders in tea industry by the Tea 
Board
The regulatory activities of tea include ensuring that no person engages 
himself as a manufacturer, broker, buyer, exporter, distributor or deal with 
tea waste except under and in accordance with the provision of a license 
issued by the Board. Accordingly, Tea Board has the right to:  
1. Inspect the stock in the factory of the manufacturer or a buyer and draw 
sample of prescribed specification to check whether the sample 
conformed to the specifications as laid down under the Prevention of 
Food Adulteration Act 1954. 
2. Enter and search at any time any land, building, premises or vehicles in 
which they had reason to believe that tea was stored, carried, distributed 
or sold in contravention of the laid down provisions. 
3. Inspect the consignment prior to export to verify the compliance with any 
or all of the laid down the provisions, prior to export. 
Further, 
4. The manufacturers/ buyers/ exporters/ distributors should furnish the 
business information to the Board in prescribed formats. 
5. Business license issued to exporters would be valid for a period of three 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      15
years from the date of its issue/renewal. It should be cancelled by Tea 
Board if the exporter has not exported tea from India during any of the 
preceding three consecutive years.
Ineffective
regulatory
control over 
various
stakeholders
3.7   With respect to these regulatory functions of Tea Board, our audit 
findings are discussed below:
As of March 2011, 1720 manufacturers and 6079 buyers were registered 
with Tea Board. Similarly, 1821 exporters were registered with Tea Board as 
of March 2011. In this regard, we observed that:  
x Although Tea Board was empowered to inspect the factory stock, no 
internal procedure existed in Tea Board as to how and when to inspect 
the factory stock and draw sample of prescribed specification to check 
whether the sample conformed to the specifications as laid down under 
the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954. In absence of this 
procedure, Tea Board did not undertake inspections unless a complaint 
was received regarding quality of tea exported or a malpractice in trade 
by manufacturers/buyers. It also did not undertake inspections of 
factory stock to ensure that samples drawn conformed to the 
specifications laid down under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 
1954.
x The Board also did not maintain information regarding number of 
inspections planned and undertaken in exercise of powers conferred 
under the subsections (3) and (5) of Section 30 of Tea Act. After being 
pointed out in audit, the Board started maintaining files including show-
cause notices issued under the above order since September 2009. As 
such, there was no mechanism in Tea Board to exercise its regulatory 
A Tea Garden in Munnar

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      16
28 Tea Board issues temporary license to an exporter first.  Permanent license is issued thereafter.   
function to prevent manufacturing/buying/export/ distribution of 
adulterated tea.
x We observed that only one-third of the 1046 registered tea exporters as 
of December 2008 were active in export of tea. This indicated that Tea 
Board did not take action to cancel the permanent
28 licenses held by 
these exporters after ascertaining their performance during the last 
three years as envisaged in the rules. Thus, the Board did not exercise its 
function of regulating export licenses as per laid down rules and 
provisions. The Ministry stated in October 2009 that they were taking 
action to cancel permanent exporters licence after ascertaining their 
performance during preceding three consecutive years. 
Thus, by failing to undertake prescribed inspections, regulating exporter’s 
licenses and ensuring fair trade practices by those who are involved in tea 
business, Tea Board had not exercised its regulatory powers effectively.
Inadequate
monitoring of 
manufacturers
and buyers 
3.8   Manufacturers are required to furnish details of sale of tea in Form “E”, 
which includes mode of selling i.e., through registered buyers/own retail 
outlets or branches directly to consumers/direct export etc. Similarly, buyers 
are required to furnish details of purchase of tea through public tea auction 
and total tea purchased in any calendar year in Form “F”.  
We observed that such returns were not furnished regularly to Tea Board by 
the manufacturers and buyers. We test checked monthly returns (‘E’ and ‘F’) 
submitted by 10 manufacturers and 10 buyers for the period 2007-09. We 
observed that instead of submitting the returns every month, only one 
monthly return was submitted by four manufacturers as against 24 monthly 
returns each. The remaining six manufacturers did not submit any return 
during this period.
Tea leaves collected in a tea factory for manufacturing tea 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      17
Similarly, as against a total of 240 ‘F’ returns which were to be submitted by 
10 buyers in two years to Tea Board, only 54 returns were submitted.  
Thus, due to non-submission of returns by the manufacturers and buyers 
on a regular basis, the Tea Board remained unaware of the activities of 
manufacturers and buyers and was not in a position to exercise control 
over their activities as envisaged. This also affected the timely compilation 
of Tea Statistics by Tea Board as we observed that there was delay in 
publication of Tea Statistics from one year to three years.  
Tea Board agreed in October 2009 that submission of such returns regularly 
is necessary to exercise control over their activities. 
Inadequate  
penalties for 
breach of 
provisions of Tea 
Act
3.9 Sections 36 to 42 stipulate different types of penalties for illicit export, 
making false return, obstructing a member of the Board in the discharge of 
any duty, illicit cultivation, contravention of order relating to control of price 
and distribution etc. In this regard, we observed that failure of Tea Board to 
effectively perform its regulatory role is in part attributable to the failure to 
levy appropriate penalties on the stakeholders. We also observed that the 
quantum of penalties which ranged from `1000 to `5000 only were not 
adequate as they did not serve as a deterrent for violation of various 
provisions of Tea Act. For exercising effective regulatory role, there is a need 
to review the existing rates of penalty for breach of various provisions of the 
Tea Act and to make effective use of the provisions so that Tea Board carry 
out its regulatory role as per the mandate of the Act.
Ministry of Commerce stated in May 2011 that for review of existing rates of 
penalty for breach of various provisions of Tea Act, all related sections of the 
Act need to be amended and this would be considered at the time of 
amendments in the Act.
Action taken on 
revival of closed 
gardens
3.10 One of the regulatory functions of Tea Board was to take action on 
closed tea gardens which was defined in Section 16(E) of Tea Act, 1953. As 
per the said provision, Central Government can take over the management 
without conducting any investigation in cases where due to reckless 
investment, creation of encumbrances or diversion of funds, a situation has 
arisen which is likely to affect production of tea or where the entity has been 
closed for a period not less than three months.  
In June 2007, Ministry of Commerce approved a rehabilitation package for 
revival of closed tea gardens. The main features of the scheme for revival of 
closed gardens are given below. 
Rehabilitation package for revival of closed gardens
The existing outstanding bank loans against the closed tea gardens were to 
be restructured by converting the same into term loans with a moratorium 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      18
29 Lone Tree, Permade and Bamondanga 
30 Lone Tree and Permade 
period of five years, with recovery starting from the sixth to tenth year and 
accumulated penal interest waived. The banks were to charge a simple rate 
of interest of 11 per cent  per annum on the restructured loan with 
moratorium of one year for payment of interest.  The accumulated simple 
interest was to be shared equally by the banks, Central Government and the 
beneficiaries to the extent of one third each. The banks were to extend 
further facilities of working capital to the closed tea gardens after their 
accounts were regularised as stated above. Only after regularisation, could 
closed tea gardens become eligible to obtain loan and subsidy from the 
Board under Special Purpose Tea Fund Scheme.
Deficient
formulation of 
the scheme 
3.11 As of February 2010, 12 gardens remained closed with a financial 
liability of `92.51 crore of which `70.33 crore was towards liability of banks, 
affecting livelihood of 11,417 workers. The main causes for sickness/closure 
of tea gardens were falling quality and price realisations due to poor yields 
and poor garden management, labour to land ratio and labour productivity, 
uneasy industrial relations scenario, overall lack of development perspective 
and deterioration in profits since last few years etc.   
We observed that no bilateral agreement/MOU was signed between the 
Board and Banks.  The Banks were reluctant to carry out the restructuring as 
per the scheme. Thus, failure by Board to obtain formal commitment from 
the banks before formulation of the scheme resulted in the scheme 
becoming unworkable and only one tea garden account has been 
restructured till date. Tea Board invoked Section 16(E) in respect of only 
three
29 tea gardens so far, of which owners of the two 30 gardens in Kerala 
moved the High Court and obtained a stay against the proceedings for 
invoking of the section.
Our
Recommendations 
and response of 
Tea Board 
3.12 We recommended in November 2009 that Tea Board may evolve a 
mechanism to ensure registration of all small tea growers and ensure that all 
the stakeholders in the tea business furnish requisite and complete 
information on time which can be used by Tea Board for better regulation 
under the provisions of Tea Act. We also recommended that Tea Board may 
plan and conduct regular inspections for exercising effective control and 
ensuring fair practices in tea business. 
Tea Board accepted these recommendations and stated in December 2009 
that:
x As a short-term measure, they are preparing a list of small growers 
with the help of their associations. It also stated that, on a long-term 
basis, a complete census of small tea-growers would be done for 
which survey has already been initiated by State Governments of 
Assam and West Bengal. This would be completed by the end of the 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      19
Eleventh Five Year Plan.
x Tea Board was advising all the stakeholders to provide requisite 
information and they were developing a computer-aided system for 
collection and analysis of information from various stakeholders.  It 
added that it plans to completely re-engineer the existing process of 
information collection by the end of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
x Tea Board had formulated a plan to form a panel of independent 
inspectors for scheme like Special Purpose Tea Fund.  For other areas, 
they propose to carry out inspections on the basis of complaints 
received. Complete details of manpower required to ensure effective 
inspections would be sent to the Ministry for approval. However, 
implementation of this recommendation would depend upon the 
approval by the Ministry.
Conclusion 3.13   Even after five decade of existence of Tea Board, more than 125216 
(80 per cent ) small growers in India continue to be outside the ambit of 
regulations by the Tea Board. Inspection for regulating the activities of 
various stakeholders was weak and non-transparent. Further, no internal 
procedure existed in Tea Board regarding conduct of such inspections which 
led to failure to ensure fair practices and quality. Tea Board was also not able 
to ensure submission of business information by stakeholders so as to 
exercise effective control on their activities as well as timely collection of Tea 
statistics. The scheme for rehabilitation also remained ineffective due to 
failure of Tea Board to get a formal commitment from the banks.
Thus, Tea Board had been ineffective in exercising its role as a Regulator of 
Tea in India. This has also had an adverse impact on the effectiveness of its 
functioning in other areas of development, research, marketing and 
promotion of tea in India.  Therefore, Tea Board needs to revamp its 
regulatory structure so as to exercise better control on its regulatory 
activities.
We are of the view that the response of Tea Board and the action proposed 
by it in response to our recommendations may not be sufficient to increase 
the registration of small growers, ensure better regulation of all 
stakeholders through collection of complete business information and 
ensure increase in inspections for better discharge of its regulatory role. 
Therefore, Tea Board needs to reassess its manpower requirement in 
consultation with the Ministry so that Tea Board is able to discharge its 
primary role of regulating Tea Business in India more effectively. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      20
Chapter 4 Development of Tea: Enhancing productivity
Objective 2: Whether developmental activities undertaken by Tea Board had an 
impact on enhancing productivity of tea in India. 
Surplus tea for 
Indian markets 
4.1   The Tea Act, 1953 defines the following responsibilities of Tea Board in 
the field of development of tea: 
x Regulating the production and extent of cultivation of tea; 
x Improving the quality of tea; 
x Promoting co-operative efforts among growers and manufacturers of tea; 
x Securing better working conditions and provision/improvement of 
amenities and incentives for workers.
The position of production, import and export of tea and its domestic 
consumption in India during the last 13 years is given in the table below:
Table 3 – Production, Import & Exports of tea in India and domestic consumption
Year 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
Production  810 874 826 847 854 838 878 893 946 982 986 981 
(E) 
979 
(E) 
966
(E)
Import 3 9 10 13 17 25 10 31 17 24 16 20 
(E) 
25 
(E) 
20
(E)
Total
availability 
813 883 836 860 871 863 888 924 963 1006 1002 1001 
(E) 
1004 
(E) 
986
(E)
Exports 203 210 192 207 183 201 174 198 199 219 179 203 
(E) 
198 193
(E)
Domestic
consumpti
on
597 615 633 653 673 693 714 735 757 771 786 802 819 837
Total
absorption 
800 825 825 860 856 894 888 933 956 990 965 1005 1017 1030
Surplus(+)/ 
Deficit(-) of 
availability 
vis-à-vis
absorption
13 58 11 0 15 (-)31 0 (-)9 7 16 37 (-)4 (-)13 (-)44
Cumulative
overall 
surplus
13 71 82 82 97 66 66 57 64 80 117 113 100 56
E – Estimated                                                                                                                                                                  In million kgs (mkgs)
During the period from 1997 (start of th e Ninth Five Year Plan) to 2010 (Third 
Year of the Eleventh Five Year Plan), the overall production of tea in India has 
increased by 19 per cent . The domestic consumption of tea has also been 
increasing steadily. However, the export of tea has been stagnant during this 
period and has shown declining trend after 2008. This has led to an overall 
surplus of 56 mkgs tea in the Indian market  as of 2010.   
Tea Board stated that the reason for surplus tea was excess supply over 
demand.  It further stated that tea being perishable item and the demand – 
supply being estimated for certain period, this surplus or excess supply over 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      21
1500
1550
1600
1650
1700
1750
1800
1850
1900
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Productivity of tea in India (kg per hectare)
Year
P
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
v
i
t
y
Productivity of 
tea in India 
4.3 Productivity is defined as yield of tea grown per hectare. The productivity 
of tea in India has declined over the years 31  as can be seen from the graph 
below:
The above table shows that there is stagnation in production during last four 
years despite increase in area of tea plantation.  
31 Figures after 2009 not available with Tea Board
demand remained in the trade chain and utilised by the absorption at the 
lower price.    
4.2 The stagnated exports despite surplus situation is also linked with the fact 
that cost of production of tea in India is relatively high, the quality is poor and 
productivity is low due to ageing plantations. Therefore, the tea industry 
needs to take concrete steps towards improvement in quality of tea as well 
as cost reduction which is, inter alia, related to the increase in productivity of 
tea.
As per Tea Board, the excess supply situation is likely to persist during major 
part of Eleventh Five Year Plan also and thus, it would be necessary for them 
to curtail unbridled expansion of tea area and to focus on enhancing the 
productivity in order to enhance returns, reducing the units costs through 
productivity gains, building capacity of small growers, streamlining marketing 
channels and improving infrastructure in the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  
With the above background, we studied the activities undertaken by the 
Board towards enhancing productivity, improving quality, reducing cost of 
production and extending support to small growers with reference to 
individual cases under various schemes. These are discussed below and in 
Chapters 5 and 6 respectively.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      22
Reduction in 
productivity of 
tea in India 
4.4 We observed that while productivity in respect of all major tea-producing 
countries has been increasing over the years, productivity in India has been 
reducing as can be seen from the table below: 
Table 4 – Comparison of productivity (yield of tea grown per hectare) of various tea producing 
countries32
Name of 
the country 
1994 1995 1996 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
China 519 528 538 636 662 692 718 707 731 735
India 1768 1770 1809 1690 1713 1703 1732 1705 1693 1690
Indonesia 998 1010 1078 1182 1095 1127 1083 1026 1077 1071
Japan 1584 1579 1683 1868 2059 2084 2087 1943 1958 1964
Mauritius 1681 1822 2251 2109 2199 2070 2278 2205 2376 2088
Sri Lanka 1300 1304 1349 1611 1633 1683 1648 1615 1692 1540
Age of tea 
bushes in India 
4.5 One of the primary reasons for low productivity and substandard quality 
of tea produced in the country was ageing plantations. The area under tea 
plantation for the past ten years and quantum of aged tea bushes beyond 40 
years which were not commercially productive can be seen from the following 
table.
Source: Tea Statistics, NI-North India, SI-South India, NA – not available with Tea Board, E-Estimated 
Table 5 – Age of tea bushes33
As on Total area 
under tea 
(ha) 
Area containing tea bushes aged over 40 
years (ha) 
Replanting/ 
Replacement 
planting (ha)  
Total Replanting/ 
Replacement planting 
(ha) 
All India NI SI All India Increase NI SI Total %
31.12.97 434294 128121 54484 182605 2364 64 2428 1.33
31.12.98 474027 128582 54647 183229 624 2587 18 2605 1.42
31.12.99 490200 129968 55271 185239 2010 2141 92 2233 1.21
31.12.00 504366 129320 53777 183097 -2142 1965 28 1993 1.09
31.12.01 509806 136068 54034 190102 7005 1577 15 1592 0.84
31.12.02 515832 140642 54168 194810 4708 1901 19 1920 0.99
31.12.03 519598 141422 54243 195665 855 2101 18 2119 1.08
31.12.04 521403 141474 54471 195945 280 733 0 733 0.37
31.12.05 556807 147982 54958 202940 6995 1451 0 1451 0.71
31.12.06 567020 180099 58230 238329 35389 2009 0 2009 0.84
31.12.07 578460 182050 58480 240530 2201 NA NA 1820 0.75
31.12.08 579353 (E) 188250 59360 247610 7080 NA NA NA --
65005
32 Figures after 2009 not available with Tea Board 
33 Figures after 2008 not available with Tea Board

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      23
Replanted Area
34 Based on total area under tea plantation as on 31st December 1997. 
35 Average replanting/replacement planting done between 2001 to 2007 was 1663 ha. Thus to cover a backlog of 
190102 ha, as on 31 December 2001, it would take another 114 years (190102/1663). 
36 Average replanting/replacement planting done between 2001 to 2007 was 1663 ha. Thus to cover a backlog of 
247610 ha, as on 31 December 2008, it would take another 149 years (247610/1663).
Area replanted 
abysmally low 
4.6 As the above statistics show, in 1997 out of the total area of 
4,34,294 hectares under tea cultivation, 1,82,605 hectares (42 per cent)
of tea bushes were not economically viable as they were more than 40 
years old. Further, as of 1 January 2009, the area under unproductive 
tea bushes has increased steadily from 1,82,605 to 2,47,610 hectares 
indicating increase of 36 per cent . As a result, the total area under 
commercially unproductive bushes increased from 42 per cent  in 1997 
to 57 per cent  in 2009
34.These tea bushes continued to remain 
commercially unproductive and required replantation/ replacement 
planting for maintaining the productivity.
We observed that the percentage of replanting/replacement planting in 
the country as a whole was abysmally low and less than two per cent.
The status of replanting/replacement planting in South India was 
negligible. At this rate, clearance of the backlog for 
replanting/replacement planting of 190102 ha as on 31 December 2001 
would take another 114 years
35 and the backlog as on 31 December 
2008 would take 149 years36 to clear. This would have an adverse impact 
on the productivity of tea plantations in the country. This indicates that 
increasing age of tea bushes with tardy rate of replanting would pose a 
high risk to tea industry in future.  
The Ministry agreed in October 2009 that the performance of the 
industry since inception of the scheme to subsidise 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      24
37 247610 ha X `2.46 lakhs [average of units cost of replantation per ha applicable in plains (`2.10lakh), hills (`2.50 
lakh) and Darjeeling hills (`2.77lakh)].
replanting/replacement planting has been tardy.  
Investment
required  in 
replantation
4.7 Replantation is a capital-intensive activity in tea cultivation as, apart 
from the capital investment, it takes at least five years before the new 
tea bush gives yield for tea production.  The total cost for Tea-Grower 
for replantation comprises of capital investment considered by Tea 
Board for subsidy support and crop loss of more than five years during 
gestation period.
We observed that capital investment for replantation of 2,47,610 
hectares of tea bushes aged more than 40 years (as on 1 January 2009) 
worked out to `6091.21 crore
37 (based on average unit cost) and cost of 
subsidy support at the rate of 25 per cent  was `1522.80 crore for the 
Tea Board. We also observed that the unit cost was only an indicator of 
minimum amount required for replanting as it did not take into 
consideration the cost to be borne by the grower on account of 
temporary closure of business as a result of replantation during the 
gestation period. Against this huge requirement, Tea Board had spend 
yearly only `21.06 crore during Tenth Five Year Plan and yearly `18.87
crore in first four years (March 2011) of Eleventh Five Year Plan on all 
activities including replantation.
Therefore, intervention of Tea Board in replantation to bring tea bushes 
o f   m o r e  t h a n  4 0  y e a r s  t o  a c c e p t a b l e  l e v e l  ( f r o m  5 7  per cent   a s  o n  1  
January 2009) to increase productivity was grossly inadequate as 
brought out in succeeding paragraph also.
We further observed that Tea Board did not realistically estimate 
requirement of funds for replantation and chalk out a plan for increasing 
the coverage of the activity. They also failed to mobilise funds from 
other agencies as suggested by the Ministry. Lack of sufficient funds was 
one of the main reasons for insufficient replantation.
The Ministry stated in October 2009 that the funds requirement for 
replanting/rejuvenating the old aged bushes had been worked out in 
consultation with National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD) which was responsible for fixing the unit cost of planting in 
various tea growing regions in the country. However, the fact remains 
that though the unit cost was worked out in consultation with NABARD, 
total requirement of funds as well as provision for adequate 
intervention was not made.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      25
Tea Plantation 
Development
Scheme (TPDS) 
4.8 Tea Plantation Development Scheme was introduced for the Tenth 
Plan Period in order to achieve the objectives of replanting/replacement 
planting, rejuvenation pruning, creation of irrigation facilities, organising 
self-help groups amongst small growers for easy reach of extension 
services and ensuring fair price for the green leaf. Tea Board provided 
financial incentives in the form of subsidy for the following activities to 
be undertaken by the growers under the TPD scheme: 
Subsidy under Tea Plantation Development Scheme 
All growers (regardless of the size of their holdings) 
x For replanting/replacement planting  (Para 4.9) 
x For rejuvenation pruning and consolidation by infilling of vacancies 
(Para 4.10) 
x For creation of irrigation facilities  (Para 4.11) 
Small growers (holding up to 10.12 hectares)  
x For new planting in the North Eastern states and Uttarakhand (Para 
4.12)
x For setting up of pilot tea-producers’ societies (Self-Help Groups)  
(Para 4.13) 
x For usage of mechanical aids (Pruning Machines) for field 
operations. (Para 4.14)
A sum of `105.00 crore was received from Government of India during 
the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07) and Tea Board disbursed `105.28 
crore as subsidy under TPDS.   The subsidy was to be disbursed at the 
rate of 25 per cent  of the approved unit cost per hectare in three 
installments for replanting by big growers and in two installments for 
replanting by small growers.  In case of replacement planting, subsidy 
was to be disbursed in three/four installments for plains/hills.
In the Eleventh Five Year Plan, a Special Purpose Tea Fund (SPTF) has 
been set up. Under this, the applicant is allowed subsidy of 25 per cent
by Tea Board along with 50 per cent loan from a commercial bank. For 
this, a line of credit of `150 crore has been secured by the Government 
from four commercial banks against security. The applicant may opt for 
either loan and subsidy or subsidy alone. A total sum of `35.50 crore 
was received from Government of India during 2007-08 to 2008-09 and 
Tea Board has disbursed `38.07 crore so far. 
 Shortfall in 
sanction  of 
activities
4.8.1 Some of the general audit findings relating to TPDS and SPTF are 
given below: 
The status of activity-wise sanctions vis-à-vis targets as set by Tea Board 
under the Tenth Five Year Plan was as follows: 
Table 6 – Sanction of activities vis-à-vis targets under Tenth Five Year Plan
Activity Target Sanctioned Percentage
shortfall 
New Planting 2700 ha 8444 ha -

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      26
38 (204462)/(18642/4) = 43 years. 
Replanting 5000 ha 15429 ha -
Rejuvenation Pruning and 
infilling
15000 ha 10903 ha 27
Intensive Pruning in small
holdings 
25000 ha 0h a  100
Creation of Irrigation 
facilities
9000 ha 169 ha 98
Setting up pilot tea 
producer’s societies 
100 (in no.) 37 63
We observed that under the Tenth Five Year Plan: 
x Tea Board set a target of a mere 5000 hectares for 
replanting/replacement planting under the Tenth Five Year Plan, 
which was just 2.63 per cent of the 190102 hectares of commercially 
unproductive tea plantations at the beginning of the Tenth Five Year 
Plan.
x There were shortfalls even in sanctions as against the targets in four 
activities viz., rejuvenation pruning, intensive pruning in small 
holdings, creation of irrigation facilities and setting up of tea 
producers’ societies.
x No funds could be disbursed for intensive pruning in small holdings, 
shortfall under the creation of irrigation facilities and setting up of 
pilot tea producer’s societies was 98 and 63 per cent respectively. 
We further observed that in the first four years (2007-08 and 2010-11) 
of the Eleventh Five Year Plan:
x There was 66 per cent  shortfall in sanctions against a target of 
54,524 ha area for replanting in the first four years (March 2011) as 
only 18,642 ha area was sanctioned for replanting. The area of 
2,04,462 ha targeted to be covered under replanting/replacement 
planting in 15 years would take 43 years
38 to achieve at this rate of 
sanction. For rejuvenation pruning, Tea Board /Ministry fixed a 
target of 16,890 ha (@ 3378 ha per annum) during the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan i.e., 13,512 ha in the first four years of the Plan. Against 
this, only 5702 ha was actually sanctioned registering a shortfall of 
58 per cent.
We observed that actual replantation achieved was substantially lower 
than the sanctioned as actual replantation was only 10,052 ha in six 
calendar years (2002 to 2007) against the sanction of 15,429 ha in Tenth 
Five Year Plan. Tea Board did not furnish actual achievement against 
sanctions for 2008-10. 
The Ministry attributed shortage of manpower as one of the reasons for 
shortfalls in achievement of targets. It also agreed in October 2009 that 
the targets were set at the lower level due to reluctance on the part of 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      27
39 The Normalised Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) is a simple numerical indicator that can be used to analyse 
remote sensing measurements, typically but not necessarily from a space platform, and assess whether the target 
being observed contains live green vegetation or not. 
the industry in taking up replanting in larger areas as the activity 
demanded huge investment cost, immediate crop loss due to uprooting 
of old tea and almost nil return during the gestation period.
As such, Tea Board needs to increase funds allocation to the replanting 
activity to cover more area so that more and more tea planters come 
forward to avail the benefits of the scheme.
Inadequate
documentation
4.8.2  We observed that Tea Board did not maintain a list of parties to 
whom subsidies were paid and amounts disbursed there against under 
this scheme. As such, we could not ascertain as to how many gardens 
had availed subsidy out of the total 159190. We prepared a list of all 
payments of subsidy under replanting/replacement planting from the 
ledger book containing 2,565 payment cases amounting to `60.51 crore 
during 2002-07. Similarly, we also prepared list of all payments of 
subsidy under rejuvenation pruning containing 1320 payment cases 
amounting to `2.40 crore during 2002-07. These lists were used to 
select samples for review in audit (Refer Annexure 1).
The Ministry stated that every application was processed separately for 
each activity and payment made was reflected in cash book and the 
ledger and hence, no separate list of names of parties to whom the 
subsidy was paid had been maintained. The Ministry, however, stated 
that henceforth, a separate list would be maintained with all the 
particulars of disbursement made and the activity supported. 
  Delay in 
identification of 
area for 
replantation
4.8.3 Using the capabilities of multi-sensor, satellite data can be 
acquired in different wavelength bands and different seasons for tea 
crops.  Health of tea crops can be analysed based on the Normalised 
Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)
 39  techniques of satellite data 
processing.  NDVI, with ground truth data, help in identifying the healthy 
crops as well as poor yielding crops and as such, age of the tea gardens 
can be worked out using satellite derived information and the areas for 
replantation can be located.
Tea Board undertook a project in October 2008 with Indian Space 
Research Organisation (ISRO) at a cost of `5 crore, which intended to 
use NDVI techniques of satellite data processing to map tea growing 
areas, analyse site suitability for new area, to identify degraded tea 
areas for uprooting and replantation, to identify small growers and to 
generate database for facilitating Tea Board to provide technical and 
marketing support etc.  
We observed that though Tea Board was to provide all relevant maps 
and data pertaining to tea gardens (processing, production, labour 
management and other relevant data) and soil map/in-situ observations 
with respect to Tea gardens, the same was not provided to ISRO as of 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      28
40 After a prolonged period of monoculture under tea, the physio-chemical as well as biological properties of the 
soil deteriorate considerably. Rehabilitation adds organic matter and nutrients to the soil, helps in improving soil 
structure and thereby better aeration and moisture storage, draws nutrients from deeper soil layers and added to 
the top soil through the lopping, increases the activity of micro organisms and conserves the top soil and breaks the 
food chain of the primary root diseases. 
January 2010. As such, the work could not be commenced effectively. 
Audit findings specific to the activities covered under the above schemes 
are discussed below. 
    Replanting/ 
Replacement 
Planting 
4.9 The salient features of the scheme for Replanting/Replacement 
Planting were:
Terms and conditions for subsidising replanting/ replacement planting 
x During pre-approval inspections, Tea Board was to evaluate the 
impact of the past activities on production, productivity, quality 
improvement etc., and verify past performance of the applicant, for 
which the garden was to provide necessary documents.  
x A monitoring mechanism was put in place to ensure that the 
requirements of the earlier step were fulfilled before approving the 
next installment. 
x The field activities undertaken prior to pre-approval inspection were 
not eligible for financial assistance. After the inspection, a no 
objection certificate (NOC) was to be issued by the field office to the 
applicant for proceeding with the field work. The condition was 
relaxed if NOC was unduly delayed or field activity had been 
undertaken after 75 days from the date of submission of application 
to Tea Board. 
x Similarly, three further inspections were to be carried out. 
x The applicants were eligible for subsidy only if their Provident Fund 
( P F )  d u e s  w e r e  l e s s  t h a n  `10000. For dues more than `10000, they 
were to submit a Court decree or written consent from the PF 
authorities for allowing the payment of arrears of PF dues in 
installments. Tea Board was required to verify the correctness of PF 
dues from the challans of payment of current PF subscription. 
x Specific conditions in respect of rehabilitation 40 were to be adhered to 
by the applicants. 
Of 2565 payment cases of Replanting/Replacement Planting during the 
Tenth Five Year Plan, we selected a sample of 701 cases (27 per cent )
covering 309 gardens and 430 sections.  Of `38.07 crore disbursed to 
156 producers during 2007-09, we selected the records of 18 producers 
(12 per cent) who received subsidy of `5.49 crore relating to 57 gardens. 
In this regard, we observed the following:- 
Impact of past 
activities not 
evaluated
4.9.1   Of the 309 gardens test checked, in 192 gardens, the Tea Board  
had also paid the subsidy earlier, but did not evaluate the impact of the 
past activities on production, productivity and quality improvement etc., 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      29
while conducting pre-approval inspection in these cases. In the 
remaining gardens, either the subsidy was granted for the first time or 
the fact was not recorded in the application forms. By allowing subsidies 
without assessing the impact of past activities, the effectiveness of the 
scheme was compromised. The Ministry stated that the impact of 
replanting was assessed by AF Ferguson and the productivity gain 
ranged between 42 to 74 per cent  when compared with yield prior to 
replanting. We observed that AF Ferguson evaluated the impact only for 
an area of 299.98 ha, which was a mere 1.94 per cent of the total area of 
15,429.44 ha covered under replanting/replacement planting during 
2002 to 2007. Furthermore, the scheme conditions required evaluation 
of impact in all cases during the pre-approval inspections.
Subsidy granted 
for sections with 
productivity higher 
than the average 
4.9.2   In the first two years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, out of 57 
gardens test checked, in 20 gardens, Tea Board granted subsidy for 
replantation to sections where the sectional yield was higher (up to 
3,170 kg per ha) than the average yield of tea gardens in India. As such, 
despite such a large area of old tea bushes yet to be replanted, Tea 
Board gave priority to tea bushes with high productivity. 
Delay in 
conducting
inspections
4.9.3 There were delays in conducting various inspections by Tea Board. 
In 76 per cent cases, there were delays ranging from 31 to 1161 days in 
conducting pre-approval inspections. Delays of 32 days to seven years 
were noticed in conducting first, second and third inspections in 92 per 
cent, 93 per cent and 69 per cent of the cases respectively. Further, two 
or more inspections were done on the same day in many cases. Delays in 
conducting inspections defeated the very purpose of putting in place a 
detailed and purposeful monitoring mechanism. The Ministry stated that 
the major cause for delay in carrying out field inspections was the 
limited manpower at the disposal of the Board. However, the fact 
remained that as of January 2010, there were no serious shortages 
(Sanctioned Strength: 56, Men-in-Position: 51) of Inspecting officers in 
the Development wing. Thus, delay in inspections had adversely affected 
the achievement of actual replantation which impacted productivity. 
Release of subsidy 
without adhering 
to scheme 
conditions
4.9.4 (a) In respect of 116 out of 309 tea gardens, the Board paid subsidy 
on the basis of statement of PF dues submitted by the tea garden 
owners without verifying the same through the challans. In 11 cases, no 
clearance certificate was produced by the applicant and in six cases, no 
declaration regarding outstanding dues of PF were submitted. Tea Board 
disbursed subsidy amounting to `4.82 lakh to Simulbarie Tea Estate 
despite outstanding dues of `11.99 lakh towards the Employer’s share of 
Provident Fund and no court decree or written consent from the PF 
authorities was available.  The Ministry stated that specific cases pointed 
out by the Audit would be revisited and if the PF liabilities continued 
beyond the admissible level, the subsidy paid would be recalled. It 
further stated that serious efforts would be made to avoid such lapses 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      30
hence forth.
4.9.4 (b) Tea Board released subsidy of ` 5 2  l a k h  t o  1 2  g a r d e n s  w h i c h  
had started conducting field activities before the pre-approval 
inspection, thereby, not ensuring the status of physical suitability of soil 
through soil analysis report.  Tea Board also made irregular payment of 
subsidy of ` 48 lakh to eight gardens, where field activities were 
undertaken prior to issue of NOC and in these cases, the criteria of 75 
days was not adhered to.  The Ministry stated in October 2009 that in 
few cases where soil has been analysed after commencement of 
planting, subject to soil suitability analysis report and based on the 
satisfactory growth of the tea plants, the lapse on the part of the garden 
is condoned. We, however, observed that condonation of non-
adherence to such scheme conditions, were not kept on record in 
individual cases. 
Grant of subsidy 
despite
deficiencies in 
adherence to 
conditions for 
rehabilitation
4.9.5 The scheme prescribed minimum rehabilitation period of 18 
months for plains and 12 months for hills before replanting and ensuring 
physical and chemical suitability of soil before replanting. We reviewed 
cases of 430 sections and observed that: 
9 In 14 per cent sections, no rehabilitation was done despite the fact 
that there was no certificate/recommendation from Tea Research 
Association/United Planters Association of South India 
(TRA/UPASI) that the same was not required.  
9 Of 318 sections where rehabilitation was undertaken, in 32 per
cent (100 sections), dates of completion of rehabilitation were not 
recorded. As such, adherence to the prescribed period of 
rehabilitation could not be verified in audit.   
9 In 29 sections, the Tea Gardens did not adhere to the minimum 
time period of rehabilitation before replanting.
9 In 12 per cent  sections, the soil analysis test reports were not 
submitted by the Tea Gardens.
9 In 114 sections, though recommendations were made by soil-
testing laboratories to make the soil suitable for plantations, the 
Board released the subsidy without ascertaining the action taken 
by these Tea Estates/Gardens in this regard. 
Therefore, Tea Board released payments for subsidy without ensuring 
adherence to the laid down scheme conditions. The Ministry stated in 
October 2009 that though 12-18 months rehabilitation period had been 
prescribed, it was not sacrosanct to adhere to this period and replanting 
was permitted on the basis of merits of soil analytical report. Though we 
agree that the same could be decided on the basis of merits of soil 
analytical report, Tea Board should ensure adherence to the laid down 
terms and conditions by the applicants where need for rehabilitation has 
been felt and the same has been commenced. 
Thus, monitoring was lax and weak as prescribed inspections were not 
carried out on time or not carried out at all. While disbursing subsidy, 
Tea Board could not adequately ensure that the growers were adhering 
to the various laid down conditions.  The Board also allowed further 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      31
subsidies without assessing the impact of earlier subsidies to the same 
growers. Thus, the focus of Tea Board was on the disbursement of 
subsidy rather than on ensuring completion of actual replantation which 
could enhance the productivity.
Rejuvenation
pruning  
4.10 Rejuvenation pruning is one of the most important operations, 
next to planting, which directly determines the productivity of tea 
bushes. It has to be carried out periodically in spite of huge crop losses it 
results in. Tea Board subsidises the activity of rejuvenation pruning 
under TPDS. The salient features of the scheme were as under. 
Terms and conditions for subsidising rejuvenation pruning 
x Tea Board was to evaluate impact of rejuvenation on productivity 
(long term performance). 
x To be effective, rejuvenation pruning should be carried out only on 
potentially healthy bushes. 
x The prescribed period of undertaking the activity of pruning was 
from 1 st April to 30 th September. The application specifies that if 
the rejuvenation pruning is not done in the prescribed period, the 
application is liable to be rejected. 
x Specific time schedule was laid down for inspections by Tea Board 
officials.
x All the beneficiaries should be registered with Tea Board. 
Of 1320 payment cases, we selected a sample of 414 cases (31 per cent)
covering 187 gardens and 220 sections. In this regard we observed that : 
Failure to evaluate 
long-term impact 
of rejuvenation 
4.10.1 Tea Board did not evaluate the impact of rejuvenation on 
productivity in any of the cases test checked. The Ministry stated in 
October 2009 that as per the evaluation report of AF Ferguson, the fields 
rejuvenated during the Tenth Plan period have registered productivity 
increase of about 47 per cent  as compared to the pre-pruning average 
yield.  However, we observed that total area selected as sample by AF 
Ferguson was only 124.77 ha (1.14  per cent  of the total area under 
rejuvenation pruning).  

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      32
Prescribed period 
for rejuvenation 
not adhered to 
4.10.2 Though Tea Board prescribed undertaking the activity of pruning 
during the period from 1 st April to 30th September, rejuvenation pruning 
was conducted beyond the above period in 167 sections (76 per cent)
out of 220 sections.
Delay in 
conducting
inspections
4.10.3 Though the scheme stipulated specific time schedule for each 
inspection, there were delays of one to five years in conducting first 
inspection in 50 per cent (110 out of 220 sections) sections test checked 
in audit.  The Coonoor office conducted pre-approval and first inspection 
on the same date in 40 per cent cases.  It stated that the major cause for 
delay in carrying out field inspections was the limited manpower at the 
disposal of the Board.
Subsidy released 
to non-registered 
growers
4.10.4 In Coonoor office, all the beneficiaries examined in audit were 
small growers, who were not registered with the Tea Board. As such, the 
Board paid a subsidy of `12 lakh to the unregistered growers who were 
not eligible to receive subsidy. 
Thus, Tea Board did not assess the impact of rejuvenation pruning on 
productivity.  Delayed inspections and non-adherence to prescribed 
period (April to September) for carrying out rejuvenation (in 76 per
cent of cases) added to the ineffective implementation of the scheme. 
The deficiencies in implementation of rejuvenation pruning need to be 
addressed to ensure enhanced productivity. The Ministry stated that 
the deficiencies highlighted and the recommendations made by Audit 
have been taken note of for better administration of the scheme. 
Creation of 4.11 The salient features of the scheme for creation of irrigation 
Pruned tea bush

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      33
irrigation facilities facilities were:
Terms and conditions for subsidising creation of irrigation facilities  
x Tea Board was to subsidise (25 per cent of the total cost including 
cost of creation of Irrigation sources or @ `10,000 per hectare 
whichever was less in one installment) procurement of various 
items like sprinkler equipment, drip irrigation system, pipelines, 
motors, pump sets and creation of irrigation source such as check 
dams, tube wells etc.  
x Tea Board was to conduct pre-approval inspection and issue a “No 
Objection Certificate” for installation of machinery procured. 
x If the No Objection Certificate (NOC) was not issued within 75 days 
from date of submission of application, the applicant could go 
ahead with the activity.  
x A post-installation inspection was also to be done. 
Deficiencies in 
disbursement of 
subsidy
4.11.1 Tea Board fixed an overall target of 9000 ha for coverage under 
the scheme during the Tenth Plan Period. We observed a shortfall of 98 
per cent against this target. 25 beneficiaries were disbursed subsidy of 
`1.09 crore during 2002-07. In this regard, we examined 20 cases and 
observed that: 
(a) Tea Board did not conduct pre-approval inspections in seven cases 
due to lack of manpower. In these cases, post installation inspections 
were conducted after a time gap of 237 to 736 days.
 (b)  In eight (40 per cent ) cases, the  Tea Board disbursed subsidies 
although applicants were not eligible for grant of subsidy due to reasons 
like installation of machinery before submitting application/before issue 
of NOC, default in payment of PF, loan etc. 
(c)   Though Ministry assured during 2009 that a list showing the names 
of the beneficiaries would be prepared, no such list was prepared as of 
March 2010. 
Due to the substantial shortfall of 98 per cent in creation of irrigation 
facilities, this scheme could not have any positive impact on 
productivity. Tea Board however, intimated in May 2011 that they 
have achieved the target during Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
New Planting in 
North Eastern 
4.12  The salient features of the scheme for  New Planting in North 
Eastern States and Uttarakhand were: 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      34
States and 
Uttarakhand
Terms and conditions for subsidising new planting  
x Subsidy was allowed for new plantations (up to 10.12 ha) in North 
Eastern states and Uttarakhand as a part of TPDS.  
x Applicant should have title over the land proposed to be planted 
and should be registered with Tea Board. 
x The soil should be suitable for tea cultivation. 
x Only approved planting materials to be used for planting. 
x All culture operations and soil conservation measures should be 
undertaken. 
Deficiencies in 
execution of the 
scheme
4.12.1  Guwahati office disbursed `22.78 crore during 2002-07 to 1563 
beneficiaries in North Eastern states. In this regard, we examined 10 per
cent cases (163 beneficiaries containing 163 sections) and observed 
that:
(a) In 90 per cent (147 out of 163) sections, Tea Board disbursed subsidy 
even though the applicants had completed planting before submission 
of applications under the scheme.
¾ In 40 sections (27 per cent), planting was done prior to April 2002 
and in some cases as early as 1998. These cannot be considered 
as cases of ‘new planting’.
¾ In balance 107 sections where planting was completed after 
April 2002, but before submission of application, Tea Board did 
not conduct pre-approval inspections and did not assess physical 
suitability of soil. 
(b) Tea Board delayed the first inspection from 33 to 1526 days. The 
delay was more than one year in 69 of these cases.  
(c) Though Ministry assured during 2009 that a list showing the names of 
the beneficiaries would be prepared, no such list was prepared as of 
March 2010. 
The Ministry did not furnish specific reply in this regard. As Tea Board 
has kept a target of 7450 ha  with an outlay of `36 crore in  the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan for new planting in North Eastern States and 
Uttarakhand, these deficiencies need to be addressed. 
Thus, Tea Board disbursed the subsidy in the cases where the 
plantation was completed even before the submission of the 
applications and, therefore, the adequacy of pre-requisite conditions 
like soil suitability, adherence to the proper culture operation and soil 
conservation measures were not assessed.
Setting up of pilot 
tea producers 
societies (Self help 
4.13  The salient features of the scheme for setting up of pilot tea-
producers’ societies  were:
Terms and conditions for subsidising  self-help groups 
x SHGs were to be provided subsidy on their collective efforts 
towards tea development. Each society was to have at least 50 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      35
groups - SHGs) small grower members and registered as per the provisions of the 
Societies Act. 
x The specific activities included extension – technology and 
information dissemination, leaf collection, storage and 
transportation and procurement and supply of inputs such as 
fertilisers, plant protection chemicals, sprayers, pruning machines, 
irrigation equipment etc. to the members of the society.  
Shortcoming in 
implementation of 
the scheme 
4.13.1  We observed that there was a shortfall of 63 per cent  in 
achieving the target of setting up 100 SHGs during the period 2002-07. 
Tea Board disbursed `2.27 crore to 37 SHGs. We examined case files of 
21 SHGs (57 per cent) and observed that: 
¾ No SHG was registered as per the provisions of Societies Act. 
¾ No documentary evidence was found in support of activities of 
these SHGs such as technology and information dissemination, 
leaf collection, storage and transportation etc., to the members 
of the society.
The Ministry stated that as there was considerable difficulty in bringing 
together large number of growers, it was decided to limit the minimum 
size of the membership to 20 per SHG and to recognise such SHG 
provided the group had an affiliation to the All Assam Small Tea 
Growers Association which was a registered apex body for the small tea 
growers in Assam.
Tea Board may ensure adherence to laid down terms and conditions in 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan as they have a target of setting up 212 
SHGs to achieve and disburse subsidy of `6.80 crore. 
Tea Board stated in May 2011 that they have achieved the target for the 
first four years of Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Non-usage of 
mechanical aids 
(Pruning
Machines) for field 
operations 
4.14   We further observed that though the Board targeted 25,000 
hectare tea cultivated land for use of Pruning Machines for field 
operations, no field operation was conducted using such machines and 
the activity registered 100 per cent shortfall during 2002-11. Though the 
above practice is prevailing in major tea producing countries like Sri 
Lanka, Japan and Africa, Tea Board could not popularise this practice 
amongst the planters with the aid given by the Ministry.  The Ministry 
attributed the shortfall to lack of adequate manpower for close 
supervision.
Our
Recommendations 
and response of 
Tea Board 
4.15 We recommended in November 2009 that there was a need to 
strengthen documentation both in individual cases as well as for overall 
scheme implementation.  There was also need to identify mandatory 
terms and conditions for various developmental schemes to ensure their 
strict compliance. We also recommended the need to conduct 
inspections on time and evaluate the impact of the subsidies disbursed.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      36
There was a need  for Tea Board to devise a mechanism to ensure that 
subsidy for new planting was given only in genuine cases involving ‘new 
planting’ and non-adherence to laid down conditions should result in 
calling back of the subsidy. 
Tea Board accepted these recommendations in December 2009 and 
October 2010 and stated that: 
x Documentation process in Head Office, Zonal and Regional 
Offices would  be strengthened by computerising the data entry 
process for easy generation of Management Information System 
for getting snapshot of the progress of implementation of the 
scheme as well as particulars of payments made to individual tea 
gardens at any given point of time by March 2012.
x Fresh directions  had been issued (August 2010) to the field 
offices to evaluate the physical performance in the areas for 
which assistance had been provided in the past while carrying 
out  new inspections in respect of fresh applications, ensure 
fulfillment of  the important mandatory conditions by the 
gardens to become eligible for the financial assistance by March 
2012.
Conclusion 4.16 One of the primary reasons for low productivity of tea cultivation 
in the country was ageing plantations. Therefore, programmes for 
replantation/replacement plantation, rejuvenation pruning etc., are 
necessary for enhancement of productivity which has declined 
substantially over the years. The total area under commercially 
unproductive bushes increased from 42 per cent in 1997 to 57 per cent
in 2009.  As of 2009, the capital investment and cost of subsidy support 
for replantation is estimated at `6091.21 crore and `1522.80 crore 
respectively. Against this huge requirement,  yearly spending of  Tea 
Board was mere  `21.06  crore  during Tenth Five Year Plan and  `18.87
crore in first four years of Eleventh Five Year Plan on all activities 
including replantation.
The targets for replanting/replacement planting were set very low and 
area covered during the Tenth Five Year Plan was a mere 2.63 per cent
of the commercially unproductive bushes  as on 31 December 2001.  At 
this rate, the backlog for replanting/replacement planting up to 2007 
would take another 145 years to wipe off. Interventions by Tea Board to 
increase productivity by replantation of commercially unproductive 
bushes were thus grossly inadequate. There were also deficiencies in 
implementation of various other activities aimed at increasing 
productivity. Continuously increasing commercially unproductive 
bushes  which became 57 per cent of total bushes at the end of  2008 is  
a serious threat and may pose major risk for the tea industry in the 
immediate future unless  appropriate and timely interventions are 
made for arresting increasing trend of commercially unproductive 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      37
bushes  along with exploring  areas for new plantations.  This would 
require massive efforts in terms of finances and manpower. 
Considering the poor performance of Tea Board in enhancing 
productivity of tea in India by replacement of unproductive tea bushes, 
we are of the view that Tea Board is not fully equipped to effectively 
deal with this critical situation threatening the Tea industry. Tea 
Board’s proposed course of action and timelines for enhancing 
productivity, even if implemented, may only impact on improving 
effectiveness of the schemes already designed. The Government thus 
needs to take a holistic view of this critical situation and take major 
structural and strategic decisions like redesigning of programmes, 
schemes, delivery mechanisms and much higher financial outlays.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      38
41 Figures from 2009 onwards not available with Tea Board
Chapter 5 Development of Tea:  Improving quality of tea  
Objective 3: Whether developmental activities undertaken by Tea Board had an 
impact on improving quality of tea in India. 
Improving
quality of tea 
5.1 The price of a commodity like tea depends on its quality. In the past, 
Indian tea used to command premium prices in the international markets due 
to its superior quality.
Low increase 
in unit price of 
Indian Tea 
5.2  In respect of export of tea, the unit price can be worked out by dividing 
the total quantum of tea exported at a particular time by the total value of 
tea exported at that time. Unit price of Indian Tea as compared to that of 
other major tea-exporting countries like Japan, Mauritius, Sri Lanka and 
Kenya are shown in the following table: 
(in US $ per kg)
Table 7 – Comparison of unit price of tea of major tea-exporting countries41
Name of 
the
country
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
(E) 2009
India 2.04 1.95 1.79 1.97 2.06 2.09 2.03 2.45 2.71 2.91
Japan 15.87 13.11 14.60 16.29 18.15 18.34 16.37 16.47 18.90 18.76
Kenya 2.12 1.75 1.58 1.68 1.64 1.67 2.09 1.99 2.34 2.63
Mauritius 4.37 5.27 5.72 5.63 8.29 7.57 8.44 7.41 9.26 3.06
Sri Lanka 2.37 2.28 2.24 2.25 2.41 2.58 2.64 3.26 4.02 4.09
Source: Tea Board, E – estimated  
It can be seen from above that price realisation from export of  tea  by    Sri 
Lanka has increased by  73  per cent ,  whereas price realisation of Indian tea  
has shown increase of only 43 per cent. The reason for lower increase in price 
realisation of Indian tea is primarily due to inferior quality, adverse product 
mix and other marketing factors. Further, while the world market demands 
orthodox tea, India produces only 10 per cent orthodox tea (90 per cent CTC 
tea). Tea Board thus, needs to stress on the improvement in the quality of 
CTC tea and increase the production of orthodox tea.  
During the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plans, the schemes implemented by 
Tea Board mainly focused towards production of good quality tea and the 
thrust areas were renovation of old worn out machines to augment the 
processing capabilities, diversification of product profile i.e., from CTC to 
Orthodox/green tea manufacture, improving packaging standards and 
increasing the volume of value added tea and specialty tea. Tea Board 
formulated and implemented three schemes for quality improvement i.e. 
Orthodox Tea Production Subsidy Scheme, Quality Upgradation & Product 
Diversification Scheme (QUPDS) and Crash Scheme.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      39
42 Includes orthodox and green tea 
India’s
position in 
production of 
Orthodox tea
5.3  Production of tea in India by different methods of manufacturing during 
the last five years is given  below: 
(in million kgs)
Table 8 – Production of tea in India by different methods
Category 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 
(E)
2009 
(E)
2010
(E)
CTC 815 849 894 887 875 870 850
Orthodox 71 87 77 89 97 95 100
Green 7 10 11 10 9 14 16
Total 893 946 982 986 981 979 966
It can be seen from the above table that in 2010,  of the total tea production 
in India, 98 per cent is black tea and only two per cent is green tea. Of the 98 
per cent, 88 per cent tea is CTC and 10 per cent is orthodox.
Low share in 
export of 
orthodox tea
5.4  In the world tea market of 1,648 million kg in 2008, black tea accounts 
for 83 per cent, while green tea accounts for the remaining 17 per cent. In the 
black tea segment, the share of orthodox tea is 44 per cent, whereas for CTC 
it is 39 per cent (643 mkgs).  Thus, orthodox/green tea segment accounts for 
61 per cent (1005 mkgs) of world tea trade. Therefore, even if we assume that 
all the orthodox/green tea produced in India is exported (without taking into 
account the domestic consumption of orthodox/ green tea), the export share 
of orthodox/green tea would be around 10 per cent . Thus, to enhance its 
share of export, India needs to enhance production of orthodox tea. The 
overall picture of orthodox tea production in India since 1961 is given in table 
below:
(In million kgs)
Table 9 – Percentage of orthodox tea production in India over the years 
Year Production of 
orthodox tea42
Total production of 
tea
Percentage of total 
production 
1961 232 354 66 
1971 196 436 45 
1981 203 560 36 
1991 151 754 20 
2001 94 854 11 
2002 93 839 11 
2003 79 878 9
2004 78 893 9
2005 97 946 10 
2006 88 982 9
2007 99 986 10 
2008 106 981 11 
2009 109 979 11 
2010 116 966 12 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      40
The percentage of orthodox tea production in India which was as high as 66 
per cent of total production in 1961, came down to 11 per cent in 2001. Since 
then, the share has remained more or less stagnant.  
5.5  Some of the main reasons for limited production of orthodox tea are 
inadequate capacity to produce and higher cost of production of orthodox 
tea vis-à-vis CTC tea. Tea Board proposed to address the issue of higher cost 
of production through Orthodox Subsidy Scheme and inadequate capacity 
through QUPDS and Crash Scheme. These schemes have been discussed in 
the succeeding paragraphs.
Orthodox Tea 
Production
Subsidy
Scheme
5.6  The scheme was introduced to correct the imbalance in the product mix 
within the country and to re-establish the earlier pre-eminence of India as a 
supplier of high quality and competitively priced orthodox tea in the 
international market. The scheme was approved by the Ministry in June 2005 
and an amount of `132.41 crore was disbursed during November 2005 to 
March 2011. The main features of the scheme are given below. 
Terms and conditions of Orthodox Tea Production Subsidy Scheme 
The scheme allowed subsidy for production of orthodox tea @ `3 per kg for 
leaf grades and `2 per kg for dust grades for existing levels of production 
with additional incentive @ `2 per kg for the incremental volume over the 
previous year from 1st January 2005 to 31st March 2007.
(a) In the case of producers who produced only (100 per cent) orthodox tea, 
Tea Board was required to carry out periodic inspections, verify factory 
records to check the volume of tea manufactured.  The Inspectors of the 
Board were to certify that the factory was registered with the Board and 
produce only 100 per cent orthodox tea and thus was eligible for subsidy. 
(b) In case of producers who route their tea through auctions, the quantity of 
tea sold through auction during the given month was to be considered for 
subsidy provided that the said volume was certified by the brokers 
auctioning the tea and countersigned by the competent authority of the 
concerned auction organiser. 
(c) For producers who did not route their tea through auctions or who did 
not produce 100 per cent orthodox tea, such as producers of both CTC and 
orthodox tea, in the case of direct exports by the producer or for the tea 
offered for exports through merchant exporters, a list of documents was 
specified, which were to be relied upon for releasing the subsidy, whereby 
ensuring that subsidy was not released for CTC tea. 
(d) Additionally, in the case of Darjeeling Tea Producers, the quantity 
certified under Certification Trade Mark scheme of the Board with the clear 
indication of grades of tea produced during the scheme period only were to 
be considered for subsidy. 
In all cases, the Board was to ensure that the subsidy was not claimed under 
two different modes for the same quantity of tea. 
A formal Committee comprising of Commerce Secretary, Additional Secretary 
(Plantations), Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser, Department of 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      41
Commerce, Chairman, Tea Board and representatives of Planning 
Commission, Department of Expenditure, Department of Revenue, Banking 
Division and the Industry associations (north and south) was to monitor the 
implementation of the scheme. Our audit findings in respect of the Orthodox 
Subsidy Scheme are discussed below:
Impact of the 
scheme on 
production of 
orthodox tea
5.6.1(a) The scheme was introduced in June 2005 and subsidy disbursement 
was started from November 2005. However, there was only marginal increase 
in quantum of orthodox tea production during 2006 to 2010 as compared to 
2005, though an amount of `132.41 crore was disbursed up to the year 2011 . 
In fact, the target for production of 160 mkgs of orthodox tea per year as 
spelt out in Medium Term Export Strategy as a result of the steps taken by 
Tea Board on its recommendation was never met. Tea Board stated in 
January 2010 that price of orthodox tea is generally market driven. The all-
India average auction price of orthodox tea in 2004 was `77.18, while in 2005 
it was `63.42.  Hence, considering the decreasing price trend of 2005, the 
owners could not risk producing more orthodox tea during 2006. This 
indicates that there was no impact of subsidies disbursed by Tea Board under 
this scheme.
(b) The target of 160 mkgs was set in the Medium Term Export Strategy 
(approved by the Ministry) for the terminal year of Tenth Five Year Plan.  
However, this depended on the industry diversifying its product profile from 
CTC tea to dual manufacturing (CTC and Orthodox).  The role of the Board in 
this regard was first to identify CTC manufacturing units/ new entrants, who 
were capable to transform themselves into dual manufacturers/ start 
manufacturing orthodox tea. After assessing the units, the requirement of 
funds was to be estimated and subsidy was to be provided accordingly. We 
observed that the Board did not exercise the said functions. Therefore, 
neither the target of 160 mkgs which was set by the Medium Term Export 
Strategy nor the target of 126 mkgs per annum set as per the Tenth Five Year 
Plan could be achieved.    
(c) During the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) the Board fixed a target of 
380 mkgs for orthodox tea production i.e., an average of 76 mkgs per year. 
The target has no meaning as up to the year 2007, annual production has 
never been less than 76 mkgs.
(d) The effectiveness of the scheme was to be monitored by a high-level 
committee. However, no such monitoring of the scheme had been done as of 
January 2008. The Ministry stated in October 2009 that an independent 
professional was entrusted the work of scheme evaluation and mid-course 
correction, if any, would be done based on the outcome of the study.
(e) We further observed that the eligibility conditions were deficient to the 
effect that subsidy was paid on the quantity of production/auction 
sale/export etc., without making it mandatory to increase a minimal 
percentage of the production of orthodox tea.  

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      42
43 The report has been submitted by AC Neilson and acceptance/approval of the Ministry is awaited. 
44 60 factories manufacturing only orthodox tea, 21 factories manufacturing Darjeeling tea, 20 manufacturing both 
CTC & orthodox tea and 14 Green tea factories. 
45 KDHP Pvt. Ltd, Stanes Amalgamated Estate Ltd., Rahimpur Tea Company Ltd., Harrision Malyalam Ltd. 
The Ministry stated in October 2009 that the producer needs to factor in the 
risks involved in production of orthodox tea. Hence, it was contemplated to 
achieve the incremental production through incentivisation rather than 
prefixing minimal percentage of production increase as a mandatory 
requirement.  
However, the fact remains that in the absence of a benchmark for perceptible 
increase in orthodox tea production, there was no impact of the subsidy paid. 
The independent professional agency which was entrusted the work of 
evaluation of the scheme also opined
43 (December 2009) that due to generic 
nature of the subsidy scheme across all regions and for all tea companies 
producing orthodox tea irrespective of volume and quality of tea produce, 
exact impact of the scheme could not be evaluated. 
Excess/ 
irregular
payment of 
subsidy
5.6.2  In 2009, there were 482 orthodox tea factories in India (including dual 
manufacturing factories) of which 321, 323, 374 and 230 factories were 
disbursed subsidies in the year 2005, 2006, 2007 and 2008 respectively. We 
reviewed 204 payment cases covering 115 factories
44 during the period 
November 2005 to December 2009 on a test check basis.  In respect of cases 
of 100 per cent orthodox tea producers, we observed that:
(a)  Tea Board did not carry out periodic inspection of factory records to verify 
the volume of tea manufactured as per the instructions of the Ministry in all 
the 60 factories manufacturing 100 per cent orthodox tea. In fact, Tea Board 
amended the scheme in October 2006 and stated that the procedure in 
respect of volume of tea produced would be based on documentary evidence 
submitted by the factories. However, we found that volume of tea produced 
in the factory could not be verified from Excise invoices, as the invoices ed 
details of total dispatch of tea from factory premises, which could include tea 
produced during previous years or tea purchased from outside for blending 
and sale. Thus, by not carrying out periodic inspections for verification of 
factory records to verify the volume of tea manufactured, Tea Board 
disbursed subsidy to all factories irrespective of increase/decrease in 
production of orthodox tea. In four
45 illustrative cases, we observed that Tea 
Board disbursed subsidy on the basis of Excise invoice for 9,05,455 kgs during 
2005. We, however, found that the quantity actually produced by these 
factories on the basis of the e-returns submitted by them to Tea Board was 
only 8,06,662 kgs.  Therefore, Tea Board made payment of subsidy for an 
excess quantity of 98,793 kgs.
The Ministry stated that subsidy was paid on the basis of Excise Invoice as per 
scheme guideline and not on the basis of e-return.  Hence, there was no 
excess payment. However, the fact remains that e-returns are submitted by 
the manufacturers to Tea Board monthly declaring the production of tea 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      43
46 Bhavani Tea Co. Ltd., United Nilgiri Tea Estate Co. Ltd. 
while excise invoice indicates the quantum of tea exported which may have 
included a portion of quantum of tea procured by the manufacturer from 
outside their factory. Therefore, we are of opinion that the condition 
formulated in the guidelines itself is deficient. 
(b)  Out of the above 60 factories, in 54 case files, Tea Board did not keep on 
record a certificate stating that these factories were producing only 100 per 
cent orthodox tea. Tea Board stated in March 2010 that factories once 
inspected, need not be inspected every year for certifying them as 100 per
cent orthodox tea factories. We, however, observed that in six factories to 
which subsidy was disbursed in 2005 itself, i.e., at the very beginning of the 
scheme, no certificate was placed on record.
(c)  In two46  other cases, while calculating the incremental volume of a year 
over the previous year, the Board considered only those months where there 
was an increase in production and ignored the months where there was a 
decrease with respect to the previous period. Thus, due to wrong calculation 
of incremental volume of production the Board made an overpayment of 
`2.97 lakh. The Ministry stated that the subsidy was paid on the incremental 
production of the current year over the previous year. However, the fact 
remains that total increase cannot be arrived at without taking into 
consideration the decrease in production during this period. Considering only 
the months with increased volume and not the months with decreased 
volume would lead to a situation wherein without any overall incremental 
increase during a year, the applicant would get subsidy. This loophole needs 
to be plugged. 
(d)  In respect of Darjeeling Tea Producers, the subsidy was to be disbursed 
for the quantity certified under Certification Trade Mark (CTM) scheme of the 
Board with the clear indication of grades of tea produced. We, however, 
observed in all the 21 cases test checked that Tea Board disbursed subsidy on 
the basis of information provided by Darjeeling Tea Association and not on 
the basis of CTM scheme. Tea Board replied in March 2010 that it was due to 
absence of indication of separate grade in the CTM scheme. 
(e)  Tea Board adjusted a subsidy of `1.64 crore involving 91 applicants 
against the loan on which they had  defaulted, thereby defeating the purpose 
of providing incentive to manufacturers to reduce their production cost of 
orthodox tea.  The Ministry stated that it was the policy decision of the Board. 
However, the fact remains that in these cases, production of orthodox tea 
was not encouraged. 
Thus, while the tea industry needed to produce more orthodox tea to 
capture international markets, production of orthodox tea in India is not 
significant.  Tea Board’s support to boost up orthodox tea production had 
not been effective as there was no mandatory condition of a perceptible

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      44
47 International Standards Organisation.
48 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) is a process control system designed to identify and prevent 
microbial and other hazards in food production.  It includes steps designed to prevent problems before they occur 
and to correct deviations as soon as they are detected.  Such preventive control system with documentation and 
verification are widely recognised by scientific authorities and international oganisations as the most effective 
approach available for producing safe food. Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) offers such certification.
49 Not less than 85 per cent of the leaf consisting of two to three leaves + single and two leaf banjies 
increase in production of orthodox tea for release of subsidy.
Quality
Upgradation
and Product 
Diversification
Scheme
5.7  The QUPD scheme was implemented from 2002 to provide subsidy to 
the needy tea gardens/factories towards production of good quality tea as 
well as augmenting their processing capabilities by improving packaging 
standard, product diversification and quality certification. During 2002-09, 
Tea Board received `109.43 crore and disbursed `110.87 crore to 1747 
manufacturing units, out of the total 1896 manufacturing units in India. The 
main features of the scheme are given below. 
Terms and conditions of Quality Upgradation and Product Diversification 
Scheme
x Bought leaf factories, single estate tea factories and medium sized tea 
gardens were eligible to get the subsidy. 
x Orthodox processing facilities including rollers, conventional dryers and 
various sorting equipment (Middleton sorters, bichromatic colour 
sorters, etc.) withering facilities – complete withering troughs inclusive 
of construction were to be subsidised. 
x Green tea processing facilities, tea-packaging facilities, tea-bagging 
facilities, tea-cleaning equipment, blending and allied machineries were 
also to be subsidised. 
x The applicant factory had to mobilise 75 per cent  of the total funds 
required and Tea Board provided subsidy of 25 per cent of the total cost 
subject to a limit of `0.25 crore in single installment after installation of 
the approved machinery.  
x Subsidy for acquisition of ISO 47/HACCP48 and organic certification was 
extended at 50 per cent of the cost of certification subject to a maximum 
of `0.75 lakh.
Ineffective
monitoring of 
impact/
benefits
accrued
5.7.1  W e  s e l e c t e d  a  s a m p l e  o f  1 9  per cent  (338 out of 1747) cases, for 
scrutiny and observed that: 
(a) In none of the selected cases, the quality of green leaf was verified, 
though the manufacturing units availing the subsidy were supposed to use 
only good quality green leaf
49 as per the scheme guidelines. The Ministry 
stated that these were the general guidelines and it was the responsibility of 
the factory to ensure that they procure only the good quality green leaf and it 
would be simply impossible task on the part of the Board to keep a daily 
watch on the quality of leaf purchased by each and every factory. The reply 
may be viewed in light of the fact that this was one of the important 
conditions for disbursement of subsidy, violation of which was to result in 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      45
refund of subsidy along with 12 per cent interest.  Thus, the intention of the 
scheme to disburse subsidy for only good quality green leaf was not met in 
absence of verification mechanism with Tea Board.
(b)  The Board did not assess the benefits accrued from the activity in terms 
of price realisation, product augmentation, quality upgradation and cost 
reduction in manufacturing process, as required under the scheme. Though 
the Ministry stated that the scheme was evaluated by an independent 
agency, we observed that case to case evaluation was not done as prescribed 
under the scheme.
(c)  Applicants were required to  submit  annually a document showing 
performance of the machinery items installed and benefits accrued in terms 
of value realisation, augmentation, reduction in cost of processing. We found 
that this was not submitted by any client in respect of Kolkata and Guwahati 
offices. In respect of Coonoor office, though in four cases, manufacturers 
submitted the annual statements, the follow-up information was furnished 
only once and not every year as required. Thus, in the absence of such details, 
Tea Board had no mechanism to follow up on the impact of subsidy. The 
Ministry agreed and stated in October 2009 that actions have been initiated 
for mandatory submission and follow up of performance report after 
completion of each account year in the current plan period.
Subsidy paid 
for ineligible 
items
5.7.2  Tea Board paid subsidy of `1.40 crore in 41 out of 338 cases for 
ineligible items such as conveyor systems, dehumidifiers, AC machine, 
electronic weighing scale, moisture meter, electrical equipment and fittings 
etc. No justification for release of subsidy to these ineligible items was placed 
on record by the Tea Board. The Ministry stated in October 2009 that the list 
of eligible items is continually updated as and when the industry seeks 
inclusion of additional items. Tea Board is empowered to 
amend/condone/relax any norm of the scheme provided it meets the 
objective of the scheme. However, such condonation/relaxation granted by 
Tea Board was not found on record in these cases.
Objective of 
conversion 
from CTC to 
orthodox tea 
not achieved
5.7.3 (a) 157 (46 per cent ) out of 338 cases test checked, who availed the 
subsidy of `16.87 crore for upgradation of existing machinery, were solely 
CTC tea manufacturers. Only they could have converted to orthodox tea 
manufacturing.  They, however, chose to upgrade their existing machinery 
instead of converting to production of orthodox tea. The Ministry stated that 
the scheme had only an enabling provision for facilitating the conversion 
from CTC to orthodox, but it cannot be mandatorily forced on the tea 
factories as it was a commercial proposition to be decided by the factory 
managements in consideration of the market conditions. Thus, the objective 
of conversion from CTC to orthodox tea was not fulfilled in these cases.  
5.7.3 (b)  In one case, a company applied for subsidy in May 2006 for 
establishing a new orthodox factory and buy Colour Sorter machine from 
Japan.  Though the firm did not procure the said machine till September 
2008, Tea Board released a subsidy of `20.85 lakh for other machines 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      46
50 In Bought Leaf Factories (BLFs – a factory that procures at least 2/3rd of its leaf from small growers)) in South 
India, high percentage of coarse leave in the raw material (i.e. plucked green leaf) results in low/un-withered 
leaves, which, during subsequent stages of manufacturing, results in formation of big balls and do not conform to 
standard manufacture. Such tea does not have any market. BLFs reuse this un-saleable form of tea for re-
conditioning along with fresh batch of green leaves. The practice is not desirable as it leads to the manufacture of 
sub-standard quality of tea. The scheme was introduced to address two aspects to enhance quality viz., fine 
plucking of tea leaves (Good quality tea is produced from tender and succulent fine leaves i.e., first 2 to 3 leaves 
from the tip of a shoot) and correction of imbalance of tea-processing line in a tea factory. 
procured and installed prior to submission of the application. The purpose of 
releasing subsidy was thus not achieved. 
 5.7.3 (c)  In 15 cases (4 per cent) only, subsidy of `5.82 crore was released by 
Tea Board to encourage blending and packaging.
Objectives of 
quality
certification
and
awareness
not achieved 
5.7.4 Of 338 cases, only in 11 cases, subsidy was released for obtaining 
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) certification and organic 
tea certification.  In none of the cases test checked, subsidy was released to 
promote quality awareness programmes in small growers segment. Thus, the 
objectives of undertaking quality certification and promoting quality 
awareness were not achieved. 
The Ministry did not give any reply for the same. 
Crash Scheme 5.8  In the year 2001-02, Tea Board implemented Crash Scheme for 
encouraging correction of imbalance in manufacturing capabilities of 
manufacturers and production of non-Reconditioned (RC)
50 CTC tea. A 
payment of `8.23 crore was made to 79 factories over Ninth and Tenth Five 
Year Plan. Our review of 25 cases (32 per cent ) showed that Tea Board 
allowed subsidy for machineries, other than those mentioned in the scheme 
conditions in five cases. Only three factories committed for conversion and 18 
factories obtained quality certification under HACCP/ISO, despite the same 
being mandatory. Tea Board did not test check and verify quality standards of 
tea leaves as well as made tea as per the requirement of the scheme. 
Price Subsidy 
Scheme (PSS) 
5.9  The scheme aimed at giving relief to registered small growers of tea in 
view of the low price realisation for green leaf.  The scheme was operated for 
four months (with effect from February 2004), depending on the price 
situation and was to be suspended, if the average price of made tea exceeded 
`55 per kg in South Indian auctions and `65 per kg in North Indian auctions 
for five consecutive weeks.  The subsidy payable was an amount equivalent to 
one fourth of the difference between the ceiling price limit of `55 or `65 and 
the monthly average auction price of the region per kg of made tea, subject 
to the maximum of `2.00 for each kg of green leaf. Other features of the 
scheme were as under. 
Terms and conditions of Price Subsidy Scheme 
x Small growers had to submit application in the prescribed form (Form I) to 
their respective tea factories and the factory was to then consolidate these 
particulars in respect of all their supplier small growers (Form II) and send the 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      47
same for claiming subsidy to Tea Board. 
x Tea Board granted subsidy to the tea factories, which were to be encashed 
and disbursed to small growers by the factories after obtaining a stamped 
receipt from each of them. 
x The factories were supposed to maintain original cash receipts and record the 
quantum of payment every month in a separate ledger (Form III) and send 
monthly certificates (Form IV) to the Board to the effect that payment had 
been made to each of the supplier small grower as per the sanction order. 
x All tea factories were required to properly maintain all the records regarding 
cash receipts and subsidy payment ledger so as to enable Tea Board officials to 
verify the same.  
During 2004-05 and 2005-06, the Board disbursed `21.33 crore under this 
scheme, of which `21.14 crore (99 per cent ) was disbursed from Coonoor 
office. We observed that up to March 2005 Coonoor office disbursed subsidy 
of `20.36 crore to 194 Tea Factories who, in turn, disbursed the amount to 
47,379 small growers.  In this regard, we observed the following: 
Payment
made to un-
registered
growers
5.9.1 The Board disbursed subsidy to 47379 growers planting tea in South 
India through its regional office at Coonoor. We, however, observed that in 
South India, the total number of small growers registered with the Board was 
16583 as of December 2009. As such, the Board released subsidy to 30796 
growers who were not registered with the Board. 
Proper record 
of payment to 
small growers 
not
maintained
5.9.2 Only 31 out of 194 Tea Factories submitted the Form IV giving a 
declaration regarding disbursement of subsidy of `2.32 crore to small 
growers.  Further, records showed that though subsidy was disbursed to 
47379 small growers through these factories, acquittance of only 393 small 
growers for `4.60 lakh was found on record in Tea Board, Coonoor. Thus, 
there was no evidence to prove that the remaining 163 factories had paid the 
amount of subsidy of `20.31 crore as disbursed by Tea Board to the 
remaining 46986 small growers.
The Ministry stated that the scheme was purely an ad hoc intervention which 
provided some relief to the small growers to tide over the distress condition 
and had no impact in bringing out any positive changes. However, the 
Ministry did not offer any comments on the authenticity of disbursement of 
`20.31 crore to remaining 46986 growers.
Our
Recommend-
ations and 
response of 
Tea Board 
5.10 We recommended in November 2009 that the perceptible increase in 
production of orthodox tea may be prescribed as a one of the conditions for 
release of subsidy under the Orthodox Subsidy Scheme. We also 
recommended for strengthening of the monitoring mechanism for 
implementation of the QUPD scheme to ensure the augmentation of 
processing capabilities of orthodox tea. We further recommended that a 
mechanism may be devised to analyse the reasons for decline in quality even 
after payment of subsidy for remedial measures.  
Tea Board accepted these recommendations and stated in October 2010 that 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      48
in the event of Government agreeing for the continuation of the scheme 
during the remaining period of Eleventh Five Year Plan, the suggestions of 
Audit regarding introduction of a benchmark for perceptible increase in 
production would be considered for implementation. Tea Board issued 
directions in August 2010 to field offices to carry out periodic inspections of 
factory records to verify actual orthodox tea production.  Tea Board proposed 
the strengthening of inspections of factories by appointment of Factory 
Development Officers as a new cadre, put in place a mechanism to assess the 
impact of the subsidy disbursed on the quality of tea and evolve appropriate 
remedial measures.
Conclusion 5.11 Lower price realisation of Indian tea was primarily due to inferior quality 
and adverse product mix. The main objective of Orthodox Tea Production 
Subsidy Scheme was to correct the imbalance in the product mix within the 
country.  There was no increase in production of orthodox tea and actual 
production of orthodox tea was substantially below the target of Tea Board 
despite the scheme being in operation for more than four years.  The scheme 
was ill conceived as it did not lay down enhancement in production of 
orthodox tea as a pre-requisite for eligibility of subsidy and was ineffectively 
implemented as subsidy was allowed despite non-submission of proper 
documents/without proper verification of factory records.  
QUPD Scheme could not ensure improvement in quality of green leaves, 
higher price realisation, product augmentation and quality upgradation. The 
objective of product diversification was also not achieved.  
The Price Subsidy Scheme was a one-time scheme and had no long term 
impact. In the absence of adequate documentary evidence, it is also 
questionable whether the intended benefit to the small growers actually 
reached them. 
We are of the view that Tea Board’s proposed course of action and 
timelines for improving quality of tea and product mix, even if 
implemented, may not yield any positive results unless efforts on these 
measures are very well structured and supported by appropriate quality of 
manpower and timely support from the Government.  

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      49
Chapter 6 Development of Tea:  Cost Reduction
Objective 4: Whether developmental activities undertaken by Tea Board had an 
impact on cost reduction of tea in India. 
Comparative
cost of 
production
against
realisation
6.1 India has the highest cost of production amongst major tea producing 
countries in the world. The cost of sales is also above the auction realisation. A 
comparison of cost of production against price realisation in tea producing 
countries is given below:
Table 10 – Cost of production vis-à-vis price realisation  
Name of the country Cost of 
production (US 
$/kg) 
Auction realisation 
(US $/kg) 
Average
margins
India North India 1.62 1.50 (-) 8%
South India 1.48 0.95 (-) 56%
Kenya 0.97 2.02 52%
Malawi 0.80 1.02 22%
Sri Lanka 1.52 1.92 21%
Source: Accenture Report 2002 (data in respect of China and Indonesia not available in the report) and 
information furnished by Tea Board 
After 2002, Tea Board did not conduct any study comparing the cost of 
production in various countries like China, Kenya, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Japan and 
Mauritius, which could facilitate analysis of various components and take up 
measures to reduce the cost of production.    
Failure to 
take action
for reduction 
in cost of 
production
of tea 
6.2  The Medium Term Export Strategy recommended (January 2002) specific 
steps to be undertaken by the Tea Board to bring about reduction of cost of 
production through reduction in cost of labour, overheads, field inputs and 
infrastructure ( refer Annexure II ). We observed that Tea Board did not take 
action as above. Tea Board in its reply stated in September 2008 that since India 
has the highest cost of production amongst tea-producing countries, it was 
important to bring down the cost. The component of the labour-related cost 
formed about 50 per cent of total cost of production of tea. As these costs are 
mandated statutorily under the Plantation Labour Act, improvement in the 
productivity of labour was most essential area to be addressed for overall 
reduction in cost of production of tea.   
Comparative
cost of 
manufactu-
ring CTC tea 
in various 
states of 
India 
6.3  Tea Board engaged a consultancy agency to study the cost of production of 
CTC tea by estate factory state-wise within India for the year 2004-05, 2005-06 
and 2006-07.  The cost of manufacturing of made tea (CTC) by various states of 
India is given below: 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      50
Table 11 – Details of components of cost of production (` per kg.) 
Particular Sikkim Karnataka Assam Tripura Himachal 
Pradesh
Kerala Tamil
Nadu
West
Bengal
India 
Cost of green 
leaf 
182.50 31.15 42.08 26.64 42.98 41.44 41.23 46.71 42.13
Wages and 
salaries
79.51 8.26 5.78 7.78 11.64 4.65 2.40 4.22 5.23
Cost including 
power, fuel, 
depreciation,
packaging etc 
65.89 13.25 15.62 12.61 13.00 11.90 11.73 18.30 15.23
Cess 0.37 0.26 0.61 0.13 0.23 0.30 0.23 0.27 0.45
Production 
cost 
328.27 52.92 64.09 47.16 67.85 58.29 55.59 69.50 63.04
Administrative
overheads
22.52 0.34 3.06 1.52 0.00 1.83 1.31 8.52 3.63
Cost of selling 
including
transport
outward,
warehousing,
sampling cost 
etc. 
3.12 1.20 3.74 4.44 10.55 0.72 5.18 3.09 3.45
Interest on 
working
capital 
0.00 0.69 2.97 0.00 0.35 0.00 0.00 3.11 2.23
Total cost of 
sales 
353.91 55.15 73.86 53.12 78.75 60.84 62.08 84.22 72.35
Average 
realization 
239.18 54.78 65.78 54.21 87.04 54.77 62.41 83.78 67.41
Source: Tea Board
It can be seen from the above table that the largest component of the production 
cost was cost of green leaf, almost 58.23 per cent to the total cost of production 
in India. Tea Board did not identify components of cost through cost studies, 
where the scope of cost reduction existed. In this regard, we observed that no 
major initiatives were taken by Tea Board in relation to improving the 
productivity of labour as well as other components of cost where the scope of 
cost reduction existed. We examined the role of Tea Board in reducing the labour 
cost by undertaking training and welfare activities aimed at improving 
productivity through Human Resource Development Scheme.  
Our audit findings in respect of the Human Resources Development Scheme are 
discussed below: 
Human
Resource 
Development
Scheme 
6.4  The objective of the scheme was to bring about overall improvement of 
skills of people associated with tea plantations at all levels i.e., from workers to 
managers.  Activities to be undertaken under this scheme were as under. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      51
Terms and conditions of the Human Resource Development Scheme 
x Training was to be provided in plantation management, labour productivity, 
skills improvement at all levels from workers to managers.  
x Tea Board was to subsidise welfare activities such as provision of drinking 
water, conservancy, canteens, crèches and medical, educational and housing 
facilities.
Deficiencies 
in training 
activities
under HRD 
scheme
6.4.1  The Tenth Five Year Plan outlay of the scheme was `6.01 crore consisting 
of `2.29 crore for training activities and `3.72 crore for welfare measures.  The 
Eleventh Five Year Plan outlay of the scheme was `50 crore of which `12.50 crore 
was for training and `37.50 crore was for welfare activities. In this regard, we 
observed that:
 (a)  The actual disbursement for training activities was insignificant (16 per cent)
given the large number of labour force employed in the tea industry. Further, 
against the total Plan allocation of `2.29 crore for training, the Board disbursed 
only `0.91 crore under the scheme towards training activities for all levels from 
workers to managers. Thus, there was a shortfall of 60 per cent in spending under 
training during Tenth Plan against the targets fixed despite the fact that the 
training programme of plantation labour was the main focus of the scheme as 
well as the prime need of the tea industry. 
 (b)  The Board fixed only financial targets and not physical targets.  
 (c)  None of the trainings were conducted through the approved institutions 
during 2004-05 and 2005-06 except one. 
A worker plucking handful of tea leaves instead of tea banjies (2 leaves and a bud)

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      52
Deficiencies 
in grant of 
subsidy for 
welfare
activities
6.4.2  We also examined 368 cases (100 per cent) under welfare activities where 
subsidy of `6.32 crore was disbursed during 2007-09 and observed that:
(a) No amount was disbursed for facilities like housing, drinking water, 
conservancy, sanitation, canteens and crèches in the above two years. 
(b)  The expenditure on medical facilities was 4.57 per cent. One of the conditions 
for sanctioning capital grant to Hospitals/Medical institutions was that the 
institute should be preferably located in a tea growing area and cater sufficiently 
to the needs of the tea garden workers and their dependants. Though Board 
incurred an expenditure of `28.87 lakh during the 2007-09, it did not undertake 
any evaluation to assess whether the medical needs of the tea garden workers 
and their dependants were met sufficiently.
(c) In October 2007, the Board proposed to the Ministry for payment of some 
incentive to the plantation workers in the closed tea gardens before the festive 
season. Ministry approved the proposal for payment of lump sum payment of 
`1000 per ward of the plantation workers of the tea gardens which remained 
closed as of then.  Tea Board disbursed `3.35 crore to 33,708 plantation workers 
of 33 closed Tea Gardens during 2007-08.  However, such payments do not have 
any long-term effect on reducing the labour cost. Further, acquittance in support 
of money actually received by the beneficiaries was also not found on record.
The Ministry did not offer any specific comments on the above observations. It, 
however, stated in October 2009 that keeping in view the importance of human 
resources, their knowledge level besides their physical well being, the outlay has 
been increased to `50 crore in the Eleventh Five Year Plan (Training – `12.50
crore and Welfare activities – `37.50 crore). The reply of the Ministry may be 
viewed in light of the fact that as against allotment of `3.75 crore during 2007-
09, the Board could utilise only `1.43 crore thereby registering shortfall of 62 per
cent.
Our
Recommend-
ations and 
response of 
Tea Board
6.5 We recommended in November 2009 that Tea Board must fix annual 
physical targets for training and welfare activities and available funds for  
training activities must be fully utilised without being diverted to other activities. 
Tea Board accepted these recommendations in December 2009 for 
implementation by March 2011. 
Conclusion 6.6  Tea Board  did not prescribe regular cost studies despite India having highest 
cost of production amongst major tea-producing countries in the World and cost 
of sales often being above the auction realisation. Tea Board did not formulate 
and undertake schemes specifically for states where average realisation was less 
than the total cost of sales. Tea Board also did not identify other components of 
cost through cost studies, where the scope of cost reduction existed. As regards 
reduction in manpower cost, the funds allocated for training activities were 
insignificant and Tea Board even failed to utilise the same effectively. No physical 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      53
targets were fixed for training. Tea Board also did not spend on the facilities like 
housing, drinking water, conservancy, sanitation, canteens and crèches during 
the two years reviewed. 
We further recommend that Tea Board needs to adopt an appropriate system 
of cost studies for identifying areas for cost reduction and effectively address 
those areas to ensure the long term sustainability. We are of the view that 
improving the productivity of manpower and appropriate technology 
intervention are essential for cost reduction. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      54
51 Against the sanctioned strength of 11, only 8 scientific personnel were posted  as of March 2009. 
Chapter 7 Research Activities 
Objective 5: Whether research activities undertaken by Tea Board or financed by Tea 
Board were effective in delivering results for effective tea development.
Support for 
research activities 
7.1  Tea Board undertakes research work on tea through Darjeeling Tea 
Research and Development Centre (DTR&DC) in Kurseong, which was 
established by the Ministry in 1977 to primarily provide research and 
development support to the Darjeeling tea industry on demand of the 
State Government and Tea Associations.  The Ministry, through Tea Board, 
also finances a substantial part of the expenditure of two industry-based 
Tea Research Institutes viz., Tea Research Association (TRA) and United 
Planter’s Association for South India (UPASI-TRF), which also undertake 
research work on various tea-related areas.  During 2002-11, the Board 
received `169.07 crore from the Ministry towards research and 
development activities which included funding to DTR&DC, TRA and 
UPASI-TRF and expenditure on IT Portal. Tea Board incurred an 
expenditure of `171.91 crore during this period.
Darjeeling Tea 
Research and 
Development
Centre
7.2  The objective of this Centre is to perform research on various 
botanical and agronomical aspects, soil aspects, biochemical aspects and 
plant protection aspects of Darjeeling Tea. The Centre also extends 
advisory services to various gardens on specific requests. The Centre is 
headed by a Project Director. It has four divisions/ laboratories viz., Farm 
Management, Soil Science, Bio-chemistry and Plant Protection. An 
experimental farm of 21.6 hectares is also a part of the Centre. 
Failure to provide 
research and 
development
support to the 
Darjeeling tea 
industry
7.2.1  During 2002-09, DTR&DC received `76.46 lakh under Plan and `2.55 
crore under Non-plan head from Tea Board. We observed that: 
(a) DTR&DC spent only `73.57 lakh on Plan activities during 2002-09 which 
was inadequate to undertake proper research activities.   
(b) There were 27 per cent vacancies of scientific staff 51 in the centre. As 
such, the centre was not equipped with adequate manpower to undertake 
research activities to support the Darjeeling tea industry as per its 
mandate.
(c) Extension Services to the tea estates in the Darjeeling hills could also 
not be provided due to shortage of staff. 
(d) Only one seminar was organised in the year 2004 at Darjeeling. No 
targets were set for conducting trainings /seminars /symposia /workshops 
and no training courses were organised to train people associated with tea 
industry.
 (e) The Centre undertook 21 projects and completed eight during 2002-09. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      55
52 The approved administrative items include salary and allowances including gratuity, PF and medical expenses 
(excluding pension), expenses on meetings and conferences, seminars and training, consumables, electricity and 
water supply, printing and stationery, postage and telegram, travel expenses, books and journals and clonal 
selection and nursery. 
Neither were any deliverables transferred for the use of the tea industry 
nor were any patents filed. Tea Board also did not fix any target for 
research publications for the Centre. The Center published eight research 
papers in Indian Journals and one research paper in International Journal 
during 2002-09, however, impact factor of the same was not furnished.  
(f) Scientific Advisory Committee, with expert scientist members, is 
responsible for evaluation and finalisation of the programmes prepared by 
first and middle level committees. We observed that the Committee did 
not meet twice a year as mandated and met only thrice during April 2002 
to October 2008. This indicated inadequate monitoring at apex level. 
Thus, projects activities of DTR&DC did not give any fruitful end results for 
use of the tea industry due to inadequate manpower and resources. The 
Ministry agreed in October 2009 that due to lack of scientific manpower 
and infrastructural development, significant contribution of research in the 
form of publication and development of package of practices for the 
industry did not happen.
Other research 
organisations
funded by GOI
7.3  Government of India supports Tea Research Association (TRA) and 
United Planters’ Association for Southern India–Tea Research Foundation 
(UPASI-TRF) by contributing 49 per cent  of their annual expenditure on 
certain approved administrative items
52 subject to a specified ceiling, from 
the Plan Budget of Tea Board. Tea Board released an amount of `8.15
crore to UPASI-TRF and `43.07 crore to TRA during 2004-05 to 2010-11.  In 
addition, an amount of `4.86 crore and `16.45 crore was released by the 
Board to UPASI-TRF and TRA as research grant during the said period. The 
responsibilities assigned to these organisations are given below. 
Responsibilities of Tea Board to monitor performance of TRA and UPASI-
TRF
To ensure that the grant-in-aid is spent by these research organisations for 
the purpose envisaged
x These oganisations are required to submit their accounts of previous 
financial year, duly audited and passed by their respective 
Council/Trustee Board to Tea Board by 30th September. 
x Tea Board is required to audit their annual accounts and ensure 
accountability for proper utilisation of funds.  
x The Ministry directed Tea Board to develop a system for monitoring 
and evaluating the research activities undertaken by UPASI-TRF and 
TRA and take steps to ensure that research results were disseminated 
to end-users.
Failure to conduct 7.3.1 We observed that Tea Board conducted audit of TRA for the period 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      56
audit by Tea Board  from 2001-02 to 2004-05 only in December 2005. Tea Board did not 
conduct audit of TRA thereafter. Tea Board also did not conduct audit of 
UPASI-TRF for the period from 2002-03 to 2007-08. The status of 
conducting audit of these two institutions during 2008-09 was not 
intimated. As such, there was no mechanism in Tea Board to assure that 
the funds released by them were utilised for the purpose for which they 
were released.
The Ministry agreed in October 2009 that regularity in conduct of audit of 
TRA and UPASI-TRF was lacking and they would do it on regular basis in 
future.
Increased
dependence of
GOI funding  
7.3.2 We observed that though till the year 2003-04, Tea Board released 
49 per cent  of the annual expenditure of these research organisations as 
envisaged, from 2004-05 onwards, the percentage share of GOI increased 
to 80 per cent  as these organisations were not able to meet their own 
expenses. On the other hand, a huge amount i.e., `5.86 crore towards 
subscription from member tea gardens was lying outstanding in respect of 
TRA during 2002-03 to 2008-09. Outstanding subscriptions in respect of 
UPASI-TRF were not furnished. This led to increased dependence on 
Government of India funding.
The Ministry stated that both Tea Board and TRA have been continuously 
pursuing this issue of outstanding subscription with the Industry and there 
has been some improvement as compared to earlier years.  
Absence of 
controls to 
evaluate and 
monitor research 
activities
7.3.3 We observed that no mechanism was put in place by the Board to 
monitor and evaluate the research projects undertaken by them. These 
oganisations undertook 34 projects from 1997 to 2009 at an expenditure 
of `22.52 crore and completed 19 projects. We reviewed 10 (50 per cent)
projects costing `7.09 crore and observed that: 
x In four projects, technologies were not commercialised for end use of 
the industry, though developed.
x In the remaining six projects, no technology was developed.
x Tea Board had no information regarding the number of research 
papers published, their impact factor, patents filed and granted and 
technologies developed, transferred and commercialised etc., 
despite instructions of the Ministry to monitor and evaluate research 
activities of TRA and UPASI-TRF. 
During the Exit Conference, Ministry/Tea Board agreed that a strict control 
needs to be put in place for monitoring and evaluating the performance of 
these research oganisations, so as to make them accountable for the 
grants provided by the Ministry. 
Information
Transparency-
Development of IT 
Portal
7.4 Tea Board undertook development of IT framework to facilitate 
consolidation and dissemination of information globally. The plan laid 
down a specific programme for setting up an Indian Tea Portal on the 
World Wide Web with the following three-fold objectives: 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      57
x Disseminating information about Indian Tea to the industry, both in 
India and abroad. 
x Assisting various tea auction centers in their initiatives to create an 
efficient market place for trading Indian tea, and 
x Generating awareness of information technology in areas that are 
primarily dependent on tea industry. 
To fulfill the above objectives, the Ministry approved a research project 
titled ‘Supply, installation and implementation of the IT based Information 
Dissemination Plan’ at a cost of `23.01 crore in July 2003. While conveying 
the approval, the Ministry had categorically directed that the Government/ 
Tea Board would not bear any recurring expenditure after 2004-05 and 
that the same should be borne by the tea industry from the year 2005-06 
onwards.  In November 2002, Tea Board awarded, the work for ‘Supply, 
Installation and Implementation of an Electronic Commerce Solution’ to 
IBM India Limited. The scope of work included providing technical 
architectural design, business requirement specifications (BRS) and 
detailed system design and install, commission and execute testing plan to 
meet the defined business requirements and the system functionality. 
However, the project could not be completed and after incurring an 
expenditure of `17.26 crore, Tea Board awarded the work to another 
vendor i.e., Information Technology arm of National Stock Exchange 
(NSE.IT) in September 2007 at a cost of `9.35 crore. Tea Board intimated 
during the exit conference in October 2009 that the newly developed 
software was functional. 
Deficiencies in 
planning of the 
project
7.4.1  In this regard, we observed that the planning for the project and its 
execution was deficient  as discussed below: 
x The Ministry accorded approval to the project categorically stating 
that Tea Board would not bear any recurring expenditure after 
2004-05 and that the same should be borne by the tea industry 
from the year 2005-06 onwards. We, however, observed that Tea 
Board took up the project without any commitment from the 
industry and incurred recurring expenditure of `6.71 crore during 
2003-04 to 2007-08, which was `2.40 crore in excess of the 
sanctioned funds of `4.31 crore. The Ministry stated that the Board 
could not pass on the burden of sharing the revenue expenditure 
from third year onwards to the Industry, as the e-auction system 
was not fully functional at that time and could not be handed over 
to them. We further observed that the Tea Board awarded a 
contract for a new IT Portal to NSE.IT, again without obtaining 
formal commitment from the industry to take responsibility of 
financing recurring expenditure after a specified period. There were 
gaps between the business requirements and the system 
functionality, as the BRS prepared by IBM was not comprehensive. 
As such, the desired software could not be developed and the 
project could not be implemented. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      58
x In the absence of a penalty clause in the agreement, the Board 
could not impose penalty on IBM and had to bear losses as 
discussed in Para below.
Deficiencies in 
execution of the 
project
7.4.2   The Board incurred `10.55 crore for capital items and `6.71 crore 
for recurring expenditure from November 2002 to March 2008. The 
implementation of the software had two components. In the first part, 
separate contracts for Internet housing and communication services, 
system integration and operation management and IT Portal support 
services etc., were awarded at a cost of `9.35 crore. The second 
component comprised of procurement of servers and other related 
hardware, 265 PCs and 480 laptops at an estimated cost of `6.87 crore. In 
this regard we observed the following : 
x An amount of `6.71 crore towards recurring expenditure was 
rendered unfruitful as services contracts for these services were 
terminated.  Hardware worth `2.16 crore was disposed off at a loss 
of `0.43 crore.
x The laptops and PCs procured for Auction Centers remained idle 
since 2003, blocking an expenditure of `4.71 crore. In order to 
make these compatible in the new environment, Board further 
needs to upgrade RAM of these laptops and PCs from 256 MB to 
512 MB, which would require additional expenditure.  
The Ministry agreed and stated in October 2009 that the Board had taken 
all possible steps to protect the investments made in the project, but it 
was not a cost effective solution to use the hardware procured earlier and 
thus, it was decided to dispose of the same. 
Non-updation of 
Tea Statistics 
7.5 We observed that the statistics of the Tea Board were published up to 
2005-06. The statistics were posted on the web site of the Tea Board only 
up to 2003-04. Thus, late publication of the statistics resulted in poor 
dissemination of data to the tea industry.
Despite incurring an expenditure of `26.61 crore on development of IT 
Portal, Tea Board was unable to maintain the website with updated data 
on tea statistics.
Our
Recommendations 
and response of 
Tea Board
7.6 We recommended in November 2009 that Tea Board may provide 
adequate scientific manpower and other resources for Tea Research, while 
ensuring effectiveness in terms of papers published along with Impact 
Factor of the papers and technology developed/ transferred 
/commercialised and patented. We also recommended that Tea Board may 
evolve an effective mechanism to ensure accountability of the money 
spent by external research entities like UPASI and TRA and obtain formal 
commitment of the industry for fruitful/effective implementation and 
continuance of the e-commerce initiative of IT-portal.  
Tea Board accepted these recommendations and stated in October 2010 
that the following measures would be taken.
x Augmentation of equipment and development of infrastructural 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      59
facilities including establishment of Quality Control Laboratory and 
Training Centre.
x Strengthening of monitoring of the funds release and fund 
utilisation mechanism based on performance on a quarterly basis 
and evaluation of Annual Progress Report by Tea Research Liaison 
Committee formed by MOC&I once in a year. 
x Conducting mid-term scientific review by independent agencies like 
CSIR and ICAR and Performance Audit/Outcome Audit along with 
scientific evaluation in line with CSIR adopted system. 
x  Getting mandatory number of research papers to be published in 
peer reviewed journals with impact factors for each 
scientist/department/institute and encouraging Patenting 
(product/process) wherever applicable.
Tea Board proposed timeline for implementation by March 2012.
Conclusion 7.7 Research activities were not fruitful as neither any deliverables were 
transferred for the use of the tea industry nor were any patents filed due 
to inadequate monitoring and shortage of manpower and resources.  The 
outcome of the research activities was also not commensurate with the 
support provided to external entities i.e., UPASI-TRF and TRA. Tea Board 
despite having regulatory and development role, failed to bring tea 
industry along in implementation of e-commerce initiative of the IT Portal 
Project which impacted the success of its initiative and an expenditure of 
`7.14 crore on revenue/capital account was rendered unfruitful. Tea Board 
is yet to secure the financial commitment from the industry for operating 
IT Portal Project post implementation.  
We are of the view that proposed course of action on our 
recommendations for improving the results of research can be achieved 
only when the adequate scientific manpower and other resources for Tea 
Research along with effective monitoring system are ensured. Further 
success of IT portal project would depend on the ability of Tea Board to 
rope in Tea industries willing support.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      60
 Chapter 8 Marketing and Promotional Activities
Objective 6: Whether adequate and effective steps were undertaken for marketing 
and promotion of Indian Tea to improve its position in world as well as domestic 
market. 
International
market scenario  
8.1  The production and export share of major tea producing and 
exporting countries is given below:  
Table 12 – Production and Export share of major tea producing and exporting countries (%) 
1993 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009(E) 2010(E)
Produc-
tion
share 
Export
share  
Produc-
tion
share 
Export
share 
Produc-
tion
share 
Export
share 
Produc-
tion
share 
Export
share 
Produc-
tion
share 
Export
share 
Produc-
tion
share 
Export
share  
Produc-
tion
share 
Export
share 
China 23.50 17.42 27.12 18.28 28.72 18.12 30.06 18.37 32.54 17.93 34.55 19.14 33.69 17.45 
India 29.80 15.17 27.45 12.70 27.43 13.83 26.01 11.34 25.38 12.26 24.90 12.50 23.76 11.15 
Indo-
nesia  
5.35 10.72 4.53 6.53 4.10 6.03 3.62 5.31 3.56 5.81 3.47 5.83 3.18 5.03 
Kenya  8.27 16.30 9.53 21.64 8.68 19.74 9.75 21.81 8.95 23.15 7.99 21.64 9.81 25.44 
Sri
Lanka
9.14 18.16 9.20 19.06 8.68 19.91 8.03 18.68 8.25 18.04 7.37 17.68 8.10 17.23 
Source: Tea Statistics 
In the world market, India, China, Sri Lanka, Kenya and Indonesia are 
major producers as well as exporters of tea. From the table it can be seen 
that:
x India’s production share has declined from 29.80 per cent in 1993 to 
23.76 per cent in 2010 while China’s production share has increased 
from 23.50 per cent in 1993 to 33.69 per cent in 2010. 
x India’s export share has declined from 15.17 per cent  in 1993 to 
11.15 per cent  in 2010 while Kenya’s export share has increased 
from 16.30 per cent in 1993 to 25.44 per cent in 2010.
Domestic market 
scenario  
8.2  The role of Tea Board in promoting Indian tea in domestic market is 
to increase consumption of tea in India and carrying out propaganda for 
increasing domestic consumption of tea.  
The trend of production, import and export of tea in India and 
consumption of tea in domestic market since the year 2003 is given in the 
table below: 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      61
million kgs
Table 13  – Production, import and export of tea in India and consumption of tea in domestic market 
Year  2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
Production  878 893 946 982 986 981 (E) 979 (E) 966 (E) 
Import 10 31 17 24 16 20 (E) 25(E) 20 (E) 
Total availability 888 924 963 1006 1002 1001 (E) 1004 
(E) 
986 (E) 
Exports 174 198 199 219 179 203  198 193 (E) 
Domestic consumption 714 735 757 771 786 802 819 837 
Total absorption 888 933 956 990 965 1005 1017 1030 
Source: Tea Board E-Estimated 
From the table, it can be seen that, while the production of tea in India 
has increased by 10 per cent  since 2003 to 2010, the domestic 
consumption has increased by 17 per cent  since 2003 to 2010. The 
exports have remained stagnant during this period.  
During 2002-09, the Board received `129.44 crore for Marketing and 
Promotion and disbursed `135.53 crore. We reviewed 46 per cent of total 
expenditure incurred on Marketing and Promotional Activities during 
2002-09. We studied documents relating to incentive/subsidy schemes, 
Medium Term Export Strategy, marketing and promotion through foreign 
offices and activities undertaken for domestic promotion. Our audit 
findings in this regard are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
Schemes for 
export, marketing 
and promotion 
8.3  Tea Board implemented the three schemes for marketing and 
promotion of tea during the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plans viz., 
Export Incentive Scheme, Transport Subsidy Scheme and Export 
Promotion Scheme. Audit findings on these schemes are discussed below: 
Export Incentive 
Scheme 
8.4  An Export Incentive Scheme for assistance to tea exporters towards 
meeting cost of handling, packaging, transport/freight charges and value 
addition with an outlay of `5.25 crore was approved by the Ministry as a 
one-time measure in January 2002. Conditions for grant of export 
incentive were as under. 
Terms and conditions of Export Incentive Scheme 
Tea Board was to monitor the progress of volume of export during the 
remaining period of the year 2001-02 and grant subsidy only when there 
was perceptible increase in quantity of tea exported during the year 2001-
02 as compared to the corresponding period of the year 2000-01. 
Deficient
implementation
of the scheme 
8.4.1  The Board released incentive of `3.60 crore to 68 exporters 
between January to March 2002. In this regard, we analysed the quantum 
of exports by these 68 applicants and observed that:
x Tea Board granted subsidy to 31 applicants despite the fact that their 
exports had declined in 2001-02 as compared to the year 2000-01.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      62
x The quantum of exports further declined In respect of these 31 
applicants post subsidy. 
x There was no quantifiable measure to define perceptible increase in 
the quantity of tea exported so as to decide on grant of subsidy. 
As such, there was no outcome of this expenditure.
Transport Subsidy 
Scheme 
8.5  The scope of Export Incentive Scheme was extended to Transport 
Subsidy Scheme implemented subsequently and the main features are 
given below.
Terms and conditions of Transport Subsidy Scheme 
xTea for exports from North East is sent to Kolkata and Haldia ports by 
road where it is directly containerised, customs cleared and exported 
via Inland Container Depot (ICD), Amingaon, Assam. The scheme 
proposed to compensate the exporters who had to bear extra cost for 
empty haulage of containers to Amingaon.   
xFinancial assistance by way of incentive towards export of tea through 
ICD, Amingaon was fixed at ` 1.00 per kg of tea with effect from January 
2002 and `1.50 per kg with effect from April 2006. 
Non achievement 
of the objectives 
of the scheme 
8.5.1  An amount of `23.05 crore was disbursed under the scheme during 
2002-03 to 2008-09 to 16 exporters. In this regard, we observed that:
x Though most of the companies have gardens in North East, the 
scheme benefited only 16 companies who availed of the subsidy 
during last seven years (2002-03 to 2008-09). The share of tea 
exported by these companies was only 12.40 per cent, 15.91 per cent
and 14.15 per cent  in the years 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 
respectively.  
x During 2006-09, though `12.38 crore was disbursed to these 16 
exporters, the quantity of export came down from 28.72 mkg in 
2006-07 and 27.33 mkg in 2007-08 to 26.47 mkg in 2008-09. 
x No benchmark in terms of quantity of export was defined for 
exporters to make them eligible for grant of subsidy. 
As such, Tea Board released subsidies despite decrease in exports by 
these applicants.  
Export Promotion 
Scheme
8.6  An amount of `0.57 crore was spent under this scheme during 2005-
09. Features of the scheme were: 
Terms and conditions of Export Promotion Scheme   
x The scheme was introduced in 2003 to help exporters exporting value-
added tea, boost exports and also make forays into new markets. 
x Assistance was provided to individual exporters for export promotion 
activities abroad for participation in trade fairs/exhibitions/buyer seller 
meets (BSM).  
x After participation in a particular fair/exhibition/BSM, Tea Board was 
required to submit an evaluation report indicating the outcome of the 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      63
53 Free on Board- A shipping term which indicates that the supplier pays the shipping costs (and usually also the 
insurance costs) from the point of manufacture to a specified destination, at which point the buyer takes 
responsibility. The value of export quantity of tea at the time of shipment at India is to be more than `15 crore. 
visit and the actual business transacted.  
x Exporting companies with f.o.b. 53 value of `15 crore were eligible under 
the scheme.
Failure to assess 
the outcome of 
support activities 
8.6.1  Of the 25 per cent (27 cases) of the total payment vouchers (110 
cases) called for audit review, Tea Board furnished only five case files 
relating to five fairs/exhibitions where 34 exporters participated.  
In this regard, we observed that: 
x None of the above participation was in Pakistan, Chile, Syria, Sudan or 
South Africa, though these were considered as the new markets for 
India to gain entry.
x Though India’s prime products such as Darjeeling, Assam and Nilgiri 
were displayed, no specific products of the participating exporters 
were displayed. Thus, the objective of participation of exporters in 
exploring individual products/brands was not achieved. 
x The reports submitted by the Board did not spell out the outcome of 
the fairs/exhibitions/ buyer-seller meets.  The reports were also silent 
about the actual business transacted. 
Thus, in the absence of benchmarks/quantifiable measure to assess the 
outcome of these support activities, the impact of the scheme was not 
verifiable.
The Ministry stated that it was difficult to identify quantifiable measures 
to assess the outcome of support activities under Marketing and 
Promotion Scheme. However, the fact remains that the Board was to 
monitor the progress of volume of export and grant subsidy only when 
there was perceptible increase in quantity of tea exported.
Medium Term 
Export Strategy 
8.7  The Medium Term Export Strategy which was based on the report of 
M/s Accenture (January 2002) laid down various recommendations which 
were initially agreed to by the Tea Board. A Steering Committee 
comprising industry representatives from North and South India as well as 
members from Tea Board was formed. A Programme Management Cell 
was set up along with a Secretariat to handle the working of the Steering 
Committee. 10 Task Forces were also formed to implement specific 
recommendations of the report.
We observed that these task forces eventually became defunct as Tea 
Board could not hire/provide manpower to support its functions. We also 
observed that though Tea Board initially accepted all the 
recommendations of the Medium Term Export Strategy, they did not 
implement all the recommendations fully. During the Exit Conference, the 
Ministry/Tea Board took a stand that formal rejection of some 
recommendations was not recorded but Tea Board is now looking 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      64
forward to take up the important issues flagged by the Accenture Report 
in a different manner. However, we observed that out of 11 major 
recommendations, Tea Board accepted 10 recommendations. A list 
containing the recommendations highlighted in the Medium Term Export 
Strategy and action taken by the Board against these recommendations 
are given in Annexure II.
Response of Tea Board to some of the important issues suggested in the  
Medium Term Export Strategy are discussed below.
Market Portfolio 
Diversification
8.8  The Medium Term Export Strategy identified Chile and Syria as 
lucrative markets for CTC tea, where India had almost no or insignificant 
share. To get opportunistic entry to these markets, Tea Board was to 
commission structured market research to determine consumer and 
importer preferences to formulate strategy in terms of target products, 
customer segments and geographic segments, contact key players and 
generate list of interested parties and generate list of interested tea 
importers/packers in UAE to evaluate Joint Venture (JV) opportunities for 
routing tea to Pakistan and to identify regulatory changes and, taxation 
incentives that could be made to encourage formation of JVs. 
In July 2002, Tea Board commissioned market research studies on Chile, 
Syria, UAE and Saudi Arabia. The market research brought out ‘Entry 
Plans’ to these countries and spelt out specific activities to be undertaken 
by Tea Board.
We observed that though market research was conducted and ‘Entry 
Plans’ made, Board did not launch any specific scheme to encourage 
exports to Chile and Syria. Moreover, there was no impact on the exports 
to these countries as can be seen from the table below:
(in thousand kgs)
Table 14 – Exports to Chile and Syria since 2003 
Name of the 
Country
2003 2004 2005 2006 200
7
2008 2009 2010 
(E)
Chile 49 0 11 0 0 0 3 12
Syria 84 2467 37 127 154 282 286 80
Source: Tea Statistics 
The Ministry stated that capturing new markets cannot be done in the 
short term and a long-term plan was required, since Chile is quite far 
geographically and is catered to by Argentinean tea. Tea Board has been 
participating in trade fairs in Chile with Indian tea exporters. Regarding 
Syria, the Ministry stated that Syria was still on the Tea Board radar and 
different ways of entering the market were being considered.   
 8.9 Further, to gain opportunistic entry in Pakistan market, Tea Board, 
through its Dubai office, was to generate a list of interested tea 
importers/packers in UAE to evaluate Joint Venture (JVs) opportunities for 
routing tea to Pakistan and identify regulatory changes and taxation 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      65
incentives which could encourage formation of JVs. We, however, 
observed that no scheme for providing financial incentives to encourage 
investments in JVs was formulated and no JVs had materialised till date.
The Ministry agreed that formation of Joint Ventures was one of the ways 
to facilitate market access provided both parties were interested in such a 
venture. Thus, neither has any long-term plan been implemented nor JVs 
formulated to diversify market portfolio of Indian tea. 
Activities towards 
Export Market 
Development
8.10  The Medium Term Export Strategy recommended devising an 
overall promotion strategy as well as market specific strategies. These 
promotions were needed to be tailored to the right target segment i.e., 
end-consumer or trade.  Tea Board had to undertake Logo Development 
and its administration and also develop an Exporter Rating System for 
rating of exporters. In this regard we observed the following. 
Failure to enhance 
the coverage of 
Indian Logo
8.10.1  To develop single Indian logo, Tea Board was to finalise logo rules, 
set criteria for quality control and hire an independent agency for quality 
monitoring and to commence trials with trade. Further, subsidiaries logos 
viz., Darjeeling, Nilgiri etc., were also to be developed.   
Based on the study of Sri Lankan logo, an international agency J. Walter 
Thompson undertook development of the India Tea Logo with the new 
bye-line ‘World’s Gold Standard’. The logo was launched on a trial basis in 
the Russian market for which benchmarking was done. Trials were 
conducted and companies adopted the logo for their Indian tea packets 
exported to Russia. We observed that, as the quantum of packet tea 
exported to Russia was much less as compared to bulk tea, very few 
packets were carrying the India Tea logo, the number further declining 
due to decline in exports to Russia. Despite being introduced in 2002, 
India Tea Logo is yet to be used (February 2010) for 21 major markets 
except Russia, where India exports tea.  
The Ministry replied that the system in place domestically for grant of 
permission for use of all logos is being reviewed and revamped along with 
implementation of their respective administrative systems. 
Failure to 
implement
Exporter Rating 
System
8.10.2   The Medium Term Export Strategy recommended establishing an 
Exporter Rating System to provide transparency and guarantee exporter 
reliability, to help build credibility of the Indian exporters by encouraging 
better exporters to improve service levels. 
Indian Tea logos 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      66
We observed that though the Exporters’ Rating System was introduced in 
September 2002, the level of response was inadequate. Initially over 80 
exporters signed up but most companies backed out since they felt that if 
they did not get good rating, it would affect their export prospects.  
Unless Tea Board takes adequate measures to ensure this rating system is 
accepted by the exporters, it cannot play its role of a catalyst in enhancing 
transparency and reliability of Indian Exporters in the International 
Market. 
Promotional 
activities through 
foreign offices 
8.10.3   Tea Board’s export promotion work is carried out from Head 
Office and through its foreign offices located at London, Moscow and 
Dubai. Tea Board incurred `11.56 crore during 2006-09 towards 
promotional activities through these offices. We analysed the expenditure 
incurred by these offices on various marketing and promotional activities 
such as market surveys, participation in buyer seller meets, fairs and 
exhibitions, promotional support/joint promotion, logo promotion/media 
publicity etc. The activity-wise expenditures of the three foreign offices is 
given below:
(`  in lakh)
Table 15 –  Expenditure of overseas offices on marketing and promotional activities 
Year Fair and 
exhibition 
Buyer-Seller 
Meet 
Promotional 
Support/ Joint 
Promotion 
Media publicity/ 
Logo Promotion 
Market
survey 
Other 
expenses* 
Total
expenditur
e
Moscow*
2007-08 25.46 8.99 3.59 0 0.17 123.51 161.72
2008-09 65.49 7.35 0.98 0 0 121.28 195.10
London 
2006-07 9.87 0.28 16.32 0 0 60.21 86.68
2007-08 0.16 1.98 0.94 0 0 25.74 28.82
2008-09 78.09 0 13.01 0.63 0.43 84.04 176.20
Dubai
2006-07 20.85 4.27 0 21.27 0.43 60.54 107.36
2007-08 37.61 3.51 0 15.5 1.28 142.72 200.62
2008-09 9.56 0.88 0.9 4.51 0 184.31 200.16
Total 247.09 27.26 35.74 41.91 2.31 802.35 1156.66
*Figures in respect of Moscow for the year 2006-07 not available 
*Salary, PR activities, Contribution to Tea Council, Wages, Loss in exchange, Bank charges and other miscellaneous expenses
In this regard, we observed that:
x Expenditure on Market Survey by three foreign offices during 2006-09 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      67
was insignificant, though market surveys help determine consumer 
and importer preferences and can be used for detailed strategy 
formulation.
x The activities of the above three offices for participation in buyer seller 
meet was insignificant.  
x Though a significant amount (21 per cent) was spent on participation 
in fairs and exhibitions by all the three offices during 2006-09, no 
quantifiable measures were set for assessing the outcome of the 
activity.
x No activity was conducted for logo promotion from Moscow and 
London office during this period. 
x Other expenses which were in nature of indirect expenses constituted 
major share of 69 per cent  of total expenditure impacting the 
effectiveness of outcome of marketing and promotional activities. 
Thus, the marketing and promotional activities of the foreign offices were 
mainly focused on attending fairs and exhibitions, for which Tea Board 
neither fixed any annual target for participation in the potential markets 
nor laid down any mechanism to measure impact of such participation. 
Given the negligible impact of these foreign offices of Tea Board, the 
Ministry should review whether this function could instead be performed 
through the Economic Wing in the Missions/Posts abroad. The Ministry 
did not furnish reply in this regard. 
Non assessment 
of impact of 
activities of Tea 
Councils
8.11  The Tea Board undertook generic promotion of tea through Tea 
Councils to increase overall consumption of tea and subscribed for 
membership of the tea councils of UK, Germany, Canada and USA. In this 
regard, we observed that: 
x Tea Board justified membership to these councils taking export figures 
to these countries as an important parameter.  However, despite 
spending `3.42 crore during 2005-09 as subscription, the quantum of 
tea exports to these countries fluctuated with marginal increase in 
some cases, as can be seen from the table below. The Ministry itself 
questioned (August 2006) the justification for continuing with these 
memberships.
(In thousand kgs)
Table 16  – Exports to countries where India subscribed as member to their Tea Councils 
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
(E) 
Canada 1233 1497 1170 1611 1131 1041 1517 2440 2120
Germany 5002 5116 5222 4846 4364 5833 4329 4001 4390
UK 20912 19904 19787 21356 23210 17876 19298 16720 14821
USA 7361 8693 7781 9077 8536 9550 9547 9210 10320
x Tea Board acknowledged that generic promotion was slowly becoming 
a weak platform and there was a need to shift focus to promotion of 
original brands. We observed that the issue was not yet taken up with 
other councils. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      68
54 The contractor who was given the contract of running the Tea Centre 
x The Board did not furnish information on the nature of the 
promotional campaign activities or any other campaign undertaken by 
the councils for the last three years.  The Board also did not assess the 
impact of these activities on Indian Tea.   
The Ministry informed in October 2009 that the utility of the Tea Councils 
was undergoing review. Tea Board had resigned from the Canadian Tea 
Council and also reviewing the role of the UK Tea Council.   
Domestic
promotion - 
Formal review on 
effectiveness of 
Domestic Media 
Campaign not 
conducted
8.12  The activities of Tea Board under domestic promotion mainly 
include media campaign and domestic fair and exhibitions. Tea Board 
incurred an expenditure of `36.35 crore on these activities during 2005-
09, of which   an expenditure of `28.07 crore was incurred on domestic 
generic campaign of tea.  We examined expenditure of `17.33 crore 
incurred on two campaigns viz., Domestic Generic Campaign through 
electronic media to M/s. Ogilvy & Mather ( `13.06 crore) in March 2006 
and ‘Publicity and promotional work of Darjeeling, Assam and Nilgiri tea 
along with publications in reputed dailies and magazines i.e., print media 
to M/s. J Walter Thompson, Kolkata for a period of three years ( `4.27 
crore) in June 2006.
In this regard, we observed that: 
x Tea Board did not fix any criteria / benchmark to evaluate its efforts 
towards domestic promotion. 
x No formal review of the effectiveness of the print and electronic 
media campaign was conducted by the Board.  
x The telecast was campaigned in the TV channels such as Star One-
Nach Baliye, ESPN/Star Sports and Aaj Tak.  However, the Board did 
not intimate any plan which recommended a particular bouquet of 
channels in preference to others for an effective media campaign. 
During Exit Conference, the Ministry/Tea Board agreed that a formal 
review on effectiveness of Media Campaign was necessary. 
Poor performance 
of Tea Centre, 
Mumbai
8.13  Apart from the regular functions of a branch office the Mumbai 
Office of Tea Board runs a Tea Centre where tea and snacks are served. In 
this regard, we observed that: 
x No commercial benefit could be gained from the Tea Centre during 
July 2002 to May 2007 as Tea Board earned an amount of `81.6 lakh 
from M/s Basu Media
54 and spent an amount of `3 crore towards 
development grant to the building authority, apart from `16.37 lakh 
under non-plan expenditure.
x The Tea Centre was set up to promote Indian tea in the domestic 
market by popularising speciality Indian tea. We observed that though 
tea of different types viz. Darjeeling, Assam and Nilgiri were served,  
specialty teas such as White tea, Yellow tea, Compressed tea, Puer 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      69
tea, Organic Tea, Decaffeinated tea, Flavoured Tea, Spiced Tea, Iced 
Tea etc did not form part of the menu.   
x No expenditure was incurred on plan activities such as participation in 
fair/exhibitions and domestic market survey for tea promotion. 
x The Board also did not review the performance of the Centre for the 
last three years, though business review committee meetings were to 
be held twelve times during the above period. 
The Ministry stated that promotional activities of Mumbai office like 
participation in exhibitions was largely dependent on fund availability. 
Our
Recommendations
and response of 
Tea Board 
8.14 We recommended in November 2009 that Tea Board may fix 
quantifiable benchmarks for increase in exports for exporters to become 
eligible for any incentive/support and assess the impact/outcome of the 
support activities.  We also recommended that effective steps be taken to 
implement exporters rating system and frame logo rules to ensure that 
exporters adhere to set benchmarks in quality. The Board may evaluate 
the impact and effectiveness of all its marketing and promotion activities 
on tea promotion in international and domestic markets by fixing 
appropriate criteria/ benchmarks.
Tea Board agreed in December 2009 with the recommendations and 
proposed to put in place a mechanism by March 2012 to assess the impact 
of promotional support being provided. It further stated that logo usage 
and monitoring norms are being put in place and quality norms to 
accompany the logo would be finalised thereafter without indicating any 
time-line. Tea Board also agreed to review the effectiveness of various 
promotion activities including tea council and domestic promotion and 
take measures to streamline the activities by March 2012.
Conclusion  8.15 Market diversification efforts including exploring new markets 
through its overseas offices and other promotional activities have not 
yielded any effective results and exports have remained largely stagnant. 
The three schemes for promoting exports viz., Export Incentive Scheme, 
Transport Subsidy Scheme and Export Promotion Scheme had not made 
even marginal impact and benefitted only 11 per cent of total exporters. 
Domestic promotion where more than `36 crore were spent without 
specifying outcomes to be achieved, no formal evaluation of benefits 
derived was done.  Medium term export strategy covering introduction of 
Indian tea logo, exporter rating system and market portfolio 
diversification was also not implemented fully. Tea Board neither fixed 
any target/outcome in any schemes nor laid down any mechanism to 
measure impact of such schemes. As a result, India’s export share has 
declined from 15.17 per cent in 1993 to 11.15 per cent in 2010. 
We are of the view that Tea Board’s proposed course of action and 
timelines for improving the results of Marketing and promotional 
schemes can be achieved only when Tea Board is able to frame a long 
term strategic plan and detailed plan for marketing of Indian tea. The 
plans should clearly identify the weaknesses including those brought out 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      70
   
in our Report as well as the Medium Term Export Strategy and 
appropriately devise schemes and action plan with the proper 
involvement of all stakeholders.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      71
Chapter 9 Financial Management and Internal control 
Objective 7: Whether an effective financial management and internal control 
mechanism existed in Tea Board. 
Financial
management
9.1  During 2002-11 funds received by Tea Board and expenditure there 
against was as follows: 
(` in crore) 
Table 17 – Funds received* 
Year Plan Total
Plan
Non-Plan Total
Subsidy R&D Recovery of loan 
& interest/loan 
received from 
MOC&I 
2002-03 46.97 9.36 11.78 68.11 16.49 84.60
2003-04 30.99 14.70 10.59 56.28 15.50 71.78
2004-05 69.17 18.00 11.83 99.00 16.00 115.00
2005-06 82.88 18.38 11.37 112.63 17.15 129.78
2006-07 116.76 15.51 40.53 172.80 17.75 190.55
2007-08 96.42 14.00 22.41 132.83 18.75 151.58
2008-09 87.02 22.97 10.14 120.13 21.86 141.99
2009-10 86.51 27.32 14.20 128.03 22.22 150.25
2010-11 100.56 28.83 11.26 140.65 26.43 167.08
Total 717.28 169.07 144.11 1030.46 172.15 1202.61
(` in crore) 
Table 18 – Funds disbursed/expenditure incurred* 
Year Plan Total Plan Non-
Plan** 
Total
Subsidy R&D Loan disbursed 
2002-03 51.68 13.88 6.78 72.34 18.20 90.54
2003-04 31.68 15.81 7.01 54.50 17.67 72.17
2004-05 68.05 18.01 3.15 89.21 17.17 106.38
2005-06 76.35 17.12 0.70 94.17 19.54 113.71
2006-07 123.91 14.60 0.55 139.06 20.43 159.49
2007-08 89.06 11.83 0.25 101.14 20.16 121.30
2008-09 102.35 25.44 0.00 127.79 33.17 160.96
2009-10 85.62 27.24 0.00 112.86 43.96 156.82
2010-11 101.77*** 27.98*** 0.00 129.75*** 40.50*** 170.25
Total 730.47 171.91 18.44 920.82 230.80 1151.62
*Source – Annual Accounts of Tea Board  
** information furnished by the Tea Board. 
***Estimated and subject to finalization of accounts 
The observations on financial management, manpower management 
and internal audit are discussed in paragraphs given below. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      72
Need for review of 
rates of cess 
9.2  In terms of Section 25 of Tea Act, a cess is levied on all tea 
produced in India at rate not exceeding 50 paisa per kilogram. The cess 
as reduced after deducting the expenses of collection would be used for 
development of Tea and would be made over to the Tea Board as per 
Section 26 of the Act.  Analysis of year- wise revenue receipts on cess on 
tea exhibited in the Union Government Finance Accounts revealed the 
following:
Table 19 – Year-wise receipt and disbursement of cess 
Year Receipt of 
Cess on 
Tea* 
Amounts transferred to Tea Fund** 
Opening 
Balance
Receipt 
during the 
year
Disburse- 
ment during 
the year 
Closing 
Balance
2005-06 26.43 53.00 70.00 26.58 96.42
2006-07 37.40 96.42 0.00 32.68 63.74
2007-08 30.15 63.74 0.00 49.42 14.32
2008-09 32.14 14.32 0.00 4.06 10.26
2009-10 32.68 10.26 0.00 4.06 6.20
Total 158.80 70.00 116.80
(` in crore) 
 Source: *Statement 8 of Union Finance Accounts,  **Statement 13 of Union Finance 
Accounts  
During 2005-10, a total sum of `158.80 crore was collected as cess on all 
tea produced in India. However, only `70 crore was transferred to the 
Tea Fund during 2005-06. It was observed that there were no transfers 
made in lieu of cess collection on tea for the financial years 2006-07 to 
2009-10.  
The details of rates of cess imposed from time to time are shown below:
Table 20– Rates of cess imposed from time to time 
Date Rate of cess
From 10 June 1967 4 paisa per kg
From 27 November 
1975 
6 paisa per kg
From 11 August 1978 8 paisa per kg
From 15 August 1986 8 paisa for tea produced in hilly areas of Kurseong, 
Kalimpong and Darjeeling sub divisions 
15 paisa per kg on tea produced in other areas 
From 1 April 1997 till 
date 
12 paisa for tea produced in hilly areas of Kurseong, 
Kalimpong and Darjeeling sub divisions 
30 paisa per kg on tea produced in other areas 
As evident from the table above, the rates of cess have been revised at 
varying intervals ranging from nearly three years to more than 14 years.  
Since Tea Board had a resource constraint for the developmental 
activities as discussed in paragraph 4.7, rates of cess should be 
considered for revision by the Ministry at more regular intervals.  We 
further observed that the ceiling of cess at rate not exceeding 50 paisa 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      73
55  Simple interest @ 6 per cent on monthly closing balances. 
per kilogram was fixed way back in 1986. The Government may consider 
review of the ceiling so fixed.  
Ministry of Commerce stated in May 2011 that a proposal to increase 
the cess is under active consideration of the Government.  As regards 
increasing the ceiling of cess beyond 50 paisa per kg, It stated that since 
this would require amendment in the Tea Act with the approval of the 
Parliament, this would be considered at the time of amendments in the 
Act.
Diversion of Plan 
funds for Non-
Plan activities 
9.3 As per rule 10(6) of Delegation of Financial Power Rules (DFPRs), 
appropriation or re-appropriation from Plan head to Non-Plan head 
should be made only with the prior approval of Ministry of Finance. We
observed that during 2002-03 to 2007-08, Tea Board diverted a total 
amount of `48.10 crore from Plan to Non-Plan head and `32.18 crore 
from Non-Plan to Plan head. However, approval of the Ministry for such 
diversion was not placed on record. In the following instances, Plan 
funds were utilised for Non-Plan activities.
 (a)   Government of India approved creation of a Revolving Corpus by 
freezing the outstanding loan dues payable by Tea Board up to April 
1998. In December 2001, Government accorded approval to retain a 
sum of `43.96 crore in the corpus, which was otherwise payable to them 
by Tea Board. We observed that during the period 2002-08, the Board 
transferred `7.50 crore from Revolving Corpus (Plan Head) to Tea Board 
Tea Fund Account (TBTF) (Non-plan Head) and realised back `4.50 crore, 
leaving a balance of `3.00 crore yet to be transferred to Revolving 
Corpus. Tea Board/Ministry stated in October 2009 that the same was 
done to meet the day to day expenditure of the office.  
(b)   During 2003-08, a total sum of `13.77 crore was paid by the Board 
from its Research and Development Account to its Non-Plan account for 
meeting salary and allowances of personnel other than those involved in 
research and development. However, the said amount was not credited 
back to Research and Development Scheme. The Ministry did not furnish 
a specific reply.
Funds retained in 
current account 
resulting in loss of 
interest
9.4 Analysis of closing balance of  Revolving Corpus fund during the 
period 2002-08 revealed that yearly closing balance ranging from `3.51
crore to `19.08 crore were lying in the current account.  Further analysis 
of monthly closing balance revealed that due to retention of funds in the 
current account, the Board had borne loss of interest of `93.43 lakh
55
during the period from September 2005 to March 2008.
The Ministry stated in October 2009 that as government funding was 
stopped for new loan schemes, the available fund was retained for 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      74
56 License/registration fee earned from various regulatory activities 
fulfilling the committed payment of already sanctioned cases and also 
for repayment of government loan. However, the fact remains that 
retention of funds in current account resulted in loss of interest. 
Inadequate
generation of 
internal resources 
9.5  Government of India has, from time to time, taken steps such as 
forming of Revolving Corpus, so as to reduce the dependence of Tea 
Board on government grants and enhance the degree of self reliance. In 
November 2005, Ministry of Finance issued guidelines to all Ministries 
wherein, as a measure to reduce dependence of autonomous bodies on 
government budgetary support and on greater self-reliance, the grants 
were reduced by 10 per cent for the year 2006-07.
We observed that Tea Board largely depended on the funds released 
from the Ministry and their revenue
56 generation was only 1.76 per cent
of the total Non-Plan expenditure incurred during 2002-08. The 
percentage of revenue generation had reduced from 2.73 per cent  in 
2002-03 to 0.86 per cent in 2007-08.  
The Ministry stated that generation of external resources also included 
sale of tea by their own counters, miscellaneous receipt, and interest on 
advances etc. All taken together, Tea Board generates revenue more 
than the fixed target for Internal and Extra-budgetary Resources. 
However, the fact remains that sale price of tea cannot be reflected 
without taking into account the purchase cost of the tea sold. Further, 
the interest earned by Tea Board was on grants given by the 
government.
Weaknesses in 
Internal Audit  
9.6  Internal Audit is conducted to ascertain how far the rules and 
regulations, systems and procedures and instructions issued by the top 
management in accounting, financial and administrative matters are 
being followed in the organisation. It is the primary responsibility of the 
management to install an effective internal audit system and take 
prompt corrective action in respect of the deficiencies in its working as 
pointed out by such audit. In this regard, we observed that: 
x Eight personnel were engaged for conducting Internal Audit in 2004-
05, which was reduced to six in the year 2007-08.  
x In spite of staff available for conducting Internal Audit, no Internal 
Audit was conducted in Tea Board during 2005-06, 2006-07 and 
2007-08. Further, only two units were audited in the year 2004-05 
out of 15 units. 
x Adequate attention was not paid to the findings of Internal Audit as 
Tea Board, Coonoor did not comply with the observations raised by 
the Internal Audit during 2004-05 and did not furnish replies to 
observations issued earlier.  
x Tea Board could not furnish the number of old audit objections and 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      75
also the number of audit objections added/settled during the period 
2003-08.
x Tea Board did not prepare any manual detailing procedure for 
preparation of audit plan based on the risk assessment, 
prioritisation and fixing of periodicity for audit and processing of 
audit objections for guidance of the members of the staff 
conducting Internal Audit.
The Ministry stated that Chairman Tea Board had already approved 
revamping of Internal Audit and that Internal Audit of units would start 
covering every due office once in two years to begin with and shift to 
annual audit in due course. It stated that Chairman had approved 
preparation of an inventory of all Internal Audit objections and 
monitoring of their clearance through quarterly meetings. It also stated 
that approval has also been taken for preparation of Internal Audit 
Manual.
Manpower
Management
9.7 On the request of MOC&I, the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU), Ministry of 
Finance, conducted detailed study over the staff strength of Tea Board 
during April 2003 and assessed the manpower requirement of Tea Board 
in different categories of posts, on the existing level of workload. SIU, in 
its report of July 2003, recommended abolition of 355 posts and 
creation of 24 new posts, thereby reducing the staff strength of Tea 
Board to 623. Subsequently, in September 2009, Tea Board assessed 
requirement of 116 new posts (Technical 83 and Non-Technical 33) for 
Development Directorate and requested the Ministry for approval. 
Another proposal for creation of 22 posts of Factory Advisory Officers 
was sent by the Board in October 2009 to the Ministry. 
In this regard, we observed that, against 116 new posts, the Ministry 
approved only one post. The Ministry was yet to approve creation of 
posts of Factory Advisory Officers.
Inadequate
monitoring
9.8 During February 2002 to December 2007, Board meetings were 
conducted on 24 occasions as required. In this regard, we observed that 
in thirteen meetings (48 per cent ) the presence of members was less 
than 50 per cent  of the total 31 members comprising the Board. The 
status of presence of the members in Board meeting indicated not only 
the lack of interest and commitment by Board members but also 
resulted in inadequate monitoring of activities of Tea Board by its Board.
The Ministry stated in October 2009 that the Administration has no 
scope to ensure presence of Board Members. It further stated that one 
probable reason of less percentage of attendance may be the late 
constitution of the Board. The Board, during the period April 2005 to 
March 2008 was constituted fully only after two and half years. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      76
Our
Recommendations 
and response of 
Tea Board 
9.9 We recommended in November 2009 that internal audit may be 
strengthened commensurate to the level of activities of the 
organisation. We also recommended that Tea Board address the issue of 
providing adequate and professionally qualified manpower to undertake 
its functions and responsibilities efficiently and effectively.  Tea Board 
accepted these recommendations in December 2009 and stated that 
they have taken steps to strengthen its Internal Audit.
Conclusion 9.10  Financial management and Internal controls in Tea Board were 
weak as Tea Board diverted funds from Plan to Non-Plan from time to 
time for meeting Non-Plan expenditure. Internal generation of funds 
was not adequate and Tea Board was fully dependent on the 
Government for support in respect of every activity despite its role of 
regulation and development of tea. Internal Audit was also not 
commensurate with the extent of activities undertaken by the Board.

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      77
Chapter 10 Final Responses of the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry
10.1 Tea Board of India was established in 1954 under Section 4 of the 
‘Tea Act, 1953’ as a statutory body under the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry (MOC&I). Tea Board was mandated to perform regulatory, 
developmental, research, marketing and promotional activities. We 
conducted a Performance Audit of Tea Board in view of declining 
productivity of tea in India, comparative decline in the prices of tea, 
increased cost of production and decline in India’s production and export 
share.
10.2   Our audit examination highlighted the following critical issues. 
Regulatory role 
Final Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry 
10.2.1 Even after more than five decades of its existence, Tea Board has 
failed to discharge even its basic regulatory role effectively. More than 
80 per cent of small growers in India continue to be outside the ambit of 
regulations by the Tea Board. System of inspection for regulating the 
activities of various stakeholders was weak and non-transparent. Tea 
Board was also not able to ensure submission of business information by 
stakeholders so as to exercise effective control on their activities. 
Tea Board needs to completely revamp its structure so as to exercise 
better regulatory control on the Tea industry in India.
The Ministry agreed with the observations of Audit as large extent of 
small growers had remained outside the purview of regulatory control. 
The Ministry felt that the major factors for the small growers to be 
outside the ambit of regulations were the increase in number of small 
tea-growers and inadequate land records available with them. On the 
directions of the Government, Tea Board had extended financial support 
to the State Governments of Assam, West Bengal and Tripura to conduct 
a base-line survey for complete enumeration of the small growers. While 
the survey in Assam and West Bengal had since been completed, it was 
under progress in Tripura. On completion of the surveys, the Board would 
be in a position to update the registration, provided the state 
Governments confirmed their land ownership. 
Further, manpower deployment of Tea Board was designed for carrying 
out regulatory functions of the Tea Board considering the large size of the 
big gardens.  With the increase number of small growers and limited 
scope for redeployment, creation of new posts had become a necessity. 
Tea Board had already submitted a proposal for establishing a separate 
cell for looking after the interests of small sector and the same was under 
active consideration of the Government.
Increasing
Productivity 
10.2.2 One of the most critical reasons for low productivity of Indian tea 
was that 57 per cent of the tea bushes were commercially unproductive.  

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      78
Final Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry
Tea Board’s efforts at replantation were insignificant both in terms of 
area covered as well financial support provided. The backlog for 
replanting up to 2008 would take 149 years to clear at the present pace 
of implementation. Yearly spending of merely around `19.97 crores 
during the last nine years was insignificant as compared to requirement 
of capital subsidy  (25 per cent) of `1522.80 crore for replantation alone. 
Continuously increasing commercially unproductive bushes is the most 
serious threat to the tea industry in the immediate future and 
appropriate and timely interventions are essential for arresting this 
increasing trend.  
The Ministry agreed with the observations of Audit and stated that the 
tea industry was shy of borrowing under the scheme and the loan off take 
over the last four years was only 
`36 crore as against the envisaged 
target of lending @ `150 crore per annum because of the long gestation 
period. The other issues of significance which also had a bearing on the 
decision of tea companies in taking up replanting was the non-availability 
of high yielding planting materials and labour apart from high unit cost.  
Government had directed TRA & UPASI to focus the R&D efforts in 
identifying the clones capable of yielding more than 5000 kgs. For 
addressing the problem of shortage of labour which was prevalent in the 
other plantation sectors, Ministry was in the process of formulation of 
some schemes on farm mechanisation on the lines of Coffee Board. 
The Ministry stated that some of issues which were hindering the 
progress would be taken up with the Planning Commission for the 
Twelfth Plan period. Some other suggestions on these issues would also 
be considered while formulating Twelfth Plan scheme. In the meantime, 
stakeholder consultation had begun for Twelfth Plan proposals and their 
views would also be incorporated.
Improving Quality 
Final Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry
10.2.3 Despite the schemes for improvement in quality being in 
operation for more than four years, there was no increase in production 
of orthodox tea.  For improving quality of tea and product mix, Tea Board 
needs to take very well structured measures supported by appropriate 
manpower and finance from the Government. 
At the instance of the Ministry, an evaluation of the ongoing scheme was 
carried out by Tea Board through an independent consultancy firm. The 
recommendations emerging from the study had been deliberated at 
length with the industry and Tea Board. Government had already 
enhanced the allocation for orthodox subsidy by 
`20 crore this year. It 
had been decided to factor in the recommendations while considering the 
scheme for continuation during the Twelfth Plan period. At that point of 
time the suggestions of the audit with regard to manpower and finance 
will also be given due consideration.
Reducing Cost 10.2.4 Tea Board needs to adopt an appropriate system of cost studies 
for identifying areas for cost reduction to ensure long term sustainability

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      79
Final Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry
for the tea industry. We are of the view that improving the productivity 
of manpower and appropriate technology intervention are essential for 
cost reduction. 
The Ministry agreed with the suggestions of Audit for the Tea Board to 
adopt an appropriate system of cost studies for identifying areas for cost 
reduction to ensure long term sustainability for the tea industry.  The 
Board would be asked to undertake such cost audit on a regular basis. 
Since the Indian tea plantations were bound by various legislations which 
mandated the owners of the tea gardens to take care of the welfare 
amenities of the workers which inevitably result in high cost of 
production,  the Government was contemplating to bring more schemes 
for the welfare of the garden workers. For technological intervention, the 
scheme such as farm mechanisation, new roller machines and packaging 
for value addition might be evolved after taking the views of the 
stakeholders.
Research 
Final Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry
10.2.5 Research activities were not fruitful as neither any deliverables 
were transferred for the use of the tea industry nor were any patents 
filed due to inadequate monitoring and shortage of manpower and 
resources.
Tea Board needs to ensure availability of adequate scientific manpower 
and other resources for fruitful Tea Research along with effective 
monitoring systems.  
The Ministry agreed with the observations of Audit and stated that the 
suggestions of Audit would be given due consideration while formulating 
the new R&D schemes for the Twelfth Plan period and  Tea Board had 
been already advised to disseminate the research findings to the tea 
industry.
Marketing and 
Promotion
Final Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry
10.2.6 In view of ineffective implementation and execution of schemes 
aimed at marketing and promotion of Indian tea in India and abroad, Tea 
Board needs to frame a long term strategic plan and detailed plans for 
marketing of Indian tea. The plans should clearly identify the weaknesses 
including those brought out in our Report as well as the Medium Term 
Export Strategy and appropriately devise schemes and action plans with 
the adequate involvement of all stakeholders. 
The Ministry agreed with the observations of Audit and stated that it was 
in the process of evolving a scheme that would give emphasis to value 
addition, brand promotion, market access and product mix for exports. A 
strategy paper in this regard was under preparation for impact of 
promotion in five countries. Ministry further stated that Tea Board would 
be advised to give due consideration while formulating the market 
promotion scheme for the ensuing Twelfth plan period.
10.3 Thus, Tea Board needs to carry out major structural and strategic 
changes in its policies and plans to perform its regulatory functions 
more efficiently and effectively. Considering the poor performance of 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      80
Final Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry 
Tea Board in enhancing productivity, improving quality and reducing 
cost of Indian tea, we are of the view that the Government needs to 
review the entire functioning of Tea Board and take a holistic view on 
its existence and role in the future. The Government may also consider 
redesigning its programmes, schemes, delivery mechanisms and 
allocate higher financial outlays to effectively address the problems 
that plague the tea industry in India.  
Ministry stated that suggestion made by Audit will be taken up in earnest 
spirit and modification will be brought in while finalising the Twelfth plan. 
Ministry further stated that it has already requested Indian Institute of 
Plantation Management, Bangalore and Central for Development Studies 
to provide their views on structural infirmities faced by the plantation 
industry including tea. The report was expected be a holistic exercise and 
effort would be made to enhance the outlay of Tea Board.
Overall Response of 
the Ministry of 
Commerce and 
Industry 
The Ministry stated that any major changes in the ongoing scheme 
might not be possible at this juncture as they were in the terminal year 
of Eleventh Five Year Plan.  Suggestions made by Audit would taken up 
in earnest spirit and modifications would be brought in while finalising 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan subject to the financial outlay of the 
Department of Commerce. 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      81
Chapter 11 Conclusion
Tea Board of India was set up in 1954. Yet, even after five decades of its existence, more than 
80 per cent small growers in India continue to be outside the ambit of Tea Board’s regulations. 
We found that the system of inspection for regulating the activities of various stakeholders was 
weak and non-transparent. Tea Board was also not able to ensure submission of business 
information by stakeholders so as to exercise effective control on their activities, nor was it able 
to collect Tea statistics in a timely manner. We found Tea Board ineffective in exercising its role 
as a regulator of tea in India. This had an adverse impact on the effectiveness of its functioning 
in other areas of development such as research, marketing and promotion of tea in India.
Ageing plantation is one of the primary reasons for declining productivity of tea cultivation in 
the country. The total area under commercially unproductive bushes has increased 
substantially. Therefore, programmes for replantation/replacement plantation, rejuvenation, 
pruning etc., are necessary for enhancing productivity. The targets for replanting/replacement 
planting are set very low and at current rate, it would take another 149 years to wipe off the 
backlog for replanting/replacement planting up to 2008.
Tea Board neither fixed any target/outcome in any of its subsidy schemes nor laid down any 
mechanism to measure impact of such schemes. There are deficiencies in implementation of 
various other activities aimed at increasing productivity. The capital investment and subsidy 
support for replantation is grossly inadequate as compared to the requirement. The continuous 
rise in commercially unproductive bushes is a serious threat and may pose major risk to the Tea 
industry in the immediate future unless appropriate and timely interventions are made for 
arresting this trend and unless efforts are made to explore areas for new plantations.
Indian tea realises low price as compared to its other competitors primarily due to its inferior 
quality and adverse product mix. Production of orthodox tea has not increased and actual 
production of orthodox tea has fallen substantially below the targets set. Tea Board failed to lay 
down enhancement in production of orthodox tea as a pre-requisite for eligibility of subsidy 
and allowed subsidy despite non-submission of proper documents/without proper verification 
of factory records.  
India has the highest cost of production amongst major tea-producing countries in the World 
and cost of sales are often higher than the auction realisation. Yet Tea Board did not prescribe  
regular cost studies to identify the components which would aid cost reductions. 
Research activities are not fruitful as neither any deliverables are transferred for the use of the 
tea industry nor are any patents filed. This is attributable to inadequate monitoring and 
shortage of manpower and resources.  Tea Board failed to work in consonance with the tea 
industry in implementation of e-commerce initiative of the IT Portal Project as well as for 
securing its financial commitment for operating IT Portal Project post-implementation.  
Market diversification efforts including exploring new markets through its overseas offices and 
other promotional activities have not yielded any effective results and exports have remained 
largely stagnant.  Government budgetary support is inadequate for effective discharge of 
functions of the Board.  Generation of resources from duty of excise as a cess on all tea 
produced in India is also not adequate. The rates of cess have been revised at varying intervals 
ranging from nearly three years to more than 14 years. The ceiling of cess at rate not exceeding 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      82
50 paisa per kilogram was fixed way back in 1986. Internal generation of funds was also not 
adequate.
Thus, Tea Board needs to carry out major structural and strategic changes in its policies and 
plans to perform its regulatory functions more efficiently and effectively. Considering the poor 
performance of Tea Board in enhancing productivity, improving quality and reducing cost of 
Indian tea, we are of the view that the Government needs to review the entire functioning of 
Tea Board and take a holistic view on its existence and role in the future. The Government may 
also consider redesigning its programmes, schemes, delivery mechanisms and allocate higher 
financial outlays to effectively address the problems that plague the tea industry in India. 
                    (GEETALI TARE) 
N e w  D e l h i         P r i n c i p a l  D i r e c t o r  o f  A u d i t ,  
D a t e d :             S c i e n t i f i c  D e p a r t m e n t s  
Countersigned 
New Delhi                       (VINOD RAI) 
Dated:                 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      83
Annexure I 
Sample reviewed under various schemes (Chapter 4, 5 & 6) 
Name of the scheme Tenth Five 
Year Plan 
(2002-07)
Eleventh Five 
Year Plan 
(2007-09)
Total Audit samples Percentage Remarks 
A. Productivity 
Tea Plantation Development Scheme (PDS) 
Replanting/Replacement
Planting 
Continued Discontinued 2565
payments 
701
payments 
27 per cent Out of total 15429 
ha, examination 
conducted on 2798 
ha   
Rejuvenation Continued Discontinued 1320
payments 
414
payments 
31 per cent Out of total 10903 
ha, examination 
conducted on 1391 
ha   
Irrigation Continued Continued
under PDS 
25
payments 
20
payments 
80 per cent For Kolkata and 
Coonoor, period 
covered 2002-07 
New Planting Continued Continued
under PDS 
1563
payments
(2002-07)
163 payments 10 per cent Out of total 8444 ha, 
examination
conducted on 286 ha 
during 2002-07 
Self Help Groups Continued Continued
under PDS 
37 SHGs 
(2002-07)
21 SHGs 57 per cent Period covered 
2002-07
Special Purpose Tea 
Fund 
-- Introduced in 
this Plan 
156
companies 
17 companies 10 per cent Out of total 7217 ha 
examination
conducted on 1303 
ha  during 2007-09  
Revolving Corpus Fund  
Loan Scheme Discontinued but loan 
account of defaulters are 
continued.
317 gardens 52 gardens 16 per cent 52 case files 
reviewed 
B. Quality 
Orthodox Subsidy Scheme 
Scheme started in 
November 2005 
Continued Payment was 
made up to 
Dec 2008
2747
manufacturers
200
manufacturers
7 per cent 200 case files 
reviewed. Overall 
sample 7 per cent.
Quality Up-gradation and Product Diversification (QUPDS) 
QUPDS Continued Continued 977
manufacturers
261
manufacturers
27 per cent Period covered 
2002-07
770
manufacturers
77
manufacturers
10 per cent Period covered 
2007-09
Crash Scheme 
One time scheme 
introduced in 2002
Continued Discontinued
and merged 
with QUPDS 
79
manufacturers
25
manufacturers
32 per cent --
Price Subsidy Scheme 
One time scheme 
introduced in 2002 
Continued Discontinued 21.33 crore 21.14 crore 99 per cent --

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      84
Name of the scheme Tenth Five 
Year Plan 
(2002-07)
Eleventh Five 
Year Plan 
(2007-09)
Total Audit samples Percentage Remarks 
C. Cost reduction 
Human Resource Development Scheme (HRDS) 
Training Continued Continued 0.91 crore 0.91 crore 100 per
cent
--
Welfare Continued Continued 11.16 crore 6.32 crore 57 per cent --

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      85
Annexure II 
Key elements of Medium Term Export Strategy and action taken by Tea Board (Paragraph number 8.7) 
Implementation Plan Action taken by Board
FRONT-END 
1.    Market Portfolio Diversification Accepted
CHILE, PAKISTAN & SYRIA 
Target Chile, Syria and Pakistan for opportunistic entry Market research was 
conducted in four markets 
(i.e. Syria, UAE, Saudi Arabia 
and Chile) to assess 
potentiality. The reports were 
disseminated amongst the 
industry for further follow-up 
action. 
Conduct structured market research and detailed strategy formulation for 
these markets 
Contact key players and generate list of interested parties. Share 
information with industries 
Tea Board to actively participate in discussions with buyers for initial 
contracts 
Contact key buyers in Pakistan, and generate list of interested parties
Industry associations to organise workshop inviting these buyers along with 
select Indian players 
Generate list of interested tea importers / packers in UAE to evaluate JV 
opportunities for routing teas to Pakistan 
Identify regulatory changes, taxation incentives that can be made to 
encourage formation of JVs 
2.    Export Market Development Accepted
(a) LOGO DEVELOPMENT & ADMINISTRATION
Define a task-force for promotion & marketing The Lion logo of Sri Lanka was 
studied by the Board and 
benchmarking was done for 
the Russian market. An 
attempt was made to 
implement Exporter Rating 
System. 
Hire an international agency to handle all promotion activities
Develop single Indian logo 
Finalise Logo rules in consultation with the industry
Study Sri Lankan Logo processes in detail
Initiate discussions with industry on logo - attributes, administration 
processes and finalise rules 
Define a sub-group responsible for quality control  - comprising industry 
experts
Set quality benchmarks specific to each market
Hire independent agency for quality monitoring
Commence trials with trade 
Set processes for monitoring promotion effectiveness
Develop subsidiary logos - Darjeeling, Nilgiri etc
Develop an Exporter Rating System for Exporters using the Indian logo
Design mechanism for rating exporters
Hire independent body to collate data and implement mechanism
Develop a formal trade feedback mechanism
Develop process for rewarding top exporters
Develop regular updation process 
Pilot system in test market and subsequently roll out to other markets
(b) CONSUMER PROMOTION & TRADE PROMOTION
Develop and plan campaign activities Major campaign in overseas 
countries could not be 
conducted due to paucity of 
funds. 
Pilot campaign in Russia, and subsequently roll-out in other markets
Conduct formal research to evaluate effectiveness
Target focused trade promotion activities in countries like UAE, UK, Iran

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      86
Implementation Plan Action taken by Board
(c) PRIVATE BRAND DEVELOPMENT 
Individual players to develop brands in international markets Draft scheme had been 
prepared. Government to assist in promotion of brands of individual players
Tea Board to formulate detailed rules for private brand assistance
Allocate fund to part subsidise promotion spends of individual players. 
Government to subsidise only actual direct spends on mass media 
promotion up to a cap of 20 per cent of total spends 
(d) MARKET RESEARCH 
Hire professional international agency to conduct research Independent agencies were 
hired to conduct market 
research. 
Commission market research in 1 market every 2 years on a rotational basis
(e) AGGREGATED MARKETING 
Industry to evaluate formation of single / multiple entities for aggregated 
marketing of tea 
No action taken.  
Evaluate formation along geographic groupings, product groupings, or 
ownership types 
Develop business case for organisation and operating strategy - roles, 
ownership structure, high-level financials 
3.     Information Transparency Accepted
Process review to establish required information flow to industry, Tea Board 
and buyers 
A project titled ‘Supply, 
installation and 
implementation of the IT 
based Information 
Dissemination Plan’ was 
implemented.  
Develop a comprehensive IT plan outlining application systems, data flow, 
h/w, communication  
Develop IT back-bone to facilitate collation and dissemination of 
information
Introduce mechanism for ensuring transparency of auction and private sale 
prices  
Auction price information sharing to be made mandatory
Introduce mechanism for monitoring and reporting private sale prices
4.     Value Addition Accepted
Identify list of interested parties in these markets for import of packet tea A list of interested parties 
wanting to import teas was 
prepared for circulating trade 
enquiries.
Remove import duties on import of packing material / machinery
South India clear teas to be utilised for the RTD segment
Aim to enter long-term relationships with bottling companies in USA and 
Japan - who control the instant tea segment 
5.      Niche Segments Accepted
Activities to target single-estate teas and organic tea segments aggressively Subsidy was given to 
encourage organic production 
and HACCAP certification. 
Conduct seminars for plantation owners to demonstrate high revenue 
opportunity in single-estate & organic exports 
Convert low realisation estates in Darjeeling into organic estates
Government to encourage organic tea production  by part subsidising 
conversion of traditional tea estates to organic 
Tea Board to generate list of niche tea importers in these markets in USA, 
Japan, UK and Germany 
Implement consumer activities in select stores - in-store promotions, tea 
tasting sessions 
Government to part subsidise up to a cap of 20 per cent of the total direct 
spend

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      87
Implementation Plan Action taken by Board
BACK-END
6.      Conversion of CTC to Orthodox Accepted
Identify players with dual capabilities and estimate additional capacity 
requirement 
Orthodox Subsidy scheme 
was introduced in 2005. 
Tea Board to design financial package to support conversion & commence 
disbursal of finances 
Establish mechanism for monitoring conversion
7.       Landed Cost Reduction Accepted
(a) LABOUR COST REDUCTION
Representations to the Government for review of existing Plantation Labour 
legislations to link wages to productivity 
No action was taken. 
Initiate discussions with labour unions to demonstrate cost imperative
Link wages to productivity - redefine productivity as a function of quality & 
quantity 
Evaluate feasibility of reducing permanent labour force
Estimate financial resources required to implement labour force cut
Implement labour force reduction 
Individual players to evaluate mechanised plucking
(b) OVERHEADS & FIELD INPUTS
Target reduction in estate overheads and HO expenses by 25 per cent in
FY02 and additional 15 per cent in FY-03 
No action was taken. 
Target reduction in field input procurement cost by 8% in FY-02 and 
additional 5 per cent in FY-03 
Pilot cost reduction  in select regions, set benchmarks and roll out process 
subsequently 
Create fund to part subsidise any expenses incurred in hiring professional 
assistance in this process 
8.      Quality Improvement Accepted
(a) BENCHMARKING OF BLENDS
Institutionalise process of tracking customer preferences Popular brands in Russia were 
benchmarked and standards 
developed for using Indian 
teas.   
Benchmark top 3 brands in each category in top 20 markets to ascertain 
blend profiles & packaging standards 
Formal collation of product and market feedback from top 5 importers in 
each market 
Sourcing of available market research & commissioning of new research 
every 2 years 
(b) TRAINING, R&D
Implement formal mechanism to synergise Government and industry R&D 
initiatives
Human Resource 
Development Scheme and 
Crash Scheme (for moving 
away from practice of 
reconditioning) were 
implemented. 
Implement ongoing training in plantation and garden practices
Create a task force of industry experts to implement training
Individual players in South India to move away from practice of 
reconditioning 
(c) PRE-SHIPMENT QUALITY CONTROL
Form a quality control committee with required legal authority No action was taken. 
Devise criteria for minimum quality of exports
Hire independent agency to set pre-shipment quality norms, and monitor 
shipments 

Report No. 10 of 2011-12 
                                                Role of Tea Board in Tea Development in India      88
Implementation Plan Action taken by Board
Make it mandatory for all exporters to obtain quality certification within the 
next 2 years 
(d) STORAGE OF SEASONAL TEAS
Individual exporters to examine vacuum packing for better storage of 
seasonal teas 
No action was taken. 
Industry players to evaluate option of warehousing near destination and 
estimate financial requirement 
(e) REPLANTING / REJUVENATION 
Focus on replanting The SPTF (Special Purpose Tea 
Fund) has been introduced 
with main focus on 
replantation.   
Government to reallocate present subsidies in new area development to 
replanting
Government to source funds from international agencies to fund replanting
Government to set fixed portion of 33AB exemption to replanting
Form a sub-group to coordinate implementation in this area
Source funds from international agencies to fund development of new 
clonals and replanting efforts 
9.      Program Management of Implementation Accepted
Define a program management cell to manage and monitor implementation 
process 
Task forces though 
introduced, became defunct 
as Tea Board could not 
hire/provide manpower to 
support its functions. 
Design and maintenance of a comprehensive monitoring mechanism
Coordinating effort amongst various task forces
Monthly status review with task forces; highlighting potential issues
Moderate mid-course corrections to recommendations, if any
10.      Sourcing of Funds Accepted
Define task force for sourcing funds for the industry No funds were mobilised
except UNDP funding for 
South India. 
Task force to be headed by Tea Board Chairman
Members to include representatives of ITA,UPASI, and other industry 
associations 
Identify areas for financing from multilateral institutions based on 
experience of other countries/industries 
Target areas for financing ; build strong business case
Tap multilateral international financial institutions; make presentations
11.      Reviewing Roles of the Tea Board Not accepted
Redesign structure of Tea Board based on revised priorities
Develop measurable key performance indicators for the top 3 levels of Tea 
Board management 
Ensure adequacy of controls and legal authority to enable execution
Redeployment of staff in HO 
Realign geographic spread of  foreign offices based on the revised focus 
markets
UAE office to exclusively focus on UAE and its re-export markets
Germany office can be redeployed 
UK office to handle all of Western Europe
Moscow office to be retained 
One office to focus on niche markets 