Performance Audit of AIBP a

Preface

his report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for

the year ended March 2008 containing the results of the

Performance Audit of the Implementation of the “Accelerated
Irrigation Benefits Programme” has been prepared for submission to
the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution.

The Performance Audit was conducted between May 2008 to
September 2008 through test-check of records of the Ministry of
Water Resources, CWC and Water Resources/Irrigation Departments
and Implementing agencies of the 26 State Governments. The period
covered under the audit was 2003-04 to 2007-08.



Performance Audit of AIBP a

Executive Summary

Why did the Government of India (Gol) launch the Accelerated
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP)?

additional Irrigation Potential (IP) and reduced allocation of funds by the States to

the irrigation sector, Gol launched the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
(AIBP) in 1996-97 for accelerating the implementation of large major and multi-purpose
irrigation projects which were beyond the resource capability of the States, and to
complete ongoing major and medium irrigation projects which were in an advanced stage
of completion. This was later extended to cover surface water Minor Irrigation (MI) projects
in Special Category (SC) States’, and such projects satisfying specified criteria in other
States.

[२ ००0० to a sudden decline during the VIII Plan in the rate of creation of

From 1996-97 to 2007-08, 253 major, medium and ERM’ projects and 6855 MI projects
were approved under AIBP; the Ultimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) of these projects was
10.49 million ha, which represented about 8 per cent of the country’s total UIP. During this
period, Gol provided funding of Rs. 26,719 crore for such projects — Rs. 16,720 crore in the
form of Central Loan Assistance (CLA) and Rs. 9,999 crore as grant.

Why did we decide to conduct a performance audit of AIBP now?

Our earlier audit report on AIBP (No. 15 of 2004) revealed that the progress in completion of
AIBP projects and creation of Irrigation Potential (IP) was very poor; many projects had not
been taken up or were abandoned mid-way; and there were numerous instances of cost
and time over-runs. Further, the programme had been repeatedly modified, resulting in
dilution of the original focus; many projects had been injudiciously selected (despite
elaborate guidelines), and there were several instances of diversion, parking and misuse of
funds, as well as poor contract management.

We decided to conduct a follow-up audit to assess whether the performance of AIBP had
improved, and also whether the key issues highlighted in our earlier report had been
appropriately addressed. Our audit, which was for the period 2003-04 to 2007-08, covered
70 major and medium irrigation projects and 346 MI projects in 26 States, and involved
field audit of the records of the Ministry of Water Resources, the Central Water
Commission, the Water Resources/ Irrigation Departments and implementing agencies of
the State Governments, and field inspections of the sampled projects.

1 States in the North Eastern Region (including Sikkim), Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh
? Extension, Renovation and Modernisation



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Executive How is this performance audit report organized?
Summary

Chapters 1 and 2 of this report provide background information on AIBP, our audit
approach, and the previous audit findings in brief. Chapter 3 to 8 provides overall audit
findings on different areas of interest from a national perspective, while Chapter 10
provides detailed audit findings relevant to individual States, with a separate section for
each State.

What did our performance audit reveal?

Repeated Modifications in AIBP Guidelines

The scope and coverage of AIBP, as well as funding pattern, were altered successively
through six sets of modifications to the AIBP guidelines between October 1996 and
December 2006. Reform measures introduced under AIBP, viz. the concept of reforming
States (which agreed to revise water rates to cover operation and maintenance charges),
and the “fast track” approach for speedy completion of projects, were not satisfactory, and
were subsequently abandoned. This trend of repeated modifications was clearly indicative
of continued lack of clarity in the focus and objectives of AIBP, which had been pointed out
in the earlier Audit Report.

AIBP's Role in Overall Creation and Utilisation of Irrigation Potential

Although AIBP was a significant factor in the reported creation of Irrigation Potential (IP) in
the major, medium, and ERM sector (especially since 2003-04), project-wise data regarding
actual utilization of potential reportedly created was not furnished either by the Ministry of
Water Resources (MoWR) or the Central Water Commission (CWC). Consequently, the
contribution of AIBP to IP which was actually utilized could not be ascertained in audit.

The role of AIBP in the Minor Irrigation (MI) sector is relatively small. However, the Ministry
did not maintain project-wise details of IP created and utilized under AIBP MI projects and
could only furnish lump sum figures of IP created and utilized on a year-wise and State-wise
basis. In the absence of detailed data, the authenticity of creation and utilization of
Irrigation Potential under individual AIBP MI projects could not be verified.

Poor Progress in Completion of Projects

The status of completion of projects taken up under AIBP continued to be poor. Of the 253
major, medium and ERM projects sanctioned under AIBP between October 1996 and
March 2008, only 100 projects were reported as completed. However, of the 70 major and
medium projects within our audit sample, while 21 projects were reported as completed,
12 of these “reportedly complete” projects were found to be actually incomplete or non-
commissioned. Most of the major and medium projects also suffered from cost and time
over-runs.



Performance Audit of AIBP a

As regards minor irrigation projects, while about 37 per cent of the projects sanctioned
under AIBP were reportedly complete, the authenticity of completion of individual MI
projects, as reported by the Ministry, could not be verified in the absence of detailed
project-wise data with the Ministry.

The major reasons for non-completion/ delayed completion of projects were non-
fulfilment of pre-requisites (acquisition of land, receipt of forest/ environmental and other
clearances), delayed construction of railway and highway crossings, and poor tendering
and contract management.

Short creation of Irrigation Potential/ Non-utilisation of created Irrigation Potential

Out of 41 major, 29 medium and 346 minor irrigation projects test-checked by Audit, the
targeted irrigation potential was not created in 25 major, 19 medium and 189 minor
irrigation projects; even the IP reported as created was not being utilized fully. In addition to
delayed work execution, one of the main reasons for short creation/ non-utilisation of IP
was due to splitting a single irrigation project into two or more projects for approval under
AIBP, or dividing a project into AIBP and non-AIBP components; even if the concerned AIBP
project was completed, irrigation potential was incapable of being actually utilized due to
non-completion / non-functional state of the linked projects.

Deficiencies in Planning and Approval of AIBP Projects

Preliminary reports, which form the first stage in the process for obtaining investment
clearance for the irrigation project from the Planning Commission, were deficiently
prepared in 11 out of 28 major/ medium projects approved during 2003-08; they were
prepared without survey and investigation (and were based exclusively on desk study) or
did not assess the anticipated benefits and expected outcomes.

Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) (which form the basis for techno-economic scrutiny and
approval of projects) in 14 out of 70 test-checked major/ medium projects were found to be
deficient in several aspects — incomplete meteorological and other data like soil surveys
and water logging; hydrological aspects like catchment area, monsoon rainfall and annual
yield; water availability and need in the command area, 100 years return flood period,
ground water potential etc. As regards minor irrigation projects, DPRs for 112 out of 364
test-checked minor irrigation projects were not prepared/ made available and the projects
were cleared on the basis of “concept papers” or simple project proposals.

The Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR), which is critical for assessing the economic viability of an
irrigation project through detailed assessment of incremental annual benefits and annual
costs, was either not assessed at all or overstated (through improper calculation of costs
like interest, depreciation, on-farm development cost, maintenance costs, as well as
benefits) in 28 major/ medium and 177 minor irrigation projects. Further, in 12 major/
medium and 119 minor irrigation projects, the proposed cropping pattern (which is critical
to determination of incremental benefits and BCR) were not adapted in consultation with

Executive
Summary



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Executive the State Agriculture Department and were not based on soil surveys of the command area,
Summary casting further doubts on the calculated BCR and the economic viability of projects
approved under AIBP.

Poor Project Execution

In addition to delays due to non-fulfilment of pre-requisites, one of the main deficiencies in
project execution was incorrect phasing of project implementation. Contrary to the
guidelines stipulating that the construction programme of various components of major
projects was to be appropriately planned on ayearly basis so as to start yielding phase-wise
benefits quickly, we found numerous instances of incorrect phasing of project components.
e.g. dam section incomplete, but main/ branch canals complete or nearly complete; main/
branch canals completed, but work of distributaries and water courses not taken up; main
and branch canals constructed in patches, with gaps (particularly in the initial reaches).
Consequently, despite incurring of substantial expenditure, the benefits of irrigation water
were not fully available to the targeted beneficiaries.

We also found that maintenance of assets created under AIBP were not being accorded due
priority, with 3 major, 3 medium and 37 minor irrigation projects having lost their capacity
due to silting, weed growth and structural erosion. Further, arrangements for handing over
completed projects to farmers/ water users had not been operationalised in 30 major/
medium and 194 minor irrigation projects.

Poor Financial Management

Between 75 to 85 per cent of the AIBP grants released during 2005-06 to 2007-08 were
released to just six States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, and Orissa). These states were thus, cornering major portion of AIBP grants
without corresponding performance in terms of project completion, thus providing an
incentive for inclusion of fresh AIBP projects driven by construction work.

We found that the majority of Gol sanctions for release of funds were issued at the fag end
of the financial year (last quarter/ March). Further, State Governments did not release the
Gol funds in entirety or delayed such release to the implementing agencies well beyond
the stipulated period of 15 days; short release of funds amounting to Rs 116 crore were
detected. There was a substantial “rush of expenditure” on AIBP projects in the last quarter/
month (March) of the financial year, which was also indicative of poor financial
management.

We also found that the Gol had failed to enforce the provisions of the AIBP guidelines for
converting the grant component into loan in cases of failure to complete the projects in
time in 7 major/ medium projects in Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan, and 18 minor
irrigation projects in Himachal Pradesh. In three States (Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and
Karnataka), the second installment for the State was irregularly released by the Gol before



Performance Audit of AIBP a

submission of the Utilisation Certificates (UCs) for the first installment. Further, audited
Statements of Expenditure in support of the UCs for each project were not being sent by 12
States’.

We found substantial diversion of funds and other financial irregularities in the AIBP
components of the Sardar Sarovar Project (SSP), Gujarat. The State Government overstated
expenditure incurred out of AIBP Central Loan Assistance during 2003-05 by Rs. 1158 crore.
Even the utilization certificates provided by the Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited
(SSNNL) for utilization of funds of Rs. 675.20 crore provided by Gol for irrigation benefits to
Drought Prone Areas (DPA) were irregular, as the branch canals covered under DPA were
already constructed or were under construction when the DPA component was
introduced. Our audit scrutiny also revealed other instances of diversion/ parking of funds
of Rs. 280 crore in 14 States’.

Poor Contractual Management

Our audit scrutiny revealed grant of undue benefits to contractors amounting to Rs. 186.89
crore in 14 States, as well as cases of unauthorised/ irregular expenditure of Rs. 403.83
crore in 17 States. In addition, other cases of irregular contractual management were also
detected in 12 major/ medium and 28 minor irrigation projects.

Monitoring and Evaluation

The Central Water Commission (CWC) was required to carry out monitoring visits to major/
medium projects at least twice a year. We found that the actual percentage of monitoring
visits ranged from 66 to 73 per cent during 2002-08. As regards monitoring of minor
irrigation projects, a “sample” of such project was to be checked by the CWC. However, we
found that CWC had made monitoring visits to only 57 minor irrigation projects in 10
States, which constituted a negligible proportion of the 8699 minor irrigation projects
sanctioned under AIBP. The monitoring of AIBP projects at the State and Project levels was
also deficient.

An evaluation study, covering AIBP projects in 28 States with data upto September 2004,
had been got conducted by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
(MOSPI); however, efforts for circulating the report of the study to the States/
implementing agencies for necessary remedial action had not been undertaken. Also,
Remote Sensing Technology (RST) had not been used in most States to monitor the
progress of AIBP Projects.

3 Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal

4 Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Nagaland, Orissa,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh

Executive
Summary



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Executive
Summary

What do we recommend?

1

There has been significant dilution in the focus and objectives of AIBP due to repeated
modifications (six sets of modifications since its inception in 1996-97) in the scope and
funding pattern of the scheme. Consequently, Gol must have a long-term perspective
of AIBP in the programme guidelines, and avoid repeated and piecemeal modifications
inanad hocmanner.

The Ministry must institute a system to collect authentic and validated data of not only
creation, but also utilisation of IP for AIBP projects in the major/medium/ ERM and MI
sector at least for a period of five years after the completion of the projects.

The role of AIBP in funding a large number of individual MI projects with miniscule |?
needs to be re-examined, particularly in view of the lack of monitoring and data
collection by both the Ministry and CWC.

MoWR must investigate all cases of incomplete/ non-commissioned projects reported
as complete to ensure that there is no diversion or misuse of funds released for these
projects. Appropriate action must also be taken against the authorities issuing such
false completion certificates.

Since AIBP is an Additional Central Assistance (ACA) programme, Gol may ensure
equitable distribution of AIBP funds to states based on predefined criteria e.g.
population dependent on agriculture, UIP yet to be fulfilled; and also past performance
incompletion/commissioning of projects and utilisation of targeted IP under AIBP.

In order encourage the defaulting State Governments to ensure timely completion of
projects, Gol must apply the provision for conversion of grant to loan in all cases of
serious slippages in completion schedule, as provided for inthe MoU.

Gol may recover the amounts diverted by the State Governments, if necessary, by
making deductions from the next instalment of Plan Assistance to the defaulting State
Governments.

The major reasons for non-completion of major/ medium/ ERM projects include (a)
non-acquisition of land; (b) delays in construction of railway/ highway crossings; (c)
improper synchronisation of project components (dealt with elsewhere in this Report),
and (d) delayed tendering and contract management. While we note that acquisition of
land is a complex and sensitive process, Gol funds should be released only after the
State Government certifies that the major portion of the land required for the project
(not just for the dam/ headworks but also for the canals) has already been acquired.
Further, future releases should be linked to progress in land acquisition.

Better co-ordination with railways and NHAI is required for quick completion of
crossings.

In case of irrigation projects which have been split into two or more AIBP projects or
which have been separated into AIBP and non-AIBP components, MoWR should ensure


10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Performance Audit of AIBP a

that linked components of AIBP projects are completed, so as to ensure the creation of
targeted IP under AIBP, and commissioning/utilisation thereof.

Survey and investigation may be ensured in respect of all preliminary reports for
investment clearance; these cannot be based only on desk study.

Formal DPRs may be insisted upon for all minor irrigation projects; concept papers or
equivalents should not be treated as sufficient.

AIBP guidelines and the Planning Commission's investments clearance lay great stress
on Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) so as to provide assurance regarding the economic viability
of the project. In this context, the MoWR must ensure that BCRs for all projects are
properly calculated, based on validated and verifiable data and assumptions relating to
costs, revenues, cropping patterns etc.

To tackle the problem of incorrect phasing of project implementation e.g. dam section
incomplete, but main and branch canals completed or nearly complete; main/ branch
canals completed, but work of distributaries/ water courses not taken up or at a very
preliminary stage; main/ branch canals constructed in patches, with gaps (particularly
in the initial stages), creation of irrigation potential should be recognized by
MoWR/CWC only where (a) there are no gaps in the main/ branch canals, and water is
capable of flowing right through the sections recognized for creation of IP; and (b) not
just the main/ branch canals, but also all associated minors and distributaries have
been completed.

In order to ensure that funds provided under AIBP do not go waste due to poor
maintenance of assets created under AIBP, MoWR may ensure that before approving a
project for AIBP funding, the State Government provides a formal undertaking to
ensure adequate resources for its maintenance for the next ten years. Further, MoWR/
CWC may consider instituting a system to assess the actual quality of maintenance of
Major/ Medium AIBP projects post-completion.

In order to maintain the sanctity of the budgeting process, MoF/MoWR must ensure
release of AIBP funds well in time, and notin the last quarter or in March.

Gol may take up the matter with the concerned State Governments to avoid short
release and delayed release of AIBP funds to the implementing agencies. Further, a
system should be put in place for monitoring releases on a project-wise basis.

The Ministry/ CWC should ensure that the stipulated monitoring visits twice a year to
all major and medium projects are carried out without fail. As regards minor irrigation
projects, a reasonable sample of projects should be inspected by the Ministry/ CWC; if
CWC is unable to carry out such inspections, the Ministry may consider hiring its own
consultants for such inspections.

Executive
Summary



= Irrigation
Benefits Programme (AIBP)

- An Overview

1.1 Irrigation

The Ultimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) of the country has been estimated by the Ministry of
Water Resources (MoWR) at 139.9 million hectare (ha)*. Against this, the Irrigation Potential
(IP) created till the end of the X Plan was estimated at 102.77 million ha, of which 87.23
million ha had reportedly been utilized. With an average irrigation intensity of 140 per cent,
the actual net irrigated area is estimated by the Planning Commission at around 62.31 million
ha, which is only 43 per cent of the net sown area of the country of 142 million ha.

Major, Medium and Minor Irrigation Projects

Major irrigation projects are those projects creating irrigation potential of more than
10,000 ha of Culturable Command Area (CCA). Medium irrigation projects involve
creation of irrigation potential of 2,000 to 10,000 ha of CCA, while minor irrigation (MI)

projects involve creation of irrigation potential of less than 2,000 haof CCA.

CCA is the area that can be reliably irrigated from a project and is fit for cultivation. In the
case of multiple cropping, the area is computed as many times as the number of crops
grown and irrigated in ayear.

1 Without inter-basin sharing of water



Ez Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 1 A profile of the UIF, and potential created and utilized is given below:

Accelerated
Irrigation

Benefits
Programme (In million ha) {In million ha)
(AIBP)
50.00
40.00
30.00
20.00
10.00
J है
jater 17.3
Major/ ९00 Major/ Minor Minor
Major/Medium Medium Medium Surface | Ground
64.05 58.47 Water Water
Mi Potential Created Mil Potential Utilised

(Source: XI Five Year Plan; includes anticipated potential created/ utilized for X Plan) |

The build-up of creation of irrigation potential during the various Plan periods is summarized below:

{In million ha)

| | | | . | . |

x} S| aI &| as ag

120.00 |
100.00
80.00
60.00
40.00
20.00
0.00

Pre-Pian | 1 Plan | MPlan | Ill Plan | IV Plan | VPlan | VIPlan | VII Plan VIII Pian| IX Plan | X Plan
(3990-99

हा? Utilised Ml Potential Created

(Source: XI Five Year Plan; includes anticipated potential created/ utilized for X Plan)



= Audit of AIBP

In numerical terms, 1887 major, medium, and ERM’ projects were taken up, of which 1410 Chapter - 1
projects were reported as completed’, as summarized below: Accelerated
Irrigation

—_—_—_—_—_——_ISX ovens
Programme

(AIBP)

Major
Medium

ERM

0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400

ll Projects Taken up Ml Projects Completed

[ (Source: Report ofthe Working Group on Water Resources forthe xiPlan) = Report of the Working Group on Water Resources for the XI Plan)

1.2 Initiation of AIBP

Under the Constitution, water (including irrigation) falls in the State list of subjects and the
powers of the Government of India (Gol) are limited to regulation and development of inter-
State rivers to the extent necessary in the public interest.
However, the rate of creation of additional irrigation potential, which was 2.04 million ha per
nt wan लत attmrwinane tana pam
down sharply to 1.03 million ha per annum during the VIII Plan. Responding to this sudden
decline in the rate of creation of irrigation potential as well as allocation of funds to the
irrigation sector in the States’ Annual Plans, the Gol launched the Accelerated Irrigation
Benefits Programme (AIBP) in 1996-97 as an Additional Central Assistance (ACA) programme
for accelerating the implementation of large major and multi-purpose irrigation projects
which were beyond the resource capability of the States, and to complete ongoing major and
medium irrigation projects which were in an advanced stage of completion. This was later
extended to cover surface water minor irrigation projects in Special Category (SC) States, and
such projects satisfying specified criteria in other States.

? ERM: Extension, Renovation and Modernisation | |
» This includes pre-Plan projects and projects in various Plan periods.
* States in the North Eastern Region (including Sikkim), Jammu & Kashmit, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh



Aeceleraved
irrigation
Benefits
Programme
89)

— Performance Aut of AIP

1.3 Scope and Coverage of AIBP

The scope and caverage of AIBR as well asthe terms of assistance, have undergone several
amendments rom time o time, From December 2006 onwards, AIBP'scaverage as follows

‘= Major, medium and ERM projects cleared by the Planning Commission, which
are in an advanced stage of construction, and not receiving any athe form of
financial assstance, and which can be completed in the next four financial
‘years, are covered. A “one for one” condition is stipulated, whereby fresh
projects in a state can be included under AIBP only on completion af ngoing
projects, with exceptions being made for projects in drought-prone and tibal
areas, districts identified under the Prime Minister's package for agrarian
aistress, and States with lower rigaion potential than the national average

‘= Surface minor irigation (m) projects in the Sc States and drought-prone KBK"
Districts of Orissa are fully covered, provided they have a Benefit Cost Ratio
(BCR) of mare than 1:1 and a development cost of ess than S.1.5 akty a. At
projets in other States serving tibal and drought areas could aso be covered
‘The minimum coverage under Ml schemes is 20 ha for individual schemey 50
ha for groupschemes in 5९ States, and Soha inothe States.

1.4 Fundi

व Pattern

‘The funding patter of projects under AIBP has also undergone several changes from time to
time, From December 2006 onwards, gratis provided a the rate of 90 per ent ofthe project
os for projects in Special Category States, XBK Districts and tribal, drought prone and flod
prone areas, while for ater projects, the grant is 25 per cent ofthe project cost. The grant is
released on a yearsvise basis, wih funding for subsequent years based on receipt of
ilisation Certiticates (७७) for past years. 90 per cent ofthe grant is released in advance
‘with the remaining 10 per cent on reimbursement basis.

1.5 Organisational Setup

‘The nodal ministy in the Gol for AIBP isthe Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR). A chart
depicting the role of various authorities atthe Central and State level in planning, funding.
‘and executing the programme sgiven below



Fg Audie of AIBP [माना
Organisational Setup for AIBP Shepter= 1

irigetion
[central tevel | ots
——— oe es
‘MoWR Ministry of Finance |
Btenringcommission | | uogsiwinisrytorovert| | Relese cf CLA and
11070 execution loan recovery
nd montorne seme of Grant
‘Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) EA Ee)
Seruty andCtevrance at Techical Aastancein approval
Mae Prjecs of Majr/elum Paes
Montoring of Poets
[statetevel |
gional CWE Ofices Seats irigton State Face
tsarnaton of Pree Department Department
broponisfowardes by | | Panning, mentoring | | Sudgetprovionfor
rojectieveuntsand | | andevdloston ot ॥०८० 8००५४)
mentoring poet bros alofnon find the
implementation implementing acy
{WC Project Level Units |_| Project iplementing
Senin ofthe proposals Agencies
‘eee rom esate seats irigion
Govermenteand "|_| Deprtments
Tmontorngat | | Corpor igs ad
roe 22202

1.6 Projects approved under AIBP

A summary of the major, medium and minor irigation projets approved under AIBP is given
below:

Table 1 - Number of AIBP Projects

Per
कक छ राह m S
खाया] a I 2
Tost 1 = 1 wes

‘list of Major. Medium and ERM Irigation Projects covered under AIBP is given in Annexure-1



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 1

Accelerated
Irrigation
Benefits
Programme

(AIBP)

1.7 Financial Outlay and Expenditure
Aprofile of funds released under AIBP and expenditure reported there against is given below:

Table 2 - Financial Outlay and Expenditure on AIBP (Amount in Rs. Crore)

1995-1996 to 2002-03 |

2003-04 to 2007-08

Total

(Source: Central releases (CLA and grant) are based on the records of the Ministry and CWC, while figures of States’
share and reported expenditure have been compiled from information provided by the State Governments to the
State Accountants General.

(Itmay be noted that details of releases of State Share and reported expenditure for all projects were
not provided to audit by the Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra, as they were
Teportedly not maintained). Details of state-wise releases and reported expenditure during 2003-08
aregivenin Annexure-Il.

AIBP was a significant source of funding for all major/ medium/ ERM projects. Out of the total
expenditure during 2002-07 on all major/ medium/ ERM projects of Rs. 66,449 crore, expenditure on
AIBP funded projects amounted to Rs. 27,914 crore (42 per cent) as shown below:

{Amount in Rs. Crore)

ee, - AIBP Funded

Projects

Non-AIBP
Funded Projects.



Audit Approach,
Previous Audit Findings
and Organisation of
Current Audit Findings

2.1 Audit Approach

2.1.1 Audit Objectives
The main objectives of the current performance audit were to ascertain whether:

m The programme was well-designed, and the investment focus and priorities
were well-defined and managed.

बा Projects taken up under 8187 were completed within the stipulated time and
cost, and the Irrigation Potential targeted under AIBP was actually created and
effectively utilised.

i] The process for planning and approval of new projects was adequate and
effective, and the AIBP guidelines were fully complied with.

हब... Adequate funds were released on time and were poperly utilised.

m The desired Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) was achieved, and the actual BCR was
properly evaluated and assessed.

i] Individual projects were executed in an economical, efficient, and effective
manner.

i] The mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of AIBP projects was adequate
and effective.



7 Performance Aut of AIP

2.12 AuditScopeand Sample

peat ‘The perimanc aut covered 26 sates forthe per tom 2003-041 200708, The audit
Peovous Audit sample covered 70 major medium and ERM iigation projects, and 346 minor rigtion
Fcings and pret these projects wee chosen using “Simple Random Sampling witout Replacement

Organisation

Auaie Findings

(saswoa)".Detallsof the audit sampleareindicatedin Annexure—I.

2.13 Auditcriteria
‘The main sources of auditeriteraor the performanceauditwere:
= ThealBPguidelines, asamended from timetoime:
Guidelines issued by CWC for preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPR):
= Instructions ssved by MowR and CWC; and
= _DPRsofthe est checked projects

2.1.4 Audit Methodology

‘The performance audit commenced with an entry conference withthe MoWR in May 2008,
‘wherein the audit methodology scope, objectives and criteria were explained. During the
meeting, the MoWR also made a presentation onthe status of AIBP.

Fleld auditofthe records ofthe Mow, CWC, and Water Resources rigation Departments and
Implementing agencies of the Sate Governments and field inspections (including
photographs) ofthe tstchecked projects were conducted between May 2008 and September
2008,

‘Thedralt audit report was issued tothe Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources in August 2008,
requesting for written responses/ comments within six weeks and also the holding ofan exit
conference 10 discuss the main audit findings (as per standard audit practice). However til
January 2010, despite the sue of written reindes tothe Ministry, no response was received
fom the ministry, nor could an exit conference be scheduled. Exit conferences to discuss State
specific findings were, however, held with 14 State Governments between September 2008
and ay 2008,

Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Ministry of Water

Resources, the Central Water Commission, and the Stale Governments and thet implementing
agencies during the course ofthe performance audit.



z ee |

2.2 Previous Audit Findings Chaptor-2
‘Au

‘ABP was previously reviewed in ausitand ndings reprtedthroughhe AGS Reper'NO. 15 Aggroach
of 2008 (Union Government = Performance appraisal) The main ndings ofthe eater audit Previous Aue
wereas folios Feaings and
Org

of Current

1 Therewereambigutesn the programme guidlines. andthe programme os 4,5! uranE

successively modified, resulting in relaxation of ritria for selection of projects,
and dilution ofthe original fous.

‘= AsofMarch 2003, only23 out ofthe 172 projects covered under the programme
had been completed: none of the 29 projects selected for completion through
the “fast tack” had been completed. of the 10 Inter-State projects, only one
project had been completed.

= Only28 percentof the envisage irrigation potential could beceated, and only
11 per cent could be utilized. The poor programme performance was also
reflected in high Development Cost per hectare, and low Benefit Cost Ratio
(003)

‘= Despite elaborate guidelines, selection of several projets was injudcious, and
pojects outside the scope ० AIBP and projets not ulling pre-requisites were
selected.

‘= Many approved projects had not been taken up by the State Governments or
‘were abandoned mid-way. There were also numerous instances of cst and ime
‘overruns. However, funds requirement was not the only reason for the
languishing of projects

= There were several instances of diversion, parking and misuse of funds, aswell
3s poor contract planning and management,

‘= Monitoring and evaluation of AIBP proectswas inadequate,

In the Action Taken Note {ATN) of 2008-09 on the findings ofthe previous Performance Audit
Report, the MaWR indicated that tha initiated the fllowing steps:

‘= Evaluation of AIBP had been stepped up, and the Planning Commission was
‘canrying out an evaluation ofthe programme.

‘= The monitoring mechanism of the CWC was now quite effective, as CWC was
‘monitoring the progres of Major and tedium irigation projects through actual
field visits, discussions with concerned State Government officers, and review of
the physical and financial reports rom the States,


HI 7०० Aust oP

Chapter - 2 = Tom December 2006, the MoUs with the State Governments contained physical
Audit targets of the potential created on a year wise basis. The pre-defined targets
Approach, ‘were being examined by the CWC during field visits, and while releasing

Previous Audit
Findings and

Installments of AIBP funds.

= Monitoring of utilization of IP was nat covered in the programme, as the
utilization did not start immediately in many projects, and usually took two to
three years, due to various reasons.

‘Audit Findings

= Thedelay in completion of projects was caused by various reasons which were
beyond the control f the project executing agency and the Central Government.

= There were builtin safeguards in the AIBP guidelines which ensured that ifthe
State Government faled to utilize central assistance along with the state share,
‘no further Central Assistance would bereleased tothe State Government.
However as detailed in this Performance Audit Report, most ofthe deficiencies pointed out in
the earlier Audit Report continued to persist, and AIBP had still not achieved its targeted
objective of accelerating completion of large itrigation projects and delivering the benefits of
irrigation water tothe farmers.

2.3 Organisation of Current Audit Findings
‘The findings from the current Performance Audit have been categorized into wo sections:

= Overall Audit Findings ~ In this section, different areas of interest have been
analysed from a nation-wide perspective, and only brief, summary information
on findings in different tates has been provided

= State-specitic findings In this section, detalled findings, amplifying the overall
‘audit findings, have been presented state-wise,



=

3.1, Successive Modifications in AIBP Guidelines

‘The cope and coverage of ABP had undergone numerous amendments fom ts inception in
‘October 1996 fo December 2006, as summarized below:

in AIBP Sco

Figure 2 - chang nd Coverage

papas ros oa 7 Pope na
21006702% 2 Se a
Sager atta eae
11777 aoe
; ees cee
meen pn ane 27208
17170: 11
atte eh
11151
=S
sees | Als seat "at
la FIPS tobe completed in 2 years O ile aks wang
Ju One-for-one condition specified for majored: Seasons
ete =
mln esa or

=

= oj: me and enn pecs wi Pani Grmmison cance which ween
77707 00007 70 07077:

1 lichnesinnon spelt अ002६४७९०एफाएलर(॥ 21095

{Seren asia mipofeobeo Rs athe

५ शपथ | |



नग्न Performance कै ता?
| । Chapter - 3 ‘Likewise, the funding pattern for projects under AIBP had also undergone numerous changes, as
Fronning summed below

1 Concept of forming.

rndog Str oroaced wh
tassogas | | | funn Stel (11017
gees || JES |p] |e eee Sa eee
bans ot Saou

base
3 1008 Ca for Fas ack
free Sts aK

‘Grant revised to 90% for

‘TribaVdrought prone and 5 fo be converted of
festa seer |G] 620
मे 10000 | | chica

न]
“substantial progres", “advanced 3396", and “beyond the resource capability of a State” the
(uidelines for selection of projects under AIBR as well as the successive modifications of AIBP
‘uidelines in 1997 and 1999 on the grounds of extending benefit to mare States, which resulted in
relaxation oferiteriaand dilution of ABP soriginal objectives

‘Thisttend of modifications to AIBP guidelines continued further upto December 2006, Further the XI
Plan confirmed thatthe results of eform measures intioduced under AIBP (suchas revision of water
rates to cover Operation and Maintenance charges) were not satisfactory, because ० the sluggish
efforts the State Governments to comply with the reform measures and also because the incentive
{o State Governments was not attractive enough fo cary out the reforms.

‘This trend of modifications to AIBP guidelines was clearly indicative of continued lack of clarity in
the focus and objectives of ABE which had been pointed outin the earlier Audit Report

Recommendation - 1

There has been significant dilution in the focus ai ves of AIBP due to
repeated modifications (six sets of modifications sine eption in 1996-97) in

the scope and funding pattern of the scheme. Consequently, Gol must have a long:
term perspe AIBP in the programme guidelines, and avoid repeated and
piecemeal modifications in an ad hoc manner



S use of १०० (I

३.2 Overview of Approval Process

‘The processes for approval of major/mediumy ERM projects and Ml projects under ABP are
‘depicted below, in ri:

Figur ‘and Approval of Major/ Medi

rein
Ep) oy bene eR or)
Trond Consdeaton and Sry of DPR
| ee ES
गा common | | cn 2/४३00 0008८ TAC ‘oft
= —— ८5 _
Tpprelas eed pect pars wih sonar
Santon by IBF Poet ‘hong ४०08 and es
cats 60 sent to Cte coer as
sen impleetston nev came

Figure 5 - Approval of AIBP

Tnvestment clearance ‘Submission of ‘Approval of ATBP

Projects

8०8 By Sate Level sa el
eae we sia टला |» Luton ee

3.3 Irregular Selection of MI Projects

‘Audit Scrutiny revealed that 13 out of $46 M1 projects in the audit sample were irregularly
selected, as detailed below:

= In Arunachal Pradesh, although the madtfication and improvement works to
exiting projects are not allowed as fesh AIBP projets, investment clearance
‘was given by Planning Commission’ MoWR to five such profects’ in two
divisions.

= Indizoram, despite the fact thatthe topographical and geographical condition
of the areas falling under the three divisions were similar, there was wide
variation the projected cost pet ha ofthe seven projects ofthe three divisions,
‘hich ranged between Rs.1.52 lah per ha 10 RS2.92 lakh per ha. Moreover,
sanctioning of projects with cost per ha ofmore than Rs. 1 lakh (revised to Rs.1.5
Takh in December 2006} was n contravention ofthe AIP guidelines

Chapter -3

Planning



III ००००० aust of ne

| Chapter - 3 =n Jammu & Kashmir, one scheme (Unis Ujfoo khul) which was already
Planning receiving finance ftom Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojna (RSVY) was iegularly
approved and funded under AIBE

Besides, 82 other schemes (no falling within the original audit sample) were also found tobe
‘regulary selected, as detailed below:

= InManipur, 1514 Projects ou of 211 Projects sanctioned during 2005-06,
‘which were shown tohave been completed in March 2007. wereagain included
inthe istof242 new projects sanctioned afresh 2007-08.

‘=n Uttarakhand, 15101 individual Schemes" were selected where the CCA was
less than 20 ha, and 50 group schemes within radius of 5 Km. were selected
\wherethe CCA wasless than $0 ha: this wasinvielation of LBP guidelines

= In Jammu & Kashmir, tvo schemes (Suet canal and Noorabad canal) which
‘were already receiving finance from NABARD were approved and funded under
AIP

3.4 Deficiencies in Preliminary Reports

The first stage in the process for obtaining investment clearance from the Planning
Commission is the preparation by the State Government of a preliminary report, based on.
‘which CWC gives in-principle consent for preparation ofa DPR. Thisreportshould be based on
survey and investigations and collection of information, and should cover the following
aspects:

‘= General data and planning

‘= Interstate and international aspects;

= Survey and investigations (including geological, seismic, foundation,
hydrological and meteorological investigations, and construction material
survey:

= Hysotogy

= Drinking water requirements;

= trigation planning and planning for other intended benefits: and
= Environmental and eclogical aspects

27772 ems tin ra arn
enon ou se engage a Rann Coon

ogee rays (०७७ hans a

हा ४ गण ०३७ भ १७७०७ ५०॥५

* afro 0882 0908 (Nth 01७९0 Cen aa ons 090: ७ KAD Sh

name w ac



= +०१०० १०० झा

However, out of 28 testchecked majormedium projects approved during 2003-08, audit
scrutiny revealed that preliminary reports were prepared without survey and investigation,
and were hence inadequate (being based exclusively on desk study) in respect of 7 major
projects and 1 medium project in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir and
Maharashtra (6 States). Further, in 3 major and 2 medium projects in Andhra Pradesh Bihar,
‘Maharashtra and Punjab (4 tates, the anticipated benefits and expected outcomes were not
assessed inthe preliminary eportDetals are given below:

‘Table 3 Projects taken up without Proper Preliminary Reports

Project | Proecte where Project Cost
11711 | (in crore)
(fin outcomes wre

Ere)

AndivaPradesh | Sian कु बल Supe m
Bihar >>» 108
tyne [Saree won enc | =
enn od Kathi | Nadel anna! | [==
wen | a ज्रिजरा-»>ाफाओ

पूनम गाना जाए जान

[PaguniomPoct | a | = |
Poni L = | = | =

UBD C Cres

जा | Hoc Banen Sen Let - 1 =

3.5 Deficient Detailed Project Reports

3.5.1 DPRsfor Major/ Medium Projects

॥ terms of the “Guideines for submission, appraisal and clearance of irigation and
‘Multipurpose Projects -2002" issued by the CWE, the DPRs should be prepared in accordance
‘with the applicable Indian Standard and guidelines isued by the MowR and CWC, and
should include the following broad aspects:

‘Table 4 Aspects tobe included in the Detailed Project Reports

5 |

a rit

Pyslalfstures Det ssoapial sos porenhy and onlay ० he bes, een and
comme area. vest आए 52 chavs

Inersateftematonal | Suickounies raved yer, dsibuo fcaleret ere, eed of

aspects) esafrienatoral aware

Surveys and Sievys a vesgtor ७४०७० are vas aeraves conse jy he

_lnwesigatons __inalctace cn eaten anypesf vars corpora othe recs

Chapter -3
Planning



III ००००० aust of ne

po
Ponne हल [Bet Dseton
yee) oe pe ty, ml apts erga
the eer ny pn eto
Benner du te a le
‘at hao
= (So SEES

sures cf venus, Wa aes, ove, sna 002९४ आ०-
Dats feat of anal risa anal cos fob rgaten acho ret

‘Benet — Coat Ratio and

111] congernt oh peel and ९७९७० of 30 a ral erofivanal ९७३४.
Environmental and >>

3600968 aspects

Financial resoures & | Asad छाए ७ पक ecu ofa Si, गए का पड sicher canal!
stim [08 30 contemplated ary an tad erates fo vais tems coveredunst

(86 1४8०६
Det ० ७५५९५ ha 1091 dal, ond दबा. hd cenol neasas, कद,
ulann cies ०४:

Det esting are ropes iaten ales, rg Comp ano, so su,
ae paring ०४.

Feed contol nd drainage

‘rignton planing

‘Audit scrutiny revealed that in 14 out of 7a test checked major and medium projects, the DPRS were
found tobe deicient asa number ofimportant aspects were issing/ neglected as detailed below:

‘Table 5 - Deficiencies in Detailed Project Reports

1... The pst pana not con at sare
fans suns hacks maps sa
fer necesay componerts ue slang,
Works, ries, ७४३७, os,

‘Siransagar Sage. Mat
339 Sagar, Tees Barage
Proet eur 0४०१
‘Shame ar Pao gator
seen

‘osha Paes, ajasan ae
‘West Bena Stas)

2... Maesobgealardoterdaa esol | Siarsogu Spe Sone | Arve Padeh, Be, Gujral,

suo, ec econ 88000 suey, | Cara edeisaon, Ween | Mararasha, Ur Pas,
एकता suys, walling. salty | KsiCanal Proje ard et erg 8 is
andcrarag 0७1 किए काका of | Muha Project Na
wks Macrmedhtwar, Sango

‘Branch Caral Pagan.

pong igen वाहक,

Mari arch som,

oasis Barage Pro,

Hanurata Inga Shere
and Patel gation Schone

S| Aspects बदन तप fe poe _| Sore Canleersaon, | har Janu &Kasir
hyslgyaspaiuchascicrant | Moderation Rank Coal] West Sagal (3 Ss)
आर, morscn al anual yeldetz, | Teast Barage Project,

Hanunaia Ingato Scheme
anda gation Schone



z= ‘Aspects he eet of 000 ८७४७४.
typeset, cal pst cst, nn
fac maters, he ested cos,
राह cos ao cate ne tape, cst.

Sone Canal eden,
Pigeon, Ma 3a Sa,
Teast Barage Prec.
Hanunata ingaon Serene

|

Chapter -3

a Planning

Star, Marat, Pasar
| West Bengal Sates)

fare gon et ‘Pato nigatonSetene
| Asesrnt ol wal avalbiy rds | Chanparat Wigan Poet | Assan, Bhar, Ut Paes &
18080 Command ve, ander | Wostr Kiana Po, | Wt Bongal(¢ Sas)
59508 188 ceprdatl yl. 00 years | provi हुआ try
‘atu ood prod, eeu भव potential, | of Hard ranch शा,
fe Teesa Barage Pres.

Hanaraia nian Scheme
dale igaton Scene

तु

३5.2. DPRsfor MI Projects
‘Aut scratiny of ३46 projets approved during 200308 revealed thatthe DPR were nat
prepared made available to audit andthe projects were cleared on the bats of Concept
Papers” or simple project proposals in 112 MI projects in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihat
‘WimachalPradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaye, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura States),

3.6 Wrong Computation of Benefit Cost Ratio

8०० 2 computation of BC Ratio

‘The Benefit Cost Ratio (BC Ratio) is one of ७
assessing the economic Vabilty ofthe project. For aniti
Benefits /Annual Cost,

most important aspects needed for
on project, BC Ratio = Annual

Annual Benefits: are computed by takingin to account the agriculture production in the
area to be irrigated under pre-projact conditions and agriculture production inthe area,

after completion oft

fon the estimated cost of the project (including the cost of
४६ depreciation ofthe project based on

Annual Cost: includes inte
land development), operation and maintenane
the estimated life of the project, maintenance of the head-works, depreciation of the
[pumping system and rising main (in liftcanal systems)



III ००००० aust of ne

| Chapter - 3 ‘Audit scrtiny of 41 Major 29 Mediumand 346 projects revealed that
Planning

= TheBC Ratios in 18 Major, 10 Medium. and 177 minor test-checked inigation
Projects were ether not assessed atthe time of preparation of DPR, or were not
assessed/ calculated correctly by taking into account the applied cost, value.
rates, interest, depreciation, charges etc. in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh Bihar Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Sikkim, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttaraktand and West Bengal (17 States

‘= 1n12Major/ Medium and 119 MH Projects, the proposed cropping pattems were
not adopted in consultation with the State Agriculture Department and were not
based on soil surveys of the command area in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
‘Manipur Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, 008 Pradesh and Utaraknand (14
States)

Details of audit observations on deficient and tregular calculation of BC Ratio are summarised
below:

‘able 6 - Instances of Deficient Calculation of BC Ratio

ste [Pr =
Anaen Alsen | Conair ws cn ne

fon [tom ae ey ma rena uu me a
co] Tioga enar pone DF bono
Nota nd Tava peated pono न सब पतन
‘Mizoram ar invostigalion ard also through State Agicullure Departmert, However,

thro was no docurartaon a prooased oping patios mae cepa
in consiton ih Autre parr or ar Sis ७७७७
topping ta, th proalin mara as ape nw 08.

Bihar | Westar Koi Carel | BOR was caida 2734 at psjecrg Khai roprotictan which was
Propet eval conan ४४७ was 1206 rove [038६ Kart op nce).
ujeat | Brad ‘Oran deveep cost was ol ended fo ealng BCR. हक,

8७ BOR of 2581 nasbasedon De og sina esto. 7308 0०७;
8 BOR 88368 one ७838 eet of Pe 19854 00% woudbe
0०७ ७#».

= कि या

Pj costo, 1:57 core Base one pet ot on conposn et
Fs: 4881 core, reac P costpc ta as Rs 081 ah pera

“hatband | Sous Reson हज | BOR O29 was कब; based one dia of Hazarbagh Dei [esaad
cf Chisels bso on Chats Dit 438, BCA wou e031

Tapkra Resevoir | Projected BR o 2887 was based on ०००७४ 00॥ 22a. The raved
Prost BCR, based one acl Preto 311 ha and cbr caret word
cuttoiy 02



= +०१०० १०० झा

CR at 1.35 par od sin, was negra ७ 170 0 natn
lan evcpor cos an cet aac marten adn be
en actu ef cata ह ए३9 816 (ibrar aren sane wou
२09७७ jin.

| ‘CR ०३ (as pe revised esi) was iniated rol rrr righ

‘erection nec mechanical ios, oases os ol euan
‘neal spremere aa, ng unssaing rest on ye
00919 an deel a
BCR was iio by १४ dg 1038 :00 waiarncs cats andl
‘evalment eos, arn es of ४३७१ ॥ 8७७93 wes, a
‘hein one cpr
Forte Sua ३४४०७, BOR calcined copoved by ONO was based on
the nie pect oes ard bene, nd oon he ALP components bre.
DRG wre a pada cons ० BR ara wae pa ware asin
inprenaton 608.

Inne case bano 6५8 ७ ie sawd by arm or riging 0७ fal was
nag asi, ota to BCR,

|| Tit sibsseneso pes wee undtatn wha aang BR.

Testowcad
TarkPooes

Waar

Sin

न]

(|

Survey and investigation may be ensured in respect of all preliminary reports for
investment clearance; these cannot be based only on desk study.

Formal DPRs may be insisted upon for all minor irrigation projects; concept papers
or equivalents shouldnatbe treatedas sufficient,

87 guidelines and the Planning Commission's investments clearance lay great
stress on Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) so as to provide assurance regarding the
‘economic viability of the project. In this context, the MoWR must ensure that BCRS
for all projects are properly calculated, based on validated and verifiable data and
assumptions relating to costs, revenues, cropping patterns etc

Chapter -3
Planning



|| Completion

4.1 Share of AIBP in Irrigation Potential
Out of the Ultimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) of the country of 139.9 million ha, AIBP projects
(excluding non-AIBP components of such projects) accounted for 10.49 million ha (8 per cent).
Analysis of UIP and IP creation for major, medium and ERM projects revealed the following:

m@ Out of total UIP of 58.47 million ha, targeted potential under AIBP was 9.65 million
ha (17 per cent), against which 4.90 million ha of Irrigation Potential (IP) was
teportedly created upto 2007-08.

m Outofthe 4.90 million ha
of IP reportedly created

under AIBP 2.16 million

ha (44 per cent) was \ = ha)
created during 1996-97
to 2002-03, while 2.74
million ha (56 per cent)
was created during
2003-04 to 2007-08.
A State-wise profile of reported
creation of IP under AIBP projects is

given in Chart 6; details of state-
wise reported creation are given in थक (10.3 Pradesh QB Rejasthan GH Gujarat
@® Bihar @® Karnataka @® Maharastra
Annexure -IV. @ Andhra Pradesh @ Others |



= Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 4 Clearly, AIBP was a significant factor in the reported creation of Irrigation Potential in the
Project major, medium and ERM sector, especially since 2003-04. However, project-wise data
Completion regarding actual utilisation of IP reportedly created was not furnished by either CWCor MoWR,

and was evidently not maintained. In the absence of such data, the contribution of AIBP to
irrigation potential which wasactually utilised could not be ascertained in audit.

In the Action Taken Report of 2008-09 on the previous audit report, the MoWR had stated that
monitoring of utilization of IP was not covered in the programme, as the utilization did not
Start immediately in many projects, and usually took two to three years, due to various
reasons. The current audit confirmed the continued lack of monitoring of utilization of IP by
the MoWR/CWC. It would, thus, appear that MoWR merely intended AIBP to fund large-scale
construction of works and structures without ensuring the benefit of irrigation water to the
farmers.

The role of AIBP in the Minor Irrigation (Ml) sector is relatively small. Analysis of UIP and IP
creation for MI projects revealed that:

m@ Outof the total UIP of the country of the MI sector of 81.43 million ha, 17.38 million
ha pertains to the surface water component, where AIBP is applicable. Of this UIP
of 17.38 million ha, the UIP of AIBP MI schemes was only 0.84 million ha (5 per
cent).

m Against the UIP of AIBP MI schemes of 8.36 lakh ha, 2.67 lakh ha of IP was
teportedly created from 1999-2000 to 2007-08.

m Of the above, 1.99 lakh ha of IP was reportedly created during 2003-08, and 1.23
lakh ha (62 per cent of IP created) reportedly utilized.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry did not maintain project-wise details of IP created
and utilised under AIBP MI projects; it could only furnish total IP created and utilised on a
year-wise and State-wise basis. In the absence of detailed data, the authenticity of creation/
utilisation of 1P under individual AIBP MI projects could not be verified. This compounds the
minuscule contribution of MI projects under AIBP to even the surface water component of the
entire MI sector in the country.



= Audit of AIBP a

4.2 Completion of Major, Medium and ERM Projects under AIBP Shapter - 4 [|

Project

4.2.1 — Overall Profile of Reported Completion of AIBP Major, Medium Completion

and ERM Projects

The earlier audit report (No. 15 of 2004) had highlighted the poor progress in completion of
major, medium and ERM AIBP projects. Only 23 out of 172 projects approved since 1996-97
had been completed; even out of these 23 projects, completion certificates were yet to be
issued for 10 projects. Further the concept of 'Fast Track Projects” introduced within AIBP in
February 2002 turned out to be a futile effort, as none of the 29 “Fast Track Projects” had been
completed.

Notwithstanding the numerous changes in scope, coverage, and terms of assistance under
AIBP the current audit revealed that the status of completion of projects taken up under AIBP
continued to be poor. Of the 253 major, medium and ERM projects sanctioned under AIBP
between October 1996 and March 2008, only 100 projects were reported as completed". An
age-wise profile of the 153 projects reported as ongoing, based on the year of inclusion under
AIBP is given below:

_— ———

an | (४
| iam

रे

@® Before 1999-2000 थक 2003-06 @ Maharashtra थक Andhra Pradesh सके O-ssa
@ 2000-03 @ 2006-08 © arms & Kasim Maya Pradesh QP 00०७

It may be noted that these five states, which had the maximum number of ongoing AIBP
projects, also received, along with Karnataka (except J&K), the vast majority of AIBP
grants during the period 2005-06 to 2007-08 as detailed in paragraph 7.1.

11 This should be read in the context of the audit findings that 12 out of 21 test-checked projects reported as complete, were, in reality, either | |
not completed or not commissioned.



नग्न Performance कै ता?

किया] = 4 4.2.2 Status of Completion of Test-checked Projects

Chap

| पा Audit scrtiny of वा Major and 29 Medium Inigation Project in 26 States revealed that 21
projects (12 Major and 9 medium projects representing 30 pe cen fhe total test-checked
projects were eprted ascompleted ether bythe State Govt or MoWR, However. fed aut
revealed that 12 projects out of these reportedly complete projects were actually
‘ncompletenon commissioned as detailed bein:

Table 7 Profile of Completed Projects in Audit Sample

Wsjor " 2 7
Wecium ७. | +$+ | 5
Toa 0 a @

Details of projects falling within the audit sample, which were found incomplete or non-
commissioned, are given below:

‘Table 8 - Details of MajouMedium Projects found incompletelnon- commissioned

nvaPraesh
1 | ignaeinor गहन
7
ech Pale
‘ane
| Santora | Onset mb amas Ste ont re ey
seat, | Si
विस | ath ateent tl cpse के. आता bye mat
hata
| पापा... | Tats tated orm tah
eee eee ee
Epes
Ker
+. | le Teo oe ent oak re argent angen coo
17777: ip tenia
Vaasa
| we The Hcg ec a 2000 0७०
Deri comme eaten eae oan
pe ee 4727 2:722"
हलक Tien dl le
17727: 77777 77724



| Audie of AIBP [नाना

७७ and कह Chapter - 4

es Proje State

3५5. Project
Punjab Completion
1. | Revogsngot फ७ 80॥ | Tn Sao Govern cece 8० oe conga es acompleson

Soo anal BOE) | cere mStar 2006 /0व ny. omer rea sore wer ae

fovag gas an gor js nares co Gate! wat go
{ros repr mre samp on ug 208. Apert pgs
2060 ne Wing Pop 0 Noenbe 2006 (00७९७ Oat ae ee
erst f Ges qu 2 al nape wi al RD 2750, 01 sca
erating te 10७ of wate 92 1000 01 130७ Bach lover Bl) are
eran of KBLTascape a8 3058. पर थ। 09019. 18 ७03 wea
ertaceurg १88 st mace ye ht pary ॥ 0-8 2008 caine aro
(sara gat system wee sted LBL A 15400 ean ato beech

है 12260
Rajasthan
8. | Medrano 39 wo uf 4 ners ling eaian ७80 #0 000 145
acm err payessermaebaneyens.
© | इक शरण. 0080 08800 panne wt dota te down sean aon tna
‘aarbaay 80७ 2 80598 2) 203 03440 6010 0ए७/0॥2 0ए७छ oe
tar Pradesh
10. | Mocersatonet 1 Toe rides at Pata, Hangar 200 11990 ere leant
paca SeplenbrZ005 auth, be 708४३ ७६७४७ ८७७/)॥ Nach 2038,
«030 580 vit Ae Cana ५४७७ ond nat as eundbeten Kn
2585 fen 7100 ० Aga Carl Thee woe roan ७७७१३ a ar भर.
‘nents ange istchweaplingbe cal wt
ता... | सह ताकत... w Neve net Mls ed wih he arse owe Craton inc
[DPPC fr 80209 of wan, ner ibe आरा, le Ses Wels Pas
Snovescndetwenocaralgtbe war
utc seal cosine poses 18 cnet cana nur cous
‘sms #000000 0०९१४ ७७७ ८९०४७
‘ost Bengal
12 | Heunaa gain | contacto fone gua at change 480 00 m of gh BK ॥७॥ Can
‘Sthene Rancrashpoges

= Teta ot RBM rom taupe 198.8 09४७७ wa tar Dante en
ee aan mony fay 2000 ॥॥ vee sore ७ 00 REMC were
‘Sate te chanage 19880 a st, (आओ wa as 10 ae छा.
‘gaan er hangs 199 89 ears, wchmeatat hep code
‘Hanya pocent be अप ३३

8. Faoloccpaton yo npc uréaasytaneredtopeetaunotis
lect 0७501 cere torch 89m 2 8 31 nae Ia 1238
‘vat eve RBM,

= ar rgaon ry NBP prin of te cra as rt alae oie are
(71772

Recommendation

MoWR must investigate all cases of incomplete/ non-commissioned projects
reported as complete to ensure that there is no diversion or misuse of funds

released for these projects, Appropriate action must also be taken against the
authorities issuing such false completion certificates.



— Performance Aut of AIP
chapter 4
Project
Compl on

4.2.3. Reasons for Non-Completion

A State wise analysis ofthe major reasons for projects nat being completed revealed the
{ollowing postion:

Table 9 -State-vise profil of Reasons for Non-Completion

‘eta Pradesh, Non arqusitn an lay next works

Bir 204 West Bengal

roy Nov asqisiion ond layed las shar alas ol CLA Gar Nowleasa of
Ska sae: over stalen

Gujarat ke! prope lsning and exgcion of wo han neyehenbed manne daly
sccusilonl rd ard ereizon contac: ders of ids

Maryan | 0386 eocten of wor

Wimactal Pradesh | Lack elettycnnecters or raat enn: rn-cirtaton of war
हर आए dts

“hathand Meghalaya | Novscuiston ७७8

and Trpua

arataa and Kerla | Novacqisin end dl a constucon cdots ard apa carl wos

MachyaPradesh | Dabyedexscon of wots (ia dev, nal work mai ब्याज,

Maas Tnconpl cara an conrand wea wns nova ld danaghd ces
20:87 campers)

Manipur | 03888 one of कत rd vay

‘ries एड बवाल ढक nathan ofafaion ad selene’ of doled
pesars; artiste fdas; noconstucon edges ve ay ard twa
‘ess sub-stardad execean wos

Pani Treo wo (te ar pig ater ncaa disband! alr uo ताक
requ); 08168 sites

‘tar Pradesh recto of are nar usyeiend manne (exc. estar wos lower
उडी arethan upper ach; absence avrg neon wr ta
‘Sess आ sages oration of Mos

wm

‘The major reasons for non-completion of major/ medium/ ERM projects in
{a) non-acquisition of land; (b) delays in construction of railway/ highway crossings;
(c) improper synchronisation of project components (dealt with elsewhere in this
Report), and (4) delayed tendering and contract management. While we note that
acquisition of land is a complex and sensitive process, Gol funds should be released
only after the State Government certifies that the major portion of the land
required for the project (not just for the dam/ headworks but also for the canals)
has already been acquired. Further, future releases should be linked to progress in
land acquisition,

Better co-ordination with railways and NHAI is required for quick completion of



= Audie of AIBP [नाना

4.3 Overall Profile of Reported Completion of AIBP MI Projects

Asin the case of major, medium, and ERM projects the earlier audit of ALBP had pointed out
‘oor progress in completion of शा projects also. Out of 3,129 2 projects approved during
1999-2003, 1,677 projects (54 pe cent) were completed. However, against the targeted 2.46
Jak ha of 1 only 0.56 lak ha of 1 (23 percent} was created, of which ony 0.1 lakh ha (19
percentofiP created) was uilizd,

‘Thecurrent audit revealed that therewas no improvement in competion of MI projects. Out of
6855 MI projects sanctioned under 888 only 2535 projects (37 percent) were reported as
competed

‘Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry does not tack profect-wise detals of status of Ml
projects could only furish total numberof projects taken up/ completed ona tate-wiseand
‘yearwvise basis. This yearvise data did not even indicate when the projects reported as
completed in a particular year were taken up. In he absence of such data, the authenticity of
competion af individual projects, as reported by Mow, could not beverited.

4.4 Ti

ime and Cost Overrun,

Audit scrutiny ofthe test-checked projects revealed that
1» 48 majo medium projects ( 69 per cent of the test checked projects) and 60 MI
piojets (18 percent suffered fom cost overrun:
« 53 majt/ medium projects (76 per cent) and 73 MI projects (21 percent suffered
from time overrun,
Almost al the major and medium irrigation procs est-checked in Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
‘Guarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmit, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and West Bengal suffered fiom time and costavertun, On the
other hand, in Maharashtra, only one out of eight majowmedium test checked projects
suffered from time overun; this must, however, be read with the fact that the AIBP
‘components ofthese test checked projects merely constituted fractions ofthe whole projects
and also the absenceof details of reported expenditutefor AIBP projects in Maharashtra,

The states performing poorly in ensuring timely completion of Minor Inigation Projects
within approved cost were Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, Maharashtra and
Meghalaya,

‘State-wise details oftime and costoverrun are given in Annexure-V.

4.5 Achievement of targeted IP and Utilisation of created IP in
Test Checked Projects

‘The ultimate alm of the programme was to create srigation Potential (IP) and optimum
utilization of the created IP Ault scrutiny of the records of the implementing agencies
revealed tha the targeted 1P was not created in25 Major, 19 Medium and 189 Minor iigation

Chapter - 4

Project
Completion



नग्न Performance कै ता?

Chapter - 4 Projets in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat
Project Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmit, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Completion Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, 01533, Punjab, Rajasthan,

Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (26 States) out ofthe test
‘checked 41 major, 29 medium and 346 minor itigation projects. Further, even the IP reported
ascreated was notbeing utlized fully

Key instances of short creation of targeted IP and non-utlisation ofthe created IP are given
below:

Table 10 - Key instances of Short creation Non-utlsation ०?

Reasons

state | Projects

Anda | Siramssgn Sage: | Nosuppotig ayactrgsts, waterless 508: wee mained by
Pradean | Yeralala Resencr | te ler sar Assocation consequent parody ete

ized cout bere

‘eam | Chanparat ‘Saal neato Pd ४ ७079 क0]॥ eanpiaion a pone: wide
derision laruna) aan between ize ७ ७2१09 ol eeae tush by gallon
gation Poet Depart ard Deca of cori and Sass

‘Bhar | Wiest Kiara | Ulan of ony 02 aka oul raed of 76 uk ha ao
Prt ron-onalton 0 ral syst,
‘one Gaal TP 1.6 facta ud IP aud ote ne ७.

Modenston Projet | nor-onoln ol eso Paall Lak Cara (PLC). Furr, rong of
canals doar esutod darage canals andreducen hn quan
stro,

‘Catisgarh | Kesaraie rose! | StarllinP cost was ono diay nnd acuion

‘Gjaat | Sena SaverPrjac | Agate etc unr AIP) 1440 a a on 60 et al
was rato whch an 071 aha was ike asf Maren 2008

बाग; Bhai! | Sorin P satin was 0७७ dbl nar accion

Waryana | BaceWorcel WAP | No हे was aca rate bo wns wee hfe rate orohabiaten
‘apa of ening 00७९

Himachal | Sala Pose “Thee was tartan Perea ear बाप a rou oak
Pradesh Ungar Setenes
‘Sahand | User Sark "No Tne ad ad bean ante or cestcin ol sibs
Pane Tanke
asenr
‘arataka | Upper Kira Sage | Tho was darag hcsaon Phe dyin consbuen a
1] 4३७28 andr corn ० apa canal ans
Upper सका Sage! | Caal wok comps fr S600ha coud pui we, dso nr eaon
oil canna
Kecale—_| Kalas गा te pj was declared compet, work on mor tas was

rlcorpltd and ital tarde Fume, ३६७३ enticed ३.8

Depart in 208 eee mt sopage mas igh een 3 per

ent cota sss} agit halon spay 0१076 car iss

baie आप श ६४७ ws edt gass ४0 00७8 was, nd

‘so becaute 00 (०6 ४७९1७ ॥000 ० rg wer crane

P| गर्ल "Nonacivenontt arated P was deo ronconploton ef branch canals
0 सरल

[eat | Nevactiononet ot gad P was die dey rdaoyston



q Audie of AIBP [नाना

aay Chapter - 4
Project

‘Thaintal ng of canal ot 424m was bircated Wo phases (271 completion

‘en अत 71-42 ॥, batt wien rane corps aen ater te

cern ofr Sys

‘hast 1038 9008 at RD 4231 ktm cana nas sl hear

ofa airs al 2 yous Corsequaiy Pbayond «231k col abo

las, atnaughdrbtan nar erry CCA ot 2286 18 had 8०8)

evel 071 hn

Bansaar Un

(ne भा main cana was breaches, 0॥३ ४ oer pig of acer par
ung cna tngner gander

‘he compa potn oh i Bank Man Cana betwee ४०0७७ 38 was
sale cary ery 15 60058 agate srsages277 cares, whieh Was
‘sont ७ 2०228 designe Po te ceed nas ge,
“rusieoe ane lay suas eth debut ester wae net compa,

‘eva

TP cu ete ld as he pnay dan अल was si orp

ao
ven

“There was Sido ० ७५०३ - 18 83 kr 3063-94 km However,
IP beyond 38 ma reall 38 rl work at 33:35 Pave ४86
stl earpelealr 3 l re yours. Furor Past Be wrk
ain nay ra esing lt staring eae te Mas ban cara
asta een ar alapocl 3 ears

Wabaratte

Veteuput

1 tatd coud tba ७४९७ due renconplten ot Par wera
command at,

‘ena

“Tha wok ol pal cnal 103204) akon up dng 200208 was भा.
ste conpied.

‘ard eras,
७6800 (४);
rca)

‘vo conte ७ acos l ०००७७७॥७ wn ABP enrol tw projet
81 who per crated was Paral ard cout ob lle

Pagsor

TP of 1982 roared cratedurder ABP ou 09103 ld as ०७०
‘7K. Wei, fou KT, Wer ad clases a four KT. Ws eed
rl:

‘Dee tron asin fn 200 ot acral ng cara 0
1500 ete आ 1702 250 rt, wok aston a acral
was stoped se uy 2007. Tu alr was sre he ese
‘aon was rl pose

Trews

(Censor spay was gong ६७॥॥० wae was ovirg
1 te Le Main Canal and Chararpat rane Calon ding te
‘any season

onl aly

“enon ol barage was suposed Apt 200 aor 95 pr cont ence,
4७8 8 cortatrs slo canran ४४५ wre seedy srcon ९.
sad ostinals ane peer is

vest

‘Upper naraa BK)

“Tha ropes chee nena ot and it aa gyaons wich ee
‘ako up dre 2008.04 complete by Mach 2008, was en 22 por cot
4७88 doa facut of andre rasan ost ofan uaa
anon consucon lips ovr carl cassis en Sa Natora
Highway.

Benga

“Tense caudate achive a onsen wont
<lsuon sym wih ma पका, ७891 of wrk cena
व्रत, ard deja ९७०७/आ४० poe ४०१ |

[Tee wa

| Ted codrotbe echoed १० dlay wand apiatin



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 4

State Projects Major Reasons
Project
Completion Punjab Kandi Canal Extension | Canal siphon at RD 64.109 km was completely damaged

(Phase ॥)

Rajasthan Indira Gandhi Nahar Non-utilisation/ short-utilisation of created IP was due to non-completion of

Project Stage-II pumping stations and command area development works, and non-construction
of water courses in lift areas

Narmada Canal ‘Against the targeted 2,240 diggis, only 662 were constructed.

Mahi Bajaj Sagar Creation of targeted IP was affected due to delays in environmental clearance
and land acquisition.

Modernisation of Non-achievement of targeted IP was due to non-completion of

Gang Canal distributaries and minors.

Tripura Khowai Out of the targeted IP of 4515 ha, only 1453 ha (32 per cent) could be
achieved. Non-creation of targeted IP and under-utilisation of created IP was
due to non-operation of Left Bank Main Canal and non-execution/
non-completion of works in different chainages of the main and branch canals.

Uttar Bansagar Canal Underground water sprouted up in chainage km 40.7-43.3 km of the Meja-Jirgo

Pradesh Link Canal (MJLC), stopping further excavation. Further, MJRC intersected
the existing Upper Khajuri Left Canal at km 43.050, blocking the latter and
depriving farmers of existing irrigation facilities.

Rajghat Canal Although the project was declared complete in 2007-08, various works for
which 22 MoUs were signed with UPPCL during 1997-2006 were still
incomplete - 3 MoUs were rescinded, and 9 MoUs were still to be finalized.
Further, only four out of eight rail crossings and none of the five bridges over
National Highways could be constructed.

Modernisation of Although the project was declared complete as of March 2008, three bridges

Agra Canal were still incomplete as of September 2008. Also, new bridges were
constructed without dismantling the old bridges, which led to silting and growth
of weeds in the canal section.

Modernisation of 68 drawings related to the project were pending approval.

Lachhura Dam

Improving Irrigation Restoration works in lower lying branches were started earlier than those in

Intensity of Hardoi upper reaches. Further, work was started after a delay of nine months.

Branch System

West Teesta Barrage Project Only two our of five main canals were completed; 21 out of 35 distributaries

Bengal pertaining to the completed canals were still incomplete, mainly on account
of land disputes.

Patloi Irrigation Scheme | 123 cases of land acquisition disputes resulted in several stretches of canals
and distributaries remaining incomplete.

Hanumata Irrigation Land disputes and delayed execution of works resulted in non-availability of

Scheme irrigation water from the AIBP portion of the canals.

Photographs of 15 test-checked Major and Medium Irrigation projects of 8 States show various
bottlenecks viz. High vegetation and breakage in Canals (Bihar); canals without water (Gujarat);
incomplete works at railway crossings (Kerala); incomplete works at tunnel and railway crossings
(Madhya Pradesh ); weeds and siltation in canals (Manipur); incomplete works and slippage of

| | embankments (Orissa); incomplete bridge and defective canal crossing(Uttar Pradesh), and no trace
ofcanal water/work held up due to land dispute (West Bengal).



Performance Audit of AIBP a

Chapter - 4

Project
Completion



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 4

Project
Completion



Performance Audit of AIBP a
Chapter - 4
Project
Completion



Pe Performance Audit of 8187

Chapter - 4

Project
Completion

Bansagar Project (Unit-II -Canal) - Madhya Pradesh i te structure at Rd km 42

Bargi Diversion (Phase 1) - Madhya Pradesh i i 10 35.4

Incomplete Railway Crossing

| Bargi Diversion (Phase I & Il) - Madhya Pradesh 5 ant

complete railw ach can



Performance Audit of 8187 a

Chapter - 4

Project
Completion

Right Bank Canal (RBC) of Rengali Irrigation Project - Orissa :
at RD 31.55 to 34.24 km



a Performance Audit of AIBP
Chapter - 4
Project
Completion



Performance Audit of AIBP a

Chapter - 4

Project
Completion

Despite investment of funds in AIBP Projects, there was no change in the existing cropping

pattern/ introduction of double & multi-cropping system as per the records of the Department

of Agriculture / Land Revenue (which were targeted outcomes) in 11 Major, 6 Medium and

128 MI Projects test checked in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,

Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya

Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and | |
Uttarakhand (18 States).



Project Execution
and Maintenance
ee

5.1 Commencement without pre-requisites

Approvals of AIBP Projects were subject to fulfillment of various prerequisites such as
acquisition of land for the project (which also involved payment of compensation to the
affected families), clearance from the forest and environment departments and approval/
clearances from other departments involved viz. Railways, National Highways etc.
Commencement of the projects without fulfilling such prerequisites is beset with the adverse
consequences of funds being blocked in incomplete projects.

Audit scrutiny revealed that 11 Major, 10 Medium and 22 MI Projects were taken up for
execution without ensuring the fulfillment of the prerequisites such as land acquisition, forest
clearances etc. in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal (12 States).

Details of such instances of commencement of projects without fulfilling the required
prerequisites are given below:

Table 11 - Instances of Commencement of Projects without fulfilling pre-requisites

State _| Projects | Findings

Andhra Four out of seven test-cheked major/ medium projects and two Mls were

Pradesh delayed, since the Government awarded project works without prior
acquisition of land.

Assam | Champamati Project | 302 ha out of the total land requirement of 478 ha was yet to be acquired,



नग्न Performance कै ता?
Shapter-S [लत || Figs
Project
Broject gar Dupawa Raine | Wak was spc sw 20627 ck ace.
Ee ae
a Tse Ga | Ean nai a ain Tin
ee
Sor] न Gras pats
1770 | Sopnana'te var Penton
ito a Mas ion nn opt ata i ay
धान पक > पर ४०४
mea ease afer ea ada बदककत
im [117707777077: 77:
asad | men आप प्र न
Nee | ere rac avemetesanse
Simonse
ean | Hc pt wd aA oy
seats मल कि अ 74 न a
ase
| | Tr ana aT NT न
ae पिफग ० oro on Pawo et her
Dossy cmon gy 20
eg pel D
‘aay oes ene wo दी
[01271
oie Ta et ed i ain iki co
as
छल eo
conn
Cina | pena Tagl| छल Sd td
अप इण कण
Show
= Se
Se Re
feltman | Dyan ret oa)
iar] Bess GF no i Gaaws n
Ets [ES fear ole iie ore a
ee eed ee गत ore
पदक आफ लगन 40 ०१ rms nara
“न ००१1० ११० नल
ais
Taibo ie Feet olin wa ee
1277 020 77/0४/१०००:
(Stet



E Audie of AIBP —_

5.2 Incorrect Phasing of Project Implementation हि 8
Project

AIBP guidelines trom 1908-99 envisaged assistance on large projects for their phased Execution
completion, so that benefits could start flowing early with comparatively smaller and

Maintenance

Investments. The construction programine of major projects was tobe phased out in such a
‘way that the length of main canal and distibutaries taken up fincluding the distribution
system) ina year could be completed soastostartyieding phase-wise benefit

Audit scrutiny however revealed that such phased implementation was not ensured during
the construction of17 Major, 7 Medium and 4 Minor iigation Projects in Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
Manip Orisa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tpura and West Bengal {15 States), Resultantly
projets remained non functional despite huge investments,

Details of instances where phase-wise bene could not be availed due to construction of
‘the projects in an uncoordinated manner ae given below:

‘Table 12 Instances of Incorrect Phasing of Project Implementation

७० [rk | caret 00819 Inpleneition
Andra | Yr tin | Ou ef 5 dette vr cop en as uh pope
57 Fall nas सम कण अा क.
Bihar | Wear Kara | Th er 1 rc cop, ad bare तक
roe अप टी था 2०० हवा ॥ ०० आज 40५०४ ५५०७०
aaa ety rca ep ope
Soe ta Thea tn arc eg a abc co

Modernisation Prost | 97 pecertconpes, progess ncorsusion 0 डा was ony
pet car ancne wae couses १४0६९ erste
‘Chatisgar | sar Tank, Hang | Thou Paswons wore compat cral wal वेब woe
Drosen Pitara | etaxeied
Tan Sehr
Gujarat—_| Sarr SeoiarPces_| Thouhife man crlandie rnc cara were 100pe cat ard
oper car compe respecte, progress of works ofthe dsbaes
ard ios wee ey 27 prc an 23 98 cet epee
सडक. तरल Renews | The dma mal bench als mw 56 878 pore
‘eran ४०6५९ debut wae coun was dace

SaruaResevel | The da and mabe canals woe 8 nd 3 poco
‘enrol 00 ४०6०९ (000७4 naa courses was done
TapkaaResevci’—_| The dim nda branch aa we 100and parca

carotene workon dst ७20 wae couse as done

‘ope Shak Reser | Thee and ma branch canals wore 8 ad 58 poor
carob; 25 pact workan doves nas 6008, vino wrk nas ora

amataka | User esr कण 3251 ha was etd on ha Ana La Bank Cra,
Prot (Sages) | alr couse ltt aca ae apposen carl ४०१७ wate

netoomplted,



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 5

State Projects Incorrect Phasing of Implementation
Project ‘nati sti ‘nor Distr
हु Kerala Kallada Irrigation The works of Poovathoor Distributary and Bhoothakulam Minor Distributary
Execution है पे है हे
Project were held up due to non completion of work at the railway crossing and two
and id a 5 i
Maint bridges on the road crossing portions respectively. Work on two other Minor
aintenance Distributaries v.iz Kottapuram Minor Distributary and Mynagappally Minor
Distributary was only 22 and 60 percent complete respectively.

Muvattupuzha Valley The works of the Manjoor distributary and Ettumanur Branch Canal were held

Irrigation Project up due to non completion of work at Railway crossing portions. Further, the
work of Mulakulam brach canal in the portion from ch.5650m to 6770 m could
not be completed due to heavy seepage and sliding of earth.

Madhya Bawanthadi Project While construction of almost all major items of the project was completed, the
Pradesh primary dam section of the project was incomplete.

Bargi Diversion Although 80 per cent of the work of the Majholi branch canal was complete,

(Phase-ll) Project the work of the canal crossing of a main railway line at the starting reaches
was not completed.

Indira Sagar Project The district road bridge at RD 42.31 km of the main canal was still incomplete,

(Canal) after a lapse of 12 years.

Maharashtra | Vishnupuri Project Though the project was declared completed, the part-I works of the command
area were not completed.

Dhamangaon Storage Though the project was declared completed, the utilization of created irrigation

Tank MI Project potential could not be done for want of non existence of facilities for lifting the
water.

Manipur Thoubal Multipurpose While progress in construction of canals and distributaries was 89 and 68 per

Project cent respectively, construction of the dam and spillway was lagging behind at
60 and 70 per cent respectively.

Orissa Right Bank Canal of While the dam and main canal were 100 and 99 per cent complete

Rengali Irrigation Project | respectively, progress in construction of distributary systems was only
23 per cent.

Upper Indravati Although the majority of the main canal works had been completed, the minors

Irrigation Project and sub-minors from RD 11 to 22.40 km were still in the planning/ land
acquisition stage.

Punjab Extension of Kandi Though the main canal was constructed upto 112.00 km, work on
Canal Stage-lI Project distributaries, lift irrigation schemes, and water courses was not taken up.
Rajasthan Indira Gandhi Nahar Instead of executing work in the flow system first and lift system later, both

Project Stage Il, systems were taken up together and both were incomplete. Further, in IGNP

Narmada Canal Stage-ll, the work of water courses was not completed in various systems
due to lack of co-ordination.

Mahi Bajajsagar Project | Even though the project was declared complete, the works of Nithauwa
distributary were not completed in the reach 2.50 - 6.48 km, as forest
clearance was awaited.

Tripura Khowai Medium Though the barrage portion of the project was completed before inclusion of

Irrigation Project the project under AIBP, the construction of branch canals implemented under
AIBP was only 5 percent.

West Teesta Barrage Project | Out of five main canals, only two canals (TMLC and MMC) were completed,
Bengal ‘one canal (DNMC) was partially completed, one canal (TJMC) was in progress,

and construction of one canal (NTMC) was yet to be taken up. Out of 35
distributaries of the completed canals, 21 were still incomplete, mainly due
to land disputes.



Performance Audit of AIBP a
Recommendation - 7 Chapter - 5

Project
To tackle the problem of incorrect phasing of project implementation e.g. dam Execution
section incomplete, but main and branch canals completed or nearly complete; and
main/ branch canals completed, but work of distributaries/ water courses not Maintenance
taken up or at a very preliminary stage; main/ branch canals constructed in

patches, with gaps (particularly in the initial stages), creation of irrigation
potential should be recognized by MOWR/CWC only where (a) there are no gaps in
the main/ branch canals, and water is capable of flowing right through the sections
recognized for creation of IP; and (b) not just the main/ branch canals, but also all
associated minors and distributaries have been completed.

5.3 Maintenance of the projects

हब. Irrigation being a State subject, funds for maintenance of the Irrigation projects
created under AIBP/ any other scheme was not permissible in the AIBP Guidelines.
However, the need for maintenance of the assets created by investing huge funds
cannot be overemphasised. During field visits of the test-checked projects it was
observed that the irrigation tanks/ canals of 3 Major, 3 Medium and 37 Minor
Irrigation Projects in Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Manipur, Sikkim,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal (7 States) had lost their capacity due to silting, weed
growth, structural erosion etc.

= Toensure interest and encourage participation by farmers/ water user associations
in the execution and maintenance of the projects, they were to be involved in the
project from commencement to commissioning stage. After completion, projects
were to be handed over to the beneficiaries, and a three level arrangement i.e.
Water Users Associations, Distributary Level Societies and Minor Irrigation Project
Level Councils were envisaged. However, such arrangements were either absent or
practically non-functional in 18 Major, 12 Medium and 194 Minor Irrigation Projects
test checked in Audit in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (21 States).

wv

In order to ensure that funds provided under AIBP do not go waste due to poor
maintenance of assets created under AIBP, MoWR may ensure that before approving
a project for AIBP funding, the State Government provides a formal undertaking to
ensure adequate resources for its maintenance for the next ten years. Further,
MoWR/ CWC may consider instituting a system to assess the actual quality of
maintenance of Major/ Medium AIBP projects post-completion.



Contractual Management

न
मी 1.

6.1 Undue Benefits to Contractors

Various cases of undue benefits to the contractors amounting to Rs.186.89 crore were noticed
in audit in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal
(14 States). Details of such cases of undue benefits to the contractors, as observed during
Audit, are given below:

Table 13 - Instances of Undue Benefits to contractors

State Amount Nature of Undue 88
(In Rs. crore)
Andhra 1 Major-Ali Sagar Lift 33.67 Systemic deficiencies e.g. entrustment of work
Pradesh Irrigation Scheme & on fixed price basis with variable scope of work
2 Medium- Khomaram and non-adherence to agreement clauses
Bhim Project and Thotapalli
Barrage Project
Assam 1 Major- Champamati Irrigation 3.22 Instead of booking the amount under
Project &1 Medium- Miscellaneous Public Work Advances, the
Modernisation of Jamuna amount was charged as expenditure to the
Irrigation Project and 1 MI projects.
Chhattisgarh 1 Major- Hasdeo Bango 0.34 Excess payment beyond sanctioned estimates and
non deduction of royalty on use of metal and sand
in the cement concrete lining work in a distributary.
Jharkhand 2 Medium- Sonua Reservoir 3.89 Price escalation and non-recovery/short recovery
Scheme & Upper Shankh of penalty/liquidated damages.
Reservoir Scheme

Karnataka 1 Major- Upper Krishna 3.60 Non levy of penalty on delayed supply of | |
Project - Stage | material



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 6 State jects Amount Nature of Undue Benefit
Contractual (In Rs. crore)
Management Madhya 2 Major- Bargi Diversion 45.53 Price escalations and payment of interest free

Pradesh Project Phase | & Indirasagar mobilization advances.

Project Phase |
Maharashtra 1 Major- Nandur 9.74 Price escalations and payment for work after
Madhmeshwar expiry of validity period of contract without
obtaining extension,

Manipur 1 Major- Thoubal Multipurpose 7.57 Payments made on unapproved works, escalation

Project and 4 Mis charges, and by adopting incorrect rates; non
recovery of penalty for non-completion of the
works within the stipulated time frame and for
non-employment of technical staff.

Nagaland 4 Mis 4.78 Projects were declared completed and payments
made to the contractors on the basis of false
measurements recorded in the MBs.

Orissa 3 Major- Upper Indravati 67.26 Non-recovery of liquidated damages for non-

Irrigation Project, Telengiri completion / abandonment of works, payments

Irrigation Project & Rengali for works not carried out as per agreements and

Irrigation Project and 7 Mls inadmissible items, due to adoption of wrong
‘Schedule of Rates, non-recovery of excess
payments made on inflated measurements,
non-recovery of interest free advances, payment
of escalation charges beyond the permissible
limits etc.

Punjab 1 Medium -Remodelling 1.21 Security deposits released before the expiry of

of U.B.D.C.Channels. stipulated period, and payment made on higher
rates,

Rajasthan 4 Major -Narmada Canal, 5.43 Non-recovery of compensation due to non-

Modernisation of Gang Canal, completion of the works within the stipulated time

IGNP Stage-Il & Mahi Bajaj and making payment for a work which was to be

Sagar constructed by the contractor.

Uttar 1 Major -Improving Irrigation 0.60 Payment for excavation of earth, which had

Pradesh Intensity of Hardoi Branch already been made.

System

West Bengal | 1 Major- Teesta Barrage 0.05 Non-completion of work within the stipulated

Project period.

Total Rs. 186.89 crore)



व Audie of AIBP [नाना

6.2 Wasteful/ Irregular Expenditure Chapter - 6 |
Contractual
‘Audit scrutiny revealed cases of wastefuiregularexpenditureamountng toRs.403.83cr0%@ Management

‘incurred on unapproved components of works, in excess of the quantities specified in the
estimates, as interest fre mobilization advances to contractors, as penalty fr not obtaining
statutory clearances etc. in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bibar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashira, Maniput, Mizoram, Orissa,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Ultar Pradesh and West Bengal (17 States), Details of such cases of
\wastetl/ irregular expenditure from the programme funds are givenbelow:

Table 14 - Instances of Wastefulirregular expenditure

‘Amount
(inks, crore)
‘anda {Mun Yorkatwa Pree | 121 | Exon irewrsen eps wot,
rade
‘es TMi Campanas Pree | O77 | Work al asl count be put ous १०७,
snore rar uti fol conatioresubg waste
pena

Inone Ma gan 8431. hough Site
Covenant dd ot acuta adie
spr ॥ 4०9७४ 208 06 vin hed cured
st axgndie fs. 98 baween 20142

203200446.
का Majer Wes Kosi Canal | 7355 | Experi of 7220 cre pts March 2008
Prot RCP ara Sore vas uredte एव ef soni rads
Cara Moderate Pret SCM (tou seving he pupose ct ड़
(sour) ard payret ol 725 006 was mad ७)
‘rahe oa wore in KP.
“Cater | 7 Majer sso Bago 37) was ned on pagan

ons regias, ugh 08 wok sous ave
beer car ub conceed contac.

Haryana | THe WP 24 | Beenie wasincwed (on unapproved
‘nts 28 0) wera bang tessa ot
the Comps: Atony

“anand | 7 Modis Sora Resin 214 | Expr was ured on cstton al

Propel Inspocson Bug ard tice by ering
hounds

Karat | 1 Moe Upp Kiso 1544 | Excssanpenlive was reed des dca

Propet Sige का as hepa racuremets ot era

fo acontartz, pepstatin oestrus,
‘etarinatonl he ageaantlass 816.
‘pesiaionte, wate rot xan and
340४4.
Enbariomet at nde of R192 oa
10 02०७8 in Kshs Bhogal Nga
Lined NL,

erie Mee फरार ‘574 | Expalve was inired on rapped was

va Fomaton ard mpovaranis ७ Ress,
कट mors, uae of dar, हा
cea os



7 Performance Aut of AIP

Chapter - 6 ‘Amount of Unauthor
Contractual (inks. crore) | expendture
Managemen: adhya | 1 Maja Sagar Project | 18873 | Tha sine goverment dared ABP gan
Pradesh Rs 165.73 छा paymart lian
‘shar of Dante pole 48 pret
‘Shar hotingin Jt vote Crary
ith NHPC wou cing te approval et
(७8०४०
Maharastra | Sor Borla (कआउएए७ | 1381 | Fund ७३७७0 ४ १परणाए agence छा works
and Arana ‘nrg atari enorme hare
ता parent for uraprvedomporeis
ardor nos exci rere है हल,
ejects under ABP.
Waipur | 1 Maer TH 480 Conmanang wrk on ander wars
Mizoram — | ais 034... खरा lr urna en rail
ting charges C8 macins ard bow
crass
‘reee “jr IP, UIP ard M28 | Funds fo 32.8 roe gen LADS or
“ekg gtr Projet and payment nd acquton charges ars
aus ‘enable assatanee weet sarten
‘ett anon ॥0७009 0| secur fot sue
payrens,
Expert ot 190 eon canton ot
30038 0९१७४ लाश salma ary
‘tte
Pani 1 Medur-erodeig ot 567 | Exendive was neuredon nacre
५३०० हज.
ojatian | आता 7893 | nde ware 8800 torr payment fend
‘cana Poet compete a cad une eet >
18 Siege nd slap fis; exper wa ended
‘arg Cen) ‘runs, wor were abandoned miay
on ect gundsependie was cured
‘or unapaovos wns: mos ere ken ७
tou pope sana,
‘ir “Wj oderizaion ot 3578 | हक neared en usoproved ४०५७,
Pradesh | Agra Cars pee हलक ha econo pena nina tx es,
‘Cana Pet Reghat Canal excess payments Panay daperner
Prostar Latenza Dam nor epee under wong head
Prose
Wert 7 Maar Tee तय एड. Expedia nas eared on ७५७०७७/७० wot,
Bonga Pret arde wong eaten dor
capac,
Tot is 403.89 ero



हू Audie of AIBP [नाना

6.3 Other cases of Irregular Contractual Management Chapeor-6 |
Contractual
‘Audit scrutiny revealed poor management of contracts and works in 8 Major. 4 Medium and Vanagemont

28Minorestchecked Irigation Projects in Assam, Bihar, Maharashira, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh (9 States). Details of instances of such
‘rregulanities, as observed during audit, aregiven below:

Table 15 - Other instances of Iegular Contractual Management

arty

1 Nj hana gon | Tesh arto were 32०08 3) 0 pce mes! asion te aod

Proto  Medn- sancierg by compet att (oon 89005 0७.
वाट मे emina | Sarl ones,
Irgaton Projet

‘her 7 Mer SOUP Raconmardsar of Wat Ard Pons Carsutaney Swos

|WAPCOS) oath cana, dso, sub-detaes,

‘pc and wats couse, wo raincoat ine estas,

4७81७ ich barks wee egy draped are 0५७१७

lon tars 388 atc,

ahacstia | 4 Neat 0 pr eral ga coud १७७७ ized due vars
seaor ich as rn aval and ebbitaon sues and

pst rom aecad pores ard oo 8 ol कक and

appro chica strates,

Menpur | 20Ms open es war eal, and ost ol 1 aoc wae
spltup to 54 srs esata oi aprons hae
compat arts,

Meghalaya | 4M Sup wale tea end was recut ७७ ७ econ ke

regal znd irroer stb of al 898 and pene
vaso pois, moe agent ol pipeline te,

‘rissa Mer engargsion | Retrdeing ० wo aban yet conartos, ran ceplance
Prot Uperinravas | oh west ence invzton of ade wiht axquston af nd
legion Pret and 1 du ne-iraisaion of eeonenittablisionssun, substandard
डक लए Pct | works sutin day and ou casts 08 pees.

Puna 2 Medun-Renodoleg ५... Funds for pct ucts ४७७ sperton abr works ka
UBD. Chanel ans काका scare a
Extesonf arCanal_—_| Dace marks a ound pile esl ruse cabs
Saget 84198 aes

casa procedures ol boo adopts ४086 eeing
ipod noc ० ७ cura. Bess, separa
(4 rat ore ary ways A meas recover he os of ost
wae couse tote bras

Fajstan | 2NaorIGNP Stage tard | Excess expends oR. 336 was eed ० work
Narmass Cana Peet” | charged esabionrant

Nonsmcorey of uss ton Pune Hea Enger Deparment

{PED ७०३७ propriate str ९०७ of ont.

‘tar Pradesh | 2H Sisagnrcanal and | NeUs were sed lh atonal Propel Comicon Crain
एम rienty tart | (NPC) ptr sac fe estates an acai be
Bareh Sor reid ands

‘atonal ogee was eure rican lbs a
निशा wok



__ || Management

7.1 Release of Funds

Analysis of the State-wise grants released under AIBP for Major/ Medium Irrigation Projects
from 2005-06 to 2007-08 revealed that about 75 to 85 per cent of the total grant was released
to just six States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
and Orissa, as summarised below:

Table 16 - States which availed majority of the Grants under AIBP during 2005-2008

(Rs. in crore)
State Grant Released Total
| 2005-06 | 2006-07 | 2007-08 |

Andhra Pradesh 311.38 816.42 987.77 2115.57
Maharashtra 167.39 340.70 885.76 1393.85
Gujarat 339,60 121.89 585.72 1047.21
Orissa 148.00 133.12 609.49, 890.61
Karnataka 140.78 160.37 349.90 651.05
Madhya Pradesh 168.10 25.81 372.02 565.93
Sub total of Selected States 1275.25 1598.31 3790.66 6664.22
Total release to all States 1709.25 1884.22 4483.95 8077.42
Percentage to the total funds 75 85 85 83
release in r/o selected States



गन्ना Performance कै ता?

Chapter - 7 However, the performance ofthese states, in terms of completion of projects was very por, as
Financial summarised below:
Manageme!

Table 17 - Profle of com;

projects in six selected states.

‘nat
Pra

मम | 0% | ०००० |

eo
ime] 5 ५ | | ७

Cleaty these six states (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashira
‘and Orssa) were cornering the major part of ALBP grants without corresponding performance
in termsof project completion. State-wise lst of Majorand Medium Projectstaken up/ongoing
‘during 2005-08 is given in Annexure-V,

Since AIBP is an Additional gramme, Gol may ensure

equitable distribution of AIBP funds to ५ criteria e.g
population dependent on agriculture, UIP and also past
performance in completion/ commissioning of projects and utilisation of targeted
IP under AIBP.

7.2. Non-submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) and
Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) by State Governments.

= Interms of the AIBP Guidelines, the second installment ofthe CLAY Grant was to be
released by the Got only after submission of Ucs in respect ofthe fist installment
‘Audit scrutiny, however revealed that in Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka (3
States) the second installments for the States were iregulary released ty the Gol
before submission ofthe UCS for hefistinstallment.

= AIP guidelines (1998-99 onwards) envisaged thal the States would be required to
submit audited statements of expenditure on the projects within nine manths ofthe
‘completion ofthe financial yea. Further, the guidelines effective from December 2006
also envisaged the release of central assstance for the subsequent years would not be
‘considered (40620 Statement of Expenditure SOEs) were not furnished within ine



|] Audie of AIBP —

‘months It was, however observed thatthe audited 508 in respect ofeach project Chapter - 7
‘were not being sent in support of the Utlsation Certificates (05) by the State Financial
Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Management
Pradesh, Kamataka, Mizoram, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal

ca2states)

7.3 Non-conversion of Grant to Loan

As per the AIBP guidelines, f he State Government falled to comply withthe agreed date of
completion ofthe project, as mentioned inthe MoU, the grant component released would be
treated as loan and recovered as per the usual terms of recavery of central loan. ॥ was
haweverebserved in audit that:

= InAndtra Pradesh, fr five projects” which were originally scheduled tobe completed
between March 2007 and March 2008, the CWC/MOWR gave extension af time up to
‘march 2009 without invoking the above clause. In effect, the grant amount of
's.230.88 cote ot any patofit had not been converted inte aloanasenvisaged under
theguidelines.

‘= In Rajasthan, the Narmada Canal and Gang Canal Modernisation Projects taken up
‘under AIBP in 1998-99 and 2000-2001 respectively were lobe completed within four
‘years. The State Governments, however, extended the date of completion of these
projets and fixed the revised targets fr creation of irigaton potential Resultanty.
0९10 non-completion of phased targets of these projets within the prescribed period,
the grant of Rs 166 20 crore (Rs 150.17 crore released in 2006-08 for Narmada Canal
Project and Rs 16.03 crore in 2007-08 for Gang Canal Modernisation project) was
required to be converted info a loan and recovered from the State as per the usual
terms of recovery of Central oan. This was. however, not done, violating AIBP
Guidelines.

= In Himachal Pradesh, 18 minor irtigation projects in 4 divisions" approved by the
Government of India between July 2000 and October 2005 ata total cst of Rs. 9.67
crore could not be completed by the concemed divisions by the targeted date
(between 3/2003 and 3/2008) of completion. Thus, the grantof Rs. 5.03 coe between
‘May 2006 and February 2007) waste have been converted as oan, with interest duet
2s. 1.44 crore a the rate of 13 percent per annum. No such action was taken by the

Ministry
Recommendation - 10

In order to encourage the defaulting State Governments to ensure timely
completion of projects, Gol must apply the provision for conversion of grant to loan
inal f serious stippages in completion schedule, as provided or in the MoU.



_— Performance Aust of AIP
Chapter -7
Mangere

7.4 Release of Funds by Gol at fag end of financial year

Analysis of the sanction orders issued by the Ministry of Finance (oF) during 2003-04 to
2007-08 for release of funds fo various States under AIBP revealed that huge quantum of
unds were released during the last quarter especially during the month of March of the
‘relevant year as detailed below:

‘Table 18 - Percentage of funds released between 2003-04 and 2007-08

leased

m बहु जात

during last quarter

0-० | A | हू
‘oa | र | 2
705-06 | = | =
2086-07 | a | 2
खाक | 2 | =

Details of Sanctions issued between 2003-04 and 2007-08 aregiven in Annexure-VI

‘As the funds were being released by the MoF at the fag end ofthe year, the State Governments were,
consequently releasing the funds tothe implementing agencies very late. Resultant, in order to
show vtlisaion of the funds received, the implementing agencies were either mistepoting their
financial achievements, diverting the availabe funds fr non AIBP purposes, o resorting to various
Irregula/ unauthorised expencituresas discussed inthe succeeding paragraphs.

7.5 Rush of Expenditure by State Governments

‘Due to release of funds at the fag end ofthe financial yearby the Mo the State Governments
Inturn leased funds to theimplementing agencies in the ast quater ofthe financial yar in
Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tipura, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (11 tates). The details of rush of expenditure inthe
closing months ofthe financial years are given below:

‘Table 19 - Rush of Expenditure

Expenditure made inast quater of | Expenditure made in ast month

the year (a parentage ofthe total _| (art ofthe year(s pecetage of
expenditure) thetoal Expenditure)

naan | Tow pet nrg 0028 | sn 7pecetaung 200-08

and | 2७8४ pcan a ३७७

Propet KP} dung 200598 ard 790
{4 porentinrepecto Matpucha

|
a 00 parca repo of aad aon -
Yale ination Pr org

i868



= mat
‘the year (a8 percentage ofthe total
Expenditure)

in ast quarter of

Performance Aust of AIP —

Expenditure made in ast month Shapeer=7
(are) ofthe year (percentage of Financial
the total Expenditure) Management

Maur Ss £967 peers ba
uppen Pre TMP 109
7711
rsa eipremtanrgzetosinmpedt | apc dg 208 invest
० 0०0 7४०७ pies teu napt nein peas
Poni {sto 100 peat ving ores | na cart ing I het
alo an ot stored oc
Asan | at per शा [ tein pect ang 08
Tee आए हा perry 20000, ‘Wins pout in 08m
मल (0 काका... reget! Won gen
Poss eu) 208० (08
varPriseh | S | sitet
Urata | att pace a8 | Ho pce ang
‘West eng | oe roopecedchgaoneon | smn perer acng aioe

WR must ensure
‘or in March,

7.6 Short and Delayed Release of funds by State Governments

For smooth implementation of the Projets, AIBP Guidelines stipulated that the Gol funds
released by the MoF were tobe further released by the State Govertament, alongwith the
State’ share tothe implementing agencies within 15 days ofthe receipt ofthe Gl funds.
However, the State Governments ether didnot release the funds within the stipulated period
‘or did not release the entire Gol funds alongwith the requisite state share resulting in short
release of funds in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Maniput
Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Utarakhand and West Bengal
(14 States), एशक of cases of shor delayed release of funds by the State Government the

Implementing agenciesaregiven below:



हू Performance कै ता?

7

Chapt

Financial
Management

‘able 20 - Instances of short releaseidelayed release of Gl funds by State Governments

ye Release by Sti
Government to implementing
agencies

(ut of lds fs. 4586
crore raehedtor MOF. he Sate
(Goverinet asada Fi
32 0७७४७ arn isons
reg 200738.
es छह. Starveases ras bye Se | Ooty angry om 371378 ds.
Goverment project inpenertrg
20०0७ dtr 20808,
ajar 3594 | Thistle chr ona of) -
30 008 Govennet of
Inthe Sao Goverment,
hr 2000.08 pt ot ie
Pees (chen SSP) ant
(i) Re261 cor oye Sa
‘Goverment proj inperaning
tutors deg 200805 nase
४ 80481.
Samm = = Doty arg am 26 and 18 ays
este ur 200808,
Kerala 880. | Thaw massa las ५ re by -
th 8988 Gorernnt topo
छह artes fo
Mavatpzha ४४७) eatin
Propet MVP dr 20808,
2005-06 ६ 20067 96७
aeons ripe Poo (KR)
reg 200708
Manipur 47 | Thow mas snan ase fs | 0.08 #909 rom 101450 ys
by he Salo Goverment o ‘sont of Toa Mutpurpose
Progetmplirnirgautartes | Powe TMP] ence gion
fire 200608 poco Props.
Mor iain Propet
रण = = “he 9888 Govonmert ous rds,
alto goed of year dung
2103.08,
Nogains | = | bt angng am tom 210 ००8.
Pun - - ‘Te Se Governat leased an
smourt et. 1030 cer fore
fle Esteson of ar Canal
Sage I Jue 2005 aug oe
sour was steered
Novena 2002.

tear



Short Release by State Government to

implementing agencies

Performance Audit of AIBP —

Delayed Release by State
Government to implementing
agencies

Chapter - 7

Financial
Management.

Sikkim 0.61 Against the receipt of Rs. 8.15 crore | The magnitude of delay could not be
from Gol towards Central assistance | checked in audit as the State Finance
for 2003-08 under AIBP schemes, Department did not maintain the
‘the State Government did not provide | date-wise release of funds by the Gol
the matching share which resulted in and corresponding allocation of
short release of State share. resources by the State Goverment.

Tripura - - Delays ranging from 11 to 130 days

during 2003-07.

Uttar Pradesh 9.00 There was short release of funds -
by Engineer — in Chief/ Chief Engineer|
to various executing divisions of five
selected projects during 2003-08.

Uttarakhand - - Delays ranging from 35 days to 57

days during 2003-08.
West Bengal - - Delays ranging from 32 days to
185 days during 2003-08.
Total Rs. 115.53 crore

Recommenda

Gol may take up the matter with the concerned State Governments to avoid short.
release and delayed release of AIBP funds to the implementing agencies. Further, a
system should be put in place for monitoring releases on a project-wise basis.

7.7 Diversion of Funds

7.7.1 _ Diversion of AIBP funds in Gujarat
Diversion of AIBP funds in respect of Sardar Sarovar Project (Gujarat)

Gol released Rs. 675.20 crore for extending irrigation benefits to drought prone area (DPA).
Audit scrutiny revealed that ten branch canals were proposed to be developed under DPA.
Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited (SSNNL) provided utilization certificates to Gol,
certifying that the funds provided under DPA were spent on the branch canals. However, the
branch canals covered under DPA had already been constructed or were under construction,
when the DPA component under AIBP was introduced. This implied that the SSNNL gave
incorrect UCs to Gol, and the funds provided under DPA were used by it on works other than
those covered under AIBP DPA.

78 Narsinghpura, Maliya, Vallabhipur, Viramgam 1&ll, Kharaghoda, Jijanuwada, Goriya, Rajpura and Amarapura



गन्ना Performance कै ता?

Chapter - 7 ‘Audit scrutiny also revealed that during the period 2003-04 to 2004-05, against the actual
Financial ‘expenditure of Rs. 1702 crore incurted by the SSNNI, the State Government reported an
Management ‘expenditure of Bs. 2987 crore fo Gol. Thus, the State Government overstated expenditure

Incurred under 88

7.7.2 Other Cases of Diversion of Funds

‘An amount of Rs, 280.00 crore received by the various implementing agencies were either
parked in banks, utilised under other miscellaneous heads of accounts not related to AIBP ot
«verted for utilisation on non-AIBP works projects under the implementing agency or given
as advances not recovered adjusted etc. n Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Xashmit, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maniput, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
‘ipura and Uttar Pradesh (14 States). Details of such cases of parking and diversion of
programme funds are given below:

‘Table 21 - Instances of Diversion of Funds

Amount (Rs. in 0०) | Detalis

Assn ost Deed meet बला of consultancy sences and
uc थे पक.

लग 1538 1 8७०७ Engr, Cansion Dvn No 7, Karnal erad|

‘urd aneurin As 105% 0७, avd 20847,
pyro! abiaion snares.

1 IpNawara Wale Series Drs, Rs 489 ७७३ was us
ure 200408 छा costar a rk chan. which wast
en कक ABP compet

inact Pradesh ono Tn wedumané ior pec ud wore ७७28४ beeen

Mash 2006 ard March 2008 one ches.

Jam & Kashnie 22 Fundsin wipe oto leskchoeto schon wre dvd
‘den hp! 200-0 200748 atl e
Ihe rogaren थार

sharhand 1050 शक pects Panne, Sonu ard Up Shark seni,
ede wae dence ehaitaon 008 wine pap

arcouil pad in banks pared aging bluse 15

‘rd 102 mons

erat emo Ine 2०8 (Upper Kish Projet - Stage land Karla
Projet urd wre rod forint exper a rar ABP

anon viper bis paring es 29045,

meniarace ७ bulérgs & squpnenis,beauiaon wots,

परत am In Toutl Miipzpos Projet and Pos, nds ware
‘duareaa nen ABP compners v2. constuion oS que,
‘feb, wal eng sppauch oa purse of vet,
हाथ sary 288७, 8७ ४७७ payers Werk
Caged & wus Pl st, payer ect ise.



z

on

Performance Aust of AIP —

Financial
urd were dor arose of vehicles, corpus and Management
fur, whch wee rot covered te 30084 estas

st 0०७०१(७५.॥ ४७४०) | chapter 7 ||

‘ries

urd ar dverod one xeon ff amas reps
won, consi ता 536. puchasecl sues and putas
lal oedema ne was

152

ards wr oie pated Bark Asa or dora
एड एफ.

Rajesthan

1225

हे ihe Nemade Canal Po, epaymarte Rs 14813 cor
es rae Josou Vit Veen Ngan Linea JW) छा.
311 eva over हा, ad 08 experce ४४४
Booka neq on th Proje hough thee wasn ron
fer suh expend.

1 Apayranto Fs 2882 cre was mad oe contacts ing
2008.8 ७ 98 esto reer syste, hig deny poate
(HOPE sins, ung ouss, sure, nors, pus ee,
ardiragdty chargd ob pj ough nie costo
‘such wars was be 8०1 yb WA, a pare pac
rep,

Intwo tar pros (NP Sap Pec and Garg Cara

edarisaten pet, ds wore dete छ matares ard

‘apa worsen ४०१8 taken pur on Bank

2४86 procs andor making paynt wars cid ior

loins of poet 2

os

Fur er dood omar payne sales ol worchargod
employes, putas o sock al wor nol coved
er ABP, are eb 0888 igh was pari urd
BP

om

Info sens, ABP rds was eras tones paymantol
dle corsurotn ols 18०1 pace nos,
ranterance wos of rr Deep Tube Wel (OT) and Lit
(का Schanes

‘tar Pradesh

65

Furs ore ord lth oll Engines hah
Ergot bar he 6096७ ० Carpi’ 0108 व के sa
in Eins ig, paranlo i alld the sin,
20600 wo saree ५१४७ hep.

Toa [Be 20n00 roe

wi

| may recover the amount

making deductions from the next

State Governments

diverted by the State Governments, if necessary, by

e to the defaulting



_ || and
Evaluation

8.1 Inadequate Monitoring by Central Water Commission

The CWC is to carry out monitoring visits and submit status reports in respect of Major /
Medium projects at least twice a year for the period ending March and September of the year.
The MI projects are to be monitored periodically on a sample basis by CWC and assessed
against pre-determined targets by the MoWR. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed the following:

mAs per the information made available by the CWC, the visits made for monitoring
ranged between 66 per cent to 73 per cent of the stipulated number during 2002-
03 to 2007-08. A comparative chart in respect of the achievement of monitoring
visits is detailed below:

Visits by CWC

bhhbbh
हद

हा 9००५
sits per
project per
year)

Hi Achievernents

2002-03 | 2003-04 | 2004-05 | 2005-06 | 2006-07 | 2007-08 | |



Monitoring
‘and
Evaluation

नग्न Performance कै ता?

Chapter - 8.

Purther, as per information made available by MoWR, in respect of शान irigation Projects
being implemented under AIBP. monitoring visits had been made by MoWRY CWC only in 10
stales covering 57 projects (out of 8699 MI Projects being implemented under AIBP) as
detailed in AnnexureVil.

8.2 Deficient State and Project Level Monitoring

‘The four tier monitoring system of AIBP includes monitoring at State level and Project level
Further, the progress of minor irigaion schemes 8 10 be monitored bythe State Governments
through agencies independent of the construction agencies. Audit scrutiny, however,
revealed:

= State Level Monitoring Committees had not been formed in Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Sinar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashi, arkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashira,
Manipur. Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Untarakhnandand West Bengal (22 tates

1 Project Level Monitoring Committees had not been formed in Andhta Pradesh,
‘Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Xashmit, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashira
Meghalaya, Nagaland, risa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttarakhand and West,
Bengal (20States

1 The CWCailed to monitor Mi Schemes periodically ona sample basis in Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
‘Manipur Mizoram, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (11 States) Further,
the State Government also did not monitor the MI Projects through agencies
independent ofthe construction agencies in Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya
Mizoram, Nagaland, 01853, Tripura, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (13 States)

8.3 Evaluation and Impact Assessment

‘= Ministry of statistics and Programme Implementation (1050) got the AIBP
Projects in 28 States studied through 10 reputed organizatfony consultants and
appointed Water and Power Consultancy Services I} Lid. (WAPCOS) as the
‘eordinator with the responsibility of coordinating with all the consultants
Pertaining to 20 different zones and to prepare a consolidated report The study,
‘which considered the data of various parameters of AIBP upto September 2004,
identified a foal of 93 Major, 71 Medium, 15 ERM and 2804 Minor ttigation
Projects in 28 States and focused on the impact of implementation of AIBP Projets.
& benefits therefor, shortfall’ bottlenecks in implementation, views and
suggestions for speedy completion with special reference to mode of funding and
termsof repayment of CLA. The report was finalized in January 2008,



ft Audie of AIBP —_

= The Study, in its concluding remarks, identified various constraints which had an Chapter - 8

adverse impact on the project implementation and retums on investment which Monitoring
needed tobe removed. These constainty problems included: and
Evaluation

4 Land acquisition,

4 Paymentat compensation tdisplaced persons.

4 Caranceftom statutory authorities, especialy Forest Clearance.

‘4 Recruitment & pope placementof qualified stat.

3. Contractmanagement a projectevel

‘A Delay nreleaseoffunds othe project authorities.

‘The study, apart from highlighting Statewise achievements’ bottlenecks in
‘implementation suggestions for improvement etc, gave general recommendations
‘hich included the fllowing:

‘A. Special efforts need tobe made at Central State Levels for timely release
Of AIBP funds othe project authorities.

‘4. Efflors need to be made to eliminate contractual management problems
atprojectievel

‘4. Problems of land acquisition and forest clearance need to be resolved by
appropriate legislative and administrativereforms.

‘A. Various institutions which are tobe involved for benefit realization viz
Agriculture department, Panchayati Raj, cooperative, and financial &
credit institutions; research organizations etc. must come together and
‘ake responsibility for providing inputs. This aspectwas largely neglected

‘4 Ina future AIBP Projects, planning for production and marketing should
bean important element and those tates which cannot take up this work
should temade accept this asa precondition fr getting AIBP support

‘4 Adequate measures are required to compensate project affected people
Aland acquisition and compensation should be made maximum within
‘wo yearsof project initiation. There shouldbe project clearance deadlines
for each Ministry/ Authority, Uness clearance is provided afte submission
‘of relevant documents by project authorities, t should be presumed that
clearance has been oblained,

3. Theteis need for close scrutiny of ex-ante crop production data provided in
the project reports to obtain project clearance from the Gol. The highly
exaggerated productivity figures inflate BC Ratio and economic rate of
return, thereby improving the chance of inclusion under क्र?



HI) 7००० aust of ap

Chapter -9 Despite the fact that such an elaborate evaluation had been carried out by MOSPI and the

Monitoring report was finalized in January 2008, the MoWR/ CWC did not make any effort to circulate the

ans report of the Evaluation Study to the States/ implementing agencies ofthe Projects, to share
valuation

the findings ofthe study and initiate remedial measures on the constraints highlighted inthe
study, This is evident from the fact that the State Governments’ implementing agencies of
Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmit,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (19
States) reported that the State Government’ CWC/ MoWR had not conducted any type of study,
evaluating the AIBR

2. Remote Sensing Technology (RST) was not used o monitor the progress ofthe AIBP
Projects in Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmit, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan. Sikkim, Tripura, Utar
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal (22States).

= AS per the information made available by MaWR, the National Remote Sensing
‘Agency (NRSA), Hyderabad was entrusted with the conduct of a study to evaluate
‘the physical achievements af 56 AIBP projects, out of which repors in respect of 17
ABP Projects had been submitted to the CWC as of June/ July 2008, The MoWR!
‘CWC, however, did not make any effort to share the results ofthe study with the
State Governments as is evident from the fact that the State Governments of
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Manipur and
Orissa, implementing these 17 Projects were unaware of any such monitoring
study using RST.

Recommendation - 14

‘The Ministry/ CWC should ensure that the stipulated monitoring visits twic
to all major and medium projects are carried out without fail. As regards
irrigation projects, a reasonable sample of projects should be inspected by the
Ministry/ CWC; if CWC is unable to carry out such inspections, the Ministry may
consider hiring its own consultants for such inspections.



Conclusion | ॥
=

‘The Accelerated Irrigation Benefis Programme had failed to achieve its targeted objective of
‘accelerating completion of large irigation projects and delivery of the benefits of irigation water to
‘the farmers, despite lapse of more than 13 yeas since inception and release af nearly 8. 26,000
‘roreof ७० assistance. While progress in completion of major, medium, and minor irigation projec
already taken up under AIBP was very poor, fresh projets were being taken up under the
programme and funds provide for such new projects, without adequate atention being focussed
‘on existing incomplete projects. Even the irrigation potential reportedly created under ABP projects
‘was nol being fully utilised, and the Ministry of Water Resources did not have project-wise data
regarding utilisation of irigation potential. 1n the case of minor ierigation projects, the Minsty did
not have project wise detalls regarding ether creation or uilsation of irrigation potential and could
‘only furnishump sum figures ona year-wiseand Stae-wise basis.

‘There were numerous deficiencies in planning and approval of AIBP projects, particulary वा the
formulation of DPRs as well n the calculation of Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR} to assess the economic
viability of projects. Project execution was also deficient, with lack of synchronised execution of
different project components (dam and headworks; main and branch canals: dstibutares; and
‘water courses), construction of canals in patches with substantial gaps, and delayed completion of
railway and highway crossings. Non-fulfilment of pre-requisites, viz. timely acquisition of the
complete land requited and obtaining forest and other clearances were other major hindrances to
Project execut



HI ताल mt tase

Chapter - 10

Conclusion

Financial management was poor, with the majority of grants during 2005-08 being released to just six
‘States without adequate linkages to project completion. There were also large scale instances of
diversion of AIBP funds for other purposes, gant of undue benefits, and other cases of irregular and
‘unauthorised expenditure. Monitoring and evaluation systems, both atthe Central and Statelevels, were
also deficient in the case ofminor irrigation projects, monitoring by CWCwas insignificant.

‘TheGol needs to take frm steps to ensure the achievement the targeted objectives of AIBR by focusing
fon completion of existing projects (rather than taking up more fresh projects), and ensuring and
‘monitoring utlsation of irrigation potential already created, so that the huge funds invested in these
projectsareputto productive use



State Specific Findings

10.1 Andhra Pradesh

10.2 Arunachal Pradesh

10.3 Assam

10.4 Bihar

10.5 Chhattisgarh

10.6 Gujarat

10.7 Haryana

10.8 Himachal Pradesh

10.9 Jammu & Kashmir
10.10 Jharkhand

\ 9 .] aie) - 10.11 Karnataka

\ J owas जन ० _ 10.12 Kerala

10.13 Madhya Pradesh

10.14 Maharashtra

10.15 Manipur

10.16 Meghalaya

10.17 Mizoram

10.18 Nagaland

10.19 Orissa

10.20 Punjab

10.21 Rajasthan

10.22 Sikkim

10.23 Tripura

10.24 Uttar Pradesh

10.25 Uttarakhand

10.26 West Bengal | |

ws

LL g
३३ कस ym बे
I SP की iS
Urea, pag §

aDivapraoesi <>



ANDHRA PRADESH



Andhra Pradesh

10.1.1 Background Chantercald

State
During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned 30 major/ medium irrigation projects and 61 minor irrigation Specific
projects in Andhra Pradesh, and released Rs. 2662 crore and Rs. 27 crore respectively towards these Findings
projects. Of these, a sample of 7 major/ medium irrigation projects and 10 minor irrigation projects Andhra
was selected for detailed audit scrutiny: Pradesh

10.1.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the total of 30 major/ medium irrigation projects 11 projects were sanctioned between 1996-97
and 2004-05, and Rs. 956.89 crore of Gol assistance was provided during 1996-2005. However, only
six of these projects were reportedly complete, and five projects were still incomplete/ non-
commissioned - one completed but not commissioned, two abandoned and one ongoing. Even in
the case of the six completed projects, there were time overruns of one to five years, as detailed
below:

Table S1- Status of AIBP projects in Andhra Pradesh sanctioned upto 2004-05

Year of

No. | Name of Project pe Sanction Status Remarks
1 | Sriramsagar Stage-|__| Major 1996-97 | Commissioned Delay of 5 years in completion
2 | Cheyyeru(Annamaya) | Medium | 1996-97 | Commissioned Delay of 2 years in completion
3 | Jurala (Vi) Major 1997-98 | Commissioned Delay of 4 years in completion
4 | Somasila Major 1997-98 | Completed but not =
functioning/ commissioned
5 | Nagarjunasagar (III) | Major 1998-99 | Commissioned Delay of 3 years in completion
6 | Madduvalasa (V) Medium | 1998-99 | Commissioned Delay of 1 years in completion
7 | Gundalavagu (V) Medium | 2000-01 | Abandoned -
8 | Maddigeda (V) Medium | 2000-01 | Ongoing Work still in progress
9 | Kanupur canal (It!) Medium | 2000-01 | Abandoned =
10. | Yerrakaluva (V) Medium | 2000-01 | Ongoing Work still in progress
11 | Vamsedhera phase! | Major 2002-03 | Commissioned Delay of 1 year in completion

Despite the poor progress of projects sanctioned during 1996-2005, 19 new projects were added
under AIBP during 2005-08, and received Gol assistance of Rs. 1731.65 crore during this period; of
these, none of the projects were reportedly complete. By contrast, the 11 projects sanctioned earlier



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 under AIBP received Gol assistance of only Rs. 24.57 crore during the same period. The issue of

State certain states (including Andhra Pradesh) cornering the vast majority of AIBP funds during 2005-08,
Specific without linkages to the completion of AIBP projects and providing an incentive for inclusion of AIBP
Findings projects driven by construction work, has already been highlighted in para 7.1 of the report. This,
Andhra further, shows lack of commitment by the state government in completing the older projects
Pradesh sanctioned under AIBP. with attention being focused on inclusion of fresh projects under AIBP and

receipt of Gol assistance therefor.

As regards MI projects, only two of the 61 minor irrigation projects, which were taken up in 2006-07,
were reportedly complete as of September 2008.

10.1.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Of the seven test-checked major/ medium irrigation projects, four projects i.e. Thotapalli barrage,
Komaram Bhim, Ralivagu and Yerrakaluva were still incomplete, while three projects (SRSP
Stage-l, Veligallu Project”, and Alisagar LIS) were reportedly complete. However, audit scrutiny of
the reportedly complete projects revealed the following:

1] In respect of the Veligallu project, there was 100 per cent shortfall in reported creation
of irrigation potential (vis-a-vis the target) due to non-completion of rehabilitation &
resettlement works. In respect of SRSP Stage-l and Alisagar LIS, the reported creation
of irrigation potential could not be verified, as no supporting ayacut registers, water
release schedules etc. were maintained by the Water Users Associations.

/ There was variation in the figures of IP created reported by the State Government and
MoWRas detailed below:

Table S2 - Variation in IP creation in respect of AIBP projects in Andhra Pradesh

As reported by State As per Difference
Government to Audit | MoWR in IP
Report created

S.No.| Name of Audit Findings

Project

1 | SRSPStage,| 122560ha | 115972ha | 117910ha | 1938ha — | No supporting ayacut registers,

Karimnagar water release schedules etc.,
were maintained by the Water
Users Association (WUAS).

2 | AlisagarLift | 21769ha 18473 ha 21769 ha 3296 ha There was no new IP creation,
Irrigation as this Lif irrigation scheme
Scheme, was only stabilizing/
Nizamabad

supplementing the source of
existing ayacuts. Further, no
supporting ayacut registers,
water release schedules etc.,
were maintained by the Water
Users Association (WUAs).

* The project was declared complete by MoWR; however, this was not shown complete in the records of the state implementing agencies.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

Photographs of two Ongoing AIBP projects in Andhra Pradesh as of September 2008 Chapter - 10

a State
Specific
Findings

Andhra
Pradesh

Ongoing work at Thotapally Barrage Project, Vizianagaram District



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 / The project completion certificates in respect of the Alisagar LIS had not been prepared
State as of September 2008.

Specific 7 i. 7

Findings Out of 10 test-checked Minor Irrigation Projects:

Andhra / Only two projects (Formation of new tanks at Nambala and Thugeda villages of

Pradesh Adilabad district) were completed. However, completion reports had not been issued
as of September 2008, as no water was released to the fields due to non-construction of
field channels, despite water being impounded in the tanks. Thus, even these two
complete projects were not delivering the intended benefits. The remaii
were still incomplete as summarised below:

Table $3 - Incomplete MI Projects test-checked in Andhra Pradesh

Date of Target date of | Status as on| Reasons for non compl
Completion Sep-2008 being non-functional

1. | Formation of new tank | 11.07.2006 10.07.2007 Work in Completion reports had not been
across Mangli varrey progress submitted. No water was released
near Nambala (V) to the fields due to non-construction
Adilabad District of field channels

2 | Formation of newtank | 16.07.2006 15.01.2007 Work in. -
Rechini Ragadi near progress
Rebbana (V) Adilabad
District

3 | Formation of new tank | 21.02.2008 20.02.2009 Work in Due to non-acquisition of land, the
across Kankilavorre progress work had not commenced as of
near Marrigudem (V) September 2008,

Adilabad District

4 | Formation of newtank | 27.12.2007 25.12.2008 Work in _
across local stream progress
near Nandulapalli (V)
Adilabad District

5 | Formation ofnewtank | 17.06.2008 16.06.2009 Work in Due to non acquisition of land,
across branch of progress the work had not commenced as
Bkkalavagu near of September 2008.

Nandulapalli (४)
Adilabad District

6 | Formation of newtank | 1.12.2007 1.12.2008 Work in _
across Mearamvagu progress
near Medaram (V)
Adilabad District

7 | Construction of pick 02.12.2006 14.09.2007 Work in Non approval of tentative
up anicut across progress drawings of the projects and
Musi river near stoppage of works by the
Muppavaram (V) contractor.

Prakasam District

8 | Construction of 21.07.2005 20.07.2006 Work in Non approval of tentative drawings
multipurpose progress of the projects

checkdam across
Musi river near
Ananthavaram (V)
Prakasam District



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Target date 0 i Chapter - 10
Completion State
9 | Construction of anicut | 12.01.2007 | 11.01.2008 | Work in Non approval of tentative drawings Specific
‘cum road across progress of the projects Findings
Maneru River near
Machavaram (V) Andhra
Prakasam District Pradesh
10 | Raising FTL & 19.12.2007 18.12.2008 Work in _
improvements to progress
Valleru Tank near
Valeru (V). Prakasam
District

10.1.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

There were no preliminary project reports or DPRs for any of the selected 10 MI projects. Also, there
‘were no scheme-wise calculations of BCR - only a certificate from the State Government that the BCR
was more than 1. Nevertheless, these projects were approved for assistance by the Gol.

10.1.5 Financial Management

10.1.5.1 Undue benefits to contractors

Audit scrutiny revealed that contract agreements for two projects — Alisagar LIS and
Thotapally Barrage Project - were awarded on fixed scope basis. However, the scope of
work was not precisely defined, and was subsequently altered during execution. Further,
the milestones for the project were not specified by the State Government, but were fixed
on the basis of proposals from the contractors, and were also revised in cases of delay/non-
completion of work in accordance with the original milestones.

Further, undue benefits of Rs. 33.67 crore, primarily on account of variation in scope for
fixed scope projects, were passed on to contractors, as summarized below:

Table $4 - Undue Benefits to Contractors in AIBP projects in Andhra Pradesh

Name of Project | Amount (Rs. in crore) | Au gs
1 | Alisagar Lift 25.88 @ Reduction of number of rows and length of pipeline
Irrigation Scheme during execution.

हब. Though the agreement conditions stipulated that the
contractor was responsible for construction of Road under
Bridge, separate payment was made for that work.

lm There was reduction in the length of the canal by

2.26 Km while executing the work.

2 | Thotapalli Barrage 4.81
Project



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 Name of Project | Amount (Rs. in crore) | Audit Findings

State

Specific 3 | Sri Khomaram 2.98 lm Two per cent of the agreement amount was to be
Findings Bhim गिणुन्ण deducted towards maintenance, but no such deduction

was made from the intermediate payment.
| ies व. Seigniorage charges amounting to Rs.0.32 crore on
ades' earth used for refiling of excavated Cut of Trench (COT)
and formation of embankment with borrowed soils were
not recovered.

10.1.5.2 Other Financial Irregularities

Table $5 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Andhra Pradesh

Nature of Irregularity Details

Non-submission of UCs ™ Utilisation Certificates for Rs. 12.55 crore (Rs 5.84 crore for Yerrakalva and
Rs 6.71 crore for Ralivagu projects) of Gol assistance during 2004-07 had not
been submitted to CWC.

Diversion of funds mm Expenditure of Rs. 1.21 crore was irregularly incurred out of AIBP funds for repair
work on the Yerrakalva Project.

Wasteful expenditure @ In one minor irrigation project (Construction of multipurpose checkdam across

Musi river near Avarama), an anicut with two lift irrigation schemes was to be
constructed at a cost of Rs. 7.80 crore. The contractor, however, stopped the work
after completing the anicut at a cost of Rs. 1.97 crore. No irrigation potential had,
thus, been created without the lift irrigation.

10.1.6 Monitoring & Evaluation

/ No mechanism for evaluation of projects to assess creation of envisaged Irrigation
Potential, the increase in Agricultural Production/Irrigated area of the major crops,
multiple cropping system, and the achievement of the desired Benefit Cost ratio
existed in the State.

. In the selected 7 major/ medium projects, there was a substantial shortfall in field
inspections by CWC, ranging from 50 to 86 per cent.



ARUNACHAL PRADESH



Arunachal Pradesh

10.2.1 Background

During 1999-2008, Gol sanctioned 1736 minor irrigation projects in Arunachal Pradesh, and
teleased Rs. 154 crore towards them. Of these, 749 projects were sanctioned during the period 2003-
08, and assistance of Rs. 135 crore released for these projects.

Table S6 - Ml Projects in Arunachal Pradesh

हर Number of Completed Total Availability of Funds Reported
Year of Sanction | projects Sanctioned (Gol Share + State Share) Expenditure
(Rs. in Crores) (Rs. in Crores)

2003-2004 | 275 | 275 | 25.00 | 25.00
2004-2005 | 00 | 00 | 12.50 | 12.50
2005-2006 =| 243 |. शा | 22.50 | 22.50
2006-2007 | 178 | 00 | 29.70 | 29.70
2007-2008 | 53 | 00 | 45.45 | 45.45
Total | 1736 | 1473 | 135.15 | 135.15

Out of the 749 projects, 21 projects in three divisions (Itanagar, Ziro and Pasighat) of the Water
Resources Department were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.2.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out of the 1736 projects sanctioned during 1999-2008, 1473 projects were reportedly complete, as of
November 2008. Further, out of 749 projects sanctioned during 2003-08, only 486 projects were
reportedly completed; none of the 231 projects sanctioned during 2006-08 were reportedly
complete.

10.2.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

While all the 21 projects selected for audit scrutiny were reportedly complete, field audit revealed
that 11 of these projects were not in functional condition, as summarized below:

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Arunachal
Pradesh

Px



Performance Audit of AIBP

There was no water
supply in the main field
canal, as the retaining
wall at the main head
had been completely
damaged, reportedly by
floods during June
2008. Further, about 500
metre of the main canal
was found fully buried
under sand and debris.

Due to heavy floods in
June 2008, 25 metre of
the field canal was
damaged. This was
subsequently repaired
using 3-4 Gl pipes.
However, this was not
sufficient to restore the
full flow of water, and
there was no water in
300 metre of channel on
the second side of the
command area.

The head work and
main canal in the MI
Project was totally
damaged, reportedly
by floods in June
2008. The 300 metre
main channel was
fully buried under
sand and rocky dunes.



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10

The headwork was totally —_\—§
damaged, reportedly by State
floods in June 2008, and Specific
Findings

could not be identified
during the field visit.
Further, 20 metre of the
main channel was
completely buried under
debris and rocky stones
and could not be traced,
while the remaining part
of the channel of 40 metre
was partially filled with
sand.

Arunachal |
Pradesh

Px

About 900 metre of
earthen canal was
found damaged at
many places due to
landslides, and no
water was flowing
through the main
channel from the
headworks to the tail
end.

About 900 metre of
earthen canal was.
found damaged at

many places due to
landslides, and no
water was flowing

through the main
channel from the
headworks to the tail
end.

Damaged earthen canal at MI Project from Teer Stream to Hoya Happa at Yachuli Village, Zito Division



Performance Audit of AIBP

The headwork was
completely damaged, and
the 100 metre concrete and
cement work on the main
side wall, which was
reportedly carried out with
AIBP funding, was buried
under rocky stones.
Beneficiaries had made
alternate arrangements for
flow of water, by raising
the height of the side wall
with rocky stones.

The headworks and the
tenovated section of the
channel of 20 metre from the
main source were found totally
damaged. In addition, the
remaining portion of the main
channel was damaged and
covered with debris and sand.
Although the villagers had
made some makeshift
arrangements, the full
quantum of water at the
Starting point was not reaching
the tail end.

The original headwork was
completely damaged, and
water was being diverted
by a temporary headwork
of wire created boulders.
There was approximately 50
per cent loss of water in
transit, most probably due
to water seepage, and
beneficiaries requested
construction of the entire
earthen embankment of the
channel in pucca form.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Arunachal |
Pradesh

Px

The retaining wall of
the head work, required
for storing the water at
the source and lifting it
for diversion to the
main field channel, was
totally damaged.
Consequently, no water
was flowing through the
main field channel.

Head work stated to have
been constructed in 30
metre area, was found to
be totally damaged and
washed away. Presently,
the water from main
stream to the main
channel had been
diverted with an
alternative arrangement
of raised platform/
structure constructed/ with
the support of wire
created boulders.

Damaged headwork at “Improvement and Renovation of Sipir MI Project” at Ayang Village,
Pasighat Division

10.2.4 Planning and Approval of Projects
Audit scrutiny of Minor Irrigation Projects revealed the following:

/ Contrary to the AIBP guidelines, five improvement and renovation works in
Pasighat and Ziro Divisions at a cost of Rs. 56.20 lakhs were approved and taken up
under AIBP.

1] Although the project proposals were stated to be based on prior survey and
investigation, no survey reports were shown to audit, and the authenticity of data
indicated in the DPRs could, thus, not be verified.

/ The DPRs did not indicate the schedule for completion.



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter-10 40.2.5 Financial Management

State वि वि en 4००१० # 4
Specific Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:
Findings
Arunachal Table S7 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Arunachal Pradesh
छाप) Nature of Irregularity Details
Px Short release of funds ™ Out of the total funds of Rs. 45.96 crore received from MoF, the State Government
released only Rs. 41.32 crore to various divisions during 2007-08.
Rush of expenditure Unusual rush of expenditure during the last quarter of the financial year, in particular

the month of March, during 2003-08; between 69 to 73 per cent of the annual
expenditure was incurred in March, and 76 to 82 per cent of the annual expenditure
was incurred in the last quarter.

10.2.6 Non-functional Water Users Associations

According to the AIBP guidelines, projects were to be handed after completion to Water
Users Associations, who would be responsible for their maintenance by levying water
charges. However, audit scrutiny of the 21 test-checked projects revealed that the Water
Users Associations were not fully functional, nor had assets created under AIBP been
handed over to the users. Further, water distribution schedules were also not found in
place.

10.2.7 Monitoring and Evaluation
Audit scrutiny revealed that:

. The State Level Monitoring Committee had not been formed. Further, Project Level
Committees had not been formed in two test-checked Divisions (Pasighat and Ziro),
while in the third Division (Itanagar), although a Project Level Committee had
purportedly been formed, details of the Committee's meetings were not made
available to audit.

. Evaluation of the completed projects for assessing the improvement in irrigation
potential and utilization, agricultural production and cropping pattern had not
been carried out.

nnn


10.3.1 Background

During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned 10 major/ medium irrigation projects and 289 minor irrigation
projects in Assam. The Gol and State Government releases towards these projects and reported
expenditure during 1996-2008 are summarized below:

Table S8 - Profile of AIBP Projects in Assam

Category of No. of Projects Gol Releases | State Government Reported Expenditure
projects (Rs. incrore) | Contribution (Rs. (Rs. in crore)
Major/Medium | 10 | 44.68 | 34.63 | 63.35

Minor | 289 | 140.98 | 21.16 | 145.78

Out of the above, a sample of two major/ medium projects - Champamati Irrigation Project and
Modernisation of Jamuna Irrigation Project - and 25 minor projects were selected for detailed audit
scrutiny.

10.3.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out of the 10 major/ medium projects (which were all taken up under AIBP between 1996-97 and
2001-02), only five projects were completed by December 2009. Even the completed projects had
time overruns of 2 to 9 years, and a total cost overrun of Rs. 485.44 crore. Details of the
Major/Medium projects are given below:

Table $9 - Status of Major/Medium 8187 projects in Assam

os हु Year of Expenditure as | Expected date | Time over-run | Cost over-run with
Nane.cd iriestion शिणुभ्ण Inclusion on March 2008 | ofcompletion | before AIBP | reference to original]
under AIBP_ | (Rs. in crore) After AIBP Estimated Cost
(March 2008) | (Rs. in crore)

Dhansiri (Major) 1996-97 195.36 2009-10 30 years 179.53

9 years
Champamati (Major) 1996-97 72.94 2009-10 25 years 57.62

9 years
Bodikarai (Major) 1996-97 49.89 = = 46.33
Integrated I.P. on Kollong 1996-97 79.30 - - 74.73
Basin (Major)
Pohumara (Medium) 1996-97 39.92 March 2008 16 years 34.95

9 years
Rupahi (Medium) 1996-97 7.56 - 20 years 5.73

9 years

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Assam |



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 an , Year of Expenditure as | Expected date | Time over-run| Cost over-run with
ia Name of Irrigation Project inciusion | on March 2008 | of completion | before AIBP | reference to original
Ee under AIBP | (Rs. in crore) After AIBP | Estimated Cost

Specific (March 2008) | (Rs. in crore)
Findings
Borolia (Medium) 1996-97 64.53 2008-09 25 years 57.76
9 years
| Assam
Buridihing (Medium) 1996-97 17.42 2008-09 25 years 16.28
Syears
Waipur (Medium) 1996-97, 14.50 - 22 years 12.51
9 years
Modernisation of 2001-02 29.27 2008-09 7 years NIL
Jamuna |.?, (Major) 2years
Total | 80.09 | 485.44
Failure of the State Government to contribute matching share and delayed release of CLA/Grant were
the main reasons for delay in completion of projects ranging from 9 years to 39 years.
10.3.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects
As regards the two test-checked major/ medium projects, only 1 project was completed.

/ The Champamati Irrigation Project had not been completed after 12 years of
inclusion. The main reason was non-acquisition of land, with only 176 ha out of the
required 478 ha having been acquired.

= _In Modernisation of Jamuna Irrigation Project, there was a time overrun of 2 years
in completion of the project, reportedly due to insufficient flow of funds and law
and order problems in the State.

| | Champamati Irrigation Project (Head Work)



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Assam |

Modernisation of Jamuna Irrigation Project (Head Work)

As regards the 25 test-checked minor irrigation projects;
ry] Six projects were in the General Area; of these, none had been completed.

. 19 projects were under the Karbi Anglong Autonomous District Council (KAAC)
area. Of these, 10 projects had been completed, with two projects delayed by one
year. Cost overrun of Rs. 0.24 crore was incurred on 5 projects, by diversion of funds
from other minor projects.

As regards creation of irrigation potential, the shortfall in respect of major/ medium and minor
projects ranged from 7 to 77 per cent and from 20 to 41 per cent respectively. In respect of 1 Major
(Champamati Irrigation Project) and 20 test-checked minor irrigation projects, no assessment of the
IP utilized was carried out at any level.

Umphoo MI Scheme (Head Work)



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Assam

uf”

Mortem MI Scheme (Head Work)

There was variation in the figures of percentage utilization of IP (ranging from 17 to 58 percent) as
reported by the Irrigation Department and the Directorate of Economics and Statistics.

10.3.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

Audit scrutiny revealed that technical sanction for the two test-checked major/ medium projects was
accorded in piecemeal fashion through 159 sanctions between November 1991 and August 2008,
evidently to avoid sanction by a higher-level competent authority.

As regards minor irrigation projects,

. No DPRs were prepared in respect of any of the 131 projects under AIBP Instead,
“concept papers”, which contained a brief description of the project including
location, index map, annual irrigation area, length of canal, targeted irrigation
potential, cropping pattern, projected BCR and abstract of project cost, were
prepared. However, these did not conform to the full requirements/ specifications of
DPRs. Nevertheless, these projects were approved by the MOWR.

बा The 143 minor irrigation projects in KAAC areas were approved by a separate
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC). In respect of general areas, the State TAC was
not formed till 2008-09, and 131 projects were approved by the MOWR without TAC

i approval.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.3.5 Financial Management Chapter - 10
State

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management: Specific
Findings

Table S10 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Assam

Nature of Irregularity Details Assam |

Undue benefits to lm Advance payments of Rs. 3.22 crore were made between March 2006 and
contractors March 2008 and irregularly charged to the projects, instead of the Miscellaneous
Public Works Advances account head against individual officers for watching
recovery and eventual adjustment within a month. Of this amount, only Rs. 0.29
crore was adjusted as of July 2008.

Short-release of funds ™ There were short-releases of Gol assistance of Rs. 15.96 crore and Rs. 18.83 crore
by the State Goverment to the implementing agencies during 2003-08; and
delays ranging from 37 to 376 days in release of funds.

Diversion of funds Funds amounting to Rs. 0.31 crore allocated under AIBP were diverted for
unrelated purposes.

Wasteful expenditure m@ One case of wasteful expenditure of Rs. 0.35 crore in the Champamati project,
and another case of irregular expenditure of Rs. 0.36 crore without administrative
approval on a minor irrigation project were noticed.

Poor collection of @ Although water rates were revised in March 2000 to meet the condition for reforming
water rates States (envisaged under the earlier guidelines), collection by the Irrigation
Department against demands raised was very poor, with only Rs. 0.16 crore out of
total demand of Rs. 13.90 crore being recovered during 2003-04 to 2007-08.

10.3.6 Monitoring and Evaluation
Audit scrutiny revealed that :

/ The State Government did not have an independent monitoring mechanism for
minor irrigation projects. Although a central monitoring cell in the Irrigation
Department was reportedly monitoring such projects, no reports on monitoring
were onrecord.

/ A performance evaluation of AIBP projects by an external agency at the instance of
MOSP1 attribute the main reasons for delay in completion of projects in Assam to the
failure of the state in contributing its matching share and delayed release of Gol
assistance by the State Governments. These problems had, however not been
resolved.

1] During 2003-08, CWC conducted 26 inspections, covering 7 major / medium and
only 1 minor projects. No project was visited every year during 2003-08, and only
four projects were visited twice in any of the five years.



10.4.1 Background Chapter - 10

State
Under 8188 three major, two medium and four minor irrigation projects had been taken up in Bihar. Specific
During 2003-08, Gol provided assistance of Rs. 164.82 crore and the State Government released Rs. Findings
567.05 crore, against which expenditure of Rs. 707.87 crore was incurred.
Out of the above, two major projects - Western Kosi Canal Project (WKCP) and Sone Canal Bihar | |

Modernisation Project (SCMP)—and four minor projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.4.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects
Of the five major/ medium irrigation projects,

/ Two major projects, Western Kosi Canal Project and Sone Canal Modernisation
Project, which were included in 1996-97, had not been completed as of March 2008
as the work of distributaries and water courses were yet to be completed, while the
third major project - Durgawati Reservoir Project - was abandoned in 2006-07 for
want of forest clearance.

/ Two medium projects — Upper Kiul Reservoir Project (UKRP) and Orhni Reservoir
Project (ORP) — were reported as complete in March 2007. However, 18 out of the
642 structures in UKRP were yet to be completed as of March 2007; 40 per cent of
the water courses in 087 and 100 per cent of the water courses in UKRP were yet to
be constructed.

All four minor irrigation projects, which were taken up in 2007-08, were ongoing as of March 2008

10.4.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

10.4.3.1 Western Kosi Canal Project (WKCP)

This project is a part of the multi-purpose Kosi Project, and was included under AIBP in
1996-97. The estimated cost as of 1999 was Rs. 830.69 crore, with the 4th revised estimate
of Rs. 1115.71 crore under process. The project was targeted for completion by March
2009.

Audit scrutiny of the records, however, revealed that:

/ As of March 2008, only three out of four distributaries were completed. Slow
acquisition of land was the main bottleneck for completion of distributaries,
with possession of only 883 acres of land taken against the total land demand of
4195 acres as of March 2008.



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 . Five out of the seven railway bridges falling across the WKC Main and Branch
State Canals were yet to be completed, due to lack of effective pursuance by the
Specific Irrigation Departmentwith the Railways.

Findings

/ De-siltation taken up in March 2008 was not completed as of September 2008,
| Bihar as only 7.45 lakh m’ of the targeted earthwork of 13.86 lakh m’ could be
completed.

1] As of February 2008, due to non-functional branch canals, non-completion of
distributaries and slow progress of desiltation, irrigation potential of only 0.24
lakh ha could be utilized, as against the reported creation of 1.68 lakh ha of
irrigation potential.

Siltation in upstream of Western Kosi Main Canal (WKMC) at RD 55 Km



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Bihar है

Breakage in Saharghat Branch Canal at tail end of WKMC

Siltation and vegetation in WKMC at RD 135.45 Km



Le Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Bi Binar

yater at Saharghat Branch Canal of WKMC

Vegetation and non-availability of

10.4.3.2 Sone Canal Modernisation Project (SCMP)

This project was included under AIBP in 2003. The revised cost of the project, as of March
2003, was estimated at Rs. 493.17 crore, with a stipulated completion date of March 2008.

Audit scrutiny, however revealed that:

हा As of March 2008, 12 per cent of the proposed distributaries and 100 per cent of
the water courses were yet to be constructed.

बा Construction of the Western Project Link Canal (WPLC) could not be completed,
due to heavy seepage from the Western main canal and non-clearance from the
Road Construction Department. As a result, IP of 1.69 lakh ha. reportedly
created under AIBP could not be utilised.

हब... Thebanks of the distributaries and sub-distributaries were regularly damaged
they
were notlined.


Performance Audit of AIBP a

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Bihar है

Incomplete WPLC under SCMP

10.4.3.3 Minor Irrigation Projects

In respect of the test-checked minor irrigation projects, audit scrutiny revealed that



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

BB sinar

Damaged embankment of Gerua Reservoir Scheme



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.4.4 Planning and Approval of Projects Chapter - 10
Stat

Audit scrutiny of the projects revealed the following: specific

Findings

m The BC Ratio of WKCP was calculated at 2.794 after adopting the kharif crop
production, which was unrealistic as the command area was completely flood prone, Bih | |
making the kharifcrop uncertain. thar

m The BC Ratio of SCMP was not calculated, and the 2nd revised estimate was not
approved by CWC due to this lacunae.

m In respect of test-checked MI projects, the BC Ratio was calculated on the basis of
assumed crop production and the basic records on the basis of which it was calculated
were not available with the department.

10.4.5 Non-creation & Utilisation of targeted Irrigation Potential
Audit scrutiny revealed that:

= During 2003-08, only 74 per cent of the targeted irrigation potential was reportedly
created under AIBP against which reported utilization was only 51 per cent.

= The figures of created and utilized irrigation potential provided to audit did not have
supporting basic records, and could not be vouchsafed in audit.

10.4.6 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table S11 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Bihar

Nature of Irregularity Details

Irregular expenditure @ In Sone Canal Modemisation Project (SCMP), Rs. 72.20 crore was spent on
metalling of service road, which was wrongly included under the Sub-head
‘Earthwork’ in the estimates.
@ In Western Kosi Project, an expenditure of Rs 7.35 crore was incurred by Western
Kosi Canal Division on unapproved works.

10.4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation
Audit scrutiny revealed that:

m No State Level and Project Level monitoring committees were formed, while the
monitoring cell in the Secretariat merely compiled information furnished by the
Divisions, without any system for verifying the authenticity of information.

m The Chief Engineer, Dehri reportedly conducted 47 field inspections during 2003-08;
however, inspection notes for only four visits were on record.
nnn



CHHATTISGARH

[Note:The Coordinates of Hasdeo Bango Projet, Mahanad Reserve Pojct and Kosareda Project were nol provided by the CWC.


Chhattisgarh

10.5.1 Background Chapter - 10

State
During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned seven major/ medium and 120 minor irrigation projects in Specific
Chhattisgarh, and released 312.60 crore and Rs. 70.27 crore, respectively, towards these projects. Of Findings

these, a sample of three major/ medium projects (Hasdeo Bango Phase- Ill, Mahanadi Reservoir
Project and Kosarteda Project) and 12 minor irrigation projects was selected for detailed audit Chhattisgarh |
scrutiny.

10.5.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the seven major & medium projects taken up under AIBP. two major projects (Hasdeo Bango
Project Phase- Ill and Jonk Diversion) and two medium projects (Shivnath Diversion Project and
Barni Project) had been completed as of March 2008. Of the 120 minor irrigation projects, which
were sanctioned during 2006-08, only two projects were completed as of March 2008.

10.5.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects
Audit scrutiny revealed that:

1] The State Government made adequate allotment of funds for completion of the
projects. Against the central releases of Rs. 299.47 crore for the test-checked major/
medium projects, the State Government provided funding of Rs. 934.10 crore.
Similarly in respect of the 120 minor irrigation projects, against the Gol assistance
of Rs. 70.27 crore, the State Government allocated Rs. 191.63 crore.

/ Of the test-checked major/ medium projects, only one major project (Hasdeo Bango
Phase-lll Project) had been completed. In the Kosarteda Project (Ongoing project),
against the requirement of 237.33 ha of land, 34.4 ha was still pending for
acquisition.

/ Of the test-checked 12 minor irrigation projects, two projects (Kokia Diversion
Scheme and Pandoli Anicut Scheme) had been completed. In six test-checked
minor irrigation schemes”, the main reason for non-completion and non-creation
of irrigation potential was non-acquisition of land.

20 malanger Scheme, Muskuti Diversion, Kokia Diversion/ Renovation, Chendra Tank, Pithama Tank and Jharan Tank



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Chhattisgarh

Roopur Tank Minor Irrigation Scheme

Pandoli Anicut Minor Irrigation Scheme



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.5.4 Financial Management Chapter - 10
State
Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management: Specific
Findings
Table $12 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Chhattisgarh
Chhattisgarh |
Nature of Irregularity Detai
Undue benefits to In Hasdeo Bango Project :
contractors m During excavation of the canal, the contractor over excavated a few reaches

and again filled the gaps and pockets, for which he was paid Rs.11.38 lakh.

@ Royalty amounting to Rs.22.88 lakh was not deducted from two
contractors for payments of use of metal and sand in the cement concrete
lining work in Kurda distributary.

Wasteful expenditure lm In Hasdeo Bango Project the work of erection of gate and cross regulator
amounting to Rs.14 lakh was executed through a contractor during 2003-04.
However, nine months after of issue of completion certificate, the department
declared that the system had failed. Instead of repairing the system through the
defaulter, the department again spent Rs.10.94 lakh through another contractor.

10.5.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme.



be Lake

Rann of Kachohh
=

or ~~
a) 58१2९ ३8

ROVAR PROJECT
Css

a
i
\ Map not to Scale

z=

Int, Boundary _
State Boundary =
District Boundary —
State Capital 10]
Major Irrigation Projects = @)

| Medium irgation Projects. @)

Note: The Co-ordinates of Sardar Sarovar Project, Mukteshwar Project and Bhadar-II Project were not provided by CWC.

i °° — |



10.6.1 Background

During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned 15 major and medium projects in Gujarat. Of these, the largest
project is the Sardar Sarovar Project (SSP), which was included under AIBP in 1996-97 at an
originally approved cost of Rs. 6406 crore for completion by 2000-01. The components under AIBP
are the Narmada Main Canal (Unit-1l) and the distribution system upto minor level (6000-19). As
regards the other 14 major/ medium projects, a provision of Rs. 105.87 crore was made, against
which Gol released Rs. 76.67 crore; the State Government made a provision of Rs. 141.54 crore for
these projects.

10.6.2 Sardar Sarovar Project (SSP)

SSP is being executed by the Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited (SSNNL). Against the original
Cost of RS. 6406 crore, the latest cost estimate proposed by the State Government in July 2007 was Rs.
35,046 crore; this estimate had not yet been approved. Till March 2008, the total investment in SSP
was RS. 26,353 crore, of which Gol assistance was Rs. 5,140 crore. Despite non-approval of the
tevised estimate, Gol released funds of Rs. 837.62 crore during 2007-08. The main audit findings are
as follows:

m= While the originally projected BC Ratio was 2.0, the State Government had not
revised the BCR, while up scaling the costs and the revised project estimates of Rs.
35,046 crore do not mention a revised BCR; the continued economic viability of SSP
is thus notverifiable.

: The project is still ongoing, with a revised completion date of 2010-11. As of March
ee न्न्णा
16 to 28 per cent.

= During 2003-08, despite expenditure of Rs. 4676 crore, the construction of
earthwork, lining and structures ranged between 8 to 65 per cent of the targets.

|| While according investment clearance to SSP the Planning Commission had
stipulateda vertically integrated approach for the implementation schedule for the
canal network, whereby a segment of the canal network, taken from the head, was.

in that segment for the designed potential. Contrarily, priority was accorded to
construction of branch canals, but distributaries, minors and sub-minors were not
developed, leading tonon-creation of the targeted 1९ as summarized below:

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Gujarat |



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 a While seven branch canals were constructed under Phases IIA and IIB between
State October 2001 and May 2008, construction of their distributaries had not been taken
Specific up as of December 2008.

Findings

a Construction of distributaries in blocks 9A4 and 9A5 was completed in June 2002;
| Gujarat however, only 100 km of minors out of a total of 200 km of minors of these
distributaries were completed. Even of these 100 km, water could flow only in 4.70
km due to incomplete stretches. As regards sub-minors for these blocks, 422 km of
sub-minors were constructed as of June 2008, against the envisaged construction
of 719 km by July 2005. Even of these 422 km of sub-minors, water could flow only
in2km.

a While the canal siphon of the Morbi branch canal at the Viramgam —Rajkot railway
line crossing had been completed in May 2005, the contract for construction of the
branch canal had not been awarded till January 2009.

Further, audit scrutiny revealed diversion of Gol assistance of Rs.1833 crore:

/ Gol released Rs. 675.20 crore for extending irrigation benefits to drought prone
area (DPA). Audit scrutiny revealed that the irrigation potential proposed to be
developed under DPA was of seven already constructed branch canals
(Narsinghpura, Maliya, Vallabhipur, Viramgam 1&ll, Kharaghoda and
Jijanuwada) and three under construction branch canals (Goriya, Rajpura and
Amarapura). Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited (SSNNL) provided
utilization certificates to Gol certifying that the funds provided under DPA had
already been spent. However, the branch canals covered under DPA were already
constructedAvere under construction when the DPA component was introduced.
The branch canals which were under construction were still not complete and no
expenditure had been incurred on distributaries or other downstream networks.
This implied that the funds provided under DPA were used by the Company in the
works other than those covered under DPA and SSNNL gave incorrect UCs to Gol.

. Out of the CLA of Rs. 1898 crore received during 2002-05, SSNNL could not utilize
CLA of Rs. 1103 crore. Further, there was a shortfall in expenditure of Rs. 82 crore 35
on 31.03.2002 corresponding to CLA of Rs. 55 crore. The total CLA unutilized till
2004-05 was Rs 1158 crore.

During the period 2003-04 to 2004-05, against the actual expenditure of Rs. 1702 crore
incurred by the SSNNL, the State Government reported an expenditure of Rs. 2987 crore to
Gol. Thus, the State Government overstated expenditure incurred under AIBP.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.6.3 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects Chapter - 10
Stat
Ten of the 14 major/ medium projects (excluding SSP) under AIBP were completed as of March 2008. Spel a
In respect of five projects, no Gol assistance was released during 2004-08. While the reported fund Findings
utilization on the 14 projects during 2003-08 was 34 per cent of the balance estimated cost, only
three per cent of the balance IP was created. Gujarat |

10.6.4 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Of the two test-checked medium projects;

/ Bhadar-II Project was incomplete, due to thin release of funds, delay in acquisition
of land for canals/ distributaries and rehabilitation and resettlement of a village
being submerged. There was a 95 per cent shortfall in creation of IP. Also, the BC
Ratio was deficiently calculated, by not including the cost of on-farm development,
and had not been revised to take into consideration the increase in estimated cost
of Rs. 65.46 crore.

/ Mukteshwar Project was completed in December 2005 with a cost overrun of
Rs. 30.43 crore and time overrun of four years attributed to delay in acquisition of
land, protests by farmers over land acquisition, delay in preparing designs, and
inadequate budget provisions. While, there was a marginal shortfall in creation of
IP of four per cent, vis-a-vis the targeted IP, only 14 per cent of the IP created could
be utilized.

Bhadar-ll Project- Incomplete canal



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Gujarat

Mukteshwar Project-Dry canal with Weeds and Siltation

10.6.5 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $13 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Gujarat

Nature of Irregularity Details

No allocations of Gol funds @ During 2003-04, against allocation of Rs. 4.19 crore for major/medium projects
(other than SSP), only Rs. 0.86 crore was released by Gol, and no allocations were
made during 2004-08.

Irregularities in UCs 1m Instead of sending year-wise UCs, the State Goverment sent consolidated UCs in
July 2004 for Rs. 10.86 crore for 1996-2004 for the Mukteshwar Project and
Rs, 0.87 crore for Bhadar-ll for 2003-04, without getting UCs from the project
divisions; the authenticity of these consolidated UCs could, thus, not be
vouchsafed. Further, UCs for Rs, 27.22 crore for 2001-04 for three ongoing projects
were sent only in July 2004, while UCs for nine projects, completed by March 2003
for Gol assistance of Rs. 37.73 crore, had not been sent to Gol as of March 2008.

10.6.6 Monitoring and Evaluation

The State Level Committee, which was formed only in May 2006, had not met or visited the projects
during 2006-08. As regards SSP the Board of Directors of SSNNL had constituted a project committee
for monitoring progress in August 2007; except for approving contracts, this committee had not done
any meaningful monitoring.


HARYANA
a



Haryana

10.7.1 Background Chapter - 10
State

The Water Resources Consolidation Project (WRCP), intended to achieve an increase in surface water Specific

supplies by reducing seepage losses and increasing the carrying capacities of major canals, received Findings

assistance of Rs 44.50 crore under AIBP during 1996-98 and was declared as completed in 2001-02.

‘Balance Works of WRCP', like repair & rehabilitation of canals, bank strengthening, Haryana |

restoration/strengthening of structures like bridges and ghats etc, were approved for funding under
AIBP in 2002. The project, which had an estimated cost of 135.74 crore, received Gol assistance of
46.05 crore. Expenditure of Rs 176.65 crore was incurred on the project, which was declared 35
completed in 2006-07.

10.7.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Project

/ The project was reportedly completed in 2006-07. However, against the 104
distinct works to be completed by March 2007, 31 works were not taken up. Further,
the shortage in completion of various components of work - earthwork, lining,
structures, cement concrete etc. - ranged from 31 to 70 per cent, despite
expenditure of Rs. 135.47 crore out of the projected cost on these components of
Rs. 147.87 crore.

1] Against the targeted IP of 44,000 ha, IP of only 24,240 ha was reportedly created
up to March 2007. Even this figure was incorrect and unreliable, as 19 out of the 28
divisions audited intimated that no IP was created by the works executed by them
under the project, as these works were in the nature of rehabilitation /repair of
already existing infrastructure.

/ The Engineer-in-Charge, Irrigation, Haryana replied (October 2008) that the IP
targeted and created were calculated in a theoretical manner and did not depend
upon the expenditure incurred on works; the response is not tenable as the targeted
IP was to be calculated as per the AIBP guidelines, and the potential created was to
be taken on actual basis. Further, the working papers for calculation of IP were not
produced to audit.



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter-10 40.7.3 Financial Management

State वि oe aaah मु
Specific Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:
Findings
Table $14 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Haryana
| Haryana
Nature of Irregularity Details
Diversion of funds m Executive Engineer, Construction Division No.17, Kamal irregularly diverted funds
amounting to Rs. 10.51 crore for AIBP works received in 2006-07, for payment of
arbitration awards.
™ Test check of records of Narwana Water Services Division Narwana revealed
(September 2008) that Dhamtan Distributary was to be linked (2004-05) with
Kalwan Feeder. Instead, the tail of the Dhamtan Distributary had been linked
directly to Bhakra Main Line (BML) by constructing a link channel off taking
at RD 538021-L of BML after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 4.83 crore; this was
not an approved AIBP component.
Irregular expenditure In 16 cases of six test checked irrigation circles, excess expenditure of Rs. 7.43

crore was incurred, without obtaining the sanction of competent authority.

Test check of records of 8 divisions revealed that these divisions used AIBP funds
amounting to Rs 5.01 crore for executing works that were not identified under
the approved project.

10.7.4 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme.



HIMACHAL PRADESH



Himachal Pradesh

10.8.1 Background Chapter - 10
During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned one major, two medium, and 278 minor irrigation projects in =
Himachal Pradesh under AIBP. During 2003-08, Gol provided assistance of Rs. 213.69 crore, while Findings
the State contributed Rs. 29.88 crore. The entire available funds of Rs. 243.57 crore were shown as .

expended as of March 2008. Himachal

Of these, two medium Projects namely, Sidhata Medium irrigation Project at Jawali and Changer
Area Medium Irrigation Project at Bassi, and 25 MI Projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.8.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects
Despite being taken up during 1996-2000, none of the major and medium projects were completed.
Of the 278 minor irrigation projects:
/ All 60 minor irrigation projects sanctioned during 1999-2001 were reported as
complete.
/ 73 out of 102 projects sanctioned during 2005-06 were reported as completed.

/ None of the remaining 116 projects, which were sanctioned during 2007-08, were
completed as of March 2008.

10.8.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

10.8.3.1 Sidhata Medium Irrigation Project

This project, which was approved in February 2000 at a cost of Rs. 33.62 crore for
completion by March 2005, had not been completed as of September 2008. Audit scrutiny
revealed that:

/ Only 2.04 km of the main canal had been completed, while several other
components of the main canal e.g. pattra cutting over a length of 0.96 km,
aquaducts over a length of 0.11 km in various isolated reaches, RCC box over a
length of 4.12 km, and tunnel work over a length of 1.31 km remained to be
executed.

1] Out of six lift irrigation schemes, four LIS (Harian, Basantpur, Bagoor and Beh
Maskar) had not been completed/commissioned, while one LIS (Kaldoon) had
been completed, but no irrigation was provided.

1] As against the targeted irrigation potential of 3150 ha, only 185 ha of irrigation
potential had been created.



Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 The main reasons attributed for delay in completion were slow pace of execution of work, and

State railway land falling within the alignment of canal, the case for which was initiated with the Railways.
Specific only in November 2004.

Findings

Himachal नि नि २०५ q F

Pradesh Sidhata Medium Irrigation Project at Jawali as on September 2008



Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

5
Findings

Himachal
Pradesh



Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Himachal
Pradesh



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.8.3.2 Changer Area Medium Irrigation Project

This project, which was approved in September 2000 at a cost of Rs. 28.37 crore for
completion by March 2006, was still incomplete as of October 2008. Audit scrutiny
revealed that:

Out of the six zones of the project, works in only two zones had been completed,
while works in the other zones had only been partly executed.

Against the targeted irrigation potential of 2350 ha, only 176 ha of irrigation
potential had been created as of March 2008.

The reasons attributed for the time overrun were slow pace of execution of works,
lack of effective planning of execution of different components, and non-obtaining
of permission to transfer forest land for use for non-forestry purpose, for which the
case was initiated with the forest department only in October 2008.

॥ tw fl |

Work not executed due to forest land in Pumping machinery for Zone 2A not
Changer Area Medium Lift Irrigation Project at Bassi | | functioning due to lack of power supply

10.8.3.3 Minor Irrigation Projects

Audit scrutiny revealed that six minor irrigation projects (LIS to Village Majhiar Sera and
Pakhrol Phase Il, LIS-cum-FIS Kharahal, FIS Bakhnoj, LIS Kotla Ban, FIS Kardwan, and FIS
Gojra Khakhnal, had not been completed, mainly due to:

Non-starting of work/ slow pace of work;

Delay in according of administrative approval and expenditure sanction, and
finalization of tenders;

Work of field channels and other components being stopped by villagers, due to
failure to obtain their written consent in advance.

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Himachal
Pradesh



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 Further, of these six projects, three projects (LIS Kotla Ban, FIS Kardwan and FIS Gojra Khakhnal)

State were incorrectly declared as completed, even though several major components were yet to be
Specific completed. In one case (FIS Kardwan), the limited irrigation potential created was only utilized in
nts the Rabi cropping season, and no irrigation was provided in the Kharif cropping season.

Himachal

Pradesh

| | Work at FIS Kakhnoj stopped due to objections of villagers



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.8.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table S15 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Himachal Pradesh

Nature of Irregularity Details

Undue benefits to & In two medium projects (Sidhata Medium Irrigation Project and Changer Area

contractors Medium Irrigation Project) and one minor irrigation project (LIS cum FIS Sarwari
River to Kharhal), compensation of Rs. 1.03 crore due on account of non-completion
of work within the stipulated time was not recovered from the contractors.

Injudicious payment & In Sidhata Medium Irrigation Project, in one of the implementing Divisions, instead
of charging the advance payments of Rs. 2.27 crore to Miscellaneous Works
Advances, these were charged to the final head of account of the Project.

Irregular utilization of lm Funds amounting to Rs. 0.79 crore released through Letter of Credit for two MI

budget projects (FIS Gojra Khakhnal & LIS cum FIS Sarwari River to Kharhal) were
debited to final heads of accounts of the works, without actual execution, and the
entire amount was kept under the deposits head.

Diversion of funds @ In4 divisions, CLA/grant of Rs. 39.79 lakh for the execution of 5 AIBP irrigation
schemes (1 medium and 4 minor) were utilized between March 2006 and
March 2008 on other schemes.

10.8.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

1] No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to
monitor the implementation of the programme.

/ As per the instructions of the Engineer-in-Chief, the C.Es, S.Es and E.Es were
required to conduct 4, 6 and 12 inspections of works in a year. However, during
audit scrutiny of the test-checked projects only 6 inspection notes were made
available to Audit. The authenticity of reported inspections could, thus, not be
verified.

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Himachal
Pradesh



LEGEND

= =
नम
pees fo}
accion mies

Medium irigation Prjsccs की.

Note:The Coordinates of Modernization af Ranbir Canal, Madernzation of Dadk Canal, Meernizaton of Mav Khu and Ut igation

| ॥ Scheme Lethpora were not provided by the CWC.


ammu & Kashmir

10.9.1 Background

During the period from 1996-97 to 2008-09 (August 2009), Gol approved 14 major/ medium and 391
minor irrigation projects under AIBP and released Rs. 229.06 crore of assistance during 2002-08. Of
these, one major, three medium and 19 minor irrigation projects were selected for detailed audit
scrutiny.

10.9.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the 14 major/ medium projects, 4 projects were declared as completed, while 47 out of the 391
minor irrigation schemes were reported as completed (of which only 7 schemes were completed
within the stipulated time).

Overall, 86,094 ha of IP was created against the envisaged IP of 198,659 ha. In respect of the 51
completed schemes, IP of only 28,237 ha was created against the envisaged potential of 34,912 ha.

10.9.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects
Audit scrutiny revealed that:

/ Out of the 23 test-checked schemes, despite expenditure of Rs. 119.45 crore during
1996-2008, only three schemes (LIS Lethpora, Improvement to Wani Aram Canal,
and Remodelling of Basantpur Canal) were declared as completed. Even out of these
three schemes reported as completed, completion certificate for the Remodelling of
Basantpur Canal minor irrigation project was wrongly issued, since remodeling of
2.10 km out of 6.30 km of the main canal was not completed as of October 2008.

/ Out of the four test-checked major/ medium schemes, two schemes (Modernisation
of Ranbir Canal and Modernisation of Dadi Canal) were not completed in time, due
to slow pace of execution, execution of additional works, and late release of funds.
This resulted in cost overrun of Rs. 18.77 crore, and time overrun of 6 months to
5years.

1] One minor irrigation project, Lift Irrigation Scheme, Saidgarh, was abandoned /
suspended after expenditure of Rs. 0.66 crore, as the available water source and the
additional water source identified were not sufficient for irrigation.

1] Against the envisaged irrigation potential of 43,938 ha for the 23 test-checked
projects, only 17,204 ha of potential was created; no potential had been created in 8
projects, despite incurring of expenditure. In respect of the two completed projects,
the IP created was only 740 ha against the envisaged potential of 3,632 ha.

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Jammu &
Kashmir



Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10
State
Specific
Findings

Jammu &
Kashmir



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10
State
Specific
Findings

Jammu &
Kashmir

Abandoned well at LIS Saidgarh

Unlined Portion of Basantpur Canal



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter-10 10.9.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

State

Specific Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in selection/ prioritisation of schemes:

जीएशीएड बा Rs. 1.25 crore of AIBP funding was irregularly released during 2008-09 to one
| Jammu & scheme -— Construction of Unis Ujroo Khul - which was being financed from another

Kashmir scheme, the Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojna.

. Gol irregularly released Rs. 14.92 crore during 2008-09 for the Modernisation of
Ranbir Canal Project, which had not been cleared by the Planning Commission as
of June 2008.

10.9.4.1 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $16 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Jammu & Kashmir

Nature of Irregul: Details

Delayed release of funds m There were delays ranging between 28 and 184 days in release of funds by the
department in respect of 12 out of 23 test-checked schemes during the period
2004-05 to 2007-08.

Funds lying unutilised ™ Out of the total Central assistance of Rs. 229.06 crore during 2002-08,

Rs. 17.99 crore remained unutilized as of March 2008. Further, matching State
share of Rs. 1.02 crore could not be utilized during the same period.

Parking of funds under ™@ Inone division, an amount of Rs. 0.44 crore was parked under deposits as of
deposits March 2008.
Diversion of funds @ Funds of Rs. 2.02 crore in respect of 3 out of 23 test-checked schemes were

diverted/utilized on activities/items not related to the programme of AIBP /
approved schemes reports of the schemes during the period 2003-04 to 2007-08.

Reflection of Inflated figures @ Rs. 0.62 crore was irregularly reflected as expenditure incurred in the utilization
of expenditure certificate issued to the Government of India in respect of LIS Saranoo Thathi,
when the whole amount was mainly advanced to various agencies.

10.9.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme.



JHARKHAND

[Note:The Co-ordinates of TapkaraReservot Project were not provided bythe CWE



Jharkhand

10.10.1 Background Chapter - 10

Gol sanctioned 1 major and 8 medium irrigation projects under AIBP during 1998-2005. During owe
2002-08, Gol provided assistance of Rs. 48.34 crore and the State contributed Rs. 203.21 crore, out of eae
which the reported expenditure, as of March 2008, was Rs. 210.15 crore. Out of the 9 projects taken

up, 4medium projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny. Jharkhand |

10.10.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the 9 major/medium irrigation projects, only two projects (Latratu Reservoir project and Tapkara
Reservoir project) had been completed, and one project (Torari Reservoir project) had been kept in
abeyance since 1999-2000 due to public hindrances.

10.10.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Audit scrutiny of the four test-checked medium projects revealed that:

/ Only one project, Tapkara Reservoir Project, was completed. Even from this project,
irrigation was provided only in 311 ha, against the targeted CCA of 2,732 ha. The
targeted CCA was not being achieved due to heavy leakage of water from the main
canal from chainage 0 to 100 kms, thin flow of water in chainage 101 to 150 kms,
and no water flow beyond 150 kms, as the construction of aquaduct, branch canal
and distributaries and repair/ maintenance work had not been undertaken

. For the three ongoing projects, the cost overrun ranged from 10 to 15 times of the
original cost, and the time overrun ranged from 18 to 25 years. Non-acquisition of
land was the main cause of non-completion of the three ongoing projects.

/ Unsynchronised execution of various components (Dam/head works, main/branch
canals, distributaries and water courses) was seen in all four projects, as
summarised below:

Table $17 - Unsynchronised Execution of Project components in Jharkhand
Projects | Unsynchronised Execution of AIBP components

The dam and main/ branch canals were 56 and 28 per cent complete; no work on

Panchkhero Reservoir
distributaries and water courses was done.

The dam and main/ branch canals were 98 and 83 per cent complete; no work on

Sonua Reservoir
distributaries and water courses was done.

The dam and main/ branch canals were 100 and 75 per cent complete; no work on
distributaries and water courses was done.

The dam and main/ branch canals were 99 and 58 per cent complete; 25 per cent
work on distributaries was done, but no work was done on water courses.

Tapkara Reservoir

Upper Shankh Reservoir



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 . 114 works in the four selected projects were incomplete after a lapse of 1 to 18
State years. Their non-completion was attributed to delay in land acquisition, public
Specific hindrance, delay in payment of land compensation, and the Naxal-affected nature
"पीर ofthearea.

| Jharkhand . 175 out of the 271 families affected by submergence in the Sonua and Panchkero

Reservoir Projects had not been compensated.

Damage of canal boulder masonry wall at Chainage 11 km of Tapkara Project



Performance Audit of AIBP

129


| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Jharkhand

Incomplete work in Left Main Canal of Panchkero Reservoir Project

. The BC Ratio for the Sonua Reservoir Project was incorrectly depicted in the DPR at
1.29 instead of 0.91, since it was wrongly based on data from Hazaribagh District,
instead of Chaibasa District. Similarly, a recomputation of the originally projected
BC Ratio of 2.64 for the Tapkara Reservoir Project on the basis of the actually
utilized irrigation potential resulted in a BC Ratio of just 0.22. At these BC Ratios, the
projects were not economically viable.

. The revised DPR for the Sonua Reservoir Project, on account of the estimated 35
per cent increase in cost in 2005, was not sent to MoWR for receiving clearance from
the Planning Commission.

. Three out of four projects required 105.38 ha of forest land. However, in the case of
Sonua and Tapkara Reservoir Projects, forest clearance had not yet been obtained,
although the construction of the reservoir/ dam was almost complete and forest
land had already been submerged. In the case of the Upper Shank Reservoir
Project, the conditional clearance by the MoEF in August 1998 stipulated a penalty
of Rs. 0.37 crore, as the construction had started without prior clearance.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.10.4 Financial Management Chapter - 10
7 a epee वि State
Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in Financial Management: Specific
Findings
Table $18 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Jharkhand
Jharkhand [i
Nature of Irregularity Details
Undue benefits to In Upper Shankh Reservoir project, a sum of Rs 2.13 crore was irregularly paid to
contractors two contractors for meeting price escalation of materials, fuel and labour charges

of the construction of earthen dam, though the clause for payment to meet price
escalation was not incorporated in agreements executed with the contractors.

lm In Sonua and Upper Shankh Reservoir Projects, in case of 14 agreements
(2 Agreements of Sonua and 12 agreements of Upper Shankh), a sum of Rs 1.76
crore due as penalty/liquidated damages for not completing the works within
stipulated time frame was not recovered/short recovered from the contractors.

Parking of funds @ In Panchkhero, Sonua and Upper Shankh Reservoir Projects, Rs 6.86 crore was
advanced for land acquisition between March 2001 to June 2007, of which only
Rs 2.91 crore was adjusted, leaving a balance of Rs 3.95 crore in the bank,
parked for periods ranging between 15 and 102 months. Similarly, in Panckhero
Reservoir Project, fund for rehabilitation amounting to Rs 6.55 crore was drawn.
by the division and advanced to Rehabilitation Officer during February 2005 to
March 2008 but neither the account of expenditure nor any record, though called
for, was made available to audit.

Irregular expenditure @ An expenditure of Rs 14.33 lakh was incurred on unapproved works by diverting
the fund of Sonua Reservoir Project during the period 2002-04 without obtaining
sanction from GOI.

10.10.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme.



KARNATAKA



Karnataka

10.11.1 Background Chapter - 10

Gol sanctioned 6 major and 3 medium irrigation projects under AIBP in Karnataka during 1996- g State
2008. While Gol assistance during this period was Rs. 3110.11 crore, the State's contribution was Fi Pa

Rs. 1738.93 crore, and the entire amount of Rs. 4845.04 crore was reported as incurred, as of

March 2008. Karnataka |

Of these 9 projects, 4 projects namely, Varahi, Upper Krishna Stage | (Ph-Ill), Upper Krishna Project
Stage ll and Karanjawere selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.11.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the 9 Major/ Medium Irrigation Projects taken up till 2006-07, only one medium project
(Maskinala) had been completed. Against the originally envisaged period of 24 to 36 months for
completion, the time overrun ranged from 33 to 114 months. The cost over-run as per the latest
revised estimates ranged from 24 to 302 per cent. Further, as against the targeted irrigation potential
of 6,05,912 ha, the IP created as of March 2008 was 5,17,081 ha.

10.11.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Audit scrutiny revealed that:

/ None of the four test-checked projects viz. UKP Stage-] (Phase Ill), UKP Stage-ll,
Varahi and Karanja, could be completed as of March 2008. The time overrun
ranged from 3 years to 9 years, and the cost overrun ranged from Rs. 148 crore to
Rs. 810 crore.

/ The reasons attributed by the implementing agencies for shortage of creation of IP
were Slow progress of work due to land acquisition and rehabilitation and
resettlement problems, non availability of declared command in some projects,
and non clearance of bottlenecks in main canals and distributaries. Further, there
was short utilization of created IP due to non-completion of canal works/
distributaries and non-completion of approach works, non creation of field
irrigation channels and poor inflow of water in the catchment area.



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Karnataka

Bottleneck in tail end of Almatti Left Bank Canal of Upper Krishna Project Stage-Il

10.11.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $19 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Karnataka

Nature of Irregularity

Is

Undue benefits to
contractors

In Upper Krishna Project - Stage Il, non levy of penalty for delay in supply of pumps
resulted in non recovery of Rs. 3.60 crore from the pump supply contractor.

Embezzlement of funds

Funds worth Rs.1.39 crore were reported to have been embezzled in 10 cases in
Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam Limited (KBJNL), and departmental enquiry had
been initiated in 2006.

Diversion of funds

In two projects ( Upper Krishna Project - Stage Il and Karanja Project), funds
amounting to Rs. 8.08 crore were diverted for incurring expenditure on non-AIBP
components viz. payment of bills pertaining to earlier periods on works and
rehabilitation (Rs. 3.22 crore), maintenance of buildings & equipments (Rs. 2.24
crore), beautification of works (Rs. 2.04 crore) and payment of electricity bills
(Rs. 0.58 crore).

Avoidable extra
expenditure

In respect of various works under Upper Krishna Project ~ Stage ll, designs and
specifications were not properly examined/adopted, leading to avoidable extra
expenditure of Rs.5.93 crore on two works due to defective estimation, and of
Rs. 8.12 crore on four canal works due to provision of 100 mm thickness of
Cement Concrete lining instead of a maximum thickness of 75mm.

10.11.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
| | implementation of the programme.


wskor<o3 ७७१.
SEA

Sie Bounday =
DevieBountay
Sa Catal (0)
Mar inigaton Poses की.

a Mosumissten recs @

Note: The Co-ordinates of Karapuzha Vale tigation Project. huvatupuzha Valley Iigation Projet and Kallad Ieigaton Project wete
not provided bythe CWC.


Kerala

10.12.1 Background Chapter - 10

Gol approved two major projects, namely Kallada Irrigation Project (KIP) and Muvattupuzha Valley 5 पा श्र
Irrigation Project (MVIP), and one medium project, namely Karapuzha Irrigation Project (KRP) under Findings

AIBP during 1996-2008 and released assistance of Rs 106.40 crore during 2003-08. After including

the State share, the total availability of funds during 2003-08 was Rs. 271.64 crore, against which Kerala |
the reported expenditure was Rs 232.54 core. All three projects were selected for detailed audit

scrutiny.

10.12.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the three major/medium irrigation projects, only one project (Kallada Irrigation Project) had been
completed.

10.12.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

10.12.3.1 Kallada Irrigation Project (KIP)

The project was reportedly completed and commissioned in 2004. Audit scrutiny,
however, revealed that:

m= Subsequent revised estimates after the revised estimate of Rs 163.67 crore,
approved in 1981, had not been submitted for investment clearance by the
Planning Commission.

m= Only 60 per cent, 25 per cent and 22 per cent of the work for three distributaries -
Mynagappally, West Kallada Minor, and Kottapuram Minor could be completed
as of August 2008, due to shortage of labourers and strike in quarry.

m= The Poovathoor Distributary was completed, except for the 70m of railway
crossing portion. Consequently, out of the total ayacut area of 514 ha, 314 ha could
not beutilized.

m= The Bhoothakulam Minor Distributary was completed in March 2006, except in
Ch.0m to 250m due to non shifting of telephone cables and water supply lines from
the existing cross roads.



Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Kerala

10.12.3.2 Muvattupuzha Valley Irrigation Project (MVIP),

The project was included under AIBP in 2000-01, with target date of completion of March
2010. Audit scrutiny revealed that:

बा Out of the envisaged 6 branch canals and 60 distributaries, only 2 branch canals
and 34 distributaries were completed. Works of branch canals for 13.61km (23
percent) and distributaries for 81.824 km (34 percent) were yet to be completed.

. Two works due to be completed in June 1998 and November 2003 were not
completed as of August 2008 due to abandonment of the work by one contractor.

. Three works could not be completed as of August 2008 due to non availability of
| | land, as these works had been awarded before getting government sanctions for
acquisition ofland.


Performance Audit of AIBP

The work of construction of Manjoor Distributary was completed, except from
Ch.732m to 891m at the Railway crossing portion.

Thework, Ettumanur Branch Canal - Construction of aquaducts from Ch.18028m to
18525m, was completed in April 2005, except 2 piers on either side of the Railway
boundary and an aquaduct barrel over the Railway line.

The Mulakulam branch canal having a length of 6770 m was completed, except the
portion from Ch.5650m to 6770 m. The reported reasons for non completion were
the peculiar nature and geography of the site and heavy seepage and sliding of
earth.

Further, in two divisions (Thodupuzha and Muvattupuzha), expenditure of Rs 5.74
crore was incurred on unapproved works.

139


| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 10.12.3.3. Karapuzha Irrigation Project (KRP)
Stat
as The project was included under AIBP in 2006-07, with target date of completion in 2010.
Findings Audit scrutiny revealed that:

| . Two works were completed after a delay of 16 and 61 months due to delay in
Kerala finalization of designs and approval of revised estimates by the Department.

. Two other works, due to be completed by January 2005 and December 2005, were
not completed, due to delay in payment of part bills, unfavorable weather
conditions and non availability of materials.

. Only the main canals were completed, and the spill way was not completed. Out of
branch canals of length 41.89 km, only 17.15 km (41 per cent) of the branch canals
and only 2.12 km (3 per cent) of the distributaries were completed.

10.12.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $20 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Kerala

Nature of Irregularity |

Short release of funds There was short release of Rs. 29.60 crore during 2003-08 by the State
Government to the implementing agencies.

Rush of expenditure lm InKIP, the entire expenditure of Rs. 0.75 crore was incurred during the last quarter
in 2005-06, while in MVIP, the expenditure incurred during the last quarter in
2003-06 was Rs 110.65 crore. This was attributed to release of funds by the
State Government in the last quarter.

10.12.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme.


MADHYA PRADESH
ee



10.13.1 Background

112 Major, 3 Medium and 163 Minor Irrigation Projects were taken up under AIBP during 1996-
2008. During 2002-08, Gol funding was Rs. 1860.21 crore, while the State share was Rs. 308.44
crore. Out of the available funds of Rs. 4491.00 crore (including unspent balance from previous years
of Rs. 2322.40 crore), the expenditure incurred during 2002-08 was Rs. 3486.58 crore.

Of these projects, five major irrigation projects, namely Bawanthadi Project (Rajiv Sagar), Bargi
Diversion Project - Phase 1] (Canal RD Km. 63-104), Bansagar Project - Phase Il (Canal), Bargi
Diversion Project — Phase | (Canal RD Km. 16-63) and Indira Sagar Project (Canal), and 16 minor
irrigation projects under two river basins i.e. Chambal, Betwa, Bhopal and Narmada Tapti, Indore
were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.13.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the 15 major/ medium Projects taken up under AIBP during 1996-2004, only 5 Projects could be
completed and the remaining 10 projects were incomplete. Of these, 2 projects were sanctioned in
1996-97, 1 project in 1998-99, and 2 projects in 2000-01; none of the 5 projects sanctioned during
2001-04 were completed.

Of the 163 minor irrigation projects,

/ 17 projects were taken up in 2006-07, of which only 1 Project could be completed
and 16 projects were ongoing as of March 2008.

/ 146 Projects were sanctioned in 2007-08, of which 9 projects could not be started,
and the remaining 137 projects were ongoing as of March 2008.

10.13.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Audit scrutiny revealed that none of the test-checked five major projects and only one out of 16 minor
projects (Chhagola Project, Dist. Jnabua ) were completed as of March 2008.
Further details of the projects are summarized below:

/ In Bawanthadi Project, the most critical item of the projecti.e. river closure was not
done till October 2008, and the primary dam section of the project remained
incomplete, although main/branch canals were almost complete.

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Madhya
Pradesh

ae



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Madhya
Pradesh

Incomplete river closure of Bawanthadi Project

Incomplete
Railway Crossing

ey 24 Tunnel

Bargi Diversion (Phase- | & Il) - Madhya Pradesh, Diagram showing incomplete tunnel at
Rd. km 33 to 35 and incomplete railway 'X'-ing at the starting reaches of Majholi branch canal



Performance Audit of AIBP |

The Bargi Multipurpose Dam was completed in the year 1988-1989. The Right Bank Canal (RBC)- Chapter - 10

taking off from Bargi Dam was re-named as Bargi Diversion Project (BDP) in 1992. Works in RD Km. State
16 toKm 63 and RD Km. 63 to Km 104, of this canal, were taken up under AIBP in 2002-03 as Bargi Specific
Diversion Project Phase | and Phase ll, respectively. Findings
/ In Bargi Diversion Phase - | Project (Canal RD Km 16-63 Km), the Workin RD Km. Madhya
16 to km 63 was taken up under AIBP in 2002-03, at an estimated cost of RS.315.64 Doadesh

crore to irrigate 21194 ha, with target date of completion in May 2003. However,

as of October 2008, the work was still under execution and only 7748 ha of IP had

been created, of which IP of 710 hectare only could be utilized primarily due to
non-completion of tunnel work in Km. 33-35. The delay in execution of tunnel work
deprived utilization of IP beyond RD Km. 35. Further, works against administrative
approval of Rs. 1101.00 lakh were split into as many as 10 different groups and
awarded to a firm without adequately assessing its ability for simultaneous
completion of so many groups on schedule. This resulted in unwarranted
delays/abandonment/rescinding of all the 10 contracts. It also attracted litigations-
and avoidable time/cost escalations on re-awards of the rescinded works to other
contractors.

Incomplete tunnel work at road 33 to 35 km of Bargi Diversion Project — Ph-I



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 . Bargi Diversion Phase — 1] Project ( Canal RD Km 63-104 Km), was taken up under
State AIBP in 2002-03 at an estimated cost of Rs.295.00 crore, to irrigate 31889 ha, with
Specific target date of completion in December 2004. However, as of October 2008, the
nts work was still under execution and no IP was created, mainly on account of non-
Madhya completion of critical work of canal crossing of a main railway line at the starting
Pradesh reaches, which was neither identified in original DPR nor in adhoc proposals for

fund under AIBP. Moreover, there was no point in taking up the Bargi Diversion
LS (Phase Il) Project, when the essential works of the phase —1 project were still

incomplete.

/ In Bansagar Project (unit-Il - Canal), the completed portions of the Right Bank
Main canal in the initial reaches (between km 0 to 38) were having serious design
deficiencies. The canal was able to carry only 1.5 cumecs against the envisaged
2.77 cumecs essential for achieving the designed irrigation potential through
subsequent feeder canal network.

ब्रा Indira Sagar Project (Canal) was bifurcated into two phases (e.g. phase-1, upto 71
km. and phase - Il, from 71 to 142 km). Both phases of canal remained
incomplete even after a time overrun of over 5 years and an expenditure of Rs.
1182.00 crore (March 2008). The district road bridge at RD 42.31 km of main canal
was still incomplete even after lapse of 12 years (since 1996-97). This left the
created capacity beyond 42.31 km. totally un-utilizable.

10.13.3.4 Planning and Approval of Projects
Audit scrutiny of test-checked Projects revealed the following:

/ In Bawanthadi Project, the Benefit Cost Ratio was inflated irregularly to 1.76, by
ignoring the land development cost and irregularly adding a new item viz.
cultivation in galper land (submergence area in summer season) without
considering the actually irrigable area.

ब्रा In Bansagar Project (Unit-Il - Canal), the BC Ratio was inflated due to deviations
from guidelines on account of (i) non provision for higher depreciation on pumping
mains/lines and other electrical/mechanical system being made, (ii) losses of
cultivation in canal submergence areas not assessed and (iii) interest on capital
being understated due to non-inclusion of land development costs.

1] The B.C. ratio of the minor irrigation tank projects test-checked were found to be
inflated. The significant deviations were (i) maintenance of headwork @ 1 per
cent not added in annual costs (ii) cost of land development of command area not
computed and added in project costs (iii) loss of agriculture in submergence area
not deducted from annual benefits and (iv) charging lower depreciation of 1 per
cent (100 years life) instead of 2. per cent for minor tanks (50 years life).


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.13.5 Financial Management Chapter - 10
State

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management: Specific
Findings

Table S21 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Madhya Pradesh

Nature of Irregularity Details pop

Undue benefits to @ In Bargi Diversion Project, price escalations amounting to Rs.53.27 lakh were

contractors irregularly paid to a contractor.

@ In Indira Sagar Project-(Canal), two contractors were awarded tum-key contracts
and irregularly paid interest free mobilization advances of Rs. 45.00 crore, before
actual work started.

Diversion of funds lm The goverment of Madhya Pradesh was liable to pay Rs. 165.73 crore from the

state budget to Narmada Hydro Development Corporation for irrigation share of
the dam to protect its 49 per cent share holding in the joint venture Company with
NHPC after transferred assets valuations. But it was noticed in the revised DPR
for Unit Il, that AIBP grants were incorrectly diverted for this payment of

Rs 165.73 crore without obtaining approval of MoWR.

10.13.6 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme.



MAHARASHTRA

Note: The Co-ordinates of Sangola Branch Canal, Vshnupur Project. Krishna and Paigaon Projet were nt provided by the CWC.



© Maharashtra

10.14.1 Background

Since 1996-97, 58 major/medium projects and 134 minor projects of the State of Maharashtra were
included under AIBP. Gol released Central Loan Assistance (CLA) of Rs 1099.04 crore and Rs 2483.33
crore respectively as grants for completion of these irrigation projects. Further, the government of
Maharashtra released Rs 1732.93 crore as its matching share. However, details of expenditure were
not made available to Audit, as the state government did not maintain project-wise details of
disbursement for all the AIBP Projects. The extent of utilization of Gol funds for AIBP funds could not
beverified”.

Of the above projects, 8 major/medium and 15 MI projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.14.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out of the 58 Major and Medium Projects taken up under 8188 only 17 Projects
could be completed as of March 2008; however, none of these projects had yet been
commissioned.

Further, despite non-completion of the earlier projects in hand, the State
Government kept on including new projects, and MoWR approved these project for
inclusion under AIBP. as detailed below:

Table S22 - Inclusion of new AIBP Projects in Maharashtra

ongoing projects No. of projects. of new projects Balance ongoing

ui IBP at the completed luded under AIBP | projects at the end

beginning of the yee of the year
2003-04 | 21 | 7 | 1 | 15
2004-05 | 15 | 5 | 3 | 13
2005-06 | 13 | 4 | 8 | 7
2006-07 | 7 | Nil | 12 | 29
2007-08 | 29 | 1 | 13 | 4

The issue of certain states (including Maharashtra) cornering the vast majority of
AIBP funds during 2005-08, without linkages to the completion of AIBP projects
and providing an incentive for inclusion of AIBP projects driven by construction
work, has already been highlighted in paragraph 7.1 of this report. This, further,
shows lack of commitment by the State Government in completing the older

21 The release of central assistance, state share, and expenditure incurred on AIBP components in respect of the test-checked projects was
however, ascertained by audit through field scrutiny of records of the project implementing agencies.

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Maharashtra |

on



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 projects sanctioned under AIBP with attention being focused on inclusion of fresh
State projects under AIBP and receipt of Gol assistance therefor.
Specific
mer ngs . In the State, 33,13,48 ha of IP was stated to have been created under 8187 ata total
cost of Rs.5163.00 crore as of March 2008. However, as only the AIBP components
| Maharashtra of the projects had been completed and not the project as a whole (which included
non AIBP components too), the projects could not be commissioned and the
no created IP could not beutilized.
/ In respect of MI Projects, though 124 projects were sanctioned during 2006-07 and

2007-08, details regarding their status (ongoing/ completion etc.) were not
available with the State Government.

10.14.2.1 Inclusion of fraction of components of projects

In the cases of major and medium projects, inclusion of projects under AIBP actually
amounted to inclusion of project components, that too in fractions. However, the BC Ratio
calculated and approved by CWC was based on the entire project cost and projected
benefits to be derived from the completed project. Detail of the components which were
proposed to be completed under AIBP in the selected Major and Medium Irrigation
Projects were as listed below:

Table $23 - Inclusion of fractions of Components of Projects under AIBP in Maharashtra

lame of the project AIBP components
1 | Bembala 4 per cent Head works, 65 per cent Main & branch canal, 90 per cent Distributaries
2 (| Arunawati 1 per cent Left Bank Canal, 3 per cent Distributaries, 34 per cent Water courses
3 | Khadakpurna 20 per cent Earthen Dam, 40 per cent Main Dam, 68 per cent Main canal,
78 per cent LIS, 95 per cent Distributaries
4 | Vishnupuri 36 per cent Main & Branch canal, 24 per cent Distributaries, 24 per cent
Water courses
5 | Patgaon 1 per cent Embankment, 9 per cent spillway, 50 per cent Gates

6 | Sangola Branch Canal Main Canal and its Branches 0 km to 103 km

7 | Krishna River 0 km to 204 km of Main canal and branches of Arphal canal

8 | Nandur Madhmeshwar Express canal lining work 0 to 128 km and distribution system
Canal

Clearly, the MoWR & CWC failed to assess the economic viability of the AIBP components of
these projects, before release of Gol funds. The lack of viability of such fractured funding
of projects under AIBP was confirmed by their non-commissioning and non-utilisation of
10 due to non-completion of the other (non-AIBP) components.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.14.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects Chapter - 10

State
Out of the test-checked projects, only three” major projects and one” medium project were declared Specific

as completed in terms of AIBP components. However, two projects (Vishnupuri and Patgaon) out of Findings

the four projects were not commissioned” due to non-completion of non-AIBP components. None of

the test-checked projects were executed as per the physical and financial programme projectedin Maharashtra |
the AIBP proposals. In four” projects, divisions could not start the work and in five” projects, nearly

50 per cent of the grant could not be utilized mainly due to non availability of land (private and

forest), rehabilitation issues and opposition from Project affected persons, etc.

Audit scrutiny of individual projects revealed the following:

1] Patgaon Irrigation Project (Medium) was declared as completed in March 2007 ata
revised cost of Rs.82.20 crore. However, the irrigation potential of 1992 ha said to
have created under AIBP could not be utilized, as out of 17 Kolhapur Type (९1)
Weirs, four K.T. Weirs had collapsed and four K.T. Weirs required major repairs
costing Rs 4.27 crore.

/ In Bembala River Project, the construction of Dam and spillway was completed
before June 2007 and water was stored in the reservoir from June 2007. However,
due to non acquisition of land for 2.3 km of canal length in chainage 0 to 1.5 km
and 1.7 to 2.5 km, the work of construction of the main canal was stopped since July
2007, and noirrigation was possible.

1] The work of construction of 6 Mis (Chaupala MI Tank, Deopudi M.1, Sangamwadi
M1. Tank, Mawalgaon Storage Tank, Mirzapur M.1. Tank and Chopan M.1.) was
hindered due to delay in land acquisition.

22 vishnupuri (completed 2005-06), Arunawati (completed 2008-09), Krishna ( completed 2008-09),
23 patgaon (completed in 2006-07).

24 n respect of the other two projects (Arunawati and Krishna) formal gazette notification for commissioning of the projects
had not been issued,

25 Bhandarwadi, Mawalgaon, Ucchil, Wazar
26chopan, Daul Hipparga, Sangamwadi, Sangola Branch Canal, Sindgi



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Maharashtra

Incomplete Minors in Krishna Project

Canal work in progress in Kadakpurna River Project

Slow progress of canal works in Arunawati River Project



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Deoputi MI Project - Non-completion of Canal work in first 300 metre due to land acquisition problems

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Maharashtra |



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Maharashtra

KT Weir at Inamgaon - Non-completion of work despite availability of sufficient funds



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.14.3.1 Creation and Utilisation of Irrigation Potential Chapter - 10
State
/ Out of 23 Major/ Medium/ Minor Irrigation Projects test-checked in audit, the Specific
targeted IP was created in only seven projects. However, in respect of the test- Findings
checked 8 major/medium projects, the IP creation was theoretical, as it pertained
only to the AIBP components. Maharashtra |

/ In Daul Hipparga Storage Tank, the work of construction of dam was almost
completed and irrigation potential of 900 Ha was created (June 2007). However,
only 478.75 Ha was handed over (January 2008) to the Water Users Association.

1] In Vishnupuri Project, the project (887 component) was declared completed
(March 2006) with creation of 2636 Ha of irrigation potential. However, as the
Part-1 works of the command area were not completed, the created irrigation
potential could not be utilised.

/ In Dhamangaon Storage Tank, the project was completed (March 2007) with 256
ha of irrigation potential. However, the created irrigation potential could not be
utilised due to non existence of facilities for lifting the water and non formation of
Water Users Association.

10.14.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table S24 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Maharastra

Nature of Irregularity Details

Undue benefits to tm Anamount of Rs 9.74 crore was passed on as undue benefit to contractors on
contractors account of price escalations and payment for work after expiry of the validity period
of the contract and without obtaining extension.

Delayed release of funds &@ In Vishnupuri Project, the State Government delayed release of AIBP assistance of
Rs 4.00 crore to the implementing agency by 64 months.

@ In Bhandarwadi K.T.Weir and Wazar Storage Tank, despite the availability of funds,
there was delay in approval/ issue of work orders.

The State Government did not fumish the details of project wise disbursement of
Central Assistance to Audit, as they were reportedly not maintained by them.

Irregular expenditure ™@ Irregular expenditure amounting to Rs 13.51 crore was incurred on items such as
engaging agencies for works relating to obtaining environmental clearance,
making payment for unapproved components and for works executed prior to the
inclusion of projects under AIBP..

10.14.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

Neither any State level / Project level monitoring committee had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme nor any study / performance evaluation of the AIBP projects was
conducted with reference to improvement in irrigation efficiency.



MANIPUR



© Manipur

10.15.1 Background Chapter - 10

State
During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned 2 major, 1 medium and 678 minor irrigation projects and Specific
provided assistance of Rs. 457.80 crore. Of these, one major project, namely Thoubal Multipurpose Findings

Project (TMP), and 20 MI projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.
Manipur |
10.15.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects हे ।

None of the 3 major/ medium projects were completed as of March 2008. Of the 678 minor irrigation
projects,

ब. All 436 projects sanctioned during 1999-2000 and 2005-06 were reported as
completed.

m= None ofthe 242 projects sanctioned during 2007-08 were reported as completed.

10.15.3 Execution of Test-Checked Projects

The Thoubal Multipurpose Project (TMP) was originally approved by the Planning Commission in
1980 at an estimated cost of Rs.47.25 crore. However, the due date for completion of the project was
tescheduled several times, purportedly due to financial constraints and law and order problems. The
latest due date for completion was March 2009 ata revised estimated cost of Rs.715.81 crore. Despite
expenditure of Rs.521.24 crore as of March 2008, the project was still incomplete. Construction of the
main components of the project ie. dam and spillway was only 45 per cent and 60 per cent
respectively, while the progress of canals and distribution work were 88 per cent and 68 per cent
respectively. Further, a joint field visit revealed that:

1] Water was found flowing through the Left Main Canal (LMC) upto RD 13,939 km
and Charangpat Branch Canal (CBC) upto RD 6.30 km during the rainy season only.
Thereafter, the flow of water was hindered due to siltation and grasses/weeds.

/ Construction of a canal syphon at RD 25.518 km was discontinued.



None of the 20 selected MI Projects were completed as of March 2008. During field visits and
interaction with farmers, it was observed that the farmers were getting benefits mainly during the
rainy season as there was insufficient water during lean season.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.15.4 Planning and Approval of Projects Chapter - 10

State
Audit scrutiny revealed that 15 MI Projects out of the 211 MI Projects sanctioned during 2005-06 and Specific
shown to have been completed in March 2007 had again been included in the 242 new projects Findings

sanctioned afresh in 2007-08 ata total estimated cost of Rs.10.43 crore.

Manipur |

10.15.5 Financial Management
Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:
Table $25 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Manipur

Nature of Irregularity Details

Undue benefits to @ An amount of Rs 7.57 crore was passed on as undue benefit to contractors on
contractors account of payments made on unapproved works, escalation charges, and by
adopting incorrect rates, non recovery of penalty for non-completion of the works
within the stipulated time frame and for non-employment of technical staff.

Diversion of funds @ In TMP and Minor Irrigation Projects, funds amounting to Rs. 3.74 crore were
diverted for non AIBP components viz. construction of staff quarter, office building,
wall fencing, approach road, purchase of vehicle, camera, stationery, petrol, repair
works, payments to Work Charged & Muster Roll staff, payment of electricity bills etc.

Delay in release of funds lm There were delays, ranging from 10 days to 450 days, in release of funds for the
major/ medium and minor irrigation projects by the State Government to the
implementing agencies.

Short release of funds There was short release of Rs.3.47 crore of Gol assistance by the State Government,
which was wrongly reported to Gol as utilised.

Parking of funds @ Rs. 47.60 crore of funds, during 2006-08, were parked under deposits and withdrawn/
utilised in the subsequent financial year.

Irregular expenditure lm Expenditure of Rs 4.80 crore was incurred on commencing work on previously
abandoned works,

10.15.6 Monitoring and Evaluation
Audit scrutiny revealed that:
/ Only six visits had been made by the CWC for TMP during 2003-08.

1] Similarly, for the MI Projects, no external independent agency was engaged for
monitoring and no evaluation was carried out to assess the benefit in terms of
irrigation potential created and actually utilised. Also, no Water Users' Association
of MIPs had been formed in any of the selected projects.



© Meghalaya

10.16.1 Background Chapter - 10
Gol approved one medium irrigation project - Rongai Valley Project and 74 minor irrigation schemes 5 oe
during 1996-2008 and provided assistance of Rs.21.00 crore during the period. Of these, Rongai Findings
Valley Project and 11 minor irrigation projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

Meghalaya |
10.16.2 Overall completion of Projects ,

The only medium irrigation project, Rongai Valley Project, was incomplete. Of the 74 minor irrigation
projects:
m= 200प्रार्ण 47 projects sanctioned during 1999-2001 were still incomplete.
m= 27 projects sanctioned during 2007-08 had not yet been taken up for want of
administrative approval.

10.16.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

10.16.3.1 Rongai Valley Project

Rongai Valley Irrigation Project was taken up in January 1990 at an estimated cost of
Rs. 16.30 crore for completion within four years. The Project envisaged construction of a
76.4 metres long barrage across river Rongai and unlined canals of 7.5 Km and 9.75 Km
long on the left and right banks respectively to irrigate 5,153 hectares of land annually in
the West Garo Hills District. In 2000-01, the project was brought under AIBP and Rs. 4.00
crore assistance was provided by Gol. However, audit scrutiny revealed that the project
was still incomplete, even after 18 years from the date of its sanction, despite
expenditure of Rs. 17.90 crore, as summarised below:

m In April 2003, the completion of the barrage was suspended, after 95 per cent
execution, due to the contractor's refusal to continue the work, pending sanction of
revised estimates and payment of bills. No physical progress had since been made.

= No further assistance had been provided by Gol due to increase in the project cost.
Revised cost estimates had not been approved by the Gol as they were not as per
the guidelines of the CWC and the Planning Commission.

m In September 2007, Gol had advised that no work be taken up, until the entire land
for the canal system was acquired. However, no land had been acquired for the
canal system and follow up action on this aspect could not be ascertained.



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 10.16.3.2 Minor Irrigation Projects
State A FEY - न 9
Specific The MoUs in respect of the minor irrigation projects sanctioned under AIBP during 1999-
Findings 2001 were not signed by the State Government. Also, nine out of the eleven test-checked
projects could not be completed within the prescribed time schedule, and the delay in
| Meghalaya completion ranged between one and six years, as detailed below:
, Table S26 - Status of MI Projects in Meghalaya
Date of Status/ Approved | Actual Reasons for
Name of Target Date of | Actual Cost Expenditure | delayed
Fok Start of ; ;
roject Project | Completion | Date of Payne completion!
i Completion (83. ए (80) non-completion
1 | Chiljora Flow | 1999- 2001-02 Completed) | 110.36 114.30 Delay in award
Irrigation 2000 2003-04 of works
Project (FIP)
2. | Gandual FIP 2002-03 2004-05 Completed’ | 53.53 (0) 63.79 Delay in award
2005-06 61.30 (R) of works
3 | Ringdee FIP 2000-01 2002-03 Ongoing 272.05 260.85 ason | Inadequate
March 2008 planning and
unsynchronized
execution of work
4 | Andherkona | 2001-02 2003-04 | Completed’ | 231.74(0)| 330.31 Required revision
FIP 2006-07 339.33 (R) due to inclusion of
additional items of
works
5 | Kharukol FIP | 1999- 2001-02 Completed’ | 106.44(0)| 12.93 Required revision
2000 2007-08 127.93 (R) due to inclusion of
additional items of
works
6 | Galasara FIP | 2001-02 2003-04 | Completed’ | 49.37 (0) 60.60 Delay in issue of
2006-07 60.60 (R) work order
7 | Lyting Lyngdoh| 2001-02 2003-04 | Completed’ | 30.60 30.79 | Completed
FIP 2003-04
8 | Madan Jynru | 2001-02 2003-04 | Completed’ | 47.20 49.01 Defective site
FIP 2004-05 selection
9 | Lyngkhoi FIP | 2001-02 2003-04 Completed’ | 192.72 202.26 Land acquisition
2005-06 problem
10 | Pynthor song 1999 - 2000-01 Completed’ | 22.49 22.52 Completed
FIP 2000 2000-01
11 | Mynrud 1999 - 2001-02 Ongoing 64.64 (0) 73.45 as of Incomplete due to
Moopasor FIP | 2000 73.87 (R) | March 2008 | one contractor not
taking up the work



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Meghalaya |

Gandual MI Project — Cross Regulator in the earthen canal with no water in the canal

Ringdee MI Project - Headwork in progress

10.16.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

Audit scrutiny of eleven selected MI projects revealed that there were no records of conduct of survey,
and the DPRs did not cover various important aspects viz. hydrological and metrological
investigations, availability of potential ground water, and details of command area showing
climate, seasonal distribution etc. Further, some of the MI Projects, despite being declared as
completed, were not able to provide the desired benefits, as discussed below:

m= In the Madan Jynru FIP the discharge at the tail end was low, due to improper
alignment of the pipeline, which was shifted from the original alignment due to
quarrying activities along the hill slope.



164

Performance Audit of AIBP

In Lyngkhoi FIP. Lyting Lyngdoh FIP and Pynthor Song FIP. despite the fact that the
projects were completed and supplementary works were executed, the supply of
water at the tail end continued to be less due to unequal and improper distribution

of water and lack of effective participation of the beneficiaries.



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.16.5 Financial Management Chapter - 10
State
Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management: Specific
Findings

Table $27 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Meghalaya Meghalaya |

Nature of Irregularity | Details Wm

Short release of @ There was shortfall of 4 to 44 per cent in release of funds by the State Government

funds to the implementing agencies.

Non-release of @ During 2007-08, only the State share of Rs.0.51 crore was released and the Central

Central share share of Rs.1.16 crore was not released. However, even despite these limited funds,
there were savings of 1 to 50 per cent during 2003-08 by the executing divisions.

Irregulaties in UCs ™@ The Statements of Expenditure were forwarded along with Utilisation Certificates

to the Government of India during 2003-04 to 2006-07 without getting them
audited by the Accountant General.

10.16.6 Monitoring and Evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the
implementation of the programme



=
<
ao
oO
IN
=



@ Mizoram

10.17.1 Background Chapter - 10
State

During 1999-2008, 186 MI Projects were sanctioned under AIBP in Mizoram. During 2003-08, Gol Specific

had released assistance of Rs.72.19 crore, against which the State Government released Rs. 86.20 Findings

crore, including the State share, tothe implementing agencies. Seven MI Projects in three Divisions

namely, Aizawl, Lunglei and Kolasib, were selected for detailed audit scrutiny. Mizoram |

10.17.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out 186 MI Projects sanctioned during 1999-2000 to 2007-08, 124 MI projects were completed and
62 projects were ongoing.

10.17.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Three projects, namely, Sakelui- Thingsul, Saphak — Pangzawl and Saihapui in three
selected divisions were reported as completed, as per the physical progress report
furnished by the State. However, during physical verification and also as reported by the
departmental authorities during audit, the projects were still under progress.

Reservoir under construction in Saihapui MI Project under Kolasib division



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Earthen dam and spillway under construction in Saihapui MI Project under Kolasib division

10.17.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

= Despite the fact that the topographical and geographical condition of the areas
falling under the three divisions test-checked were similar, there was wide
variation in the projected cost per ha of the sample test-checked of the three
divisions, which ranged between Rs.1.52 lakh per ha to Rs.2.92 lakh per hai.e. a
variation of 92 percent . Moreover, sanctioning of projects with cost per ha of more
than Rs. 1 lakh (revised to Rs. 1.5 lakh in December 2006) was in contravention of
the AIBP guidelines. Wide variation in projected cost of these projects suggest that
the estimates were theoretical.

m= The correctness of the BC Ratio in all the test-checked and the authenticity of the
data could not be vouchsafed, as the data was reportedly collected in oral form.
Even the change in cropping pattern projected in the DPR was reportedly on the
basis of the general oral opinion collected during detailed survey and
investigation of the area.

10.17.5 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $28 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Mizoram

Nature of Irregularity Details

Irregular Utilization Utilization Certificates were used to wrongly report a higher expenditure to MoWR as
Certificates detailed below:
@ In Chhimluang- Saitual project, the expenditure reported to MoWR in December 2007
| | was Rs. 120.53 lakh, whereas the expenditure reported to Audit by the departmental

authorities was only Rs. 65.36 lakh.



Performance Audit of AIBP |
Nature of Irregularity Details Chapter - 10

State
Irregular Utilization @ In Tuichar- Lungpher project, the expenditure reported to MoWR in December 2007 Specific
Certificates was Rs. 83.42 lakh, whereas the expenditure reported to Audit by the departmental Findings
authorities was only Rs. 64.00 lakh.
@ In Saichhun Thualthu project, the expenditure reported to MoWR in December 2007 Mizoram |
was Rs. 130.67 lakh, whereas the expenditure reported to Audit by the departmental

authorities was only Rs. 70.32 lakh.

@ In Saphak, Pangzawl project, the expenditure reported to MoWR in December 2007
was Rs. 189.52 lakh, whereas the expenditure reported to Audit by the departmental
authorities was only Rs. 120.51 lakh.

Irregular m In three projects in Aizawl District, the authenticity of payment of Rs. 0.94 crore to
expenditure labour/ firms could not be verified, as payments were made to the labourers through
deficient muster rolls/ payment made to anonymous firms.

Delay in release of funds ™ During 2003-04 to 2007-08, the Ministry of Finance had released the Central funds
of Rs.72.19 crore in instalments to the State Government i.e. for 2003-04 during
December to March; for 2004-05 in March 2005; for 2005-06 during September to
January; for 2006-07 during December to March and for 2007-08 during April to
March. However, the different implementing agencies were funded, together with
the State's matching share in batches only in the month of March i.e. at the fag end
of the years 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06 & 2006-07 and during December to March
of 2007-08. Thus, the Gol allocation was not released by the State Government of
Mizoram within 15 days of its receipt to the Implementing agencies.

10.17.6 Outcome and impact of the MI Projects

Out of 186 MI Projects sanctioned up to 2007-08 under AIBP 124 projects were stated to have been
completed with an expenditure of Rs. 92.75 crore as of March 2008. However, a comparative analysis
of the production data of some of the major crops in the State, based on information given to audit,
revealed that during 2001-02 to 2007-08, the production of major crops like Paddy, Maize, Oilseeds,
Sugarcane and Potato had not increased significantly.

10.17.7 Monitoring and Evaluation
Monitoring ofthe AIBP Projects was deficient as:
= NoState level monitoring committee had been formed.

m= No performance evaluation in the State had been carried out for improvement in
irrigation utilization and usage efficiency.

m= 11९ CWC and MoWR authorities had not carried out any monitoring inspections of
the selected projects.



Nagaland

10.18.1 Background Chapter - 10
Stat

During 1999-2008, Gol approved 965 MI Projects under AIBP. of which 424 projects were approved specific

during 2003-08. Gol released Rs.71.09 crore of central assistance during 2003-08 and the State Findings

Government contributed Rs.15.33 crore as its share, with a total reported expenditure of Rs.89.10

crore. Of the above 424 projects, 17 projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny. Nagaland |

10.18.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out of the 469 MI Projects being executed during 2003-08 (424 new projects and 45 ongoing
projects), 395 Projects were reportedly completed, and 74 Projects were ongoing as of March 2008.

10.18.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Out of the 17 selected MI Projects, 11 Projects, which were sanctioned in 2006-07, were
teportedly complete. Seven projects (Chathe Ph Il, Aphughoki MI, Nyapongsum Ph ll,
Kherezhu Ml, Tishi, Longnok Tegee MI and Thezairie) out of these 11 projects were
complete , while four projects (Langlong MI, Langlong - Ph II MI, Awokupughoki MI and
Dikhu Valley) were still in progress.

Scrutiny of the records and physical verification of the test-checked projects revealed the
following:

m= The work Langlong MI project - Phase | was shown as completed in November
2007 at a cost of Rs.5.12 crore . However, the value of the work done was only
Rs.3.61 crore upto March 2008 according to the progress report furnished to audit,
which was also corroborated by a joint verification which revealed that the work
was in progress.

/ In the two projects- Langlong MI Project - Phase Il and Awokupughoki MI Project,
which were reported as complete, the physical progress was only 20 per cent. The
physical progress in Dikhu Valley MI Project, which was also reported as complete,
was 90 per cent.

/ The construction of Nzu minor irrigation project under Kohima Division was taken
up in December 2007 at a cost of Rs.0.30 crore and as of March 2008, the value of
work done was Rs.0.15 crore and the physical progress was 20 per cent as per
measurement book. However, the Executive Engineer intimated that the project
was yet to start.



Performance Audit of AIBP

As per the measurement books, the work of Kicheliqa MI Project was started in
November 2007 and the value of work done till October 2007 was Rs.2.40 lakh. The
Executive Engineer concerned, however, intimated audit that the work on the

project was yet to start.

172


Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Dikhu Valley MI Project - Work in progress in July 2008 despite the project being declared
as completed in December 2007

10.18.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table S29 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Nagaland

Nature of Irregularity Det:

Irregular
expenditure

m@ Asum of Rs.28.94 lakh was irregularly spent on purchase of vehicles, computers
and furniture etc,

Delays in release of
funds

™ There were delays in release of funds by State Government, ranging from 10 days
to 210 days, to the executing agencies,

10.18.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

No Monitoring Committee was formed, as of March 2008, either at the State or Project level. The
Monitoring system remained confined only to inspection from the C.E's office on a random basis
during progress of work.



<
w
wy
ao
(es)

3 Salt Project were not povided by the CWC


Orissa

10.19.1 Background Chapter - 10
Stat

During 1996-2008, Gol released loan assistance/grant of Rs 1835.14 crore for taking up 18 specific

Major/Medium and 41 Minor Irrigation Projects. Two major projects — Rengali Irrigation Project Findings

(RIP) and Upper Indravati Irrigation Project (Right Canal System and U.1. Extensions), two medium

projects — Telengiri Irrigation Project (TIP) and Improvement to Salki Irrigation Project, and 16 minor Orissa |

irrigation projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.19.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out of the 18 Major/Medium Irrigation Projects and 41 Minor Irrigation Projects, only seven
Majot/Medium Irrigation projects and 17 MI Projects had been reportedly completed after incurring
an expenditure of Rs 370.48 crore.

10.19.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

10.19.3.1 Completion of Projects— Major & Medium

Out of the four test-checked major/medium projects, only one medium project, namely
Improvement to Salki Irrigation Project, was completed. The remaining projects were
not fully completed/commissioned due to the constraints enumerated as follows:

= Right Bank Canal (RBC) of Rengali Irrigation Project (RIP)

e The RBC of RIP which was taken up in 1996-97, was executed in a piecemeal
manner, resulting in time over run of over nine years and a cost over run of Rs
421.19 crore. Against the requirement of 1820.86 ha ofland, only 1620.32 ha
ofland had been acquired.

e Against the nine railway/NH crossings required to be constructed, the
construction of only five railway crossings was completed.

e The construction of distribution systems was only 23 per cent complete. Out of
27 distributaries/minors/sub-minors of RBC, only one minor was completed.

= Upper Indravati Irrigation Project (UIP)

७ The Right Canal System was completed after a time overrun of four years and
cost overrun of Rs 87.36 crore. Further, the extension of left and right canal
systems could not be completed on account of delay in acquisition of land, non
finalization of designs, and non construction of bridges over canal crossings.

e Theliftcanal system was not taken up.



Le Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 : Telengiri Irrigation Project (TIP)
see ७ Against Rs 73.41 crore provided for head works, the expenditure incurred was
Findings Rs 131.04 crore i.e. 79 per cent excess over the estimated cost. The cost overrun
was attributed to non
| Orissa finalisation of rehabilitation claims in time. Further 338.53 ha of Government

land was pending acquisition out of the total requirement of 1412.59 ha.

@ The injudicious decision of the Department to construct spillway on the river
bed without ascertaining the underground rock strata led to abandonment of
the site and rendered the expenditure of Rs 99.20 lakh as wasteful. Further, the
completion schedule of the project was also consequently delayed by four
years.

Right Bank Canal (RBC) of Rengali Irrigation Project (RIP) — Failure of slope and slippage of
embankments at RD 34.24 km of RBC

| | Upper Indravati Irrigation Project - Syphon Aquaduct over river Sagada at RD 2820 metre of
REMC remained incomplete due to non finalization of design

| आऔी ““ “  अ :»+थ



Performance Audit of AIBP a

Telengiri irrigation Project - Abandoned site of spillway

10.19.3.2 Completion of Projects—MI Projects

Out of 16 MIPs taken up, only three projects (Chitrangi, Hirapur and Chipuljore)
were completed. None of the projects was completed within the stipulated period
due to non acquisition of land, delay in forest clearance and change in scope of the
work during execution. The delay in completion of the projects ranged between
two to five years.

Further, in three MIPs (Kurubela, Laxmipur and Jagumguda) clearance from the
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF ) for 26.39 ha of Government land was
pending.

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Orissa |



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Orissa

Doraguda MI Project — Incomplete Head reach canal from RD 00 metre to 1250 metre

10.19.3.3 Creation and Utilisation of Irrigation Potential

. As against the creation of targeted irrigation potential of 5,911 ha, only 1,570 ha
irrigation potential was created in five MIPs, out of which only 350 ha was assessed
for collection of Compulsory Basic Water Rates (CBWR).

: In the Right Bank Canal of Rengali Irrigation Project, irrigation potential of 0.01
lakh ha was reported to have been created against the targeted potential of 0.21
lakh ha and trial irrigation was provided during 2007, but thereafter no irrigation
was provided.

. In Upper Indravati Irrigation Project, the project authorities claimed to have
created 0.01 lakh ha in the right extension canal, but the same was subsequently
teported by state government as not created.

10.19.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

m_ The revised estimates of RBC of Rengali Irrigation Project and Upper Indrawati
Irrigation Project were not prepared, as a result of which the techno-economic
viability of the projects on the basis of revised costs could not be assessed.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.19.5 Financial Management Chapter - 10
State

10.19.5.1 Undue Benefits to Contractors Specific

Findings

In the three major/medium and 11 M1 irrigation projects test-checked in audit, poor

management of contract and improper planning in execution of works resulted in undue Orissa |
benefit to the contractors to the tune of Rs 138.77 crore (Rengali Irrigation Project -

Rs 57.94 crore, Telengiri Irrigation Project — Rs 50.88 crore, Upper Indravati Irrigation

Project— Rs 19.40 crore and Mls— Rs. 10.55 crore), as detailed below:

Table $30 - Undue Benefits to Contractors in AIBP Projects in Orissa

Nature of Irregularity Details

Rengali Irrigation m Re-execution of abandoned works - Rs 9.54 crore

Project = Unfruitful expenditure on account of incomplete works/substandard

execution — Rs 33.63 crore.

Payment for inadmissible work/ inflated measurement — Rs 4.43 crore

Extra expenditure on account of non-acceptance of lowest tender - Rs 1.14 crore
Adoption of higher rates — Rs. 5.07 crore

Payment of escalation charges - Rs. 0.30 crore

Un-adjusted advances - Rs 3.83 crore.

Upper Indravati
Irrigation Project

Invitation of tenders without acquisition of land - Rs 1.97 crore.
Payment for inadmissible items — Rs 1.06 crore.
Non-deduction of cost of surplus earth - Rs. 0.93 crore
Non-deduction of settlement charges - Rs. 2.37 crore.
Non-compliance with OPWD codal provisions - Rs. 1.69 crore
Adoption of higher rates — Rs. 8.54 crore

Non-levy of liquidated damages - Rs.2.77 crore

Payment of escalation charges - Rs. 0.07 crore

Telengiri Irrigation
Project

Adoption of higher rates — Rs. 10.70 crore

Non-deduction of hidden charges - Rs. 11.56 crore

Non-levy of liquidated damages — Rs.10.84 crore

Payment of escalation charges - Rs. 0.15 crore

Injudicious execution leading to abandonment of work - Rs. 17.63 crore

MIPs Adoption of higher rates — Rs. 0.50 crore
Non-levy of liquidated damages - Rs.0.08 crore
Execution of unapproved rates - Rs.2.88 crore

Execution of works without acquisition of land - Rs 7.09 crore



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 10.19.5.2 Other Financial Irregularities

State
Specific Other instances of financial irregularities in the test-checked projects are summarized

Findings below:

| Orissa Table $31 - Other Financial Irregularities in AIBP Projects in Orissa

Details

Nature of Irregularity

Payment of m= Out of the total advance of Rs 50.81 crore paid to the Land Acquisition Officers (LAOs)
unauthorized advances in respect of RBC of RIP, UIIP and Telengiri Irrigation Project between April 1998 and
March 2008 for payment of land acquisition charges and rehabilitation assistance, the
LAO did not furnish accounts for Rs 31.91 crore as of March 2008.

The EE, Right Canal Division No.III of UIIP paid (March 2008) Rs 1.90 crore to the
NH Division, Kesinga for construction of a bridge at RD 10 km of right extension
canal, without any estimate. No work was commenced by the NH Division as of
May 2008.

The EE of MI Division, Rayagada, paid (March/June 2008) Rs 0.45 crore to LAO,
Rayagada for payment of land compensation of three MIPs (Laxmipur, Randikona and
Karanjanullah) without sanction of estimate to avoid lapse of allotment and letter

of credit.

Diversion of funds

Two EEs of Upper Indravati Project diverted Rs 6.91 crore available under AIBP_
‘towards execution of flood damage repair works. One EE of Boudh Irrigation Division
of Salki Irrigation Project incurred an expenditure of Rs 1.01 crore towards construction
of the road and purchase of shutters. These works were beyond the scope of the
works sanctioned under AIBP.

EEs of two MI Divisions diverted Rs 99.07 lakh to projects not covered under AIBP
and Rs 47.60 lakh towards purchase of material not required for immediate use in
the work.

10.19.6 Monitoring and Evaluation

m= The State level monitoring committee was formed only in June 2005, 9 years after
the AIBP was launched. The committee was to meet quarterly and visit each project
at least twice a year. The committee after its constitution met only once. The
committee had also never visited any project nor was any sub-committee
constituted for the purpose.

m= Nomonitoring committee was constituted at the project level.



Int Boundary —
‘State Bounsary =
Dit Bondy =

10)
Mesum irigation Prjac:s @)

‘Note:The co-odinates af Remodeling af ७8७८, Kandi Canal Extension (PH. I} and Rehabiltaion of Ist Patiala Feeder and Kola Branch



10.20.1 Background

Five Medium Irrigation Projects were taken up under AIBP during 1999-2008 in Punjab. During
2002-08, Gol released Rs.175.14 crore as central assistance, and the State Government contributed
Rs.190.43 crore as its share. The State Government reported an expenditure of Rs. 357.37 crore as of
March 2008. Three Projects, namely Kandi Canal Extension Stage-ll, Remodeling of U.B.D.C.”
System, and Rehabilitation of 1st Patiala Feeder and Kotla Branch, were selected for detailed audit
scrutiny.

10.20.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out of the five medium projects taken up under AIBP only one Project, namely Remodelling of UBDC
System, which was sanctioned in April 1999, was reported as completed. Three Projects sanctioned
in 1999-2000 and one project sanctioned in 2006-07 were still incomplete as of March 2008.

10.20.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

m= The State Government declared the Project “Remodeling of UBDC System” as
completed and furnished a completion certificate in September 2006. Audit
scrutiny, however, revealed that some works like providing gates and gearing
system on various canal distributaries/ water regulators/ cross regulators were still
incomplete as of August 2008. A perusal of the photographs printed in the
Monitoring Report of November 2006 (issued in April 2007), revealed that works.
like construction of Cross Regulator cum foot bridge with fall at RD 12750, old
structures obstructing the flow of water at RD 195000 of Kasur Branch Lower (KBL)
and construction of KBL Tail/escape at RD 30680 were still ongoing. The facts were
also confirmed during field visits made by the audit party in October 2008
indicating that no gates and gearing system were installed at KBL RD 168.400 km
and Sabraon branch RD 127.250km.

= Audit scrutiny of the Project for Remodeling of Channels of UBDC System revealed
that 39 Village Road Bridges, and bridges-cum-falls which were required to be
remodeled at an estimated cost of Rs. 3.34 crore were not taken up by the division
purportedly because these were low priority items. The provision of Rs. 3.34 crore
was spent on other works like maintenance of channels etc.

= Kandi Canal Stage-II was taken up under AIBP in 2002-03 as a Fast Track Project
(FTP) targeted to be completed by March 2008. However, the project was still
incomplete as of August 2008. The main canal up to 112 Kms was completed in
March 2008, but the construction of ten distributaries had not been taken up as of
August 2008 due to non-acquisition of land. Further, due to defective designing, a
canal siphon constructed at a cost of Rs. 278 lakh was completely damaged.

27 Upper Bari Doab Canal

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Punjab |



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter-10 0.20.4 Financial management

State
Specific
Findings

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $32 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Punjab

| Punjab Nature of Irregularity Detai

Undue benefits to = In6 divisions, during August and September 2008, security deposits amounting to
CHEERS s.80.90 lakh deducted from the bills of 63 contractors were released before the
expiry of the stipulated period of 6 months from the date of completion of work.

Parking of funds = Six Executive Engineers and L.A.O. Hoshiarpur had parked funds to the tune of
Rs. 10.62 crore in 52 Bank Accounts between April 2003 and August 2006

m Out of Rs.30 crore meant for the Project “Rehabilitation of 1st Patiala feeder’,
Rs.4.50 crore was diverted to other projects.

Unauthorised = Expenditure of Rs.5.67 crore was incurred on unapproved works in the Project
expenditure “Remodelling of UBDC system’

10.20.5 Environmental Issues

= Polluted water and untreated discharge ofindustry was being discharged into the
Chheratta Distributary of UBDC. During field visits and interaction with the
beneficiaries it was observed that due to discharge of sewer in the Chheratta
distributary, 10719 acres of land was being affected, resulting in damage/loss to
crops and animals.

Discharge of Sullage/Polluted water at RD 58500 metre of Chheharata Distributary of Upper Bari Doab Canal (UBDC)

10.20.6 Monitoring and Evaluation

The implementation of the Programme was not properly monitored by the Department except by
way of holding review meetings and obtaining monthly progress reports. None of the divisions test
| | checked in Performance audit had maintained any monitoring data.



Co-ordinates of Modernisation of Gang Canal, IGNP Stage I, Narmada Canal and Mahi Bafa Sagar were not

Note:
provided by the CWC,



10.21.1 Background Chapter - 10

Stat
During 1996-2001, Gol approved 10 Major/Medium Irrigation projects in Rajasthan. During 2003- specific

08, Gol assistance was Rs 1258.56 crore and cumulative reported expenditure (including state share) Findings

till March 2008 was Rs 3175.85 crore. Four Major Projects, namely, Indira Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana

(IGNP) Stage-Il, Gang Canal (modernisation) Project, Mahi Bajajsagar Project, and Narmada Canal Rajasthan |
Project were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.21.2 Overall status of Reported Completion of Projects

Out of the 10 Major/Medium Irrigation projects, all projects, except IGNP Stage-Il and Narmada
Canal Project, were reportedly complete.

10.21.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

= Two of the four major projects (Gang Canal Modernisation and Mahi Bajaj Sagar)
declared completed by the government, were actually found to be incomplete
during audit. The work of Narmada Canal Project, Mahi Bajaj Sagar Project (Unit-
1), and Gang Canal System were badly delayed, resulting in time over run of 3 to 5
years with consequent cost overrun of Rs 666.71 crore. This was reportedly due to
increase in rate of land compensation, non-completion of canal works due to
inadequate budget allotment, slow tender process, delay in land acquisition/
clearance of forest land and mismanagementin planning.

m The IGNP Stage-Il, Mahi Bajaj Sagar, and Narmada Canal were major projects and
not completed till March 2008. Considering the paucity of funds with the State
Government and availability of CCA in flow area, the department should have
taken up the workin a phased manner - the flow system first so that partial benefit
could have been derived, and the lift system thereafter. However, the department
executed works of flow and lift together on IGNP Stage Il and Narmada Canal
Projects. As a result, both the systems were incomplete and the required potential
could not be created. Further, though canal works (branches, minors etc.) were
completed in IGNP Stage 1, the Command Area Development (CAD) authorities
could not complete the work of water courses; thus, adversely affecting the
utilization of created IP



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 = Bhikha Bhai Sagwara Canal (BBSC) with Nithauwa distributary for Mahi
State Bajajsagar Project was cleared (June 2002) by CWC. However, the sanction for
Specific diversion of forest land for Nithauwa distributary was received only in March 2007.
nts The works of Nithauwa distributary from 0 to 2.50 km and 6.48 to 21.54 km and

| Rajasthan nine minors were completed between March 2005 and March 2006, but the workin
the reaches from 2.50 to 6.48 km was not taken up as the approval for use of forest

land in this reach was delayed. The water did not reach the downstream portion of
Nithauwa distributary beyond 2.50 kms. Consequently, an area of 3,445 ha did
not receive the benefits of the canal, and nine minors of reaches 6.48 to 21.54 km
remained unfruitful as of March 2008. Even then, the project was declared as
completed, and the project completion report was irregularly issued in August
2007.

10.21.3.1 Non-utilisation of created potential

Audit scrutiny revealed that 662 (543 in flow area and 119 in lift area) diggis (open
shallow water tanks) were constructed, but only 60 Water User Associations (WUAs) were
formed as of March 2008. Further, not a single WUA had taken power connection for the
diggi. Hence, the IP of 88,090 ha created during 2006-08 could not be utilised. Further,
the mechanism for recovery of irrigation water charges by WUAs for carrying out
maintenance and its sharing with the State Government was not decided by the State
Government, as of March 2008.

Narmada Canal Project - Electrified diggi but power connection not taken by WUA.



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Narmada Canal Project - Incomplete work in the Inlet of Diggi No.5 Basan Minor at tail 3.701 km -
Vank Distributary

Narmada Canal Project - Incomplete work in the Inlet of Diggi No.5 Basan Minor at tail 3.701 km -
Vank Distributary

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Rajasthan |



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Narmada Canal Project — Incomplete work in the Inlet of Diggi No.5 Basan Minor at tail 3.701 km -
Vank Distributary

10.21.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $33 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Rajasthan

Nature of Irregularity Detai

Undue benefits to m__ Inthe four test checked projects, non-recovery of compensation due to non-
contractors completion of the works within the stipulated time and making payment for a work
which was to be constructed by the contractor, resulted in undue favour to
contractors to the tune of Rs.5.43 crore.

Diversion of funds = In Narmada Canal Project, a payment of Rs 143.13 crore was made to Jodhpur
Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited (JVVNL) for 33/11 Kilowatt power line/sub-station and
the expenditure was booked irregularly under AIBP, though there was no provision
for such expenditure.

= Apayment of Rs 28.52 crore was made to the contractors during 2006-08 for the
cost of sprinkler system, high density polyethylene (HDPE) pipelines, pump houses,
sumps, motors, pumps etc., and irregularly charged to AIBP funds, though the entire
cost of such works was to be borne by the WUAs', as per the project report.

७. In IGNP Stage-II Project, an expenditure of Rs 9.58 crore incurred during 2003-06
on maintenance and repair works was charged to the project.

= InGang Canal Modernisation project, Rs. 0.53 crore of AIBP funds were irregularly
used for court deposits for making payment to eight contractors for works executed
prior to inclusion of the Gang Canal Project under AIBP.

= Rs 0.49 crore was spent on rehabilitation works taken up under World Bank funded
“Rajasthan Water Sector Restructuring Project (RWSRP)" during 2003-07 and was

| | irregularly booked under the AIBP component of Gang Canal Project.



Misutilisation / ||
irregular expenditure
.
.
.

Performance Audit of AIBP |
Nature of Irregularity Details Chapter - 10

In IGNP Stage-II Project, Rs.6.40 crore was irregularly spent on construction of
Cross Drainage (CD) works and charged to the project cost, though there were no
provisions of CD works in the Revised Project Estimate of the Project.

In Narmada Canal Project, Rs.5.39 crore was drawn towards payment of land
compensation (Rs. 4 crore without sanction of collector and Rs. 1.39 crore without
disbursement to the land owners) during 2004-08 and booked under the Project to
avoid lapse of funds.

In IGNP Stage-II Project, the work of construction of drains was taken up and then
abandoned on technical grounds after execution of half of the estimated quantity
and incurring an expenditure of Rs 1.16 crore, despite the observations of SE,
Vigilance that there was no justification for constructing the surface drains.

In Gang Canal Modernisation project, an expenditure of Rs 0.98 crore was incurred
on raising of unlined portions of the canal, as the lining work was executed without
proper planning.

10.21.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

In the Narmada Canal Project, a Task Force Committee was formed. Six meetings were held between
June 2006 and May 2007, but thereafter no meeting was held.

State
Specific
Findings

Rajasthan |



pz

© canatoK

west
pisTaIcT

Map not to Scale

z=

Intl, Boundary —_—
State Boundary —
District Boundary

State Capital ©
Oo

Coverage of

| | Minor Irrigation Projects

| आऔी  “  __|।



10.22.1 Background Chapter - 10

Stati
During 1999-2008, Gol sanctioned 370 MI schemes with 6400 ha of irrigation potential in Sikkim. Specific
During 2003-08, the State received Rs.8.97 crore as central assistance and contributed Rs.1.59 crore Findings
as its share. Out of the total available funds of Rs. 11.80 crore, the reported expenditure during 2003-08
was Rs.8.23 crore. 65 schemes implemented during 2003-08 were selected for detailed audit scrutiny. Sikkim |
10.22.2 Overall reported status of completion of projects |

Out of 370 MI Projects sanctioned under 887 during 1999-2000 and 2007-08, all the projects,
except one ongoing project, had been declared as completed as of March 2008.

10.22.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects
10.22.3.1 Defunct MI Projects

Out of 26 MI Projects (out of the test-checked 65 MI projects) physically verified, 6 MI
Projects constructed at a total cost of Rs. 16.75 lakh to cover 86.07 hectares of land were
defunct due to landslides and leakage of water near the sources which was selected ina
sinking area. In Jugdum Khola, Lower Labing, Kajanikulo and Khanikhola to
Pradhangaon MI Channels, the farmers had to collect water from small brooks nearby.

10.22.3.2 Supply of polluted water

In two schemes, Sokeythang MI Channel and Chalisay Army Camp to Bagey Genopang
Khet, polluted water was supplied through completed channels due to mixing of drain
water.

[MI Project at Khanikhola to Pradhangaon-Defunct Michannel Cd



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10
State
Specific
Findings

By आए

MI Project Damala Gaon — Non-visible channel due to non-maintenance

Sokethang MI Project at Lower Lingding - polluted water in the channel

10.22.3.3  Non-availability of water for irrigation during lean period

During interviews with beneficiaries of 11 schemes out of 26 physically verified
schemes, the beneficiaries stated that the irrigation channels remained dry during the
winter seasons, at a time when more water was required for irrigation.



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.22.3.4 Creation and utilisation of Irrigation Potential Chapter - 10
Against the targeted potential of 2741.78 hectares till 2007-08 in respect of 242 =
schemes, the IP created was 2,095.49 hectares. The claimed IP utilization had increased Findings

from 85 per cent during 2003-04 to 95 per cent during 2007-08. However, the

Department failed to produce any document in support of the claimed utilization. Sikkim |
Further, although there was a moderate increase in yield per hectare, there was almost

no impact on coverage of agricultural area even after spending an aggregated amount |

of Rs.14.26 द0९ प्रावश AIBP during 1999-00 to 2007-08.

10.22.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

m= Survey and Investigation: In all the 65 schemes test checked in audit, there was
no recorded evidence of survey and investigation having been conducted.

m= Improper assessment of BC Ratio: The Department failed to produce DPRs for
any of the projects. However, in some of the individual implementation files where
copies of the BCR analysis were available, it was seen that one component i.e.
benefit due to reduced cost of farming (on time saved by farmers for irrigating the
fields), which was not included in the CWC guidelines, was taken into consideration
for calculation, which resulted in overstatement of the BCR.

= Non formation of Water User Groups: Neither had any water user group (WUG)
been formed, nor had the constructed channels been handed over to the local
Panchayats for upkeep and maintenance.

10.22.5 Financial Management
Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $34 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Sikkim

Nature of Irregularity Details

Short-release of ™@ Against the receipt of Rs. 8.15 crore from GOI towards Central assistance for 2003-08

funds under AIBP schemes, the State Government did not provide the matching share
which resulted in short release of State share of Rs 0.61 crore. Delay in release of
funds by the state government could not be ascertained, due to non maintenance of
related records.

Diversion of funds ™ Funds amounting to Rs. 0.25 crore were diverted towards payment of salaries of work-
charged employees, purchase of stock materials from AIBP fund and supplied to
works other than AIBP, and debris clearance which was not permitted under AIBP.

10.22.6 Monitoring and evaluation

No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to monitor the

implementation of the programme.
nnn



TRIPURA

ee
a



Tripura

10.23.1 Background Chapter - 10
Stat

Gol approved three medium irrigation projects - Gumti Irrigation Project, Khowai Irrigation Project specific

and Manu Irrigation Project - and 1241 MI projects during 1996-2008. During 2003-08, the Gol Findings

teleased assistance of Rs. 100.38 crore and the State Government released Rs. 46.56 crore as its share

and Rs. 10.65 crore as advance release of Central share. Out of the total available funds of Rs. 169.53 Tripua |

crore (including opening balance of Rs. 11.94 crore), the reported expenditure during 2003-08 was
Rs. 170.29 crore. One medium project, namely Khowai Irrigation Project, and 25 MI Projects were
selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.23.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Despite being taken up in 1996-97, none of the three ongoing medium irrigation projects were
completed as of March 2008. Out of 1439 MI Projects sanctioned during 1999-2008:

m= 202 Projects were abandoned, after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 3.72 crore.

m= 1112 Projects were reportedly completed, out of which eight schemes were not
functioning as of November 2008 reportedly due to dispute on engagement of
operator by Gram Panchayat (GP), non-availability of water due to storage at
upstream, frequent stealing of pump motor, and shifts of river course on Bangladesh
side.

m= 125 Projects were in progress as of March 2008.

10.23.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

= __InKhowai Medium Irrigation Project, only the canal systems were to be implemented
under AIBP Audit scrutiny revealed that even after spending Rs.75.23 crore (98 per
cent of the revised cost) the department could construct only 25.684 km of main canal
out of the targeted 31.094 km. Further, only 1.351 km of branch canals out of the
targeted 26.682 km could be constructed. Resultantly, only 1453 ha (32.18 per cent)
of the targeted irrigation potential of 4515 ha could be created during 1996-2009
(November 2008). The tardy progress was attributed to delay in land acquisition and
surrender of physical possession by the land owners, insurgency problems, shortage
of skilled labourers etc.

/ Out of the 25 sampled MI Projects, 10 Projects were declared as completed, out of
which in six projects, the shortfall in creation of the targeted IP ranged from 9 per cent
to 57 per cent. Thus even after completion of the projects, the MI Projects were not
delivering the targeted benefits.



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Tripua

1] In Lift Irrigation scheme (LIS) at North Dabbari, though the work of laying and
distribution of pipe lines had not commenced, it was reported as completed in
November 2008. Further, in the LI scheme at Rabindranagar, though the work
began in March 2004, the process of land acquisition started after 21 months and
the department incorrectly assessed land requirement at 2.6 acre, instead of the
actual requirement of 95.48 acre.

1] In 24 out of 25 test-checked MI Projects, there was no evidence of any survey and
investigation having been conducted. Further, the BC Ratio was assessed only in
cases of two projects.

10.23.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table $35 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Tripura

Nature of Irregularity Details

Delays in release of ™ During 2003-07, the Gol funds were released by the State Government, after delays
Gol funds ranging from 11 to 130 days.
Diversion of funds @ Funds amounting to Rs. 0.82 crore were diverted in four test checked divisions

(Water Resource Division-|, II, IIl and IV) for flood protection and maintenance works
of different Deep Tube Wells (DTW) and Lift Irrigation (LI) Schemes.

@ Funds amounting to Rs. 0.12 crore were diverted for payment of electricity consumption
bills of different running Lift Irrigation schemes in Water Resource Division-|.

10.23.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

In the test-checked MI schemes, no independent agency had been engaged for monitoring of the
schemes.



UTTAR PRADESH



Uttar Pradesh

10.24.1 Background Chapter - 10
State

During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned 14 major irrigation Projects. During 2003-08, Gol released Specific

Rs 3117.79 crore of central assistance and the State Government contributed Rs.2006.84 crore as its Findings

share; the total reported expenditure was Rs. 2798.64 crore. Five projects, Modernisation of Agra

Canal, Modernisation of Lahchura Dam, Improving Irrigation intensity of Hardoi Branch System, pees

Bansagar Canal and Rajghat Canal, were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.

10.24.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects

Of the 14 major projects , only five projects had been reportedly completed (Upper Ganga
& Madhya Ganga, Kharif Channel in H K Doab, Rajghat Canal, Modernisation Of Agra
Canal, and Jarauli Pump Canal).

10.24.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Audit scrutiny revealed that all the five test-checked Projects were ongoing, although two
projects - Agra Canal Project and Rajghat Canal Project were declared completed. Further
audit scrutiny revealed the following:

= Although the Modernisation of Agra Canal Project was declared completed, three
bridges at Palwal, Chhajunagar and Lilwari were incomplete and old bridges were
not dismantled, which led to silting and growth of weeds in the canal section. The
reported utilization of the created IP in the project was 77 per cent. During field visit
to Agra Canal, supply of polluted water was found between Km 2.355 to Km 7.100 of
Agra Canal. There were six open sewage drains and six Hume pipes sewage drains
which were polluting the canal water.

ब. The Rajghat Canal Project was declared completed, although nine MoUs of Rs 8.67
crore out of twenty MoUs signed with Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited
(UPPCL) were still to be finalized, while three MoUs had been rescinded without
completing the work. Out of eight rail crossings proposed to be constructed on the
canal at a cost of Rs 8.95 crore during 1995-04, only four could be completed,
including one defective canal crossing. Further, a proposal of Rs. 56.07 crore was
made for the remaining works even after declaring the project as completed.

= In Bansagar Canal Project, the construction work of canal was stopped midway in
Adwa Meja Link Channel (AMLC) as clearance for forest land was not obtained due to
opposition by the affected villagers, although a sum of Rs 86.29 crore was deposited
with forest department for their rehabilitation. Further, in the Meja-Jirgo Link Channel
(५110), excavation work between chainage Km 40.700 to 43.300 was stalled due to
sprouting up of water.



Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Uttar
Pradesh

The works of Hardoi Branch System project were commenced in an unplanned
way 35 the restoration works in branches lying in lower reaches were started
earlier than those lying upstream, which resulted in formation of earth mound
and silting in the canal system. An additional expenditure of Rs74.61 lakh was
incurred to remove the same.

In three test-checked projects (Agra Canal Project, Rajghat Canal Project and
Bansagar Canal Project), cost overrun varied from 119 per cent to 501 per cent of
the original cost, and the time overrun ranged from 70 months to 165 months.



Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

5
Findings

Uttar
Pradesh



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Uttar
Pradesh

Bansagar Canal Project

Improvement of Irrigation Intensity of Hardoi Branch System



Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.24.4 Financial Management Chapter - 10
State

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management: Specific
Findings

Table $36 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Uttar Pradesh

Uttar
Nature of Irregularity ails Pradesh

Undue benefits to = Under Improvement of Irrigation Intensity of Hardoi Branch, payment of Rs 59.50
contractors lakh was made on excavation of earth, for which work payment was previously
made in Unnao Branch.

Diversion of funds = 0५119 2003-08, Engineer-in-Chief (E-in-C) allotted Rs 1225.91 crore for further
allotment to executing field offices. The Chief Engineers (CEs), however, allotted
only Rs 1216.91 crore to the executing divisions. The balance of Rs 9.00 crore was
diverted at the level of Engineer-in-Chief / Chief Engineer.

= Anamount of Rs 4.71 crore (CE, Bansagar Canal Project: Rs 4.56 crore and CE
Ganga: Rs 0.15 crore) was diverted to CE, Sarda Sahayak during 2004-07 under
the instructions issued by Engineer-in-Chief (E-in-C) to allot 0.5 per cent of the
project cost from the State share to meet the expenditures of E-in-C office.

m  In Bansagar Canal project, Rs.0.81 crore was diverted to E-in-C office to bear the
expenditure of Computer Centre and its staff in E-in-C’'s office.

= In Bansagar Canal Construction Division-I, Rs.0.33 crore was diverted for payment
of bills not related to the division.

= In'Irrigation Works Circle-IIl, Agra, AIBP funds to the tune of Rs.15.80 crore were
diverted and utilized on works not sanctioned under the project.

Unauthorised /Irregular = Inthe Modemization of Agra Canal project, the department paid Rs. 9.41 crore to
expenditure Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam for renovation of the Yamunotri Guest House,
Annexe building, Old Inspection House and eight type-II buildings at Okhla, New
Delhi, although these works were not approved by CWC/ MoWR. Besides, the
division also debited Rs.6.39 crore to the project for various works carried out in the
above premises during the year 2006-07.

= In Bansagar canal project, four MoUs of National Project Construction Corporation
(NPCC) were rescinded but penalty of Rs 3.73 crore was not recovered. Besides, Rs
83.65 lakh of Income tax was also not deducted, before making payment to NPCC.

व. In Rajghat Canal Project, excess payment of Rs 0.86 crore made to the Railway
Department was not recovered.

m In Lahchura Dam Project, EE Mahoba Dam Construction Division-I, advance
payments of Rs. 14.55 crore were made between March 2003 and March 2008 and
irregularly charged to the projects, instead of the Miscellaneous Public Works
Advances account head against individual officers for watching recovery and eventual
adjustment.

10.24.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

= _ AState level monitoring committee had been constituted. It was, however, foundin
audit that as against the ten meetings required to be held as of March 2008, only
three meetings were held.

= Monthly meetings were carried out at the project level but any reference regarding
sending the meeting-reports to State level committee was not found.



Uttarakhand

10.25.1 Background Chapter - 10
Stat
During 1999-2008, Gol sanctioned 1931 MI projects in the State. During 2003-08, the Gol released specific

Rs.520.54 crore as central assistance, and the State Government contributed Rs.116.93 crore as Findings
State share. Out of the available funds of Rs.637.47 crore, the reported expenditure, as of March
2008, was Rs.636.13 crore. Out of 1738 MI Projects taken up during 2003-08, 30 MI Projects were Uttarakhand |

selected for detailed audit scrutiny. श्र

10.25.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects
Out of the 1931 MI Projects taken up during 1999-2008, as of March 2008:

ब.. 961 Projects were completed, 905 Projects were ongoing, and 65 Projects could not
bestarted.

m= 193 MI projects and 229 MI projects sanctioned during 2002-03 and 2005-06
respectively, were still ongoing as of March 2008.

m= Out of the 65 Projects which could not be started as of March 2008, 64 MI Projects
were those which were sanctioned in 2005-06.

10.25.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

Out of the 30 test-checked projects, 21 projects were complete, while nine projects”
wereincomplete. Physical verification by audit of 30 selected schemes involving 80 sub-
schemes, further, revealed that:

m — 11sub-schemes (14 per cent) lacked command area as the guls/ water canals were
constructed midway between the water source and command area, and did not
teach the fields.

m 19 sub-schemes (24 per cent) were lying defunct, and 23 sub-schemes (29 per
cent) were damaged.

m= 7 sub-schemes (9 per cent) were without any water or some had in-sufficient source
of water, and in 14 sub-schemes (18 per cent), there were seepages leading to less
amount of water in the canals.

Resultantly, beneficiaries/ farmers reported that they were not getting water for
irrigation.

25 Bangouthi, Construction of 35 km. field gul lining in block Dugadda, Construction of 5.753 km. long lining of channel & gul in Kanalichhina | |
block, Construction of Baank canal in Deval Block ,Degot, Devaria, Hartad-Santad, Kheti (E.R.M) and Lining and field Gul construction
in Bhaisiachhana, Almora



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

| Uttarakhand

bd

The constructed
portion of the gul was
neither connected to
the permanent water
source nor to the
command area.

Gada Rahiya Gul (Kawakhera MI Project)

The gul was not
functional as the
head of the gul was
damaged in a 3 metre
stretch since
commissioning of the
scheme, and the
whole of the
command area
temained unirrigated.

The gul was not
functional as the
head of the gul was
damaged in a 3 metre
stretch since
commissioning of the
scheme.

Nayal_Ganaikuna Gul (Nayal MI Project)



Performance Audit of AIBP |

Water was not
flowing in due to
seepage, debris,
weed growth,
structural erosion etc.
The beneficiaries
reported to audit that «: है
due to cracks, nes
damage & seepage,
they were not getting
sufficient benefits.

Laduda Gul (Jaicholi MI Project)

10.25.4 Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management:

Table S37 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Uttarakhand

Details

Nature of Irregularity

™ During 2003-08, there were delays ranging from 35 days to 57 days in release of funds
by the State Government to the implementing agencies.

Delayed release of
funds

10.25.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

No monitoring committee was formed either at the State or project level. Further, the CWC had not
carried out any monitoring and evaluation of the completed projects during 2003-08.

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

Uttarakhand |



© West Bengal

10.26.1 Background Chapter - 10

State
During 1996-2008, Gol sanctioned four major and three medium projects, while 32 minor irrigation Specific

schemes were sanctioned in 2007-08. During 2003-08, Gol released assistance of Rs. 32.26 crore and Findings
the State share was Rs. 34.49 crore, against which the reported expenditure was Rs. 78.40 crore. one

major, two medium and 8 MI projects were selected for detailed audit scrutiny. West

Bengal

10.26.2 Overall Status of Reported Completion of Projects
Of the seven major/medium projects,

m One major project, the Subarnarekha Barrage Project, had been abandoned, and
three projects - 1 major (Teesta Barrage Project) and 2 medium (Patloi Irrigation
scheme and Tatko Irrigation scheme) were ongoing.

m_ Three projects — 2 major (Kangsabati Reservoir Project and Modernisation of Barrage
and Irrigation of Damodar Valley Corporation) and 1 medium (Hanumata Irrigation
scheme) were reportedly complete as of March 2008.

m Incase of Mls, despite the availability of sufficient funds (Rs 10.14 crore) during
2007-08, only Rs.0.60 crore was released to the divisions and no work, except for
procurement of materials of Rs 0.52 crore for five Ml projects, could be started as of
March 2008. No work had been started on the remaining 27 MI projects.

10.26.3 Status of Completion of Test-Checked Projects

10.26.3.1 Teesta Barrage Project (TBP)

न. The project which was started in 1976, and brought under AIBP in 1996-97, was still
incomplete as of March 2008, with a time overrun of 18 years and cost overrun of Rs.
1110 crore. Despite the expenditure of Rs 1179.66 crore, only 30 per cent physical
progress had been achieved, while the cost estimates had been revised to Rs 2979
crore, as of March 2008. The target date had been revised to 2012.

= Out of total five main canals of the TBP. only two (Teesta Mahananda Link Canal -
TMLC and Mahananda Main Canal - MMC) were completed. Operations of head
regulator gates of another canal- Teesta Jaldhaka Main Canal (TJMC) had not yet
been started as of March 2008. Out of 35 distributaries of the completed canals, 14
were complete, while 21 were still incomplete mainly due to disputes of land
acquisition.



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10 : The department started the project in 1976 without obtaining any environment &
State forest clearances. In September 1994, the Ministry of Environment and Forest
Specific (MoEF) gave clearances subject to various conditions, none of which had, however,
nts been fulfilled as of August 2008.

West

Bengal

Dauk Nagar Main Canal of TBP at Ch. 63.585 where no trace of canal water was observed due to
land dispute in Uttar Dinajpur District

10.26.3.2 Patloi Irrigation Scheme (PIS)

. The Project, which was started in the mid-seventies with an estimated cost of Rs
0.90 crore, was revised to Rs 9.41 crore as of 1998. Despite expenditure of Rs 8.89
crore and physical achievement ranging from 56 to 60 per cent, the project was still
incomplete and against the ultimate target of 2158 ha, only 270 ha of IP was
reportedly created, of which 70 ha was reportedly utilized. There were gaps in the
main canals and the component parts of the spillway gate were in deplorable
condition.

. Construction of a siphon at chainage 130.45 km of Left Bank Main Canal (LBMC)
and canal construction from chainage 0.00 to 65.00 km of Right Bank Main Canal
(RBMC) was still in progress.

बा Water for irrigation in AIBP portion of the canals was not available due to land
disputes and delayed execution of works.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

Chapter - 10
State
Specific
Findings

West
Bengal

LBMC of Patloi Irrigation Scheme near proposed RCC Tunnel at chainage 551.20 in Purulia
District - The work was held up due to land dispute.

10.26.3.3 Hanumata Irrigation Scheme (HIS)

1] The Project was declared completed in March 2007. However, audit scrutiny
revealed that the project was, in fact, incomplete since construction of one
aquaduct at chainage 480.00m of Right Bank Main Canal (RBMC) was in progress
and the bed level of RBMC from chainage 199.89 m onwards was higher than the
design bed level and fell mostly in a rocky zone. All 3 distributaries of the RBMC
were situated after chainage 199.89 m. Asa result, canal water was not available
for irrigation from chainage 199.89 m onwards.

At Ch. 198.00m no canal water at RBMC of HIS in Purulia District was available due to rocky zone.
(The water in picture is rain water)



| Performance Audit of AIBP

Chapter - 10

State
Specific
Findings

West
Bengal

Chainage 199.89m beyond which actual bed level was higher than the design bed level in Purulia
District. Resultantly there was no flow of water. (The water in picture is rain water)

10.26.4 Planning and Approval of Projects

The department did not prepare any DPR, including assessment of B.C. Ratio, in respect of the selected
major/medium projects brought under AIBP in 1996-97, and the original DPRs, stated to have been
prepared long back in the 70s, were not available.


Performance Audit of AIBP |

10.26.5 Financial Management Chapter - 10
Audit scrutiny revealed the following irregularities in financial management: =
Table $38 - Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in West Bengal Findings
Nature of Irregularity Details West | |
Bengal
Undue benefits to m In Teesta Barrage Project (TBP), failure to impose penalty on account of non
contractor completion of work in scheduled time resulted in undue favour amounting to

Rs 5.40 lakh, to the contractor.

Delay in release of lm There were delays in release of funds both by the Gol (which released funds at the
funds fag end of every financial year) and the State Government, which released funds after
delays ranging from 32 to 185 days.

Wasteful / Irregular In Teesta Barrage Project (TBP):

expenditure 1m Six out of ten test-checked Divisions of TBP incurred unauthorized expenditure of

Rs 2.71 crore on unapproved works.
m@ Expenditure of Rs 11.16 crore on the construction of an escape channel proved
wasteful, due to wrong estimation of design capacity of the Dauk River.

10.26.6 Monitoring and Evaluation

m= No State level and Project level monitoring committees had been constituted to
monitor the implementation of the programme.

m= Audit scrutiny revealed that CWC conducted monitoring visits and submitted
Monitoring status reports only once in a year, in respect of PIS and HIS during 2003-
08. Further, in its inspection report of April 2008, CWC mentioned the lack of full
cooperation from the project authorities, and stated that the visits could be actually
undertaken to only such work sites which the project engineers wanted to show.

kerr,

(IK.R.SRIRAM)
Principal Director of Audit
Dated : 26 April, 2010 Economic & Service Ministries
Countersigned
Ghee =
a
Dated : 26 April, 2010 (VINOD RAI)
Place : New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India



Annexure - I
List of Major, Medium & ERM Irrigation Projects covered under AIBP

Project Name ategory No. | Project Name Category
Andhra Prade: pAssam

1. | Sriramsagar St.1 Major 33. | Dhan Major

2. Priyadarshini Jurala Major 34, Champamati Major

3. Somasila Major 35. | Bordikarai Major

4... Nagarjunsagar Major 36... Intg. Irr. Scheme in Kollong Basin Major

5. | Vamsdhara St-ll Ph Major 37. | Pahumara Medium

6. | Tadipudi LIS Major 38... Hawaipur lift Medium

7. | Pushkara LIS Major 39. | Rupahi Medium

8.  Gundlakdamma Major 40. | Borolia Medium

9. | Alisagar LIS Major 41. | Kolonga Medium
10. | J. Chokka Rao LIS Major 42. | Burhi Dihing Medium
11. | Guthpa LIS Major 43. | Modernisation of Jamuna Irrigation ERM
12. | Thotapally Barrage Major Eig
13. | Rajiv Bhima LIS. Major 18॥9'______... |
14... Cheyyeru (Annamaya) Medium 44. | Western Kosi Major
15. Madduvalasa Medium 45... Upper Kiul Major
16. | Gundalavagu Medium 46.  Durgawati Major
17. | Maddigedda Medium 47. | Punpun Major
18. | Kanupur Canal Medium 48. Omi Reservoir Medium
19. | Yerrakalva Res. Medium 49. | Bilasi Reservoir Medium
20. Ralivagu Medium. 50.  Batane Medium
21. | Gollavagu Medium 51. | Sone Modernisation ERM
23. | Peddavagu Medium 52. | Hasdeo Bango Major
24... Veligallu Medium 53. | Jonk Diversion Major
25. | Nilwai Medium 54. | Mahanadi Res. Pr. Major
26. | SriKomaram Bheem Medium 55. | Minimata (Hasdeo Bango Ph. IV) Major
27. | Tarakarama thirtha Sagaram Medium 56. — Shivnath Diversion
28... Swarnamukhi Medium 57. | Kosarteda Medium
29. | Palemvagu Medium 58... Barai Medium
30. | Musurumill Medium |७००__........ |
31. | FFC of SRSP ERM 59. | Salauli Major
32. | SRSP Stl ERM 60. Tillaril. S Major

7.



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Annexure-l है Project Name Category

List of
Major,
Medium &
ERM
Irrigation
Projects
covered
under
AIBP

Project Name

Category

61. | Sardar Sarovar Major 93. | Torai Medium
Sipu Major 94, | Latratu Medium
63. | Damanganga Major 95. | Kansjore Medium
64... Karjan Major 96.  Sonua Medium
65. | Sukhi Major 97. | Surangi Medium
66.  Watrak Major 98.  Tapkara Reservoir Medium
6. | Jhuj Medium 99. | Upper Sankh Medium
68. | Mukteshwar Medium 100... Panchkhero Medium
69. | Harnav- Il Medium 101. | Mod. of Ranbir Canal ERM
70.  Umaria Medium 102. | Mod. of New Pratap Canal ERM
71, | Deo Medium 103. | Mod. of Kathua Canal ERM
72... Aji-IV Medium 104. | Mod. of Zaingir Canal ERM
73. | Ozat-ll Medium. 105. | Mod. Of Dadi Canal ERM
74... शिक्षा Medium 106. | Mod. Of Martand Canal ERM
75, | Bhadar-Il Medium 107. | Mod. Of Mav Khul ERM
C108 Mod. of Babul canal ERM

76. | Gurgaon Canal Major [Karnataka titsisi—sCSY
77. | WRCP Major 109. | Upper Krishna St.1 Major
78. Jawahar lal Nehru Lift Irrigation Major 110. | Malaprabha Major
79. | WRCP ERM 111. | Karanja Major
112, | Upper Krishna Stl Major
80. | Shahnehar Irrigation Project Major 113. | Varahi Irrigation Project Major
81. | Sidhata Medium 114. | Hirehalla Medium
82. Changer Lift Irrigation Project Medium 115. | Gandori Nala Medium
e116. Maskinatan Medium
83. | Marwal Lift Medium 117. | Votehole Medium
84. Lethpora Lift Medium 118. | Ghataprabha St.lll ERM
86. | Rajpora Lift Medium 119. | Kallada Major
87. | Tral Lift Medium 120. | Muvattupuzha Major
88. — Igophey Medium 121. | Karapuzha Medium
89. | Rafiabad High Lift Irrigation Medium Madhya Pradesh
90. Mod. Kandi Canal Medium 122. | Indira Sagar Unit | Major
91. | Prakachik Knows Canal Medium 123. | Bansagar (Unit!) (M.P. Share - Works) | Major
92.  Gumani Medium 124. | Upper Weinganga Major



Performance Audit of AIBP a

Ss. Project Name Category Project Name ategory Annexure-I
List of
Major,
125. | Sindh Phase Il Major 160, | Tarli Major Medium &
426. | Sindh Phase | Major 161. | Dhom Balakwadi Major ERM
Irrigation
127. | Mahi Major 162, | Bahula Medium Projects
428.  Bariarpur LBC Major 163, | Upper Manar(W) Medium covered
129. | Urmil RBC Major 164. | Hetwane Medium une 4
130.  Bawanthadi Major 165. — Pothra Nalla Medium
131. | Mahan Major 166. Utawali Medium
132.  Omkareshwar, Ph. -| Major 167, | Purna(W) Medium
133. _ Bargi Diversion Ph | Major 168. | Kar (W) Medium
134. | Pench Div-I Major 169. | Lalnala (W) Medium
13, | Banjar Medium 170. | Tajnapur LIS Medium
171, | Kadvi Medium
136. | Ghosi Khurd (Sawargaon) Major 172, | Kasarsai Medium
187. | Surya Major 173, | Jawalgaon Medium
138. | Waghur( Works) Major 174, | Kumbhi Medium
139. | Bhima Major 175. | Kasari Medium
140. Upper Tapi Major 176.  Patgaon Medium
141. | Upper Wardha Major 177. | Madan Tank Medium
142. | Wan Major 178. | Dongargaon Medium
143, | Jayakwadi Stage-Il Major 179. | Shivna Takli Medium
144. | Isthapuri (Vishnupuri) Major 180. | Amravati Medium
145. | Krishna Major 181. | Gul Medium
146... Kukadi Major 182.  Chandarbhaga Medium
147. | Chaskman Major 183, | Sapan Medium
148. | Upper Penganga Major 184. | Uttermand Medium
149. | Lower Dudhna (७) Major 185. | Sangola Branch Canal Medium
150.  Warna Major 186, | Morna (Gureghar) Medium
151. | Wan-Il Major 187. | Arjuna Medium
152, | Punad Major 188, | Prakasha Barrage Medium
153. | Nandur Madhmeshwar Major 189, | Sulwade Barrage Medium
154... Lower Wardha (W) Major 190, | Sarangkheda Medium
18 | Rua 1 १७०. [CCN
156.  Arunavati (W) Major 191. | Khuga Major
157. | Khadakawasla Major 192,  Thoubal Major
158. | Bembla Major 193. | Dolaithabi Barrage Medium
159. | Pentakli Major

=



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Annexure-l है Project Name Category
Meghalaya

List of
Major,
Medium &
ERM
Irrigation
Projects
covered
under
AIBP

Ss. Project Name Category

194.  Rongai Valley Medium Chauli Medium
Orissa 225. | Jaisamand (Modernisation) ERM
195. | Upper Indravati(KBK) Major 226.  Gambhiri (Modernisation) ERM
196. | Subemarekha Major 227. — Mod. of Gang Canal ERM
198. Upper Kolab(KBK) Major Gumti Medium
199. Lower Indra(KBK) Major 229. Manu Medium
200. — Lower Suktel(KBK) Major 230. — Khowai Medium
202.  Telengiri(KBK) Major 231. | WRCP ERM
204... Titlagarh St-II(KBK) Medium 232. | Upper Ganga Major
205. | RET Irrigation(KBK) Medium 233. | Sarda Sahayak Major
206. — Chheligada Dam Medium 234. | Saryu Nahar Major
207. | Anandpur Barr/ ERM 235, | Providing Khari Channelin H.K.Doab | Major
Integrated Anandpur Barr. 236. | Rajghat Dam Major
208, | Naraj Barrage ERM 234.  Bansagar Canal Major
209. Improvement to Sason Canal System ERM 238. | Lakhwar Vyasi Major
210.  Salandi Left Main Canal-Ambahata ERM 239. | Tehri Major
211. | Improvement to Salki Irrigation ERM 240.  Gyanapur Pump Canal Major
C241 Easter Ganga Canal Major
212. | Ranjit Sagar Dam Major 242. | Rajghat Canal Major
213. | Shahpur Kandi Dam Major 243. | Jarauli Pump Canal Major
214, | Irrigation to H.P. below Talwara Medium 244. | Gunta Nala Dam Medium
215. Rehabilitation of Ist Patiala Feeder and Medium 245. | Mod. Agra Canal ERM
Kotla Branch Project 248. | Mod. of Lachhura Dam ERM
216. | Remodelling of UBDC ERM 247. | Improving Irr. Intensity of Hardoi ERM
217. | Kandi Canal Extension (Ph.ll) ERM Geene pa)
Rajasthan ee
218. | IGNP Stage-I Major 1-8 82032 Riese
219. | Bisalpur Major 249. | Subemrekha Barrage Major
220. Narmada Canal Major Ges ED Medi
221. | Mahi Bajaj Sagar Major 25. 0 Medium
222. | Chhapi Medium 252.  Hanumata Medium
223, | Panchana Medium 253. Mod of Barrage and Irrigation System ERM



State-wise releases and reported expenditure

Annexure - Il

(pny 2ouewioyieg गए ui parenod ou sen} sep2322109 Jou Sem ०००३०] uoIeULopUI ;PaUIE UIE
ou Atpaiodar 2१ Aayy se “BxYSseIEYW PUR Ysepelg EIYPULY Jo SJuBUIUsAROD BLY Aq गए 01 paplrosd jou BAM sWafosd {18 304 aimipuadxe pariodai pue a1eys Biers Jo Sasbea1 jo sap yey) payou aq (शा)

Je1aua5 sjuRIUNODDY aes गए 0} प्रपन्‍्णप1३5०9 Zz
गण 24) Aq papinoid uonewi0yL1 wos pajiduio> u2aq aney ainyipuadka 9५104 90० aleys sares yo saInBy ay ‘IND pue AySIUIW गग Jo 9०0०० [ UO paseq ०० (0९: pue WID) saswajal [९|४०० :३०1005
Sepy हद... ऋ. छत. कक... eLOL SC =| aL 088. 18 की... 86... 086. के... 8... deze 98GB 100 reo.
wn iz 8 L 8 | zw | o |Z a | 0 o jo zie o ja 4४ jz o je eBuog iso, | 12
we | 08 | 6 | 0 it | 6 | o@ | 0 et | 68 | + | 0 ws | et + jo w \6 b [oo Pueyevenn | 9
wh | Sly | 0 ist | 68 | os | 0 | 2 | 898 | we | 0 | eer | ise | zr | 0 | ou | ee | so | 0 | oe dn) च्
न) 8 jo s |e | wz lt z [॥ | 9 | o a i 2 818 wz f2 ॥ ढ़ चमक... कट
z 1 £ 0 के 0 e lo 1 9 1 0 0 0 1 jo 1 0 b | o pps | &%
zi | 0 0 it | zt | 0 o la lr | 0 0 06 zo | 0 o | ee | sie | 0 0 | 005 uewseley | 22
86 js |o # | w | & | o 0 w | we | 0 | @ ss | 0 o |o o | @ 0 |0 qolung | 12
es | 66 | 9 60 | ish | ust | + | cer | gee | un | © | am | ze | e | 0 | w@ | uz | 96 2 | a S80
w | w jo 6 | 6 u ilo ॥ ड़ 8.10 न) y 0 न) 8.10 pueje6en
zB \3 we jo बह | 9 n | o 9 | 9 6 jo o | 9 s |o o | 6 | 0 uesoziy,
ao jo ' 9 6 0 bo 8 L z ° 9 n z | 0 8 0 1 | o ehmeuBon | LL
66 | is | o | os | wr | ८8 | 8 | or | we | w | s | m aoju zja|m |9 e |e andjuen | 91
> > 99. | 988 set | Wve o | wt Oo | ees o | 9 eqseveyen |S
gov | 66 | eh | ae | 68 | ८४ छू | % | om | 0 o 189 | ८8 | छ o | us | iy | o oO | 999 Ysoperg eAypeN | Yt
ow | 0 o jo ow | 0 | 0 wv | |o | 6 wu प्र o | | & |» o | ejeoy | sh
wr | we | 0 | os | se | oe | 0 os | vse | 0 wh | us | 18 | 0 | oe | zig | sz | 0 | 992 बी]
o कर jo ४७686 0 t) 0 e |» |o |¢ e@ |e o | | @ | % o ढ़ puewpueyr |i
zo | 8 so | we | | a | 08 so | mn | a | x e&% | st s [2 er | 8 6 | a wer | ob
ue fk | wm fw | w | 9 z wily nm | ot ait z |@ w |s o | ab sepeig गण... 6
° 0 o jo 88 | %& | 0 gv | 66 | 0 | 9 98 | 2 o ju | we | 988 018 eurkiey 8
कै [# | 0 | ws | @ | छढ | 0 8 8 o | oe | 8 | a o | is | 6 | 8 0 | 099 yerelng | 1
2 ४०७ | 9
eer | 08 | 09 | ve | sek | छा su | seh | 0 | 8 bw | ou o je si | 8 | 0 | %# eBsmeyyo |S
oz | ez | + | 6s | 698 | cuz i | ez | 0 | a 90: | ८६ o 28 | eu | के 01५४ veya | +
86 18 69 9 09 | 9 पटक wz | a o | + aio ait o | 6 uessy | ¢
wv | w \o o |e @ | s a | 0 a |e o | 0 s | s Ca usapeid jeyeunry |Z
> > 0 | 986 t) he y= > o |e | - 2 0 | S02 sopeig euypuy | 4

॥ | wnipow
iofew i iw | poten

saimyp | 8४४५७ | +] ,eunyp | 0४५७ | ——"—"] eurp | .ezeyg | —— 218g
suodea | 11S usp | -uodeg | aes suey | -uodeg | aS 4 ais |... muBID/YTO

ण्ण्ण = गण sone om

(21019 0] १४)



Annexure - Ill
Details of Test-Checked Projects

Sample A - Major/ Medium Projects sanctioned during
1996-97 to 2007-08

Major Irrigation Projects |

1. Andhra Pradesh

= Alisagar Lift Irrigation Scheme,
Nizamabad

= Sriram Sagar Project Stage-I,
Karimnagar

(2)

Medium Irrigation Projects

m  Veligallu Reservoir Project, Kadapa

m= Thotapalli Barrage Project,
Vizianagaram

m= Khomaram Bhima Project, Adilabad
m_ Ralivagu Project, Adilabad
m  Yerrakaluva Project, West Godavari

(5)

2 | Arunachal Pradesh

NIL

NIL

3. Assam m= Champamati Irrigation Project = Modernisation of Jamuna Irrigation
4 Project
(1)
(1)
4. Bihar Western Kosi Canal Project NIL

Sone Canal Modemization
project

(2)

5... Chhattisgarh

m Mahanadi Reservoir Project
m  Minimata (Hasdeo) Bango

(2)

m Kosarteda

(1)

6. Gujarat = Sardar Sarovar Project = Bhadar-ll project
(1) m Mukteshwar project
(2)
7. Haryana m Balance work of Water NIL
Resources Consolidation
Project (WRCP)
(1)
8 | Himachal Pradesh NIL = Sidhata Medium Irrigation Project at

Jawali, District Kangra.

= Changer Area Medium Lift Irrigation
project at Bassi, District Bilaspur

(2)

9. Jammu & Kashmir

m_ Modernization of Ranbir Canal

(1)

= Modernization of Dadi Canal
m= Modernization of Mav Khul
बे. Lift Irrigation Scheme, Lethpora

(3)



Performance Audit of AIBP a

10. Jharkhand NIL m Upper Sankh Reservoir Scheme.
m Panchkhero Reservoir scheme
m  Sonua Reservoir Scheme
m_ Tapkhero Reservoir scheme
(4)
11 Karnataka = Varahi Irrigation Project, NIL
Siddhapur
Karanja Project
m Upper Krishna Project - Stage |
m Upper Krishna Project - Stage II
(4)
12 Kerala = Kallada Irrigation Project m= Karapuzha Irrigation Project
= Muvattupuzha Valley Irrigation (1)
Project
(2)
13 Madhya Pradesh = Bawanthadi Project (Rajiv NIL
Sagar) Balaghat
= Bargi Diversion Project Phase
I(Canal RD Km. 63-104),
Jabalpur
m _Bansagar Project Phase II
(Canal), Rewa
= Bargi Diversion Project Phase |
(Canal RD Km. 16-63),
Jabalpur
m Indira Sagar Project (Canal)
Sanawad
(6)
14. Maharashtra = Arunavati = Patgaon
= Bembla (1)
m Khadakpurna
m Nandur Madhmedhshwar
m  Sangola Branch Canal
बे. Vishnupuri
= Krishna
@
15. Manipur = Thoubal Multipurpose Project NIL
(1)
16 | Meghalaya NIL m= Rongai Valley Irrigation Project
(1)
17 Mizoram NIL NIL
18 | Nagaland NIL NIL
19 | Orissa m= Rengali Irrigation Project (RBC) |= TelengirIrigation Project

m Upper Indravati Irrigation
Project (Right Canal System
and U.I. Extensions)

(2)

m_ Improvement to Salki Irrigation

(2)

Annexure:

Details of

Test-Checked

Projects

7.


a Performance Audit of AIBP

Annexure-Ill
Details of .
Test-Checked 20 | Punjab NIL = Rehabilitation of Ist Patiala Feeder &
Projects Kotla Branch
m Remodelling of U.B.D.C.Channels
m Extension of Kandi Canal Stage-II
(From Hoshiarpur to Balachaur Rd
59.500 kms to 130.00 kms)
(3)
21 Rajasthan m Modernisation of GangCanal NIL
ब. IGNP Stage-II
= Mahi Bajaj Sagar
m Narmada Canal
(4)
22. Sikkim NIL. NIL.
23. Tripura NIL m= Khowai Medium Irigation Project
(1)
24 | Uttar Pradesh = Modernisation of Lahchura Dam NIL
Improving Irrigation Intensity of
Hardoi Branch System (ERM)
Bansagar Canal,
m  Rajghat Canal
m_ Modernisation of Agra Canal
(5)
25 Uttarakhand NIL NIL
26... West Bengal न. Teesta Barrage Project = Patloi Irrigation Scheme
mm Hanumata Irrigation Scheme
(2)



Details of Test - Checked Projects वि

1. Andhra Pradesh

Performance Audit of AIBP a

Details of
Test-Checked
Projects

Minor Irrigation Projects

Formation of new tank in Adilabad Dist

Formation of new tank Rechini Ragadi near Rebbana (V) Adilabad dist
Formation of new tank across Kankilavorre near Marrigudem (V) Adilabad Dist
Formation of new tank across local stream near Nandulapalli (V) Adilabad Dist

Formation of new tank across branch of Bkkalavagu near Nandulapalli (V)
Adilabad Dist

Formation of new tank across Mearamvagu near Medaram (V) Adilabad Dist

Construction of pick up anicut across Musi River near Muppavaram (V)
Prakasam Dist.

Construction of multipurpose checkdam across Musi river near Ananthavaram
(V) Prakasam Dist.

Construction of anicut cum road across Maneru River near Machavaram (४)
Prakasam Dist.

Raising FTL & improvements to Valleru Tank near Valeru (V). Prakasam Dist.
(10)

2 | Arunachal Pradesh

MIP at Chimi village

MIP at Ganga village

MIP at Kanabung village

MIP at Naharlagun village

MIP at Chiputa village

MIP at Mane village

MIP at Hoya happa, Makam happa and Pyoto happa at Yachuli (Three MIPs)
Rikha Bogo MIP at Reru Kallung Village

MIP at Saro- Rai near Pine Grove

Improvement & Modification of Lipa Gai MIP (Hong), Sipu (Old Ziro) & Kohi
Bogo (Tajang Kley) MIP under Ziro- | area (Three MIPs)

Improvement and Renovation of Sigo Nallah MIP at Ngorlung Vilage
Renovation of Head Work of Gagur MIP at Niglok

Construction of Sille to Dekam MIP at Ledum Pasighat Sub-division.
Construction of MIC at Eme Garsing (M) & Rangkop Area at Sigar
Improvement & Renovation of Suli MIC at Sigar

Improvement & Renovation of Tali MIP at Mottum Sigar area
Improvement and Renovation of Sipir MIC at Ayeng village

(21)

3. Assam

Umpho Irrigation Scheme (IS), Karbi Anglong
Chitunlangso I.S., Karbi Anglong
Dumatumkuchi |.S.,Karbi Anglong
Dikoipi |.S., Karbi Anglong

Upper Langhan I.S., Karbi Anglong
Langlakso I.S., Karbi Anglong
Kramkuchi |.S., Karbi Anglong

Mortem 1.S., Karbi Anglong

Habang |.S., Karbi Anglong

Kamar Tisso Gaon I.S., Karbi Anglong
Simaluti Gaon |.S., Karbi Anglong
Kunguri Harimabour |.S., Karbi Anglong

इन



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Annexure-Ill

State

Details of
Test-Checked
Projects

Rongkuru I.S., Karbi Anglong
Langkangbob |.S., Karbi Anglong
Chelabor |.S., Karbi Anglong

Longkimi |.S., Karbi Anglong

Long Teroi I.S., Karbi Anglong

Balijan |.S., Karbi Anglong

Moinapur |.S.,Karbi Anglong

Geruah |.S., Udalguri

Revival of Raja Mayong I.S., Moorigoan
LILS. in Upper Joysanbad Area, Hailkandi
Modernisation of Ubhati |.S., Kamrup_
Improvement of Lakhinadi I.S., Nalbari
FIS from Brahmacherra Nala in Tarapur Area., Cachar
(25)

4... Bihar Gerua Ahar Reservoir Scheme
Nayaki Reservoir Scheme
Manijor Ahar Reservoir Scheme
Ganesh Asthan Weir Scheme

(4)

5. Chhattisgarh Malanger Diversion Scheme
Pithama Tank

Jharan Tank

Chendra Tank

Muskuti Diversion Scheme
Kokia Diversion Scheme
Pandoli Anicut

Roopur Tank

Jamti Jhariya Diversion Scheme
Jawar Nagar Anicut
Bamhani Diversion Scheme
Ghumrapada Tank

(12)

6. Himachal
Pradesh

Lift Irrigation Scheme Haroli, District Una

Lift Irrigation Scheme Takka, District Una

Lift Irrigation Scheme Majhiar Sera and Pakhrol, District Hamirpur
Flow Irrigation Scheme Baknoj, District Kullu

Flow Irrigation Scheme Gojra Khakhnal, District Kullu

Lift Irrigation Scheme Cum Flow Irrigation Scheme Kharahal from Sarwari River,
District Kullu

Flow Irrigation Scheme Seena Ropa at Anni, District Kullu

Lift Irrigation Scheme Kotla Ban in G.P. Langna, District Mandi

Flow Irrigation Scheme kardhwan in Tehsil Sarkaghat, District Mandi

Flow Irrigation Scheme Behal Pairi Kasrala, District Mandi

Imp. of Bata Majra Canal, District Sirmour

Rem. & Imp. of Giri Irrigation Project, District Sirmour

Lift Irrigation Scheme Bhadana Kalatha, District Sirmour

Lift Irrigation Scheme at RD 15400 on LBC of Giri Project, District Sirmour



Performance Audit of AIBP a

Annexure:

State Minor Irrigation Projects
Details of
m Flow Irrigation Scheme Kaiyri Khanari and Powari, District Sirmour Test-Checked
= Flow Irrigation Scheme Dabua Sarkoti, District Sirmour Projects
= Lift Irrigation Scheme Kudla Kharag and Reti, District Simour
= Lift Irrigation Scheme for Village Bata Mandi, District Sirmour
= Flow Irrigation Scheme Dandgheel, District Solan
m Flow Irrigation Scheme from Garog Khad to Pandii, District Shimla
= Lift Irrigation Scheme from Dogru Khad to Koftadhar and Chambidhar, District
Shimla
= Flow Irrigation Scheme from Jond Nallah to Bhagru, District Shimla
= Lift Irrigation Scheme for Horticulture Land of Village Annu Gumma, District
Shimla
= Lift Irrigation Scheme Bhandhu Kaloon, District Shimla
= Lift Irrigation Scheme Bhir Sandhili and Mangrot, District Bilaspur
(25)
व. Jammu & Kashmir = Construction of LIS Saidgarh, Jammu
m Remodelling of Basantpur Canal,Kathua
= Construction of LIS Ambaran-II, Jammu
= Construction of LIS Saranoo Thathi, Rajouri
m= Construction of Shiv Ganga Canal, Reasi
= Construction of Jib Padanoo Khul, Udhampur
= Construction of Kaw Sadota Khul, Udhampur
= Construction of Marothi Khul, Udhampur
m Laxmi Mawas Canal, Ganderbal
= (भा Aram Canal, Ganderbal
m Padshahi Canal, Ganderbal
m__LIS Watchi, Shopain
न LIS Haritar, Barmulla
= Construction of LIS Hassanpur Tulkhan, Kulgam
= Construction of New Station at Kharamntoor, Anantnag
= Construction of 15 No. tanks at Rajwar,Kupwara
= Construction of Younus Ujroo Khul,Kupwara
= Construction of Gouripora , Pulwama
= Construction of Hanji Khul, Pulwama
(19)
8 | Madhya = Bharkanda,
Pradesh = Tulsipar
m Ataikheda.
= Gokulpura,
m= Kawarpura,
= Katitalai,
= Baldavad
m= Chhagola,
= Kadwal,
m Daria,
= Bajrangsagar,
= Tambolia,
= Kalsadia,
m Ratnali
= Kolpur,
m= Makanpur

(16) |



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Annexure-Ill

State

Details of

Test-Checked 9 — Maharashtra
Projects

Mirzapur M. |. Tank
Inamgaon K.T Weir

Ucchil M. |. Tank

Kangaon K. T. Weir

Daul Hipparaga Storage Tank
Kawara Nala M. |. Tank
Chopan M. |. Tank
Mawalgaon Storage Tank
Sindgi Storage Tank

Wazar Storage Tank,
Bhandarwadi K. T. Weir
Chaupala M. |. Tank
Sangamwadi M. |. Tank
Deopudi M. |. Tank
Dhamangaon Storage Tank
(18)

10 | Manipur Construction of Irrigation Tank at Salouni paddy field, Senapati District.

Construction of pucca canal of RLI Scheme at Kumbi Setupur, Bishnupur

Construction of weir across Laiki River, Kameng, Imphal East District.

Construction of weir across Nachou Turel at Nachou, Bishnupur District.

Construction of weir at Borayangbi across Sandangkhong Stream, Bishnupur

District.

Construction of weir at Murri(Joyland), Senapati District.

Construction of weir at Ningthoumanai, Waikhong, Thoubal District.

Construction of weir over Itok River at Chandrakhong, Thoubal District.

MI Scheme at Sinjawl Tuijen, Churachandpur District.

Construction of weir across Honia river at Thiwa Village, Senapati District.

M.L. Scheme at Mataleisang, Churachandpur District.

Construction of weir across Leingaklok River at Namthejang, Senapati District.

Construction of weir across Nungpokpi at Kabo Wakching Maning, Bishnupur

District.

Construction of weir at Oksu, Imphal East District.

= Construction of Dam across Lalkhan at Ningthou Latingkhal, Imphal East
District.

= Construction of weir at Elang Chingjin, Bishnupur District.

= Construction of weir across Tuining River Khongkaijang Village, Churachandpur
District.

= Construction of weir at Tungam Village, Senapati District.

= Construction of M.I. Canal at Wangkhei Payeng Loukon (Thanga Lawai),
Bishnupur District,

= Construction of providing and fixing steel regulator at Magujang Maril (Tentha
Thongkhong, Thoubal District.

(20)

11. Meghalaya Chiljhora
Gandual
Ringdee
Andherkona
Kharukoi

Galasora



State

Lyting Lyngdoh
Madan Jynru
Lynkhoi
Punthorsong
Mynrud Moopasar.

(11)

Performance Audit of AIBP a

Annexure:

Details of
Test-Checked
Projects

Mizoram

Chhimluang- Saitual, Aizawl

Sakelui- Thingsul, Tlangnuam, Aizawl
Tuichar- Lungpher, Aizawl

Saichhun Thualthu, Lunglei

Saphak, Lunglei

Jeep Road - Zau, Kolasib

Saihapui, Kolasib

@

Nagaland

Kicheliga, Kiyekhu, Zunheeboto
Tishi, Sute-shichi, Zunheeboto

Chathe Ph.Il, Razaphe, Dimapur
Aphughoki, Nehokhu, Dimapur
Balughoki, Henevi, Dimapur
‘Awokupughoki, Ghokito Village, Dimapur
Langlong, Noklak, Tuensang

Langlong Ph. |I,Noklak, Tuensang

Duibi, Jalukie Town, Jalukie

Teuzairie, Poilwa, Jalukie

Mangleu, Beisumpuikum, Jalukie
Nyapongsum Ph. Il, Tuensang,

Dikhu Valley, Ponjo/Yachem, Longleng
Shimlo , Mon Village, Mon
Longnok-Tegee, Phomching, Mon

Nzu, Phiro, Wokha

Kheruzhu, Zubza, Kohima

(17)

Orissa

Chitrangi , Koraput
Doraguda , Malkhangiri
Kurubela , Nawarangpur
Chipuliore , Kalandi
Dhawandhar , Kalandi
Hirapur, Koraput

Jatakhali, Kalandi
Subamarekha, Bolangir
Laxmipur , Rayagada
Badatema Koraput
Chacharabhata, Nauapada
Randikona , Rayagada
Jagamunda ,Koraput
Ankamara,Bolangir
Rangamaguda, Malkhangiri
Karanjanalla, Rayagada
(16)



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Annexure-Ill

State

Details of

Test-Checked 45 | gikkim
Projects

Tumin MIC khola source to Adikari Tara L/Raley
Koti khola khet, South Kartok in Namcheybong
MIC at Pachey Samsing

MIC at Rangtu khola to Yongthang at L/Sumin

MIC at Dantakgaon,Khatiwadagaon, Gurung gaon,Chamling gaon at
Dalapchand

Malangthang MIC at Ranka

MIC at Arigaon, Simana Khola Khet, Khamdong
Lokchu khola MIC at Nandok busty

Ghumouney khet MIC at Aritar

Devithan MIC to Lingzey Thulo khet

Bechhu khola MIC at Nandok busty.

Singlabong Kholsa Pokhrel Khet, West Pendam
Pagla Khola Khoteng Khet MIC at Namrong, Martam Mazitam
MIC from Rabong Khola to Rungdung Khet

Damala Gaon MIC

MIC from Gangyap Chulung Jhora, Chulung khet, Changey Cheti GPU
Sokeythang MIC at L/Linding

MIC at Chilisay Army Camp to Bagay Genopang Khet
MIC ffrom Kali Khola to Lingzey Khet at Sum

MIC Gagyap busty to Gerethang busty under Lachen
MIC at Gor

MIC from Tumin Khola to Raley paddy field at Raley
MIC at Tingvong

Tokdang MIC

Jholongay to L/Maney dara MIC

MIC Paglakhola to Tingley, Timi-Tarku.

MIC at Devithang to Thulo khet at Dong busty
Phodong khola to Namlung MIC

Khani Khola to Kubindey MIC

MIC at Sadam -Suntalay, Melli

Bering MIC, Wok.

Selep MIC from Chankang kyong under Barfung block
Const/Extension of Mainabotey MIC,Damthang
Extn/Constn.of Manpur khola to Manpur khet MIC
Chokam Khola, Ralang

Rayong to Tinkitam Tarnaim MIC.

Const. / Extension of Khalbalay MIC (D.P.Rai), Jorthang
Dong MIC at Namprik

Lingmoo MIC

Samardung MIC at Samardung

College Khola to Samardung MIC

Lingzo MIC

Khani Khola to Pradhan gaon MIC, Payong

Borong MIC

Niyakhola MIC, Knamdong

Geyten MIC under Dentam constituency

MIC (35cmx40cm) internal dimension open channel from Karemthang



State

Performance Audit of AIBP a

Annexure:

Details of
Test-Checked

MIC at Samok khola to Phagudara at Bermiok Berthang Projects

MIC from Ridang khola Bich kulo to Pemba Tshering Lepcha field
MIC at Beyoung,Labing

lower Arithang MIC under Tashiding constituency.

Const / Renovation of Kezini Kulo MIC under at Lower Thambong.
Langang Khola to Toyang MIC under Gyalsing constituency.

MIC(35cmx40cm) internal dimension open channel Deku kholsa to Ghimeray
gaon Kyongsha

MIC from Thulo khola to Mazgaon under Petchrek Martak block
Channel at Begha khola to Nabrung paddy field

MIC at LiChumbong Singratam

Devi Mandir to Dentam Tar

MIC from Rothak Khola to Gurung paddy field
Const/Renovation of Rajaya Kulo MIC at Upper Thambong
Const./Renovatiion of Upper Timburbong, Soreng MIC
Ransang Khola MIC to Lower Rungdu Berthang

Jugdum Khola MIC at Arubotey

Lower Labing MIC under Yuksom Consttuency

Chiean Dara MIC at Toyang

(65)

Tripura

LI Scheme at Kathiram over Dagducherra, Mandi, West District

1. Scheme at Kalibari-II over Lalcherra, Khowai NP, West District

1.1 Scheme at Naprai Sardarpara from river Sonai, Hezamara, West District

1.1 Scheme at ujandudhpur-IV, Kumarghat, North District

1.1 Scheme at Nutanpally-| from Kalapaniacherra, Satchand, South District

1.| Scheme at Tuisama (Chandul ADC) near Lalshingmura Jr. B. School,
Melaghar, West District

LI Scheme at Purba Rangamati-lI, Amarpur South District

L.I Scheme at Gamakomath (Burburia), Amarpur South District

LI Scheme at Parba Nalicherra (Near land of Bhanu Ghosh), Ambassa, Dhalai
District

LI Scheme at Balaramcherra near high school , Ambassa, Dhalai District

1.1 Scheme at Noagaon Fatikcherra Phase-IV, Mohanpur, West District

1.1 Scheme at Berimura Phase-ll in Fatikcherra G/S, Mohanpur, West District
1.1 Scheme at Noagaon Fatikcherra Phase-IIl, Mohanpur, West District

1.1 Scheme at Satyagurupara (near santipurin) Ghilatali G.P from Khowai river ,
Kalyanpur, West District

L.I Scheme at Bhagyamani Chakmapara from Gaburcherra Phase-Il,
Hrishyamukh, South District

1.1 Scheme at Sarkipara (Chakrakcherra) from Longairiver , Damcherra North
District

LI Scheme at Futtali ove Baghuacherra in Futtali G/S, Goumagar, North District
1.1 Scheme at North Dabbari G/P, Salema, Dhalai District

LI Scheme at West Lamboo, Salema, Dhalai District

1.1 Scheme at South Padmabill from Dugangacherra, Panisagar, North District
LI Scheme at Noabaripara over Maharanicherra, Matabari, South District

L.I Scheme at Maithulong (Conv), Killa, South District

LI Scheme at Chandrakiran Para, Karbook, South District

LI Scheme at with high capacity pump at Rabindranagar, Kathalia, West District

(25)

LI Scheme at SouthMasauli over Manu, Kumarghat, North District |



a Performance Audit of AIBP

Annexure-Ill

State
Details of
na 47 | Uttarakhand Sobra, Pauri
Garhmola, Pauri
Gawani, Pauri
Jakhola, Pauri

Construction of 35 km. field gul lining in block Dugadda, Pauri Garhwal
Kheti (E.R.M), Chamoli

Lalisera Mailagwar, Chamoli

Koliagair, Chamoli

Kush, Chamoli

Construction of Baank canal in Deval Block of Chamoli District
Devaria, Udham Singh Nagar

Surajpur Richha, Udham Singh Nagar

Srirampur II, Udham Singh Nagar

Harsan, Udham Singh Nagar

Lining of Katna, Basgar, Bhuria and Daunda Canal, Udham Singh Nagar
Jaicholi, Almora

Dhungamohan, Almora

Degot, Almora

Dhaura, Almora

Lining and field Gul construction in Bhaisiachhana, Almora

Construction of 5.753 km. long lining of channel & gul in Kanalichhina block of
Pithoragarh District

Barave, Pithoragarh

Nayal, Pithoragarh.

Bhadgaon, Pithoragarh

Bangouthi, Pithoragarh

Kawakhera, Dehradun

Vinhar, Dehradun

Gohri Maphi, Dehradun

Hartad-Santad, Dehradun

Construction of 29.70 km. Hill channels in Chakrata Block, Dehradun
(30)

18 | West Bengal Aulia BLIS, Goalpokher-Il, Uttar Dinajpur
Dhajore SFMIS, Ranibundh, Bankura

Hura Check Dam, Hura, Purulia

Kheriarata SFMIS, Binapur-ll, Pachim Midnapore
Nwada SFMIS, Chhatna-|, Bankura

Paniha RLIS, Karandighi, Uttar Dinajpur

Saltora Check Dam, Saltora, Bankura

Sanka SFMIS, Raghunathpur-|, Purulia

(8)



Annexure - IV
State-wise Irrigation Potential created till 2007-08

Irrigation Potential reportedly
created till 2007-08

Ultimate Irrigation Potential of

S.No. | Name of States AIBP Projects (In million ha)

(In million ha)
1. Andhra Pradesh 1.531 0.348
2, Assam 0,234 0,069
3. Bihar 1.228 0.480
4 Chhattisgarh 0.691 0.115
5. Goa 0,039 0.013
6. Gujarat 2,028 0.495
7. Haryana 0.401 0.109
8. Himachal Pradesh 0,033 0.011
9. Jammu & Kashmir 0,069 0.031
10. | Jharkhand 0.063 0.014
1. Karnataka 1.137 0.448
12. | Kerala 0.128 0.034
13. | Madhya Pradesh 1.389 0.230
14, | Maharashtra 2.022 0.350
15. Manipur 0,056 0.007
16. | Meghalaya 0.005 0.000
17. | Orissa 1.112 0.136
18. | Punjab 0.141 0.116
19. | Rajasthan 1,300 0.562
20. ‘Tripura 0.017 0.010
21. Tamilnadu 0,000 0.00
22. | Uttar Pradesh 4,286 1.234
23. West Bengal 1.080 0.091

Total 18.990 4,903



Annexure - V
State-wise details of Time & Cost Overrun

Total Test Total number Total number | Total Test | Total number of
S.No. | Name of States Checked Major | of MMI Projects | of MMI Checked Minor Projects with
{Medium with time Projects with | Minor time and cost
Irrigation (MMI) | overrun cost overrun | Irrigation | overrun
Project Project
1, | Andhra Pradesh 7 7 6 10 0
2... Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 24 0
3... Assam 2 2 1 25 0
4... Bihar 2 2 2 4 0
5. Chhattisgarh 3 2 2 12 5
6... Gujarat 3 3 3 0 0
7. | Haryana 1 1 0 0 0
8... Himachal Pradesh 2 2 2 25 18
9. Jammu & Kashmir 4 4 3 19 0
10. | Jharkhand 4 4 4 0 0
11. Karnataka 4 4 3 0 0
12. | Kerala 3 1 3 0 0
13. | Madhya Pradesh 5 4 3 16 16
14. Maharashtra 8 1 1 15 9 (only time overrun)
15. Manipur 1 1 1 20 0
16. Meghalaya 1 1 1 abl 7
17. | Mizoram 0 0 0 7 0
18. Nagaland 0 0 0 17 4 (only time overrun)
19. | Orissa 4 3 2 16 13
20. | Punjab 3 1 1 0 0
21. Rajasthan 4 3 3 0 0
22. | Sikkim 0 0 0 65 0
23, Tripura 1 1 1 25 1
24. Uttar Pradesh 5 3 3 0 0
25, | Uttarakhand 0 0 0 30 0
26. West Bengal 3 3 3 8 0
Total 70 53 48 346 73



Annexure - VI
State-wise list of Major and Medium Projects taken up/ongoing
during 2005-08

Projects taken up during Projects ongoing as of

S.No. | Name of States 2005-2008 March 2008

1. Andhra Pradesh 21 21
2 Assam 0 5
3. Bihar 0 5
4, Chhattisgarh 2 3
5. Goa 0 1
6. Gujarat 0 5
7. Haryana 0 1
8. Himachal Pradesh 0 3
9. Jammu & Kashmir 6 10
10. | Jharkhand 0 7
11. Karnataka 2 8
12, | Kerala 1 2
13. | Madhya Pradesh 5 9
14, | Maharashtra 33 38
15... Manipur 0 3
16. | Meghalaya 0 1
1... Orissa 0 ab}
18. | Punjab 1 4
19. | Rajasthan 0 2
20. ‘Tripura 0 3
21. Tamilnadu 0 0
22, | Uttar Pradesh 2 7
23, West Bengal 0 4

| Total 73 153



Annexure - VII
Details of Sanctions issued between 2003-04 and 2007-08

Sanctions issued during Sanctions issued during | Sanctions issued during
the Year the last quarter March

No. of Amount No. of Amount No. of Amount
sanctions | (Rs.incrore) | sanctions (Rs. in crore) sanctions | (Rs. in crore)

2003-04 | 4 3229 | 9 | 2338 6 | 1704

2004-05 | "1 | 2867 | 6 | 2139 | 5 | 2050

2005-06 | 7 1960 1 | 1082 | 7 | 1071

2006-07 | 15 | 18238 | 8 1478 | 3 | 944

2007-08 | 7 | 7609 4 | 4516 | 2 | 4188
| | | | |

(Note: The data regarding the sanctions issued during the years was furnished by the MoWR. These figures,
however, do not tally with the total releases made during a particular year by MoWR, as furnished by it in the
consolidated statements of releases.)



Annexure - VIII
Details of Monitoring Visits by MoWR/CWC

Name of State Number of projects visited Month and Year of Visit
by monitoring team of
MoWR/ CWC
1. Andhra Pradesh 3 12/2006
7 9/2008
2 Chhattisgarh 7 9/2008
3. Himachal Pradesh 7 9/2008
4, Jammu & Kashmir 10 Between 6/2007 and 11/2007
5. Maharashtra 6 5/2008
6. Meghalaya 1 5/2007
7. Nagaland 5 9/2007
8. Orissa 1 12/2007
9. Tripura 6 11/2005



List of Abbreviations

ACA Additional Central Assistance

AIBP Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
BCR Benefit Cost Ratio

CAD Command Area Development

७8४४ Compulsory Basic Water Rates

CCA Culturable Command Area

cD Cross Drainage

CLA Central Loan Assistance

DPA Drought Prone Area

DPR Detail Project Reports

DTW Deep Tube Well

EE Executive Engineer

E-in-C Engineer-in-Chief

ERM Extension, Renovation & Modernisation
FIP Flow Irrigation Project

FIP Fast Track Project

Gcs General Category States

Gol Government of India

ha Hectare

IP Irrigation Potential

K.T. Weirs Kolhapur Type Weirs

KBK Areas falling within erstwhile Koraput, Bolangir, and Kalahandi Districts of Orissa
us Lift Irrigation Scheme

MIP Minor Irrigation Projects

MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests

MoF Ministry of Finance

MoU Memorandum of Undertaking

MoWR Ministry of Water Resources

NHAI National Highways Authority of India
NPCC National Project Construction Corporation
RST Remote Sensing Technology

scs Special Category States

SoE Statements of Expenditure

SRSWOR Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement
UCs Utilisation Certificates

UIP Ultimate Irrigation Potential

WUAS Water User Associations



a Performance Audit of AIBP

List of Tables, Boxes, Figures and Charts
Trace no |

Table 1 Number of AIBP Projects 5
Table 2 Financial Outlay and Expenditure on AIBP. 6
Table 3 | Projects taken up without Proper Preliminary Reports 15
Table 4 —_| Aspects to be included in the Detailed Project Reports 15
Table 5 Deficiencies in Detailed Project Reports 16
Table 6 Instances of Deficient Calculation of BC Ratio 18
Table 7 Profile of Completed Projects in Audit Sample 24
Table 8 Details of Major/Medium Projects found incomplete/non- commissioned 24
Table 9 State-wise profile of Reasons for Non-Completion 26
Table 10 Key instances of Short creation/Non-utilisation of IP 28
Table 11 Instances of Commencement of Projects without fulfilling pre-requisites 39
Table 12 Instances of Incorrect Phasing of Project Implementation 4t
Table13 Instances of Undue Benefits to contractors 45
Table14 Instances of Wasteful/Irregular expenditure 47
Table15 Other Instances of Irregular Contractual Management 49
Table 16 States which availed majority of the Grants under AIBP during 2005-2008 51
Table 17 | Profile of completion of projects in six selected states 52
Table 18 Percentage of funds released between 2003-04 and 2007-08 54
Table 19 | Rush of Expenditure 54
Table 20 Instances of short release/delayed release of Gol funds by State Govermments 56
Table 21 Instances of Diversion of Funds 58
हात्पत्आ
Table 911 Status of AIBP projects in Andhra Pradesh sanctioned upto 2004-05 69
Table $2__| Variation in IP creation in respect of AIBP projects in Andhra Pradesh 70
Table $3__| Incomplete MI Projects test-checked in Andhra Pradesh 72
Table $4 _| Undue benefits to contractors in AIBP projects in Andhra Pradesh 73
Table S5 _|_ Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Andhra Pradesh 74
Table 56 | MI Projects in Arunachal Pradesh 7
Table S7 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Arunachal Pradesh 82
Table 98 | Profile of AIBP Projects in Assam 85
Table $9 | Status of Major/Medium AIBP projects in Assam 85
Table $10 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Assam 89
Table $11 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Bihar 97
Table $12 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Chhattisgarh 101
Table $13 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Gujarat 106
Table $14 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Haryana 110
Table $15 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Himachal Pradesh 119
Table $16 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Jammu & Kashmir 124
Table S17 | Unsynchronised Execution of Project components in Jharkhand 127
Table $18 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Jharkhand 131
Table $19 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Karnataka 134
Table $20 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Kerala 140



Performance Audit of AIBP a

STATE SPECIFIC TABLES | PAGENO. |

Table $21 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Madhya Pradesh 147
Table $22 | Inclusion of new AIBP Projects in Maharashtra 149
Table $23 | Inclusion of fractions of Components of projects under AIBP in Maharashtra 150
Table $24 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Maharashtra 155
Table $25 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Manipur 159
Table $26 | Status of Ml Projects in Meghalaya 162
Table $27 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Meghalaya 165
Table $28 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Mizoram 168
Table $29 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Nagaland 173
Table $30 | Undue Benefits to contractors in AIBP Projects in Orissa 179
Table S31 | Other Financial Irregularities in AIBP Projects in Orissa 180
Table $32 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Punjab 184
Table $33 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Rajasthan 190
Table $34 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Sikkim 195
Table $35 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Tripura 198
Table $36 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Uttar Pradesh 205
Table $37 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in Uttarakhand 209
Table $38 | Irregularities in Financial Management of AIBP Projects in West Bengal 215

LIST OF BOXES | PAGENO. |

Box 1

Major, Medium and Minor Irrigation Projects

1

Box 2

Computation of BC Ratio

17

LIST OF FIGURES | PAGENO. |

Figure 1 Organisational Setup for AIBP 5

Figure 2 Changes in AIBP Scope and Coverage "
Figure 3 Changes in Terms of Funding by Centre and States 12
Figure 4 Planning and Approval of Major/ Medium/ ERM Schemes 13
Figure 5 | Approval of AIBP MI Projects 13

LIST OF CHARTS | PAGENO. |

Chart 1 Ultimate Irrigation Potential 2
Chart 2 Potential Created and Utilised 2
Chart 3 Cumulative IP Created/ Utilised 2
Chart 4 Number of Major, Medium and ERM Projects 3
Chart 5 Expenditure on AIBP and Non-AIBP Projects during 2002 - 07 6
Charté | State-wise profile of Reported Creation of IP under AIBP projects 21
Chart 7 Age-wise Profile of Ongoing AIBP Major/ Medium/ ERM Projects 23
Chart 8 State-wise Profile of Ongoing AIBP Major! Medium/ ERM Projects 23
Chart 9 Achievement of Monitoring Visits by CWC. 61