Report of the 
 Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on 
Public Debt Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government  
Ministry of Finance 
Report No. 16 of 2016 
(Performance Audit) 

Contents 
 
Particulars Page No. 
 
Preface 
 
i 
 
Executive Summary 
 
iii 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
 
1 
 
Chapter 2: Legal Framework 
 
9 
 
Chapter 3: Organizational Framework 
 
15 
 
Chapter 4: Debt Management Strategy 
 
21 
 
Chapter 5:Borrowing Activities 
 
25 
 
Chapter 6:  Debt Information System, Debt Servicing and Debt Reporting 
 
37 
 
Chapter 7:  Government Securities Market 
 
43 
 
Chapter 8: Conclusion and Recommendations 
 
47 
 
Annexures 
 
49 
 
List of Abbreviations  
 
59 
 
Glossary 
 
61 
 

i 
 
Preface 
 
his Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General o f India has been 
prepared for submission to the President of India u nder Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the Parliament. 
This report contains the result of the Performance Audit on ‘Public Debt 
Management’ and covers the period from 2009-10 to 2014-15.  
This report results from the scrutiny of the files and documents pertaining to Public 
Debt Management in the Department of Economic Affai rs and the Reserve Bank of 
India.  
 
 
T 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
iii 
 
Executive Summary 
1. Introduction  
Public debt is the total financial obligations incu rred by the entire public sector of a nation, 
including guarantees and implicit debt. Public debt  would include obligations evidenced by 
a legal instrument issued by the Central, State, Mu nicipal, or Local Government or 
Enterprises owned or controlled by the Government; and other entities considered public or 
quasi public. Public debt management is the process  of establishing and executing a 
strategy for managing public debt in order to raise  the required amount of funding at the 
desired risk and cost levels. 
India, like most of the developing countries, seeks  to grow its economy as also to expand 
social services to its citizens. This raises large financing needs on the country resulting in 
excess of expenditure over non–debt receipts, terme d as fiscal deficit. The fiscal deficit is 
sought to be plugged by borrowing, which adds to th e country’s outstanding debt stock. 
The shortfall is met either by internal or external  borrowing contracted on the security of 
the Consolidated Fund of India or by the use of sur plus fund in the Public Account. In the 
budget documents, internal debt and external debt together are referred to as ‘Public Debt’. 
Internal debt refers to rupee–denominated debt, con sisting of marketable securities (dated 
securities, treasury bills) and non-marketable secu rities (14 days Intermediate Treasury 
bills, compensation and other bonds, securities iss ued to international financial institution 
etc.).  
External debt refers to the debt raised by the Unio n Government from non-domestic 
sources, namely, multilateral institutions like the  International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (IBRD), International Development Assoc iation (IDA), Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) etc. In addition, external debt was also  contracted from bilateral sources, i.e., 
directly from the foreign countries. 
In India, the function of public debt management in  respect of internal debt was performed 
by Budget Division of the Department of Economic Af fairs (DEA) of the Ministry of 
Finance (MOF) along with the Internal Debt Manageme nt Department (IDMD) of Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI). In respect of external debt (M ultilateral and Bilateral), the various 
divisions of the DEA like the Multilateral Relation s (MR), Bilateral Cooperation (BC) and 
Multilateral Institutions (MI) performed the function of debt management. They were also  
 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
iv 
supported by the Controller of Aid, Accounts and Au dit (CAAA). The Chief Controller of 
Accounts, Ministry of Finance maintained accounts for both internal and external debt. 
The performance audit on Public Debt Management was  conducted as public debt 
constituted a significant portion of the receipts o f the Union Government. Further, such an 
audit would help policymakers to understand the ris ks of public debt, make their operations 
more effective, increase the efficiency of internal administrative processes and also enhance 
public debt transparency and accountability. Moreov er, the frequency and severity of debt 
crises across the world and the consequent adverse impact on managing of public finances 
reinforces the need for promoting responsible lending and borrowing behaviours.  
The total outstanding public debt of India as on 31  March 2015 was ` 51,04,675 crore of 
which ` 47,38,291 crore (92.82 per cent) was internal debt and ` 3,66,384 crore ( 7.18 per 
cent) was external debt. The repayment of principal and  the payment of interest of the 
contracted debt is together termed as debt servicin g. In 2014-15, 77 per cent of the long 
term internal borrowings and 73 per cent of the external borrowings were utilized for debt 
servicing implying that a larger percentage of debt  was being used for debt servicing which 
in turn meant lower percentage of debt taken was av ailable for meeting developmental 
expenditure to promote growth which is one of the reasons for contracting debt. 
(Chapter 1) 
2. Legal Framework 
The legal framework provides strategic direction, d efines and clarifies powers and supports 
professionalism and operational focus in public deb t management and promotes good 
governance by establishing accountability for manag ing the government’s debt liabilities. 
As per international best practices, the legal fram ework of public debt management should 
provide for authorization by Parliament to the Exec utive and the debt management unit to 
borrow, include the borrowing purposes and the debt  management objectives, provide for 
the formulation of debt management strategy and ind icate the reporting requirements to 
ensure accountability of the executive to the legislature.  
The existing legal framework for the management of public debt in India is contained in  
the Constitution of India and in various primary an d secondary legislations like RBI  
Act, 1934, Public Debt Act, 1944, FRBM Act, 2003, F RBM Rules, 2004, Government 
Securities Act, 2006 etc. The existing legal framew ork does not define the term ‘Public 
Debt’, does not indicate the objectives of public d ebt and the borrowing purposes and  
also does not require the formulation of a debt management strategy. 
(Para 2.3.1& 2.3.2) 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
v 
 
As per Rule 3 (4) of FRBM Rules, 2004, no additiona l liabilities could have been assumed 
in 2013-14 or thereafter. This provision was incons istent with the target of 3 per cent of 
GDP for fiscal deficit provided in Rule 3 (2) of FRBM Rules, 2004. 
(Para 2.4) 
3. Organizational Framework 
A number of expert committees set up in India over the past two decades had recommended 
the establishment of a separate Public Debt Managem ent Agency (PDMA). Though a 
PDMA was not set up, a separate Middle Office (MO) was established in September 2008. 
No further progress has been made on the setting up of a separate PDMA till date. 
The responsibilities of the MO, among other things, included formulation of comprehensive 
risk management framework, formulation of a long te rm debt management strategy and 
developing and maintaining a centralized database o n Government liabilities. However, 
these activities were not performed by the MO. Some  of these functions were, however, 
discharged by other agencies. 
(Paras 3.2 & 3.4) 
In respect of external debt (bilateral and multilat eral), the MO functions, namely, 
undertaking risk analysis and monitoring reports on  portfolio-related risks, and assessing 
the performance of debt managers against any strate gic targets/benchmarks, were not being 
performed by any entity. 
(Para 3.3) 
4. Debt Management Strategy 
A debt management strategy is a plan that operation alizes the debt management objectives. 
It lays out the desired composition of the public d ebt portfolio, which captures the 
government’s preferences with regard to a cost-risk trade-off.  
DEA brought out a Medium Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) for the first time in December 
2015 which included risk analysis and stress testin g but its scope was restricted to the 
marketable debt of the Union Government only. Previ ously, some of the elements of debt 
management strategy were discussed in the meetings of the Monitoring Group on Cash and 
Debt Management (MGCDM) but MTDS had not been formulated.  
(Para 4.2) 
 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
vi 
 
5. Borrowing Activities 
The borrowing activities envisage all the activitie s from the estimation of the required 
borrowing to the actual borrowing of fund either fr om the domestic markets or from the 
external markets.  
The budget division, DEA, MOF is responsible for pr eparation of budget estimates (BE) 
and revised estimates (RE) in respect of internal b orrowings, external borrowings and other 
receipts on the basis of inputs received from RBI, CAAA and other departments. 
The borrowing calendar for market borrowings is pre pared half–yearly on the basis of the 
estimates of market borrowing, cash inflows, cash o utflows and the likely funding-gap of 
the Union Government. The borrowing calendar indica ted the amount of securities to be 
issued through weekly primary auctions during the e nsuing half year and is issued with the 
approval of the MGCDM. 
During the period from 2009–10 to 2014–15, the vari ation between the actual external 
borrowing and the revised estimates of external bor rowing as per the budget ranged 
between (-)33 per cent and 225 per cent.  
(Para 5.3) 
Primary auctions of government securities were cond ucted on the E–Kuber platform by 
RBI. A system of underwriting for market lending op erated in the government securities 
markets in India through the mechanism of Primary Dealers (PDs). The Auction Committee 
in the RBI decided the cut-off price/yield and the securities, if any, to be devolved upon the 
underwriters.  
There were no criteria for deciding particular issu es wherein securities were to be devolved 
on the underwriters. There were also no criteria fo r deciding the cut–off rate or the reasons 
for deciding a particular cut-off rate. Subsequentl y RBI informed (May 2016) that a policy 
on devolvement criteria had been prepared which inter alia incorporated the factors to be 
considered for arriving at the devolvement decision.  
(Para 5.2) 
In respect of external borrowing, DEA is the nodal agency for posing projects to WB, ADB 
and the IFAD. The proposals for external assistance  to be posed to WB, ADB and IFAD 
were decided by the Screening Committee in the DEA constituted in August 2009.  

Report No. 16 of 2016 
vii 
 
‘Finance Plus’ criteria were instituted (September 2011) to maximize access and leverage 
of Multilateral Financial Institutions’ (MFIs’)/Mul tilateral Development Banks’ (MDBs’) 
knowledge base, international experience and famili arities with best practices making the 
best use of limited available external resources. S ince September 2011, a total of 82 
proposals for obtaining external loan assistance we re approved by the Screening 
Committee. But in 60 of the approved proposals, the  minutes of the Screening Committee 
did not indicate whether knowledge transfer, techno logy transfer and best practices transfer 
from international experience were considered.  
(Para 5.4) 
RBI is entrusted with the cash management of Govern ment of India which they perform in 
co-ordination with the Ministry of Finance, Government of India. Cash management mainly 
entails cash flow forecasting, arranging temporary liquidity, maintaining target balance in 
the Government account, investment of surplus balan ce over and above the target balance 
in the market etc. 
The mismatches between inflow and outflow in Govern ment account are managed by cash 
management instruments, viz. treasury bills and fur ther fine tuned through availing Ways 
and Means Advances/Overdraft and issuing Cash Manag ement Bills (CMBs). Ways and 
Means Advances (WMA) are the advances made by the R BI to the Government. Limits on 
the WMA are fixed on a half yearly basis. Overdraft  (OD) is similar to WMA and can be 
resorted to for maximum 10 days at a stretch, when limit of WMA is crossed.  
During the period from 2010 to 2015, in at least 40  weeks in each year, the variations 
between the weekly projected cash balance and the a ctual cash balance were more than                 
` 10,000 crore. In many instances, the projection of  the weekly cash balance was negative. 
 (Para 5.5.1) 
Cash Management Bills were introduced in 2009 to me et temporary cash flow mismatches 
of the Government. During August and September 2013 , Cash Management Bills were 
issued to the extent of ` 96,000 crore for meeting monetary policy objectives. 
(Para 5.5.2.1) 
6. Debt Information System, Debt Servicing and Debt Reporting 
 
Debt management activities should be supported by a n accurate and comprehensive 
information system with proper safeguards. The info rmation system should comprise of 
components that capture, monitor, analyse and repor t debt information of a country. A 
Public Debt Information System should support recor ding, reporting and analytical 
functions.  

Report No. 16 of 2016 
viii 
RBI uses E-Kuber for primary auctions of dated secu rities and treasury bills, debt service 
payments and generating various reports for interna l debt. In respect of external debt, 
Integrated Computerised System (ICS) is used for maintaining various ledgers and registers 
relating to each loan/grant, debt servicing and gen erating various reports. E-Kuber and ICS 
did not have the provision for analytical functions. 
(Para 6.1.1) 
A centralized database on all internal and external liabilities o f the government was not 
available. The information in respect of internal d ebt and external debt was, however, 
available in RBI and in the Office of the Controlle r of Aid, Audit and Accounts 
respectively. 
(Para 6.1.3) 
Commitment charges on undrawn balance of external l oans are paid on the amount of 
principal rescheduled for drawal on later dates. During the period from 2009-10 to 2014-15, 
commitment charges to the extent of ` 602.66 crore were paid. 
(Para 6.2.1) 
The figures of internal debt presented in different  documents such as Status Paper and 
Indian Public Finance Statistics published by Gover nment of India did not agree with those 
in the Finance Accounts of the Government of India. 
(Para 6.3.2) 
7. Government Securities Market 
One of the objectives of Public Debt Management is to develop a liquid market. 
Developing a liquid and vibrant secondary market fo r government securities and 
broadening the investor base are the key factors to  ensure that debt is raised in a cost 
effective manner. Further, the government securitie s market (GSM) provides the 
benchmark yield and imparts liquidity to other fina ncial markets and is considered an 
essential precursor, in particular, for development  of the corporate debt market. Moreover, 
government securities market acts as a channel for integration of various segments of the 
domestic financial market and helps in establishing inter linkages between the domestic and 
external financial markets. 
Trade in dated Government securities in the seconda ry market was predominantly taking 
place in a few securities with the top ten securiti es accounting for more than 90 per cent of 
the trading volume of government securities.  

Report No. 16 of 2016 
ix 
 
(Para 7.3) 
A scheme of non-competitive bidding for allocation of upto 5 per cent  of the notified 
amount in the specified auctions of dated securitie s was introduced in January 2002 to 
encourage small and medium investors to participate  in the primary auction. However, the 
total amount of bids received and accepted during 2 009 to 2015 from small and medium 
investors ranged from 0.30 per cent to 0.47 per cent of the notified amount. 
 (Para 7.4) 
8  Recommendations  
• Legal framework, consisting of both the primary as well as secondary legislation, may 
include the definition of public debt, debt managem ent objectives, borrowing purposes, 
and requirement of debt management strategy. DEA ma y consider doing this in a 
phased manner.  
• Conditions of ‘Finance Plus’ criteria aimed at maxi mizing access and leverage of 
Multilateral Financial Institutions’/Multilateral D evelopment Banks’ knowledge base, 
international experience and familiarity with best practices may be applied in deciding 
on the projects for external assistance and the same should be properly documented. 
• A centralized database of internal debt, external d ebt and other liabilities may be 
developed. 
• Steps may be taken to ensure that the public debt i nformation systems used (E-Kuber 
and ICS) support analytical functions. 
• Mechanism may be developed to ensure consistency in  the reporting of public debt by 
RBI and DEA and amongst the various divisions of DEA. 
 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 1 
 
Chapter 1 
Introduction  
1.1  Public Debt 
Public debt occupies a centre stage in public finan cial management. Public debt is the total 
financial obligations incurred by the entire public  sector of a nation, including guarantees and 
implicit debt. Public debt would include obligation s evidenced by a legal instrument issued by 
the Central, State, Municipal, or Local Government or Enterprises owned or controlled by the 
Government; and other entities considered public or  quasi public. The public debt portfolio is 
often the largest financial portfolio in the countr y and can have a far-reaching impact on 
financial stability. 
Most governments have large financial needs as they seek to grow their economies and expand 
social services in their countries. A country is re quired to borrow both for consumption as well 
as investment to promote growth which would help in  improving the living standards of its 
population. In theory, public borrowing is an effec tive tool for generating economic growth by 
expanding the production and consumption choices of current and future generations and fairly 
distributing the debt burden between current and fu ture generations of taxpayers. Without 
public borrowing, Governments may have to reduce th e number and amount of productive 
investments or impose high taxes on current taxpaye rs or reduce current spending on services 
to its citizens or choose a mix of these choices.  
Public debt, while giving an opportunity to the cou ntry to fuel economic growth and ensure 
inter–generational equity, also places onus on the country for being responsible in its use of the 
borrowed funds. Borrowing for this purpose, when no t justified by a national need, could be 
inconsistent with sustainable economic policy.  
1.2  Public Debt Management 
Public debt management is the process of establishi ng and executing a strategy for managing 
public debt in order to raise the required amount o f funding at the desired risk and cost levels. 
It should encompass the main financial obligations over which governments, central, regional 
and local, exercise control. Public debt management is important for a number of reasons like:  
• ensuring that the level and rate of growth of publi c debt is sustainable in a wide range 
of circumstances;  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
2 
• lowering public borrowing costs over the long term,  thus reducing the impact of deficit 
financing and contributing to debt and fiscal sustainability; and 
• avoiding economic crisis because of poorly structured debt.   
1.3  Public Debt of Union Government  
India, like most of the developing countries, seeks  to grow its economy and to expand social 
services to its citizens. This raises large financi ng needs on the country resulting in excess of 
expenditure over non-debt receipts, termed as fisca l deficit. The fiscal deficit is sought to be 
plugged by borrowing, which adds to the country’s o utstanding debt stock. In other words, 
fiscal deficit can be seen as being indicative of t he net incremental liabilities of the 
Government or its additional borrowings to bridge t he budgetary gap. The shortfall is met 
either by internal or external borrowing contracted  on the security of the Consolidated Fund of 
India (CFI) or by the use of surplus fund in the Pu blic Account. In the budget documents, 
internal debt and external debt together are referred to as ‘Public Debt’.  
Internal debt refers to rupee-denominated debt, con sisting of marketable securities (dated 
securities, treasury bills) and non-marketable secu rities (14 days Intermediate Treasury Bills, 
compensation and other bonds, securities issued to international financial institutions etc.).  
External debt refers to the debt raised by the Unio n Government from non-domestic sources, 
namely, multilateral institutions like the Internat ional Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (IBRD), International Development Assoc iation (IDA), Asian Development 
Bank (ADB) etc. or bilateral sources, i.e., directly from the foreign countries. 
Liabilities in the Public Account (referred to as ‘ other liabilities’) include National Small 
Savings Fund (NSSF), Provident Funds, Reserve Funds  and deposits and special bonds issued 
to oil marketing companies, fertilizer companies an d Food Corporation of India. ‘Other 
liabilities’ are not included in the public debt. 
Besides above direct liabilities, the Union Governm ent provides guarantees for repayment of 
borrowings and payment of interest thereon, repayme nt of share capital and payment of 
minimum dividend, payment against agreements for su pplies of materials and equipment on 
credit basis, etc. on behalf of Government Companie s/Corporations, Railways, Union 
Territories, State Governments, Local Bodies, joint  stock companies, co-operative institutions 
etc. These guarantees constitute contingent liability of the CFI. 
The details of the outstanding total liabilities of  the Union Government at the end of each year 
from 2011-12 to 2014-15 is presented in Table 1.1. 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 3 
 
Table 1.1: Union Government Liabilities 
(`` `` in crore) 
Period 
 
Gross 
Domestic 
Product 
(GDP) at 
current 
prices 
Internal 
debt 
 
External 
debt (at 
current 
rate) 
Public 
debt 
 
Other 
liabilities 
Total 
liabilities (at 
current rate) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5=3+4) (6) (7=5+6) 
2011-12  88,32,012 @ 32,30,622  
(36.58)  
3,22,897  
(3.66)  
35,53,519  
(40.24)  
5,97,765  
(6.77)  
41,51,284  
(47.00)  
2012-13  99,88,540 @ 37,64,566  
(37.69)  
3,32,004  
(3.32)  
40,96,570  
(41.01)  
6,10,016  
(6.11)  
47,06,586  
(47.12)  
2013-14  1,13,45,056 
@ 
42,40,767  
(37.38)  
3,74,483  
(3.30)  
46,15,250  
(40.68)  
6,44,060  
(5.68)  
52,59,310  
(46.36)  
2014-15  1,25,41,208 $ 47,38,291  
(37.78)  
3,66,384  
(2.92)  
51,04,675  
(40.70)  
6,71,010  
(5.35)  
57,75,685  
(46.05)  
Note: Figures in parenthesis show percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). GDP data is based on new series (Base year 
2011-12).  Data for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 is not included due to change in base year of GDP to 2011-12. 
@ Source:  Central Statistical Office (CSO), Ministry of Statist ics and Programme Implementation, Press Note  
dated 30 January 2015 
$ Source:   Central Statistical Office (CSO), Ministr y of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Press  Note dated  
29 May 2015 
From Table 1.1 , it can be seen that the outstanding total liabili ties of the Union Government 
had generally been around 46 per cent  of the GDP of the country over the period from 2011-12 
to 2014-15.   

Report No. 16 of 2016 
4 
The internal debt forms the major portion of the ou tstanding Union Government Liabilities as 
depicted in Chart 1.1 below.  
Chart 1.1: Union Government Liabilities  
 
Further, guarantees were outstanding for an amount of ` 2,94,700 crore as on 31 March 2015. 
1.4  Servicing of Public Debt of Union Government  
The interest payment and repayment of principal for  the period from 2009-10 to 2014-15 are 
presented in Table 1.2. 
Table 1.2: Servicing of Public Debt 
(`` `` in crore) 
Period Interest Payment Repayment of Principal Public debt receipts Servicing as a percentage of 
receipts 
Internal Extern
al 
Internal Extern
al 
Internal Extern
al 
Internal External 
Short 
Term 
Long 
Term 
Short 
Term 
Long 
Term 
Short 
Term 
Long 
Term 
Short 
Term 
Long 
Term 
2009-10 10,026 1,65,224 3,629 29,17,992 1,56,660 11,140 29,08,223 4,74,927 22,177 101 68 67 
2010-11 12,047 1,84,958 3,156 26,70,008 1,32,992 11,774 26,77,767 4,64,009 35,330 100 69 42 
2011-12 26,288 2,07,431 3,501 33,83,996 98,347 13,586 35,10,862 5,26,280 26,034 97 58 66 
2012-13 30,129 2,49,248 4,019 33,11,674 99,111 16,108 33,65,024 5,79,705 23,309 99 60 86 
2013-14 34,346 3,08,852 3,880 33,48,315 1,44,852 18,124 33,56,044 6,13,506 25,416 101 74 87 
2014-15 35,702 3,33,943 3,766 35,00,183 1,86,916 20,601 35,09,362 6,75,300 33,534 101 77 73 
 (Source: Finance Accounts, GOI for the year ) 
It can be seen from the above table that servicing (interest payment + repayment of principal) 
was more than 97 per cent  of the total short term debt receipts in each of t he six years in 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 5 
 
respect of short term internal debt, which is under standable as short term debt is normally 
repaid within a period of one year. In the case of long term internal debt, the corresponding 
percentage ranged from 58 per cent  to 77 per cent  while in case of external debt, it ranged 
from 42 per cent  to 87 per cent  over the period from 2009-10 to 2014-15. In 2014-1 5, 77 per 
cent  of the long term internal borrowings and 73 per cent  of the external borrowing were 
utilized for debt servicing implying that a larger percentage of debt was being used for debt 
servicing which in turn meant lower percentage of d ebt taken was available for meeting 
developmental expenditure to promote growth, which is one of the reasons for contracting 
debt.  
1.5  Rationale for Audit 
As per Article 149 of the Constitution of India rea d with the provisions of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (Duties, Powers and Condit ions of Service) Act, 1971, it is the duty 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to audit all receipts and expenditure of the 
Union Government and State Governments.  Public debt constitutes a significant portion of the 
receipts of the Union Government. Further, audit of  public debt would help in underlining the 
significance and benefits of public debt management  and also help policymakers to understand 
the risks of public debt. It would make their opera tions more effective and increase the 
efficiency of internal administrative processes. Su ch audit would also enhance public debt 
transparency and accountability.  
In the last few years, several countries across the  world have faced public debt crisis. The 
frequency and severity of debt crisis and the conse quent adverse impact on managing of public 
finances reinforces the need for promoting responsible lending and borrowing practices.  
It is in this background that the topic of Public D ebt Management was selected for 
performance audit. 
1.6  Audit Methodology 
An introductory meeting was held with the Departmen t of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry 
of Finance (MOF) on 12 March 2014 and with the Rese rve Bank of India (RBI) on 04 April 
2014 to understand and assess the entire gamut of p ublic debt management of the Union 
Government. Performance audit on this topic commenc ed with an Entry Conference with RBI 
on 16 July 2014 and with DEA on 05 August 2014 during which the audit methodology, scope, 
objectives and criteria were discussed. 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
6 
Audit was conducted in the offices of DEA and RBI. In order to assess the processes involved 
in the public debt management, the audit procedure included inspection and examination of 
records and documents as well as data analysis. Dra ft Performance Audit Report was issued to 
DEA/RBI on 19 August 2015. On receipt of reply from  RBI and clarifications from DEA, 
another draft of the report was issued to DEA on 02  December 2015. An exit conference with 
RBI was held on 06 November 2015 and with DEA on 04  April 2016. Responses of RBI and 
DEA to the Draft Audit Report and views expressed b y them during exit conference have been 
duly considered and suitably incorporated in the report.  
National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NI PFP), a society engaged in research in 
public economics and policies, provided consultancy in the conduct of this audit. 
1.7  Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit on Public Debt Management was  conducted in order to assess whether 
the Government of India: 
• had a clear and explicit legal as well as organizat ional framework for managing Public 
Debt;  
• had a debt management strategy to enable minimization of the risk and cost involved; 
• had established an arrangement for effective execut ion of debt management activities and 
adopted sound practices in debt servicing; and 
• had set up effective information systems which enab led complete and accurate public debt 
reporting system/debt database, to provide reliable  financial information and to meet legal 
requirements. 
1.8  Audit Criteria 
The audit objectives were benchmarked against audit criteria drawn from : 
• Laws and regulations governing public debt activities viz.  
o Fiscal Responsibilities and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 
o Fiscal Responsibilities and Budget Management (FRBM) Rules, 2004 
o Government Securities Act, 2006 
o Government Securities Regulations, 2007 
o Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
• International practices 
o Guidelines for Public Debt Management prepared by I nternational Monetary 
Fund(IMF) and World Bank (WB) 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 7 
 
o Manual of Effective Debt Management by Economic and  Social Commission for Asia 
and the Pacific issued by United Nations 
• Circulars/guidelines issued by Government of India (GOI)/RBI from time to time 
• Quarterly/Annual Reports relating to Public Debt  
• Status Paper on Government Debt issued by DEA 
• Manuals of Internal Debt Management Department (IDMD) of RBI/Middle Office etc. 
• Annual Financial Statements of the Government of India 
1.9  Audit Scope 
The performance audit covered internal and external debt of Union Government. The period of 
audit coverage was for the five years from 2009-10 to 2013-14. However, facts and figures 
were updated upto 31 March 2015. 
1.10  Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation of DEA and RBI in fa cilitating the audit by providing 
necessary records and information in connection wit h the conduct of this performance audit. 
We also acknowledge the support and guidance provided by NIPFP. 
  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 9 
 
Chapter 2  
Legal Framework 
2.1    Introduction 
The legal framework provides strategic direction, d efines and clarifies powers and supports 
professionalism and operational focus in public deb t management and also limits potential 
abuses of power and promotes good governance by est ablishing accountability for managing 
the government’s debt liabilities. A clear and expl icit legal framework could contribute much 
to achieve lower borrowing costs and prevent waste and inefficiency in public debt 
management. The legal framework comprises both prim ary legislation (laws enacted with 
approval of the legislature) and secondary or delegated legislation (rules, regulations, executive 
orders etc.). As per international best practices, the legal framework of public debt 
management should contain the following elements: 
• Authorization by Parliament to the executive:  The Parliament has ultimate power to 
borrow on behalf of the government arising from its  power to approve government tax and 
expending measures. The Parliament should, therefore, authorize the executive to borrow. 
• Authorization to the debt management unit:  The legal framework should authorize the 
debt management unit to borrow through regular issue of government securities. 
• Borrowing purposes:  The legal framework should clearly define the borrowing purposes. 
• Debt management objectives:  Having public debt objectives in legal framework a llows a 
country to formulate a debt management strategy to achieve the debt management 
objectives. 
• Debt management strategy: The legal framework should provide for preparation of debt 
management strategy that is consistent with the debt management objectives.  
• Debt reporting:  There should be clear and explicit legal reporting  requirements to hold 
debt management unit/executive accountable to legislature. 
2.2    Legal Framework in India 
The legal framework for the management of public de bt in India is contained in Article 292  
of the Constitution of India which empowers the Uni on Government to borrow upon the 
security of the CFI within such limits, if any, as may be fixed by Parliament by law, and in 
different primary and secondary legislations as given below: 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
10 
 
• The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FR BM) Act, 2003 : The FRBM 
Act, 2003 provided limits on the Central Government ’s borrowings, debt and deficits, 
greater transparency in fiscal operations of the Ce ntral Government and conducting fiscal 
policy in a medium-term framework and of matters co nnected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
• FRBM Rules, 2004: FRBM Rules, 2004 framed under FRBM Act, 2003 specif ied the 
annual targets for reduction of fiscal and revenue deficits, annual targets for assuming 
contingent liabilities in the form of guarantees an d additional liabilities as a percentage of 
GDP.  
• RBI Act, 1934: Under Section 20 of the RBI Act, 1934, RBI was obli ged to manage the 
Central Government public debt.  
• Public Debt Act, 1944 and Government Securities Act , 2006: The Public Debt Act is an 
Act to consolidate the law relating to government s ecurities and the management of the 
public debt by RBI.  With the enactment of the Government Securities Act , 2006,  which  
amends the law relating to Government securities an d its management by RBI and matters 
connected therewith, the Public Debt Act, 1944 ceas ed to apply to the government 
securities. 
2.3    Inadequacies in the Legal Framework 
The existing legal framework in India covered some of the requirements of a good legal 
framework. However, some aspects of an ideal legal framework for management of public debt 
were not present in legislations governing public debt in India as discussed below. 
2.3.1  Definition of Public Debt 
Under the Indian budgetary classification; three se ts of liabilities constituted Central 
Government liabilities, namely, internal debt, exte rnal debt and other liabilities. In the budget 
documents, internal debt and external debt were tog ether termed as public debt. However, it 
was observed in audit that the term ‘Public Debt’ h ad not been defined in the existing legal 
framework. 
RBI stated (July 2015) that though public debt had not been explicitly defined, all the liabilities 
of government were listed and reported on a regular  basis through Finance Accounts / Status 
Paper of Government debt. In the Exit Conference, D EA stated that the term public debt had 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 11 
 
been defined in the Indian Government Accounting St andard (IGAS) which could be adopted 
after its notification. 
DEA may consider adopting the definition as well as  the components of public debt given in 
the proposed IGAS. 
 
2.3.2  Objectives, Purposes of Public Debt and Formulation  of Debt Management 
Strategy  
As mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, the legal  framework should ideally indicate the 
public debt objectives, the borrowing purposes and should require the preparation of a debt 
management strategy.  
Audit observed that though the debt management obje ctives were mentioned in the Status 
Paper prepared by the DEA, the existing legal frame work did not indicate debt management 
objectives explicitly. Further, while it can be con strued from the Annual Financial Statement 
passed by Parliament that borrowing was for financi ng the fiscal deficit, Audit observed that 
borrowing purposes had not been mentioned in the ex isting legal framework of public debt 
management in India. Moreover, the legal framework did not necessitate the formulation of a 
debt management strategy. 
RBI stated (July 2015) that  the debt management objectives were implicit in FRB M Act and 
Budgets and added (September 2015) that the overall  objective of the Government debt 
management policy was to meet Union Government’s fi nancing need at the lowest possible 
long term borrowing costs and also to keep the tota l debt within sustainable levels. 
Additionally, it aimed at supporting development of  a well-functioning and vibrant domestic 
bond market. RBI stated (July 2015) that  the main purpose of borrowing by the GOI was for 
financing the fiscal deficit. RBI added that the ma ndate to manage public debt implicitly 
imposed strategy formulation on the debt management  agency. RBI further added that the 
international sound practice clearly mentioned debt  management objectives and the executive 
in India had adopted those objectives.  
DEA replied (September 2015) that borrowing was for the financing of fiscal deficit which has 
Parliamentary approval. It was added that the purpo se was dynamic and varied over time 
depending on the priority of the nation and general socio-economic environment. It was opined 
by DEA that such legal provisions might either crea te rigidities and/or require frequent legal 
amendments. 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
12 
In the Exit Conference, DEA stated that the inclusi on of objectives of debt management, 
borrowing purposes and the need for debt management  strategy into the existing legal 
framework such as Public Debt Act/Government Securi ties Act, etc. might not be desirable as 
it could infuse elements of rigidity into debt management activities.  
The reply of DEA should be viewed in light of the following: 
• The FRBM Act, 2003 did not specify the objective of  public debt management but 
placed a ceiling on the Government’s borrowings whi le the budget shows the gap in 
funding and requirement of debt. In no primary or s econdary legislation were the 
objectives of public debt management specified. 
• It is to be noted that the FRBM Act, 2003 mandated submission of three reports to the 
Parliament on an annual basis which inter alia  contained information on debt 
management activities. However, in the absence of stated objectives or requirement of a 
strategy as indicated above, there was no evaluation of outcomes. 
• While it is true that the borrowing purposes may be  dynamic, the broad contours may 
be prescribed in the legal framework.  
• Though RBI stated that the mandate to manage public  debt implicitly imposed strategy 
formulation on the debt management agency, a debt m anagement strategy had been 
brought out only in December 2015 by DEA which cove rs the period from 2015 to 
2018. Inclusion of the requirement to prepare a deb t management strategy in the legal 
framework would assure timely and regular preparation of the said strategy. 
• The international best practices recommend that the legal framework should contain the 
debt management objectives, borrowing purposes and formulation of debt management 
strategy for effective debt management.  
 
2.4    Inconsistency in the Provisions of FRBM Rules 
Rule 3 (4) of FRBM Rules, 2004 framed under FRBM Act, 2003 provided: 
“The Central Government shall not assume additional  liabilities (including external debt at 
current exchange rate) in excess of nine per cent  of GDP for the financial year 2004-05 and in 
each subsequent financial year, the limit of nine per cent  of GDP shall be progressively 
reduced by at least one percentage point of GDP.” 
Rule 3 (2) of FRBM Rules, 2004 as amended by FRBM (Amendment) Rules, 2015 provided: 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 13 
 
“The Central Government shall reduce the fiscal def icit by an amount equivalent to  
0.4 per cent  or more of the GDP at the end of each financial ye ar beginning with the financial 
year 2015-16, so that fiscal deficit is brought dow n to not more than 3 per cent  to GDP at the 
end of 31 st  day of March 2018.” 
As per Rule 3 (4) above, it is clear that no additi onal liabilities could have been assumed in 
2013-14 or thereafter which is inconsistent with the fiscal deficit target of 3 per cent  of GDP as 
per Rule 3 (2) above as amended.  
In the Exit Conference, DEA noted the inconsistency  between Rule 3(2) and Rule 3(4) of the 
FRBM Rules for corrective action. 
2.5    Management of External Debt  
As per section 20 of the RBI Act, 1934, it is the o bligation of RBI to undertake the 
management of public debt. As stated above, the bud get documents termed internal and 
external debt together as public debt. However, it was observed that RBI was managing only 
internal debt and DEA was managing external debt.  
RBI, in their reply (July 2015), stated that Govern ment of India (Allocation of Business) Rules 
framed under the powers conferred by clause (3) of Article 77 of the Constitution of India; 
allocated ‘management of external debt’ to DEA, Min istry of Finance (MOF); giving them 
necessary legal authority to manage the debt. RBI, while stating that the MOF might be 
managing the external debt due to sovereign – sover eign / multilateral relationship, added that 
they managed the debt whenever it was issued in int ernational capital markets like GBP 1 
denominated Indian Government bond in UK in 1935 and a Sterling loan in 1949.  
DEA replied  (September 2015) that considering more  than 90 per cent  financing of the fiscal 
deficit was funded by domestic market borrowings wh ich was being managed by RBI, as also 
that external borrowing was largely concessional (a nd not market linked), it might be said that 
legal provisions were being followed in spirit and to a substantial extent. 
It is true that the Government of India (Allocation  of Business) Rules provided sufficient legal 
authority to DEA for management of external debt. H owever, it is pertinent to mention here  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1  Great Britain Pound  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
14 
 
that the requirement of RBI managing public debt is  in the RBI Act, 1934. It is felt that these 
two legislations need to be in consonance with each other. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation: 
1.  Legal framework, consisting of both the primary as well as secondary 
legislation, may include the definition of public d ebt, debt management 
objectives, borrowing purposes and requirement of debt management strategy. 
DEA may consider doing this in a phased manner.  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 15 
 
Chapter 3 
Organizational Framework 
3.1  Introduction  
Organisational framework for debt management should  establish clear roles and 
responsibilities to ensure the effective execution of debt management activities, provide well 
defined coordinating mechanism and establish a tran sparent and accountable system of checks 
and balances. It should also enable debt managers t o have the operational independence to 
execute their objectives and strategies. 
In order to increase efficiency, create adequate se gregation of duties and achieve a basic level 
of internal control, a Debt Management Office (DMO)  is normally organized with front, 
middle and back offices discharging distinct functions.  
• The front office is typically responsible for execu ting transactions in financial markets, 
including the management of auctions and other form s of borrowing, and all other funding 
operations.  
• The back office handles the settlement of transacti ons and the maintenance of the financial 
records.  
• The middle office usually undertakes risk analysis,  monitors and reports on portfolio-
related risks and assesses the performance of debt managers against any strategic 
targets/benchmarks.  
In India, a number of entities are involved in publ ic debt management operations with their 
functions ranging from advisory to actual implementation to recording operations. Internal debt 
is managed by the Budget Division of DEA, MOF along  with the Internal Debt Management 
Department (IDMD) of RBI while external debt is man aged by various divisions of DEA like 
Multilateral Relations (MR), Bilateral Cooperation (BC) and Multilateral Institutions (MI) and 
Controller of Aid, Accounts and Audit (CAAA). Chief  Controller of Accounts (CCA), MOF 
maintains accounts for both internal and external debt. 
Debt Management functions in respect of Public Debt  Management of Union Government are 
presented in Table 3.1  as below : 
 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
16 
Table 3.1: Debt Management Functions of the Union G overnment 
 Front Office Middle Office Back Office 
Internal Debt IDMD (RBI) IDMD (RBI), Middle 
Office (DEA), Budget 
Division (DEA)  
IDMD (RBI),  
CCA (MOF) 
External Debt MI, MR and BC 
Divisions (DEA) 
- CAAA (DEA), 
CCA (MOF) 
  
3.2  Functioning of Middle Office 
In India, though a DMO was not set up, as a first s tep the Middle Office (MO) was established 
in September 2008. The responsibilities of MO, inter alia , included: 
• formulation of comprehensive risk management framework;  
• formulation of a long term debt management strategy; and  
• developing and maintaining a centralized database on Government liabilities. 
However, it was observed that these activities were  not performed by the MO. Detailed 
observations in this regard have been brought out in Chapter 4 and Chapter 6 of this Report.  
In the Exit Conference, DEA stated that the MO coul d not function as a full-fledged MO 
unless the statutory framework was appropriately am ended to assign these functions to the 
MO. It was added that apart from the creation of a centralized database, the other functions 
were being performed by other agencies. 
From the submission of DEA, it can be seen that the  MO was not fully discharging the 
functions assigned to it.  
 
3.3  Middle Office Functions in respect of External Debt 
Audit observed that in respect of external debt, th e functions of MO were not being performed 
by any entity. 
DEA replied (September 2015) that performance evalu ation and back testing against portfolio-
related benchmarks might not be meaningful as India ’s external debt was largely multilateral 
and on concessional terms. In the Exit Conference, it was stated that RBI were conducting a 
cost-benefit analysis to ascertain the benefit or o therwise of contracting external loans as far as 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 17 
 
market loans were concerned. It was also added that  a strategic cap on the quantum of external 
debt which could be contracted had been fixed.  
Reply of DEA may be seen in the light of the fact that: 
• Borrowings from IBRD and ADB which accounted for ne arly 31 per cent  of the total 
external borrowing as on 31 March 2015 were not on concessional terms.  
• The cost-benefit analysis conducted by RBI was to d ecide between market borrowing 
within India or from abroad and was not in respect of bilateral and multilateral loans 
which form the entirety of the external debt.  
• The functions of the Middle Office also include ris k analysis, essential for effective 
debt management but the same were not being perform ed in respect of external debt. It 
is to be noted that external debt is prone to excha nge rate variations which pose a 
serious risk and therefore, effective management of the same is of utmost importance. 
3.4  Public Debt Management Agency (PDMA) 
The issue of establishment of a separate PDMA in In dia has been considered by a number of 
Committees like the Committee on Capital Account Co nvertibility (1997), the Working Group 
on Separation of Debt Management from Monetary Mana gement (1997), the Internal Expert 
Group on the Need for a Middle Office for Public Debt Management (2001), the Committee on 
Fuller Capital Account Convertibility (2006), High Level Committee on Financial Sector 
Reforms (2008) and the Internal Working Group on De bt Management (2008) among others. 
All the above Committees had suggested that there s hould be an independently functioning 
office of public debt outside of RBI to enable more  efficient debt management as well as 
monetary management. Further, it was stated that in ternationally, there had been a strong 
movement towards establishing separate debt managem ent offices for selling bonds for the 
government which was considered a best practice. Mo reover, a separate debt management 
agency would consolidate all debt management functi ons and be the catalyst for wider 
institutional reform and transparency in public debt management.  
The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2007-08)  had proposed to set up an autonomous 
DMO and, in the first phase a MO to facilitate the transition to a full-fledged DMO. 
Accordingly, a MO was established in September 2008  in the MOF. The Financial Sector 
Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC) in its Repor t (March 2013) recommended fast-
tracking of setting up of an independent PDMA.  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
18 
It is pertinent to mention here that announcements on the establishment of a separate debt 
management agency were made in the budget speeches of 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2014-15 also. 
Taking forward the process for establishment of a s eparate DMO, the MOF set up a task force 
(September 2014) with the objective of supporting t he Ministry in preparatory work for 
PDMA.  
The Finance Minister in his budget speech (2015-16)  observed that “one vital factor in 
promoting investment in India, including in the inf rastructure sector, is the deepening of the 
Indian bond market, which we will have to bring at the same level as our world class equity 
market. I intend to begin this process by setting u p a Public Debt Management Agency 
(PDMA) which will bring both India’s external borro wings and domestic debt under one 
roof.”  
The proposal for the setting up a separate public d ebt management agency had, however, been 
shelved from the finance bill for the year with the  following remarks of the Finance Minister 
made in the Parliament (30 April 2015), “since, RBI has been handling Public Debt 
Management, the Government in consultation with the  RBI will prepare a detailed roadmap 
separating the debt management and market infrastru cture from RBI and having a unified 
financial market..........it is being decided to de lete the PDMA provisions from the finance bill 
for the financial year” . He further added , “this Government is committed to unifying the 
financial market both by making Government securiti es part of this market as well as creating 
a proper bond currency market.” 
From the above, it could be seen that even though a  number of expert committees had 
recommended the establishment of a separate public debt management agency over the past 
two decades and the first step in the direction was  taken seven years ago with the setting up of 
a Middle Office, no further progress was made on th e setting up of a separate public debt 
management agency, except for setting up of a task force in September 2014.  
RBI in their reply (September 2015), stated that DM O was only an agent of the treasury and 
could not be independent while adding that multipli city of arrangements existed around the 
world regarding location of sovereign debt manageme nt functions. RBI further added that they 
had been discharging their functions efficiently and effectively.  
Referring to the statements made by the successive Finance Ministers in their budget speeches, 
DEA replied (September 2015) that it was clear that  the Government was ready with the draft 
bill on PDMA with inputs from all stakeholders. DEA  enumerated some measures taken for 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 19 
 
setting up the PDMA like capacity building at MO, p ublications by MO for information 
dissemination, setting up of task force for PDMA with a time schedule for implementation, etc. 
In this regard, it is to be noted that while some m easures had been taken for the setting up of a 
PDMA, the task force for the setting up of an indep endent PDMA was established only in 
September 2014, six years after the setting up of t he MO and there was no clarity on the 
proposed establishment of the PDMA despite several statements made by the Finance Minister 
in Parliament.  
  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 21 
 
Chapter 4 
Debt Management Strategy 
4.1 Introduction 
A debt management strategy is a plan that operation alizes the debt management objectives. It 
lays down the desired composition of the public deb t portfolio, which captures the 
government’s preferences with regard to a cost-risk  trade-off. A debt management strategy has 
a longer focus than a borrowing plan, and is essent ially an iterative process to define the 
government’s optimal funding sources, based on its risk tolerance, the stage of development of 
domestic financial markets, the ability of the gove rnment and the private sector to obtain 
external funding, and the country’s stage of economic development.  
A public debt management strategy document contains  description of the market risks being 
managed, the future environment for debt management, including fiscal and debt projections. It 
should also describe the analysis undertaken to sup port the recommended debt management 
strategy and indicate the adopted strategy and its rationale, with specific targets and ranges for 
key portfolio risk indicators and the financing programme over the projected horizon.  
A risk management framework is developed to enable debt managers to identify and manage 
the trade-offs between expected cost and risk in th e government debt portfolio. To assess 
risk, debt managers should regularly conduct stress  tests of the debt portfolio on the basis of 
the economic and financial shocks to which the gove rnment - and the country more generally - 
are potentially exposed. The stress testing framewo rk should consider the interrelations among 
the variables that affect public debt dynamics and cover extreme scenarios to better assess the 
costs and risks associated with the debt portfolio. 
A debt management strategy is generally for a medium term, i.e., three to five years. Further, it 
is seen that a medium term debt management strategy formulated for achieving the longer term 
debt management objectives, should be reviewed peri odically to assess the validity of the 
assumptions in the light of changed circumstances. This is all the more important where the 
debt is predominantly long term. It can be seen tha t nearly 70 per cent of the outstanding 
public debt of India as on 31 March 2015 had residu al maturity period of more than five years 
extending upto 30 years as shown in Table 4.1 below pointing towards the criticality of 
formulation of debt management strategy in India . 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
22 
Table 4.1: Maturity Profile of Outstanding Dated Securities-Union Government  
Residual Maturity Percentage of dated securities 
Less than 1 year 3.5  
1-5 Years 21.4  
5-10 Years 31.4  
10-20 Years 30.6  
20 years and above 13.1  
2  
(Source: Quarterly Report on PDM, MO, DEA) ) 
4.2 Formulation of Medium Term Debt Management Stra tegy and Risk 
Management Framework 
Audit observed that although some of the elements o f a debt management strategy such as roll 
over risk, projected cash flows and government mark et borrowing for six months, elongation 
of maturity, issuance of debt instruments with vari able coupons, revision in the upper limit of 
maturity buckets and individual securities and usage of cash balances, were discussed in the six 
monthly meetings of the Monitoring Group on Cash an d Debt Management (MGCDM) 2, 
medium term debt strategy (MTDS) was not formulated  till December 2015. Audit further 
observed that some of the elements of debt manageme nt strategy, namely, description of the 
future environment for debt management; specific ta rgets and ranges for key risk indicators; 
assessment and management of risks associated with foreign currency and policies related to 
management of external debt vulnerabilities, were n ot discussed/analyzed in the meetings of 
the MGCDM.  
Audit observed that although refinance risk (roll over risk) and interest rate risk were discussed 
in MGCDM meetings, Risk Management Framework was no t formulated. Audit further 
observed that the expected cost of debt was not bei ng projected forward over the medium to 
long term, exchange rate risk was not considered and stress tests were not being conducted. 
It was stated in the Status Paper 
3 (December 2014) that ‘there is little consensus wi th regard to 
a level of debt that may be considered unsustainabl e’. While it may be true that there is little 
consensus even among international organizations on  the acceptable levels of debt in the 
country, it is felt that every country, including India, should work out the level and type of debt 
                                                           
2 MGCDM consisted of Secretary (DEA), Deputy Governor (RBI) and other Officers from DEA and RBI. 
3 Status Paper presents an analysis of the Government’s debt position and is brought out by the DEA annually.   

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 23 
 
that is acceptable to them on the basis of analysis  of the fiscal, economic, financial and other 
parameters applicable to them and also work out ind icative levels of debt and debt indicators, 
so that the conclusion on the sustainability of the government debt may be verifiable. 
In December 2015, DEA brought out a Debt Management  Strategy for India for a period of 
three years (2015-18). In the Debt Management Strat egy document, issues related to raising 
debt at low cost, risk mitigation and market development had been delved upon. The document 
contained strategic benchmarks for certain items like share of short term debt, average maturity 
of debt, issuance limits, indexed and floating debt  and share of domestic to external debt. The 
Debt Management Strategy also contained a Risk Mana gement Framework presenting risk 
analysis and stress testing. While this is a welcom e step, the scope of the Debt Management 
Strategy was restricted only to the marketable debt of Union Government. 
In the Exit Conference, DEA stated that most of the  external debt were concessional and were 
backed by other considerations of bi/multi-lateral co-operation, agreements etc; it did not seem 
appropriate to bracket them under the category of ' borrowing' and include them into debt 
management strategy. 
The reply of DEA needs to be seen in light of the f act that the borrowings from IBRD and 
ADB which accounted for nearly 31 per cent  of the total external borrowing as on 31 March 
2015 were not on concessional terms. Further, exter nal borrowing, whether concessional or 
not, is subject to exchange rate risk which needs t o be managed through a well-thought out 
strategy.  
  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 25 
 
Chapter 5 
Borrowing Activities 
5.1  Introduction 
The borrowing activities envisage all the activitie s from the estimation of the required 
borrowing to the actual borrowing of the funds eith er from the domestic markets or from the 
external markets.  
The Budget division, DEA, MOF was responsible for preparation of budget estimates (BE) and 
revised estimates (RE) in respect of internal borro wings, external borrowings and other 
receipts on the basis of inputs received from RBI, CAAA and other departments. 
The borrowing calendar for market borrowings was pr epared half-yearly on the basis of the 
estimates of market borrowing, cash inflows, cash o utflows and the likely funding gap of the 
Union Government. The borrowing calendar indicated the amount of securities to be issued 
through weekly primary auctions during the ensuing half year and was issued with the approval 
of the MGCDM.   
The information on each primary auction was posted on RBI website as a press release 
indicating the details of auctions such as notified  amount, date and timings for electronic 
bidding, type of auction (multiple/uniform; yield b ased/price based), norms for non-
competitive bids, settlement date, when issued trading, etc.  
Treasury bills, which were generally issued for 91 days, 182 days and 364 days, offered short 
term investment opportunity to financial institutio ns, banks etc. The amount of weekly auction 
of treasury bills was notified in indicative quarterly calendars.  
Government borrowings from external sources were pr imarily from multilateral and bilateral 
sources and were long-term in nature. The principal  sources of multilateral external assistance 
to India were the WB, the ADB, the International Fu nd for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
etc. Bilateral sources of external assistance inclu ded direct borrowing from foreign countries. 
The external loans were contracted through negotiat ions with the concerned multilateral 
agencies and/or the countries. 
5.2  Devolvement of Union Government Dated Securities on  Primary Dealers 
Primary auctions of government securities were cond ucted on the E–Kuber platform by RBI. 
Within ten minutes of the closure of the auction wi ndow, the result was processed and the 
various reports giving details such as amount recei ved under competitive /non-competitive 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
26 
route, cut off yield/price, weighted average yield/ price were generated and put up to the 
Auction Committee for approval. The Auction Committ ee 4 decided the cut-off price/yield. 
Once the cut off was decided by the Auction Committ ee, the same was marked off in the E-
Kuber system and allotment was done by the system w ithout any manual intervention.  A 
system of underwriting 5 for market lending was also operating in the gover nment securities 
markets in India through the mechanism of Primary Dealers (PDs).  
The underwriting commitment on dated securities of Union Government was divided into two 
parts- (i) Minimum Underwriting Commitment (MUC) an d (ii) Additional Competitive 
Underwriting (ACU). The MUC amounted to 50 per cent  of the notified amount of each issue. 
This was distributed equally amongst all the PDs. T he remaining portion of the notified 
amount was underwritten through ACU auction. In the  ACU auction, each PD was required to 
bid for an amount at least equal to its share of MU C, but not exceeding 30 per cent  of the 
notified amount. Thus, there was 100 per cent  underwriting of the government auction. The 
PDs were also required to bid in the primary auctio ns of government securities for an amount 
not less than its total underwriting obligation. Thus, in the existing arrangement, bid cover ratio 
of primary auctions would not be less than one impl ying that there was no possibility of bonds 
remaining unsubscribed. Hence, it appeared that the devolvement 6 depended on the decision of 
the Auction Committee and not on the amount remaining unsubscribed. A perusal of auction of 
Union Government dated securities during 2009-10 to  2014-15 revealed that in 71 auctions, an 
amount of ` 49,654.48 crore was devolved on underwriting PDs. 
Audit observed that there were no criteria for devo lvement of securities in a particular case. In 
the absence of such criteria, Audit could not verif y the necessity or otherwise of the 
devolvement. There were also no criteria for decidi ng the cut–off rate or the reasons for 
deciding a particular cut-off rate though various factors like market clearing rate, Fixed Income 
Money Market and Derivatives Association of India ( FIMMDA) 7 previous day closing yield, 
secondary market yield just before the auction and poll rate etc., were considered.  
RBI in their reply stated (July 2015) that devolvem ent decision was taken after careful 
consideration of market conditions, bidding pattern  and cash/budget management needs when 
the bidding in the auctions did not reflect the pri ce of the security. RBI reiterated (September 
                                                           
4 Auction Committee consisted of Executive Director (E D) in charge of IDMD and Chief General Managers (CGM s) of 
IDMD, Department of External Investments and Operat ions (DEIO), Financial Markets Operation Department  (FMOD) and 
Monetary Policy Department (MPD) 
5  Engaging to buy all the unsubscribed securities/ bonds in case of issue of securities/bonds 
6  Devolvement is a process whereby if an investment  issue is undersubscribed, an underwriter is requir ed to subscribe to the 
remaining securities / bonds. The outstanding unsubscribed amount devolves onto the underwriter. 
7  For illiquid securities where there is no trading or volumes are very low, FIMMDA comes out with model price.  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 27 
 
2015) their earlier reply and stated that they woul d further strengthen the documentation in 
devolvement cases to ensure that appropriate detail ed recording was done.  It added that 
general principles could be laid down for deciding on the devolvement of issues.  
In the Exit Conference, RBI stated that a policy fr amework to indicate broad criteria for 
devolvement was under finalization.  Subsequently R BI informed (May 2016) that a policy on 
devolvement criteria had been prepared which inter alia  incorporated the factors to be 
considered for arriving at the devolvement decision.  
5.3  Variation between the Revised Estimate (RE) and Act uals with respect to 
External Assistance 
Audit observed that there were variations between R E and Actuals in respect of External 
Assistance as mentioned in Table 5.1 below: 
Table 5.1: Variation between RE & Actuals in respec t of External Assistance 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals Variation between 
RE and actuals (in 
Percent) 
2009-10  16,047  16,535  11,038  (-) 33  
2010-11  22,464  22,264  23,556  6 
2011-12  14,500  10,311  12,449  21  
2012-13  10,148  2,214  7,201  225  
2013-14  10,560  5,440  7,292  34  
2014-15  5,734  9,705  12,933  33  
(Source:  Receipt Budgets and Finance Accounts of GOI) 
From the above, it can be seen that the RE of exter nal assistance varied from the actual 
external assistance in the range of (-)33 per cent  to 225 per cent. Thus, it appeared that the 
system of preparation of BE and RE in respect of external debt was not robust. 
5.4  Approval of External Assistance Proposals without c onsidering 
Knowledge Transfer, Technology Transfer and Best Pr actices Transfer 
from International Experience 
DEA was the nodal agency for posing projects to WB,  ADB and the IFAD. No proposal for 
external assistance was posed directly by any Centr al Ministry or State Government to the 
multilateral/bilateral funding agency. A Screening Committee 8 in DEA (constituted in August 
2009) decided proposals to be posed to WB, ADB and IFAD. 
                                                           
8 Screening Committee consisted of Joint Secretary (MI), DEA and other Officers from DEA.  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
28 
DEA vide its circular dated 01 September 2011 insti tuted a new set of principles and ‘Finance 
Plus’ criteria to govern the selection of projects to be posed to the WB, ADB and the IFAD. 
The goal of instituting the criteria was to maximiz e access and leverage of Multilateral 
Financial Institutions’ (MFIs’)/Multilateral Develo pment Banks’ (MDBs’) knowledge base, 
international experience and familiarities with bes t practices making the best use of limited 
available external resources.  
The ‘Finance Plus’ criteria formed the main approac h for accessing assistance from the WB, 
ADB and IFAD. The criteria, inter alia , included that knowledge transfer, technology tran sfer 
and best practices transfer from international expe rience should be envisaged with adequate 
long term engagement for ensuring sustainability of  the projects in the context of India. This 
could be considered the crux of ‘Finance Plus’ criteria going a long way in realizing the goal of 
instituting this criteria. The Screening Committee had, in one of its meetings (01 December 
2011), also underscored the fact that external assistance should not be taken only for resources, 
reiterating the spirit of the criteria cited above. 
Scrutiny of minutes of the Screening Committee meet ings held after the issue of the ‘Finance 
Plus’ criteria, i.e., after 01 September 2011, prov ided to audit revealed that the Screening 
Committee had deferred two 
9 proposals for loan assistance due to lack of knowl edge transfer, 
technology transfer and best practices transfer fro m international experience. However, the 
minutes of the meetings of the Screening Committee did not indicate whether knowledge 
transfer, technology transfer and best practices tr ansfer from international experience were 
considered while approving 60 projects   (Annexure -I) out of a total of 82 approved projects 
for external assistance.  
DEA in their reply (April 2015) stated that Screeni ng Committee examined the preliminary 
proposal for financial assistance from multilateral  agencies received from State Governments/ 
Central Ministries, in consultation with Central Li ne Ministries (in case of State projects) and 
Planning Commission/NITI Aayog (in case of Central projects), and decided about their 
suitability for external funding. It was added that  during the meetings of the Screening 
Committee, a preliminary presentation on Finance Plus elements was made that ultimately took 
shape after the complete design of the project. In the Exit Conference, DEA accepted that in 
some cases, the verification of these criteria was not documented but added that they were 
considered in all cases.  
                                                           
9 Drinking Water Supply Scheme, Madhya Pradesh (Meeting dated 03 February 2013) and Rehabilitation and Upgradation to 
two – lane, Uttarakhand (Meeting dated 22  August 2014)  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 29 
 
Audit noticed that in 60 proposals/projects approve d by the Screening Committee, the minutes 
of the meetings of the Screening Committee did not indicate that knowledge transfer, 
technology transfer and best practices transfer wer e considered. This was contrary to the 
provisions of the circular cited above. Thus, in th e absence of documentation, Audit could not 
draw an assurance that the goal of instituting the criteria, to maximize access and leverage of 
MFIs/MDBs knowledge base, international experience and familiarities with best practices had 
been fulfilled. 
5.5  Cash Management  
Cash management mainly entails cash flow forecastin g, arranging temporary liquidity, 
maintaining target balance in the Government accoun t, investment of surplus balance over and 
above the target balance in the market etc. The mar ket borrowing undertaken for budget 
execution may contribute to large build up of surpl us cash balance in the Government account 
making it challenging for the cash management to deploy these surplus balances efficiently. 
In India, RBI was entrusted with the cash managemen t of Government of India under Sections 
17, 20 and 21 of the RBI Act, 1934 which they perfo rmed in coordination with the Ministry of 
Finance, Government of India. 
The key features of the cash management operations were as under: 
• There was treasury single account (TSA) 
10  with RBI and all the transactions (i.e. 
receipts and payments) were routed through this acc ount. GOI maintained minimum 
balance of ` 100 crore on each reporting Friday and RBI’s annua l closing day and ` 10 
crore on all other days. 
• RBI forecast the weekly inflows and outflows in GOI  account based on past trends, 
information given in the budget and any other infor mation provided by the MOF, GOI 
from time to time. 
• The mismatches between inflows and outflow in TSA w ere rough tuned through 
issuance of cash management instruments, viz., trea sury bills and further fine tuned 
through availing Ways and Means Advances (WMA)/ Ove rdraft (OD) and issuing cash 
management bills (CMBs). WMA are the advances made by the RBI to the 
                                                           
10  A TSA (Treasury Single Account) is a unified struct ure of government bank accounts that gives a consol idated view of 
government cash resources.  Based on the principle o f unity of cash and the unity of treasury, a TSA is  a bank account or a 
set of linked accounts through which the government transacts all its receipts and payments.  
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
30 
Government. Limits on the WMA are fixed on a half y early basis. OD is similar to 
WMA and can be resorted to for maximum 10 days at a  stretch, when limit of WMA is 
crossed. CMBs were non-standard, discounted instrum ents issued for maturities less 
than 91 days. The half yearly limits of WMA for the  period 2009-10 to 2014-15 are 
mentioned in Table 5.2 below: 
Table 5.2: WMA Limits of GOI 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year April-September October-March 
2009-10 20,000 10,000 
2010-11 30,000 10,000 
2011-12 30,000 (45,000*) 10,000 (20,000**) 
2012-13 50,000 (Q1) 
45,000 (Q2) 
20,000 
2013-14 30,000 20,000 
2014-15 35,000 20,000 
*  Raised from April 21 to June 30, 2011 
** Raised for October-December 2011  
(Source:  Records of DEA & RBI ) 
• Surplus cash balances in GOI’s account were investe d up to ` 50,000 crore in the 
government securities through sale of securities to  GOI from RBI’s investment account. 
With effect from 16 December 2014, RBI had put in p lace a mechanism for investing 
surplus cash balances (above precautionary balance of ` 20,000 crore) of the GOI in 
variable rate repo instruments 11 . The end of day balance was placed in reverse repo  
instruments  12  with RBI. 
5.5.1    Deficiencies in Projected Cash Balances 
Examination of Weekly Projected Cash Balance and Ac tual Cash Balance for the period 2010-
11 to 2014-15 revealed that:  
(i)  In at least 40 weeks in each year, the variations b etween the weekly projected cash 
balances and the actual cash balance were more than  
` 10,000 crore as reflected in 
Table 5.3  below :  
                                                           
11  Repo instrument means an instrument for borrowing fu nds by selling securities with an agreement to repu rchase the said 
securities on a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes interest for the funds borrowed. 
12  Reverse repo instrument means an instrument for lending funds by purchasing securities with an agreement to resell the said 
securities on a mutually agreed future date at an agreed price which includes interest for the funds lent.  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 31 
 
 
Table 5.3: Number of Instances of Variations in Wee kly Projected Cash Balance 
and Actual Cash Balance 
Year  Variation of more than ` ` ` ` 10,000  crore  
2010-11  47 
2011-12  40 
2012-13  49 
2013-14  41 
2014-15  41 
(Source : Records of RBI ) 
(ii)  As reflected in Table 5.4  below, the weekly projected cash balance was negat ive in 
many instances:  
 Table 5.4: Instances of Weekly Negative Projected C ash Balance 
 
Year  Number of Instances  
2010-11  16 
2011-12  30 
2012-13  26 
2013-14  04 
2014-15  19 
(Source : Records of DEA/RBI ) 
From the above, it appears that the system of forec ast of inflow and outflow in TSA of GOI 
was not robust. 
RBI replied (August 2015) that though their endeavo ur was to project cash balances with fair 
degree of accuracy, there were occasions when the a ctual balances differed from projections. 
RBI stated that the GOI’s cash balances were projected at least six months in advance and were 
impacted by multiple factors including spending by GOI departments/units across the country, 
spending by States (reflected by withdrawal from In termediate Treasury Bills), etc. It was 
added that RBI and GOI were continuously striving t o improve the efficacy of the cash 
forecasting. RBI further stated that issuance of da ted securities and Treasury Bills were 
generally evenly distributed across the weeks to en able successful auctions without distorting 
the market and yield movements. It was further stat ed that issue of huge amount just to meet 
the funding requirement may impact cost of issuance s and hence, there might be instances 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
32 
wherein cash balances could turn out to be negative  and such mismatches in funding would be 
met by WMA / OD and /or issuance of Cash Management Bills. 
DEA replied (September 2015) that the purpose of forecasting GOI balances for the purpose of 
Debt Management was not forecasting actual cash (as  might be done for the purpose of cash 
management in a commercial institution), but to ens ure that GOI balances are between WMA 
limits to a reasonable surplus, generally to prepar e itself for bulky payments. It was added that 
due to uncertainties involved in the forecasting an d as market might not be able to fund a very 
large requirement in a short period, it was prudent  to allow negative GOI balances upto 
permissible WMA limit. 
The reply of RBI and DEA needs to be seen in the li ght of the fact that WMA/OD was for the 
purpose of fine tuning the actual mismatches betwee n the inflows and outflows and should not 
be considered for forecasting cash balances. The pu rpose of the forecast was to ascertain the 
possible position of cash so that appropriate steps  could be taken to bridge the gap between 
projected cash requirement and projected cash avail ability, if any. A wide variation between 
the projected and the actual cash balance defeated the purpose of this projection.  
In the Exit Conference, DEA stated that a Cash Coor dination Committee had been set up to 
strengthen cash flow forecasting and cash management.  
5.5.2     Issuance of CMBs and Availing WMA/OD 
As stated in the preceding paragraphs, the fine tun ing of mismatches in TSA may be done 
through CMBs/ WMA/ OD. The instances of fine tuning  of the mismatches during the period 
from 2009-2010 to 2014-2015 are presented in Table  5.5 below:  
Table 5.5: Issuance of CMBs and Availing WMA/OD 
Year CMBs (No. of 
Instances) 
WMA (No. 
of days) 
OD (No. of days) 
2009-10 - 76 28 
2010-11 2 (35 days, 28 days)  57 02 
2011-12 14(35 -77  days) 263 74 
2012-13 - 40 0 
2013-14 13 (7-56 days) 42 9 
2014-15 1(42 days) 74 25 
(Source : Records of DEA and RBI ) 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 33 
 
5.5.2.1  Issuance of CMBs for Monetary Policy Objectives 
CMBs were introduced in 2009 to meet temporary cash  flow mismatches of the Government. 
However, it was observed that during August and Sep tember 2013, CMBs worth ` 96,000 
crore were issued to meet monetary policy objectives as shown in Table 5.6 given below: 
Table 5.6: CMBs Issued for Monetary Policy Objectiv es 
 (`` `` in crore) 
Sl. No. Date Amount of CMBs 
issued for monetary 
purpose 
Discount 
(Cost) 
1 13 August 2013 11,000  119.49  
2 14 August 2013 11,000  119.38  
3 20 August 2013 11,000  100.91  
4 21 August 2013 11,000  98.46  
5 27 August 2013 11,000  167.64  
6 28 August 2013 11,000  169.18  
7 03 September 2013  11,000  166.65  
8 04 September 2013  11,000  163.19  
9 06 September 2013  8,000  87.71  
Total 96,000  1192.61  
                        (Source:  Records of RBI )  
In this regard, DEA had also communicated (14 Augus t 2013) to RBI that use of debt 
instruments for monetary policy objectives would in terfere with the Government’s debt 
strategy apart from fiscal implications. DEA advised that RBI may examine the option of using 
non–debt instrument for the purpose of monetary pol icy. However, DEA approved issuance of 
CMBs by RBI for monetary policy objectives.  
RBI in their reply accepted (May 2015) the audit vi ew with the remarks that the exchange rate 
of the Indian Rupee (May 2013) had come under inten se pressure, depreciated significantly 
and was viewed by markets as the worst performing e merging market currency (with a 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
34 
maximum depreciation of about 19 per cent  during a short span of about three months between 
22 May to 28 August 2013) warranting the issue of CMBs. 
The above facts need to be seen in the light of: 
• CMBs were to be issued to meet temporary cash flow mismatches. 
• In such a scenario, even the monetary objectives ma y not be achieved as liquidity absorbed 
through regular issuance of CMBs remained available  with the GOI for spending as the 
money impounded through CMBs got injected back into the system. 
5.5.2.2 Issuance of CMBs on consecutive days 
It was seen from the records that in anticipation o f the government account not coming out of 
overdraft within stipulated period of 10 consecutiv e working days, RBI had proposed  
(2 November 2011) to the GOI to issue CMBs in two t ranches, i.e., for ` 6,000 crore on  
3 November 2011 and for ` 8,000 crore on 8 November 2011. RBI reassessed the  position as 
the Government had not issued the proposed first tr anche on 3 November 2011 and proposed 
that the Government may issue CMBs for ` 10,000 crore on 8 November 2011. However, it 
was observed that the GOI decided to issue the CMBs  on two consecutive days, i.e., 8 and 9 
November 2011. RBI informed DEA vide their letter d ated 25 November 2011 that in such an 
environment, the cash management operation could ha ve serious implications for the 
remaining portion of market borrowing programme as well as the financial system including 
primary dealers. Further, RBI had proposed (Novembe r 2011) that cash management 
operations, especially issuance of CMBs, might be planned well in advance, preferably as soon 
as WMA reaches 75 per cent of the limit.  
RBI in their reply (May 2015) stated that it was su ggested that the issuance of CMBs on 
consecutive days should be avoided in the best inte rest of the market borrowing programme as 
well as the stability of the financial system, as t he market reads such move adversely. 
However, RBI stated that the yields had not hardene d very much in the subsequent days as 
expected indicating that the yield had hardened by 20 basis points.  
The reply of RBI should be viewed in light of the f act that RBI had informed the DEA (even 
when RBI was aware that the yield had hardened by o nly 20 basis points) that the timing of 
issuance of CMBs on two consecutive days, i.e., on 8 November 2011 and 9 November 2011, 
when the Government had utilized OD for eight and n ine working days had dampened the 
market sentiment and pushed the yields upwards acro ss the maturity in government securities 
market.  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 35 
 
RBI further furnished (April 2016) copies of corres pondence with the DEA wherein it was 
stated that they would endeavour to ensure that the  GOI will not be availing OD. RBI had 
again proposed that they will trigger issuance of C MBs as soon as WMA reaches 75 per cent 
based on assessment of market conditions which indi cates that the previous proposal of the 
RBI has not yet been acted upon. 
It is recommended that a decision on issue of CMBs as soon as WMA reaches 75 per cent  be 
taken expeditiously. 
 
 
 
Recommendation: 
2. Conditions of ‘Finance Plus’ criteria aimed at m aximizing access and 
leverage of Multilateral Financial Institutions’/Mu ltilateral Development 
Banks’ knowledge base, international experience and  familiarities with 
best practices may be applied in deciding on the pr ojects for external 
assistance and the same should be properly documented.  
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 37 
 
 
Chapter 6 
Debt Information System, Debt Servicing and Debt Reporting 
6.1     Debt Information System 
Debt management activities should be supported by a n accurate and comprehensive 
information system with proper safeguards. The info rmation system should comprise of 
components that capture, monitor, analyse and repor t debt information of a country. The 
system may be a combination of software, hardware, people that support data input, 
processing, storage and report generation. While th e importance of the system for effective 
public debt management cannot be overemphasized, it  should be ensured that the costs and 
complexities of the system are appropriate to the n eeds of the organization. A Public Debt 
Information System should support the following functions: 
• Recording Function: To record debt and debt related information includi ng basic details 
and terms of contractual debt instruments such as l oans and debt securities in addition to 
actual transactions of disbursements and debt servi ce and forecast for debt service 
schedules. 
• Reporting Function: To generate reports that meet internal and external  reporting 
requirements. 
• Analytical Function: To obtain debt indicators and develop ‘what-if’ sce nario analysis 
resulting from hypothetical changes in financial va riables, which linked with market 
information and key macroeconomic information, assi sts in analysing the public debt 
portfolio and the debt strategy. 
In respect of internal debt, RBI used  E-Kuber for primary auctions of dated securities an d 
treasury bills, debt service payments and generatin g various reports. In respect of external 
debt, CAAA used Integrated Computerised System (ICS ) for maintaining various ledgers and 
registers relating to each loan/grant, debt servicing and generating various reports.  
6.1.1   Analytical Functions  
 
Audit observed that E-Kuber and ICS did not have th e provision for analytical functions as 
mentioned in previous paragraphs. 
RBI replied (September 2015) that they were using E xcel based tools for debt management 
strategy and added that going forward, they would c onsider incorporating such analytical tools 
in E-Kuber.  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
38 
DEA replied (September 2015) that there existed no such software at their end. It was, 
however, added that the relevant debt and cash related information was collated in spreadsheets 
and maintained in W&M Section and MO. 
In the Exit Conference, DEA stated that a system wo uld be developed to support analytical 
functions. 
6.1.2  Deficient / Inaccurate report generation 
 
The report generation in E-Kuber did not appear to be accurate as indicated by the following 
instances: 
• All the loans (dated securities and treasury bills)  floated during the period 01 April 2009 to 
31 March 2014 did not appear in the report generated from E-Kuber.  
• The list of interest payment generated from E-Kuber  did not indicate interest payment 
during 01 April 2009 to 31 March 2014 in respect of all of the securities outstanding during 
the aforesaid period.  
• The list on redemptions generated from E-Kuber did not indicate all the loans that had 
matured and been repaid during the period from 01 April 2009 to 31 March 2014.  
In the absence of complete and correct lists, inter est payments and redemptions made against 
dated securities during the period 2009-10 to 2013-14 could not be verified. 
In the Exit conference, RBI stated that all data wa s available as system of maintaining physical 
registers also existed in parallel and there was no risk of data loss and accepted that there might 
be issues with the report generation. 
6.1.3    Centralised Database 
 
It was observed that a centralized database of all internal and external liabilities of the 
Government was not available. It was seen that this  issue was considered over four years ago 
when the Working Group on Debt Management (WG) had in its meeting suggested (December 
2011) that steps be initiated to develop MO’s own d atabase with the help of National 
Informatics Centre (NIC). It was also suggested tha t the Commonwealth Secretariat’s Debt 
Recording and Management System (CS-DRMS) be adopte d as a temporary arrangement. 
Audit observed that the requisite amount for conduc ting a System Requirement Study (SRS) 
could not be released to NIC due to delayed process ing of invoice. CS-DRMS had not been 
adopted as a temporary measure in line with suggestion of the WG. 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 39 
 
DEA in their reply (September 2015) stated that dev elopment of debt database was a desirable 
outcome and not a necessity. DEA further stated tha t though adoption of the CS-DRMS would 
have involved an expenditure of ` 1.92 lakh only, its implementation would require s ignificant 
human resources and also physical space. It was added that in the meanwhile, NIC initiated the 
process and started working on the project in assoc iation with the MO and hence committing 
MO’s limited human and physical resource to the tem porary measure such as the CS-DRMS 
was felt unfeasible.   
In the Exit Conference, DEA agreed with the audit observation and stated that efforts would be 
made to put in place a centralised database. Debt Servicing 
6.2  Debt Servicing 
Debt Servicing refers to payments made to creditor( s) towards interest and matured principal 
amount. It usually includes service charges, commitment charges etc. 
6.2.1  Payment of Commitment Charges  
Commitment Charges on undrawn balance of external l oans are paid on principal amount 
rescheduled for drawal on later dates. During the p eriod from 2009-10 to 2014-15, 
commitment charges to the extent of ` 602.66 crore were paid. The year-wise total undraw n 
balance (loans) from various sources and payment of  commitment charges are shown in  
Table 6.1 .  
Table 6.1: Undrawn Balance (Loans) and Payment of C ommitment Charges 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Undrawn Balance (loans) Commitment charges 
2009-10 1,05,668 86.11 
2010-11 1,10,872 112.57 
2011-12 1,48,182 83.29 
2012-13 1,89,197 92.95 
2013-14 2,16,900 117.21 
2014-15 2,10,099 110.53 
Total 602.66 
(Source:  External Assistance (2013-14), CAAA, GOI ) 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
40 
The  need for  payment of commitment charges points towards inadeq uate planning of the 
loans/credits without proper linkages with the requ irement leading to avoidable payment of 
commitment charges. 
 
6.3   Debt Reporting 
 
6.3.1  Delay in Publication of Status Paper 
In the Union Budget for 2010-11, it was announced t hat a Status Paper would be brought out 
giving detailed analysis of the Government’s debt s ituation. Consequently, DEA published the 
Status Paper as indicated in the Table 6.2  below:  
Table 6.2: Month of Publication of Status Paper  
S. No. Year to which 
pertaining 
Month of publication 
1 2009 – 10 November 2010 
2 2010 – 11 March 2012 
3 2011 – 12 Not published 
4 2012 – 13 July 2013 
5 2013 – 14 December 2014 
6 2014 – 15 January 2016 
The above table reveals that: 
• Status Paper was not brought out for the year 2011–12. 
• Four of the five editions of the Status Paper were published with a lag of more than six 
months from the close of the financial year. 
• One edition was brought out within four months of the close of the financial year.  
In the Exit Conference, DEA stated that it was diff icult to decide a precise date for the 
publication of the Status Paper as it was dependent  upon the availability of the Finance 
Accounts and other State – wise statistics. It furt her added that it was their endeavour to bring 
the Status Paper as quickly as possible after the r equired statistics become available. It was 
added that Budget Division would explore to decide a timeline for publication of this 
document to infuse elements of certainty and discipline.  
Delay in publishing the status paper may impact the  usefulness of the analysis of debt 
presented in the Status Paper. The Government may d ecide to bring out the Status Paper at a 
particular time every year or within a fixed time after receipt of all information. 
  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 41 
 
6.3.2  Variations in Figures of Internal Debt in different  Reports  
The details of internal debt are shown in ‘Statemen t 14: Statement of debts and other interest 
bearing obligations of Government’ of the Finance A ccounts of GOI. The figures of internal 
debt are also presented in other  documents/publica tions like the Status Paper and the Indian 
Public Finance Statistics (IPFS) published by the M OF and the Handbook of Statistics on the 
Indian Economy brought out by the RBI. The figure o f internal debt presented in these 
publications is shown in Table 6.3  below: 
 
Table 6.3: Internal Debt of Central Government 
(`` `` in crore) 
 
  (Source: Status Paper, IPFS, RBI's Handbook and Finance Accounts, GoI for the year ) 
 
From the above, it can be seen that the figure of internal debt presented in the IPFS varied from 
the figure of internal debt presented in the Financ e Accounts in all the five years while the 
figure in the Status Paper varied from the figure i n the Finance Accounts in 2009-10. It was 
further noted that the figures of outstanding debt which were presented in the IPFS and the 
Status Paper, which are both published by the MOF, differed from each other in all the five 
years.  
Further, Audit observed that the figures of outstan ding amounts against individual government 
securities as on 31 March 2014 presented in the Sta tus Paper did not match with the 
corresponding figures in the Finance Accounts in respect of 19 outstanding securities as shown 
in Annexure-II . 
Year Finance 
Accounts  
Status Paper  
January 
2016  
Budget 
Division  
IPFS, Economic 
Division  
Handbook of Statistics 
on the Indian 
Economy, RBI 
2009-10 23,28,339  23,34,310 33,95,877 23,28,339 
2010-11 26,67,115  26,67,115 37,81,135 26,67,115 
2011-12 32,30,622  32,30,622 43,33,165 32,30,622 
2012-13 37,64,566  37,64,566 48,72,409 37,64,566 
2013-14 42,40,767  42,40,767 
(Provisional) 
53,83,827 
(RE) 
42,40,767 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
42 
DEA in their reply (March 2016) stated that the dat a provided by the Budget Division and the 
DMO was the right source of information and requested not to consider the figures given in the 
IPFS of the Economic Division. In respect of the di fferences in the outstanding amounts 
against individual outstanding securities, it was s tated that they were either due to 
typographical errors in the nomenclature of the sto ck or due to non–inclusion of the amount of 
debt under the head conversion of bonds in marketab le securities and that they were 
compensatory errors. 
Though the DEA accepted that the figures as shown i n the IPFS did not match with their 
figures and stated that the same should not be cons idered, it needs to be noted that the IPFS is 
also brought out by the MOF and therefore it should  be in consonance with the figures 
presented in the other documents. Government needs to ensure that all reports published by 
them are reconciled and reflect the accurate figures. 
6.3.3  Publication of Security-wise Interest Payment 
Audit observed that the amount of interest paid aga inst each security during a year was not 
reflected in any of the reports published by RBI/DE A. The depiction of this information would 
make the reports more informative and transparent and might also be helpful in the verification 
and accounting of the interest payment details at the government accounting units.  
In the Exit Conference, DEA stated that they would explore the feasibility of compiling such 
data and take necessary action accordingly. 
 
 
  
Recommendations: 
3.  A centralized database of internal debt, external d ebt and other liabilities 
may be developed. 
 
4.  Steps may be taken to ensure that the public debt i nformation systems used 
(E-Kuber and ICS) support analytical functions. 
 
5.  Mechanism may be developed to ensure consistency in  the reporting of 
public debt by RBI and DEA and amongst the various divisions of DEA. 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 43 
 
Chapter 7 
Government Securities Market 
7.1  Introduction 
One of the objectives of Public Debt Management is to develop a liquid market. Developing a 
liquid and vibrant secondary market for government securities and broadening the investor 
base are the key factors to ensure that debt is rai sed in a cost effective manner. Further, the 
government securities market provides the benchmark yield and imparts liquidity to other 
financial markets and is considered an essential precursor, in particular, for development of the 
corporate debt market. Moreover, government securit ies market acts as a channel for 
integration of various segments of the domestic fin ancial market and helps in establishing inter 
linkages between the domestic and external financial markets. 
7.2  RBI Holding of Government Securities 
In terms of the FRBM Act, 2003, RBI was not allowed  to subscribe to the primary issuance of 
the Government from April 2006 while they were allo wed to buy and sell government 
securities in the secondary market. In practice, RB I purchases and sells government securities 
through Open Market Operations (OMOs) to infuse or absorb liquidity for monetary operations 
and to adjust the monetary base and/or the interest  rate in line with their targets. The OMOs 
may also result in infusing liquidity to support th e banking sector’s purchases of government 
bonds. Audit observed that during the period 2009-1 0 to 2014-15, the holdings of Government 
securities by Commercial Banks, Life Insurance Comp anies and RBI together ranged between 
77.65 to 82.09 per cent  of the outstanding dated securities as shown in the Table 7.1  below:  
Table 7.1: Major Holders of Government Securities 
(In per cent)  
Category  2010 
March 
2011 
March 
2012 
March 
2013 
March 
2014 
March 
2015 
March 
Commercial Banks 
(including Bank PDs)  
47.25  47.03  46.11  43.86  44.46  43.30  
Insurance companies  22.16  22.22  21.08  18.56  19.54  20.87  
RBI  11.76  12.84  14.41  16.99  16.05  13.48  
Total 81.17  82.09  81.6  79.41  80.05  77.65  
                                   (Source:  Status Paper January 2016 ) 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
44 
From the above, it can also be seen that RBI’s hold ing of Government securities had increased 
from 11.76 per cent of dated securities in March 2010 to 16.99  per cent  in March 2013 before 
declining to 13.48 per cent  in March 2015. 
7.3  Concentrated Trading in a Few Securities 
The total annual trading (outright) in government s ecurities had increased from  
` 24,80,850 crore to ` 91,49,608 crore over the period from 2009-10 to 20 14-15 indicating  
a 268.81 per cent  increase. The details of the total dated governmen t securities outstanding, 
total quarterly trade in dated Government securitie s, trade in top three and 10 dated 
Government securities has been presented in Annexure-III. 
It was observed that though the trading volume of g overnment securities had increased nearly 
threefold, trade in government securities in the se condary market was predominantly taking 
place in a few securities as can be seen from the Annexure-III. Thus, objective of developing 
a deep and liquid market did not appear to have been fully achieved. 
RBI in their reply stated (August 2015) that they w ere committed to development of the 
government securities market and focused on market development along with cost 
minimisation and risk mitigation while adding that Indian government securities market was 
reasonably deep and liquid as evidenced by some mea sures of liquidity  like average trading 
volumes, turnover ratio, bid-ask spread, impact cos t etc. RBI further enumerated the steps 
taken by them for the development of the government  securities markets in India and added 
that they would continue efforts to further develop liquidity in government securities market. 
7.4 Retail Participation in Government Securities M arket 
In order to encourage participation of medium and s mall investors in the primary market for 
government securities, a scheme of non-competitive bidding for allocation of upto 5 per cent  
of the notified amount in the specified auctions of  dated securities at weighted average rate of 
accepted bids was introduced in January 2002. The p articipation of retail investors in the 
auction of dated securities during 2009-10 to 2014-15 is presented in Annexure-IV. 
Audit observed that the total amount of bids received and accepted in respect of retail investors 
during 2009-10 to 2014-15, ranged from 0.30 per cent  to 0.47 per cent of the notified amount 
as can be seen in Annexure-IV. From the above, it appeared that the steps taken by RBI and 
the Government for improving retail participation i n government securities market were not 
producing the desired results. 

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 45 
 
RBI in their reply (August 2015) enumerated the steps taken to promote retail participation and 
stated that retail participation in government secu rities market, even though low, had been 
increasing gradually over the years. RBI added that  they were continuously exploring 
possibility of making the system more investor frie ndly and that recent steps taken to enable 
seamless transfer of securities from de-mat to Subs idiary General Ledger may increase the 
retail participation. 
In the Exit Conference, DEA accepted the audit obse rvation and stated that steps would be 
taken to improve the position. 
7.5 Participation of Foreign Institutional Investor s (FIIs) in Government 
Security Market 
Foreign investment in rupee denominated government securities takes the form of foreign 
investors buying Government bonds in the Indian Gov ernment bond market, all of which are 
denominated in rupees. The percentage of foreign in vestment in outstanding government 
securities during the period 2009-10 to 2014-15 ran ged from 0.59 per cent  to 3.67 per cent . 
The limits on foreign investment in government debt  and the minimum and maximum foreign 
investment in government debt during the years 2013 -14 and 2014-15 are presented in  
Table 7.2 below: 
Table 7.2: Minimum and Maximum Foreign Investment i n Government Debt 
(`` `` in crore) 
 2013 – 14 
(upto 11 
June 2013) 
2013 – 14 
(from 12 
June 2013) 
2014 - 15 
Ceiling Limit 1,24,432  1,53,569  1,53,569  
Minimum Investment 79,906  53,491.95  81,795  
Maximum Investment 96,392  88,078.5  1,53,387  
As can be seen from the above, the holdings of the FIIs in government securities during  
2013-14 were considerably less than the limits pres cribed for them, while it seemed to have 
improved considerably during 2014-15. 
  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
46 
RBI in their reply stated (August 2015) that there was robust demand from FIIs for government 
securities and the limits were fully utilized. RBI added that there was a demand from various 
quarters to further open up the limits and that the y had taken measures to improve the 
participation of FIIs in government securities market.  
RBI may continue to take steps to ensure that the p articipation of FIIs in the Indian 
government securities market is maintained.  
  

Report No. 16 of 2016  
 47 
 
Chapter 8 
Conclusion and Recommendations 
8.1  Conclusion  
Union Government’s public debt, consisting of inter nal and external debt, was managed by 
various agencies with internal debt being managed by Budget Division of the DEA of the MOF 
along with the IDMD of RBI and external debt being managed by MR, BC and  MI divisions 
of DEA and supported by the CAAA. The Performance A udit on Public Debt Management 
showed that:  
• The legal framework for debt management did not def ine the term public debt. The legal 
framework did not indicate clearly debt management objectives and borrowing purposes; 
and also did not provide for formulation of a debt management strategy.  
• There were no objective criteria/guidelines for dev olvement on PDs in auction of 
securities. Subsequently RBI informed (May 2016) th at a policy on devolvement criteria 
had been prepared which inter alia incorporated the factors to be considered for arri ving at 
the devolvement decision.   
• The minutes of the meetings of the Screening Commit tee did not indicate whether 
knowledge transfer, technology transfer and best pr actices transfer from international 
experience were considered while approving projects for external assistance in 60 of the 82 
approved projects.  
• CMBs, introduced to meet temporary cash flow mismat ches of the Government, were 
issued to meet monetary policy objectives.  
• The public debt information systems used for intern al debt (E-Kuber) and external debt 
(ICS) did not have provisions for analytical functions. 
• There was no centralized database of all internal and external liabilities of the Government. 
Further, discrepancies were noticed in the internal  debt figures published by various 
divisions of DEA and RBI.  
8.2  Recommendations  
Based on the audit findings discussed in the forego ing chapters, the following 
recommendations are made: 
• Legal framework, consisting of both the primary as well as secondary legislation, may 
include the definition of public debt, debt management objectives, borrowing purposes, and 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
48 
requirement of debt management strategy. DEA may co nsider doing this in a phased 
manner.  
• Conditions of ‘Finance Plus’ criteria aimed at maxi mizing access and leverage of 
Multilateral Financial Institutions’/Multilateral D evelopment Banks’ knowledge base, 
international experience and familiarity with best practices may be applied in deciding on 
the projects for external assistance and the same should be properly documented. 
• A centralized database of internal debt, external d ebt and other liabilities may be 
developed. 
• Steps may be taken to ensure that the public debt i nformation systems used (E-Kuber and 
ICS) support analytical functions. 
• Mechanism may be developed to ensure consistency in  the reporting of public debt by RBI 
and DEA and amongst the various divisions of DEA. 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 49  
 
Annexure-I 
(Refer to para No. 5.4) 
 
Projects/Proposals approved by the Screening Commit tee 13   
 
Sl. 
No. 
Proposal  Date of approval Proposal posed by Funding 
agency 
Amount 
1.   Second Uttarakhand rural water 
supply and sanitation project II 
27-02-15 Uttarakhand WB USD 120 
million  
2.   Assam agriculture competitiveness 
project 
27-02-15 Assam WB USD 200 
million 
3.   Reconstruction and recovery from 
damages due to Hudhud 
25-02-15 Andhra Pradesh WB USD 250 
million 
4.   National cyclone risk mitigation 
project II 
25-02-15 National Disaster 
Management 
Authority 
WB USD 34.81 
million 
5.   Renewable energy in agriculture 
sector 
25-02-15 Punjab ADB USD 55 
million 
6.   Solid waste management project in 
urban areas 
25-02-15 Uttar Pradesh WB USD 85 
million 
7.   Mukhyamantri Gram Sampark Yojana  20-11-14 Bihar WB USD 235 
million 
8.   Six lane green field bridge over river 
Ganga 
22-08-14 Bihar ADB USD 500 
million 
9.   MP integrated urban water resource 
management program 
22-08-14 Madhya Pradesh ADB USD 266 
million 
10.   Special project on production and 
marketing with an emphasis on post 
harvest management practices of 
horticulture crops in HP 
28-05-14 Himachal Pradesh WB USD 135 
million 
11.   Nagaland multi sectoral heath 
initiative project 
28-05-14 Nagaland WB USD 48 
million 
                                                           
13   Where minutes did not indicate whether knowledge transfer, technology transfer and best practices transfer from international experience were considered. 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
50  
Sl. 
No. 
Proposal  Date of approval Proposal posed by Funding 
agency 
Amount 
12.   Additional financing for Andhra 
Pradesh under NCRMP 
28-02-14 Andhra Pradesh  WB USD 49 
million 
13.   Second Punjab rural water supply and 
sanitation 
28-02-14 Punjab  WB USD 248 
million 
14.   Additional financing of Phase II of 
Gram Swaraj- Karnataka Panchayat 
Strengthening Project 
28-02-14 Karnataka  WB USD 220 
million 
15.   Odisha power sector emergency 
assistance 
28-02-14 Odisha ADB USD 30 
million 
16.   Higher education reforms in Madhya 
Pradesh 
24-02-14 Madhya Pradesh WB USD 300 
million 
17.   TN sustainable Urban Development 
Programme 
24-02-14 Tamil Nadu WB USD 400 
million 
18.   Strenghting of Lok Sewa Kendra 24-02-14 Madhya Pradesh WB ` 210 crore 
19.   Supporting additional skill acquisition 
programme 
03-02-14 Kerala ADB USD 100 
million 
20.   Urban Development Investment 
Programme Phase-III 
17-01-14 Rajasthan ADB USD 250 
million 
21.   Reconstruction of damaged houses  31-12-13 Odisha WB USD 153 
million 
22.   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation 
Project 
31-12-13 Odisha WB USD 55 
million 
23.   Integrated Coastal Zone management 
Project (ICZMP), Odisha 
31-12-13 Odisha WB USD 3 
million 
24.   Rehabilitating damaged power sector 
infrastructure 
31-12-13 Odisha ADB USD 70 
million 
25.   Odisha Intergrated Agriculture and 
Water Management Project for Saline 
and River Embankments 
31-12-13 Odisha ADB USD 35 
million 
26.   Nagaland Multi Sectoral Health 
Initiative 
29-11-13 Nagaland WB USD 48 
million 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 51  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Proposal  Date of approval Proposal posed by Funding 
agency 
Amount 
27.   National Urban Health Mission 29-11-13 Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare 
ADB USD 500 
million 
28.   Revised National Tuberculosis Control 
Programme 
29-11-13 Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare 
WB USD 100 
million 
29.   Uttar Pradesh Core Road Network 
Development Programme 
29-11-13 Uttar Pradesh ADB USD 300 
million 
30.   SASEC road connectivity project 29-11-13 Manipur ADB  USD 500 
million 
31.   Mizoram State Roads Project-II  24-09-13 Mizoram WB USD 237 
million 
32.   TN climate adaptation through sub-
basin development programme 
13-09-13 Tamil Nadu ADB USD 210 
million 
33.   Assam Power Sector Enhancement 
Project-II 
13-09-13 Assam ADB USD 300 
million 
34.   Livelihood improvement of 
particularly vulnerable tribal groups 
13-09-13 Odisha WB USD 50 
million 
35.   Improvement of water supply system 
in Wazirabad WTP command area of 
Delhi 
13-09-13 Delhi Jal Board ADB USD 290 
million 
36.   Uttarakhand health systems 
development project 
13-09-13 Uttarakhand WB USD 100 
million 
37.   Reconstruction and disaster response 
project  
19-08-13 Uttarakhand WB USD 150 
million 
38.   Rural water supply project 19-08-13 Uttarakhand WB USD 24 
million 
39.   Reconstruction and disaster response 
project 
19-08-13 Uttarakhand ADB USD 200 
million 
40.   Livelihoods project 19-08-13 Uttarakhand IFAD USD 28 
million 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
52  
Sl. 
No. 
Proposal  Date of approval Proposal posed by Funding 
agency 
Amount 
41.   City cluster development around 
Bangalore 
19-07-13 Karnataka ADB USD 300 
million 
42.   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation 
Project II 
19-07-13 National Disaster 
Management 
Authority 
WB USD 250 
million 
43.   Karnataka Integrated and Sustainable 
Water Resource Management 
Investment Programme- Urban Water 
Supply & Sanitation component 
15-05-13 Karnataka ADB USD 150 
million 
44.   Jaipur Rail Metro Corporation project 15-05-13 Rajasthan ADB USD 176 
millon 
45.   Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency  
15-05-13 Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy 
ADB USD 500 
million 
46.   Project proposal for power 
transmission 
15-05-13 Madhya Pradesh ADB USD 350 
million 
47.   Livelihood improvement of vulnerable 
tribal group 
15-05-13 Odisha IFAD USD 35 
million 
48.   Ravine Reclamation UP Sodic Land 
Reclamation III 
15-05-13 Uttar Pradesh WB USD 84 
million 
49.   Tiranga Infrastructure Finance Facility  15-05-13 India Infrastructure 
Finance Company 
Limited 
ADB USD 700 
million 
50.   Punjab development finance 
programme 
18-02-13 Punjab ADB USD 200 
million  
51.   Second Kolkata Environment 
improvement project 
18-02-13 West Bengal ADB USD 400 
million 
52.   Meghalaya Integrated Rural 
Development Project 
21-01-13 Meghalaya IFAD USD 45 
Million  
53.   Karnataka state road improvement 
project (KSHIP-III) 
21-12-12 Karnataka ADB USD 350 
million 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 53  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Proposal  Date of approval Proposal posed by Funding 
agency 
Amount 
54.   Rapid response to the food price crisis 
and malnutrition in Karnataka 
21-12-12 Karnataka WB USD 5 
million 
55.   Chhattisgarh state road connectivity 
project 
05-11-12 Chhattisgarh ADB USD 300 
million 
56.   TN Roads II 31-08-12 Tamil Nadu WB USD 300 
million 
57.   Watershed Management Project 27-07-12 Ministry of Rural 
Development 
WB USD 245 
million 
58.   Piped Water Supply 21-05-12 Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation 
WB USD 500 
million 
59.   AP Rural Inclusive Growth project 18-05-12 Andhra Pradesh WB USD 150 
million 
60.   Strengthening of teacher training 
institutes for training of untrained 
teachers of Bihar using distance mode 
18-05-12 Bihar WB ` 1280 crore 
 
(Source: Screening Committee Minutes ) 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
54  
Annexure-II 
(Refer to para No. 6.3.2) 
 
 Variation in Figures of Outstanding amount of Date d Securities as on 31 March 2014 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. No. Nomenclature Outstanding 
amount as 
per Status 
Paper 
December 
2014 
Outstanding 
amount as 
per Finance 
Accounts 
Difference 
1.   7.56% GS 2014 40,845.08  15,845.08  25,000  
2.   7.38% GS 2015 (Conv.) 57,386.74  54,386.73  3,000.01  
3.   7.56% GS 2016 (Conv.) - 25,000  -25,000  
4.   7.49% GS 2017(Conv.) 58,000  53,000  5,000  
5.   6.25% GS 2018 (Conv.) 16,886.80  10,886.80  6,000  
6.   5.69% GS 2018 (Conv.) 16,130  10,000  6,130  
7.   6.50% GS 2019 - 4,000  - 4,000  
8.   6.35% GS 2020 (Conv.) 61,000  56,000  5,000  
9.   7.83% GS 2021 - 68,000  -68,000  
10.   6.17% GS 2023 (Conv.) 14,000  6,000  8,000  
11.   1.44 Inflation Index GS 
2023 
- 6,582.58  -6,582.58  
12.   8.28% GS 2032 90,687.11  85,687.11  5,000  
13.   8.32% GS 2032 62,434.05  67,434.05  -5,000  
14.   8.30% GS 2040 72,000  - 72,000  

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 55  
 
Sl. No. Nomenclature Outstanding 
amount as 
per Status 
Paper 
December 
2014 
Outstanding 
amount as 
per Finance 
Accounts 
Difference 
15.   6.30% GS 2040 - 72,000  -72,000  
16.   Inflation Indexed 
National Saving 
Securities – 2013 
- 92  -92  
17.   7.80% GS 2021 68,000  - 68,000  
18.   5.87% GS 2022 (Conv.) 11,000  - 11,000  
19.   5.97% GS 2025 (Conv.) 16,687.95  - 16,687.95  
(Source:   Status Paper 2014 and Finance Accounts, GoI ) 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
56  
Annexure -III 
(Refer to para No. 7.3) 
Trade in Dated Government Securities 
    ( `` `` in crore) 
Quarter  Number of 
dated 
Government 
securities 
outstanding  
Total amount 
outstanding 
against dated 
Government 
securities 
Total trade 
in dated 
Government 
securities 
Total trade 
in Top 10 
traded dated 
Government 
securities 
Percentage of 
total trade in 
top 10 traded 
dated 
Government 
securities 
against total 
trade in dated 
Government 
securities 
Total trade 
in top 3 
traded 
dated 
Government 
securities 
Percentage 
of total 
trade in top 
3 against 
total in 
dated 
Government 
securities 
Apr-Jun 2010* 96  19 ,41 ,595.40  8,95 ,231  8,22 ,630  91.89  6,58 ,018  73.50  
Jul-Sep 2010 95  20 ,32 ,467.40  6,98 ,608  6,48 ,863  92.88  5,34 ,262  76.48  
Oct-Dec 2010 94 21 ,29 ,843.00  5,14 ,299  4,77 ,444  92.83  3,32 ,976  64.74  
Jan -Mar  2011  92 21 ,56 ,914.70  4,44 ,043  4,27 ,976  96.38  3,28 ,542  73.99  
        
Apr -Jun  2011  92  22 ,63 ,441.70  5,09 ,795  4,92 ,163  96.54  4,24 ,671  83.30  
Jul-Sep 2011 89 23 ,47 ,580.40  7,70 ,109  7,52 ,586  97.72  6,75 ,850  87.76  
Oct-Dec 2011 91  24 ,62 ,333.50  8,19 ,819  7,94 ,562  96.92  6,16 ,644  75.22  
Jan-Mar 2012 92  25 ,93 ,328.50  9,99 ,384  9,56 ,844  95.74  8,82 ,881  88.34  
        
Apr-Jun 2012 90  27 ,05 ,754.30  11 ,50 ,531  11 ,20 ,254  97.37  9,83 ,930  85.52  
Jul-Sep 2012 90  28 ,62 ,712.50  13 ,23 ,826  12 ,73 ,275  96.18  9,67 ,603  73.09  
Oct -Dec  2012  91 30 ,12 ,712.50  11,65,239  11 ,21 ,349  96.23  7,90 ,520  67.84  
Jan-Mar 2013 91 30 ,60 ,712.50  22 ,81 ,333  21 ,82 ,433  95.66  17 ,53 ,563  76.87  
        

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 57  
 
Quarter Number of 
dated 
Government 
securities 
outstanding  
Total amount 
outstanding 
against dated 
Government 
securities 
Total trade 
in dated 
Government 
securities 
Total trade 
in Top 10 
traded dated 
Government 
securities 
Percentage of 
total trade in 
top 10 traded 
dated 
Government 
securities 
against total 
trade in dated 
Government 
securities 
Total trade 
in top 3 
traded 
dated 
Government 
securities 
Percentage 
of total 
trade in top 
3 against 
total in 
dated 
Government 
securities 
Apr -Jun  2013  92  31 ,98 ,961.20  36 ,32 ,422  34 ,67 ,288  95.45  26 ,91 ,049  74.08  
Jul -Sep  2013  90 33 ,29 ,977.30  14 ,23 ,720  13 ,07 ,364  91.83  10 ,17 ,297  71.45  
Oct -Dec  2013  92  34 ,95 ,277.00  13 ,12 ,755  12 ,41 ,440  94.57  8,96 ,836  68.32  
Jan -Mar  2014  91 35 ,14 ,178.43  15 ,99 ,764  15 ,45 ,564  96.61  12 ,65 ,135  79.08  
        
Apr-Jun 2014 89  36 ,37 ,065.40  23 ,67 ,773  22 ,84 ,644  96.49  18 ,03 ,718  76.18  
Jul -Sep  2014  90 37 ,72 ,260.50  18 ,06 ,274  17 ,28 ,369  95.69  13 ,88 ,656  76.88  
Oct -Dec  2014  89  38 ,69 ,869.61  26 ,90 ,532  24 ,93 ,679  92.68  20 ,32 ,631  75.55  
Jan-Mar 2015 88  39 ,59 ,445.65  22 ,85 ,029  20 ,80 ,761  91.06  16 ,91 ,912  74.04  
 
* Quarterly data is available in the quarterly repo rts from the year 2010-11. 
 (Source:  Quarterly Report on Public Debt Management ) 
 
  

Report No. 16 of 2016 
58  
Annexure-IV 
(Refer to para No. 7.4) 
Retail Participation in the Auction of Dated Govern ment Securities 
                 ( `` `` in crore) 
Year Notified 
Amount 
Amount 
Allocated for 
retail 
participation 
(i.e. 5 percent  
of notified 
amount) 
Non-competitive bids received Non-competitive bids accepted 
Number Amount Percentage  
of  the 
notified 
amount 
Percentage 
against 
amount 
allocated 
for retail 
investors 
Number Amount Percentage 
of  Notified 
Amount 
Percentage 
against 
amount 
allocated 
for retail 
investors 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) 
          
((5)/ 
(2)*100) 
(5)/(3)*100) 
    
(9)/–(2)*100 (9)/–
(3)*100) 
2009-10  4,18,000.00  20,900.00  504.00  1,241.00  0.30  5.94  504.00  1,241.00  0.30  5.94  
2010-11  4,37,000.00  21,850.00  620.00  2,045.00  0.47  9.36  620.00  2,045.00  0.47  9.36  
2011-12  5,10,000.00  25,500.00  714.00  1,703.00  0.33  6.68  714.00  1,698.00  0.33  6.66  
2012-13  5,58,000.00  27,900.00  813.00  1,881.00  0.34  6.74  813.00  1,881.00  0.34  6.74  
2013-14  5,63,500.00  28,175.00  898.00  1,738.00  0.31  6.17  898.00  1,738.00  0.31  6.17  
2014-15  5,92,000.00  29,600.00  965.00  2,111.00  0.36  7.13  965.00  2,111.00  0.36  7.13  
Total  30,78,500.00  1,53,925.00  4,514.00  10,719.00  0.35  6.96  4,514.00  10,714.00  0.35  6.96  
 (Source:  RBI’s website ) 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 59  
List of Abbreviations  
 
Sl. No.  Term  Description  
1.   ADB Asian Development Bank  
2.   BC Bilateral Cooperation  
3.   CAAA Controller of Aid, Accounts and Audit  
4.   CCA Chief Controller of Accounts  
5.   CS-DRMS Commonwealth Secretariat’s Debt Recording and 
Management System 
6.   CFI Consolidated Fund of India 
7.   CGM Chief General Manager 
8.   CMB Cash Management Bill 
9.   CSO Central Statistical Office  
10.   DEA Department of Economic Affairs  
11.   DEIO Department of External Investments and Operations  
12.   DMO Debt Management Office  
13.   ED Executive Director  
14.   FIMMDA Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives A ssociation 
of India  
15.   FMOD Financial Markets Operation Department  
16.   FSLRC Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commiss ion  
17.   GDP Gross Domestic Product 
18.   GOI Government of India  
19.   IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  
20.   ICS Integrated Computerised System  
21.   IDA International Development Association  
22.   IDMD Internal Debt Management Department  
23.   IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development  
24.   IGAS Indian Government Accounting Standard  
25.   ITB Intermediate Treasury Bill 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 60  
Sl. No.  Term  Description  
26.   MDB Multilateral Development Bank 
27.   MFI Multilateral Financial Institution 
28.   MGCDM Monitoring Group on Cash & Debt Management  
29.   MI Multilateral Institutions  
30.   MO Middle Office  
31.   MOF Ministry of Finance  
32.   MPD Monetary Policy Department  
33.   MR Multilateral Relations  
34.   MTDS Medium Term Debt Strategy  
35.   MUC Minimum Underwriting Commitment  
36.   NBFC Non Banking Finance Company 
37.   NIC National Informatics Centre 
38.   NIPFP National Institute of Public Finance and Pol icy  
39.   NSSF National Small Savings Fund  
40.   OD Overdraft  
41.   OMO Open Market Operation  
42.   PDMA Public Debt Management Agency 
43.   PD Primary Dealer 
44.   QR Quantitative Restriction  
45.   RBI Reserve Bank of India  
46.   RMF Risk Management Framework  
47.   SRS System Requirement Study  
48.   TSA Treasury Single Account  
49.   UK United Kingdom  
50.   WB World Bank 
51.   WMA Ways and Means Advances  
52.   WSS Weekly Statistical Supplement  
 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 61  
 
Glossary  
Sl. No. Term Description 
1.   Bid – Ask spread The difference between the offer price and the bid price.  
2.   Buyback of 
Government Securities 
Buyback of Government securities is a process where by the 
Government of India buys back their existing securi ties from the 
holders.   
3.   Cash Management 
Bills (CMBs) 
 
The CMBs have the generic character of T-bills but are issued for 
maturities less than 91 days. The tenure, notified amount and date 
of issue of the CMBs depends upon the temporary cas h 
requirement of the Government. Investment in CMBs i s also 
reckoned as an eligible investment in Government se curities by 
banks for SLR purpose under Section 24 of the Banki ng 
Regulation Act, 1949.  
4.   Competitive Bidding 
 
Competitive bidding is a process in which an invest or bids at a 
specific price / yield and is allotted securities i f the price / yield 
quoted is within the cut-off price / yield.  
5.   Consolidated Fund of 
India 
The fund constituted under Article 266 (1) of the C onstitution of 
India into which all receipts, revenues and loans f low. It consists 
of two main divisions, namely, Revenue Account (Rev enue 
Receipts and Revenue Expenditure) and Capital Accou nt (Public 
Debt and Loans, etc.). 
6.   Currency Risk 
 
The risk of loss from an adverse movement in exchan ge rates 
between the time of purchase and the time of sale o f a currency 
position / security.  
7.   Dated Government 
Securities 
 
Dated Government securities are long term securitie s and carry a 
fixed or floating  coupon (interest rate) which is paid on the face 
value, payable at fixed time periods (usually half-yearly).  
8.   Debt Service Payments made to creditor(s) towards matured principal amount 
and interest.  It usually includes service charges,  commitment 
charges etc. 
9.   Devolvement Devolvement is a process whereby if an investment i ssue is 
undersubscribed, an underwriter is required to subs cribe to the 
remaining securities / bonds. The outstanding unsub scribed 
amount devolves onto the underwriter. 
 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 62  
Sl. No. Term Description 
10.   FIMMDA 
 
Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Associati on of 
India (FIMMDA), a Company incorporated under sectio n 25 of 
the Companies Act, 1956, has members representing a ll major 
institutional segments of the market. FIMMDA releas es rates of 
various Government securities that are used by mark et 
participants for valuation purposes.  
11.   Fiscal Deficit It means the excess of total disbur sements, from the Consolidated 
Fund of India, excluding repayment of debt, over to tal receipts 
into the Fund (excluding the debt receipts), during  a financial 
year.    
12.   Fixed Rate Bonds  These are bonds on which the coupon rate is fixed f or the entire 
life of the bond 
13.   Floating Rate Bonds 
 
Floating Rate Bonds are securities which do not hav e a fixed 
coupon rate. The coupon is re-set at pre-announced intervals 
(say, every six months or one year) by adding a spr ead over a 
base rate.  
14.   Government Security 
 
A Government security is a tradable instrument issu ed by the 
Central Government or the State Governments. It ack nowledges 
the Government’s debt obligation. 
15.   Impact Cost Impact cost represents the cost of exe cuting a transaction in a 
given stock, for a specific predefined order size, at any given 
point of time.  
16.   Indexed Bonds These are bonds, the principal and coupon of which is linked to 
an accepted index of inflation with a view to prote cting the 
holder from inflation. 
17.   Interest Rate Risk 
 
The risk faced by an entity holding a debt portfoli o on account of 
adverse movements in interest rates.  
18.   Market clearing rate Market clearing rate is the rate at which the quant ity supplied 
equals the quantity demanded. 
19.   Market Risk  
 
Market risk is the exposure that arises as a conseq uence of 
movement in market price of assets and positions wh ich can be 
traded in a defined market.  
20.   Maturity Buckets Maturity bucket denotes the period of residual matu rity of a 
security.  
21.   Maturity Date The date when the principal (face va lue) is paid back 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 63  
 
Sl. No. Term Description 
22.   Monetary Policy  The procedures by which Governmen ts or the Central Banks try 
to affect macroeconomic conditions by influencing t he supply of 
money.  
23.   Multiple/Uniform price 
based auction 
In a Uniform price auction, all the successful bidders are required 
to pay for the allotted quantity of securities at t he same rate, i.e., 
at the auction cut-off rate, irrespective of the rate quoted by them. 
On the other hand, in a multiple price auction, the  successful 
bidders are required to pay for the allotted quanti ty of security at 
the respective price/yield at which they have bid. 
24.   Multilateral and 
Bilateral Debt  
 
Multilateral debt is debt contracted from multilate ral institutions 
such as the International Development Association ( IDA), 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Developme nt (IBRD), 
Asian Development bank (ADB) etc. Bilateral debt is  contracted 
from sovereign countries.  
25.   Non-Competitive 
Bidding  
 
Non – competitive bidding is a process by which inv estors can 
participate in the auction process without mentioni ng a specific 
price / yield. Such bidders are allotted securities  at the weighted 
average price / yield of the auction 
26.   Open Market 
Operations (OMOs) 
 
OMOs are the market operations conducted by the Res erve Bank 
of India by way of sale/ purchase of Government sec urities to/ 
from the market with an objective to adjust the rup ee liquidity 
conditions in the market on a durable basis.  
27.   Price based 
auction/yield based 
auction  
A price based auction is conducted when GOI reissue s securities 
issued  earlier. Bidders quote in terms of price per ` 100 of  face 
value of the security (e.g., ` 102.00, ` 101.00, ` 100.00, ` 99.00 
etc. per ` 100) bids are arranged in decending order and the 
successful bidders are those who have bid at or abo ve the cut-off 
price. A yield based auction is generally conducted  when a new 
government security is issued. Investors bid in yie ld terms up to 
two decimal places (e.g., 8.19 percent, 8.20 percen t, etc.). Bids 
are arranged in ascending order and cut-off yield i s arrived at the 
yield corresponding to the notified amount of the a uction. The 
cut-off yield is taken as a coupon rate of security .  Successful 
bidders are those who have bid at or below the cut-off price. 
28.   Primary Dealers 
 
Primary dealers are a group of highly qualified fin ancial firms/ 
banks who are appointed to play the role of special ist 
intermediaries in the government security market be tween the 
issuer on the one hand and the market on the other to accomplish 
the objective of meeting the government borrowing n eeds as 
cheaply and efficiently as possible.  

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 64  
Sl. No. Term Description 
29.   Public Account All moneys other than those include d in the Consolidated Fund, 
received by or on behalf of Government of India, ar e credited to 
the Public Account of India [Article 266 (2) of the  Constitution 
of India]. It includes transactions relating to ‘de bt’ other than 
those included in the Consolidated Fund of India. Public Account 
transactions are not subject to vote/appropriation by Parliament 
and the balances are carried forward. 
30.   Public Debt Office 
(PDO) 
Public Debt Office of the Reserve Bank of India act s as the 
registry / depository of Government securities and deals with the 
issue, interest payment and repayment of principal at maturity 
31.   Refinancing/Rollover 
Risks 
The risk associated with the redemption and renewal  of 
government debt. 
32.   Repo Repo is an instrument for borrowing funds by sellin g securities 
with an agreement to repurchase the said securities  on a mutually 
agreed future date at an agreed price which include s interest for 
the fund borrowed. 
33.   Reverse Repo 
 
Reverse Repo is lending funds against purchasing se curities with 
an agreement to resell the said securities on a mut ually agreed 
future date at an agreed price which includes inter est for the fund 
lent. 
34.   Residual Maturity 
 
The remaining period until maturity date of a secur ity is its 
residual maturity. For example, a security issued f or an original 
term to maturity of 10 years, after 2 years, will h ave a residual 
maturity of 8 years. 
35.   Secondary Market 
 
The market in which outstanding securities are trad ed. This 
market is different from the primary or initial mar ket where 
securities are sold for the first time. Secondary m arket refers to 
the buying and selling that goes on after the initi al public sale of 
the security. 
36.   Special Securities  
 
These are Securities issued by the Government of India to entities 
like Oil Marketing Companies, Fertilizer Companies,  the Food 
Corporation of India, etc. as compensation to these  companies in 
lieu of cash subsidies, with a spread of about 20-2 5 basis points 
over the yield of the dated securities of comparable maturity.  
37.   Stress Test A method of risk analysis in which sim ulations are used to 
estimate the impact of worst case situations. 
Sl. No. Term Description 
38.   Target Balance The minimum balance which should be  kept in the Government 

Report No. 16 of 2016 
 65  
 
 
 
 
account with the Central Bank on a given date. 
39.   Treasury Bills  
(T-bills) 
 
Treasury bills or T-bills are short term debt instruments issued by 
the Government of India and are presently issued in  three tenors, 
namely, 91 day, 182 day and 364 day. Treasury bills  are zero 
coupon securities and pay no interest.  
40.   Treasury Single 
Account (TSA) 
TSA (Treasury Single Account) is a unified structur e of 
government bank accounts that gives a consolidated view of 
government cash resources. Based on the principle o f unity of 
cash and the unity of treasury, a TSA is a bank account or a set of 
linked accounts through which the government transa cts all its 
receipts and payments. The principle of unity follo ws from the 
fungibility of all cash irrespective of its end use. 
41.   Underwriting The arrangement by which investment bankers underta ke to 
acquire any unsubscribed portion of a primary issua nce of a 
security. 
42.   Ways and Means 
Advance (WMA)  
Advances to the Government made by the central bank . These 
are made when necessary, if Government expenditure runs in 
advance of receipts from taxation plus receipts from borrowings. 
43.   Weighted Average 
Price/ Yield 
It is the weighted average mean of the price/yield where weight 
being the amount used at that price/yield.  
44.   Yield The annual percentage rate of return earned on a security. Yield 
is a function of a security’s purchase price and co upon interest 
rate.  