 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
on  
 
 
e-Auction of Coal Mines  
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government  
Ministry of Coal  
Report No. 20 of 2016 
(Compliance Audit) 

i 
 
 CONTENTS 
Chapter/Title     Page No. 
 
Preface iii 
 
Executive Summary v to x           
 
Chapter 1 -      Introduction  
1.1          Background 1 
1.2          Sequence of Events 2 
1.3          Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 2014 2 
1.4          Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rules, 2014 3 
 
Chapter 2 -     The e-Auction: Design and Process  
2.1          Classification and Earmarking of Coal Mines/Blocks 4 
2.2          Valuation of Coal Mines 4 
2.3      Information Provided by the Prior Allottee s 5 
2.4          Prioritisation of Coal Mines for Auction 5 
2.5          Payment of Additional Levy 5 
2.6          Standard Tender Documents/ Tender Documents  6 
2.7          Auction Process  6 
2.8          Approval of MOC for Declaring the Successful Bidder 9 
2.9          Signing of Coal Mine Development and Production  Agreement 9 
2.10        Issue of Vesting Order 9 
2.11        Post Vesting Order Obligation of the Successful Bidder 10 
2.12        Role of Various Stake Holders 10 
2.13        Results of e-Auction  12 
 
Chapter 3 -     Audit Approach  
3.1         Audit Objectives 13 
3.2         Methodology  and Scope of Audit 13 
3.3         Sources of Audit Criteria 14 
3.4         The e-Auction Mechanism 14 
3.5         Acknowledgement 14 
 
Chapter 4 -      Valuation of Coal Mines  
4.1         Computation of Intrinsic Value by CMPDIL 15 
4.2         Valuation of Coking Coal Mine          19 
4.3         Non-Inclusion of Mine Closure Plans in Mine Dossiers          23 
 

ii 
 
 
Chapter 5 -      The e-Auction  
5.1          Ranking and Qualification of Bidders 24 
5.2          Technical Disqualification of a Bidder 27 
5.3          Re-examination of Selected Cases by MOC 29 
5.4           e-Auction of Power Sector Coal Mines  31 
 
Chapter 6 -    The e-Auction Platform  
6.1          Introduction 39 
6.2          Design of e-Auction Platform 39 
6.3          IT System Infrastructure 40 
6.4          Audit Findings 40 
 
Chapter 7 -      Operationalisation of Coal Mines  
7.1          Status of Operationalisation of the Successfully Auctioned Coal Mines          43 
7.2          Status of Remaining Schedule II Coal Mines 43 
7.3          Status of Remaining Schedule III Coal Mines 45 
7.4          MOC’s Reply and Comments         46 
 
Chapter 8 -     Monitoring Mechanism  
8.1          Introduction 47 
8.2          Monitoring by Nominated Authority 48 
8.3          Monitoring by Coal Controller’s Organisation 50 
8.4          Imposition and Collection of Additional Levy 53 
8.5          Compliance with Mine Closure Plans  53 
8.6          Other Significant Issues 54 
 
Chapter 9 -     Conclusion  56 
 
Annexures  
Annexure I to IX I to XXXI 
 
Abbreviations A-I 
 
Glossary G-I to G-II 
 
 

 
iii 
 
 
Preface 
 
This report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India has been prepared for submission to 
the President of India under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the 
Parliament. 
The report, covering the coal mines auctioned 
in the first two tranches in February 2015 and Marc h 
2015, contains the results of the analysis of the            
e-auction from the stage of design of the e-auction  
mechanism to the stage of production of coal and 
monitoring thereof.    
 

 
v 
 
Executive Summary 
Background 
The Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India  in the Performance Audit (PA) 
Report No. 7 of 2012-13 highlighted lack of transpa rency and objectivity in the allocation 
of coal blocks by the Central Government. The Hon’b le Supreme Court of India in its 
judgment on a writ petition, held that the allotmen ts of coal blocks were arbitrary and 
illegal and vide its order of 24 September 2014 cancelled the allocation of 204 coal blocks 
- 42 coal blocks under ‘producing’ and ‘ready to pr oduce’ category were cancelled from 
31 March 2015 and the remaining 162 coal blocks wer e cancelled from 24 September 
2014. The allottees of the 42 coal blocks were requ ired to pay an amount of `295 per 
metric tonne (PMT) of coal extracted till 31 March 2015, as an additional levy.  
As Government of India (GoI) wanted to re-allocate the 204 coal blocks cancelled by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, a legal framework t hrough the Coal Mines (Special 
Provisions) Act, 2015 (preceded by the two Ordinanc es of October 2014 and December 
2014) and the Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rules, 2014  (the Rules) was laid down.  
The Act provided for allocation of the cancelled co al blocks through public auction for 
specified end uses (SEUs) or allotment to Governmen t companies. The SEUs were 
grouped under ‘power’ and ‘non-regulated’ (Iron and  Steel, Cement and Captive Power 
Plant) sector categories. The Rules laid down enabl ing provisions for carrying out the 
auction and allotment processes and prescribed e-au ction comprising of technical and 
financial parameters as the process for conducting auctions, among others. Rules were 
followed by issue of standard tender documents (STD ) prescribing the conditions and the 
process for e-auction of the coal mines.  
Prior to allocation of the cancelled coal blocks, t he Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) approved the “Methodology for fixing  floor price and reserve price for 
coal mines/blocks proposed to be auctioned/allotted ” which was notified by the Ministry 
of Coal (MOC) in December 2014. The methodology als o provided for fixation of a 
ceiling price for power sector coal mines/blocks, w hich was to be Coal India Limited 
(CIL) notified price for the equivalent grade of co al. On the basis of the said 
methodology, the Central Mine Planning and Design I nstitute Limited (CMPDIL) 
calculated the intrinsic value based on the net pre sent value (NPV) and the corresponding 
floor and additional reserve price of the coal mines/blocks.  

 
vi 
 
The STD for power sector and non-regulated sector c oal mines prescribed a two stage 
bidding methodology viz. Stage I and Stage II. The Stage I bidding comprised of 
submitting technical bid providing details regardin g compliance with the eligibility 
conditions; and financial bid specifying the initia l price offer (IPO). In the case of non-
regulated sector coal mines, the IPO was to be high er than the floor price and in case of 
power sector coal mines the IPO was to be lower tha n the ceiling price. The bidders who 
qualified on the basis of Stage I bidding submitted  their final price offer (FPO) at Stage II 
bidding (e-auction), which was carried out online o n the platform for e-auction provided 
by MSTC Limited on its website. 
Audit objectives and scope of audit 
Audit was conducted to ascertain the robustness and  efficacy of the design adopted for 
allocation of coal mines through e-auction and prop er implementation of the planned e-
auction process/procedures and that the e-auction w as conducted in a fair and transparent 
manner. 
While the Audit examination was limited to the coal  mines e-auctioned in the first two 
tranches, for the purpose of a comprehensive analys is of the e-auction and the mines 
allocated thereof, Audit has covered the allocation s from the stage of design of the e-
auction mechanism to the stage of production of coal and monitoring thereof. 
Major Audit Findings  
It was observed in audit that the new mechanism for  e-auction of coal mines was an 
improvement over the earlier system and attempted t o incorporate the principles of 
objectivity, transparency and fairness in allocatio n of natural resources to private sector 
participants. However, Audit observed that there we re some systemic and procedural 
issues, which needed to be addressed for further im provement in the e-auction 
mechanism, as mentioned below: 
• Computation of intrinsic value of coal mines based on NPV required projections of 
cash flows, which in turn was dependent upon projec tions of revenue and costs 
(capital and revenue) associated with functioning o f the concerned coal mine. Audit 
examined the records relating to computation of int rinsic value of 29 coal mines by 
CMPDIL. It was noticed that inconsistencies and ina ccuracies in following some of 
the assumptions and various errors in computation o f intrinsic values cumulatively 
resulted in under determination of upfront amounts in 15 coal mines, under 

 
vii 
 
determination of floor prices in six non-regulated sector coal mines and revised fixed 
rates in all nine power sector coal mines. 
(Para 4.1) 
• Moitra coal mine contained 97 per cent coking coal out of its total coal reserves. It 
was washery grade coking coal, which was to be supp lied to steel plant/s mainly for 
steel production and was to be washed for utilisati on in the steel plant. There was 
provision for installation of washery in the MOC ap proved mine plan also. Though 
CIL did not notify the prices of washed coking coal , CIL’s subsidiaries were selling 
washed coking coal at a much higher price than the notified price of raw coking coal. 
However, price of washed coking coal along with the  capital cost of washery and 
related expenditure were not considered for calcula tion of intrinsic value of this mine. 
CMPDIL should have flagged the issue while carrying  out the valuation and the 
matter should have been referred to the CCEA for reconsideration. Otherwise, keeping 
in mind the spirit of CCEA’s approval, the price at  which CIL’s subsidiaries were 
selling washed coking coal, should have been consid ered for calculation of intrinsic 
value, the absence of which resulted in under deter mination of upfront amount and 
floor price of the mine. 
(Para 4.2) 
• Clause 3.3.2 of the STD provided that the technical ly qualified bidders (TQBs), which 
held first 50 per cent  of the ranks or five TQBs, whichever was higher, w ould be 
considered as qualified for participating in the e- auction as qualified bidders (QBs). 
Simultaneously, Clause 4.1.1 of the STD provided th at a joint venture (JV) company 
formed by two or more companies having a common SEU  and which were 
independently eligible to bid in accordance with th e Act, would be eligible to 
participate in the e-auction. Audit noted that in 1 1 out of the 29 coal mines 
successfully auctioned during the 1 st and 2 nd tranche, QBs ranging between two and 
three were from the same company/parent-subsidiary company coalition/JV coalition. 
Audit could not draw an assurance that the potential level of competition was achieved 
during the Stage II bidding of these 11 coal mines auctioned in the first two tranches.  
MOC subsequently amended Clause 4.1.1 in June 2015 with the objective of 
increasing the overall competition, for the coal mines auctioned in the 3rd tranche. 
 (Para 5.1) 
 

 
viii 
 
• In terms of the STD, in the event that a bidder was  a prior allottee, then it must have 
paid the additional levy within the time period pre scribed for participating in the e-
auction of coal mines. The Second Ordinance issued on 26 December 2014, amended 
the definition of the ‘prior allottee’ explaining t hat in case a mining lease has been 
executed in favour of a third party, then, the third party shall be deemed to be the prior 
allottee. However, in the auction of Sarisatolli an d Trans Damodar coal mines, which 
were put up for auction on 27 December 2014, West B engal Power Development 
Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) was disqualified (Febr uary 2015) for non-payment 
of additional levy. This was done despite the fact that for the coal mines for which 
WBPDCL was held as defaulter, the prior allottee, a s per the amended definition, was 
a JV company i.e. Bengal Emta Coal Mines. Therefore , this disqualification was not 
as per the existing provisions.  
(Para 5.2) 
• The Nominated Authority (NA) recommended preferred bidder to the Central 
Government for declaration of successful bidders, a s per the provisions of the Coal 
Mines (Special Provisions) Rules 2014. These Rules empowered the Central 
Government to direct NA to issue vesting order for the coal  mine in favour of the 
successful bidder or provide such other binding dir ections to NA as deemed 
appropriate. After NA made recommendations for pref erred bidder for 32 coal mines, 
MOC returned the cases of eight coal mines for re-e xamination. After submission of 
results of re-examination carried out on various pa rameters by NA, MOC examined 
these eight cases and rejected recommendation of NA  for declaration of the ‘Preferred 
Bidder’ as ‘Successful Bidder’ in respect of three coal mines. While not commenting 
on any individual case, Audit is of the view that b road guidelines incorporating the 
parameters to be applied by NA and by MOC for evalu ation of final bid prices would 
enhance transparency of the bidding process and may eliminate avoidable litigation. 
(Para 5.3) 
• Objectives of auction of coal mines for power secto r were to augment power 
production for benefit of the economy and to provid e cheaper coal to the power sector 
for benefit of consumers of power. Audit is of the view that in the light of 
vulnerabilities like stipulations regarding non-recovery of various charges from power 
consumers, weaknesses in the monitoring system and bank guarantee not being valid 

 
ix 
 
for the life of the mine, the risk of non-complianc e with contractual obligations was 
high. These may affect the sustainability of the model adversely in the long run.    
(Para 5.4.1) 
• The CCEA approved methodology allowed sale of 15 per cent  of the generation 
capacity linked to the allotted coal mine on mercha nt basis, where the electricity tariff 
was not regulated. It also provided that coal utili sed for generation of merchant power 
was to cost more than the coal used for generation of electricity to be sold at regulated 
rates. After the introduction of reverse then forwa rd bidding, concept of payment of 
additional premium was introduced. However, the payment of additional premium was 
specifically excluded for the quantum of coal utili sed for generation of power sold on 
merchant basis. This resulted in a scenario where t he power producers would be 
paying lesser amount to the Government on utilisati on of coal for producing power to 
be sold on merchant basis as compared to the coal u tilised for production of power to 
be sold under the power purchase agreements (PPAs),  which appeared to be not in 
consonance with the CCEA approval. 
(Para 5.4.2) 
• The e-auction process was carried out on the online  e-auction platform provided by 
MSTC. Audit noticed that the audit trail was inadeq uate in the system and the system 
did not provide for linking specified end use plant (SEUP) with the registration ids.  
(Para 6.4.1 and 6.4.2) 
• Early auctioning of the coal mines in the first two  tranches was taken up so that these 
could be brought under production speedily, as they  were already producing/likely to 
produce/at an advanced stage of their statutory cle arances at the time of their de-
allocation. Though efforts were being made by the G overnment to start production 
from the successfully auctioned coal mines, only in 11 out of 26 coal mines, for which 
vesting orders were issued, production could be sta rted/mine opening permission was 
issued. In the remaining coal mines, production cou ld not commence as various 
statutory clearances/approvals were pending at the Central Government level, State 
Governments level and also at the level of allottee s themselves. Delay in 
operationalisation of these coal mines had the pote ntial to adversely affect an 
important objective of early auctioning of these co al mines, which was to ensure 
continuity in coal production thereby minimising ad verse impact on core sectors such 
as steel, cement and power utilities.  
(Para 7.1 to 7.4) 
 

 
x 
 
• The provisions of Coal Mine Development and Product ion Agreement laid down 
various terms and conditions for extraction and uti lisation of coal and therefore, there 
was a need for strong and effective monitoring syst em. However, it was noticed in 
Audit that the monitoring mechanism at NA was under  process of evolution. There 
was lack of clarity on the roles and responsibiliti es for various aspects of monitoring 
of the e-auctioned mines at the Coal Controller’s O rganisation (CCO), which was 
further accentuated by the weaknesses in the system , processes and resources at their 
disposal. 
 
(Para 8.2, 8.3.1 and 8.5) 
• There was a mismatch in eight cases between the pro duction quantity submitted by 
prior allottees of the coal mines to State Governme nts vis-à-vis production quantity 
submitted to CCO. There was no mechanism to cross c heck the production figures 
given by the prior allottees indicating absence of regular monitoring and inspection of 
coal mines, which was one of the important activiti es of CCO. Further, additional 
levy of `3536.56 crore was pending from the prior allottees.  
(Para 8.3.2 and 8.4) 
• The Act provided that the allottee may use the coal  from an allocated coal mine for 
any plant of the company or its subsidiary company,  engaged in common specified 
end uses after providing written intimation (divers ion notice) to the Central 
Government. Further, power sector coal mines were a uctioned with the objective of 
providing cheaper power to the consumers. In such a  scenario it was important to 
ensure that the benefit of the low cost of diverted  coal was passed on to the 
consumers of the power produced by the ‘other power  plants’. However, Audit could 
not draw an assurance that a system existed/had bee n put in place to ensure that the 
diversion details are sent timely to the concerned authorities to ensure passing of 
benefit of cheaper coal to the consumers. 
 (Para 8.6.1) 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
1 
 
Chapter 1 -  Introduction 
 
1.1  Background 
Coal is a natural mineral and one of the largest so urces of energy in the world. It is used as a 
fuel for generation of electricity and for industri al purposes such as refining metals etc. The 
Indian Constitution has put mines and mineral devel opment at entry 54 of the List I of 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, i.e. Union Li st. Therefore, the Parliament is competent 
to legislate for its regulation. Between 1993 and 2 011, the Central Government allocated 218 
coal blocks through the Screening Committee 1 route and through Government dispensation 
route 2. The Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India in its Performance Audit (PA) 
Report No. 7 of 2012-13 for the year ended March 20 12 highlighted the issues of lack of 
transparency and objectivity in the allocation proc ess of coal blocks and financial gains of 
`1.86 lakh crore to the private parties, a part of w hich could have been tapped by the 
Government by taking timely decision on competitive  bidding for allocation of coal blocks. 
The said report of C&AG of India was under examination of the Public Accounts Committee. 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in its judgment 3 (25 August 2014) held that the 
allotment of coal blocks made by the Screening Comm ittee of the Government of India (GoI) 
since 1993, as also the allotments made through the  Government dispensation route, were 
arbitrary and illegal. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Supr eme Court pronounced its order on 24 
September 2014 and cancelled the allocation of 204 coal blocks. Cancellation in case of 42 
coal blocks under ‘producing’ and ‘ready to produce ’  category was to take effect from 
31 March 2015. The remaining 162 coal blocks stood cancelled from the date of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court’s order. The allottees of the 42 coal blocks were required to pay an amount of 
`295 per metric tonne (PMT) of coal extracted till 31 March 2015, as an additional levy.  
After the cancellation of the allocation of the coa l blocks by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
September 2014, the GoI, within a short span of tim e, laid down the framework and 
successfully auctioned 29 coal mines in two tranches by March 2015.  
                                                 
1  The Screening Committee consisting of Additional Sec retary, Ministry of Coal (MOC) and Advisor (Projects) , MOC, 
Joint Secretary, and Financial Advisor, representat ives of Ministry of Railways, Power and the concerne d State 
Government as member was constituted by the Governm ent of India (GoI) in July 1992 for screening propo sals received 
for captive mining by the private power generation companies.  
2  The direct allocation of coal blocks made by MOC for Public Sector Enterprises for captive use or commercial mining was 
termed as Government dispensation route.  
3  Manohar Lal Sharma V/s the Principal Secretary & Others (Writ Petition (CRL.) No. 120 of 2012) 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
2 
1.2  Sequence of Events 
The sequence of events, subsequent to cancellation of allocation of 204 coal blocks by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court, was as given below: 
Table 1 :  Sequence of Events 
Date Event 
21 October 2014 
Promulgation of Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Ord inance, 2014 to 
empower the Government to re-allocate 204 coal bloc ks cancelled by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court  
29  October 2014 
Pursuant to Section 6 of the Ordinance, the GoI app ointed Nominated 
Authority (NA) to take all the necessary action for  allocation of cancelled 
coal blocks 
11  December 2014 Notification of Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rul es, 2014 to 
operationalise provisions of the said Ordinance  
26  December 2014 Promulgation of the Coal Mines (Special Provisions)  Second Ordinance, 
2014  
27  December 2014 Uploading of Standard Tender Document (STD) on MSTC  Limited  
website  
14  February 2015 – 
22  February 2015 Auction for 1 st   tranche 
04  March 2015 – 
13 March 2015 Auction for 2 nd  tranche 
30  March 2015 Notification of Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015  
1.3  Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 2014 
Government of India (GoI) promulgated (21 October 2 014) an Ordinance ‘The Coal Mines 
(Special Provisions) Ordinance, 2014’ with the obje ctive to re-allocate 204 coal blocks 
cancelled by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and ensure s mooth transfer of right, title and 
interests in the mine along with its land and other  associated mining infrastructure to the new 
allottee to be selected through an auction or allot ment to Government companies, as the case 
may be. The Ordinance provided the legal framework for allocation of the cancelled coal 
blocks.  
GoI introduced a Bill in the Parliament to replace the Ordinance. The Bill was passed in the 
Lok Sabha and was pending in the Rajya Sabha. There fore, GoI promulgated the Coal Mines 
(Special Provisions) Second Ordinance, 2014 on 26 D ecember 2014. Subsequently, the Bill 
was passed by the Parliament and after receipt of a ssent of the President, the Coal Mines 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
3 
 
(Special Provisions) Act, 2015 (the Act) was notifi ed on 30 March 2015. It was deemed to 
have come into force from 21 October 2014. 
The Ordinance/Act was promulgated/ passed: 
• to ensure continuity in coal mining operations and production of coal, and for promoting 
optimum utilisation of coal resources consistent wi th the requirement of the country in 
national interest, and 
• to take immediate action to allocate coal mines to successful bidders and allottees keeping 
in view the energy security of the country and to m inimise any impact on core sectors 
such as steel, cement and power utilities, which ar e vital for the development of the 
nation.  
1.4  Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rules, 2014 
For carrying out the provisions of the Ordinance pr omulgated in October 2014 for auction of 
the coal mines, GoI notified Coal Mines (Special Pr ovisions) Rules, 2014 (the Rules) on 11 
December 2014. The Rules laid down enabling provisi ons for carrying out the auction and 
allotment processes and prescribed e-auction compri sing of technical and financial 
parameters as the process for conducting auctions, among others. 
  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
4 
Chapter 2 -  The e-Auction: Design and Process 
The legal framework for allocation of cancelled coa l blocks was provided through the Coal 
Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015 (preceded by t he two Ordinances in October 2014 and 
December 2014), Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rul es, which were followed by issue of 
Standard Tender Document (STD). Within this framewo rk, the prescribed system of auction 
of coal mines is as follows:  
2.1  Classification and Earmarking of Coal Mines/Blocks 
The Act contained three Schedules, each containing a list of coal mines/blocks: 
• Schedule I was the master schedule, containing list of all the 204 cancelled mines/blocks. 
• Schedule II  had 42 coal mines/blocks, which were producing/ready to produce. 
• Schedule III  had 32 coal mines/blocks, which were at an advance d stage of their 
statutory clearances.  
The Act provided for two methods of allocation of the cancelled coal mines. These were:  
• Public auction for specified end uses (SEUs) viz. g eneration of power/ captive power; 
production of iron/steel/cement. Those SEUs were gr ouped under ‘power’ and ‘non-
regulated’ sector categories. 
• Allotment to a Government company or corporation or  to a joint venture between two or 
more Government companies or corporations or to a company which had been awarded a 
power project (including ultra mega power projects).  
Ministry of Coal (MOC) constituted an Inter-Ministe rial Technical Committee (IMTC) on 
29 October 2014 to formulate criteria for earmarkin g of mines for (i) auction and allotment; 
(ii) classification under power and non-regulated s ectors; (iii) suggesting transfer of coal 
mines from Schedule I to Schedule III.  
2.2  Valuation of Coal Mines 
Valuation of coal mines was necessary before alloca tion of the cancelled coal blocks. 
Accordingly, MOC prescribed a methodology for fixin g (i) floor price for auction for non-
regulated sector coal mines and (ii) reserve price for auction of power sector coal mines. The 
methodology provided for calculation of the intrins ic value of the coal mines/blocks for the 
purpose of fixation of the floor and reserve price.  A minimum rate of `150 per tonne for the 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
5 
 
floor price and `100 per tonne (fixed) for the reserve price was pre scribed. The methodology 
also provided for fixation of a ceiling price for p ower sector coal mines, which was to be 
Coal India Limited (CIL) notified price for the equ ivalent grade of coal. Bidding for the non-
regulated sector coal mines/blocks was to start fro m the floor price. For the power sector coal 
mines, reserve price was to be paid by the successf ul bidders for the coal extracted and 
bidding for these mines was to start below the ceiling price.  
The methodology for valuation also provided that th e successful allottees of the coal mines 
would also have to make payment of 10 per cent  of the intrinsic value as upfront payment.  
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) carried out detailed exercise 
for calculation of intrinsic value and correspondin g floor and additional reserve price 4 of the 
coal mines. 
2.3  Information Provided by Prior Allottees 
The prior allottees provided the approved mining pl an and other details related to various 
clearances and approvals taken and land acquired et c. The exercise of earmarking, 
classification and valuation was carried out on the  basis of data and information relating to 
individual coal mine (including extractable reserve s, grade of coal) as provided by the prior 
allottees.  
2.4  Prioritisation of Coal Mines for Auction 
Coal mines were prioritised for auction as detailed below:  
• 1st  tranche: 20 out of the 42 Schedule II coal mines ( earmarked for auction), which were 
either producing or ready to produce.  
• 2nd  tranche: 18 out of the 32 Schedule III coal mines (earmarked for auction). 
2.5  Payment of Additional Levy 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court’s order dated 24 Septembe r 2014 provided for payment of 
‘additional levy’ by the prior allottees of the can celled coal blocks @ `295 PMT of coal 
extracted. This was also a pre-condition for any pr ior allottee to participate in the e-auction 
process for any of the coal mines.  
                                                 
4  The reserve price was fixed @ `100 per tonne in the methodology and the additional  reserve price was the price, based on 
the intrinsic value of coal mine (minimum `150 per tonne), which was required to be paid by th e allottee for quantum of 
coal used for merchant sale of power.  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
6 
2.6  Standard Tender Documents/Tender Documents  
An approach paper was prepared by MOC for finalisin g the process of e-auction and was put 
in public domain for comments and feedback. The STD s were prepared and finalised after 
incorporating the views of various stakeholders on the approach paper and the views of  
CIL/its legal counsel. Thereafter, the tender docum ents for individual coal mines were 
uploaded on the website of MSTC Limited (the servic e provider for conducting e-auction  
of coal mines). 
2.7  Auction Process  
 
2.7.1  Coal Mines Earmarked for Power Sector 
Coal mines earmarked for power sector were auctioned with the twin objectives of increasing 
the generation of power along with providing cheape r coal for the benefit of consumers of 
power. In this context, the STD for power sector co al mines, issued on 27 December 2014, 
prescribed a two stage bidding methodology viz. Stage I and Stage II.  
2.7.1.1  Stage I Bidding 
The Stage I bidding comprised of submitting two envelopes containing: 
•  Technical bid, in which the bidders were required to provide details regarding 
compliance with the eligibility conditions; and 
•  Financial bid, to the extent of specifying the initial price offer (IPO), which was not to be 
higher than the ceiling price 5;  
o The financial bid was the run of mine (ROM) cost i. e. which the bidders were 
allowed to charge the power consumers as energy cha rges under the power purchase 
agreements (PPA). 
Thereafter, on 31 January 2015 MOC issued corrigend um No.3 to the STD, which amended 
the condition relating to the submission of the fin ancial bid upto the extent of specifying the 
IPO. The amendment provided that the IPO should be greater than or equal to INR 0  
(Indian Rupees Zero) and lower than the ceiling price .  
                                                 
5  The ceiling price for the coal mine was the CIL notified price for the equivalent grade of coal. 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
7 
 
After the technical bids were received, they were o pened at a pre specified date and venue in 
the presence of the participating bidders who wishe d to be present. A committee formed for 
the purpose, evaluated the technical bids. Those wh o qualified the technical evaluation were 
called as ‘Technically Qualified Bidders’ (TQB). 
Thereafter, IPOs of TQBs were opened and the TQBs w ere ranked on the basis of ascending 
IPOs. The TQBs quoting the lowest rates (holding first 50 per cent of the ranks or five TQBs, 
whichever was higher) were considered to be qualifi ed bidders (QBs), for participating in the 
e-auction in the Stage II bidding. The lowest IPO w as to be treated as the applicable ceiling 
price i.e. the maximum price below which reverse bidding in the Stage II would start. 
2.7.1.2  Stage II Bidding 
Stage II bidding was conducted by MSTC on pre decla red date and time. The QBs could 
submit their final price offer (FPO) as many times as they wished against the same coal mine 
during the scheduled time. The FPO (final reverse b id by a bidder) was the ROM cost i.e. 
which the bidders were allowed to charge the power consumers as energy charges under the 
power purchase agreements (PPA). 
The initial STD issued in December 2014 provided th at the QBs were to submit their bids 
(FPO) which were to be lower than the displayed low est bid by at least 
`2. The QB that 
submitted the lowest price offer during the e-aucti on process was to be declared as the 
“Preferred Bidder”.  
The corrigendum No. 3 to the STD (January 2015) cha nged the bidding methodology from 
‘reverse’ to ‘reverse then forward’. The amendment provided that in the event the applicable 
ceiling price was equal to 
` zero or during the Stage II bidding, a QB quoted ` zero, then the 
bidding would convert into a forward bidding. After  that the QBs were to quote an 
“additional premium” as their bid, which was an add itional payment for coal extracted from 
the coal mine, in addition to all other payments required to be made.  
The QB, which submitted the highest additional prem ium, was declared as the “preferred 
bidder” under the reverse then forward auction/bidding.  
Nominated Authority (NA) recommended name of the pr eferred bidder to Ministry of Coal 
(MOC) and on approval, the preferred bidder was declared as the “successful bidder”.  
 
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
8 
The successful bidder was required to make monthly payments to NA with respect to the coal  
extracted from the coal mine on the basis of `100 per tonne (the “fixed rate” i.e. the reserve 
price) plus the “additional premium”, if applicable , in addition to the applicable statutory 
levies. 
2.7.1.3  Provision for Sale of Power on Merchant Basis 
The STD also provided that the successful bidder co uld sell a maximum of 15 per cent  of the 
generation capacity of the specified end use plant (SEUP) as merchant 6 power. It also 
stipulated that the fixed rate of `100 per tonne would stand revised to ` XXX 7  for the 
quantum of coal utilised for generation of power so ld on merchant basis. The STD further 
stipulated that ‘additional premium’ was not payabl e on the quantum of coal utilised for 
generation of such power sold on merchant basis. 
2.7.2  Auction Process for Non-Regulated Sector Coal Mines 
The STD issued in December 2014 for non-regulated s ectors, prescribed a two stage bidding 
methodology viz. Stage I and Stage II. 
2.7.2.1  Stage I Bidding 
The Stage I bidding comprised of submitting two envelopes containing:  
•  Technical bid, in which the bidders were required to provide details regarding 
compliance with the eligibility conditions; and 
•  Financial bid to the extent of specifying the IPO,  which was to be not less than the floor 
price. 
After the technical bids were received, they were o pened at a pre specified date and venue in 
the presence of the participating bidders who wishe d to be present. A committee formed for 
the purpose, evaluated the technical bids. Those wh o qualified the technical evaluation were 
called as TQBs. 
Thereafter, the IPOs of TQBs were opened and the TQ Bs were ranked on the basis of 
descending IPOs. The TQBs quoting the highest rates  (holding first 50 per cent of the ranks 
or five TQBs, whichever was higher) were considered  to be qualified bidders (QBs), for 
participating in the e-auction in the Stage II bidd ing. The highest IPO was to be treated as the 
                                                 
6  Power sold outside the medium and long term PPAs contracted under Section 62/63 of the Electricity Act, 2003. 
7  Fixed for each coal mine separately on the basis of the intrinsic value of the coal mine. 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
9 
 
applicable floor price i.e. the minimum price above  which forward bidding in the Stage II 
would start.  
2.7.2.2  Stage II Bidding 
Stage II bidding was conducted by MSTC on pre decla red date and time. The QBs could 
submit their final price offer (FPO) as many times as they wished against the same coal mine 
during the scheduled time.  
The STD provided that the QBs were to submit their bids (FPO), which were to be higher 
than the displayed highest bid by at least 
`2. The QB that submitted the highest price offer 
during the e-auction process was to be declared as the “preferred bidder”.  
2.8  Approval of MOC for Declaring the Successful Bidder 
After completion of the bidding, NA sent its recomm endations in respect of the preferred 
bidder of each coal mine to MOC for approval, to de clare the preferred bidder as successful 
bidder. After receipt of such recommendation MOC may direct NA to issue a vesting order in 
favour of the successful bidder or may provide such  other binding directions to the NA as 
may be deemed appropriate.  
It was noticed from the records relating to auction  of coal mines in the first two tranches, 
MOC either gave its approval for declaring the pref erred bidder as successful bidders or 
returned the cases to NA for re-examination and giv ing its recommendations. In the scenario 
where cases were sent for re-examination, MOC, afte r taking cognizance of the 
recommendations of NA after such re-examination, ei ther gave its approval for declaring the 
preferred bidder as successful bidder or rejected the bids. 
2.9  Signing of Coal Mine Development and Production Agreement  
After declaration of successful bidder, NA executed  the Coal Mine Development and 
Production Agreement (CMDPA) with the successful bidder. 
2.10  Issue of Vesting Order 
The successful bidder was to pay a fixed amount for  the value of land and mine 
infrastructure, cost of preparation of geological report, cost of obtaining all statutory licenses, 
permits, permissions, approvals, clearances or cons ents relevant to the mining operations, the 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
10 
transaction expense 8 (collectively the ‘fixed amount’), performance sec urity and the first 
installment of upfront amount. 
Upon receipt of performance security and other paym ents, the vesting order was issued, by 
NA to the successful bidder. 
CMDPA for the coal mines auctioned in the 1
st  and 2nd  tranche provided that the performance 
security would remain valid till the coal mine achi eved the annual peak rated capacity. This 
was amended in the CMDPA of the coal mines auctione d in the 3 rd  tranche wherein it was 
stipulated that performance security would remain v alid (a) until the expiry of the period for 
which mining lease (including renewed mining lease)  has been granted or will be granted, or 
(b) until extractable reserves are remaining in the coal mine, whichever is earlier. 
2.11   Post Vesting Order Obligation of the Successful Bidder 
The Coal Mine Development and Production Agreement (CMDPA) stipulated various ‘post 
vesting obligations’ which included: 
• Submission of commencement plan within 30 business days of the date of vesting order; 
• Undertaking various activities for commencement of production of coal;  
• Making monthly payments on the basis of the FPO, in  addition to other statutory levies 
including royalty; 
• Provisions for various returns/information that the  successful bidder was required to 
furnish to NA and Coal Controller’s Organisation (CCO).  
2.12  Role of Various Stake Holders 
 
Details of the entities involved in the process of auctioning of the coal mines are given below. 
2.12.1  Ministry of Coal 
Role of Ministry of Coal (MOC) included: 
• Earmarking and classifying coal mines for auction/a llotment for power/non-regulated 
sector;  
• Issuing orders for the manner of allocation of the Schedule I coal mines;  
• Modifying Schedule III by adding any other Schedule I coal mine;  
• Giving approval for declaring preferred bidder as successful bidder. 
                                                 
8  A fixed amount of `1685400 towards cost and expenses incurred by the NA for conduct of auction process.  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
11 
 
2.12.2  Nominated Authority (NA) 
Government of India (GoI) appointed NA to act for a nd on behalf of GoI for the purposes 
relating to the e-auction process, whose role included: 
• Notifying the prior allottees to enable them to fur nish information required for notifying 
the particulars of coal mines to be auctioned;  
• Determining the floor price or reserve price in consultation with the Ministry;  
• Conducting the auction process with assistance of experts;  
• Executing the CMDPA;  
• Issuing vesting orders for transfer and vesting of coal mines pursuant to the auction.  
2.12.3   MSTC Limited (MSTC) 
NA engaged (11 December 2014) MSTC as the e-auction  service provider for conducting  
e-auction of the coal mines and entered into a Memo randum of Understanding (MoU) which 
was to remain valid for the period till the 204 coa l mines were allocated through e-auction 
and allotment.  
2.12.4   Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) 
MOC entrusted (October 2014) CMPDIL the work relating to preparation of the mine dossier 
for each mine identified by MOC. The mine dossier consisted of geological report, mine plan, 
mine closure plan and environmental and forest clearance. CMPDIL also determined intrinsic 
value/NPV and floor price of each mine as per guidelines/methodology issued by MOC. 
2.12.5  Coal Controller’s Organisation (CCO) 
The Coal Controller’s Organisation (CCO) is a subor dinate office under the administrative 
control of MOC. The functions of CCO, inter alia , included laying down procedure and 
standard for sampling of coal, inspection of collie ries so as to ensure correctness of the class, 
grade or size of coal, granting opening/re-opening permission of coal mine. In addition to the 
statutory functions, work relating to monitoring th e progress of captive coal mines and their 
associated end use projects were to be done by CCO.  
As per the Act and the Rules, MOC authorised (Decem ber 2014) CCO to collect the 
additional levy from the prior allottees of Schedul e II coal mines and deposit the same in the 
Government account.  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
12 
2.12.6  Transaction Advisor to NA 
Nominated Authority appointed (January 2015) SBI Ca pital Markets Limited as the 
Transaction Advisor (TA) to assist it on matters re lating to e-auction of coal mines which 
included computing the reserve/floor price; designi ng the auction process and arrange for 
submission of draft of notice inviting tender; allo tment and auctioning of coal mines in the 
time frame prescribed; drawing up CMDPA and vesting order.  
2.13  Results of e-Auction  
Summary of the coal mines put up for e-auction and successfully auctioned during 1st  and 2nd  
tranche is given in table 2 below. The details are given in Annexure I. 
Table 2 :  Summary of Coal Mines Auctioned during the 1 st and 2nd  Tranche 
Tranche 
No. of Coal mines put up for auction No. of Coal mines successfully auctioned 
Power Non-regulated Total Power Non-regulated Total 
1st  Tranche (All 
Schedule II) 06 14 20 05 11 16 
2nd  Tranche (All 
Schedule III) 05 13 18 04 09 13 
Total 11 27 38 9 20 29 
Analysis of the above table revealed that of the 38  coal mines put up for auction, 29 coal 
mines were successfully auctioned. Remaining mines were not successfully auctioned due to 
the reasons mentioned below: 
• Less than three technical bids were received in res pect of two coal mines each  
(non-regulated sector) of Schedule II and Schedule III;  
• Three coal mines (one of non-regulated sector and t wo of power sector) were cancelled 
by MOC due to non-receipt of fair value of coal; and  
• Two Schedule III coal mines (non-regulated sector) were withdrawn from the auction 
process by MOC. 
  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
13 
 
Chapter 3 -  Audit Approach 
 
3.1  Audit Objectives 
Audit was conducted to ascertain: 
• Robustness and efficacy of the design adopted for a llocation of coal mines through  
e-auction. 
• Proper implementation of the planned e-auction proc ess and procedures and that the  
e-auction was conducted in a fair and transparent manner. 
3.2  Methodology and Scope of Audit 
An entry meeting was held with Ministry of Coal (MO C) and Nominated Authority (NA) on 
28 May 2015, wherein the scope and objectives of au dit were discussed. Audit examined the 
coal mines e-auctioned in the first two tranches. A udit examined the records at MOC, NA, 
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL), MSTC, Coal Controller’s 
Organisation (CCO) and collected necessary document s from the other stakeholder 
Ministries/Department viz. Ministry of Power, the M inistry of Steel and the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion. During field audit , audit requisitions and audit queries were 
issued. Draft audit report, after duly incorporatin g the replies received, was issued to MOC 
on 08 January 2016. Modified draft audit report was  issued to MOC on 26 February 2016 
after considering the issues raised by MOC on 04 Fe bruary 2016. Reply of MOC on the 
modified draft audit report was received vide lette r dated 10 March 2016. An Exit 
Conference was held on 31 March 2016 with the Secre tary, MOC and other officers. 
Additional comments of MOC were received on 01 Apri l 2016. Replies and comments 
received from MOC and the views expressed during th e Exit Conference have been duly 
considered while finalising this report. Status of operationalisation of mines has been updated 
in the report on the basis of information received from MOC in May 2016. 
As per the scope of this audit, Audit covered the c oal mines auctioned in the first two 
tranches of the e-auction. For the purpose of a com prehensive analysis of the e-auction and 
the mines allocated thereof, Audit has covered the allocations from the stage of design of the 
e-auction mechanism to the stage of production of coal and monitoring thereof.  
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
14 
3.3  Sources of Audit Criteria 
The sources of audit criteria were as given below: 
• The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 2014 
• The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Second Ordinance, 2014 
• The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015 
• The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rules, 2014 
• The Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 
• Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 
• General Financial Rules, 2005  
• Orders/Circulars/Office Memoranda issued from time to time 
• Methodology issued for fixing floor/reserve price of coal mines 
• Contractual documents, tender documents and other relevant documents 
 
3.4  The e-Auction Mechanism 
Ministry of Coal laid down the new mechanism and ca rried out the 1 st  tranche of e-auction 
within five months of the Hon’ble Supreme Court jud gment cancelling the allocation of 204 
coal blocks. Audit appreciates the efforts made by MOC in planning and implementing a new 
paradigm of allocation of natural resources within this short span of time. As the mechanism 
has emerged, a substantial amount of financial reso urces has accrued/would accrue to the 
public exchequer from the mining activities carried out by the allottees of the coal mines.  
Audit of this new system of e-auction was conducted  and comments relating to the system 
and processes of the e-auction mechanism are given in this Report.  
3.5  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation provided by MOC , NA and all other stake holders viz. 
CMPDIL, MSTC and CCO. 
  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
15 
 
Chapter 4 -  Valuation of Coal Mines 
The methodology of valuation of coal mines had been  under consideration of Ministry of 
Coal (MOC) for some time. Prior to the de-allocatio n of 204 coal blocks by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in 2014, ‘auction by competitive bidd ing of coal mines rules, 2012’ was 
notified in February 2012 by MOC. Thereafter, MOC e ngaged (May 2012) M/s CRISIL 
Infrastructure Advisory (CRISIL) as consultant thro ugh Central Mine Planning and Design 
Institute Limited (CMPDIL), to formulate the method ology for calculation of floor and 
reserve price under these rules. Based on the sugge stions of CRISIL, MOC prescribed 
(November 2013) a methodology for calculating intri nsic value of the mine by computing its 
net present value (NPV) (based on discounted cash f low method). The final NPV (after 
subtracting 10 per cent intrinsic value as upfront payment) was then propos ed to be 
annuitised to become equal to a unit rate ( ` per tonne). The methodology also prescribed that 
average of imported coal prices for last five years  (Indonesia, Australia) were to be used for 
calculation of intrinsic value. These were prescrib ed as in the scenario of shortage in coal 
production by Coal India Limited (CIL), the only re alistic option for end use companies was 
to either import coal or use coal from overseas coa l mines that those companies had acquired 
and therefore, were willing to pay international price of coal. 
Thereafter, MOC prescribed a methodology for fixing  floor price and reserve price for coal 
mines proposed to be auctioned/allotted. The method ology was based on the 
recommendations of an Inter Ministerial Committee ( IMC), which changed the aspect of 
international price to CIL notified price from the earlier prescribed methodology. The 
committee stated that taking international prices m ight serve as an incentive for people to go 
for linkage rather than mining and might also have a long term implication for cost 
competitiveness vis-à-vis other countries. The pric ing methodology was approved by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 24 December 2014.  
Audit examined the valuation carried out by CMPDIL and the results are discussed in the 
following paras: 
4.1  Computation of Intrinsic Value by CMPDIL 
Computation of intrinsic value of coal mines based on NPV required projections of cash 
flows, which in turn was dependent upon projections  of revenue and costs (capital and 
revenue) associated with functioning of the concern ed coal mine. CMPDIL carried out the  
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
16 
computation with capital costs including cost of la nd, buildings, plant and machinery, 
furniture and fittings, vehicles, development cost,  etc. and revenue costs including cost 
incurred towards salaries and wages, stores, annual  mine closure, power, etc.  Revenue was 
measured by sale prices of coal as notified by CIL.  
CMPDIL engaged CRISIL for suggesting ways for deter mining intrinsic value of coal mines. 
In addition, certain assumptions 9 were made for estimating cash flows. The basis of taking 
these assumptions included practices followed by CM PDIL for estimation of cash flows for 
preparation of project reports of subsidiaries of CIL and recommendations of CRISIL. 
Audit examined the records relating to computation of intrinsic value of 29 coal mines by 
CMPDIL. Issues noticed by Audit, inter alia , included instances of inconsistencies and 
inaccuracies in following certain assumptions, erro rs in consideration of aspects of revenue 
and costs. Details of the observations on the above  deficiencies, reply of MOC and CMPDIL 
and audit comments thereon are contained in Annexure II. Summary of the issues noticed 
are as follows: 
 
Table 3 :  Summary of Issues Noticed by Audit Relating to Valuation by CMPDIL 
Nature of deficiency  
Deficiency 
noticed in 
number of 
Coal mines  
Impact of the deficiency on 
number of Coal mines  
As under  
valuation 
As over  
valuation 
Deficiencies in consideration of grade of coal  Four Three One 
Deficiencies in consideration of mine closure costs Twenty Four Twenty Four 
Consideration of lower rates of crushing charges  Six Six - 
Deficiencies in consideration of cost of land  Five Two Three 
Consideration of cost of heavy earth moving 
machines in opencast mines  Three Three - 
Incomplete treatment of indirect taxes and levies  All All - 
Deficiencies in consideration of cost of manpower  Two - Two 
Inconsistencies in implementation of adopted 
assumptions and deviation from mine plans  Five One Four 
Consideration of incorrect cost  Two One One 
Analysis of the above table revealed that each of t he individual deficiency noticed by Audit  
 
                                                 
9  Consideration of discounted cash flow (DCF) at the rate  of 10 per  cent , project life or 25 years, whichever is lower,  
equity and loan component of capital in ratio of 80 :20 , royalty at the rate of 14 per cent , income tax at the rate of  
33.99 per cent  etc. 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
17 
 
had an impact in the form of under valuation or ove r valuation in respect of a particular coal 
mine. Audit noticed that all these deficiencies cum ulatively resulted in under valuation of 15 
coal mines. For the remaining 14 coal mines, the in trinsic value was in negative or the floor 
price was less than `150 per tonne (in case of non-regulated sector coal  mines) and therefore, 
there was no cumulative impact on the calculation o f intrinsic value of these coal mines as a 
result of these deficiencies.  
Calculation of the intrinsic value was an important stage of the whole e-auction process as the 
extent of upfront amount payable by the successful bidders, the floor price from which the 
bidding was to start for the non-regulated sector coal mines and the revised fixed rate payable 
for coal used for generation of power to be sold on  merchant basis were derived from the 
intrinsic value only. In this context, Audit attemp ted to carry out a revised calculation of 
intrinsic value by incorporating revised elements o f cost and revenue after considering all the 
deficiencies together in individual coal mines. Net  impact of all the observations (including 
that of Para 4.2 below) on 15 out of the 29 coal mines (details in Annexure-III ) was: 
• Under valuation of 15 coal mines, which resulted in  under determination of upfront 
amount by 
`381.83 crore (41 per cent  of the total upfront amount of `932.44 crore).   
• In six non-regulated sector coal mines, floor price s were under determined by 
amounts ranging between `4.70 per tonne and `1264.44 per tonne.  
• In all the nine power sector coal mines, revised fi xed rates (price for coal used for 
power produced for sale on merchant basis) were und er determined by amounts 
ranging between `32.28 per tonne and `142.57 per tonne.  
Audit noticed that the detailed calculations for NP V and intrinsic value of the coal mines 
were carried out by CMPDIL using their valuation mo del in MS Excel. Audit requested 
CMPDIL to provide the valuation model so as to calc ulate the impact of these audit 
observations using the same model. However, CMPDIL did not furnish the same and 
furnished only the final MS Excel sheets covering d etails of various elements of costs and 
revenue and the final result. CMPDIL stated that it  did not have a standardised/proved 
valuation model with formulae for valuation of coal  mine. Therefore, Audit attempted to re-
calculate the NPV of the coal mines within the same  Excel sheets for each of the coal mine, 
revising the relevant factors. Thereafter, the revi sed calculations were forwarded to CMPDIL 
for confirmation. However, CMPDIL stated that they could neither confirm nor refute the 
calculations made by Audit. 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
18 
 
MOC in its reply (March 2016) and during the exit conference (March 2016) stated that: 
• Fifteen cases of over valuation had been identified  by Audit. As cases of over valuation 
would lead to higher upfront amount and consequentl y larger revenue realisation, 
Ministry refrains from commenting on its accuracy. CCEA approved methodology 
mandated that for the non-regulated sector the floo r price should be a minimum of 
`150 
per tonne notwithstanding the intrinsic value, whic h meant that for coal mines where the 
intrinsic value was negative or less than `150 per tonne the floor price should be fixed at 
`150 per tonne. Several cases noted by Audit were of that category. 
• There was no information asymmetry for the bidders affecting the fairness and 
transparency of the e-auction process. Even if ther e was any inadvertent omission 
resulting in the valuation on the lower side (thoug h it really was not), it would be taken 
care of by the bidding itself. Those mines had received bids in multiples of the floor price. 
Similarly, even if the upfront amount was “lower”, it would get factored in the bidding 
and its initial valuation would not result in any loss to the state exchequer.  
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
• As per the methodology for fixing floor/reserve price, intrinsic value of the coal mine was 
to be calculated by computing its NPV. The audit an alysis was on the fact whether all the 
relevant assumptions and aspects of revenue and cos ts were correctly taken into 
consideration for calculation of the intrinsic valu e of the coal mines irrespective of the 
fact whether the resultant intrinsic value was nega tive or less/more than `150 per tonne 
(in case of non-regulated sector coal mines) or `100 per tonne (in case of power sector 
coal mines). As already explained above, the impact  as over valuation/under valuation in 
table 3 was for individual deficiencies only. The n et impact of all those components in 
individual mines was under valuation of 15 coal mines.   
• Upfront amount was to be calculated as 10 per cent  of the intrinsic value. It was 
independent of the final bid amount and was to be p aid subsequent to signing of the 
agreement, irrespective of the operationalisation o f mines. Thus, it was fixed by the 
Government and the receipt of which was certain at the initial stage itself. However, 
MOC’s reply reflected that the onus of correction of errors in the calculation and resultant 
under valuation, which was controllable, was left o n the bidding process, which was 
outside its control and the result of which was uncertain. 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
19 
 
• Calculation of floor prices/additional reserve pric es reflected Government’s perception of 
the fair value of the coal mines. Bidding process a nd the resultant bids received reflected 
the perception of the bidders regarding fair value of those mines. Both these perceptions 
would have had an impact on the bidding process. Mo reover, the calculation of floor 
prices/additional reserve prices was controllable b y the Government and errors in their 
calculation should not have been left for correctio n in the bidding process, which was 
outside its control and the result of which was uncertain.  
 
Inconsistencies and inaccuracies in following some of the assumptions and various 
errors in  computation of intrinsic values resulted in under d etermination of upfront 
amounts in 15 coal mines, under determination of fl oor prices in six non-regulated 
sector coal mines and revised fixed rates in all nine power sector coal mines.  
 
4.2  Valuation of Coking Coal Mine 
Intrinsic valuation implies calculation of inherent  value of the underlying asset. For 
calculation of true inherent value of any underlyin g asset, it was important that its individual 
characteristics were factored in. This was also inherent in the CCEA approved methodology’s 
provision for taking notified price of relevant gra de of coal. CMPDIL implemented the same 
by taking necessary data and information from the m ine dossiers submitted by prior allottees 
for computation of intrinsic value of coal mines. 
Audit noticed that the coal mines auctioned in the two tranches also included coal mine 
having coking 
10  coal reserves. Out of the 29 successfully auctione d coal mines, one i.e. 
Moitra mine, of non-regulated sector, had 97 per cent  coking coal out of its total coal 
reserves. It was noticed that the mine had been exp lored by Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
and CMPDIL. As per their estimation, the mine had g eological reserves of 215.78 million 
tonne (121.93 million tonne of proved reserves), ou t of which 203.15 million tonne reserves 
were of coking coal. The mining plan of the mine, h owever, depicted the geological reserves 
and extractable reserves as 38.16 million tonne (37 .01 million tonne of coking coal) and 
29.91 million tonne (29.01 million tonne of coking coal) respectively, considering opencast 
mining upto a depth of 215 meter. Audit noticed tha t, the information for reserves up to 215 
meter depth was used for classification and valuation of Moitra coal mine.  
                                                 
10  Coking coal, when heated in the absence of air, for m coherent beads, free from volatiles, with strong and porous mass, 
called coke. These have coking properties, mainly used in steel making and metallurgical industries and also used for hard 
coke manufacturing. 
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
20 
Due to the presence of coking coal, the mine plan a lso envisaged installation of coal washery 
for production of clean coal for supply to steel plant. As per the mine plan, the clean coal was 
to be produced at a yield rate of 40 per cent  and rest was to be treated as ‘middling and 
rejects’ which was to be used in power houses. Audi t noticed that the CCEA approved 
methodology laid down broad guidelines for calculat ion of intrinsic value by computing its 
net present value taking CIL notified prices. CIL n otified prices did not provide for price of 
washed coking coal. However, CIL’s subsidiary compa nies were selling washed coking coal 
at different and higher prices than the notified pr ice of raw coking coal. Moitra was the only 
coking coal mine auctioned in the two tranches and MOC approved mine plan provided for 
establishment of washery, washing of coking coal fo r the mine and production of clean coal, 
middling and rejects. 
However, CMPDIL did not consider price of washed co king coal, middling, slurry and 
rejects 
11  for valuation of Moitra coal mine. It also did not consider the capital cost of washery 
and related expenditure. Audit calculated the intrinsic value of Moitra coal mine, taking value 
of washed coking coal, cost of installation of washery and other related operating costs. Audit 
considered price of washed coking coal at which it was sold by subsidiaries of CIL to public 
sector undertakings (PSUs). This analysis indicated  that the mine was under valued, which 
had an effect of under determination of upfront amo unt by `101.24 crore and under 
determination of floor price by `1264.44  per tonne.  
CMPDIL and MOC, in their replies (March 2016) and d uring the Exit Conference  
(March 2016) stated that: 
• The valuation of the mine was done as per the metho dology for fixing floor/reserve price 
approved by the CCEA, which was based on the criter ia of specified end uses and not on 
the grade of coal. The extant notified price of CIL  for the non-regulated sectors for the 
corresponding gross calorific value (GCV) bands was  to be taken into account for 
computing NPV.  
• There was no statutory provision for calculation of  intrinsic value or NPV of a coal mine. 
The mining plan did not have any provision for valu ation of the mine. Neither the Order 
nor the Ordinance speaks about washery, or the nego tiated price. As per the Act, 
washeries were clearly not part of mine infrastruct ure. Therefore, it would not be 
                                                 
11  Price of washed coking coal has been taken @ `5871.15/tonne at 17 per cent  ash as per Memorandum of Understanding 
between Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) and Steel Auth ority of India Limited. Further, the prices of midd lings, slurry 
and rejects have been taken @ `2858.93, `2248 and  `1257 per tonne respectively as per the rates prescr ibed for coking 
coal washeries of CCL vide notification dated 16 April 2012. 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
21 
 
appropriate to consider coal washeries or washed co al. Audit had taken the negotiated 
price of washed coking coal for valuation of the mi ne and CMPDIL was not given any 
mandate for that.  
• As per mining plans, there were ten mines with wash ery provisions, but only one mine 
(Moitra) was considered in the draft report for val uation with washery. If washeries 
should have been considered in calculation of intri nsic values, in all such ten coal mines, 
intrinsic value should have been calculated. The co mbined intrinsic values calculated on 
the basis of the notified CIL price would be less t han the one calculated by CMPDIL 
earlier. 
• In view of the explicit provision in the Colliery C ontrol Rules, 2004 that coal included 
coking coal, such a distinction could also not have been made by the Ministry/CMPDIL. 
MOC also stated that the matter was referred to the  Ld. Attorney General (AG) for obtaining 
his opinion on the issue. While quoting the opinion  of the Ld. AG, MOC, inter alia , stated 
that decisions taken by the Cabinet constituted fun damental policy directives for 
implementation by the Ministries and it was bound to follow the decision of the CCEA. 
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
• Though there was no specific provision for calculation of intrinsic value or NPV of a coal 
mine, MOC had taken CCEA’s approval for the methodo logy. Audit has commented on 
the issues observed in implementation of the CCEA approved methodology. 
• The methodology approved by the CCEA prescribed cal culation of intrinsic value of the 
mine by computing its NPV, based on discounted cash  flow method. Intrinsic value 
calculation implies calculation of inherent value o f the underlying asset and for that 
purpose, it was important that the basic characteri stics of the underlying assets were 
considered. The mine dossier including mine plan for each individual coal mine contained 
specific details of that particular mine including area, total reserves, grade-wise reserves, 
annual target and mine life, assets among others. A ccordingly, the valuation methodology 
was implemented by carrying out valuation of each c oal mine on the basis of the details 
provided in the mine dossier by CMPDIL.  
• CIL did not notify the prices of washed coking coal . However, CIL’s subsidiaries were 
selling washed coking coal at a much higher price than notified price of raw coking coal. 
• Moitra was the only coal mine put up for auction having coking coal reserves (97 per cent  
of its total coal reserves). It contained washery g rade coking coal, which was to be  
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
22 
supplied to steel plant(s) mainly for steel product ion. This was confirmed from the fact 
that all the bidders for this mine had mainly steel  plants as the specified end use plants 
(SEUPs). Further, washery grade coal is to be washe d in a washery for use in a steel 
plant. Therefore, washed coal should have been cons idered for valuation of the coking 
coal mine. Scrutiny of the mine plans of the mines referred by MOC revealed that 
provision for washery was there in six mines (exclu ding Moitra coal mine). Further, 
MOC’s another contention that combined intrinsic va lues calculated on the basis of the 
notified CIL price  will be lesser after considering washeries for non -coking coal mines 
may be viewed in light of the fact that CIL did not  notify prices for washed non-coking 
coal also and details of calculation carried out we re not provided to Audit. Considering 
prices of the washed non-coking coal (along with sl urry and rejects) on which it was sold 
by subsidiary of CIL, the impact on intrinsic value  was higher in two mines, lesser in one 
mine and there was no impact on three mines.     
• Moitra had 97 per cent  coking coal out of its total coal reserves and the re was a provision 
for installation of washery in the approved mine pl an, clearly showing that coking coal 
produced from the mine was to be washed. Hence, the price of washed coking coal should 
have been considered for calculation of the intrinsic value.  
• Though washery was not specifically covered under t he definition of mine infrastructure, 
but it was noticed in Audit that there were various  types of assets including movable and 
intangible assets which were also not covered under  the definition of Mine Infrastructure 
given under section 3 (j) of the Act, which were ta ken into consideration for calculation 
of intrinsic value of the coal mines by CMPDIL.     
 
Moitra coal mine contained washery grade coking coa l, which was to be washed before 
utilisation in the SEUP. Approved mine plan for thi s mine also contained provision for 
installation of washery for washing of coking coal produced. However, this aspect of 
washing of coking coal was not considered during ca lculation of intrinsic value. 
CMPDIL should have flagged the issue while carrying  out the valuation and the matter 
should have been referred to the CCEA for reconsideration. Otherwise, keeping in mind 
the spirit of CCEA’s approval, the price at which C IL’s subsidiaries were selling 
washed coking coal, should have been considered for  calculation of intrinsic value of 
this mine, the absence of which resulted in under d etermination of upfront amount and 
floor price of the mine.   
 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
23 
 
4.3  Non-Inclusion of Mine Closure Plans in Mine Dossiers 
CMPDIL was entrusted to prepare mine dossiers in re spect of all coal mines to be auctioned. 
As per the definition of mine dossier given in the Rules, “mine dossier” means the mine 
dossier as referred to in sub-rule (6) of Rule 9. R ule 9 (6) provided that Nominated Authority 
(NA) shall finalise a mine dossier for each Schedul e I coal mine, based on the information 
received from prior allottee under Rule 9 (1). MOC asked (November 2014) prior allottees to 
provide various information for determination of in trinsic value, which included approved 
mine plan and mine closure plan. Therefore, the inf ormation, which included mine closure 
plan, called for by NA from the prior allottees was to form part of the mine dossier. However, 
it was noticed that mine dossiers did not include a pproved mine closure plan in case of nine 
coal mines and thus remained incomplete.  
MOC, in its reply (March 2016) stated that scores o f items of information, including mine 
closure plans was sought from the prior allottees. It carried out auctions in a very compressed 
time frame, meeting very aggressive timelines to co mplete the auctions and it might be 
possible that one or two of those voluminous items of information in some cases were not 
part of mine dossiers. Therefore, the absence of mi ne closure plan should not be considered 
as deviation from the rules. Also, there was no inf ormation asymmetry for the bidders of 
those nine mines affecting the fairness and transparency of the e-auction process. 
The mine dossiers remained incomplete in the absenc e of the mine closure plans, in 
respect of nine coal mines. 
  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
24 
Chapter 5 -  The e-Auction   
The e-auction process in the 1 st  tranche was carried out from 14 February 2015 to 2 2 
February 2015 and in the 2 nd  tranche from 04 March 2015 to 13 March 2015 as det ailed in 
Chapter 2 of the report. A total of 38 coal mines w ere put up for auction in these two 
tranches, out of which 29 coal mines were successfully auctioned.  
5.1  Ranking and Qualification of Bidders  
Standard Tender Document (STD) - for both power and  non-regulated sectors – provided 
(Clause 3.3.2) that the initial price offers (IPOs)  of technically qualified bidders (TQBs) 
would be opened and they would be ranked on the bas is of ascending/descending IPOs. 
TQBs who held first 50 per cent  of the ranks or five TQBs, whichever was higher, w ould be 
considered as qualified for participating in the e- auction i.e. the qualified bidders (QBs). 
Further, the Act [Section 4 (3) (b)] and the STD (C lause 4.1.1) also provided that a joint 
venture company (JV) formed by two or more companies having a common specified end use 
(SEU) and which were independently eligible to bid in accordance with the Act, would be 
eligible to participate in the e-auction.  
Out of 29 coal mines successfully auctioned, in 11 coal mines (two power sector and nine 
non-regulated sector) there was participation by th e same company/parent-subsidiary 
company coalition/JV coalition bidding for differen t specified end use plants (SEUPs) 
(Annexure IV). In these cases: 
• The total numbers of QBs ranged between four and se ven and independent QBs 
12 , in 
Stage II, were between three and five. 
• QBs ranging between two and three were from the sam e company/parent-subsidiary 
company coalition/JV coalition bidding for different SEUPs.  
• In five out of these 11 cases, the competition at t he Stage II bidding was effectively 
between one to three bidders.  
Resultantly, Audit could not draw an assurance that  the potential level of competition was 
achieved during the Stage II bidding of these coal mines.  
Further, the STD did not prohibit splitting up of t he units of a specified end use plant (SEUP) 
into different SEUPs for the purpose of participati ng in the coal mines auction. A company/ 
                                                 
12  A qualified bidder, which is not from the same comp any/parent-subsidiary company coalition/JV coalition as of the other 
qualified bidders for auction of a particular coal mine.    

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
25 
 
Case Study: Auction/ Vesting of Coal Mine ‘X’ 
 
A case study of how one of the companies, following  the provision of the rules and the STD, 
increased its participation in the e-auction of this coal mine:  
Schedule – II  Prior Allottee - Company A  Technical Bids Received – Six ;  
Qualified Bidders – Five  
• Qualified Bidders: 
Company A  
Same Group 
Company 
Company B ( a subsidiary of Company A) 
Company C ( a subsidiary of Company A and which also had shareholding 
of Company D i.e. another subsidiary of Company A) 
Company E  Independent 
Bidders Company F  
• Company A became the holding company of Company C o n the last date of sale of 
tender document. 
• Two companies i.e. Company E and Company B did not participate in the bidding.  
• Company C bid only once, from the same IP address as that of Company A. 
• Company A bid for power plant ‘P’ (Unit I and II) a s its SEUP; Company C bid for 
power plant ‘P’ (Unit III) and a power plant of Company D as its SEUPs  
 
On the culmination of the Stage II bidding, Company  A was declared as the ‘Preferred 
Bidder’ for its SEUP i.e. power plant ‘P’ (Unit I and II). 
 
The annual ‘coal requirement’ of the power plant ‘P ’ (Unit I and II) i.e. the SEUP of 
Company A, was 66 per cent  of the annual production of the Mine ‘X’, within t he STD 
provisions. The annual requirement of power plant ( Unit III) i.e. one of the SEUPs of 
Company C was 11 per cent  of the annual coal production of Mine ‘X’. But, Co mpany A 
projected power plant (Unit III) as a separate SEUP  and bid it through Company C. After 
becoming the successful allottee of the coal mine ‘ X’, Company A issued request for 
diversion of coal for its various other power plants including power plant ‘P’ Unit III. 
 
its JV coalition, while participating in the auctio n of a particular mine, projected different 
units/phases of a SEUP as separate SEUP and submitt ed bids for each such unit/phase 
(separately or in various permutations/combinations ) through the parent company and its JV 
company. 
A case study of the e-auction of a coal mine is giv en below, which showcases the means 
adopted by the bidders, within the provisions of th e extant rules and contractual framework, 
to increase their presence in the auction through t he combined operation of the clause 
allowing participation of JVs in one auction as sep arate entities and the fact that the STD did 
not prohibit splitting up of units of one SEUP into different SEUPs.   
 
 
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
26 
Ministry of Coal (MOC) informed that the conjoint o peration of Clauses 4.1.2 (d) 
[Limitations on number of bids] and 3.3.2 of the ST D was challenged in Delhi High Court in 
Sharda Energy and Minerals Ltd. V/s Union of India,  wherein the Hon’ble High Court had 
observed that the methodology adopted appeared to be working well. 
Audit, however, noted that for the coal mines aucti oned in the 3 rd  tranche, the STD provided, 
“in the event that Qualified Bidders are the same C ompany or Corporation or the Qualified 
Bidders belong to the same Group and they have subm itted distinct Initial Price Offers, then 
the Technically Qualified Bidders at next such numb er of ranks which shall be equal to total 
number of ranks held by such Qualified Bidders in t he first fifty per cent of the ranks minus 
Number of Distinct Qualified Bidders, shall also be  declared as Qualified Bidders.”  
Operation of this clause apparently had the implica tion on same company/parent– subsidiary 
company coalition/JV coalition bids, which were tec hnically qualified, being treated as one 
bid for the purpose of ranking and qualification of qualified bidders.  
MOC in its replies (October/November 2015 and March  2016) and also during the Exit 
Conference (March 2016) stated that: 
• Joint ventures actually enabled smaller companies t o participate in the auction and thus 
increased competition. 
• Even after the participation of a company and its J V with own subsidiary company/ 
another company, there were at least three independ ent companies which participated in 
all the e-auctions. 
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
• In order to overcome the possibility of misuse of the provision  and to prevent a company 
submitting multiple bids to stifle competition in F inal Price Offer (FPO), MOC has made 
changes in the Clause 4.1.1, containing the provisi on for participation of JVs with the 
objective of increasing the overall competition , for the coal mines auctioned in the 3 
rd  
tranche.     
• As detailed in Annexure IV , the total numbers of independent bidders were les ser than 
the total numbers of QBs.  
• Most of the ‘ready’ and ‘ready to produce’ mines id entified for allocations through 
auctions had been put up for auction in the first two tranches.  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
27 
 
Audit could not draw an assurance that the potential level of competition was achieved 
during the Stage II bidding of 11 coal mines auctio ned in the first two tranches. This 
was due to the provision of allowing the same compa ny/parent-subsidiary company 
coalition/JV coalition to independently participate  in e-auction of a particular coal 
mine, when there was a cap on the number of technic ally qualified bidders being 
allowed participation during the Stage  II bidding.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.2  Technical Disqualification of a Bidder  
West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited ( WBPDCL) submitted its bid for 
participation in the e-auction of Sarisatolli and T rans Damodar coal mines (both Schedule II 
power sector coal mines). These mines were put up f or auction in the 1 st  tranche and the STD 
was issued on 27 December 2014. As per the Schedule  I of the Act, WBPDCL was the prior 
allottee of five 13  Schedule II coal mines. However, the mining leases  for these coal mines 
were executed in favour of Bengal Emta Coal Mines L imited, a JV between WBPDCL, 
Durgapur Projects Limited  and Emta Coal Limited. 
Audit noticed that the bids of WBPDCL for Sarisatol li and Trans Damodar coal mines were 
technically rejected (26 February 2015) with the ob servations of the technical committee that 
it ‘ is a prior allottee and has not deposited such levy  within the prescribed time ’. In this 
connection, it was noticed that: 
• In terms of the STD, one of the pre-requisites for participating in the e-auction of coal 
mines was that in the event that a bidder was a pri or allottee, then it must have paid the 
additional levy within the time period prescribed in the Rule. 
• The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Second Ordinanc e was promulgated on 26 
December 2014. As per Section 3 (1) (n) of the Ordinance, “prior allottee” means prior 
allottee of Schedule I coal mines as listed therein whose allotments have been cancelled 
pursuant to the judgment/orders of the Hon’ble Supr eme Court . However, an 
‘Explanation’  was given below this definition, which provided th at ‘In case a mining 
lease has been executed in favour of a third party,  subsequent to such allocation of 
Schedule I coal mines, then, the third party shall be deemed to be the prior allottee’ .   
• As the mining lease for these coal mines were execu ted in favour of Bengal Emta Coal 
Mines Limited, WBPDCL was not a prior allottee in t erms of the ‘Explanation’  given 
                                                 
13  Tara (West); Gangaramchak; Gangaramchak Bhadhulia; Barjora; and Pachwara (North). 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
28 
below the definition of prior allottee. Hence, the rejection of bids of WBPDCL for 
Sarisatolli and Trans Damodar on this ground was not correct. 
• Further, WBPDCL was allotted six coal mines (throug h the allotment route) 14  on 26 
March 2015 (date of issue of vesting order), taking  cognizance of the ‘ Explanation ’ 
given below the definition of ‘prior allottee’ in the Act.   
MOC stated (March 2016) that as per the schedules t o the Coal Mines (SP) Act, 2015, 
WBPDCL was the prior allottee for Barjora, Gangaram chak and Gangaramchak-Bhadulia. It 
was therefore, technically disqualified from partic ipation. After the amendment (26 
December 2014) wherein it was clarified that in the event the mining lease had been executed 
in favour of third party, then the third party woul d be treated as the prior allottee, it was 
determined that though the prior allottee for Tara East and West coal mines was WBPDCL, 
the mining lease had been executed in favour of Ben gal Emta Limited and therefore, the 
liability to pay the additional levy did not lie wi th WBPDCL and it was, therefore, qualified 
for the allotment.  
During the Exit Conference (March 2016), MOC stated  that as the name of WBPDCL was in 
the list of prior allottees in the Schedule I, the bid was technically rejected.  
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact s that as per the explanation given with 
the definition of prior allottee in the Second Ordi nance promulgated on 26 December 2014, 
in case a mining lease has been executed in favour of a third party, then, the third party shall 
be deemed to be the prior allottee. Sarisatolli and  Trans-Damodar coal mines were put up for 
auction in the 1 
st  tranche on 27 December 2014 i.e. after the definit ion of prior allottee had 
already been clarified. Thus, WBPDCL was not a prio r allottee in terms of the ‘Explanation’  
of the amended definition for any of the mines incl uding any of the three mines 15 , even 
though its name featured in the Schedule I of the O rdinance and its bid should have been 
considered especially as MOC allotted six coal mine s to WBPDCL in March 2015 taking 
cognizance of the ‘ Explanation’ of 26 December 2014. 
Disqualification of WBPDCL from participating in the auction of Sarisatolli and Trans-
Damodar coal mines, on the basis of it being a prio r allottee and not depositing the 
additional levy within the prescribed time, was not as per the existing provisions. 
                                                 
14  Tara (East) & Tara (West); Gangaramchak & Gangaramc hak Bhadhulia; Barjora; Barjora (North); Kasta (East) and 
Pachwara (North). 
15    Gangaramchak & Gangaramchak Bhadhulia; Barjora as stated by MOC in its reply  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
29 
 
5.3  Re-examination of Selected Cases by MOC  
Clause 3.3 of the Standard Tender Documents (STDs) for auction of both power sector coal 
mines and non-regulated sector coal mines described  the process to be followed for the 
auction. As per the provisions of the said clause, the qualified bidder who submits the lowest 
price offer for power sector coal mines and highest  price offer for non-regulated sector coal 
mines was to be declared as the preferred bidder. The Nominated Authority recommended the 
preferred bidder to the Central Government as provi ded under provisions of Rule 10 (9) of 
the Coal Mines (Special Provisions Rules) 2014 for selection of successful bidder. Rule 10 
(10) of the said Rules empowered the Central Govern ment to direct the Nominated Authority 
to issue vesting order for the coal mine in favour of the successful bidder or provide such 
other binding directions to the Nominated Authority as deemed appropriate.  
Clause 3.3.2 of the STD stated that the Nominated A uthority shall evaluate the technical bid 
against the Eligibility Conditions and against the Test of Responsiveness in accordance with 
Clause 3.4 of the STD. Clause 3.4 laid down the par ameters that the Nominated Authority 
should consider with respect to responsiveness of t he technical bid. These parameters inter 
alia  included compliance with prescribed format and pro cedure, documentary evidence to 
support eligibility conditions to participate in th e auction, availability of all required 
information including initial price offer, presence  of any condition or qualification included 
by the bidder, limiting the technical bid to a particular End Use Plant and any other parameter 
considered relevant by the Nominated Authority. 
Audit could not find any laid down parameters for evaluation of the final price bids before the 
Nominated Authority made recommendation to Central Government on the preferred bidder 
except the provisions of Clause 3.3.2 (c) of the ST D which stated that the qualified bidder 
that submits the lowest price offer for power secto r coal mines and highest price offer for the 
non-regulated sector coal mines shall be declared a s the ‘Preferred Bidder’. Similarly, Audit 
could not find any laid down guidelines to be follo wed by the Central Government before 
giving directions to the Nominated Authority on the  recommendations made by the said 
Authority. The absence of broad guidelines for eval uation of final price bids by the 
Nominated Authority and the Central Government, may , in the opinion of audit, impact the 
degree of robustness, transparency and fairness of the bidding process.  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
30 
MOC in its replies (December 2015 and March 2016) and during the Exit Conference (March 
2016) stated that that there are numerous factors w hich influenced the decision of the bidder 
while bidding for a mine and that those factors varied from bidder to bidder while bidding for 
a particular coal mine. Further, considering the fa ct that the auction was being undertaken for 
the first time, absence of past precedent and data,  and the issues being contextual, it would 
not be feasible to formulate broad guidelines/crite ria incorporating all the relevant aspects. 
MOC also referred to the opinion of the Ld. Attorne y General (AG) that the absolute right to 
cancel the auction/tender process lies with the tendering authority, which is subject to it being 
bonafide and free from arbitrariness. If the Govern ment were to frame such guidelines, it 
would undermine its absolute right to safeguard its economic interests. 
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
The Nominated Authority made the recommendations in  respect of the preferred bidder for a 
total of 11 coal mines of power sector and 21 coal mines of non-regulated sector that were 
put to auction during 14 February 2015 and 9 March 2015 solely on the basis of amount of 
bid received as per provisions of Clause 3.3.2 (c) of the STD. However, the Ministry returned 
the cases of eight coal mines (two power sector coa l mines and six non-regulated sector coal 
mines) to the Nominated Authority for re-examinatio n and giving its recommendations for 
consideration of the competent authority. These cas es were identified as needing re-
examination on the basis of lower number of bids made by the qualified bidders. 
Audit observed that the Nominated Authority evaluat ed the final price bids of each of these 
eight cases during the re-examination on the basis of parameters consisting of total number of 
bids received in those cases vis-à-vis other coal m ines of same sector put to auction during 
the same period, the coal requirement that would ha ve been met for each bidder (End Use 
Plant of the bidders), the value of bids received v is-à-vis other coal mines of same sector put 
to auction during the same period and the quantum o f increment achieved over the applicable 
floor/ceiling price. Nominated Authority submitted the results of evaluation on the basis of 
the above parameters to the Ministry with an overal l conclusion that there was no conclusive 
proof of collusive bidding and there was no complai nt received regarding obstruction of 
bidders or any procedural irregularity and requeste d the Ministry to take an appropriate 
decision on the matter.    
Audit observed that the Ministry reviewed the recom mendations of the Nominated Authority 
and examined these eight cases. On the basis of thi s examination, the Ministry rejected the 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
31 
 
recommendation of the Nominated Authority for decla ration of the ‘Preferred Bidder’ as 
‘Successful Bidder’ in respect of three coal mines (two power sector coal mines and one non-
regulated sector coal mine). In respect of the othe r five cases, the ‘Preferred Bidder’ was 
declared as ‘Successful Bidder’.  
Audit observed that the preferred bidders of the coal mines for which the recommendations of 
the Nominated Authority were rejected filed petitio n before the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi 
for setting aside the order cancelling the auction on the grounds of, inter alia , 
unreasonableness and arbitrariness of the action of cancellation.   
The reply of the Ministry that broad guidelines for  evaluation could not be laid down is not 
acceptable since both the Nominated Authority and t he Ministry have applied certain 
parameters while deciding on the acceptability or o therwise of the eight bids subjected to re-
examination.  
While not commenting on any individual case, Audit is of the view that guidelines 
incorporating the parameters to be applied by the N ominated Authority and by 
Ministry of Coal for evaluation of final bid prices  would enhance the transparency of 
the bidding process and may eliminate avoidable litigation. 
 
5.4  e-Auction of Power Sector Coal Mines  
Generation of power is an important end use of coal  production. As already discussed in 
Chapter 2, coal mines were specifically earmarked f or power sector and a separate 
methodology was prescribed for auction of these pow er sector coal mines. These mines were 
auctioned with the twin objectives of increasing the generation of power along with providing 
cheaper coal for the benefit of consumers of power. 
Audit noticed that auction of coal mines for power as SEU was meant for power plants with: 
(a) Generation capacity having cost-plus power purc hase agreements (PPAs), or tariff based 
PPAs; and; 
(b) Generation capacity to be contracted in future through cost plus PPAs/tariff based PPAs      
(Case-1)16  . 
                                                 
16  Case-1 PPAs were those where fuel sourcing is entirely the responsibility of the bidder. 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
32 
The tariff for power generated by various power stations was decided on the basis of capacity 
charge (fixed cost) and energy charge (variable cost).  
As power sector coal mines were planned to be alloc ated on the basis of reverse bidding at 
cheaper rates, it was important that the benefit of  cheaper coal was passed on to the 
consumers. For this objective, it was provided in t he Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) approved methodology for valuation o f coal mines that, in respect of all 
existing and future PPAs, the appropriate commissio n (concerned electricity regulatory 
commissions) should ensure that the energy charges quoted under PPAs were based on the 
actual bid price of coal and make necessary revisions in the ongoing PPAs also to that effect.  
As brought out at Para 2.7.1.2 of Chapter 2 of this  report, reverse then forward bidding was 
introduced in corrigendum No. 3 to the STD as the m ethodology for conducting e-auction of 
power sector coal mines.  
Audit noticed that an approach paper for ‘auctionin g of coal mines’ was prepared and placed 
in the public domain on 17 December 2014 for commen ts and some of the comments 
received on the approach paper were considered. The  STD was uploaded on MSTC website 
on 27 December 2014. A reverse bidding scenario had  the inherent possibility of the bids 
reaching zero, which was also brought (22 December 2014) to the notice of the Ministry, 
during the process of seeking comments on the approach paper. However, a new aspect in the 
bidding process i.e. reverse then forward bidding ( which catered to the possibility of reverse 
bidding reaching zero) was introduced on 31 January  2015, i.e. after more than a month from 
the tender uploading date which was the bid due dat e itself. The bid due date was thereafter 
extended to 3 February 2015.  
The basis of the change in the auction methodology from ‘reverse’ to ‘reverse then forward’ 
for power sector coal mines was not available in the records furnished to Audit. 
MOC stated (March and April 2016) that during the p rocess of public consultations, one such 
possibility (reverse then forward bidding) was expr essed among more than hundred 
comments received; however, it did not seem plausib le. Subsequently, consultations were 
held and such bidding pattern seemed possible. This  remote possibility was also factored in 
the auction design before due date. Revised auction  methodology was formulated in 
consultation with SBI Capital Markets Limited, draf t of which was received on 31 January 
2015. As per the Clause 5.8.1 of the tender documen t, NA had the right to issue 
addendum/corrigendum to the document from time to time till the bid due date. 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
33 
 
5.4.1  Sustainability of Model Adopted for e-Auction of Power Sector Coal Mines  
Audit noticed that certain conditions were laid dow n in the bidding documents, corrigenda 
and pre-bid conferences as to the cost which could be charged from the tariff for electricity 
produced and supplied. When a bidder was declared a s a successful bidder, two scenarios 
emerged with respect to recovery of the costs, as given below: 
Table 4 :  Scenarios of Recovery of Costs 
Scenarios Costs that could be passed through 
Scenario I: Reverse bidding 
• The final price offer (run-of-the-mine cost, pursua nt to 
which the successful bidder has received the vesting order); 
and;  
• The fixed rate 17  (`100 per tonne) 
Scenario II: Reverse then forward 
bidding 
• The fixed rate (`100 per tonne) 
 
Audit noticed that all the nine 18  mines of the power sector, auction of which had be en 
successfully completed, were auctioned at additiona l premium ranging between `202 per 
tonne and `1,010 per tonne. Additional premium was not allowed  to be charged from the 
power consumers under the ‘reverse then forward’ me thodology with the objective of 
keeping the tariff low.  
In this scenario, the risk of non-compliance with contractual conditions and commitments can 
be high, necessitating a robust monitoring system for sustainability of the model. 
On an audit enquiry in this regard, MOC replied (December 2015 and March 2016) that: 
• All the bidders were fully aware of all the terms a nd conditions including the provision 
that the additional premium shall not be reckoned f or the purposes of determination of 
tariff for electricity. They were free to bid after  considering their own viability. In an 
open auction it was not possible to restrain bidder s from bidding in any manner. Such 
restrictions would have invited severe criticism an d possible charges of causing loss to 
the exchequer. It would have also been in contravention to Article 19 of the Constitution.  
                                                 
17  It is the minimum “reserve price” fixed as per the  order of MOC dated 26 December 2014 on  “methodolog y for fixing 
floor/ reserve price for auction and allotment of coal mines/ blocks” 
18  Schedule II – Talabira-I, Sarisatolli, Trans-Damod ar, Amelia North and Tokisud North; Schedule III – Jitpur, Mandakini, 
Ganeshpur and Utkal C 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
34 
• It would not be correct to say that the impact of t he non-recovery of cost may affect the 
objective of providing cheaper coal to the power se ctor as the successful bidders have 
undertaken to provide coal at nominal cost to power  producers. Coal is but one 
component of the total cost and the power producer can lower the overall cost through 
efficiency gains. In case the successful bidders ar e unable to sustain their operations, the 
NA has fully secured the amounts due to the Government by obtaining bank guarantee. 
• Out of the five Schedule II power sector coal mines , which were successfully auctioned, 
three coal mines had started production and were regularly making monthly payments.  
Reply of MOC may be viewed in light of the fact that: 
• The concept of reverse then forward bidding was int roduced on the originally scheduled 
last day of submission of bids for the 1 st  tranche. Further, as per MOC reply, the 
possibility of bids touching zero did not seem plau sible during formation of the STD and 
subsequently consultations were held and such biddi ng pattern seemed possible. This 
scenario indicates that the model for auction of po wer sector coal mines was 
conceptualised in a fragmented manner.      
• As various charges/costs for mining of coal were no n-recoverable, the risk of non-
compliance with the contractual obligations and com mitments relating to production and 
utilisation of coal was higher. 
• Further, it has been noticed that the monitoring sy stem itself was vulnerable due to 
inadequacies in its planning and implementation, as  commented upon in Chapter 8 of this 
Report. 
• Also, the bank guarantees themselves were valid onl y till the time the mines achieved 
their peak rated capacity. Thereafter, the amount d ue to the Government would not be 
secured by any bank guarantee. 
Since the objectives of auction of coal mines for t he power sector were to augment 
power production for benefit of the economy and to provide cheaper coal to the power 
sector for the benefit of consumers of power, Audit  is of the view that the above stated 
weaknesses in the system may affect the sustainabil ity of the model adversely in the  
long run. 
5.4.2  Merchant Power  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
35 
 
Merchant power was described as sale of power outsi de medium and long term PPAs by the 
power companies and the price of such power was not  regulated. As discussed in Para 2.7.1.3 
of Chapter 2 of the report, the successful bidders were mandated to cap their merchant 
capacity at 15 per cent  of the generation capacity linked to the allotted coal mines. This 
provision was apparently incorporated to ensure tha t the benefit of cheaper coal was passed 
on to the power consumers through the regulated sale of power.  
Audit noticed that the “Methodology for fixing floo r/reserve price for auction and allotment 
of coal mines/blocks”, as approved by CCEA, stipula ted (in respect of the coal mine for 
power sector), inter alia , that a ‘ reserve price of `100 per tonne of coal shall be payable, as 
per actual production by the successful allottee ’. It also stipulated that ‘ the bidder shall have 
to pay an additional reserve price for the quantum of coal used for power sold in the 
merchant market. The additional reserve price for coal used for merchant sale of power shall 
be based on the intrinsic value of the coal mine/bl ock...The additional reserve price shall not 
be less than ` 150 per tonne’ . Evidently, the objective of the Government was to  charge 
higher rates for coal utilised for production of po wer sold on merchant basis as such power 
was to be sold in the open market where the power tariff was not regulated.  
Audit noticed that along with the corrigendum to ST D issued for introducing the concept of 
reverse then forward bidding and ‘Additional Premium’, an additional provision was added in 
the STD, which provided that “ the Additional Premium is not payable  on the quantum of coal 
utilized for generation of such power sold on merchant basis” . 
Inclusion of the provision for not including additi onal premium on the quantum of coal 
utilised for generation of power sold on merchant b asis did not appear to be in consonance 
with the CCEA approval, as it resulted in a scenari o where the power producers would be 
paying less amount to the Government on coal utilis ed for producing power which would be 
sold on merchant basis, where prices are not regula ted, as compared to the coal utilised for 
production of power sold under PPAs where benefits of cheaper coal is to be passed on to the 
power consumers. Details are depicted in the table on next page: 
  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
36 
Table 5 :  Impact of Non-Recovery of Additional Premium for Power Sold on 
Merchant Basis 
S. 
No Coal mine Allottee 
Fixed rate 
for power 
to be sold 
under 
PPAs      
(in `` ``    per 
tonne) 
Additional 
premium  
(in `` ``    per 
tonne) 
Rate of coal 
utilised for 
generation 
of power to 
be sold 
under PPAs  
(in `` ``    per 
tonne ) 
Rate of coal 
utilised for 
generation 
of power to 
be sold on 
merchant 
basis 
(in `` ``    per 
tonne) 
Difference 
(in `` ``    per 
tonne) 
(A)  (B) (C) (D) (E) (F)=(D)+(E) (G) (H = F-G) 
1.   Talabira-I GMR 
Chhattisgarh 
Energy Limited 
100.00  378.00 478.00  262.86  215.14  
2.   Sarisatolli CESC Limited 100.00  370.00 470.00  426.49  43.51  
3.   Trans 
Damodar 
The Durgapur 
Projects 
Limited 
100.00  840.00 940.00  150.00  790.00  
4.   Amelia 
North 
Jaiprakash 
Power 
Ventures 
Limited 
100.00  612.00 712.00  345.15  366.85  
5.   Tokisud 
North 
Essar Power 
MP Limited 100.00  1010.00 1110.00  326.49  783.51  
6.   Jitpur Adani Power 
Limited 100.00  202.00 302.00  150.00  152.00  
7.   Mandakini Mandakini 
Exploration 
and Mining 
Limited 
100.00  550.00 650.00  358.26  291.74  
8.   Ganeshpur GMR 
Chhattisgarh 
Energy Limited 
100.00  604.00 704.00  273.10  430.90  
9.   Utkal – C Monnet Power 
Co. Limited 100.00  670.00 770.00  150.00  620.00  
Further, the ‘revised fixed rate’ for generation of  merchant power was to be based on the 
intrinsic value of coal mine. However, as observed in Para 4.1 of Chapter 4 of this Report, the 
calculation of intrinsic value was fraught with various deficiencies and as a result, the revised 
fixed rates themselves were fixed on a lower side.  
MOC stated (March 2016) that the term used in the CCEA Order was additional reserve price 
while in the tender document the equivalent term us ed was fixed rate. In accordance with the 
CCEA approval the tender document for power sector mines stipulated that a ‘fixed rate’ 
shall be payable on the quantum of coal utilised fo r generation of power sold on merchant 
basis. This was to be based on the intrinsic value of the coal mine as stipulated by the CCEA, 
which was to be arrived at as per the existing appr oved methodology for the non-regulated 
sector but would not be less than `150 per tonne. MOC further stated that it was corre ct that 
the coal used for merchant power was to cost more t han the coal used for generation of 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
37 
 
electricity to be sold at regulated rates and was f aithfully complied with in the auction 
process as the ‘Fixed Reserve Price’ for non-mercha nt power for all the power sector coal 
mines were `100 per tonne whereas the ‘Fixed Rate’ of coal for sale on merchant basis 
ranged between `150 per tonne and `426 per tonne and therefore, Audit view was not 
correct.  
MOC, during the Exit Conference (March 2016), also stated that the reason for exclusion of 
additional premium on merchant power was because th ere was no provision for it in the 
methodology approved by CCEA. Moreover, as the mine s were allocated through open 
public auction and there was no information asymmet ry, the bidders would have taken all the 
available factors into consideration and bid accord ingly. Therefore, it would not have any 
impact on the total revenue to accrue to the exchequer.  
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
 
• The terms used and their implications are as depicted below:  
Table 6 :  Implementation of the Concepts of Pricing of Coal for Power Sector in the 
Standard Tender Document (STD)  
Particulars  Concept of pricing as per 
CCEA approved order  
Original STD  Revised STD  
For coal used for 
power generation 
(regulated sales) 
Reserve price 
of `100 per tonne 
Fixed rate 
of `100 per tonne  
Fixed rate 
of `100 per tonne plus 
additional premium  
For coal used for 
generation of  
merchant power 
Additional reserve price 
(based on intrinsic value 
and not less than `150 per 
tonne) 
Revised fixed 
rate  
 
 
Revised fixed rate 
(additional premium was 
not to be paid ) 
 
• The CCEA approved methodology of December 2014, pre scribed that a ceiling price for 
power sector coal mine would be fixed, which would be the CIL notified price for the 
equivalent grade, and the bidders would be mandated  to quote lower than the ceiling 
price. The bidder quoting the lowest would be the s uccessful bidder. It also prescribed 
that a reserve price/fixed rate of ‘ 
`100 per tonne’ was required to be paid for coal 
extracted and utilised for generation of power to b e sold under PPAs and additional 
reserve price/revised fixed rate of ‘not less than `150 per tonne’ was to be paid for coal 
utilised for generation of power sold under merchan t basis, i.e. the coal used for 
generation of merchant power was to cost more than the coal used for generation of 
power to be sold under PPAs. Further, MOC’s content ion that the intrinsic value was to 
be arrived at as per the existing approved methodol ogy for the non-regulated sector 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
38 
should be seen in light of the fact that the CCEA a pproval provided that the intrinsic 
value “ can be arrived at with the existing approved method ology for steel/sponge 
iron/cement sectors/captive power” . 
• The concept of reverse then forward auction for pow er sector and the concept of 
additional premium arising therefrom were introduce d only in January 2015 i.e. after the 
CCEA had approved the methodology for fixing floor/ reserve price for auction and 
allotment of coal mines/blocks. Hence, the CCEA app roved methodology did not contain 
any provision regarding reverse then forward auction or the additional premium. 
• As per the corrigendum No. 3 to the STD, the additi onal premium was payable for coal 
extracted and utilised for generation of power to b e sold under PPA, in addition to the 
fixed rate of `100 per tonne. However, payment of the additional p remium, for coal 
extracted and utilised for generation of merchant power, was explicitly excluded.  
 
Due to exclusion of payment of additional premium o n coal used for generation of the 
power sold on merchant basis, the total payments 
19  made for generation of power to be 
sold under PPAs would be more than the total payments 20  made for generation of power 
to be sold on merchant basis (where the power tarif f was not regulated). This appeared 
to be not in consonance with the objectives of the CCEA approval in this regard.  
  
                                                 
19  Fixed rate + additional premium (for power sold under PPAs) 
20  Only revised fixed rate (for power sold on merchant basis) 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
39 
 
Chapter 6 -  The e-Auction Platform  
 
6.1  Introduction 
The methodology and modalities of the e-auction process has been elaborated in Chapter 2 of 
this Report. Nominated Authority (NA) engaged (11 D ecember 2014) MSTC Limited 
(MSTC) as the e-auction service provider. According ly, a memorandum of understanding 
(MoU) was signed on 23 December 2014 between NA and  MSTC and the same was to 
remain valid for the period till the 204 coal block s were allocated through e-auction and 
allotment.  
As per the agreement, the following responsibilities were assigned to MSTC:  
• online registration of prospective bidders;  
• arranging publicity of e-auction through website; 
• draw up the calendar and duration for e-auctions in consultation with NA; 
• display the floor price in the e-auction catalog fo r the information of the prospective 
bidders; 
• to conduct e-auction in a fair, smooth and transparent manner;  
• on completion of e-auction, to make available system generated bid sheet to NA. 
The auction was to be carried out online on the pla tform for e-auction provided by MSTC on 
its website. 
6.2  Design of e-Auction Platform 
MSTC was a mini ratna category-I public sector unde rtaking (PSU) under the administrative 
control of the Ministry of Steel, Government of Ind ia (GoI). The company worked mainly in 
two wings, viz. – i) trading and ii) e-commerce through their own e-auction portal. As per the 
MoU, it designed a sub-domain under its main e-comm erce website for conducting the e-
auction of the coal mines.  
All intending bidders were required to register the mselves with the said website free of cost 
. 
The registration process involved accepting certain  general and specific terms and conditions 
and filling up the online form after submission of certain documents like company permanent 
account number (PAN), ID of contact person, digital  signature certificate (DSC) of that 
contact person, letter of authorisation etc. A bidd er had to make the registration only once 
and could participate in the bidding for multiple coal mines with the same registration. 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
40 
NA had provided various documents for uploading in the e-auction portal of the company. 
Among those documents, some were categorised as ‘pu blic documents’ viz. Standard Tender 
Document (STD), standard Coal Mine Development and Production Agreement (CMDPA), 
standard vesting orders, mine summary, consumption norms etc. which were freely available 
and others were categorised as ‘paid documents’ viz . – tender document for individual mine, 
mine dossier, etc. which were available on payment of ` five lakh per coal mine. MSTC 
collected the fees of ` five lakh through its online payment system from t he intending bidders 
on behalf of NA and provided access to such bidders  for downloading the paid documents 
from the MSTC website. Bidders were allowed to subm it bids for only such coal mines for 
which the fee was paid by them. Apart from such doc uments, the company also uploaded the 
schedule of bidding (for Stage I and Stage II), bidder's guide and corrigendum, etc.  
 
6.3  IT System Infrastructure 
MSTC e-auction platform for all types of e-auction activities, including e-auction of coal 
mine, was a client-server based system which helps in marketing, sales and related decision 
support system. The operating system was IBM AIX with IBM DB2 as the relational database 
management system (RDBMS). The platform was develop ed in-house and was considered as 
mission-critical as it directly put an impact on th e primary function of the organisation. 
Ministry informed that a third party security audit of MSTC’s e-auction portal was conducted, 
all vulnerabilities were rectified and the company also obtained certification. 
6.4  Audit Findings 
 
6.4.1  Inadequate Audit Trail 
The system as developed by the company did not capture the logout details of the bidders from 
the system during e-auction. As such, the audit tra il of the complete activities of the bidders 
could not be traced. The company should have design ed their system to capture the bidder 
logging out activities. 
While accepting the facts, MSTC stated (September 2 015) that their system did not capture 
logout details of the bidders from the system and t hey agreed to capture logout details of 
bidders in future auctions. This was also accepted by MOC in the Exit Conference. 
Complete audit trail was not captured by the e-auction platform provided by MSTC.  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
41 
 
6.4.2  System Customisation 
Linking of Specified End-Use Plant (SEUP) with Registration Ids 
Creation of registration ids for the bidders through which a bidder would access the e-auction 
platform and participate in the e-auction process w as an important step in the whole process. 
Audit noticed that 245 registration ids were created in the system for the initial two tranches of 
the e-auction process.  
Audit scrutiny of registration data revealed that t he registration ids were allotted to the 
companies participating in the e-auction process without linking the SEUP in respect of which 
bids would be placed, whereas, bidding was to be made for SEUP/s and only one bid could be 
submitted for one coal mine for a SEUP. Audit further observed that: 
• Out of 245 registration ids, 34 registration ids we re allotted to 11 entities who submitted 
same tax identification number (TIN) for their resp ective registration. TIN is a state-
specific registration number for the purpose of ass essing central sales tax (CST), value-
added tax (VAT), etc. Out of the above cases, compa nies like – Bharat Aluminium 
Company Limited (BALCO), Jindal Steel and Power Lim ited (JSPL), Ultratech Cement 
Limited (UCL), etc. created multiple ids with same TIN but submitted SEUPs, which were 
outside the State of their registered TIN.  
• Out of three registration ids created by a company,  it used two registration ids (i.e. 64845 
and 65340), with same TIN of the State of Delhi and  submitted bids for the same SEUP of 
Chhattisgarh for five different coal mines. Further , bids were submitted for different coal 
mines for same SEUP with different registration ids, as depicted in the table below: 
Table 7 :  Different Registration IDs for Same SEUPs 
Coal mine Registration 
ID SEUP 
Belgaon  64845 810 MW (4x67.5MW 4x135) Korba, Chhattisgarh 
Chotia; Gare Palma IV/5; 
Gare Palma IV/4;  and Gare 
Palma IV/7  
65340 810 MW (4x67.5MW 4x135) Korba, Chhattisgarh 
As the e-auction platform was an automated platform , linking SEUPs with registration ids at 
the registration stage itself would have reduced th e vulnerability of the system from element 
of human error, which was not the case as that link ing was not provided resulting in making 
the system vulnerable. 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
42 
The registration process and the registration numbe r issued were not linked with the 
SEUP, even though the bidding was to be made for SE UP/s and only one bid could be 
submitted for one SEUP for one coal mine.  
MSTC and Ministry of Coal (MOC) in their replies (O ctober 2015 and March 2016) stated 
that system for bidder registration did not require  a bidder to identify and map the end use 
plant (EUP) against a specific registration id for registration purpose. There was no bar on a 
company creating more than one ID to make bids. The  tender document prescribed for a 
unique EUP for placing bids which was verified at t he time of the technical scrutiny. No 
provision of the Act, Rules or the tender document has been violated, nor has multiple IDs 
affected the fairness and transparency when the sam e was anyway permitted and widely 
known and no principle of auction has been compromised. There was no case of multiple bids 
being placed from a single EUP in contravention of the tender conditions.  
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that in the e-auction process, bidding was 
to be made for SEUP/s and only one bid could be submitted for one coal mine for a SEUP. So 
the automated system (i.e. the e-auction Platform o f the MSTC) should be designed in a 
manner where the registration (which was unique) wa s linked and mapped to the SEUP also. 
This would also have resulted in a validation check  in the system itself. Further, the fact 
whether a single company had submitted two bids in an auction with same SEUP, was only 
being checked manually at the time of ‘Technical Ev aluation’ by the technical committee, 
which made the system vulnerable to human error.  
     
  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
43 
 
Chapter 7 -     Operationalisation of Coal Mines 
The Act had categorised the coal mines/blocks in va rious schedules. As discussed in Chapter 
2, Schedule II included 42 Schedule I mines that we re under production at the time of their 
cancellation or were about to start production. Sch edule III mines included 32 Schedule I 
mines that were earmarked for specified end use.  
In the wake of the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s judgment , a preliminary contingency plan was 
prepared by Ministry of Coal (MOC) in October 2014,  which analysed the ‘preparedness of 
captive coal blocks for mining’. It brought out tha t out of 32 Schedule III mines/blocks, eight 
mines were such where environment clearance (EC) an d forest clearance (FC) had been 
received and substantial land had been acquired. Th ese mines could be opened/mined in 3-6 
months period after obtaining mining lease (ML) and  mine operation permission. Further, 
remaining 24 coal mines were such mines which were fully explored, the mining plans were 
ready, substantial amount of land had been acquired  and statutory clearance such as EC and 
FC (Stage I) had been obtained. In such cases, mini ng could be started within a period of six-
eighteen months after obtaining remaining clearances and approvals. 
In this context, Audit analysed the status of produ ction of coal from the successfully 
auctioned coal mines in the first two tranches of e-auction. Results of Audit are as follows: 
7.1  Status of Operationalisation of the Successfully Auctioned Coal Mines 
Audit noticed from scrutiny of records provided by MOC that out of the 29 successfully 
auctioned coal mines, vesting orders had been issue d in respect of 26 coal mines (15 of 
Schedule II and 11 of Schedule III as detailed in Annexure V ). In case of the remaining three 
coal mines (Ardhagram, Utkal-C and Mandakini) vesti ng orders were not issued due to 
pending court cases.  
MOC informed (May 2016) that in ten 
21   Schedule II coal mines and one 22  Schedule III coal 
mine, production of coal was started/mine opening permission was granted.  
7.2  Status of Remaining Schedule II Coal Mines 
As per the Coal Mines Development and Production Ag reement (CMDPA), pre-
commencement reports were to be submitted by successful bidders once every thirty calendar  
 
                                                 
21  Amelia North, Belgaon, Bicharpur, Chotia, Gare Palma I V/4, Gare Palma IV/5, Mandla North, Sarisatolli, Si al Ghoghri, 
Talabira-I. 
22  Mandla South.  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
44 
days prior to commencement of mining operations. Th ese reports were to contain, inter alia , 
details of action taken by the successful bidders t owards commencement of the mining 
operations. Scrutiny of the pre-commencement reports for March 2016, furnished by MOC in 
May 2016, revealed that various approvals/clearance s were pending for five 23  Schedule II 
coal mines (two of power sector 24 ) at the Central Government level, State Government s level 
and at the level of allottees themselves. Vesting o rders for these coal mines were issued in 
March 2015 (for four coal mines) and April 2015 (fo r one coal mine 25 ). Details of the 
pending processes at various levels are given below: 
Table 8 :  Process Pending with Central Government (details in Annexure VI) 
Permissions/ 
Approvals 
Time limit in months 
for completion (from 
issue of vesting order) 
Name of coal mine 
Opening permission 
from CCO 26  03 Gare Palma IV/7 Trans Damodar 
Ground water 
clearance 03 Kathautia Trans Damodar 
Mine closure plan 06 Gare Palma IV/7 - 
 
Table 9 :  Process Pending with State Governments (details in Annexure VII) 
Permissions/ 
Approvals 
Time limit in months 
for completion (from 
issue of vesting order) 
Name of coal mine 
Opening permission 
from DGMS 03 Gare Palma IV/7 Trans Damodar 
Consent to operate 03 Kathautia Tokisud North 
Land Diversion/ 
Mutation 03 Tokisud North Kathautia 
Explosive Licence 03 Kathautia Marki 
Mangli III 
Tokisud 
North 
Trans 
Damodar 
Railway siding 
approval 03 Tokisud North 
Grant of mining 
lease 03 Kathautia Marki 
Mangli III 
Tokisud 
North 
Gare 
Palma 
IV/7 
 
                                                 
23  Gare Palma IV/7, Trans Damodar, Kathautia, Tokisud North, Marki Mangli III 
24  Two mines of Power  Sector i.e. Trans Damodar and Tokisud North 
25   Marki Mangli III coal mine (non-regulated sector). 
26  Coal Controller’s Organisation  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
45 
 
 
Table 10 :  Process Pending on the Part of Allottees (details in Annexure VIII) 
Permissions/ 
Approvals 
Time limit in months 
for completion (from 
issue of vesting order) 
Name of coal mine 
Ground Water 
Clearance 03 Marki Mangli III - 
Environment 
Clearance 03 Marki Mangli III - 
Electricity Supply 03 Trans Damodar - 
Opening permission 
from DGMS 03 Marki Mangli III - 
Opening of Escrow 
Account 06 Trans Damodar Tokisud North 
Mine Closure Plan 
(MCP) 
10 
(For revised MCP) Marki Mangli III - 
 
All these cases should be further seen in light of the fact that as per the efficiency parameters 
given in the CMDPA, these clearances should have be en completed within six months from 
the signing of vesting order i.e. by September/Octo ber 2015. This became more significant in 
cases where the process was pending at the level of allottees themselves.  
7.3  Status of Remaining Schedule III Coal Mines 
Audit also analysed the status of pending clearance s/approvals in 10 out of 11 successfully 
auctioned Schedule III coal mines where production had not started. The vesting orders for 
these coal mines were issued in April 2015. As per the efficiency parameters laid down in 
CMDPA, various statutory approvals/clearances were to be obtained by the allottee within a 
period of three months to forty four months. Analys is of the status of clearances/approvals, 
which were to be issued in 12 months from issue of vesting order, revealed that the allottee of 
Nerad Malegaon coal mine had submitted the mine clo sure plan (MCP) to MOC for approval 
in October 2015. However, the MCP was not approved by MOC till March 2016 as against 
the prescribed time of 11 months under CMDPA. This delay might lead to delayed 
operationalisation of the coal mine. 
The above analysis revealed that production in the auctioned coal mines was pending for 
various approvals/clearances at the Central Governm ent and State Governments level and for 
necessary action at the level of individual allotte es also. Further, it was noticed in audit that 
the risk of sustainability of the model adopted for  auctioning of power sector coal mines 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
46 
 
could have contributed in the delays in operational isation of the pending power sector coal 
mines.  
7.4  MOC’s Reply and Comments 
Ministry in its replies (November 2015, January 201 6 and March 2016) stated that specific 
pending issues have been taken up with the relevant  authorities and many issues are getting 
resolved. Several mines could not be operationalised due to court cases instituted by the prior 
allottees. The Central Government transferred the e ntitlement to the mining plans, mine 
closure plans and prior approvals for grant of mini ng lease with the vesting orders itself to 
expedite the process. A predominant majority of pen ding permits/clearances etc are at the 
State level. The status with regard to the coal min es for which vesting order had been issued 
was being reviewed regularly at the highest levels.  
The main objective for early auctioning of the Sche dule II and Schedule III coal mines was 
that they could be brought under production speedil y, as they were already producing/likely 
to produce at the time of de-allocation and to achi eve the objectives of energy security of the 
country and minimising impact on core sectors such as steel, cement and power utilities, 
which are vital for the development of the nation. Though efforts were made at the 
Government level to start production from these coa l mines, the fact remained that only in 11 
out of 26 coal mines production could be started/mi ne opening permission was granted till 
May 2016.    
  
Pendency of various approvals at the level of the C entral Government, State 
Governments and with the allottees themselves affec ted the achievement of the very 
objectives of early auctioning of these coal mines. 
 
 
  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
47 
 
Chapter 8 -  Monitoring Mechanism 
 
8.1  Introduction 
The e-auction mechanism of coal mines had multiple 27  conditions for extraction and 
utilisation of coal by the successful bidders. Thos e conditions were necessary to ensure that 
the coal resources were optimally extracted as per the plan, utilised in the manner and 
purpose for which the mines were allocated and interest of exchequer was protected.  
In terms of rule 13(5) of the Rules, the successful  allottees entered into Coal Mine 
Development and Production Agreement (CMDPA) with N ominated Authority (NA). 
CMDPA prescribed various conditions for extraction and utilisation of coal, which were to be 
adhered by the allottee of the coal mines. CMDPA al so prescribed the following 
reports/returns to be prepared and sent by allottee s to the Government to monitor compliance 
with the agreement:  
Table 11 :  Reports/Returns to be Provided by Successful Bidders as per CMDPA 
Reports  Information to be provided  Returns/Report to 
be submitted to  
Pre commencement 
report  
• Information for commencement of the mining 
operation including commencement plan, every 
thirty calendar days. 
• Also provide details of deviation from the 
commencement plan, reason for the deviation and 
rectification thereof. 
 
 
Nominated 
Authority 
Commencement 
report  
Intimation regarding commencement of mining 
operation within three business days of the 
commencement. 
Nominated 
Authority 
 
Monthly report  Details of compliance with efficiency parameters an d 
reasons for non-compliance, if any. 
Coal Controller’s 
Organisation 
Yearly report  Copies of final accounts along with statutory audit or’s 
report 
Coal Controller’s 
Organisation 
Engagement of 
contractors  
Certified copy of any contract relating to mining 
operation to be submitted within 15 business days o f its 
execution. 
Nominated 
Authority 
 
  
                                                 
27  Extraction of coal as per mine plan; use of extract ed coal in specified end use plant only; in case of  utilisation of coal in 
any other specified end use plant prior permission required; coal extracted in excess of the entitleme nt should be supplied 
to Coal India Limited (CIL) at fixed rate offer for power sector and at CIL notified price for non-regulated sector etc.   

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
48 
Further, as per the CMDPA, NA had the right to: 
• Inspect, through its authorised representative, the  mining activities in order to monitor 
and verify the compliance with CMDPA. 
• Have access, through its authorised representative, to the successful bidder’s financial and 
other records (related to any period) at any time upon reasonable advance notice. 
• Conduct performance audit directly/indirectly or through third party. 
The above reveals that it was planned that the two offices i.e. NA and Coal Controller’s 
Organisation (CCO) were to be responsible for monit oring the adherence of CMDPA 
conditions by the allottees of e-auctioned coal mines. Further, the agreement had provided for 
regular sources of information and powers for check ing adherence to the CMDPA conditions 
to the Government.  
In this context, Audit checked the preparation for and status of the monitoring mechanism at 
both these organisations. 
8.2  Monitoring by Nominated Authority 
Audit noticed that NA had adopted/planned to adopt following mechanism to monitor the 
compliance with all the terms and conditions specified in CMDPA:   
• Directed all the successful bidders to furnish info rmation related to commencement plan 
and also designed a report on production of coal an d payments (Form MRPC&P-1 28 ), to 
be submitted on monthly basis.  
• A stand–alone database to monitor the financial obl igations by the successful bidder 
covering monthly payments, upfront amount, fixed amount and performance security.   
• The physical performance in respect of each mine wa s being monitored based on the 
information received from successful bidders vis-à-vis the conditions laid in the CMDPA. 
• A web-based application for online monitoring of th e compliance covering post vesting 
obligations by the successful bidder was under deve lopment. It planned to cover 
submission of commencement plan, payment of upfront  amount, performance security 
and appropriation, submission of periodic reports t o NA (regarding mining operations), 
utilisation of coal, monthly payments and escalation etc. 
 
During the audit of NA, it was noticed that: 
                                                 
28  Monthly Report for Production of Coal and Payments   

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
49 
 
 
• Form MRPC&P-1 was designed for bidders to submit se lf-certified monthly report to NA 
in respect of quantity produced, quantity dispatche d and payment due thereon. The said 
proforma did not capture, inter alia , destination of quantity dispatched, destination w here 
extracted coal was used, quantity of coal used and extent of merchant and regulated 
power produced by the allottee (for power sector mines).  
• Absence of these information would have an inherent  risk of lack of comprehensive and 
effective monitoring over utilisation of coal for i ntended purpose and end use plants. 
Further, the quantities of actual utilisation of co al also could not be tracked from this 
form.  
• The monitoring mechanism at NA was still under proc ess of evolution (March 2016), 
after expiry of more than 11 months of the issue of the first set of vesting orders in respect 
of coal mines e-auctioned.  
• Audit could not find details of any plan for and me chanism by which the physical 
inspections to check the actual status in field would be ensured by NA.  
Ministry of Coal (MOC) replied (March 2016) that CM DPA clearly mentioned the details of 
end use plant, where the extracted coal would be di spatched/used including the penal clauses 
on diversion of coal. There was, therefore, no need  for capturing the destination and end use 
plant of dispatched coal in the proforma. The monit oring mechanism, as laid down in 
CMDPA, included pre-commencement reports, commencem ent plans etc. which were 
regularly monitored by NA. Several measures had bee n implemented, while others were 
under implementation including an online web based portal. It was true that the monitoring 
mechanism of NA was still under process of evolution.  
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact s that Audit could not find any document 
relating to the plan and methodology to monitor act ual dispatch and utilisation of coal to a 
specific end use plant. Further, CMDPA’s penal clau ses would have no impact till a proper 
monitoring mechanism was put in place which could d etect instances of violations, so that 
these penal clauses could be used. Moreover, MOC ac cepted that the monitoring mechanism 
of NA was still under process of evolution. 
The monitoring mechanism at NA was inadequate and u nder evolution even after a 
lapse of 11 months (March 2016) since the allocation of the mines for first two tranches. 
 
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
50 
8.3  Monitoring by Coal Controller’s Organisation 
The duties and functions of CCO have been discussed  in Chapter 2 of this report. MOC, as 
per existing order (January 2005), decided that clo se monitoring of the progress made by the 
successful allottees of the captive mine might be c arried out by CCO. In respect of mines 
permitted for operation, as approved by MOC, the co py of mining plan was forwarded to 
CCO. CCO was also required to furnish six-monthly r eport to MOC with regard to each 
allottee after obtaining required confirmation from  the allottees, which were to be placed 
before a committee headed by the Additional Secreta ry (Coal) to monitor the development of 
allocated coal mines. Further, CCO was entrusted to  accord opening permission for the 
mines, checking of coal grades, collection of stowi ng excise duty and monitoring of various 
infrastructural works at the mines of allottees. Th e monitoring of coal mines including 
captive coal mines in terms of various rules framed  by MOC were carried out by CCO 
through its officers on special duty (OSD) stationed in seven regions, spread over the country. 
The monitoring activities of OSD mainly involved qu ality surveillance through collection of 
coal samples and analysis for determining the quali ty of coal produced, physical verification 
of activities and monitoring of compliance of the allottees on mine closure plans.  
8.3.1  Emerging Role of CCO for Monitoring of e-Auctioned Mines 
The vesting orders, issued after conduct of e-aucti on of coal mines, inter alia , envisaged 
transfer of the erstwhile approved mine plan to the  new allottees on the same terms and 
conditions as approved for the prior allottees. The  CMDPA, inter alia , stipulated various 
terms and conditions for utilisation of coal by the  allottees and monitoring mechanism for 
operation of the mines, as discussed in Para 8.1 ab ove. In addition to the duties mentioned in 
table 11 (in respect to CMDPA), CCO was also author ised by MOC in December 2014 to 
collect additional levy in respect of Schedule II coal mines. 
However, Audit could not find any record/system at CCO to show that these conditions were 
to be monitored and the system by which this monito ring was to be done. It was also noticed 
that this was not included in the work of monitorin g being done by CCO through the OSD. 
Therefore, the monitoring system at CCO was inadequate to that extent. 
Further, scrutiny of records relating to the activi ties of successful bidders monitored by CCO 
revealed that based on opening permission accorded to seven coal mines, six mines 
commenced operation from April 2015. They had been providing information on the monthly 
production and dispatch of coal only. No other info rmation or reports were submitted by 
them as required under CMDPA.  

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
51 
 
 
From the monthly report submitted by them, it could  not be ascertained whether the coal was 
being used in the specified end use plant and wheth er the bidders had complied with the 
efficiency parameters regarding extraction and util isation of coal. Further, Audit could not 
find any document relating to devising of any mecha nism for monitoring of the mining 
activities of the bidders vis-à-vis the terms of various statutes, rules, mining plans etc.  
As highlighted earlier in the Performance Audit Rep ort of Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India on Allocation of coal blocks and Augmentat ion of Coal Production (Report No. 7 of         
2012-13), CCO did not have adequate sanctioned stre ngth or men-in-position for effective 
monitoring of coal blocks. Further, the Standing Co mmittee on Coal and Steel in its 31 st  
report presented in Parliament in April 2013 had al so strongly recommended the Government 
to take immediate steps to strengthen the office of CCO. 
CCO in reply (September 2015) stated that CCO had n ot been entrusted by MOC to monitor 
freshly allotted/vested mines. The reply, however, was silent on the non-compliance of 
monitoring mechanism as contemplated under CMDPA.  
MOC in its reply (March 2016) stated that as per th e Colliery Control Rules, 2004 CCO 
already had the authority to seek information on production, including the authority to inspect 
collieries. There was, therefore, no need to put a new legal framework in place for the 
purpose. 
MOC’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact  that CCO stated that they had not been 
entrusted by MOC to monitor freshly allotted/vested  mines. Moreover, analysis of the 
monitoring being carried out by CCO revealed that, successful bidders had been providing 
information on the monthly production and dispatch of coal only. No other information or 
reports were submitted by them to CCO as required under CMDPA.  
Further, contradictory replies of MOC and CCO clear ly implied that there was lack of clarity 
for the respective roles and responsibilities for c arrying out various  aspects of monitoring to 
ensure compliance of the terms and conditions of CMDPA.  
The monitoring mechanism at CCO was suffering from weaknesses in planning and 
implementation especially in the evolving scenario after the e-auctions.  
 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
52 
 
8.3.2  Discrepancies in the Production Data Furnished by Prior Allottees 
It was noticed that production figures certified by  statutory auditors were furnished by prior 
allottees for the purpose of calculation and deposi t of additional levy to CCO. Production 
figures submitted to CCO by 19 prior allottees situ ated in four States (West Bengal, 
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra), based on which additional levy was collected by 
CCO, were cross checked in audit with reference to the production figures submitted by them 
to the respective State Directorate of Mines for assessment and payment of royalty.  
 
It was noticed that in case of eight prior allottee s, there was a mismatch in both sets of 
figures. In case of two allottees, production figur es reported at CCO were less than those 
reported to respective State Governments. In six ca ses, the production figures submitted to 
the respective State Governments were less than the ones reported to CCO. Details of the two 
cases are as follows: 
Table 12 :  Cases where Production Reported to CCO were Lesser than those 
Reported to the State Governments 
Name of Coal 
mine  Prior allottee  
Production 
figures (to 
CCO) (in 
MT)  
Production 
figures (to 
State 
Governments) 
(in MT)  
Difference 
in 
production  
(in MT)  
Difference 
in 
additional 
levy ( `` `` in 
crore)  
Gare Palma 
IV/5  
Monnet Ispat 
Energy Limited  8573105  8657005  83900  2.48  
Ardhagram  
Sova Ispat Limited 
and Jai Balaji 
Sponge 
733416  764916  31500  0.93  
 
CCO in its reply (September 2015) stated that addit ional levy was collected on the basis of 
certificate of Chartered Accountant/statistical ret urn for coal production as furnished by the 
prior allottees. No other mechanism to check the au thenticity of production data was 
available with CCO.  
 
There was no mechanism to cross check the productio n figures given by the prior 
allottees indicating absence of regular monitoring and inspections of coal mines, which 
was one of the important activities of CCO.  
 
 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
53 
 
 
8.4  Imposition and Collection of Additional Levy 
During the scrutiny of records relating to impositi on and collection of additional levy at CCO 
office it was noticed that out of 42 Schedule II mi nes, 39 mines were operational and 
produced coal and were required to deposit addition al levy. These mines had produced  
34.46 crore MT of coal up to 31 March 2015 as per c ertificates from Chartered 
Accountants/self-certificates submitted by the prio r allottees, which were considered for 
collection of additional levy. Based on the above p roduction figure, the prior allottees  
were required to deposit `10165.12 crore against which `6628.56 crore only was collected  
as additional levy till May 2016. Details of cases where additional levy was not received  
or less amount was received are given in Annexure IX. Thus `3536.56 crore was pending  
as additional levy for collection from the prior allottees. 
It was also noticed that a contempt petition had be en filed by MOC in February 2015 against 
the defaulters who had not paid additional levy.  
8.5  Compliance with Mine Closure Plans 
MOC issued guidelines on mine closure plan in Augus t 2009, which was subsequently 
amended in January 2012, April 2012 and January 201 3.  In terms of the guidelines for mine 
closure plan, 42 producing captive coal mines/block s included in Schedule II and 32 non-
producing captive coal mines/blocks under Schedule III were required to submit the approved 
mining closure plans to CCO. Further, these 42 prod ucing mines/blocks of Schedule II were 
required to open escrow accounts and deposit annual  mine-closure cost in the account. Audit 
observed that CCO failed to ensure the compliance o f various provisions of the mine closure 
plan as discussed below: 
• Prior allottees of 22 (out of the 42) Schedule II c oal mines, and 24 (out of the 32) 
Schedule III mines had not submitted approved mine closure plans to CCO. 
• Out of the 20 prior allottees of Schedule II coal m ines, who had submitted approved mine 
closure plans and also opened escrow account, only seven prior allottees (of mines e-
auctioned during 1
st  and 2 nd  tranche) had deposited the mine closure cost in th e escrow 
account. Further, out of the seven prior allottees, five allottees had made a short deposit of 
`8.30 crore against the liability of `17.48 crore in this regard.   

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
54 
 
• The prior allottees of captive mines that had opene d escrow account and deposited mine 
closure cost upto 2014-15 had not submitted the det ails of land use activities to determine 
the extent of expenditure to be reimbursed to prior  allottees from the escrow account on 
account of mine closure activities already carried out by them and further liability, if any.  
• As required under the guidelines, they had not subm itted any annual report to CCO 
regarding the extent of protective and rehabilitati ve work carried out by them for the 
mines. MOC/CCO had also not initiated any penal act ion against the defaulting prior 
allottees in terms of guidelines.  
CCO stated (September 2015) that they were regularl y pursuing the defaulting party to open 
the escrow account and to deposit the required amou nt. The matter of defaulting cases was 
being reported to MOC regularly. Further, necessary  communications were made (September 
2015) to all the prior allottees whose coal mines h ad been cancelled to get the certification of 
work done and submit the same to CCO for further action.  
Though the CMDPA prescribed various conditions rela ting to production and 
utilisation of coal from the e-auctioned coal mines , these were not being properly 
monitored at any level. Moreover, the roles and res ponsibilities for various aspects of 
monitoring and corresponding coordination mechanism  were not adequately defined. 
This was further accentuated by the fact that CCO w as ineffective in even performing 
the existing responsibilities relating to the coal mines and was also devoid of necessary 
resources for that purpose.  
 
8.6  Other Significant Issues 
 
8.6.1  Diversion of Coal 
The Act and the CMDPA provided that the allottee ma y use the coal from an allocated coal 
mine for any plant of the company or its subsidiary  company, engaged in common specified 
end uses after providing written intimation (Divers ion Notice) to the Central Government. 
Audit noticed that CESC Limited, the allottee of Sarisatolli coal mine, diverted coal from this 
mine to its ‘other plants’. 
Power sector coal mines were auctioned with the obj ective of providing cheaper power to the 
consumers. In such a scenario it was important to e nsure that the benefit of the low cost of 
diverted coal was passed on to the consumers of the  power produced by the ‘other power 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
55 
 
 
plants’. It was, however, not clear as to how MOC a nd/or Ministry of Power (MOP) ensured, 
that benefit of the low costs of diverted coal was passed on to the consumers of the  
power produced by the ‘other power plants’, to the extent of the coal diverted to the  
‘other power plant’. 
MOC replied (January 2016 and March 2016) that:  
• MOP had issued directions to Central Electricity Re gulatory Commission (CERC) and 
State Governments, on 16 April 2015, for the power projects using coal from the 
auctioned/allotted coal mines, to ensure that the b enefits of the mined coal are passed on 
to the consumers and were also applicable for the d iverted coal from auctioned/allotted 
coal mines.  
• All the concerned stakeholders have been apprised o f all the diversion notices received so 
far and have been requested to ensure that the bene fit of the cost of coal extracted from 
the coal mine is passed on to the consumers of the plants, in accordance with the tender 
conditions. 
• Comments of the MOP were sought on diversion proposals before approval and there was 
no delay on the part of MOC. MOP was aware of the i ssue well before the decision was 
taken. 
MOC’s replies need to be viewed in light of the fac t that though the vesting order of 
Sarisatolli coal mine was issued on 23 March 2015 a nd the proposed diversions were 
approved in August 2015, but the intimations of the  proposed diversions were given to the 
MOP, CERC, SERC and the concerned State Government only on 20 January 2016, after the 
issue was raised by Audit.   
Audit could not draw an assurance that a system was  put in place to ensure that the 
diversion details are sent timely to the concerned authorities to ensure passing of benefit 
of the low costs of diverted coal to the consumers of the ‘other power plant’ where coal 
was diverted. 
 
  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
56 
Chapter 9 -  Conclusion  
In September 2014, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Ind ia cancelled the allocation of 204 coal 
blocks made by Ministry of Coal (MOC) since 1993. A  new framework for allocation of the 
cancelled coal mines was laid down by Promulgation of Coal Mines (Special Provisions) 
Ordinance 2014. This was followed by notification of Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rules, 
2014 to operationalise provisions of the said Ordin ance and uploading Standard Tender 
Document (STD) in December 2014. The notification o f the Coal Mines (Special Provisions) 
Act, 2015 was done in March 2015.  
• The new mechanism for e-auction of coal mines was a n improvement over the earlier 
system and attempted to incorporate the principles of objectivity, transparency and 
fairness in allocation of natural resources to priv ate sector participants. However, Audit 
observed that there were some systemic and procedur al issues which needed to be 
addressed for further improvement in the e-auction mechanism. 
• Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approv ed a methodology for valuation 
of coal mines/blocks by calculating their intrinsic  value and the floor/reserve price. Audit 
noticed inconsistencies and inaccuracies in followi ng certain assumptions and various 
errors in computation of intrinsic values. Revised calculation of intrinsic value was 
carried out by incorporating revised elements of co sts and revenue after considering all 
the deficiencies together in individual coal mines.  There was under determination of 
upfront amounts in 15 coal mines by 
`381.83 crore, under determination of floor prices in 
six non-regulated sector coal mines and revised fix ed rates in all nine power sector coal 
mines.   
• After the Nominated Authority (NA) made the recomme ndations in respect of the 
preferred bidder for 32 coal mines, MOC returned the cases of eight coal mines to NA for 
re-examination. After submission of results of re-e xamination carried out on various 
parameters by NA, MOC examined these eight cases an d thereafter, rejected the 
recommendation of the Nominated Authority for decla ration of the ‘preferred bidder’ as 
‘Successful Bidder’ in respect of three coal mines and preferred bidders were declared as 
successful bidders in the other five cases. Audit i s of the view that there was a need for 
framing of broad guidelines including various param eters considered relevant by MOC 

Report No. 20 of 2016 
 
57 
 
for evaluation of final bid prices to enhance trans parency of the bidding process and help 
in eliminating avoidable litigation. 
• The ultimate objective of auction of coal mines for  the power sector is to augment power 
production for benefit of the economy. Audit is of the view that in the light of 
vulnerabilities like stipulations regarding non-rec overy of various charges from power 
consumers, weaknesses in the monitoring system and bank guarantee not being valid for 
the life of the mine, the risk of non-compliance wi th contractual obligations was high. 
These may adversely affect the sustainability of the model in the long run.    
• The e-auction was planned to provide cheaper coal t o power producers for the ultimate 
objective of providing cheaper power. In this conte xt, the CCEA approved methodology 
for fixing floor/reserve price provided that the co al used for merchant power was to cost 
more than the coal used for generation of electrici ty to be sold at regulated rates. 
However, after introduction of reverse then forward  bidding, the concept of additional 
premium was introduced. But this component of additional premium was excluded for the 
quantum of coal utilised for generation of power so ld on merchant basis. This resulted in 
a scenario where the power producers would be payin g lesser amount to the Government 
on utilisation of coal for producing power to be sold on merchant basis as compared to the 
coal utilised for production of power to be sold un der the power purchase agreements 
(PPAs). 
• The e-auction process was carried out on the online  e-auction platform provided by 
MSTC Limited. It was noticed in audit that there wa s inadequate audit trail and non-
linking of specified end use plants with the registration ids. 
• Though various efforts were being made by the Gover nment to start production from the 
successfully auctioned coal mines, only in 11 out o f 26 coal mines, for which vesting 
orders were issued, production could be started/min e opening permissions were granted 
till May 2016. In respect of the remaining coal min es, production could not start as 
various statutory approvals were pending at the Cen tral Government level, State 
Governments level and also at the level of allottee s themselves. Delay in 
operationalisation of these coal mines had the pote ntial to adversely affect an important 
objective of early auctioning of these coal mines, which was to ensure continuity in coal 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
58 
production thereby minimising adverse impact on cor e sectors such as steel, cement and 
power utilities. 
• As per the terms and conditions of allocation of mi nes, which were also detailed in Coal 
Mine Development and Production Agreement (CMPDA), there were various 
requirements relating to extraction and utilisation  of coal as well as payments to be made 
to the Government. Therefore, there was a need for strong and effective monitoring over 
extraction and utilisation of coal. However, it was  noticed in Audit that the monitoring 
mechanism at Nominated Authority was under process of evolution. There was lack of 
clarity on the roles and responsibilities for vario us aspects of monitoring of the                 
e-auctioned mines at the Coal Controller’s Organisa tion (CCO), which was further 
accentuated by the weaknesses in the system, processes and resources at their disposal.  
 
 
 
                                                             
                                               
                                                     
                              

Report No.20 of 2016 
I  
Annexure I (refer Para 2.13)  
Coal Mines put up for e-Auction during 1 st  and 2 nd  Tranche 
S. No Name of Coal mines Tranche Schedule Sector Remarks 
 
1 Amelia North 1st  Schedule II Power  Vesting order issued 
2 Ardhagram 1st  Schedule II Non- regulated Vesting order  not issued 
3 Belgaon 1st  Schedule II Non- regulated Vesting order issued 
4 Bicharpur 1st  Schedule II Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
5 Chotia  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
6 Gare Palma IV/1  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Cancelled by MOC  
7 Gare Palma IV/2  & 3  1st  Schedule II  Power  Cancelled By MOC  
8 Gare Palma IV/4  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
9 Gare Palma IV/5  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
10 Gare Palma IV/7  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
11 Kathautia  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
12 Mandla North  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
13 Marki Mangli -I 1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Annulled as less than three 
qualified bidders  
14 Marki Mangli -III  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
15 Prabhatpur Central  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Annulled as less than three 
qualified bidders  
16 Tokisud North  1st  Schedule II  Power  Vesting order issued  
17 Trans Damodar  1st  Schedule II  Power  Vesting order issued  
18 Sarisatolli  1st  Schedule II  Power  Vesting order issued  
19 Sial Ghoghri  1st  Schedule II  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
20 Talabira-I 1st  Schedule II  Power  Vesting order issued  
21-22 Brinda & Sasai  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
23 Dongri Tal-II  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Annulled as less than three 
qualified bidders  
24 Dumri  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
25 Ganeshpur  2nd  Schedule III  Power  Vesting order issued  
26 Gare Palma IV/8  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
II 
S. No Name of Coal mines Tranche Schedule Sector Remarks 
 
27 Jamkhani  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Withdrawn by MOC due to 
court case  
28 Jitpur  2nd  Schedule III  Power  Vesting order issued  
29 Kosar Dongergaon  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Annulled as less than three 
qualified bidders  
30 Lohari  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
31 Mandakini  2nd  Schedule III  Power  Vesting order  not issued  
32 Mandla South  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
33 Meral  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
34 Moitra  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
35 Nerad Malegaon  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Vesting order issued  
36 Rohne  2nd  Schedule III  Non- regulated  Withdrawn by MOC for 
Ministry of Steel  
37 Tara  2nd  Schedule III  Power  Cancelled by MOC  
38 Utkal C  2nd  Schedule III  Power  Vesting order  not issued  
 
***** 
 

Report No.20 of 2016 
III  
Annexure II (refer Para 4.1)  
Computation of Intrinsic Value by CMPDIL – Details of Audit Observations, Reply of MOC/CMPDIL and Audit 
Comments on the Replies 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
1 Deficiencies in 
Consideration of 
Grade of Coal 
A coal mine  contains different grades 
of coal. In view of availability of 
different grades, it was assumed to 
work out weighted average grade (of 
different available extractable grades) 
of coal and average grade so 
determined was taken for valuation of 
coal mines. However, following 
discrepancies were noted in 
determination of grade: 
 
   
  Belgaon Mine 
Mine Plan stipulated average grade of 
coal as D, hence as per norm worked 
out by MOC for conversion of grade 
from UHV to GCV, the resultant GCV 
should have been 5089 (G8). 
However, CMPDIL considered GCV 
of 4597 (G10) for valuation as 
provided by the prior-allottee 
 
Under   
Valuation 
of Mine 
The grade considered in certain 
cases was for initial evaluation 
only to ascertain whether the 
NPV of the mine was positive. 
Reply not acceptable as estimation 
of revenue should have been done 
on the basis of correct grade of 
coal regardless of positive or 
negative NPV of the mine.  
  Mandla South Mine  
There was total reserve of coal of 
80.400 MT consisting of A to E grade. 
Out of 80.400 MT, grade C consist of 
Under  
valuation 
of Mine 
The grade considered in certain 
cases was for initial evaluation 
only to ascertain whether the 
NPV of the mine was positive. 
Reply not acceptable as estimation 
of revenue should have been done 
on the basis of correct grade of 
coal regardless of positive or 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
IV 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
30.260 MT (38 per cent ) and grade D 
of 28.499 MT (35 per cent ) and rest of 
other grades. Thus, grade C had more 
quantity than grade D, however, for 
valuation G8 grade was determined 
considering D as  the average grade. 
The mine has extractable reserve of 
13.35 MT of which grade-wise detail 
was not available in the Mine Plan. 
Thus, considering grade-wise 
percentage of total reserve (in absence 
of grade-wise extractable reserve) and 
taking into account moisture content 
of five per cent, the average grade 
should have been G7 instead of G8. 
 
negative NPV of the mine .  
  Ardhagram Mine 
As per Mine Plan, UG part had seam 1 
no. VI to IV which were extractable. 
Taking into account seam-wise 
extractable reserve, average grade 
should have been G7. However, 
CMPDIL had taken G8 grade for 
valuation without considering seam 
no. IV. Seam no. IV contained higher 
grade consisting of 44 per cent  of the 
extractable reserve (8.6 MT out of 
19.29 MT). 
Under       
valuation 
of Mine 
The grade considered in certain 
cases was for initial evaluation 
only to ascertain whether the 
NPV of the mine was positive. 
Reply not acceptable as estimation 
of revenue should have been done 
on the basis of correct grade of 
coal regardless of positive or 
negative NPV of the mine.  
                                                 
1  A bed of coal usually thick enough to be profitably mined. 

Report No.20 of 2016 
V  
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
  Brinda and Sasai Mine 
In grade determination of UG portion 
of the mine, 18.186 MT of mineable 
reserve was considered instead of 
10.20 MT of extractable reserve. As a 
result, grade determined for valuation 
was G7 in place of G8 
 
Over  
Valuation 
of Mine 
The grade considered in certain 
cases was for initial evaluation 
only to ascertain whether the 
NPV of the mine was positive. 
Reply not acceptable as estimation 
of revenue should have been done 
on the basis of correct grade of 
coal regardless of positive or 
negative NPV of the mine.  
2 Deficiencies in 
consideration of 
Mine Closure 
Cost 
The Guidelines is sued (August 2009) 
by MOC for preparation of Mine 
Closure Plan and subsequent 
modification (January 2013) thereof 
stipulates computation of mine closure 
cost at the base rate (August 2009) of 
`6.00 lakh per hectare (Ha) for 
Opencast Project (OCP) and ` 1.00 
lakh per Ha for Underground (UG) 
mine of the total project area, “which 
was increased to ` 9.00 lakh per 
hectare and `1.5 lakh per hectare 
based on WPI (January 2015)” and 
“compounded”. Further, to derive the 
annual mine closure cost, the mine 
closure cost so computed is divided by 
the entire life of the mine in case of a 
new project or balance life of the mine 
in case of an operating/existing mine. 
It was noted that: 
 
   

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
VI 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
  In contrary to the guideline, CMPDIL 
considered period of 25 years for 
computation of mine closure cost in 
respect of 19 2 mines where life of 
mines was more than 25 years. 
However, in case of Mandla South 
mine having life of 50 years, mine 
closure cost was computed considering 
the period of 30 years, which was in 
deviation of its own assumption of 25 
year.  
Under   
valuation 
of Mines 
It has been a well set practice to 
consider a period of 25 years or 
mine life whichever is less for 
charging the mine closure cost 
for techno–economic evaluation 
of coal mining projects. The 
same approach has been used for 
valuation of coal mines for 
auctioning. Further, difference 
in annual mine closure cost due 
to above consideration would 
have marginal effect on 
valuation of coal mines. 
 
The fact remained that 
consideration of 25 years of mine 
life for computation of mine 
closure cost was deviation of the 
provisions of guideline on mine 
closure cost.  
  The mine summary of coal mine s 
shows the mining lease area and the 
project area out of the mining lease area 
separately. CMPDIL considered the 
mining lease area instead of the project 
area for computing mine closure cost, 
which resulted in consideration of 
excess mine closure cost in six 3 coal 
mines.   
Under  
valuation 
of Mines 
In Jitpur, 541 Ha of land also 
included 241 Ha of land outside 
the geological mine. In Tokisud 
North and Kathautia, 237 Ha 
and 687.93 Ha of land had been 
earmarked for quarry excavation 
area and was not the project 
area. In Mandla South, the 
project area of coal mine, as 
envisaged by the mine planner 
with the available information 
Reply is not convincing since as 
per the guidelines of January 
2013, the mine closure cost was to 
be computed on the basis of the 
total project area. Accordingly, 
Audit considered project area of 
237 Ha (Tokisud North), 560 Ha 
(Mandla South), 687.93 Ha 
(Kathautia), 294.86 Ha (Trans 
Damodar) and 300 Ha (Jitpur) as 
contained in the respective Mining 
                                                 
2  Kathautia (33 years), Gare Palma IV/7 (52 years),  Trans Damodar (48 years), Jitpur (27 years), Moitr a (33 years), Dumri (49 years), Utkal C (41 years),  Belgaon (39 years), 
Ardhagram (48 years), Gare Palma IV/5 (45 years), B icharpur (41 years), Brinda and Sasai (56 years), M eral (29 years), Nerad Malegaon (OC-28, UG-35 years), Mandla South ( 50 
years), Lohari (45 years), Mandakini (40 years), Gare Palma IV/8 (OC-19, UG-50 years), Amelia North (27 years).  
3  541 Ha in place of 300 Ha (Jitpur), 585 Ha in pla ce of 237 Ha (Tokisud North), 942.25 Ha in place of  687.93 Ha (Kathautia),572 Ha in place of 560 Ha (Mandla South ),  462 Ha in     
place of 279 Ha (Dumri) and 365.76 Ha in place of 294.86  (Trans Damodar). 

Report No.20 of 2016 
VII  
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
had been considered for 
determining the annual mine 
closure cost 
In reply, MOC stated that it had 
correctly considered the area of 
585 Ha, 572 Ha, 541 Ha and 
942 Ha respectively in respect of 
Tokisud North, Mandla South, 
Jitpur and Kathautia on the basis 
of mining plan/information 
submitted by the prior allottee. 
.   
Plan. Reply was silent about 
Dumri coal mine. 
  Less land area was taken in three 4 
mines for computing mine closure 
cost, which resulted in consideration 
of less mine closure cost.  
Over   
valuation 
of Mines 
In Utkal C mine , project area of 
610 Ha included land area for 
washery, railway siding, 
rehabilitation & resettlement site 
and staff colony, hence not 
considered entirely for 
computation of mine closure 
cost. In Ardhagram, project area 
of the coal mine as envisaged by 
the mine planners with the 
available information had been 
considered for determining the 
mine closure cost. 
 
The reply not acceptable as the 
approved Mine Plan of Utkal C 
and Ardhagram coal mines 
stipulated 610 Ha and 800 Ha of 
land as the project area. Reply was 
silent about Gare Palma IV/7. 
                                                 
4   576.55 Ha in place of 610.86 Ha (Utkal C) and 29 6 Ha (172.44 Ha for UG and 123.56 Ha for OCP) in pl ace of 800 Ha (90.5 Ha for OCP and 709.5 Ha for UG)  in Ardhagram and 
420 Ha in place of 335.75 Ha in Gare Palma IV/7. 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
VIII 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
  Gare Palma IV/4 Mine 
Land of 730.65 Ha pertaining to UG 
(349.44 Ha) and OCP (381.21 Ha). 
However, mine closure cost was 
calculated at the uniform rate of ` 1.00 
lakh/Ha for total 730.65 Ha of land 
instead of calculating for UG portion 
at the rate of `1.00 lakh per Ha and 
OCP at the rate of `6 lakh per Ha. 
Over   
valuation 
of Mine 
While accepting the fact, it was 
stated that mine closure cost had 
been inadvertently taken on 
higher side. 
The contention was not factually 
correct as the cost had been taken 
on lower side due to calculation of 
total mine closure cost at the 
uniform rate of ` 1.00 lakh/Ha 
instead of `1.00 lakh/Ha for UG 
and `6.00 lakh/Ha for OCP. 
3 Consideration of 
lower rates of 
crushing charges  
Crushing charges were considered `39 
per tonne in place of `51 per tonne for 
coal size of 200 mm to 250 mm in 
Belgaon, Chotia and Gare Palma IV/4, 
`79 per tonne instead of `100 per 
tonne for less than 50 mm size in case 
of Sarisatolli, for valuation of the 
respective coal mines. Further, in case 
of Nerad Malegaon and Gare Palma 
IV/8 coal mine, recovery for 
beneficiation/crushing charge was not 
considered in the sale price. 
 
Under   
valuation 
of Mines 
While  accepting the facts, it was 
stated that earlier prevailing 
crushing charges instead of 
current applicable charges were 
inadvertently considered and in 
case of Nerad Malegaon and 
Gare Palma IV/8, crushing 
charges were inadvertently not 
considered at all. 
Accepted by CMPDIL.  
4 Deficiencies in 
consideration of 
cost of land 
It was assumed to value (i) tenancy 
land at actual rate subject to a 
maximum of `25 lakh/Ha, and (ii) 
government land at actual rate. It was 
noted that:  
(i)  In Utkal-C coal mine, tenancy 
land was valued at the rate of 
 
 
 
 
 
Under  
valuation 
While accepting the facts in 
respect of Marki Mangli-III, it 
was stated that the cost of 
government land was 
inadvertently/erroneously not 
considered.  
The reply  was , however, silent 
about non-consideration of 
Government land of 11.88 Ha in 
case of Gare Palma IV/8 mine. In 
case of Utkal C, it was stated that 
actual cost incurred by the prior 
allottee had been taken. The reply 

Report No.20 of 2016 
IX  
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
`36.45 lakh/Ha which was in 
excess of `25 lakh. 
(ii)  In Trans-Damodar, tenancy land 
of 119.41 Ha acquired by the prior 
allottee was valued at the rate of 
`34.28 lakh/Ha which was in 
excess of `25 lakh. 
(iii)  In Gare Palma IV/8 and Marki 
Mangli III mine, cost of area of 
government land was not 
considered. 
 
of Mine  
 
Under  
valuation 
of Mine 
 
Over  
valuation 
of Mines 
 
in respect of Utkal C not 
acceptable as it was in contrary to 
its own assumptions which 
stipulated that cost of tenancy land 
should not exceed `25 lakh per 
Ha. 
  Brinda-Sasai Mine 
As per the approved Mine Plan, 
1210.74 Ha of land was required for 
UG mine, however, cost of 606.07 Ha 
of land only was considered for 
valuation. 
Over   
valuation 
of Mine 
As per the Mine Plan, the 
proposed method of mining 
would give maximum extraction 
with no damage to the surface 
due to subsidence. Surface rights 
for 604.67 Ha of non-forest land 
was therefore not required. 
Hence, capital provision for 
604.67 Ha of land had not been 
considered for valuation. 
 
The reply not acceptable as the 
approved Mine Plan stipulated 
requirement of 1210.74 Ha of land 
for mining purpose. 
5 Consideration of 
cost of Heavy 
Earth Moving 
Machines 
(HEMM) in 
opencast mines 
Production of coal from OCP was 
assumed to be done through 
outsourcing mode. Thus, capital cost 
on HEMM should have been excluded 
for valuation of OCPs. However, in 
valuation of Talabira-1, Trans 
Under   
valuation 
of Mines 
While  accepting the facts, it was 
stated that cost of HEMMs in 
respect of above mines had been 
inadvertently and erroneously 
taken into consideration for 
valuation. 
Accepted by CMPDIL  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
X 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
Damodar and Gare Palma IV/4 OCP 
coal mines, capital cost of HEMMs of 
`6.19 crore, `16.36 crore and `2.35 
crore respectively was considered. 
 
6 Non -
consideration of 
indirect taxes 
applicable on 
coal as revenue 
(cash inflow).  
Mining and removal of coal attract 
payment of indirect taxes such as 
royalty, stowing excise duty (SED), 
clean energy cess, excise duty (ED). 
These are collected from the 
customers in addition to the 
notified/sale price of coal and paid to 
the Government. The collection of 
these taxes results in cash inflow while 
its payment to the Government results 
in cash outflow. Thus, for computation 
of present value of a coal mine, both 
cash inflow as well as cash outflow as 
a result of mining of coal should be 
considered. 
It was noted that indirect taxes i.e. 
royalty, stowing excise duty, excise 
duty payable on coal were taken as 
component of cost i.e. cash outflows. 
These taxes were, however, not 
considered as cash inflow for working 
out NPV. In addition, clean energy 
cess was neither considered as outflow 
nor inflow of cash.  
Under   
valuation 
of Mines 
CMPDIL stated that valuation of 
coal mines was done on the 
methodology dated 26 
December 2014 of MOC which 
proposed for taking extant 
notified price of CIL (price of 
domestic coal) and the 
methodology was silent about 
inclusion of deemed cash 
inflows in terms of taxes and 
duties. Further, the mines were 
auctioned under the presumption 
that coal produced would be 
used by the allocatee as raw 
material for value addition to 
other saleable commodity at End 
Use Plant (EUP) as opposed to 
coal companies where taxes paid 
by the coal producer are 
recovered from the coal buyers 
and so are shown in the cash 
inflow. 
 
a)  Since valuation of coal mine s 
had been done on various 
assumptions, including the 
revenue stream as CIL notified 
price, the assumptions for cash 
inflows in terms of taxes and 
duties should also have been 
considered accordingly. 
b)  Methodology dated 26 
December 2014 did not state 
that only the notified price 
would be the cash inflow. In 
fact, CMPDIL had not 
restricted to notified price of 
coal only but it considered 
crushing charges of coal also 
as part of cash inflow. 
c)  Ministry’s contention 
regarding mines being sold for 
captive use substantiates Audit 
point as CMPDIL had 
considered indirect taxes viz. 
ED, royalty, and SED as 
component of cost for 
calculating intrinsic value of 

Report No.20 of 2016 
XI  
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
In its reply, MOC stated that 
those mines were sold for 
captive use and there was no 
sale of coal. Therefore, no taxes 
were payable and no revenue 
should accrue to the successful 
bidder. Further, many of the 
issues enumerated were 
theoretical in nature with 
legitimate differences as to their 
treatment in the accounts. 
 
coal mine s. However, those 
taxes were not considered for 
revenue.   
d)  As in EUPs, cost of coal 
inclusive of taxes would be 
raw material cost for 
production of other saleable 
commodities which is 
ultimately, recoverable from 
the customer, as such those 
taxes should have been 
considered as a component of 
revenue and cost or 
alternatively, they could have 
been excluded from carrying 
out the calculation. 
 
7 Deficiencies in 
consideration of 
cost of 
manpower 
Production of coal from OCPs was 
assumed to be done through 
outsourcing mode and UG mines 
through departmental mode. Further, 
manpower cost for UG mines was 
considered as cost applicable for 
departmental based on Earning per 
Man shift (EMS) at the rate of `2700 
and OCPs based on EMS at the rate of 
`500. It was noted that: 
 
   

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XII 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
  Amelia North OCP Mine 
Salary & wages cost of departmental 5 
manpower was calculated on EMS at 
the rate of `500 instead of `2,700.  
Over 
valuation 
of Mine 
While accepting the fact, it was 
stated that EMS at the rate of 
`500 for the manpower was 
inadvertently and erroneously 
logged against `2,700 on the 
presumption of it being the 
outsourced manpower. 
 
Accepted by CMPDIL.  
  Gare Palma IV/5 UG Mine  
The Mine Plan stipulated requirement 
of 2,200 manpower for running the 
mine at full capacity. Technical 
evaluation team of CMPDIL had 
suggested the requirement of 2,140 
manpower. However, in valuation of 
the mine, cost of 1,040 manpower was 
considered as departmental (taking 
EMS `2,700) and the balance 1,100 
manpower was incorrectly considered 
as outsourced (EMS `500). It being 
UG mine, the entire manpower cost 
should have been taken at 
departmental EMS rate. 
 
Over 
valuation 
of Mine 
A total manpower of 2,140 had 
been considered in valuation 
after deducting 60 manpower 
(from 2,200 manpower) for 
mechanized continuous miner 
district which has been 
considered to be operated 
contractually.  
The reply not acceptable s ince this 
was in deviation of assumption 
wherein production in UG mine 
was to be done by departmental 
means and thus cost of entire 
manpower of 2,140 should have 
been taken at departmental EMS 
rate. 
8 Inconsistency in 
implementation 
of adopted 
assumptions/ 
For computation of intrinsic value, 
CMPDIL adopted a set of 
assumptions. The assumptions inter-
alia included consideration of ratio of 
   
                                                 
5  Departmental manpower in an OCP is required for supervision purpose and also to meet the statutory requirement. 

Report No.20 of 2016 
XIII  
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
deviation from 
Mine Plan 
equity and loan capital as 80:20, price 
of plant & machineries to be taken 
from standard price list prepared by 
CMPDIL, etc. Further, compliance to 
provisions of Mine Plan/ requirement 
relating to environmental/forest 
clearance were also to be taken into 
account in valuation of coal mines. It 
was noted that: 
 
  Talabira-1 Mine 
Equity and loan ratio of 80:20 was not 
followed and the entire capital was 
taken as equity. 
 
Over 
valuation 
of Mine 
Balance life of the project was 
only 3-4 years, hence 100 per 
cent  equity was considered. 
The reply not acceptable as 
consideration of 100 per cent  
equity was in deviation to its own 
adopted assumption. 
 
 
   Ardhagram Mine 
The Mine Plan stipulated removal of 
over burden (OB) 6 of 15.23 Mm 3 from 
OCP part of the mine for extraction of 
1.52 MT of coal. As per the data 
provided by prior allottee, 1.28 Mm 3 
of OB had already been removed till 
2013-14 and 1.25 Mm 3 of OB was 
proposed to be removed in 2014-15. 
Thus, total 2.53 Mm 3 of OB (1.28 
Mm 3 + 1.25 Mm 3) was supposed to be 
Over 
valuation 
of Mine 
In absence of calendar program 
for removal of OB in the Mine 
Plan, actual quantity of OB 
removed by the prior allottee 
were extrapolated for 
assessment in the remaining 
years. 
The reply not acceptable as cost of 
removal of 10.25 Mm 3 of OB was 
not considered, deviating from 
provisions of the approved Mine 
Plan. 
                                                 
6   In mining, over burden (OB) (also called waste o r spoil) is the material that lies above an area th at lends itself to economical exploitation, such as  the rock, soil, and ecosystem that 
lies above a coal seam or ore body. 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XIV 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
removed till 2014 -15 and balance 
12.70 Mm 3 of OB (15.23 Mm 3 - 2.53 
Mm 3) to be removed thereafter. 
However, in valuation of the mine, 
cost of removal of 2.45 Mm 3 of OB 
was considered instead of cost of 
removal of 12.70 Mm 3 of OB. 
 
   Bicharpur UG Mine 
As per the revised production schedule 
annexed with the Mine Plan, 1 st  and 
2nd  year were considered for project 
construction period and production of 
coal stipulated in 3 rd  year of 0.25 MT, 
4th  year of 0.50 MT and from 5 th  year 
onwards production at full capacity of 
0.75 MT per year. The project has life 
of 41 years. However, in valuation, 
production at full capacity of 0.75 MT 
was taken from the 3 rd  year itself in 
contravention of the revised 
production schedule of the Mine Plan. 
Since the coal mine has life beyond 25 
years, hence excess production of 0.75 
MT (0.50 MT in 3 rd  year and 0.25 MT 
in 4 th  year) was considered for 
valuation. 
 
 
Over 
valuation 
of Mine 
Production schedule as per the 
annexure contained in the 
approved Mining Plan and Mine 
closure plan was considered. 
The reply not acceptable as the 
revised production schedule 
annexed with the Mine Plan 
stipulated production of 0.25 MT 
in 3 rd  year and 0.50 MT in 4 th  year 
instead of 0.75 MT as considered 
for valuation. 

Report No.20 of 2016 
XV  
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
   Bicharpur UG Mine 
Environmental clearance order (July 
2013) stipulated capital expenditure of 
`9.37 crore under CSR during first 
five years. However, in valuation, this 
cost was not considered.  
Over 
valuation 
of Mine 
CSR was an expenditure that 
was to be considered by the 
company based on its profit and 
was a part of stipulations of the 
Companies Act 2013. As per 
valuation, the NPV of the mine 
was negative and no profit was 
foreseen, hence CSR 
expenditure was not considered 
for computation of NPV. 
 
The reply not acceptable as 
intrinsic value was to be worked 
out considering all the cost 
elements. 
   Nerad Malegaon Mine 
Environmental clearance stipulated 
provision of `37.00 lakh for CSR in 
addition to a provision of `5 per tonne 
of production of coal as recurring cost. 
However, this expenditure was not 
considered in valuation of the mine. 
 
Over   
valuation 
of Mine 
CSR was an expenditure that 
was to be considered by the 
company based on its profit and 
was a part of stipulations of the 
Companies Act 2013. As per 
valuation, the NPV of the mine 
was negative and no profit was 
foreseen, hence CSR 
expenditure was not considered 
for computation of NPV. 
 
The reply not acceptable as 
intrinsic value was to be worked 
out considering all the cost 
elements. 
   Kathautia Mine 
Rate of depreciation of ten per cent 
was considered for residential building 
instead of adopted rate of five per cent.  
Under   
valuation 
of Mine 
While accepting the fact it was 
stated that depreciation rate of 
ten per cent had been 
inadvertently and erroneously 
charged to residential building. 
 
 
Accepted by CMPDIL . 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XVI 
S. No.  Nature of 
observation  
Details of observation  Impact  MOC/CMPDIL’s reply  Audit comment on the reply  
9 Consideration of 
incorrect cost 
 Mandla South Mine 
Cost of Prospecting and Boring was 
taken as `1.21 crore instead of `12.12 
crore which was the actual cost 
incurred. 
 
Over 
valuation 
of Mine 
This was attributed to 
typographical error. 
Accepted by CMPDIL . 
 Bicharpur UG Mine 
Prior allottee had provided data 
relating to outsourcing cost of 
operation of Continuous Miner at the 
rate of `1,295 per tonne, however, in 
valuation cost at the rate of `1422.54 
per tonne was considered. 
 
Under   
valuation 
of Mine 
The rate of contractual operation 
of Continuous Miner prevailing 
in South Eastern Coalfield 
Limited was considered.  
The reply not acceptable as 
CMPDIL did not consider the data 
provided by prior allottee which 
was one of the basis adopted for 
valuation of mines. 
 
***** 
  

Report No.20 of 2016 
XVII  
Annexure III (refer Para 4.1)  
Statement Showing Net Impact of All Audit Observations as Under Valuation of Mines 
S 
No. 
Name of 
coal mine 
 
Sector CMPDIL Floor price/NPV/Upfront derived by 
Audit based on notified price* 
(after inclusion of indirect taxes) 
Net impact 
Difference 
in upfront 
amount  
Difference 
in floor 
price  
(For non 
regulated 
sector 
mines)  
Difference 
in revised 
fixed rate  
(For 
power 
sector 
mines)  
Floor 
price  
Revised 
fixed rate  
(for power 
sector coal 
mines)  
NPV  Upfront  Floor price  NPV  Upfront  
(A)  (B)   (C)  (D)   (E)  (E)- (C)  (D)- (A)  (D)-(B)  
`` ``/tonne  `` ``in lakh  `` ``/tonne  `` `` in lakh  `` `` in lakh  `` ``/tonne  `` ``/tonne  
1 Amelia 
North 
Power 345.15  345.15  85329.52  8532.95  476.97  117916.90  11791.69  3258.74  - 131.82  
2 Utkal C Power 147.91  150  32586.50  3258.65  265.05  58392.60  5839.26  2580.61  - 115.05  
3 Dumri Non 
Regulated 
150.00  NA  3593.94  1229.96  154.70  12685.26  1268.53  38.57  4.70  - 
4 Ganeshpur Power 273.10  273.10  87777.62  8777.76  371.23  119317.28  11931.73  3153.97  - 98.13  
5 Gare Palma 
IV/7 
Non 
Regulated 
206.34  NA  24973.05  2497.30  241.16  29186.22  2918.62  421.32  34.82  - 
6 Jitpur Power 114.81  150  27208.24  2720.82  210.34  49849.01  4984.90  2264.08  - 60.34  
7 Talabira 1 Power 262.86  262.86  25030.65  2503.07  361.07  34382.08  3438.21  935.14  - 98.21  
8 Tokisud 
North 
Power 326.49  326.49  70324.59  7032.46  469.06  101036.24  10103.62  3071.16  - 142.57  
9 Trans 
Damodar 
Power 147.08  150  14833.49  1483.35  207.67  20944.44 2094.44 611.09  - 57.67  
10 Kathautia Non 
Regulated 
678.87  NA  54774.87  5477.49  1028.83  83015.05  8301.51  2824.02  349.96  - 
11 Mandakini Power 358.26  358.26  216277.35  21627.73  476.69  287773.77  28777.38  7149.65 - 118.43  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XVIII 
S 
No. 
Name of 
coal mine 
 
Sector CMPDIL Floor price/NPV/Upfront derived by 
Audit based on notified price* 
(after inclusion of indirect taxes) 
Net impact 
Difference 
in upfront 
amount  
Difference 
in floor 
price  
(For non 
regulated 
sector 
mines)  
Difference 
in revised 
fixed rate  
(For 
power 
sector 
mines)  
Floor 
price  
Revised 
fixed rate  
(for power 
sector coal 
mines)  
NPV  Upfront  Floor price  NPV  Upfront  
(A)  (B)   (C)  (D)   (E)  (E)- (C)  (D)- (A)  (D)-(B)  
`` ``/tonne  `` ``in lakh  `` ``/tonne  `` `` in lakh  `` `` in lakh  `` ``/tonne  `` ``/tonne  
12 Moitra Non 
Regulated 
413.71  NA  33125.99  3312.60  1678.15  134363.88  13436.39  10123.79  1264.44  - 
13 Sarisatolli Power 426.49  426.49  123427.40  12342.74  458.77  132768.49  13276.85  934.11  - 32.28  
14 Chotia Non 
Regulated 
150.00  NA  2810.85  1349.54  199.58  17956.19  1795.62  446.08  49.58  - 
15 Gare Palma 
IV/8 
Non 
Regulated 
150.00  NA  2721.38  1480.50  187.59  18515.23  1851.52  371.02  37.59  - 
      83626.92    121810.27  38183.35   
 
* In Moitra (Sl. No. 12), the prices of washed coking coal, middlings, slurry and rejects have been taken in place of notified price (Para 4.2 of this Report 
refers) 
***** 
 
  

Report No.20 of 2016 
XIX  
Annexure IV (refer Para 5.1)  
Analysis of the Bidding in the e-Auction where JV Companies were Participants 
Legend: 
 And  Same Company/ JV  
 Cases where the effective bidding was among 2 -3 bidders only  
 
S. 
No.  
Name of the 
coal mine  
Shortlisted 
companies/ bidders  
No. of bids  Total QBs  QBs of the 
JVs/ same 
companies  
Total 
independent 
QBs  
 
1 Kathautia; 
Jharkhand;  
Schedule II  
Hindalco - Odisha  111  5 
  
  
  
  
3 
  
  
  
  
3 
Hindalco - MP  1 
Ultratech Cement  1 
Monnet Ispat  0 
Usha Martin  111  
Total Bids  224     
2 Mandla 
North; 
Madhya 
Pradesh; 
Schedule II  
Jaiprakash Industries  85  5 
  
  
  
  
3 
  
  
  
  
3 
Ultratech Cement  162  
Hindalco  3 
Ultratech Cement  3 
Hindustan Zinc  92  
Total Bids  345     
3 Chotia; 
Chattisgarh; 
Schedule II  
BALCO  132  5 
  
  
  
  
3 
  
  
  
  
3 
BALCO  0 
God awari  Power & 
Ispat  
147  
Sarda Energy & 
Mineral  
32  
Sesa Sterlite  6 
Total Bids  317     
4 Gare Palma 
IV/5; 
Chattisgarh; 
Schedule II  
Ambuja Cement  17  6 
  
  
  
  
  
2+2  
  
  
  
  
  
4 
BALCO  9 
BALCO  0 
Hindalco - Odisha  248  
Hindalco  - MP  4 
Monnet Ispat  233  
Total Bids  511     

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XX 
S. 
No.  
Name of the 
coal mine  
Shortlisted 
companies/ bidders  
No. of bids  Total QBs  QBs of the 
JVs/ same 
companies  
Total 
independent 
QBs  
 
5 Bicharpur; 
Madhya 
Pradesh; 
Schedule II  
Ultratech Cement  122  6 
  
  
  
  
  
3 
  
  
  
  
  
4 
Hindalco - Odisha  1 
Hindalco - MP  1 
JP Cement  104  
Monnet Ispat  3 
ACC Cement  66  
Total Bids  297     
6 Gare Palma 
IV/4; 
Chattisgarh; 
Schedule II  
Hindalco - Odisha  165  6 
  
  
  
  
  
2+2  
  
  
  
  
  
4 
Hindalco - MP  2 
ACC Cement  157  
Sharda Energy & 
Minerals  
9 
BALCO  2 
BALCO  0 
Total Bids  335     
7 Gare Palma 
IV/7; 
Chattisgarh; 
Schedule II  
BALCO  1 7 
  
  
  
  
  
  
3+3  
  
  
  
  
  
  
3 
BALCO  0 
Hindalco - Odisha  171  
Hindalco - MP  2 
Monnet Ispat  16 7 
Sesa Sterlite  13  
Ultratech Cement  1 
Total Bids  355     
8 Gare Palma 
IV/8; 
Chattisgarh; 
Schedule III  
Ambuja Cement  114  6 
  
  
  
  
  
2 
  
  
  
  
  
5 
BALCO  0 
Hindalco  91  
Jayaswal Neco  1 
Rungta Mining  3 
Sesa Sterlite  17  
Total Bids  226     
9 Sarisatolli; 
West 
Bengal; 
Schedule-II  
Adani Power  0 5 
  
  
  
  
3 
  
  
  
  
3 
CESE Ltd  84  
Sheesham  1 
Haldia  0 
GMR  82  
Total Bids  167     

Report No.20 of 2016 
XXI  
S. 
No.  
Name of the 
coal mine  
Shortlisted 
companies/ bidders  
No. of bids  Total QBs  QBs of the 
JVs/ same 
companies  
Total 
independent 
QBs  
 
10  Mandakini ; 
Odisha; 
Schedule-III  
Adani Power  56  5 
  
  
  
  
2 
  
  
  
  
4 
GMR  Mining  20  
Jindal Power  3 
Mandakini Exploration  81  
Wigeon Commotrade  0 
Total Bids  160     
11  
Brinda & 
Sasai; 
Jharkhand; 
Schedule III 
Usha Martin  1 4 
  
  
2 
  
  
3 
BALCO  0 
Sesa Sterlite  0 
Easternrange Coal 
Mining  
0 
Total Bids  1    
 
***** 
 
  

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XXII 
Annexure V (refer Para 7.1)  
Dates of Issue of Vesting Orders in respect of Coal Mines e-Auctioned in 1st  and 2nd  
Tranche 
S. No. Name of the Coal 
mine 
State Schedule Sector of end 
use 
Date of vesting 
order 
1 Sial Ghoghri  Madhya Pradesh  II  Non -regulated  23.03.2015  
2 Talabira -I Odisha  II  Power  23.03.2015  
3 Kathautia  Jharkhand  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
4 Belgaon  Maharashtra  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
5 Sarisatolli  West Bengal  II  Power  23.03.2015  
6 Marki Mangli III  Maharashtra  II  Non - regulated  17.04.2015  
7 Trans Damodar  West Bengal  II  Power  23.03.2015  
8 Mandla North  Madhya Pradesh  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
9 Amelia North  Madhya Pradesh  II  Power  23.03.2015  
10 Ardhagram  West Bengal  II  Non - regulated  Not issued  
11 Chotia  Ch hattisgarh  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
12 Tokisud North  Jharkhand  II  Power  23.03.2015  
13 Gare Palma IV/5  Chhattisgarh  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
14 Bicharpur  Madhya Pradesh  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
15 Gare Palma IV/4  Chhatisgarh  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
16  Gare Palma IV/7  Chhattisgarh  II  Non - regulated  23.03.2015  
17-18 Brinda & Sasai  Jharkhand  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
19 Jitpur  Jharkhand  III  Power  22.04.2015  
20 Moitra  Jharkhand  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
21 Mandakini  Odisha  III  Power  Not issued  
22 Meral  Jharkhand  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
23 Dumri   Jharkhand  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
24 Nerad Malegaon  Maharashtra  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
25 Ganeshpur  Jharkhand  III  Power  22.04.2015  
26 Gare Palma IV/8  Chhattisgarh  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
27 Mandla South  Madhya Pradesh  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
28 Lohari  Jharkhand  III  Non - regulated  22.04.2015  
29 Utkal -C Odisha  III  Power  Not issued  
  

Report No.20 of 2016 
XXIII  
Annexure VI  (refer Para 7.2)  
Process Pending with Central Government for Schedule II Coal Mines 
S. No  Statutory 
permission 
Time limit 
in months 
for 
completion 
(as per 
CMDPA) 
Authority 
responsible 
for transfer 
of 
permission 
Name of Coal 
mine 
Reasons for pendency  
(As mentioned in the pre-
commencement report)  
 
1 Opening 
permission 
from CCO 
03  Ministry of 
Coal - CCO 
Gare Palma 
IV/7  
Under process with CCO  
Trans 
Damodar 
Applied for  
 
2 Ground 
water 
clearance 
03  Central 
Ground 
Water 
Authority 
(CGWA) 
 
Kathautia 
 
NOC awaited  
Trans 
Damodar 
 
District level and State level 
committees had approved the 
proposal. Final clearance from 
High Power Committee was 
awaited. 
 
3 Mine 
closure plan 
(MCP) 
06  Ministry of 
Coal 
Gare Palma 
IV/7  
• MOC informed that the MCP 
submitted by the prior allottee 
was not approved. It was also 
advised to adopt the same MCP 
or submit a revised MCP. It was 
intimated to MOC that Monnet 
Ispat and Energy Ltd. (MIEL) 
shall adopt the same MCP as 
submitted by prior allottee.  
• Under process for approval at 
MOC.  
 
***** 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XXIV 
Annexure VII (refer Para 7.2)  
Process Pending with State Government for Schedule II Coal Mines 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Statutory 
permission 
Time limit 
in months 
for 
completion 
(as per 
CMDPA)  
Authority 
responsible for 
transfer of 
permission 
Name of 
Coal mine  
Reasons for pendency  
(As mentioned in the pre-
commencement report) 
 
1 Opening 
permission 
from DGMS 
03  Zonal office of 
DGMS  
Gare Palma 
IV/7 
Application had  been submitted to 
Director of Mines Safety, Raigarh. 
Permission was awaited. Expected to be 
received after execution of ML.  
Trans 
Damodar  
Applied for  
2 Consent to 
operate 
03  State Pollution 
Control Board 
Kathautia  Site inspection was  complete. Final 
issuance was awaited subject to 
execution of mining lease.  
Tokisud 
North  
Application submitted to Assistant 
Environment Engineer in March 2016 
3 Land 
diversion/ 
Mutation 
03  State 
Government. 
 
Tokisud 
North 
 
• For Government land, the final 
transfer and demand note for 
applicable stamp duty and registration 
charges from respective District 
Administration were awaited. 
• For Freehold land, DC, Hazaribagh 
informed to obtain the permission 
under CNT Act but no 
communication had been received on 
modalities for transfer of these lands.  
Kathautia  
 
• 70 per cent  of total land acquired by 
the prior allottee was under litigation. 
The fact was not disclosed by the 
prior allottee in mine dossier (part of 
tender document). There was no land 
available for commencing mining 
operation. 
• The immediate working may not be in 
compliance with the existing mining 
plan/mine closure plan due to land 
availability constraints.  
 

Report No.20 of 2016 
XXV  
Sl. 
No. 
Statutory 
permission 
Time limit 
in months 
for 
completion 
(as per 
CMDPA)  
Authority 
responsible for 
transfer of 
permission 
Name of 
Coal mine  
Reasons for pendency  
(As mentioned in the pre-
commencement report) 
 
4 Explosive 
Licence 
03  District 
Administration/ 
Magistrate 
Kathautia  Under  submission . NOC shall be 
transferred after execution of mining 
lease.  
Marki 
Mangli III  
Application submitted to District 
Collector for permission. 
Tokisud 
North  
Delay in issuance of NOC by District 
Administration. 
Trans 
Damodar  
NOC from Distric t Magistrate, Bankura 
awaited. 
5 Railway 
siding 
approval 
03  Zonal Railway 
Department 
Tokisud 
North 
Pending with E CR , Hajipur  
6 Grant of 
mining lease 
03  State Mining 
Department 
Kathautia  Pending with state mining 
department/District Administration for 
settlement of issues related to 
Government land and Jungle Jhari land.  
Marki 
Mangli III  
• District Mining Officer, Yavatmal 
advised to fulfil the compliances 
related to Environment Clearance, 
Stamp Duty, DGPS survey and 
deposition of ` 15 crore for road 
construction. 
• Reply in this regard submitted to 
DMO, Yavatmal.  
• Approval awaited 
 
Tokisud 
North  
• Stamp duty and registration charges 
for execution of mining lease were 
revised and demand note on the basis 
of such revisions was received. 
• Assistant Mining Officer, Hazaribag 
was requested to give extension for 
06 months from the date of revised 
stamp duty and registration charges. 
• Response awaited.  
Gare Palma 
IV/7  
• Fee for execution of lease was 
submitted. Monnet Ispat Energy 
Limited (MIEL) had raised some 
issues in respect of EUP and 
exploration cost which were linked to 
prior allottee. 
• Further, MRD, Chhatisgarh directed 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XXVI 
Sl. 
No. 
Statutory 
permission 
Time limit 
in months 
for 
completion 
(as per 
CMDPA)  
Authority 
responsible for 
transfer of 
permission 
Name of 
Coal mine  
Reasons for pendency  
(As mentioned in the pre-
commencement report) 
 
to get the Forest Clearance first for 
grant of mining lease which was not 
applicable at the time of execution of 
Vesting Order as forest area was not 
involved in existing block boundary 
as per the mining lease executed with 
prior allottee subsequently transferred 
to MIEL vide the Vesting Order. 
Secretary, Mines, Chhatisgarh has 
directed MRD, Chhatisgarh to 
examine the application made by 
MIEL and take action accordingly.  
 
 
***** 
  

Report No.20 of 2016 
XXVII  
Annexure VIII  (refer Para 7.2)  
Process Pending on the Part of Allottee for Schedule II Mines 
Sl. 
No 
Statutory 
permission 
Time limit 
in months 
for 
completion 
(as per 
CMDPA) 
Authority 
responsible for 
transfer of 
permission 
Name of 
Coal mine 
Reasons for pendency 
(As mentioned in the pre-
commencement report) 
 
 1 Ground water 
clearance 
03  Central Ground 
Water 
Authority 
(CGWA) 
Marki 
Mangli III 
Application would  be submitted after 
preparation of hydro-geological report 
which is under progress. 
2 Environment 
clearance 
(EC) 
03  Ministry of 
Environment 
and Forests 
(MOEF) 
Marki 
Mangli III 
Application was submitted in time but 
MoEF directed to seek fresh EC. 
Consultant had started the work for 
preparing EMP/EIA documentation.  
 3 Electricity 
Supply 
03  State 
Electricity 
Board 
Trans 
Damodar 
Electricity supply was being maintained 
from the sub-station of prior allottee. 
MDO was required to be appointed for 
applying for fresh connection or 
transferring the existing connection.  
4 Opening 
permission 
from DGMS 
03  Zonal office of 
DGMS  
Marki 
Mangli III 
 
Application was submitted to DGMS, 
Dhanbad. As per DGMS, a new 
application was to be submitted. The 
submission of new application was 
awaited for the completion of mining 
lease, consent to operate and 
environment clearance. 
5 Opening of 
escrow 
account 
06  Ministry of 
Coal 
Trans 
Damodar 
MCP was  not approved. The annual 
amount to be deposited was not 
available. MCP was to be prepared for 
which RQP was to be appointed.  
Tokisud 
North 
Statutory permissions awaited.  
6 Mine Closure 
Plan (MCP) 
10  
(For 
approval of 
Revised 
MCP) 
Ministry of 
Coal 
Marki 
Mangli III 
• The prior allottee had not obtained 
the approval for MCP. Therefore, a 
fresh MCP was prepared and 
submitted for approval of MOC. 
• The Expert Committee had found that 
the prior allottee had not been in 
compliance with the Mining Plan, 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XXVIII 
Sl. 
No 
Statutory 
permission 
Time limit 
in months 
for 
completion 
(as per 
CMDPA) 
Authority 
responsible for 
transfer of 
permission 
Name of 
Coal mine 
Reasons for pendency 
(As mentioned in the pre-
commencement report) 
 
therefore, it advised to resubmit Mine 
Plan along with MCP. 
• Fresh MCP is under preparation and 
it was intimated to the Ministry that 
the fresh MCP as per approved Mine 
Plan would be submitted.  
 
 
***** 
 
  

Report No.20 of 2016 
XXIX  
Annexure – IX (refer Para 8.4)  
Details of Cases where Additional Levy was not Received or Less Amount was Received 
S.  No  Name of Coal mine  Name of the previous allottee  
[as per Coal Mines (SP) Act 
2015] 
Quantity of 
coal 
produced till 
31.03.2015  
(in tonne) 
Amount to be 
deposited @ `` `` 
295 PMT  
(`` ``    in thousands)  
Amount 
deposited by the 
allottee  
( `` ``    in thousands) 
Less deposited  
( `` ``    in thousands)  
 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) = (5-6) 
1 Sarisatolli  CESC Limited  35419441  10448735  10448735  0 
2 Belgaon  Sunflag Iron & Steel Company 
Limited 
1058977  312398  312398  0 
3 Tal abira -I Hindalco Industries Limited  20340898  6000565  6000565  0 
4-5 Parsa (E)  & Kanta 
Basan 
Rajasthan  Rajya Vidyut 
Utpadan Nigam Limited 
4931907  1454913  1454913  0 
6 Chotia  Prakash Industries Limited  8442725  2490604  2490604  0 
7 Gare Palma IV/1  Jindal Strips Limited  70584161  20822327  20822327  0 
8-9 Gare Palma IV/2 -3 Jindal Power Limited  40176384  11852033  11852033  0 
10  Ardh agram  Sova Ispat Limited, Jai Balaji 
Sponge Limited 
764917  225651  216358  9293  
11 Gare Palma IV/7  Raipur Alloys & Steel Limited  4834912  1426299  1426299  0 
12 Marki Mangli - I B S Ispat Limited  191566  56512  56420  92  
13  Amelia North  Madhya Pradesh State Mining 
Corporation  
1504431  443807  443807  0 
14 Parbatpur  Central  Electrosteel Casting Limited  1201816  354536  354536  0 
15 Kathautia  Usha Martin Limited  2838266  837288  837288  0 

Audit Report on e-Auction of Coal Mines 
XXX 
S. No  Name of Coal mine  Name of the previous allottee  
[as per Coal Mines (SP) Act 
2015] 
Quantity of 
coal 
produced till 
31.03.2015  
(in tonne) 
Amount to be 
deposited @ `` `` 
295 PMT  
(`` ``    in thousands)  
Amount 
deposited by the 
allottee  
( `` ``    in thousands) 
Less deposited  
( `` ``    in thousands)  
 
 
16 Pachwara Central  Panem Coal Mines Limited (JV 
Company between Punjab State 
Electricity Board & Emta Coal 
Limited). 
52682567  15541357  3914636  11626721  
17-22  Bajrang I to IV, 
Kiloni & Manora 
Deep 
Karnataka Emta Coal Mines 
Limited (JV Company between 
Karnataka Power Corporation 
Limited & Emta Coal Limited). 
15193208  4481996  1104324  3377672  
23 Gare Palma IV/5  Monnet Ispat &  Energy Limited  8573105  2529066  2529066  0 
24 Marki Mangli - II  Shree Veerangana Steels 
Limited 
153577  45305  45305  0 
25 Marki Mangli -III  Shree Veerangana Steels 
Limited 
768172  226611  226611  0 
26 Gare Palma IV/4  Jaswal Neco Limited  3808493  1123505  1123505  0 
27 Sial Ghog hri  Prism Cement Limited  1181  348  348  0 
28 Tokisud North  GVK Power  
(Govindwal Sahib ) Limited 
1000  295  295  0 
29 Mandla North  Jaipraksh Associates  0 0 0 0 
30 Kagra Joydeb  Damodar Valley Corporation  0 0 0 0 
31  Bicharpur  Madhya Pradesh State Mining 
Corporation  Limited 
0 0 0 0 
32 Trans Damodar  West Bengal Mineral 
Development & Trading 
Corporation Limited 
2119359  625211  625211  0 

Report No.20 of 2016 
XXXI  
S. No  Name of Coal mine  Name of the previous allottee  
[as per Coal Mines (SP) Act 
2015] 
Quantity of 
coal 
produced till 
31.03.2015  
(in tonne) 
Amount to be 
deposited @ `` `` 
295 PMT  
(`` ``    in thousands)  
Amount 
deposited by the 
allottee  
( `` ``    in thousands) 
Less deposited  
( `` ``    in thousands)  
 
 
33-34  Tara (E) & Tara (W)  Bengal Emta Coal Mines 
Limited (JV of WPDCL, 
Durgapur Projects Limited and 
Emta Coal Limited) 
53836980  15881909  0 1588 19 09  
35-36  Gangara mchak & 
Gangaramchak 
Bhadaulia 
Bengal Emta Coal Mines 
Limited (JV of WPDCL, 
Durgapur Projects Limited and 
Emta Coal Limited) 
386822  114112  0 114112  
37  Ba rjora  Bengal Emta  Coal Mines 
Limited (JV of WPDCL, 
Durgapur Projects Limited and 
Emta Coal Limited) 
1098772  324138  0 324138  
38 Pachwara North  Bengal Emta Coal Mines 
Limited (JV of WPDCL, 
Durgapur Projects Limited and 
Emta Coal Limited) 
4094873  1207988  0 1207988  
39  Barjora (North)  DVC Emta Limited (JV of DVC 
and Emta Coal Limited)  
5542741  1635109  0 1635109  
40  Namchik Namphuk  Arunachal Pradesh Mineral 
Development & Trading 
Corporation 
1073000  316535  0 316535  
41-42  Gotitoria (E) & (W)  BLA Industries Limited  2955989  872017  0 872017  
Total  344580240  10165117 0 66285584  
 
35365586  
 
 

A-I 
Abbreviations 
S. No Abbreviations Detail 
1.  CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs  
2.  CCO Coal Controller’s Organization  
3.  CERC Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
4.  CIL Coal India Limited 
5.  CMDPA Coal Mine Development and Production Agreemen t  
6.  CMPDIL Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited  
7.  COS Committee of Secretaries  
8.  e-Auction Electronic Auction 
9.  EC Environment Clearance  
10.  ED Excise Duty 
11.  FC Forest Clearance  
12.  FPO Final Price Offer  
13.  GCV Gross Calorific Value 
14.  GoI  Government of India  
15.  GSI Geological Survey of India  
16.  HEMM Heavy Earth Moving Machine 
17.  IMC Inter-Ministerial Committee  
18.  IPO Initial Price Offer  
19.  JV Joint Venture 
20.  ML Mining Lease  
21.  MOC Ministry of Coal 
22.  MoU Memorandum of Understanding  
23.  MT (quantity of coal) Million Tonne 
24.  MTPA (quantity of coal)  Million Tonne Per Annum 
25.  NA Nominated Authority 
26.  NPV Net Present Value  
27.  PMT (for price of coal)  Per Metric Tonne  
28.  PPA Power Purchase Agreements  
29.  PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
30.  QBs Qualified Bidders  
31.  ROM Run of Mine 
32.  SERC State Electricity Regulatory Commission 
33.  SEU Specified End Uses  
34.  SEUP/EUP Specified End Use Plant/End Use Plant 
35.  STD Standard Tender Document 
36.  TA Transaction Advisor  
37.  The Act Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015  
38.  The Rules Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Rules, 2014  
39.  TQB Technically Qualified Bidders  

G-I 
 
Glossary 
1.  Additional Levy  Amount payable by the prior allottees of 42 'Produc ing' & 'Ready 
to Produce' coal blocks, calculated at the rate of ` 295 PMT, on 
the quantum of coal extracted from these blocks til l 31 March 
2015, in compliance to the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.  
2.  Additional 
Premium 
Per tonne rate quoted by a bidder (for power sector  coal mines) in 
case of "Reverse then Forward Bidding".  
3.  Bid Sheet A system generated format indicating the name of th e successful 
bidder and final bid price that will be made availa ble to the 
Nominated Authority by MSTC Limited.  
4.  Captive Coal 
Mine 
Captive coal mine is a mine allocated for fulfilmen t of own 
requirement of allottee.  
5.  Ceiling Price Per tonne CIL notified price of coal for a coal min e of power 
sector below which the prospective bidders were req uired to quote 
their Initial Price Offers.   
6.  CIL Notified 
Price 
Price of coal based on quality/grade/heat value of the coal, notified 
by Coal India Limited from time to time. 
7.  Coking Coal Coking coal, when heated in the absence of air, for m coherent 
beads, free from volatiles, with strong and porous mass, called 
coke. These have coking properties, mainly used in steel making 
and metallurgical industries and also used for hard  coke 
manufacturing. 
8.  Extractable 
Reserves 
Coal reserve of a mine which is likely to be extrac ted out of total 
mineable reserve. 
9.  Fixed Amount Value of land and mine infrastructure, cost of tend er document, 
preparation of geological report borne by the prior  allottee, cost of 
obtaining all statutory licenses, permits, permissi ons, approvals, 
clearances or consents relevant to the mining opera tions borne by 
the prior allottee and the transaction expense (col lectively the 
“Fixed Amount”). 
10.  Final Price 
Offer 
Price per tonne of coal extracted, required to be s ubmitted as part 
of the financial bid on the electronic auction platform. 
11.  Floor Price The per tonne price calculated on the basis of intr insic value of  a 
coal mine of non-regulated sector, above which the prospective 
bidders were required to quote their initial price offers.  
12.  Gross Calorific 
Value (GCV) 
GCV means the heat value of coal determined on equi librated 
basis.  
13.  Geological 
Reserve 
Geological reserve is the entire reserve of a coal mine, irrespective 
of reserve supposed to be mined or extracted.  
14.  Initial Price 
Offer 
Price per tonne of coal extracted, required to be s ubmitted as part 
of the financial bid and which must be below the ce iling price in 
cases of power sector coal mines and above the floor price in cases 
of non-regulated sector coal mines. 
15.  Merchant Power sold outside medium and long term PPAs contra cted under 

G-II 
 
Power Section 62 or Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 20 03. Sale of 
merchant power is to be made, subject to a maximum 15% of 
generation capacity of specified end use plant 
16.  Middlings and 
Rejects 
Middlings are by products of coal washing/beneficia tion process, 
as a fraction of feed raw coal. Rejects are the pro ducts of coal 
beneficiation process after separation of clean and/or middlings, as 
a fraction of feed raw coal.   
17.  Mine Closure 
Plan 
A plan describing the method of closing of a mine after exhaustion 
of the entire reserve.  
18.  Mine Dossier It consists of the information/data related to a coal mine from prior 
allottee, sought by the nominated authority as per Rule 9 of Coal 
Mine (Special Provisions) Rules, 2014. 
19.  Mine Plan Mine plan enumerating the geological status of a mi ne along with 
the method of mining required by the mine as per th e geological 
status. It provides all the relevant information about the mine.  
20.  Mineable 
Reserves 
Coal reserve of a mine which is likely to be mined out of total 
geological reserve through a particular mining method.  
21.  Open Cast 
Mine   
A mine which is supposed to be mined through open c ast mining 
method.  
22.  Pass-through Part of the electricity generation cost, both fixed  as well as 
variable that can be recovered from the consumers o f electricity as 
part of the electricity tariff. 
23.  Pithead Pithead is the top of the coal mine. 
24.  Power Purchase 
Agreement 
(PPA) 
PPA is a contract between two parties, one which ge nerates 
electricity (the seller) and one which is looking t o purchase 
electricity (the buyer). 
25.  Proved 
Reserves 
The coal resources of an area falling within 200 me ter radius from 
a borehole point. 
26.  Reserve Price Reserve price is the price fixed in `/tonne for a power sector coal 
mine payable as per actual production by the successful allottee. 
27.  Reverse 
Bidding 
Under the reverse bidding process prescribed for au ction of a coal 
mine for power sector, the prospective bidders were  required to 
quote their initial price offer below the ceiling p rice (per tonne 
CIL notified price of coal )   
28.  Run of Mine 
Coal 
The raw material for the coal preparation plant and  consists of 
coal, rocks, middlings, minerals and contamination. 
29.  Specified End 
Use (SEU) 
Coal mine is auctioned strictly for the purposes of  utilisation of 
coal for the specified end use, which is generation  of power/iron 
and steel, cement and generation of power for captive use.   
30.  Useful Heat 
Value (UHV) 
Heat value of coal determined on equilibrated basis  through an 
established formula. 
31.  Untied Power Power for which no PPA had been signed. 
 