 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial) 
No. 15 of 2016 
(Compliance Audit Observations) 
 
Volume I 

i 
 
 
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT PSU PAGE 
NO. 
 PREFACE  v 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  vii 
 
Chapter I DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
1.1 Payment of City/ Site Conveyance 
Allowance to officials provided with 
Transport facility 
 
Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India 
Limited  
1 
 
Chapter II MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
2.1 Potential loss of revenue to Airport 
Authority of India (AAI) resulting 
from flaw in agreement between 
MIAL and private developer HDIL 
for removal of encroachments from 
Airport Land  
Airports Authority of 
India 
3 
2.2 Short realization of Annual Fee from 
MIAL resulting in loss of revenue to 
AAI 
 
Airports Authority of 
India 
7 
2.3 Non-realisation of revenue share as 
per provisions of agreement 
Airports Authority of 
India 
9 
2.4 Irregular payments towards 
encashment of half pay leave 
Airports Authority of 
India 
11 
2.5 Poor utilization of infrastructure 
developed with Government funds at 
Birsi airport, Gondia resulting in 
recurring losses for its maintenance  
Airports Authority of 
India 
13 
 
Chapter III MINISTRY OF COAL 
3.1 Avoidable loss due to short payment 
of advance income tax  
Eastern Coalfields 
Limited 
17 
3.2 Avoidable expenditure 
 
Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation Limited 
19 
 
Chapter IV MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
4.1 Blocking of funds on account of 
failure to implement IT Solution 
System 
 
ECGC Limited  
 
22 
 
Chapter V MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PU BLIC 
DISTRIBUTION 
5.1 Export of wheat  Food Corporation of 
India 
25 
5.2 IT audit on implementation of 
Financial Accounting Package  
Food Corporation of 
India 
35 
CONTENTS 

ii  
5.3 Award of work of construction of 
godown on nomination basis 
Food Corporation of 
India 
48 
5.4 Undue benefit to the transport 
contractors 
Food Corporation of 
India 
50 
5.5 Extra expenditure on transportation 
of food grains 
Food Corporation of 
India 
52 
 
Chapter VI DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS 
6.1 Marketing of Products of Fertilizer 
Companies 
 
Madras Fertilizers 
Limited and The 
Fertilizers and Chemicals 
Travancore Limited 
 
54 
6.2 Infructuous expenditure on leasing 
of land  
Rashtriya Chemicals and 
Fertilizers Limited 
 
64 
 
Chapter VII MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES - 
INSURANCE DIVISION) 
7.1 Decision to reschedule loan without 
insisting on adequate tangible 
security led to non-recovery of dues 
IFCI Factors Limited 
 
67 
7.2 Non Compliance with provisions of 
credit policy and extension of undue 
favour led to non-recovery of dues 
 
IFCI Factors Limited 
 
69 
7.3 Blocking of funds in bad loans STCI Finance Lim ited 71 
7.4 Avoidable payment of insurance 
claim due to excess retention of risk   
United India Insurance 
Company Limited 
 
75 
 
Chapter VIII MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE   
8.1 Efficiency and effectiveness of 
marketing activities of HLL Lifecare 
Limited, Thiruvananthapuram. 
HLL Lifecare Limited 77 
8.2 Release of advance payments 
without obtaining adequate security 
HLL Lifecare Limited 86 
 
Chapter IX MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES 
 
9.1 Avoidable payment of compensation 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
89 
9.2 Avoidable expenditure on payment 
of sales tax  
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
90 
9.3 Unfruitful expenditure on 
procurement of rail wagon  
Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited 
92 
 
 

iii  
Chapter X MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY 
ALLEVIATION  
 
10.1 Fund Management and Financing 
Activities 
Housing and Urban 
Development 
Corporation Limited 
94 
 
Chapter XI MINISTRY OF POWER   
11.1 Loss due to delay in lodging of 
claims with Railways  
Damodar Valley 
Corporation 
111 
11.2 Wilful negligence leading to sub-
standard asset  
Power Finance 
Corporation Limited 
112 
11.3 Injudicious decision leading to 
substandard asset  
Power Finance 
Corporation Limited 
114 
11.4 Loss due to under-recovery of fuel 
cost  
North Eastern Electric 
Power Corporation 
Limited 
115 
11.5 Renovation and Modernisation of 
NTPC Power Plants  
NTPC Limited  
 
117 
11.6 Sanction of loan to financially weak 
private developer  
Rural Electrification 
Corporation Limited 
130 
 
Chapter XII RECOVERIES, CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS BY 
CPSEs AT THE INSTANCE OF AUDIT  
 
12.1 Recoveries at the instance of audit Bharat Hea vy Electricals 
Limited, Food 
Corporation of India, 
Northern Coalfields 
Limited, South Eastern 
Coalfields Limited and 
The New India 
Assurance Company 
Limited 
132 
12.2 Corrections/rectifications at the 
instance of audit 
 
Central Warehousing 
Corporation and 
Engineering Projects 
(India) Limited 
132 
    
Chapter XIII Follow up on Audit Reports  133 
 Appendix I  137 
 Appendix II  140 
 Appendix III  141 
 Annexures  143 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
1. The accounts of Government Companies set up unde r the provisions of the 
Companies Act (including Companies deemed to be Gov ernment Companies as per the 
provisions of the Companies Act) are audited by the  Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (CAG) under the provisions of Section 143(6) of Companies Act, 2013. The 
accounts certified by the Statutory Auditors (Chart ered Accountants) appointed by the 
CAG under the Companies Act are subject to the supp lementary audit by CAG whose 
comments supplement the reports of the Statutory Auditors.  In addition, these companies 
are also subject to test audit by CAG. 
 
2. The statutes governing some Corporations and Aut horities require their accounts 
to be audited by CAG. In respect of five such Corpo rations viz. Airports Authority of 
India, National Highways Authority of India, Inland  Waterways Authority of India, Food 
Corporation of India and Damodar Valley Corporation , the relevant statutes designate 
CAG as their sole auditor. In respect of one Corpor ation viz. Central Warehousing 
Corporation, CAG has the right to conduct supplemen tary and test audit after audit has 
been conducted by the Chartered Accountants appoint ed under the statute governing the 
Corporation. 
 
3. Reports in relation to the accounts of a Governm ent Company or Corporation are 
submitted to the Government by CAG under the provis ions of Section 19-A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers a nd Conditions of Service) Act, 
1971, as amended in 1984. 
 
4. The Audit Report for the year 31 March 2015 has been prepared in two volumes. 
This is Volume I of the Audit Report and contains 3 2 individual audit observations 
relating to 20 PSUs under control of 11 Ministries/ Departments. Volume II contains 21 
individual audit observations pertaining to 11 PSUs  under the control of five 
Ministries/Departments. Instances mentioned in this  Report are among those which came 
to notice in the course of audit during 2014-15 as well as those which came to notice in 
earlier years. Results of audit of transactions sub sequent to March 2015 in a few cases 
have also been mentioned. 
 
5. All references to ‘Companies/Corporations or PSU s’ in this Report may be 
construed to refer to ‘Central Government Companies /Corporations’ unless the context 
suggests otherwise. 
 
6. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
PREFACE  

Report No. 15  of 2016 (Volume I) 
vii 
 
 
I Introduction   
1. This Report includes important audit findings noti ced as a result of test check of 
accounts of records of Central Government Companies  and Corporations conducted by 
the officers of the Comptroller and Auditor General  of India under Section 143 (6) of the 
Companies Act, 2013 or the statutes governing the particular Corporations. 
2. The Report contains 32 individual observations rel ating to 20 PSUs under 11 
Ministries/Departments. The draft observations were  forwarded to the Secretaries of the 
concerned Ministries/Departments under whose admini strative control the PSUs are 
working to give them an opportunity to furnish thei r replies/comments in each case 
within a period of six weeks. Replies to 22 observa tions were not received even as this 
Report was being finalised. Earlier, the draft obse rvations were sent to the Managements 
of the PSUs concerned, whose replies have been suitable incorporated in the report. 
3. The paragraphs included in this Report relate to th e PSUs under the 
administrative control of the following Ministries/ Departments of the Government of 
India:   
Ministry/Department (Number of 
PSUs involved 
Number of 
paragraphs  
Number of paragraphs in 
respect of which 
Ministry/Department’s reply 
was awaited 
1. 
 
Atomic Energy  
(NPCIL)  
1 1 
2. 
 
Civil Aviation 
(AAI)  
5 5 
3. 
 
Coal 
 (ECL and NLCL)  
2 1 
4.  Commerce and Industry 
(ECGC) 
1 1 
5. 
 
 
Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public  Distribution 
 (FCI)  
5 5 
6. Fertilizers 
(MFL,  FACT and RCF) 
2 1 
7. 
 
Finance 
 (IFCI Factors Ltd., STCI and 
UIICL)  
4 - 
8. 
       
Health And Family Welfare 
(HLL) 
2 - 
9. 
 
 
Heavy Industries and Public  
Enterprises  
(BHEL)  
 
3 3 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Report No. 15  of 2016 (Volume I) 
viii 
10.  
 
Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation 
 (HUDCO)  
1 - 
11.  
 
Power 
 (DVC, PFCL, NEEPCO, NTPC 
and REC)  
6 5 
Total 32 22 
 
4. Total financial implication of audit observations is ` 5,936.76 crore. 
5. Individual Audit observations in this Report are broadly of the following nature: 
/xrhombus Non-compliance with rules, directives, procedure, t erms and conditions of 
the contract etc. involving ` 2,858.12 crore in 14 audit paragraphs. 
/xrhombus Non safeguarding of financial interest of organisat ions involving ` 638.46 
crore in 10 audit paragraphs. 
/xrhombus Defective/deficient planning involving ` 2,389.95 crore in seven audit 
paragraphs. 
/xrhombus Inadequate/deficient monitoring involving ` 50.23 crore in one audit 
paragraphs. 
6. The Report also contains a paragraph relating to re coveries of ` 49.19 crore made 
by five PSUs and another paragraph relating to corr ections/rectifications carried out 
by two PSUs at the instance of Audit.  
       
  

Report No. 15  of 2016 (Volume I) 
ix 
 
II   Highlights of some significant paragraphs incl uded in the Report are given 
below: 
The renovation and modernization activities of 18 p ower stations of NTPC Limited were 
planned to be carried out during 2004-19 as per the  R&M Policy 2002 and Business 
Process 2006. The actual expenditure incurred on re novation and modernization stood at 
` 4147.02 crore up to March 2015 as against ` 8327.40 crore sanctioned between July 
2007 and March 2015. Audit observed delay of three to 109 months in completing 
activities relating to R&M works in 19 out of 20 sc hemes selected in nine power stations.  
Out of 335 contract packages, only 197 contract pac kages were awarded. Out of 107 
packages completed, 41 packages were delayed as on 31 March 2015. NTPC had to forgo 
tariff recovery of ` 199.65 crore in four power stations due to non-comp letion of works 
within tariff period 2004-09, as the norm for tarif f recovery was modified by CERC for 
tariff period 2004-09 and refunded tariff along wit h interest of ` 23.42 crore since some 
projects against which tariff recovery was allowed could not be completed within the 
tariff period 2009-14. There was avoidable or extra  expenditure of ` 54.45 crore and 
generation loss of ` 269.78 crore due to defective systems, as implement ation of R&M 
works for their replacement was delayed. Excess coa l consumption of ` 881.89 crore due 
to poor thermal efficiency, generation loss of ` 489.29 crore on account of forced outages 
and non-adherence of environment norms due to non-c ompletion of projects in time even 
after their initiation were also noticed. 
(Para 11.5) 
Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited ( HUDCO) mobilised ` 37128.32 
crore during the period 2010-11 to 2014-15. The sha re of Loans which carried higher 
interest rates was high among different source of f unds. In assessing fund requirement, 
critical elements of fund inflow/outflow were not g iven due cognizance resulting in 
excess mobilization of funds and additional interes t burden of ` 30.39 crore.  Lower 
credit rating due to higher Non-performing assets a nd lower net interest margin resulted 
in higher coupon rate and consequent additional fin ancial burden of ` 134.97 crore. In 
lending operations, the disbursement ranged between  38.40 and 69.72 per cent of loans 
sanctioned during the five years ended 2014-15. Vio lations of directions issued by the 
regulator National Housing Bank, deficiencies in in ternal guidelines, and deficiencies in 
appraisal mechanism, system of disbursement, monito ring of financed projects and 
waiver of critical pre-disbursement conditions led to non-performing assets, which 
increased from ` 1227.60 crore in 2010-11 to ` 2029.33 crore in 2014-15 and ranged 
between 5.46 per cent  and 6.76 per cent of gross outstanding loans, during the same 
period. 
(Para 10.1) 
A review of the marketing activities of five divisi ons of HLL Lifecare Limited, for three 
years from 2012-13 to 2014-15  was taken up with a view to assess the efficiency a nd 
effectiveness of those operations. Some of the observations are given below: 
• All the four domestic divisions failed to achieve t heir respective sales targets, 
particularly in the last two years. The shortfall i n achievement of targets was in 
spite of substantial funds spent by HLL from 2012-1 3 to 2014-15 on marketing of 
its products.  

Report No. 15  of 2016 (Volume I) 
x 
• HLL had no uniform structure for grant of credit li mit and credit period to its 
clients. Outstanding dues beyond credit period at ` 312.92 crore as  on 31 March 
2015 was significant.  
• The sales volume decreased despite HLL offering qua ntity discount ranging 
between 19.81 per cent and 300.88 per cent. 
• HLL had no method of conducting customized market r esearch for product 
change and development, to meet competition and to plan for improvement in 
market share. 
• Although, HLL has undertaken expansion of productio n facilities, capacity 
utilisation was mainly dependent on government orde rs. Further, the delay in 
timely receipt of subsidy claims adversely affected its funds position.  
(Para 8.1) 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) implemented Financi al Accounting package (FAP) in 
collaboration with Tata Consultancy Services (TCS ). Two core components of FAP are 
Accounting Module and Payroll Module. Audit examine d the adequacy of programming 
logic and mapping of business rules. The major audit findings are as shown below:   
• The roll out of FAP (Payroll module) was started w. e.f. 01 October 2010 and the 
“Go live” certificate (w.e.f. 01 December 2013) for  FAP was issued by the 
Management to TCS in February 2014 even though cert ificates for completion of 
FAP were not issued by any of the pilot locations. Inspite of non-fulfilment of 
contractual condition for issue of completion certi ficate by the pilot locations, 
FCI/TCS rolled out the package and full payment of ` 12.53 crore was made to 
TCS. 
• Virtual Private Network connectivity was not provid ed to district offices which 
were the prime end users of the FAP project.  Thus,  the district offices were 
forced to depend upon other sources like data card services and individual 
broadband services in an unstructured manner. This rendered the expenditure of 
` 4.02 crore unfruitful. 
• No provision was made for interface of FAP with sto ck accounting in violation of 
terms and conditions of contract. As a result the e ntries were made manually in 
FAP from the monthly stock accounts statement sent by various depot offices. 
• Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) application deve loped at a total cost of                  
` 21.84 crore (including hardware and software) was not generating the financial 
statements as per requirement of the Companies Act, 2013.  
• Audit noticed number of inconsistencies and discrep ancies in the FAP data. 
Besides, several deficiencies were also noticed in the Financial Accounting 
Module and Payroll Module which are discussed in detail in the para. 
(Para 5.2) 
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved export of 65 lakh Metric 
Tonnes (MTs) of wheat from Central Pool stocks of F CI through three Central Public 

Report No. 15  of 2016 (Volume I) 
xi 
 
Sector Undertakings. An audit of export of wheat by  West Zone of FCI was taken up 
from May 2015 to July 2015 which revealed the following: 
• Inclusion of an additional clause in tender on the request of Port Authority 
resulted in elimination of other registered bidders  for Handling and Transport 
(H&T) contracts. In six cases insufficient time was  allowed for submission of 
tenders by Empowered Committee (EC). 
• While the EC compared offered rates of ports in respect of th ree cases with the 
rates of wheat received in other ports in nine case s, the EC neither made any such 
comparison nor made any efforts for maximizing the rate even when the offered 
price was lower as compared to other ports on the same date.  
• For similar job Clearing and Handling Agents (CHAs) at the Mundra and Pipavav 
private ports charged higher handling charges compa red to those charged by M/s 
Rishi Shipping (CHA at Kandla port).  
• After completion of Phase I and Phase II of Export,  balance quantity of wheat 
stock was transported to different depots in Gujara t which resulted in avoidable 
expenditure of ` 20.67 crore. 
• Mines and Metals Trading Corporation (MMTC) withhel d ` 60.99 crore of the 
realised amount as adjustment in respect of old due s pertaining to the year 1991 
receivables from FCI. 
• Adani Port & SEZ Limited (APSEZ) failed to clean th e cargo of wheat within the 
stipulated period upto the specified level resultin g in cancellation of the tender. 
Thus, due to cancellation of order an amount of ` 2.83 crore was foregone.  
• Full charges were reimbursed/paid to the CHAs resul ting in additional 
expenditure to the tune of ` 8.01 crore, even though FCI carried out the handli ng 
operations which was the responsibility of CHA appointed by CPSUs. 
(Para 5.1) 
The audit of fertilizer products by Fertilisers and  Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) 
and Madras Fertilisers Limited (MFL) for the period  2012-13 to 2014-15 revealed the 
following: 
• The Companies did not achieve targets prescribed in  Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) entered into with Government of  India for production and 
sales. Non-achievement of the production and sales target, as per MoU, was one 
of the reasons for FACT being given an adverse cred it rating by the bankers 
leading to  higher interest rate being charged  on cash credit facilities availed by 
the Company. 
• There were cases of non-adherence to the guidelines  of Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC) in finalisation of bids.  FACT was hiring permanent godowns 
without following usual tendering process and was r enewing the agreements at 
the end of the existing agreement period at renewed  rates after negotiation with 
the owners of the godown. Non-finalization of perma nent railhead contracts/non-
tendering of hiring of godowns, led to lack of tran sparency in procurement 
procedures. MFL negotiated with all the Lowest cont ractors of railhead awarded 

Report No. 15  of 2016 (Volume I) 
xii 
for 35 locations in 2012-13, 20 locations in 2013-1 4 and 44 locations in 2014-15 
even though instructions of CVC (January 2010) proh ibited post tender 
negotiations with L1, except in certain exceptional situations.  
• There were delays in claiming and follow up of subs idy from Government of 
India due to which the Companies faced liquidity cr unch. As on 31 March 2015, 
subsidy amount of ` 740.12 crore and ` 448.23 crore was pending to be received 
from the Government by MFL and FACT respectively.  
(Para 6.1) 
The due diligence conducted by the committee consti tuted by Rural Electrification 
Corporation Limited for screening loan application justified a loan of ` 45 crore only, 
whereas the Board of Directors approved ` 250 crore.  Although the Board directed 
management to take a considered and independent vie w irrespective of the decision of 
lead/other lenders, the risk mitigating measures co ntemplated as part of pre-disbursement 
conditions were relaxed by way of extension of time  for their compliance, and most of 
the conditions have not been complied with througho ut the period of loan disbursement 
between August 2007 and March 2010 and as on Decemb er 2015.  The loan was 
classified as non-performing asset in June 2011 due to continuous default of the borrower 
in servicing the loan since December 2010 and categ orised as doubtful in January 2013. 
Thus, decision to sanction and disburse the loan di sregarding the risk associated with 
financially weak promoters, after relaxing pre-disb ursement conditions resulted in risky 
exposure of ` 250 crore. 
(Para 11.6) 
Decision by Power Finance Corporation  Limited (PFC) to relax pre-disbursement 
conditions and release of instalments of loan  disr egarding the provisions of Common 
Loan Agreement that permitted PFC to take independe nt decision on release of 
instalments irrespective of the decision of other c onsortium partners led to risky loan 
exposure of ` 239.36 crore and the loan became a sub-standard ass et. There were 
uncertainties surrounding the project arising from apparently fraudulent allotment of Coal 
block for the project. 
(Para 11.2) 
STCI Finance Limited, a Non-Banking Financial Compa ny (NBFC) registered with 
Reserve Bank of India, failed to declare loans as N PAs, recall defaulting loans, enforce 
the security, explore options to sell the NPA to As set Reconstruction Company and file 
civil suit against defaulter loanees within the pre scribed time, as per the provisions of its 
lending policy and terms and conditions of facility  agreements with lenders. 
Consequently, funds to the extent of ` 152 crore remained blocked in bad loans and 
suffered loss of interest of ` 39.36 crore thereon during March 2010 to June 2015.  
(Para 7.3) 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) designed transformers without ascertaining the 
actual operational requirements of a foreign client  assuming that the transformers would 
be operated on equal loading basis, and failed to undertake corrective measures to address 
the premature failure of transformers supplied by i t even within three years from the 

Report No. 15  of 2016 (Volume I) 
xiii 
 
notice of default.  As a result, the client initiat ed arbitration proceedings and the Tribunal 
awarded in favour of the client. BHEL paid compensa tion of ` 163.17 crore towards 
replacement cost of transformers supplied by it. 
(Para 9.1) 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited paid Tra nsport Allowance renamed as City 
Conveyance Allowance (CCA), for Headquarters and Site Conveyance Allowance (SCA) 
for sites, to officers/staff who were already provi ded with independent cars/ transport 
facility from residence to place of towns. The said  CCA/SCA was calculated at 40 per 
cent of the rate of conveyance allowance proposed for e mployees not provided with 
transport facility (base rate). The payment of CCA/ SCA to officers/staff was in violation 
of the established principle of conveyance allowanc e and led to consequential extra 
expenditure of ` 105.47 crore during September 2008 to March 2015.  
(Para 1.1) 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
1 
g10.05 
 
 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited  
1.1 Payment of City/Site Conveyance Allowance to of ficials provided with Transport 
facility  
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited extended  undue benefits of City/Site 
Conveyance Allowance to those officers/staff who we re already provided with 
independent car/transport facility. This resulted i n consequential extra expenditure 
of `` ``105.47 crore during September 2008 to March 2015.  
The Board of Directors (BOD) of Nuclear Power Corpo ration of India Limited (NPCIL) 
approved (September 2008) implementation of the rec ommendation of the Sixth Central 
Pay Commission (6 th  CPC) in NPCIL. While approving the proposal relati ng to pay and 
allowances, the BOD authorized its Chairman and Man aging Director (CMD) to decide 
the Transport Allowance, separately for NPCIL Headq uarters and NPCIL Sites keeping 
in view the different factors including cost effectiveness and operational feasibility. 
The CMD approved (October 2008) payment of Transpor t Allowance renamed as City 
Conveyance Allowance (CCA), for Headquarters and Site Conveyance Allowance (SCA) 
for sites, to officers/staff who were already provi ded with independent cars/ transport 
facility. The said CCA/SCA was calculated at 40 per cent  of the rate of conveyance 
allowance proposed for employees not provided with transport facility (base rate). While 
allowing the payment of CCA/SCA to officers/staff a lready provided with independent 
cars/transport facility, it was stated that the cos t of transportation from residence to work 
place and back together with the cost of making tri ps to nearby market town accounted 
for about 60 per cent  of overall transportation cost of NPCIL and theref ore CCA/SCA 
was allowed @ 40 per cent of the base rate to those officers/staff who were a lready 
provided with independent cars/ transport facility by NPCIL.  
Allowance of CCA/SCA to officers/staff who were alr eady provided with independent 
cars/transport facility from residence to place of duty and in nearby towns was in 
complete violation of the established principle of conveyance allowance and led to 
consequential extra expenditure of `105.47 crore during September 2008 to March 2015. 
The Management stated (December 2013) that due to n uclear safety consideration it is 
essential that NPCIL maintains a fleet of transport  for the purpose of evacuation of 
employees as a part of emergency preparedness as we ll as to ensure staff availability 
during local unrest etc.  Further, keeping in view the remoteness of the nuclear power 
plants and reluctance of young talent to work at si tes, NPCIL has been taking various 
incremental measures as a part of attraction and re tention strategy. Therefore as 
authorized by the Board, it was decided to grant co nveyance allowance to NPCIL 
employees in place of Transport Allowance which sha ll be more or less comparable to 
the rate of Transport Allowance. Thus, while finali zing the amount of conveyance 
CHAPTER I: DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
2 
allowance, it was decided that conveyance allowance  be paid at 40 per cent  of base rate 
even to those employees who were provided with official transport. 
The Management further stated (December 2015) that sixth CPC allowed employees to 
choose the company transport or the transport allow ance. Thus, given a choice, perhaps 
employees would have chosen the allowance which cou ld have compromised the 
imperatives of safety and emergency situation manag ement effectively. Since, NPCIL is 
required to maintain the transport contingent for s afety, security and emergency 
preparedness imperatives, this would have caused ad ditional expenditure on maintaining 
the mandatory fleet of transport with a view to mee t regulatory requirement apart from 
paying transport allowance in full to all employees . Thus, to optimise and make an 
attractive proposition, a scheme of conveyance allo wance was evolved after a lot of 
deliberations and consultative process held with em ployees at all the time including shift 
working which otherwise would have been difficult h ad the employees been allowed to 
commute in their own vehicles. Thus, punctuality and discipline was ensured.     
The reply of the Management is untenable as conveya nce allowance is to take care of the 
cost incurred by an employee to commute from his/he r residence to place of work. In 
case employees are provided with official transport  (car, bus etc.) for to and fro 
commutation between residence and office, there is no justification for paying any 
amount of conveyance allowance. Moreover, for retai ning young talent at sites the fact 
was that to offset locational disadvantage, officia ls posted at operating 
stations/projects/new sites are already being paid site allowance at the rate 10 per cent  of 
basic pay plus Non Practicing Allowance (in respect  of Medical officers of the 
Company). Moreover, NPCIL's stand that employees, b y using their own transport, 
would compromise the safety at the establishment an d lead to tardiness unfairly implies 
adverse behavioural attributes to NPCIL employees and is unacceptable. 
Thus, the payment of CCA/SCA to officers/ staff alr eady provided with independent 
cars/transport facility was not only a violation of  GOI rules but also resulted in extra 
expenditure to the tune of ` 105.47 crore during the period September 2008 to M arch 
2015.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in October 2015; their reply was awaited  
(March 2016). 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
3 
CHAPTER II: MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION   
 
 
Airports Authority of India 
2.1 Potential loss of revenue to Airports Authority  of India (AAI) resulting from flaw 
in agreement between MIAL and private developer HDI L for removal of 
encroachments from Airport Land  
As per Operation Management and Development Agreeme nt signed between AAI 
and MIAL, MIAL was to remove encroachments in the d emised airport land 
handed over by AAI to MIAL. Subsequently, MIAL awar ded rights for commercial 
development on a considerable portion (65.20 acres)  of Mumbai airport land owned 
by Airports Authority of India (AAI) to HDIL for a very long period (upto 60 years) 
in return for removal of encroachments from the air port land. MIAL did not 
inform AAI before entering into an agreement. MIAL would not receive any 
revenue from HDIL for the commercial development of  airport land and hence no 
revenue share would accrue to AAI. Though the contr act between HDIL and MIAL 
has since been terminated (February 2013), the matt er is still under arbitration and 
hence the possibilities of transfer of land with at tached commercial development 
rights have not been closed finally. Meanwhile, the  encroachment of airport land is 
continuing. 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) handed over (Apri l 2006), Chatrapati Shivaji 
International Airport (CSIA) , Mumbai to Mumbai Int ernational Airport Limited (MIAL) 
under Operation Management and Development Agreemen t (OMDA) for a period of 30 
years. The airport land handed over to MIAL was ter med the ‘demised premises’. At the 
time of signing of OMDA, the status of total land o f Mumbai Airport was 1875 acres. 
Out of this 1875 acres, 76.3 acres were carved out assets retained by AAI. The balance 
area i.e 1798.7 acres was demised premises. As per clause 2.2.4 of OMDA, MIAL was 
eligible to utilize 10 per cent of the demised premises in the airport for commerci al 
development. The area available for commercial deve lopment was 179.8 acres. As per 
clause 11.1.2 of OMDA, AAI was eligible to receive 38.7 per cent  of the gross revenue 
(including revenue from commercial activities) generated by MIAL. 
The demised premises included encroached land.As pe r the State Government Support 
Agreement (SGSA) signed by MIAL (April 2006) with Govt. of Maharashtra, MIAL was 
to bear the entire cost of relocation of approx. 80,000 families encroaching airport land.In 
March 2007, State Government allowed inclusion of t he project for rehabilitation of slum 
dwellers from the airport site under the Developmen t Control Regulations (DCR). DCR 
provides for both in-situ rehabilitation (clause 33(10) of DCR) as well as rehabilitation in 
an alternate site (clause 3.11 of DCR). It was deci ded that the encroachers of airport land 
would be rehabilitated in an alternate site (clause 3.11 of DCR). 
In October 2007, MIAL signed an agreement with a pr ivate company, Housing 
Development and Infrastructure Limited (HDIL) for r emoving and rehabilitating 
encroachers of airport land by October 2011. The work was to be taken up in two phases, 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
4 
removing encroachment from airport land measuring 1 57.93 acres in the first phase and 
from 118.53 acres in the second phase. As per agreement, HDIL was to bear the entire 
cost of rehabilitation and in return, receive right s for commercial development of 65.2 
acres (55 per cent of the airport land cleared of encroachment in the second phase). As 
required under clause 3.11 of DCR, HDIL identified its own land and took up 
construction of 28,000 tenements in the first phase  of encroachment removal scheme. 
HDIL signed deeds of conveyances (December 2007) with Slum Rehabilitation Authority 
(SRA) of Government of Maharashtra, transferring th e ownership of land and tenements 
to SRA. Under the DCR provisions, HDIL was eligible  for Transfer of Development 
Rights (TDRs) in lieu of land that it provided (lan d TDR) and for construction of 
tenements (construction TDR). As on Sept 2015, SRA had released land TDR for 
2,50,679.63 sq. mtrs and construction TDR for 6,49, 392.00 sq. mtrs (Approx. value 
` 2,400 crores 1).  
Clause 8.5.7 (e) of OMDA required that the JVC shal l ensure that any sub-contract, 
license or sub-lease granted in relation to the air port expires on the 30th anniversary of 
effective date. The agreement between HDIL and MIAL , however, envisaged  sub-lease 
of 65.2 acres of airport land to HDIL for commercia l development for a period of 30 
years to be renewed automatically for another 30 ye ars in case the airport lease with 
MIAL gets renewed, which is in contravention of the  provisions of clause 8.5.7 (e) of 
OMDA. 
In February 2013, MIAL terminated its contract with  HDIL as the airport encroachment, 
being agreed under the Contract, could not be remov ed by HDIL by October 2011. HDIL 
invoked the arbitration process. Presently (Novembe r 2015), the dispute between HDIL 
and MIAL is under arbitration. Till date, no encroa chment has been removed from the 
airport site. SRA meanwhile released considerable q uantum of TDR (both land and 
construction TDR) to HDIL. The grant of such TDR, t hus, did not serve the intended 
purpose of encroachment removal from Mumbai Airport. 
Audit has the following observations: 
• MIAL was eligible for commercial development of 179 .8 acres of land (10 per 
cent of the demised premises of 1798.7 acres) in the Mum bai airport. In the 
sanctioned Interim Development Plan (IDP) of CSIA f or the period 2010-14 
MIAL proposed commercial utilisation of 169.31 acre s with  floor space 
index (FSI) of 4.0. In August 2014, MIAL pointed ou t to Government of 
Maharashtra that the available land at Mumbai airpo rt for commercial 
development was only 133.08 acres as against its re quirement of 169.31 acres 
(sanctioned in the IDP). The State Government accor dingly allowed MIAL an 
additional FSI of 1 (the available FSI of 4 increas ed to 5) for 133.08 acres of 
airport land to cover the shortfall. Thus, MIAL has  already received commercial 
development rights for 169.31 acres of airport land out of 179.8 acres mandated in 
the OMDA for which MIAL has also identified specifi c commercial activities. 
Thus, balance land available to MIAL for commercial development as per OMDA 
is only 10.49 acres (179.8 – 169.31 acres = 10.49 a cres). The agreement between 
                                                           
1  As submitted by HDIL to Hon’ble High Court of Mum bai during November 2013. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
5 
MIAL and HDIL provides for sub-lease of 65.2 acres of airport land to HDIL for 
commercial development,even though,only 10.49 acres  would be available as per 
the OMDA as against the 65.2 acres required to be p rovided to HDIL, in case the 
arbitration award goes in its favor. Though the agr eement has been terminated by 
MIAL, it has been disputed by HDIL and the matter i s presently under arbitration 
which leaves open the possibility of excess airport  land being utilized for 
commercial development.  
• MIAL had embarked on removal of encroachment from a irport land citing 
aeronautical requirements. However, once the airpor t land becomes free of 
encroachments, 65.2 acres of this freed land would be available to HDIL for 
commercial development. As per OMDA, AAI was eligib le to receive 38.7 
percent of the gross revenue 1 generated by MIAL. As per the agreement between 
HDIL and MIAL, MIAL would not receive any revenue s hare for 65.2 acres of 
land of airport land available for commercial devel opment. Consequently AAI, 
would not receive any revenue share for development  of airport land by HDIL in 
case arbitration award goes in favor of HDIL. 
• AAI has given an in-principle approval to MIAL (Feb ruary 2014) to carry out in-
situ rehabilitation of slums in Mumbai airport (cla use 33 (10) of DCR). As per 
provisions of DCR, the built up area to be consumed  on the site for the in-situ 
rehabilitation project is 2.5 times of available Fl oor Space Index (FSI). The 
balance built up area, after in-situ rehabilitation , can be taken as transferable 
development rights (TDR). Thus TDR benefits would b e available to MIAL in 
case of in-situ rehabilitation of airport slum. In such an event, the same 
encroachment site at the airport would form the bas is for TDR benefits to HDIL 
(under clause 3.11 of DCR which has already been pa rtially granted) and to 
MIAL (under clause 33(10) of DCR) resulting in bene fit to two different entities 
for the same encroachment site. 
• As per clause 8.5.7 (c) (bb) of OMDA, MIAL had to i nform AAI before entering 
into any agreement with a third party. However, MIAL, did not inform AAI of the 
agreement between itself and HDIL regarding removal  of encroachments from 
airport land. The lack of information with AAI rega rding this contract, to 
safeguard its interest also needs to be viewed in t he context of a representative of 
AAI being a member of the board of MIAL 2. 
• Report No. 2(Civil) of C&AG of India for the year e nded 31 March 2011 on 
Government of Maharashtra had reported on “Slum Reh abilitation Schemes in 
Mumbai”. It was brought out that the Government of Maharashtra had extended 
(30 March 2007) the provisions of DCR to MIAL, on p ayment of additional 
infrastructural charges at double the rate of norma l infrastructure charges (subject 
                                                           
1  As per OMDA, AAI is eligible for 38.7 per cent of  gross revenue earned from services/activities such  
as aeronautical as well as non-aeronautical. (Aeron autical services include the services provided as 
listed in schedule 5 of OMDA. Non-aeronautical serv ices include the services provided as listed in 
schedule 6 of OMDA.) 
2  AAI having 26 per cent share in MIAL  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
6 
to a maximum of `30,000 per tenement). However, only normal infrastr ucture 
charges were recovered from MIAL, leading to a short recovery of `84 crore.  
AAI in its reply stated that: 
(i)  At the time of executing the agreement with HDIL, M IAL had not informed AAI 
of the same. However, as per OMDA clause 8.5.7, MIA L had the right to sub- 
lease any land for commercial use. 
(ii)  As per Article 18.1(b) of OMDA, the JVC does not ha ve automatic right to 
extend the period but the extension is subject to review by AAI.  
(iii)  Land under encroachment has been shown as Encroache d Land in the Draft 
Master Plan of 2011. Similarly, table 4-1 indicates  land uses which include both 
aeronautical and non-aeronautical uses.   
(iv)  As per MIAL, there is no transfer of TDR to HDIL ge nerated out of AAI 
encroached land. Further generation and any further  transaction of TDR falls in 
the purview of the SRA/State Govt. The said grant o f TDR is between the SRA 
and HDIL and AAI/MoCA is not a party to this transaction. 
(v)  In principle approval for the in-situ rehabilitatio n has been accorded by AAI. 
MIAL has also approached Govt. of Maharashtra to fo rmulate Rehabilitation 
Scheme specific to Airport which is yet to be finalized. It has also been decided in 
the 19th OMDA Inspection Oversight Committee(OIOC) meeting on 1st October 
2015 that MIAL will closely liaison with the State Government for finalization of 
its scheme for rehabilitation of slums which could thereafter be taken to the Union 
Cabinet for its approval, if necessary. 
(vi)  The Audit observation has become inoperative as the  contract between MIAL and 
HDIL has been terminated by MIAL due to non-fulfill ment of its obligation.  The 
dispute between HDIL and MIAL is under arbitration and it is fait accompli in 
any such contract. 
The reply furnished is not tenable in view of the following:  
(i)  AAI has acknowledged that it was not aware of the agreement between MIAL and 
HDIL despite the presence of representative of AAI on the Board of MIAL. 
(ii)  Audit has commented on the agreement entered into b y MIAL with HDIL with 
maximum duration of 30 years (clause 8.5.7(e) of OM DA). By allowing an 
automatic extension of this contract, clause 8.5.7( e) has been violated. The clause 
18.1(b) quoted by AAI, pertains to the extension of  OMDA between AAI and 
MIAL and is not relevant to the audit observation.  
(iii)  AAI has confirmed that presently there is a proposa l for in-situ development of 
encroached land. The audit concern is that this may  lead to TDR benefits allowed 
under DCR of Maharashtra for such in-situ development benefits being allowed to 
different parties (HDIL under ex-situ development a nd another party for in-situ 
development of the same site). 
(iv)  The reply of the management that the dispute betwee n MIAL and HDIL is fait 
accompli is incorrect. Audit has pointed out weakne sses in the operation of PPP 
which led to a possibility of transfer of AAI land to a third party without AAI’s 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
7 
knowledge and to its detriment, even though AAI is represented on the MIAL 
Board. The present dispute under arbitration is a f allout of this lack of monitoring 
on the part of AAI.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in February  2016; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
2.2 Short realization of Annual Fee from MIAL resul ting in loss of revenue to 
AAI 
As per OMDA, MIAL had to share 38.7 per cent  of its pretax gross revenues with 
AAI except for those specifically exempted. In cont ravention of OMDA terms, 
MIAL did not share revenues earned as non-refundabl e deposits made by bidders 
and additional water and electricity charges collec ted over and above the rates at 
which it paid to concerned authorities. AAI failed to recover these monies long after 
these violations were pointed by the independent auditors appointed by it.  
Airports Authority of India (AAI) signed the Operat ion, Management and Development 
Agreement (OMDA) with  Mumbai International Airport  (Private) Limited (MIAL) on 
4th April, 2006 thereby handing over the Chhatrapat i Shivaji International Airport 
(CSIA), Mumbai to MIAL for development, operation a nd management for a period of 
30 years, extendable by another 30 years.  
As per clause 11.1.2.1 of the OMDA, MIAL has to pay  to AAI an annual fee for each 
year during the term of the agreement, equal to 38. 70 per cent  of ‘revenue’ for the said 
year. The annual fee is payable in twelve equal mon thly installments, on the first day of 
each calendar month. In case of non-receipt of mont hly payment by AAI, interest for the 
delay would be charged at State Bank of India Prime  Lending Rates (SBI PLR) +10 per 
cent  p.a (clause 11.1.2.2 of OMDA).  
‘Revenue’ is defined in the OMDA (clause 1.1 of OMD A) as “all pre-tax gross revenue 
of JVC, excluding the following: (a) payments made by JVC, if any, for the activities 
undertaken by Relevant Authorities or payments rece ived by JVC for provision of 
electricity, water, sewerage, or analogous utilitie s to the extent of amounts paid for such 
utilities to third party service providers; (b) ins urance proceeds except insurance 
indemnification for loss of revenue; (c) any amount  that accrues to JVC from sale of any 
capital assets or items; (d) payments and/or monies collected by JVC for and on behalf of 
any governmental authorities under Applicable Law ( e) any bad debts written off 
provided these pertain to past revenues on which annual fee has been paid to AAI”. 
Audit noticed that the independent revenue auditors  appointed by AAI had highlighted 
some specific instances where revenue of MIAL were not shared with AAI. It was 
observed that AAI had not taken any corrective acti on on the matter, despite lapse of 
considerable time. The specific instances noticed are shown below: 
(i)  Non-refundable deposits collected by MIAL, not shared with AAI  
MIAL had collected non-refundable deposits from bid derswhile tendering for allotment 
ofspace at the new terminal T2. Being non-refundabl e, these amounts constituted an 
income to MIAL. Till June 2015, MIAL had collected an amount of 
` 31.47 crores on 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
8 
this account. It was noticed that MIAL had adjusted  ` 18.10 crores out of it, towards its 
expenditure (2013-14 and 2014-15) and only shared t he balance amount of `13.37 crore 
with AAI.  
The independent auditor had statedin his report (fo r the quarter ended March 2013) that 
these non-refundable deposits are not recognized as  income and hence not shared with 
AAI. MIAL in its response to AAI (June 21, 2014) st ated that non-refundable deposits 
were essentially in the nature of recoupment of the  cost of consultants appointed by 
MIAL for advising on business planning, concession planning, formulation of RFQ and 
RFP, commercial terms for T2 commercial tenders and  other concessions and hence 
could not be treated as revenue. Audit did not noti ce any further effort on the part of AAI 
to demand share of the balance revenues. 
The contention of MIAL that these items are recoupm ents and not to be recognized as 
revenue is not acceptable. As per terms of OMDA, the gross revenue of MIAL with a few 
specified exclusions has to be shared with AAI. Non -refundable deposits, even if 
collected as recoupment of expenses do not qualify for exemption under OMDA and 
hence ought to be shared with AAI. 
Non-sharing of 
`18.10 crore of non-refundable deposits collected by MIAL with AAI has 
resulted in short realization of ` 7 crore revenue (38.70 per cent  of `18.10 crore) and loss 
of interest of ` 2.02 crorethereonto AAI. 
AAI in its reply (March 2016) stated that,as inform ed by MIAL, the above “Bid 
Development Cost” from bidders was collected toward s cost of RFP process to ensure 
participation by serious bidders and only tender related expenditure were adjusted against 
such bid development cost and as such no revenue in come accrued to MIAL in this 
regard. AAI further stated that the independent aud itor has been instructed to verify the 
same including the justification of MIAL towards adjustment of bid development cost.  
Management reply is not in line with the terms of t he OMDA which does not allow 
adjustments of such expenses while arriving at the gross shareable revenue. Further 
action of AAI in this regard would be reviewed in future audits. 
(ii)  Additional revenue collected by MIAL as electricity  and water charges from 
concessionaires not shared with AAI  
MIAL provides electricity and water facilities to v arious trade concessionaires and 
recovers charges for these utilities at agreed fixe d rates from them. MIAL has been 
recovering since December 2010, theseutility charge s atrates higher than the actual 
applicable rates, payable to the authorities. The e xcess amount so collected is being 
retained by MIAL and was not shared with AAI.  
The matter had been highlighted by the Independent Auditor (since December 2010).  In 
response to AAI’s demand (letters of June 2011 and March 2012) for release of payment 
towards excess utility charges collected, MIAL had stated that these utility charges are 
collected from the concessionaires as reimbursement  of common area cost and not 
revenue. The matter had been referred to Ministry o f Law and Justice (MoL&J) who 
observed (May 2012) that  payments received and mad e by JVC for electricity charges, 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
9 
municipal taxes etc. do not form a part of the annu al fee payable. AAI did not further 
pursue the demand with MIAL in view of this observation of MoL&J. 
Audit noticed that the MoL&J opinion has only state d that utility charges collected from 
the trade concessionaires, to the extent that they are paid to the government authorities, 
does not form a part of revenue. However, MIAL coll ected additional amounts, over and 
above payments made to the authorities for these ut ilities. This additional amount 
retained by MIAL is an income of MIAL, which ought to be shared with AAI. 
Over the period, April 2010 to March 2015, MIAL had  recovered additional charges of 
` 58.36 crore 1 ( ` 52.47 crore towards additional electricity charges  and ` 5.89 crore 
towards additional water charges). This amount ough t to have been regarded as revenue 
of MIAL and should have been shared with AAI as per  clause 11.1.2.1 of the OMDA.  
Failure to do so had led to short realization of an nual fee of AAI by ` 22.59 crore (38.7 
per cent  of ` 58.36 crore) and loss of interest of ` 18.62 crore thereon. 
AAI in its reply (March 2016) stated that it has be en decided after discussion with MIAL 
that any excess collection in this regard is to be shared with AAI. However, acceptance of 
said decision from MIAL for the same is awaited.  
The reply needs to be viewed against the fact that the Independent Auditor has been 
highlighting this issue since December 2010 and AAI  had not pursued the matter since 
May 2012. 
In all the above instances, MIAL had not shared its  revenue with AAI in line with the 
provisions of OMDA. Audit noticed that AAI has not taken any concrete steps for 
recovery of the revenue and safeguarding its own in terests even when they had been 
highlighted by the independent auditor. This led to  short receipt of 
` 29.59 crore as 
revenue from MIAL and consequent loss of interest of ` 20.64 crore. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in March 20 16; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
2.3 Non-realisation of revenue share as per provisi ons of agreement 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) did not take the required action to protect its 
financial interests in terms of the provisions of O peration, Management and 
Development Agreements signed with MIAL and DIAL wh ich resulted in non 
realisation of share of `` `` 29.62 crore by AAI in the revenues of MIAL and DIA L. 
AAI also sustained loss of interest to the extent o f `` `` 13.86 crore (till March 2015) on 
the unrealised amount. 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) signed on 4 April , 2006 two separate agreements viz. 
Operation, Management and Development Agreements (OMDA) with Delhi International 
Airport (Private) Limited (DIAL) and with Mumbai In ternational Airport (Private) 
Limited (MIAL), thereby handing over Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA), Delhi 
and Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport (CSIA ), Mumbai to DIAL and MIAL, 
respectively, for development, operation and management of the airports.  
                                                           
1  As per Independent Auditor report for the quarter  ended March 2015 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
10 
As per clause 11.1.2 of both the OMDAs, DIAL and MIAL have to pay to AAI an annual 
fee for each year during the term of the agreement,  equal to 45.99 per cent and 38.70 per 
cent, of ‘revenue’ for the said year, respectively. The a nnual fee is payable in twelve 
equal monthly instalments, on the first day of each calendar month. In case of non-receipt 
of monthly payment by the due date, the AAI is enti tled to recover intereston the amount 
due, at Prime Lending Rate of State Bank of India + 10 per cent  p.a. for the period of 
delay.The above clause of OMDA further stipulates t hat the applicable revenue used for 
final verification/reconciliation of the Annual Fee  shall be the revenue of the JVC as 
certified by the Independent Auditor every quarter. 
Further, clause 1.1 of both the OMDAsdefined 'Reven ue’ as “all pre-tax gross revenue of 
JVC, excluding the following: (a) payments made by JVC, if any, for the activities 
undertaken by Relevant Authorities or payments rece ived by JVC for provision of 
electricity, water, sewerage, or analogous utilitie s to the extent of amounts paid for such 
utilities to third party service providers; (b) ins urance proceeds except insurance 
indemnification for loss of revenue; (c) any amount  that accrues to JVC from sale of any 
capital assets or items; (d) payments and/or monies collected by JVC for and on behalf of 
any governmental authorities under Applicable Law a nd (e) any bad debts written off 
provided these pertain to past revenues on which annual fee has been paid to AAI”. 
MIAL and DIAL constituted a Marketing Fund in April  2010 and August 2012, 
respectively, and started collecting 0.5 per cent  and one per cent respectively of Net Sales 
from various concessionaires as Marketing Fund Char ge. The objective of the Marketing 
Fund was to promote business of concessionaries at CSIA Mumbai and IGIA Delhi.  
Audit observed that MIAL and DIAL had collected/bil led from the concessionaires (till 
March 2015) an amount of ` 66.76 crore in the name of Marketing Fund (MIAL ` 14.90 
crore and DIAL ` 51.86 crore)without sharing it with the AAI in ter ms of clause 11.1.2 
of OMDAs referred above.Audit further observed that  respective Independent Auditors, 
while certifying revenue of MIAL and DIAL, have bee n raising through the quarterly 
reports, the issue of non inclusion of the amount o f Marketing Fund in the revenues of 
MIAL and DIAL. Thus non-sharing of the revenue by M IAL and DIAL with AAI 
resulted in short realization of ` 29.62 crore (MIAL ` 5.77 crore + DIAL ` 23.85 crore) 
to AAI and loss of interest of `13.86 crore (MIAL ` 2.02 crore + DIAL ` 11.84 crore) 
thereon (till 31 March 2015), as worked out in term s of above mentioned provisions of 
OMDAs. 
AAI in their reply (February 2016) stated that: 
(i)  As there is no provision in OMDA with regard to uti lization of revenue, for the 
promotion of the business of the concessionaires at  the airport, in the name of 
Marketing Fund, they have communicated (February 2016) to MIAL and DIAL to 
treat the Marketing Fund as shareable revenue and r emit the same to AAI at the 
applicable rate as per OMDA, since introduction of marketing fund including 
interest.  
(ii)  The Independent Revenue Auditors appointed under cl ause 11.2 of OMDAs have 
also been instructed to look into the matter and the issue would be taken up by the 
AAI representative in the Board meeting of MIAL/DIAL. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
11 
Fact remains that though constitution of Marketing Fund was in contravention of 
provisions of OMDA, AAI did not object to constitut ion of the fund. The Agenda and 
Board Minutes of MIAL/DIAL, reflecting the inputs o f AAI representative on the Boards 
of MIAL/DIAL, while approving the decision of estab lishment of the respective 
Marketing Funds, were also not made available to Au dit. Further, even after highlighting 
the matter by therespective Independent Revenue Aud itors in their quarterly Revenue 
Audit Reports (for quarter ended December 2012 in c ase of MIAL and for quarter ended 
June 2014 in case of DIAL), AAI did not take approp riate action in the matter for more 
than two years. The action proposed by AAI would be reviewed in future audits.  
Thus, AAI’s failure in resolving the issue promptly  has resulted in non realisation of 
revenue of ` 29.62 crore and loss of interestthereon to the extent of  ` 13.86 crore. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December  2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
2.4 Irregular payments towards encashment of half p ay leave 
AAI allowed to its employees encashment of half pay  leave/earned leave, on their 
retirement/superannuation/death,beyond the prescrib ed ceiling of 300 days,in 
contravention ofGoI/DPE guidelines, which resulted in irregular payment of ` 30.30 
crore during the period from January 2006 to March 2015.  
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) had instruct ed (April 1987 1) that the individual 
public enterprises may frame leave rules for its em ployees keeping the broad parameters 
of the policy guidelines laid down in this regard b y the Government of India (GoI). DPE 
enhanced (August 2005) the existing ceiling on accu mulation of earned leave from 240 
days to 300 days for public enterprises. GoI allowe d encashment of earned leave (EL) 
and half pay leave (HPL) subject to overall limit o f 300 days with effect from 1 January 
2006. DPE, referring to its instructions of April 1 987, issued clarification on 17 July 
2012 2 that EL and HPL could be considered for encashment  of leave on retirement 
subject to the overall limit of 300 days. Thus, in terms of DPE instructions of April 1987 
ibid , public enterprises were required to follow the ov erall ceiling of 300 days for 
encashment of EL and HPL on retirementof their employees.   
Audit observed (January 2015) that: 
• Though the guidelines did not permit for encashment  of HPL till 1 January 2006, 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) allowed encashmen t of 240 days HPL on 
superannuation/resignation/death since 29 August 20 00. The ceiling of 240 days 
was further enhanced in November 2004 to maximum of  leave standing at the 
credit of the employees on the date of superannuati on/resignation/death. Thus, 
encashment of HPL during the period from 29 August 2000 to 31 December 2005 
was in violation of guidelines of GoI and DPE. In t he absence of details, the 
excess amount paid during this period could not be ascertained.  
                                                           
1   OM No.2(27)85-BPE(WC) dated 24 April 1987  
2   OM No.2(14)/2012-DPE(WC) dated 17 July 2012 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
12 
• Contrary to GoI/DPE guidelinesfor encashment of EL/ HPL on superannuation 
/resignation/death subject to the ceiling of 300 da ys, AAI allowed encashment of 
EL/HPL in excess of 300 days, resulting in irregula r payment of `30.30 crore to 
its employees, during the period from January 2006 to March 2015. 
• As per clause 43 of AAI Act 1994, each regulation i ssued by AAI is required to 
be laid before the Parliament. However, whether the  AAI (Leave) Regulations, 
2003, notified on 13 June 2003, allowing encashment  of 240 days of HPL beside 
encashment of 300 days of EL, were laid before each  House of Parliament (as 
required under Clause 43 of AAI Act 1994), could no t be verified in audit due to 
non production of relevant records sought by Audit.   
Management replied (September 2013 and October 2015) that: 
(i)  As per Clause 42(2)(b) of the AAI Act, AAI is empow ered to frame its own 
regulations, following due procedure of notifications such as approval of Ministry 
of Civil Aviation and finally duly vetted by the Mi nistry of Law. Accordingly, 
Airports Authority of India (Leave) Regulations, 20 03 were notified which 
contain the provision of encashment of HPL and only  the ceiling was raised in 
November 2004 to raise it to maximum limit of leave  standing at the credit of 
employees on the date of separation from the service.  
(ii)  AAIwas not paying the gross excess amount/leave at par with the employees of 
GoI i.e. 730 days towards Child Care Leave, 15 days  for Paternity Leave and EL 
encashment while availing LTC in addition to encash ment of EL standing at the 
credit at the time of superannuation.  
(iii)  The said benefit was applicable to executives and n on-executives and any 
alteration in the same will have Industrial Relation (IR) problem. 
Reply of the management was not acceptable in view of the following: 
(i)  Leave encashment beyond the overall ceiling prescri bed by DPE/GoI was not 
permitted in view of DPE instructions of April 1987 , followed by DPE's 
clarification of July 2012 reiteratingthe overall l imit of 300 days to be considered 
for encashment of EL and HPL on superannuation. Fur ther, despite requests 
(January 2015 and February 2016) made by Audit, AAI  did not furnish the 
documentary evidence relating to laying of AAI (Lea ve) Regulation, 2003, before 
each House of Parliament. 
(ii)  The comparison made by the Management between the benefits applicable to AAI 
and Central Government employees was irrelevant bec ause DPE guidelines are 
not applicable to Central Government employees. Fur ther, despite following the 
DPE/GoI guidelines for other purposes like revision  of pay scales, credit of leave 
in a year, maximum ceiling for encashment of EL, et c., AAI had framed rules for 
encashment of HPL which were inconsistent withDPE's guidelines.  
(iii)  Non-adherence to DPE guidelines in the name of IR p roblem is not acceptable as 
before deviating from the guidelines, the AAI shoul d have raised the issue, 
through their administrative ministry, with the DPE.   

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
13 
Thus, payment made by AAI towards encashment of EL/ HPL in violation of GoI/DPE 
guidelines, resulted in irregular payment of `30.30 crore (January 2006 to March 2015). 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2016; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
2.5 Poor utilization of infrastructure developed wi th Government funds at Birsi 
airport, Gondia resulting in recurring losses for its maintenance  
Government budgetary funds ( `` ``198.80 crore) were used to develop Birsi airport at  
Gondia with the objective of supporting a private f lying training institute. The 
revenue earned by Airports Authority of India (AAI)  from this institute was 
insufficient to meet the operation and maintenance cost of the airport. Even with 
utilisation of the airport infrastructure by anothe r institute it failed to generate 
enough revenues to cover the running costs of the a irport. Meanwhile, AAI 
established another institute at Gondia for better utilisation of the airport facilities. 
However, the institute could not fulfil its objecti ves or utilise the airport 
infrastructure. This left AAI with recurring losses; the cumulated losses incurred by 
AAI on Gondia airport during April 2009 to March 2015 being ` 27.31 crore.  
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) intended (Februar y 2005) to set up a flying training 
institute with development of an airport at Gondia,  Maharashtra through Government of 
India (GoI) budgetary support. It was subsequently decided (May 2005) that the Birsi 
airport at Gondia would be taken over from Maharash tra Industrial Development 
Corporation (MIDC) and developed to be a part of th e flying training institute proposed 
to be set up at Gondia. The Detailed Project Report  (DPR) prepared for the project 
estimated a total project cost of ` 240.01 crore ( ` 118.62 crore for setting up the flying 
institute and ` 121.39crore for development of Birsi airport at Gondia). 
Subsequently (November 2007), MoCA decided that AAI would develop the Birsi airport 
at Gondia with budgetary support and the flying tra ining institute would be constructed, 
developed and managed by a private joint venture (J V) company. While approving 
Government Budgetary Support (GBS) for the airport development project, MoCA 
directed (November 2007) that the recurring costs o f the airport be borne from the 
resources of AAI. 
Government approved (November 2007) the proposal to  establish the flying training 
institute on JV mode.  JV agreement between M/s. CA E Inc., Canada (CAE) and AAI 
was signed in February 2008. The shareholders agree ment between AAI and 
International Flight School (Mauritius) Ltd. (IFSML ) (an associate company of CAE) 
was signed in April 2008. AAI holds (March 2014) 45 .36 per cent of the equity stake in 
National Flying Training Institute (NFTI) (the othe r 51 per cent  held by IFSML and 3.64 
per cent by M/s. Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited).  AAI was required to provide land on 
lease to the JV for development of NFTI. 
AAI has (March 2014) released 
` 36.03 crore as equity contribution for the institu te and 
allotted 12 acres of land at Birsi airport for sett ing up NFTI at a lease rent of ` 110 per 
sq.m.per annum. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
14 
The actual expenditure for development of the Birsi  airport as per initial plan was 
` 117.82 crore against which Government released ` 117.95 crore. This work was 
completed by August 2010. AAI highlighted the need for additional infrastructure at the 
Birsi airport for operation of bigger aircraft (A-3 20 aircraft) and proposed to take up a 
second phase of the development with government bud getary support which was agreed 
to by MoCA. The cost estimate for the second phase was ` 143.59 crore against which 
cumulative expenditure (upto July 2014) has been ` 83.82 crore. Till March 2015, AAI 
has received Government grant of ` 80.85 crore for the second phase of development of  
Birsi airport.  
The maintenance of the Birsi airport is the respons ibility of AAI. Over the last six years 
of operation (April 2009 to March 2015), AAI has in curred a revenue expenditure of 
` 39.77 crore. Against this expenditure, AAI has earn ed the following revenue on the 
Birsi airport at Gondia during April 2009 to March 2015. 
(i)  AAI earned a revenue of ` 11.07 crore from NFTI during April 2009 to March 
2015. AAI has not received any dividend from NFTI a s the institute has been 
incurring losses.  
(ii)  The Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Udaan Academy (IGRUA), Rae Bareli commenced 
operations at Gondia for approx. six months a year since December 2007. AAI 
earned revenue of ` 1.28 crore during the period from 2009 to 2015.  
(iii)  AAI established (August 2010) another institute Nat ional Institute of Aviation 
Training and Management (NIATAM) at Gondia at a cos t of ` 51.91 crore, for 
training aircraft maintenance engineers, flight dis patchers, cabin crew and ground 
handling personnel. So far, NIATAM has only imparte d training to AAI Air 
Traffic Control staff. AAI has earned revenue of ` 0.11 crore on this account. 
Thus, against expenditure of ` 39.77 crore, AAI earned a revenue of `12.46 crore on the 
Birsi airport at Gondia during April 2009 to March 2015. AAI, thus, has incurred an 
operational loss of ` 27.31 crore during the period from April 2009 to March 2015. 
Audit has the following observations in this context: 
• Till date, an expenditure of ` 201.64 crore has been incurred (of which ` 198.8 
crore are from Government budgetary funds) for deve lopment of the Birsi airport 
at Gondia. No commercial flights are operated or sc heduled for operation to and 
from Birsi airport at Gondia.  
• Audit further observed that AAI had been billing NFTI at discounted rates (during 
March 2009 to July 2012) i.e. @10 percent  of the normal rate applicable for 
Category I 1 flying institutions though it is a Category II 2 flying institution and 
ought to be billed at the normal rate. It was only subsequently (on the basis of 
clarification dated 03.02.2012 received from Centra l Head Quarters (CHQ) of 
                                                           
1 Category I : Flying clubs, flying training adminis trations registered as education societies and 
operating on no profit no loss basis : nominal charges of 10 per cent of normal rates. 
2   Category II: All other flying clubs/ flying institutions would be charged at the normal rates for various 
AAI services  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
15 
AAI), that the error was rectified and outstanding bills raised on NFTI at normal 
rates. NFTI is yet to pay the difference and the ac cumulated outstanding dues 
from NFTI as on March 2015 amounts to ` 6.72 crore.  
In reply, the AAI stated (November 2015) the following:  
(i)  Government decided to set up a new flying training institute as pilots trained at 
IGRUA would not meet the demand of trained pilots. The institute was set up at 
Birsi airport, Gondia as the airstrip was found sui table for such an institute. The 
profit or loss at an airport depends on various factors like frequency of operations, 
type of aircraft, non-traffic revenue etc. and can be overcome by effective 
management.  
(ii)  The Institute is serving the nation by creating ski lled pilots to meet our Aviation 
Industry demand. The assets/aviation infrastructure  created at Birsi Airport, 
Gondia is sufficient to handle commercial domestic flights for which AAI is 
requesting the airlines to start schedule operation s. Since the airlines plan their 
flight schedules as per their market survey and fle et availability, the commercial 
flights have not yet commenced.  
(iii)  The aviation industry also require aircraft mainten ance engineers, flight 
dispatchers, cabin crew and ground handling personn el and need to be adequately 
trained. As there were no organised schools in the country to cater for these 
requirements, and development works of airstrip at Birsi Airport, Gondia were in 
progress to facilitate establishment of NFTI, Gover nment suggested that 
NIATAM may also be set up at the same location.  AA I had to join hands with a 
private Institute for providing training and managi ng day to day business of the 
institute. The collaboration could not succeed and the private party agreement was 
terminated. The loss being incurred by Birsi Airpor t cannot be attributed to the 
Institute as AAI is making all efforts to utilise t he assets created for training 
facilities.  
(iv)  With regard to payment of difference by NFTI, the r epresentatives of AAI in the 
Board constantly pursue with the NFTI Board for set tlement of its outstanding 
dues. In the Board Meeting held in September 2015, it was decided that NFTI will 
make a payment of approx ` 13 lakhs p.m. to AAI towards settlement of dues.  
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
(i)  The demand for pilot training at NFTI, as envisaged  in the DPR, has not been 
realised. The number of pilots actually trained was  336 as against 770 number of 
pilots targeted to be trained during the period fro m 2008-09 to 2014-15. The short 
utilisation of seats contributed to losses in operation of NFTI. 
(ii)  No commercial flights were operational or intended to/from the airport while 
envisaging its development for NFTI. No commercial flights have been scheduled 
subsequent to the development of the airport, eithe r.  Hence, it may be correct to   
state that the development of infrastructure at Gon dia was intended solely for 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
16 
meeting the requirement of NFTI (as brought out in 139th meeting of AAI Board, 
August 2010).  
(iii)  Audit noticed that AAI carried out major additional  works at Birsi airport 
(` 83.82 crores spent on phase II development) increas ing the terminal building 
capacity and extending the runway. The additional i nfrastructure has not been put 
to use either by NFTI or by commercial flight opera tion. Besides, though AAI 
stated that it had time and again requested the air line operators to start operations, 
no supporting documents in this regard was furnishe d by AAI despite being 
requested for by Audit.    
(iv)  NIATAM, created at an expenditure of ` 51.91 crore, could not achieve its 
objective of training aircraft maintenance engineers, flight dispatchers, cabin crew 
and ground handling personnel. Few AAI personnel we re trained at this institute 
rendering the cost of establishment and maintenance  of NIATAM largely 
unfruitful.  
(v)  The arrears bills on NFTI, correcting the concessional rates charged for the period 
March 2009 to July 2012, were raised by AAI in Sept ember 2012. Till March 
2015, NFTI has not paid the arrears. Besides, traff ic and non-traffic dues have 
accumulated to ` 6.72 crore (March 2015). The pursuance by AAI, thu s, has not 
yielded the desired result. 
Thus, significant Government budgetary funds have b een employed ( ` 198.80 crore) for 
development of Birsi airport at Gondia with the obj ective of supporting NFTI, a private 
flying training institute. The revenue earned by AA I from NFTI was not sufficient to 
meet the operation and maintenance cost of the airp ort. Subsequently, AAI established 
another institute NIATAM at a cost of ` 51.91 crore intending utilisation of infrastructure 
facilities created at Gondia. However, the expendit ure on the institute remained largely 
unfruitful as neither did NIATAM fulfil its trainin g objectives nor did it utilise the 
infrastructure created at Birsi airport. Utilisatio n of infrastructure Birsi airport at Gondia 
by another institute, IGRUA, also did not generate enough revenues to cover the 
operation and maintenance costs of Birsi airport, l eaving AAI with recurring losses; the 
cumulated losses incurred by AAI on Birsi airport d uring April 2009 to March 2015 
being ` 27.31 crore. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in Septembe r 2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
17 
CHAPTER III: MINISTRY OF COAL   
 
Eastern Coalfields Limited 
3.1 Avoidable loss due to short payment of advance income tax 
Incorrect estimation of taxable income and conseque nt short payment of advance 
income tax by Eastern Coalfields Limited resulted i n avoidable payment of interest 
of `` `` 12.38 crore for the financial years 2013-14 and 2014-15. 
Under Section 208 read with Section  211 of the Inc ome Tax Act, 1961 (Act), each 
company is required to pay advance tax at the presc ribed rates on due dates in quarterly 
instalments pertaining to a financial year, in case  the amount of income tax payable by 
the company during that year exceeds ` 10,000. In the event of short payment of advance 
tax, the company is liable for payment of interest under the provisions of the Act. 
According to Section 234(B) of the Act, if the advance tax paid is less than 90 per cent  of 
the assessed tax, simple interest at the prescribed  rate is leviable for every month or part 
thereof, from first April of the assessment year to  the date of determination of income 
under the Act, on the amount by which the advance i ncome tax paid falls short of the 
assessed tax. Section 234(C) of the Act also provid es for payment of interest at the 
prescribed rate on the amount of short paid install ments of advance tax for a period of 
three months in case of default made in payment of first, second and third installment and 
for one month in case of shortfall in payment of last installment. 
Audit observed (August 2015) that Eastern Coalfield s Limited (ECL), a subsidiary of 
Coal India Limited, engaged in coal mining activiti es, failed to correctly assess the 
amount of advance income tax during the financial y ears 2013-14 and 2014-15. As a 
result, ECL paid less advance income tax and eventu ally had to pay interest of ` 4.83 
crore and `    3.00 crore under Section 234(B) for the financial y ears 2013-14 and 2014-15 
respectively for short payment of advance tax. Similarly, under Section 234(C), ECL paid 
` 3.05 crore and ` 9.53 crore for the financial years 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively for 
short payment of individual instalments of advance tax. Thus, ECL paid interest 
amounting to ` 20.41 crore to Income Tax Department, due to incor rect estimation of 
taxable income and delayed payment of advance tax d uring the financial years 2013-14 
and 2014-15, of which ` 12.38 crore was avoidable which is detailed as under:- 
Year  Interest u/s  
234(B) in ` ` ` `     
 Interest u/s 234(C) in `` ``    Total 
2013-14 4.83 crore ` 3.05 crore (including ` 60.35 lakh for the 
last quarter) 
` 7.88  crore 
2014-15 3.00 crore  ` 1.50 crore for the 4 th  quarter ` 4.50 crore 
Total  ` ` ` ` 12.38 crore 
While admitting the facts, the Management stated (November 2015/ January 2016) that: 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
18 
• Payment of interest under section 234(B) and 234(C)  of the Act was due to 
unanticipated additional gain of ` 226.15 crore on sale of coal as per 
Memorandum of Understanding (January 2014) with NTP C and write-back of 
very old liabilities at the fag end of the financial year 2013-14. 
• Till the financial year 2013-14, ECL was not liable  to pay tax under the provision 
of Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) of the Act. In Febru ary 2015, the Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) decl ared ECL out of its sickness 
considering the fact that the paid up capital of EC L and free reserves as on 31 
December 2014 exceeded the accumulated losses, resu lting in applicability of 
MAT for the financial year 2014-15. Thus ECL became  liable to pay tax under 
MAT only in the month of February 2015, although EC L paid advance tax 
without considering the MAT as on 15 June/September/December 2014.  
• Though ECL paid interest at the rate of 12 per cent  per annum under section 
234(B) and 234(C) for default in payment of income tax, the actual loss was only 
one-fourth of the amount of interest paid, consider ing the fact that ECL earned 
interest from its investment at an average rate of more than 9 per cent  per annum 
on the short amount of advance Income Tax paid. Fur ther, for all practical 
purposes, the interest paid on belated payment of I ncome Tax was contributing to 
the national exchequer. 
• ECL, however, assured that proper care would be tak en in future to avoid any 
such occurrences. 
The Ministry in its reply (February 2016) endorsed the view of the management. 
The above contentions of the Management/Ministryare  not tenable in view of the 
following: 
• MOU forsale of coal was executed between ECL and NT PC on 9 January 2014. 
ECL realised advance amount of 
` 575 crore from NTPC on account of MOU 
within 10 March 2014 ( ` 165 crore in January 2014, ` 325 crore in February 2014 
and ` 85 crore on 10 March 2014). Hence, ECL could have estimated the receipts 
for payment of advance income tax which was due on 15 March 2014, as by 10 
March, 2014, 80 per cent  of release had already taken place ( `    575 crore out of 
` 717.50 crore) and ECL could estimate the lifting in the ensuing 21 days. 
• For the purpose of Section 234 (B), ECL could easil y estimate 90 per cent  of the 
assessed tax for the financial year 2013-14 but the  company did not do so. 
Consequently, ECL also paid interest of ` 4.83 crore as per section 234(B) for 
delayed payment of advance income tax for the financial year 2013-14. 
• It is pertinent to mention that due to failure in m aking correct estimation of 
advance Income Tax by ECL management for the financ ial year 2013-14, ECL 
paid interest of ` 3.05 crore as per section 234(C) for the whole yea r out of which 
only ` 60.35 lakh was for delayed payment of 4 th  quarter instalment of advance 
income tax. While there was no justification for in ability to estimate the receipts 
for the first three quarters, even for the fourth q uarter the receipts were estimable 
as per audit’s view. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
19 
• As ECL was under BIFR during the financial year 201 3-14, the company got the 
above benefit and thereby MAT liability as per u/s 115JB was nil. However, ECL 
came out of BIFR in February 2015 on the ground tha t the net worth surpassed 
the accumulated loss of the company. Thus, ECL was not eligible to get the above 
deduction u/s 115JB for the financial year 2014-15.  Further, it was also seen from 
the BIFR Report (February 2015) that  ECL made requ ests to the Board to de-
register the company from the purview of BIFR as th e net worth of the company 
had turned positive based on its audited Balance Sh eet as on 31 December 2014. 
Hence, the management was well aware of the fact th at the MAT deduction u/s 
115JB for the financial year 2014-15 would not be a vailable as the company had 
positive net worth as on 31 December 2014. Though t he company was discharged 
from BIFR in February 2015, but due to the above facts, the company had enough 
time and scope for payment of 90 per cent  of the assessed income tax as per 
section 234(B). However, the company was not able t o assess the payment of 
advance income tax u/s 234(B) and 234(C) for the ye ars 2013-14 as well as 2014-
15. Had ECL paid advance tax for the financial year  2014-15 as per MAT, 
immediately after coming out from BIFR in February 2015, ECL could have 
saved at least ` 4.50 crore comprising ` 3.00 crore for payment of interest under 
Section 234(B) for short payment of advance tax dur ing the financial year 2014-
15 and ` 1.50 crore under Section 234(C) for short payment of fourth instalment 
of advance tax due as on 15 March 2015. Thus ECL co uld have avoided payment 
of interest of ` 12.38 crore ( ` 7.88 crore and ` 4.50 crore for the financial year 
2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively) by prudent tax management. 
• The reply of ECL that it earned interest is not ten able as the company is not in the 
business to earn interest on unpaid Govt dues. Furt her, the interest earned due to 
short payment of advance income tax is also taxable  for the financial years 2013-
14 and 2014-15 as per Income Tax Act. 
• The company had the opportunity to review the unusu al variation in annual profit 
before tax and other factors and revise their estim ated taxable income while 
paying the quarterly instalments of advance income tax due in June, September, 
December and March of the respective years by close ly monitoring its actual 
income and expenditure vis-a-vis  the estimates which could reduce the difference 
to the minimum extent as possible. 
Thus, due to absence of a well defined system for w orking out the taxable income based 
on realistic inputs, ECL incurred avoidable loss of  `12.38 crore  on account of short and 
delayed payment of advance income tax during the financial years 2013-14 and 2014-15.  
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited 
3.2 Avoidable expenditure 
Drawal of loan far in advance of requirement and su bsequent foreclosure resulted 
in an avoidable expenditure of `10.31 crore. 
Government of India (Ministry of Coal) sanctioned ( June 2011) a project for installation 
of a 2x500 MW Neyveli New Thermal Power Station (NN TPS) at Neyveli. The 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
20 
estimated cost of the project ( ` 5907.11 crore) comprised term loan ( ` 2500 crore), other 
borrowings ( ` 665.17 crore), foreign currency loan ( ` 969.81 crore) and equity                      
(` 1772.13 crore). The Ministry also directed the Comp any to finance the project on 
70:30 debt equity basis and to complete Unit I and Unit II within 48/54 months 
respectively i.e., by June 2015 and December 2015.  
After retendering the project twice, the Company is sued Letter of Award (LOA) to 
BHEL for erection of Steam Generator and Auxiliarie s in October 2013 and for Steam 
Turbine Generator in December 2013 with the commiss ioning of the Project scheduled 
for October 2017 and April 2018. 
In the meantime, the Company entered into (March 20 12) an agreement with State Bank 
of India for a loan of 
` 2500 crore.The company withdrew `100 crore (March 2012) out 
of which only ` 34.92 crore could be utilized up to December 2013. The Board 
subsequently decided (December 2013) to foreclose t he loan and go in for a fresh loan 
later when the project gets momentum and to meet th e current fund requirements from 
internal resources. Accordingly, the Company forecl osed the SBI loan on 23 February 
2014, after payment ` 23.47 crore 1 as interest and other charges on the loan.  
Audit observed that: 
• The Company was aware that the Tender committee had  recommended    
(February 2012) not to process one out of the two t echnically feasible bids and 
that in case the contract was to be retendered, it would take minimum of nine 
months; hence the LOA could not have been released as per the scheduled date. 
• At the time of entering into the agreement with SBI , LOA was not issued to any 
of the packages of the NNTPS project. 
• As on 31 March 2012, the Company had surplus funds of 
` 3275.20 crore in short 
term deposits which could have been utilized to mee t the temporary financial 
needs. 
Thus, drawal of loan far in advance of the requirem ent led to an avoidable expenditure of 
` 23.47 crore. 
The Company stated (October 2015) that tendering ac tivity of project activity was 
delayed and consequently the order for main plant p ackages to BHEL was released only 
in October 2013 and December 2013 with the revised scheduled commercial operation 
date as April 2018. In order to avoid restructuring  of existing loan and avail the 
advantage of softening interest rate in the market,  it had pre closed the existing 
loan.Further,it invested the loan amount in short t erm deposit and earned `13.16 crore as 
interest. 
The reply of the company may be viewed in light of the following: 
• The Company drew (March 2012) the loan even before the issue of LOA to 
BHEL in October and December 2013 and thus the draw al of loan was not need-
based and in line with the progress of work. 
                                                           
1    `` ``    20.53 crore (Interest Paid)+ `` ``    2.76 crore (upfront fee paid) + `` `` 0.18 crore (legal charges paid) 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
21 
• The Company could have utilized its own surplus fun ds in term deposit even if it 
had anticipated delay in entering into alternative arrangement with banks. 
• The purpose of the loan was to finance the project and not earn interest by 
investing the same in short term deposits. 
Thus, drawal of loan far in advance of the requirem ent led to an avoidable expenditure of 
` 10.31 crore 1, even after considering the interest earned thereon. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December  2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1        `` ``23.47 crore minus `` ``13.16 crore (interest earned on short term deposit) 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
22 
CHAPTER IV: MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
 
 
ECGC Limited  
4.1 Blocking of funds on account of failure to impl ement IT Solution 
System 
Failure of the Company to implement its IT Solution  System resulted in blocking of 
funds of `` ``42.67 crore on account of advance payment for softw are licenses and part 
payment for unutilised hardware with expired warran ties and loss of interest of 
`` `` 3.56 crore, besides the burden of maintaining the existing system and ending up 
with no upgradation after lapse of more than four y ears since the scheduled Go-live 
date. 
ECGC (Company), entered (June 2010) into an agreeme nt for implementation of an 
integrated IT solution ‘Online Credit Insurance Sys tem (OCIS)’ with HCL Technologies 
Limited (HCL) at a cost of ` 124.41 crore, to be paid over a period of eight ye ars. HCL 
acting as the System Integrator was responsible for  providing an Integrated IT Solution 
for implementing ECGC-OCIS comprising of developmen t and/or integration of 
application software, co-hosting of Primary Data Ce ntre and Disaster Recovery Centre 
and Maintenance and operation of the setup for a pe riod of eight years from the Go-live 
date being July 2011. The mile stones as per the Ag reement were not achieved and there 
was a delay of 4 years and 6 months as of December 2015. Board instructed (February 
2016) to legally examine the termination of contrac t with HCL and the same was under 
progress (February 2016). Total amount of ` 42.67 crore (` 25.96 crore + ` 16.71 crore) 
was paid to HCL under this contract.  
Audit observed the following in this regard: 
• The System Requirement Specifications (SRS) documen ts that were prepared by 
HCL in consultation with the Company did not captur e the process flow/business 
rules in totality. Although the Board considered th e significance of SRS and 
emphasized the need to examine the SRS in great det ail before it was finalized 
and frozen in December 2010, during User Acceptance  Testing (UAT) stage in 
2014, it was realized that the process description in SRS documents were 
elementary and had to be reworked. This resulted in time overrun. 
• HCL as System Integrator entered into (October 2011 ) tripartite agreement with 
SFS, a Company in Turkey, for granting software lic enses for the core insurance 
software. Although the project implementation depen ded heavily on software 
development and delivery by SFS, there were numerou s differences of opinions 
and disagreements between HCL and SFS. As per the t ripartite agreement the 
supplier of licenses retained the property rights i n source code and object code 
and in the absence of terms for transfer of source code in the agreement, HCL, 
could not exercise any control over the timely deli very of software and licenses 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
23 
for Company’s utilisation. Ultimately, the agreemen t with SFS was decided to be 
terminated (February 2015).  
• Based on the initial project plan of going live in July 2011, HCL procured the 
entire data centre hardware which was installed in 2010-11 and as per the terms of 
contract, 70 per cent  of the payment being ` 16.71 crore was released against the 
delivery of the hardware. The procurement of hardwa re was not synchronised 
with the progress of the project and when the hardw are was delivered, the SRS 
documents were still under preparation. The hardwar e was not utilised by the 
Company as the software was not yet ready and now a s the agreement with HCL 
was proposed to be terminated (February 2016), the warranty for the entire data 
centre hardware had already expired. The Company in formed that it would 
explore the possibility of alternate use of the hardware.  
• Though the Agreement with HCL provided for payment after successful 
completion of installation and commissioning of var ious components of OCIS 
and successful completion of UAT and also explicitl y prohibited payment of 
advance, the Company released (August 2013/March 20 14) ` 25.96 crore against 
bank guarantees to HCL as advance towards system so ftware licenses. This was 
despite repeated failure of HCL in meeting the completion schedule of the project. 
The Board decided (February 2016) to invoke the bank guarantees and recover the 
advance paid to HCL. Thus, the release of payment a s advance without achieving 
respective mile stones resulted in blocking of ` 25.96 crore.  
• Company decided (February 2015) to terminate the co ntract with SFS and Board 
accepted (February 2015) HCL’s proposal to complete  the project on the basis of 
bespoke software 1 developer, within 15 months of the ‘new start date ’ without 
any additional cost.HCL, however, did not accept th e go-ahead given by ECGC 
(April 2015) and informed (December 2015) that it w ould be unable to adhere to 
some clauses of the contract. Board instructed (Feb ruary 2016) to examine the 
termination of the contract with HCL and this was u nder progress (February 
2016).  
• Despite abnormal delays in the project, the Company  did not issue any notice 
indicating levy of liquidated damages to the extent  of ` 6.22 crore on HCL as per 
the terms of contract. The acceptance of a ‘new sta rt date’ without any 
amendments/addendum to the Master Service Agreement  (MSA) may impact the 
ability of the Company to protect its financial rig hts and claim for compensation 
for the delays from HCL as per the terms of the agr eement. The Company also 
did not invoke the specific clause relating to mate rial breach of the contract with 
reference to failure in adhering to the time frame and enforce the Performance 
Guarantee of `12.44 crore. Board decided (February 2016) to invok e the 
Performance Guarantee after legal advice on termination of contract. 
The Management stated (November/December 2015) that: 
                                                           
1   Custom software also known as bespoke software o r tailor-made software.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
24 
(i)  SRS was a technical document to be prepared by HCL,  in consultation with 
ECGC and that it had provided all information inclu ding circulars, office orders, 
functional requirement specification and other docu ments.  Further, it was stated 
that SRS was prepared after due analysis of the sha red documents and interviews 
with ECGC domain expert and HCL had not shared the inputs provided by ECGC 
to its developers and Third Party Developers in its entirety.  
(ii)  The advance payment was released to ensure some fun d flow to the developer 
without which the interest to complete the project would have waned. 
The reply of the Company was not tenable as HCL had  raised the issue with regard to the 
quality of the SRS prepared as a counter to the 600 0 feedbacks given by ECGC during 
UAT and the SRS documents were strengthened (2014) jointly by both the parties. 
Company could not ensure completion of project eith er through the third party vendor of 
core insurance software, SFS or directly through HC L by the Bespoke application 
method. The release of advance payments to HCL in v iolation of the terms of Master 
Agreement also failed to ensure successful completi on of project. Further, Company also 
failed to issue notice for liquidated damages or in voke Performance Guarantee while 
granting 11 extensions to HCL upto April 2015. 
Thus, the Company invested substantial resources in  terms of money and manpower for 
the project development but even after a delay of m ore than four years since the agreed 
Go-live date, it failed to upgrade its systems and continues to bear the burden of 
maintaining the existing system. With the cancellat ion of the project, the Company has 
ended up with blocked funds amounting to 
` 42.67 crores ( ` 16.71 crores + ` 25.96 
crore) with loss of interest to the extent of ` 3.56 crore (on the advance of ` 25.96 crore 
paid in violation of terms of contract, for the period upto February 2016).  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2016; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
25 
CHAPTER V: MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD  
AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION 
 
 
 
Food Corporation of India 
5.1 Export of wheat  
While finalising tenders for export of wheat, Food Corporation of India did not 
compare the rates offered at different ports, which  resulted in short realisation to 
the tune of  ` ` ` ` 13.75 crore. The Corporation also incurred avoidabl e expenditure of 
`` ``    20.67 crore due to bulking of stock at ports and th e balance stock not exported 
was transported back to various depots. Excess paym ent of `` `` 6.22 crore was also 
made to Handling and Transport (H&T) contactors due  to application of wrong 
clause. Unjustified payment of `` `` 8.01 crore was also made to Clearing and Handling 
Agents (CHAs) for work under their scope but not carried out by the CHAs. Failure 
to pursue claims timely and vigorously resulted in non-receipt of Service Tax 
Refund from Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPS Us) amounting to `` `` 20.09 
crore.  
5.1.1 Introduction 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) was set up under th e Food Corporations Act, 1964 to 
fulfil the objectives of the Food Policy viz. (a) E ffective price support operations for 
safeguarding the interests of the farmers, (b) dist ribution of food grains throughout the 
country for public distribution system and (c) main taining satisfactory level of 
operational and buffer stocks of food grains to ensure nation’s food security.  
Considering the constraints of storage space for fo od grains faced by FCI and that stocks 
far exceeded the buffer stock norms, the Cabinet Co mmittee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA), approved (3 July 2012) the following:- 
• Export of 20 Lakh Metric Tonnes (MTs) of wheat from  Central Pool stocks of 
FCI through the Central Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) viz., State Trading 
Corporation of India Limited (STC), Projects and Equipment Corporation Limited 
(PEC) and Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation Limited (MMTC).  
• Constitution of an Empowered Committee authorised t o decide the modalities of 
export such as determining the export price from te nder to tender, other 
operational issues regarding movement, timely payme nt from CPSUs to FCI and 
any other exigencies arising on day to day basis.  
• Reimbursement of loss by the Government to FCI on a ccount of exports 
calculated as the difference between the economic c ost to FCI and its realisation 
from the exporting CPSUs after deduction of actual port expenses and their 
commission at the rate of 2.5 per cent for which additional funds over and above 
Budget estimate would be provided. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
26 
As per approval of CCEA, export of wheat was carrie d out in two phases. During Phase I 
(September 2012 to July 2013) 20 lakh MTs was appro ved for export which was further 
increased to 45 lakh MTs, subsequently. During Phas e II (December 2013 to May 2014) 
20 lakh MT was approved. Out of 65 lakh MTs of whea t approved for export, 57.98 lakh 
MTs was exported during the two phases of which fou r ports located in Western Region 
accounted for export of 30.59 lakh MTs, constitutin g 52.76 per cent of total exports as 
shown below: 
Name of Port Quantity exported 
(Lakh Metric Tonne)  
Value ( ` in 
crore) 
Associated CPSU 
Kandla 11.28 1934.16  PEC 
Mundra 14.66 2518.01  STC 
Pipavav 3.90 661.94  MMTC 
Goa 0.75 125.94  MMTC 
Total 30.59 5240.05   
As more than 50 per cent  of the exports were made through these ports in western region, 
an audit on export of wheat by FCI in West Zone was  taken up from May 2015 to July 
2015. The period from 2012-13 to 2013-14 (extended up to 30 June 2014) has been 
covered under this audit. The important findings are as under: 
5.1.2 Audit findings 
5.1.2.1 Deficiencies in tendering process 
(a) Prequalification criteria changed after NIT res ulting in restricted competition 
A tender for appointment of Ad-hoc Handling and Tra nsport (H&T) contractors at 
Pipavav Port was floated on 11 July 2012. A corrige ndum was issued on 14 July 2012 by 
FCI with the additional clause, “the prospective bidders should have consent letter  from 
the respective port Authority for carrying out H&T operations in their port premises” . 
This was done as M/s APM Terminals, Pipavav {former ly Gujarat Pipavav Port Limited 
(GPPL)}, the Port Authority had furnished a list of six cargo handling agencies registered 
with Pipavav port and insisted that FCI should rest rict the bids from these six agencies or 
those who can register with them. 
Audit observed that though the condition of consent  letter from Port authorities was not 
insisted by GPPL, the same was included in the corr igendum and that four agencies were 
disqualified due to non furnishing of consent letter from the Port Authorities. Thus, out of 
the five parties the only party who qualified was t he Port Authority (GPPL) itself at 
quoted rate of 275 per cent  ASOR 
1, while the average rate of all the Depots in Gujar at 
region in June 2012 was 139 per cent  ASOR. This resulted in an additional expenditure 
of ` 4.52 crore on the total quantity exported from Pipavav port. Thus, due to inclusion of 
additional condition all the parties except the Por t Authority were disqualified and 
contract was awarded to the single party. 
The management replied that since time was of essen ce and arrangements had to be done 
on war-footing basis without any loss of time, it w as decided to complete all formalities 
                                                           
1  Above Schedule of Rate 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
27 
by allowing seven days time. Further, as private po rts had raised concerns of security in 
port premises and efficient carrying out of operati ons, only registered contractors or their 
authorised agencies were allowed for submitting ten der and that no favour was extended 
to any party by additional clause. 
The Management reply is not tenable as the addition al clause inserted by FCI, eliminated 
even the registered bidders and only the Port Authority became the sole bidder. 
(b)  Insufficient time allowed for submission of te nder, in violation of Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines 
As per the CVC guidelines sufficient time of four t o six weeks in case of advertised/ 
global tenders and three to four weeks in case of l imited tenders is allowed except in case 
of recorded emergencies. 
The Empowered Committee (EC) in its meeting dated 7  July 2012 decided to keep the 
tender period as three weeks and to keep the CVC in formed in writing of the reasons. 
Audit observed that in six tenders valuing 
` 1149.57 crore, the tender period varied from 
two weeks to four weeks. Out of these six cases, in  three cases valuing ` 490.28 crore, 
the tender period was less than three weeks in clea r violation of CVC guidelines as well 
as the EC decision. Further, there were no records to indicate whether the CVC was 
informed in writing about the deviation and requisi te approval was obtained in these 
cases. 
5.1.2.2  Inefficiencies in port operations 
(a)  Non comparison of rates offered at different p orts 
As per the procedures prescribed during export of w heat, CPSUs were to invite tenders 
from foreign buyers and submit the same to the Empo wered Committee for their 
approval. The Empowered Committee was authorised to  approve the tender. On a review 
of the details of tenders received, it was seen tha t in respect of three cases 
1, the 
Empowered Committee had compared offered rates of p orts with the rates received in 
other ports. As per instructions of the Committee, the CPSUs negotiated with H1 bidder 
who agreed to match the higher rates in other ports . However, in nine cases, the 
Empowered Committee neither made any such compariso n nor made any efforts for 
maximizing the rate even when the offered price was lower as compared to other ports on 
the same date. The non comparison of rates resulted in short realisation of ` 13.75 crore. 
In respect of concerns raised by the Ministry of Co mmerce in the CCEA’s Note with 
regard to the implication of export price on calcul ation of loss, the Ministry of Consumer 
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (MOCAF&PD) ha d assured that views of FCI 
would be given emphasis during the Empowered Commit tee meetings. However, it was 
observed that though FCI and Department of Food wer e the members of Empowered 
Committee, the difference in rates at different por ts was not raised in the Empowered 
Committee meetings. 
                                                           
1 Three tender floated by MMTC were (a) Kakinada Por t, Tender for 75,000 MT, (b) Retender of 
1,00,000 MT from Pipavav port and  (c) Re-tender of 40,000 MT from Mormugao port. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
28 
(b) Higher rate charged by Clearing and Handling Ag ents (CHAs) at private ports  
M/s Rishi Shipping (CHA appointed for Kandla Port b y PEC) charged for their services 
an all inclusive rates of ` 530 per MT for vessels of 40,000 MT carrying capaci ty and 
` 505 per MT for smaller vessels. These rates were in clusive of all applicable taxes, rates 
and duties. In comparison Consortium of Mundra Port  & SEZ Limited (MPSEZ) and 
GujratPipavav Port Limited charged for their servic es at Mundra and Pipavav Port an all 
inclusive consolidated rate of ` 590 per MT including Service Tax plus Wharfage of ` 40 
per MT and Service Tax on Wharfage. 
Though all CHA agents were doing similar job, the C HA at the Mundra and Pipavav 
private ports charged higher rates for their servic es compared to those charged by M/s 
Rishi Shipping. In addition to handling charges at higher rates, CHAs at the two private 
ports also charged wharfage at the rate of 
` 40 per MT plus Service Tax. There was no 
justification on record for charging higher rates. 
The higher rates charged by the CHAs at private por ts of Mundra and Pipavav in 
comparison to CHA at Kandla resulted in excess expe nditure of 
` 18.15 crore in the 
export of wheat during 2012-13 and 2013-14. 
Audit further observed that Wharfage was payable on ly if goods were removed after 
expiry of free time 
1. Thus applying wharfage on all transactions irresp ective of 
applicability resulted in undue benefit of ` 8.28 crore ( ` 44.94 2 x 1729156 MT + ` 40 x 
127452 MT) to the CHAs of Pipavav and Mundra port.  
The Management stated that FCI has no role in quest ioning rates charged by CHAs of 
CPSU and that whatever port charges were charged, F CI has to allow and rates were 
bound to vary in different locations.  
The reply of the Management is not acceptable becau se in view of the CCEA Note dated 
25 June 2012, FCI’s views were to be considered whi le deciding pricing. Also, as the 
increase in expenditure results in consequent addit ional subsidy burden, FCI should have 
raised this issue in the Empowered Committee Meetings to safeguard its interests. 
(c) Avoidable expenditure of 
`` `` 20.67 crore due to bulking of stock before 
finalization of tenders and payment to H&T for its transport back to various 
depots by FCI 
On review of records relating to dispatch of wheat after completion of Phase I and Phase 
II of Export, it was observed that avoidable expend iture was incurred due to non-
achievement/non completion of export obligation by the CPSUs. Thus,  balance wheat 
stock which could not be exported during Phase I an d Phase II was transported to 
different depots in Gujarat by incurring an expenditure of ` 20.67 crore.  
In respect of stock accumulated at Mundra port duri ng Phase II, Management stated that 
it was due to non approval of tenders and cancellat ion of pilot project of clean cargo and 
considering the qualitative risk of stock, the comp etent authority directed to move the 
                                                           
1   Time allowed to remove the goods from the Author ity’s property. 
2  Wharfage `` `` 40 plus service tax at the rate of 12.36 per cent 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
29 
said stock to various destinations and the expendit ure of H&T movement was borne by 
FCI. 
The Management reply is not acceptable as non-achie vement/non completion of export 
obligation by the CPSUs resulted in avoidable expen diture of 
` 20.67 crore and FCI 
suffered the loss. 
5.1.2.3 Weakness in Monitoring  
(a) Excess payment of 
`` `` 6.22 crore on account of application of wrong clause 
FCI appointed M/s Adani Port & SEZ Ltd at Mundra Po rt and M/s GPPL at Pipavav port 
as H&T contractor for unloading from wagons, loadin g into trucks, transportation from 
Railway goodshed/siding to godowns, unloading from trucks and Stacking in godowns. 
As per tender the relevant clauses for payment of h andling and transportation of wheat is 
brought out as below:-  
Clause 6 “for carrying the food-grain bags by means of trucks from the Railway siding to 
the godowns exceeding 200 meters situated in same p remises or vice-versa which is 
inclusive of the operation of loading into and unloading from trucks”.  
Clause No.7 or Clause No 2 “for transporting the food grain bags by trucks fro m one 
godown to another godown /Railhead or any other pla ce or vice versa" alongwith  Clause 
1(b) “for unloading food grains bags for wagons/tru cks for any other transport vehicles 
and directly loading on trucks". 
As FCI godown and their railway sidings were in sam e premises, the payment to CHAs 
should have been regulated by clause 6 of the tende r. However, it was noticed that FCI 
applied Clause No.7 or 2 in place of clause No.6 al ong with Clause  No  1(b). Thus, on the 
quantity of 9.37 LMT transported , FCI made an excess payment of 
` 6.22 crore (937000 
MT * ` 66.38) due to application of wrong clause .  
The Management replied that godown having rail sidi ng and godown served from a 
railhead/non railway siding godown were different a nd that the Port premises and the 
godown premises should not be interchanged.  
Reply of the management was not tenable because Reg ional Office Ahmedabad and 
Zonal Office (Mumbai) had given recommendations (De cember 2012) for payment to be 
made under Clause 6. Further, in absence of any cla rification of the word ‘same 
premises’ in the MTF, FCI should have made the paym ent of export operations under 
clause 6 to protect its financial interests  
(b) Claims receivable from PSUs in respect of Phase  I and II of exports 
On review of the pending claims, it was seen that a s per FCI books an amount of 
` 17.19 
crore was pending with STC, PEC and MMTC. Further e xamination of the pending 
claims revealed that: 
STC remitted an amount of 
`10.92 crore on 12 September 2014 but did not provid e the 
detailed break up of claims. As a result, the claim s were still shown as pending claims in 
the accounts of the Corporation, even though more t han 10 months had passed from the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
30 
date of receipt of money. Though FCI has reminded S TC about providing break up for 
the claims to be adjusted, the same was not provide d by STC till the date of audit (July 
2015) and the claims remained unsettled.  
It was observed that CPSUs had not paid full sales proceeds to FCI according to 
guidelines/procedures and an amount of 
` 9.32 crore was outstanding as on 31 March 
2015 ( ` 7.99 crore from STC and ` 1.33 crore from PEC), even after a lapse of more than 
one year and reminders by FCI. 
The interest amounting to 
` 2.08 crore as on 31 March 2015 was recoverable fro m 
CPSUs.  
The Management stated that interest would be calcul ated and claimed on the delayed 
remittance of sale proceeds of gunny after receipt of bifurcation of amount of 
` 10.92 
crore remitted by STC. FCI needs to actively pursue  for realisation of sale proceeds and 
interest thereon.  
(c) Non receipt of Service tax refund of 
`` `` 20.09 crore from the CPSUs 
Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Departmen t of Expenditure vide Notification 
No. 41/2012-Service Tax dated 29 June 2012, granted rebate of service tax on the taxable 
services received by an exporter of goods and used for export of goods.  The proviso to 
the notification further stated that the rebate sha ll be granted by way of refund of service 
tax paid and the claim for rebate of service tax pa id on the specified services used for 
export of goods shall be filed within one year from  the date of export of the said goods.  
The rebate on service tax was to be claimed as refund by the exporters (CPSUs). 
It was observed that apart from an intimation from STC of receipt of Service tax of 
` 0.45 crore on other charges,  no refund of Service Tax was received on the export of 
wheat and the total service tax of ` 20.09 crore as on 31 March 2015 was due. Further, 
though the total service tax refund receivable in r espect of Phase I&II from the CPSUs 
was ` 20.09 crore, FCI had claimed only ` 5.71 crore from the CPSU i.e., only refund 
claims relating to services other than that of CHAs . FCI claimed ` 15.95 crore (STC 
` 9.52 crore+ PEC ` 6.43 crore) in respect of service tax refund relat ing to CHAs only in 
July 2015 after being pointed out by audit. 
It was also observed that FCI Regional Office, Ahme dabad addressed letters to PSUs 
only on 16 December 2013 i.e, after a delay of more  than one year claiming the refund of 
Service Tax from the Service Tax Department. STC as sured (9 July 2014) that they will 
file the refund claim with Service Tax Department a nd remit the amount to FCI as soon 
as the same is received. Further, none of the other  CPSUs had claimed refund of Service 
Tax even after completion of Phase II exports. Thus  non maintenance of regular follow 
up resulted in delay in lodging the claim. The Mana gement stated that claims are being 
pursued but the same were not yet received from the CPSUs. 
(d) Withholding of export sales realisation 
`` `` 60.99 crore by MMTC 
In respect of the last shipment (7 May 2014) from P ipavav port, MMTC realised ` 80.11 
crore from exports and remitted only ` 13.40 crore to FCI after deducting their expenses 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
31 
and commission amounting to ` 5.72 crore, it withheld ` 60.99 crore of the realised 
amount as adjustment in respect of very old dues re ceivable from FCI pertaining to 1991 
(` 24.99 crore as principal plus  interest amounting to ` 36 crore). Even after more than 
one year, MMTC has neither remitted the withheld am ount nor paid the interest of ` 5.72 
crore claimed by FCI on the delayed payment as on 3 1 March 2015 inspite of various 
correspondence by FCI. In absence of any agreement/ MOU between FCI and MMTC 
with regard to the current export transaction, the chances of recovery of the above said 
amount was remote. 
(e) Short receipt of despatch money 
During loading on the ship, if the charterer comple tes the load/discharge operations 
before the time frame indicated, it can claim “Desp atch” from the ship owners at pre-
agreed rate and if it fails then demurrage will be levied by the owner on the charterers. As 
per FCI HQ guidelines (24 September 2012) despatch money earned had to be passed on 
to FCI within one working day on receipt failing which CPSUs were liable to pay interest 
for delayed period at FCI’s Cash Credit rate. 
 
The despatch money of ` 4.13 crore was earned and demurrages of `10.54 lakh were 
incurred during the export operation. In case of de spatch money and demurrages, it was 
observed that: 
(i)  No information/ details were available relating to1 3 vessels during Phase-I and of 
one vessel during Phase-II in respect of exports fr om Mundra port. In absence of 
information it could not be ascertained whether des patch money was earned or 
demurrage was incurred. 
(ii)  FCI HQ guidelines dated 24 September 2012, clearly stated that private ports 
shall be liable to incur the demurrage and FCI will  not be responsible for any 
demurrage charges; despatch earned, if any, will be  passed on to FCI. Audit 
observed that for Mundra, FCI had incurred 
` 10.54 lakh as demurrage charges. 
This deduction of ` 10.54 lakh towards demurrage is not in order and FC I ought 
to have demanded for the recovery of the same. On b eing pointed out by audit, 
FCI lodged a claim for ` 10.54 lakh (July 2015). 
(iii)  As per the 22 nd  Sub Committee meeting (18 December 2012), total de spatch 
money had to be passed on to FCI except in case of Mundra port wherein it was to 
be shared on 50:50 basis. The management stated tha t infrastructure and 
operations at private ports could not be compared w ith Government ports. 
However, no specific reasons were given by the Mana gement for giving 
differential treatment to Mundra Port.  
Efforts need to be made by FCI to expeditiously rec over the despatch money as well as 
demurrage from port authority. 
(f) Loss of 
`` `` 4.46 crore due to cancellation of shipment  
(i)  A Pilot Project for cleaning/upgradation of wheat for exports at Mundra was approved 
in the 352 nd  Board meeting held on 20 December 2012 of FCI. STC  was entrusted the 
export of 50,000 MT of clean cargo from Mundra port  at the rate of USD 323.05 with 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
32 
shipment period from 21 January 2013 to 5 March 201 3. For carrying out this work, STC 
appointed its CHA, M/s Adani Port & SEZ Ltd. (APSEZ ) as the cleaning agent. FCI 
supplied 26,092.710 MT of wheat to STC for this pur pose. As the contracted physical 
parameters in respect of first shipment of 25,000 M T could not be achieved, the buyer 
was not pursued for opening of the Letter of Credit  (LC) till the expiry of the shipping 
period to avoid claim for damages by the buyer.  
The LC was opened by the buyer, four months after t he stipulated shipment period, with 
last date of shipment as 15 July 2013. APSEZ failed  to clean the cargo within the 
stipulated period and the request made to extend th e LC was not accepted by the buyer 
resulting in cancellation of the tender. Though APSEZ (CHA of STC) could not complete 
the cleaning of wheat upto the specified level, no liability was fixed on anyone. STC 
intimated the Committee (4 October 2013) that the cleaning project could not be achieved 
and assured the Committee that there would not be l iability from the buyer either on FCI 
or STC and written confirmation in this regard is e xpected from the buyer shortly. 
However, the written confirmation was not obtained and the matter was also not pursued 
further even by FCI. Since STC could not achieve th e required export specification, 
20,806 MT of wheat was exported at a lower rate of USD 300.40/MT. Thus, due to 
cancellation of order of clean wheat an amount of 
` 2.83 1 crore was foregone.  
Audit observed that the cleaning started only after  opening of LC though the stocks were 
inducted by FCI well in time. The delay resulted in  non-completion of the cleaning of 
wheat as assured by STC before the date of shipment  period resulting in cancellation of 
order and loss to FCI to the tune of  ` 2.83 crore. 
(ii) A quantity of 4295.788 MTs of cleaned stock was des patched to various centres of 
FCI by rail in Gujarat Region for public distributi on system and remaining quantity of 
990.922 MTs of cleaned cargo remained with STC, whi ch was reported after a gap of 
nine months resulting in discarding the cargo as it  had become unfit for human 
consumption. FCI submitted a claim of ` 1.63 crore on STC at Open Market Sale 
Scheme rate vide its letter dated 21 August 2014 an d further reminded on 02 February 
2015. However, there was no response from STC in this regard.  
Thus, the total loss to FCI works out to ` 4.46 crore ( ` 1.63 crore plus ` 2.83 crore) 
against which FCI had lodged only a claim of ` 1.63 crore with STC instead of taking up 
the matter with the Empowered Committee to protect its interest.  
(g)  Reduction in scope of work of CHA without redu ction in rate leading to over 
payment of `` `` 5.01 crore 
PEC, STC and MMTC were appointed Clearing and Handl ing Agents (CHAs), at Kandla 
Port (Rishi Shipping), Mundra Port (Consortium of M undra Port & SEZ Ltd (MPSEZ)) 
and Pipavav Port (Gujarat Pipavav Port Ltd), respectively. 
As per FCI Hqrs instructions, FCI had to provide wh eat stocks during Phase I to CPSUs 
at the port town godowns of FCI at identified ports  for further shipment and during Phase 
II, at the designated CPSU godowns at the Port thro ugh FCI’s Handling and Transport 
                                                           
1 USD323.05-300.40 = USD 22.65 * ` ` ` ` 60* 20806. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
33 
Contractor. However this arrangement was not applic able in case of Pipavav port where 
the entire operation beginning with unloading of rakes was to be undertaken by MMTC. 
During Phase II (2013-14), FCI exported 7.50 LMT th rough Mundra and Kandla Ports 
and incurred ` 11.66 crore towards handling & transportation charg es for handing over 
the stocks to CPSUs/CHAs. 
Audit observed that though there was reduction in scope of CHA’s job during phase II (as 
lifting from FCI godown and the transportation upto  CHA’s godown which was in the 
scope of the CHA during first phase was carried out  by FCI in Phase II), the same rates 
were continued by PEC and STC for the CHAs at Kandl a and Mundra respectively 
without calling for fresh tenders.  
Thus, non-reduction in rate on change in scope of w ork of CHA resulted in undue benefit 
to the CHAs and additional expenditure to the tune of 
` 5.01 crore (transportation 
expenditure borne by FCI ` 2.07 crore and ` 2.94 crore at Kandla and Mundra port 
respectively).  
(h) Payment of 
` ` ` ` 8.01 crore to CHAs for work, included in their scop e but actually 
carried out by FCI 
As per agreement entered into by CPSUs with CHA for  Mundra and Pipavav port, the 
CHAs were responsible for lifting wheat stock from FCI port godowns to carry out 
operation for loading wheat by arranging their own labour. 
For arranging stocks at FCI’s godowns at the Ports,  FCI appointed H&T contractor, 
Khaja Travel Service/Jay Enterprises (w.e.f 16 July 2013) at Kandla Port, M/s. MPSEZ at 
Mundra port and M/s Pipavav at Pipavav port. As per  Item 1(b) of Price Bid Clause XIX 
for unloading food grain bags from wagons/trucks or  any other transport vehicles and 
directly loading on trucks or any other vehicles et c., a separate rate of ` 24 per MT (plus 
ASOR quoted and agreed) was applicable. 
As decided in the Sub Committee meeting (10 October  2012), stocks were issued to 
CPSU directly from Rail Head instead of from FCI go down through H&T contractors 
during Phase I export of wheat. Audit observed that  though FCI carried out the handling 
operation through H&T Contractors which was respons ibility of CHA appointed by 
CPSUs but full charges were reimbursed/paid to the CHAs resulting in additional 
expenditure to the  tune of 
` 8.01 crore and undue benefit to the CHAs,  
It was further noticed that as per 39 th  Sub Committee meeting (12 July 2013), CPSUs 
were required to provide a certificate that all act ivities as indicated in the tender were 
carried out by the CHA at the port, to ascertain th at payment was made against the actual 
operations carried out by them. However, no such certificate was furnished by the CPSUs 
whereas FCI made full payment of ` 8.01 crore. 
The Management stated that as  the lifting of food grains at the railhead was not a CHA 
job they cannot be compelled to lift the food grain s from rail head and that there was no 
deviation in policy framework conveyed by FCI HQ du ly endorsed by the Sub 
Committee.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
34 
The reply of the Management is not tenable because as per procedure, the CPSUs were to 
take the stock from FCI godowns through their CHAs. Hence, in case of direct delivery at 
railhead, the CPSUs should take delivery of the sam e through its CHAs. The export 
policy framework conveyed by FCI HQ neither mention s about changes to be made in 
agreement with CHA to accommodate the above scope o f work nor does it include the 
decision of Sub Committee for delivery of food grains. 
(i)  Non deduction of TDS of `` `` 10.93 crore on commission paid to CPSUs 
As per Section 194H of the Income Tax Act, 1961, th e consignor/principal would have to 
deposit the tax deductible (at the rate of 10 per cent ) on the amount of commission 
income to the credit of the Central Government, wit hin the prescribed time. CPSUs remit 
the export sales proceeds to FCI after deducting po rt expenses and their commission. As 
retention of commission by the consignee/agent amou nts to constructive payment of the 
same to him by the consignor/principal, deduction o f tax at source is required to be made 
from the amount of commission. However, no TDS was paid. Subsequently, in Section 
194H of the Income Tax Act, the word “Trade Commiss ion” was replaced with “Trade 
Margin” and FCI contended that TDS is not applicable on Trade Margin. 
Audit observed that, based on an opinion received f rom a Chartered Accountants firm 
that the relation between FCI and CPSUs is that of Seller and buyer (and not that of 
Principal and Agent), the credit sales invoice of e xport of wheat was prepared by the 
Corporation and issued to CPSUs wherein FCI had not  deducted TDS amounting to 
` 10.93 crore from the amount paid to CPSUs as their commission. 
In this regard it was observed that the relation be tween FCI and STC/PEC/MMTC was 
that of Principal and Agent and not that of seller and buyer due to the following reasons: 
(i)  The CPSUs were appointed as exporting agencies to f acilitate export operation 
i.e., act as agents to bring the seller and prospec tive buyer together for which 
there was to be no profit making by PSUs but they w ould be paid trading 
commission. 
(ii)  FCI had not entered into a ‘Sale Agreement’ (as per  the Sales of Goods Act) with 
CPSUs and has booked the sales under Export Sales and not indigenous sales.  
(iii)  The stock was to be issued through CPSUs and not so ld to CPSU and the CPSUs 
were allowed handling loss of 0.25 per cent .  If the stock had been sold to CPSUs 
the question of handling loss on stock issued to CPSUs did not arise. 
(iv)  The sales invoice was not raised when the stock was issued to the CPSUs but only 
on arrival of vessel in consultation with CPSU on t he basis of capacity of the 
vessel and shipping contract. 
(v)  Un-exported stock lying with CPSUs were directly ta ken to FCI Stock and not 
shown as sales return from CPSUs. 
As the relation between FCI and CPSUs (STC, PEC & M MTC) was that of Principal and 
Agent, FCI was liable to deduct TDS from CPSUs and remit the same to the accounts of 
Central Government.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
35 
The Management replied that no TDS was applicable o n trade margin. The Management 
reply was not acceptable as the relation between FC I and CPSUs clearly was that of 
Principal and Agent and hence FCI was liable to ded uct TDS on commission paid and 
remit it to the Government. Thus, non deduction of TDS amounting to ` 10.93 crore on 
the Trade Commission paid to CPSUs resulted in loss to the Government. 
Conclusions 
A number of deficiencies and irregularities were no ticed in the export of wheat by FCI. 
Separate Agreement/MOUs were not entered between CP SUs and FCI for export 
operations. Though FCI and Department of Food were members of the empowered 
Committee, to invite/evaluate the tender from forei gn buyers FCI did not protect its 
interest by raising the pertinent issues in the mee ting leading to extra expenditure.  
Moreover, higher rates were charged by the CHAs at private ports of Mundra and 
Pipavav when compared to CHA at Kandla port. Further, undue favours were extended to 
the private parties/CHAs resulting in loss to FCI. Tender period varied from two weeks to 
four weeks in violation of CVC guidelines. There we re delays in claiming service tax 
refund from CPSUs and chances of recovery of procee ds of export sales withheld by 
MMTC were remote in absence of any agreement/ MOU between the FCI & MMTC. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in 
 November 2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
5.2 IT audit on implementation of Financial Account ing Package 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) rolled out FAP with out the pilot locations 
expressing their satisfaction and full payment of `` `` 12.53 crore was released to TCS. 
The Corporation incurred unfruitful expenditure of `` `` 4.92 crore on networking and 
hardware. Moreover, FCI sanctioned `` `` 200.78 crore to implement an altogether 
different software instead of using the FAP’s inven tory module in Oracle. Financial 
Statements could not be generated through FAP due t o deficient customisation and 
these were being prepared manually. Modules of FAP lacked proper validation, 
security provisions and processing controls leading  to incorrect output, unreliable 
data and excess payments. 
5.2.1 Introduction 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) functions through five Zonal Offices (ZOs), 25 Regional 
Offices (ROs) and 169 District Offices (DOs). In th e meeting held on 26 July 2005, the 
Board of Directors of FCI approved implementation o f Financial Accounting Package 
(FAP) to computerise the financial accounting of FC I. The Finance division of FCI 
implemented FAP {Oracle Enterprise Resource Plannin g (ERP)} in collaboration with 
Tata Consultancy Services (TCS). FCI entered into c ontract (November 2006) with TCS 
for implementation and customization of FAP. The co ntract also covered four years of 
maintenance support at a cost of 
` 3.01 crore. The main modules of Financial Accounting 
Package were (a) Financial Accounting (b) Cash Mana gement (c) Budgeting and Costing 
(d) Payroll and (e) Contributory Provident Fund (CPF) Trust Accounting. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
36 
FCI released payment of ` 12.53 crore (cost of software and other revenue ex penditure) 
to TCS against the above contract till December 201 5. The targeted date of 
implementation of the project was one year from the  date of award of tender i.e., 24 
November 2006. FCI continued with simultaneous manual book-keeping along with FAP 
till 31March 2013.  
5.2.2 Audit Findings 
5.2.2.1 Project management and implementation of FAP  
(a) Rollout of the project without receiving comple tion certificates from pilot sites 
Implementation of the project was to be carried out  in two phases, i.e., Phase I and Phase 
II. Phase I implementation was to be at pilot sites  at FCI Head Office, five Zonal Offices, 
five Regional Offices and five District Offices. Su bsequently, the roll out was to be 
carried out as Phase II for rest of the sites. As p er the relevant clause in the tender, the 
date of completion certificate from pilot locations  was to be considered as the Go 
live/completion of the project .  
Audit observed that even though certificates for co mpletion of FAP were not given by 
any of the pilot locations the roll out of FAP (Pay roll Module) was started w.e.f. 01 
October 2010 and the “Go live” certificate (w.e.f. 01 December 2013) for FAP was 
issued by the Management to TCS in February 2014. . 
Thus, in spite of non-fulfilment of contractual con dition of completion certificate from 
the pilot locations, FCI/TCS rolled out the package and full payment of 
` 12.53 crore was 
made to TCS. 
The Management accepted that there was no formal cl osure from the pilot locations and 
stated (February 2016) that keeping in view the pro gress made and also FAP being ready 
to give desired results it was decided to roll out the FAP.  
The reply of the Management is not tenable as full payment was made to TCS without 
the pilot locations expressing their satisfaction w hether FAP fulfilled their user 
requirements. 
(b) Unfruitful expenditure of 
`` `` 4.92 crore on networking and hardware 
(i) As per the minutes of the meeting held on 07 Ja nuary 2005, NIC was to provide 
Virtual Private Network (VPN) connectivity at a cost of `4 crore, through Bharat Sanchar 
Nigam Limited (BSNL) 1 for the project up to District level. In complianc e with the NIC 
recommendations, FCI released a payment of ` 4.02 crore to BSNL (March 2005) 
towards bandwidth usage charges and hardware items. 
Audit observed that VPN connectivity was not provided to district offices which were the 
prime end users of the FAP project. Thus, the distr ict offices were forced to depend upon 
other sources like data card services and individual broadband services in an unstructured 
                                                           
1  A VPN is a network technology that creates a secure  network connection over a public network such 
as the Internet or a private network owned by a service provider 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
37 
and unmanaged manner leading to delayed communicati on between the district offices 
and the central server. This rendered the expenditure of ` 4.02 crore unfruitful. 
The Management stated (February 2016) that increase  in traffic usage of internet in 
IISFM, FAP and other application had resulted in sl ow connectivity. Therefore, as per 
advice of NIC and after approval of Chairman and Ma naging Director of FCI, BSNL was 
requested to discontinue the VPN. 
The reply is not tenable as the Management did not consider up-gradation of the VPN 
connectivity to cater to the increased internet tra ffic; rather it chose to discontinue VPN 
connectivity which resulted in transmission in an u nstructured and unsecured manner 
1 
between district offices/depots and FCI Hqrs. 
(ii) Clause 7.3 of the tender stipulated that “TCS is responsible for the complete delivery, 
implementation and rollout of all application softw are including database within 12 
months from the date of award of contract”. Thus, t he project was to be completed by 
December 2007. Audit observed that FCI management c ould not provide the requisite 
hardware and server on time to TCS which delayed th e implementation of project. 
Further, implementation of FAP also got delayed due  to utilisation of workforce to clear 
the arrear of accounts (for two to three years), la ck of dedicated manpower, and delay at 
pilot locations. Finally, Completion certificate wa s issued (February 2014) to TCS 
effective from 01 December 2013. Thus, there was in ordinate delay of six years in 
implementation of project. Due to this delay the se rvers procured (2008) at cost of     
` 89.90 lakh (one production server and development server) got outdated which needed 
to be replaced resulting in sub-optimal utilisation of the servers.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that the serv ers procured for FAP were used for 
different activities during different phases of FAP  implementation and never remained 
idle or unutilised and that the servers had outlived their life and needed to be replaced. 
The Management reply does not address the fact that  the servers which were procured in 
2008 for FAP could not be put to their intended use  due to six year delay, by which time 
the servers had become outdated. 
5.2.2.2 Critical functional requirements not incorporated in FAP 
(a) Non-integration of stock accounting with Financ ial Accounting Package 
Integrated Information System for Food Grains Manag ement (IISFM) was approved at a 
total cost of 
` 97.66 crore to install an online MIS in FCI by Nat ional Informatics Centre 
(NIC) which would give the stock position in any Fo od Storage Depot at any given point 
of time. The stock data entry in IISFM was based on  details of transactions 2 of food 
grains in depots. However, FCI kept IISFM in abeyance (August 2010) due to incomplete 
implementation, absence of connectivity, unreliable  data and various flaws in system 
                                                           
1 The LAN is without information outlets, Jack Panel,  equipment racks etc. The switches are 
unmanaged and are of various brands and most of the  FCI District offices have individual broadband 
connections.  
2  Stock transactions such as truck wise receipt, is sue, transit losses. storage  losses, inter variety  
changes, loss due to down gradation etc. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
38 
design resulting in unfruitful expenditure of ` 97.66 crore on implementation of IISFM. 
Non-achievement of the intended objectives of the p roject was highlighted in the CAG 
Audit Report No. 3 of 2011-12.  
The Board of Directors of FCI decided (23 September 2005) that FAP was to be provided 
with adequate interface with the existing IISFM. Th e data flow was to be with respect to 
stock transactions such as receipts, issues, transi t losses, storage losses, inter variety 
changes, losses due to down gradation etc., so that  such data would not be required to be 
re-entered manually. Moreover, integration of IISFM  with FAP for inventory 
management was also envisaged in the contract with TCS. 
However, it was observed that no provision was made  by TCS for interface of FAP with 
stock accounting in violation of terms and conditio ns of contract. As a result the entries 
were made manually in FAP from the monthly stock ac counts statement sent by various 
depot offices.  
The Management in their reply (February 2016) offered no comments to this observation. 
(b)  It was further observed in audit that TCS had prop osed that Oracle Inventory 
Module of FAP can take care of the inventory transa ctions at depot level.  However, 
Board of Directors’ of FCI sanctioned (08 April 2015) an amount of 
` 200.78 crore on an 
altogether different project called ‘Depot online’ overlooking the possibilities of 
implementing the already existing Oracle Inventory Module in FAP. Thus, instead of 
making use of the already available Oracle Inventor y Module in FAP, which was 
implemented by the Finance Division of FCI, the Man agement made a decision to 
procure hardware and software, at a significant cos t, for implementing an altogether 
different project (Depot Online). This indicates la ck of co-ordination between the IT and 
Finance Divisions of FCI resulting in non-optimizat ion of organizational resources and 
substantial additional expenditure.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that as far as possibility of using existing Oracle 
Inventory was concerned, being an open tender, M/s Oracle was also free to participate in 
the selection process. However, no such response wa s received from them. As far as the 
additional cost of purchase of hardware for Depot O nline Project was concerned, most of 
it was being supplied to the depots where such hard ware was not available. Hence, 
additional cost would have been incurred even in ca se the solution of Oracle was 
implemented. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable as it di d not consider making use of the 
already available Oracle Inventory Module in FAP pr oposed by the TCS and instead 
committed itself to an additional expenditure of 
` 200.78 crore for the Depot Online 
project. Further, as regards cost of hardware, FCI without considering the utilisation of 
hardware which was supplied in the depots under IIS FM project, sanctioned purchase of 
additional hardware for similar use. 
(c) Deficient customisation for generation of Finan cial Statements in FAP 
ERP application developed by TCS at a total cost of  
` 21.84 crore (including hardware 
and software) was not generating the financial stat ements as per requirement of the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
39 
Companies Act, 2013 thereby defeating one of the ma in objectives of implementing 
Financial Accounting Package. The Annual Financial Statements were in fact being 
prepared manually by FCI. Further, in built functio n for generating Bank Reconciliation 
Statement was also not being used by FCI.  
The Management accepted and stated (February 2016) that the work to generate the 
above reports through FAP was under testing. The Ma nagement further stated that field 
offices were directed to prepare Bank Reconciliation Statement through FAP.  
Thus, even after five years 
1 of implementation and expenditure of ` 21.84 crore the 
system implemented in FCI fell short of the overall intended objectives.  
5.2.2.3 Programme Change Control - Non authorisatio n over the escrow account and 
source code of the FAP project 
Clause 7.10 of the tender document inter alia  stipulated that the software source code (in 
a compact disc) shall be kept in a locker opened in  the Bank and paid for by the 
Contractor. FCI shall have unilateral power to open  the locker and necessary 
authorisation has to be provided to FCI from concer ned bank by the Contractor so that 
FCI operations do not suffer. 
It was observed that FCI had no authorisation over the escrow account and source code of 
the FAP project. This made FCI completely dependent  on TCS for any change 
management and also rendered continuity of FAP oper ation vulnerable in case of 
dispute/disagreement with the vendor. 
The Management accepted and stated (November 2016) that TCS was requested to 
provide the source code of the application. 
 
5.2.2.4 Non-Evaluation of FAP by External Agency  
One of the essential documents required for develop ment of any IT application i.e. 
System Requirement Specification document was also not prepared by the vendor before 
designing and implementation of the project. Only a  document in the shape of gap 
analysis carried out by implementing agency (TCS) w as prepared. As a result of non-
maintenance of basic documents like SRS, the audit and evaluation of FAP by external 
agency in terms of the MOU for the year 2012-13 bet ween FCI and Ministry of 
Consumer Affairs, was declined by the external agen cy viz., Standard Testing and 
Quality Certification (STQC) Directorate (an attach ed office of the Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India, providing quality 
assurance services in the area of electronics and I T). The reason cited for refusal by the 
agency was absence of the minimum documentation required for SRS along with the user 
manual clearly mentioning the software requirement,  work flows, validation rules and 
access to the application along with the sample data. 
                                                           
1   Payroll module of FAP was started in October 2010  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
40 
Thus, in the absence of SRS document and user manua ls and associated documentation 
of FAP the evaluation of the project by an independ ent third party was never carried out. 
Hence, the security, stability and quality assurance of FAP remained uncertified.  
The Management confirmed (February 2016) that STQC refused on the ground that 
evaluation will not be possible without SRS documen tation. Further, it stated that a 
tender for system audit of FAP was floated and awar ded to M/s JKNP & Associates on 
15 December 2015 and the system audit was under progress. 
The reply is indicative of the fact that TCS did no t fulfil its contractual obligation 
regarding system documentation leading to the syste m remaining unaudited. Evidently, 
absence of system documentation hampered the certification of the system.  
5.2.2.5 Inadequate Disaster recovery and Business C ontinuity Plan leading to 
disruption and data loss 
Disaster Recovery and Business continuity includes regular backups, storage of backups 
and periodic recovery simulation exercise to ensure  that backups taken are recoverable in 
case of a disaster.  
The backup of the FAP data was taken on Storage Are a Network (SAN-2) by the Data 
Base Administrator and the same was copied in tape drive by NIC. The backup of the 
FAP server was taken centrally and the tape drives were kept at NIC, Hyderabad. 
However, it was observed that during the month of J une 2013, there was a breakdown of 
the only existing server for 22 days (08 June 2013 to 29 June 2013) and transaction data 
was lost. As the backup could not be restored by FC I, the lost data had to be restored 
manually.  
Audit analysis revealed that neither a Disaster Rec overy Server was installed nor any 
recovery exercise was simulated. 
The Management accepted (February 2016) the failure  of backup restoration and stated 
that the requisite action for installation of new s ervers for Data Centre and Disaster 
Recovery site is in progress and would be completed by July 2016. 
Thus, storage of data on tape drives in absence of Disaster Recovery Server puts the 
entire database at risk in the event of major break down. This is an unacceptable risk to 
FAP which processes transactions worth 
` 1,36,561.13 crore 1 per year.  
5.2.2.6  Inadequate security provisions in FAP 
(a) User can simultaneously log in to FAP through more than one computer (LAN or 
standalone). This deficiency made the system vulnerable to unauthorized access.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that the rest rictions on multiple sessions are 
being evaluated. The vulnerabilities thus remain unaddressed. 
                                                           
1  Sale and Purchase transactions of FCI for the yea r 2014-15. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
41 
(b)  No log files depicting login details of users such  as login date/time, IP address 
etc., were maintained in the system. This detective  control weakness compounded the 
already deficient preventive controls (as in 2.6.1)  and is a major security vulnerability of 
the accounting system. It was also observed that th e outsourced personnel staff at District 
Office FCI Tadepalligudem was engaged for entering the transactions in FAP leading to 
security risk and violation of principles of segregation of duties. 
The Management stated (February 2016) that the reco rd of history of transactions is 
available in the system. Further, with regard to ou tsourcing of staff it stated that the field 
offices have been advised to strictly follow the FC I Hqrs instructions of not-sharing the 
user IDs. 
The Management reply with reference to login detail s of users is not tenable as it did not 
address the deficiencies in the log file details of users, rather it refers only to the record of 
history of the transactions which is not relevant in this case.  
(c) There were instances where all the staff of Account s section were found using the 
same user ID and password and thereby compromising the security of the system and 
also making it difficult to fix responsibility in c ase of any misuse . Audit observed that at 
RO Raipur, one user ID was created for three Assist ant posts, and one super user ID was 
created for three managers post. This indicated tha t the ID was being shared with other 
users and super users. In Gujarat Region, the numbe r of user IDs exceeded the number of 
employees working in the accounts section. Existenc e of excess User IDs in comparison 
to number of users indicates that the User IDs crea ted for the employees who were 
transferred/ retired were still active and were not  disabled. The Management stated 
(February 2016) that field offices were advised to strictly follow the Hqrs. Instruction of 
not sharing the User IDs. 
The Management reply is not tenable as apart from i ssuing instruction it has not initiated 
any concrete measure to stop sharing of User IDs.  
5.2.3 Deficiencies in different modules of FAP  
Two core components of FAP are Financial Accounting  Module and Payroll Module. 
Audit examined the adequacy of programming logic an d mapping of business rules by 
test data method and running queries at the backend
1. The major observations are given 
below:-  
5.2.3.1 Financial Accounting Module 
FAP has a Financial Accounting Module which is cent ral to the functioning of the 
application. The inputs to this module include entr ies related to financial transactions of 
food grains. The output is in the form of General L edger, Purchase day book, Sales day 
book, Trial Balance etc. Deficiencies noticed in audit are as detailed below: 
                                                           
1 Backend is a Computer program (such as server soft ware) that remains in the background, 
or resides on a server located in a back room 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
42 
(i)  The logic to calculate depreciation was incorrectly  configured in the system in 
violation of the Companies Act 2013 whereby the app lication calculated 
depreciation on the full useful life of the asset (from 01 April 2014) rather than on 
remaining useful life of the asset which were purchased prior to April 2014. Audit 
observed that the amount of difference between the old method (Written Down 
Value) and new method (depreciation on full useful life of asset from 01 April 
2014) of depreciation calculation was ` 33.99 crore. Incidentally, acquisition date 
of all the assets acquired since inception and befo re April 2014 was depicted as 
April 2013 in the system. The quantification of cor rect depreciation is hampered 
due to absence of historical acquisition data of assets in the system.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that the issu e relate, to accounting policy and 
availability of historical data in manual system.  
The Management, thus, needs to enter correct acquis ition dates of FCI’s assets in its FAP 
data base to correctly calculate depreciation to provide an accurate picture.  
(ii)  The cash credit limit (CC) in the system was found to have no correlation with the 
approved cash credit limit of respective districts.  It was observed that system 
accepted amounts in excess of the actual cash credi t limit of the districts. This 
deficiency is not only fraught with the risk of exc ess payment getting processed 
through the system but would also result in cases o f excess payments going 
unnoticed at management level in FCI HQ. 
The Management stated (February 2016) that the CC l imits are daily notional limits for 
the banks to clear the transactions during that day  and no control can be exercised over a 
bank for clearing the amount up to CC limits through FAP. 
The Management reply is not tenable as it did not a ddress the issue of absence of inbuilt 
control in the system to restrict amount of payment  to the CC limit of respective districts 
which poses risk of excess payment getting processed through the system. 
(iii)  The application lacked a provision to validate the issue quantity of food grains 
against the respective Release Order (RO) quantity.  This, apart from creating a 
risk of processing payment for unauthorized issue of food grains also disables any 
monitoring of field level lifting of food grains ag ainst their respective 
authorizations. Moreover, while processing sales tr ansactions, the invoices were 
being generated with neither referencing them to th e scheme 
1 under which the 
stocks were issued, nor linking with the stock leve ls in the respective depot. 
Moreover, the rates applicable for each scheme were  not found linked in FAP. 
This created risk of generation of incorrect vouche rs and also made such data of 
limited use for MIS and decision making by the management.   
(iv)  The system did not have the facility to calculate t he amount payable/receivable 
from the quantity of food grain received/issued by linking it to the per quintal rate 
of that particular food grain. The net amount payab le/receivable had thus to be 
                                                           
1  Various schemes like Below Poverty Line,  Above P overty line, Open market sale etc. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
43 
calculated manually and then fed in to the system m aking it prone to human error 
and creating a risk of incorrect invoice generation and payment thereon. 
The Management stated (February 2016) that separate  Release Order Module, Depot 
Online Module and Procurement Module are being impl emented by IT Division to 
address the above issue (iii and iv). The deficiency, thus, remained unaddressed.  
(v)  Mandatory functions like calculation of Service tax  rates, VAT rates, Standard 
rates etc. were not configured in the application a nd they continued to be 
calculated manually making them prone to human errors.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that no separate accounting for the service tax is 
made in the books of accounts as the rates differ from State to State. Hence, the amount is 
being calculated manually by field offices.  
The reply of the Management is not tenable as Servi ce tax, VAT, Standard rates etc., 
were mandatory functions which need to be auto conf igured in the application to prevent 
manual error. 
(vi)  The application did not have a provision to reconci le different payments made to 
more than one party, through Real time Gross Settle ment (RTGS), by a single 
cheque. As such, reconciliation of such payments re quired manual interventions 
resulting in undue delays in procedural work beside s making it prone to human 
error. 
The Management in its reply (February 2016) produce d an annexure of batch payment 
through system, however, they could not provide any  evidence of party wise 
reconciliation made through the system. 
(vii)  As per business rules of FCI a transaction is proce ssed after it is approved by the 
super user. Only after approval by the super user c an the transaction be processed 
by the user and further passing of the same is done  by the cashier for payment. 
However, there was no system for the user to know w hether a transaction put up 
for approval was approved by the super user as no f eedback/prompt was 
generated at the time of approval of a transaction.  All such transactions were 
shown as pending invoices until they are checked by  the user by opening the 
invoice or by being reminded by the party whose pay ment is due. This created 
undue delays in payment. As on 05 November 2015 the re were 38,698 
transactions amounting to 
` 214.36 crore which were depicted as pending for 
approval.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that the supe r user approves the transaction 
once he gets the physical voucher for verification and approval and is required to verify 
the same by opening the invoice. The Management rep ly did not address the audit 
observation on feedback/prompt which was not genera ted by the system for invoice 
approvals. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
44 
5.2.3.2 Payroll Module 
The inputs to this module include entries related t o employee pay and leave data. The 
output is in the form of Salary Slip, Form-16, Cont ributory Provident Fund report etc. 
The deficiencies noticed in audit are detailed below:   
(i)  As per FCI Rules annual increment shall be released  on 01 January every year. 
The rule position is silent on eligible service cri teria for release of annual 
increment for new recruits. Therefore the organisat ion should comply with the 
rule position prescribed in Fundamental Rules and S upplementary Rules (FRSR) 
which state that annual increment can only be released after completion of eligible 
six months of service. However, audit observed that  annual increment of new 
recruits was released by the system despite non-com pletion of eligible six month 
service. Further, audit analysis revealed that due to this deficient processing 
control, an excess payment on account of increments  amounting to 
` 3.46 crore 
was released by FCI w.e.f. January 2011 to March 2015 pertaining to new recruits 
joining at Assistant Grade, Manager and Assistant G eneral Manager level. As the 
deficiency is yet to be rectified it will result in continuing excess payments.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that the annual increment has been implemented 
correctly in FAP as per regulation 86 of FCI (Staff ) Regulation 1971 where date of 
increment is 01 January. However, the reply is comp letely silent on the eligibility criteria 
of six month service for release of increment as prescribed in FRSR . 
(ii)  Though the application provided a facility for gene ration of Form-16 of 
employees it could not be made use of due to wrong processing of the tax 
calculation by the application. It was observed tha t an amount of ` 28.48 crore 
was shown as tax rebate under Section 89 of Income Tax Act, 1961 (meant for 
rebate on arrear of salary) for 2547 number of empl oyees even when no arrear 
was received by these employees. Resultantly, Form- 16 was being prepared 
manually leading to duplicity of work. The processing logic has not been rectified 
to generate accurate Form-16 through the system.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that actual a mount of rebate under Section 89 
was ` 13,66,496 for 35 records. The Management reply is not tenable as its reply referred 
to rebate given only to employees who had made exte rnal savings whereas audit has 
taken into account record of all those employees wh o were given rebate in their Form-16 
under Section 89 of Income Tax Act, 1961.  
(iii)  There was no provision for entering PAN details of individuals in the Professional 
Tax schedule wherever such tax was leviable. Due to  this a separate sheet had to 
be prepared manually at the time of filing Tax Retu rn. This made the system 
dependent upon manual intervention and was prone to human error.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that no requirement of professional tax schedule 
was received from any of the field offices. The rep ly is incorrect as Professional tax is 
paid by FCI employees in various States like Odisha, West Bengal, Maharashtra etc.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
45 
(iv)  Any recovery from employees on account of shortage/ defalcation of 
stock/cash/spares etc., affected through Payroll Mo dule was not getting routed 
though the respective claim schedule of FAP. The re covery was instead getting 
credited to miscellaneous income and thus the claim s remained unadjusted in the 
present system. This results in incorrect depiction  of figures in the books of 
accounts. As on 05 November2015 an amount of ` 31.69 crore of recovery was 
incorrectly shown as Miscellaneous Income. 
The Management stated (February 2016) that instruct ions have now been issued to field 
offices to adjust such claims to the extent of recoveries taken in Miscellaneous Income.  
The Management reply did not address the audit obse rvation of non-routing the recovery 
through respective claim schedule in FAP and only refers to adjustment to be made.   
(v)  The module lacked a validation check to restrict the amount of leave sanctioned to 
the extent of leave available to the credit of empl oyee as the leave details were 
maintained manually.Payroll Module of the system wa s also found to be allowing 
Child care leave even to the male employees and pat ernity leave to female 
employees. Audit observed that 19 male employees an d two female employees 
were granted child care and paternity leave respect ively. This was in clear 
violation of the extant leave rules.  
The Management accepted (February 2016) that leave records were maintained manually. 
Further, with regard to entry of child care leave a gainst male employee and paternity 
leave to female employee, the same was rectified in Payroll Module. 
The Management reply did not address the audit obse rvation on absence of validation 
control in the system to prevent similar occurrences. 
(vi)  As per FCI regulations if any employee was on leave  (except casual leave) on 01 
January, his/her annual increment is not to be rele ased. However, there was no 
inbuilt control in the system to enforce this rule.  Audit analysis revealed that 
leave salary of 1211 employees was released even wh en they were on leave on 01 
January 2015.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that there is  a provision to recover the 
differential increment through Maintain Direct Payr oll (MDP) in case the employee is on 
leave. Evidently the system has no preventive contr ol and is dependent on post 
transactions adjustments/recovery. 
(vii)  The module lacked the facility to calculate the amo unt of gratuity of retiring 
employees based on their employment/payroll data an d the same continued to be 
calculated manually and then fed into the computerized system making it prone to 
human error and creating a risk of incorrect paymen ts. Similarly, there was no 
facility in the module to calculate month wise brea kup for arrears of pay given to 
employees; the arrear sheets were still being prepared manually. 
The Management stated (February 2016) that entry of gratuity is made in the system after 
manual sanction order. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
46 
The Management reply is silent on the audit observa tion about absence of auto 
calculation of gratuity and arrear sheet by the system. 
(viii)  As per extant FCI rules no Special Duty Allowance ( SDA) was payable to the 
employees who were on leave for more than 15 days i n a given month. However, 
it was observed that in absence of inbuilt control in the system, the system 
allowed SDA even to those employees, who were on le ave for more than 15 days. 
Thereafter deduction for such overpayment was done manually. In absence of 
inbuilt control system, overpayments cannot be ruled out. 
The Management stated (February 2016) that there is  no such condition to disallow SDA 
to an employee who was on leave for more than 15 days. 
The Management reply is incorrect as FCI circular d ated 21 August 1991 clearly states 
that no Special Duty Allowance (SDA) is payable to employees who were on leave for 
more than 15 days in a stretch.  
(ix)  The lowest competent authority for releasing increm ent in basic pay for 
employees/labour is Area Manager. However, it was n oticed that the increments 
can be released using the login credentials of Assi stant/Manager at the district 
level. Moreover, for such actions no authentication  of higher management was 
required while releasing increment through Payroll Module of FAP. Apart from 
such increments being released in an unauthorized f ashion the practice also 
created a risk of inaccurate increments being given to employees.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that the increment is fed in the system only after 
receiving the administrative order from the Personn el Division and accepted that it is an 
offline process due to non-availability of Human Re source Management SystemModule 
in FAP. 
5.2.3.3 Discrepancies in data 
Inconsistencies and discrepancies in data are as detailed below: 
(i)  In East Zone of FCI there was a difference of 
` 1,019.81 lakh between the figures 
of the Trial Balance and that of the schedules gene rated through FAP. After being 
pointed out by Audit, the discrepancy was adjusted by FCI by passing 
rectification entries through General Ledger Module. However, the reasons for the 
differences were not analysed by FCI to take any corrective action. 
(ii)  Age wise analysis for the debtors and creditors pertaining to the period prior to 31 
March 2013 could not be generated due to incorrect porting of legacy data.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that legacy d ata was taken as an opening 
balance as on 01 April 2013. Therefore, age-wise an alysis for the invoices older than 31 
March 2013 was not available. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
47 
The Management reply itself suggests that the legac y data was not entered year wise 
during data entry at the implementing stage of the system which resulted in above 
deficiencies. 
(iii)  Normally accounting entries are made either through  the Accounts Receivable or 
Accounts Payable Module whereby such entries are al so automatically captured 
and reflected in the schedules pertaining to respec tive account head. However, 
accounting entries made through the Journal Module were not being reflected in 
the respective schedules. Audit analysis revealed t hat there were 87,833 such 
entries amounting to 
` 38,106.00 crore as on 05 November 2015. Thus, abse nce 
of matching figures in schedule for General Ledger entries renders the audit trail 
defective for tracing and vouching for Management Information System.   
It was seen in audit that no records were available  to indicate documented authorisation 
of the competent authorities for high value journal  entries (over `1 crore) requiring 
authorisation by different level of officers as per  the limits indicated in FCI's circular no. 
932/Accts of 15 December 2004. In absence of such d ocumentation it could not be 
verified in audit if the above provisions were being complied with. 
The Management accepted and stated (February 2016) that a circular to obtain post facto  
approval of all the JEs above the prescribed amount had been issued to field offices. 
5.2.4 Non mapping of business rules into the applic ation 
In order to successfully capture the business rules  of an organization in a computerised 
application it is essential that they may be coded (after authorized BPR 1 if any) into the 
software.  Deficiencies in mapping of business rules are given below: 
(i)  In FAP Head of account (1631 2) clear reflection of output tax collected, deposit ed 
and adjusted could not be ascertained from the Tria l Balance which was depicted 
under manual head of account (5.136 A, 5.136 B and 5.136 C 3) prior to 
computerisation.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that multiple account heads were not required as 
it was not found to be appropriate. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable as due t o merger of A/c head 5.136 series in 
to single accounting head 1631- Output tax (in FAP) , clear reflection of output tax 
collected, deposited and adjusted is not  ascertainable from the Trial Balance.  
(ii)  In the Stock Ledger Summary (SLS) generated through  FAP there was no option 
of closing stock valuation at standard rates and me asurement unit of quantity of 
food grains. Moreover, there was no option of captu ring details of Goods in 
transit in the SLS. Thus, absence of above renders the audit trail defective with 
incomplete MIS in FAP.  
                                                           
1  Business Process Re-engineering. 
2  Head of account of Output Tax in FAP 
3  Manual Head of accounts for output tax prior to c omputerisation 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
48 
The Management stated (February 2016) that closing stock is valued at average 
acquisition cost and no account head for goods in t ransit is required as no accounting 
entry is passed in transit. 
The Management reply is not tenable as closing stoc k and goods in transit continue to be 
valued through a manual system and not from data entered in the FAP.  
(iii)  The modules for trade receivable and trade payable were not interlinked.  Thus, 
there was no option to generate customized reports like details of outstanding 
against a single supplier/customer and a valuable i nput for the management was 
found missing because of this deficiency.  
The Management stated (February 2016) that a net of f report is available in Receivable 
Module to ascertain outstanding against a single supplier/customer. 
The Management reply is not tenable as audit conten tion is about the net off report of 
Trade receivables and trade payables rather than th e report mentioned by the 
Management which is net off report for Trade Receivable Module only. 
Conclusion 
FAP was envisaged as an enterprise wide system to a utomate and integrate FCI’s 
Finance, Treasury, Inventory and payroll functions across all its units. However, even 
after spending 
` 21.84 crore (including hardware and software), it was seen that the 
system is unable to generate financial statements as per the requirement of the Companies 
Act, 2013. Moreover, the project management suffere d from number of deficiencies such 
as lack of system documentation, inadequate disaste r recovery and business continuity 
planning. 
The programming logic of main modules (Financial Ac counting and Payroll) was found 
to have multiple deficiencies resulting in generati on of incorrect output and unreliable 
data. Many business rules of FCI have not been mapp ed into FAP, thus limiting its utility 
as an MIS.   
Moreover, instead of making use of Oracle Inventory  Module in the FAP system, FCI 
Management decided to spend another 
` 200.78 crore on a completely different project 
‘Depot online’ which will have to be linked and integrated with FAP.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in  December 2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
5.3 Award of work of construction of godown on nomi nation basis  
Food Corporation of India entrusted the work of construction of a godown to Assam 
State Warehousing Corporation on nomination basis i n violation of guidelines laid 
down by the Central Vigilance Commission and withou t carrying out due dilligence 
in assessing their technical expertise and capabili ty. Subsequently, FCI terminated 
the contract due to non-performance by Assam State Warehousing Corporation and 
entrusted the work to another agency which resulted  in avoidable extra expenditure 
of ` ` ` ` 21.27 crore. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
49 
The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines ( July 2007), while referring to a 
Supreme Court of India judgment 1, stated that tendering process or public auction i s a 
basic requirement for award of contract by any Gove rnment agency as any other method, 
especially award of contract on nomination basis wo uld amount to a breach of Article 14 
of the Constitution guaranteeing right to equality,  which implies right to equality to all 
interested parties. However, in rare and exceptiona l cases, for instance during natural 
calamities and emergencies declared by the Governme nt, where the procurement is 
possible from a single source only, where the suppl ier or contractor has exclusive rights 
in respect of goods or services and no reasonable a lternative or substitute exists, where 
the auction was held on several days but there were  no bidder or the bid offered was too 
low, etc., this normal rule may be departed from an d such contract may be awarded 
through 'private negotiations'. The aforesaid guide lines of CVC had further laid down 
that mere post facto approval of the Board, rather than the inevitability of the situation, 
was not sufficient to award the contracts on nomination basis. 
The Executive Director {North East (NE) Zone}, Guwa hati of FCI entered into 
(December 2009) an agreement with Assam State Wareh ousing Corporation (ASWC) for 
entrustment of work of construction of 50,000 metri c tonne (MT) capacity godown at 
Changsari, Guwahati at an estimated cost of ` 34.86 crore. The work was awarded on 
nomination basis, without following the procedure o f open tender. However, the Zonal 
office of FCI did not record any reason for awardin g the construction work on 
nomination basis, highlighting any rare and excepti onal circumstances that would have 
justified such an award of work. Further, the award  of work by the Executive Director 
(NE Zone) was beyond the powers delegated to him bu t it was subsequently ratified 
(June 2010) by the Chairman and Managing Director ( CMD) of FCI. In absence of any 
justification establishing the inevitability of the  situation thus warranting the need for 
awarding the work on nomination basis, the ratifica tion done by CMD, FCI was also not 
in consonance with CVC guidelines. 
During execution of this work, FCI deposited (March  2010) a sum of 
` 2.75 crore with 
ASWC as initial advance for construction of godown which was to be completed by 
ASWC within two years from the receipt of advance i .e. by March 2012. However, the 
value of work done by ASWC during the two years per iod was only ` 2.56 crore. As the 
work was not completed within the agreed time, FCI intimated (July 2012) ASWC that 
due to lack of capability for executing the construction work, the agreement would not be 
renewed and therefore the work entrusted to ASWC wa s withdrawn (July 2012) as per 
terms of the agreement. 
Audit observed that FCI cited (July 2012) technical  incapability in executing the work as 
primary reason for terminating the agreement with A SWC as it did not equip itself with 
the required number of qualified engineers to super vise the project in a professional way 
and was also not aware of the quantum of work, meth odology for calculation and 
structural designing of the project. This was compl etely in contradiction to an earlier 
communication of January 2010 by ED (NE Zone) to FC I HQ wherein it was stated that 
ASWC had its own Engineering cell where sufficient engineers were available and the 
design specification of the godowns constructed by ASWC was as per FCI pattern. Thus, 
from the apparent contradiction in the facts stated  by FCI at the time of award of contract 
                                                           
1  Nagar Nigam, Meerut Vs A1 Faheem Meat Export Priv ate Limited [arising out of SLP(Civil) No. 
10174 of 2006] 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
50 
to ASWC and at the time of termination of contract,  it is evident that FCI (NE Zone) did 
not carry out due diligence in assessing the techni cal expertise and capability of ASWC 
in executing the construction work. 
Subsequently, FCI invited (November 2012) expressio n of interest from Central Public 
Sector Undertakings for taking up the remaining con struction work and entered into 
(March 2013) an agreement with National Building Co nstruction Corporation Ltd. 
(NBCC) for completion of balance work at an estimat ed cost of 
` 53.57 crore which 
resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of ` 21.27 crore 1. FCI handed over (July 2013) 
the construction site including the incomplete work  of ASWC to NBCC for completion 
of work in two years i.e. by July 2015. NBCC had ha nded over constructed godown of 
39170 MT capacity only to FCI and the balance 21 per cent  construction  work was yet to 
be completed (January 2016). 
Thus, award of construction work to ASWC on nominat ion basis without evaluation of 
their capability not only resulted in violation of CVC guidelines but also led to 
subsequent termination of agreement due to non-comp letion of work by ASWC. 
Subsequent re-entrustment of the balance work to an other agency resulted in avoidable 
extra expenditure of 
` 21.27 crore besides delay of more than three years in completion 
of work. 
The Management stated (February/November 2015) that  there was urgency for creation 
of storage capacity for buffer stock for public dis tribution system in the North-East zone. 
The work was entrusted to a government agency such as ASWC which cannot be termed 
as award on nomination basis and that the CVC guide lines were not applicable in cases 
where work is entrusted to Central/ State Governmen t, Central/ State PSUs who execute 
the work at Central Public Works Department (CPWD) schedule of rates by following 
CVC guidelines. 
The reply is not acceptable as these reasons were not recorded at the time of awarding the 
work and appears to be an afterthought after audit has raised the issue; even the issue of 
urgency is untenable as more than five years have l apsed and the godown is yet to be 
fully constructed and put to use. Further, the CVC guidelines did not grant any exemption 
in cases where work is entrusted to Central/ State Government, Central/ State PSUs who 
execute the work at CPWD schedule of rates.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in October 2015; their reply was awaited (March  
2016). 
5.4 Undue benefit to the transport contractors  
GOI exempted incidence of service tax on transporta tion of food grains in February 
2010. However, Regional offices of Food Corporation  of India at Guwahati and 
Shillong floated tenders for transportation of food  grains inclusive of element of 
service tax in violation of their Headquarters' ins tructions of October 2012. This 
resulted in avoidable payment of element of service  tax of `` `` 13.18 crore to the 
transporters.   
                                                           
1   Increase in cost estimate = Revised estimate – ( Original estimate – Value of work done) 
                                            = ` ` ` ` 53.57 crore – (` ` ` ` 34.86 crore - `` `` 2.56 crore) = `` `` 21.27 crore  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
51 
According to Section 68(2) of the Finance Act, 1994 read with Rule 2(i)(d) of the Service 
Tax Rules 1994, FCI, the recipient of service of tr ansport contract is required to deposit 
the Service Tax on the taxable service cost with the Service Tax Authority. 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) Headquarters issued  (March 2008) directives to its field 
offices to include a condition in Model Tender Form  (MTF) that all tenderers (for 
transportation of food grains/sugar) were required to quote rates inclusive of all taxes, 
duties, cess etc. Consequently, the rate quoted by the transport contractors for 
transportation of food grains/sugar included freigh t (per metric tonne per kilo meter) and 
Service Tax on taxable portion of freight without a ny bifurcation of rates for services and 
taxes on services. The field offices released payme nts to the transport contractors after 
deduction of Service Tax from gross bill amounts fo r depositing the same with the 
Service Tax Authority (GOI).  
The GOI vide its notification dated 27 February 201 0 exempted the services provided by 
a goods transport agency for transportation of food  grains from incidence of Service Tax. 
To clarify the matters arising out of change in Ser vice Tax due to exemption and absence 
of separate rates for service and Service Tax in co ntract, FCI West Bengal Regional 
Office and FCI Kerala Regional Office referred (Mar ch/November 2010) the matter to 
FCI Headquarters. The issues were examined by finan ce, legal and contract wings of FCI 
Headquarters and it was discussed that since there was no Service Tax on transportation 
of food grains after 27 February 2010, FCI should n ot enrich the road transport 
contractors by paying them the service tax amount. FCI Headquarters issued (April 2011) 
instructions to its field offices to release paymen t to the road transport contractors after 
deducting proportionate amount of Service Tax from their gross bill amounts. 
Further, in October 2012 FCI Headquarters circulated guidance note on Service Tax to its 
field Offices wherein it was clarified that future contract might be floated seeking rates 
exclusive of Service Tax. 
Audit, however, observed that in violation of above  instructions of FCI Headquarters, the 
Regional offices at Guwahati 
1 and Shillong 2 continued to float tenders for transportation 
of food grains/sugar inclusive of Service Tax. As t here were common contracts for 
transport of food grains and sugar, the transport c ontractors were paid after deducting the 
amount of Service Tax from their bills in case of s ugar. Whereas in case of transport of 
food grains, the payments were released to the cont ractors at rates quoted by them which 
included component of Service Tax as was applicable  in case of transportation of sugar, 
as the tender conditions specified that the rates t o be quoted should be inclusive of all 
taxes. Thus, payments were released to the transpor ts unjustifiably including Service Tax 
component despite exemption of incidence of Service  Tax on the transportation activity 
of food grains. Thus, FCI suffered an avoidable los s of `13.18 crore in these two regions 
due to not deducting inadmissible component of Serv ice Tax from the transportation bills 
of food grains during November 2012 to March 2015 i n respect of contracts finalized 
after October 2012.  
                                                           
1 Nine Area offices under Regional Office at Guwahat i namely, Bongaigaon, Kokrajhar, Nagaon, 
Silchar, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Tezpur, North Lakhimpur and Guwahati. 
2 Three Area offices under Regional office at Shillong  namely, Shillong, Aizawl and Agartala 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
52 
FCI North East Zonal Office Management stated (Febr uary 2014) that payments were 
released due to contractual obligations of acceptin g all inclusive rate as per MTF. They 
further stated that they would approach FCI Headquarters for modification of MTF. 
The reply of Management is not tenable as FCI Headq uarters issued (April 2011) 
instructions to its field offices to release paymen ts to the contractors after deducting 
proportional amount of Service Tax from their gross  bills and it had further issued 
instructions (October 2012) to float tenders seekin g rates exclusive of Service Tax. Thus, 
the tender conditions were not in agreement with th e FCI Headquarters instructions 
(October 2012) and release of Service Tax component to the contractors in two regions of 
FCI resulted in undue enrichment of the transport contractors.  
Thus, issue of tenders inclusive of Service Tax in Regional offices of FCI at Guwahati 
and Shillong for transportation of food grains in v iolation of the instructions of FCI 
Headquarters and release of payment to the transpor t contractors without deducting 
component of the Service Tax resulted in an avoidable loss of `13.18 crore.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in  December 2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
5.5 Extra expenditure on transportation of food gra ins 
Food Corporation of India incurred extra expenditur e of `` `` 11.22 croreon 
transporting food grains to its food storage godown s in and around Bhiwandi from 
Railways’ Turbhe goods shed instead of a nearer point of Kalyan goods shed. 
Food Corporation of India (FCI) decided to use Rail ways’ Kalyan goods shed (KGS) for 
economical transportation of food grains to its god owns in and around Bhiwandi 
(Maharashtra) on the basis of preliminary survey (A ugust 2009) and site visit (September 
2009). Accordingly, FCI awarded (October 2009) cont ract for handling and transport of 
food grains from KGS to its food storage godowns in Bhiwandi. 
While placing two Railways rakes at KGS and unloadi ng food grains during January 
2010, FCI incurred demurrage charges 1 of `12.01 lakh and wharfage charges 2 of ` 15.47 
lakh due to delay in unloading and transportation o f food grains. FCI set up (25 January 
2010) a committee to investigate demurrage and whar fage charges incurred at KGS and 
to ascertainthe extent of these charges attributabl e to the contractor. The committee in its 
report (30 January 2010) stated that the contractor  neither deployed sufficient labour for 
unloading the food grains from the Railways' rakes nor provided loaders and trucks in 
sufficient numbers for subsequent loading and trans portation of food grains. The 
committee further stated that there was an unloaded  cement rake at the same time, which 
affected unloading of food grains and also expressed apprehension that in view of regular 
placement of rakes carrying cement and other chemic als at KGS, accumulation of 
cement, chemical powder and dust on platform would be a regular phenomenon. 
                                                           
1  Charge levied by railways for detention of any ro lling stock after expiry of free time, if any, allo wed 
for such detention.  
2  Charge levied by railways on goods for not removi ng them from the railway after expiry of free time 
for such removal.  
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
53 
Thereafter, FCI discontinued (April 2010) handling operations from KGS because of 
non-supply of tarpaulins by Railways, non-cleaning of platform, placement of rakes 
without adequate space on the platform, unrest amon g staff and police restrictions on 
entry of heavy trucks to KGS.  Since then food grains to Bhiwandi area are being handled 
through Turbhe goods shed (TGS) leading to addition al expenditure on transportation of 
food grains as the food grain transportation distan ce increased by 24 Km when compared 
to KGS. This led to extra expenditure of `11.22 crore during April 2010 to March 2015. 
FCI stated (May 2014) that Audit had focused only o n saving of transportation cost but 
had not considered the value of food grains that co uld have been contaminated, become 
unfit for human consumption and thus, the decision to continue using TGS in place of 
KGS was sound in the broader interest of manpower a nd society. The Management 
further stated (January 2015) that due to bad exper ience of FCI in handling of rakes on 
experimental basis at KGS, it was not utilised furt her. However, FCI Regional office, 
Maharashtra was instructed by FCI Headquarters to r eassess the feasibility of KGS for 
starting operations instead of TGS, for supply in t he adjoining areas. The Ministry 
endorsed (April 2015) the Management reply of Janua ry 2015 and added that FCI 
Regional office, Maharashtra had awarded (March 2015) ad-hoc  handling contract to M/s 
NSS Logistics and operations at KGS are expected to begin soon.     
Evidently, the two replies of the Management are co ntradictory in nature whereby earlier 
reply implied that KGS was unfit for fear of contam ination while the later reply states 
that FCI is exploring the possibility to restart th e operation from KGS. In fact, the delay 
in unloading and transportation of food grains at t he time of placing Railway rakes at 
KGS was mainly due to poor logistics provided by th e contractor. FCI's decision to 
discontinue operations at KGS based on operation of  only two rakes was not justified as 
FCI, RO Maharashtra stated (July 2015) that no contamination of food grains at KGS was 
encountered during past five years. Further, FCI di d not have constructive discussion 
with the Railways and Police authorities before tak ing the decision to discontinue 
handling operations from KGS. 
 
Thus, the decision to discontinue transportation of food grains from KGS without making 
efforts to resolve the issues encountered at KGS re sulted in extra expenditure of 
` 11.22 
crore besides recurring loss in the form of extra e xpenditure on transportation due to 
increase in distance for transportation of food gra ins to the  godowns in the Bhiwandi 
area. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in 
 December 2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
54 
CHAPTER VI: DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS  
 
The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited and Madras Fertilizers Limited  
6.1 Marketing of Products of Fertilizer Companies 
6.1.1 Introduction 
The Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (F ACT) was incorporated in 
September 1943 as a private limited company. It com menced production in 1947 and 
became a Government company in 1962. The paid up ca pital as on 31 March 2016 was     
` 647.07 crore. FACT produces mainly Ammonium Sulpha te and Complex fertilizer 
under the brand name of “Factamfos”. 
Madras Fertilisers Limited, Manali (MFL) was incorp orated in December 1966 as a joint 
venture between Government of India (GOI) and AMOCO  India Inc. of U.S.A.  After 
disinvestment of shares by AMOCO, the paid up capit al as on 31 March 2015 was 
` 162.14 crore. MFL produces mainly Urea and complex fertilisers under the brand name 
of “Vijay”.  
6.1.2 Audit objectives, criteria and scope and methodology 
Audit of marketing of products was conducted to ass ess whether (a) the Marketing 
activities of fertilisers are carried out efficient ly, (b) the system of appointment of 
dealers, hiring of godowns/warehouses, transporters , rail head handling etc was 
transparent, fair and as per the sound commercial p rinciples, (c) the internal control 
mechanism in the Companies was effective in transpo rtation of finished products, hiring 
of godown, railhead transportation etc, and (d) the  Companies claimed and received the 
subsidy in time as per guidelines . 
Criteria for audit consisted of provisions of Ferti lizer Control Order, 1973/1985, 
Fertilizers policy, Memorandum of Understanding (MO U) with Department of 
Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, g uidelines of Central Vigilance 
Commission (CVC) on tendering and of GOI on subsidy. 
6.1.3 Audit findings 
Performance of the Companies, in marketing of ferti liser products and their production 
activity wherever relevant, are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:  
6.1.3.1 Performance of the Companies in Marketing 
FACT and MFL separately entered into MoU with Minis try of Chemicals and Fertilisers 
(GOI) for production of Factamfos and Ammonium Sulp hate (FACT) and Urea and 
Complex fertilisers (MFL) during the period of audi t, viz., 2012-13 to 2014-15, based on 
the production capacity of the plants, performance of previous years etc. The details of 
targets for production/Sales as per MOU and actual production and sales in respect of 
these products for three years 2013-13 to 2014-15 were as detailed below:    
            

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
55 
 
MoU Targets and Actual Production/Sales of Urea and NPK 
(In lakh MT) 
Name of 
Company 
Name of 
product 
 
Period 
MoU target  
(Productio 
n/Sales) 
Production 
 
Sales 
FACT 
Factamfos 
2012-13 6.80 5.40 5.52 
2013-14 6.80 6.57 6.54 
2014-15 6.80 5.98 6.22 
Ammonium 
Sulphate 
2012-13 1.80 1.26 1.35 
2013-14  1.70 1.79 1.66 
2014-15 1.80 1.20 1.11 
MFL 
Urea 
2012-13 4.70 4.36 4.24 
2013-14 4.70 4.87 5.00 
2014-15 4.80 3.29 3.26 
NPK 2012-13 4.04 1.00 1.02 
2013-14 3.02 0.45 0.45 
2014-15 0.45 0.74 0.74 
Audit observed that: 
• One of the reasons for non-achievement of the sales  targets during 2012-13 to 
2014-15 by FACT was non-achievement of production t argets in the 
corresponding years. The reasons for non-achievemen t of production targets were 
intermittent shutdown of plants due to shortage of raw materials and breakdown 
of plants. Further, the non-achievement of the prod uction and sales target, as per 
MOU, was one of the reasons for the company being g iven adverse credit rating 
by the bankers which resulted in charging higher in terest rate on cash credit 
facilities availed by the company. 
•  In the case of MFL, the sales targets could be ach ieved only in 2013-14 for Urea 
and   2014-15 for NPK. The company achieved target for NPK due to fixation of 
very low target in 2014-15. The company took a cons cious decision to stop 
production of costlier complex fertiliser (NPK) by using Nitrogen from captive 
Ammonia with naptha as feedstock because the govern ment stopped releasing 
additional subsidy for NPK fertiliser under Nutrien t Based Subsidy (NBS) since 
April 2012. One of the reasons for non-achievement of targets was non-
achievement of production target, reasons being int ermittent shutdown of plants 
due to shortage of raw materials, breakdown of plan ts and lack of production of 
captive Ammonia. 
6.1.3.2 Management of Marketing Contracts  
(a) Award of contracts on ad-hoc basis/without tend ering (FACT)  
The Company has been awarding ad-hoc contracts for Railhead handling and 
transportation, and hiring permanent godowns without following tendering process. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
56 
A review of the railhead 1 contracts in audit for the period 2012-13 to 2014- 15 in states of 
Kerala and Karnataka indicated that: 
• The Company did not finalize permanent contracts th rough open tender in respect 
of Kayamkulam (from August 2012 to 18 August 2013, 19 February 2014 to 19 
March 2014 and 28 November 2014 till date), Palakka d (from April 2013 to 
September 2013), Calicut (from January 2015 till da te), Thrissur (from January 
2015 till date) and Shimoga (never entered into per manent contracts). The 
Company instead carried out the Railhead activities  through adhoc contracts 
(contracts entered into through limited tendering).  
• The company could not finalize permanent railhead c ontracts in Kerala since the 
bidders quoted higher rates in the three open tende rs (floated in August 2011, 
September 2012 and July 2014) floated by the compan y. The reason for getting 
higher rates in second and third tender was due to inclusion of shortage clause 
2 in 
the tender conditions . In the case of Shimoga, the rates quoted by the bi dders 
were found to be on higher side and the bidder did not extend the validity of their 
offer so that negotiation could not be carried out with the bidder. 
The non-finalization of permanent railhead contracts/non-tendering of hiring of godowns, 
thus resulted in reduced transparency in procedures  and the reasonability of rates for 
godowns could not be ascertained. 
The Company agreed that permanent railhead contract s should be finalized at the earliest 
to avoid payment of higher rates on ad hoc contract s. Materials Department has been 
processing the tenders for Railheads and whenever t he rates were high and not 
reasonable, finalization of contracts got delayed, and in order to move the product adhoc 
contracts were made.  
Audit further noticed that the Company was hiring p ermanent godowns without 
following usual tendering process and was renewing the agreements for hiring of 
godowns at the end of the existing agreement period  at renewed rates after negotiation 
with the owners of the godown. The value of contrac ts entered into for godowns 
(permanent & temporary) by the Company amounted to 
` 1.32 crore (2012-13), ` 0.92 
crore (2013-14) and ` 0.81 crore in 2014-15. 
The company stated that the Materials Department wa s taking efforts in speedy 
processing of tenders for hiring permanent godowns as per the laid down procedures. 
The company’s reply should be viewed in the light o f the fact that despite the orders (22 
July 2014) of Deputy General Manager (Marketing) fo r hiring of godowns on tendering 
basis, the Company has not adhered to the procedure (February 2016). 
                                                           
1  The scope of work under the railhead contract inc ludes clearing of bagged products (such as 
fertilizers, gypsum or any other materials) from wa gons at the RH location, unloading on to Railway 
Platform (if necessary) and loading on to trucks/lo rries for onward movement to required destinations 
and also transportation of bagged products in truck s/lorries placed by contractor from Rail Head to 
Godowns /Stock Point Dealers and ASC’s. 
2  Clause for recovering cost of shortages, found be tween Railway Receipt quantity and delivered 
quantity at receiving RH, from the dues/bills of the contractor 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
57 
(b) Awarding contracts on basis of single tender wi thout resorting to retendering 
According to guidelines issued by CVC, single tende r is to be resorted to only under 
exceptional circumstances such as natural calamitie s and emergencies or there were no 
bids to repeated tenders or where only one supplier  has been licensed (proprietary item) 
in respect of goods sought to be procured. However,  MFL did not resort to re-tendering 
in cases where only a single bid was technically qu alified and awarded the B&S 1 
contracts during the period 2012-13 and 2013-14 to a single bidder.   
Audit noticed that: 
• During 2012-13, two new conditions 
2 were incorporated in the contracts with a 
view to ensure the financial capability of the cont actor in making payments to 
labourers. However, out of the three bids received,  the existing contractor, who 
was already irregular in making payments to the lab ourers, was the only qualified 
bidder, and was   awarded the contract. This defeated the purpose of incorporation 
of the new conditions in the contract besides violating CVC guidelines. 
• During the period 2013-14, though the tender condit ions specified experience of 
three years, the contract was awarded to an inexper ienced single bidder on trial 
basis. Even though the performance of the contracto r was found to be not 
satisfactory 3, Company extended the contract up to 31 October 20 13 instead of 
floating tenders in the trial period. The legal opinion that insisted upon experience 
for evaluation of bid as per the tender conditions was also ignored while awarding 
the tender. 
(c) Post tender negotiations (MFL) 
There should be no post tender negotiations with lo west bidder (L1), except in certain 
exceptional situation as per the CVC instructions (January 2010). Resorting to post tender 
negotiation on regular basis may prevent receipt of  most competitive offer at the time of 
submission of bids. The Company appointed contracto rsfor transportation and 
warehousing separately by inviting tenders from eli gible contractors with experience in 
transporting fertilizers from the Railheads to vari ous dealers. Audit scrutiny of railhead 
contracts awarded for 35 locations in 2012-13, 20 l ocations in 2013-14 and 43 locations 
in 2014-15 revealed that the Company negotiated wit h L1 in all contracts for the year 
2012-13 and 2013-14 and 79 percent  of contracts for the year 2014-15 as shown below.  
                                                           
1  Bagging, upkeep, handling and shipping operations   
2  viz ., Submission of Service tax and ESI & PF returns for 3 years in Form ST 3, Form 5 and Form 6A 
respectively (Earlier, the number for ST, ESI & PF only need to be provided) and the turnover of  ` ` ` ` 
2.00 crore for 3 years 
3  Due to non-supply of required no. of workers/labo urers, stoppage of work due to payment problem and 
delayed reporting of workers/labourers, which also led to shutdown of plant 
Year 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Total no of contract awarded 35 20 43 
No. of contracts where 
negotiations held with L1 
35 20 34 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
58 
Every evaluation process would not be an exceptiona l situation and hence conducting 
negotiations with L1 contractors on almost every occasion was against CVC guidelines.  
(d) Absence of contracts for certain locations (MFL ) 
The Company had 57 Railhead locations.Contracts wer e, however, not awarded to cover 
all the locations every year. The procurement Manua l of the Company did not specify 
any norms in this regard except indicating that con tracts should be awarded within three 
weeks of completion of earlier contract. During 201 2-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15, the 
Company did not enter into any contracts for 24, 39  and 15 locations respectively.  In the 
absence of contracts for such RH locations, supply for the districts / dealers was made 
from the nearest RH location or road movement from Plant. This entailed extra 
expenditure as under recovery in road movement was higher compared to railhead 
movement.  However, additional expenditure could not be quantified in audit. 
The company stated (August 2015) that it required f our months for finalising the 
contract; hence, the contracts could not be finalised in time for all locations.    
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  Company was aware of the timelines 
for existing contracts and should have initiated th e tender process before their expiry so 
that the next contract could be finalised without a ny delay. Further, so long as the 
contracts were not finalised to economise the opera tions, the chances of incurring higher 
cost by distributing to the districts from a farther railhead are not ruled out.  
(e) Delay in finalising stevedoring contracts (MFL)  
A review in audit of the stevedoring contracts awar ded by MFL during the period 2012-
13 to 2014-15 indicated the following: 
(i)  Tender procedures for Stevedoring contract for 2012-13 was initiated in July 2012 
and the contract was awarded to SICAL in December 2 012 after a delay of more 
than four months. 
(ii)  The tender procedures for 2013-14 were initiated on ly in November 2013. The 
Chief Executive approved the e-tender enquiry in Ma y 2014 and the tender were 
awarded in June 2014. 
The Company stated (July 2015) that the delay was d ue to the expected extension of the 
existing contract for another year not materialising.  
The Company’s reply should be viewed against the fa ct that it did not strengthen the 
tendering procedure to avoid delay in finalisation of contract. 
6.1.3.3  Claiming and receipt of subsidy 
(A) Delay in claim and receipt of price subsidy  
(i) Delays in respect of FACT  
Audit noticed the following delays in respect of FACT: 
(a)  There have been delays on the part of the Comp any in raising the 85 per cent  ‘on 
account’ claim with the Government. They arose due to delays in regularization of 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
59 
Supply Plan by Department of Fertiliser (DoF) and d elay on the part of the statutory 
auditor in certifying the claims. For generating th e subsidy claims in Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (FMS), the supplies of fertilizers in districts are to be made as per the 
Supply Plan and in case of deviation from the suppl y plan regularization of Supply Plan 
is required. The Company being dependent on overdra ft facilities, the delay in claiming 
of 85  per cent  price subsidy resulted in avoidable interest burde n of ` 8.28 crore (at 14 
per cent )  after allowing grace period of 15 days for gener ation and certification by 
statutory auditors as shown below: 
Year Amount 
(`` `` in crore) 
Delay 
(Range in days) 
Loss of interest 
(`` `` in crore) 
2012-13 502.44 10 - 106 5.94 
2013-14 162.44 12 - 49 0.86 
2014-15 252.63 5 - 29 1.48 
Total   8.28 
A test check of claims for 12 months out of 36 mont hs (33 per cent ) in audit revealed the 
following: 
• There was no provision in the FMS site to allocate quantities for supply of 
Ammonium Sulphate in the monthly plan, which result s in absence of an 
approved Supply Plan for Ammonium Sulphate. The mov ement of the 
Ammonium Sulphate has to be approved by the DoF sub sequently which results 
in delay in claiming and obtaining subsidy against Ammonium Sulphate. Since 
Factamfos and Ammonium Sulphate produced in Udyogam andal Division comes 
under one license, the delay in approval of Supply Plan of Ammonium Sulphate 
also resulted in delay in claiming of subsidy for F actamfos produced in 
Udyogamandal Division. 
• In four out of the 12 months, FACT could not intima te DoF on time 
1, the actual 
quantities supplied against the supply plan, so tha t the Supply Plan could be 
regularized with actuals and claim could be generated. 
• In the subsidy claims for two months, the differenc e of actuals from the Supply 
Plan was only 317.75 MT and 602.35 MT. Since the re gularization of Supply 
Plan results in delay in claiming of subsidy, the company should have avoided the 
change in Supply Plan. 
• Even if the movement of actual fertilizers against Supply Plan is informed to DoF 
in time, the regularization of the Supply Plan is d elayed by the DoF and 
generation of claims also gets delayed. 
(b)  There was delay ranging from 25 days to 636 da ys in claiming 15 per cent  
balance subsidy amounting to ` 59.14 crore by the Company due to non-completion o f 
sales within one month of supply of fertilizers, sh ortage finalization and delay in 
                                                           
1  Delay of more than 10 days in intimating the corr ect actuals against supply plan to DoF 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
60 
certification by auditor. This delay has resulted i n a loss of interest of ` 2.37 crore due to 
the delays which ranged between 25 to 636 days upto October 2012. 
(c)  The 15 per cent  balance subsidy from November 2012 amounting to ` 163.12 
crore could not be claimed by the company in time d ue to non-transfer of data to mFMS 1 
by the DoF as shown below: 
Year Amount  
(`` `` in crore)  
Delay  
(Range in days)  
2012-13(from Nov 2012) 39.84  518-638  
2013-14 99.69  310 -522  
2014-15 23.59  187 - 279  
Total 163.12   
(d) As on 31 March 2015, subsidy amounting to ` 448.22 crore was pending to be 
received from the Government ( ` 1.16 crore for 2008-09, ` 2.35 crore for 2009-10, 
` 0.47 crore for 2010-11, ` 0.44 for 2011-12, ` 40.51 crore for 2012-13, ` 111. 52 crore 
for 2013-14 and ` 291.77 crore for 2014-15).  
The Company stated (December 2015) that the submiss ion of proposed Supply Plan for 
Ammonium Sulphate was not facilitated in FMS and therefore regularization by DoF was 
required every month for the entire quantity suppli ed. Further, the supply of fertilizers as 
per Supply Plan would result in dumping of products  in places where demand of the 
product was less, which would have negative impact on sales; hence submission of 
revised supply plan based on actual receipts was in evitable and the consequent delay is 
unavoidable. The acknowledgement of receipt of the fertilizers is to be done by the 
retailers in mFMS for claiming the 15 per cent balance subsidy and the data has to be 
transferred to the FMS since claims could be genera ted only from FMS site. The non-
transfer of data from mFMS to FMS by DoF since Nove mber 2012 in respect of sales 
completed resulted in delay in claiming of the balance 15 per cent subsidy.  
The reply of the Company is to be viewed against the following facts: 
• The Company communicated change in supply plan to D oF (in 4 out of 12 cases) 
only after seven to 28 days after giving 10 days gr ace period, from the end of the 
month.  
• Non-inclusion of supply plan for Ammonium Sulphate in FMS was not taken up 
with DoF to reduce the delay in claiming the subsidy.  
(ii)  Delays in respect of MFL  
As per policy of Department of Fertilisers (Order N o. 19011/59/2003-MPR (pt.) dated 12 
March 2009), manufacturers/ importers could claim “ On account” payment of 85  
per cent  (NPK) and 95 per cent  (urea) on the basis of arrival of the products in the district 
                                                           
2  Mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
61 
of the State/ Union Territory upon uploading of Pro forma A & C in the FMS 1 on the 
basis of the certification of the same by the Statu tory Auditor of the Company.  The State 
Government/Union Territory concerned would be requi red to submit certification of 
receipt of fertiliser in Proforma B within one mont h. The manufacturers could claim the 
balance subsidy upon Proforma D being uploaded in the FMS. Audit observed that: 
• As on 31 March 2015, subsidy amount of ` 740.11 crore was pending to be 
received from the Government ( ` 45.26 crore for 2012-13; `176.08 crore for 
2013-14 and ` 518.77 crore for 2014-15).  
• The Company has generated the data for balance 15 per cent  subsidy relating to 
Price Concession Subsidy (PCS) claims for ` 5.02 crore for the period 10/13 to 5/ 
14 only in 2015 and was yet to prefer the claim (December 2015) with GoI. 
• Claim for  ` 67.41 crore being the five percent balance amount for Urea was yet to 
be made for want of certification from State Government (December 2015). 
(B) Delay in claiming freight subsidy 
(i) Delay due to failure to update system (FACT) 
The Company transports fertilizers (Factamfos and A mmonium Sulphate) from 
Udyogamandal Plant to Kalamassery Railhead through Trucks/Lorries for further 
transportation by railways to respective states/dis tricts. This being part of primary freight 
(Plant to respective states/districts), Company is eligible for freight subsidy. Freight 
claim generation was made online through FMSfrom Ma rch 2009.However, FMS does 
not have a provision for claiming freight subsidy f or the said transportation. The 
company preferred manual claims for these subsidies ; however, they were not admitted 
by DoF. The freight subsidy receivable since March 2009 on this account amounted to      
` 8 crore.  
The Company stated (December 2015) that approval of  the DoF was required for 
incorporating the facility of updating the transpor tation and freight claims could be 
generated through FMS only after incorporating the facility. The issue has been taken up 
with DoF and it was expected that changes would be incorporated in FMS system soon. 
(ii) Under recovery of road freight (MFL) 
As per the policy of the Department of Fertiliser, movement of fertilisers by Rail and 
Road should be in the ratio of 80:20.Further the Do F policy stated that the company 
would get subsidy for primary road freight equivale nt to rail freight. The primary road 
freight was always higher than the rail freight and  therefore the higher the fertilizers 
transferred through road, the higher the under recovery of freight subsidy.   
Audit noted that the company transported fertilizer s ranging from 43 to 68 per cent  by 
road during the period 2012-13 to 2014-15. Further, the increased movement of fertilizers 
                                                           
1 Fertilizer Monitoring System 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
62 
through road resulted in under recovery of freight subsidy amounting to ` 12.41 crore as 
detailed below: 
        (
` in crore) 
Year 2014-15 2013-14 2012-13 
Urea 3.20 3.42 2.02 
 NPK 2.25 0.43 1.09 
 Total 5.45 3.85 3.11 
6.1.3.4 Other Points 
(a) Idling of infrastructure at Kochi Port due to n on-allocation of Urea handling 
operation (FACT) 
GOI awarded (May 2012) the Urea handling operations  at Kochi Port to FACT for a 
period of three years from 2012-13. Audit noticed that  
(i)  Despite awarding of the contract, no allocation of Urea was made to Kochi Port 
from May 2012 to December 2015, which resulted in n on-utilization of the infrastructure 
facilities of FACT Ltd. at Kochi Port optimally. Th e non-allocation of Urea can be 
attributed to lack of follow up of the company with  the DoF, as corroborated by the 
following facts: 
• FACT is the only company, which has received alloca tion during earlier years 
(2008-09, 2009-10 and 2011-12) and did not receive allocation for the period 
2012-13 to 2014-15.  
• The company apprised the Board (459th Board Meeting  on 29 January 2014) 
about non-allocation of Urea to Kochi port only aft er lapse of almost 2 years 
without any urea allocation.  
• There have been Urea Sales of 1.36 lakh MT, 1.44 la kh MT and 1.36 lakh MT in 
Kerala during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 respecti vely. Since there were no 
Urea Manufacturers/importers in Kerala, Urea had to  be supplied from other 
states. 
• The company also failed to submit 
` 50 lakh bank guarantee which was required 
for the award of contract; and 
(ii)  Despite having stock of 1.35 lakh Urea bags as on 3 1 March 2012, FACT ordered 
four lakh Urea bags in January 2013 (which were del ivered in January 2014) though urea 
handling operations had not been allotted to the co mpany during the first two years of 
contract. This purchase of Urea Bags resulted in bl ocking up of the cost of these bags at 
` 96 lakh till March 2016.  It was further noticed t hat the chances of utilization of these 
bags in future by FACT is bleak because the company  has not submitted its bid to DoF 
against Notice Inviting Tender for Urea handling, n eem coating and marketing of 
imported Urea shipments for the period 2015-16 to 2 017-18. The Company also did not 
find it feasible to create facility for the mandato ry neem coating at Cochin port. The non-

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
63 
participation of the company in the tender for Urea  allocation points towards possible 
non-utilization of the urea bags. 
The Company noted with concern (December 2015) that  the profitable urea operations 
were not allotted to the Company due to lack of fol low up with DoF. Company also 
stated that they were committed to handle urea vess el if and when allotted by DoF on 
short notice as per the contract and it was essenti al to purchase and maintain adequate 
stocks of bags for bagging urea. 
The Company’s reply is to be viewed against the fac t that it had sufficient stock of bags 
as on 31 March 2012 for urgent use and purchased ur ea bags after a lapse of almost two 
years from the award of contract. The Company shoul d have purchased additional bags 
only in the case of allocation of urea to Kochi por t/assurance from DoF for allocation of 
Urea materialises.  
(b) Inadequacies in Logistics Plan (MFL) 
The freight subsidy for distribution/movement of fe rtilizers included Primary freight (by 
rail from the plant or the port to various rake poi nts) and Secondary Movement (by road 
from nearest rake points to the block headquarters in the Districts). The quantum of 
secondary freight subsidy reimbursed was based on t he average district distance in 
respect of Urea, whereas for complex fertilizers th is was not reimbursed. The cost of 
secondary transportation as incurred by the company  through FoL (Free on Lorry) 
contracts was higher than the expenses reimbursed b y DoF and there was an under 
recovery of ` 15.48 crore in respect of Urea during the three yea rs covered under audit as 
detailed below: 
Details of freight paid, freight allowed and Under recovery 
Year Product Expenses 
incurred towards 
FOL  
(`` ``    in crore) 
Expenses 
reimbursed by 
GOI towards 
secondary cost 
(`` ``    in crore) 
Under recovery 
on secondary 
cost  
(`` ``    in crore) 
1 2 3 4 5 
2012-13  Urea  8.83  3.49  -5.34  
2013-14  Urea  10.34  4.29  -6.05  
2014-15  Urea  6.79  2.70  -4.09  
Total  25.96  10.48  -15.48  
The company did not furnish to audit adequate recor ds for scrutinizing the economics in 
the secondary movement of fertilizers. Hence, audit  could not conclude whether the 
under recovery of ` 15.48 crore was avoidable .  
Conclusion 
The Companies did not achieve the MoU targets for production and sales effectively. The 
marketing performance of the Companies had overall adverse repercussions like poor 
rating by bankers and charging of interest at highe r rates by them etc. There were delays 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
64 
in claiming and follow up of subsidy from Governmen t of India due to which the 
Companies faced liquidity crunch. Audit also notice d cases of non-adherence to the CVC 
guidelines in finalisation of bids.  
Recommendations 
The following recommendations are made: 
/head2right MFL should take up with GoI issue of underutilisation of NPK plant. 
/head2right Both the Companies should strive to achieve the MoU  production and sales 
targets. 
/head2right  The Companies should adhere to the CVC guidelines and strengthen all the 
processes of tendering to ensure that they are transparent and fair.  
/head2right The Companies should formulate a follow up mechanis m to keep a check on 
requirements of Department of Fertilisers, Governme nt of India for release of 
outstanding subsidies and take concrete steps to re duce the delay in claiming 
subsidy, and  
/head2right Maintain sufficient records for the logistics plan to assess the economics of 
secondary fertiliser movement and reduce the under recovery. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in February  2016; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
6.2 Infructuous expenditure on leasing of land 
Infructuous expenditure of `` `` 9.02 crore on leasing of land from Visakhapatnam 
Port Trust and loss of interest of `` `` 2.67 crore 
The Board of Directors of Rashtriya Chemicals and F ertilizers Limited (RCF) decided 
(July 2007) to acquire 10 acres of land on lease fr om Visakhapatnam Port Trust (VPT) 
for a period of 30 years for construction of storag e area of about 80000 MT which could 
be fully utilized for storage of RCF cargo. The proposal was based on the following: 
(i)  Import of 1.25 lakh MTs each of Muriate of Potash ( MoP) and Di Ammonium 
Phosphate (DAP) at Vizag and Tuticorin during 2005- 06 and 2006-07 i.e. 2.50 
lakh MTs per annum.  
(ii)  The Company was offered urea handling operation on behalf of Government of 
India for three years extendable for another two years.  
(iii)  Overall saving on account of storage, transportatio n and dispatch was expected to 
be more than ` 100 per metric ton after developing the infrastruct ure.  Entire 
investment was expected to be recovered within a pe riod of two years depending 
on the volume handled.  
RCF paid ` 7.65 crore (` 7.24 crore towards upfront lease premium, ` 0.40 crore towards 
non-refundable premium, ` 0.004 crore towards annual rent and ` 0.004 crore             
towards refundable security deposit) in October 200 7 to VPT. In addition, RCF incurred 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
65 
an expenditure of ` 1.37 crore towards registration charges, annual no minal rent, etc. 
between April 2009 and March 2014. Thus, total expenditure incurred on leasing the land 
was ` 9.02 crore.  RCF took possession of the land in Ja nuary 2008 and also entered 
(June 2009) into a lease deed with VPT. 
After taking over the land, RCF invited (September 2010) offers for development of 
leased land on joint venture concept.  However, the  tender did not fetch desired response 
and it was decided (April 2011) not to pursue the j oint venture approach but to develop 
warehouse and related facilities on Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis. VPT, 
however, refused (August 2011) permission stating t hat there was no provision in the 
Government guidelines for development of warehouse on BOT basis. The Company, 
decided (October 2011) to proceed with the construc tion of warehouse on its own and 
offers were invited (November 2012) on open tender basis. The estimated expenditure 
based on the lowest offer was 
` 15.56 crore. However, an inhouse viability study 
revealed that the proposed construction of warehous e was not feasible as the traffic at the 
port had considerably reduced due to diversion of t raffic to nearby Gangavaram port.  
The project was dropped (July 2013) and instead it was decided to explore the possibility 
of setting up a container freight station. This pro ject was also not found techno 
economically viable. RCF then proposed to install P hotovoltaic Solar Power generation 
facility, which also did not materialise as VPT did not grant permission.  
The lease agreement required RCF to develop the fac ilities within a period of 18 months 
of the lease agreement or within the further time g iven by VPT, failing which the Port 
can terminate the lease agreement without any notic e. VPT notified (January 2015) RCF 
to vacate and hand over vacant possession of the la nd back to VPT immediately and also 
stated that no more correspondence would be enterta ined in this regard. VPT also 
intimated (November 2015) that the lease agreement did not provide for any refund or 
compensation if the lease was terminated on the gro und of default or failing to adhere to 
lease conditions. RCF removed the leased land from its fixed assets schedule and charged 
off its carrying value amounting to ` 6.73 crore during 2014-15. 
Audit observed the following: 
• The feasibility study conducted by RCF consisted on ly of projected financial 
performance and failed to consider other critical v iability factors like realistic 
estimation of expected volume of cargo and the impa ct of existing Kakinada port 
and Gangavaram port under construction, on cargo volume.  
• The Board was apprised of the import of 2.50 MTs of  MoP and DAP per annum 
at Vizag and Tuticorin Ports, while placing the pro posal for construction of 
warehouse at Vizag, Tuticorin and Kandla Ports. The  actual import at VPT alone 
during 2005-06 and 2006-07 was only 47144 MTs and 6 5987 MTs respectively, 
which was not considered by the Board. 
• The Board was intimated that Company has been offer ed imported urea handling 
operations on behalf of GoI for three years with li kely extension for two years. 
The Board was informed that the total expected impo rt volume at the three ports 
viz. Vizag, Tuticorin and Kandla was 15 lakh MT per  year without highlighting 
the fact that Urea handling contract for VPT was not awarded to RCF.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
66 
• The Board of Directors authorized (July 2007) the C hairman and Managing 
Director for construction either by the Company or under any other arrangement 
such as BOLT as may be feasible, but the Company di d not seek any clarification 
from VPT in this regard. It was only after taking t he land on lease, that the 
Company approached VPT for permission to develop th e warehouse on BOT 
basis which VPT denied. 
Audit further observed that after the proposal for developing the storage facility by means 
of JV or BOT did not materialize, RCF invited (Nove mber 2012) bids for own 
construction of warehouse without studying its feas ibility. The viability study which was 
conducted (June 2013) only subsequent to invitation  of bids revealed that own 
construction of warehouse by the Company was not feasible.  
The Management and the Ministry stated (January 201 6) that the investment in the 
infrastructure of Vizag Port Trust was RCF’s backwa rd integration plan made for 
handling the anticipated increased imports of urea,  rock phosphate, potash and other 
chemicals which RCF was expected to meet to fulfill the country’s requirement. RCF had 
after acquiring the land initiated various steps to  utilise the Vizag land, but subsequent 
developments did not proceed as per the envisaged plan of Government of India, Port and 
RCF and land could not be utilised for the desired purpose due to various unforeseen 
factors beyond their control and viability issues i n spite of best efforts. They added that 
had the godown been constructed by investing huge m oney, it would have remained idle 
and the Company would have continued to incur expen diture on import through other 
ports (as rates were lesser) in addition to the cos t incurred for construction of the godown 
and its maintenance. They have further stated that they have asked for refund of the 
amount paid and have also taken up the matter with the Ministry of Shipping and 
response is awaited. 
The reply of the Management and Ministry are not tenable as the decision to take the land 
on lease was based on incorrect, inflated and inade quate information. The various 
attempts made for utilising the land on joint ventu re, build operate transfer basis, self 
construction of facilities only indicated that they had no concrete plans to put in place the 
import handling facilities within the sanctioned pe riod of the lease. Also the limited 
feasibility study did not examine the potential pro spects of construction/utilization of 
storage facility.  
Thus, inadequate planning for development of wareho using facilities and utilization of 
leased land at Vizag Port Trust, resulted in infruc tuous expenditure of 
` 9.02 crore 
besides loss of interest of ` 2.67 crore (October 2007 to March 2015) (based on 
minimum fixed deposit interest rates for each year) . RCF’s efforts to get back refund of 
the upfront lease premium paid to VPT looks bleak a s the Port has refused the refund of 
` 7.65 crore since the lease was terminated due to failure to adhere to lease conditions. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
67 
CHAPTER VII: MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
 
 
  
IFCI Factors Limited 
7.1 Decision to reschedule loan without insisting o n adequate tangible security led 
to non-recovery of dues 
IFCI Factors Limited decided to restructure short t erm loan sanctioned in 
December 2010 to Glodyne Ventures and Holding Priva te Limited without insisting 
on  tangible security which led to non-recovery of dues of `` `` 24.23 crore.  
IFCI Factors Limited (the Company) offers corporate  loans/short term loans to the 
customers for general purpose/augmenting their work ing capital. These loans are backed 
by suitable security in the form of pledge of liste d shares/equitable mortgage of tangible 
properties. 
In order to meet expenses for various business init iatives of Glodyne Ventures and 
Holding Pvt Ltd. (GVHPL) (a Glodyne Group Company) the Company sanctioned and 
disbursed corporate loan of 
` 15 crore in December 2010. The tenure of the loan was two 
years including a moratorium of 17 months.  Accordi ngly, it was repayable in three equal 
quarterly instalments of ` 5 crore each in June, September and December 2012.  The loan 
was secured by 5,86,000 shares of Glodyne Technoser ve Limited (GTL, a group 
company) having market value of ` 42.95 crore (December 2010), to cover at least 250  
per cent of loan. Subsequently in May 2012, the number of pl edged shares were 
increased to 11,69,490 due to fall in value of secu rity. Besides, post dated cheques 
(PDCs) for interest/principal repayment were also obtained in the form of security. 
The loan agreement with the borrower stipulated that the borrower would top up shares in 
3 working days, if the value of stipulated security  cover fell by 10 per cent to maintain 
security cover of at least 250 per cent of the outstanding loan amount at all the times 
during the currency of loan. The borrower had to pr ovide cash margin within 3 days, if 
the market value of shares fell by 20  per cent from the initial pledge price. Further, 
additional security to the satisfaction of the Comp any was to be provided when the 
security provided by the borrower was lost or becam e inadequate to cover the balance of 
the loan.   
GVHPL defaulted in payment of interest with effect from May 2012 and the first 
instalment of loan due in June 2012.  Further, the share price of GTL fell drastically from 
` 341.95 per share on 25 July 2012 to ` 218.90 per share on 27 July 2012 (36  per cent  
fall). The prices further decreased to ` 87.30 per share (74 per cent  fall) on 24 August 
2012 resulting in reduction of security cover to ` 10.21 crore which was below the loan 
amount by around ` 5 crore. Meanwhile (on 12 August 2012), ICRA (Inve stment Credit 
Rating Agency) reduced the rating of GTL from A2+ ( Strongly safe), assigned to its ` 75 
crore commercial paper programme, to D which is the  default level rating (i.e., the 
instruments with this rating are in default or expe cted to be in default on maturity). 
Moreover, ICRA withdrew its BBB+ (moderately safe) rating assigned to the ` 75 crore 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
68 
Non-convertible Debenture programme as it failed to  raise funds against the rated 
instrument.  
Despite being aware of fall in security, reduction of credit rating by ICRA and default in 
payment of both principal and interest, the Company restructured the loan and signed  (28 
August 2012) a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) wi th GVHPL along with other 
lenders with modified terms and conditions which st ipulated that the interest due and 
payable as on 1 July 2012 would be payable by 31 Au gust 2012 and the interest due and 
payable by 15 September 2012 would be payable by 15  September 2012 and subsequent 
interest shall be paid on the first day of every mo nth starting from 1 October 2012.  The 
principal was to be repaid in six quarterly instalm ents starting from 1 January 2013 and 
ending on 1 April 2014. Additional interest of 2 per cent  would be charged on account of 
security shortfall till the time security cover was restored to the stipulated value.  GVHPL 
failed to make interest payment by 31 August 2012 and thereafter.   
The Company started selling shares from October 201 2 and realized 
` 1.23 crore till 
December 2012 and adjusted the same towards overdue  interest of ` 1.57 crore.GVHPL 
failed to repay the principal due on 1 January and 1 April 2013. The Company again 
started selling of shares from May 2013 to Septembe r 2013 and realized ` 74 lakh and 
adjusted towards overdue interest and deposited (Ju ly 2013) post dated cheques for 
` 2.19 crore to make further recovery. But the cheques were dishonored and therefore the 
Company filed (September 2013) a complaint u/s 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act.  
Even then no repayment towards principal and intere st was received. Again, the 
Company started (19 December 2013) selling shares a nd sold entire stock of 33,504 
shares and realized ` 2.84 lakh.  Further, GVHPL is in the process of wi nding up as per 
the orders (October 2014) of the Bombay High Court. 
Audit observed that: 
• The decision to restructure the loan with lenient t erms was injudicious as GVHPL 
did not furnish additional security to cover the lo an of 
` 15 crore as per the terms 
of loan agreement when the value of security reduce d to ` 25 crore ( ` 218.90 per 
share) against the required security of ` 37.50 crore on 27 July 2012 and further 
drastically reduced to ` 10.21 crore ( ` 87.30 per share) on 24 August 2012.  It 
was a clear evidence of poor financial strength of GVHPL. Further, D (Default) 
rating by ICRA indicated payment delays and liquidity constraints of GTL. 
• Considering the continuous fall in price of shares from July 2012 to the date of 
MOU, the Company could have sold the pledged shares  to recover the maximum 
possible instead of entering into MOU with liberal lending terms.  
• Tangible security should have been insisted at the time of restructuring instead of 
additional interest of 2 per cent on account of sec urity shortfall till the time 
security cover was restored to the stipulated value.  
The Ministry replied (February 2016) that in view o f security short fall as stipulated by 
lenders, non-payment of outstanding dues and GVHPL’ s inability to restore security 
cover or pay cash margin despite repeated request t o the Company, the lenders of 
GVHPL decided (22 August 2012) to allow the Company  time to recover and service the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
69 
debt, instead of selling the pledged shares in bulk  which would have resulted in price fall 
immediately and more drastically. 
The reply is not tenable because GVHPL was defaulte r in repayment of principal from 
the beginning and of interest from May 2012 and the re was no certainty in recovering the 
dues considering the reduced rating by ICRA.  Furth er, the Company failed to insist on 
additional tangible security to safeguard its finan cial interest but signed the MoU with 
liberal terms and conditions without having adequat e security in violation of its own 
credit policy which  led to non-recovery of dues of 
` 24.23 crore ( ` 15 crore principal and 
` 9.23 crore towards interest.) 
7.2 Non Compliance with provisions of credit policy  and extension of undue favour 
led to non-recovery of dues 
IFCI Factors Limited deviated from provisions of cr edit policy while appraising the 
financials of a buyer and extended undue favour to Gangotri Iron and Steel 
Company Limited by not selling the pledged shares w hich resulted in non- recovery 
of dues of ` 13.22 crore 
IFCI Factors Limited (the Company) is offering wide  range of products to the target 
customer segments to satisfy their specific credit needs. Domestic Sales bill factoring is 
one among them whereby the client (seller) invoices  the goods to a domestic buyer 
located within India, assigns the invoices to the C ompany and receives prepayment up to 
80 to 90 per cent  of the invoice value immediately. The Company foll ows up the 
payment with the buyer.  The buyer makes the paymen t directly to the Company and the 
Company makes the balance payment to the client (se ller). The credit policy of the 
Company for the year 2011-12 stipulates that the cl ient should not have concentration of 
sales exceeding 15 per cent  of its total sales to a particular buyer and exten sive due 
diligence exercise should be carried out to ensure the credit worthiness of client and 
buyers before sanctioning factoring facility. 
The Company sanctioned (July 2011) domestic sales b ill factoring to Gangotri Iron and 
Steel Company Limited (GISCO) to the extent of 
` 10 crore against the sales invoice to 
be raised on 13 buyers with factoring limit of ` 1 crore to ` 2 crore against each buyer.  
Vijay Traders was one among the 13 buyers. An agree ment was entered into (August 
2011) between the Company and GISCO the terms of wh ich inter alia  stated that the 
buyer/GISCO would repay the factoring facility avai led within 90 days or less from 
invoice dates as may be approved for each buyer. Fu rther, GISCO shall furnish post-
dated cheques for `10 crore, pledge equity shares of aggregate market value not less than 
the amount equal to two times the facility amount w ith top up at 10 per cent  fall in the 
market price, personal guarantee of promoters and c orporate guarantee of group 
companies.  Accordingly, GISCO pledged 34.50 lakh 1 shares of GISCO valuing ` 20 
crore (@ ` 57.97 per share) and fulfilled other formalities. 
                                                           
1 GISCO also pledged 5.38 lakh shares during Septemb er-November 2011 taking the pledged shares to 
39.88 lakh shares 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
70 
Though the Company initially extended factoring fac ility against invoices on six buyers 1 
of GISCO, this facility was extended only to Vijay Traders from 28 December 2012 
onwards because GISCO was having business only with Vijay traders.   
Audit observed that since beginning, Vijay Traders was not making timely payments as it 
took 141 to 307 days in making payments for various  invoices against stipulated period 
of 90 days. Further, neither repayment of principal  nor payment of overdue penalty was 
made by Vijay Traders from 2 December 2013 onwards by which date the principal dues 
amounted to ` 9.99 crore.  
Meanwhile, Market value of pledged shares had decre ased to ` 28.70 per share on 17 
January 2012 resulting in fall in security to the e xtent of ` 11.23 crore i.e 1.12 times only 
of facility extended. GISCO failed to top up the se curity andthe Company sold (2-13 
January 2012) 74175 shares for ` 34.71 lakh and adjusted the sale proceeds against the 
outstanding dues of ` 9.64 crore (including overdue penalty) as on 20 Jan uary 2012. 
However, on the request (January 2012) of GISCO exp laining its financial hardship, the 
Company did not sell any shares till November 2014.   From November 2014 onwards, 
though the Company sold 9,86,638 shares, it could r ealise only ` 7.31 lakhas market 
value of pledged shares had fallen considerably 2 by that time.   
GISCO deposited (December 2013) post-dated cheques valuing ` 7.14 crore for 
encashment but all the cheques were dishonoured. Co mpany also failed to encash 
pledged shares in time and as a result outstanding dues against GISCO amounted to 
` 13.22 crore ( ` 9.99 crore towards principal and ` 3.23 crore towards penalty for 
overdue principal) as on 30 June 2015. Against this  dues the security available with the 
Company was 29.27 lakh shares valuing ` 7.32 lakh (@ ` 0.25 per share). 
Following deficiencies were observed by Audit in this case: 
• The Company did not ensure the credit worthiness of  Vijay Traders and seven 
other buyers before sanctioning the factoring facil ity, due to non-availability of 
their financials.  
• Despite significant delays in payment of dues by Vi jay Traders since beginning, 
credit limit for them was increased thrice i.e. from ` 1 crore to ` 2 crore in August 
2011, ` 6 crore in August 2012 and ` 10 crore on 5 March 2013 without any 
recorded justification.  This was done despite the fact that there was 100 per cent 
sales concentration with Vijay Traders since Decemb er 2012 onwards which 
violated credit policy of company that client shoul d not have concentration of 
sales exceeding 15 per cent of its total sales to a particular buyer. 
 
                                                           
1  Vijay Traders, Shanti Steels Limited, Rani Sati E nterprises, TanuInternatioanl, Sonalika enterprises  
and ChauriChaura steels. 
2 Value of shares which was ranging from `` `` 30.95 to `` `` 50.40 between January 2012 to February 2013 
remained at less than `` `` 2 in November 2014 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
71 
• Despite significant fall in security cover 1 that started from January 2012 onwards 
Company did not sell the pledged shares though as p er its own agreement in case 
of shortfall in security cover, it could have sold shares to realise its dues.  
• The personal guarantee of promoter and corporate gu arantee of group company 
were not invoked because it costs four per cent  of outstanding dues as court fee to 
the Company without any guarantee for realisation of dues.  
The Company replied that (November 2015) decision t o defer the process of sale of 
shares was taken based on the prospects of better r ecovery from the client and 
improvement in share price. Further, it has put in place a system and teams to 
monitor/track movement of shares to take immediate action either for sale of shares or 
top-up of security in a situation where there is fa ll in security. It also stated that legal 
action has been initiated against the client and co mplaints have been filed against the 
client company and its directors under Negotiable I nstruments Act which are pending 
adjudication before the Court. 
Ministry endorsed (February 2016) the reply of the Company  and stated that the decision 
to increase the credit limit of Vijay Traders was a  conscious business decision taken by 
the Competent Authority. The facility was continued  in anticipation of revival in the 
macro-economic conditions as a result of which GISCO would also be able to recover.  
The reply is not acceptable because GISCO while req uesting the Company not to 
liquidate its shares in January 2012 had assured to  regularise its accounts by February 
2012. After failure of GISCO to fulfil its promise,  Company could have sold the pledged 
shares to recover its entire outstanding dues when the share prices were ranging from 
` 36.05 to ` 50.40 per share during March 2012 to February 2013 . Moreover, decision to 
extend credit limit for Vijay Traders thrice despit e continuous defaults in payment and 
100 per cent  sales concentration with them was also not prudent . So far as taking legal 
action against client is concerned, it was only for  dishonour of cheques and no recovery 
suit could be filed by the Company as it involved f urther loss to the Company on account 
of payment of 4 per cent  of claimed amount as Court Fee. 
Thus, lack of due diligence while appraisal, freque nt upward revision in credit limit and 
failure to sell the pledged shares resulted in non-recovery of dues of ` 13.22 crore. 
STCI Finance Limited 
7.3     Blocking of funds in bad loans  
Failure to initiate timely action by the Company as  per provisions of lending policy 
and terms & conditions of facility agreements, resulted in bad loans and blocking up 
of own funds to the extent of ` ` ` ` 152 crore and loss of interest of ` ` ` ` 39.36 crore 
STCI Finance Ltd. (formerly known as Securities Tra ding Corporation of India 
Limited)(Company), has been undertaking lending and  investment activities as a Non-
                                                           
1  The security cover was up to     ` ` ` ` 17.24 crore on 28 February 2013 , ` , ` , ` , `  10 crore on 4 March 2013, `` ``    4.15 
crore on 28 March 2013 and it drastically reduced t o `` ``  77.88 lakh in October 2014 against the 
required security of `` `` 20 crore. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
72 
Banking Financial Company (NBFC) registered with Re serve Bank of India (RBI) which 
classified it as a Loan Company. 
The loan book of the Company showed (as on 30 June 2015) 112 loans amounting to 
` 4113 crore of which loans amounting to ` 3627 crore were disbursed to 107 clients. As 
per clause 13.4 of its lending policy any asset, in  respect of which interest remained 
overdue for six months or more, was to be treated as Non-performing Asset (NPA). Audit 
examined 20 high value loans including all the seve n loans that were declared as Non-
performing Assets (NPA). Audit observed that in five cases where loans were declared as 
NPAs, the Company did not initiate action as stipul ated by the Lending Policy. All other 
cases were performing satisfactorily as per loan book and as per test check in audit. 
Clause 15.2 of the lending policy of the Company states that, if a corporate client defaults 
in payment of dues to STCI despite follow up and issue of recall notice and if the primary 
security is mortgage and/or hypothecation besides g uarantees (personal/corporate), the 
Company has to enforce security interest immediatel y and inform the Board. As soon as 
an asset becomes NPA, a recall notice is to be sent  to the borrower and guarantor and 
acivil suit for recovery should be filed within six  months (Clause 15.6). In case of NPAs, 
the Company should strive hard to recover its dues in shortest possible time through 
negotiations with the client. In case of likelihood of prolonged negotiations, the Company 
should explore possibility of selling its NPAs to A sset Reconstruction Companies 
(Clause 15.4).  
Details of three loans declared as NPAs wherein STC I failed to take up action as 
stipulated by the lending policy is as under: 
Sl. 
No 
Details of 
Borrower and 
amount disbursed  
Details of loan 
disbursement/ 
repayment 
Purpose of loan and 
collateral securities available  
Details of 
Repayment / Default 
and action 
Amount due 
on Principal 
+ Interest 
(30 June 
2015) 
` in crore 
1 Biltube Industries 
Ltd. 
(BIL) - `` `` 
15.00 
Crore 
November 2010 
To be repaid in 10 
installments (quarterly) 
from 01-07-2011  
Loan for General Corporate 
purpose including part 
financing of captive power 
plant against the primary 
security on the entire fixed 
assets valuing `317.07 crore 
Paid only two 
installments of `1.50 
crore each. 
Declared the loan as 
NPA on 31-07-12.  
19.19 
(12.00+7.19) 
2 Era Housing & 
Developers 
(India) Ltd. 
(EHDL) - `` ``    
25.00 
Crore 
March 2010 
One year  
Loan was renewed 
from time to time. Last 
renewal on 23.09.2013 
for a period of twelve 
months. 
Loan sanctioned against 
pledge of 37,59,819 shares of 
promoter Company viz. Era 
Infra Engineering Ltd. The 
Company sold (February 2014 
to December 2014) 32,86,201 
shares of the borrower and 
adjusted the amount of ` 2.46 
crore towards interest due. The 
market value of shares 
remaining with the Company 
is ` 13.97 lakh ( September 
2015). 
Defaulted the 
payment of interest 
since October 2013 
Declared the loan as 
NPA on 01.03.2015.  
25 
 
(Interest 
amount 
adjusted 
from sale of 
shares 
pledged) 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
73 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Two promoter 
companies of 
Tulip Telecom 
Ltd. viz. Cedar 
Infonet Pvt Ltd 
(CIPL - `` ``50 
crore ), Sukhmani 
Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd. (STPL- `` ``50 
crore) and its 
promoters in 
individual capacity  
(`` ``15 crore)  
`` `` 115.00 Crore  
September 2010/ 
February 2012 / 
September 2013 
 
The two loans to CIPL 
& STPL renewed in 
November 2013. 
Loan sanctioned against 
pledge of shares Tulip 
Telecom Ltd. ( ` 1.43 crore + 
` 1.35 crore) and against 
Second & subservient 
mortgage charge on residential 
property for individual loan of 
` 15 crore.  
The Company 
declared them as 
NPAs in August  
/September 2014. 
 
Recall 
notices issued 
(September 2014)  
147.17  
(115.00+ 
32.17) 
Audit observed the following in respect of the three loans: 
• BIL defaulted in payment of installments from the f irst due date of 1 st  July 2011. 
The borrower (BIL) came forward (August 2014) for a  one time settlement. 
However, the request was not acceded to on the grounds that no concrete plan was 
provided. The Net worth of BIL eroded by March 2014  and was referred (July 
2015) to the Board for Industrial and Financial Rec onstruction (BIFR). The 
Company terminated the loan agreement and issued (A ugust 2015) Recall Notice 
only after the borrower was registered with BIFR an d three years lapsed between 
the declaration of asset as NPA and recalling of lo anas against the provision for 
recall after one quarter of non-payment of interest  (Clause 5(h) of the facility 
agreement.The Company issued notices under provisio ns of the Negotiable 
Instruments Act for three instances of dishonour of  cheques. Though the personal 
guarantee of Directors for `15 crore was invoked (August 2015) by the Company, 
no recovery was possible as this personal guarantee  was unsecured. The failure of 
the Company to recover its dues was despite the fac t that the Company had first 
charge on the fixed assets of the Borrower. The Com pany also did not declare the 
borrower as a defaulter till date as per clauses 17 (a) and (c iii) of the facility 
agreement, but only reported the details of non-payment of loans to Reserve Bank 
of India (RBI) periodically.  
• EHDL started defaulting the payment of interest fro m October 2013. However, 
the Company could not dispose off the pledged share s to recover the principal 
loan as the share prices declined sharply. Audit al so observed that although, the 
credit rating by credit rating agency CIBIL at the time of sanction of loan was 
satisfactory in respect of the borrower, it showed overdue position in respect of 
the guarantor. The loan was declared (March 2015) N PA after a delay of 10 
months and Recall Notice was issued only on 30 Octo ber 2015 after delay of 17 
months as against the stipulated period of six mont hs since interest remained 
overdue.  
• CIPL and STPL defaulted in repayment of the initial  loan but the Compan y not 
only renewed the loans but also granted (September 2013) fresh loan of `15 crore 
to the promoters in their individual capacity. Vari ous concessions extended at the 
time of renewal of loans included the extension of loan at the existing rate (15 per 
cent ) instead of required increased rate of 15.5 per cent  (as per renewal term and 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
74 
conditions) and adjustment (March 2014) of excess/penal interest charged for four 
months amounting to ` 14.69 lakhs against interest due. Despite i ssue (September 
2014) of Recall Notice, the borrowers/ guarantors d id not pay the outstanding 
dues. The Company did not initiate any legal action for enforcement of security as 
provided under clause 15.2 of lending policy (December 2015). 
Thus, the inaction of the Company in declaring the loans as NPA, recalling the loans, 
enforcing the security, exploring the option of sel ling the NPA to Asset Reconstruction 
Companies and filing a civil suit against the Loane e within the time prescribed as per the 
terms of its lending policy, resulted in non-recove ry of ` 191.36 crore towards principal 
and interest in the above three loan cases. 
The Management stated (November/December 2015) that: 
(i)  BIL  had availed credit facilities from various banks and the share of the Company 
was only 5% approx.The Corporate Debt Restructuring  (CDR) was approved 
(May 2013) by the CDR Cell, and therefore STCI did not initiate recovery 
proceedings alone by filing suit in the court of la w immediately as it was felt that 
common action by all lenders would be more effectiv e than individual action by 
each lender. However, the CDR package failed (March 2014). It is only after State 
Bank of India, the lead banker of the consortium, s old its assets (March 2015) to 
another Asset reconstruction Company that recall no tice was issued in August 
2015. The action initiated under Negotiable Instruments Act continues.  
(ii)  EHDL expressed its inability to repay the dues as the gr oup is in infrastructure 
sector and many of its projects were struck due to adverse economic conditions, 
delayed payments from various authorities, difficul ty in completing road projects 
due to various hurdles, resulting in increase of de bt. The share prices declined 
continuously which restricted the efforts to liquid ate the stock. The client had 
been servicing interest with some delays upto April  2014, due to continuous 
follow up and persuasion from the Company. The addi tional land parcels were 
obtained as security only after extreme pressure from the Company. Recall Notice 
was issued on 30 October 2015 and the Company is in  the process of filing suit 
for recovery of dues. 
(iii)  CIPL & STPL were unable to provide additional margin by way of pledge of 
shares or deposit of cash margin. As a result of fr ee fall of TTL shares in stock 
markets (August 2012), no lender could sell any sha res. To provide further 
assistance for the successful implementation of the  CDR package, the individual 
loan was sanctioned against available asset cover o n the residential property of 
the promoter already mortgaged to another lender. The CDR package could not be 
implemented due to various reasons. The Board of th e Company has approved (7 
November 2015) initiation of arbitration proceeding s against STPL and 
individuals and filing of suit against CIPL. 
(iv)  The accounts declared as NPA are reported to CIBIL by way of monthly updation 
of data.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
75 
The Ministry stated (January 2016) that the matter was taken up with RBI and RBI has 
intimated that STCI Finance Ltd. had classified the  accounts mentioned as NPA and that 
it has no comments to offer on the recovery process adopted by the Company.  
The reply is not tenable as the Company being an in dependent NBFC and having first 
charge on assets of BIL, should have taken appropri ate and timely action to recover the 
dues, when the CDR package failed or when the borro wer came forward for one time 
settlement. No legal action was initiated against t he defaulters. The Company’s decision 
to not initiate recovery proceedings did not yield expected result since SBI, the lead 
banker of loan to BIL sold its loans to an Asset Re construction Company in March 2015 
without intimation to the Company. In respect of th e borrower EHDL, the value of 
security shares with the Company was only ` 0.14 crore and the value of additional 
security in the form of agricultural land was `13.36 crore as against the loan amount 
outstanding of ` 25 crore. Further, the probability of recovery thr ough the guarantor was 
also not certain as even at the time of sanction of  loan, the credit report for the guarantor 
showed overdues. In the case of loans to CIPL, STPL  and the promoters, the security 
available in the form of 2.78 crore pledged shares of TTL are not disposable and second 
charge on the residential property of ` 109 crore in respect of the borrowers against the 
loan of ` 115 crore will not be sufficient to secure the int erest of the Company. Further, 
the additional loan of ` 15 crore, was extended without obtaining any additional security.  
Thus, the failure of the Company to initiate approp riate action as per provisions of its 
Lending Policy and terms & conditions of Facility A greements resulted in bad loans and 
blocking up of Company’s own funds to the extent of  `152 crore and loss of interest of 
` 39.36 crore thereon. 
United India Insurance Company Limited 
7.4 Avoidable payment of insurance claim due to exc ess retention of risk 
Due to failure to arrange Facultative (FAC) reinsur ance before underwriting of risk 
beyond its automatic capacity, UIIC had to pay an avoidable claim of `` `` 8.93 crore 
United India Insurance Company Limited (UIIC) (the Company) issued (March 2009) a 
Marine cum Erection Policy 1 to BHEL Pipava Project (the insured) covering a pe riod 
from 20 March 2009 to 19 March 2012 for a sum insur ed of ` 1,501.04 crore. The Per 
Bottom Limit (PBL 2) in the policy was `150 crore and the company’s share of PBL was 
` 135 crore as risk shared between the company and Or iental Insurance Company was in 
the ratio of 90:10. The Company’s automatic capacit y 3 was `103.50 crore. Despite the 
fact that PBL was more than its automatic capacity,  the company did not arrange 
facultative reinsurance for excess insurance covera ge of ` 31.50 crore (i.e., ` 135 crore – 
` 103.50 crore).   
                                                           
1  Policy No.500300/21/08/02/000001360 issued at New  Delhi date 20 March 2009 
2  PBL is the maximum value of consignment in a sing le transit declared by the insured covering marine 
cargo risk. 
3  Automatic capacity = `` `` 103.50 crore [Obligatory `` ``    13.50 crore + Net retention of `` ``    10 crore+(inter-
group treaties + surplus treaties) of `` ``    80 crore] 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
76 
The insured (BHEL) reported a loss of `114.48 crore under the policy due to damage 
caused (August 2009) to gas turbine while carrying it to Pipavav site.  The final insured 
value for this consignment was `130.18 crore. The Company assessed the loss at ` 83.95 
crore and approved (October 2013) net claim of ` 75.44 crore after deducting ` 8.51 
crore towards non-protection of recovery rights. Th e company paid its share of ` 67.90 
crore from net approved claim. Thus, the company ma de an avoidable payment of ` 8.93 
crore 1 due to non-arrangement of facultative reinsurance for risk covered beyond its 
automatic capacity.  
The Management while accepting the audit point stat ed (December 2013) that facultative 
reinsurance was not arranged for the consignment due to  non-receipt of prior information 
with regard to the transit of the consignment and f urther stated that the variation in 
reinsurance program was approved (March 2011) by th e competent authority while 
settling the claim. Ministry has endorsed (March 2015) the view of the management.  
The Management’s Ministry’s reply is to be viewed i n the light of the fact that as the Per 
Bottom Limit was more than automatic capacity, the company was required to take 
Facultative reinsurance for the insurance coverage exceeding its automatic capacity while 
underwriting the risk. No specific approval for the  deviation from approved RI program 
was accorded by the competent authority.   
Thus, due to failure to arrange Facultative reinsur ance before underwriting of excess risk 
beyond its automatic capacity, the Company had to s ustain an avoidable payment of 
claim of 
` 8.93 crore. 
 
  
                                                           
1  Avoidable claim payment: Total net claim ( `` `` 75.44 crore)*90 per cent  (i.e. `` `` 67.90 crore) *13.18 per 
cent (i.e. `` `` 8.95 crore) minus proportionate premium income ( `` ``    1.78 lakh)= `` ``    8.93 crore 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
77 
CHAPTER VIII: MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE  
 
 
 
 
HLL Lifecare Limited 
8.1 Efficiency and effectiveness of marketing activ ities  
Highlights 
/xrhombus HLL has not evolved any distinct, separate and documented Marketing Policy  
(Para 8.1.2.2) 
/xrhombus In respect of realization of outstanding receivable s beyond credit period, the 
Company did not charge any interest on delayed paym ents by the parties. HLL had 
an outstanding of ` 86.39 crore as on 31 March 2015 under direct marke ting and 
exports, of which ` 14.43 crore was outstanding beyond a period of one year to five 
years and ` 4.69 crore was overdue, beyond five years.  
(Para 8.1.2.2) 
/xrhombus In Consumer Business Division, the outstanding dues  beyond credit period showed 
an increasing trend and rose sharply from ` 2.58 crore in 2012-13 to ` 11.38 crore 
in 2014-15.  
(Para 8.1.2.3) 
/xrhombus The position of debtors {excluding Government Busin ess Division (GBD)} ranged 
from 22.36 per cent  to 58.18 per cent  and almost all the marketing divisions had an 
unhealthy position in 2014-15.   
 (Para 8.1.3.1) 
/xrhombus There was non-collection/submission of sales tax do cuments on sales/stock transfer 
valued at ` 3.54 crore resulting in avoidable statutory liability on HLL.      
(Para 8.1.3.2) 
/xrhombus HLL has no formal method of conducting market resea rch for product change and 
development, to combat competition resulting in sta gnant and/or dwindling market 
share of its products.     
(Para 8.1.4.1)  
8.1.1 Introduction 
HLL Lifecare Limited (HLL) under the Ministry of He alth & Family Welfare was 
incorporated on 01 March 1966. HLL manufactures and  markets a wide range of 
contraceptives such as condoms, intra-uterine devic es, oral and emergency pills, cream, 
tubal-rings and also blood collection bags, surgica l sutures, auto disable syringes, vitro-
diagnostic test kits, shunts, iron and sanitary nap kins etc. The turnover of HLL for the 
year ended 31 March 2015 was 
` 1058.05 crore with a profit after tax of ` 31.55 crore. 
HLL has distribution network covering the country t hrough its various divisions viz., Hi-
Care Division (HCD), Women Health Care Division (WH D) being operated from 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
78 
Chennai and Consumer Business Division (CBD) operat ed from Bengaluru. The 
Government Business Division (GBD) mainly operates through Regional Office at 
Noida, which procures orders from the Central and v arious State Governments for 
contraceptives and hospital products.The Internatio nal Business Division (IBD) at Kochi 
handles HLL’s export operations.  
A review of the marketing activities carried out by  various divisions, for three years from 
2012-13 to 2014-15 was taken up with a view to asse ss the efficiency and effectiveness 
of those operations. 
8.1.2 Audit Findings 
8.1.2.1Sales targets and achievements 
The sales targets and achievements by the CBD, HCD,  WHD, IBD and GBD, in 
marketing of products during the years 2012-13 to 2014-15 are given in Annexure-I. 
It was noticed that all the domestic divisions fail ed to achieve their respective targets, 
particularly in the last two years. Moreover, two m arketing divisions viz., CBD and HCD 
continuously failed to attain the target since 2012 -13 onwards. The IBD could achieve its 
target during the year 2012-13 only. However, it was observed that targets were increased 
to three times in 2013-14 but were subsequently bro ught down in 2014-15 but even the 
reduced targets could also not be achieved.  
The shortfall in achievement of sales targets was i n spite of substantial funds of 
` 22.12 
crore, ` 22.15 crore and ` 30.95 crore spent by HLL during 2012-13, 2013-14 a nd 2014-
15 respectively on marketing of its products. It wa s also observed in audit that as against 
the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) agreed net-wo rth of ` 491.43 crore and 
` 531.01 crore, HLL could achieve ` 399.40 crore and ` 426.29 crore during 2013-14 
and 2014-15 respectively.  
The Ministry stated (March, 2016) that HLL sets cha llenging turnover targets for its 
Marketing Division and the same used to be much hig her. Hence, there is bound to be 
slippages in the achievement of targets, but nevert heless, the turnover achieved reflects 
healthy growth in business year after year.  
The reply is not acceptable, as it consistently fai led to achieve the targets which indicate 
that its growth of sales was not commensurate with the overall market growth of the 
related products. 
The contributory factors for this sub-optimal perfo rmance of HLL are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs: 
8.1.2.2  Non-uniform credit policy and non-levy of interest on payments delayed 
beyond credit period 
It was noticed that HLL had no distinct and separat e documented Marketing Policy, it 
sold its products, both on cash and credit basis. T he terms of grant of credit period and 
credit limit and relaxation/extension of credit per iod were found to be varying on a case-
to-case basis. There was no uniform structure in gr ant of credit limit and period to its 
clients.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
79 
In respect of realization of outstanding receivable s beyond credit period, HLL did not 
charge any interest for delayed payments and had an  outstanding of ` 86.39 crore as on 
31 March 2015 from clients under direct marketing a nd exports. Out of this, ` 14.43 
crore was outstanding beyond a period of one year t o five years and ` 4.69 crore was 
overdue, beyond five years. HLL stated that it was as per business practice existing in the 
market, however, it could not provide any documenta ry evidence to support its 
contention. As HLL was sourcing its funds through c ash credit availed from bankers, 
non-levy of interest though cited as a business pra ctice, resulted in loss of interest to the 
extent of ` 9.15 crore. 
Information on the exact credit period availed by t he parties and the cost of credit to the 
customers was not found available with the Manageme nt. Lack of above information 
severely curtailed HLL's ability to effectively monitor and recover outstanding amounts.  
It was further noticed in audit that in WHD, the tu rnover actually came down from 
` 133.51 crore in 2012-13 to ` 117.37 crore in 2014-15, in spite of grant of credi t period 
and credit limit to its clients. Evidently, the cre dit facility, though stated to be a market 
practice, has failed to increase the turnover of th is important division and being 
ineffective, requires re-evaluation. 
The Management stated (January 2016) that substanti al portion ( 
` 81.73 crore) of the 
total outstanding beyond credit period belongs to t he government institutions for which 
credit period did not exist.  
The Management contention is not correct as HLL pro vides 90 days credit period to the 
government institutions and the Management in its r eply of January 2016 itself accepted 
that an amount of 
` 47.18 crore out of ` 81.73 crore was overdue i.e., outstanding beyond 
the permitted credit period. 
8.1.2.3 Lack of monitoring in the implementation of credit terms for realization 
A test check of records selected for implementation  of credit terms, revealed that 
outstanding dues, beyond credit period, were substantial and stood at 
` 312.92 croreon 31 
March 2015. The main observations are given below:  
• Products like Nirodh, Mala-D and female condoms wer e marketed by CBD 
through stockists and retail outlets. The outstandi ng dues beyond credit period 
showed an increasing trend and it rose sharply from  ` 2.58 crore in 2012-13 to 
` 11.38 crore in 2014-15, i.e., from 16.07 per cent  of total dues of the division in 
2012-13 to 50.64 per cent  of total dues during 2014-15.  
• In WHD, where products like female contraceptives, pregnancy test-kits were 
dealt with and marketed through retail outlets, the total dues beyond credit period, 
increased from ` 22.32 crore in 2012-13 to ` 28.09 crore in 2014-15. 
• In the case of exports, the average percentage of d ues beyond credit period was 
49.68 per cent for the period 2012-13 to 2014-15. 
• In the case of GBD, the payments were received after credit period of 90 days and 
HLL thus, had to bear the loss of interest on delay ed payments. The payments 
were made only after certification of delivery at t he receiving locations which 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
80 
involved long processing time due to administrative  clearances and procedural 
formalities. 
From the above, it could be seen that the dues beyo nd credit period were not brought 
down during 2012-13 to 2014-15 which indicates that  the recovery system in HLL was 
not effective.  
The Management stated that HLL was having a robust SAP based Dynamic Credit 
Control System (DCCS). 
The reply is not acceptable, as DCCS is activated f or all customers except Govt. 
Department/Institution and out of dues relating to CBD and WHD 96.75 per cent dues 
pertained to Govt. Department/Institution, thus mak ing the DCCS of limited use. This 
delayed collection of credit sales adversely affected the working capital position of HLL. 
8.1.2.4  Heavy discounts without commensurate increase in consumer sales  
In order to increase its turnover HLL offered both cash and quantity discount to its 
clients. Cash discount at two per cent  on invoice value was given at the time of cash sal e 
and quantity discount was given, both for cash and credit sales. On a test check of sales 
with quantity discount in 2014-15, audit observed t hat in respect of thirteen (13) 
products, though the quantity discount ranged from 19.81 per cent  to a high of 300.88 
1 
per cent , HLL still lost sales volume. The decline in sales  volume was particularly steep 
in the following products:  
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars Sales unit  2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Quantity sold  Quantity sold  Quantity 
sold  
1. Moods Ultrathin 3’S Wallet 823537  27469  7802  
2. HILCAL 500 Strip 168539  155779  73991  
3. HILZOL  Strip 89830  31864  400  
4. P-DRIVE S  Strip 26105  22256  162  
HLL sells its products, with varying prices at varying levels of profitability. A scrutiny of 
records revealed that the prices were fixed and rev ised several times in a year. Though, 
the Chairman & Managing Director advised the Price Fixation Committee to resort to 
price revision either at the beginning of the calen dar year or financial year as it will have 
an impact on the market, no corrective action was t aken. HLL continued its operations 
without having a documented pricing policy to facil itate fixation/periodical review of 
prices. 
Audit noticed that according to the latest availabl e Cost Audit Report, there was negative 
margin to HLL during 2012-13 on supplies to the Government of condoms ( 
` 2.66 crore), 
sanitary napkins ( ` 2.36 crore) and pregnancy test kits ( ` 1.88 crore). This was on 
account of increase in input costs. Though, HLL had  taken up the issue with the 
Ministry/Tariff Commission for review and fixation of fair price, no revision was 
effected during the last one to two years. This led  to HLL incurring recurring losses on 
orders received from the Government. 
                                                           
1  Discount on order placed with extra q uantity offered. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
81 
Management agreed to the audit observation and adde d that the negative margin on the 
supplies to the Government was due to non revision of prices by the Ministry/Tariff 
commission inspite of repeated reminders by HLL to fix fair price for the years 2012-13 
to 2014-15.  
The Ministry (March, 2016) stated that discounts we re offered as per the practice 
followed for similar products by their competitors.  In a few situations, there is a 
requirement of offering more quantity discounts, in  order to liquidate the inventory 
whose shelf life is nearing expiry or where the com petitor becomes suddenly aggressive 
in pushing their product. Thus, discounts are offer ed to win over competition and to 
maintain company's position in the market. 
The Management contention is not acceptable as even  the high discount allowed could 
not improve sales of the products, therefore, the policy needs to be reviewed.   
8.1.2.5  Deficiencies in monitoring of channels of distribution for supply of products  
HLL established four Regional Offices 
1 and fourteen stock points across India for 
delivery of products. The materials were dispatched  from manufacturing units to these 
stock points for onward movement to the channel partners.   
The test-check of the performance of the distributo rs/stockists for the years 2012-13 to 
2014-15 revealed the following deficiencies: 
Though HLL had eleven Carrying and Forwarding Agent  (CFA) and five depots (2014-
15) across the country but it conducted only seven  surprise visits during the three year 
period from 2012-13 to 2014-15 and in all the cases , shortages were noticed with batch 
variation. The visits were made only when problems were reported and as a general 
procedure, verifications were not made. 
Audit noticed that M/s. S.S. Logistics was working as CFA in Zirakpur, Punjab and 
Punchkula, Haryana for supply of products in Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab. HLL had 
to terminate the arrangement (July 2013) due to the ft of stock, non-reconciliation of sales 
and stock figures, non-filing of service tax and pe nding VAT assessment. HLL had no 
provision or clause in the manual/operating practic es prescribing the number of surprise 
checks to be undertaken by the logistics department  to ensure the safety and security of 
the products. Also, surprise visits/checks made by the logistics department were not 
documented in the form of a verification/inspection  report and submitted to the top 
management. This was indicative of poor and ineffec tive supervision of depot operations 
especially when consumer products were stored and dealt with. 
The Management stated that it was ensured to make o ne surprise visit per warehouse per 
year. The reply is not acceptable as the Management  had not evolved any mechanism to 
prescribe the number of surprise checks in the oper ating practices and to document the 
result of surprise checks. 
 
                                                           
1  Mumbai, Kolkata, Bengaluru and Noida. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
82 
8.1.3 Debtors’ Management  
8.1.3.1 Debtors’ and Turnover 
The trade receivables outstanding as on 31 March 20 15 stood at 
` 622.61 crore of which 
sum of `304.35 crore pertained to the five Divisions viz., CBD, HCD, WHD, IBD and 
GBD. The details of turnover and the debtors’ posit ion in respect of various divisions for 
the three years ended 31 March 2015 was as below:       
                                                                                                                          (`` ``  in crore ) 
Year CBD  HCD WHD IBD GBD 
2012-13 :   Turnover 59.14 42.50 133.51 126.96 269.07 
Debtors  
Percentage to Turnover 
16.06 
(27.16) 
23.87 
(56.16) 
53.10  
(39.77) 
67.49 
(53.16) 
2.45 
(0.91) 
2013-14: Turnover 65.51 53.57 110.05 133.11 252.55 
Debtors  
Percentage to Turnover 
14.65 
(22.36) 
12.46 
(23.26) 
64.03 
(58.18) 
54.05 
(40.61) 
0.65  
(0.26) 
2014-15 : Turnover 79.93 73.64 117.37 155.58 320.89 
Debtors  
Percentage to Turnover 
22.47 
(28.11) 
29.89 
(40.59) 
65.76 
(56.03) 
79.63 
(51.18) 
106.60 
(33.22) 
It can be seen from the table above that debtors (e xcluding GBD) ranged from 22.36 per 
cent  to 58.18 per cent  and almost all the marketing divisions had an unhe althy position in 
the year 2014-15. This adversely affected the funds  management position and hampered 
the working capital cycle.  
In both, CBD and HCD, the outstanding debtors for a  period exceeding three years 
ranged from 10.45 percent  to 28.44 percent  during the three years ended 31 March 2015.  
The position of provisions made in respect of doubt ful debts during 2012-13 to 2014-15 
was as follows:   
                                                                                                              (`` ``  in crore ) 
  Year/Division 2012-13  2013-14  2014-15  
Consumer Business Division 4.96  3.12  2.75  
Hi-Care Division 3.05  3.57  3.26  
Women Health Care Division 1.81  0.92  1.47  
International Business Division 0.04  0.51 0.29  
Total  9.86  8.12 7.77  
Audit analysis revealed that though the amount of p rovisions had come down over the 
years, it was primarily due to the write-off of dou btful debts amounting to `3.91 crore 
during the last three years. 
The Management in its reply confirmed write off of its debts and advances.  
The Ministry (March 2016) stated that HLL reviews t he credit balances of the customers 
regularly and takes appropriate action in March for  those accounts which come under the 
law of limitation. 
The increase in the credit balances in debtors’ acc ounts from 
` 2.84 crore in 2012-13 to 
` 7.87 crore in 2014-15 contradicts the Ministry's co ntention regarding periodical review 
by the Management. Further, the main credit balance s were in the accounts of National 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
83 
Aids Control Organization- ` 1.18 crore and Directorate of Ayush- ` 3.99 crore in 2014-
15. 
(a)   Audit further noticed that an amount of 
` 5.55 crore (February 2016) was still to be 
recovered due to various reasons such as non-fulfil ment of contractual obligations by 
clients, dishonor of cheques of parties, unclaimed earnest money deposits in respect of 
failed tenders, refund of wrong payment of service tax, incentives under Focus Market 
Scheme etc. as given below: 
(`` ``  in crore) 
Party/nature  Amount to be 
recovered 
Particulars  
Various parties  
 
1.69 Non-recovery of Earnest Money Deposit on 
failed tenders 
M/s Rama Shipping Services, 
Bangalore  
2.00 Advance paid for purchase of iron ore for 
export without security.  
O/o the Joint Director General, 
Foreign Trade 
0.45 Non-realization of export incentives under 
Focus Market Scheme as the Organisation 
could not furnish the Bank Realization 
Certificates.  
M/s Gururaj Associates  0.32 Advance paid on unsold  stock of iron ore 
stock held for exports.  
Ten Debtors 0.55 Dishonoured cheques of clients. 
M/s/ Qingdao Jianbang 
International Trading Co. Ltd. 
0.45 Non-recovery of 5 per cent  balance on sale 
of rejected stock of iron ore exports. 
Service Tax Department  0.09 Wrong payment of Servi ce tax refundable by 
the Service Tax department.  
Total 5.55  
Non-recovery of the above amounts affected the work ing capital management in HLL 
besides loss of interest on blocked funds. It also indicated poor monitoring mechanism 
for recovery of long term receivables. 
The facts stated in the Audit observation were agreed toby the Management. 
8.1.3.2  Avoidable additional statutory liability o n sales/stock transfer valued at 
` 3.54 
crore due to non-collection/submission of sales tax documents. 
Under Central Sales Tax (CST) Act, 1956, registered  dealers are eligible for certain 
concessions and exemptions of tax on inter-state transactions on submission of prescribed 
declarations in Form C and Form F.  
Form C:  Under the provisions of the Central Sales Tax (CST ) Act, 1956, every dealer 
who in the course of interstate Trade and Commerce,  sells to a registered dealer, goods 
specified in the certificate of registration of pur chasing dealer shall be liable to pay tax at 
the concessional rate if such sales are supported b y declaration in Form C. If the buyer 
fails to furnish the sales tax concessional forms t o the seller, then the sales will be 
assessed at full rate and tax levied at the full rate of tax. 
Form F:  Under the provisions of Central Sales Tax Act, 195 6, every dealer is required to 
declare his place of business in other States at th e time of seeking registration. Transfer 
of goods claimed otherwise than by way of sale made  by a registered dealer to any other 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
84 
place of his business located outside the State is exempted from tax on production of 
Form F.  
Audit noticed that HLL sold goods from its Kanagala  (Karnataka) and Manesar 
(Haryana) factories but did not collect Form C from  buyers for sales valued at ` 3.32 
crore (February 2016). This was indicative of laxit y in collection of requisite sales tax 
forms from buyers resulting in avoidable additional  statutory liability on HLL and 
passing of undue benefit to the buyers. Moreover, H LL moved its goods from Manesar 
unit to other States during 2013-14 and 2014-15 and  Form F for transfer of stock valued 
at ` 0.22 crore (February 2016) remained to be furnishe d. Evidently, documentation of 
sales tax records was poor even though HLL has full -fledged Regional Offices 
responsible for the sales, collection and submissio n of C and F Forms and Sales tax 
assessments.  
The Management agreed to the facts stated in the audit observation. 
8.1.4 Market Competition and improvement in market- share: 
8.1.4.1 Market Research 
Market research is done by way of planning, collect ing and analyzing market data and is 
important to improve the quality of marketing decision making and attract new customers 
to increase market share.  
Audit noticed that HLL had no formal method of cond ucting customized market research 
for product change and development, to combat competition and to plan for improvement 
in market share. 
The CBD subscribed to A C Nielson for their study r eport, only for MOODS condoms in 
respect of domestic market. For other products, CBD  was entirely dependent on the feed-
back from its own agents/distributors on the produc ts. WHD collected market data only 
for Emily (79 per cent  market share), Novex (64 per cent) and Novex DS (48 per cent ) 
brands in 2014 from institutions like All India Org anization of Chemists and Druggists 
(AICOD). For rest of their products, there was no c omprehensive data/information 
available for a proper market research. HCD used ma rket reports for 2013-14 only on 
surgical sutures. It was noticed that CBD did not c ollect data for market research related 
to the other products handled by it.  
The International Marketing Division purchased repo rts on ‘Moods’ condoms, only for 
Gulf market from AC Nielson for the years 2013 and 2014. In the absence of reports for 
other marketing countries, on the exported products , HLL could not plan its marketing 
strategy on export sales. 
The Management replied that in respect of WHD, market details of other brands were not 
provided as they were in the cluttered market segme nt whereas for HCD which had 
aexperienced team, and got the market pulse in time . Further, in respect of Export 
division, due to non availability of Nielson report s, they had to depend on other sources 
like information from distributors and secondary information from online reports. 
The replies of the Management were not acceptable as in respect of WHD, HLL itself had 
collected and furnished (reply of January 2016) the  market details in respect of other 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
85 
products which indicate that collection of market d ata was possible. Moreover, the 
market research undertaken by HLL was only in respe ct of its major products like blood 
bags, sutures, male condoms and that too, for limit ed period only. It does not have an 
organized system for collection of market trends an d hence could not plan its marketing 
strategies to combat competition. This reflected in  the stagnant and/or dwindling market 
share of HLL as brought out in the report.  
8.1.4.2  Market share 
On review of market share of the HLL products, Audi t observed that in the case of 
‘MOODS’, there was an increase in market share from  13 per cent  in 2011-12 to 14 per 
cent  each in 2012-13 and 2013-14. However, the market s hare of Blood Bags came down 
to 39 per cent  in 2014-15from44  per cent  in2013-14. Audit observed that, HLL lost five 
percent  market share in 2014-15 due to delayed delivery sc hedules, increased cost of 
production and absence of aggressive marketing stra tegies. In the case of sutures, HLL’s 
share was a negligible 2 per cent  in 2013-14. Audit also noticed that as no market 
reports/vital data on market share, trends and beha vior on various other products were 
available, HLL failed to identify its strengths/wea kness in the market and could not 
effectively plan its marketing strategies to increase its market share. 
The Management replied that HLL is major player in the blood transfusion market with 
consistent market share of more than 35 per cent  over the years. The reply is not 
acceptable as it has not addressed the reason for r eduction in the market share which is a 
cause for concern.  
8.1.4.3  Dependence on a single buyer 
The turnover from the marketing activities of GBD f or the three years ended 31 March 
2015 was as given below: 
(
`` ``  in crore) 
Year Total Sales Sales from Government 
business 
Percentage 
2012-13 648.34 269.07 41.50 
2013-14 665.66 252.55 37.94 
2014-15 800.62 320.89 40.08 
It is evident from the above that share of governme nt business to HLL’s marketing 
turnover ranged from 38 per cent  to 41.50 per cent  during the years 2012-13 to 2014-15. 
The major portion of sales was from the Government supplies and hence dependence on 
the orders from the Government, to make the product ion facilities run continuously, 
could not be ruled out. Though, HLL has undertaken expansion of production facilities in 
products like condoms, blood bags and sanitary napk ins, but the capacity utilization was 
mainly dependent on government orders to utilize the enhanced capacity. 
The Management agreed to the risks of dependency on  single buyer and it further added 
that there was increase of non government sales in 2014-15 over 2012-13. The reply is 
not acceptable as the increase is due to increase i n turnover of HLL and the share of the 
Non-Government sales has remained the same during the three years. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
86 
8.1.4.4 Pending Subsidy claims from Government of India 
HLL’s products like Nirodh, Mala-D etc. are subsidi zed by the Government of India and 
prices were fixed by the Ministry. As HLL sells the se products below their cost of 
production, the subsidy claims were submitted to th e Government every year. However, 
they were released by the Government after consider able delays, extending up to two 
years. The delay in timely receipt of subsidy claims adversely affected the funds position. 
Moreover, HLL’s profits were affected as the produc ts were accounted at provisional 
prices due to non-revision of prices of its product s controlled by the Government. The 
subsidy claims of ` 9.27 crore (including ` 4.80 crore for promotion of products) were 
pending receipt from the Government of India as on 31 March 2015.  
Non-revision of provisional prices was a contributi ng factor for HLL not achieving the 
projections and promises made in the Memorandum of Understanding entered into with 
the Ministry. 
The Management accepted and replied that the matter  is continuously taken up with the 
Ministry. 
The Ministry (March, 2016) did not elaborate upon t he reasons for delay in settlement of 
subsidy claims.  
Conclusion 
The marketing activities of HLL, despite various pr omotional schemes like heavy 
discounts and relaxed credit failed to create a sub stantial impact on increasing the market 
share. Moreover, the market research undertaken by HLL was inadequate and 
insufficient. HLL was heavily dependent on a single  buyer i.e. the Government of India 
where it faced issues like long pending subsidy claims and supplying products at negative 
margin. HLL also had substantial outstanding debtor s pending recovery which 
hadadverse impact onits working capital.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.2 Release of advance payments without obtaining a dequate security 
HLL Lifecare Limited made advance payments of ` ` ` ` 12.04 crore to M/s. Goa Mining 
Industries (GMI) under a contract for export of iro n ore, without obtaining 
adequate security to protect its financial interest s. Subsequently, the export of iron 
ore was abandoned due to ban on exports of iron ore  and the risks involved in 
transporting large quantities. This resulted in out standing recoverable from GMI 
amounting to ` ` ` ` 4.92crore on account of principal and `` `` 4.48 crore as interest on 
principal as on November 2015.   
HLL Lifecare Limited (Company) engaged in manufactu re of health/life care related 
products, decided (December 2005) to enter into a n ew line of business viz. Merchant 
Exports. The Board of Directors of the Company reco mmended (September 2006) that 
Memorandum and Articles of Association may be amend ed to enable the Company to 
undertake merchant exports in any goods or classes of goods whatsoever and the same 
was approved in the 40 th  Annual General Meeting of the Company held on 29 S eptember 
2006. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
87 
In the meanwhile, the Company had entered into (Jun e 2006) a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with M/s. Goa Mining Industries  (GMI) for execution of 60,000 
Metric Tonne (MT)(+/-) 10 per centof iron ore export contract at the rate of USD 42.0 0 
per MT. The amount was to be paid in four instalmen ts on receiving confirmation from 
Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd. (KIOCL), Mangalore that the specified quantity had 
been unloaded at the nominated plot in KIOCL. Thoug h exports were performed for only 
25,047 MTs of iron ore fines by GMItill June 2007, HLL paid to GMI entire contracted 
amount of ` 12.04 crore for 60,000 MTs of iron ore fines betwee n June 2006 and 
December 2006 in four instalments on confirmations from Quantity & Quality surveyors, 
appointed by overseas buyer and the co-seller (M/s GMI). In addition, an amount of 
` 1.73 crore was also paid by HLL to GMI between June  2007 and March 2011 on 
various grounds. GMI could not export the balance q uantity due to continued ban on 
export of Iron Ore in the States of Karnataka and G oa and offered to supply the iron ore 
fines from the State of Odisha. The Company decline d the offer due to its unwillingness 
to take any further exposure in iron ore business i n view of risks involved in quality of 
the iron ore fines or transportation of large quant ities of the ore. The amount recoverable 
from GMI as on November 2015 stood at ` 4.92 crore on account of principal and ` 4.48 1 
crore on account of interest on principal outstandi ng from June 2006 to 30 November 
2015. 
Audit observed that the Company had entered into su ch a high-value contract by 
accepting a single signed cheque from GMI as collat eral security without contemplating 
execution of a bank guarantee or performance guaran tee or letter of credit, etc. to 
safeguard its financial interests. It was also seen  in audit that the contract with GMI was 
entered in June 2006 which was three months before the Company was authorized in its 
AGM of September 2006 to enter into this new line o f business. Thus, this action was 
ultra vires  the Memorandum of Association of the Company. 
The Management stated (November 2015) that they had  to accept the blank signed 
cheque as financial security as GMI was not agreeab le to any enforceable securities. It 
also stated that the Company before entering into new line of business sought expert legal 
opinion from a law firm which opined that the MOA a uthorized the mercantile export 
business by the Company and it further informed tha t it was advisable and prudent to 
amend the object clause to specifically include the  proposed business activity also as an 
object for which the Company was established. Further, the Company made provision for 
doubtful advances in the accounts for the year 2014 -15 as after demise of sole proprietor 
of GMI in July 2014 the chances of recovery of the outstanding became remote and the 
Company had initiated legal action (March 2015). Fu rther, as a corrective action it has 
issued guidelines restricting release of advances without appropriate enforceable security. 
The Ministry (January 2016) reiterated the management’s reply and agreed that the lapses 
were due to lack of experience of officials in the new area of business. 
The fact that iron ore export being a new business and lack of experience in the field 
made it all the more important that a secure form o f financial security instrument such as 
                                                           
1  Since interest rate ranging from six per cent to 10.5 per cent per annum was offered by Public Secto r 
Banks for term deposits during September 2012 to No vember 2015, therefore, on conservative basis 
lowest applicable rate of six per cent per annum ha s been adopted for calculation of interest 
recoverable.   

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
88 
a bank guarantee, performance guarantee or a letter of credit, etc. should have been taken. 
Instead, the Company entered into a high value cont ract without safeguarding financial 
interest of the Company which was against prudentia l business practices. Had the 
Company obtained proper collateral to safeguard its  financial interests, it could have 
recovered its dues fully.  
Thus, due to venturing into a new line of business without any in-house expertise coupled 
with lack of  adequate security to safeguard its fi nancial interest, the Company could not 
recover 
` 9.40 crore (Principal ` 4.92 crore + Interest ` 4.48 crore) from a private party. 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
89 
CHAPTER IX: MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND 
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 
 
 
 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
9.1 Avoidable payment of compensation 
Designing transformers without ascertaining actual operational requirements of the 
client, coupled with failure to undertake correctiv e measures resulted in avoidable 
payment of `` ``163.17 crore. 
M/s Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) receive d (May 2003) an order from M/s 
Zesco Limited, Zambia for supply and installation o f 10 numbers of main transformers, 
rehabilitation of two existing auxiliary transforme rs and training for their Kafue Gorge 
Power Station at a contract price of US$ 5.96 milli on. BHEL supplied and installed the 
transformers between March 2006 and May 2008. Howev er, subsequent to premature 
failure of three transformers in 2006 and another o ne in 2008, M/s Zesco commissioned 
consultants to undertake “dissolved gas in oil” (DG A) analyses on all the transformers.  
The consultants concluded (January/February 2009) t hat the DGA signatures of eight out 
of 10 transformers were ‘ unacceptable’  indicating an actual thermal fault or ´suspect’  
indicating either the ’the development of a thermal fault’ and/or ‘ unusual levels of 
hydrocarbons’ or ‘ high moisture content and low dielectric strength’.   Accordingly, M/s 
Zesco served (March 2009) notice to BHEL pursuant t o Clause 27.4 of the General 
Conditions of Contract (GCC) of an overheating defe ct for the purpose of Clause 27.2 of 
GCC.  Since both the parties failed to resolve the issues, M/s Zesco preferred (May 2012) 
arbitration against BHEL.   
Audit observed that BHEL accepted (September 2009) that it had designed the 
transformers assuming that both the LV windings wou ld be simultaneously loaded with 
equal capacity, since there was no mention of singl e LV loading condition or unequal 
loading of LV winding by the two generators, and he ating of clamp plates seemed to be 
the reason for high DGA gases in transformers.  On the other hand, M/s Zesco opined 
(November 2009) that the specification might not ha ve mentioned unequal loading, but 
neither did it mention equal loading. Thus, the assumption made by BHEL was a material 
one and the same should have been cleared with them  before actual design of the 
transformers.      
The Arbitration Tribunal examined the evidence pres ented to it, heard arguments of both 
the parties and concluded (December 2014) that BHEL  had failed to take prompt 
remedial action in coordination with M/s Zesco. It concluded that in a period of 16 
months since March 2009, BHEL (i) maintained that t here was no design defect, (ii) 
continued to press its proposal to run the transfor mers on an equal loading basis, and (iii) 
had failed to produce either the promised R&D depar tment electromagnetic analysis of 
equal vs. unequal loading or the permitted loading unbalance s limits, or to produce any 
reports or undertake any investigations responsive to the series of consultant reports, nor 
made any other concrete proposal. As such, the arbi tration was awarded (December 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
90 
2014) in favour of M/s Zesco, directing (June 2015)  BHEL to pay compensation, which 
worked out to ` 163.17 crore (as of 31 December 2015), towards rep lacement cost of 10 
transformers and other costs related to arbitration. 
BHEL stated (November 2015) that the three failures  in 2006 outside the active part of 
transformers were rectified. There was a failure in 2008 due to inadvertent admission of a 
copper strip during repair work carried out in 2006 , and M/s Zesco was sceptical about 
the quality of transformer and appointed consultant  in 2009, while the defects claimed by 
the customer were suspected and not proved. The Arb itration Tribunal awarded the case 
against BHEL due to presence of black marks in flit ch plates and felt that this was due to 
inherent design defect, which was a common factor for all the transformers.  It was added 
that as per the opinions taken from the Zambian Law firm and BHEL Counsel at London, 
option of challenging the award was very bleak and as per the award, BHEL has to pay 
the dues to M/s Zesco. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that BHE L had failed to provide corrective 
measures even within three years of receiving the n otice of fault, though it accepted 
(September 2009) that the transformer was designed assuming that both the LV windings 
would be simultaneously loaded with equal capacity without ascertaining the actual 
operational requirements of M/s Zesco.  
Thus, designing transformers without ascertaining t he actual operational requirements of 
M/s Zesco assuming that the transformers would be o perated on equal loading basis, 
coupled with failure of BHEL to undertake correctiv e measures even within three years 
from the notice of default resulted in avoidable pa yment of 
`163.17 crore towards 
compensation. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2016; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
9.2 Avoidable expenditure on payment of sales tax 
Failure to include enabling clause in the agreement  for reimbursement of taxes for 
Away Centre Fabrication (ACF) despatches resulted i n the Company bearing an 
avoidable expenditure of `` `` 11.27 crore. 
Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited (Company) secured ( April 2008) two contracts from 
Chhattisgarh State Power Generation Company Limited  (CSPGCL) for supply of Boiler 
Turbine Generator, Electricals, Station Control & I nstrumentation and mandatory spares 
for Marwa and Korba West Thermal Power Project for ` 1845 crore and ` 942 crore 
(exclusive of all taxes and duties) respectively. A ccordingly, the Company entered into 
an agreement (September 2009) with CSPGCL and alloc ated ` 851 crore to its High 
Pressure Boiler Plant (Unit) Tiruchirappalli for th e supply of 62369 MT of structural and 
ducting items. These were to be manufactured by Awa y Centre Fabrication (ACF) 
vendors using their own material as per drawings of  the Company and to be despatched 
direct to site from ACF vendors.  
As per the terms of the agreement and General Condi tions of Contract (GCC), 100 
 per cent  taxes and duties as applicable on BHEL manufacture d items including 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
91 
mandatory spares would be reimbursed by CSPGCL at a ctuals on production of 
satisfactory documentary evidence. GCC also stipula ted that CSPGCL would reimburse 
all applicable taxes and duties at actuals in respe ct of direct transactions between the 
CSPGCL and the Company. However, the reimbursement of sales tax on the ACF 
supplies was not covered under the contracts signed with CSPGCL.  
The proposal for ACF operations was taken up (Janua ry /February 2009) by the company 
during the stage of Billing Break up (BBU) approval  and after receipt of BBU approval, 
the company started ACF supplies. Initially CSPGCL reimbursed sales tax amounting to 
` 11.27 crore towards VAT/CST on the ACF supplies (M arwa ` 7.14 crore and Korba 
` 4.13 crore). But later on it recovered (October 201 0) the sales taxalready reimbursed 
citing that reimbursement of Sales tax on ACF items  was not in conformity with 
GCC/agreement. 
Audit observed that despite knowing (January 2009) that sales tax on ACF dispatched  
items were not reimbursable as per GCC, BHEL did not take action for including suitable 
clause to cover it while entering into agreement with CSPGCL which resulted in payment 
of avoidable sales tax of 
` 11.27 crore. 
While admitting the audit observation BHEL in its r eply stated (August 2015) that the 
concept of Away Centre Fabrication (ACF) was in nas cent stage in 2008, and that 
proposal for ACF operations was taken up during the  stage of Billing Breakup (BBU) 
approval itself. Further, it would follow up with c ustomer along with Power Sector 
marketing, New Delhi for realisation of the same.  
The reply of the company needs to be viewed in light of the following facts: 
• Though the contract was awarded in April 2008 the a greement was signed only in 
September 2009. 
• The company spelt out the specific terms on reimbur sement of taxes and duties in 
the agreement with CGSPCL but failed to incorporate  a clause for reimbursement 
of taxes for ACF despatches to Marwa and Korba Thermal power projects.  
• Further, in a similar contract placed (February 200 9) with MP Power Generating 
Company Ltd, BHEL resorted to ACF despatches after obtaining (July 2009) 
approval from the customer for reimbursement of tax.  
• Getting realisation without obtaining amendments to  the contract (which at this 
stage will not be possible) is remote.  
Thus, BHEL’s failure to include enabling clause in the agreement for reimbursement of 
taxes for ACF despatches resulted in the Company be aring an avoidable expenditure of 
` 11.27crore towards payment of sales tax.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December  2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
Recommendation: 
/head2right The company may incorporate suitable clause for rec overy/reimbursement of Sales 
tax for items supplied/manufactured by sub-vendor/ACF unit works. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
92 
9.3 Unfruitful expenditure on procurement of rail w agon 
Deficient planning and subsequent non-utilisation o f special rail wagon by BHEL 
resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ` 8.07 crore on procurement of the wagon.  
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited – High Pressure Bo iler Plant – Tiruchirappalli (Unit) 
owns a 24 Axle Special Wagon with carrying capacity of 260 Tons (acquired in 1984 at a 
cost of ` 56.04 lakh) designed exclusively for transporting b oiler drum from the Trichy 
Unit to other parts of the country as over-dimensional consignments (ODCs). This wagon 
was grossly under-utilized as only three boiler dru ms were transported in 2009-10 and no 
boiler drum was transported from 2010-11 onwards. 
Power Sector Marketing of BHEL (2006) made a busine ss projection for procurement of 
300 tons Drum Transportation Railway Wagon under Ca pacity Augmentation of Boiler 
shop Phase II at HPBP due to projection of increase d numbers of sub-critical boilers and 
due to unsuitable road infrastructures in India for  heavy consignments. The scheme was 
approved by the Board of Directors on 25.05.2007.   
Despite under-utilization of the wagon, under the s cheme for Capacity Augmentation of 
Boiler Shop (Phase-2), the Trichy Unit procured (Ju ly 2009) 300 Ton Drum 
Transportation Railway Wagon from the Company’s Jha nsi Unit at a cost of 
` 8.07 crore 
and the same was commissioned in August 2013.  
Audit observed that: 
• One of the objectives of the Capacity Augmentation Scheme (Phase-2) was to 
enhance capability to build higher rating boilers t hrough "Once Through Super 
Critical Technology" from 800 MW to 1000 MW in whic h no drum is involved. 
Thus, the procurement of 300 Ton Drum Transportatio n Railway Wagon was not 
need-based.   
• The management placed the purchase order for 300 to ns drum transportation 
wagon on BHEL, Jhansi in July 2009 without reassess ment of its requirement in 
the changed scenario of road infrastructure in India. 
• Not even a single boiler drum was transported by th is wagon so far (August 
2014). 
BHEL justified the procurement (February 2013)  on the ground that prior to  2009-10, 
the road infrastructure in India was not suitable f or transporation of heavy consignments 
and only mechanical trailers were available in the country. In the mean time, road 
infrastructure started developing and vehicles with  hydraulic axles were introduced and 
transportation of boiler drums by road was found su ccessful and economical. Further, 
annual savings of 
` 86 lakh in hire charges to BHEL would accrue by th e use of the 
drum. BHEL further stated (August 2014) that since all running orders were super critical 
boilers in which no drum was  involved, the 300 Ton  Drum Wagon could not be utilized. 
BHEL reiterated (November 2014) that in the 13 th  five year plan scenario, where super 
critical technology was adopted, the utility of spe cial railway wagons for drum 
transportation has reduced. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
93 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  procurement order for the wagon was 
placed in July 2009 based on the business projectio n made in 2006 without reassessment 
of the situation prevailing at the time of placement of order. 
Thus, defective planning for procurement of wagon r esulted in unfruitful expenditure of 
` 8.07 crore. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in October 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
94 
CHAPTER X: MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN 
POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
 
 
Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited 
10.1 Fund Management and Financing Activities  
HUDCO mobilised `` `` 37128.32 crore during 2010-11 to 2014-15, but it s uffered from 
heavy concentration on bank loans, which carried hi gh interest. In assessing fund 
requirement, critical elements of fund inflow/outfl ow were not given due cognisance 
resulting in excess mobilisation and additional interest of `` ``30.39 crore. Lower credit 
rating due to higher NPA and lower net interest mar gin resulted in higher coupon 
rate and consequent additional financial burden of `` ``134.97 crore was also noticed. 
In lending operations, amount disbursed ranged between 38.40 and 69.72 per cent of 
loans sanctioned during the five years ended 2014-1 5. Violations of directions issued 
by National Housing Bank and deficiencies in intern al guidelines affected quality of 
assets. Deficiencies in appraisal mechanism, system  of disbursement, monitoring of 
financed projects and waiver of critical pre-disbur sement conditions led to non-
performing assets, which increased from `` ``    1227.60 crore in 2010-11 to `` `` 2029.33 
crore in 2014-15 and ranged between 5.46 and 6.76 per cent , during the same period.   
10.1.1 Introduction 
Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited ( HUDCO/Company) was 
incorporated on 25 April 1970  in order to facilita te housing and infrastructure 
development in the country with a social thrust on meeting the housing needs of 
economically weaker sections and low-income groups.  It extends financial assistance in 
three categories, viz., housing 1, housing related infrastructure 2 and otherinfrastructure 3to 
the State government agencies, primarycooperativeso cieties, individuals, public and 
privatesector agencies.  HUDCO operates under the r egulatory oversight of National 
Housing Bank (NHB).  During 2010-11 to 2014-15 HUDCO mobilized ` 37128.32 crore, 
sanctioned loans of ` 74950 crore and disbursed ` 33111 crore.  As at 31 March 2015, 
the outstanding loans stood at ` 32465 crore.  Against this backdrop, a need was fe lt to 
review in audit the process of fund management and financing activities. 
10.1.2 Audit objective and scope 
All activities from assessment of fund requirements , its mobilisation and management, 
lending operations and management of non-performing  assets (NPAs) during April 2010 
                                                           
1  All housing projects and composite projects havin g 50 percent or more components towards housing. 
2 Water Supply, Sewerage, Drainage, Sanitation, Soli d Waste Management, Educational, Health, 
Recreational facilities, Community Centres, Bus Sta nds, Terminals, City Road network including ring 
roads, bye-passes and transport infrastructure, Met ros, Shopping Complex, Markets and such other 
centres catering to the day to day needs of the res idents of the housing colonies and forming part of a 
housing project, Distribution of Power and other services. 
3 Highways, airport, Commercial Malls, Power Generat ion and Transmission, Telecom, Industrial 
Infrastructure, Oil and Gas pipelines etc . 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
95 
to March 2015 were examined in order to assess whet her (i) mobilisation of funds was 
done after proper planning and was commensurate wit h business requirements, (ii) due 
diligence and economies were ensured while borrowin g, and utilisation of funds was 
done effectively and efficiently, (iii) controls re lating to appraisal of applications, 
sanction and disbursement of loans were sound, effe ctive and adequate to cover the 
associated risks, and (iv) adequate monitoring mech anism existed to ensure timely 
recovery of dues, initiation of legal action agains t defaulters and for adherence to 
directions of the Regulator. 
The sample for audit was selected through Interacti ve Data Extraction and Analysis 
(IDEA) software based on amount of borrowings, fina ncing and Non Performing Asset 
(NPA) belonging to both private and public sector. The sample selected for examination 
in audit contributed 36.78 per cent  of borrowings, 10.71 per cent of financingand of 8.70  
per cent of NPAsas shown in Table-1. 
Table-1:  Sample selected in audit  
10.1.3.  Audit findings 
10.1.3.1 Fund management 
(a)  Resource mobilisation 
The Table-2 below indicates the mobilisation of funds by HUDCO during five years from 
2010-11 to 2014-15through the sources of bonds, loa ns from banks, loans from financial 
institutions (FIs) and public deposits (PDs). 
Table-2:  Details of fund mobilisation 
Year Mix of borrowings (Amount in ` ` ` ` crore)  
Tax free 
bonds 
Taxable 
bonds 
Loans 
from banks 
Commerci 
al papers 
Loans 
from FIs 
Public 
deposits 
Total 
2010-11 - - 4339.00  - - 464.97  4803.97 
2011-12 5000.00  667.40  4146.76 1 - 250.00  331.79  10395.95 
2012-13 2401.35  500.00  2079.37 2 - 500.00  582.34  6063.06 
2013-14 4987.12  700.00  1080.71  - 1000.00  266.78  8034.61 
2014-15 - - 2815.37 3 2700.00 1700.00  615.36  7830.73 
Total 12388.47 1867.40 14461.21 2700.00 3450.00 2261.24 37128.32 
(per cent ) 33.37 5.03 38.95 7.27 9.29 6.09 100 
Source:  Annual Reports of HUDCO 
                                                           
1  Including cash credit/overdraft limits of `` `` 1137.76 crore outstanding as on 31 March 2012. 
2  Represents cash credit/overdraft from banking sec tor. 
3  Represents cash credit/overdraft from banking sec tor outstanding as on 31 March 2015. 
Particulars Population Selected in audit Sample in per cent  
Number 
of cases 
Amount 
(`` `` in crore ) 
Number 
of cases 
Amount 
(`` ``in crore ) 
Number 
of cases 
Amount 
(`` ``in crore ) 
Borrowings 87 37128.32 32 23155.81 36.78 62.36 
Financing  868 33111.02 93 14432.15 10.71 43.59 
NPAs 184 2029.33 16 1459.74 8.70 71.94 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
96 
From the table, it is evident that HUDCO has mobili sed 38.95 per cent of funds from 
high interest bearing source i.e. , loan from banks at an average cost of 9.18 per cent .  
While more than 90 per cent  of fund requirement was met from bank loans in 201 0-11, it 
did not use the potential of low interest bearing s ources like  taxable bonds, commercial 
papers, loan from FIs in all the years, as the over all fund mobilised from these sources 
were between 5.03 and 9.29 per cent.   In all the years, the cost of funds borrowed through 
bank loans was higher than those from other sources  by one to two per cent . Thus, 
HUDCO failed to contemplate initiatives for cost optimisation of mobilised funds so as to 
offer competitive rates for lending.   
HUDCO/Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Allevia tion (MoHUPA) stated 
(December 2015/March 2016) that cost of borrowing f rom banks was lower than 
corporate bond yields during 2010-11, and bank loan s offered much more operational 
flexibility. In respect of other years, it was stat ed that though it took loan from banks, it 
was repaid or foreclosed in the same year itself.  However, the fact remains that HUDCO 
resorted to bank loans during 2010-11 at weighted a verage rate of interest of 9.18 per 
cent when other organizations 1 of AA+ rating mobilized funds through corporate bo nds 
at the interest rate of 8.35 to 8.95  per cent during April to December 2010.  HUDCO did 
not mobilize funds during 2010-11 from any other so urce, except public deposits (PD) of 
` 464.97 crore.  Further, no guidelines were put in place nor any cost-benefit analysis of 
various products carried out while mobilizing funds  in order to optimize the overall cost 
of borrowed funds. It is pertinent to note that whi le the cost of borrowing from taxable 
bonds and FIs ranged between 6.25 per cent and 9.64 per cent  during 2011-12 to 2013-
14, HUDCO resorted to bank loans with cost ranging between 10.22 per cent and 10.40 
per cent  during the same period.    
(b) Assessment of fund requirement 
The resource mobilisation was planned by HUDCO on a nnual basis through a ‘resource 
plan’ approved by Board of Directors (Board).  HUDC O assessed requirement of funds 
for the period 2010-11 to 2014-15 on the basis of ( i) targets fixed for disbursement of 
loans corresponding to targets fixed in MoU with Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation (MoHUPA), (ii) estimated repayment of p rincipal and interest payable on 
borrowings, (iii) estimated recovery of principal a nd interest from the loanees, and (iv) 
estimated principal and interest receivable from in vestments made. However, audit 
observed that HUDCO did not consider net cash incom e (interest receivable minus  
interest payable) from 2011-12 onwards, repayments of PDs, interest receivable on bonds 
while planning resource mobilisation. There were al so mismatches in estimating 
repayment of borrowings and repayment from investme nts from 2010-11 to 2014-15 as 
depicted in Table-3. 
                                                           
1  L&T Infra, TATA Capital, IDBI Bank and Indian Ban k 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
97 
Table-3:  Statement showing excess borrowing 
(Amount in ` ` ` ` crore) 
Year Net cash 
income 
(interest 
receivable 
- interest 
payable) 
Mismatch 
in 
estimating 
repayment 
of 
borrowings 
Repayme 
nt of 
public 
deposits 
Opening 
bank 
balances 
(other 
than 
earmarke 
d fund) 
Repaym 
ents 
from  
investm 
ent 
Interest 
receivab 
le on 
bonds 
Borrowin 
g 
requireme 
nt after 
considerin 
g 
( 2 to 7) 
Actual 
borrowi 
ng 
without 
overdraf 
t 
Excess 
borrowing 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10=(9-8) 
2010-11 - 1144.43 626.87 584.73 - 137 5420.43 4697.23 (-) 723.20 
2011-12 1226.65 917.87 1256.85 552.44 - 123.33 6073.30 9258.19 3184.89 
2012-13 1037.31 (-) 205.24 - 2603.08 250 107.32 4530.79 3983.69 (-) 547.10 
2013-14 834.33 (-) 698.67 - 515.37 - 54.01 6654.25 6719.64 65.39 
2014-15 2255.11 1096.59 - - 400 54.01 7418.05 7445.73 27.68 
Thus, there was excess borrowing of ` 3184.89 crore in 2011-12 and shortfall of 
` 723.20 crore and ` 547.10 crore in 2010-11 and 2012-13 respectively.  The shortfall 
was met by resorting to overdraft from banks. HUDCO  availed average overdraft of 
` 218 crore, ` 1314.97 crore and ` 385 crore during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 
respectively.  This resulted in avoidable interest cost of ` 30.39 crore.   
HUDCO/MoHUPA stated (December 2015/March 2016) that  interest receivables has 
been considered while estimating resource requireme nt in the resource plan for 2015-16.  
Excess borrowing in 2011-12 occurred mainly due to mobilising funds through tax-free 
bonds at the end of financial year and HUDCO had no  option but to issue the bonds as it 
would have otherwise lost the opportunity to mobili se funds through tax-free bonds. It 
was added that due to volatile interest rate moveme nt, it opted for cash credit/overdraft 
facility as per actual funds requirement and repaid  as and when surplus was generated.  
On the other hand, if it had issued bonds, it would  have committed to a fixed liability for 
the entire tenor of the bond. 
While appreciating the corrective action taken, Aud it notes that the reply was silent on 
why items other than interest receivables as indica ted in the table were not considered 
while estimating fund requirement.  The excess borr owing was ascertained on account of 
not considering some sources of funds, which were known and ascertainable by HUDCO.  
Therefore, reasons attributed in the reply were not  tenable. Moreover, fact remains that 
though there were excess borrowing, it resorted to cash credit or overdraft facilities 
entailing additional interest burden, which is indi cative of the fact that the resources 
planning was not done judiciously. 
(c) Extra cost of `` `` 134.97 crore due to lower credit rating  
HUDCO has been assigned credit rating of AA + for its financial instruments issued 
during 2011-12 to 2013-14. This was mainly due to p resence of high NPAs, 
concentration of loan portfolio to only 20 borrower s (194 per cent of equity capital as of 
March 2013), lower net interest margin, and signifi cant exposure in vulnerable sectors 
like energy and real estate. As a result, HUDCO inc urred an extra expenditure of 
` 134.97 crore on issue of tax free and taxable bonds  during 2011-12 to 2014-15.  In this 
connection, Audit appreciates that HUDCO was rated as AAA during 2015-16, as it 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
98 
could reduce NPAs from 5.3 per cent  in 2013-14 to 3.4 per cent  in 2014-15 in respect of 
housing loans and increase net interest margin ( i.e. , difference between average yield of 
loan and average cost of funds) from 1.59 per cent  in 2013-14 to 2.21 per cent  in 2014-
15.  
HUDCO/MoHUPA stated (December 2015/March 2016) that  while there has been 
constant growth in loan portfolio, consistent effor ts to mobilise low cost fund together 
with constant improvement in operational performanc e over all the years resulted in 
getting higher rating for 2015-16.  However, reply is to be viewed against the fact that in 
spite of having been incorporated in 1970 as a prem ier Government agency, HUDCO 
could not succeed in obtaining and maintaining high er rating primarily due to higher 
levels of NPA and poor operational efficiencies in terms of high cost of funds, low net 
interest margin, etc., which resulted in mobilisation of funds at higher coupon rates.  
(d) Fixing higher coupon rate resulted in excess ex penditure of `` `` 12.42 crore 
During 2011-12, HUDCO issued taxable bonds Series-B  amounting to ` 413.90 crore at 
the rate of interest of 9.75 per cent for a tenor of five years through arrangers on priv ate 
placement basis and the allotment was made on 18 No vember 2011.  In order to ascertain 
the competitiveness of coupon rate, National Stock Exchange (NSE) data in this regard 
was examined and it was observed that some institut ions had issued bonds at lesser 
coupon rates around the same time as HUDCO.  While one issue ( ` 2500 crore and date 
of allotment 21 November 2011) related to Indiabull s Housing Finance Limited for a 
tenor of 3 years having coupon rate of 9.50 per cent,  another issue ( ` 250 crore and 
allotment date 15 November 2011) related to L&T Inf rastructure Finance Company 
Limited for a tenor of 5 years with coupon rate of 9.15 per cent .  It was also noticed that 
both the institutions were having similar credit rating (AA+) as HUDCO. While similarly 
rated private institutions mobilized ` 250 crore at 9.15 per cent  approximately at the 
same time (within a gap of three days), HUDCO mobil ized ` 413.90 crore at 9.75 per 
cent  at comparatively higher coupon rate by 0.60 per cent  and thereby had to absorb an 
extra payout of ` 12.42 crore (0.60 per cent x 5 years x ` 413.90 crore) as interest over a 
period of five years.  
HUDCO/MoHUPA stated (December 2015/March 2016) that  the issue by private 
institutions cannot be compared, as the same was al lotted with put/call option at the end 
of 13 months and the period after which put/call op tion was exercisable was construed as 
tenor of the bond for pricing by market/investors. The reply, however, is to be viewed 
against the fact that any issue with put/call optio n normally carry higher coupon rate, as 
the option could be exercised by either of the part y.  Therefore, the private institutions 
issued bonds with put/call option at a lesser coupon rate than HUDCO.   
(e) Engagement of arrangers  
HUDCO had issued taxable bonds on private placement  amounting to ` 1867.40 crore 
during the period 2011-12 to 2013-14 at interest ra tes ranging from 8.14 per cent to 9.75 
per cent using the services of arrangers for fund mobilizati on while loans of ` 7186.84 
crore from the banks were mobilised at interest ran ging from 10.22 per cent to 10.40 per 
cent  during the same period.  In the two series of bond s valuing `928.50 crore during 
2011-12 to 2013-14, where the services of arrangers  had been availed, the arrangers 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
99 
themselves or their group entities invested `563.40 crore (60.68 per cent ).  Conflict of 
interest is a risk to be managed in an arrangement where the arranger is also the investor. 
HUDCO stated (December 2015) that funds by way of p rivate placement were mobilized 
through arrangers, who submitted firm commitment at  offered terms prior to opening of 
the issue. Further, it was also added that coupon r ate arrived at was verified for its 
competitiveness with reference to benchmark rates a nd corporate bond yields before the 
same was finalised.  The reply, however, needs to b e viewed against the fact that coupon 
rate was higher by 0.60 per cent  as referred to in para 3.1.4 above when HUDCO and a 
private institution issued bonds within a gap of three days.  
10.1.3.2 Lending operations 
(a)  Loan sanctions and disbursements  
Details of loan sanctioned and disbursed by HUDCO d uring the five years ending 
31March 2015 are depicted in the Chart below.  It c an be seen that actual disbursements 
during 2010-11 to 2014-15 ranged from 38.40 (2014-1 5) to 69.72  per cent (2011-12) of 
sanctioned loans whereas the corresponding per cent  ranged in peer institutions like 
LHFL and HDFC 
from88.10 per cent to 
94.62 per cent  and 78.88 
per cent to 80.25 per cent  
respectively during 2010-
11 to 2013-14.  Even 
though the business 
models of these 
institutions do not match 
with HUDCO 
completely, the 
percentage of 
disbursement of HUDCO 
was comparatively lower.  
As per information 
furnished by HUDCO, (i) 
18 out of 21 regional 
offices lost business of ` 14019.49 crore during 2010- to 2014-15 due to high er lending 
rates, while information about three 1 offices was awaited (January 2016), (ii) loan of  
` 2847.25 crore were automatically closed due to lap se of sanction period and loan of  
` 3139.32 crore were closed due to non-completion of  legal documentation, while 
reasons for early closure of loan of ` 1755.00 crore was awaited (January 2016), and  
(iii) separate targets were not fixed for housing finance scheme named “HUDCO Niwas”. 
The above indicated that HUDCO did not analyse the reasons for non-availing of loans 
by parties even after its sanction . 
HUDCO/MoHUPA stated (December 2015/March 2016) that  in view of time taken for 
completion of various projects, comparing sanction and disbursement of a particular year 
                                                           
1  Bhopal, Dehradun, and Lucknow 


Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
100 
might not provide the right picture.  Infrastructur e projects get delayed or closed due to 
various reasons and affects disbursements, and as a  matter of policy, it did not disburse 
funds where a government agency was in default of a bove 5 per cent .  In view of these, 
disbursement of earlier sanctioned schemes got dela yed or held up, but it had to continue 
sanctioning schemes in anticipation of future impro vement of recovery and state of 
finance. Regarding housing loans, majority of portf olio of HDFC and LHFL were in 
retail housing sector and they sanction a project a fter completion of all permissions and 
land acquisitions, and separate targets were not fixed for HUDCO Niwas, since it was not 
the major focus area.  
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that tes t check of 14 cases 1 has shown that 
disbursement was completed between one and 28 month s in respect of infrastructure 
funding. Audit has also not included loan sanctione d in principle, i.e.,  loans which were 
not disbursed due to election and state/national le vel policy issues like land acquisition, 
departmental permissions in availing the disburseme nt, etc . Further, HUDCO could not 
disburse `1917 crore in two 2 regional offices due to default by State agencies.   This 
default constituted only 4.64 per cent  of amount ( `41839 crore) not disbursed.In 
comparison with the peers 3 involved in retail housing loans, the performance of HUDCO 
varied between 18.05 and 30.41 per cent  of housing loans sanctioned.   
(b) Violation of directions of NHB 
(i) As per clause 28 and 32 of NHB Directions 2001/2010 , housing finance company 
should not lend to any single borrower in excess of  15 per cent of itsnetowned funds 
(NoF)and to any single group of borrowers in excess  of 25 per cent of NoF. However, 
Board of Directors approved (May 2005) exposure lim its of 50 per cent  of NoF for 
government agencies, while no limit was prescribed for each State government citing that 
the principle of ‘group’ would not apply to them.  Despite this violation being pointed out 
in Report No.22 of 2007 of CAG of India and refusal  of any concession by NHB in this 
regard, HUDCO continued to entertain loans beyond t he prescribed limits involving an 
amount of `2570 crore as noticed in four out of 93 cases test checked in audit.  
Meanwhile, NHB acceded to HUDCO’s request in April 2011 and allowed 50 per cent  of 
NoF to government agencies only for housing and hou sing related infrastructure and 100 
per cent  of NoF to individual State government.  Audit furt her noticed that HUDCO 
sanctioned `375 crore in July 2011 and `300 crore in May 2012 to Uttar Pradesh Power 
Corporation Limited (UPPCL) despite having an incre ase in cumulative loss from 
` 7169.89 crore in 2006-07 to ` 26988.75 crore in 2010-11.  Due to liquidity probl em 
consequent to non-receipt of grant from State gover nment, UPPCL defaulted in servicing 
the loan and as a result, the loan became NPA.  Sim ilarly, HUDCO released a loan of 
` 750 crore in 2014-15 to Uttar Pradesh Rural Housing  Board (UPRHB) even when it 
was defaulting (since 1999) on an earlier loan whic h was backed by government 
guarantee.  HUDCO had failed to recover the amount from the earlier loan even after 
invoking the government guarantee. 
                                                           
1  Loan Scheme Numbers: 19713, 19847, 19919, 19945, 19954, 20022, 20067, 20120, 20172, 20171, 
20090, 20121, 20051, and 20212. 
2  Jammu and Thiruvananthapuram 
3  LHFL between 88.10 per cent and 94.62 per cent, a nd HDFC between 78.88 per cent and 80.25 per 
cent 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
101 
The reply that NHB relaxation has been obtained nee ds to be viewed in light of the fact 
that Secretary, MoHUPA observed 1 that although the relaxation would enable HUDCO 
to lend more to government agencies, it would also shift onus to ensure due diligence and 
careful risk assessment before exposing themselves to single/individual borrowers to this 
extent.  The Secretary further suggested that HUDCO  should review its internal norms to 
ensure that exposure beyond 15 per cent  was covered by greater internal controls for 
careful risk assessment and security requirements.  However, extending loans to agencies 
of Uttar Pradesh Government indicated that the suggestion of the Secretary was not given 
due cognisance. 
(ii) As per clause 22(2) of NHB Directions2010, interest/discount or any other charges on 
NPA shall be adjusted/recognized only when it was a ctually realized. However, HUDCO 
adjusted `134.07 crore during 2014-15 from loan accounts of M /s RKM Powergen 
Private Limited and M/s KVK Nilachal Power Private Limited after these accounts 
became NPAs.  
HUDCO stated (December 2015) that necessary changes  in the procedures/guidelines 
were being done to prevent such occurrence in futur e. MoHUPA stated (March 2016) 
that HUDCO amended (January 2016) its internal inst ructions about non adjustment of 
interest during construction period for accounts wh ich are NPA. Audit appreciates that 
HUDCO took corrective action in this regard . 
(iii) As per NHB Directions 2001/2010, where delay in com pletion of a project was 
caused by factors beyond the control of project imp lementing agency, terms of loan 
agreement regarding interest and/or principal might  be rescheduled once before the 
completion of project and such loans might be treat ed as standard asset, subject to the 
condition that such re-scheduling is permitted only  once by Board of Directors and that 
interest on such loan was paid regularly and there was no default. However, HUDCO 
introduced (July 2005) internal guidelines not in c onsonance with the directives of NHB 
and concessions were granted to parties. Audit noti ced 71 deferment cases involving 
principal default of ` 1551.80 crore without the approval of Board, inclu ding 22 cases 
where deferment was allowed twice or more. In addit ion to this, Board allowed four 
deferment cases involving principal default of ` 287.28 crore,of which one case was 
allowed twice. On this being pointed by NHB Inspect ion Team in their report for 2010-
11, the guidelines were withdrawn on 27 July 2013.   
HUDCO confirmed (December 2015) the audit observati on.  However, fact remains that 
the impact of violations still continued and as on 31March 2015, there were 25 cases out 
of total 75 cases which continued to be in default and out of these 25 default cases, 18 
were NPA.   
 (c) Deficiencies in internal guidelines  
HUDCO laid down guidelines for appraisal of loan ap plications received and 
disbursement thereof.  Shortcomings noticed in the control system in this regard are 
discussed in succeeding sub-paras: 
                                                           
1  Letter dated 4 July 2011 addressed to Director (F inance) HUDCO. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
102 
(i) The guidelines did not indicate any benchmark for d ebt service coverage ratio 
(DSCR), breakeven point (BEP), and return on equity  (RoE), etc.  in respect of real estate 
projects, though the same were prescribed for other  loans.  HUDCO stated (December 
2015) that having one benchmark to judge all projects was impractical. However, absence 
of this in real estate did not facilitate transparent and judicious selection of projects. 
(ii)  No system was in place to ensure the veracity of d ata in project proposals vis-à-
vis  industry norms and financial parameters. HUDCO sta ted (December 2015) that the 
appraisal team takes these factors into account.  However, this was not the case as seen in 
the test checked case as discussed in para 10.1.3.2 (e) (vi)   
(iii)  The internal guidelines did not provide for indepe ndent appraisal of application 
involving consortium lending and depended upon the lead lender’s project 
appraisal/Project Information Memorandum (PIM).  HU DCO stated (December 2015) 
that as it did not have sectoral expertise in areas  like  power, road, etc. , it decided to 
follow the lead lenders.  Moreover, it undertook ex posure of around 5 per cent  only of 
total project cost in individual projects.  However , the reply is not tenable as its exposure 
was more than 5 per cent  of project cost in five cases 1 test checked in audit and the same 
ranged between 7.51 and 26.67 per  cent.  MoHUPA stated (March 2016) that there were 
no guidelines limiting HUDCO’s exposure to 5 per cent  of project cost in case of 
consortium projects which also confirms that HUDCO was not mitigating its risk through 
limited exposure of around 5 per cent  only of the total project cost in the individual 
projects.  The fact, therefore, remains that only i ndependent appraisal of proposals even 
in cases of consortium lending could ensure protect ion of HUDCO’s financial interest, as 
the risk exposure cannot be shared with lead lender. 
(d) Recovery and NPAs 
Quality of assets is the primary consideration whil e assessing credit risk by financing 
institutions, and therefore, level of NPA indicates  quality of assets. As per NHB 
Directions 2010, a loan asset in respect of which i nterest or instalment remained overdue 
for 90 days was classified as NPA.  As such, higher  level of NPA amounts to lower 
revenue. Table-4 below indicates the age of default  and percentage of NPA for the five 
years ended 31 March 2015. 
Table-4:  Age of default vs.  NPA  
Age  
( Months) 
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
(Amount in `` ``crore) 
0-3 138.05 110.26 200.23 273.76 198.24 
3-6  52.38 10.84 393.25 12.41 1.87 
6-30  163.94 284.92 539.36 831.03 593.69 
Above 30  3412.48 3966.30 3509.01 4171.21 4001.23 
Total  3766.85 4372.32 4641.85 5288.41 4795.03 
NPA (Per cent) 5.46 6.07 5.69 6.76 6.30 
                                                           
1  (i) RKM Powergen Private Limited, (ii) KVK Nilach al Power Private Limited, (iii) Himachal Sorang 
Power Private Limited, (iv) Shree MaheshwarHydel Po wer Corporation Limited, and (v) Nagarjuna 
Oil Corporation Limited. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
103 
It is evident from the above that percentage of NPA s to gross outstanding has been above 
five per cent in all the five years with a high of 6.76 per cent in 2013-14 and low of 5.46 
per cent in 2010-11.  Though the business model of HDFC and LHFL functioning in the 
same business segment was different from HUDCO, a c omparison revealed that these 
institutions had much lower levels of NPA, which ra nged between 0.40 to 0.70 per cent 
during the same period.  Similarly, default of loan  above 30 months accounted for 83.45 
per cent  of the total default as on 31 March 2015 indicating a higher risk of recovery.    
HUDCO stated (December 2015) that a comparison with  HDFC and LHFL does not 
appear to be justified, as more than 90 per cent  of its portfolio was bulk loan, while 
HDFC and LHFL were majorly retail lending instituti ons. Further, HUDCO was also 
operating in infrastructure sector like power, road , transport, etc.  and during the period 
under review this sector has been suffering due to policy and regulatory issues and even 
PSU banks and FIs have posted higher NPAs in these sectors.  
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  comparison was made to highlight the 
magnitude of NPA vis-a-vis  other Public Financing Institutions. The alarming position of 
NPA can further be corroborated with the fact that the NPA of IIFCL and IDFC 
(institutions engaged in financing of infrastructur e projects) during 2012-13 to 2014-15 
ranged between 0.94 and 3.79 per cent  in case of IIFCL, and 0.15 and 0.70 per cent  in 
case of IDFC, while the same for HUDCO was 5.68 and  7.53 per cent .  In respect of 
loans in housing sector, where a comparison with HD FC and LHFL was justifiable, as 
against NPA between 3.40 and 9.50 per cent  of HUDCO during 2011-11 to 2014-15, it 
ranged between 0.5 to 0.8 per cent  for HDFC and LHFL in the same period.   
(e) Illustrative cases of default and NPAs 
Audit observed instances of deficient appraisal of loan applications and pre-disbursement 
system, lack of benchmarks, deficient monitoring mechanism to ensure utilisation of loan 
and exposure in excess of ceiling fixed and other d eficiencies noticed in the internal 
guidelines coupled with violations of NHB Direction s. Resultantly, the projects, 
otherwise not eligible for financing, had been fina nced or greater exposure had been 
taken, leading to NPAs or to legal issues as discussed below:  
(i)  M/s RKM Powergen Private Limited  
Two loans of ` 200 crore and ` 300 crore were sanctioned (March 2008 and May 2010 ) 
to M/s RKM PowergenPvt. Ltd under consortium lendin g for a power project (Phase I 
and II) to be implemented by September 2010 and Nov ember 2012 respectively. Audit 
observed lapses in sanction of loan like (i) DSCR 1 being decreased from 4.39 to 0.70 as 
against 1.5 based on REC guidelines and (ii) non ad herence to lending cap of up to five 
per cent  of project cost.  Further, ` 493.34 crorewas disbursed during August 2009 to 
February 2015 relaxing essential pre disbursement c onditions of signing Fuel Supply 
Agreement (FSA) along with coal linkage and Power P urchase Agreement (PPA) by 
August 2010. Due to delay in implementation, projec t cost has escalated (February 2015) 
to ` 2389.18 crore and ` 7988.15 crore from ` 1487 crore and ` 5166.11 crore for Phase 
                                                           
1  DSCR denotes repayment capacity of the borrower. Higher ratio denotes better repayment capacity of 
the borrower and consequently safety of the repayment of principal and interest.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
104 
I and II respectively, and the project is yet to be come operational (January 2016).  
Meanwhile, the loan with an outstanding amount of `482.57 crore became NPA in July 
2014. 
HUDCO/ MoHUPA stated (December 2015/ March 2016) th at the loan was sanctioned 
on the strength of financial viability as appraised by the lead lender and not merely on the 
financial health of promoter.  Coal linkage was sig ned with SECL on 23 September 2013 
and PPA for 490 MW with Chhattisgarh State Electric ity Board (CSEB) had been signed 
and expression of interest for supply of 350 MW to UPPCL, Telangana and Andhra 
Pradesh had been received and the PPAs would be sig ned after obtaining bank guarantee. 
The reply confirms that the crucial pre-disbursement conditions were fully not adhered to 
by the borrower, while HUDCO had disbursed more tha n 98 per cent of the loan and 
absence of independent appraisal of loan applicatio n and dependence on lead lender has 
eventually exposed HUDCO to risky portfolio.  Apart  from this, lead lender appraised in 
its Investment Memorandum that CSEB may not procure  the power under the executed 
PPA due to cost overrun. 
MoHUPA further stated (March 2016) that FSA and PPA  were required to be in place at 
the time of the project achieving commercial operational date (COD). 
Reply of MoHUPA is to be viewed against the fact that this project is not able to generate 
the electricity in absence of FSA and PPA after achieving COD. 
(ii)  M/s KVK Nilachal Power Private Limited 
HUDCOsanctioned (23 July 2007) a term loan of `360 crore to M/s KVK Nilachal 
Power Private Limited for setting up a power plant at `1350 crore.  Audit noticed that (i) 
annual contribution `0.06 per unit  of energy to Environment Management Fund (EMF) 
was not considered while estimating profit resultin g in overestimation of profit between 
` 8.45 crore and `11.27 crore per annum , which impacted repaying capacity of the 
borrower, (ii) pre-disbursement condition of promot ers bringing in equity contribution of 
`270 crore and finalising FSA and PPA were relaxed, (iii) promoters failed to bring in 
additional contribution of `354.56 crore towards cost escalation, (iv) HUDCO ex tended 
(27 May 2011) buyers’ line of credit (BLC) of `94.53 crore to UCO Bank to facilitate the 
borrower to purchase equipment without adhering to pre-disbursement conditions, and 
(v) lending cap of up to 5 per cent  of project cost was not adhered to.  The project c ould 
not be completed, and as a result project cost esca lated to `2768.25 crore and 
implementation schedule got delayed from January 2010 to December 2016.  Meanwhile, 
loan became NPA in October 2014 with an outstanding amount of `348.71 crore. 
HUDCO/ MoHUPA stated (December 2015/ March 2016) th at since the project was 
funded on consortium basis, no detailed appraisal w as carried out and it relied on the 
Project Information Memorandum of the lead lender.  Even after considering the transfer 
to Environment Management Fund, project profitabili ty was positive and would not have 
affected the funding.  It added that promoters had contributed equity of `243.20 crore 
against the envisaged equity of `270 crore. MoHUPA further stated that buyers’ line of 
credit was extended to UCO Bank on terms of common loan agreement.  The reply, 
however, needs to be viewed against the fact that t hough there was shortfall in bringing 
in additional equity, the additional contribution t owards cost escalation was not even 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
105 
brought in. Non consideration of EMF adversely impa cted cash flow of borrower which 
in return impacted recovery of loan.  In order to s afe guard its interest, Management was 
required to ensure compliance with its disbursement  conditions.  The reply that the time 
for finalising FSA and PPA were extended up to Apri l 2012 confirms that pre-
disbursement conditions were unduly relaxed, which eventually led the loan account to 
become NPA.  
(iii)   M/s Himachal Sorang Power Private Limited  
A loan of ` 100 crore was sanctioned (March 2007) to M/s Himac hal Sorang Power 
Private Limited for setting up of a power project a t ` 580 crore.  The loan had been 
disbursed during August 2007 to July 2010, while th e project was to be implemented by 
March 2010. Audit observed that (i) requirement of having a PPA within 12 months from 
the first disbursement was relaxed, (ii) the requir ement for assigning rights of forest lease 
hold land as well as pledging of 51 per cent  of borrower’s share capital was waived, and 
(iii) lending cap of up to five per cent  of project cost was also not adhered to. Further, 
there was time overrun of more than 5 years and cos t overrun of ` 673.90 crore (116.19 
per cent ). As a result, there was dilution in security avai lable to HUDCO, though the 
project was in operation since 31 October 2015.   
In their reply (December 2015), HUDCO maintained th at the loan was sanctioned under 
consortium and no independent appraisal was made by  it, and relaxation for assigning 
forest land was made in line with lead lender, whil e additional one per cent  interest was 
levied for relaxation to assigning shares. However,  the fact remains that approving 
projects and relaxing pre-disbursement conditions i n line with lead lender cannot be 
considered as prudent, as every lender has to sanct ion and disburse loan based on an 
independent evaluation of risk vis-a-vis  their acceptable benchmarks. 
Apart from HUDCO’s reply, MoHUPA stated (March 2016 ) that there was no guideline 
limiting HUDCO’s exposure to 5 per cent  of project cost in case of consortium projects.  
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that HUD CO had claimed (December 2015) 
that it limited its exposure to the extent of 5 per cent  only of the total project cost in case 
of consortium funding. 
(iv)  M/s Electosteel Steels Limited  
HUDCO accorded (March 2007) ‘ in principle’  approval for a loan of ` 300 crore to M/s 
Electosteel Steels Limited for setting up of a stee l plant based on PIM prepared by 
IL&FS Financial Services Limited (IFIN) as principa l advisor to the project. The loan 
was sanctioned on 14 June 2007 for ` 295 crore after receipt of a letter from SBI agreeing 
to take up the role of lead lender based on PIM pre pared by IFIN.  As per the practice in 
vogue, no appraisal was required for a loan under c onsortium, provided the project had 
been appraised by lead lender.  Audit, however, fou nd nothing on record that indicated 
that the lead lender had appraised the project.    
HUDCO/ MoHUPA confirmed (December 2015/ March 2016)  the above and added that 
it followed the wisdom of lead lender who had exper tise in the field of industrial 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
106 
financing. However, fact remains that no record was  found that could suggest that the 
project was appraised by SBI. 
(v)   M/s Pipavav Defence and Offshore Engineering Company Limited 
HUDCO sanctioned (May 2005) a loan of ` 271 crore to M/s Pipavav Defence and 
Offshore Engineering Company Limited. The loan beca me NPA in February 2014 and 
the outstanding principal and interest stood at ` 92.75 crore and ` 14.66 crore 
respectively as on 31 March 2015. Clause 15 of loan  agreement (September 2005) 
provided HUDCO a right to convert their exposure, in  part or fully, together with interest 
and other charges thereon into equity shares of the  borrower company at a price of 
minimum face value or prevailing market price, whic hever is less. Further, the pre-
disbursement condition of the loan required the bor rower to obtain requisite approvals 
from its shareholders through a special resolution and furnish the same to HUDCO.  
Moreover, loan to the borrower was neither covered under the main objective of HUDCO 
nor under the categories approved by Board in March  2012. No recorded reasons for 
sanctioning the sanction of loan to an ineligible sector were found in audit.   
HUDCO stated (February 2016) that since the loan wa s provided for development of 
infrastructure of the shipyard, it falls within the  purview of main objective. The reply is 
not tenable as it belonged neither to housing nor to the urban infrastructure. 
MoHUPA stated (March 2016) that the matter is under  follow up with the agency for 
conversion of HUDCO’s loan into equity. Audit appre ciates MoHUPA’s intention in 
taking corrective measures. 
(vi)  M/s Vikat Hotels Private Limited  
HUDCO sanctioned (April 2007) a loan of ` 20.80 crore to M/s Vikat Hotels Private 
Limited for construction of a hotel in Bangalore. A udit observed that the loan was 
processed based on a project report provided by the  borrower and no independent 
assessment was done to ensure the veracity of proje ctions of occupancy rate and 
operation cost made therein. The loan was sanctione d taking occupancy rate of 75 to 91 
per cent  and projected operation cost of 33.73 per cent  of total earnings before 
depreciation, interest and taxes. A survey report c onducted by Federation of Hotel and 
Restaurant Associations of India (FHRAI) for the pe riod 2005-06 and 2006-07, however, 
revealed that occupancy rate of hotels in Bangalore  had decreased from 79 per cent  in 
2004-05 to 68 per cent  in 2006-07 and the same was expected to decrease d ue to addition 
of 8000 to 9000 rooms during 2009-10.  Moreover, co st of operation was to the extent of 
68 per cent  of total income. Audit also noticed that HUDCO dis bursed ` 18.48 crore 
during July 2007 to August 2008 based on Chartered Accountants’ certificate/site 
inspection of regional office. However, as per a re port submitted by the regional chief 
after physical verification, excess disbursement of  ` 8.36 crore was noticed due to 
overstatement of expenditure. The loan became NPA i n November 2008 with an 
outstanding of ` 56.99 crore as on 31 March 2015. 
HUDCO/ MoHUPA stated (December 2015/ March 2016) th at details in the project 
report and supporting demand assessment reports/doc uments as well as reconnaissance 
survey details of similar projects were ascertained /analyzed and agency’s project reports 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
107 
were also relied upon. Even though the loan was par tly utilized, it levied penalty on 
unutilized amount from the date of release as per p rovisions of loan agreement. 
MoHUPA further stated that the study pointed by Aud it pertains to the years 2005-06, 
2006-07 and 2009-10 of Bangalore city which was rep orted after sanction of scheme in 
April 2007. The reply, however, is to be viewed aga inst the fact that data/study from a 
private firm was obtained only after sanction of the loan while international/national level 
study was available which revealed significant vari ation from the data furnished by the 
borrower.  Apart from this, the study report of FHR AI for the period 2005-06 which was 
published in February 2007 also included prediction  for occupancy of rooms during 
2006-07 and 2009-10. Further, levy of penalty does not take away the fact that excess 
amount was disbursed without ensuring real progress  of the work or actual amount spent 
on the project.  Further, the reply was silent on the aspect of dilution of security.  
(vii)  M/s Dreams Consultants Private Limited 
HUDCO sanctioned (August 2007) a term loan of ` 25 crore to M/s Dreams Consultants 
Private Limited for construction of Nilai Internati onal College at Ranchi and ` 16.00 
crore was disbursed between November 2007 and March 2009.  Despite the project being 
in operation, the borrower defaulted (May 2009) and  the loan became NPA in May 2009, 
and total outstanding including interest as on 31 M arch 2015stood as ` 42.67 crore.  It 
was observed that the borrower transferred the mort gaged property to Nilai Educational 
Trust in which the borrower was also a trustee with out informing or seeking permission 
from HUDCO, and the same came to the notice of HUDC O only in April 2009.  
Subsequently, a cancellation deed (May 2009) regist ered with District Sub Registrar was 
submitted to HUDCO with an explanation that the lan d was inadvertently transferred. 
The legal wing of HUDCO treated this as an act of f raud and suggested (June 2009) 
recall of the entire loan along with other dues and  to take legal action. Accordingly, 
HUDCO recalled (5 May 2010) the entire loan togethe r with interest and other monies as 
payable through legal notice, while criminal case was filed only in March 2015. 
HUDCO/ MoHUPA stated (December 2015/ March 2016) th at legal action was taken in 
May 2010 when the recall notice was issued, and to recover the outstanding amount, it 
invoked personal and corporate guarantee (24 May 20 10) and bank guarantee (8 June 
2010) of ` 25 lakh and process of filing a criminal case for fraud and breach of trust has 
been started. However, the fact remains that it too k action as recommended by legal 
department in May 2010, while such action should ha ve been taken after two quarters of 
persistent default since May 2009.  Moreover, though it was termed (June 2009) as a case 
of intentional fraud, criminal case was filed only in March 2015. 
(viii)   M/s Sunil Ispat and Power Limited 
HUDCO sanctioned a loan of ` 24.50 crore in March 2006 to M/s Sunil Ispat and P ower 
Limited for construction of a captive power plant ( CPP) as part of a proposed mini 
integrated steel plant under a consortium arrangeme nt. As per norms in vogue, after first 
disbursal, subsequent releases were to be made afte r site inspection.  HUDCO, however, 
failed to monitor utilization of loan, as borrower diverted the loan, while its officers from 
regional office at Raipur periodically furnished sa tisfactory reports and recommended 
further disbursements, and also endorsed false repo rts of lenders’ engineer and Chartered 
Accountant. Meanwhile, it emerged (November 2008) i n a consortium meeting that work 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
108 
had not been started for CPP.  Despite likely fraud  coming to notice, legal action was 
initiated only after lapse of more than 3 years in May 2012. The loan became NPA in 
May 2009, and the total outstanding stood at ` 75.59 crore as on 31 March 2015.  
Further, the realisable value of assets was assesse d between ` 22.85 crore and ` 30 crore 
against outstanding amount of ` 144.14 crore to the consortium. Therefore, suffici ent 
tangible security to recover this loan does not exi st. It was also noticed that this loan has 
been picked by Corporate Vigilance Wing and Central  Bureau of Investigation for 
investigation in February 2013. 
HUDCO/ MoHUPA accepted (December 2015/ March 2016) that monitoring of the 
project failed and borrower was successful in diver ting the loan as it largely depended on 
reports of lenders’ engineer/auditor, who furnished false report and no adverse report was 
furnished even by its officials. As no consortium d ocuments were executed, it was 
decided to file suit separately as accepted by all the lenders, and accordingly action was 
initiated. The reply, however, is to be viewed against the fact that HUDCO did not ensure 
that a common loan agreement was executed though th e loan was under consortium, and 
failure on the part of lenders’ engineer does not take away its responsibility of monitoring 
the progress of work. Further, it took three years to initiate legal action against the 
borrower while internal guidelines stipulated actio n after expiry of one quarter of loan 
becoming NPA. Moreover, the reply was silent on the  action taken or proposed to be 
taken against its officers who furnished or endorse d false reports, based on which 
disbursements were made. 
(ix)   M/s Shree Maheshwar Hydel Power Corporation Limited 
HUDCO disbursed a loan of 
`259.00 crore to M/s Shree MaheshwarHydel Power 
Corporation Limited for a power project under a con sortium. While approving the loan, 
Board directed that release of loan instalments be made after the promoter brought in 
additional equity and acquired entire land includin g land for rehabilitation and 
resettlement (R&R) of affected villages. However, t hese were relaxed and loan was 
disbursed between June 2007 and January 2010. Meanw hile, borrower defaulted in 
servicing the loan from January 2011 and project ac tivities were held up since March 
2013.  It is pertinent to note that estimated proje ct cost and expected tariff from it has 
increased steadily from ` 736 crore and ` 2.76 per unit  (1993) respectively to ` 2449 
crore and ` 5.32 per unit  (2006) and to ` 6793 crore and ` 13 per unit  (2015) making the 
future of the project and recovery of loan uncertai n, as Madhya Pradesh Power 
Management Company Limited refused to purchase at t ariff beyond ` 5.32 per unit . A 
high level committee constituted (September 2014) t o suggest the way forward for the 
project though recommended (May 2015) three measure s, two of which did not 
materialise leaving only the third option of exitin g of Madhya Pradesh government and 
its agencies from the project and managing it by lenders, a credible and clear roadmap for 
which is yet (December 2015) to be finalised. The l oan became NPA in April 2011 with 
an outstanding amount of ` 490.29 crore as of March 2015.   
HUDCO stated (December 2015) that promoters agreed to contribute additional equity 
and the existing lenders agreed to restructure thei r loan to make the project economically 
viable.  It is to be noted that the loan account is  under NPA in the books of all lenders 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
109 
because of non-infusion of fund by the promoters. F urther, Board authorised the 
management to relax pre-disbursement conditions in line with the lead lender. 
The reply needs to be viewed against the fact that while sanctioning the loan, HUDCO 
was aware that the project was delayed due to inabi lity of promoters to bring in required 
funds, and was defaulting in servicing of existing loan, and therefore, relaxation of pre-
disbursement conditions was not judicious.  
MoHUPA stated (March 2016) that there is a proposal to invoke the pledged shares of the 
company thereby taking control of the project for completion and revenue generation. 
Reply is to be viewed in light of the refusal by MP  Power Management Company Ltd. 
(erstwhile MPSEB) to purchase the power at the tariff exceeding 
` 5.32 per unit . 
(x)   M/s Ascot Hotel and Resort Limited  
HUDCO sanctioned (June 2006) a loan of ` 80 crore to M/s Ascot Hotel and Resort 
Limited for construction of club-cum-banquet hall at Noida.  Audit observed that the loan 
was sanctioned without ensuring adequate net-worth of promoters and accepted pledge of 
a property valued at ` 12 crore against promoters’ share of ` 22.73 crore in borrowing 
company (51 per cent  of total equity), resulting in inadequate security  to the extent of 
` 10.73 crore.  The loan became NPA in February 2012 and the total outstanding stood at 
`100.84 crore as on 31 March 2015.  
HUDCO/ MoHUPA stated (December 2015/ March 2016) th at it accepted the mortgage 
of property in lieu of shares after approval of com petent authority and that the total value 
of security was well beyond 150 per cent.  Further, the shares were already pledged to 
other FIs and the promoters proposed initial public  offer (IPO) of their shares. The fact, 
however,remainsthat acceptance of the alternate sec urity was inadequate and resulted in 
dilution of security available to HUDCO. 
Conclusion  
HUDCO mobilised ` 37128.32 crore during 2010-11 to 2014-15, but the mobilization 
was not judicious, on account of higher proportion of bank loans, which carried interest 
rates higher than those for funds from other source s by one to two per cent .  Assessment 
of requirement of fund was not made based on laid d own policy or framework, and 
certain elements of fund inflow/outflow were not gi ven due consideration resulting in 
excess mobilisation of ` 3277.96 crore and additional interest burden of ` 30.39 crore.  
Incidence of extra expenditure of ` 147.39 crore was also noticed due to lower credit 
rating and fixing of higher coupon rate. The exclus ive dependence on arrangers for fund 
mobilisation instead of developing own capabilities  with attendant benefits of reduced 
coupon and lending rate exposed HUDCO to possible r isk of higher coupon rate arising 
from possible conflict of interest.   
In lending operations, the amount disbursed ranged between 38.40 and 69.72 per cent of 
loans sanctioned during five years ended 2014-15. A udit examination revealed non 
compliance with directions issued by National Housi ng Bank, the Regulator.  
Deficiencies in internal guidelines also affected t he quality of assets. Deficiencies in 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
110 
existing appraisal mechanism, system of disbursemen t, monitoring of financed projects 
and waiver of critical pre-disbursement conditions led to considerable loan accounts 
turning into non performing assets, which were in t he range of 5.46 to 6.76 per cent  
during the five year period.  In monetary terms, th e amount in default increased from 
` 3766.86 crore in 2010-11 to ` 4795.05 crore in 2014-15, while NPA increased from  
` 1227.60 crore to ` 2029.33 crore during the same period.  
Recommendations 
Audit makes the following recommendations to addres s the shortcomings noticed and 
to improve the operations of HUDCO. 
/head2right Strengthen the procedure for assessment of requirement of funds;  
/head2right Ensure that mobilisation of funds is carried out in  an economical, efficient and 
effective manner through judicious selection of fin ancial instruments, 
increasing the investor base and  developing own me chanism to mobilise 
resources so as to optimise cost and return;  
/head2right Independently evaluate loans granted under consorti um lending and validate 
assumptions and projections furnished by borrowers or lending partners; 
/head2right Examine the need for prescribing financial benchmar ks for financing real 
estate and consortium funding; and   
/head2right Strengthen the monitoring system to ensure proper u tilisation of funds by 
borrowing institutions.  
HUDCO/ MoHUPA stated (December 2015/ March 2016) th at the review and 
strengthening is an ongoing process which is being done regularly and all out efforts to 
improve on the above aspects shall be undertaken. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
111 
 
 
 
Damodar Valley Corporation 
11.1 Loss due to delay in lodging of claims with Ra ilways 
The Corporation suffered a loss of `` `` 5.24 crore due to delay in lodging claims with 
the Railways for undelivered coal wagons.  
Damodar Valley Corporation (Corporation) is engaged  in generation and distribution of 
power mainly through its coal based Thermal Power S tations (TPS). The Corporation 
procures coal from Government Companies under a fue l supply agreement. Coal is 
transported to the respective TPS either by road or  by rail. Railways on acceptance of 
goods, issue a Railway Receipt (RR) which is eviden ce of weight and number of 
packages therein. The consignment is delivered on s urrender of such RR. Railways are 
responsible for loss, damage or non-delivery of con signment arising from any cause 
except force majeure clause. However, as per provis ions of section 106 (1) of the 
Railways Act 1989 (RA), any claim for compensation against Railways for the loss or 
non-delivery of goods would not be entertained unle ss a notice is served to railways 
within a period of six months from the date of entr ustment of the goods. In case, 
Railways do not settle any claim within a period of  three months, an application may be 
filed against them before the Railway Claims Tribun al (RCT) within a period of three 
years from the date of entrustment of the consignment. 
Audit observed that during the period from July 201 0 to December 2010, Mejia Thermal 
Power Station (MTPS) of the Corporation did not rec eive 303 number of wagons 
containing coal valued at ` 4.40 crore. Claims for such undelivered wagons wer e not 
lodged within the required six months period from t he date of issue of RR, as a result of 
which Railways rejected these claims as per provisi ons of RA. Similarly, at the Durgapur 
Thermal Power Station (DTPS), Audit observed non-de livery of 58 wagons entrusted to 
Railways in August 2011 containing coal amounting t o ` 0.84 crore. While filing 
(December 2011) claim with the Railways, DTPS gave incorrect RR number against 
which coal had already been received. As a result, Railways rejected the claim. Later 
when the Corporation requested (July 2013) for rectification of mistake and re-opening of 
the case, Railways rejected (August 2013) the claim  as time-barred. Audit further 
observed that the stipulated time (July 2013– Augus t 2014) for filing an appeal against 
the above rejections relating to both MTPS and DTPS  before the RCT had also expired. 
Thus delay in filing claims resulted in a loss of ` 5.24 crore 1 to the Corporation.  
Management stated (October 2015) that claims were l odged with Railways through 
Registered Post within stipulated time frame of six  months from the dates of issuance of 
RR but same were registered/acknowledged by Railway s after a lapse of about 15-20 
days from the date of receipt at their end, thereby  making the claims as time-barred. 
Management also stated that as per Railways website  the claims were still under 
                                                           
1`` `` 4.40 crore + `` `` 0.84 crore  
CHAPTER XI: MINISTRY OF POWER 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
112 
processing, making the matter confusing and mislead ing to the Corporation and they 
were considering filing appeal before the RCT. Mini stry also endorsed (February 2016) 
the above views of the management.  
Ministry/Management’s contention was not tenable be cause as per provisions of RA, a 
person was not entitled to a claim for non-delivery  of goods carried by Railways unless a 
notice thereof was served to Railways within a peri od of six months from the date of 
entrustment of such goods. In the cases highlighted  above, the claims were merely 
dispatched by the Corporation without ensuring rece ipt of the same by Railways within 
the stipulated period. Management’s contention on c onfusion relating to the status of 
claim was also not tenable as Railways had already communicated about the rejection of 
these claims. The stipulated time for filing an app eal before the RCT had also expired in 
respect of these claims leaving no scope for recovery.  
Thus, due to delay on the part of management in lod ging claims for undelivered coal 
wagons, the Corporation had to suffer a loss of 
` 5.24 crore.  
Power Finance Corporation Limited 
11.2 Wilful negligence leading to sub-standard asse t 
Decision to relax pre-disbursement conditions, disr egarding the provisions of CLA 
and regularising payment of interest by way of IDC funding against the backdrop of 
uncertainties surrounding a project, led to risky loan exposure of `` `` 239.36 crore and 
consequent sub-standard asset. 
M/s Power Finance Corporation Limited (the Company)  sanctioned (October 2011) a 
term loan of ` 1150 crore to M/s Jas Infrastructure & Power Limited for setting up a 1320 
MW thermal power plant at Banka District in Bihar. The project was funded on a debt 
equity ratio of 80:20 by a consortium of 11 lenders  (including the Company) led by Axis 
Bank. The total project cost was estimated at ` 7400 crore comprising senior debt of        
` 5550 crore, sub debt of ` 370 crore and equity of ` 1480 crore.  The Company, in its 
part, has made disbursement of ` 239.36 crore between February 2013 and February 
2015, which included funding of Interest During Con struction (IDC) of ` 53.54 crore. 
The project activities were stopped (September 2012 ) due to failure of the promoters to 
mobilise funds and institution of an investigation by Central Bureau of Investigation 
(CBI) against the promoters.  Finally, due to non-p ayment of outstanding dues by the 
borrower, the loan was classified (October 2015) as sub-standard asset. 
Audit observed that the Company disbursed ` 185.82 crore towards first disbursement on 
28 February 2013, while the loan was sanctioned on 14 October 2011. Between the 
period of loan sanction and first disbursement, the re occurred significant events, which 
warranted a cautious approach from the Company towa rds the loan disbursals.  However, 
such an approach was lacking and minimum level of f inancial prudence and commercial 
diligence in decision making was not evident.  In J une 2012, i.e.,  after eight months of 
sanctioning loan and about nine months before first  disbursement, a CBI investigation 
was instituted against the promoters of the project  for fraudulently obtaining coal block, 
and an FIR against the promoters was filed on 3 Sep tember 2012.  The borrower himself 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
113 
admitted that CBI enquiry caused tremendous hardship to mobilize funds through IPO (as 
envisaged) or by identifying strategic partner(s), which impacted project implementation 
and in effect, the project was at a standstill sinc e September 2012. The Company went 
ahead and disbursed ` 185.82 crore in February 2013 and further disbursement by way of 
IDC funding against payment of interest ( ` 53.54 crore) up to February 2015, even 
relaxing the already fixed pre-disbursement conditions. 
The Company stated (June/November 2015) that in pri vate sector loans where it was not 
the lead lender loans were disbursed on the advice of the respective lead lender, as per the 
policy of the Company and procedure laid down in Co mmon Loan Agreement (CLA). 
All the facts regarding CBI investigation were brou ght to the notice of competent 
authority before making disbursement and in order t o mitigate the risk of de-allocation of 
coal block and to safeguard interest, additional se curity conditions were insisted upon. It 
was further added that as per available records, al l disbursements including disbursement 
against IDC were made after ensuring safeguards and  after obtaining approval of 
competent authority, on compliance with conditions prescribed by lead lender and as per 
provisions of CLA.   
The reply is, however, to be viewed against the fac t that though the loan was disbursed to 
the borrower under consortium, process of loan appl ication, assessing adequacy of 
security, eligibility of borrower, loan exposure ri sks, general as well as special terms and 
conditions, decision regarding loan disbursement, e tc. were to be made in accordance 
with the instant policy and procedure of the lender .  Clause 11.2 of CLA provided that 
the Company should satisfy itself on the fulfilment  of pre-disbursement conditions 
stipulated in CLA like  clause 11.2.1 (upfront equity of 30 per cent ), clause 11.2.2 (entire 
tie up for equity), clause 11.2.6 (coal requirement ), and clause 11.2.7 (sale of power, 
power evacuation, etc.).  CLA also empowered the Co mpany in clause 13.15 to withhold 
disbursement at any point of time, irrespective of whether any disbursement were made 
by the lead lender or by other lender(s), if in its  opinion, there occurred any event that 
adversely affects the viability of the project. However, these safeguards were ignored and 
waived, which was unwarranted and not justifiable. Against the backdrop of CBI 
investigation and uncertainties surrounding the pro ject, the Company’s decision to 
disburse loan came when the project was at a stands till (as of November 2012, physical 
progress of the project was 28.81 per cent , incurring 
`2698.62 crore), and as per 
available records, the project did not move further  (January 2015), thus leaving open 
scope for diversion of loan disbursal by the promot ers.  Further, the loan was placed 
under Standard category by financing IDC relaxing t he pre-set conditions and such 
relaxations were even granted after cancellation of  coal block by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India. 
Thus, decision to relax pre-disbursement conditions , disregarding the provisions of CLA 
and regularising payment of interest by way of IDC funding against the backdrop of 
uncertainties surrounding a project, led to risky l oan exposure of 
` 239.36 crore and 
consequent sub-standard asset.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December  2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
114 
11.3 Injudicious decision leading to substandard as set 
Failure to correctly assess the risks involved in u sing unsecured loan for project 
funding and release of disbursements waiving the pr e-commitment conditions 
without matching physical vis-a-vis financial progr ess resulted in the loan of `` ``24.55 
crore becoming sub-standard. 
M/s . Power Finance Corporation Limited (PFC) sanctioned  (April 2012) a term loan of 
` 26 crore to M/s Swarnajyothi Agrotech & Power Limit ed for setting up a 10 MW 
Biomass-cum-Thermal Power Project at Sambalpur dist rict in Odisha. Loan sanction 
letter, inter-alia , contained two sets of conditions, viz.,  (i) pre-commitment conditions 1 
that the balance term loan ( `10.40 crore) was to be tied up with other Financial  
Institution(s) (FIs) and (ii) pre-disbursement cond itions 2 that the upfront equity of  
` 5.82 crore was to be brought in along with addition al amount of ` 10.50 crore. The 
Facility Agreement was signed in October 2012 and ` 24.55 crore was disbursed/adjusted 
between November 2012 and October 2013. However, on  account of continued default 
by the borrower since April 2013, the loan became sub-standard in April 2014.  
Audit noted that PFC allowed (October 2012) the bor rower to source the balance debt of 
` 10.40 crore through an unsecured loan as the loan s anction from State Bank of 
Hyderabad (SBH) for ` 10 crore had expired.  PFC, despite knowing that th e borrower 
did not comply with the pre-commitment condition of  having complete financial tie-up, 
and without correctly assessing the risk involved i n using unsecured loan for project 
financing, disbursed ` 17 crore in November 2012. It may be noted that uns ecured loan 
has inherent risk that has potential to seriously a ffect project completion.  In the instant 
case, project activities were affected as the borro wer had to take another unsecured loan 
from the EPC Contractor of the project to repay the  first unsecured loan. The EPC 
Contractor also stopped supply of plant and machine ry demanding repayment of his 
unsecured loan.  As a result, the project activities stopped in August 2013.   
It was also noticed that Rural Electrification Corp oration Limited (REC), who was 
considering a loan application for the project , opined (September 2013) that the progress 
of the project was not matching with the equity inf used and amount disbursed by PFC, 
and declined to extend loan facility to the project .  It was also noticed from the progress 
report furnished by Lenders’ Engineer for the month  of February and August 2013 that 
the progress of the work was unsatisfactory. On the  other hand, PFC, without looking 
into the physical progress vis-a-vis  financial progress, disbursed/adjusted further amo unt 
of ` 7.55 crore between March and October 2013. Thus, P FC disbursed loan instalments 
without giving due cognisance either to the pre-com mitment conditions or to the physical 
progress, which was not justified. 
PFC stated (November 2015) that the borrower was in  advance stages of tying up the 
balance loan with Bank/FIs and in order to expedite the financial closure, it had permitted 
to bring in unsecured loan till sanction of loan fr om Bank/FIs, after stipulating additional 
                                                           
1  The obligations of PFC to commit financial assist ance shall become effective upon complying with 
these conditions. 
2  The obligations of PFC to disburse funds sanction ed become effective upon complying with these 
conditions. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
115 
pre-commitment and pre-disbursement conditions and the financial closure was 
considered to be achieved after infusion of unsecured loan. It also added that the loan was 
sanctioned as per policy and disbursement was made after borrower fulfilling all 
conditions of disbursement. Regarding unsatisfactor y progress, PFC stated that delays 
were not extremely rare especially for power projec ts, and keeping in view the facts 
reported by Lenders’ Engineer in May and August 201 3, it had stopped cash 
disbursement since then. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that PFC  waived the requirement of financial 
tie-up and disbursements were made at a time when t he borrower was finding it difficult 
to achieve financial closure consequent to expiry o f loan sanction from SBH and denial 
of loan by other FIs/REC. Thus, it cannot be accept ed that the borrower was in advance 
stages of financial closure and had complied with a ll the conditions of loan sanction. The 
decision of PFC to bring in unsecured loan landed the project in deep trouble.    
Thus, disbursement of loan in violation of the pre- commitment conditions resulted in the 
loan of 
`24.55 crore becoming sub-standard and the project being stranded. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December  2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited  
11.4 Loss due to under-recovery of fuel cost 
Failure of the management in ensuring accuracy of i mportant data submitted for 
fixation of tariff result in a loss of `` `` 28.32 crore.  
In terms of the Central Electricity Regulatory Comm ission (CERC) (Terms and 
Conditions of Tariff) Regulation 2009, tariff for s upply of electricity from a thermal 
generating station for the tariff period 2009-14 wo uld comprise of capacity charges (for 
recovery of annual fixed cost) and energy charges 1 (for recovery of primary fuel cost).  
The CERC had specified the operational norms for th e tariff period 2009-14 after 
considering the actual average based on past perfor mance of the generating stations 
during 2004-05 to 2006-07. Thus, normative Gross St ation Heat Rate (GHR) for a power 
station was fixed by the CERC based on the operatio nal parameters achieved by different 
generating stations during the past period.  
Based on the above principles, the GHR (kCal/kWh2) for two power plants of North 
Eastern Electric Power Corporation Limited (company ) i.e. Assam Gas Based Power 
                                                           
1 The energy charges rate (ECR) in rupees per kWh for gas fuel based station would be calculated as per th e 
following formula 
ECR = GHR x LPPF x 100 /{CVPF x (100-AUX)}, where  
GHR = normative gross station heat rate 
LPPF = landed price of primary fuel 
CVPF = gross calorific value of primary fuel as fired 
AUX = auxiliary consumption 
 
2  Kilo calorie per kilo watt hour 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
116 
Plant (AGBPP) was notified by CERC as 2400 (for com bined cycle) and for Agartala 
Gas Turbine Power Plant (AGTPP) as 3500 (for open c ycle). The energy charges for the 
ensuing period i.e. 2009-14 would have been calcula ted and recovered from the 
beneficiaries of the power supplied by the Company on the basis of the above GHR. 
It was observed in audit that the company while sub mitting (April 2008) operational data 
to the CERC, erroneously furnished ‘Weighted Averag e Net Calorific Values of fuel’ as 
‘Weighted Average Gross Calorific Values of fuel’ l eading to fixation of GHR by the 
CERC at lower rates. As a result, the landed cost o f fuel had not been fully recovered by 
the Company under the recovery mechanism prescribed  by the CERC for AGBPP and 
AGTPP in 2009-10 and 2010-11. 
After noticing the error, the Company filed a petit ion (26 May 2011) for revision of heat 
rate norms with retrospective effect from 01 April 2009, so that the landed cost of fuel 
would be fully recovered from the beneficiaries. CE RC, on examining the submission of 
the Company and the beneficiaries, revised the norm ative GHR (kCal/kWh) as 2500 for 
AGBPP and 3700 for AGTPP prospectively i.e. from th e date of filing the petition for 
revision of tariff (26 May 2011). The CERC, however , did not allow recovering the 
revised cost of fuel with retrospective effect from  01 April 2009 opining that the 
Company would not be allowed to take advantage of its own mistake.  
It was observed in Audit that due to non-admission of the petition for revision of 
normative GHR with retrospective effect because of negligence on the part of the 
management in submission of data to the CERC, an am ount of 
` 28.32 crore could not be 
recovered towards energy charges from the beneficia ries during the period from 2009-10 
to 2011-12 (upto 25 May 2011).  
Management stated (December 2015) that the mistake was an oversight and occurred due 
to non-specific nature of information available at the time of submission of data and not 
due to negligence. It was contended that the CERC i n its wisdom gave effect to the 
revised SHR 
1 from the date of petition on which the Company had  no control and the 
under-recovery may not be termed as loss because th e same was not an absolute figure 
but dependent on the normative SHR fixed by CERC. M anagement also stated that they 
had submitted another review petition before the CE RC on 23 January 2014 seeking 
further relaxation of the norms with effect from 01  April 2009 and the same was under 
process. 
Management’s contention was not acceptable as ensur ing correctness of data which was 
directly linked to the revenue generation was the b asic responsibility of the management. 
Management’s contention that the CERC in its wisdom  gave effect for the revised SHR 
from the date of petition and the under-recovery ca nnot be termed as loss were not based 
on facts because management themselves admitted tha t fuel cost was not fully recovered 
because of the mistake in submission of information . Further, the Management’s petition 
(23 January 2014) for further revision of tariff re trospectively from 01 April 2009 was 
also rejected by CERC vide its order dated 05 February 2016.  
                                                           
1  Station heat rate  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
117 
Thus, failure of the management in ensuring accurac y of important data submitted for 
fixation of tariff resulted in a loss of ` 28.32 crore to the Company. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in December  2015; their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
NTPC Limited  
11.5 Renovation and Modernisation of NTPC Power Pla nts 
There was a total delay of three to 109 months in c ompleting activities relating to 
R&M works in 19 out of 20 schemes selected for audit in nine power stations. Out of 
335 contract packages, only 197 contract packages w ere awarded, 107 of these 
packages were completed of which 41 were delayed. T his led to reduced tariff 
recovery of `` ``    199.65 crore in four power stations and refund of tariff with interest of 
`` `` 23.42 crore. Avoidable or extra expenditure of `` `` 47.13 crore, generation loss of 
`` ``    269.78 crore due to defective systems, excess coal consumption of `` `` 881.89 crore 
due to poor thermal efficiency, generation loss of `` `` 489.29 crore on account of forced 
outages and non-adherence to environment norms due to non-completion of 
projects in time even after their intiation were also noticed.   
11.5.1 Introduction 
NTPC Limited (NTPC) formulated (May 2002) a Renovat ion and Modernisation (R&M) 
Policy with the objective of sustaining improved pe rformance of power plants and to 
extend their useful life.  Accordingly, R&M activities of 18 power stations 
1 were planned 
to be carried out during 2004-19 and `8327.40 crore was sanctioned between July 2007 
and March 2015 ( except Anta power station in July 2004).  The R&M activiti es were 
reviewed in audit in order to assess (i) compliance  with R&M policy in conceptualising, 
awarding and implementing R&M activities, (ii) effi ciency, economy and effectiveness 
in execution of the contracts, (iii) effectiveness of monitoring of R&M activities and (iv) 
reasons for slippage, if any, in meeting targets affecting operations of power plants.   
11.5.2 Scope of audit and sample 
Audit selected nine 
2out of 18 power stations where R&M activities were being carried 
out based on their age, investment approval, expend iture incurred and the need for wider 
coverage across the country by adopting systematic random sampling through Interactive 
Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA) software . Table-1 below indicates details of overall 
R&M activities and Table-2 indicates R&M activities reviewed in audit:     
 
 
 
                                                           
1  Korba STPS, Rihand STPS, Vindhyachal STPS, Kawas GPS, Auraiya GPS, JhanorGandhar GPS, 
Dadri Gas, Dadri TPS, Anta GPS, Badarpur TPS, Simha dri STPS, TalcherKaniha STPS, Talcher 
TPS, Ramagundam STPS, Kahalgaon STPS, Singrauli TPS, Farraka TPS and Unchahar TPS 
2  Korba STPS, Singrauli STPS, Ramagundam STPS,  Far akka STPS, Badarpur TPS, Dadri TPS, 
Dadri GPS Jhanor-Gandhar GPS and Anta GPS 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
118 
Table-1: Overall R&M activities  
Table-2 : R&M activities vis-à-vis  audit coverage 
Scheme Total Selection in Audit Percentage of selec tion 
No. of 
schemes 
Investment 
approval 
 (`` ``in crore) 
No. of 
schemes 
Investment 
approval  
(`` `` in crore) 
Schemes Investment 
approval 
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Mega life 1 16 6808.10 13 5194.13 81.25 76.29 
Mid life 2 18 1519.29 7 486.19 38.89 32.00 
Total 34 8327.39 20 5680.32 58.82 68.21 
A total of 335 contract packages were identified in the selected 20 schemes,  out of which 
197 packages were awarded upto March 2015.  All the  197 packages including 107 ( i.e. 
54.31 per cent ) completed upto March 2015 were covered in audit. 
NTPC accorded investment approval for ` 8327.40 crore for various schemes up to 
March 2015 and earmarked ` 4281.70 crore in budget for carrying out R&M activ ities 
from April 2007 to March 2015. The actual expenditu re incurred against the budget 
provision stood at ` 4147.02 crore up to March 2015. Though NTPC has sp ent 96.85 per 
cent  of overall budgeted expenditure, the year-wise and station-wise expenditure incurred 
varied considerably in respect of nine power plants selected in audit.  While the year-wise 
budget utilization was more than 100 per cent  in three years (2007-08, 2008-09 and 
2013-14) and between 80 and 92 per cent  in three years (2009-10, 2012-13 and 2014-15), 
the same was as low as 32.31 and 45 per cent in 2011-12 and 2010-11 respectively.   
11.5.3  Audit findings 
11.5.3.1  Delayed implementation of R&M activities 
(a)  Scheme identification and approval 
As per the R&M Policy 2002, R&M activities of power  plants were planned under two 
categories, viz.,  mid-life and mega-life/life extension schemes. A m id-life scheme was to 
be initiated when a unit completed 70,000 or 50,000  operating hours in pulverised coal 
fired power stations and gas/liquid fuel fired powe r station respectively; R&M work was 
to be commenced when a unit completed 100,000 or 80 ,000 operating hours respectively. 
                                                           
1  Mega-life refers to life extension of a plant whe n it completes 25 yeas or 200,000 operating hours. 
2  Mid-life refers to improvement in operation after  a plant completes 70,000 or 50,000 operating hours  
for coal or gas based stations respectively 
 Number of 
power 
stations 
 
Number of 
R&M 
schemes 
 
Investment 
approval  
(upto 
March 
2015)  
(
`` ``  in crore)  
Budgeted 
expenditure 
(April 2007 
to March 
2015) 
(
`` `` in crore)  
Actual 
expenditure 
(April 2007 
to  March 
2015) 
(
`` `` in crore)  
Per cent  of 
actual 
expenditure to 
budget (6/5*100) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1. 18 (Total) 34 (Total) 8327.40 4281.70 4147.02 96 .85 
2. 09 (Selected) 20 (Total) 5680.32 2374.32 2209.97  93.08 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
119 
In the case of mega-life/life extensions, R&M schem es were to be initiated after 
completion of useful life of a unit ( i.e., 25 years or 200,000 operating hours for coal 
based power stations and 15 years or 100,000 operat ing hours for gas/liquid based power 
stations). As per the R&M Business Process 2006, im plementation of schemes require 
three to four years and hence, the schemes were req uired to be initiated on completion of 
21 or 11 years for coal and gas based power station s respectively. The R&M Policy 2002 
and Business Process 2006 stipulated a total period  of 48 months for completion of 
various R&M activities as indicated in Table-3.  
 Table-3: Timeline for completion of R&M activities  
(In months) 
Initiating 
R&M 
proposal 
by PS 
Sending 
proposal 
to CO by 
PS 
Approval of 
proposal by 
ED level 
EC 1 
Approval by 
Management 
Approval 
by CEA 
Final 
approval 
by ED 
level EC 
Investment 
approval by 
BoD/ 
CMD 2 
Awarding 
and 
implemen 
tation at 
PS 
Total 
0 8 8 1 8 1 1 21 48 
(PS  = Power Station; CO =Corporate Office; ED level EC = Executive Director level Empowered Committee)  
Audit observed inordinate delay in all the stages o f R&M activities from those envisaged 
in the R&M Policy and Business Process (Annexure-II and III). In almost all the power 
stations, schemes were not initiated after completi on of specified operating hours of 
generating units and submitted to the corporate off ice. While the delay ranged between 
four to 38 months for initiation, the same ranged b etween four to 64 months for 
submission to corporate office. NTPC did not furnis h recorded/justifiable reasons for 
such delays except in case of Badarpur Thermal Powe r Station (TPS) where it was stated 
(December 2015) that the delay was due to transfer of ownership of the power plant only 
in June 2006.  However, the fact was that the manag ement of the power plant was 
transferred to NTPC in April 1978 and the R&M Polic y specifically stated that R&M 
activities were to be initiated in power plants who se management was with NTPC. Delay 
ranging from six months to 30 months was also notic ed in approval of schemes by 
Executive Director level empowered committee in cas e of Korba STPS, Dadri TPS, 
Badarpur TPS, Dadri GPS and Jhanor GPS, which was a ttributable to revision of 
packages like  deletion, changing from mega-life to mid-life and vice versa . This indicated 
that the initiation of packages were carried out wi thout adequate assessment or those 
revisions were made on financial considerations tha n the need for R&M activities as per 
R&M Policy. This vitiated the purpose of identifyin g packages and meeting the timelines 
specified for the same.   
Audit also observed that as against one month’s tim e stipulated for according investment 
approval for schemes, NTPC delayed the same by one to 39 months. This delay was 
attributable to the fact that NTPC took 21 months (from 19 January 2009 to 26 October 
2010)  for finalising the strategy for claiming R&M expen diture in line with CERC 
Regulations 2009-14 compared to the earlier Regulat ions 2004-09. CERC notified the 
                                                           
1 ED level Empowered Committee comprising of Regiona l Executive Director, Executive Director 
(Operating Service), Executive Director (Engineerin g), Executive Director (Finance) and Executive 
Director (Commercial)  
2  As per delegation of power, CMD is authorised to approve R&M proposal of any unit up to `` ``150 crore. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
120 
Regulations on 18 January 2009 and NTPC appointed a committee on 6 February 2009 
for formulation of strategy. Though the committee t ook more than seven months and 
submitted the strategy in October 2009, the same wa s placed before the Board only in 
October 2010.  It is pertinent that this delay occu rred at a time when a number of R&M 
works were held up for want of finalisation of the strategy. Further, though the new 
strategy was finalized in October 2010, investment approval for most of the packages 
was accorded between February 2011 and April 2013.   
NTPC stated (October 2014/February and December 201 5) that mid-life R&M was 
mentioned as first cycle of R&M and the same was no t elaborated in R&M Business 
Process. Mid-life R&M was mainly need based and not  to be construed as mandatory.In 
order to optimize R&M expenditure, schemes of highe r priority were taken up and 
schemes of lower priority were deferred or deleted. In case of mega-life schemes, some 
critical R&M activities were taken up on priority a s per needs of the power stations 
without waiting for finalization of the entire sche me. It was added that since the CERC 
Regulations 2009-14 mandated switchover to compensa tion allowance for mid-life R&M 
resulting in less availability of fund, the Empowered Committee had to prioritiseschemes.  
R&M Policy was formulated (May 2002) for the first time primarily keeping in view the 
operational issues prevalent at that time and based  on the operational experience of 
stations, the guidelines were reviewed in March 2006.  
The reply is to be viewed in light of the fact that  it was clearly mentioned in R&M Policy 
2002 and Business Process 2006 that schemes were to  be taken up after specified hours 
of operation for mid-life and for mega-life R&M act ivities. The main purpose was to 
achieve the objectives set for improving the perfor mance or extending life of power 
stations through proper diligence process including  prioritization within the specified 
timelines, as any delay in initiating and completin g R&M would have considerable 
financial implication by way of increased cost of g eneration or extra expenditure. The 
delays were worked out with reference to the time e armarked for each activity in the 
R&M Business Process 2006, which was prepared as a supplementary document to the 
R&M Policy 2002. It is also pertinent to note that when a policy was in place for R&M 
activities, the primary responsibility was to ensur e that those were adhered to so that the 
specific objectives were achieved. Regarding change  in CERC Regulations, Audit 
noticed that NTPC took 21 months to finalise the st rategy for claiming R&M expenditure 
knowing that a number of R&M packages were held up for want of its finalization, which 
was not justifiable. It is pertinent to note that t hough eight power stations had already 
completed more than 21 years of useful life, none o f them formulated any R&M schemes 
due to non-formulation of strategy in view of chang e in Regulations 2014-19 compared 
to Regulations 2009-14. 
(b) Tendering and awarding  
As per R&M Business Process 2006, the R&M packages were to be awarded within four 
months from the date of investment approval. Audit noticed that out of 335 
1contract 
packages identified for implementation, 34contract packages were to be awarded by 
corporate office and 301 by regional/site offices. Thecorporate office awarded 18 contract 
                                                           
1  Initially 272 contract packages were involved in 20 approved R&M schemes, however, after deletion, 
clubbing or bifurcation, these were increased to 335 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
121 
packages with a delay of five to 55 months.  Furthe r analysis revealed that delay in issue 
of notice inviting tenders (NIT) ranged from two to  50 months, delay of five to 24 
months was noticed in award of contract from the date of issue of NIT.  Similarly, in case 
of packages awarded by regional/site offices, delay of one to 99 months in 149 out of 179 
contract packages was noticed.  Main reasons attrib utable for these delays were (i) 
changes in packages before tendering, (ii) mismatch  of work schedules specified in 
NIT/quoted by the bidders,(iii) non-availability of  units as per maintenance/capital 
overhauls, rolling plan,etc ., and (iv) frequent revision of package list of R&M schemes.   
NTPC stated (February 2015) that subsequent to the issue of R&M Policy 2002, a revised 
policy was issued in 2006. Further, time allowed fo r placing awards was now governed 
by contract circular no. 665 dated 27 July 2012. It  was further (December 2015) stated 
that this circular was a suggestive one and more ti me might be required in certain 
circumstances. 
The fact, however, remains that R&M Business Proces s 2006 prescribed a time frame of 
four months from investment approval to award a contract, which was not complied with, 
and the reasons attributable for delay indicated la ck of planning in initiating the R&M 
packages. Further, the contract circular referred t o did not prescribe any time frame for 
activities between investment approvals to NIT. The  contract circular of July 2012 
prescribed 10 months for completing activities between NIT and award.  There was delay 
ranging between one to 14 months in eight out of 18  corporate packages even after 
adopting the timelines prescribed in the circular.    
11.5.3.2 Implementation of R&M packages 
(a)  Time over-run 
Audit noticed that NTPC accorded investment approva l for 20 schemes in nine selected 
power stations during July 2007 to April 2013 (except Anta GPS which was in July 2004) 
with scheduled date of completion of 15 by March 20 15.  However, none of the schemes 
was fully completed as of March 2015.  Out of 197 p ackagesawarded up to March 2015, 
only 107 packages were completed.Delays noticed in respect of completed packages as of 
31 March 2015 are indicated in the following chart. 
 
0
5
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
KSTPS SSTPS RSTPS FSTPS DTPS BTPS AGPS JGGPS DGPS 
No. of completed contracts Power Plants 
Chart: 1  Delays in completion of contract packages 
No delays 0-10 months' delay 10-20 months' delay 
20-30 months' delay 30 months' & above 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
122 
Audit observed that 41 out of 107 packages complete d suffered from delays, the reasons 
for the same were mainly attributable to NTPC and c onsisted of (i) delay in issuing 
construction drawing/system requirements (Badarpur TPS, Ramagundam STPS, Farakka 
STPS and Korba STPS), (ii) delay in providing front  (Ramagundam STPS and Anta 
GPS), (iii) delay in approval of drawingsand docume nts like quality assurance plan, type 
test, etc.,  and un-clarified pre-dispatch inspection clause (B adarpur TPS, Ramagundam 
STPS, Korba STPS and Singrauli STPS), (iv) delay in  test report of soil by engineering 
division (Badarpur TPS), (v) additional scope added  in the contract package (Badarpur 
TPS and Dadri TPS), and (vi) non-availability of sh ut down at units for installation of 
materials (Dadri TPS, Badarpur TPS, Anta GPS, Korba  STPS, Singrauli STPS and 
Farakka STPS). Audit also observed that due to non- synchronisation of procurement 
activities with available shutdown of units, the ma terial remained idle till shut down of 
units were available. Similarly, in fiveout of 107 packages, the reasons for delay were 
attributable to contractors and these included  del ay in performance guarantee test (Dadri 
TPS), delay in supply of material and failure/delay  in sending supplier’s representative 
(Ramagundam STPS). As a result of these delays, NTP C sufferedloss on account of 
forced outages, excess coal consumption and non-com pliance with environment 
norms, etc . No cost overrun was, however, noticed in complete d packages, except in case 
of Ramagundam STPS where cost overrun of `1.10 crore in 12 completed packages was 
noticed. 
NTPC, while not furnishing any clarification for th e delay in completing packages, 
accepted (December 2015) that the proposals were in itiated by taking budgetary offer 
from vendors in 2006 and due to time lag, there has  been minor increase in award value 
of some schemes.  However, the fact remains that th is delay had resulted in avoidable 
forced outages and excess coal consumption as the p ower plants were operated with 
old/deficient systems. 
(b) Packages under implementation  
Audit observed considerable delays in implementatio n of some of the packages, due to 
which NTPC has been incurring extra/avoidable expenditure as indicated in Table-4.    
Table-4:  Illustrative cases of delayed implementation  
Observations NTPC reply and audit remarks 
(i) Loss due to leakage of cooling water ducts  
- In Singrauli STPS, a cooling water duct was 
leaking since 1990 and a supplementary pump 
had to be operated incurring additional energy 
charges of ` 1.97 crore per annum . On the 
advice of Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore (April 2009), a contract was 
awarded (May 2011) to M/s IVRCL 
Infrastructure & Projects Ltd for ` 68.05 crore 
with scheduled completion by May 2013. 
However, 50 per cent of works only was 
completed up to March 2015.  Though NTPC 
NTPC stated (December 2015) that once the 
old duct was replaced; energy losses would be 
averted once and for all. The work was taken 
up without shutting down any of the units, an 
option which would have resulted in disruption 
of power supply/costlier power besides huge 
loss, much more than the energy charges. It 
was added that action was now being taken for 
early completion of the work. However, it is 
pertinent to note that the duct was to be laid 
without any separate unit shut down and both 
the ends of the duct were planned to be 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
123 
Observations NTPC reply and audit remarks 
withheld ` 1.71 crore towards liquidated 
damages, it gave time extension upto March 
2016. Thus, despite incurring additional 
expenditure of ` 1.97 crore per annum  (` 7.88 
crore from 2012 to 2015), NTPC could not 
ensure that the project was completed within 
scheduled time to avoid further expenditure 
though the work was awarded in May 2011.  
connected in the system duringannual shut 
down only. 
(ii) Loss due to poor water quality – For 
urgent requirement of clean water for Badarpur 
TPS, NTPC approved (July 2011) R&M works 
for cooling water system at ` 239.88 crore. Out 
of total 37 packages of the system (2 major 
corporate, one regional and 34 site packages) , 
two major corporate and 22 site packages were 
not awarded (October 2015). It was noticed 
that due to poor water quality, power station 
has been facing problems like choking of 
condenser tubes, frequent back 
washing/condenser cleaning, replacement of 
condenser tubes, boiler tube leakage, etc . This 
has also resulted in avoidable expenditure of 
` 33.77 crore on account of condenser cleaning 
job, condenser tube replacement, partial load 
reduction and generation loss of electricity of 
423.512 million units (MU) valued at `138.42 
crore on account of hydrogen embrittlement 
causing boiler tube leakage during 2011 to 
2015.  
NTPC stated (December 2015) that Delhi 
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) and 
Delhi Government, citing high levels of 
pollution, have been requesting to consider 
closing down the station. As such, station was 
being operated to meet power requirement of 
Delhi. In view of this, the packages were not 
being pursued.  The fact, however, remains that 
NTPC has already completed packages for 
reducing pollution in April 2014 and May 2015 
for two units and has been operating one of 
these units regularly, and the pollution levels 
were now under the DPCC norms.  Since no 
decision has so far been taken on closure of 
units, NTPC would continue to operate the 
units and incur avoidable expenditure and 
generation loss. 
(iii)  Extra/wasteful expenditure due to delay 
in placing order – In Singrauli STPS (Stage-I), 
R&M package for gravimetric feeder 
controller 
1 (GFC) system having 18 feeders 
was approved (November 2003) at an 
estimated cost of `1.97 crore. A proposal to 
award this work to original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM) M/s Stock Redler at 
` 3.59 crore was scrapped (23 September 
2006) citing high price and decided to award 
(11 February 2008) the same to Bharat Heavy 
Electrical Limited (BHEL) at ` 0.63 crore (for 
two feeders).  Since GFC commissioned by 
BHEL did not work properly, the work for 
retrofitting all 18 feeders was awarded (March 
2015) to OEM contractor at ` 6.82 crore with 
NTPC stated (December 2015) that the work 
was taken up on an experimental basis to 
attempt reduction in the cost of procurement 
and dependence on foreign vendors and had it 
been successful, it would have resulted in 
substantial savings. The reply needs to be 
viewed against the fact that while NTPC cited 
high cost for not awarding the work to OEM 
contractor who quoted a total of ` 3.59 crore 
for 18 feeders ( i.e., ` 0.20 crore per feeder), it 
awarded the work to BHEL at ` 0.32 crore per 
feeder.  Therefore, the argument that it took up 
the work on an experimental basis to reduce 
cost was not factual.  
                                                           
1  GFC is a weight measurement system for coal. Afte r the Coal Handling Plant get loaded into the coal 
bunker, the coal input to the coal mill is regulated through GFC. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
124 
Observations NTPC reply and audit remarks 
scheduled completion by April 2016.  As a 
result, NTPC not only suffered a loss of ` 4.85 
crore ( ` 6.82 crore - ` 1.97 crore) towards 
price escalation but also incurred wasteful 
expenditure of ` 0.63 crore on account of 
feeders supplied by BHEL.  
(iv) Delay in rectifying defective work –In 
Singrauli STPS, the work of condenser on load 
tube cleaning system was awarded (October 
2005) to M/s Technos et Compagnie, France 
for supplies and to M/s Macmet India Ltd. 
(January 2006) for supply and installation from 
India at a total value of ` 3.41 crore.  The 
works were completed in February 2008, and 
on testing, it was observed that only 60 percent  
ball recovery was achieved as against 95 
percent  ball recovery as agreed. As such, 
default notices were served (December 2010) 
to the contractors and asked (June 2015) them 
to remit ` 2.53 crore paid to them. However, 
Audit observed that the defective work had not 
been rectified so far (March 2015). 
NTPC accepted (December 2015) that due to 
not achieving guaranteed performance, bank 
guarantees equivalent to ` 0.65 crore have been 
encashed.  However, fact remains that NTPC 
did not encash remaining bank guarantees 
(Euro 88683 and 
` 0.25 crore)  though it issued 
notice of failure in December 2010, and no 
steps have been taken to rectify the defective 
works, whch has been causing excess 
consumption of coal. 
(v)  Generation loss due to high shaft 
vibration – In Singrauli STPS, since the useful 
life (200,000 operating hours) of turbo 
generator bearings of all the seven units were 
completed between 2008 and 2013, a package 
for upgradation of bearings for unit # 1 to 5 
was approved in April 2013, but contract for 
the same has not been awarded till March 
2015. Meanwhile, a purchase order for 
procuring bearings for unit # 6 and 7 was 
placed (October 2013), but the supply was not 
completed till March 2015.  As the bearings 
were being operated beyond their useful life, 
high vibration were noticed in units # 1, 2, 5 
and 6,  due to which the units were under 
forced shutdown for 2297 hours during 2009-
10 to 2014-15.  This resulted in generation loss 
of 763.53 MU valuing ` 131.36 crore. 
NTPC accepted (December 2015) that decision 
for replacement of bearing was taken on the 
basis of deviation observed in dye penetration 
test and ultrasonic test of bearing. It was also 
stated that the issue as mentioned in audit para 
has already been addressed and these units 
were presently in healthy condition giving full 
generation. The reply needs to be viewed 
against the fact that though the bearing 
exceeded its useful life since 2008, it were not 
replaced yet (December 2015), and during this 
period four out of six units were under forced 
shutdown causing generation loss. 
11.5.3.3Impact of delay in implementing R&M packages 
(a) Excess coal consumption of `` `` 881.89 crore 
With increasing age, efficiency 1 of power generation units decrease, while good operation 
and maintenance practices and timely renovation and  modernization enable the units to 
                                                           
1  Efficiency = 860/heat rate; as heat rate increase , efficiency declines. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
125 
recover a portion of past deterioration allowing th em to stay close to design parameters. 
Against this background, NTPC initiated a number of R&M packages to increase thermal 
efficiency of power plants. Audit, however, observe d that due to non-completion of 
R&M packages within stipulated time, power plants h ave been consuming more coal due 
to poor thermal efficiency. There were a host of is sues that affected thermal efficiency of 
NTPC power plants, which included (i) intake of incorrect coal flow inside furnace due to 
malfunctioning of feeder control system cards (Korb a STPS), (ii) absence of high 
pressure heater, flue gas temperature at air prehea ter in excess of 136 degree Celsius, etc.  
(Singrauli STPS), (iii) problems in boiler and boil er auxiliary (Ramagundam STPS), and 
(iv) old age of power plants (Badarpur TPS, Dadri  TPS, and Farakka TPS).  As a result, 
power plants had been operating with poor thermal e fficiency and consuming excess coal 
as indicated in Table-5.    
Table-5:  Details of excess coal consumption due to poor thermal efficiency 
Sl 
No. 
Name of power 
plant 
Scheduled 
completion 
from actual 
date of 
initiation 
Designed/ 
desired* 
efficiency 
(Per cent ) 
Actual 
efficiency 
range (Per 
cent ) 
Period 
of loss 
Excess coal 
consump- 
tion 1 (Lakh 
MT) 
Value of 
excess coal 
(`` ``in crore) 
1 Korba Stage I 2010-11 37.73 35.70 to 35.73 2011-1 5 7.34 88.05 
2 Singrauli Stage-I 2011-12 37.19 35.97 to 36.16 20 12-15 5.31 81.50 
3 Badarpur TPS 
Stage-II 
2008-09 * 33.73 * 32.97 to 33.86 2009-15 1.57 37.85 
4 Dadri TPS 
Stage-I 
2008-09 * 36.32 * 35.76 to 36.04 2009-15 2.85 119.91 
6 Ramagundam 
STPS Stage-I 
2010-11 39.05 36.29 to 36.59 2011-15 8.11 221.52 
7 Ramagundam 
STPS Stage-II 
2010-11 37.77 36.16 to 36.39 2011-15 12.24 333.06 
 Total     37.42 881.89 
*  In these power plants, desired efficiency was ap plied and excess coal consumption was worked out 
from 2008-09 only, since management estimated improvement in thermal efficiency. 
NTPC stated (December 2015) that there was wide var iation of actual thermal efficiency 
with respect to design efficiency because of differ ent ambient conditions, load variation, 
poor quality of coal, number of start-ups and stress due to continuous operation over long 
duration,etc . CERC allowed certain margin while notifying the h eat rate norms to take 
care of the actual operating conditions and it has been operating within these norms.  
Regarding measurement of coal flow in case of Korba  STPS, it was stated that the same 
has no relation with combustion. The air flow was m aintained through oxygen 
measurement and occasional failure of feeder contro l cards would not cause loss 
continuously.  
The reply needs to be viewed against the fact that excess coal consumption has been 
worked out with reference to gross calorific value of coal as claimed by NTPCwhile 
working out loss of quality of coal, and therefore,  the poor quality of coal was already 
considered. Since actual thermal efficiency was lower than the designed ones in all power 
                                                           
1  Excess Coal consumption = {(Design Heat rate/Actu al GCV of coal )*Generation }-Actual Coal 
consumption 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
126 
stations, R&M schemes were identified and non-compl etion of the same, therefore, 
resulted in persistent excess consumption of coal.  Regarding heat rate fixed by CERC, it 
is worthwhile to note that CERC fixes the norm cons idering the present operating 
conditions of the plant. However, audit observation  pertains to non-achieving desired 
objectives of R&M with respect to improving thermal  efficiency. Through R&M 
packages, NTPC envisaged heat rate improvement in p ower stations, andhad these been 
achieved, CERC would have also revised the norm acc ordingly. In respect of Korba 
STPS, it was noticed that due to malfunctioning of feeder control system cards, there was 
a chance of incorrect coal flow inside the furnace leading to incorrect coal accounting, 
which, in turn, cause improper combustion and accum ulation of incombustible material 
inside the furnace area or loss of efficiency and heat rate. 
(b) Forced outages resulting in generation loss of `` `` 489.29 crore 
NTPC, with the objective of controlling forced outa ges, identified various R&M 
packages like control and instrumentation (C&I) package, electric al packages, boiler 
packages and turbine packages, to be completed duri ng 2007-15. However, as these 
packages were not completed in time, forced outage of 3917.97 hours due to failure of 
the above systems was noticed during 2007-2015. Thi s resulted in generation loss of 
1924.77 MUs and opportunity to earn additional revenue of ` 489.29 crore in eight power 
stations as indicated in Table-6. 
Table-6:  Details of plant-wise forced outages 
Sl. 
No. Name of power plant Period 
of loss Hours Units (MU) 
Amount 
(`` `` in 
crore) 
1 Korba STPS 2011-15  53.32  22.07  3.85  
2 Singrauli STPS 2012-15  67.92  30.60  5.34  
3 Jhanor GGPS 2009-15  7.44  1.47  0.94  
4 Dadri GPS 2008-15  1266.09  191.47  65.92  
5 Dadri TPS 2007-15  1607.83  340.95  122.62  
6 Badarpur TPS 2007-15  548.26  115.13  42.99  
7 Anta GPS 2007-15  367.11  45.19  15.88  
8 Ramagundam STPS 2011-15  NA @ 1177.90  231.75  
 Total  3917.97  1924.77  489.29  
@  Details were not maintained by the plant 
NTPC stated (December 2015) that in a power plant, planned outage of about 5 to 6 per 
cent , forced outage of 2 to 3 per cent  and partial loading of about 1 to 2 per cent were 
common and considered normal. Achieving performance  better than thiswould require 
enormous efforts and investments, which might not b e commensurate with benefits.  
Tariff for the period 2004-09 and 2009-14 comprised  two parts, namely , capacity charge 
(for recovery of annual fixed cost) and energy char ge. Fixed component was recovered 
on the basis of annual availability whereas variabl e components were recovered towards 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
127 
fuel cost. CERC Regulations specify annual target plant availability factor for the stations 
and if the specified target availability was achieved, full fixed cost recovery was made. 
The reply is to be viewed in light of the fact that  forced outages occurred due to non-
completion of R&M packages for systems like C&I, el ectrical and boiler and auxiliary 
systems etc. , which were envisaged in R&M schemes for implement ation during 2007-
15. Though CERC has not prescribed any norm for for ced outages, NTPC has also not 
produced any approved norms fixed by it or by any o ther competent body to be 
considered as industry benchmark. Audit has worked out generation loss reckoning only 
variable price and for the periods in which R&M packageswere to be completed. 
(c) Non-adherence to environmental norms 
As part of R&M activities, ESP schemes were approve d in five power stations ( viz. , 
Korba STPS, Singrauli STPS, Badarpur TPS, Farakka S TPS and Ramagundam STPS) in 
order to reduce the emission levels of these statio ns so that to meet the norms fixed by 
State agencies. Table-7 below indicates emission le vel vs. norms in four out of five 
1 
power stations. 
Table -7:  Details of pollution norms vs.  actual  
Year Korba 
Stage-I & II  
(Units 1 to 6)  
Singrauli, 
Stage-I & II 
(Units 1 to 7) 
Badarpur TPS, 
Stage-II 
(Units 4 to 5) 
Farakka STPS, 
Stage-I & II 
(Units 1 to 6) 
 Stack emission ranged level (mg/Nm 3) (average)  
Norm 50 100 50 150 
2007-08 NA 126.00 NA 163.50  
2008-09 122.39  128.50 NA 87.00  
2009-10 122.55  128.00 80.50 84.50  
2010-11 118.79  129.00 85.50 74.00  
2011-12 92.37  127.50 87.00 136.00  
2012-13 111.65  127.00 98.50 166.50  
2013-14 90.70  128.50 96.00 71.50  
2014-15 99.64  126.00 99.50 119.50  
It may be seen that range of emission levels were h igher than those fixed by pollution 
control agencies.  Audit observed that though the C entral/State agencies gave directions 
to adhere to the pollution norms, but inordinate de lay in implementing ESP packages 
resulted in persistent non-compliance with environm ental norms. As a result, NTPC had 
to deposit bank guarantee of ` 27.86 crore for Korba STPS and Badarpur TPS and to  
incur an avoidable expenditure of ` 7.32 crore for ammonia dosing system in Korba 
STPS and Singrauli STPS during the period from 2008-09 to 2014-15. 
                                                           
1  However, in Ramagundam STPS, audit noticed that E SP levels reported by Management were within 
the standard for all years 2007-08 to 2014-15, but during inspection, the Andhra Pradesh Pollution 
Control Board has noticed EPS levels higher than prescribed norms. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
128 
NTPC stated (February 2015/January 2016) that the t arget fixed by State agencies was 
very stringent for an old station and time period o f one year was not feasible for 
implementation of ESP package due to complex techni cal issues. It was further added 
that after commissioning of ESP packages at unit # 4 and 5 of Badarpur TPS (Stage-II), 
the emission levels were within the limit.  The fac t, however, remains that though State 
agencies had stipulated norms as early as 2005, NTP C was yet (December 2015) to 
complete the packages, as such it had to incur avoi dable expenditure of ` 7.32 crore for 
reducing the emission level through ammonia dosing system.  
(d) Reduced tariff recovery of `` `` 199.65 crore   
During 2009-14, NTPC availed compensatory allowance  for mid-life R&M schemes in 
four coal based power stations 1, while the schemes were due for implementation dur ing 
2004-09.  As a result, tariff recovery in four powe r plants was reduced by `199.65 crore 
as indicated in Table 8.      
Table-8:  Calculation showing amount forgone due to delay in implementing R&M 
packages 
S. 
N. 
Name of power 
station 
Number 
of 
schemes 
Estimated 
cost 
(`` ``in crore) 
Amount allowed/to be 
allowed by CERC 
under Regulations 
2009-14 up to 25 years  
(`` `` in crore) 
Benefits foregone 
(i.e.  by not 
claiming under 
Regulations 2004-
09)  ( `` `` in crore) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)=(4)-(5) 
1. Korba  Stage –II 2 105.03 53.80 51.23 
2. Singrauli,Stage-II 2 67.44 30.55 36.89 
3. Dadri, Stage-I 1 120.78 57.12 63.66 
4. Ramagundam, 
Stage-II 
1 111.02 63.15 47.87 
 Total  6 404.27 204.62 199.65 
As evident from the table, out of total estimated e xpenditure of `404.27 crore, only 
` 204.62 crore was allowed or to be allowed as compen satory allowance by CERC till 
useful life of above power stations. On the contrary, completion of R&M activities within 
time schedule, i.e. , during 2004-09 2 would have resulted in recovery of `404.27 crore as 
additional capitalisation as per CERC Regulations 2004-09.  
NTPC stated (December 2015) that essential process time was required for formulating 
proposals and taking them through the approval proc ess. This became more time 
consuming, especially when CERC changed the regulat ory norms. Even if it had 
implemented these schemes and claimed tariff during  2004-09, there was no certainty 
that the entire amount would have been reimbursed b y CERC. Tariff fixation was done 
after prudence check and CERC might have cleared le sser number of schemes/lesser cost 
                                                           
1  Korba STPS Stage-II, Singrauli STPS Stage-I, Dadr i TPS and Ramagundam STPS Stage-II. 
2  As per the R&M Policy/R&M Business process of NTP C, the R&M work of Korba Stage-II, Singrauli   
Stage-II, Ramagundam Stage-II and Dadri TPS was to be completed upto March 2002, March 2001, 
March 2003 and March 2006 respectively. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
129 
after such checks. It was also stated that only the  actual expenditure incurred by NTPC 
on R&M and amount allowed by CERC were comparable. 
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact t hat NTPC had itself considered the 
R&M activities as essential and therefore had estim ated the cost to be incurred, and as 
per Regulations 2009-14 it would be paid compensato ry allowance at a lump sum per 
station till it completes 25 years rather than the estimated cost. The argument of prudent 
check by CERC or allowance of lesser schemes/cost d oes not hold good considering the 
fact that as per Regulations 2004-09, NTPC had been  booking expenditure on R&M as 
additional capital and no instance of reducing the scheme or cost was pointed by NTPC.   
Regarding comparison of actual cost and recovery, i t is pertinent to note that since NTPC 
did not complete the works, the actual expenditure was not available, and hence the 
comparison was made with estimated cost.   
(e) Loss of 
`` `` 23.42 crore due to disallowance of R&M expenditure 
 NTPC claimed R&M expenditure of ` 591.35 crore for Dadri GPS and ` 499.45 crore 
for Jhanor GGPS through tariff as additional capita lisation during 2009-14. However, 
CERC, at the time of truing up, allowed ` 380.62 crore for Dadri GPS (June 2012) and 
` 170.17 crore for Jhanor GGPS (December 2011), and d isallowed ` 210.72 crore for 
Dadri GPS and ` 329.28 crore for Jhanor GGPS, as NTPC failed to co mplete the works 
within the tariff period and the benefit would accr ue to the beneficiaries in the next tariff 
period only. Consequently, as per CERC Regulations,  NTPC had to refund the amount 
collected through tariff plus interest of ` 23.42 crore to the beneficiaries.   
NTPC accepted (November 2014/December 2015) that it  refunded an amount of ` 87.76 
crore to the beneficiaries with interest of ` 8.42 crore in case of Dadri GPS and `109 
crore with interest of `15 crore in case of Jhanor GGPS.  The reply confirm s the fact that 
NTPC had to pay interest purely on account of delay ed implementation of R&M 
schemes. 
Conclusion 
NTPC framed (May 2002) R&M Policy with the objectiv es to sustain improved levels of 
performance of plant, equipments and systems, and t o extend the useful life of the same. 
In order to streamline the timelines for implementi ng R&M activities, NTPC also 
formulated R&M Business Process 2006. Audit, howeve r, noticed that the policy and 
business process were not adhered to, causing inord inate delays in initiating and 
implementing R&M packages. There were delays of thr ee to 109 months in completing 
activities relating to R&M works in 19 out of 20 sc hemes selected in nine power stations.  
Under these schemes, 335 contract packages were ide ntified but only 197 contract 
packages were awarded. Out of 107 packages completed, 41 packages were delayed up to 
31 March 2015. Consequently, many of the packages w ere deferred resulting in reduced 
tariff recovery of 
`199.65 crore in four power stations. Similarly, NTP C had to refund 
tariff recovered against R&M packages along with in terest of `23.42 crore, as these 
packages were not completed in time.  Similarly, du e to non-completion of projects in 
time, there were instances of avoidable or extra ex penditure of `47.13 crore and 
generation loss of `269.78 crore.   

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
130 
As a result of delay in implementing R&M packages, excess coal consumption of 
` 881.89 crore was noticed due to non up-gradation of coal feeder system in Korba STPS 
and poor thermal efficiency of boiler and turbine in Singrauli STPS, Dadri TPS, Badarpur 
TPS and Ramagundam STPS. Similarly, there was avoid able generation loss of 
electricity valued at `489.29 crore on account of forced outages due to fr equent failure of 
C&I, electrical and other systems in Korba STPS, Si ngrauli STPS, Dadri TPS, Dadri 
GPS, Anta GPS, Badarpur TPS and Ramagundam STPS. No n-adherence to environment 
norms in Singrauli STPS, Korba STPS, Anta GPS, Fara kka STPS, Badarpur TPS and 
Ramagundam STPS was also noticed.   
Recommendations  
In order to overcome the shortcomings noticed in im plementation of R&M initiatives, 
Audit suggests that NTPC may:  
/head2right Ensure submission of comprehensive R&M proposals at  the initiation stage 
itself so that time involved in re-submission of pr oposal and consequent delays 
are avoided. 
/head2right Review the R&M Policy and R&M Business Process to m inimize delays in 
various phases of implementation of R&M schemes. 
/head2right Expedite the R&M activities so that forced outages and excess coal 
consumption are kept at minimum. 
/head2right Ensure that amount claimed as R&M expenditure in ta riff petitions is utilised 
within the tariff period to avoid refund or deferral of allowance by CERC. 
/head2right Monitoring mechanism at all levels are made proacti ve so as to ensure timely 
completion of R&M schemes and for overall achievement of desired objectives. 
NTPC accepted (February/December 2015) all the reco mmendations and audit 
observations were appreciated as it would add value.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2016; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
Rural Electrification Corporation Limited 
11.6 Sanction of loan to financially weak private d eveloper 
Decision to sanction and disburse a loan disregardi ng the risk associated with 
financially weak promoters, after relaxing pre-disb ursement conditions, resulted in 
risky exposure of `` `` 250 crore. 
Rural Electrification Corporation Limited (REC) san ctioned (September 2005) a loan of 
`250 crore to M/s Shree Maheshwar Hydel Power Corpor ation Limited to set up a hydro 
power project in Madhya Pradesh. REC disbursed the loan in 12 instalments between 
August 2007 and March 2010. The loan was classified  as non-performing asset in June 
2011due to continuous default of the borrower in servicing the loan since December 2010 
and categorised as doubtful in January 2013. The pr oject was to achieve commercial 
operation by March 2010, but due to delay in implem entation, commercial operation is 
yet to be achieved (December 2015). 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
131 
Audit observed that as per loan sanction letter, bo rrower was required to fulfil certain 
pre-disbursement conditions, which, inter alia,  included (i) complete underwriting for 
public issue of equity and bonds, (ii) tie-up of en tire equity share capital, (iii) acquisition 
of all land required for rehabilitation and resettl ement of affected villages and 
submergence, (iv) confirmation of clearance of outs tanding to other lenders, (v) 
furnishing information on net-worth of promoters an d (vi) approval of Madhya Pradesh 
State Electricity Board and Government of Madhya Pr adesh for conversion of asset 
transferred to the borrower. However, these conditi ons were relaxed subsequent to 
approval of the loan at the time of disbursement of  instalments by way of time extension 
for their compliance. The management of REC had den iedloan to the borrower on two 
previous occasions (August 2003/July 2004) citing d efault in servicing existing lenders 
and non-infusion of equity. Though the screening co mmittee evaluated the loan 
application for an amount of ` 45 crore subject to a commitment of the lead lende r for a 
term of loan of `529 crore, the Board of Directors sanctioned a loan of ` 250 crore.   
REC stated (December 2015) that the loan was sancti oned after proper due diligence and 
risks identified were mitigated through appropriate  conditions and/or taking undertakings 
from borrower/promoters. As per the practice follow ed among lending institutions and in 
line with lead lender, conditions were relaxed or m odified with approval of competent 
authority. There were constraints of funds during l ast leg of project implementation and 
main reasons for delay were attributable to non-infusion of equity by promoters.   
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  due diligence conducted by the 
screening committee justified a loan of `45 crore only, while the Board had approved 
` 250 crore. Although Board of Directors directed man agement to take a considered and 
independent view irrespective of the decision of le ad/other lenders, the risk mitigating 
measures contemplated by way of pre-disbursement co nditions were relaxed by way of 
extension of time for their compliance, and most of  the conditions have not been 
complied with throughout the period of loan disbursement and as on December 2015.   
Thus, decision to sanction and disburse the loan di sregarding the risk associated with 
financially weak promoters, after relaxing pre-disb ursement conditions resulted in risky 
exposure of ` 250 crore. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in January 2016; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
132 
CHAPTER XII- RECOVERIES, 
CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS BY CPSEs AT THE 
INSTANCE OF AUDIT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Food Corporation of India, Northern Coalfields 
Limited, South Eastern Coalfields Limited and The N ew India Assurance Company 
Limited 
12.1 Recoveries at the instance of audit 
In 22 cases pertaining to 05 CPSEs, audit pointed o ut that an amount of `49.19 crore was 
due for recovery. The management of CPSEs had recov ered an amount of `34.55 crore 
(70 per cent ) during the period 2014-15 as detailed in Appendix-I. 
 
Central Warehousing Corporation and Engineering Projects (India) Limited 
12.2 Corrections/rectifications at the instance of audit 
During test check, cases relating to violation of r ules/regulations, non-compliance of 
guidelines were observed and brought to the notice of the management. Details of the 
cases where the changes were made by the management  in their rules/regulations etc. at 
the instance of audit are given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I)  
133 
CHAPTER XIII 
 
 
 
Follow-up on Audit Reports (Commercial)  
Audit Reports of the CAG represent the culmination of the process of scrutiny of 
accounts and records maintained in various offices and departments of CPSEs. It is, 
therefore, necessary that appropriate and timely re sponse is received from the executive 
on the audit findings included in the Audit Reports. 
The LokSabha Secretariat requested (July 1985) all the Ministries to furnish notes (duly 
vetted by Audit) indicating remedial/corrective act ion taken by them on various 
paragraphs/appraisals contained in the Audit Report s (Commercial) of the CAG as laid 
on the table of both the Houses of Parliament. Such  notes were required to be submitted 
even in respect of paragraphs/appraisals which were  not selected by the Committee on 
Public Sector Undertakings (COPU) for detailed exam ination. The COPU in its Second 
Report (1998-99-Twelfth LokSabha), while reiteratin g the above instructions, 
recommended: 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in each Ministry fo r monitoring the submission of 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of Audit Repor ts (Commercial) on 
individual Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs); 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in Department of Pu blic Enterprises (DPE) for 
monitoring the submission of ATNs in respect of Rep orts containing paras 
relating to a number of PSUs under different Ministries; and 
• submission to the Committee, within six months from  the date of presentation of 
the relevant Audit Reports, the follow up ATNs duly vetted by Audit in respect of 
all Reports of the CAG presented to Parliament. 
In the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (Jun e 2010), it was decided to make 
special efforts to clear the pending ATNs/ATRs on C AG Audit Paras and PAC 
recommendations within the following three months. While conveying this decision (July 
2010), the Ministry of Finance recommended institut ional mechanism to expedite action 
in the future. 
While reviewing the follow up action taken by the G overnment on the above 
recommendations, the COPU in its First Report (1999 -2000-Thirteenth Lok Sabha) 
reiterated its earlier recommendations that the DPE  should set up a separate monitoring 
cell in the DPE itself to monitor the follow-up act ion taken by various 
Ministries/Departments on the observations contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) 
on individual undertakings. DPE informed (March 201 5) that a separate monitoring cell 
had been set up to monitor the follow up on submiss ion of ATNs by the concerned 
administrative Ministries/Department.  DPE also inf ormed that they had also requested 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-I) 
134 
all the concerned departments having jurisdiction o ver CPSEs to set up Monitoring Cells 
in their department. 
A review in Audit revealed that despite reminders, 39 ATNs are awaited from various 
Ministries, as detailed in Appendix-III. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
137  
 
  (Referred to in para 12.1) 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit during 2014-15 
                    
    (Amount `` `` in lakh) 
Name of 
Ministry/Department 
Name of the Central Public 
Sector Enterprise (CPSE) 
Audit observations in brief Amount of 
recovery 
pointed out by 
Audit 
Amount 
recovered by 
the 
Management 
Coal  Northern Coalfields Limited  Loss due to short billing of 
performance incentive 
522 1329 
Coal Northern Coalfields Limited Excess payment to Forest department  1874.29 321.33 
Coal South Eastern Coalfields 
Limited 
Recovery of increased licence fees 
from Executives in respect of 
company’s quarters at Areas and 
consequent under recovery  
150.00 179.39 
Coal Northern Coalfields Limited Non-recovery of re vised licence fees 
from the executives of the Company 
 
616.00 90.18 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Incorrect payment of carr yover charges 16.89 16.89 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Incorrect payment to Stat e Agencies 66.66 56.58 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Over payment on account o f gunny 
depreciation to State Govt. and its 
agencies on procurement of CMR rice 
402.00 788.42 
Appendix-I 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
138  
during 2009-10 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Delay in recovery due to weak internal 
controls on gunnies given on loan to 
State Agencies 
874.00 262.68 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Avoidable payment of demu rrage 
charges 
28.69 3.76 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Non-recovery of stacking and 
weighment charges on replacement of 
BRL rice due to delay in replacement 
of substandard rice by State Agencies/ 
Millers 
5.50 8.67 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Non recovery of different ial amount 
from the State 
29.40 77.18 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Non-forfeiture of securit y deposit 
collected from the defaulting transport 
contractor for the period 2010-11 
29.76 29.65 
Consumer Affairs 
Food and Public 
Distribution 
Food Corporation of India Irregular  payment of Inc entive to the 
junior departmental labour based on the 
basic pay of the senior departmental 
labour 
70.30 58.38 
Finance The New India Assurance 
Company Ltd. 
Non-payment of stamp duty on lease 
rent agreements  
7.39 8.33 
Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd Loss due to non-claimi ng customs duty 
reimbursement from customer. 
108.85 110.00 
Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd Non claiming of freigh t and service tax 
amounting to Rs 10.97 lakh 
10.97 12.11 
Heavy Industries and Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd N on billing of freight of Rs 4.62 lakh 4.62 4.00 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
139  
Public Enterprises even after lapse of more than on e year 
from supply completion 
Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd Non recovery of Rs 18. 32 lakh due to 
lapse in the ERP SAP system. 
18.32 18.32 
Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd Non claiming of servic e tax incurred on 
transportation from customer Rs 13.05 
lakh. 
13.05 13.05 
Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd Excess payment of Roya lty of Rs 17.10 
lakh due to exclusion of cost applicable 
for the Auxiliary Boiler from the net 
invoiced value.  
17.10 17.10 
Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd Non-recovery of site d ebit (Rs.49.96 
lakh) accepted for rectification of the 
mismatch of holes in the splice plates 
supplied by various vendors 
49.96 46.96 
Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd Non reversal of propor tionate 
CENVAT Credit taken on service tax 
for the sale of exempted goods. 
3.00 3.00 
  TOTAL 4918.75 3454.98 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
140  
Appendix-II 
(Referred to in para 12.2) 
Corrections/Rectifications at the instance of Audit 
Name of 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the 
CPSE 
Audit observations/suggestions in brief Action take n by the Management 
Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public 
Distribution, 
Department of Food 
and Public 
Distribution 
Central 
Warehousing 
Corporation 
In terms of DPE OM No.2(27)85-BPE(WC) dated 24 
April 1987, followed by DPE's clarification of July  
2012, the central public enterprises were required to 
follow the overall ceiling of 300 days for encashme nt of 
EL and HPL on retirement of their employees.  In 
deviation to the above guidelines, Central Warehous ing 
Corporation  (CWC) allowed encashment of 240 days 
HPL (120 days with full pay and DA/DP) beyond 
prescribed ceiling of 300 days to its retiring empl oyees 
after attaining the age of superannuation only and paid 
an amount of ` four crore during the period from 
January 2010 to April 2014. 
On being pointed out by Audit (April 
2009), CWC amended its Leave 
Rules in the 309 
th  meeting of the 
Board of Directors held on 26 April, 
2014 limiting the maximum ceiling 
for encashment of leave at the time of 
superannuation  to 300 days 
(including HPL)  without 
commutation of HPL, with effect 
from 01 May 2014. 
Heavy Industries & 
Public Enterprises 
Engineering 
Projects 
(India) 
Limited 
In terms of DPE OM No.2(27)85-BPE(WC) dated 24 
April 1987, followed by DPE's clarification of July  
2012, the central public enterprises were required to 
follow the overall ceiling of 300 days for encashme nt of 
EL and HPL on retirement of their employees. In 
deviation to the above guidelines, EPIL allowed 
encashment of EL/HPL beyond prescribed ceiling of 
300 days to its employees on retirement /superannua tion 
/death and paid an amount of ` 2.51 crore during the 
period from January 2006 to March 2014.   
On being pointed out by audit 
(September 2013), EPIL amended its 
Leave Rules in the 229 
th  meeting of 
the Board of Directors held on 22 
November, 2013, limiting the 
maximum ceiling for encashment of 
leave at the time of superannuation / 
cessation of service other than on 
disciplinary grounds to 300 days of 
EL and HPL combined, with effect 
from 28 November 2013. 
 

Report No. 15 of  2016 (Volume-I) 
141 
 
 
 (Referred to in Chapter XIII)  
Statement showing the details of Audit Reports (Com mercial) up to 2015 for which 
Action Taken Notes are pending  
No. & year of 
Report  
Name of Report  Para No.  
Department of Atomic Energy  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras  1.1, 1.2 and 1.3  
Ministry of Civil Aviation  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras 2.1, 2.2, 2.6, 2. 7, 2.8 and 
8.1 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Paras 3.1 and 3.3 
Ministry of Coal        
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras 3.2, 3.4 and 8.1 
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Para  3.1  
Ministry of Commerce and Industry  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras 4.1 and 4.3  
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit  Para 6.1 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 8.1 
Department of Fertilizers  
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit  Para 2.2  
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Para 8.1 
3 of 2011-12 Compliance Audit Para 8.1 
Ministry of Finance, Department of Financial Services  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit  Paras 9.2 (02 Companies) and 
9.4 
 
Department of Food and Public Distribution  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Para 5.3  
Appendix-III 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
142  
Department of Heavy Industries  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras 1.1, 1.7 and 1.8 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 13.2 
26 of 2013 Performance Audit on 
expansion and utilization of 
power equipment 
manufacturing capacity in 
BHEL 
Standalone Report 
Ministry of Mines  
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Para 2.2 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 13.1 
Ministry of Power 
10 of 2012-13 Performance Audit on 
Capacity expansion in Hydro 
power sector by CPSEs 
Standalone Report 
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Para 4.1 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Para 12.1 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
143 
 Annexure-I  
(referred to para 8.1.2.1) 
Target and achievement  
(`` ``  in crore) 
Particulars  2012-13  2013-14  2014-15  
Consumer Business Division   
Target 84.92  88.43  113.71  
Achievement  59.14  65.51  79.93  
Per cent  of achievement  69.64  74.08  70.29  
Hi-Care Division 
Target 60.03  77.97  107.88  
Achievement 42.50  53.57  73.64  
Per cent  of achievement 70.80  68.70  68.27  
Women Health Care division : 
Target 75.00  95.58  129.00  
Achievement  82.34  110.05  117.37  
Per cent  of achievement  110  115.13  90.98  
International Business Division 
Particulars  2012-13  2013-14  2014-15  
Target 76.60  206.76  165.29  
Achievement 126.96  133.11  155.58  
Per cent  of achievement  165.74  64.38  94.12  
Government Business Division  
Target No target fixed 
Achievement  319.10  283.56  342.85  
 

Report No. 15 of  2016 (Volume-I) 
144 
 
Annexure-II 
{Referred to in Para No. 11.5.3.1(a)} 
Details of delays in different R&M activities of 20 Mid/Mega life R&M schemes 
(Delay in months) 
                                                           
1One month time for management approval before sending to CEA was not considered for delay. 
2 As per CERC Tariff Regulation 2009-14, CEA approval was not required after March 2009. 
3 Approval from ED level empowered committee before sending to CEA was not applicable after March 2009 in view of CERC Tariff Regulation 2009-14. 
4 Control & Instrumentation system 
Sl.
No. 
Name of power station 
 
Type of R&M 
scheme  
Delay in 
initiation 
power 
stations 
@ 
Delay in 
submission of 
final proposal 
to corporate 
office by 
power 
stations 
Delay in 
approval by 
ED level 
Committee 
before 
1 
sending to 
CEA  
Delay in 
approval 
by CEA 
2 
Delay in 
final 
approval by 
ED level 
Committee  
after CEA’s 
approval 
Delay in 
approval of 
Investment by 
CMD/ 
Board 
 
Total 
delay 
 Prescribed time As per R&M Policy 8 months 8 months  8 months 1 month 1 month  
1 Korba STPS 
(3x500MW) Stage-II 
Mid No delay * 
 
4 
 
Not 
applicable 3 
Not 
required 
No delay 
 
8 
 
12 
2 Korba STPS 
(3x500MW) Stage-II 
Mid 
(C&I 
4) 
No delay * 
 
No delay 6 No delay 
 
Not held 3 
 
9 
3 Singrauli STPS  
(2x500 MW) Stage-II 
Mid No delay * 
 
No delay 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
No delay 
 
10 
 
10 
4 Singrauli STPS  
(2x500 MW) Stage-II 
Mid 
(DDCMIS ) 
No delay 
* 
 
2 
 
No delay 
 
No delay 
 
Not held 1 
 
3 
5 Dadri TPS (4x210 MW) Mid  12 20 12 10 Not held 28  82 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
145 
                                                           
5 Electrostatic precipitator  
6 Cooling Water duct 
6 Ramagundam 
STPS 
(3x500 MW) Stage-II 
Mid No delay
* 
 
No delay 
 
Not  
Applicable  
Not 
required 
34 
 
8 
 
42 
7 Farakka STPS 
(2x500 MW) Stage –II 
Mid 
 
No delay 
* 
 
No delay 
 
Not applicable Not 
required  
No delay No delay 
 
0 
8. Korba STPS 
(3x200 MW) Stage-I 
Mega 19 
 
18 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
19 
 
6 
 
74 
9 Korba STPS (3x200 
MW), Stage-I 
Mega 
(C&I)  
19 
 
18 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
No delay 
 
10 
 
47 
10 Korba STPS (3x200 
MW), Stage-I 
Mega 
(ESP 
5 Stage 
I&II) 
Initiated by 
Corporate 
office 
64 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
No delay 
 
9 
 
73 
11 Singrauli STPS 
(5x200 MW) Stage-I 
Mega  38 
 
4 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
34 
 
6 
 
82 
12 Singrauli STPS  
(5x200 MW) 
Stage-I 
Mega (CW 
6
  
duct) 
38 
 
4 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
3 
 
4 
 
49 
13 Singrauli STPS  
(5x200MW)  Stage-I 
Mega  
(ESP stage – I 
& II) 
38 
 
38 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
Not required No delay 
 
76 
14 Badarpur TPS(2x210 
MW) unit 4&5 
Mega No delay 
 
11 
 
30 
 
No delay 
 
Not required 20 
 
61 
15 Badarpur TPS  
(3x95 MW + 2x210 
MW) 
Mega 
(CW duct) 
No delay 
 
11 
 
30 
 
29 
 
Not required 39 
 
109 
16 Ramagundam STPS 
(3x200 MW) 
Stage-I 
Mega  20 
 
17 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
19 
 
3 
 
59 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
146  
 
@ Though the time to initiate R&M Schemes fell in the middle of respective financial years, the delays were worked out from the beginning of next financial year. 
*Delay has not been considered in these R&M schemes as the Management had already initiated some of the R&M activities in these projects between 2001 and 
2007.  
 
17 Farakka STPS 
(3x200 MW) Stage-I 
Mega 
ESP  
Initiated by 
corporate 
office 
50 
 
Not required  Not 
required  
Not required 
 No delay 
 
50 
18 Jhanor GPS  
(657.39 MW) 
Mega No delay 6 15 5 Not held 20 46 
19 Dadri GPS Mega  4 24 7 2 27 4 68 
20 Anta GPS Mega No delay 
 
29 
 
Not applicable Not 
required 
Not required No delays 29 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
147 
Annexure-III 
{Referred to in Para No. 11.5.3.1(a)} 
Details of abnormal delays in various R&M activities by Power Station/ Corporate Office 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Power Station Type of R&M scheme Main reaso ns for delays 
1 Korba Super Thermal Power Station 
(KSTPS)(3x200MW) Stage-I 
Mega /head2right Revision of packages by Power Stations. 
/head2right C&I and ESP packages were deleted from Mega R&M sch eme on the basis of 
urgency and compliance of Statutory Requirement.  
/head2right Shifting of R&M packages from Mega life scheme to O peration & 
Maintenance. 
/head2right Revision/deletion of packages by ED level Empowered  Committee in light of 
change in CERC Tariff Regulation. 
2 Korba STPS (3x200 MW), Stage-I Mega (C&I) 
3 Korba STPS (3x200 MW), Stage-I Mega (ESP Stage I& II) 
4 Korba STPS(3x500MW)Stage-II Mid /head2right Shifting of R&M packages from Mid-life to Mega life  by Empowered 
Committee/Financial Appraisal Agency, 
/head2right Change in CERC Tariff Regulation. 
/head2right Reasons for delay in initiation and submission to Corporate Office were not on 
record. 
5 Korba STPS(3x500MW)Stage-II Mid (C&I) 
6 Singrauli Super Thermal Power Station 
(SSTPS) (5x200 MW) Stage-I 
Mega /head2right Revision of packages by Power Stations. 
/head2right Cooling Water Duct and ESP packages were deleted fr om Mega R&M scheme 
on the basis of change in law category and complian ce of Statutory 
Requirement. 
/head2right Revised/deleted R&M schemes by ED level Empowered Committee in view of 
Change in CERC Tariff Regulation 
7 Singruali STPS(5x200 MW)Stage-I Mega (CW water du ct) 
8 Singrauli STPS (5x200MW), Stage-I Mega (ESP stage  –I &II) 
9 Singrauli STPS (2x500 MW) Stage-II Mid /head2right Comprehensive R&M proposal/schemes were not made at initial stage. 
/head2right Revision of packages  and inordinate time take by E D level Empowered 
Committee, 
/head2right Revised/deleted R&M schemes by ED level Empowered Committee in view of 
Change in CERC Tariff Regulation 
10 Singrauli STPS (2x500 MW) Stage-II Mid (DDCMIS )  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
148  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Power Station Type of R&M scheme Main reaso ns for delays 
11 Jhanor Gandhar GPS(657.39 MW) Mega 
 
/head2right Revision of packages by Power Station, 
/head2right Inordinate time taken by ED level Empowered committee 
/head2right Revised/deleted R&M schemes by ED level Empowered Committee in view of 
Change in CERC Tariff Regulation 
12 Dadri TPS(4x210 MW) Mid /head2right Inordinate time taken by ED level empowered committee to approve the R&M 
proposals before submission to CEA. 
/head2right Revised/deleted R&M schemes by ED level Empowered Committee in view of 
Change in CERC Tariff Regulation 
/head2right Reasons for delay in initiation and submission to Corporate Office were not on 
record. 
13 Dadri GPS (829.78 MW) Mega /head2right Delay in sending of R&M proposals by Power Station 
/head2right Revision/deletion of packages by Empowered Committee 
/head2right Revised/deleted R&M schemes by ED level Empowered Committee in view of 
Change in CERC Tariff Regulation 
14 Badarpur TPS  (2x210 MW) unit 4&5 Mega /head2right Revision in R&M packages which were already approved from CEA. 
/head2right Revision of R&M packages by ED level Empowered Committee. 15 Badarpur TPS  (3x95 MW + 2x210 MW) Mega(C&W) 
16 Anta GPS (419.33 MW) Mega /head2right Delay in submission of R&M proposal by Station to Corporate. 
17 RamagundamSTPS(3x200 MW) 
Stage-I 
Mega /head2right Comprehensive proposal were not made at initial stage of R&M scheme. 
/head2right Revision/deletion of R&M packages by ED level empowered committee on 
basis must schemes. 
/head2right Revised/deleted R&M schemes by ED level Empowered Committee in view of 
Change in CERC Tariff Regulation 
18 Ramagundam STPS(3x500 MW) 
Stage-II 
Mid /head2right Comprehensive proposal/schemes were not made at the initially stage, 
/head2right Revised/deleted R&M schemes by ED level Empowered Committee in view of 
Change in CERC Tariff Regulation 
/head2right Deletion/Shifting R&M packages to Mega life by ED l evel Empowered 
Committee 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume I)  
149 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Power Station Type of R&M scheme Main reaso ns for delays 
19 Farakka TPS(2x500 MW)Stage –II Mid 
 
/head2right Reasons for delays in initiation of Corporate Office is not on record 
20 Farakka TPS(3x200 MW)Stage-I MegaESP package /head2right Reasons for delays in initiation of Corporate Office is not on record 