 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial) 
No. 15 of 2016 
(Compliance Audit Observations) 
 
Volume II 

i 
 
 
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT PSU PAGE 
NO. 
 PREFACE  v 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  vii 
 
Chapter I MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS   
1.1 Extension of credit facility to a 
defaulter company without security  
Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited 
1 
1.2 Safety Preparedness of Oil and Gas 
Transmission Pipelines  
GAIL (India) Limited 
and Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited 
3 
1.3 Petrochemical Production and 
Project Management   
 
GAIL (India) Limited 
and Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited 
22 
1.4 Avoidable expenditure on Diesel 
Hydro Treater Project in Mumbai 
Refinery  
Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited 
 
36 
1.5 Irregular payment of Performance 
Related Pay  
Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited   
38 
1.6 Undue benefit extended to the 
executives in the form of shift 
allowance 
Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited   
40 
1.7 Delay in appraisal and non-
monetization of the discoveries in 
KG DWN 98/2 block 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited  
41 
1.8 Non achievement of objective of 
acquiring Coal Bed Methane blocks  
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited  
57 
1.9 Loss of returns to ONGC due to 
adoption of financing mechanism to 
maintain the status of ONGC Petro 
additions Limited (OPaL) as a non 
public sector undertaking 
 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited  
68 
1.10 Loss of interest due to inordinate 
delay in receipt of share of gas 
transportation charges 
 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited  
72 
1.11 Improper decision of procuring 
intelligent well completion 
equipment led to idling of 
equipment 
 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited  
75 
1.12 Non–synchronization of 
construction of downstream units 
and other utilities with the Cracker 
Plant led to avoidable expenditure 
on Preservation and plant check of 
Cracker Plant 
 
ONGC Petro additions 
Limited 
 
78 
CONTENTS 

ii  
 
Chapter II MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS  
2.1 Undue benefit to the concessionaire 
(PIU Begusarai)  
National Highways 
Authority of India  
82 
2.2 Undue benefit to the Concessionaire 
relating to four-laning project 
between Hazaribagh – Ranchi 
Section of NH – 33. 
  
National Highways 
Authority of India  
 
84 
2.3 Undue Benefit to the concessionaire 
(PIU Darbhanga) 
National Highways 
Authority of India  
86 
 
Chapter III DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL  
RESEARCH 
 
3.1 Unproductive expenditure on 
upscaling of operations  
Central Electronics 
Limited 
90 
 
Chapter IV MINISTRY OF SHIPPING  
4.1 Review of status of utilisation of 
infrastructure facilities 
Inland Waterways 
Authority of India 
92 
 
Chapter V MINISTRY OF STEEL  
5.1 Execution of Jobs  Hindustan Steelworks 
Construction Limited 
97 
5.2 Marketing Activities  
 
Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
106 
5.3 Idle investment at SPU Bettiah 
project  
Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
116 
5.4 Avoidable expenditure  Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
119 
 
Chapter VI RECOVERIES, CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS B Y 
CPSEs AT THE INSTANCE OF AUDIT  
 
6.1 Recoveries at the instance of audit National Bu ilding 
Constructions 
Corporation Limited, Oil  
India Limited and Oil 
and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
122 
6.2 Corrections/rectifications at the 
instance of audit National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and 
Development 
Corporation and National 
Scheduled Castes 
Finance and 
Development 
Corporation 
122 

iii  
Chapter VII Follow up on Audit Reports  123 
 Appendix I  127 
 Appendix II  128 
 Appendix III  129 
 Annexures  130 
 

 
v 
 
 
 
 
 
1. The accounts of Government Companies set up unde r the provisions of the 
Companies Act (including Companies deemed to be Gov ernment Companies as per the 
provisions of the Companies Act) are audited by the  Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (CAG) under the provisions of Section 143(6) of Companies Act, 2013. The 
accounts certified by the Statutory Auditors (Chart ered Accountants) appointed by the 
CAG under the Companies Act are subject to the supp lementary audit by CAG whose 
comments supplement the reports of the Statutory Auditors.  In addition, these companies 
are also subject to test audit by CAG. 
 
2. The statutes governing some Corporations and Aut horities require their accounts 
to be audited by CAG. In respect of five such Corpo rations viz. Airports Authority of 
India, National Highways Authority of India, Inland  Waterways Authority of India, Food 
Corporation of India and Damodar Valley Corporation , the relevant statutes designate 
CAG as their sole auditor. In respect of one Corpor ation viz. Central Warehousing 
Corporation, CAG has the right to conduct supplemen tary and test audit after audit has 
been conducted by the Chartered Accountants appoint ed under the statute governing the 
Corporation. 
 
3. Reports in relation to the accounts of a Governm ent Company or Corporation are 
submitted to the Government by CAG under the provis ions of Section 19-A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers a nd Conditions of Service) Act, 
1971, as amended in 1984. 
 
4. The Audit Report for the year 31 March 2015 has been prepared in two volumes. 
This is Volume II of the Audit Report and contains 21 individual audit observations 
relating to 11 PSUs under control of five Ministrie s/Departments. Volume I contains 32 
individual audit observations pertaining to 20 PSUs  under the control of 11 
Ministries/Departments. Instances mentioned in this  Report are among those which came 
to notice in the course of audit during 2014-15 as well as those which came to notice in 
earlier years. Results of audit of transactions sub sequent to March 2015 in a few cases 
have also been mentioned. 
 
5. All references to ‘Companies/Corporations or PSU s’ in this Report may be 
construed to refer to ‘Central Government Companies /Corporations’ unless the context 
suggests otherwise. 
 
6. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
PREFACE 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II)  
 
vii 
 
I Introduction   
1. This Report includes important audit findings  noticed as a result of test check of 
accounts of records of Central Government Companies and Corporations 
conducted by the officers of the Comptro ller and Auditor General of India under 
Section 143 (6) of the Companies Act,  2013 or the statutes governing the 
particular Corporations. 
2. The Report contains 21 individual observations rela ting to 11 PSUs under five 
Ministries/Departments. The draft observat ions were forwarded to the Secretaries 
of the concerned Ministries/Departments  under whose administrative control the 
PSUs are working to give them an opportuni ty to furnish their replies/comments 
in each case within a period of six weeks. Replies to 16 observations were not 
received even as this Report was being finalised. Earlier, th e draft observations 
were sent to the Managements of the PSUs concerned, whose replies have been 
suitable incorporated in the report. 
3. The paragraphs included in this Report relate to the PSUs under the 
administrative control of the followi ng Ministries/Departments of the 
Government of India:   
 
Ministry/Department (Number of 
PSUs involved 
Number of 
paragraphs  
Number of paragraphs in 
respect of which 
Ministry/Department’s 
reply was awaited 
1. 
 
Petroleum and Natural Gas  
(BPCL, GAIL, HPCL, IOCL and 
ONGC, OPal)  
12 11 
2. 
 
Road Transport and Highways 
(NHAI)  
3 - 
3. 
 
Scientific and Industrial 
Research 
 (CEL)  
1 1 
4.  Shipping 
(IWAI) 
1 1 
5. 
 
 
Steel 
 (HSCL and SAIL)  
4 3 
Total 21 16 
 
4. Total financial implication of audit observations is ` 9,736.69 crore. 
5. Individual Audit observations in this Report are broadly of the following nature: 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
viii 
 Non-compliance with rules, directives, procedure, terms and conditions of 
the contract etc. involving ` 308.42 crore in six audit paragraphs. 
 Failure in safeguarding of financial interest of organisations involving 
` 632.61 crore in five audit paragraphs. 
 Defective/deficient planning involving ` 3,531.30 crore in five audit 
paragraphs. 
 Inadequate/deficient monitoring involving ` 117.86 crore in two audit 
paragraphs. 
 Non-realisation/partial realisation of objectives involving ` 5,146.50 crore 
in three audit paragraphs. 
6. The Report also contains a paragr aph relating to recoveries of ` 6.38 crore made 
by three PSUs and another paragraph relatin g to corrections/rectifications carried 
out by two PSUs at the instance of Audit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II)  
 
ix 
II. Highlights of some significant paragr aphs included in the Report are given 
below:- 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) acquired 90 per cent stake in the KG-DWN-
98/2 block in 2005 and balance in 2012 under first round of New Exploration Licensing 
Policy. The Company availed several extensions to explore and appraise its discoveries at 
a cost of ` 8,402.56 crore (March 2015). The Company also suffered a major setback in 
view of the expert confirmation regarding substantial migration of reserves from this area 
and their exploitation by RIL through its  KG-DWN-98/3 block. Besides, the Company 
had considered a higher gas price while considering the viability of the block in 
December 2013.  Under the New Domestic Gas Pricing Guidelines the gas price was 
fixed at a much lower price, which would furt her adversely affect the financial viability 
of the block. The Company has notified total of 11 discoveries in the block till August 
2015. 
(Para 1.7) 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) acquired 9 blocks of Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM) Blocks out of the 33 blocks aw arded by Government of  India during the period 
from 2001 to 2003. It relinquished five blocks on the grounds of poor prospects. Because 
of delayed acquisition of land due to various  reasons and ONGC’s failure in completing 
the committed Minimum Works Programme in the blocks, Exploration Phase of the 
blocks was affected and ONGC had to seek  repeated extensions of time from GOI. 
Repeated extensions had the effect of reduci ng the Development Phase of five years. It 
also failed in promptly obtaining Mining Leases and Environmental Clearances which are 
pre-requisite for commencement of de velopment operations. Thus ONGC spent 
` 1,217.86 crore on the four CBM blocks without achieving the objective of acquiring it.  
(Para 1.8) 
Considering the wide range of applicati ons of petrochemicals and resultant demand, 
GAIL (India) Limited and Indian Oil Cor poration Limited (IOCL) entered into the 
petrochemical industry in 1999 and 2004 resp ectively. Audit of ‘Petrochemical 
Production and Project Manage ment by GAIL and IOCL’ c overed the operations of 
Petrochemical Plant at Pata of GAIL and Napht ha Cracker Plant of IOCL at Panipat for 
the period from 2009-10 to 2014-15. Aud it was conducted to assess feedstock 
availability, consumption of feedstock and ot her inputs/utilities as  per industrial norms 
and effectiveness of project implementation etc. Some of the significant audit findings 
were as under: 
• Mismatch between upstream and downstream production capacity led to loss of 
opportunity for production (Pata Plant of GAIL). 
• Creation of capacity of utilit ies in excess of requirement led to underutilisation of 
these utilities (Panipat plant of IOCL).  
• Consumption of feedstoc k, chemicals and steam in  excess of industrial 
norms/design standards led to increase in  cost of production (Panipat plant of 
IOCL). 
• Non-maintenance of grade-wise cost by GAIL and IOCL. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
x 
• Delay in execution of capacity enhancem ent project of GAIL led to production 
loss. 
(Para 1.3) 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited is  engaged mainly with the execution of 
construction projects for iron and steel works and ancillary plants. Audit of execution of 
jobs showed that the proce ss of award of work based on Approved Rate Structure (ARS) 
was not competitive and lacked transparency because in majority of cases work was 
given on nomination basis without inviting quot ations from empanelled contractors. 14 
contracts awarded to the company valuing ` 133.59 crore were split into 160 contracts 
and offloaded to 32 contractors mostly on th e basis of Limited Tender Enquiry or ARS. 
Procedures governing invitation of bids were not conducive in attracting wider response 
from the prospective contra ctors. Audit observed delays  ranging from 10 days to 288 
days over permissible time in submissi on of Performance Bank Guarantee by the 
contractor in 35 contracts valuing ` 241.46 crore. The compa ny could not realize 
` 21.85 crore as centage charges/PMC fee from the client due to deficiencies in the 
agreement.  
(Para 5.1) 
Review of the marketing activ ities of Central Marketing Or ganisation (CMO) of SAIL 
revealed the following: 
• Delay in capacity addition, resulted in reduction of market share from 18.5 per 
cent in 2009-10 to 14.2 per cent in 2014-15 despite increase in steel consumption 
in India by 30 per cent during 2009-15.  
• The company did not have an effectiv e strategy for seeking business through 
participation in tenders and it was not su ccessful in 69 tenders out of 224 tenders 
in which it participated primarily due to quoting higher prices.  
• Absence of active dealership base advers ely impacted the growth in retail sales 
and overall market share of the compa ny. SAIL disbursed dispensation of  
` 26,058 crore in last 6 years and average dispensation per ton increased from  
` 2241/- in 2009-10 to ` 5764/- in 2014-15. 
•  Net Sales Realisation incr eased by 13.43 per cent over 5 years whereas the cost 
of sales increased by 31.16 per cent. SAIL ’s cost of raw material to total 
expenditure was 7-9 and 9-17 percentage points higher than that of  Jindal Steel & 
Power Limited and  TATA Steel Company Limited  respectively.  
• There were instances of misuse of the company’s supplies and SAIL brand name 
by Conversion Agents and Wet Leasing Agents.  
 (Para 5.2) 
Indian Oil Corporation Limite d and GAIL (India) Limited own a large network of oil & 
gas pipelines for transporti ng crude oil, Natural Gas, Liquefied Petroleum Gas and 
various other petroleum products. Audit of  'Safety preparedness of Oil and Gas 
Transmission Pipelines' of Indian Oil Cor poration Limited and GAIL (India) Limited, 
covering operations from April 2012 to Ma rch 2015 was conducted to assess the safety 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II)  
 
xi 
preparedness of their pipeline operations. So me of the significant audit findings are as 
under: 
• Non compliance with recommendations of External Safety a udits conducted by 
Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD) in IOCL/GAIL for more than two years.  
• The Companies failed to take effective measures to prevent/evict encroachment of 
Right of Use. 
• Non-compliance with various Oil Industry Safety Directorate standards (Indian 
Oil Corporation Limited) and Petrol eum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board 
regulations (Gas Authority of  India Limited) leading to  frequent pipeline failure, 
pipeline deterioration and frequent accidents.  
• Inadequate maintenance practices coupl ed with non-formulation of/deviation 
from SOPs leading to ineffective handling of several incidents.  
The failures led to loss of lives, property and damage to environment from accidents.         
(Para 1.2)  
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPC L) initiated the Diesel Hydro Treater 
(DHT) project in 2007 for meeting the statut ory quality specificatio ns ( Euro IV) of 
diesel at a cost of ` 1,969.59 crore ignoring the existing Di esel Hydro de-sulphurisation 
(DHDS) plant, which was capable of producing similar quality of diesel. Subsequently, 
the DHDS project was taken up for upgrada tion (2009) to enhance its capacity. The 
revamped DHDS was capable of meeting the Euro IV requirement of Mumbai Refinery 
of HPCL. This resulted in  avoidable expenditure of ` 1,969.59 crore as well as creation 
of excess capacity in production of diesel.  
(Para 1.4) 
Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC ) made advances agai nst equity to Oil 
and Natural Gas Corporation Petro Additions  Limited (OPaL) during April 2007 to May 
2013. OPaL delayed the conversion of the advances into equity shares. OPaL also offered 
rights issue (March 2015) to ONGC. However,  OPaL did not issue the shares with the 
intention of avoiding the Company becomi ng a CPSU. ONGC again paid (June 2015) 
money towards instalment against equity shar es which is yet to be  issued. Thus, ONGC 
made available interest free funds to OPaL  without any commensu rate benefit. This 
resulted in loss of interest of ` 408.15 crore to ONGC.   
(Para 1.9) 
Review of the status of utilisation of infrastructure created by Inland Waterways 
Authority of India (IWAI) in National Wa terways (NW) 1, 2 and 3 showed that 
infrastructure created at a cost of ` 284.20 crore remained under ut ilised. In the case of 
NW-1 a High Level Jetty was constructe d at Gaighat, Patna at a cost of ` 27.54 crore in 
addition to the existing Low Level Jetty constructed at a cost of ` 30.29 crore. Total 
cargo movement during the period from 2012- 13 to 2014-15 from both the jetties was 
only 0.3 lakh Metric Tonnes leading to signi ficant under utilisation of infrastructure 
created at a total cost of ` 57.83 crore. Jetty II constructed at Garden Reach, Kolkata in 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
xii 
NW 1 at a cost of ` 36.59 crore also remained under ut ilised since the cargo handled in 
the jetty was only 0.02 lakh Metric Tonnes during 2014-15. 
In NW 2, infrastructure consisting of a Lo w Level Jetty and a High Level Jetty at Pandu 
Terminal constructed at cost of ` 37.91 crore and ` 43.85 crore, respectively, remained 
under utilised since the cargo movement was only 314 Metric Tonnes during the period 
from 2009-10 to 2014-15. Further, a broad-ga uge railway link betw een Pandu Terminal 
and Guwahati Railway Station constructed at a cost of ` 12.59 crore remained idle due to 
operational constraints pointed out by Railways.  
NW 3 could not be made fully navigable due  to non completion of two stretches viz. 
Kayamkulam-Edapallikota and Edapallikota-Kollam. The benefit of ` 73.97 crore spent 
on capital dredging and ` 21.46 crore on construction of Terminals could not be availed 
due to non-completion of these two stretches.  
(Para 4.1) 
Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) (trans porter) did not get its legitimate claim 
towards gas transportation charges due to di spute between the seller Panna Mukta Tapti 
Joint Venture (PMTJV) and buyer GAIL (India)  Ltd. (GAIL) on deliv ery point, this led 
to inordinate deferment of its dues (US$ 21.54 million) and consequent loss of interest 
thereon amounting to ` 157.05 crore (US$ 24.93 million) between 1998 and 2005.  
(Para 1.10) 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) d ecided (2007) to set up a Steel Processing Unit 
(SPU) at Bettiah, Bihar. The Board approved (July 2008) the project at a total cost of 
` 116.24 crore. The Pipe/Tube mills and facili ties for Galvanised Pipes/Galvanised 
Corrugated Sheets were to be installed in Phase I which could not be completed as 
scheduled by January 2010. The SPU was finally completed by December 2012 with a 
delay of about three year s at a total cost of ` 140.16 crore. Due to the higher cost of 
production compared to the market price, the company did not in crease the production 
beyond the required level for testing and to keep the mills operational. Production was 
less than one per cent of mill’s capacity during the period from 2011 to 2015. Thus the 
investment of ` 140.16 crore in SPU Bettiah became non-performing and 137 officials 
(out of initially a ppointed 145 officials) specifical ly recruited for the SPU, were 
remaining idle (January 2016). Director (Techni cal) of the Company in a review meeting 
(29 April 2014) opined that sale of SPU at Bettiah would be a better option than closing 
down the same, which was endorsed by the th en Joint Secretary (MoS) and Secretary 
(Steel) of GoI. The management, however, has not taken any action for implementation 
of this decision (January 2016).  
(Para 5.3) 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited made an irregular payment of ` 110.40 crore for the years 
2012-13 and 2013-14 towards ‘Performance Relate d Pay’ due to non-adherence to the 
guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprises.  
(Para 1.5) 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
1 
 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited  
1.1 Extension of credit facility to a defaulter com pany without security  
BPCL had been supplying fuel oil to KPCPL since Jun e 2000. The fuel supply 
agreement did not have adequate safeguards to prote ct the financial interests of 
BPCL. BPCL did not ensure suitable security against credit sales to KPCPL, though 
the company defaulted on payment. This resulted in non-recovery of sales revenue 
amounting to     `` ``    23.50 crore.  
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL) signed (24.06.2000) a Fuel Supply 
Agreement (FSA) with Kasargod Power Corporation Pri vate Limited (KPCPL) 1 for 
supply of Fuel Oil (HSD and LSHS) to KPCPL’s power plant at Mylatti in Kasargod 
District, Kerala State. The FSA, inter-alia , stipulated that the agreement period would be 
for 15 years (Article 2), that the bills would be p aid on the 1 st  of every month along with 
interest for delay (Article 8) and that the agreement would be terminated if the buyer fails 
to make payment continuously for a period of three months (Article 16.02.1). The FSA 
did not have provisions for ‘letter of credit’ or ‘ liquidated damages & indemnity’ to 
safeguard the financial interests of BPCL. 
BPCL commenced supply as per the agreement and rece ived timely payments upto 
March 2006. KPCPL defaulted and delayed the payment s w.e.f April 2006. BPCL, 
however, continued credit sale of fuel oil to KPCPL. 
Meanwhile, a credit policy was introduced in BPCL o n 1 
st  January 2009. This policy 
inter-alia stipulated customer categorisation, risk  assessment, customer re-appraisal and 
setting credit limit accordingly. As per this polic y, sales to very high risk customers were 
to be made either on pre-payment basis or secured w ith documents such as Letter of 
Credit, bank guarantee, parent performance guarante e or asset pledges. BPCL carried out 
the credit evaluation of KPCPL after one year. KPCP L was classified as “Medium Risk” 
customer 2 and sanctioned a credit limit of ` 10.50 crore in February 2010. The ‘medium 
risk’categorisation was despite outstanding dues wo rth ` 27.40 crore against KPCPL 
which had accumulated from 2006-07 to 2009-10; more  than twice the sanctioned credit 
limit. 
Audit had commented (May 2010) on the accumulation of outstanding amount from 
KPCPL and up-liftment of products by KPCPL being mo re than payments made by it. 
Management had assured Audit that the case would be reviewed based on further receipts 
from the customer. After being flagged by Audit, BP CL raised (July 2010) the issue of 
                                                           
1  KPCPL never used the word “Private” in their lett er pad while corresponding with BPCL and even in 
FSA agreement the word “Private” was not printed ho wever “Pvt” was manually incorporated and 
signed. 
2  Credit policy permitted unsecured credit to medium risk customers. 
CHAPTER I: MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
2 
non-payment with KPCPL which was reiterated in Augu st 2010. BPCL also asked 
(August 2010) KPCPL for a bank guarantee of ` 25 crore from a nationalized bank as 
security. 
KPCPL neither paid the outstanding amount nor did i t submit a bank guarantee. BPCL, 
however, continued to supply fuel on credit till Ju ly 2011. In July 2011, BPCL decided 
that future supplies to KPCPL would be drawn agains t advance payment till the overdue 
payments were cleared. At this point (June 2011), K PCPL had an outstanding balance of 
`22.06 crore. 
KPCPL again defaulted in November 2012. BPCL contin ued its fuel supply till June 
2013 after which fuel supply was stopped. As on Mar ch 2015, an amount of ` 23.50 
crores 1 remained to be recovered from KPCPL. Meanwhile (in  February 2014), BPCL 
has initiated arbitration proceedings against KPCPL  which is presently under process 
(November 2015).  
BPCL, thus, failed to secure its financial interest  vis-à-vis KPCPL, ab initio  through 
appropriate clauses in the FSA. Even after default by KPCPL, credit sales beyond the 
credit limit were continued to the company, without  security, in contravention of the 
credit policy of BPCL. This has led to accumulation  of outstanding dues of 
` 23.50 crore 
(March 2015) and arbitration proceedings for its recovery. 
Management replied (October 2015) that the terms of  agreement with KPCPL were 
finalized as per the prevalent delegation consideri ng then existing market conditions, 
business opportunity, availability of products etc.  The credit extended was agreed to 
considering the payment receipt cycle of KPCPL from  Kerala State Electricity Board 
(KSEB) and bank guarantee/ letter of credit was not  considered necessary. Further,            
M/s. KSEB, being a utility company, unilateral stoppage could not be done due to critical 
nature of business.  Both KPCPL and KSEB agreements, which were for supply of power 
to the State of Kerala, did not have any payment se curity through bank guarantee/LC. 
Management also stated that liquidated damages clau se had been incorporated in both 
agreements. As such, there was no difference betwee n these agreements. Management 
also stated that the recovery from KPCPL is presently under arbitration. 
The Management response is not acceptable in view of the following: 
(i)  The statement that the agreement signed by BPCL wit h KPCPL had a ‘liquidated 
damages’ clause is incorrect. In fact, Audit notice d that clauses in the nature of 
‘letter of credit’/ ‘liquidated damages and indemni ty’ to safeguard the financial 
interest of BPCL had indeed been incorporated in FS As with three other 
customers 2 including KSEB 3 which had been entered into prior to FSA with           
M/s. KPCPL. The FSA with KPCPL, however, did not have the relevant clauses. 
                                                           
1   ` 11 crores plus ` 12.50 crore towards principal and interest respectively. 
2  M/s Tanir Bavi Power Company Private Limited (Ban galore, Karnataka), M/s. Samalpatti Power 
Corporation (Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu) and  M/s. Kera la State Electricity Board 
(Thiruvanamthapuram) 
3  Article 11 LD and Indemnity of FSA with KSEB stat es that “it is mutually agreed that though the 
buyer and the seller being the Government bodies, n o BG or indemnity bond shall be provided by 
either of the parties to cover liquidated damages a gainst the default.  It is further agreed that in t he 
event of change of ownership of either of the parti es from Government Body, BG or Indemnity Bond 
for invoking LD shall be provided”. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
3 
(ii)  BPCL did not adhere to its own credit policy introd uced in January 2009 and 
continued credit sales despite KPCPL accumulating o utstanding amounts beyond 
credit limit. Had BPCL secured its financial intere st in time, accumulation of 
outstanding dues as well as arbitration proceedings  for their recovery could have 
been prevented. 
(iii)  The contention of BPCL that stopping of supply to K PCPL would affect 
electricity supply in the State of Kerala needs to be viewed in the context of 
stoppage of supply to KPCPL w.e.f June 2013.  
Thus, non-inclusion of an indemnity clause in FSA a nd not insisting on bank 
guarantee/secured advance payment to cover risk of credit sales to a defaulter company 
led to non-recovery of ` 23.50 crore (towards sales revenue and interest the reon) from 
KPCPL. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (December 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
GAIL (India) Limited and Indian Oil Corporation Limited     
1.2 Safety Preparedness of Oil and Gas Transmission  Pipelines  
1.2.1 Introduction 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) and GAIL (Ind ia) Limited (GAIL) own cross 
country network of oil & gas pipelines covering 242 30 kms (IOCL-11221 kms. and 
GAIL-13009 kms) for transporting crude oil, Natural Gas (NG), Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
(LPG) and various other petroleum products (Annexure-I & II ). These pipelines carry 
large quantities of inherently inflammable products ; hence safety of pipelines and their 
periodical health assessment are of critical import ance to ensure that they do not pose a 
risk to the public and environment. 
1.2.2 Audit Objectives, Scope and Methodology  
Audit of 'Safety preparedness of Oil and Gas Transmission Pi pelines' of Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited and GAIL (India) Limited was co nducted to assess the safety 
preparedness of their pipeline operations. Audit co vered operations from April 2012 to 
March 2015. 
The criteria adopted for Audit consisted of the following: 
1.  Safety norms applicable to the pipelines;  
2.  Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) policy of the companies; 
3.  Safety requirements laid down by regulatory authorities; 
4.  Procedures / Guidelines adopted for maintenance & inspection of pipelines. 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
4 
1.2.3 Safety Regulatory Framework 
Safety aspects of oil & gas pipelines are governed by provisions of various Acts/ 
regulations/ standards and guidelines developed by the following agencies: 
(i)  Oil Industry Safety Directorate (OISD):  OISD, a technical directorate, was 
constituted (1986) by the Ministry of Petroleum and  Natural Gas (MoPNG) to 
formulate / standardize procedures and guidelines in the areas of design, operation 
and maintenance.  
(ii)  Petroleum & Explosive Safety Organisation (PESO):  PESO, under the 
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP),  Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry, is the statutory authority for implementation of Petroleum Act, 1934 and 
Rules thereof as well as Explosives Act, 1884. 
(iii)  Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board (PNGRB):  PNGRB was 
constituted (2006) to protect the interests of cons umers and entities engaged in 
specified activities relating to petroleum and natu ral gas. It has notified (2009) 
Technical Standards and Specifications including Sa fety Standard (T4S) 
Regulations for NG Pipelines.  
Compliance with safety standards/guidelines is ensu red by the companies through HSE 
departments which also conduct internal safety audit of various locations.  
1.2.4 Audit findings 
1.2.4.1 Non-compliance with safety norms 
Non-compliance with safety regulations / guidelines  issued by various regulators was 
observed in IOCL & GAIL as discussed below: 
(I) Non-compliance with recommendations of External  Safety Audit 
OISD carries out External Safety Audits (ESA) of pi peline operators and gives its 
recommendations to ensure safe pipeline operations.  It also monitors the implementation 
of ESA recommendations by way of quarterly reports.  Generally it is expected that ESA 
recommendations are complied within two years of submission of report.  
Audit observed that there were 149 recommendations pending compliance in IOCL as at 
September 2015 of which 11 were pending compliance for more than two years. In 
respect of GAIL, it was observed that 109 recommend ations were pending compliance as 
at end of June 2015. Further, audit observed delay ranging from nine to 163 months in 
complying with ESA recommendations.  
Whereas IOCL replied (November 2015) that complianc e with recommendations was 
being reviewed on quarterly basis and compliance wi th 83 per cent  recommendations 
was achieved, GAIL attributed (December 2015) the d elay in compliance with ESA 
recommendations to non-feasibility of implementatio n, contractual issues, Govt. 
permissions etc.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
5 
Replies need to be viewed against the fact that tim ely compliance of ESA 
recommendations would strengthen safety preparedness.  
(II) Non-compliance with regulations on Intelligent  Pigging Survey  
A. PNGRB T4S Regulations (2009): 
Intelligent Pigging Survey (IPS) is conducted to as sess health of a pipeline. Intelligent 
pigs are used to perform in-line inspections of act ive pipelines for signs of metal loss, 
corrosion or dents etc.  
PNGRB, vide T4S Regulations (2009), identified cert ain critical infrastructure to be 
provided, activities and processes to be undertaken  in existing NG pipeline network 
within stipulated period of six months to two years. 
 
Test check of operations in respect of GAIL revealed the following: 
/head2right Intelligent Pigging Survey 1 (IPS) for piggable sections has to be carried out 
once in ten years from the date of commissioning, w hereas for pipelines 
transporting sour gas, it has to be conducted within five years. However, delay 
ranging from one year to 17 years was noticed in ca rrying out IPS in 66 
pipelines; 
/head2right IPS for Non-piggable Section (NPS) above 12” and le ngth above 10 km. was 
to be conducted within two years from T4S notificat ion (2009). However, 
audit observed a delay ranging from one to four yea rs in IPS implementation 
in 46 pipelines; 
GAIL replied (December 2015) that work for conducting IPS was under progress.  
T4S regulations have not yet been complied with eve n after a lapse of more than six 
years.   
B. OISD standards on IPS: 
OISD-STD-141 on ‘Design, Construction and Inspection requirements for Cross Country 
Liquid Hydrocarbon Pipelines’ stipulates that the f irst IPS shall be carried out at the 
earliest but not later than 10 years of commissioning. Subsequent periodicity of IPS shall, 
in no case, be more than 10 years. Further, OISD-ST D-139 on ‘Inspection for Offshore 
Pipelines’ stipulates conduct of IPS of Offshore pipelines once in five years. 
Audit, however, observed that IOCL has not conducte d IPS of eight pipelines and two 
offshore pipelines in violation of OISD-STD-141 and  139 respectively. Further, IOCL 
had planned to conduct IPS of 17 pipeline sections during the period 2013 to 2015 as per 
its IPS rolling plan; however, the same were either  not conducted or conducted belatedly. 
(Annexure-III ) 
IOCL replied (November 2015) that the work for IPS is being awarded shortly and all the 
vendors of IPS are located outside India and their lining-up takes considerable time. 
                                                           
1  A monitoring mechanism to ascertain pipeline heal th by accurately locating and defining the pipeline  
wall defects (internal / external). 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
6 
Reply needs to be seen in view of the fact that del ay in conducting IPS is not only in 
violation of OISD standards but also indicative of improper planning. Further, five 
incidents of leakage had occurred due to corrosion / dents etc. at pipeline locations 1 
where IPS was delayed.  
(III) Failure to obtain of PESO approval - GAIL 
As per amendment (2000) of Manufacture, Storage and  Import of Hazardous Chemical 
Rules, 1989, PESO approval was required to be obtained for new as well as existing NG / 
LPG pipelines. However, the Company had not obtaine d the same for nine pipeline 
networks.  
GAIL replied (December 2015) that applications have  been made for obtaining PESO 
approval for all pipeline networks.  
The delay is inordinate as GAIL has applied for PES O approval only in November 2014 
even though the same was made mandatory in the year 2000. 
(IV) Non-implementation of recommendations of MB La l Committee – IOCL  
MB Lal committee was constituted by MoPNG to enquir e into the fire incident (October 
2009) at Jaipur Terminal of IOCL. MoPNG accepted (A pril 2010) the committee’s report 
which, inter alia,  included remedial measures to prevent recurrence o f such incidents. 
The committee had given 113 recommendations, implem entation of which was to be 
completed by IOCL between July 2010 and November 20 14 as per schedule agreed with 
MoPNG.  
Audit, however, observed that despite lapse of more  than five years, recommendations 
were yet to be implemented by IOCL in respect of it s pipeline locations as installation of 
26 Remote Operated Shut-off Valves (ROSOVs) at its pipeline locations, required by 
May 2012, were not completed upto November 2015. 
IOCL replied (November 2015) that implementation of  the recommendations was 
delayed due to slow progress by contractors, workin g in an operating installation, re-
tendering etc.  
Reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that timely implementation of the 
recommendations would have strengthened the safety preparedness.  
(V)  Encroachment of Right of Use 
For the purpose of laying of pipeline, Right of Use  (RoU) is to be acquired from the land 
owners as per Petroleum and Minerals Pipeline Act, 1962 (PMP Act). The PMP Act 
imposes restrictions regarding construction of buil ding/structure, excavation/construction 
of tank, well, reservoir, and plantation of trees on the land so acquired under RoU so as to 
avoid potential damage to pipelines. 
                                                           
1 Three in Salaya Mathura Pipeline and one each at M athura Tundla Pipeline and Paradip Haldia 
Barauni Pipeline  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
7 
Audit observed that there were 1116 cases of encroa chment (August 2015) of which 647 
cases pertained to installation of Electric Poles/transformers besides cases of construction 
of houses, boundary wall, bore wells and telephone towers inside the RoU area. 
However, IOCL has not yet been able to evict these encroachments despite the fact that 
some of these cases were pending for more than 40 y ears. MoPNG had also directed 
(September 2014) to ensure that the pipeline RoU remains free of encroachment. 
It is also pertinent to mention that a fire took pl ace (September 2011) on Allahabad-
Mughalsarai section (BKPL 1) due to fault in electric transformer installed in  RoU area. 
OISD investigation highlighted threat to pipeline o perations from number of electric 
poles/transformers in this RoU. 
IOCL had no system to ensure periodical reporting o f encroachment cases by Regional 
Offices to HO to enable timely action. 
IOCL replied (November 2015) that it has been regul arly taking action for removal of 
encroachment from RoU area from time to time. Howev er, the fact remains that large 
number of encroachments still exist at RoU area and  no system to ensure periodical 
reporting of encroachment by regional offices has been introduced.  
In respect of GAIL, it was observed that: 
/head2right Out of total 527 encroachments noticed till September 2015, 201 were categorised 
as highly vulnerable viz. electrical transformer/to wer, drilling activities, bore-
wells, residential and commercial establishments etc. 
/head2right Seven encroachments in HVJ pipeline RoU were pendin g eviction since 1987 
indicating ineffective eviction measures.  
/head2right Encroachments were reported also in Mumbai (48), Gu jarat (19), NCR (15), HVJ 
pipeline (7), Pondicherry (5) and KG basin (2) pipeline networks.  
GAIL replied (December 2015) that it has been takin g follow-up action with encroachers 
as well as with District Administration for eviction.  
The fact remains that GAIL has neither been able to  evict existing encroachments nor 
prevent new encroachments in its pipelines RoU. 
(VI) Non-compliance with OISD Standard-117 (Revised -Oct.2010) - IOCL 
Rim Seal Fire Protection System (RSFPS) automatical ly detects and extinguishes fire at 
the petroleum storage tank roof at the incipient st age. In order to ensure safer oil & gas 
operations, OISD revised (October 2010) Standard-11 7 (OISD-STD-117) on “Fire 
Protection Facilities for Petroleum Depots, Terminals, Pipeline Installations and Lube Oil 
Installations” which stipulated that RSFPS shall be  provided on all external floating roof 
tanks storing Class ‘A’ petroleum. Accordingly, Hal on based RSFPS at 36 tanks at four 
locations viz. Vadinar, Viramgam, Chaksu and Haldia  were to be replaced with Hollow 
metallic based RSFPS so as to comply with Revised OISD-STD-117.  
                                                           
1  Barauni-Kanpur Pipeline 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
8 
Audit observed that: 
/head2right As per approval of the Board (June 2011) for augmen tation/revamping of fire 
water network related facilities at Crude Oil Stora ge Tank, revamping work was 
to be completed within 21 months i.e. by March 2013 . However, IOCL could not 
achieve this timeline despite concerns expressed (D ecember 2012) by the 
MoPNG in this regard; 
/head2right In June 2013, major fire incident occurred at Vadin ar Crude Oil Tank which was 
attributed to non-performance of Halon based RSFPS; 
/head2right Work orders for 22 tanks (Vadinar and Viramgam) wer e placed in August 2014 
and for remaining 14 tanks (Chaksu and Haldia) in O ctober 2014 for completion 
of work within 18 months. Thus, the work which was to be completed by March 
2013 is scheduled to be completed only by March 2016.  
IOCL replied (November 2015) that fire incident at Vadinar happened due to lightning 
and thunderstorm and the tank was already provided with Halon based RSFPS which 
could not extinguish the fire since the fire was intense.  
The reply strengthens the audit observation that th e existing Halon based RSFPS should 
have been replaced with Hollow metallic based RSFPS  in compliance with revised 
OISD-STD-117 and further highlighted (June 2013)  by OISD in its incident investigation 
report. 
(VII) Unsafe location of Control Rooms in contraven tion of OISD Safety Standard-
IOCL 
IOCL’s Guwahati-Siliguri Product Pipeline (GSPL) is  having four pumping/tap-off-point 
stations (TOP) at Betkuchi, Bongaigaon, Hasimara an d Madarihat. Betkuchi TOP, 
alongwith its control room located within marketing  installation, is surrounded by nine 
Product Storage Tanks (Three each for Motor Spirit,  Superior Kerosine Oil and High 
Speed Diesel) with total storage capacity of 25000 KL. 
OISD-STD-118 on ‘Layouts of Oil and Gas installatio ns’ stipulates that the distance of 
control room from storage tanks should not be less than 60 meters and 30 meters for MS 
and SKO respectively.  
Review of records in audit revealed the following: 
/head2right Risk Analysis study got conducted (April 2011) by t he Company  highlighted  
that Betkuchi control room falls under zone where I ncident Thermal Radiation 
Intensity is of very high magnitude;  
/head2right OISD, while conducting External Safety Audit of GSP L in November 2011, also 
observed that the distance between the Control Room  and the Storage tanks was 
less than that stipulated and advised to carry out detailed risk analysis of the 
location apart from recommending relocation of cont rol room. Similarly, Hazard 
and Operability Study (HAZOP) conducted by the Comp any in November 2012 
also highlighted that the control room located at B etkuchi TOP was at a distance 
of 9 meters from MS storage tank dyke wall, 27 mete rs from MS storage tank 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
9 
body and 24 meters from SKO tank. Considering the p otential hazard, relocation 
of the control room was recommended;  
/head2right OISD in its ESA Report reiterated (March 2013) to a ddress the issue on top 
priority.  
Location of control room at Jalandhar Terminal was pointed out (July 2011) by OISD as 
violating OISD-STD-118. 
IOCL has not relocated the Betkuchi and Jalandhar t erminal control rooms even after 
lapse of four years. 
IOCL replied (November 2015) that as Betkuchi and J alandhar terminals were 
commissioned prior to formation of OISD, there was no violation of OISD-STD-118 
which was published in 1988.  
Reply is not tenable as OISD-STD-118 though publish ed in 1988, became mandatory in 
2002 for all terminals including existing terminals.  
(VIII)  Non-compliance with OISD Safety Standards r esulting in frequent pipeline 
failures - IOCL 
Mundra-Panipat Pipeline (MPPL) of IOCL transports mainly sour crude oil from Mundra 
Port to Panipat Refinery. Kandla-Panipat (KP) secti on of MPPL, commissioned (1996) 
for transporting petroleum products, was converted (August 2006) to crude oil service to 
meet the requirement of crude oil at Panipat Refinery.  
IPS is conducted to assess pipeline health by Magne tic Flux Leakage (MFL) or 
Ultrasonic (UT) based special pigs to identify diff erent types of anomalies in the 
pipelines. MFL based IPS is used for detecting corr osion type anomalies whereas UT 
based IPS is used for detection of cracks.  
OISD-STD-188 stipulates that in case of pipelines c arrying sour crude or sour gas, IPS 
having capability to detect cracks should be conducted once in five years.  
An incident of pipeline failure (line burst) occurr ed in MPPL in September 2014 near 
Rewari pump station. This pipeline failure was thir d such incident in MPPL within nine 
months as two similar incidents had occurred earlie r (January and March 2014) on 
account of anomalies in weld seam. As recommended b y OISD in investigation report 
(October 2014), detailed metallurgical/ chemical/ m echanical analysis of the ruptured 
section was got conducted by IOCL through National Metallurgical Laboratory, 
Jamshedpur (NML). 
Review of records revealed that: 
/head2right IOCL did not conduct IPS of MPPL with UT based pigs  though MFL based IPS 
was conducted in 2012 wherein certain corrosion (me tal loss) anomalies were 
detected but no cracks were reported due to inheren t limitations of the technology 
used. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
10 
/head2right Technical review was required to be carried out for conversion of product pipeline 
to crude service as per OISD-GDN-178. However, noth ing was found on record 
to substantiate that such technical review was carr ied out in case of KP section of 
MPPL.  
/head2right After an earlier pipeline failure incident (January  2014), OISD highlighted that 
the weld seam quality of the pipes was not upto the  desired level which should 
have been noticed at procurement stage itself. Furt her, it also raised concerns on 
poor quality of pipes and fatigue failure. 
/head2right NML concluded presence of iron oxides and iron sulp hides and identified that the 
failure was caused by Hydrogen Sulphide 1 (H 2S) of crude oil and a combination 
of cyclic loading on pre-existing weld defects. Thu s, it advised that concentration 
of H 2S in crude oil be kept under control to avoid recur rence of such failure. 
Moreover, it also recommended to identify the defec tive (weld defect) pipeline 
section to be removed from the service to avoid catastrophic failure. 
IOCL replied (November 2015) that generally the fir st IPS is always done with MFL 
technology and UT based IPS is planned as soon as e vidence of cracks is found. Further, 
all these failures were unusual and no visual sign of corrosion / other anomaly could be 
found during normal inspection. 
Reply is not convincing as IPS, in case of MPPL bei ng engaged in transportation of sour 
crude, was required to be conducted with UT based t echnology in line with OISD-STD-
188. 
(IX) Non-compliance with Safety norms in PJPL resul ting in excessive corrosion - 
IOCL 
Panipat-Jalandhar LPG Pipeline (PJPL) was commissio ned (November 2008) for 
transportation of LPG from Panipat Refinery. IOCL noticed (September 2013) significant 
quantity of muck/contaminants and other harmful che micals received at Nabha and 
Jalandhar stations, analysis of which indicated a h igh pH value 
2 and high amount of 
water, iron and sulfur contents all of which are ha rmful for the pipeline health. High pH 
value leads to formation of Iron Sulfide (FeS) and Iron Oxide (Fe 2O3) both being 
undesirable corrosion products. After cleaning pigging of PJPL in 2014, high presence of 
corrosive elements were again observed which resulted in continuous internal corrosion. 
Audit observed that: 
• Despite lapse of more than two years, IOCL has not yet taken corrective measures 
to prevent corrosive products in PJPL causing inter nal corrosion of the pipeline 
and Horton Spheres 3.  
                                                           
1  A corrosive agent 
2  A measure of acidity or alkalinity of water solub le substances (pH stands for 'potential of Hydrogen ’) 
on a scale of 1 to 14, pH of 1 being the most acidi c and 14 being most alkaline and in pig residue pH 
is generally in the range of 6-8 
3  A spherical pressure vessel used for storage of c ompressed gases such as Propane, Butane or LPG in 
Liquid gas stage 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
11 
• Pigging of LPG pipeline was required to be done at least once a year as per 
OISD-STD-214. However, first pigging of PJPL since inception was conducted in 
2014 resulting in severe corrosion of PJPL due to c onsistent presence of corrosive 
elements. 
• Presence of water in LPG was strictly prohibited by  OISD-STD-214. However, 
presence of significant water was observed consiste ntly in pipelines and Horton 
Spheres which may lead to failure of the pipeline a nd storage system on account 
of severe internal corrosion.  
IOCL replied (November 2015) that Panipat Refinery has been sensitized for prevention 
of water and other contaminants in LPG. Further, delay in pigging was due to intermittent 
operations and development of expertise in pigging in LPG pipelines; however, regular 
pigging has been done since 2014. 
Reply is not tenable as despite repeated requests P anipat Reinery has not yet been able to 
prevent and monitor the water contents in LPG. Furt her, prior to 2014, the Company 
failed to comply with mandatory requirement of annual pigging of LPG pipelines. 
(X) Non-monitoring of R-LNG/NG specifications posing threat to DPPL - IOCL 
Dadri-Panipat gas pipeline (DPPL) was commissioned (2010) for catering to the demand 
of Re-gasified Liquefied Natural Gas (R-LNG) at Pan ipat Refinery. IOCL has been 
procuring R-LNG from Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) at Dahej as per Gas Sale Purchase 
Agreement (GSPA). For transmission of gas from deli very point i.e. Dahej terminal to 
redelivery point i.e. Dadri, IOCL signed (April 201 0) Gas Transmission Agreement 
(GTA) with GAIL.  
In order to ensure the quality of gas, the GTA stip ulated that the gas supplied at delivery 
point will have a specific composition. Further, Ar ticle 7 of GTA stipulated that IOCL 
will ensure measurement, analysis and testing of th e gas and results therefrom be 
transmitted to GAIL in order to maintain the operat ing conditions and quality 
requirements for delivery into the transmission system. 
Audit observed that: 
• IOCL did not install any mechanism to ensure the qu ality of supplied gas despite 
lapse of five years from its commissioning; 
• IOCL had been receiving a large quantity of black d ust, fines etc. in the filter 
cartridges of DPPL at Panipat necessitating its rep etitive replacement due to 
choking by muck. The test reports of muck sample an alysis (October/ December 
2014) at Panipat confirmed the presence of signific ant quantity of Iron Oxide 
(Fe 
2O3) i.e. ranging from 41.80 per cent  to 52.40 per cent  which resulted in 
receipt of R-LNG with  large quantity of fines/dust at Panipat Refinery;   
IOCL replied (November 2015) that the gas quality in terms of GTA is to be monitored at 
source itself and the reconfirmation at redelivery point was not necessary. Further, the 
parameters were being monitored at Refinery end to ensure absence of any hazardous 
component. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
12 
Replies are not tenable as the monitoring of hazard ous components at Panipat was not 
serving the purpose of ensuring safety of DPPL. The same should have been monitored at 
Dadri end to restrict the corrosive elements in DPPL at the entry point itself. 
(XI) Non-adherence to PNGRB gas specifications and Ministry’s directives resulting 
in pipeline deterioration and frequent accidents - GAIL 
(A)  Non Compliance with  PNGRB Access Code for Common Carrier Natural Gas 
Pipelines, 2008 
PNGRB Access Code for Common Carrier Natural Gas Pi pelines, 2008 emphasize on 
gas quality conforming to pipeline health and stipu lates maximum tolerable limits  of 
corrosive constituents . 
OISD also stipulates for evaluation of corrosive co nstituents in gaseous hydrocarbon. As 
per this, presence of H 2S, CO 2, salts etc. can cause stress corrosion. Further, O ISD also 
stipulates for IPS of pipelines transporting sour gas once in every five years. 
GAIL signed GSA (July 2006) with Oil & Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) for 15 years 
for gas supply to Hazira-Vijaipur-Jagdishpur pipeli ne (HVJ) and other pipeline 
networks 1.  
Audit observed that specifications of non-hydrocarb ons were described 2 in GSA for HVJ 
network; however, no such specifications were menti oned in other pipeline networks. 
GAIL also contractually agreed to accept all types of gas (wet 3, dry 4 and sour gas 5) 
despite being aware that presence of condensate 6 in gas is hazardous. Thus, GAIL had 
agreed to accept off-specification gas ignoring the  likely safety hazards arising thereof. 
This was alarming as untreated wet and sour gas was  being supplied from 60 out of 65 
sources by ONGC thereby adversely impacting the pipeline health. 
Similarly, such specifications were also not incorp orated in GSAs signed with Hindustan 
Oil Exploration Company Limited (HOEC), OIL etc. ; with the result that the suppliers 
were not obligated to supply gas in conformity with  the specification prescribed by the 
safety regulators. 
Further, PNGRB stipulated that in case of off-speci fication gas delivered by upstream 
supplier, the transporter (GAIL) may either refuse such gas or may provide additional 
treatment facilities and charge cost thereof from u pstream supplier. Thus, GAIL was 
liable to ensure that off-specification gas did not  adversely affect pipeline integrity and 
end-user specifications. However, GAIL continued to  accept off-specification gas and 
transport the same to end users without treatment, thus exposing its pipeline network to 
                                                           
1   Krishna Godavari (KG) basin, Agartala, Cauvery b asin and Gujarat network 
2  H 2S: 4 ppm, Hydrocarbon dew point: +5 Centigrade, water dew point: 0 centigrade and no free water 
3  Unprocessed natural gas or partially processed ga s containing condensable hydrocarbons and liquid 
hydrocarbons in solution. 
4  Gas with water content reduced by dehydration pro cess.  
5  Natural gas which in its natural state, contains such amounts of sulphur as to make it impractical t o 
use because of its corrosive effect. 
6  Mixture of hydrocarbon liquids present as gaseous  components in raw natural gas which is hazardous 
for pipeline health 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
13 
corrosion risk as well as unwarranted risk to end u sers. Audit observed that GAIL had 
paid (September 2015) ` 45 lakh as penalty to PNGRB on account of non-comp liance 
with PNGRB specifications and that it has not yet t aken corrective action and is liable to 
pay `1 lakh per day as penalty. 
GAIL replied (December 2015) that ONGC had denied g as quality guarantee and the 
same was accepted by GAIL on ‘as is where is’ basis . However, GSA has a provision for 
compensating GAIL for condensate supplied with gas.  Moreover, GAIL has installed 
slug catchers near source point. 
Replies are not tenable as the fact remains that PN GRB explicitly stipulated that primary 
responsibility for safe transmission lies on the tr ansporter. Thus, GAIL cannot overlook 
its responsibility of safe transmission while prote cting its commercial interests. Further, 
GAIL has to ensure compliance with safety guideline s/ regulations notified from time to 
time. Moreover, despite the installation of slug ca tchers, condensate/ water continued to 
flow with gas, thus putting the pipeline safety at risk. 
(B) Frequent incidents of accident, pipeline burst and corrosion in KG Basin 
pipeline network 
Audit observed that though the 869 km long KG Basin pipeline network was designed for 
transmission of dry gas, gas supplied by ONGC was w et, sour and ingressed with water, 
condensate and sulphur thereby exposing the network  to internal corrosion. Further, it 
was observed that quantity of condensate in gas rea ched alarming level of 13000-15000 
Litres per day. Moreover, inadequate and unsatisfac tory maintenance of pipelines by 
GAIL led to frequent pipeline accidents involving m assive human casualties, incidents of 
pipeline burst and reduction of its useful life as follows: 
(i)  Ponnamada-Kadali NG pipline:  Gas in this pipeline was being supplied from 
ONGC gas fields viz. Ponnamada, Kesanapalli (W) and  Adavipalem. A fire 
accident occurred (November 2010) in this pipeline involving massive damage to 
agriculture, ecology and property due to supply of off-specification gas by ONGC 
resulting in extensive internal corrosion and reduc tion of pipeline thickness. 
Compensation of 
`51 lakh was paid by GAIL.  
It was observed that GAIL conducted IPS in the pipe line only after the occurrence of 
incident. After carrying out IPS, severe internal c orrosion was noticed which resulted in 
pipeline thickness reduction ranging from 20  per cent  to 80  per cent.  
GAIL replied (December 2015) that it has been condu cting the cleaning pigging on 
yearly basis and has also installed slug catchers t o prevent the condensate/ water in the 
gas.  
Reply is not tenable as scrapper pigging instead of  foam pigging was essential to prevent 
corrosion. Further, despite installation of slug ca tchers, condensate and water continued 
to flow with gas. 
(ii)  Tatipaka-Kondapalli Pipeline (TKPL):  A major fire accident occurred (June 
2014) in TKPL wherein 22 people were burnt alive an d 18 people sustained 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
14 
serious injuries apart from damage to nearby proper ty and agriculture for which 
GAIL paid compensation of ` 8.88 crore.  MoPNG constituted a committee to 
inquire into the accident which held GAIL responsib le for the incident on 
account of its various negligent and unsafe transmi ssion practices. Audit further 
observed that: 
• TKPL was commissioned (August 2001) for supply of g as to downstream 
consumers like power producers and City Gas Distrib ution entities. 
Though designed for transmission of dry gas, the pi peline was being used 
for wet gas transmission from ONGC fields which res ulted in internal 
corrosion of pipeline. Further, GAIL had not developed separate policy for 
mitigating wet gas induced corrosion. Consequently,  in a short period 
(April to June 2014), eight instances of leakage in  the pipeline were 
reported, for which only make-shift/temporary arran gements were made. 
Temporary repairing of pipeline adversely impacted the pipeline integrity. 
• OISD-STD-226 requires cleaning pigging annually and more frequently in 
case of significant liquid hold-up in the pipeline.  GAIL, though 
commissioned TKPL in 2001, started cleaning pigging  only after 2006 
which led to significant accumulation of condensate , water and sulphur. 
IPS of the pipeline highlighted alarming metal loss  to the extent of 50 per 
cent . However, GAIL did not replace corroded pipeline s ection. Further, 
GAIL was conducting pigging as per design of dry ga s pipeline despite 
using it for wet gas which required pigging at a hi gher frequency. 
Moreover, scrapper pigging is essential to remove and mitigate condensate 
and muck, GAIL, however, relied upon foam pigging d espite noticing 
huge supply of condensate associated gas from 2007 onwards which 
defeated the very purpose of pigging.  
• Chemical examination of quality of deposits (pig re sidue) received after 
pigging was essential to assess pipeline health as per OISD and PNGRB. 
However, GAIL carried out pig residue analysis in K G basin network on 
two-three occasions only. Resultantly, deterioratio n of pipeline by 
significant amount of sulphur remained unnoticed.  
• GAIL relied on contractors for repair/maintenance o f pipelines without 
any inspection.  
• GAIL did not install any Leak Detection System (LDS ) despite mandatory 
safety regulations. 
• Even after the disastrous incident, several long ag ed encroachments were 
noticed along pipelines. RoU boundary markers and R oute marker were 
also found missing at various places.  
• No Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) were develop ed for 
transportation of wet gas pipelines. 
• Though GAIL has Regional Gas Management Centres (RG MC) to 
monitor various gas parameters like temperature, fl ow, gas compositions, 
the information and cause of TKPL failure could not  be ascertained due to 
functionalities/configuration issues in RGMC of KG basin. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
15 
Audit further observed that incidents of pipeline f ailure due to off-specification gas were 
also noticed in Gujarat region. For example, Gas le akage occurred (July 2014) in Kadi 
GMS-SKCTF pipeline due to flow of sour gas, condens ate/free water resulting in 
multiple leakages.  
GAIL replied (December 2015) that condensates were prominently observed from 2007-
08 onwards only and T4S Regulations do not define t he pigging frequency for dry and 
wet gas separately. As regards LDS, GAIL replied th at it has taken the initiative to install 
APPS software for leak detection.  
Reply is not tenable because GAIL violated OISD stipulations in respect of installation of 
LDS and annual pigging despite using the pipeline for transmission of wet gas.  
(C) Non-adherence to Ministry directives on gas spe cification resulting in 
damages/safety hazards in downstream consumers’ equipment 
MoPNG directed (June 2010) major oil companies incl uding GAIL for adherence to gas 
specifications as the gas being produced and suppli ed contained liquid hydrocarbon and 
water carryover which could damage equipments of downstream consumers.  
Audit observed that though downstream consumers rep orted matter of low quality gas, 
GAIL did not take remedial action by way of install ation of Gas Dehydration Units 
which led to avoidable accidents / interruptions in downstream consumers’ equipments as 
described below: 
• Instances of fire in downstream consumers’ furnaces  were reported in Gujarat 
Region due to continuous transportation of condensa te, posing a threat to life and 
property of consumers. 
• CNG cylinder at CNG dispensing station of M/s Baghy anagar Gas Limited burst 
(January 2011) due to condensate, water, oily substances in the gas.  
• Konaseema Gas Power Limited complained (March 2011/  January 2013) of 
damage to gas turbines due to off-specification gas. 
Despite MoPNG directives (June, August and December  2010), GAIL failed to ensure 
adherence to gas specification and to prevent safet y hazards in downstream consumers’ 
equipment and public life. Audit observed that internal corrosion of the pipeline remained 
the root cause of all safety hazards which was due to non-incorporation of gas 
specifications in GSA and non-installation of GDU. Resultantly, various pipelines were 
corroded and needed replacement in short period of four to ten years against designed 
operational life of 20 years. Further, GAIL also as sessed (October 2014) that 850 km 
pipeline was rendered unfit from safety point of view and needed replacement. 
Moreover, issue of water/condensate between GAIL an d gas suppliers remained 
inconclusive and resultantly GAIL continued to coll ect and hand over a large quantity of 
condensate to gas suppliers for reimbursement but c ould not address safety concerns. 
This may further be viewed against the fact that GS A signed (2000) with gas supplier 
CAIRN included gas specifications and hence, the su pplier was contractually bound to 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
16 
deliver gas conforming to GSA and corrosive element s in the gas sample were found to 
be within specified limits, but such arrangements c ould not be made with other suppliers 
viz. ONGC, OIL and HOEC etc. 
Though GAIL has a system in place for internal safe ty audit, the matter of pipeline 
corrosion due to condensate remained unaddressed. U nsafe gas transmission needed 
remedial action by the apex management in consultation with MoPNG. 
(XII) Safety and Health Management of LPG pipelines  - GAIL  
Vizag-Secunderabad Pipeline (VSPL) was commissioned  (2004) for transportation of 
LPG from HPCL, BPCL to various LPG bottling plants.  A major accident occurred 
(April 2015) at Suryapet (Vijaywada–Suryapet sectio n) causing two human fatalities. 
Review of records relating to the incident revealed that: 
• GAIL did not conduct pigging for 10 years (since co mmissioning till July 2014) 
despite being recommended (February 2005 & September 2013) by OISD leading 
to accumulation of huge muck/debris in the pipeline . Consequently, during 
cleaning operations in April 2015 the pressurized p ig ejected out violently and hit 
the workers.  
• Improper design of scrapper barrel, type of pigging  (magnetic pigging in spite of 
high iron content presence as indicated in pig residue analysis conducted in 2014), 
inadequate design of pig receiver and non-maintenan ce of minimum safe inter-
distance were other factors responsible for accident. 
• GAIL neither formulated SOP for pigging nor followe d SOP for maintenance 
activities especially regarding availability of fir e tender during pigging despite 
MoPNG directives (July 2014).  
• GAIL did not ensure deployment of expert contractua l manpower and deployed 
its own personnel who were not well versed with this type of job. 
• Off-specification and moisture ingressed LPG supply  in pipelines was noticed. 
However, the matter remained inconclusive due to di sagreement on gas quality 
with HPCL. Moreover, GAIL was also not monitoring L PG quality as in-house/ 
third party quality checking facilities were not available. 
Similarly, audit also noticed that cleaning pigging  was being carried out in another 
pipeline JLPL (Loni section) once in five years aga inst the requirement of annual 
pigging.  
GAIL replied (December 2015) that though VSPL was c ommissioned in 2004, pigging 
was conducted only from 2008 onwards when substanti al flow of LPG started. However, 
pigging of this section was not conducted till 2014 due to technical limitation of flow. 
Reply is to be seen in view of the fact that safety  aspects were compromised as delay in 
pigging of Vijaywada–Suryapet section resulted in h uge muck/debris leading to two 
human fatalities. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
17 
 (XIII) Monitoring mechanism of pipeline integrity - GAIL 
PNGRB and OISD mandates monitoring and control of N G pipeline system using 
SCADA 1 to safeguard the pipeline against corrosive elemen ts/ impurities (H 2S, moisture, 
CO 2 etc.) 
Audit observed that though SCADA was installed and NGMC 2 was operational, various 
aspects of gas composition especially impurities at  many regional gas grids were not 
being regularly monitored which led to transmission  of gas in these grids with high level 
of impurities and corrosive substances; consequentl y, around 850 km pipeline was 
rendered unfit for safe operations forcing GAIL to replace the huge network as has been 
mentioned in para 1.2.4.1 (XI). 
Further, PNGRB and OISD stipulate that gas should n ot contain H 
2S, CO 2 and water etc. 
beyond a permissible limit to control corrosion. He nce, pipeline operators are obligated 
to install mechanism for evaluation and monitoring of H 2S and moisture. 
Audit observed that GAIL was not carrying out gas a nalysis for monitoring H 2S and 
moisture regularly as analyzers for continuous moni toring were not available at many 
places. Presence of H 2S and moisture beyond threshold limit was reported in regional 
networks (Gujarat, Cauvery, KG and Agartala) underlining need of real-time monitoring. 
GAIL replied (December 2015) that online analyzers at some additional locations were 
under commissioning.  
The fact remains that requirements of OISD/PNGRB have not yet been complied with. 
(XIV) Surveillance of gas transmission pipelines - GAIL 
PNGRB mandates surveillance of pipelines RoU throug h improvised means like GPS, 
CCTV and satellite based monitoring to detect abnor mal activities across pipeline RoU 
since third party damage contributes to highest num ber of incidents of pipeline integrity 
breach. 
(a)  Satellite/Remote sensing based RoU monitoring  
Remote sensing based surveillance is about monitoring and detecting changes on pipeline 
networks RoU especially in remote and inaccessible areas. Traditional surveillance 
through aerial, vehicular and foot patrols have var ious shortcomings in terms of efficacy, 
accuracy, cost and safety.  
Audit observed that though GAIL contemplated satell ite based RoU surveillance project 
in June 2013, it has not been able to make use of this technology so far (December 2015).  
                                                           
1  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition is the t echnique for monitoring gas pipelines, remote 
operational abilities for controlling physical para meters viz. pressure, temperature, flow measurement  
and gas composition data without the need for onsit e personnel control and supervision of the 
pipeline. 
2  National Gas Management Centre 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
18 
GAIL replied (December 2015) that this project was taken up as an R&D project on pilot 
basis, it was not time bound.  
Audit suggests that the project may be pursued for early completion and implementation 
as the same would strengthen the safety of its pipelines operations.  
(b)  GPS based surveillance  
GPS based line patrolling enables effective monitor ing of foot patrolling through real-
time tracking and online alerts about movement of patrolling personnel. 
Audit observed that a large network 
1 of GAIL was not equipped with GPS technology.  
GAIL replied that GPS based foot patrolling is in p lace for more than 80 per cent  
network of GAIL. 
Fact remains that 20 per cent  network is still devoid of GPS based patrolling.  
(c) Pipeline RoU Surveillance  
OISD as well as PNGRB mandate installation of pipel ine markers and route markers. 
Report of third party inspection got conducted (Aug ust 2011) by GAIL through PNGRB 
empanelled agency revealed that RoU Boundary marker s/ Route marker were not 
available at various places in KG pipeline network.  Further, the pipeline markers were 
corroded at most of the places in Gandhar-Dabka pipeline section. 
Another ESA conducted (September 2014) by OISD reve aled that  ground patrolling was 
not being carried out for Thulendi-Phulpur pipeline  whereas the same was being carried 
out for only 17 per cent RoU of Auriaya-Jagdishpur and 45 per cent  RoU of Suchendi-
Kanpur pipelines.  
(XV) Integrity management of non-piggable pipelines  - GAIL  
In view of significant increase in major incidents in non-piggable sections (NPS), OISD 
requires special focus on integrity of NPS.  PNGRB also mandates that gas pipelines with 
diameter of 4” and above and length greater than 10  km. shall be provided with pigging 
facilities besides carrying out IPS to detect metal  loss for the pipelines of 12" and above 
and length of 10 km. and above. 
Audit observed that: 
• Around 1000 km. pipeline was required to be provide d with pigging and IPS 
facilities as per PNGRB stipulations. However, GAIL has so far (December 2015) 
converted only 100 km length of NPS to piggable. Ma jority of these were 
operational in KG Basin, Maharashtra Region, Gujara t Region and Cauvery 
Region which were prone to internal corrosion as ga s being supplied was wet and 
sour.  
                                                           
1 Tripura, Gujarat, Cauvery basin, Assam, Dabhol-Ban galore Pipeline, southern pipeline grid, 
Jaisalmer Region etc. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
19 
• Further, corrosion monitoring was also not being do ne in Gandhar-Dabka and 
Vadodara Regions despite being highlighted by OISD.  
• OISD stipulates dosing of Corrosion Inhibitors 1 (CI) for preservation of pipelines 
especially in sour gas pipelines. However, GAIL ado pted CI dosing only after 
occurrence of a major accident (Tatipaka fire accid ent in June 2014), which was 
also not being regularly dosed by suppliers.  
GAIL replied (December 2015) that conversion of NPS  into piggable sections is in 
progress. GAIL further stated that it has also been  relying upon other measures like bell 
hole inspection. 
The non-conversion of NPS into piggable section is fraught with safety risk as is also 
evident from a number of pipeline failures in non-piggable sections due to sour gas. 
1.2.4.2  Other instances of inadequate safety preparedness 
Other instances of inadequate safety preparedness w ere also observed in IOCL & GAIL 
as discussed below: 
(I) Inadequate safety measures leading to major fir e incident - IOCL 
SMPL crude oil pipeline has an originating pump sta tion at Vadinar and intermediate 
stations at 12 locations 
2. Of them Vadinar, Viramgam and Chaksu installation s also have 
crude oil storage facilities. Vadinar Crude Oil Terminal consists of 18 storage tanks.  
On 18 February 2014, oil leakage was detected from ground outside the dyke wall of a 
tank. During repair/replacement work, a fire incide nt occurred (27 February 2014) due to 
flash fire from grinding operation in which three c ontract workmen sustained burn 
injuries; of them, two succumbed to their injuries.  IOCL’s Investigation Report 
highlighted various reasons/factors causing the inc ident. OISD also investigated the 
incident and issued recommendations for compliance. 
Review of records relating to the incident revealed that: 
• There was no structured system for maintaining hist ory of pipeline health; 
drawings depicting corrosion prone locations, posit ion of clamps/sleeves, timely 
compliance and its monitoring; 
• SOP for undertaking repair works was not formulated  and the Maintenance 
Manual was also not updated since July 2002; 
• Job Safety Analysis for the work was also not carri ed out and the work was being 
executed during night hours despite the same being a critical work; 
• Water flushing of the Header connecting the tank wa s not done for making it free 
from hydrocarbon vapour before execution of work; 
                                                           
1  A chemical compound which when added to liquid or  gas, decreases the corrosion rate of metal 
2  Jamnagar, Gauridad, Surendernagar, Viramgam, Sidh pur, Abu Road, Kot, Rajola, Sendra, Ramsar, 
Chaksu and Rewari 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
20 
• Repair work was being carried out by operations gro up instead of by dedicated 
maintenance group; 
• The officials issuing/receiving work permit had not  undergone the mandatory 
minimum one-day training as stipulated vide OISD-STD-105; 
• Fire fighting preparedness at the site was deficien t as the fire tender engines were 
not kept ‘ON’ during repair work; further, second f ire tender was not put into 
service; 
• Coating survey of underground station piping, as st ipulated in OISD-STD-130 
had not been carried out as there was no written pr ocedure available across the 
Pipelines Division. 
IOCL, in its reply, stated (November 2015) that var ious procedures have been developed 
and implemented to ensure safe operations. However,  the fact remains that IOCL has 
developed the requisite procedures only after the incident. 
(II) Pipeline control and emergency preparedness sy stem - GAIL 
PNGRB and OISD prescribe installation of Sectionali sing Valves (SVs) with remote 
shut-off provision. SVs are provided in the pipelines to isolate the pipeline section in case 
of leakage / incident. Remote operability is a vital component of emergency preparedness 
system especially in remote, inaccessible areas. 
Test check of records, however, revealed that: 
• Pan-India pipeline network of GAIL consists of 549 SVs, of which only 332 SVs 
were remote operated valves (ROVs).  
• No time-bound plan was prepared for installation of  RoVs despite recommended 
by HAZOP studies, MoPNG, OISD and MB Lal Committee.  It was observed that 
only after occurrence (June 2014) of major pipeline  incident in KG Basin, GAIL 
belatedly (June 2015) planned for conversion of man ual operated valves into 
ROVs; however, action thereon was still pending (December 2015). 
Though SCADA was in place, its objective of effecti ve monitoring and control of the 
pipelines in these regions could not be fully achie ved as 217 SVs were manually 
operated. Further, GAIL had belatedly assessed (Feb ruary 2015) that remote operation 
with auto closure facilities could have been done f or pan-India pipeline network without 
any additional facilities like land, power and building at a cost of 
` 9.27 crore only. 
GAIL replied (December 2015) that action for conver sion of manual operated valves into 
RoVs was under advanced stage of execution at most of the locations. 
1.2.4.3 Monitoring mechanism 
Roles of Safety Regulators in Oil and Gas Industry 
Regulatory environment of hydrocarbon industry in t he country is mainly governed by 
OISD, PNGRB and PESO. However, these regulators are  functioning under different 
administrative ministries.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
21 
OISD, a technical directorate under MoPNG, was form ed with an objective to formulate 
and standardize procedures and guidelines to enhance safety in the oil and gas industry in 
India. PESO, on the other hand, is a statutory auth ority functioning under administrative 
control of Department of Industrial Policy & Promot ion, Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry. Further, PNGRB was constituted by an act of Parliament to protect the interests 
of consumers and entities engaged in specified activities relating to petroleum and natural 
gas under MoPNG.  
In this regard, Audit observed that: 
• There were different and overlapping safety regulat ions by these regulators with 
multiple points of reporting without any coordination among these agencies. 
• Though PNGRB empanels accredited external agencies for carrying out safety 
audits, nothing was found on record to substantiate  that PNGRB takes any follow 
up action to ensure compliance with observations/re commendations contained in 
such reports.  
• Safety standards, though formulated by OISD, implem entation thereof is left 
unmonitored as OISD has no statutory powers to enfo rce the same. Further, 
though PESO administers six OISD standards over the  oil and gas industry, it 
does not come under administrative control of MoPNG  with the result that no 
legal action could be taken in case of violation. 
• In the absence of any statutory powers, OISD could not enforce the companies to 
implement the ESA recommendations as the same was p ending compliance in 
IOCL and GAIL even after lapse of 24 months and 168 months respectively. 
Further, the Standing Committee on P&NG (2011-12) o f the Parliament also suggested 
that OISD should be made the nodal agency to formul ate, monitor and enforce the OISD 
standards and other applicable laws for the entire oil and gas sector. However, action in 
this regard has not yet been taken (August 2015). 
Conclusion 
Safety preparedness of IOCL & GAIL in respect of tr ansmission pipelines was found 
inadequate in view of the following: 
• There were instances of non-compliance with OISD sa fety standards and PNGRB 
regulations; 
• Non-compliance with recommendations of ESA and MB L al Committee was 
observed; 
• There was lack of effective action on the part of m anagement to evict RoU 
encroachments thereby posing threat to safety of pipeline operations 
• Inadequate maintenance activities coupled with non- formulation of/ deviation 
from SOPs led to ineffective handling of several incidents. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
22 
As a result, the companies failed to protect pipeli ne network from accidents/ incidents 
leading to loss of lives, property and environment indicating inadequate safety 
preparedness. Further, in the scenario of global im portance of HSE policy, there was no 
single nodal agency to ensure the requisite safety preparedness on the companies. 
Recommendations 
The following recommendations are made: 
/head2right Compliance with all applicable safety standards/regulations should be ensured; 
/head2right ESA/ other recommendations relating to safety shoul d be implemented in a 
time-bound manner; 
/head2right There should be an empowered nodal agency to enforc e compliance with safety 
norms; 
/head2right Effective action should be taken to prevent encroac hments and for eviction 
thereof immediately;  
/head2right Companies should ensure regular maintenance activit ies to ensure pipeline 
integrity; 
/head2right Mechanism for timely and regular review/monitoring of safety preparedness 
should be in place. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (December 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
1.3 Petrochemical Production and Project Management    
1.3.1  Introduction 
Petrochemicals are hydrocarbons derived from crude oil and Natural Gas (NG) and form 
a major segment of manufacturing industry. Petroche mical sector in India is deregulated 
and products are imported freely under Open General  Licence 
1. Polymers viz.  
Polyethylene (PE) 2 and Polypropylene (PP) form a major part of petrochemicals.   
GAIL (India) Limited (GAIL) commissioned a petroche mical plant at Pata, district 
Auraiya in 1999 (Uttar Pradesh Petrochemical Comple x –UPPC) with an investment of 
` 2327 crore and Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC L) established Panipat Naphtha 
Cracker Plant (PNCP) in 2010 with an investment of `    14400 crore. Major products of 
UPPC and PNCP are different grades of High Density Poly Ethylene (HDPE) and Linear 
Low Density Poly Ethylene (LLDPE). PNCP also produc es PP and Mono Ethylene 
Glycol (MEG). UPPC of GAIL consumes Natural Gas (NG ) and PNCP of IOCL 
consumes Naphtha for producing basic raw material f or petrochemicals. Financial 
performance of both the plants is given in Annexure-IV.  
                                                           
1  Open General License (OGL) is issued by the Gover nment of India in pursuance of the Imports 
(Control) Order, 1955. It is the most liberalized t ype of license for imports for freely traded items for 
which no specific permission is required.  
2  Includes LDPE, LLDPE & HDPE 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
23 
1.3.2 Audit objectives, scope & methodology 
Audit Objectives were to ascertain whether:  
• Sufficient feedstock was available to meet the production requirement; 
• Consumption of feedstock and other inputs, includin g utilities, was as per 
industrial norms/standards;  and 
• Capacity enhancement projects and other projects we re carried out effectively to 
achieve the production target. 
Audit examined records relating to operational perf ormance of plants with reference to 
targets set by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Ga s (MoPNG), production capacity, 
industrial norms/standards on consumption of feedst ock and chemicals, quality standards 
as per industrial practice and capacity augmentatio n along with other projects for 
petrochemicals for the period 2009-10 to 2014-15. V iews of MoPNG and GAIL/IOCL 
have been obtained and incorporated. 
1.3.3 Audit Findings 
 Audit findings emerging from review of performance  of UPPC & PNCP and 
implementation of petrochemical projects by GAIL an d IOCL are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  
1.3.3.1 Petrochemical Production  
(I)  Capacity utilisation   
A.  Under utilisation of downstream capacity (GAIL)  
UPPC has three units in upstream ie.  Gas Sweetening Unit (GSU), Gas Processing Unit 
(GPU) & Gas Cracker Unit (GCU) and five units in do wnstream ie.  Polymer units 
(HDPE I and II, SWING), Butene-1 & LPG unit.  
As per the production process, impurities in NG is removed in GSU and heavier 
fractions 
1 extracted in GPU. These fractions are subsequently  cracked in GCU for 
producing ethylene. Ethylene is subsequently consum ed in polymer units for production 
of polymers.  
Capacity utilization of GCU (upstream) and polymer units (downstream) was above the 
installed capacity during the period of audit as in dicated in Annexure-V. Analysis, 
however, revealed that downstream units had capacit y for achieving further production 
level but there was constraint in producing suffici ent ethylene from the upstream (GCU) 
unit as discussed below. 
The plant was commissioned (1999) with GCU 
2 capacity of 3,00,000 MTPA 3 (ethylene) 
and polymer capacity of 2,60,000 MTPA. There were f our furnaces in GCU with 
                                                           
1  Ethane (C2), propane (C3) etc. 
2  Consisted four cracker furnaces, towers, vessels,  drums, compressors, and pipelines as integral part s 
for gas cracking. 
3  Metric Tonne Per Annum 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
24 
1,00,000 MTPA capacity each, with three furnaces in  cracking mode and fourth one as 
standby. Under petrochemical expansion project, fif th furnace was installed (2005) and 
ethylene capacity was increased from 3,00,000 MTPA to 4,00,000 MTPA with four 
furnaces in cracking mode at a time. Polymer capaci ty was also increased from 2,60,000 
MTPA to 4,10,000 MTPA by 2009-10 .  
Polymer production units, with the installed capaci ty 4,10,000 MTPA, had the ability to 
produce over and above the installed capacity 
1. Considering this, achievable capacity in 
polymer units was assessed at 5,10,000 MTPA . This additional capacity, however, was 
not utilised due to non-availability of sufficient ethylene from GCU. Management, 
therefore, considered (2008) that if GCU capacity was not de-bottlenecked, the additional 
available capacity in downstream units would remain  under-utilized. Accordingly, sixth 
furnace (1,00,000 MTPA) was installed in GCU and co mmissioned in December 2010 
with a total capital expenditure of  `    73.89 crore. 
Installation of sixth furnace was expected to give maximum flexibility for augmenting 
capacity of GCU, as it would make-up for the down t ime of furnaces for maintenance. In 
respect of availability of other infrastructure, it  was noticed that GPU had sufficient 
capacity for providing feedstock for the additional  capacity of GCU. Existing utility 
systems were also adequate to cater to the requirement of additional furnace.  
Audit noticed that before commissioning of sixth fu rnace, GCU, had achieved ethylene 
production of 4,31,580 MTPA with the existing set of five furnaces including one furnace 
as standby for decoking 2. With the addition of sixth furnace, furnace capac ity was 
increased to 5,00,000 MTPA (excluding one furnace a s standby). The actual maximum 
production of ethylene achieved so far was only 4,6 0,024 MTPA (2014-15). Resultantly, 
UPPC has been underutilizing the available ethylene  capacity of 5,00,000 MTPA (after 
considering the spare capacity of 1,00,000 MTPA).  
Management stated (April 2015) that sixth furnace w as installed as an additional furnace 
to achieve sustained performance of existing five f urnaces and to increase flexibility in 
operations. While admitting that with the addition of sixth furnace the ethylene 
production should have been 5,00,000 MTPA; it was stated that addition of furnace alone 
will not lead to proportionate increment in ethylen e production. Certain de-bottlenecking 
of other integral parts of GCU was also required to  be carried out to increase the 
production. It was also stated (July 2015) that for  achieving 5,00,000 MTPA ethylene 
capacity, additional studies were required to be do ne by the licensor. Management also 
informed (October 2015) that additional sixth furna ce was installed not in totality as 
debottlenecking of other parts was not considered economical.  
Reply should be viewed against the fact that instal lation of sixth furnace was first step 
towards achieving 5,00,000 MTPA ethylene production . De-bottlenecking of integral 
parts such as Cracked Gas Compressor, ethane recove ry unit, quench tower, de-
propaniser, de-butaniser etc . were also carried out subsequently. As there was limitation 
                                                           
1  SWING plant had the ability to achieve about 20 p er cent over the design capacity. Similarly HDPE 1 
and 2 plant was capable of achieving about 25 to 30 per cent over the design capacity. 
2  Cracking takes place in furnaces at high temperat ure. At the time of cracking, coke formation takes 
place. Thus, the furnace needs to be decoked on regular intervals.   

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
25 
in other integral parts like pipelines, no further debottlenecking could be taken up and 
intended enhancement in ethylene production could n ot be achieved. It may be noted that 
as per assessment of the Company (2008); before ins tallation of sixth furnace in GCU, 
the polymer units were capable of achieving additio nal 1,00,000 MTPA (5,10,000 – 
4,10,000)  production provided sufficient ethylene is available from GCU. The constraint 
in increasing ethylene capacity, even after install ation of sixth furnace hindered 
utilisation of additional capacity available in dow nstream polymer unit. This has resulted 
in operating downstream units at lesser load with r esultant loss of opportunity to increase 
the polymer output by about 234593 MT 1. Based on the prevailing price level of 
polymers the Company could have generated additiona l revenue and realised a margin of 
`    630.70 crore from this additional polymer productio n during the period 2011-12 to 
2014-15. 
MoPNG/Management stated (October/November 2015) tha t in 2010 GAIL decided to go 
for doubling the polymer production capacity (Pata-  II) and sufficient margin was kept 
therein so that upstream and downstream capacity ge ts matched which would rectify this 
mismatch.  
Fact, however, remains that the downstream unit of existing plant was operating at lesser 
load for all these years and the intended benefit o f adding sixth furnace could not be 
achieved fully. 
B.  Creation of capacity of utilities in excess of requirement (IOCL) 
PNCP comprises Naphtha Cracker Unit (NCU) including  associate units 
2 in upstream, 
PP, HDPE, SWING, MEG, Butadiene Extraction Unit in downstream and power & steam 
generation units. Power and steam are critical requ irement for operation of PNCP. 
Optimum utilization of facilities created for produ ction of these utilities in combination 
with utilization of up and downstream units of the PNCP was essential for ideal 
absorption of fixed cost.  
Audit analysis of monthly operation report revealed  that maximum utilisation of power 
and steam in PNCP was 135 MW and 668 MT/hr respecti vely from April 2010 to March 
2015 against the power and steam generation capacit y of 241 MW and 1295 MT/hr 
respectively created at a total investment of 
`    1217.26 crore. Maximum power and steam 
requirement for achieving 100 per cent  up and downstream capacity after considering 
future expansion/projects at PNCP and Styrene Butad iene Rubber unit was 172 MW and 
1000 MT/hr respectively.  
It was also noticed that capacity configuration of power and steam production facilities 
were substantially increased from Detailed Feasibil ity Report (DFR) stage to investment 
approval/ installation stage (power from 130 to 241  MW and steam from 600 to 1295 
MT/hr) without corresponding upward revision in the  capacity configuration of PNCP 
except NCU (from 2170 to 2345 TMTPA) and MEG unit ( from 250 to 300 TMTPA). 
This led to creation of capacity of utilities in ex cess of requirement of NCU and 
downstream units.  
                                                           
1  (5,00,000 x 4 years = 20,00,000) – (1765407) = 23 4593 MT 
2  C 4 hydrogenation unit, Benzene extraction unit and Pyrolysis hydrogenation unit  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
26 
Maximum capacity utilised in respect of power and s team was 54 per cent  (2014-15) and 
37 per cent  (2012-13) respectively ( Annexure-VI ). It may be noted that during the year 
2014-15, NCU and downstream units had achieved 100 per cent  capacity utilisation.  
Management stated (April/July 2015) that power and utility systems cannot be designed 
for average consumption. Sufficient cushion in marg in of capacity was designed to cater 
to peak requirement of units based on combination o f scenario such as requirement of 
spare capacity for periodic maintenance, increase i n requirement during emergency 
situations etc.  defined in feasibility study. Moreover, 25 per cent  margin has also been 
kept for future capacity addition.  
Statement made by the management may be viewed agai nst the fact that audit 
observation was made after taking into consideratio n peak demand for power (135 MW) 
and steam (668 MT/hr) of the plant. Moreover, as pe r the practice, periodic maintenance 
is carried out during annual shut down, where all f acilities including utility units were 
also taken off the production line for maintenance.  Hence the argument of sufficient 
margin of spare capacity for utility systems for me eting the periodic maintenance is not 
acceptable. Further, regarding keeping of 25 per cent  margin for future capacity addition, 
it may be noted that there is no immediate plan of IOCL for expansion of up and 
downstream capacities. Thus, the investment made in  utility capacity to the extent of 
facilities underutilised as mentioned above remained idle since commissioning. 
(II) Feedstock management (IOCL) 
PNCP was conceptualized (2003) to give value additi on by producing petrochemicals 
from the surplus naphtha available from Panipat, Ma thura and Koyali refineries of IOCL. 
The estimated requirement of naphtha (3016 TMTPA) w as expected to be obtained from 
Panipat (1280), Mathura (300) and Koyali (1436) ref ineries. Naphtha produced from 
refineries of IOCL is allocated as  per the Industrial Logistic Plan of Refinery 
Headquarters (RHQ). Accordingly, PNCP receives naph tha from four more refineries 
(Barauni, Bongaigaon, Haldia of IOCL and HPCL Mitta l Energy Limited- HMEL) in 
addition to Panipat, Mathura and Koyali refineries.  
The plant has been receiving naphtha from Panipat a nd Mathura Refineries through 
pipelines as per the estimated availability. Availa bility of naphtha from Koyali, however, 
was in the range of 130 to 397 TMT which was less t han the estimated availability of 
1436 TMTPA. Non availability of estimated quantity of naphtha was made up from other 
refineries and using different feed mix.  
Audit noticed that:  
• During the period 2012-13 to 2014-15, 1683 TMT naph tha was procured from 
Barauni, Haldia, Bongaigaon, Koyali, Mathura 
1 and HMEL through railway 
rakes. Out of this 17.90 TMT naphtha valuing ` 85.25 crore was lost in transit. 
Even in its fifth year of operation the plant is ye t to set norms for permissible 
                                                           
1  Some quantity of naphtha from Mathura refinery is  transported through rail in addition to quantity 
transported through pipeline. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
27 
limit for transit loss of naphtha. In absence of an y norms, the extent of 
controllable loss of naphtha in transit could not be assessed.  
• In addition to naphtha, PNCP uses ‘hydrogenated C4’  (C4H) as feedstock in 
NCU. C4 mix is a by-product from production of ethy lene. It is a mixture of 
gaseous hydrocarbons 1. C4 mix as such is unsuitable for blending in LPG or for 
sale. Therefore, C4 mix is first hydrogenated (C4H)  and then blended with LPG 
and/or sold to industrial LPG consumers. In view of  better marketability of C4H 
through blending with LPG, recycling of C4H in NCU was not commercially 
rewarding as discussed below. 
NCU produced 10.59 lakh MT (LMT) C4 mix during 2012 -13 to 2014-15, out of which 
9.94 LMT was hydrogenated. From this quantity, 6.09  LMT was used for production of 
LPG. In absence of naphtha, 3.55 LMT was recycled i n NCU as feedstock and remaining 
was consumed as internal fuel. It was noticed that LPG production was below the 
planned production by 70,089 MT and 63,675 MT during 2012-13 and 2013-14.  
MoPNG/Management stated (April/July/November 2015) that PNCP is designed to crack 
naphtha along with C4H recycles. Mix of naphtha and C4H in the feed, however, is based 
on naphtha availability and is determined after working out economics of recycling based 
on prices of naphtha, LPG and polymer product. Audi t, however, noticed that during the 
period 2012-13 to 2013-14, PNCP did not take the pr ice advantage of LPG and opted for 
recycling C4H instead of producing LPG. Loss of mar gin on account of this worked out 
to ` 51.39 crore 2.  
MoPNG/Management also stated (July/November 2015) t hat during the initial period 
naphtha allocation plan could not be implemented as  envisaged. Also, sourcing of 
naphtha from different refineries resulted in wide variation in feed quality of naphtha 
which called for recycling of C4H to maximise polym er production. This points to the 
fact that there is a need for better coordination i n allocation of naphtha by RHQ to obtain 
maximum value addition. 
(III)  Consumption of feedstock, chemicals and stea m (IOCL) 
For maximizing efficiency of plant it was essential  for optimum utilisation of 
feedstock/chemicals/steam and to obtain the best yi eld out of it. It was, however, noticed 
that there were instances of excess consumption of feedstock, chemicals and steam as 
discussed in succeeding paragraphs.  
A.  Non-achievement of design yield in NCU  
Naphtha and other recycle liquids 
3 are cracked in NCU to produce polymer grade 
ethylene and polymer grade propylene.  Operating ma nual of NCU specifies cracking 
yield of all feedstock for producing ethylene and propylene.  
                                                           
1  Propane (C3), propylene, butane (C4), 1-3 butadie ne etc. 
2  Amount has been worked out after considering the cost benefit from production of LPG and Polymer. 
3  Butane (C4), pentane (C5) and benzene (C6) 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
28 
Analysis, however, revealed that the plant was not achieving ethylene and propylene 
yield during the year 2012-13 to 2014-15 as per specifications of Operating Manual.  
Management stated (October 2015) that yield varies with the quality of naphtha and 
depends on recycling of other liquids from NCU. Fur ther, polymer units have different 
tendency to crack and give varying percentage of et hylene and propylene. Yield 
predictions from these recycles also change with th e proportion of recycled streams in 
mixed feed. Therefore, to know the exact yield and monitoring benchmarking, software 
called PYPS is installed. 
Audit further observed that the plant was not achie ving even the benchmarking done by 
the PYPS. Non achievement of design yield of ethyle ne (2012-13 and 2014-15) and 
propylene (2012-13 and 2013-14) from cracking of na phtha and other inputs in NCU 
resulted in substantial increase in cost of polymers amounting to 
` 90.52 crore as detailed 
in Annexure-VII .   
B.  Excess consumption of Hexane in HDPE unit  
Hexane is used as a solvent for keeping the polymer powder in slurry form in HDPE unit. 
As per the design standard 9.87 Kg of Hexane was re quired for producing one MT 
HDPE. Audit observed that actual consumption of hex ane was between 11.20 Kg (2012-
13) and 14.40 Kg (2014-15)1.  
MoPNG/Management stated (November 2015) that throug h optimisation of hexane 
recovery operation and reduction of hexane in wax, net consumption of hexane has been 
reduced over the period. Further, modifications in enhanced hexane recovery system have 
been envisaged to reduce the hexane consumption.   
Management's reply may be viewed against the fact t hat since excess consumption is 
showing an increasing trend from 2012-13 the Compan y is required to limit the 
consumption within design standard to reduce its co st of production. Additional cost 
incurred on account of excess consumption of hexane  worked out to 
` 16.43 crore as 
detailed in Annexure-VIII. 
C.  Consumption of steam in excess of design standards in NCU  
Four different streams of steam namely Super High P ressure (SHP), High pressure (HP), 
Medium Pressure (MP) and Low Pressure (LP) are required in NCU. All four streams are 
generated in Captive Power Plant (CPP). In addition  to this, SHP steam is generated 
during cracking process within NCU which is consume d internally by NCU. Therefore, 
SHP steam from CPP is required in NCU only during the start up of operations.  
It was noticed that steam consumption by downstream  units was within the prescribed 
limit during optimum operational activities. Review of data in respect of steam consumed 
in NCU (generated by CPP), however, revealed that t here was excess consumption of 
steam over and above the design standard as indicat ed in Annexure-IX  As against the 
design consumption standard of 85 MT/hr, the averag e steam consumption for the period 
                                                           
1  Specific consumption prior to 2012-13 has not bee n considered being the stabilization period. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
29 
2012-13 to 2014-15 was 191 MT/hr. Review of 'Manage ment Information System report 
for Energy Conservation Meeting and Annual Operatio n Report ' revealed that NCU has 
been continuously consuming SHP steam from CPP in a ddition to HP, MP and LP.  This 
has resulted in excess consumption of steam to the extent of 106 MT/hr with resultant 
increase in cost of production of polymers.     
Management stated (October 2015) that out of 106 MT /hr. steam consumed in excess of 
design standard, 92 MT/hr. was due to lower severit y operations, operational reasons, 
decoking requirement etc . 
Reply needs to be viewed against the fact that no s pecific reason was attributed by the 
Management for excess consumption of steam to the e xtent of 14 MT/hr. Increase in cost 
of production during the period 2012-13 to 2014-15 on account of this excess 
consumption was about `    138.85 crore. Further, no acceptable variation leve l in respect 
of excess consumption of steam due to lower severit y conditions, decoking requirement 
and operational reasons was specified by the Manage ment in absence of which financial 
impact on account of excess consumption due to thes e reasons could not be worked out 
by Audit. Thus, PNCP is required to limit consumpti on of steam within the design 
standard to reduce the production cost. 
(IV) Implementation of energy saving measures in UP PC (GAIL) 
During production process, certain amount of gas is  flared due to technical reasons. For 
safety and operational reasons, a flare system is i n place which continuously burns the 
vent gases. Company decided (2002-03) to provide a compressor arrangement to recover 
certain amount of flared gas and use the same as fu el gas in the complex. Accordingly, 
Company approved (2004) implementation of ‘Compress or based Flare Gas Recovery 
System’ (C-FGRS) at UPPC at a total cost of 
` 10.72 crore. Implementation of the 
project was expected to save fuel to the extent of 132894 MKcal/year with corresponding 
cost savings of ` 6.50 crore per annum 1. Accordingly, Lurgi India Company Limited 
(LICL) was awarded (February 2005) contract for Eng ineering, Procurement and 
Construction Management (EPCM) Consultancy for the project at an estimated cost of 
` 57.30 lakh with scheduled completion by 21 May 2006.  
LICL had carried out basic and detailed engineering  of the project, prepared tender for 
procurement of flare gas compressor and composite w ork within the contractual period. 
Meanwhile, a committee was constituted (May 2006) f or studying the feasibility of 
Ejector based Flare Gas Recovery System (E-FGRS) instead of C-FGRS. The Committee 
recommended (May 2006) for putting up E-FGRS on tur nkey basis and to drop C-FGRS. 
Cost effectiveness, independence from the consequen ce of power failure etc . were the 
advantages expected from E-FGRS in comparison with C-FGRS. Accordingly, the 
Company abandoned (May 2006) the earlier EPCM contract with LICL after incurring an 
expenditure of `    0.14 crore and decided (January 2007) to install E-FGRS at an estimated 
cost of `    4.22 crore.  
                                                           
1  Estimated based on the rate of recovery of gas at  3375 SCM/Hr at a normal flow rate of 2.5 MT/Hr. 
The calorific value of gas was considered at 4922 Kcal/SCM @ `` ``  2.44/SCM. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
30 
Contract for procurement and commissioning of E-FGR S was awarded (December 2009) 
to Comm Engineering at `    3.27 crore and work for piping and associated jobs were 
awarded 1 during 2011-12 at `    2.27 crore. The system was installed in March 2013 at a 
total cost of ` 4.70 crore. The system after commissioning was expe cted to recover gas 
from flaring and to use the same to replace lean gas used for process heating.  
Audit observed that E-FGRS system implemented in Ma rch 2013 at a total cost of `    4.70 
crore has not been commissioned so far resulting in  the asset remaining inoperative. In 
addition to this, ` 0.14 crore spent on EPCM consultancy services on C -FGRS has 
become infructuous. Moreover, delay in implementing  and utilising the system had 
resulted in non recovery of gas flared. During the period 2007-08 to 2013-14 the plant 
flared 12.43 MMSCM gas. Based on the average rate o f gas 2 the cost of flared gas 
worked out to ` 18.66 crore. Based on the present assumption on re coverability of about 
20 per cent  flared gas, the total cost of recoverable gas work s out to ` 4.06 crore during 
the same period.  
MoPNG/Management stated (November 2015) that trial run of E-FGRS was taken in 
October 2013.  Further, it is being explored to use  E-FGRS outlet for boilers for Pata-II 
which was expected by December 2015. Fact remains t hat utilisation was yet to take 
place (November 2015) with resultant financial impact as discussed above.  
(V)  Procurement of liquid nitrogen and oxygen (IOC L) 
IOCL and Air Liquide Industries, Belgium (ALB) ente red (May 2007) into a contract for 
setting up oxygen and nitrogen plant on land leased  to ALB within Naphtha Cracker 
Complex at Panipat. A license agreement for supply of oxygen and nitrogen was also 
entered (May 2007) between ALB and IOCL. Terms and conditions of contract inter alia  
stipulated that ALB was required to build, own and operate a plant capable of steady 
operation for at least 25 years for production and supply of gaseous oxygen and nitrogen 
to meet the quantity guaranteed to IOCL and market any surplus oxygen and nitrogen 
 in 
the open market. After successful completion of con struction of plant and distribution 
system, ALB assigned the scope of work to Air Liqui d North India Private Limited 
(contractor).  
IOCL was under contractual obligation to supply pow er as per the requirement of 
 oxygen 
and nitrogen  plant. Accordingly the price payable by IOCL to con tractor for off-take of 
oxygen and nitrogen during each billing period was arrived at after adjusting amount 
receivable by IOCL from contractor for the power supplied during the same period. 
Audit observed that: 
• As per the billing trend, IOCL could not recover ev en the cost of power as the 
cost of power was more than the cost of oxygen & ni trogen and an amount of  
` 39.90 
crore (as per Haryana State Electricity Board -HSEB  power rate) was pending from 
contractor as on December 2014. Yet IOCL did not ta ke any security for recovery of its 
outstanding dues. As per the amendment to bidding d ocument, bidders were required to 
                                                           
1  To various contractors 
2  Ranging between ` ` ` `  11.98 / SCM and ` ` ` `  23.50/SCM 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
31 
prepare their price bid considering the cost of pow er as ` 3.95 per unit (equivalent to 
HSEB power tariff). On the contrary, Article 8.3.1 of the contract states that rate of 
power to be charged by IOCL for supply of power to contractor is the cost of power 
generation of CPP which is higher than HSEB rates. This is disputed by contractor stating 
that ` 3.95 per unit was the base rate while bidding and is liable to pay power charges to 
IOCL as per HSEB rates only.  
Thus, entering into an agreement with contradictory  clauses in bidding document and 
agreement entered into with Contractor resulted in doubtful recovery of dues and created 
uncertainty in ensuring supply of oxygen and nitrogen for functioning of the plant.  
Management stated (June 2015) that arbitration proceeding in this regard is in progress. 
(VI) Non-maintenance of grade wise cost  
A.  GAIL  
G-lex and G-lene are the brand name of polymers produced and marketed by GAIL. Over 
the period, GAIL has developed its own policy for p ricing of its polymer products and 
has a well defined marketing mechanism. Price of po lymer products in domestic market 
is indexed to the international prices of polymers (Import Parity Price – IPP).  
Audit, however, observed that GAIL does not maintai n grade-wise cost of polymers 
which would enable determining grade wise profitability.  
MoPNG/Management stated (October /November 2015) th at GAIL initially strived to 
have pan India presence in all downstream polymer s ectors. After attaining market 
maturity, GAIL is trying to ascertain grade wise as  well as location wise profitability. It 
was also stated that standard costing mechanism is maintained from 2005-06. Recently 
fine tuning has been done to the grade wise cost an alysis and after commissioning of 
Pata-II it would be possible to effectively implement grade optimisation.  
In this regard it may be noted that GAIL has been i n the business since 1999 and was not 
able to implement grade wise cost effectively so fa r. In absence of this, margin from sale 
of different grades at different price levels could  not be estimated for providing adequate 
managerial information.  
B.  IOCL  
Under the umbrella brand 'PROPEL', IOCL offers wide  range of petrochemicals 
1 to cater 
to different applications. As per the pricing polic y for its petrochemical products (2009), 
price in the domestic market is fixed on the basis of IPP.  
Audit, however, observed that IOCL does not maintai n grade-wise cost of polymers 
which would enable determining grade wise profitability.  
Management stated (June/October 2015) that methodology for arriving grade wise cost of 
polymer is available for in-house purpose. IOCL has  also carried out studies to maximize 
                                                           
1  Linear Alkyl Benzene, Purified Terephthalic Acid,  Paraxylene, MEG, PP, LLDPE and HDPE 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
32 
profitability and M/s. Mckinsey had been appointed to develop a model for assessing 
grade wise cost of polymers. Model developed by them is under testing and stabilization. 
1.3.3.2 Petrochemical Project Management 
(I)  Capacity enhancement projects of UPPC (GAIL) 
GAIL took up (August 2010) implementation of capaci ty expansion project of UPPC 
including ethane/propane recovery plant at Vijaipur . There was delay in execution of this 
project with resultant overshooting of target date for completion and non-achieving the 
targeted MoU production as discussed below. 
The project envisaging expansion of polymer product ion capacity by 4.00 LMTPA at a 
capex of 
` 8140 crore 1 was to come up at two locations viz . ethane/propane (C2/C3) 
recovery and enrichment plant at Vijaipur (Madhya P radesh) and expansion of capacities 
at UPPC (Pata-II). The project was scheduled to be mechanically completed in 42 months 
from date of appointment of EPCM consultant.  
Engineers India Limited (EIL) was appointed (11 Aug ust 2010) as EPCM consultant for 
the project on nomination basis. Considering the sc heduled completion period of 42 
months, the date of completion of project at Pata I I and Vijaipur was scheduled as 10 
February 2014. Financing portfolio for setting up o f project was considered with debt 
component of 
` 5258 crore in the Debt: Equity ratio of 60:40.  
Plant at Vijaipur envisaged recovery of heavier fractions (ethane/propane - C2/C3) of NG 
available from HVJ pipeline. Ethane/propane recover ed (about 1.25 MMSCMD) would 
be re-injected into pipeline to enrich the NG with ethane/propane component for 
subsequent consumption at UPPC. Plant at Vijaipur ( GSU and GPU) was mechanically 
completed on 30 August 2014 against the target of F ebruary 2014 and commissioned in 
March 2015 with a delay of 12 months in commissioning.  
Expansion of existing capacity of UPPC was envisage d by setting up GCU (4.50 
LMTPA) and downstream unit (4.00 LMTPA), butene-1 p lant (20 TMTPA) along with 
required liquid hydrocarbon recovery facilities. Pr oject was partially commissioned in 
March 2015 against the scheduled completion of February 2014.  
Audit noticed that; 
• Eleven major work contracts (plant at Vijaipur) awa rded during the period 
February 2011 to September 2013 with scheduled comp letion between May 2012 
and January 2014 were not completed within the sche duled time. These projects 
were subsequently completed with a delay ranging be tween 10 and 32 months. 
Details of major work orders, project schedule, phy sical progress where slippages 
noticed and reasons thereof are given in Annexure-X.  
• Nine major work contracts (Pata II) awarded during the period May 2011 to June 
2012 with scheduled completion between August 2012 and December 2013 were 
not completed within the scheduled time. Out of the  nine contracts, seven works 
were completed with a delay ranging between 11 and 20 months.  Remaining two 
                                                           
1  Including foreign exchange component of `` `` 1364 crore. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
33 
works relating to water treatment plants were not completed by June 2015. Details 
of major work orders, project schedule, physical progress where slippages noticed 
are given in Annexure-XI.  
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Petroleum and N atural Gas also expressed 
(December 2014) concerns over delay in execution of  Pata expansion project and held 
that project execution was hampered due to lapse on  part of civil and structural 
contractors resulting in non-availability of work f ront to main contractors which had a 
cascading effect on the project completion. Besides , financial crunch of contractors at 
both sites affected the payment schedule to sub age ncies. This called for a robust 
monitoring of project schedule by GAIL and especial ly by EPCM for streamlining the 
scheduled completion.  
In respect of overall delay of project commissioning, Management stated (June 2015) that 
(i) effect of global recession affected fund flow f or various composite and infrastructure 
contractors (ii) delay in starting civil works due to unprecedented monsoon in 2011 (iii) 
shortage of work force and their limited productivi ty (iv) local law and order issues (v) 
non-availability of specific steel sections (vi) sh ortfall in estimation of quantity of 
materials on account of difference in 3-D models de veloped by EPCM consultant and 
basic engineering details provided by licensors res ulting in placement of late orders for 
procurement in the final stages (vii) delay in deli very of machines from BHEL, last 
minute shortage of materials, design faults etc . (viii) deficient design of cooling water 
system by EPCM (ix) delay in obtaining statutory cl earances (x) failure of equipments 
such as relay problems in sub-station switches supplied by Siemens at Pata etc .   
The prominent reasons such as shortage of work forc e, non-availability of material, 
deficient design etc . were associated with selection of contractor whic h was the 
responsibility of EPCM consultant. The EPCM consult ant had failed in this respect as 
discussed above. Action in line with contractual st ipulations against this failure is yet to 
be taken.  
As a result of delay in commissioning of capacity e xpansion project, GAIL could not 
achieve the MoU target of production of 1,00,000 MT  polymers from Pata expansion 
project for the year 2014-15 and thereby failed to avail the resultant profit margin of 
` 32.10 crore. Various units of Pata-II were pending completion even as of October 2015.  
(II) Non-synchronization of Butene-1 project with P NCP (IOCL)  
A.  Butene-1 is a critical chemical used in production  of HDPE and LLDPE. At the 
conceptual stage of PNCP, it was envisaged (Februar y 2004) that requirement of butene-
1 would be met from butene-1 plant at Gujarat Refin ery. Butene-1 plant at Gujarat 
Refinery though commissioned in 2001 was not functi oning due to not meeting quality 
specification of butene-1. Subsequently, IOCL provi ded for impairment of assets 
(Butene-1 plant) in its accounts for the year 2004- 05. No alternate source for butene-1, 
however, was considered while according investment approval (December 2006) for 
PNCP. IOCL continued its efforts to resolve the iss ue of butene-1 plant at Gujarat till 
January 2006. Since then plant was kept idle and finally written off in December 2009. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
34 
Since Butene-1 was not available, PNCP had no optio n but to import it for production of 
HDPE and LLDPE.  
To avoid expenditure on import and storage facility , Board of Directors (BoD) accorded 
(22 December 2010) ‘in-principle’ approval for inst allation of Ethylene Dimerisation 
Unit for production of 20 KTA Butene-1 at Panipat a t an estimated cost of 
`    134 crore. 
Final investment approval was accorded (February 20 12) at an estimated cost of `    190 
crore after a delay of 13 months from the date of ‘ in-principle’ approval.  The plant was 
subsequently commissioned on 19 May 2014 at a total cost of `    172.38 crore. 
Audit observed that: 
• Butene-1 plant at Gujarat used feed from Gujarat Re finery. As per the quality 
requirement of feed for production of butene-1, the  feedstock should have 'nil' 
level of sulphur (impurities). The feed received fr om Gujarat Refinery, however, 
was having sulphur content of 20 ppm 
1 as the crude mix processed in Gujarat 
Refinery contains around 25  per cent  to 30 per cent  weight of imported high 
sulphur crude. Butene-1 plant remained inoperative since inception as there was 
no scope of getting the desired quality of crude fo r processing at Gujarat 
Refinery. This fact was known to the Management at the time of taking a decision 
for investment approval for PNCP in 2006. Still the  Company considered 
sourcing of butene-1 from Gujarat Refinery for meet ing the requirement of 
butene-1 in the proposed PNCP.  
• To minimise the cost of import, in-principle approv al (December 2010) for in-
house production of Butene-1 at Panipat was taken a fter a lapse of one year from 
write off of Butene-1 plant at Gujarat. Subsequentl y, there was a further delay of 
13 months in the pre-implementation and planning stage and a final decision to go 
ahead with the project was taken only in February 2 012. The project was 
completed and production commenced in May 2014. Til l commencement of 
production from Butene-1 plant, PNCP imported 40,79 3 MT butene-1 at a total 
cost of ` 420.02 crore for running the plant. 
• As per the estimates of IOCL (August-2014), there w as saving of ` 50,510 per 
MT by substitution of imported butene-1 with domest ic production. Thus, due to 
delay in import substitution, IOCL had to forego savings of ` 189.24 crore 2. 
B. For import of Butene-1, IOCL hired (January 2010) d edicated storage and 
handling facilities at port location with a capacit y of 3,360 MT at a total contract 
value of ` 18 crore for a period of 24 months (upto 15 Januar y 2012) from United 
Storage and Tank Terminals Limited (USTTL) through tendering process. Period 
of contract was further extended by one year (upto 15 January 2013) with revised 
contract value of ` 26.52 crore for three years. On expiry of the peri od, the 
contract was awarded to IMC Limited (erstwhile USTT L) on single tender basis 
at ` 13.50 crore for a period of 18 months from 23 January 2013.  
                                                           
1  Parts per million 
2  Cost of imported Butene-1 per MT ( `` `` 111926) / Cost of production per MT ( `` `` 61415) = 1.82 
Total cost of import of 40793 MT of Butene-1 for the period 2010-11 to 2014-15 = ` ` ` ` 420.02 crore 
Pro-rata cost of production for import = ( ` ` ` ` 420.02 crore / 1.82) = ` ` ` ` 230.78 crore 
Extra expenditure on import = ( ` ` ` ` 420.02 crore - ` ` ` ` 230.78 crore) = ` ` ` ` 189.24 crore 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
35 
IOCL acquired storage and handling facility for par cel size of 2,500 MT to 3,000 MT at 
the time of floating the tender to avoid higher fre ight charges involved in transportation 
of lower parcel size. Import, however, was in a max imum parcel size of 2,000 MT. 
Resultantly the hired storage capacity of 3,360 MT was never utilized in full during the 
period. Also during the entire period of contract t he total receipt of Butene-1 had never 
crossed 13,000 MT per annum. 
Management stated (July 2015) that consumption of B utene-1 is grade dependent. 
Therefore monthly scheduling of grades in Petrochem ical Production Logistics Plan 
(PPLP) decides parcel size of import taking into ac count the lead time of inland 
transportation. Further, to minimise the inventory and its cost, actual parcel sizes 
imported are optimised as per requirement.  
Management’s replies may be viewed in the backdrop that actual utilization of storage 
facility was only 50 per cent . Further, before hiring the facilities, analysis o f historical 
data of PPLP regarding grade wise scheduling would have enlightened the management 
as to the actual size and requirement of storage capacity. Absence of such an analysis and 
non consideration of available storage capacity of 3360 MT at Panipat, led to 
underutilisation of hired facilities and rendered t he expenditure of 
` 15.58 crore 1 
unfruitful. 
Conclusion 
UPPC, GAIL 
• Mismatch between upstream and downstream production  capacity in UPPC led 
to operation of downstream units at lesser load wit h resultant loss of 
opportunity for production.  
• Due to not maintaining grade-wise cost of polymer, margin from sale of 
different grades at different price levels is not estimated.  
• Delay in materializing capacity expansion of Pata- II due to failure on the part 
of EPCM consultant and contractors deprived GAIL th e benefit from 
production of one lakh MT polymers during 2014-15. 
PNCP, IOCL 
• Creation of power and steam generation capacity in excess of actual 
requirement led to under-utilisation of these utilities.  
• Recycling of C4H as feedstock in NCU instead of blending with LPG resulted in 
forgoing the price advantage available from sale of LPG.  
• Non achievement of design standards in respect of c onsumption of feedstock, 
chemicals and steam led to excess consumption and resultant increase in cost of 
production. 
                                                           
1  Facility hiring charges @ `` `` 71.25 lakh for 54 months (i.e. from Jan-10 to June -14) `` `` 38.50 crore  x 
1360 MT/3360 MT 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
36 
• Due to not maintaining grade-wise cost of polymers,  margin from sale of 
different grades at different price levels is not estimated.  
• Due to delay in pre-implementation and planning sta ge of butene-1 project, 
production was delayed depriving IOCL the cost bene fit advantage through 
import substitution. 
Recommendations 
/head2right GAIL and IOCL may maintain polymer grade wise cost so as to estimate 
margin from sale of different grades. 
/head2right IOCL may take effective steps to avoid excess consu mption of feedstock and 
other inputs.  
/head2right GAIL and IOCL should develop a mechanism, with clea rly defined 
responsibility centre, to ensure and assess timely completion of petrochemical 
projects and cut down delays.  
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited  
1.4 Avoidable expenditure on Diesel Hydro Treater P roject in Mumbai Refinery  
HPCL initiated the Diesel Hydro Treater (DHT) proje ct in 2007 for meeting the 
statutory quality specifications of diesel at a cos t of `` `` 1969.59 crore ignoring the 
existing DHDS plant, which was capable of producing  similar quality of diesel since 
2005 and could be upgraded to meet the statutory re quirements. Subsequently, the 
DHDS project was taken up for upgradation (2009) to  enhance its capacity and 
improve quality of its output. The revamped DHDS wa s capable of meeting the 
entire ULSD/Euro IV requirement of Mumbai Refinery of HPCL. This resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of `` `` 1969.59 crore as well as creation of excess capaci ty 
towards production of diesel. 
The Auto Fuel Policy (2003) of GoI mandated supply of Euro-IV (sulphur content less 
than 50 ppm) quality diesel to 11 major cities of India from 1 April 2010.  
HPCL had commissioned the Diesel Hydro De-Sulphuris ation (DHDS) plant in Mumbai 
Refinery in 2000 which was subsequently revamped du ring 2005. An additional trickle 
bed reactor had been added during the revamp, which  had increased the capacity of 
DHDS to 1.65 MMTPA 1 with the capability to produce hydro treated diese l product 
having 20 ppm 2 sulphur. Thus, Mumbai Refinery (MR) was capable of  producing Euro-
IV diesel (sulphur content less than 50 ppm) throug h its DHDS plant since 2005 itself. 
Ignoring the existing capability of producing the r equired quality of diesel, HPCL 
initiated (August 2007) establishment of Diesel Hyd ro Treater (DHT) plant for meeting 
the statutory quality specifications of diesel. In fact, the Management, while submitting 
the proposal of the DHT project to the Board in Aug ust 2007, had stated that the existing 
DHDS plant had been de-bottlenecked and there was n o further possibility of enhancing 
its capacity. It was stressed that a separate DHT u nit needs to be installed to ensure the 
                                                           
1  Million Metric Tonne Per Annum 
2  Parts Per Million 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
37 
mandatory Euro IV quality of diesel.The critical information that the DHDS plant had the 
capability to produce Euro IV grade of Diesel was n ot informed to the Board while 
proposing DHT Project in August 2007. 
The estimated Net Present Value of the DHT project was (-) 
` 2397.70 crore with a 
negative Internal Rate of Return.HPCL Board approve d implementation of the project on 
5 March 2009.The DHT project was commissioned in No vember 2013 and capitalized in 
June 2015 at a cost of ` 1969.59 crore. 
While the DHT project was underway, HPCL took up a separate project (October 2009) 
using isotherming technology for revamping the exis ting DHDS plant. The revamped 
plant would be capable of producing diesel having s ulphur content lower than 10 ppm 1 
and at the same time maintain the Euro IV cetane nu mber. The Committee of Functional 
Directors (CFD) approved (April 2011) the revamp pr oject which was commissioned in 
July 2015 at a cost of ` 142.60 crore. The revamped DHDS plant had a capaci ty of  
2.28 MMTPA and the ability to produce Ultra Low Sulphur Diesel (ULSD). 
At present, thus, MR of HPCL has the capacity to pr oduce 4.48 MMTPA (2.20 MMTPA 
capacity of DHT + 2.28 MMTPA capacity of DHDS) of E uro IV/ ULSD grade of diesel. 
The present crude processing capacity of MR is howe ver only 6.50 MMTPA. 
Considering the crude throughput and diesel product ion in MR over the past six years 
(2009-10 to 2014-15), the average diesel production  in MR has been approximately 30 
per cent of the crude processed ( Annexure-XII). Besides, Euro IV diesel accounted for 
15 per cent ( August 2014 to August 2015) of the diesel productio n by MR. Thus, the 
requirement of production of ULSD/EURO IV quality d iesel is limited in MR and in no 
case more than 2.34 MMTPA as assumed by M/s EIL considering a higher crude refining 
capacity of 8 MMTPA in MR.The created capacity of production of 4.48 MMTPA of low 
sulphur diesel is thus, well above the MR requirement.  
By implementing the DHT project without considering  the existing capacity of DHDS 
and possibility of further revamping the same by us ing isotherming technology, HPCL 
has incurred an avoidable additional expenditure of  ` 1969.59 crore as well as created 
excess capacity for production of ULSD/Euro IV quality diesel. 
The Management replied (October 2015) that:- 
(i)  The DHT project was conceived to meet immediate requirement of Euro-IV grade 
fuel as well as Ultra Low Sulphur Diesel to meet th e future stringent product 
specifications.  
(ii)  In order to produce 100 per cent  Euro – IV diesel, the DHDS outlet cannot be 
blended with many high sulphur diesel streams downs tream of DHDS. Hence, 
never in the past, prior to DHT, Mumbai Refinery ha s ever produced Euro-IV 
Diesel and the market requirement had been met thro ugh coastal inputs only. 
Considering these facts, it was informed to the Boa rd that MR is not capable of 
producing Euro-IV grade diesel. Hence, there was no  event of submission of 
imprecise information regarding Euro-IV diesel production to Board. 
                                                           
1  Which is Ultra Low Sulphur Diesel superior to Eur o IV (Sulphur contain not more than 50 ppm.) 
diesel. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
38 
(iii)  The DHDS unit post revamp in 2005 had the capabilit y to produce Euro-IV diesel 
(50ppm sulphur) corresponding to 1.65 MMTPA feed of  raw diesel. The DHDS 
process licensor M/s UOP in 2006-2007 suggested maj or changes in the 
equipment of existing DHDS unit for revamping the p lant up to 1.8 MMTPA. 
Therefore, there could have been a gap of approxima tely 1.2 MMTPA of diesel. 
In view of the above, the additional capacity of di esel desulphurization to realize 
the full potential of diesel production of MR was r equired, irrespective of revamp 
of existing DHDS unit to its maximum capacity. 
The reply is not acceptable due to the following:-  
(i)  The DHT project in MR was approved by the Board des pite negative IRR and 
NPV merely to meet the GoI guidelines, to produce a nd supply Euro IV from 
April 2010. The existing DHDS had the capacity to p roduce Euro IV diesel as 
early as 2005. This option was not explored by the refinery when the proposal for 
DHT project was placed before the Board in 2007. Th e aspect of future stringent 
product specifications was not envisaged in the proposal submitted to the Board. 
(ii)  The contention of the Management that MR has a dies el potential higher than 3 
MMTPA is not borne out by the present capacity of M R or its diesel production 
profile over the last six years. In fact, even cons idering a higher refinery capacity 
(8 MMTPA as against the present 6.5 MMTPA), M/s EIL  had provided for a total 
diesel capacity of 2.34 MMTPA. Thus, by implementin g both DHT project and 
DHDS revamp, MR has created nearly double the required facility for diesel.  
(iii)  The DHDS project not only had a lower capital cost ( ` 103.40 crore for DHDS as 
against ` 1969.59 crore for DHT), it would also result in lo wer hydrogen 
consumption and higher energy conservation. Thus, e ven in operation, DHDS 
would prove economical to DHT.  
(iv)  Had the entire facts been brought before the Board at the appropriate time, the 
revamp of DHDS project could have been completed in  time to supply EURO IV 
products by April 2010 as envisaged in Auto Fuel Policy (2003).  
The implementation of DHT project at a cost of ` 1969.59 crore without giving the Board 
the option of considering DHDS project, was thus, imprudent. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (December 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited    
1.5 Irregular payment of Performance Related Pay 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited made an irregular pa yment of `` `` 110.40 crore for 
the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 towards ‘Performance Related Pay’ due to non-
adherence to the DPE guidelines 
The Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) issued (N ovember 2008) instructions for 
regulating pay and allowances, perquisites and perf ormance related pay (PRP) to 
executives and non-unionized supervisors in Central  Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs).  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
39 
The above instructions directly linked PRP to the p rofits of the CPSEs and performance 
of Executives. These instructions and further clari fications issued thereon in September 
2013 and September 2014 inter alia  laid down following condition for payment of PRP: 
Profit Before Tax (PBT) for computation of PRP was expected to come out from the 
specified objective and core activities of CPSEs an d that extraordinary items like 
valuation of stock, grants/waiver by Govt of India, sale of land, interest on idle cash/bank 
balances etc. (list of item is not exhaustive) was not to be included in calculation of PBT 
as far as PRP is concerned. 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (the company) includ ed revenue of 
` 1398.00 crore and 
` 1400.12 crore arising out of non-core activities su ch as interest on loans and advances 
to employees, interest on fixed deposits with banks , sale of scrap, income from finance 
leases, profit on sale of investments etc. in the P BT for payment of PRP for the year 
2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. Accordingly, excess payment of PRP of ` 41.94 crore 
and ` 68.46 crore was made in these years in violation o f DPE guidelines (Annexure-
XIII).  
The Company replied (April/October 2015) that since  it is a net borrower, there was no 
idle cash/ bank balance and thus no interest on the  same which is to be deducted from 
PBT for PRP purposes. On the contrary, it is an oil  marketing company and has incurred 
huge under recoveries on sale of petroleum products  till 2013-14. These under recoveries 
were compensated by either Govt. of India or Upstre am Companies but due to significant 
time gap between the announcement and actual receip t of such compensation from Govt. 
of India, the borrowing levels of the corporation w ere on very high side during 2012-13 
and 2013-14. Further, the additional interest burde n due to such delay in receipt of 
compensation has also adversely affected the financ ial result of the company. These two 
components were indeed related to core business act ivities of the Corporation and thus 
should have been be allowed to be added back while calculating PBT for the purpose of 
PRP in line with DPE letter dated 02 September 2014. 
Audit observed that the Company had requested (Dece mber 2013 / July 2014) Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) to approve exc lusion of interest burden on the 
borrowings of the Company due to delayed release of  compensation towards under 
recoveries by the Government as it dented profit ar ising from core activity of the 
Company.  MoPNG took up this matter thrice with DPE  i.e. in January 2014, June 2014 
and July 2014. But DPE had categorically rejected ( May 2014) the request of the 
Company to exclude interest burden for calculation of PBT as the existing guidelines on 
PRP clearly mention that it shall be based on PBT o f the Company and there is no 
provision to add the interest paid by the Company o n borrowed capital to the PBT.  DPE 
further reiterated (September 2014) that PRP payable to the executives and non-unionised 
supervisors of CPSEs based on the profits of financ ial year 2012-13 onwards would be 
calculated as per DPE OM dated 18 September 2013 i. e interest on idle cash/bank 
balances may be deducted from PBT and PRP may be di stributed based on profit 
accruing only from core business activities of the CPSEs.  
Audit observed that despite clear instruction from DPE not to include income from non-
core activities in the PBT for payment of PRP, the Company included such revenues 
arising out of non-core activities as has already been mentioned above.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
40 
Thus, due to non-adherence to the DPE guidelines wi th respect to payment of 
‘Performance related Pay’, the company made an irre gular payment of `110.40 crore for 
the years 2012-13 and 2013-14. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (November 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
1.6 Undue benefit extended to the executives in the  form of shift allowance  
Indian Oil Corporation Limited extended undue benef it to the executives by paying 
shift allowance amounting to `` `` 56.27 crore in violation of DPE guidelines 
Government of India formulated the policy for revis ion of pay and allowances of Board 
level and below Board level executives as well as n on-unionized supervisors in Central 
Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) with effect from 1 January 2007 vide DPE O.M. 1 
dated 26 November 2008. The said OM  inter-alia  provided that the Board of Directors 
of the CPSEs would decide on the allowances and per ks admissible to the different 
categories of executives subject to a maximum ceili ng of 50 per cent  of the basic pay. 
CPSEs may follow ‘Cafeteria Approach’ allowing the executives to choose from a set of 
perks and allowances. Only four allowances viz Nort h East allowance, Allowances for 
underground mines, Special Allowance for serving in  difficult and far flung areas as 
approved by the Ministry and Non practicing allowan ce for Medical Practitioners were 
kept outside the purview of ceiling of 50 per cent  of basic pay. It was also directed that 
infrastructure facilities created by CPSEs like hos pitals, colleges, schools, clubs etc . 
should be monetized on the basis of recurring expen diture on maintaining and running 
the infrastructure for the purpose of computing the perks and allowances. 
While implementing the revision of pay scales for B oard level and below Board level 
executives, Indian Oil Corporation Limited (the Com pany) decided that available 
entitlement of the executives would be 44 per cent  of their basic pay because six per cent  
of the basic pay has been considered as monetized value of the infrastructure facilities. 
Audit observed that the Company was paying shift al lowance to its executives and 
keeping the same outside the purview of ceiling of 50 per cent  of basic pay. During 2010-
11 to 2014-15, shift allowance of ` 56.27 crore was paid to executives of the Company.  
The Company stated (October 2015) that rotating shi ft duty was neither a normal duty 
nor its compensation was a routine payment; but it was purely a contingent/need based 
operational requirement. The compensation towards p erforming the difficult and 
hazardous duty was admissible on shift basis specif ically for those job groups of 
employees who were transferred to work in the rotat ing shift involving eight hour 
continuous duty without any break in the morning, evening and night shift. Thus, rotating 
duty allowance was neither in the nature of perk/al lowance to an officer nor it was 
universally payable to everyone i.e.  it was not a perk or allowance in the manner it wa s 
generally envisaged under the DPE guidelines. Expen ses towards rotating shift duty was 
incurred by the Company for discharging an hazardou s/difficult assignment which was 
more in the nature of underground mining allowance or non-practicing allowance 
                                                           
1  Department of Public Enterprise Office Memorandum  No. 2(70) 108-DPE (WC)-GL-XVI/08 dated 26-
11-2008 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
41 
allowed under the DPE guidelines. Further, if these  executives were given a choice to 
choose from a set of perks and allowances under the cafeteria approach that includes shift 
allowance, then no executive would choose shift all owance as it led to hardship by way 
of rotating shift duty. As a result, the operations would suffer immensely. 
The reply is not tenable as shift allowance is mean t to ensure continuous round the clock 
production and is not meant to compensate for hazar dous nature of duties performed by 
any employee. As regards the apprehension expressed  by the Management that 
operations will suffer if executives do not choose shift allowance, it needs to be 
appreciated that in a cafeteria approach with the e xecutives given the freedom to choose 
the allowance, enforcement of duties cannot be link ed to choice of a particular allowance 
in preference to others. Moreover,  DPE in this regard had categorically stated (June 2012 
and June 2013) that except four allowances as menti oned in DPE OM dated 26 
November 2008, no further allowance/benefit/perks w as admissible outside the 50 per 
cent  ceiling of basic pay under Cafeteria Approach.  
Thus, payment of ` 56.27 crore made by the Company towards shift allo wance was in 
violation of DPE guidelines and therefore, irregular.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry (November 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited  
1.7 Delay in appraisal and non-monetization of the discoveries in KG DWN 98/2 
block 
 1.7.1 Introduction 
KG DWN 98/2 is a deep-water 
block in Krishna Godavari 
basin which was awarded to 
M/s Cairn Energy India Private 
Limited (CEIL) with 100 per 
cent  participating interest (PI) 
during the first NELP round in 
April 2000. The block has a 
total area of 9756.6 square 
kilometre (sq.kms) with water 
depths ranging from 300 
metres in the north to 3000 
metres in the south. CEIL with 100 per cent  PI in the block was its operator. 
In March 2005, ONGC acquired 90 per cent  PI in the block from CEIL at a cost of 
` 371.12 crore. To associate renowned and experienced  companies with the block, 
ONGC farmed out its 10 per cent  PI share to Hydro Oil and Energy Ltd. (HOEI) in 
August 2007 and another 15 per cent  PI share to M/s Petrobras International Braspetro 
                                                           
1  HOEI-Hydro Oil and Energy Limited 
Pattern of Participating Interest held by the JV Pa rtners in 
KG-DWN-98/2 
Period Cairn 
Energy 
India 
Ltd 
ONGC 
 Petrobras 
International 
HOEI
1 
April 2000 100 %    
March 2005 10 % 90 %   
August/ 
September 2007 
10 %  65 % 15 10 
December 2009 10 % 80 % 0 10 % 
June 2010 10 % 90 % 0 0 
September 2012 
onwards 
0 100 %   

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
42 
(PIB BV) in September 2007. Subsequently, both the partners - PIB BV and M/s Statoil 
(on M/s HOEI merging with Statoil) – withdrew from the block in December 2009 and 
June 2010 respectively and re-assigned their PI sha re back to ONGC at no cost. Thus, by 
June 2010, ONGC had 90 per cent  PI in the block with the balance 10 per cent  being held 
by CEIL. In September 2012, CEIL also withdrew and ONGC acquired its share at a cost 
of ` 212.44 crore. Presently, ONGC is the sole operator of the block with 100 per cent 
PI . 
The Contractor 1, after the block was awarded, completed the explor ation during April 
2000 to April 2008 and had drilled 14 exploratory w ells and one appraisal well as against 
the Minimum Work Programme (MWP) of 6 exploratory w ells and had made nine 
discoveries. The residual contract area of 7,294.6 sq. kms existing in September 2007 
was declared as discovery area comprising of Northe rn Discovery Area (NDA) – 3,800 
sq. kms and Southern Discovery Area (SDA) – 3,494.6  sq. kms on the basis of several 
discoveries made in northern part and lone discover y (UD-1) made in southern part 
respectively and was accepted by the Management Committee (MC).  
The Contractor availed 69 months extension (April 2 008 to January 2014) for appraisal 
of discoveries.  During appraisal period, the Contr actor drilled 12 appraisal wells (eight 
in NDA and four wells in SDA) that resulted in two discoveries. The Contractor 
submitted (December 2013) Declaration of Commercial ity (DOC) proposing to develop 
10 discoveries in 3 clusters ( Cluster I : D1 and E1, Cluster II : R-1; P-1; M-1; U-1; A-1; 
A2 & M3 and Cluster III : UD-1) from a total of 11 discoveries notified til l that date in 
the Block. Cluster I and II developments were from the discoveries made in Northern 
Discovery Area and Cluster III was from the lone di scovery of Southern Discovery Area. 
The Contractor also drilled (May 2013 to June 2014)  two exploratory wells in NDA 
during appraisal period which did not result in any new discoveries. 
The Company had incurred ` 8,402.56 crore towards exploration and appraisal o f the 
block till March 2015. The present status of develo pment in the three clusters of the 
block is as below:  
• Cluster 1:  The DOC for Cluster I has not been reviewed as the  recoverable 
reserves could not be estimated and production prof ile could not be generated in 
the absence of surface flow data/ DST data for its discoveries.  
• Cluster II: Management Committee (September 2014) reviewed the DOC for 
cluster II. The Concept Field Development Plan for this cluster has been 
submitted to DGH for approval in August 2015. It proposes to recover 23.53 MMt 
of Oil during the period 2019 to 2031 and 50.71 BCM  during the period 2018 to 
2034  with approx. Capital expenditure of US $ 6583 .58 million (with option of 
fast track schedule for facility cost). 
• Cluster III:  The DOC for Cluster III was not reviewed for want of flow data/ 
DST data for the sole discovery in this cluster.  
 
                                                           
1  Contractor- As per the PSC, the Partners of the P SC together are called as Contractor 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
43 
1.7.2  Viability of integrated development of clust er 1 along with Godavari PML area 
1.7.2.1   The block (KG DWN-98/2) is contiguous to Godavari  PML area (IG 
Nomination Block) operated by ONGC where three gas discoveries termed as “G-4" 
had been made during September 2003 to October 2006 . To optimize cost, integrated 
development of Cluster I in KG-DWN-98/2 block and G 4 discoveries was planned. 
Accordingly, the Company carried out (up to July 20 13) detailed G&G interpretation of 
the seismic data of these two areas. The results of  this study indicated extension of 
“G4" pools into the contiguous NELP Block KG-DWN- 9 8/3 (D6) operated by M/s 
Reliance Industries Limited (M/s RIL). ONGC sought (July 2013), data relating to D6 
Block from DGH and Ministry to confirm continuity o f G4 pools in D6 Block. 
Subsequently (November 2013), ONGC and M/s RIL shar ed data relating to these three 
contiguous Blocks. ONGC on basis of study of shared  data concluded (December 
2013), that G4 reservoir extended into M/s RIL oper ated D6 Block and four wells 
drilled by the M/s RIL in D6 was actually draining gas from this common reservoir. 
M/s RIL disagreed.  
1.7.2.2 The disagreement could not be resolved and theCompa ny filed (May 2014) a 
writ petition in High Court of Delhi against (a) Un ion of India; (b) DGH and (c) M/s 
RIL alleging that M/s RIL had drained approximately  18 BCM of gas from the common 
reservoir shared between these contiguous blocks du ring the period 2009 to September 
2013 and continued to do so. ONGC sought apportionm ent of gas produced from the 
common reservoir 
.  
In July 2014, a third party expert, M/s DeGolyer & MacNaughton (D&M), was 
appointed at the request of ONGC and RIL under supe rvision of DGH with the 
following objectives: 
/square4 Comprehensive reservoir modelling and analysis to e valuate the continuity of 
channels and connectivity of reservoirs across the block boundaries operated by 
ONGC and RIL. 
/square4 If reservoir continuity and connectivity is establi shed, then 
/head2right To estimate gas volumes (in place volumes, estimate d ultimate recovery 
(EUR) and reserves) of the respective blocks operat ed by ONGC and RIL.  
/head2right The allocation of connected/unconnected gas volumes  (in-place volume, 
EUR, and reserves) to ONGC and RIL for the purpose of any commercial 
agreement/gas balancing, if applicable. 
The scope of study included part of the Godavari PM L area, D1 discovery of KG DWN 
98/2 (both operated by ONGC), and D1 and D3 discove ries of KG DWN 98/3 (operated 
by RIL).  
In its final report of November 2015, M/s D&M confi rmed connectivity and continuity 
of the reservoirs across the blocks operated by ONG C and RIL. The report indicates 
that as on 31 March 2015, of the gas initially in p lace, 49.32 per cent in Godavari PML 
and 34.71 per cent in KG-DWN-98/2 (Cluster I) had migrated of which 85 .15 per cent 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
44 
(pertaining to Godavari PML) and 73.25 per cent (pertaining to KG DWN98/2) was 
produced through DI, D3 fields of KG-DWN-98/3 block . The report projected a higher 
proportion of gas migration and its production thro ugh RIL operated KG DWN 98/3 
block by end of 2019. The Company had intended (Dec ember 2013) integrated 
development of Godavari PML area and cluster 1 of K G DWN 98/2 block. The Revised 
DoC and FDP for the integrated development are yet to be submitted ( November 2015) 
by the Company and as such the effect of the expert  report projecting large scale 
migration of gas from both the areas on the commerc ial viability of such development 
remains unclear. Besides, it was noticed that the C ompany had considered a gas price 
of US$ 7 per mmbtu 1 (with a payback period of 5.89 years) while consid ering the 
viability in December 2013.  Under the New Domestic  Gas Pricing Guidelines (March 
2015 and September 2015.), the gas price was fixed at US$ 4.66 per mmbtu between 
April 2015 to September 2015 and US$ 3.82 per mmbtu  between October 2015 to March 
2016, which would further adversely affect the fina ncial viability of integrated 
development of cluster 1 (KG DWN 98/2) and Godavari PML area.    
Delhi High court (September 2015) disposed the peti tion with directions that GOI shall 
take a decision on the action to be taken 
on the basis of the report of  D&M, 
within a period of six months of 
submission of the report.  On the basis 
of D&M report, Government has 
appointed (December 2015) a one 
member committee (Justice A P Shah) 
to consider the report and recommend 
future action of the Government 
considering the legal, financial and 
contractual provisions including those 
contained in the ORD 
2 Act and the 
PSCs within a period of three months. 
1.7.3  Exploration and appraisal 
process as per PSC 
PSC lays down different activities (exploration, ap praisal, development, production) 
related to petroleum operations. The sequential act ivities involved in the exploration 
phase (including appraisal) leading up to submissio n of development plan for a field are 
indicated alongside. The search for hydrocarbons (e xploration) leads to discovery. The 
commercial potential of such discovery is then assessed and notified. An appraisal plan is 
framed for appraising the discovery which is submit ted for approval of the Management 
Committee. Thereafter appraisal of the discovery is  carried out as per approved appraisal 
plan on completion of which, the document ‘Declarat ion of Commerciality (DoC)’ for 
the block is submitted to MC. On review of DoC, the  development plan is formulated. 
Subsequently, development of the block is carried o ut as per the development plan. For 
each of these activities, the PSC prescribes specific timelines. 
                                                           
1million British Thermal Units   
2 ORD: Oil fields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 
8 years from 
grant of licenc e
•Conduct of exploration 
within 30 days 
of discovery 
•Notification of Discovery 
within 60 days of 
testing discovery 
•Notification of potential 
commercial interest 
32/36 months 
from notification 
of discovery of 
oil/gas
•Appraisal of discovery 
On completion of 
appraisal
•Declaration of 
commerciality 
12 months from 
the date of 
review of DoC by 
MC 
•Submission of 
development plan 
Process of exploration and appraisal as per PSC 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
45 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG), has,  from time to time notified new 
policies allowing contractors certain relaxations t o the above PSC provisions. Audit in 
respect of KG DWN 98/2 block was conducted with ref erence to the PSC provisions and 
the subsequent MoPNG notifications to obtain assura nce that hydrocarbon operations in 
the field were carried out efficiently and effectiv ely. The audit findings are discussed in 
the subsequent paragraphs.  
1.7.4  Audit findings 
1.7.4.1  Delays in exploration and appraisal due to  lack of coordination among 
partners. 
As per terms of the PSC, the exploration phase of t he field was from April 2000 to April 
2008. During the exploration phase, M/s CEIL, the o perator of the block holding 100 per 
cent participating interest, decided to sell its assets.  For two years (2003-05), M/s CEIL 
suspended exploration efforts and other petroleum o perations in the field. Subsequently, 
in March 2005, 90 per cent of the participating interest was transferred to ON GC. In 
April 2005, ONGC became the operator of the block. In the process, two years of 
exploration phase was lost. DGH/ MoPNG did not pena lize the erstwhile operator M/s 
CEIL for stalling exploration operations as the PSC does not provide for any penalization 
of the operator/ Contractor in case of voluntary suspension of work. 
Subsequently, ONGC (operator since April 2005) decl ared (February 2008) the 
remaining area of the block as discovery area in tw o parts viz. Southern Discovery Area 
(SDA) and Northern Discovery Areas (NDA). ONGC was granted (April 2008) a 36-
month extension as per Article 21 of the PSC, from the date of last discovery in NDA and 
SDA for appraisal (till July 2010 for NDA and till December 2009 for SDA). However, 
the new partners, M/s Statoil having 10 per cent PI (during August 2007 to June 2010) 
and M/s Petrobras having 15 per cent PI (during September 2007 to December 2009) did 
not support the appraisal programme for both discov ery areas (NDA and SDA). Besides, 
M/s CEIL who had retained 10 per cent PI in the block, did not support the appraisal 
programme for SDA. The lack of consensus between th e partners delayed 
implementation of the appraisal programme. 
ONGC later agreed (April 2008) to bear sole risk of the appraisal programme in SDA and 
PI share of M/s Statoil and M/s Petrobras (addition al 25 per cent  risk) of appraisal 
programme in NDA.  MC (December 2009) approved the appraisal programme with the 
additional risks of ONGC. The appraisal programme, however, could not be completed 
before expiry of the extension period (July 2010 fo r NDA and December 2009 for SDA) 
and ONGC, without completing the appraisal programme, submitted (December 2009 for 
SDA and July 2010 for NDA) the Declaration of Comme rciality (DoC) to DGH for 
review by MC. However, MC did not review the DoC. I n September 2010, ONGC 
sought extension in the appraisal period under Rig Holiday Policy (RHP). 
Subsequently, MoPNG (June 2012), considering crunch in rig resources (January 2008 to 
December 2010), and excusable delay of 193 days 
1allowed further extension upto 
January 2014 for appraisal of discoveries. The appr aisal programme could not be 
                                                           
1 166 days for delay in grant of license and 27 days force majeure 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
46 
completed even within this extended period. The rev ised DoC was submitted (December 
2013) based on appraisal conducted till then, for d eveloping ten discoveries in three 
clusters ( Cluster I  : two discoveries, D1 and E1, Cluster II : seven discoveries, R-1; P-1; 
M-1; U-1; A-1; A2 & M3 and Cluster III : sole discovery, UD-1). Cluster I and II were 
in NDA while cluster III was in SDA. 
Suspension of exploration work for two years by the  erstwhile operator, M/s CEIL, and 
subsequent lack of consensus among the contractors,  inter alia , delayed the exploration 
and appraisal process in the block. 
1.7.4.2 Declaration of entire contract area as disc overy area and non-compliance with 
PSC mandated phase-wise relinquishment  
PSC 
1, inter-alia,  stipulated that the Contractor should relinquish c ontract areas in excess 
of 75 per cent  of the original contract area at the end of the fi rst exploration phase (four 
years from inception). Likewise, at the end of seco nd exploration phase (seven years 
from inception), 50  per cent of the original contract area was to be surrendered . By the 
third exploration phase (completion of exploration period of eight years), only 
Development/ Discovery Area would be retained by the Contractor. In case, however, the 
Development/ Discovery areas exceed the limits set in the PSC, the Contractor can retain 
the entire Development/ Discovery areas. PSC define s ‘discovery a rea’ as that part of the 
contract area about which, based on discovery and r esults obtained from a well or wells 
drilled in such part, the Contractor is of the opin ion that petroleum exists and is likely to 
be produced in commercial quantities. 
M/s CEIL (the then Contractor), at the end of the f irst exploration phase (April 2004), 
relinquished 2,462 sq. kms representing 25.23 per cent  of the original contract area of 
9,756.6 sq. kms. However, ONGC (the present Contrac tor), at the end of the second 
exploration phase, resolved (September 2007) that t he entire contract area of 7,294.6 sq. 
kms was “Discovery Area” and did not relinquish the  2,416 sq. kms (representing the 
balance area to be relinquished, i.e. 50 per cent  - 25.23 per cent  of the original contract 
area). 
The third phase of exploration ended in April 2008.  Even at the end of the third phase 
ONGC did not relinquish any further area as the ent ire area had already been designated 
as discovery area. For appraisal activities, ONGC divided the block (April 2008) into two 
distinct areas: Northern Discovery Area (NDA) with a discovery area of 3,800 sq.kms 
and Southern Discovery Area (SDA) with a discovery area of 3,494 sq.kms. 
In this regard Audit observed the following:  
(a)  In the entire SDA of 3,494 sq.kms, a single we ll had been drilled which proved 
(December 2006) to be a discovery with a notified ( February 2007) aerial extent 
of 566 sq. kms. Though aware of the limited aerial extent of the discovery in 
SDA, at the end of second phase of exploration (Sep tember 2007), ONGC 
proposed and MC approved (February 2008) retention of the entire 3,494 sq.kms 
as “Discovery Area” which was irregular.  
                                                           
1Articles 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
47 
(b)  On appraisal of this discovery, the aerial ext ent of the discovery shrunk further 
and was notified by the Contractor as 141 sq. kms i n the revised DOC submitted 
in December 2013. Even then, DGH did not seek relin quishment of balance area 
in SDA 1 though as per the PSC provisions, only discovery a nd development area 
was to be retained by the operator. 
By retaining additional area in SDA, the Contractor  incurred an additional expenditure of 
` 161.39 crore 2 in API of 3D Q marine data (2007-09) and in paymen t of PEL fee of 
` 4.59 crore (2007-14) for the additional area. 
ONGC in its reply (February 2015) stated that (a) t he “size of Discovery” and 
“Discovery Area” are two distinct things defined se parately in PSC and hence based on 
the size of discovery it cannot be arithmetically c oncluded that the Discovery Area 
would be of equivalent size; and (b) Audit remarks on reduced aerial extent of the 
discovery have been made on hindsight after results  of appraisal drilling are known and 
therefore retention of discovery area by Contractor  was not irregular. 
DGH in its reply (December 2015) stated that the Op erator was able to map several 
independent channels and geo bodies spreading over the block, which enabled the 
Operator to establish the entire area of 7294.6 sq. kms. as ‘discovery area’. 
ONGC/DGH reply is not acceptable in view of the fol lowing: 
(a)  The “size of discovery” has not been separatel y defined in PSC as stated in the 
reply. The PSC enjoins upon the operator to surrend er areas in excess of 
discovery/ development areas which has not been don e in the instant case. 
(b)  By the end of the second exploration phase, on ly one of the several prospects 
identified in the SDA based on evaluation of 2D dat a had been drilled which 
proved a limited aerial extent of 566 sq. kms. Cons idering that other identified 
prospects were not based on results obtained from a  well or wells drilled in such 
part 566 sq.kms only ought to have been retained in  SDA as against the entire 
area of 3494 sq. kms. 
(c)  A similar matter of retention of excess area i n contiguous NELP block had been 
highlighted in the AR 19 of 2011-12. Thereafter, Mo P&NG directed 3 (October 
2013) the Contractor to surrender the excess area b eyond the discovery area 
which has since been complied with by the Contracto r. In this context, DGH 
allowing ONGC to retain additional area in SDA even  after being aware 
(December 2013) that the aerial extent of the disco very is only 141 sq.kms, is 
irregular. 
                                                           
1  SDA area 3,494 Sq. kms– 2,416 sq. kms to be relin quished at the end of phase II =  1,078 sq. kms – 
141 sq. kms  Discovery Area in December 2013 =937 sq. kms to be surrendered in December 2013. 
2  3,218 sq. kms of 3D Q Marine Data was acquired an d processed during the period November 2007 to 
April 2008. at the cost of `` ``214.96 crore through contract awarded to M/s Wester ns Geeco. 
Proportionate cost of 2,416 sq. kms worked out to `` ``161.39 crore.  
3  Para No. 2.5.1.3 of Chapter 2 of Report No.24 of 2014 – Audit Report on Hydrocarbon Production 
Sharing Contracts. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
48 
Thus, failure of the Contractor to relinquish contr act area in excess of 50 per cent  of the 
original contract area (2,416 sq. kms) at the end o f II exploration phase and contract area 
in excess of discovery / development area (3,353 sq .kms) had resulted in the Contractor 
incurring avoidable expenditure of `165.98 crore 1 in API of 3D Q marine data and in 
payment of PEL fee for the additional area retained. 
ONGC retained the entire 3,494 sq.kms of SDAas ‘dis covery area’ though the aerial 
extent of the sole discovery in the area was 141 sq .kms as per notification made of 
ONGC in DOC submitted in December 2013. Besides bei ng irregular, retention of 
higher area led to additional avoidable expenses on  acquisition and interpretation of 
data and payment for exploration license. 
1.7.4.3 Extension of appraisal period 
A.  Northern Discovery Area (NDA) 
By the end of the exploration period, the Contracto r 
had made eight discoveries in NDA. Two more 
discoveries were made in the NDA during the 
appraisal phase bringing the total number of 
discoveries in NDA to ten. Appraisal wells were 
drilled for only five of these ten discoveries (R-l , P-l, 
M-l, U-l& A-l). Though a location for drilling an 
appraisal well for A2 discovery had been approved, 
the well could not be drilled within the extended 
period allowed for appraisal (December 2013). 
Finally, the Contractor submitted (December 2013) 
DOC covering nine of the ten discoveries (R-l, P-l,  M-l, D-l, U-l, A-l, E-l, A-2, and M-
3). 
In this regard Audit observed the following:  
i)  As per the PSC provision (10.5 and 21.5.4.), the Co ntractor had to appraise each 
discovery within 32 (oil discovery)/36 (gas discove ry) months from notification 
of discovery.The Contractor requested DGH for permi ssion to pool the 
discoveries in NDA as it was not economical to appr aise them on stand-alone 
basis. MC allowed the Contractor (April 2008) to po ol the then existing 
discoveries in NDA even though such pooling was not  provided for in the PSC. 
MC also allowed reckoning of appraisal period from the last discovery made in 
NDA (July 2007). Thus pooling of discoveries led to  individual discoveries in 
NDA being allowed 4 to 7 years (as against a maximum of three years provided in 
the PSC) to complete appraisal as detailed in the Annexure-XIV . 
ii)  Even with the additional time made available for ap praisal through pooling of 
discoveries, the Contractor could not complete the appraisal programme by July 
2010 and the appraisal period had to be extended ti ll January 2014.  As per the 
PSC, the DoC was to be prepared based on appraisal of the discoveries. Audit 
noticed that even after the extensions, DoC for NDA  was submitted without an 
                                                           
1`` ``  161.39 crore plus `` `` 4.59 crore.  
Notification of  
discoveries in NDA 
Sl. 
No 
NDA  
3800 sq. 
kms 
(10) 
Date of 
notification  
1)  R-1 gas 18.7.2001 
2)  P-1  oil 12.10.2001 
3)  M-1  oil  16.11.2001 
4)  U-1  gas  25.1.2006 
5)  A-1 gas 25.1.2006 
6)  W-1 gas 12.4.2006 
7)  E-1 gas 2.5.2006 
8)  D-1 gas  17.5.2006 
9)  A-2 28.3.2013 
10)  M-3 22.1.2014 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
49 
approved appraisal programme for three discoveries (D-l, E-l, M-3) and 
appraisal well not having been drilled for A2 disco very.  
ONGC in its reply stated (February 2015) the following:  
(i)  2 ½ years was lost due to non-availability of deep water rigs and 1 ½ years was 
lost due to delay in re-structuring of exploration phase by MoPNG (January 2011 
to June 2012). The New Policy Framework (November 2 014) also allows 
additional time for appraisal. 
(ii)  It would be incorrect to state that discoveri es were not appraised as G&G study 
was carried out under an appraisal programme. Appra isal programme need not 
always culminate in appraisal drilling. Besides, di scoveries D-1 and E-1 being 
quite small/ marginal, did not warrant appraisal drilling. 
(iii)  In the interest of bringing the block on pro duction at the earliest, Contractor did 
not seek any additional time to appraise A2 and M3 discoveries as sufficient data 
had already been collected from the wells based on which DOC was submitted for 
MC review and FDP is under formulation. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
(i)  The reply does not explain the reasons for del ay in submission of appraisal 
programme. The delay (in the range 3 to 8 years vid e Annexure-XIV ) is far 
greater than condoning the period of three months p rovided for in the New Policy 
Framework (November 2014).  
(ii)  The Contractor did not have a comprehensive a ppraisal programme and the G&G 
study referred to in the reply was preparatory to s ubmission of appraisal 
programme;   
(iii)  Incompleteness of appraisal of NDA discoveri es is further highlighted by the fact 
that E1 discovery notification was not accepted by MC, recoverable reserves of 
D1 and E1 discoveries were not estimated nor could the production profile for 
these discoveries be generated. A proper appraisal programme would have 
adequately tested these aspects before submission o f DoC. Thus, while the 
Contractor availed of additional time for appraisal  through pooling of discoveries 
in NDA, it failed to complete the appraisal satisfa ctorily leading to inadequate 
DoC which would further delay monetisation of these discoveries.  
B.  Southern Discovery Area (SDA) 
In the SDA, a single well was drilled (December 200 6) which was designated as a 
discovery (UD 1).  The Contractor submitted an appraisal programme for SDA (the entire 
area of 3,494 sq. kms. having been retained in SDA) in April 2008.  MC, considering that 
there was insufficient time to appraise the discove ry, granted extension for completion of 
appraisal by December 2009 (considering 36 months a ppraisal period from the date of 
discovery as per PSC provisions). The appraisal pro gramme for SDA comprised API 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
50 
(acquisition, processing and interpretation) of 3D data and Geological and Geophysical 
(G&G) studies. 
Meanwhile, GoI notified (July 2010) Rig Holiday Pol icy (RHP)for deep water blocks 
which, inter alia,  declared a rig moratorium for three years (1 
st January 2008 to 31 st  
December 2010) for deep water block PSCs signed upt o NELP V. RHP, inter alia 
stipulated that:  
(a)  Blocks with existing drilling commitment as on 1 
st  January 2009 could be 
extended upto 31 st  December 2010 or till their completion, whichever was earlier. 
(b)  Thereafter, the Contractor will have the option to avail balance exploration period, 
if any. 
The Contractor applied (September 2010) for RHP and  requested extension of 
appraisal phase in SDA upto December 2012. It also sought (June 2011) excusable 
delay of 5.5 months that occurred at the beginning of exploration phase due to 
delay in grant of PEL from April 2000 to September 2000. Ministry acceded to the 
request and granted (June 2012) extension up to Dec ember2013 for the entire 
block.   
In this regard, Audit observed that: 
(a)  SDA was ineligible for grant of extension under RHP  as it did not have any 
drilling commitment as on 1 st  January 2009. In fact, Contractor did not have any  
approved drilling commitment by the end of the appr aisal period in December 
2009.Hence, grant of extension of 43 months (Januar y 2010 to July 2013) under 
RHP for SDA was irregular.  
(b)  After the expiry of appraisal period (December 2009  for SDA) the Contractor 
drilled two appraisal wells (UD2 & UD3) during July  2010 to January 2011. 
Grant of ineligible extension (January 2010 to July  2013) had the effect of 
regularising the unauthorised drilling of these two  appraisal wells at a cost of 
` 834.24 crore. Subsequently, two more appraisal wel ls were drilled in SDA 
(November 2012 to February 2013) at a cost of ` 594.14crore. 
(c)  The effectiveness of the appraisal done by the Cont ractor through drilling of four 
appraisal wells was also in doubt. The DoC for SDA (Cluster III) submitted by 
the Contractor in December 2013 could not be review ed by the MC as 
recoverable reserves were not estimated and product ion profile could not be 
generated in the absence of surface flow data / DST  data for these discoveries. 
Besides, the Contractor claimed that there was no d emonstrable technology 
implementation analogues available anywhere in the world in such ultra-deep 
waters of 2800 metres and beyond and thus further d evelopment of this area 
remains in doubt.  
ONGC in its reply (February 2015) stated that the M inistry had granted Rig Moratorium 
Period under RHP which also gave option to the Cont ractor to avail the balance 
Exploration period after the end of rig moratorium period. The Contractor lost more 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
51 
than 2 ½ years due to non-availability of deep wate r rigs and 1 ½ years due to late 
issuance of order by Ministry in June 2012.DGH in i ts reply (December 2015) stated 
that Operator applied for RHP with respect to entir e block KG-DWN-98/2 (not for NDA 
or SDA) and MOP&NG granted it in June 2012. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
(a)  As there was no drilling commitment either for expl oration or appraisal 
activities in SDA as on 1 
st Janaury 2009, RHP was not applicable to SDA. It was  
also noticed that the Contractor did not wait for g rant of extension but took up 
appraisal drilling in SDA (where it did not have te chnology for further 
development) before grant of formal extension. 
(b)  ONGC in September 2010 had sought restructuring of exploration phase of two 
distinct areas of the Block, NDA and SDA, upto July  2013 and December 2012 
respectively and not as one entire Block as stated in the reply. With the Block 
already divided (April 2008) into two distinct disc overies areas - NDA and SDA 
having two different appraisal periods, it was inap propriate to consider the entire 
area as one Block. 
1.7.4.4 Exploratory well drilled during appraisal in NDA   
The Contractor had identified deeper ‘Cretaceous’ p rospects in NDA during exploration. 
It sought to probe these prospects through addition al drilling during the appraisal phase. 
MC approved drilling of two exploration wells KT-2 (in September 2012) and J-AA (in 
August 2013) in NDA to explore the cretaceous prosp ect. The wells were spudded in 
January 2014 (at the end of the restructured appraisal phase) and completed by May/ June 
2014 after the appraisal period. While the well KT 2 achieved the exploratory objective 
and found gas, the well J-AA could not be explored due to technical constraints. Both the 
wells were permanently abandoned after incurring an expenditure of ` 1,905.41 crore 1. 
Audit observed that the PSC does not provide for ex ploration during appraisal period. 
Continuance of exploration activities during apprai sal phase has been commented upon 
by Audit 2 earlier. In case of NDA, the appraisal activities had not been completed on time 
and the Contractor had been allowed extension to co mplete these activities. While the 
appraisal of NDA remained incomplete (para 3.3.A), additional exploration activities 
were carried out with substantial investment and no tangible benefit. 
The effect of additional exploration done during th e appraisal period in NDA was to 
increase the expenditure and hence cost recovery on the block by ` 1,905.41crore without 
any tangible benefit. There appears to be a case fo r ring-fencing such additional 
exploration efforts, as has been mandated by MoPNG (vide notification dated February 
2013) for exploration in ML area after expiry of ex ploration period. This would ensure 
that cost recovery of the original block is not und uly increased to the detriment of profit 
petroleum and Government take. 
                                                           
1        `` `` 1,244.18 crore plus `` `` 661.23 crore.  
2  Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of  India - No.19 of 2011-12 and No. 24 of 2014. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
52 
Management in its reply (August 2015) stated that t he location was approved based on 
the merit of prospectivity for adding value and reserve accretion. 
DGH in its reply (December 2015) stated that: 
(i)  The GOI restructured (June 2012) exploration period  upto December 2013. 
Further, GoI’s policy (November 2014) allows contra ctors to do extended 
appraisal activities to enable Operator to submit robust FDP; and 
(ii)  In ML area revenue is being generated so to protect  the GOI share of ‘profit 
petroleum’, safeguard measures has been taken in ML  policy. However, GOI 
policy (November 2014) allows extended appraisal ac tivities, where appraisal 
wells are to drill to evaluate extension of the res ervoir and in the initial stage of 
exploration no revenue is being generated in the Bl ock. The basic idea is that the 
Operator may submit a robust FDP. 
Reply of Management/ DGH is not acceptable in view of the following: 
(i)  The reply of management is not specific to the audi t observation which has 
highlighted the substantial investment made on such  exploration with no tangible 
benefits. 
(ii)  As per the notification of June 2012, re-structurin g of the exploration period was 
allowed only to carry out appraisal program. This i s in line with the provisions of 
Article 3.8 of PSC which allows such restructuring when there is insufficient time 
to carry out appraisal program.  
(iii)  The contention of DGH that safeguards are not requi red during exploration phase 
as no revenues are generated then is not acceptable as such expenses would add to 
the cost recovery and impact adversely profit petro leum from the block once the 
block commences production.  
1.7.4.5 Non adherence to testing processes mandated by PSC 
As per the PSC provisions (Articles 10 and 21), whe n a discovery is made within the 
contract area, the Contractor should:  
(i)  Forthwith inform the MC and Government of the Disco very and furnish 
particulars in writing within 30 days of the discovery; 
(ii)  Notify the Government at least 48 hours in advance of any drill stem test (DST)/ 
product test with government having the right to ha ve a representative present 
during the test. 
Subsequently, GoI vide its Notification (November 2 014) allowed acceptance of 
discoveries for which advance notification had not been given, provided the Contractor 
undertakes to carry out fresh tests after giving du e advance notification. GoI also 
provided (vide Notification dated 13May 2015) after  approval by CCEA on 29 April 
2015, three specific options to the defaulting Cont ractors who had not met the testing 
requirement of PSC: 
Option -1: relinquish the contract area related to discoveries;  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
53 
Option – 2:  conduct fresh test and submit revised DoC within one year from approval of 
CCEA in April 2015 with a stipulation that only 50 per cent  of cost incurred for testing 
will be allowed for cost recovery with a cap of US 15 million; and  
Option -3: proceed for development of discovery wit hout conducting DST, but cost 
recovery of such development would be ring fenced. 
The Contractor had to select the option within two months from date of CCEA approval 
of the notification (i. e., by end June 2015). The notification also laid down that the cost 
of MDT incurred by the contractors earlier in respe ct of such discoveries would not be 
allowed for cost recovery.   
The Contractor did not follow the laid down procedu re of the PSC and notified three 
discoveries - D1, E1 and UD-1 based on MDT. It also  failed to give advance notification 
before conducting MDT at D1 and E1. Hence, initiall y D1 and E1 discoveries were not 
accepted.  Later, D1 prospect was tested through an other well KT—1 by MDT, based on 
which D1 discovery was accepted by DGH.  
The Contractor submitted DoC in December 2013 for t hese discoveries (D-1 and E-1 in 
Cluster-1 and UD-1, the lone discovery in Cluster I II). DGH did not agree to review the 
DoC for these two clusters in the absence of surface flow data/ DST. 
The Contractor subsequently (March – May 2015) carr ied out DST for D-1 discovery 
through drilling a new well D1-sub and incurred an expenditure of 
` 365.97 crore 
(US$ 58.07million). In respect of E-1 and UD-1 discoveries, the Contractor has exercised 
(24 June 2015) the option of carrying out DST (as per option 2 of May 2015 notification). 
The test is yet to be carried out (June 2015). 
In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
(i)  DGH had accepted UD-1 and D-1 as ‘discoveries’ even  though the testing 
requirement of PSC had not been fulfilled. Subsequently, DGH did not review the 
DoC for these discoveries citing need for surface flow data/ DST.  
(ii)  As per the ‘Policy for testing requirement’, by exercising Option 2, the Contractor 
will be ineligible to claim cost recovery of 
` 17.28 crore which it has incurred in 
conducting MDT for the three discoveries (D-1 – ` 10.93 crore and E-1 – ` 3.10 
crore and UD-1 ` 3.25 crore) rendering this expenditure avoidable and wasteful. 
(iii)  The fresh DST done in respect of D1 by the Contract or resulted in additional 
expenditure of ` 271.44 crore (US $ 43.07 million) towards fresh DS T test 
conducted for D-1 discovery. In case of fresh DST f or E1 and UD-1 discoveries, 
the Company would only be eligible for recovery of 50 per cent of the cost with a 
cap of US$ 15 million as per the ‘Policy for testing requirement’. 
Thus, the Contractor’s non-compliance with PSC prov isions by not carrying out the 
prescribed DST has resulted in delayed monetization  of these discoveries and 
irrecoverable costs of ` 17.28 crore on MDT and ` 271.44 crore on fresh DST for D-1 
discovery with the future prospect of further irrec overable costs on DST for E-1 and  
UD-1 discoveries. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
54 
Management in its reply (August 2015) stated  that inconsistent stand of DGH had 
resulted in additional costs and avoidable delays b ut it on its part would endeavour to 
bring the field on production without much loss of time by dovetailing the proposed 
development scheme for other oil / gas fields in the block. 
Management’s contention is not acceptable as DGH in  its reply (December 2015) stated 
that they had been consistent in their stand that D ST is required to validate flow rates 
and as the Contractor failed to conduct it, DoC was  not reviewed. 
1.7.4.6  Compliance issues 
(I) Delays in submission and approval of the Work P rogramme& Budget (WP&B) 
PSC stipulated that the Contractor should submit An nual WP & B not later than 31 
st  
December of the preceding year for review of explor ation operations and approval of 
development and production operations. PSC also pro vides for submission of revised 
WP&B if the circumstances so justify, for either re view / approval of the MC. The “New 
Policy Framework” (November 2014) has allowed condo nation of delays upto three 
months in this regard. 
Audit observed that MC had not reviewed the WP&B pr ior to the PSC stipulated date 
(31 
st  December) in any year over the decade (2005-06 to 2014-15). Even considering the 
condonation period of three months, the WP & B was reviewed late by 2 months to 23 
months in six years (2005-06, 06-07, 08-09, 09-10, 12-13 and 14-15) and has not been 
reviewed yet for another three years (2010-11, 2011-12, 2013-14).  
In the years, 2010-11 and 2011-12, the budget appro val was not sought as the extended 
appraisal period had expired in August 2010 and the Contractors’ request for extension of 
appraisal period had been rejected by DGH (October 2010). However, the Contractor, 
without waiting for formal approval for extension, incurred an expenditure of ` 1,127.80 
crore during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12. The bud get proposal for the year 2013-14 
was also submitted late and its approval was still awaited (June 2015) though an 
expenditure of ` 2,503.90 crore was incurred in the year on appraisa l/exploratory drilling 
of six wells.  
The Contractor has claimed the entire expenditure o f 
` 3,631.7 crore for the years  
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2013-14 under Cost Recovery th ough such expenditure was not 
authorised. 
MC needs to expeditiously review this expenditure a nd regulate cost recovery 
accordingly. Management (August 2015) and DGH (Dece mber 2015) in their reply 
attributed the delays till 2012-13 to delays in getting Operating Committee approval from 
JV partners. Contractor also assured to make sincer e efforts to comply with PSC 
provisions in this regard. Their replies are not ac ceptable as approval of WP&B for the 
three years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2013-14 are still awaited (August 2015). 
(II) Delay in approval / adoption of Annual Audited  Accounts 
PSC stipulates that the Contractor should submit a copy of the audited accounts to GoI 
within 30 days of the receipt thereof and such audi ted accounts should be adopted by the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
55 
MC 1. Audit observed that though the Contractor had sub mitted the annual audited 
accounts of the 10 years from 2005-06 to 2014-15 wi thin 30 days of its receipt, their 
adoption in MC is pending for up to 9 years. 
Inordinate delay in adoption of accounts is against  the spirit of PSC. Hence Audit 
recommends timely approval and adoption of audited accounts for confirmation of 
transactions and for taking appropriate corrective measures. 
Management in its reply (August 2015) accepted the delays but attributed it to delay in 
receipt of Operating Committee approval from Joint Venture partners for appointment of 
Auditors. It also stated that these have since been  received and have been submitted to 
DGH in July 2013. Thereafter the audited accounts w ere once again submitted by the 
contractor to DGH in June 2015 for adoption which is in progress. 
Management has accepted that there had been delay o f 2 years to submit accounts even 
after obtaining approval of JV partners in July 2013. Moreover, the delay of 9 to 10 years 
in obtaining approval for appointment of auditors a nd adoption shows that neither the 
Operator (ONGC) as Convenor of Management Committee  Meeting nor the two 
Government nominees as Chairman/Deputy Chairman had  ensured compliance with PSC 
provisions in this regard.Such non–compliance had p erpetuated violation of PSC 
stipulated procurement procedure as brought out in succeeding paragraph. 
DGH in its reply (December 2015) also stated that a udited accounts for the year 2005-06 
was pending due to cost recovery issue pertaining t o wells D1 & A1 drilled during the 
financial year 2005-06. 
Reply is not acceptable as action required to be ta ken in respect of wells AI & D1 were 
taken by the Contractor in January 2006 & July 2007  respectively and DGH had 
recommended to Ministry to allow cost recovery of e xpenditure incurred on these wells 
in February 2008 itself. 
(III) Violation of PSC stipulated Procurement Proce dure 
PSC prescribed 
2 procedures for acquisition of goods and services. As per these 
provisions, the Contractor can procure goods and se rvices worth more than or equal to 
US $ 0.5 million on following due process of tender viz., to have a pre-qualifying criteria, 
to publish invitations for parties to pre-qualify, to select qualified parties as per pre-
qualification criteria and invite bids, and award c ontracts after due bid analysis and 
approval of Operating Committee. However, PSC also provided that the Contractor may, 
when the circumstances so justify, modify the above  laid down procedure with the 
approval of MC.  
                                                           
1  Article 6.6.(d) 
2  Appendix - F 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
56 
The Contractor had taken three Rigs - Discoverer Se ven Seas, DDKG-1 1 and GSF 
Explorer with Contract value of ` 2,953.27 crore, ` 3,914.39 crore and ` 899.49 crore 
respectively on Assignment/ Nomination basis citing  urgency of work commitment 
across various blocks of the Contractor. Though thi s was in deviation from PSC 
prescribed procurement procedure, Contractor utilized their services in the Block without 
obtaining approval of MC. 
Management in its reply (August 2015) stated that t he feasibility of separate procurement 
procedures for each ONGC operated NELP block, will not provide the scope of 
economic/cost advantage in presence of existing str ingent Material Management (MM) 
set procedures/ guidelines in line with Article 23. 2 of PSC and that the procurement 
policy of ONGC is being constantly reviewed and upg raded as per CVC guidelines. 
Management further added that ONGC does not have any JV in the KG-DWN-98/2 block 
and is currently (August 2014) holding 100 per cent  PI. 
Management reply is not acceptable as it had neither followed the procurement procedure 
it had agreed with the Government viz., PSC nor it could claim to have derived any cost 
advantage when it had awarded contracts on nominati on basis without calling for 
competitive bids. Moreover, PSC clearly stipulates 
2 that it can deviate from bidding 
process only in case of emergency and that too with  approval of MC. The contractor had 
taken the three rigs on nomination basis citing urg ency of work but utilized their services 
without obtaining approval of MC which was a clear deviation from the PSC prescribed 
procurement procedure. 
DGH in its reply (December 2015) also accepted that  no proposal has been received at 
DGH for MC approval. 
Conclusion 
The KG-DWN-98/2 block was awarded by the GoI under first round of NELP in 2000. 
The Company acquired ninety per cent  stake in 2005 and balance in 2012. The Company 
availed several extensions under various PSC provisions, policies of the Government, and 
concessions allowed, to explore and appraise its di scoveries at a cost of ` 8402.56 crore 
(March 2015). Till date (August 2015) Company has n otified total 11 discoveries in the 
block (10 in NDA and 1in SDA). The Company had subm itted (December 2013) DOC to 
develop 10 discoveries in 3 clusters (Clusters I an d II in NDA and Cluster III in SDA). 
However, the Management Committee reviewed (Septemb er 2014) the DOC for Cluster 
II alone and did not review Cluster I and III as th e recoverable reserves could not be 
estimated and production profile could not be gener ated in the absence of surface flow 
data/DST data for these discoveries. The Feasibilit y Development Plan for monetization 
of discoveries in Cluster II is yet to be approved by the DGH/MoPNG. The monetization 
of Cluster III (SDA) is not planned by the Company since there is no suitable technology 
                                                           
1  The irregular hiring of ultra deep water rig from  Reliance Industries Limited was commented vide 
Para 11.10 of Union Report (Commercial) 8 of 2012-1 3. ONGC deviated from standard tendering 
procedure and hired DDKG1 from RIL without calling for competitive bids for period of four years on 
untenable grounds and incurred an extra expenditure  of `` `` 9.36 crore due to deviation from standard 
norms and `` ``    29.32 crore due to frequent breakdowns of the rig  
2  Artcle 23.2 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
57 
available to develop the discoveries in such deepwa ter areas. The integrated development 
of discoveries of Cluster I and nomination block of  PML Godavari had also suffered a 
major setback in view of the expert confirmation re garding substantial migration of 
reserves from this area and their exploitation by R IL through its KG-DWN-98/3 block. 
Besides, the Company had considered a gas price of US$ 7 per mmbtu (with a payback 
period of 5.89 years) while considering the viabili ty of in December 2013.  Under the 
New Domestic Gas Pricing Guidelines (March 2015 and  September 2015), the gas price 
was fixed at US$  4.66 per mmbtu between April 2015  to September 2015  @ US$ 3.82 
per mmbtu between October 2015 to March 2016, which  would further adversely affect 
the financial viability of integrated development of Cluster 1 and Godavari PML area. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (September 2015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
1.8 Non achievement of objective of acquiring Coal Bed Methane blocks  
Land acquisition was critical for commencement of e xploration activities in Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) blocks acquired by Oil and Natura l Gas Corporation Limited 
(ONGC). There appeared to be lack of mechanism at p re bid stage between the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, the Ministry  of Coal and the State 
Governments to facilitate acquisition of land and s tatutory clearances for 
exploration activities in CBM blocks identified for  bidding. Besides, delayed action 
by ONGC for acquiring land after the blocks were aw arded to it and delay in 
completing the committed minimum work programme fur ther affected Exploration 
Phase of the blocks. As a result, ONGC had to seek  repeated extensions, due to 
which not only the Company had to pay liquidated da mages of `` ``    6.81 crore to the 
Government of India, but Development Phase of five years of each of the four blocks 
in hand was also reduced drastically. Failure to ob tain Mining Leases and 
Environmental Clearances from the respective agenci es in time due to delayed 
action on the part of ONGC led to a situation where  commencement of development 
operations to put any of the blocks into production  in near future appeared 
unlikely. This rendered the objective of acquiring CBM blocks unachievable and an 
aggregate expenditure of `` ``    1,217.86 crore from February 2003 to March 2015 
incurred in exploration of CBM blocks unfruitful as of August 2015.  
1.8.1 Introduction 
Coal Bed Methane (CBM), is natural gas (methane) ab sorbed in coal and lignite seams 
and is an eco-friendly non-conventional source of e nergy. Coal is both the source and 
reservoir rock for CBM. CBM is pipeline-quality gas  requiring no or minimal processing 
prior to sale. CBM gas is similar to other sources of natural gas and can be sold into any 
market for uses similar to conventional natural gas . It is considered to be more 
environmentally friendly than oil, coal or even con ventional natural gas being a “sweet 
gas” as it generally does not contain hydrogen sulphide. 
1.8.1.1 CBM exploration in India  
India, having the third largest proven coal reserve s and being the fourth largest coal 
producer in the world, holds significant prospects for commercial recovery of CBM. 
CBM blocks are carved out by the Directorate Genera l of Hydrocarbons (DGH) in close 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
58 
interaction with the Ministry of Coal and Central M ine Planning and Design Institute, 
Ranchi under the CBM policy formulated by the Government of India (GoI) in July 1997. 
For exploration and production of CBM in the countr y, technically and financially 
competent Foreign and Indian companies are invited through International Competitive 
Bidding (ICB) to bid either singly or in associatio n with other companies for allotment of 
CBM blocks. 
The winning bid is selected based on technical capa bility, financial strength, work 
programme and fiscal package, including production linked payments to GoI. Each of 
these four criteria has a fixed weightage and a CBM  block is awarded to the bidder 
having highest score. Four rounds of bidding were h eld between 2001 and 2009.The 
weightages given for the individual criteria were as under: 
Table 1  
Bidding Criteria in CBM rounds I to IV 
Bidding Criteria  Weightage on a scale of 100 points  
CBM I CBM II CBM III CBM IV 
Technical capability  20 20 20 30 
Financial  strength  10 10 -- -- 
Work programme  50 50 45 35 
Fiscal Package  20 20 35 35 
Source: Notices Inviting Offers of CBM blocks – Ist to IVth round 
The successful bidder enters into a contract with G oI which, inter alia, provides that 
CBM resources in India should be assessed and explo ited in commercial quantities with 
utmost expedition in accordance with modern industr y practices. The contract envisages 
essentially the following activities: 
 
• Exploration Operations:  These are conducted in the contract area in search  
of commercially exploitable CBM accumulation and in clude seismic surveys 
and drilling of pilot wells for assessment of CBM p otential. Exploration 
operations are carried out in two 1 Phases, Phase-I and Phase-II. The total 
duration of the two Exploration Phases is 6 to 7 years. 
• Development Operations: Development operations commence after 
completion of the exploration operations. The activ ities in this Phase are as 
per the approved development plan and include drill ing of development wells, 
laying of gathering lines, tankage, other producing  and injection facilities 
required to produce, process and transport CBM into  main gas storage or gas 
                                                           
1  Phase-I (two to three years from the effective da te) and Phase -II (4 years after Phase-I). Effectiv e 
date means date of grant of Petroleum Exploration L icense (PEL) and is generally taken as the date 
of commencement of activities in the block. 
Exploration  Development Production 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
59 
processing facilities. The Development Phase has a duration of 5 years 
immediately following exploration operations.  
• Production Operations:  The production operations constitute final Phase o f 
CBM exploitation. The Production Phase has a duration of 22 to 25 years.  
1.8.1.2  Award of CBM Blocks  
DGH carved out several prospective CBM blocks in di fferent coalfields of the country. 
The first round of CBM bidding took place in May 20 01. In all, four rounds of CBM 
bidding were held by GoI from 2001 to 2009 in which  36 CBM blocks were offered. 
During all the four rounds, 30 blocks were awarded to both public and private sector 
companies, as indicated in Table 2: 
Table 2  
Blocks awarded in four rounds to various companies 
ONG 
C 
Reliance 
Industries 
Limited 
(RIL)  
Essar Oil 
Limited 
(Essar) 
Geopetrol 
International 
Inc 
Arrow Dart Coal 
gas 
Great 
Eastern 
Energy 
Corporation 
Limited 
(GEECL)  
BP 
Exploration 
Alpha 
Limited  
7 5 5 4 3 2 2 1 1 
ONGC was successful to acquire 7 blocks in 1 st  and 2 nd  bidding rounds held in 2001 and 
2003. In addition, GoI also awarded one block to GE ECL and two blocks to ONGC on 
nomination basis in 2001 and 2003, respectively.  
1.8.1.3 Status of CBM blocks awarded by the Government 
(I)  Of the 33 blocks awarded, 16 had since been relinq uished or were under 
relinquishment (August 2015) owing to poor prospect s. The balance 17 blocks were 
under various stages of execution, the details of which are given in the Table 3 below.  
Table 3  
Details of blocks in various stages of execution 
Particulars ONGC 
Private parties 
Total RIL Essar GEECL Coal 
gas 
Geo Dart 
Blocks in Exploration Phase 0 0 4 1 2 1 1 9 1
7 Blocks in Development 
Phase 
#4 2 1 1 0 0 0 8 
Production of CBM 
(mmscm)  till March 2015 
^13.89 0 156.80 525.34 0 0 0 682.14 
Royalty on the above 
production (`` ``    in crore) paid 
to State Governments 
^1.21 0 17.63 46.36 0 0 0 63.99 
Production linked Payment 
(`` ``    in crore) to GOI based 
on above production 
^0.30 0 0 11.59 0 0 0 11.59 
# In Jharkand: Three blocks viz. Bokaro, North Karan pura and Jharia). In West Bengal: One block viz. Rani ganj 
North. 
^Relates to incidental production from Jharia block and is not included in totals.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
60 
(II)  It may be seen from the above Table that whereas pr ivate parties (Essar and 
GEECL) derived  production of 682.14 million metric standard cubic metres (mmscm) of 
CBM till March 2015 from their two blocks operated by them, paid royalty of ` 63.99 
crores to the State Governments and contributed a p roduction linked payment of ` 11.59 
crores to GoI, ONGC had not yet (August 2015) comme nced development operations in 
four blocks operated by it and, hence, did not cont ribute any revenue to any State 
Government or GOI, except that relating to incidental production. 
(III)  The details of CBM blocks acquired and surrendered  by ONGC till 31.3.2015 are 
given below in Table 4. ONGC relinquished five bloc ks after incurring an expenditure of 
` 147.68 crores. 
Table 4  
Blocks relinquished by ONGC 
Round 
No. of 
Blocks 
Name of blocks 
acquired 
Effective 
date 
Date of 
surrender, 
if 
surrendered 
Expenditure 
(`` `` in crore) 
on 
surrendered 
blocks 
Remaining 
number 
 
of blocks 
I 
 
2 
Bokaro 21.02.2003 NA 
NA 2 
North Karanpura 21.02.2003 NA 
II 5 
Barmer-Sanchor 10.09.2004 09.03.2008 32.02 
0 
Satpura 23.02.2005 20.07.2007 3.41 
Wardha 13.04.2005 12.04.2007 2.80 
South Karanpura 12.05.2006 05.07.2011 91.18 
North Karanpura 
West 
12.05.2006 23.06.2011 18.27 
Nomination 1 Jharia 28.08.2003 NA NA 1 
1 Raniganj 09.06.2004 NA NA 1 
Total  9  147.68 4 
NA ~ Not Applicable. 
As on March 2015, ONGC had spent ` 1,070.18 crores on the four blocks operated by it 
and ` 147.68 crore on the five blocks surrendered subsequ ent to acquiring the same. The 
specific reasons for unsatisfactory performance of ONGC in CBM blocks are discussed 
below. 
1.8.2 Audit Findings 
CBM activities carried out by ONGC since inception (2003–15) in all nine blocks were 
examined in Audit with a focus on the four active b locks as shown in Table 4 above. 
Audit findings are summarised in the succeeding paragraphs: 
1.8.2.1  Delays in completion of exploration activities  
ONGC could not complete exploration activities in C BM blocks within the time allotted 
in the contract. As against the contractual time fr ame of six to seven years, ONGC took 
more than seven to eight years for completion of ex ploration activities. The delay in 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
61 
Exploration Phase was loaded on to the Development Phase and would eventually 
shorten the time allowed for production of CBM. Del ays in completing exploration were 
on account of delays in land acquisition, non-avail ability of ready for drilling sites, non-
availability of logistics etc. as discussed in succeeding paragraphs:  
(I)     Delays in land acquisition 
After award of a CBM block, the Contractor (viz. ON GC) applies for Petroleum 
Exploration Licence (PEL) to the State Government c oncerned for the contract area. On 
receipt of PEL, ONGC collects data by drilling core  holes in the contract area of each 
block to facilitate identification of potential loc ations for drilling of wells. Once the 
locations are firmed up for drilling exploration/pilot wells 1, it is ONGC’s responsibility to 
apply for the land to the concerned district author ities, following which the district 
authorities acquire the land and hand it over to ON GC. The responsibility of ONGC in 
land acquisition involves, staking 2 of released locations and joint inspection, collection of 
ownership documents and demarcation and drawing of the drilling site. Following this, 
the application for land acquisition is submitted t o the district authorities. Thus, the 
responsibility of land acquisition rests partly wit h ONGC and partly with the district 
authorities of the State Government concerned. 
Audit observed that both ONGC and district authorit ies of the State Government 
concerned took inordinately long in completing the land acquisition process              
(Annexure- XV).  
The delay on the part of the concerned State Govern ments appeared to stem from lack of 
a mechanism for active coordination, at pre bid sta ge and after allotment of blocks, and 
lack of coordination  among MoPNG, the Ministry of Coal (MoC) and the concerned 
State Governments which was noticed in (i) identify ing the actual geographical stretch of 
the CBM blocks proposed to be offered to the bidder s, (ii) assessing the problems, if any, 
in facilitating availability of land to the success ful bidders and (iii) taking steps in 
advance to mitigate the issues that may be faced by  the successful bidders in 
commencing operations due to non-acquisition of lan d and other statutory clearances 
such as Environmental Clearance (EC), Mining Lease (ML) etc. so that such issues 
causing avoidable delay could be addressed in time.  Subsequent to allotment of blocks, 
delays in taking timely action by ONGC for acquisit ion of land and for EC and ML 
further aggravated the position.  
While the delays on the part of the State Governmen tswere beyond the control of ONGC, 
submission of application for land acquisition was entirely within its control and the 
delays could have been avoided. 
Of the 23 locations 
3 (Annexure-XV ) spread over four blocks in hand with ONGC (refer 
Table 4) for which details were furnished to audit,  it was noticed that in 12 cases (52 per 
cent ), ONGC took 145-600 days in submitting application s to the district authorities for 
land acquisition after the locations had been ident ified. The delay on the part of ONGC 
                                                           
1  Pilot well is drilled for determining the potenti al CBM accumulations in the Contract Area. 
2  Staking means ground checking of geological posit ion of the released location for drilling of well  
whereas released location signify a surface point w ithin PEL/ML boundary of the CBM block where a 
CBM well is proposed to be drilled and had been agreed upon by the Competent Authority. 
3  Locations are the specific points in the blocks w here wells are drilled 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
62 
contributed to the overall delay in land acquisition, loss of time scheduled for Exploration 
Phase and entering into the time scheduled for deve lopment of the four blocks as 
illustrated: 
• Bokaro block: For twelve pilot wells to be drilled in Exploration  Phase-II during 
the four year period (21February 2005 to 20 Februar y 2009), application for land 
acquisition was made as late as September-December 2006, i.e . after more than a 
year when Phase II of exploration was due for comme ncement. The actual land 
acquisition took place during May 2007 to August 20 10. Consequently, actual 
drilling of wells could take place in June/July 200 9 after obtaining extension of 
time from GoI against scheduled completion by February 2009. 
• North Karanpura:  Land acquisition for five pilot wells to be drille d during 
Exploration Phase-II (21August 2005 to 20 August 2009) started between January 
2008-July 2008 after more than two years (over 28 m onths) when Phase II of 
exploration was due for commencement. The actual la nd acquisition took place in 
July 2009. As a result, wells could be drilled only  during March 2010 to January 
2011 against their scheduled completion by August 2009. 
• Raniganj: Land acquisition for two pilot wells during Explora tion Phase-II (09 
June 2007 to 08 June 2011) started late in August 2 009 and June 2010 
respectively, more than two years after commencemen t of Phase II. The land was 
actually acquired only in November 2010 and May 201 1 respectively. Drilling of 
wells took place from April 2011 to April 2012 agai nst scheduled completion by 
June 2011.  
• Jharia: Land acquisition for two exploratory well in Explor ation Phase-I (28 
August 2003 to 27 August 2006) started in June 2005  and August 2005 nearly 
two years after commencement of Phase-I. Land was a ctually acquired in March 
2006 and June 2006, respectively. The wells were ac tually drilled between July 
2006 to May 2007 after the scheduled completion of Phase-I.  
ONGC stated (January 2015) that: 
• Land acquisition was always one of the primary caus es of delay as most of the 
areas fall in ‘Gair mazrua’ 
1 or Tribal land marked by poor 
availability/maintenance of revenue records.  
• Since land acquisition involved the local authoriti es and populace, the process of 
acquiring land and the pace of such acquisition was  hardly in the control of the 
ONGC.  
• Overlapping issues in CBM acreages (coal mining ope rations by different 
companies in CBM Blocks on being awarded coal minin g license by Ministry of 
Coal) further aggravated the land acquisition scenario. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following:  
• The audit observation focuses on the delays in land  acquisition on the part of 
ONGC which could have been avoided with efficient p lanning and coordination 
among its various sections i.e. Land Acquisition Se ction (LAQ), Civil Section, 
                                                           
1  Gair mazrua: Uncultivated waste land 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
63 
Drilling Section etc . Audit noticed that a Task Force constituted (June  2010)  by 
ONGC for expediting development and production of CBM blocks had, inter alia,  
observed (June 2010) that land acquisition manpower  was grossly inadequate in 
terms of numbers, skill and constitution and recommended association of full time 
legal officers and outside legal experts besides de dicated finance discipline 
officer. These issues were deliberated in the meeti ng (July 2010) of Executive 
Committee though no evidence of affirmative action taken in this regard was 
available in records reviewed in audit. In fact, th e manpower posted in LAQ 
section reduced from eleven in 2008-09 to five in 2014-15. 
• Audit recognizes the issue of overlapping. However,  on the basis of information 
made available to Audit by ONGC, it was seen this i ssue was not as significant as 
pointed out by the Company.  In Bokaro, North Karan pura and Raniganj blocks, 
overlap affected only one location each.  The probl em was more pronounced in 
Jharia block where six locations had been affected by overlap as shown in the 
following Table 5: 
Table 5  
Status of overlapping in CBM blocks 
Name of 
block 
Total Area 
 
(sq. Km)  
Present 
area  
Overlapped Area 
(sq. Km)  
Names of  locations falling in 
Overlapped area 
Bokaro 95.00  75.00  3.50  BKAL 
North 
Karanpura 
340.00 
 271.50  30.00  NKAB 
Jharia 84.55  65.10  08.00  JH1, 1A, 2, 3, 14, 15 
Raniganj 350.00  311.79  28.95  RNAA 
However, GoI allowed dispensation of 14 months (28 February 2007 to 27 April 2008) to 
ONGC for delay on account of overlapping issues in Jharia block.  
(II) Failure to handover sites for drilling to a co ntractor 1entailing a claim of `` ``    312 
crore  
ONGC awarded (May 2006) an integrated turnkey contr act (ITC) for drilling 36 wells 
(14 development wells in central Parbatpur area of Jharia block and 22 pilot wells: 3 
horizontal and 19 vertical in Bokaro, North Karanpu ra and Jharia block) by 18 December 
2008. As per the contract, ONGC was to make availab le land for drill sites (locations) 
and an approach road to the contractor, at least th ree months before start of drilling 
activities. In case of ONGC failing to provide the drill sites and approach road beyond 
this period, ONGC would be required to pay non-oper ating day rate (NODR) charges at 
the rate of USD 50000 and ` 50,000 for horizontal wells and USD 35,000 and ` 35,000 
for vertical wells to the contractor. The contracto r drilled 3 horizontal and 16 vertical 
wells. 
Audit noticed that though the work was awarded to t he contractor in May 2006, no ready 
locations were available with ONGC for handing over  to the contractor at that time.  The 
first location was handed over to the Contractor in  February 2007 viz. nine months after 
award of contract. Over the period 2007 to 2012, ON GC could hand over 19 locations 
                                                           
1  ‘contractor’ ~ A contractor appointed by ONGC, wh ereas ‘Contractor’ refers to a party/parties (in th e 
present case ONGC) with whom GOI has signed the CBM contract.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
64 
(out of 36 contracted) to the contractor which were  drilled. The contractor claimed 
standby charges (NODR) of ` 312 crore on account of non-availability of contrac t site. 
An Outside Expert Committee (OEC) was constituted ( March 2014) for foreclosure of 
contract (December 2011).  
ONGC stated (January 2015) that with trouble-free acquisition of land in the initial stages 
of CBM project Bokaro, it was envisaged that identi fied/released locations would be 
acquired in time to be handed over to ITC contracto r on regular basis. However, 
unexpected changes completely jeopardized the envis aged plans. ONGC stated 
(December 2015) that despite several communications  and persuasions, the contractor 
failed to comply with pre-conditions for OEC to sta rt its functioning and consequently, 
proposal for closure of OEC was initiated (November  2015) and final decision was 
awaited (December 2015).  
The reply is not acceptable as ONGC had entered int o an ITC contract without having 
any location ready for handing over to the contract or. Subsequently, the Company failed 
to ensure timely acquisition of land for the propos ed locations which led to contractor 
invoking NODR clause. Considering that the contract  had provided a NODR clause in 
case of delay in handing over sites by ONGC,  adequate seriousness on the part of ONGC 
for expediting the land acquisition process was nee ded as has been commented upon at 
para  2.1.1 above. 
(III) Delay and avoidable expenditure of 
`` ``    21.04 crore due to idling of rig even after 
land has been acquired 
Land for drilling locations in four blocks (Bokaro, North Karanpura, Jharia and Raniganj) 
under CBM Project Bokaro had been acquired between April 2004 and May 2011. 
ONGC deployed a departmental rig (M-750-I) to drill  wells on the selected locations in 
the four blocks from 5 January 2005 to 19 February 2014 i.e. 2770 days and incurred an 
expenditure of ` 134.59 crore thereon. During this period, the rig r emained idle for 552 
days, of which 428 days were attributable to non-av ailability of ready for drilling 
locations due to non-completion of civil works and 124 days to non-availability of 
logistics. The idling time constituted approximatel y 24 per cent  of total period for which 
the rig was deployed and cost the Company ` 21.04 crore (Annexure-XVI).  
ONGC stated (January 2015) that hurdles like limite d availability of contractors, lack of 
their professional competence,  shortage of quality  suppliers for civil materials and non-
cooperation/hostilities between contractor and thei r suppliers which affected efficient, 
seamless functioning and execution of operations we re experienced. The Company 
assured that with the past experience, every effort  would be made in future to ensure 
timely completion of civil works and arrangement of transportation/logistics. 
While Audit takes note of the assurance given by ON GC, the fact remains that given the 
prohibitive cost of departmental rig, being  in the  range of ` 2.7 lakh to ` 6.6 lakh per 
day during the above mentioned period, and the fact  that ONGC had been working in 
similar environments from a very long time, it ough t to have made efforts and better co-
ordination and management among its various functio nal sections viz.  drilling section, 
civil section, logistics etc. so that drilling oper ations could be carried out as planned 
without time and cost overruns. Further, failure of  the Company in selecting 
professionally competent contractors/suppliers for civil works/material etc. shows the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
65 
need for improvement in the bidding/tendering proce ss and better contract management 
in ONGC in so far it relates to exploration of CBM blocks.  
(IV) Delays in exploration leading to payment of li quidated damages 
The Exploration Phase of four blocks viz . Bokaro, North Karanpura, Jharia and Raniganj 
was scheduled to be completed between February 2009 and June 2011.  ONGC, however, 
could not complete the exploration within the sched uled period on account of delayed 
land acquisition (refer paragraph 2.1.1), non-availability of ready locations due to delayed 
civil works and logistical problems etc. (refer paragraph No.2.1.3). Consequently, ONGC 
sought repeated extensions for completing the commi tted Minimum Work Programme 
(MWP) in these blocks and had to pay ` 6.81 crore as liquidated damages to GoI for the 
delays. As a result, the exploration of these four blocks could be completed only between 
January 2011 and December 2012 with delays ranging from 368 to 549 days ( Annexure-
XVII) which in turn reduced the time available for deve lopment activities in the blocks 
for production. 
ONGC stated (January 2015) that CBM blocks were in such areas where infrastructure 
for Oil and Gas industry did not exist. Consequentl y, availability and their mobilization 
of resources was a major challenge. Land acquisition was another major stumbling block. 
ONGC was, therefore, forced to seek extensions whic h were granted by GoI after 
examining their merit.  
The reply needs to be viewed against the following: 
(i)  GoI granted extensions of time to ONGC subject to p ayment of liquidated 
damages by the latter. This indicated that the dela ys were not considered 
excusable by GoI. 
(ii)  Further, ONGC was obligated by CBM contractsto ensu re timely and effective 
management of resources and execution of committed activities. However, it 
could not ensure timely acquisition of land which c ould have been managed by 
better coordination with GoI and the State Governme nt agencies. Even after 
availability of land, there were delays on the part  of ONGC in timely completion 
of civil works, availability of logistics and adequ ate manpower, as discussed 
above and these factors were controllable while carrying out exploration activities 
in CBM blocks. 
1.8.2.2 Factors leading to constricted Development Phase with no activity  
(I) Excess time consumed in Exploration Phases 
Article 10 of CBM contract provided that Development Phase would commence, after the 
end of Exploration Phase-II, for five consecutive y ears during which the Contractor 
would carry out development operations in accordance with the development plan. GOI’s 
policy (December 2007) for extension of Exploration  Phases provided that where MWP 
of the relevant Phase has not been completed within  the stipulated period of that Phase 
and extension is sought to complete MWP (excluding excusable delay), the period of 
extension would be set off from next Phase.  
CBM contract provided that if the Contractor was un able to fulfil the development 
operations within the Development Phase, GoI may, a t the request of Contractor, 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
66 
consider extension of Development Phase, not exceed ing one year, to complete the 
development operations and the period so extended w ould be deducted from the 
Production Phase. 
Audit observed that in view of the additional time consumed in Exploration Phase, the 
Development Phase of each of the four blocks had be en constricted significantly to less 
than five years as shown in Annexure-XVII .  
In case of Bokaro block, the Development Phase was over on 27 July 2014. The window 
of seeking one year extension had also expired on 2 7 July 2015. Thus, the Development 
Phase elapsed with no development activities having  been undertaken. Similarly, in case 
of North Karanpura block, no development activities  had been undertaken. Though the 
Development Phase expired on 26 March 2015, Audit o bserved that as of July 2015 
ONGC had not sought one year extension. In case of other two blocks, viz. Raniganj and 
Jharia, though the Development Phase would expire i n June 2016 and October 2016, 
ONGC had not undertaken any development activities in these blocks too from 
commencement of their Development Phases (December 2012 and October 2012, 
respectively) till August 2015.  
ONGC did not respond specifically to the issue of delayed Development Phase. 
(II) Delay in seeking Mining Lease  
Article 11.1 of CBM contract provides that after co mpletion of Exploration Phase-II and 
on submission of a development plan pursuant to Art icle 5.6(d) of the contract, the 
Contractor would submit an application to the State  Government for lease in respect of 
the then producing and producible areas held by the Contractor in the contract area.  
Audit observed that ONGC submitted applications for  grant of Mining Lease (ML) in 
respect of four CBM blocks, mentioned above, about 7 to 29 months after completion of 
Exploration Phase-II as shown in Annexure-XVIII . ML had not been received for two 
blocks (Bokaro and Raniganj) till August 2015 where as the same for the remaining two 
blocks (North Karanpura and Jharia) had been received in July 2015.  
ONGC stated (January 2015) that applications for ML  were submitted to the respective 
State Governments in July 2013 itself after receipt  of communication from DGH 
regarding effective date of approval of Field Devel opment Plan (FDP). However, the 
process got held up (in case of Bokaro, North Karan pura and Jharia blocks) in view of 
elections held in Jharkhand State. The same was now being pursued by the project.  
Reply of ONGC is not acceptable as ML applications ought to have been submitted 
immediately after completion of Exploration Phase II and on submission of Development 
Plans in terms of Article 11.1 of CBM contract. The  Exploration Phases of four blocks 
completed between January 2011 and December 2012. H owever, the applications for ML 
were made in July 2013. The Company, thus, lost mor e than seven months to two years, 
squeezing further the already shortened time for development. 
(III)  Delay in commencement of Environmental Impac t Assessment  
Article 14.5(b) of CBM contract required, inter alia , the Contractor to carry out 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) studies to es tablish the likely effects on the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
67 
environment, human beings and local communities, fl ora and fauna in the contract area 
and adjoining areas as a consequence of CBM operati ons and submit methods and 
measures for minimizing environmental damage and ca rrying out site restoration 
activities. Article 14.5.2 provided that EIA studie s should be completed before 
commencement of development operations and shall be  submitted by the Contractor as 
part of the development plan, and specific approval  of the Government obtained before 
commencement of development operations. It also provided that such approval would not 
be unreasonably withheld.  
Audit noted that ONGC did not submit EIA studies al ong with development plans of the 
four blocks. In fact, ONGC delayed engagement of ag encies for conducting EIA studies 
even after the Terms of Reference (TOR) for the sam e had been made available to the 
Company by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF). TOR had been received 
between November 2011 and March 2014 while the enga gement of agencies for 
conducting the studies was done by ONGC only betwee n November 2013 and December 
2014. There was, thus, a time lag of more than four months to two years (Annexure-XIX ) 
which led to delay in Environmental Clearance (EC) for the Development Phase. Till 
August 2015, ONGC had received EC for only one bloc k (North Karanpura), while the 
same for the remaining three blocks was awaited.  
ONGC stated (January 2015) that it was not feasible  to conduct the EIA studies without 
approval of FDP. In case, EIA report was to be subm itted along with FDP, EIA process 
needed to be initiated at least one and half years ahead, i.e . at a time when the potential of 
the block was still under assessment and FDP area w as yet to be defined. It would not be 
a prudent thing to do, especially in light of the f act that EIA studies had substantial 
financial implication of around 
` 30 to 40 lakh each.  
The reply may be viewed against the following:  
• The contract required two EIA studies to be underta ken; one, before 
commencement of operations during Exploration Phase  and the second before 
commencement of Development Phase. Therefore, befor e commencement of the 
development operations, ONGC was required to comple te and submit the EIA 
studies as part of the Development Plan as per Article 14.5.2 of CBM contract.  
• After receipt of the proposal for EIA studies from the block-manager office of 
ONGC,  identification and engagement of agencies fo r EIA studies took an 
unduly long time with the consequence that EC was s till awaited (August 2015) 
for three  blocks viz. Bokaro, Jharia and Raniganj which would delay 
commencement of development operations.  
Conclusion 
ONGC acquired seven CBM blocks in the first two rou nds of bidding held in 2001 and 
2003. In 2003, GoI had also allotted it two blocks on nomination basis. Between April 
2007 to July 2011, ONGC relinquished all the five C BM blocks, acquired by it in the 
second bidding round, on the ground of poor prospec ts and after having incurred an 
expenditure of 
` 147.68 crore. With the remaining two blocks acquir ed through bidding 
and two nomination blocks, ONGC was operating four CBM blocks as on August 2015. 
Lack of mechanism among MoPNG, MoC and the state go vernments agencies to 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
68 
facilitate acquisition of land and statutory cleara nces for timely commencement of 
exploration activities in the blocks awarded to the  successful bidders, and delay in 
requisite action on the part of ONGC subsequent to allotment of blocks led to delayed 
acquisition of land. Because of this factor coupled  with ONGC’s failure in completing 
the committed MWP in the remaining blocks, Explorat ion Phase of these blocks was 
affected badly and ONGC had to seek repeated extens ions of time from GoI to complete 
MWP, albeit after paying liquidated damages in some  cases. Repeated extension had the 
effect of squeezing the Development Phase of five years drastically. At the end of August 
2015, the remaining period of Development Phase had  already expired in case of two 
blocks. For the remaining two blocks, the time left  was only 9 months (Raniganj block) 
and 14 months (Jharia block). Aggravating the position, ONGC failed to apply and obtain 
Mining Leases (ML) and Environmental Clearances (EC ) from the respective agencies in 
time with the result that ML and EC which are pre-r equisite for commencement of 
development operations, had not been received. The only block (North Karanpura) where 
ML and EC had been received, the scheduled Developm ent Phase had expired in March 
2015. However, ONGC had not made any application to  GoI to obtain the permissible 
extension of one year to carry out development oper ations in that block too. The 
Company had incurred an expenditure of ` 1,070.18 crore in the four blocks in hand. In 
such a scenario, with no development activities yet  (August 2015) having been 
commenced in any of the four blocks, it seems unlik ely that ONGC would be able to put 
these blocks into production in the near future. Th us, the objective of acquiring CBM 
blocks and incurring an aggregate expenditure of ` 1,217.86 crore in exploration thereof 
remained unachieved. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry of Petroleu m and Natural Gas in February 2015 
and a reminder was issued on 11 December 2015 to se ek the views of the Ministry, reply 
was awaited (March 2016).  
1.9 Loss of returns to ONGC due to adoption of fina ncing mechanism to maintain 
the status of ONGC Petro additions Limited (OPaL) a s a non public sector 
undertaking 
ONGC made advances against equity to OPaL during Ap ril 2007 to May 2013. 
OPaL delayed the conversion of the advances into eq uity shares. OPaL also offered 
rights issue (March 2015) to ONGC. However, subsequ ently it did not issue the 
shares with the intention of avoiding the status of  the Company as CPSU. ONGC 
again paid (June 2015) money towards instalment aga inst convertible warrants 
which is yet to be issued. Thus, ONGC made availabl e interest free funds to OPaL 
without any commensurate benefit. This resulted in loss of interest of `` `` 408.15 crore 
to ONGC. The financing mechanism employed by ONGC h ad the sole intent of 
retaining the character of OPaL as a non PSU entity. 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) appr oved (August 2006) 
implementation of a petrochemicals complex through Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
route with ONGC’s investment in the SPV limited to 26 per cent . Accordingly, ONGC 
Petro additions Limited (OPaL), a Joint Venture Com pany (JVC) was incorporated 
(November 2006) with 26 per cent stake of ONGC and five per cent  stake of Gujarat 
State Petroleum Corporation (GSPC). OPaL was to be a private company, with balance 
equity expected to be contributed by strategic part ners and Financial Institutions. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
69 
Subsequently (May 2009), GAIL (India) Limited (GAIL ) agreed to invest in OPaL (19 
per cent  equity stake). Thus, the public entities would hav e 50 per cent  share in OPaL 
with the balance 50 per cent to be contributed by private partners. Thus, OPaL w ould 
continue to retain its private/ non-PSU character. 
The ONGC Board had approved (February 2008) ONGC’s equity contribution as 
` 970 
crore (considering a project cost of ` 12,440 crore at a debt equity ratio of 2.33:1 with  
equity contribution of ONGC at 26 per cent ). ONGC, however, made available much 
higher quantum of funds to OPaL through a financing  mechanism designed to maintain 
OPaL’s non CPSU character, as discussed below: 
(a)  During the period from April 2007 to March 2011, ON GC contributed 
` 970.29 
crore as advances against equity to OPaL. The entir e amount remained 
categorized as ‘application money pending allotment ’ or as ‘advances against 
equity’ by OPaL. Due to amendment of Unlisted Publi c Companies (Preferential 
allotment) Rules 2003 (in December 2011) stipulatin g mandatory allotment of 
shares within 60 days of receipt of application mon ey, OPaL was forced to issue 
(September 2012) equity shares against the advances . OPaL issued equity shares 
for ` 637.43 crore to ONGC, for ` 634.44 crore to GAIL and for ` 29 crore to 
GSPC. With issue of equity shares, OPaL became a de emed Government 
Company under the Companies Act, 1956. The delay in  allotment allowed OPaL 
to utilize these funds of public sector entities (O NGC, GAIL, GSPC) without any 
cost during the period April 2007 to September 2012 , while retaining its status as 
a private company. 
(b)  While equity shares worth ` 637.43 crore had been issued to ONGC in September 
2012, OPaL had retained the balance ` 332.86 crore ( ` 970.29 crore – ` 637.43 
crore) as advances against equity. In addition, ONG C contributed ` 27.64 crore 
on 15 May 2013 to OPaL, also towards advance agains t equity. The equity shares 
for total ` 360.50 crore was allotted by OPaL only on 16 May 20 13, i.e. after 775 
to 1168 days (two to three years) from date of rece ipt of ` 332.86 crore. GAIL 
was also issued additional equity shares in May 201 3 against funds made 
available by them. With allotment of shares in May 2013, the capital structure of 
OPaL was ONGC: 49.36 per cent , GAIL: 49.21 per cent and GSPC: 1.43 per 
cent. OpaL continued to be a deemed Government Company un der Companies 
Act, 2013. The delay in allotment of equity shares by OPaL led to continued use 
of funds of Government companies without any cost for prolonged periods. 
(c)  Subsequently, ONGC continued to finance OPaL by emp loying different 
financing mechanisms to ensure that OPaL does not b ecome a public sector 
entity, as discussed below:  
(i)  Just two days after the issue of last tranche of eq uity shares, OPaL offered 
(18 May 2013) a rights issue to its equity sharehol ders. ONGC subscribed to 
the rights issue for 
` 670.92 crore on 21 May 2013. The other stakeholder s 
(namely GAIL and GSPC) did not subscribe to the rig hts issue. OPaL did not 
issue the shares to ONGC. Had the shares been issue d, OPaL would have 
become a subsidiary of ONGC and a public sector ent erprise bound by the 
prudent Government guidelines for PSUs. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
70 
(ii)  With implementation of Companies Act 2013, the fund s received by OPaL 
against rights shares qualified as ‘deposit’ accept ed before the 
commencement of the Companies Act 2013 and OPaL was  statutorily 
mandated to make requisite filings in terms of the said provision or repay the 
deposits to ONGC by 31 March 2015. OPaL (in its Fin ancial Management 
Committee (FMC) meeting held in March 2015), decide d, that it is desirable 
that the non-PSU structure and character of OPaL be  maintained. To comply 
with the statutory provisions of Companies Act 2013 , OPaL refunded the 
funds received against rights issue ( ` 670.92 crore) to ONGC on 30 March 
2015.  Thus, the amount remained locked up with OPa L for a year and ten 
months, benefitting OPaL through interest free funds.  
(iii)  A day after receiving the refund (31 March 2015) of  ` 670.92 crore from 
OPaL against non-issue of rights shares, ONGC paid ` 750.55 crore as 
application money for a new rights share. The Board  of OPaL noted (May 
2015) that ONGC was the only shareholder that had p articipated in the rights 
issue and that allotment of shares against the said  application money would 
change the nature of the Company (OPaL). It was the refore decided to refund 
the amount to ONGC. However, OPaL kept the funds fo r the maximum 
period of 75 days, allowed under the Companies Act,  2013 before refund 
(Acceptance of Deposit Rules, 2014 1). 
A fortnight after receiving the refund of ` 750.55 crore, a call notice was received for 
subscription to share warrants from OPaL. Though th e options of issuance of convertible 
debt instruments and subordinated loans were also c onsidered by OPaL, it could not 
proceed due to restrictions placed by the Companies  Act 2013; share warrants were 
neither defined in the Act nor the procedure for is sue defined thereon. ONGC subscribed 
(30 June 2015) an amount of ` 961 crore (First instalment of ` 5 per warrant) and 
` 480.50 crore (second instalment of ` 2.50 per warrant during November 2015) for 
warrants against issue of equity shares. The warran ts were convertible to equity shares 
within a period of 12 months from the date of issue. The warrant exercise period has been 
extended (October 2015) from 12 months to 18 months . The amount paid by ONGC 
against the warrants also amount to interest free f unds extended to OPaL for 18 months 
period.  
 
If on completion of eighteen months, equity shares are issued against these warrants, 
OPaL would be a subsidiary of ONGC and a public sec tor undertaking. However, ONGC 
has the option to have the warrants converted to sh are. In the event of non-exercise of 
warrant conversion by ONGC, warrant subscription pr ice already paid would stand 
forfeited.  
 
The financing mechanism employed by ONGC, thus, had  the sole intent of retaining the 
character of OPaL as a non PSU entity. Such funding  was to its own detriment as it made 
available a large quantum of interest free funds to  OPaL without any commensurate 
                                                           
1  Acceptance of Deposit Rules, 2014 stipulates that  shares would have to be issued within 60 days of 
receipt of application money with a 15 day grace pe riod for refund in case the company fails to issue 
the shares 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
71 
benefit. The loss of interest to ONGC on account of the improper financing mechanism is 
` 408.15 crore 1 as indicated in the Annexure-XX . 
Management replied (November 15) that:  
(a)  It was a conscious decision of the Board of Directo rs of ONGC, comprising of 
Executive, Non-executive/Independent and Government  nominee directors, to 
keep the structure of OPaL as non-PSU SPV so that t he projects could be 
implemented through induction of professionals from  the industry and offering 
the company a platform with flexibility of faster, transparent and objective 
decision making.   
(b)  It is pertinent to add that ONGC is spearheading OP aL project as promoter 
because this is a Downstream Integration Project an d Value Addition Project 
aligned to its future plans. So by infusing capital  as ‘Advance against Equity’ 
matching with the Cash-flow requirement in OPaL, ON GC is ensuring timely 
cash flow for execution of the projects and at the same time it is giving a comfort 
to the prospective lenders regarding its commitment  as the lead Promoter. Hence, 
in order to preserve the envisaged structure of OPaL and at the same time to fulfill 
the condition of upfront equity infusion by promoters for drawl of long-term debt, 
the option of ‘Advance against equity’ was resorted  to for implementation of the 
project. 
(c)  It may be appreciated that in case promoters were t o insist on interest against its 
commitment towards equity (i.e. Advance against Equ ity) such fund infusion 
would not be treated as promoters’ commitment to th e project and as such no 
lender would extend any fund on project finance bas is thereby jeopardizing the 
whole project itself. In other words, interest bear ing advances to be extended by 
promoters ranking paripassu  with the long-term debt would not be acceptable to  
Lenders or meet the requirement of upfront fund infusion by promoters. 
(d)  The infusion of funds towards equity by ONGC may be  seen as commitment of 
ONGC for implementing the Project as per its Board decision, rather than a lost 
opportunity for earning interest on funds infused in OPaL. 
Reply of Management needs to be viewed in context of the following: 
(a)  It needs to be emphasized that the funds with OPaL were funds of Government 
companies even though its structure remained as a n on-PSU SPV. OPaL, thus, 
was given access to public funds without the responsibilities enforced on PSUs. 
(b)  While ONGC made efforts at preserving the non PSU s tatus of OPaL (at its own 
cost), it needs to be appreciated that private stra tegic investors have not been 
identified so far even after nine years of incorpor ation of OPaL (Nov 2006 to 
December 2015). Through the financing mechanism emp loyed, ONGC has made 
available large sum of interest free funds to OPaL without any commensurate 
benefits to ONGC and thus acted against its own interest. 
(c)  Induction of professionals from industry or flexibi lity of faster, transparent and 
objective decision making is not precluded for PSUs. The response of ONGC also 
                                                           
1  Calculated on the basis of interest earned on sho rt term deposits of ONGC during the relevant periods 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
72 
needs to be viewed in the context of it being a PSU  itself. Besides, it is also noted 
that there has been abnormal delay in completion of  the project by OPaL. As 
against original scheduled completion of January 20 14, the  project is yet to be 
completed (as on December 2015) resulting in time o ver run of more than 24 
months and cost overrun of 117 percent (the estimated project cost ` 12,440 crore 
in February 2008 had increased to ` 27,011 crore in July 2014). In fact, on 
account of time and cost overrun, the project economics are no longer viable. This 
raises doubt on the professionalism and efficiency of the present structure of the 
company which has been sought to be preserved. 
(d)  Audit has not suggested that interest be charged on  funds made available to OPaL 
but has pointed out that the funding mechanism of O NGC is imprudent. ONGC 
had made interest free funds available to OPaL without any commensurate benefit 
to ONGC or responsibility on the part of OPaL. Out of the total amount of 
` 3860.92 crore invested in OPaL, ONGC received allot ment of only 997955639 
number of shares against the initial investment of ` 997.95 crore. ONGC neither 
received any return nor any further benefit in the form of equity that can be sold at 
a future date on the funds of ` 1421.47 crore which was refunded by OPaL 
without allotment of shares. Allotment of shares against the balance investment of 
` 961.00 crore and ` 480.50 crore, by ONGC towards purchase of share warrants, 
is subject to exercise of warrant conversion after a period of 18 months from the 
date of allotment. It may also be noted that other PSU investors (GAIL, GSPC) 
have not followed the financing mechanisms employed by ONGC. 
Non-conversion/delayed conversion of advances into equity by OPAL, subscription to 
rights shares by ONGC and subsequent refund to circ umvent statutory provisions and 
issue of warrants against equity shares by ONGC hav e enabled OPAL to use funds of 
Government companies without paying any dividend or interest and continue to retain the 
character of a non PSU SPV. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (February 2 015); their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
1.10     Loss of interest due to inordinate delay i n receipt of share of gas transportation 
charges  
Due to dispute between the seller Panna Mukta Tapti  Joint Venture (PMTJV) and 
buyer GAIL (India) Ltd. (GAIL) on delivery point, O il & Natural Gas Corporation 
(ONGC) (transporter) did not get its legitimate cla im towards gas transportation 
charges. ONGC allowed release of the withheld funds  to private partners Reliance 
Industries Ltd. (RIL) and BG Exploration and Produc tion India Limited 
(BGEPIL), without realising its dues, which led to inordinate deferment of its dues 
(US$ 21.54 million) and consequent loss of interest  thereon (US$ 24.93 million) from 
1998-2005. The full realisability is also doubtful due to acceptance of conditional 
comfort letter from the private partners.  
The Panna Mukta (PM) field is operated by the Panna  Mukta Tapti Joint Venture 
(PMTJV) with participating interest in the PMTJV distributed between RIL (30 per cent ), 
BGEPIL (30 per cent ) and ONGC (40 per cent ). The gas produced in the PM field 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
73 
(offshore) is transported through ONGC’s trunk pipe line to ONGC’s Hazira terminal 
where it is processed. For providing transportation  and processing services, ONGC is 
eligible for compensation.  
The Government nominated buyer of PM gas was GAIL. Since inception of production 
from PM field (February 1998), PMTJV and GAIL (Gove rnment nominated buyer) 
differed on ‘delivery point’ of the gas. While PMTJ V maintained that ‘delivery point’ 
was offshore, MoP&NG/ GAIL held that it was on-shor e, at Hazira. As per the 
production sharing contract, the seller (PMTJV) is responsible for all costs upto the 
‘delivery point’ after which it would be the respon sibility of the buyer (GAIL). As 
ONGC transports the gas between offshore and Hazira , it would receive compensation 
from seller (PM-JV) or buyer (GAIL) depending on th e location of the ‘delivery point’. 
With the dispute on ‘delivery point’, ONGC did not receive transportation charges from 
either seller or buyer (February 1998 to March 2005 ). Pending resolution of the dispute 
regarding delivery point, MoPNG directed (January 1 998) GAIL to withhold 10 per cent  
of sale proceeds of PM gas in a separate escrow account. 
 
This situation continued till April 2005 when PMTJV  was allowed direct marketing 
rights as GAIL did not agree to the revised price o f the PM gas. Having received direct 
marketing rights from the Ministry, PMTJV started s elling (from April 2005) the gas to 
private parties and shifted the delivery point to H azira. Meanwhile, the Government of 
Gujarat, under the contention that the delivery poi nt is onshore, demanded sales tax (Jan 
2004) for sale of gas by PMTJV. The demand was disputed by the PMTJV and the matter 
reached the High Court of Gujarat. After shifting t he delivery point to on-shore in April 
2005, the PMTJV paid sales tax prospectively though  the dispute continued for the past 
period (February 1998 to March 2005). 
ONGC proposed (in a meeting among PMTJV partners in  July 2005) that the JV partners 
should approach the Government for release of reven ues withheld by GAIL, 50 per cent 
of which, would be kept in an escrow account to be released after verdict of the High 
Court on sales tax and the balance shared amongst t he partners as per their participating 
interest. Accordingly, this arrangement was include d in the ‘settlement agreement’ 
entered into between PMTJV and ONGC (December 2005) . PMTJV started paying 
ONGC, transportation charges from April 2005 as per  rates agreed in the settlement 
agreement. 
On being approached for release of withheld revenues, MoPNG sought (September 2007) 
a joint indemnity from PMTJV indicating that the PM TJV shall deliver all the gas from 
Panna-Mukta at Hazira in accordance with the provis ions of the Production Sharing 
Contract (PSC) and incur all costs for delivering u p to Hazira eg. sales tax, processing 
charges, environment aspects etc., from the effecti ve date of the contract. Accordingly, 
PMTJV indemnified MoPNG (December 2007) and GAIL (A pril 2008) separately, 
stating that “Contractor undertakes to incur all costs and liabi lities relating to the 
transportation charges, processing charges and envi ronmental aspects from the time of 
inception of gas sales and shall have no claim on t his account against the Government” . 
The indemnity bond, thus, clarified that the JV wou ld pay for transportation charges for 
the prior period to ONGC. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
74 
GAIL released the withheld amount ( ` 388.84 crore) in November 2008. 50 per cent  of 
the released amount was distributed among the partn ers in their participating interest and 
balance (equivalent to gas transportation charges p ayable to ONGC) kept by the partners 
in separate escrow accounts. In May 2015, High Cour t of Gujarat passed its judgment 
that delivery point for gas was offshore and therefore PMTJV is not liable for payment of 
sales tax for the period February 1998 to March 200 5. The decision has been challenged 
by the State Government in Hon’ble Supreme Court of  India (SC) and the matter is 
presently pending before the SC. 
In this context, Audit observed the following: 
• ONGC voluntarily allowed deferment of realisation o f its legitimate dues on 
transportation and allowed distribution of 50 per cent of withheld amount (along 
with interest accrued thereon) among the PMTJV part ners rather than ensuring 
payment of its dues as a service provider. It was a lso noticed that the present 
amount (US$ 25.80 million) in the escrow account of  the private JV partners 
(including interest) is insufficient to cover the t ransportation dues of ONGC 
amounting to US$ 46.47 million 
1 (principal US$ 21.54 million and interest of 
US$ 24.93 million). 
• MoPNG advised (December 2004) ONGC to take recourse  to dispute resolution 
mechanism provided under the PSC to get its transpo rtation charges claims from 
the PMTJV. However, ONGC failed to take recourse to  dispute resolution 
mechanism provided under the PSC to protect its own  financial interest, despite 
advice of MoPNG. 
• With PMTJV indemnifying Government and GAIL, and un dertaking to pay 
transportation charges since inception, it was clea r that ONGC would receive the 
transportation charges from the JV regardless of th e outcome of the court case. 
However, ONGC had sought a comfort letter (August 2 007) from the private 
PMTJV partners (BGEPIL and RIL) to assure payment o f compensation of 
transportation services, in the event that the judg ment of High Court is in favour 
of the JV. In the comfort letter, the private partn ers inter alia  stated that, if the 
court decides that the delivery point is at offshor e, BGEPIL and RIL will 
negotiate then in good faith with ONGC, the amount of transportation cost to be 
paid to ONGC. As per the settlement agreement, ONGC  had already agreed to 
charge the JV for transportation services on actual  cost basis. By agreeing for 
further negotiation on rates, ONGC placed itself at a disadvantage.  
• The Gujarat High Court, in its judgment (May 2015),  has held that the delivery 
point for Panna Mukta gas was offshore for the peri od 1998-2005. In view of the 
conditional comfort letter, the quantum of reimburs ement to be received for 
transportation of crude by ONGC remained uncertain. 
Management in reply, stated (December 2015) that an  omnibus settlement for all the 
outstanding issues including money held in escrow a ccount by GAIL was arrived at in 
                                                           
1  Interest rate of nine per cent is adopted for the  period February 1998 to March 2005 (rate as adopte d 
in the High Court judgment on the Sales tax issue)  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
75 
the meeting held (July 2005) by the Chairman & Managing Director (CMD), ONGC with 
the representatives of RIL and BGEPIL. This was lat er formalized through ‘settlement 
agreement’ (December 2005). The amount parked in es crow account of the PMTJV 
partners is interest bearing and the issue of accru ed interest shall be dealt with after 
obtaining the verdict of Supreme Court.  
Management’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the following: 
(i)  ONGC failed to take recourse to dispute resolution mechanism provided under the 
PSC to protect its own financial interest, despite advice of MoPNG.  
(ii)  ONGC, on its own, proposed parking 50 per cent  of released amount (equivalent 
to gas transportation charges receivable) in an esc row account, linking it with the 
sales tax issue. Thus, ONGC had allowed benefit to the private partners in 
deferring realization of its legitimate dues on transportation voluntarily.  
(iii)  The private partner (RIL and BGEPIL) share of US$ 2 5.80 million including 
interest held in escrow account as on March 2015 is not sufficient to repay ONGC 
dues of US$ 46.47 million (principal US$ 21.54 million and interest of US$ 24.93 
million).  
(iv)  The ‘settlement agreement’ is also silent on the pa yment of interest due to the 
ONGC on its outstanding amount. 
Thus ONGC extended undue benefit to the private par tners (RIL and BGEPIL) which 
had resulted in inordinate deferment of its transpo rtation revenue of US$ 21.54 million 
accrued over 1998-2005. Due to delay, the Company h as suffered an interest loss of US$ 
24.93 million ( 
`157.05 crore) (PMTJV private partner’s share). The full realisability of 
these dues is doubtful considering the fact that th e escrow account does not have 
sufficient funds to meet ONGC’s claims and the cond itional comfort letter accepted by 
ONGC providing for further negotiation of the amount to be paid to ONGC. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (December 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
1.11 Improper decision of procuring intelligent wel l completion equipment led to 
idling of equipment  
The Company planned implementation of Intelligent W ell Completion (IWC) 
technology in eighteen wells in Mumbai Offshore. Th e finalisation of tender was 
delayed. By the time the contract was placed, the m ajority of the intended wells 
were already completed. The other wells where IWC technology was to be employed 
were not suitable. This led to improper use of two IWC sets and idling of 12 IWC 
sets for nearly four years. Placing the procurement  contract without proper 
assessment of the actual requirement was an imprude nt commercial decision. The 
value of the idling equipment was `` ``    46.24 crore. 
ONGC (Company) planned (December 2008) implementati on of Intelligent/smart Well 
Completion 1 (IWC) technology which precludes deployment of rig s for well completion 
                                                           
1  Intelligent well completion in Horizontal Open Ho le is a technology to combat increased water 
production, presence of intermediate shale, isolate  fault and facilitate selective stimulation of 
individual segments. In this type of completion hor izontal open hole is divided into segments using 
open hole packers, surface controlled ICVs are used  for selective production/stimulation/shut in and 
measurement devices are used to have productivity and control. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
76 
while ensuring productivity of the well. IWC was to  be employed in thirteen wells in RS-
15 and RS- 16 platforms in 2009-10 and in five well s of B-193 cluster in 2010-11.  
Indent for the same was placed in October 2009. 
The Company floated a global tender (19.02.2010) fo r designing IWC, supplying 
downhole equipment and provisioning tools and exper ts for carrying out IWC in the 18 
planned wells. Though the indent for IWC was placed  in October 2009, the contract was 
awarded to M/s Schlumberger Asia services Limited ( Contractor) in May 2011 for 
duration of 30 months from the date of mobilisation . Thus, the Company took more than 
one and a half years to finalise the contract from the date of indent, as against 140 days 
stipulated in the Material Management manual of the Company. 
The Contractor mobilised 18 sets of IWC equipment a t Company’s Nhava Supply Base 
(NSB) in January 2012 (on 09.01.2012).  
The Company had planned to utilise 13 IWC equipment s in wells of RS-15 and RS- 16 
platforms during 2009-10. With the delay in finalis ation of the IWC contract, all the 
wells in RS-15 and RS-16 platforms had been drilled  and completed before scheduled 
mobilisation of IWC equipment. Thus, 13 of the 18 I WC equipments could not be 
utilised for completion of the intended wells. 
The balance five IWC equipments were envisaged for wells in B-193 cluster. The drilling 
of these wells was taken up only in 2013-14 when IWC equipment was available with the 
Company. However, the Company did not utilise IWC e quipment in these wells citing 
high ppm of H 
2S and CO 2 in the B-193 cluster. Thus, even these five IWC eq uipments 
were not utilised for the intended wells. 
Over the next 30 months (the contract duration), the Company could use only four sets of 
IWC equipment in offshore wells and transferred ano ther two sets to Mehsana onshore 
asset. The utilisation of IWC equipment at Mehsana asset was not as intended by the 
Company. Besides, only 50 per cent of the equipment has been utilised by Mehsana asset  
and the balance 50 per cent remained unutilised. Audit did not find any plan fo r 
utilisation of these balance items of IWC units (co sting 
`4.73 crore) in the near 
future.The remaining twelve sets of IWC lie unused at NSB (December 2015).  
As per the contract terms, 60 per cent  of cost of equipment was payable within 15 
working days from the date of successful completion  of mobilisation of equipment at 
NSB. The balance 40 per cent  of equipment cost along with cost of services was payable 
after satisfactory and successful completion of eac h job.The Company paid US$ 6.36 
million ( ` 32.53 crore), i.e. sixty per cent  of the equipment cost after successful 
mobilisation and balance US$ 3.53 million ( ` 21.73 crore), i.e. forty per cent  on 
completion of contractual period.  
For nearly four years after their mobilisation (Jan  2012 to Dec 2015), twelve sets of IWC 
equipment have idled with the Company. Considering that the contract term was 30 
months within which installation of all IWC sets we re envisaged and for which warranty 
was provided, the idling of majority of the sets po ints to poor planning on part of ONGC. 
Besides, the condition of the equipment after idlin g for such a long period remains in 
doubt.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
77 
Management replied (November 2015) that: 
• As the IWC equipment and services were being procur ed for the first time in 
ONGC and the nature being complex, firming up of BE C took considerable time. 
Large number of queries in pre-bid conference, inco rporation of additional 
clauses, extension of Technical Bid Offer (TBO) and  two rounds of clarifications 
took considerable time. 
• All the wells drilled with intelligent well complet ion were planned in consultation 
with service provider and equipment supplier. Thoug h the planning of wells by 
the Asset was not inappropriate, the performance of the wells was mixed. 
• B-193 cluster wells were highly sour in nature havi ng high H 
2S and CO 2 content 
except in one gas field. Based on recommendation of  IEOT and international 
consultant expert a decision was taken by B&S Asset  to complete the wells with 
liner of Corrosion Resistant Alloy (CRA) metallurgy , liner hanger of sour 
resistant, CS metallurgy, production tubing of sour  resistant CS metallurgy and 
well completion packer of CRA metallurgy.  
• The Mumbai High (MH) Asset has identified four well s for intelligent 
completion, three wells in 2015-16 and one well in 2016-17. The Bassein & 
Satellite asset has identified four wells for intel ligent completion, two each in 
2016-17 and 2017-18. The remaining four IWC sets wo uld be used in phase III 
wells of MH Asset. The contract for hiring services  is likely to be in place by 
January 2016 with the same rates and terms and conditions.  
Management reply is not tenable in view of following. 
• By the time the contract for IWC was awarded (May 2 011), 16 wells out of total 
19 wells in these platforms had already been comple ted and two more wells were 
under drilling. Thus, even at the time of award of the contract, the Company was 
aware that the IWC sets being procured could not be utilised for completion of the 
intended 13 wells in RS-15 and RS-16 platforms. 
• The study on selection of casing metallurgy for B-1 93 development project wells 
had been carried out through Institute of Engineeri ng & Ocean Technology 
(IEOT) as early as 2009. The IEOT report (May 2009)  had observed that all the 
formations (Bassein, Mukta and Panna formation) of B-193 cluster wells are very 
sour with high H 2S and CO 2 content. IEOT had suggested to have preferably 
CRA metallurgy for B-193 wells. Thus, the Company w as well aware of the 
requirement of completion of B-193 wells with CRA m etallurgy even before 
placement of indent for IWC sets in October 2009. W hile selecting the five wells 
in B-193 cluster for IWC, the IEOT report ought to have been considered by the 
Company.  
• The Company has assured in reply that IWC sets woul d be utilised in six wells 
over 2015-16 and 2016-17. Review of Rig Deployment Plans for 2015-16 and 
2016-17 revealed that only four out of the six well s has actually been planned for 
drilling during the period from 2015 to 2017. The f uture utilisation of the IWC 
sets therefore remains doubtful. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
78 
Thus, the decision of the Company to procure IWC eq uipment without assessing their 
actual requirement was an imprudent commercial deci sion and resulted in idling of 
equipment valuing `46.24 crore. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (December 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
ONGC Petro additions Limited 
1.12 Non–synchronization of construction of downstr eam units and other utilities 
with the Cracker Plant led to avoidable expenditure on Preservation and plant check of 
Cracker Plant 
OPaL’s failure to freeze the configurations of down stream units with cracker plant 
and to synchronize the award and completion of all the packages resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of `` `` 13.19 crore towards preservation charges and payme nt 
of `` `` 73.36 crore towards plant check of Cracker plant. 
The Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) Board had approved (October 
2006) setting up of an integrated Gas and Liquid ba sed Petrochemical Complex in 
Special Economic Zone, Dahej through a separate Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) ONGC 
Petro additions Limited (OPaL). It was envisaged th at the feedstock of naphtha (from 
ONGC’s Hazira and Uran plant) and C2-C3, C4 (from O NGC’s unit in Dahej) would be 
processed in the upstream Dual Feed Cracker Unit (D FCU) and associated utilities to 
produce ethylene and propylene which then would be utilised in downstream polymer 
units to produce polymers like LLDPE, HDPE, Polypropylene, SBR 1, etc. 
 
   
Upstream                             Downstream  
        
 
 
      
  
 
 
 
Process Flow diagram of Petro Complex  
 
                                                           
1 LLDPE-Linear Low Density Polyethylene, HDPE – High  Density Polyethylene and SBR-Styrene 
Butadiene Rubber 
ONGC  
C2-C3 Extraction Plant 
LLDPE/ HDPE 
(Swing)  
Butene 
HDPE  
PP Naphtha from  
Uran, Hazira  
C2-C3-C4  
Dual feed 
Cracker (DFCU)  
Utilities 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
79 
The detailed feasibility report (DFR) of the projec t prepared by M/s. Engineers India 
Limited (EIL) in April 2005, had provided for synch ronised completion of upstream and 
downstream units. The contract for the upstream uni ts (DFCU and associated units) was 
awarded in December 2008 to a consortium 1 with the scheduled completion by 
September 2012 and commissioning by December 2012. As per the schedule drawn up in 
the DFR, the contract for all downstream units and utilities ought to have been awarded 
within two months of award of upstream contract (Fe bruary 2009).  It was, however, 
noticed that the contracts for downstream units wer e delayed and awarded piecemeal to 
different contractors (15 contracts 2) from November 2010 to May 2012.  
As per the awarded contracts, the downstream units and utilities were to be completed by 
October 2013. However, these are yet to be complete d (November 2015). The upstream 
facilities were mechanically complete by September 2012, as envisaged and have not yet 
been commissioned in the absence of downstream facilities and utilities.  
Meanwhile the warranty on DFCU expired and OPaL had  to maintain the unit under 
preservation mode since February 2014. OPaL employe d EIL from February 2014 to 
March 2015 for preservation and maintenance of the DFCU at a cost of `13.19 3 crore. 
Subsequently, in March 2015, OPaL awarded a contrac t for plant check for pre-
commissioning to the consortium of M/s. Samsung and  M/s. Linde. Till November 2015, 
OPaL has paid ` 73.36 crore to this consortium.  
Audit has the following observations in this context: 
• The delay in award of the downstream contract was o n account of frequent 
changes in project specifications by OPaL. The proj ect specifications were 
changed in February 2008, bringing down the project  cost to `12,440 crore (from 
`19486 crore estimated in 2007) involving an investm ent of ` 992 crore by 
ONGC at 26 per cent participation with management control. The project cost had 
to be reduced so that the contribution of ONGC to the project would fall within its 
financial autonomy for investment ( ` 1000 crore as a Navratna company). 
Subsequently, in March 2009, OPaL again revised the  project specifications to 
revert to the original configuration of the swing u nits and included a dedicated 
HDPE in the project scope. This increased the proje ct cost to ` 19846 crore. This 
revised cost was further discussed with SBI Caps (d ebt adviser cum arranger for 
OPaL). SBI Caps worked out revised project cost as ` 19535 crore, which was 
approved by the OPaL Board in June 2010, only after  ONGC attained Maharatna 
status (May 2010) which enhanced the financial autonomy of ONGC. 
• Following approval of the project specifications in  March 2009, OPaL selected 
the licensor for downstream units in September 2009 . It was noticed that OPaL 
did not plan for obtaining Secretariat of Industria l Assistance (SIA) clearance for 
the license which took five months. The licensor to ok another six months to make 
available the design data (September 2010). Thus, there was a delay of nearly two 
years in receipt of process package (as against sch eduled date of November 2008 
                                                           
1  M/s. Linde A.G., Germany & M/s. Samsung Engineeri ng Co. Limited, Korea 
2  Engineering Procurement Construction (EPC) contra cts 
3    `` ``    10.97 crore to M/s EIL and `` ``    2.22 crore towards other expenses. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
80 
it was received in September 2010) which contribute d to delay in initiation of the 
downstream facilities. 
• The scope for Captive power plant, Product warehous e, Laboratory, living 
quarters and water packages were added late to the original scope of project 
specifications. 
• OPaL had awarded 15 EPC contracts to different cont ractors. As per their 
scheduled completion, all downstream facilities (un its and utilities) were to be 
completed by February 2014. The execution of these contracts was delayed. In 
particular, the utility contracts (cooling water sy stems; effluent treatment plant 
and balance utilities and off-sites) were badly del ayed. The work of these utilities 
was yet to be completed (November 2015). 
• Even with completion of all downstream units and ut ilities, the project cannot be 
commissioned in absence of feedstock arrangement fo r operation. The upstream 
facility, DFCU, is designed to operate on dual feed , naphtha and C2, C3, C4. It 
had been envisaged that naphtha would be supplied f rom Hazira plant of ONGC 
through a pipeline to Dahej. However, on account of  ROU problems, the pipeline 
could not be laid. An alternate arrangement of brin ging the naphtha from 
GCPTCL to Dahej has been initiated. However, though  the pipeline between 
GCPTCL and Dahej has been laid, the terminal facilities at both ends are yet to be 
completed. 
Management in reply stated (November 2015) that:  
(i)  Such a mega petrochemical complex, with the DFCU an d associated units as the 
core unit has intricate interdependencies even at t he design stage with various 
other downstream units. The downstream and utilitie s design/load could only be 
conceived with the firming up of design output of t he DFCU and AU. With feed 
quality related supply issue (rich feed changed to comingled R-LNG feed), 
specification for output streams took time to finalize.  
(ii)  The delay in award of EPC work for downstream unit of LLDPE/HDPE swing 
unit is because of waiting on having the process de sign package (PDP) from the 
licensors. 
(iii)  The cost of the project increased by 
` 7095 crore ( ` 19535 crore – ` 12440 crore) 
due to the changes and also due to addition of capt ive power plant with steam 
generation facility necessitating approval of OPaL board for additional 
expenditure envisaged. Also, change in scope/config uration led to increased 
utilities requirement, which had to be re-worked, before tie up of utility packages; 
Management’s reply is not tenable in view of the following: 
(i)  The change in feed quality supply on account of com ingled R-LNG being 
available for C2C3 plant instead of the originally envisaged rich feed of ONGC 
has no relevance as OPaL decided to procure the bal ance C2+fractions from 
market (June 2010) to make up and maintain the desi gn feed of 973 KTPA in the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
81 
DFCU. Thus, the output of DFCU would not change and  consequently the design 
of downstream units would also not require change. 
(ii)  The delay in award of EPC work was on account of ch anges made in project 
specifications to maintain project cost within the financial autonomy of ONGC 
and also due to delay in selection of licensor due to changes in project 
specifications and not planning for SIA clearance.  
(iii)  The increase in project cost pointed out by OPaL in  reply was on account of 
intermittent changes in project scope to keep the c ontribution of ONGC within its 
financial autonomy limits. It needs to be noted tha t the project cost (2007) was 
`19486 crore which was deliberately reduced by OPaL to ` 12440 crore in 
February 2008 and then raised again to `19535 crore (June 2010). The frequent 
change in scope points to poor planning. It is note d that Central Lab – Optical 
control system package was awarded as late as Octob er 2012 while the upstream 
DFCU unit has already been completed in September 2012. 
Thus, non-synchronisation of the upstream and downs tream facilities in the 
petrochemical project led to additional expenditure  of ` 86.55 crore towards preservation 
and plant check for pre-commissioning of upstream u nit (DFCU) till November 2015. As 
the downstream units, utilities and the terminallin g facilities for obtaining feedstock are 
yet to be completed (Nov 2015), the idling of facil ities already created is likely to 
continue with additional expenditure being incurred on its preservation. 
 
The matter was reported the Ministry (December 2015 ); their reply was awaited  
(March 2016). 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
82 
CHAPTER II: MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS 
 
 
 
National Highways Authority of India  
2.1 Undue benefit to the concessionaire (PIU Begusa rai) 
NHAI paid undue financial benefits to the Concessio naire of `` `` 51.03 crore 
comprising early completion bonus of `` `` 21.83 crore in violation of the concession 
agreement, and `` `` 29.20 crore being part of annuity that was not pay able due to 
reduction in scope of work. 
National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) and M/s Mokama - Munger Highway 
Limited (the concessionaire) signed (12 July 2010) a concession agreement (CA) for 
construction of two-lane road on the Mokama - Munge r Section of NH-80 in Bihar for a 
total project length of 68.582 kms which included c onstruction of Barahiya Bypass (with 
length of 8.1 kms) and two Rail bridges (RBs). The project was to be completed in 730 
days 1 i.e. by 14 May 2013 at a total project cost of ` 351.54 crore. Article 28.1.1 of the 
CA provided for payment of early completion bonus ( ECB) to the concessionaire only 
after completion of the total project highway. Arti cle 15.1 stated that the provisional 
completion certificate (PCOD) 2 would entitle the concessionaire his first annuity  for 
completed part, subject to any deduction for any ne gative change in scope of work, but 
did not provide for early completion bonus on partl y completed work. Audit noted the 
following irregularities: 
(i)  Owing to land acquisition (LA) problems, NHAI could  not provide encumbrance-
free land and other clearances to the Concessionair e, hence, work on Barahiya 
bypass and RBs could not be commenced. Thus, the In dependent Engineer (IE), 
in agreement with NHAI, provisionally certified the  project length 60.482 kms as 
fit for commercial operation (PCOD) with effect fro m 20 January 2013. Audit 
observed that due to LA problems concessionaire had  requested for de-scoping of 
work of Barahiya bypass and RBs thrice during Octob er 2013 to July 2014. 
NHAI’s Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at Begusar ai, also recommended 
(May 2014) to NHAI Headquarters, New Delhi that ‘it  was in the interest of the 
organisation that Barahiya bypass may be deleted fr om the scope of work, as the 
concessionaire was enjoying full amount of annuitie s’. Nevertheless, citing the 
provisions of Article 28.1.1 of CA, concessionaire claimed 114 days early 
completion bonus (ECB) for partly completed 60.482 kms project length, as if full 
project highway (which included Barahiya Bypass and  two RBs) were also 
completed prior to the scheduled date of completion  i.e. 14 May 2013. On 
recommendation of IE, NHAI paid (February 2015) 100  days early completion 
bonus amounting to 
` 21.83 crore to the concessionaire.    
                                                           
1  730 days from appointed date 15 May 2011 
2  Provisional Commercial Operation Date (PCOD) 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
83 
The IE, however, used implausible assumptions (23 S eptember 2014), to recommend 
ECB for 100 days to the concessionaire. Firstly, IE  did not scientifically compute the 
likely time that the concessionaire would have take n to construct the Barahiya Bypass 
and two RBs while computing 100 days of early compl etion for payment of bonus. There 
was a time gap of 114 days between PCOD (20 January  2013) of partly completed 
project highway and Scheduled COD (14 May 2013) for  full project highway including 
Barahiya Bypass road and two RBs. This indicated th at while computing 100 days of 
early completion for partly completed project highw ay, the IE assumed to complete 
works of Barahiya Bypass road and two RBs, which ha d not commenced, in just 14 days 
which was beyond any reason. Secondly, 114 days sho uld not be considered as fair basis 
for calculation of early completion for a part proj ect length of 60.482 kms because 
timeframe of 730 days specified in CA was meant for  previously envisaged entire length 
of 68.582 kms including Barahiya bypass of 8.1 kms and two Rail Bridges (RBs), hence, 
for calculation of early completion for partly completed  project length i.e 60.482 km, the 
reference point ought not to be 14 May 2013 or 730 days but should have been 
proportionately brought down from 14 May 2013 based  on linear progression of work 
completed. This was, however, not considered by IE while calculating early completion 
days for payment of bonus to the concessionaire. Fu rther, mobilisation of resources by 
the concessionaire was not even-paced as overall mo nthly progress was less than the 
projected targets in first 8 months (from June 2011  to January 2012). It was close to 
targets in next five months (February 2012 to June 2012) and the pace of work increased 
from July 2012 onwards. Management stated that  wor k of DBM 1  started in  June 2011 
while that of BC 1 started in February 2012, however, for calculating  100 days early 
completion period, the Independent Engineer based h is assumption on maximum paving 
capacity of concessionaire considering DBM and BC w ork done in only one month i.e. 
June 2012. This was not average/ normal paving capa city in respect of entire project, 
hence, not fair to be considered as a basis for ass umption. Therefore, payment of ` 21.83 
crore to the concessionaire as an early completion bonus for 100 days was irregular and 
amounted to giving undue financial benefits to them. 
(ii)  As per the CA, the concessionaire was entitled for 26 half yearly annuity 
payments of ` 39.94 crore each, starting from six months after C OD or PCOD as 
the case may be. Article 28.4.2 of the CA provided for one per cent  reduction in 
annuity for reduction of assured lane availability 2 (ALA) up to five per cent , and 
two per cent  reduction in annuity for every one per cent  fall in ALA beyond five 
per cent . Since there was no likelihood of commencement of work on bypass and 
RBs, and PIU Begusarai had already recommended (May  2014) to NHAI Hqrs., 
for deletion of these works, this was a clear case of negative scope of work to the 
extent of 11.81 per cent 3, hence, half yearly annuity amount should have bee n 
                                                           
1  DBM (Dense Bituminous Macadam) is base course, BC  (Bituminous Concrete) is wearing course. BC 
function is to seal the surface or stop water to pe netrate into underlying layers and withstand with 
wheel load. 
2  Availability of carriageway assured by the conces sionaire for each annuity payment period 
3  11.81 per cent =  8.1/68.582 x 100 where 8.1 kms was the reduction in length of  project highway on 
account of exclusion of Barahiya bypass and two Rail bridges.   

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
84 
reduced by 14.62 per cent1 before payment of five annuities, which was not do ne. 
As a result there was an excess payment of total ` 29.20 2 crore to the 
concessionaire till 31 October 2015. 
NHAI signed a supplementary agreement (1 August 201 3) with Concessionaire for 
completion of Barahiya bypass and two RBs without a ny escalation or higher cost to 
NHAI including delays in handing over of land. It w as also decided that NHAI shall not 
exercise negative change in scope due to non handin g-over of encumbrance free land and 
will not reduce or withhold annuity as construed in  CA. Only when NHAI decides not to 
execute the balance works, the clauses of CA for reduction of annuity shall apply. 
Management stated (January 2016) that (i) the work of Barahiya Bypass and 2 RBs were 
not commenced due to failure to hand over Right of Way (ROW) to Concessionaire for 
these works, early completion bonus was paid based on the recommendation of IE and as 
per the provision of the CA (ii) Annuity amount was  not reduced or withheld as the final 
decision on negative change of scope is under exami nation and finalization. Ministry has 
re-iterated (February 2016) the views of the management.  
Reply of management/Ministry is not acceptable beca use (i) No article in CA provided 
for payment of early completion bonus on partly com pleted work, (ii) Independent 
Engineer used implausible assumptions to recommend ECB for 100 days to the 
concessionaire, (iii) Decision has been delayed on the part of NHAI to effect negative 
change in scope of work resulting in payment of hig her amount of annuities to the 
concessionaire which should have been adjusted with  respect to the actual lane 
availability as per the provisions of article 28.4. 2 of Concession Agreement. Resultantly 
there was total excess payment of ` 29.20 crore 2 to the concessionaire till 31 October 
2015. 
Thus, NHAI paid undue financial benefits to the Con cessionaire of 
` 51.03 crore 
comprising early completion bonus of ` 21.83 crore in violation of the concession 
agreement, and ` 29.20 crore being part of annuity that was not pay able due to reduction 
in scope of work. 
2.2 Undue benefit to the Concessionaire relating to  four-laning project between 
Hazaribagh – Ranchi Section of NH – 33. 
Payment of `` `` 47.05 crore to the Concessionaire as bonus for ear ly completion was 
irregular and amounted to giving undue financial benefits to the Concessionaire. 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and M/s  Hazaribagh Ranchi Expressway 
Limited, Ranchi (the Concessionaire) entered into a  concession agreement (CA - on 08 
October 2009) for construction, operation and maint enance of four laning of 71.16 kms 
(including road passing through Ramgarh city) on Ha zaribagh – Ranchi Section of NH – 
                                                           
1 Reduction in annuity amounting to 14.62 per cent = 1 per cent + 13.62 per cent (i.e 1per cent reductio n 
in annuity for  initial  5 per cent reduction in  s cope of work  + 2 per cent for next 6.81 per cent 
(11.81-5)  reduction in  scope of work) 
2 `` `` 29.20 crore = 14.62 per cent of `` `` 199.70 crore ( `` `` 39.94 crore x 5 annuity released to the 
concessionaire till 31 October 2015)  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
85 
33 in the State of Jharkhand on Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) Annuity Basis.  The 
project length of 71.16 kms was to be constructed in 910 days, i.e. by 27 January 2013. 
On 10 February 2010, as  desired by NHAI, the Conce ssionaire agreed to include 
construction of Ramgarh Bypass portion measuring 15 .723 kms of length, in lieu of road 
passing through Ramgarh city, without any financial liability whatsoever to NHAI. In the 
revised arrangement, the total length of project th us increased from 71.16 kms to 73.799 
kms i.e. 15.723 kms length of Ramgarh-bypass and 58 .076 kms excluding bypass 
portion. This was formalized (11 April 2013) by a s upplementary agreement to the 
original CA dated 08 October 2009. In the supplemen tary agreement Concessionaire also 
agreed to condone the delay in handing over of encu mbrance free land by NHAI 
including claims for delay in handing over of 2.335  kms of land for Ramgarh-bypass. A 
separate completion period was agreed for Ramgarh-b ypass portion of 15.723 kms. Final 
measurement of road including Ramgarh bypass which was certified as completed on 1 
April 2015, was 73.866 kms. 
As per Article 28.1 of the CA (dated 08 October 200 9), the Concessionaire was entitled 
to receive a bonus for early completion of the full  length of project (71.160 kms) in case 
he achieved the commercial operation date (COD) pri or to the scheduled completion date 
i.e. 27 January 2013 after being  certified by the Independent Engineers (IE). Audit noted 
that NHAI paid 
` 47.05 crore to the Concessionaire as bonus for ear ly completion which 
was irregular and amounted to giving undue financia l benefits to the Concessionaire due 
to the following reasons: 
(i)  As construction of Ramgarh-bypass and its completion timelines were determined 
by the supplementary  agreement (dated 11-4-2013), the Independent Engineers 
(IE) issued provisional completion certificate (12 April 2013) certifying that 
58.067 kms were  fit for entry into commercial oper ation w.e.f. 15 September 
2012. NHAI made payment of  
` 47.05 crore 1 to the Concessionaire towards early 
completion bonus for completing 58.067 kms 134 days 2 ahead of the scheduled 
completion date i.e. 27 January 2013. This was irre gular, because for calculating 
early completion of 58.067 kms, 27 January 2013 sho uld not be taken as the 
reference point as this date was the scheduled date  for completing previously 
envisaged length of 71.160 kms. For 58.067 kms, ref erence point should have 
been proportionately brought down from 27 January 2 013 based on linear 
progression of work completed. Based on linear prog ression, the length of 58.067 
kms, should have been completed by mid-August 2012,  whereas it was certified 
as completed on 15 September 2012, hence, this ough t not to be considered as a 
case of early completion. Therefore, payment of bon us of ` 47.05 crore to the 
concessionaire was irregular and amounted to giving  undue financial benefits to 
the Concessionaire under the provisions of the orig inal or supplementary 
concession agreement. 
(ii)  The concession agreement stated that all the listed  project facilities forming part 
of four-laning should be completed on or before the  project completion date. 
                                                           
1  Product of average daily annuity and number of da ys by which PCOD preceded the scheduled four 
laning date i.e 64.08x2/365 x 134 days 
2  The  period  of 134 days between 15 September 201 2 and  27 January  2013 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
86 
These project facilities also were not fully comple ted on 58.067 kms stretch as on 
15 September 2012.  
Management (April 2015)/Ministry (March 2016) state d that (i) bonus was paid to the 
Concessionaire according to Clause 28.1.1, 15.1 and  10.3.5 of the Concession 
Agreement, (ii) the methodology suggested for calcu lation of completion time for 58.067 
kms length on proportionate basis was not justified  as land for the project had been 
handed over to the concessionaire belatedly and on piecemeal basis, (iii) the proposal of 
Ramgarh bypass in lieu of town road was taken up by  NHAI on request of Jharkhand 
Government. Concessionaire deployed adequate resour ces to complete the work before 
time but same could not be utilized due to non-availability of land, (iv) the works relating 
to Telecom system and Highway traffic management sy stem were completed in stretches 
where land was provided but due to lack of connecti vity of cable attributable to land 
problem in Ramgarh bypass, the system could not be made operational at the time of 
PCOD. After acquiring land, the system was made operational on 19-7-2013.  
Management/Ministry reply is not acceptable because : (i) Under the referred clauses of 
the CA (dated 8 October 2009), bonus for early comp letion was payable if envisaged full 
length i.e. 71.160 km was completed by the Concessi onaire before the associated 
scheduled completion date i.e. 27 January 2013. NHA I paid ` 47.05 crore to the 
Concessionaire towards early completion bonus for 1 34 days as if the whole 71.160 km 
was completed on 15 September 2012 whereas only 58. 067 km was certified as fit for 
entry into commercial operation from this date; (ii ) Ministry’s reply that delay occurred 
due to non-availability of land is not relevant in the perspective of audit observation 
which highlights that due date of completion for re duced length i.e. 58.067 km. was not 
re-defined for calculation of early completion bonu s for completing 58.067 km. Further, 
NHAI’s  inability to provide encumbrance free land on time cannot be taken as a 
justification for payment of early completion bonus  for reduced partly completed length 
(58.067 km.) computed on the basis of time prescrib ed (910 days) for previously 
envisaged project length (71.160 km). Hence, taking 27 January 2013 as a reference point 
for completion of 58.067 km. was not proper and req uired to be redefined based on work 
completed, (iii) Issues concerning delay in handing  over land and construction of the 
Ramgarh-bypass portion was resolved by a separate a greement with no cost to NHAI; 
and (iv) Telecom System and Highway Traffic Management System was not complete by 
15 September 2012 on a stretch of 58.067 km., and w ere complete in all respect only by 
19 July 2013.  
Thus payment of 
` 47.05 crore to the Concessionaire as bonus for ear ly completion was 
irregular and amounted to giving undue financial benefits to the Concessionaire. 
2.3 Undue Benefit to the concessionaire (PIU Darbha nga) 
NHAI paid undue financial benefits of ` ` ` ` 31.90 crore to the concessionaire due to 
deficiencies in issue of provisional completion cer tificate w.e.f. 8 February 2012 
without completion of tests prescribed for safe and  reliable commercial operation 
viz. toll management system and highway traffic man agement system, and prior to 
completion of  project facilities in  contravention  of provisions  of the Concession 
Agreement. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
87 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and M/s  Kosi Bridge Infrastructure 
Company Limited (the concessionaire) signed (6 October 2006) a Concession Agreement 
(CA) for construction of four-lane bridge across Ri ver Kosi on NH-57 in Bihar between 
the milestone 148.55 and 159.185 Km on Build, Opera te and Transfer (Annuity) basis. 
The Project could not be completed on scheduled pro ject completion date (SPCD) i.e. by 
4 April2010. Independent Consultants (IC) issued (1 8 April 2012) a provisional 
completion certificate (PCC) w.e.f. 8 February 2012  (under Article 16.5 of CA), 
certifying this date to be provisional commercial o peration date (PCOD) for the whole 
project. NHAI identified total delay of 675 days 1 in completion of project, including 507 
days delay attributable to NHAI. Annuity payment sc hedule prescribed 34 annuities each 
amounting to ` 31.90 crore starting w.e.f. 4-10-2010 i.e. within six months of SPCD. 
Based on PCC w.e.f. 8 February 2012 NHAI approved p ayment of 31 annuities (out of 
34 annuities) of ` 31.90 crore each, w.e.f. 4 April 2012 falling imme diately after 8 
February 2012. Deficiencies in issue of PCC with ef fect from 8 February 2012, however, 
resulted in undue payment of ` 31.90 crore to the concessionaire. 
1.  Articles 16.1, 16.4 & 16.5 of CA provided that IC m ay issue provisional completion 
certificate with the approval of NHAI, if all tests  have been conducted in accordance 
with Schedule ‘J’ and are successful in respect of any stretch and such stretch can be 
legally, safely and reliably placed in commercial o peration though certain 
works/things forming part thereof are not yet compl ete. In such case provisional 
completion certificate shall have appended thereto a ‘Punch list’. Such punch listed 
works were required to be completed within 120 days  from effective date of PCC, 
and included works like plantation and landscaping,  unlined and lined roadside 
drains, rest areas, fencing, turfing on embankment slopes, stone masonry works and 
stone pitching in identified stretches/locations [a rticle I(1.1) read with article 16.5]. 
All other items covered in project scope were presc ribed in Schedule ‘B’ and 
minimum spatial/functional requirements of project facilities were prescribed in 
Schedule ‘C’ of the agreement. Works covered under Schedule ‘B’ and ‘C’ were  
project assets as they formed minimum spatial/funct ional requirements for the project 
and were not covered under the definition of punch list items prescribed under article 
1(1.1) referred above . 
2.  The terms of reference between IC and NHAI provided  that IC shall issue provisional 
certificate with punch list items, if any, as defin ed in the CA, after joint inspection 
with the concessionaire, if the concessionaire requ ests for it, after approval of NHAI. 
Based on concessionaire’s request, IC had sought di rections and formal approval  on 
31 January 2012 and 21 February 2012 from NHAI for issue of provisional 
completion certificate appending each time a draft punch list (updated till that date) 
which included some works forming part of schedule ‘B’ and ‘C’, along with other 
minor works.  
3.  The project was inaugurated on 8 February 2012 and NHAI agreed for issuance of 
Provisional Completion certificate of the project w ith effect from 8 February 2012. 
Subsequently, IC issued PCC on 18 April 2012 and fo rmally declared PCOD of the 
project retrospectively w.e.f. 8 February 2012. The  punch list appended thereto was 
updated till 18 April 2012 which revealed that pres cribed tests were yet to be carried 
out in respect of toll management system, and highw ay traffic management system 
                                                           
1 675 days is the timegap between SPCD  i.e 04 April 2010 and PCOD i.e. 08 February 2012  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
88 
(emergency communication system) 1. Punch list also showed incomplete works like 
provision of administrative operation and maintenan ce base camp, roadside furniture 
and  roadside facilities which formed part of Schedule ‘C’ of CA, besides other works 
of minor nature covered under the categories of article 1(1.1) of CA.  
Audit observed that declaration of 8 February 2012 as PCOD was against the provisions 
of concession agreement because (i) the tests presc ribed under Schedule ‘J’ in respect of 
toll management system and highway traffic manageme nt system (emergency 
communication system) had not been carried out till  that date and without successful 
completion of these tests, NHAI’s approval to IC fo r issuance of PCC from this date was 
in contravention of article 16 of CA. As per IC’s l etter dated 18 April 2012 these tests 
were not completed till 18 April 2012; (ii) works o f Road furniture and roadside facilities 
and administrative operation and maintenance base c amp forming part of Schedule ‘C’ 
should not have been included in Punch list items b ecause these were project assets as 
they formed minimum spatial /functional requirement s for the project  and were not 
covered under the definition of punch list items pr escribed under article 1(1.1) read with 
article 16.5 of CA. These should therefore have been completed by PCC date (8 February 
2012). By including such Schedule ‘C’ items under punch list the benefit of 120 days was 
provided to these critical items which did not qual ify to be part of punch list as pointed 
out in para 1 above. As certified by IC these works  were incomplete as on 23 June 2012. 
The exact date on which pending works of Road furni ture and roadside facilities and 
administrative operation and maintenance base camp were completed was not available, 
however, IC intimated (23 July 2013) NHAI that all items mentioned under punch list 
(dated 18 April 2012) were not completed by the con cessionaire till 8 June 2012 i.e. 
within time limit of 120 days 2 prescribed under CA, but were actually completed i n all 
respects by 8 February 2013. Hence, declaration of 8 February 2012 as provisional 
completion date by NHAI was not proper. The concess ionaire, therefore, was not entitled 
for 4 th annuity of ` 31.90 crore falling on 4 April 2012 (immediately af ter PCOD 8 
February 2012) and the total annuity entitlements s hould be 30 annuities (instead of 31 
approved by NHAI) starting from 5 th  annuity listed in Schedule ‘G’ falling due only on  4 
October 2012. Thus there was an excess payment of annuity of ` 31.90 crore. 
Management stated (February 2016) that real-time te st was to be conducted on toll 
management system and emergency caller booth which could not be conducted because 
toll collection agency was not available at the tim e of PCC and that concessionaire 
submitted reports of these tests vide letter dated 19-4-2012, items under punch list were 
of minor nature, did not affect commercial operatio n and that these were completed 
within prescribed time of 120 days from PCC except the portion which was not allowed 
by public agitation. Ministry has re-iterated (March 2016) the views of the Management. 
The reply is not acceptable because (i) tests on to ll management system and highway 
traffic management system were essential for ensuri ng safe and reliable commercial 
operation of project and they were completed after PCC date of 8 February 2012, 
whereas article 16 of CA required that PCC should b e issued after successful completion 
                                                           
1 Highway traffic management system (HTMS) was to prov ide, inter alia, facilities to the highway users to  make 
emergency calls through emergency caller booths (ECBs)  to control centre in case of accidents, breakdown o f 
vehicles and fire and pre-warn the highway users about unusual conditions on the road.   
2  120 days from effective date of Provisional compl etion certificate i.e. 8-2-2012 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
89 
of all the tests prescribed in Schedule ‘J’, (ii) The contention that punch list items were of 
minor nature is not relevant as punch list items included items of Schedule ‘C’ which lists 
minimum spatial/functional requirements of project facilities and inclusion of Schedule 
‘C’ items in punch list was against the provisions of CA as these were minimum spatial 
and functional requirements of the facilities and w ere to be completed by PCC date. The 
concessionaire was expected to complete items of wo rk in the contract in Schedule ‘C’ 
and also carry out tests prescribed in Schedule ‘J’ . The audit observation pertains to 
failure to carry out prescribed tests by PCC date o f 8 February 2012 and wrong inclusion 
of Schedule ‘C’ items in Punch List. The fact of no n-completion of some items in the 
punch list within 120 days prescribed for completio n of such items due to public 
agitation, as stated by the ministry, does not ther efore impact the audit observation.  The 
other items in punch list like toll management syst em and highway traffic management 
system (emergency communication system) also were n ot complete till 18 April 2012 (as 
shown in punch list as of 18 April 2012, enclosed w ith IC’s letter dated 18 April 2012)  
i.e till after 4 th  annuity payment falling on 4 April 2012. Hence, 4 th  annuity payments of 
` 31.90 crore was not justified and annuity payments should have started from 5 th  annuity 
onwards listed in Schedule ‘G’ falling due on 4 October 2012.  
Thus, untimely issue of provisional completion certificate w.e.f. 8 February 2012 without 
due regard to safety and reliability aspects was in  contravention to provisions of 
concession agreement and resulted in undue payment of ` 31.90 crore by NHAI to the 
concessionaire.  
  
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
90 
CHAPTER III: DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND 
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH  
 
 
 
Central Electronics Limited 
3.1 Unproductive expenditure on upscaling of operat ions 
Central Electronics Limited upscaled operations of its solar photovoltaic plant from 
two Mega Watt peak to 10 Mega Watt peak (MWp) per a nnum. However, 
production of solar photovoltaic cells remained eve n below the original capacity of 
two MWp per annum during 2007-08 to 2014-15 which r endered the expenditure of 
`` `` 22.43 crore on upscaling of operations unproductive. 
Central Electronics Limited (Company) has a solar p hotovoltaic (SPV) plant at 
Sahibabad, Uttar Pradesh for manufacturing SPV cell s by processing of silicon wafers. 
The capacity of the plant was increased from two Me ga Watt peak 1 (MWp) per annum to 
10 MWp per annum under an upgradation and upscaling  project completed in July 2007 
at a cost of ` 22.43 crore. 
Audit observed that the plant was being utilized at  capacity ranging between 0.25 MWp 
to 1.30 MWp during 2007-08 to 2014-15. The capacity  of the plant was increased 
ostensibly by giving a justification that the then production volume at two MWp per 
annum was inadequate to meet production cost and ov erheads and the Company could 
only be competitive in the domestic and global mark et if it upscales its existing plant 
capacity to at least 10 MWp per annum. However, the  actual capacity utilization over the 
last eight years was lower than even the original c apacity of two MWp which rendered 
the entire expenditure of ` 22.43 crore on upscaling of plant unproductive. 
Regarding the reasons for low production, the Manag ement’s stand (August 2011) was 
that due to volatility in the market of silicon waf ers, the Company decided to minimize 
the conversion of silicon wafers into cells and to maximize conversion of cells (procured 
from outside) to solar modules as the same was found to be more beneficial. 
However, audit examination (April 2014) revealed th at while considering the demand 
and production of silicon wafers the Company did no t consider the actual position of 
availability of raw material (viz. silicon wafers) and source of its procurement; in fact 
detailed project report (November 2003) merely stat ed that “silicon was abundantly 
available as it formed about 20 per cent  of the earth’s crust”. Moreover, records indicated 
that the Company was aware of the fact that the dem and for silicon materials and wafers 
had exceeded the total production in India in 2004 itself and approx. 90 per cent  of 
silicon wafer requirement for the Indian photovolta ic industry was met through imports. 
However, the GOI approved the upgradation and upsca ling of solar photovoltaic 
operations to 10 MWp per annum on 29 March 2005. 
                                                           
1  1000 Kilo Watt peak is equal to one Mega Watt pea k 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
91 
The Management further stated (April 2014) that as the cost of production of cells was 
much higher than the prevailing market price and th ere was competition from private 
players, the production was not increased to avoid further loss.  
The contention of the Management contradicts its ea rlier stand for justifying the proposal 
for upscaling of operations wherein it was stated t hat only substantial increase in 
production capacity would bring down the high cost of production. 
Thus, the Company did not reappraise viability of t he project in the light of constraints in 
availability of raw material and volatility in the market of wafers. This rendered the entire 
expenditure of ` 22.43 crore unproductive as the capacity utilizati on post upscaling of 
operations of the plant was kept lower than even the original capacity. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry in October 2015; their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
92 
CHAPTER IV: MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
 
 
 
Inland Waterways Authority of India   
4.1 Review of status of utilisation of infrastructu re facilities  
The Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) was formed in 1986 (October) under 
the IWAI Act, 1985 to regulate and develop the Inla nd Waterways in the country for 
shipping and navigation. Accordingly, IWAI undertak es development and maintenance 
of inland water transport infrastructure on Nationa l Waterways (NW) by utilising grants 
received from Ministry of Shipping.  
After formation of IWAI, 'Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly'  river system from Allahabad to 
Haldia (1620 Km), stretch of Brahmaputra river from  Dhubri to Sadiya (891 Km.) and 
Kollam-Kottapuram stretch of West Coast Canal along  with Udyogmandal and 
Champakara Canals (total 205 Km.) were declared as NW-1, NW-2 and NW-3 in 
October 1986, September 1988 and February 1993, res pectively. Subsequently, 
Kakinada-Puducherry stretch of canals along with Go davari and Krishna rivers, and East 
Coast Canal integrated with Brahmani River and Maha nadi Delta Rivers, were declared 
as NW-4 and NW-5 in November 2008; however, these N Ws are in primary stage of 
development as no significant development has taken place. 
Audit reviewed the status of utilization of infrast ructure created in different National 
Waterways and the audit findings are given in succeeding paragraphs.  
4.1.1 National Waterway-1  
(a)  Under utilization of Infrastructure created at Gaighat Patna  
A Low Level Jetty was constructed (April 2007) at a  cost of ` 30.29 crore at Gaighat 
Patna 1. Subsequently, considering the wide variation in w ater level during the flood 
season and the fact that cargo could not be handled  from the existing Low Level Jetty, 
IWAI entrusted (July 2005) the work of construction  of High Level Jetty to CPWD at a 
cost of ` 13.73 crore.  
Audit observed that against the cargo movement proj ected in the DPR as 2.70 lakh MT 
per annum (by 2010-11) from Low Level Jetty, the actual cargo movement was only 0.06 
lakh MT between April 2007 and January 2009. Though there was no substantial increase 
in cargo movement from Low Level Jetty, IWAI went a head with the decision to 
construct the High Level Jetty. The work relating t o construction of High Level Jetty was 
completed in August 2012 at a cost of ` 27.54 crore. Audit further observed that there 
was cargo movement of only 300  MT  from the High Level Jetty in 2012-13 and 
                                                           
1  An Audit observation on Low Level Jetty was inclu ded in previous Report (Para 8.4.1 of CAG’s 
Report No. PA 09 of 2008). 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
93 
thereafter no movement was noticed till 2014-15. Fu rther, total cargo movement in last 
three years (2012-13 to 2014-15) from both the jetties together was only 0.03 lakh MT. 
Management in its reply (February 2016) stated that  the construction of permanent 
structures especially on the river bank is undertak en considering the hydrological data of 
20 to 50 years. The data provided by the Central Wa ter Commission revealed that when 
the water level rises up to 45 M, the Low Level Jet ty would be utilized and when it rises 
above 45 M up to 50 M (submerging the Low Level Jet ty), then High Level Jetty would 
be used. Thus high level jetty was constructed cons idering the Highest Flood Level as 50 
m. It was also stated in the reply that the main st ream of river Ganges has been shifted to 
other bank where jetties existed. Hence, due to non -availability of adequate water depth 
in front of jetties, appropriate cargo handling cou ld not be done since few years. IWAI 
was in the process of taking suitable measures to k eep the channel navigable round the 
year for optimal use of jetties.  
Reply of the Management was not acceptable as even after construction of High Level 
Jetty, only 300 MT cargo was handled in the year 20 12-13 and thereafter no cargo 
movement was there till March 2015. Further, IWAI w as required to maintain the 
adequate water flow in the channel by river trainin g, dredging etc. to keep it navigable 
round the year. Thus, infrastructure created at a c ost of 
` 57.83 crore remained 
significantly underutilised.  
(b)  Non optimal utilization of the GR Jetty II con structed at Kolkata due to 
consideration of unrealistic projections  
IWAI decided to construct a permanent terminal with  RCC Jetty at Garden Reach, 
Kolkata, in view of expected cargo increase as per DPR (2004) to make the NW-1 fully 
functional by 2009. The projected cargo movement as per DPR was 10.39 lakh MT in the 
year 2005-06 and 18.20 lakh MT in the year 2010-11,  whereas the actual cargo 
movement was only 0.55 lakh MT and 1.26 lakh MT in the year 2005-06 and 2010-11. 
The work was awarded (March 2007) to CPWD at an amo unt of 
` 23.14 crore with a 
completion period of 24 months. The work was finall y completed in February 2014 at a 
cost of ` 36.59 crore. Audit observed that against the total cargo of 1.50 lakh MT handled 
from Kolkata Terminal during year 2014-15, the cont ribution of GR Jetty II was only 
0.02 lakh MT. 
Thus despite construction of GR Jetty–II at the cost of 
` 36.59 crore, no increase in cargo 
movement materialised. 
Management in its reply (February 2016) stated that  without development of terminal 
with adequate cargo handling facility at all import ant locations along entire NW-1 and 
NW-2 and sufficient navigable depth, it was not pos sible to achieve cargo movement 
projected from G.R. Jetty-II by M/s RITES in their report submitted in 2004. IWAI has 
since been entrusted 
 (October 2014)  by the Ministry of Shipping, Government of India, 
with the 'Jal Marg Vikas Project', aided by World Bank, to explore the possibilities of full 
development of entire NW1. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
94 
Reply of the Management was not acceptable as the f act remains that due to delay in 
development of NW-1 and NW-2, the infrastructure fa cility of GR Jetty-II created at a 
cost of ` 36.59 crore remained under utilised. 
4.1.2 National Waterway-2  
(a)   Underutilisation  of Low and High Level Jetties at Pandu  
The Authority decided (March 2002 and March 2006) t o construct low and high level 
jetties at Pandu at an estimated cost of ` 47.70 crore ( ` 30 crore + ` 17.70 crore). Due to 
high water level during monsoon period the Low Leve l Jetty completed in December 
2008 at a cost of ` 37.91 crore remained submerged for about six months in a year. 
The Authority approved (March 2006) construction of  High level Jetty at Pandu at an 
estimated cost of ` 17.70 crore on the basis of estimates submitted by CPWD with the 
stipulated completion period of 24 months. The cost  increased to ` 24.58 crore (May 
2007) and later to ` 33.42 crore (November 2008) and was finally complet ed at a cost of 
` 43.85 crore in March 2014. 
Audit observed that the cargo movement from both th e jetties together during last six 
years (2009-10 to 2014-15) was only 314 MT which in dicates that the infrastructure 
created at a cost of ` 81.76 crore remained substantially underutilized i n the absence of 
cargo movement.   
(b)  Underutilisation of Broad Gauge (BG) Railway siding  and alternate road at 
Pandu terminal  
IWAI decided (March 2005) to construct a Broad Gaug e link (BG link) between Pandu 
terminal and Guwahati Railway Station at a cost of 
` 5.93 crore (March 2005) which was 
later on revised to ` 10.30 crore (February 2006). The work was to be ex ecuted by the 
Northeast Frontier (NF) Railway with scheduled comp letion by March 2008. The 
construction of the BG siding was completed in Apri l 2012 at a cost of ` 12.59 crore. 
However, even after lapse of three years from compl etion, the BG siding could not be 
made functional (August 2015) due to certain operat ional constraints like non availability 
of required area to accommodate full rake of 42 BCN  wagons at IWAI siding, shunting 
constraints etc. pointed out by Railways (March 2015). 
After the decision to construct Railway siding in 2 005, IWAI decided (November 2011) 
to construct an alternative two lane road to improve road connectivity to Pandu port, at an 
estimated cost of ` 12.32 crore. The alignment of the proposed road pas ses through 
railway land measuring around 6210 sqm.  The Railway Authorities agreed to transfer the 
land of 6210 sqm. to IWAI on long term lease basis and accordingly lease charges 
amounting to ` 3.45 crore were deposited with NF Railways in June 2012 for a lease of 
35 years. The work was entrusted to Public Works De partment of Government of Assam 
(PWD Assam) in December 2011 at a cost of ` 11.43 crore and an amount of ` 6.11 
crore was paid (August 2012). However, the related work could not commence due to 
non availability of encumbrance free land. The requ est of IWAI to offer alternate land 
was also declined by the Railways (2013) stating th at the construction of road would be 
possible only on the already leased land. In Octobe r 2013, Authority decided to close the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
95 
work and reclaim the amount from PWD Assam and NF r ailways. The amount from NF 
Railways is yet to be recovered (March 2015).  
The broad gauge railway siding has therefore not be en operationalised and the 
construction of alternate road has not materialized . In the absence of these facilities, the 
infrastructure facilities provided at Pandu port co uld not be utilised. Consequently, the 
whole infrastructure created at a cost of 
` 94.35 crore is largely lying unutilized.  
Management in its reply (February 2016) stated that  the issue of non-operationalization 
of Broad Gauge Railway Siding is being pursued with  Railways. As regards construction 
of alternate approach road, the IWAI has closed the road project. Management has further 
stated that one approach road to Pandu Port already existed.   
Reply of the Management was not acceptable as the f act remains that the issues of 
providing rail / road connectivity to Pandu Terminal have not been resolved due to which 
available infrastructure could not be properly utilized. Further, the existing approach road 
was narrow and inadequate to cater to the traffic of heavy vehicles.  
4.1.3 National Waterway-3 
Underutilisation of infrastructure created at NW-3 
West Coast Canal from Kollam to Kottapuram (168 km) along with Champakara (14 km) 
and Udyogmandal Canals (23 Km) in Kerala, was decla red (February 1993) by 
Government of India as National Waterway-3. Ministr y of Surface Transport, 
Government of India, approved (December 1997) widen ing of the West Coast Canal 
through capital dredging and land acquisition at an  estimated cost of 
` 26 crore. The first 
phase of capital dredging work commenced in 1998 on  four 1 stretches between Kollam 
and Kochi. Ministry of Surface Transport also appro ved (July 1999) construction of 11 
terminals in NW-3 at a cost of ` 14.84 crore.  
Capital dredging taken up in the first phase was co mpleted in two 2 stretches by October 
2015, whereas in the Kayamkulam-Edapallikota-Kollam  stretches, the work was still 
incomplete (November 2015). Capital dredging work t aken up (February 2002), in 
second phase, in Kottapuram-Kochi stretch was compl eted in May 2012. The work of 
construction of 11 terminals entrusted to Central P ublic Works Department in October 
2001, was scheduled to be completed by 31 March, 20 03. Out of total 11 terminals, 
construction of 8 terminals 3 was completed between March 2004 and  February 2015 at a 
cost of ` 21.46 crore whereas 9 th  terminal at Alappuzha, on which an amount of ` 7.71 
crore has been incurred till March 2015, was under construction. As decided by IWAI in 
February 2007, construction of the remaining two te rminals viz. CSEZ (Kakkanad) and 
Chavara was deferred till utilisation of the terminals already constructed.  
                                                           
1  (i) Kochi-Allappuzha, (ii) Allappuzha-Kayamkulam,  (iii) Kayamkulam-Edapallikotta (iv) 
Edapallikotta-Kollam 
2  Kochi-Allappuzha (in 2000), Alappuzha-Kayamkulam (in October 2015)  
3  (i) Kottapuram, (ii) Aluva, (iii) Maradu, (iv) Th anneermukkom, (v) Vaikkom, (vi) Thrikunapuzha, 
(vii) Kayamkulam (viii) Kollam. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
96 
Audit observed that, despite incurring an expenditu re of ` 73.97 crore (till November 
2015) on capital dredging, against the revised sanc tioned cost of completion (January 
2009) of ` 89.74 crore 1, six 2 terminals remained un-utilized and remaining two viz. Aluva 
and Maradu, were substantially under-utilized. Thus , even after lapse of 23 years of its 
declaration as National Waterway, the NW-3 could not become fully navigable. 
The management replied (February 2016) that the cap ital dredging work in different 
stretches in NW-3 was interrupted due to non- avail ability of dumping grounds for 
disposal of dredged material and other local issues  which were beyond the control of 
IWAI/ contractors. The increase in the cost was due  to increase in scope of work in the 
capital dredging. With regard to construction of te rminals, Management stated that to 
provide the requisite infrastructure along with fai rway navigable channel, parallel action 
was initiated for construction of terminals. Manage ment further stated that the intended 
use of NW-3 will be achieved slowly.  
The fact remains that despite incurring an expendit ure of 
` 95.43 crore ( ` 73.97 crore on 
capital dredging, till November 2015 and ` 21.46 crore on construction of terminals, till 
March 2015), the NW-3 could not become fully naviga ble even after lapse of 23 years of 
its declaration as National Waterway.  
Thus infrastructure created at National Waterways 1 , 2 and 3 at a cost of 
` 284.20 crore 
remained underutilised.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry (February 2 016); their reply was awaited  
(March 2016). 
 
 
  
                                                           
1  Original estimated cost sanctioned in 1997 was `` `` 26 crore 
2  (i) Kottapuram, (ii) Vaikkom,(iii) Thanneermukkom , (iv) Thrikunapuzha, (v) Kayamkulam  
(vi) Kollam. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
97 
CHAPTER V: MINISTRY OF STEEL 
 
 
 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited 
5.1 Execution of Jobs  
5.1.1 Introduction 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL or the company) is under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Steel, Govern ment of India. The main objectives of 
the company include execution of construction proje cts for iron and steel works and 
ancillary plants. HSCL provides Project Management Consultancy (PMC) to projects as 
well as undertakes direct execution of projects acr oss wide range of infrastructure sectors 
like roads, steel, power, mining, railways and othe r sectors like education and health. It 
operates through its headquarters based in Kolkata and 34 site offices spread all over the 
country.  
5.1.2 Audit Objective, Scope and Methodology 
Audit reviewed the execution of jobs by the company  to assess whether (i) execution of 
projects was efficient and expeditious; (ii) monito ring was adequate and effective at all 
levels and (iii) the award of work contracts to sub -contractors was transparent, 
competitive and fair. 
This thematic study covered a period of three years from 2012-13 to 2014-15. During this 
period HSCL secured 1,398 contracts valuing 
` 5,653 crore. Out of 34 units of the 
company, audit selected 10 units based on their tur nover. These units secured 1299 
contracts valuing ` 4,226.68 crore during this period. Of these 1299 co ntracts, audit 
selected 188 contracts (all the 64 contracts valuin g more than ` 10 crore; and 124 
contracts from remaining 1,235 contracts) valuing ` 3,968.96 crore which covered 70 per 
cent  of company’s total contract value. Audit examined the records of the selected 
contracts, work manual, other operating procedures and minutes of the meetings of the 
Board of Directors. This report was finalized after  considering the management replies 
dated 8 January 2016.  
5.1.3 Audit findings 
5.1.3.1 Deficiencies in Works Manual 
The guidelines contained in Works Manual - 2004 wer e not sufficient to address the 
changes in business model of the company which shif ted from departmental execution to 
execution by sub-contractors on a back to back basi s. Audit noted that the Works Manual 
of 2004 was updated and approved (June 2010) by the  Board but the same was not 
implemented. Management stated that analysis of pro visions of 2010 manual revealed 
that they were not capable of implementation becaus e of constraints of existing 
organizational structure, embargo on induction of a dditional manpower and changed 
nature of business of HSCL. Due to recommendations of Board for Reconstruction of 
public sector enterprises (2008) on financial, busi ness and organastional restructuring of 
HSCL, it was not felt practical to implement the 20 10 manual. Reply is to be reviewed in 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
98 
light of the fact that the company did subsequently  introduce a new Standard and 
Commercial Operating Procedure (SCOP) – 2015, five years later in September 2015, 
although its restructuring proposal is yet to be ap proved by the Government of India 
(GOI). 
5.1.3.2  Absence of timeframe for different stages of awarding a contract and delays in 
award of contracts  
Works Manual-2004 did not contain any timeframe for  tendering and awarding the 
contract for offloading the work to the sub-contrac tors, after securing the orders from the 
clients. In the absence of a defined timeframe for awarding the work, audit had 
considered the timeframe stipulated in SCOP - 2015 for award of work to the sub-
contractors, according to which contracts under ope n tender were to be awarded within 
four weeks, and those under limited tender within t hree weeks, from the date of securing 
the contracts from the client. Based on this time frame, there were delays in 147 contracts 
out of 188 contracts as shown in the Table 1 below.  
Table 1: Analysis of delay in award of contracts 
Range of values of 
contracts audited 
No. of 
contracts 
audited 
Cases where delay in award of contract was observed 
Total no. 
of cases 
Delay of  
3-6 months 
Delay of  
6-12 
month 
Delay of Over 
one year 
More than  `10 crore 64 43 5 14 14 
Less than `10 crore 124 104 31 10 11 
Total 188 147 36 24 25 
Management attributed the delays to the submission by the clients of only tentative scope 
at the time of award and late submission by clients  of approval of concept plan, 
preliminary estimates, drawings, and bills of quant ity (BOQ). Reply is not acceptable 
because out of 188 contracts audited, there was del ay of over three months in 85 
contracts including delay of over one year in 25 co ntracts. Moreover, issues cited for 
delay were expected to be firmed up prior to award of contracts.  
5.1.3.3  Open mode of tendering not followed 
Approved Rate Structure (ARS) gives the breakup of ‘per unit construction cost’ based 
on standard rates like DSR 
1, schedule of rates of states, past experience and market rates 
for different types of works. Vendors were empanelled under specialized categories based 
on their bid capacity to work on ARS. Audit observe d that the process of award of work 
on ARS was not competitive because in majority of c ases the work was entrusted on 
nomitation basis. Review of 181 offloaded contracts  revealed that open tender route to 
award the contract to vendors was adopted only in 4 5 cases (25 per cent ). 22 contracts 
(12 per cent ) including 8 contracts of ` 10 crore or more were awarded on the basis of 
limited tender enquiry (LTE) and 112 contracts (62 per cent ) including 10 contracts of 
` 10 crore or more were directly awarded to empanell ed contractors on ARS. Audit also 
noted that vendor database was not updated through open advertisement during last three 
years (2012-2015) to weed out the non-performers and to include the fresh entrants in the 
field.   
                                                           
1   Delhi Schedule of Rates 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
99 
Management stated that award of work on ARS did not  fall under ‘nomination basis’ and 
it was the practical strategy when the client expre ssed urgency in the start of work. It had 
higher margin retention than open/ limited tenders.  The reply is to be seen in the light of 
the fact that split-up  of work (similar nature job s and others) compromised with general 
financial controls like delegation of power, adoption  of open tender route for competitive 
rates, financial assessment of contractors’ capabil ity etc. Absence of any specific criteria 
for selection of contractor while awarding work on ARS provided scope for adhoc 
selection of contractors.  
5.1.3.4  Splitting of contracted work for award of sub-contracts 
As per Delegation of Power framed by the company in  1999, Executive Director, Group 
General Manager and General Manager of the company were empowered to award the 
work on ARS basis up to 
` 75 lakh, ` 25 lakh and ` 10 lakh respectively. Audit observed 
that  14 contracts awarded to the company valuing ` 133.59 crore audit observed were 
split into 160 contracts and offloaded amongst  32 different contractors mostly on  LTE 
or ARS basis, and similar nature work was sub-contr acted through a number of work 
orders as given in Table-2 (a) and (b). 
 
   Table 2: Statement showing spliting of contracts into multiple sub-contracts   
 
(a)                                     Details of 14 contracts split into 160 sub-contracts  
HSCL 
offices 
Work Order 
No.  Nature of Works 
Value 
(`` `` in 
crore) 
Split 
(No.) 
Sub-
contracto 
rs (No.)$
 
OTE/LT 
E/ARS 
Days 
taken# 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
 
 
 
Bokaro 
 
4565011703 Slag disposal SMS-I  7.41 10 1 ARS 376-5 00 
4565011704 Slag disposal SMS- II 13.09 30 4 ARS 383 -500 
4565014656 Hiring loco operators 1.89 8 4 ARS 56-52 2 
4565015250 Shunting operation 3.18 18 5 ARS 45-378 
4565016781 Deployment of PRW 0.41 4 4 ARS 89-112 
5465015095 Hiring of PRW 0.16 4 3 ARS 74-110 
Bhuban-
eswar 
Proj/3985/12 Civil Construction 37.79 6 4 LTE 88-24 3 
Kolkata 2010NVS(W) School Construction 16.28 2 1 LT E 599 
 
Delhi 
144/09(vol. 
II)/611 
Civil Construction 27.00 3 2 Open 
1/LTE 2 
456-800 
2014NVS(W) Civil Construction 21.40 3 1 LTE 92-161 
 
 
Lucknow 
 
CSR/2013 26 School Classroom  1.98 26  2 ARS 42-110  
CSR/2013/48 10 School Classroom 0.76 10 3 ARS 58-12 1 
CSR/194 26 School Classroom 1.71 26 3 ARS 71-280 
CSR/194 10 School Classroom 0.53 10 3 ARS 161 
(b)                              Similar work sub-contracted through number of work orders  
 
Kolkata 
 
*20 March 2013 13 Godowns 
Construction  
43.35 - 6 LTE 169-320 
*March-May 
2013 
28.18 
# Days taken to sub-contract the works in days; *date of award from the client West Bengal Govt. 
$ There were total 32 sub-contractors who worked in  14 contracts, some of the sub-contractors being 
repeated in multiple contracts.  
Audit analysis of contracts mentioned in table 2 (a) and (b) revealed the following:  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
100 
• Two work orders (4565011703 and 4565011704) at Bokaro for slag removal from 
SMS-I and SMS-II 1 valuing ` 7.41 and ` 13.09 crore respectively, were split into  
10 and 30 work orders respectively, and were awarde d between one and four 
parties respectively. Management stated that such jobs are to be continued without 
interruption even for a day. The reply was not acce ptable as the work was 
received in September 2012 but was subcontracted on ly between July 2013 and 
September 2014.  
• Work of construction of National Law University (NL U) campus at Bhubaneswar 
(Proj./3985/12) valuing ` 37.79 crore was split up into six contracts limiti ng the 
value of each contract below ` 10 crore and thereby avoiding the need for open 
tender. Management did not offer any specific comment on this issue.  
• Two contracts at Delhi [2014 NVS (W)] and Kolkata [ (2010NVS (W)]  unit 
valuing ` 21.40 crore and ` 16.28 crore respectively, were split into three and two 
parts respectively and awarded to a single sub-cont ractor on LTE basis. The 
management stated that in respect of work of Delhi unit the split of work into 
three packages was approved by the client and were tendered separately but 
eventually the same agency became the lowest bidder  for all the three packages. 
In case of contract relating to Kolkata, split of w ork was resorted to for speedy 
execution of work. The reply is not acceptable because in Delhi unit the name of a 
particular contractor was included in all the three  separate tenders invited on LTE 
basis and the same contractor was eventually select ed in all three cases. 
Resultantly, he was awarded the work of ` 21.40 crore against his empanelled bid 
capacity of ` 5 to 10 crore only, which indicated undue favour t o the contractor. 
In the case of Kolkata uni t abnormal delay of 599 days was noticed in award of  
work. The work could be completed in January 2015, even though it was 
scheduled for completion in September 2012.  
• The work for construction of 72 classrooms valuing ` 4.98 crore at different 
locations were received by Lucknow unit, out of whi ch construction of 49 
classrooms were awarded to a single contractor on A RS basis in spite of client’s 
instruction to award the work through tendering as per procedure and CVC norms. 
Management stated that there was urgency from clien ts to speedily implement 
their CSR projects and work on ARS was considered t o avoid delay compared to 
the process of tendering. Reply is not acceptable a s the works in different 
locations were awarded on ARS to seven empanelled c ontractors and one of them 
got 49 contracts in different locations. Therefore,  company’s argument for 
splitting the works among large number of contracto rs for speedy execution does 
not hold true.  
• The West Bengal Government awarded construction of 13 food godowns during 
March-May 2013 for total value of ` 71.53 crore to the company which in turn 
off-loaded the work among six contractors between A ugust 2013 and February 
2014, through 13 separate awards on LTE basis despi te provision of a clause 1.8 
in MoU with the client which stipulated that e-tend ering was to be followed by 
the company for enhancing the transparency in the e ntire process. Management 
stated that EOI invited for initially five godowns remained non responsive, and 
                                                           
1   Steel Melting Shop I and II in Bokaro Integrated Steel Plant of SAIL.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
101 
subsequently LTE was used. The reply is not accepta ble as the management did 
not go for retendering and invitation of one open t ender for all the 13 godowns 
had fair chances of attracting large number of bids. 
Audit is of the opinion that splitting of bigger wo rks results in approval of higher value 
work being granted by subordinate officers and resu lts in these works being executed by 
contractors with lower bid capacity and it further circumvents the more competitive open 
tender route. The nature of works in column 3 of Table 2 was not diverse so as to warrant 
splitting of these works.  
5.1.3.5  Lack of adequate publicity in invitation of bids    
Audit noted that the tender notices published in ne wspapers did not contain vital 
information relating to tenders like estimated valu e of work, earnest money, place of 
work and duration of completion of contract. Management replied that to control the cost, 
all the details were not given in the abridged vers ion of advertisements, and bidders were 
referred to the Central Public Procurement Portal (CPP) on company’s website for further 
details. Reply is not acceptable because the notifi cations excluded vital information 
required for inviting participation from appropriate class of contractors.  
5.1.3.6  Lack of adequate due diligence in tender evaluation procedure 
The contract for hiring the equipment for Ramnagore Colliery’s (a captive mine of SAIL) 
scientific exploitation work valuing 
` 47.15 crore was sub-contracted (March 2012) to 
Asansol based M/s PS Mining and Construction throug h open tender. Audit scrutiny 
revealed that there were limitations in the bid doc uments submitted by the contractors 
which were ignored by the tender evaluation committ ee while finalising the award. The 
contractor did not complete the awarded work and th e contract was terminated (March 
2013) which indicated that technical evaluation of the contractor was deficient. 
Management replied that the tender committee was sa tisfied with bid documents 
submitted by contractor showing ownership and posse ssion of equipment and selection 
process was not deficient. Contractor did not submi t the bank guarantee despite follow 
up. Management reply should be seen in the light of the following: 
• Invoices showing ownership and possession of equipm ent by the contractor had 
tampering marks and were addressed in his name with  different addresses (i.e. of 
Delhi, Haryana, Bihar and Chhattisgarh) than their Asansol address even though 
the work was to be executed in West Bengal. Two let ters from the previous 
clients for confirmation of business experience wer e dated prior to the  dates of 
work orders referred therein; 
• Despite tender requirements, technical committee ac cepted a cheque in place of 
demand draft towards processing fee from the contra ctor, even though this 
contractor was disqualified on the same ground, on an earlier occasion. The 
contractor had to submit the Performance Guarantee of four per cent  of the 
contract value within 45 days of Letter of Acceptan ce (LOA) which he did not 
submit. This was an undue favour extended to the co ntractor because HSCL had 
to deposit full eight per cent  of Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) with the 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
102 
client. Hence, the company did not safeguard itself  against the risk of non-
performance by the contractor; 
•  An interest bearing advance of ` 85 lakh was paid to the contractor in two 
installments (July-September 2012) in violation of terms of contract on the basis 
of wrong statement that he had completed the work v aluing ` 99.49 lakh till June 
2012 whereas the actual work executed by him on tha t date was only to the tune 
of ` 64.83 lakh. An amount of ` 3.66 crore still remained recoverable (January 
2016) from the contractor on account of interest be aring advance, hire charges 
and liquidated damages. 
5.1.3.7  Delay in submission of Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) 
Audit observed the following with regard to submission of PBG: 
(i)  There was delay ranging from 10 days to 288 days ov er permissible time, in 
submission of PBG by the contractor in 35 contracts valuing ` 241.46 crore.  
 
(ii)  In respect of two contracts namely, construction of  Ash Pond inside Bellary 
Thermal Power Station (BTPS) and Para-Medical Insti tute in Gulbarga at 
Karnataka the terms of contract stipulated that HSC L should submit PBG at 10 
per cent and 5 per cent  respectively to its client and the same was to be obtained 
from the contractors as Counter Bank Guarantee (BG) . As per the policy of the 
company, expenditure incurred by HSCL on BG commiss ion was to be recovered 
from the contractor. Audit observed that on the req uest of contractor in case of 
BTPS work, HSCL allowed the contractors to deposit the PBGs directly with the 
clients (in both the  cases) to save the commission  on BG given by HSCL and 
recoverable from the contractors. Thus, the company favoured the contractors and 
did not hold BG of 
` 25.74 crore 1 from the two contractors to mitigate the risk of 
breach of contract by them. 
 
(iii)  In contracts for scientific exploitation of coal in  Ramnagore Colliery, the 
company failed to ensure deposit of PBG 
` 3.77 crore, and ultimately, the 
contractor failed to perform.  In case of ‘Reconstr uction of roads in township of 
Durgapur Steel Plant’, the company failed to recove r Security Deposit ` 32.83 
lakhs through RA Bills from the contractors as he a bandoned the job without 
submitting any bills.  Resultantly, additional cost  of ` 1.99 crore incurred on 
retendering of work could not be compensated to the extent of SD amount. 
Management stated that (i) delay in submission of P BG and/or recovery from running 
bills was considered with the approval of competent  authority with valid reason to avoid 
cancellation of contracts.  (ii) there was no finan cial risk involved to HSCL by submittin 
PBG directly to the client, (iii) contractor did no t submit bank guarantee despite repeated 
communication and abandoned the job without submitt ing bills. Reply is not acceptable 
in the light of the fact that (a) not ensuring time ly deposit of PBG had risks as PBG 
condition is included in tender/contract to safegua rd against the non-performing 
                                                           
1  BG amount `` ``    11.92 crore  (10% of contract value `` `` 119.23 crore) in case of Bellary Thermal Power 
Station and ` ` ` ` 13.82 crore (5% of contract value `` `` 276.47 crore)  in case of Para Medical Institutes  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
103 
contractors. (b)  deposit of PBG by the sub-contrac tors directly with the client would not 
mitigate the risks to company against non-performan ce of the contractor. (c) due to non-
adherence with the terms of PBG the loss suffered by company could not be compensated 
to the extent of BG amount. 
5.1.3.8  Execution of contract  
(I) Failure to take action under ‘Risk and Cost’ cl ause  
Every contract awarded by the company included a ‘r isk and cost’ clause. Audit noted 
that the company failed to initiate action under th e ‘risk and cost’ clause against six 
contractors when they failed to execute the contrac tual liabilities, and as a result, such 
work had to be carried out at total additional cost  of 
` 20.40 crore to the company as 
given in the Table 3.  
Table 3: Details of risk purchase action not taken and/or not pursued 
(`` `` in crore) 
Work Name of Contractor Status  of work Amount to b e 
recovered 
under Risk and 
Cost clause 
Adjusted Amount 
Unrealised 
Civil works of 
URM 
1 in 
BSP/SAIL 
Amar Infrastructure 
and Jaya Projects 
Work abandoned by 
contractors in 10/2012 and 
09/2014.  
Contract not terminated 
12.76 3.32 9.44 
Reconstruction of 
roads DSP/SAIL 
R. P. Construction Work abandoned by 
contractors in 2012. Contract 
not terminated 
1.99 - 1.99 
Workshop Const. 
CLW 
2 
Happy Hi-Rise Infra 
Ventures (P) Ltd 
Contract terminated in 
07/2012  
1.05 0.40 0.65 
PMGSY Dilip K Kar and 
Kalyani  Debnath 
Contracts terminated in 
12/2013 and 09/2014 
  11.73  3.41 8.32 
Total  27.53  7.13  20.40 
Management stated that efforts were being made to r ecover the amount including any 
dues payable to them in other contracts. An amount of ` 20.40 crore remained to be 
recovered from contractors (till January 2016) desp ite lapse of considerable time from 
abandonment of work by them/ termination of contracts.   
(II) Irregular payment of ` 6.83 crore to the contractor 
The company was nominated by Government of Tripura as Programme Implementing 
Unit (PIU) for construction of rural roads under Pr ime Minister Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY).   The company off-loaded a part of work to  M/s Dilip Kumar Kar under three 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for a total value of ` 56.36 crore. The contractor abandoned 
the job before its completion. Audit noted that tho ugh the contractor executed the work 
for only ` 33.45 crore, the site office paid ` 40.28 crore to the contractor including 
payment for some incomplete work abruptly suspended  by the defaulting contractor. No 
                                                           
1  Universal Rail Mill 
2  Chittaranjan Locomotive Works 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
104 
investigation was carried out to find out the reaso ns for excess payment of ` 6.83 crore. 
Management stated (November 2015) that the matter h ad already been intimated to the 
defaulting contractor and the case is sub-judice. R eply of the management is not 
acceptable as the fact remains that incomplete and abruptly suspended work was also 
measured while making payment to the contractor.  
(III) Non safeguarding of company’s interest due to  deficiencies in agreement. 
(a)  The company was appointed PIU for PMGSY projects in  Jharkhand. Ranchi unit 
of the company incurred 
` 48.96 lakh on preparation of DPRs (during 2012-15)  
for 59 roads/bridges construction packages which we re subsequently cancelled by 
the Jharkhand State Rural Road Development Authorit y (JSRRDA). The 
company did not raise any claim on JSRRDA for reimb ursement. Management 
stated that they would lodge the claim on JSRRDA fo r reimbursement and in case 
of non-admittance; the same will be treated as the business expenditure. Reply is 
not acceptable as the company should have envisaged  such situation and included 
reimbursement of cost in the PMC agreement.  
(b) The Company secured construction work of 41 new ITI s and 6 polytechnics from 
Government of West Bengal for a value of ` 408.28 crore 1 at five per cent   
Project Management Consultancy (PMC) fees on estimated cost. The modality for 
payment of agency fee @ five per cent  was neither defined in the agreement nor 
mentioned in sanction letter from the client. In ab sence of defined modalities for 
payment, as confirmed by the management, the compan y could not realize the 
PMC fee of ` 14.59 crore 2. Management stated that the PMC fees of ` 14.59 
crore 3 was recoverable because five per cent centage char ges was yet to be 
approved by the state government and the bills are under active consideration for 
payment. The management reply is not acceptable bec ause it was company’s 
responsibility to take up the matter with the clien t for release the PMC charges. 
Moreover, the modalities for payment were required to be defined in the 
agreement.  
(c) In respect of construction work for ESIC’s Hospital  and Para-Medical Institute at 
Gulbarga Karnataka, contract agreement stipulated c entage charges 4 as five per 
cent  of work executed to be paid by the client to HSCL in both the works. There 
was no specific clause to determine the centage cha rges in case of escalation of 
project cost. The project cost was escalated in bot h the cases. As the provision for 
levying centage charges on escalation cost were not  defined in the contract 
agreement, the client did not release ` 6.71 crore in case of Hospital and ` 55 lakh 
in case of Institute for centage charges applicable  to the escalated value. 
Management stated that matter has been taken up wit h client. Management reply 
is not acceptable because escalation being a normal  phenomenon in construction 
contracts, the company should have provided an appr opriate clause in the 
agreement for revision of centage charges on the escalated cost.  
                                                           
1  Contracts for 24 ITIs valuing `` ``    185.37 crore, 17 ITIs valuing `` `` 124.21 crore and six polytechnics 
valuing `` `` 98.70 crore were awarded in August 2012, July 2014 and July 2014 respectively. 
2  `` ``    14.59 crores is 5 per cent on work executed till March 2015 i.e. ` ` ` ` 291.78 crore. 
3  ` ` ` ` 9.62 crore w.r.t. 24 ITIs and ` ` ` ` 4.97 crore w.r.t. six Polytechnics 
4  Centage charges are supervision charges relating to construction works 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
105 
5.1.3.9  Non-imposition of Liquidated Damages (LDs) 
(I)  Clause 44 of PMGSY Standard Bidding Document read with clause 9.10 of 
Operation Manual provided imposition of Liquidated Damages (LDs) on contractor for 
delay in completion of works. Though the company wa s responsible as PMC for 
deduction of LDs for delays, if any, not exceeding 10 per cent,  on the part of the 
contractors, it did not have any incentive for recovering LDs, as the amount of LD was to 
be adjusted against the project cost borne by the client.  
Audit noted that the company did not analyse delays  to identify the stages of delay, 
reasons for delay, and whether delays could be attr ibuted to the contractors. As a result, 
till September 2015, LDs could not be imposed in 13  cases of delay out of 53 cases of 
PMGSY works in Tripura. This deprived the implement ing government departments of 
the compensation due to them in the form of liquida ted damages from defaulting 
contractors. A review of 221 out of 393 PMGSY works  at Ranchi revealed delays 
ranging from 40 to 1335 days. Management stated that all delays could not be attr ibuted 
to contractors and that Jharkhand government grante d extension of time without LDs.  
Reply is not acceptable because the company as the PIU, was responsible for determining 
the extent of delays attributed to the contractor.  Non- recognition of LDs means 
extending undue benefit to the contractor at the co st of the implementing government 
department.  
(II) Lucknow unit of the company did not impose LDs agai nst the contractor for work 
of ‘Construction of Residential Flats’ awarded (Nov ember 2010) by Small Industries  
Development  Bank of India (SIDBI) for 
` 6.61 crore on PMC basis, despite 18 months 
delay in completion caused by contractor’s inabilit y to mobilise the resources and 
persistent reminder from SIDBI to impose LD on the contractor. As per the terms with 
client, LD at the rate of 0.5 per cent  for every week not exceeding 10 per cent  of the 
estimated cost of the work was to be recovered in c ase of delay. Management stated that 
the issue of imposition of LD remains unresolved; S IDBI may bring down the LD up to 
five per cent; and sufficient amount was under hold  against the bills of the contractor to 
realize the LD amount as soon as the related disput e is resolved. The reply is not 
acceptable because audit observed that SIDBI had al ready recovered (May 2015) LD 
amount of  ` 66 lakh out of total amount payable to the company  but the company had 
not yet determined the amount of LD to be recovered  from the contractor for the delay 
attributable to him.  
5.1.3.10  Non-reimbursement of taxes from client 
The terms of contract for construction work for ESI C Hospital and Para-Medical College 
at Gulbarga, Karnataka (awarded in May 2010 and Jul y 2011 respectively) provided that 
works contract tax (WCT) and turnover tax paid by the company would be reimbursed by 
the client on submission of the requisite documents  including evidence of payments. The 
company did not get reimbursement of WCT of 
` 7.28 crore and turnover tax of ` 2.47 
crore from the client as it could not furnish all t he documents to the satisfaction of the 
client. Management stated that they were actively pursuing the matter with the client.  
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
106 
Conclusion  
The Works Manual 2004 did not lay down timelines fo r finalisation of tenders, criteria 
for selection of the mode of tendering, publication of key information in abridged version 
of Notice Inviting Tenders etc. which contributed t o delays in award and completion of 
work. High value contracts were split into smaller value contracts thereby preventing 
participation of contractors with better resources.  The requirement for submission of 
Performance Bank Guarantee was not followed in 35 c ases. Due diligence was not 
exercised in selection of contractors. The company could not realize ` 21.85 crore as 
centage charges/PMC fees from the client due to def iciencies in the agreement. On 
account of Works Contract Tax and Turnover tax ` 9.75 crore was not reimbursed by the 
client, as HSCL could not furnish required document s to their satisfaction. In addition, 
cases of excess payment of ` 6.83 crore to a contractor who left the work incom plete and 
non-imposition of risk and cost action amounting to  ` 20.40 crore were also noticed 
during the audit.  
Recommendation 
/head2right The company may revisit the existing policies, proc edures and practices with 
respect to award and execution of contracts and ade quately strengthen the existing 
internal control mechanism to mitigate the business risks and challenges.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry (January 20 16); their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
Steel Authority of India Limited 
5.2 Marketing Activities  
5.2.1 Introduction  
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL or company) is a Maharatna company under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Steel, Go vernment of India. The Central 
Marketing Organisation (CMO) of SAIL under the over all supervision of Director 
(Commercial) is responsible for marketing and selli ng the steel products of its five 
integrated steel plants through a network of four r egional offices, 37 branch sales offices 
(BSO), 67 warehouses including 42 hired warehouses, and 27 customer contact offices as 
on 31 March 2015. CMO also appoints and supervises the work of 16 conversion agents 
1, 
4 wet leasing agents 1 and 2711 authorised dealers besides monitoring the  supplies and 
realization of trade receivables and making market projections for the preparation of 
company’s annual production plan for steel plants. The marketing and selling of 
secondary products 2 is done directly by marketing divisions of individ ual steel plants. 
Audit carried out a review of marketing activities of SAIL to assess the adequacy and 
effectiveness of company’s marketing network, polic ies and schemes relating to product 
                                                           
1  Conversion Agents convert semis (like billets, bl ooms, slabs etc.) supplied by SAIL as well as other  
producers into finished products (TMT Bars, Structu rals, Wire rods etc.) in their premises, whereas, 
Wet Leasing Agents do the conversion job by leasing  out their entire infrastructure to a single 
producer for a given period of time  
2  Secondary products mainly include Iron & Steel Sc rap, Blast Furnace Slag (BF Slag), Pig Iron, Coal 
Chemicals & By Products, Waste Products etc.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
107 
pricing, customer credit, rebates and commission, t ransparency in appointments of 
conversion agents/ wet leasing agents/dealers and e ffectiveness of marketing and selling 
activities. This study focused on the operations of  CMO and reviewed the records of 
CMO offices including 19 BSOs (out of 37 BSOs) whic h together contributed about 60 
per cent  of the company’s total sales. Audit covered the tr ansactions of five years from 
2009-10 to 2013-14 and the status was updated for the year 2014-15.  
5.2.2 Audit Findings 
5.2.2.1  Sales Performance 
Quantity of saleable steel produced by company, sal es value, profit after tax, net sales 
realisation (NSR) 
1 per ton and national consumption and availability of finished steel 
during the six financial years from 2009-10 to 2014-15 is shown in Table-1.  
Table 1: National steel production, availability and consumptions and details of the company’s sale  
Year  Company’s Sales in million ton Sales  Profit  NSR 
per ton 
National Finished Steel Million 
ton$ 
Total  
Sales@ 
Percentage  Closing 
Stock  
Market 
Share 
`` `` crores Produc 
ed 
Avail 
 
able# 
Consumed 
Pvt. Govt/PSU 
2009-10 12.11 81 19 0.86 18.5 43935 6754 31030 60.6 2 64.75 59.34 
2010-11 11.72 80 20 1.10 16.2 47041 4905 33962 68.6 2 71.65 66.42 
2011-12 11.42 84 16 0.93 14.8 50348 3543 37329 75.7 0 77.97 71.02 
2012-13 11.11 82 18 1.22 13.8 49350 2170 36291 81.6 8 84.24 73.48 
2013-14 12.07 84 16 1.10 14.6 51866 2616 35572 87.6 8 87.14 74.10 
2014-15 11.71 84 16 1.44 14.2 50627 2093 35198 91.4 6 95.18 76.99 
@ included sale of secondary items,  #  after adjusting exports and imports,  $ Long, flat and PET Finished steel 
Review of production and consumprtion of steel in audit indicated: 
(i)  There was growth in demand for flat, long and PET ( Pipes, Electrical Sheets and 
Tin plated) steel products during the period of rev iew. Country’s steel 
consumption increased from 59.34 million ton in 200 9-10 to 76.99 million ton in 
2014-15. The company’s market share to total saleab le finished steel which was 
25 per cent  in 2005-06 however decreased to 18.5 per cent  in 2009-10 and to 14.2 
per cent  in 2014-15. Company’s market share decreased in al l three categories of 
steel products.  
(ii)    Three special steel plants of SAIL viz. Alloy Ste els Plant (ASP) at Durgapur, 
Visvesvaraya Iron and Steel Plant (VISP) at Bhadrav ati and Salem Steel Plant 
(SSP) at Salem were producing significantly below t heir capacity, and they 
suffered operational losses regularly ( Annexure-XXI ) because plants were not 
operated at full capacity due to inability of the c ompany to find market for their 
products.  
Management stated that dip in market share was due to capacity constraint and SAIL sold 
what it produced and that the overall market share would increase after completion of 
capacity expansion projects. Management reply should be seen in the light of the fact that 
                                                           
1  Net Sales Realisation = total revenue earned from  selling a product - cost of sales return, allowanc es 
and discounts 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
108 
decrease in the company’s market share was largely attributed to the company’s failure to 
complete capacity addition projects commenced in 2006-07 within the scheduled time i.e. 
year 2010; they are delayed by 4-5 years, whereas t he other domestic producers like Tata 
were successful in capacity additions during the sa me period, and were able to meet the 
additional steel demand in the economy.  
It may also be seen that even within the existing p roduction, Company’s sale of long and 
PET products was lower than the production, and ove rall stock in hand increased from 
0.93 million (March 2012) to 1.44 million ton (Marc h 2015) (as seen in Table 1).  
Further, even after price de-control effective from 1992, and subsequent rise in number of 
competitors, the company has not changed its strate gy for pricing, marketing and selling 
steel products.  
5.2.2.2  Sales through Retail Dealership 
SAIL has a dealership scheme with the objective of establishing a wide distribution 
network to promote and popularize SAIL products, an d to improve market share and net 
sale realization in the long-run. The company’s dea lership network covers 611 districts. 
The company has been appointing non-exclusive  Authorized Retail Dealers (ARD) who 
can sell the products of other steel manufacturers also. The company also launched 
‘SAIL Rural Dealership Scheme’ in the year 2011-12 with the primary objective of 
meeting the steel demand of the small rural consume rs at block, tehsil and taluka levels, 
but failed to achieve the scheme objectives. Audit observed that out of 910 rural ARDs as 
of March 2015, only 238 were found to be active. Po or growth in sales in retail sector 
was attributable to the following. 
(a)     975 ARDs constituting 39 per cent  of total of 2,508 ARDs in 2009-10 and 1,456 
ARDs  constituting 54 per cent  of total of 2,711 ARDs in 2014-15 were inactive 
i.e. they did not lift any material in that financial year. In 261 districts, none of the 
appointed ARDs were active as on 31 March 2015. Abs ence of active dealership 
base had adversely impacted the growth in retail sa les. The retail segment 
contributed only about 5 per cent  of total sales of the company (Annexure-XXII) . 
(b)    Company’s promotional activities, consisted primarily of  masons’ meets, 
engineers, architects’ meets and dealers’ meet and lately advertisement in FM 
channels. Annual sales promotion expenditure was me agre, ranging between 
` 3.72 crore - ` 5.45 crore during 2009-2015 which amounted to 0.00 7 - 0.01 
percent of sales turnover in respective years.  
(c)  Supervision of branch managers was seen to be inade quate. Inactive dealers were 
not removed as per the terms of their appointment. An examination in audit of 
randomly selected inactive dealers in Kolkata, Guwa hati and Patna districts 
showed that there was no inspection of ARD’s activities by the Branch Offices. In 
western region, during April 2014 to December 2014,  planned visits were 15 to 
28 per cent  of total ARDs and actual visits ranged between 23 to 88 per cent  of 
planned visits.  
Management admitted (October 2015) that demand in a reas where their authorized 
dealers had become inactive was met by the other ma in and secondary producers. They 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
109 
also stated that company has been appointing new de alers in the vicinity of the inactive 
dealers to cater to those areas, the performance of dealers was reviewed on a regular basis 
and contracts of non-performing ARDs were terminate d if performance is not 
satisfactory. Further the company stated that due t o availability constraints of TMT 1 and 
GP/GC sheets 2, the materials could not be supplied to dealers.  Management reply should 
be viewed in light of the fact that over 50 per cent  ARDs were always inactive and there 
was no off-take from them during 2011-2015. The dem and of TMT Bars of 8-12 MM 
sizes  which was high at retail networks was not met, beca use company concentrated on 
sale of TMT in higher diameter to satisfy the deman d of institutional customers though it 
gave relatively lower sales margin. The company cou ld not enhance the supply of TMT 
bars because its efforts in last ten years to opera tionalise 10 departmental Steel 
Processing Units for conversion of semi-finished go ods into TMT bars had so far failed, 
and five joint ventures formed (2012) with private parties for the same purpose have not 
been operationalised. The company relied more on hi gh value sales through 
Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) with large inst itutional consumers which 
accounted for 92 per cent  of its total sales in 2014-15, and developing cust omer base in 
retail sector was accorded lower priority in all these years (Annexure-XXIII).  
5.2.2.3  Lack of system to analyse failure in securing contracts 
Audit observed that the company participated in 224  tenders during 3 year period from 
2012-13 to 2014-15, out of which it was not success ful in 69 tenders primarily due to 
higher prices quoted. The company did not have an e ffective strategy for seeking 
business through participation in tenders. The CMO failed to collect the data from the 
BSOs in respect of tenders participated, won, lost and other related information, and no 
analysis was being done by the company for losing b usiness in tenders and  to formulate 
future action plan. 
 5.2 .2.4    Sales through Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
 The company largely sold its produce to high end in stitutional and whole sale buyers 
through MoUs. Total MoU Sales had increased from 57  per cent  in 2009-10 to 92 per 
cent  in 2014-15 ( Annexure-XXIII) . Rates offered to MoU buyers were driven by 
granting dispensations consisting of rebates and di scounts on lifting of MoU quantities. 
Audit noted that total dispensation increased from 
` 2,467 crore (6 per cent  of sales 
value) in 2009-10 to ` 6,088 crore (13 per cent ) in 2014-15 in line with the increase in 
MOU sales. Audit observed that with recent capacity  expansion among private steel 
producers coupled with their cost advantages over t he company’s product cost, many 
buyers started adopting open tender route to obtain  competitive prices. Audit noted that 
regular government and PSU customers had been moving from MoU based procurements 
to open tenders. Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) like BHEL and NTPC had 
resorted to open tenders during 2012-2015. The comp any, however, continued to attract 
the private customers by dispensing various kind of  rebates and discounts within their 
discretionary power (Paragraph 2.5), and the share of private buyers to the company’s 
total sales quantity rose from 81 per cent  in 2009-10 to 84 per cent  in 2014-15  
(Refer Table I). 
                                                           
1  Thermo Mechanically Treated (TMT) bars   
2  Galvanised Plain (GP) and Galvanised Corrugated ( GC) sheets 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
110 
5.2.2.5  Higher prices due to higher costs of production  
After de-control of the steel price by the governme nt in January 1992, the prices of its 
own saleable steel products are being fixed by the company. Since 1997, a Revenue 
Maximizing Team (RMT) consisting of Plant Heads and  2-3 functional Directors fixes 
monthly ex-work base price and monthly price adjust ment limits (Rebates) that could be 
dispensed by CMO officials from Director (Commercia l) to Heads of BSOs within their 
discretionary powers. Being a market leader in stee l production, SAIL has been setting 
the price trends in the steel market for other steel producers.  
Audit observed that the percentage of cost of raw m aterial consumption to total 
expenditure and staff cost per ton of steel produce d of the company was higher than that 
of its two competitors. SAIL’s cost of raw material  to total expenditure was 7-9 and 9-17 
percentage points higher than Jindal Steel & Power Limited (JSPL) and Tata Steel 
Company Limited (TATA) respectively. SAIL’s staff benefit expenses in terms of per ton 
of crude steel produced was ` 1,492 and ` 2,025 higher than that of RINL (a CPSE) and 
TATA in 2011-12 and this gap further increased to ` 1,631 and ` 3,324 in 2013-14. 
Table 2: Relative comparison of cost in SAIL with TATA, JSPL and RINL 
Particular 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Percentage of cost of raw materials 
consumed to total expenditure* (%) 
TATA 34.42 31.46 34.69 
JSPL 42.17 36.01 36.05 
SAIL 51.29 43.41 43.35 
Per cent of excess of cost of material in SAIL over TATA-JSPL  9 -17  7-12 7-9 
Staff Benefit Expenses  
/ton steel 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 
SAIL RINL TATA SAIL RINL TATA SAIL RINL TATA 
6397 4905 4372 6974 5066 4545 7437 5806 4113 
*Finance cost and Provision excluded  
Source: Annual Reports of respective companies for the period 2011-12 to 2014-15. 
5.2.2.6  Rebates and incentives 
The Company granted significant amount as dispensat ions to attract the buyers to buy its 
product. In five integrated steel plants alone, the  company disbursed dispensation of 
` 26,058 crore in last 6 years and average dispensati on per ton increased from ` 2241  
(7 per cent  of NSR 1) in 2009-10 to ` 5764 (16 per cent  of NSR) in 2014-15  
(Annexure-XXIV) . 
Audit observed the following:  
(a)  Impact of multiple level dispensations given to cu stomers on the recovery of 
product cost were not analysed by management.  Even  though NSR had increased 
by 13.43 per cent  over 5 years whereas the cost of sales 
2 increased by 31.16 per 
cent . With the relative cost disadvantage vis-a-vis its  competitors coupled with 
                                                           
1  Net Sales Realisation = total revenue earned from  selling a product - cost of sales return, allowanc es 
and discounts 
2   Cost of sales is the accumulated total of all cost used to create a product/services.   

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
111 
greater competition from domestic supply and import s, focus of CMO gradually 
moved from maximisation of revenue to maximisation of the sales quantity by 
using higher dispensations/rebates adversely affecting NSR in last three years.  
(b)      Audit scrutiny of 19 BSOs revealed that documen tation of dispensations or rebate 
approval was not satisfactory and the important ext ernal factors like competitors’ 
price and import price cited for disbursing higher rebates were not authenticated 
from the records made available to audit. It was therefore not possible to conclude 
in audit that rebates etc. granted to various buyer s by the CMO officers within 
their discretionary powers was justified.  
(c)   The increasing rate of rebate did not lead to incre ase in the sales volume which 
decreased from 12,110 thousand ton in 2009-10 to 11 ,710 thousand ton in 2014-
15, and saleable steel inventory of SAIL gradually increased from 26 days to 45 
days of its sales volume during 2009-2015. 
Management stated that the RMT ensured that the com pany took a balanced perspective 
on the prices, keeping in view the markets, product ion volumes, cost, quality, product 
mix etc. and to respond in time to market developme nts in the competitive market. 
During the period 2009-10 to 2013-14, there were up ward revisions of listed based 
prices, as a result of which the dispensation amoun t was used to adjust the selling price 
with respect to the prevailing market price. Over the years company’s sales volumes have 
been taking care of the full production of the stee l plants. The fact remains that proper 
documentation was lacking as it did not contain any  evidence in support of justification 
for extending higher dispensations. Further, the in creasing rebates did not result in 
increase in sales volume.   
5.2.2.7  Implementation of order booking policy 
Chairman of the company approved order booking poli cy (OBP) for different segments 
of customers. As per OBP, MoU is entered into with the customers in the beginning of 
the year to estimate sales quantity and to accordingly decide production plan. Audit noted 
the following instances where the CMO did not adhere to the approved OBP: 
(a) Undue extension of credit period  
OBP applicable for the year 2009-10 to 2011-12 stat ed that the MoU customers for HR 
Coils 
1 (including special quality) were entitled to 10-30  days Interest free Credit (IFC) 
which was increased to 10-40 days w.e.f. 2012-13. A ccordingly, M/s Tirupati Group, a 
MoU customer of HR coils was entitled for only 24 d ays and 15 days IFC for the period 
of 2009-11 and 2012-14 respectively. There was no p rovision in MOU for extending IFC 
up to 60 days. However, after signing the MoUs, on request from customer,  the company 
revised IFC  given in MoU to 60 days  for the four successive MoUs for the years 2009-
10, 2010-11, 2012-13 and 2013-14, thus extending un due benefits of ` 3.98 crore. 
Management stated that (i) a commercial decision wa s taken to extend IFC to the 
customers of LPG HR Coils to increase the sales vol umes. (ii) From the year 2012-13 
onwards, the MoUs were signed in special quality ca tegories and IFC of up to 60 days 
was extended to all LPG customers having MoUs under Special Quality category.  
                                                           
1  Hot rolled coils  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
112 
Management reply should be viewed in the light that  the OBP of special quality material 
for the year 2012-13 and 2013-14 allowed IFC up to 15 days on monthly lifting of 100 
ton and above. Higher level of credit could be considered based on merit, but in this case, 
off-take of the customer had gradually come down fr om 54,108 tons to 20,730 tons 
during 2009-10 to 2013-14. As the lifting of M/s Ti rupati Group gradually declined over 
a period of 2009-14, extension up to 60 days IFC ou tside MoU conditions during 2012-
14 lacked justification. 
 (b) Delay in decision making resulted in avoidable  revenue loss and inventory 
holding cost  
 
Railway Board issued a tender for procurement of 55 ,953 tons of stainless steel 
sheets/plates to manufacture stainless steel wagons  in March 2012. SAIL participated in 
the tender, and in anticipation of order, received 19,993 slabs in 409M grade from Alloy 
Steel Plant (ASP) Durgapur. Part of these slabs wer e rolled and kept in-process condition 
with the intention of immediate supply. The company , however, failed to get the order as 
its bid of ` 74,500 per ton (ex-works) was higher than L-1 pric e of ` 68,850 per ton. 
Indian Railways (IR) authorized the railway wagon b uilders (RWB) to procure steel 
plates through Market Price Authorization (MPA) rou te from the market for the interim 
period and Railways were to reimburse them at L-1 r ate. Audit observed that in April 
2012, Salem Steel Plant (SSP) had an inventory of  24,274 tons of 409M grade slabs, but 
did not  sell to  RWBs at ` 68850/ton (ex-works) on the grounds that  variable  cost of the 
material was ` 74,121 per ton.  After lapse of  20 months  the Boa rd gave approval in 
December 2013 to sell the same at less than variabl e cost and SAIL sold the material to 
RWB at average NSR ranging  between ` 63,517/ton and ` 66,438/ton which was less 
than the price of ` 68,850/ton approved by IR. Thus, due to inordinate  delay in taking 
decision, the company incurred a revenue loss of ` 9.47 crore and an inventory holding 
cost of ` 35.72 crore till Nov 2013 which was avoidable. 
 Management stated that they received majority of q uantity of 409M grade steel from IR 
in previous years on L-1 basis and were anticipatin g to get their order in the instant case 
too. Reply is to be viewed against the fact that de spite being aware that the material was 
developed specifically for Railways who was the onl y major customer and SAIL did not 
have an alternate market for disposal of these slab s/finished steel, company delayed 
taking a suitable decision in the context of market  conditions and held the materials in 
stock for more than one year eight months knowing t hat market value of materials may 
decrease due to quality deterioration with passage of time. Had the management 
considered all the aspects which they considered su bsequently, they could have avoided 
revenue loss of ` 9.47 crore and an inventory holding cost of ` 35.72 crore till November 
2013.  
5.2.2.8   Trade receivables  
Non recovery of interest of 
` 18.81 crore from a private buyer  
Terms and conditions of the MoU signed between the company and M/s Larson & 
Toubro Limited (L&T) for the years 2011-12 to 2014- 15 included grant of unsecured 
credit. ` 18.81 crore was recoverable from L&T on account of  interest on delayed 
payment for the period 2011-12 to 2014-15 but the c ompany did not recover the same. 
Management stated that they will recover the amount  against turnover discount payable 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
113 
to the buyer in 2014-15. Reply is not tenable as th e interest amount was to be recovered 
on year to year basis. Further, recovery of cumulat ive interest up to 2014-15 was higher 
than TOD 1 accrual of ` 11.43 crore payable to L&T, and net amount remains  to be 
recovered as on 31 October 2015.  
5.2.2.9  Conversion of semis into final product from conversion agencies 
(a) Higher revenue realization foregone due to incr ease in semis 
The company did not have sufficient rolling capacit y to fully utilize intermediate 
products like semis to produce the prime product fo r final use, and capacity additions 
could not be possible due to 4-5 years delay in com pletion of company’s modernization 
and expansion projects. Semis (Billets, Blooms and Slabs) have an economic value and 
are sold to the re-rolling mills. But they have les ser net sales realisation (NSR) than the 
finished product like TMTs and Structurals of different types (Annexure-XXV).  
Audit observed that  the company had empanelled the private conversion a gencies to 
convert semis like billets, blooms, slabs supplied from the company’s plants and return 
the value added finished products like TMT, Structu ral, after conversion. There was also 
sufficient national demand during 2009-15 for bar a nd rods (which included TMTs) and 
structural. Enough capacity for conversion was also  available with the wet leasing agents 
(WLA) and conversion agents (CA) hired by the compa ny which however was not used 
to the full extent. Conversion of semis into finish ed products has decreased over the 
period, and production of saleable semis increased from 2,392 thousand tons in 2009-10 
to 3,007 thousand tons in 2014-15. The company thus  lost the opportunity to realize 
higher revenue from value added finished products in all these years. 
Management while admitting higher realization from value added finished products 
stated that the market situation and economics of c onversion and sale of semis were 
considered while taking decision for conversion of semis. Management reply should be 
seen in the light of the fact that the company redu ced the number of CAs and WLAs on 
roll from 51 in 2009-10 to 32 in 2014-15 thus reduc ing overall conversion capacity. 
Contracted capacity of WLA was not fully used and t here was increasing retention of 
saleable semis.  
(b) Inadequate supervision over conversion agencies .  
The Conversion Agencies (CA), under the arrangement  of conversion, had liberty to roll 
semis supplied from other sources and were not rest ricted to roll the semis supplied by 
the company to their premises, whereas under wet le asing arrangement, the entire 
infrastructure of the WLA was leased for manufactur ing the final product from the semis 
supplied by the company. Conversion Policy and Wet Leasing Arrangement Policy 2009 
provided for inspection and supervision of the use of semis and converted products. 
Nearby BSOs were assigned to supervise the work of each CA and WLA. Audit noted 
the following instances of misuse of the company’s supplies and SAIL brand name by 
CAs and WLAs. 
                                                           
1  Turnover Discount  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
114 
(i)  M/s SKS Ispat, Raipur, a CA under supervision of BS O/Bhilai was found (27 
September 2011) misusing SAIL brand name but no action was taken except issue 
of a warning letter. The CA however continued misus ing SAIL embossing on 
products during next 15 months and the company term inated the contract on 28 
January 2013. Management replied that a Civil Suit had been filed at Hon’ble 
Bombay High Court under the Trademark Act for seeki ng permanent injunction 
prohibiting the CA from infringement of SAIL Tradem ark and to recover a loss. 
The company forfeited ` 6.64 crore comprising of security deposit, pending  bills 
for conversion charges and encashment of bank guara ntee. Management reply 
should be seen in the light of the fact that the CA was found misusing SAIL brand 
second time in March 2012 but the CA was allowed to  continue, and action was 
initiated only after the CA was found misusing SAIL  brand the third time in 
December 2012. The company estimated damages to its  revenues and reputation 
to the tune of ` 337 crore 1  and lodged a claim of ` 330 crore 2 on M/s SKS Ispat, 
Raipur. Thus lack of supervision on CA by BSO resul ted in estimated undue gain 
of ` 330 crore by allowing him to sell other producers’  steel with SAIL brand 
name. As per conversion policy, the BSO executives were expected to make 
frequent visits to the CA’s premises to inspect pro per usage of material but the 
same was not being done.  
 (ii)   The existing controls over conversion agencies were  found in audit to be 
inadequate or not being implemented effectively. Th e company detected only few 
instances of misuse of the SAIL brand name by CAs, after lapse of considerable 
time due to laxity at BSO level in discharging thei r oversight responsibilities. 
Clear demarcation of SAIL’s semis with proper paint  marking and finished steel 
with non-SAIL material in CA premises was not ensur ed. Copies of the 
agreements between SAIL and CAs/WLAs and between SAIL and RITES (a third 
party inspection agency) were not shared with RITES  and CAs/WLAS 
respectively which hindered the work of RITES in ef fective performance of their 
tasks. The Policy of 100 per cent  embossing as per branding prescribed by SAIL 
was not fully implemented. Management replied that the system of supervision of 
conversion process had been strengthened for strict  compliance. Management 
reply should be seen in the light of the fact that the company has not conducted 
any study to understand the magnitude of SAIL brand ed spurious material in the 
market and sources and modus-operandi of such operation. 
(iii)  BSO/Vizag did not conduct the required physical ve rification of stock at M/s 
Velgapudi Steels Limited Visakhapatnam, a WLA at th e end of March 2011 and 
2012. In physical verification conducted from 25 Ap ril 2012 to 03 May 2012, 
1152 tons of steel material valuing ` 5.74 crore were found short. Had the branch 
conducted yearly physical stock verification of 201 1 and 2012 on schedule, it 
could have noticed the shortage in time and stopped  further misappropriation of 
stock. Audit noted that the oversight over the perf ormance of WLA was 
                                                           
1  Calculated by arriving the unauthorised quantity produced (i.e. total production less quantity 
produced for SAIL conversion) multiplied by the pro fit margin or price difference between SAIL and 
the secondary producers. 
2   `` `` 330 crore claimed after adjusting `` `` 7 crore from ` ` ` ` 337 crore.  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
115 
inadequate. The firm failed to achieve the minimum quarterly guaranteed 
production of TMT bars during April 2011 to March 2 012 and BSO/Vizag issued 
notices for the payment of penalty of ` 7.54 crore. However, BSO/Vizag released 
conversion bills amounting to ` 5.50 crore during 19 July 2011 to 27 April 2012 
without recovering the penalty imposed on them. The  contract was also not 
terminated but was allowed to expire on 04 May 2012  at the end of fourth year. 
Management replied that out of total claim of ` 13.28 crore, ` 4.98 crore was 
recovered by way of encashment of BG and bills etc.  For the balance amount of ` 
8.52 crore, the party was not responding favourably  and conciliation through a 
Scope Forum was invoked. Later, the Party sought ar bitration. Reply of the 
company should be considered in the light of the fa ct that only minor penalty of 
censure was imposed and administrative warning and caution letter issued to 
officers responsible for the loss despite serious n egligence on their part, and loss 
of revenue by way of stoppage of supply of TMTs for sale in the southern region.   
5.2.2.10  Non fulfillment of Export obligation 
Salem Steel Plant (SSP) availed (2008-10) concessio nal custom duty @ 3 per cent  under 
Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) Scheme. The S SP thus saved the custom duty 
of 
` 114.55 crore on imports of capital goods and spares  imported for SSP’s capacity 
expansion programme. Under the EPCG scheme (11 Apri l 2008), the company was to 
complete export obligation of  ` 1987 crore from SSP products by 30 November 2017  
which included export obligation of ` 993.50 crore i.e. 50 per cent  of total export 
obligation from stainless steel products manufactur ed by SSP and exports from other 
plants for the remaining export obligation. Though the production facilities at SSP were 
commissioned by September 2010, total export obliga tion fulfilled by SSP up to 31 
March 2015 was not more than ` 45.29 crores. Audit observed that the company had no 
plans on how to fulfill balance export obligations of SSP and there is a risk that the 
company would have to pay ` 121.42 crore as interest and composition fee on ex piry of 
obligation period besides refund of customs duty of  ` 114.55 crore saved under the 
scheme. The management replied that efforts are bei ng made to discharge the Export 
Obligation of SSP by including the exports of other  units of SAIL. Audit however noted 
that application filed (17 April 2015) by SSP manag ement with Director General of 
Foreign Trade (DGFT), Coimbatore for including mild  steel products produced by SSP 
and other steel plants of SAIL for discharge of ful l export obligation of SSP was turned 
down (4 June 2015) as the case lacked merit. Subseq uently, SSP took up the matter (18 
June 2015) with DGFT, New Delhi, whose response was awaited as of February 2016.  
5.2.2.11   Multiple handlings of semis leading to higher cost  
Stock transfer of semis from steel plants to the pr emises of CAs and WLAs involved 
handling cost besides freight, and the same was bor ne by the company.  Audit noted that 
9.51 lakh ton of semis were first transferred from Bhilai Steel Plant to stockyards at 
Bhilai and Nagpur; and from Durgapur Steel Plant to  stockyard at Durgapur. Later the 
same was supplied to the CAs and WLAs of BSOs juris diction. This resulted in three 
handlings of material instead of two handlings if semis had been directly transferred from 
the Steel Plants to CAs/WLAs. Management replied th at all the expenses including that 
of stockyard supplies were taken care of in convers ion economics, and cited reasons like 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
116 
logistics and stocks availability for allowing stock transfer from stockyards. Management 
reply should be seen in the light of the fact that one extra handling meant additional cost 
and reduced margin from sale of finished product.  
Conclusion 
Steel consumption in India increased by 30 per cent  during 2009-15, but SAIL’s market 
share in total saleable finished steel decreased fr om 18.5 per cent  to 14.2 per cent  during 
the same period. This was not only due to the delay s in capacity addition projects, but 
also due to absence of active dealership base which  adversely impacted the growth in 
retail sales. 39 percent  to 54 per cent  of ARDs of the company were inactive. There was 
no physical verification of ARD’s activities by the  Branch Offices. Sales through MoUs 
with large institutional consumers accounted for 92  per cent  of company’s total sales in 
2014-15, and developing customer base in retail sec tor was accorded lower priority. The 
company was not successful in about 30 per cent  of the tenders participated by it during 
the 3 years period from 2012-15 mostly due to its h igher bids. No analysis of the reasons 
for losing business in tenders was being done by th e company and no action taken to 
formulate future action plan. Extension of credit p eriod to M/s Tirupati Group resulted in 
undue benefits of 
` 3.98 crore. Interest of ` 18.81 crore was not recovered from M/s 
Larson & Toubro Limited. Inadequate supervision ove r conversion agencies resulted in 
instances of misuse of the company’s supplies and S AIL brand name by CAs and WLAs. 
The company could not recover ` 8.52 crore from a WLA at Visakhapatanam.  
Recommendations  
We recommend that the company may consider taking the following measures:  
/head2right Expand its customer base in retail sector and stren gthen the  periodical 
supervision of the activities of Authorised Retail Dealers; 
/head2right Analyse the causes of failure in securing orders th rough tenders and outcome 
of such analysis may be used while formulating future action plans.  
/head2right Improve the performance appraisal of Conversion age nts and Wet Leasing 
Agents.  
The matter was reported to the Ministry (November 2 015); their reply was awaited 
(March 2016). 
5.3     Idle investment at SPU Bettiah project of SAIL 
Setting up a SPU at Bettiah for conversion of semis  into finished steel was not a 
prudent decision financially and commercially. Resu ltantly, an investment of 
`` ``    140.16 crore in the SPU became non-performing and 1 37 officials specifically 
recruited for the SPU were idle.  
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL or company) decided (2007) to set up a Steel 
Processing Unit (SPU) at Bettiah, Bihar. The Board approved (July 2008) the project at a 
total cost of ` 116.24 crore. The Pipe/Tube  mills and facilities f or GP/GC Sheets 1 with 
                                                           
1  Phase-I comprised of Pipe/Tube Mills to produce u p to 3” and 3-8” black pipe, and facilities for 
Galvanised Plain (GP) and Galvanised Corrugated (GC) sheets 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
117 
annual production capacity of  50,000 ton of pipe a nd 20,000 ton of GP/GC Sheets were 
to be installed in Phase I. Phase-I projects could not be completed as scheduled by 
January 2010. The SPU was finally completed by Dece mber 2012 with a delay of about 
three years at a total cost of ` 140.16 crore. Due to the higher cost of production  
compared to the market price, the company did not i ncrease the production beyond the 
required level for testing and to keep the mills op erational. Production was less than one 
per cent  of mills’ capacity during 2011-2015. The investmen t of ` 140.16 crore in SPU 
Bettiah therefore became non-performing and 137 officials (out of initially appointed 145 
officials) specifically recruited for the SPU, were idle (January 2016).   
Audit observed as follows:  
A)  Imprudent selection of plant location:  
 
(i)  Decision to set up SPU at Bettiah for conversion of  semis into finished steel was 
not financially and commercially prudent. The prima ry objective of setting up 
Bettiah SPU was to meet the demand for sized and fi nished steel near the point of 
consumption in the state of Bihar. However, the cos t of production was expected 
to be higher for SPU in Bettiah, because the input material was to be transferred 
from the existing steel plants (Bokaro and Durgapur ) in the form of semi-finished 
steel, thereby adding freight element to the cost of production.  
(ii)  Separate facilities like residential quarters, gues t house, green belt etc. were also 
to be created at Bettiah due to distance from exist ing plants. The advantage of 
apportionment of fixed costs was therefore not available to the unit at SPU.  
(iii)  Audit also observed that the objective of meeting t he required demand could be 
achieved by installing capacity within the existing  steel plants and supplying the 
products through company’s marketing network close to the points of 
consumption in view of the fact that company had a branch sales office in Patna 
and 103 authorized retail dealers in 37 districts o f Bihar appointed with the sole 
aim of tapping the demand in local areas. The produce from Bettiah SPU was also 
supposed to be sold through this marketing network.  Against the envisaged 
capacity of 70,000 ton of pipes and sheets, only 70 6 ton of pipes and corrugated 
sheets were produced during 2011-2015, and nearly h alf of it (366 ton) was used 
in other steel plants of SAIL. Hence, the stated objective of tapping the demand of 
rural household/ small consumers by selling the pro duce near to the point of 
consumption was not achieved. 
B)  Idling of staff  
The Chief Executive officer of BSL 
1 recruited 145 employees against the requirement of  
128 employees. These personnel were idle as the SPU  has stopped production. Presently 
there are 137 employees and over ` 3 crore per annum (as on March 2015) is being paid  
towards their salaries and wages. The cumulative ex penditure in this regard was ` 11.90 
crore (April 2009 - October 2015). 
 
                                                           
1   Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) is nodal plant for SPU Bettiah 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
118 
C)  Creation of excess capacity  
The SPU required 3.6 MVA for mills in Phase-1 1, however, company purchased (2009) 
two 5 MVA transformers, each costing ` 40.26 lakh, and one DG set costing ` 2.11 crore. 
The second transformer and the DG set has remained unused since the procurement. 
Further, the company entered into a contract (March  2011) with Bihar State Electricity 
Board (BSEB) for supply of 1000 KVA for testing and  commissioning of Phase-1 mills. 
Clause-6 of the tariff order of BSEB provided that the transformer capacity of HT 
consumer should not be more than 150 per cent  of the contract demand and violation of 
this is considered a malpractice. Nevertheless, man agement installed a transformer 
having a capacity of 5000 KVA instead of 1500 KVA, without corresponding increase in 
contract demand as there was no scope of higher use  of electricity given the 
underutilization of mills. BSEB charged ` 6.44 crore (up to March 2015) for using the 
higher capacity transformer after issuing a reminde r (December 2011). This further 
increased the cost of production at SPU.   
The Board of Directors of the company in its meetin g (25 February 2014) noted that the 
SPU at Bettiah had commenced production but regular  commercial production had not 
started, and that SPU was not viable due to higher cost of production vis-à-vis the market 
price. Director (Technical) in a review meeting (29  April 2014) opined that sale of SPU 
at Bettiah would be a better option than closing down the same. This was endorsed by the 
then Joint Secretary (MoS) and Secretary (Steel) wh o saw no scope in running this SPU 
and desired immediate action for disposing of the l and and machinery and deployment of 
personnel to other plants/units. The management, ho wever, has not taken any action for 
implementation of this decision (January 2016). 
 The Management in its reply to the Ministry of Steel stated (February 2016) as follows:   
(i)    The Project was technically feasible, financ ially viable and hence considered for 
implementation, 
(ii)   Expression of Interest (EOI) to run and main tain the Unit had been invited and 
proposal for issuing Notice Inviting Tenders will b e followed after finalization of 
the terms & conditions,  
(iii)  the SPU was set up with the social objective  of  meeting  requirement of steel of  
rural small customers at their doorstep  in the sta te where no steel plant was 
located,  
(iv) Manpower had been working for different activi ties including security job at 
different times, and 
(v)    the transformer has been received at site an d is under erection. 
The Management reply is not tenable because (i) fin ancial viability of SPU was based on 
gross margin i.e. net sales realization 
1 minus works cost, and works cost did not include 
administrative expenses like office salaries and ot her office expenses. Moreover, as per 
feasibility report (2007), the gross margin in prod uction of GC sheet ( ` 591 per ton on 
works cost of ` 39,259) was very low. Financial viability of inves tment based on low 
                                                           
1  Net sales realisation = Selling price - cost of s ales returns, if any, allowances and discounts. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
119 
gross margin computed on the basis of works cost al one was subject to high risk 
particularly when the administrative expenses had t o be fully absorbed with no scope for 
apportionment, (ii) the decision of BSL management to obtain EOI to maintain and 
operate the plant was at variance with the fact tha t SAIL Board (February 2014) and 
Ministry (April 2014) had observed that  SPU was no t viable due to higher cost of 
production vis-à-vis the market price, (iii) the so cial objective of meeting rural small 
customers’ demand at their doorstep could not be  a chieved by SPU due to high 
production cost on account of negligible production , (iv) the manpower deployed at SPU 
Bettiah was largely idle as the  production was les s than one per cent  of the  rated 
capacity and no steps were taken to redeploy the manpower to other steel plants/units and 
(v) more than three years elapsed before the Manage ment decided to replace the 
transformer and order (January 2015) a 1500 KVA tra nsformer for installation. As on 
January 2016, 5000 KVA transformer had not been rep laced and the company continued 
to bear the avoidable BSEB penalty @ ` 5.36 lakh per month. 
Thus, setting up a SPU at Bettiah for conversion of  semis into finished steel was 
financially and commercially not a prudent decision . An investment of ` 140.16 crore in 
the SPU therefore became non-performing and 137 off icials specifically recruited for the 
SPU were idle. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry (January 20 16); their reply was awaited (March 
2016). 
5.4 Avoidable expenditure 
Outsourcing of coal coordination and liaisoning ser vices from a private firm despite 
having an in-house organisation for the same purpos e led to an avoidable 
expenditure of `` `` 14.35.  
Central Coal Supply Organisation, Dhanbad (CCSO) is  a service unit of Steel Authority 
of India (SAIL or the company). The CCSO is respons ible for regular coordination and 
liaison with the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited  for supply of indigenous coking and 
boiler coal to its differently located steel plants  as well as power plants run by its joint 
ventures. The main functions of CCSO included actua l assessment of quality of coking 
coal at loading points through proper sampling and analysis, monitoring of the loading 
and weighment of coal rakes, finalization of long t erm and short term agreements with 
the coal companies, making centralized payment and settlement with the coal companies. 
Since formation of Bokaro Power Supply Company (P) Limited (BPSCL) in 2001 as 
SAIL’s power joint venture company, the CCSO perfor med these functions for BPSCL 
until November 2007, when SAIL allowed BPSCL to out source these services to a 
private firm.  
BPSCL was formed by transferring the company’s exis ting captive power generation 
utilities at Bokaro but the captive status of power  plant was maintained i.e. SAIL shall  
purchase entire power and steam produced by BPSCL. The company also signed a 
Shared Facilities and Support Services Agreement (SFSS) with the BPSCL, and Schedule 
3A of this agreement provided for CCSO’s assistance  free of cost to BPSCL. As the 
CCSO was providing such services, allowing BPSCL to  outsource such coordination and 
liaisoning services to a private firm did not add a ny demonstrated value to BPSCL. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
120 
Therefore an expenditure of ` 14.35 crore incurred from November 2007 to March 2 015 
on coal coordination and liaisoning activities at a n annual average rate of ` 1.96 crore 
was avoidable. 
The Management  in its reply to Ministry stated (Ja nuary 2016) that (i) the Boiler coal 
linkage was transferred in the name of BPSCL in pla ce of SAIL/BSL in December 2006; 
procurement of coal was taken over by BPSCL in view  of the provisions in the Power 
and Steam Purchase Agreement (PSPA) between SAIL an d BPSCL, and decision taken 
by BPSCL Board, (ii) 30-35 per cent  of the total coal supplies were from non-
conventional sources where there has been no set up  of CCSO, (iii) considering coal 
handling cost of ` 35 per ton for coal supplies from non conventional  sources linked to 
BPSCL, and ` 5 per ton on supplies from conventional sources, S AIL may have to incur 
additional expenses of approximately `18.50 crore and there would have been saving of 
` 4.15 crore. Ministry has re-iterated (March 2016) the views of Management. 
The reply of Management/Ministry is to be viewed against the following facts:  
(i)  As per Schedule 3A of SFSS, BPSCL would compulsoril y avail the assistance of 
CCSO/SAIL for coal supply co-ordination after the t ransfer of coal linkage to 
BPSCL free of charge, till it makes its own arrange ment. CCSO was providing 
coal coordination and liaisoning support from coal companies to BPSCL free of 
cost under the same agreement. Under the PSPA betwe en the company and 
BPSCL, SAIL shall purchase entire power and steam o n the basis of 
reimbursement of fixed and variable charges incurred by BPSCL on generation as 
well as supply. Therefore, cost of outsourcing such services will add to the cost of 
power purchased from BPSCL with no corresponding sa ving in expenditure of 
CCSO. Transfer of coal coordinating and liaising se rvices from CCSO to the 
BPSCL was not a pre-requisite for transfer of coal linkage from BSL to BPSCL’s 
name. Paragraph 4.1 of SFSS agreement states that B PSCL could make its 
alternative arrangement in consultation with SAIL.T he company holds 50:50 
shareholdings in BPSCL with Damodar Valley Corporat ion, and appoints its 
executives on the BPSCL’s Board in the same proport ion. Therefore, the 
company’s executives on the BPSCL Board needed to evaluate the additional cost 
to SAIL vis-a-vis benefits from outsourcing. This was, however, not d one. As 
stated by BPSCL, it had no stake in this decision a s there was no loss to them 
since cost of outsourcing was reimbursable by SAIL.  Moreover, CCSO continued 
to render the same services to another power joint venture, NSPCL;  
(ii)  Total coal supplies to BPSCL during 2008-15 period was 8.49 million tonne of 
coal comprising 7.36 million tonne from conventional and 1.13 million tonne coal 
(13.3 per cent  of the total supplies) from non conventional sources;  
(iii)  Average coal handling cost at CCSO was ` 34.68 per tonne during 2008-09 to 
2014-15, but 90 per cent  of the cost comprised employee benefits which is b orne 
by SAIL in any case. CCSO had provided these logist ical services to BPSCL 
since its incorporation in 2001 till 2007 when BPSC L appointed the private firm. 
BPSCL has failed to provide evidence of additional value or efficiency in its 
operations on account of engaging a private company . In fact its cost of operation 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
121 
has only increased leading to higher purchase cost of power for SAIL. Further, the 
saving claimed in the reply is not based on facts.  
Thus, outsourcing of the coal coordination and liai soning services to  a private firm 
despite having  an in-house organisation for the sa me purpose was not necessary, and an 
expenditure of  ` 14.35 crore incurred at an annual average of ` 1.96 crore was avoidable. 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
122 
CHAPTER VI- RECOVERIES, 
CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS BY CPSEs AT THE 
INSTANCE OF AUDIT  
 
 
 
 
 
National Building Constructions Corporation Limited, Oil 
 India Limited and Oil 
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
6.1 Recoveries at the instance of audit 
In 6 cases pertaining to 03 CPSEs, audit pointed ou t that an amount of ` 6.91 crore was 
due for recovery. The management of CPSEs had recov ered an amount of ` 6.38 crore 
(92 per cent ) during the period 2014-15 as detailed in Appendix-I. 
 
National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation and National 
Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation 
 
6.2 Corrections/rectifications at the instance of a udit 
During test check, cases relating to violation of r ules/regulations, non-compliance of 
guidelines were observed and brought to the notice of the management. Details of the 
cases where the changes were made by the management  in their rules/regulations etc. at 
the instance of audit are given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
123 
CHAPTER VII 
 
 
 
Follow-up on Audit Reports (Commercial)  
Audit Reports of the CAG represent the culmination of the process of scrutiny of 
accounts and records maintained in various offices and departments of CPSEs. It is, 
therefore, necessary that appropriate and timely re sponse is received from the executive 
on the audit findings included in the Audit Reports. 
The Lok Sabha Secretariat requested (July 1985)  al l the Ministries to furnish notes (duly 
vetted by Audit) indicating remedial/corrective act ion taken by them on various 
paragraphs/appraisals contained in the Audit Report s (Commercial) of the CAG as laid 
on the table of both the Houses of Parliament. Such  notes were required to be submitted 
even in respect of paragraphs/appraisals which were  not selected by the Committee on 
Public Sector Undertakings (COPU) for detailed exam ination. The COPU in its Second 
Report (1998-99-Twelfth Lok Sabha), while reiterati ng the above instructions, 
recommended: 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in each Ministry fo r monitoring the submission of 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of Audit Repor ts (Commercial) on 
individual Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs); 
• setting up of a monitoring cell in Department of Pu blic Enterprises (DPE) for 
monitoring the submission of ATNs in respect of Rep orts containing paras 
relating to a number of PSUs under different Ministries; and 
• submission to the Committee, within six months from  the date of presentation of 
the relevant Audit Reports, the follow up ATNs duly vetted by Audit in respect of 
all Reports of the CAG presented to Parliament. 
In the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (Jun e 2010) it was decided to make 
special efforts to clear the pending ATNs/ATRs on C AG Audit Paras and PAC 
recommendations within the following three months. While conveying this decision (July 
2010), the Ministry of Finance recommended institut ional mechanism to expedite action 
in the future. 
While reviewing the follow up action taken by the G overnment on the above 
recommendations, the COPU in its First Report (1999 -2000-Thirteenth Lok Sabha) 
reiterated its earlier recommendations that the DPE  should set up a separate monitoring 
cell in the DPE itself to monitor the follow-up act ion taken by various 
Ministries/Departments on the observations contained in the Audit Reports (Commercial) 
on individual undertakings. DPE informed (March 201 5) that a separate monitoring cell 
had been set up to monitor the follow up on submiss ion of ATNs by the concerned 
administrative Ministries/Department. DPE also informed that they had also requested all 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
124 
the concerned departments having jurisdiction over CPSEs to set up Monitoring Cells in 
their department. 
A review in Audit revealed that despite reminders, 30 ATNs are awaited from various 
Ministries, as detailed in Appendix-III. 
  
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
127  
 
  (Referred to in para 6.1) 
 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit during 2014-15 
(Amount ` in lakh)  
Name of 
Ministry/Department 
Name of the CPSE Audit observations in brief Amount  of 
recovery 
pointed out by 
Audit 
Amount 
recovered by 
the 
Management 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Ltd.  
Non-recovery of outstanding dues from gas 
consumer at Ahmedabad  
64.70 
 
64.70 
 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Ltd.  
Undue refund of irregular payments in the 
Foreign  Travelling Allowance (FTA) from 
employees at Ahmedabad Asset (Nine)  
1.91 
 
1.91 
 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Ltd.  
Undue refund of liquidated damages to 
Contractors  
2.14 2.14 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Ltd. 
Non-recovery of Electricity charges from 
the colony residents of Ankleshwar Asset 
of ONGC  at revised rates who were earlier 
charged at flat rate 
 
 
83.52 
 
 
 
83.52 
 
Petroleum  and Natural Gas Oil India Limited Excess  payment to contractor 518.00 465.00 
Urban Development National Building 
Constructions Corporation 
Ltd 
During the execution of 'Medical College 
Mewat', NBCC paid excess amount to the 
contractor in contravention of contractual 
provisions 
20.36 20.35 
  TOTAL 690.63 637.62 
Appendix-I 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
128  
Appendix-II 
(Referred to in para 6.2) 
Corrections/Rectifications at the instance of Audit 
Name of 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the CPSE Audit observations/suggestions in brief Action taken by the 
Management 
Social Justice & 
Empowerment 
National Scheduled 
Castes  Finance and 
Development Corporation 
 
Non encashment of HPL to make up the shortfall of 
overall limit of 300 days for encashment of leave i n 
violation of guidelines of GOI/DPE. 
Management has amended 
its leave rules. 
Social Justice & 
Empowerment 
National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance and 
Development Corporation 
 
Levy of non utilisation charges and liquidated 
damages and waiver thereof 
Management has revised its 
policy for levying non 
utilisation charges and 
liquidated damages. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
129 
 
(Referred to in Chapter VII) 
Statement showing the details of Audit Reports (Com mercial) up to 2015 for 
which Action Taken Notes are pending  
No. & year of 
Report  
Name of Report  Para No.  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
6 of 2015 Performance Audit on Supply and 
Infrastructure Development for 
Natural Gas 
Standalone Report 
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras 3.1, 3.4, 3.5, 3. 8, 3.9, 3.12 
and 8.1 (6 companies)  
8 of 2012-13 Compliance Audit Para 11.6 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit Paras 10.4 and 12.1 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Paras 11.1, 11.4 and 13 .1 
Ministry of Shipping 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit Para 16.3 
 
Ministry of Steel 
10 of 2015 Performance Audit on Capacity 
expansion of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited 
Standalone Report 
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Paras 5.1, 5.2, 5.4, 5. 5 and 5.6 
13 of 2013 Compliance Audit  Para 14.3 
13 of 2014 Compliance Audit  Para 17.1 
Ministry of Textiles 
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Para 6.1 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit  Para 7.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix-III 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
130  
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
(Referred to in para 1.2.1) 
 
Pipeline Network of IOCL 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Pipelines Length (Km) 
A. Product Pipelines  
1 Koyali Ahmedabad Pipeline (KAPL) 116 
2 Koyali Sanganer Pipeline (KSPL) 1287 
3 Koyali Ratlam Pipeline (KRPL) 265 
4 Koyali Dahej Pipeline (KDPL) 197 
5 Barauni Kanpur Pipeline (BKPL) 745 
6 Haldia Mourigram Rajbandh Pipeline (HMRPL) 277 
7 Haldia Barauni Pipeline (HBPL) 526 
8 Guwahati Siliguri Pipeline (GSPL) 435 
9 Panipat Bhatinda Pipeline (PBPL) 219 
10 Panipat Rewari Pipeline (PRPL) 155 
11 Panipat Ambala Jalandhar Pipeline (PAJPL) 434 
12 Panipat Delhi Pipeline (PDPL) 189 
13 Panipat Jalandhar LPG Pipeline (PJPL) 274 
14 Bijwasan Panipat Pipeline (BPPL) 111 
15 Mathura Delhi Pipeline (MDPL) 147 
16 Mathura Tundla Pipeline (MTPL) 56 
17 Mathura Bharatpur Pipeline (MBPL) 21 
18 Chennai Trichy Madurai Pipeline (CTMPL) 683 
19 Chennai Banglore Pipeline (CBPL) 290 
20 Chennai Meenambakkam ATF Pipeline (CMPL)  95 
21 Digboi Tinsukia Pipeline (DTPL) 75 
22 Devangonthi Devanhalli Pipeline (DDPL) 36 
B. Crude Pipelines  
1 Salaya Mathura Pipeline (SMPL) 1870 
2 Mundra Panipat Pipeline (MPPL) 1194 
3 Paradip Haldia Barauni Pipeline (PHBPL) 1384 
C. Gas Pipelines  
1 Dadri Panipat R LNG Pipeline (DPPL) 140 
 Total 11221 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
131 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
(Referred to in para 1.2.1) 
 
Pipeline Network of GAIL 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Pipelines Length (Km) 
A. Natural Gas Pipelines/Network  
1 HVJ-GREP-DVPL 4659 
2 GREP DVPL Upgradation 1119 
3 DUPL-DPPL 875 
4 Tripura Region 61 
5 Gujarat Region 671 
6 Mumbai Region 129 
7 Krishna Godavari Basin Region 881 
8 Cauvery Basin Region 278 
9 Assam Region 8 
10 Dadri Bawana Nangal Pipeline (DBNPL) 265 
11 Chainsa Jhajjar Hissar Pipeline (CJHPL) 835 
12 Dhabol-Bangalore Pipeline (DBPL) 1004 
13 Kochi-Koottanad-Banglore-Manglore Pipeline (KKBM PL) 41 
14 Jaiselmer Region 151 
B. LPG Pipelines  
15 Jamnagar-Loni Pipeline (JLPL) 1414 
16 Vizag-Secundarabad Pipeline (VSPL) 618 
 Total 13009 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
132  
 
Annexure-III 
{(Referred to in para 1.2 4.1 (II)(B)} 
 
A.  Violation of OISD-STD-141 
Sl. No. Pipeline Commissioned  IPS conducted 
  Kurukshetra-Roorkee-Najibabad 
Section of MJPL 
2003 Not conducted 
  Barauni-Patna Product Pipeline  2003 
  Panipat-Rewari Product Pipeline  2004 
  Asanur-Trichy Section 2005 
  Trichy-Madurai Section 2005 
  Asanur-Sankari Section 2005 
  Chennai- Asanur Section 2005 
  Baghsuri-Sanganer Section of 
KSPL 
2005 
 
B.  Violation of OISD-STD-139 
Sl. No. Pipeline IPS due Last IPS 
conducted 
1. Paradip Offshore section of 
PHBPL  
2013 Not conducted 
2. Offshore pipeline of SMPL 2014 Not conducted 
 
 
C.  Violation of IPS Rolling Plan 
Sl. No. 
 Pipeline IPS planned IPS conducted 
1.   Panipat-Jalandhar LPG Pipeline 2014-15 At tenderin g/ 
proposal stage 2.   BKPL (Old) 
3.   Lasaria-Chittaurgarh section of 
KSPL 
4.   Panipat-Ambala of PAJPL 
5.   DP Section of PDPL 
6.   MDPL 2013-14 2014-15 
7.   MTPL 
8.   HB Section of PHBPL 2015-16 
2015-16 9.   HB Section – loop-lines 
10.   VS Section of KSPL 2014-15 
 11.   SS Section of KSPL 
12.   VM Loop-lines of SMPL 
13.   CP Seciton of SMPL 
14.   SV Section of SMPL 
15.   SV Loop-lines of SMPL 
16.   VK Section of SMPL 
17.   Mundra-Churwa Section of MPPL 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
133 
 
 
Annexure-IV                                                                           
(referred to in para 1.3.1) 
Statement showing financial highlights of UPPC and PNCP during last five years 
ended March 2015. 
  (`` `` in crore) 
UPPC 
Particulars 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15  
Sales and other income 3748.05  4270.60  4867.36  6022.72 6178.89  
Expenditure  2314.01  2663.99  3001.39  4436.04 5538.75  
Profit 1434.04  1606.61  1865.97  1586.68 640.14  
PNCP 
Quantity Transferred to BD in 
MT 419479  903103  1286812  1618649 1627739  
Sales (transfer to BD at RTP)  2184.16  5627.13  8922.25  11553.33 12870.37  
Other Revenue 90.44  445.47  779.07  1225.14 1283.75  
Expenditure  4115.84  7272.32  10551.73  12934.07 12807.01  
Profit /(Loss) (-) 1841.24  (-) 1199.72  (-) 850.41  (-) 155.60 1347.10  
Financial Performance of Business Development 1 
 (in respect of petrochemical products produced from PNCP) 
Quantity Sold (MT) 367421  907111  1250473  1431541 1652821  
Sales 2375.62  7030.83  10958.6  14638.73 16984.06  
Profit /(Loss) 189.65  406.39  666.37  761.37 1130.10  
 
                                                           
1 products transferred to Business Development Division at Refinery Transfer Price for marketing 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
134  
 
Annexure-V 
(referred to in para 1.3.3.1(I)A) 
 
Statement showing capacity utilisation of GCU (ethylene production) and polymer 
units of UPPC for the last five years ended 2014-15 
Name of units Installed  capacity  
(MTPA) 2 
Capacity utilisation as a percentage of  installed  capacity 
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Ethylene production unit in upstream  
Gas Cracker 
Unit (GCU)  
4,00,000 (2009-10) 
4,40,000 (2010-11 to 2011-12) 
4,46,000 (2012-13 to 2014-15) 
104 104 101 101 103 
Polymer production units in downstream  
HDPE I and II 2,00,000 102 109 113 111 120 
LLDPE/HDPE 
SWING 
2,10,000 101 106 100 102 101 
 
Annexure-VI 
(referred to in para 1.3.3.1(I)B) 
 
Statement showing capacity utilisation of power and steam capacity in PNCP 
 
Power 
(KW) 
 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Installed capacity  2087946000  2087946000  2087946000  
Generation  1052505329  1088715610  1119594900  
Capacity utilisation in ( per 
cent)   
50  52 54  
Steam (MT) Installed capacity  11282880  11282880  11282880  
Generation  4178379  3938894  4116809  
Capacity utilisation in ( per 
cent)  
37  35  36  
                                                           
2 Metric Tonne Per Annum  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
135 
Annexure-VII 
(Referred to in para 1.3.3.1(III)A) 
 
Statement showing design standards viz a viz . actual achievement in PNCP 
               (figures in MT) 
 2012-13 2014-15 
Feedstock PYPS yield of 
ethylene ( per cent ) 
Inputs cracked Ethylene to be  
produced as per 
design 
PYPS yield of 
ethylene ( per cent ) 
Inputs cracked Ethylene to be  
produced as per 
design 
1 2 3 4=(3*2 
/100) 
5 6 7=(6*5/ 
100) 
Naphtha  23.80 2036816 485597 24.30 2818286 686202 
C3 from FCC unit  0.10 74060 104 0.20 90924 141 
HDPE recycle 0 2861 0 0 2406 0 
Swing recycle 25.00 16302 4076 25.00 18313 45.78 
PP recycle 0 13686 0 0 16918 0 
Ethane recycled  52.60 143557 75553 53.00 177636 94082 
Propane recycled 35.20 55680 19622 36.80 54767 20169 
C4 Recycled  19.00 128686 24493 19.10 117547 22489 
C5 Recycled 24.61 165273 40674 24.30 90930 22051 
C6 Recycled  30.52 126043 38468 31.30 95996 30005 
Total ethylene to be produced as per design 688587   879716 
Ethylene produced actually 686997   876323 
Shortfall of ethylene produced 1590   3393 
Price of ethylene in `` ``/MT 70226   79086 3 
Loss of ethylene ( ` ` ` ` in crore) 11.17   26.83 
Total Loss of Ethylene ( `` `` in crore) for the year 2012-13 and 2014-15 38.00 
 2012-13 2013-14 
Feedstock  PYPS yield of 
propylene ( per cent ) 
Inputs cracked  Propylene to be  
produced as per 
design   
PYPS yield of 
propylene ( per cent ) 
Inputs cracked  Propylene to be  
produced as per 
design   
1 2 3 4=(3*2 
/100) 
5 6 7=(6*5/ 
100) 
                                                           
3 Provisional figure based on price for 2013-14 due to non- availability of figures for the year 2014-15 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
136  
Naphtha  16.23 2036816 330650 16.20 2360714 382856 
C3 from FCC unit  62.00 74060 45917 65.00 83102 54016 
HDPE recycle 0 2861 0 0 3207 0 
Swing recycle 0 16302 0 0 16166 0 
PP recycle 94.88 13686 12985 94.90 15515 14721 
Ethane recycled  0.98 143557 1412 1.00 163025 1672 
Propane recycled 10.30 55680 5759 10.10 54567 5525 
C4 Recycled  19.37 128686 24926 19.30 109549 21091 
C5 Recycled 16.50 165273 27313 16.30 107062 17402 
C6 Recycled  18.60 126043 23477 17.90 108478 19370 
Total propylene to be produced as per design 472440   516653 
Propylene produced actually  469557    512644 
Shortfall of propylene produced   2883    4009 
Price of propylene in `` ``/MT 72333    78990 
Loss of propylene ( ` ` ` ` in crore) 20.85    31.67 
Total loss of propylene ( `` `` in crore) for the year 2012-13 and 2013-14 52.52 
Total loss of Ethylene and Propylene due to shortfall in production ( `` `` in crore) 90.52 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
137 
 
Annexure-VIII  
  (referred to in para 1.3.3.1(III)B) 
Statement showing excess consumption of hexane in HDPE unit of PNCP 
Year Design 
consum-
ption of 
Hexane 
Kg/MT 
Net  
consum-
ption of 
Hexane 
Kg/MT 
Excess 
consum-
ption of 
Hexane 
Kg/MT 
HDPE 
Produ-
ction in 
MT 
Excess 
Hexane 
consumed 
Kg 
Excess 
Hexane 
in MT 
Price of 
Hexane 
(in ` per 
MT) 
Increase in 
cost of 
production 
(` In crore)  
(1) (2) (3) (4)=(3-2) 
 
(5) (6)= (4x5) (7)= 
(6/1000)  
(8) (9)= (7x8/ 
crore) 
2012-13 9.87 11.20 1.33 235278 312920 312.92 43312.12  1.36 
2013-14 9.87 11.50 1.63 273365 445585 445.58 68330.72  3.04 
2014-15 9.87 14.40 4.53 306040 1386361 1386.36  86747.00  12.03 
Total 16.43 
 
 
Annexure-IX 
(referred to in para 1.3.3.1(III)C)  
Statement showing consumption of steam over and above the design standard for 
the period 2012-13 to 2014-15 in NCU of PNCP 
 
(Figures in MT) 
Year Running 
hour of 
NCU 
Steam consumption in 
excess of design during 
the year (MT)  
Rate of steam 
(`/MT) 
Amount 
(` in crore) 
1 2 3=(14 Mt/Hr 4 Col 2)) 4 5=(3*4) 
2012-13 8236  115304  3451  39.79  
2013-14 8401  117614  4124  48.50  
2014-15 8758  122612  4124 5 50.56  
Increase in cost of production of final product on account of excess 
consumption of steam over and above design standard 
138.85  
                                                           
4 Excess steam consumed @ 14 MT/Hr in CGC 
5 Provisional figure based on price for 2013-14 due to non- availability of figures for the year 2014-15 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
138  
 
Annexure-X 
{(Referred to in para 1.3.3.2.(I)} 
Statement showing details of project schedule, major work order awarded, physical 
progress of project, slippages and reasons thereof (project at Vijaipur). 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 Work Contrac 
tor 
Date of 
award 
Value of 
work 
(` ` ` ` in 
crore) 
Schedule date 
of completion 
Actual/ 
Anticipated 
date of 
completion 
Delay 
in 
months 
Reasons 
1 Composite 
works of units- 
Erection and 
fabrication of 
GSU, GPU 
OIL  May 
2012 
156.90  November 
2013 
March 2015 
 
16  
Inadequate 
deployment 
of 
manpower, 
machinery, 
delayed 
payment to 
sub-
contractors, 
delayed 
commence-
ment of 
insulation 
and 
structural 
work, 
interruption 
due to non-
availability 
of daily 
consumables 
2 Civil, Structural 
& UG piping 
Works of GSU 
and GPU  
 BISIL May 2011 48.66 November.2012 January  
2014 14 
3 Civil and 
Structural Work 
– IV of GSU and 
GPU 
 UBE June 2011 34.54 October 2012 January  
2014 16 
4 Structural Work 
– V of GSU and 
GPU 
 UBE  
December 
2011 
8.64 December 2012 September 
2013 9 
5 Civil, Structural 
Works-II-
Utilities 
 HDOL February 
2011 
73.90 June  
2012 
February 
2015 32 
6 Plant / Non-
Plant Building 
Works 
 HDOL March 
2011 
36.40 May  
2012 
December 
2014 
32 
7 Building Work -
II  
 VRG  
December 
2011 
9.30 August 2012 January 
 2014 
17 
8 Electrical & 
Instrumentation 
works  
 
Elmatics 
July 2013 
 
7.40  November 
2013 
September 
2014 
10 
9 Mechanical 
works  
 TEL September  
2013 
7.40 January 2014 February 
2015 
13 
10 Composite 
work-III (LPG-
I&II area)  
 OIL October 
2012 
7.40 June  
2013 
July 
2015 
26 
11 Composite 
work-IV 
(Compressor 
area) 
 B&R October 
2012 
 
6.50 June  
2013 
March 
2015 
21 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
139 
 
Annexure-XI 
{(Referred to in para 1.3.3.2.(I)} 
Statement of various works, value, scheduled completion, actual completion and 
delays in execution of UPPC expansion project 
S. 
No. 
 Work 
 Contractor Date of 
award 
Value 
of work       
(`` `` in 
crore) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual date 
of 
completion/ 
status 
Delay (in 
months) 
1 Civil, Structural & UG 
Piping Work – Off sites 
Bansal 
Infratech 
May-11 67.09 Oct-12 Feb-14 16 
2 Construction of Reservoir 
for raw water and fire 
water 
IVRCL Jun-11 35.97 Aug-12 On going 
(as on June 
2015) 
34 
3 Structural steel works for 
GCU 
UB 
Engineering 
Limited 
Sep-11 37.80 Dec-12 Feb-14 14 
4 Utility Boiler Thermax Sep-11 104.90 Mar-13 Jul-1 4 15 
5 Heat Recovery Steam 
Generators (HRSG) on 
turnkey basis- with a 
single point responsibility 
vendor 
Thermax Aug-11 118.60 Feb-13 Feb-14 11 
6 Civil & structural work 
for GPU unit for Pata-II 
V.V. 
Construction 
Sep-11 28.48 Dec-12 Jan-14 14 
7 Civil structural work for 
downstream units 
LLDPE/HDPE 
Bansal 
Infratech  
Dec-11 63.68 Apr-13 Dec-14 18 
8 Composite works of 
LLDPE/HDPE (SWING 
Unit) & Butene-1  
Offshore 
Infrastructur 
e Limited 
Apr-12 64.66 Dec-13 Mar-15 14 
9 Raw Water Treatment 
Plant 
Laxmi Civil 
Engineering 
Services 
Jun-12 30.40 Jul-13 On going 
(as on June 
2015) 
23 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
140  
 
 
Annexure-XII 
(Referred to in para 1.4) 
Table showing Total Overall Production & Total production of Diesel by MR 
Year Total Production 
of MR 
Production of diesel by 
MR 
Production of other 
products by MR* 
(in MMT) (in MMT) (in per cent ) (in MMT) (in per cent ) 
2009-10 6.97 2.21 31.71 4.76 68.29 
2010-11 6.65 1.90 28.57 4.75 71.43 
2011-12 7.52 1.98 26.33 5.54 73.67 
2012-13 7.75 2.20 28.39 5.55 71.61 
2013-14 7.76 2.23 28.74 5.53 71.26 
2014-15 7.50 2.50 33.00 5.00 67.00 
*including intermediate stock differential and fuel & loss (Source: - Annual Reports of HPCL) 
 
 
 
 
Table showing Euro III / Euro IV diesel & Total diesel produced in MR 
(Production figures in TMT) 
Year/Product  2013-14 
(Nov 13 to Mar 
14 )* 
2014-15 
(Apr 14 to Mar 15) 
2015-16 
(Apr 15 to Aug 
15) 
High Flash Diesel   31.40      64.80   40.30 
Euro III Diesel 935.00 2111.50 723.70 
Euro IV Diesel     0.00   364.20 134.70 
Total Production of Diesel  966.40 2540.50 898.70 
Percentage of Euro III diesel 
to total diesel production in 
MR 
     96.75%        83.11%      80.53% 
Percentage of Euro IV diesel 
to total diesel production in 
MR 
    0.00         14.34%       14.99% 
*DHT was commissioned in November 2013 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
141 
 
 
Annexure-XIII 
(Referred to in para 1.5) 
 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year  Profit 
Before 
Tax (PBT)  
PRP 
Paid 
 
Effective rate 
of PRP on 
PBT ( Per 
cent ) 
Revenue 
from non-
core 
business  
Excess 
PRP paid  
2012-13  5647.80  169.30  3.00  1398.00  41.94 
2013-14  8179.00  399.96  4.89  1400.12  68.46  
Total  13826.8  569.26   2798.12  110.40  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
142  
Annexure-XIV 
(Refer to in para 1.7.4.3A) 
Delay in appraisal of the discoveries made in KG DWN 98/2 
Sl. 
No. 
Discovery Appraisal Period 
Completion 
Appraisal period 
allowed due to pooling 
 
Appraisal program submission 
Name Type Notificatio 
n date 
Date as per 
PSC 
allowed on 
Pooling 
in months in years Due Date Actual Delay 
Years (y) 
Months(m) 
1 Annapurna Gas 18.07.2001 18.07.2004 16.07.2010 84  7y 17.07.2002 CEIL drilled 
Appraisal well but 
not tested.  
NA 
2 Kanakadurga Oil & 
Gas 
12.10.2001 12.06.2004 16.07.2010 81 6y 9m 11.02.200 2 G2P1-1, 10.12.2009  7y 10m 
3 Padmavati Oil & 
Gas 
16.11.2001 16.07.2004 16.07.2010 81 6y 9m 17.03.200 2 M2, 10.12.2009  7y 9m 
4 U-1 Gas 25.01.2006 25.01.2009 16.07.2010 54 4y 6m  24.01.2007 U-2 on 10.12.2009  2y 11m 
5 A-1 Gas 25.01.2006 25.01.2009 16.07.2010 54 4y 6m  24.01.2007 A2 - 23.08.12 5y 7m 
6 W-1 Gas 12.04.2006 12.04.2009 16.07.2010 51 4y 3m  11.04.2007   
7 E-1 Gas 02.05.2006 01.05.2010 16.07.2010 50 4y 2m  01.05.2007   
8 D-1 Gas 17.05.2006 16.05.2010 16.07.2010 50 4y 2m  16.05.2007   
Suspension was during 2003-04 and 2004-05 which has been considered for calculation of appraisal period in respect of first 3 discoveries only 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
143 
 
Annexure-XV 
{(Referred to in para 1.8.2.1(I)} 
Status of Land Acquisition for drilling sites 
Sl. 
No 
. 
 
 
(1) 
 
Name of 
Block 
 
 
 
(2) 
Name of 
Location/We 
ll 
 
 
(3) 
Effective 
date 
 
 
 
(4) 
Date of 
requisition 
received 
from Block 
(5) 
Date of 
commencem 
ent of Land 
Acquisition 
 
(6) 
Days 
taken 
{(6)-
(5)} 
 
 
(7) 
Date of 
completion 
of LAQ 
 
(8) 
Days 
taken 
{(8)-(6)} 
 
 
(9) 
1.  Bokaro BKAA 21.02.2003 04.07.2003 15-07-2003 11 08.04 .2004 268 
2.  BKAB 21.02.2003 11.02.2003 26-02-2003 15 01.04.2005 765 
3.  BKAC 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 14.10.2006 171 18.02.2009  858 
4.  BKAD 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 16-10-2006 173 04.06.2009  962 
5.  BKAE 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 16-10-2006 173 26-05-2008  588 
6.  BKAF 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 18.09.2006 145 09.08.2010  1421 
7.  BKAH (S) 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 16-10-2006 173 18-02- 2009 856 
8.  BKAI 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 16-10-2006 173 21-10-2009  1101 
9.  BKAJ 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 16.10.2006 173 25.05.2007  221 
10.  BKAK 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 12.06.2006 47 26.04.2008 684 
11.  BKAL 21.02.2003 26.04.2006 06.12.2006 224 06.05.2009  882 
12.  Jharia JHAI 28.08.2003 06.02.2004 28.09.2005 600 25 .07.2007 665 
13.  JHAN 28.08.2003 17.05.2005 27-06-2005 41 01.03.2006  247 
14.  JHAO 28.08.2003 20.07.2005 26-08-2005 37 02.06.2006  280 
15.  JHAP 28.08.2003 18.04.2008 01.10.2008 166 26-11-201 0 786 
16.  JHAQ 28.08.2003 11.11.2010 23.11.2010 12 13.04.2011  141 
17.  North 
Karanpura 
NKAA 21.02.2003 25.08.2003 07.09.2003 13 11.03.2005  551 
18.  NKAB 21.02.2003 25.08.2003 07.09.2003 13 26-2-2005 538 
19.  NKAF 21.02.2003 18.02.2008 22.02.2008 04 09.07.2009  503 
20.  NKAG 21.02.2003 18.02.2008 30.07.2008 163 09.07.200 9 344 
21.  Raniganj RNAA 09.06.2004 27.11.2006 17.01.2007 51 22. 05.2007 125 
22.  RNAB 09.06.2004 24.06.2009 21-06-2010 362 18-05-2011  331 
23.  RNAC 09.06.2004 27.08.2009 27.08.2009 00 09.11.2010 439 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
144  
 
Annexure-XVI 
{(Referred to in para 1.8.2.1(III)} 
Avoidable idling of Departmental Rig 
Well  Year of 
completion 
Waiting for 
ready 
locations 
Waiting for 
logistics 
Total waiting 
days 
Rig cost per 
day ( `` ``    in lakh) 
Total waiting cost 
(`` ``    in lakh) 
BKAA 2005-06 17 30 47 2.94 138.18 
JHAN 2006-07 85 0 85 2.73 232.05 
JHAO 2006-07 121 0 121 2.73 330.33 
RNAA 2007-08 29 9 38 3.14 119.32 
NKAC 2010-11 4 5 09 3.86 34.74 
NKAD 2010-11 61 25 86 3.86 331.96 
RNAB 2011-12 0 18 18 5.62 101.16 
BKAI 2012-13 111 20 131 5.37 703.47 
JHAR 2013-14 0 6 06 6.62 39.72 
JHAJ 2013-14 0 11 11 6.62 72.82 
Total 428 124 552 -- 2103.75 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
145 
Annexure-XVII  
{(Referred to in para 1.8.2.1(IV)} 
Status of Development Phase of four blocks 
Name of 
Block 
Effective 
Date 
Time allowed 
for 
completion 
Exploration 
Phase II from 
the effective 
date 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
of 
Exploration 
Phase II 
Actual 
Completion 
of 
Exploration 
Phase II 
Excusab 
le delay 
 
Diff between 
Schedule 
Completion and 
Actual 
Completion of 
Phase-II (-) 
Excusable delay 
No. of six 
months 
extension 
s sought 
in Phase I 
and II 
Duration of remaining 
Development Phase 
Remaining Period 
of Development as 
on 31.8.2015 
/Remarks From To 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
((5-4)-6) 
8 9 10 11 
Bokaro 21.02.2003 6 years 20.02.2009 27.01.2011 158 days 5 48 days 1+3=4 28.01.2011 27.07.2014 Nil 
FDP approved in 
Jan 2013. 
ML applied 
belatedly yet not 
received 
EC not received. 
In the absence of 
ML, development 
activities not 
possible. 
North 
Karanpura 
21.02.2003 6.5 years 20.08.2009 26.09.2011 218 days  549 days 1+3=4 27.09.2011 26.03.2015 Nil 
FDP approved in 
September 2012. 
EC received in 
May 2015. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
146  
ML applied 
belatedly was 
received in July 
2015. 
One year extension 
beyond 26.3.2015 
not applied for. 
Jharia 28.08.2003 7 years 27.08.2010 27.10.2012 424 days 3 68 days 2+2=4 28.10.2012 27.10.2016 14 Months 
FDP approved in 
April 2013. 
ML applied 
belatedly was 
received in July 
2015. 
EC not received, 
development 
activities did not 
commence. 
Raniganj 09.06.2004 7 years 08.06.2011 08.12.2012 0 549 days  2+3=5 09.12.2012 08.06.2016 09 Months 
FDP approved in 
April 2013. 
ML applied 
belatedly not 
received. 
EC not received, 
development 
activities did not 
commence 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
147 
Annexure- XVIII 
{(Referred to in para 1.8.2.2(II)} 
 Status of Mining Lease 
Name of 
the Block 
Completion 
of Phase-II 
after 
extensions/ 
dispensation 
s 
Date of 
submission of 
development 
plan 
Date of 
approval  
developmen 
t plan 
Date of 
submission 
of ML 
application 
Delay in 
submission of 
ML application 
Date of 
receipt of 
ML 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
(5-2) 
7 
Bokaro 27.01.2011 26.11.2010 21.01.2013 12.07.2013 896 days i.e. 
29 months 
approx. 
Yet to be 
received 
North 
Karanpura 
26.09.2011 25.07.2011 25.09.2012 25.07.2013 668 day s i.e. 
22 months 
approx. 
Received in 
July 2015 
Jharia 27.10.2012 24.08.2012 23.04.2013 12.07.2013 258 days i.e. 
8 months 15 
days approx. 
Received in 
July 2015 
 
Raniganj 08.12.2012 05.10.2012 23.04.2013 01.07.201 3 205 days i.e. 
7 months approx.  
Yet to be 
received 
 
 
 
Annexure-XIX 
{Referred to in paragraph 1.8.2.2(III)} 
Status of Environmental Clearance 
Block name Submission of 
FDP 
Date of receipt 
of TOR (a) 
Date of 
commencement of 
EC process (b) 
Time lag 
(months)  
(a-b) 
Status of EC 
Bokaro 26.11.2010 14.11.2011 14.11.2013 24 months A waited 
North 
Karanpura 
25.07.2011 21.02.2013 26.06.2013 4 months 3 days Re ceived on 12 May 
2015 
Jharia 24.08.2012 10.09.2013 09.04.2014 6 months 30  days Awaited 
Raniganj 05.10.2012 18.03.2014 23.12.2014 9 months 5 days Awaited 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
148  
 
Annexure-XX 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.9) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of delay and period Amount 
invested 
(
`` `` In crore) 
Loss of 
interest  
(
`` `` In crore) 
1 Delay in allotment of equity 
shares by OPaL against advances 
paid 
997.95 245.22 
2 Amount parked for rights issue – 
two years 
670.92 108.89 
3 Two and half months 750.55 10.65 
4 Warrants convertible to equity 
without interest (First instalment) 
(June 15 to Dec 15) 
961.00 38.76 
 
5 Warrants convertible to equity 
without interest (second 
instalment)  
(Nov 15 to Dec 15) 
480.50 4.63 
Total   3860.92 408.15 
 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
149 
Annexure-XXI 
{Referred to in para 5.2.2.1(ii)} 
Capacity, production, target, and actual sales of SAILs three special steel plants 
 (Quantity in ‘000 ton) 
End of 
March 
Capacity  Production Target Actual Sales 
VISP SSP ASP VISP SSP ASP VISP SSP ASP VISP SSP ASP  
2013 98 339 184 56 65 126 64 146 127 50.47 66 97 
2014 98 339 184 22 98 114 129 142 121 33.29 96 100 
2015 98 339 184 35 360 96 72 155 121 29.22 132 95 
Net Operational Loss before Interest expenses and exceptional items 
(` in crore) 
2013 117 327 113 
2014 123 282 84 
2015 97 250 118 
 
Annexure-XXII  
{Referred to in para 5.2.2.2 (a)} 
Performance of dealers in SAIL during 2009-10 to 2014-15 
Year 
ended 
March 
No. of Authorized Retail Dealers (ARD) Sales throug h ARD (Qty in '000 Ton) 
Total (As on 31st March) Added 
during 
the year 
Removed 
during the 
year 
Active ARD Target Actual Achievemen 
ts (%) 
Total sales 
of SAIL 
 
As % of 
company's 
total sales 
 
Exclusive 
ARD  
All ARD Total As % of 
total 
2010 52 2508 NA NA 1533 61 NA 604 NA 12110 4.99 
2011 85 2649 NA NA 1529 58 805 581 72 11720 4.96 
2012 96 2662 41 28 1297 49 800 556 70 11420 4.87 
2013 95 2896 234 349 1285 44 800 545 68 11110 4.91 
2014 89 2948 318 488 1150 39 626 623 100 12070 5.16 
2015 92 2711 542 448 1255 46 600 632 105 11700 5.40  
NA-Not Available  

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume-II)  
150  
 
 
Annexure-XXIII  
{Referred to in paras 5.2.2.2 and 5.2.2.4} 
 
Details of MoU sales and rebate and discounts dispensed 
    (` (` (` (` in crore) 
Years  MOU 
Sales 
Other 
Sales 
Total 
Sales* 
MOU Sales as per 
cent  of total 
Rebate and 
discounts 
2009-10 23397.9 17836.7 41234.6 57 2467 
2010-11 26111.0 18501.2 44612.2 59 4103 
2011-12 15190.1 32033.1 47223.2 32 2904 
2012-13 25473.4 21139.9 46613.3 55 4800 
2013-14 40089.9 8307.3 48397.2 83 5696 
2014-15 43591.3 4012.5 47603.8 92 6088 
*excludes secondary sales 
 
 
 
Annexure XXIV  
(Referred to in para 5.2.2.6 ) 
 
Details of sales dispensations and average net sales realisation (NSR) 
 
Year Sales 
Quantity 
('000T) 
Dispensatio 
n ( `` `` in Cr.) 
(`` ``/t) 
Average 
Dispensation  
Average 
NSR 6 
(`` ``/ton) 
Cost of 
sales 7 
(`` ``/ton) 
Dispensatio 
n to NSR 
(%) 
2009-10 11010 2467 2241 31030 26291 7 
2010-11 10683 4103 3841 33962 29354 11 
2011-12 10276 2904 2826 37329 34308 8 
2012-13 10163 4800 4723 36291 34018 13 
2013-14 10917 5696 5218 35572 35299 15 
2014-15 10562 6088 5764 35198 34484 16 
 
                                                           
6Net Sales Realisation includes total revenue earned from selling a product minus cost of sales return, 
if any; allowances and discounts.. 
7Cost of sales is the accumulated total of all cost used to create a product/services. 

Report No. 15 of 2016 (Volume II) 
151 
 
Annexure-XXV  
(Referred to in para 5.2.2.9 ) 
 
NSR of Semis and Finished product after conversion from Semis 
NSR of products in `` `` Bhilai Steel Plant Durgapur Steel Plant  
2012-13 2013-14 2012-13 2013-14 
SEMIS 30,433 29,435 32,311 31,144 
TMT 8-12 MM* 37,784 35,407 38,511 36,337 
TMT 12-25* 37,130 35,187 37,340 35,375 
TMT >25MM* 37,168 34,760 35,793 36,905 
Structural (Light)* 37,687 35,208 39,919 36,918 
Structural (Medium)* 39,088 37,504 36,849 34,067 
Structural (Heavy)* 40,703 38,363 38,364 36,416 
     *Valued added finished products 
 
 
 
 