Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India
on
Crude Oil Production Measurement and 
Reporting System in ONGC 
For the period ended 31 March 2016
Union Government (Commercial)
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Report No. 21 of 2016
(Compliance Audit)

i
Chapter Particulars Page No.
Preface (iii)
Executive Summary (vii) to (xii)
1 Introduction 1
2 Crude oil Production Measurement and Reporting System 4
3 Audit Findings on Measurement and Reporting in Offshore 
Assets
8
4 Audit Findings on Measurement and Reporting in Onshore 
Assets
20
5 Impact Assessment 28
6 Conclusion and Recommendations 32
Annexures 39
List of Abbreviations 44
Glossary of Technical Terms 46
CONTENTS

iii
Preface
T
his Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
has been prepared under the provisions of Section 19-A 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971, as amended in 1984 for 
submission to the Government for being laid before Parliament.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India.
The Report contains results of audit of the ‘Crude oil production 
measurement and reporting system in ONGC’. Following a 
report on over-reporting of crude oil production in Ankleshwar 
Asset, an audit of the crude oil measurement and reporting 
system across Assets of ONGC was taken up. 
The Report brings out deficiencies and anomalies in the crude 
oil production measurement and reporting system which resulted 
in overstatement of production figures of crude oil reported 
by the Company. This presented an inaccurate measure of the 
Company’s performance and led to additional subsidy burden to 
the Company.
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation extended by ONGC 
and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in providing records, 
information and clarification in completing the audit. 

Report No. 21 of 2016
v
Executive 
Summary

Report No. 21 of 2016
vii
Executive Summary
Introduction
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Limited (the Company) is an integrated oil 
exploration and production company. The Company conducts its exploration activities 
through ‘Basins’ and production activities through ‘Assets’. Presently, the Company 
has 13 crude oil producing Assets both in offshore and onshore areas.
Production of crude oil in Mumbai offshore 
The well fluids from the offshore well head platforms are transported to the process 
platforms through subsea well fluid lines. At the process platform, the well fluids 
are separated into crude oil, gas and water. The separated, partially stabilized, crude 
oil is then pumped through the trunk lines to the onshore terminal (Uran) for further 
processing/stabilization before sale to consumers. The partially stabilised crude oil 
dispatched to Uran plant is measured using Turbine Meters (TM) at the outlet of the 
process platforms. This is the ‘wet crude’. The water content in the crude is separately 
measured using Auto Samplers. The ‘wet crude’ is adjusted for the water content, so 
measured, to arrive at the ‘dry crude’ dispatched from the offshore terminal which is 
reported as the crude oil production from Mumbai offshore. 
Production of crude oil in onshore areas 
Emulsion along with associated gas produced from the wells is collected at Group 
Gathering Stations (GGS)/Early Production Systems (EPS) through flow lines/tankers. 
The liquid so received at GGS/EPS is processed through a separator where liquid and 
gas is separated. The separated liquid (emulsion) is stored in tanks and after stabilisation,  
free water is drained out. For GGS/EPS without processing facility, the emulsion is 
transported to the designated processing installation. The processing installations will 
process the emulsion through Heater Treater by adding demulsifier to separate water 
and crude oil. The separated crude oil is stored in oil tanks at the respective processing 
installation and after stabilisation, further free water, if any, is drained out and crude oil 
with desired quantum (0.2 per cent) of basic sediment and water (BSW) is dispatched 
to refineries through trunk pipelines.
The Base office of the Asset collates the information from all processing installations in 
the Asset and prepares the Daily Production Report (DPR) for the Asset. The quantum 
of crude oil recorded in the DPR is reported as the production of the onshore Asset.
Highlights
 ONGC defines ‘condensate’ as liquid hydrocarbons produced with natural gas, i. 
separated by cooling and other means. ‘Condensate’ is distinct from crude oil, 
being produced from gas fields. Inclusion of ‘condensate’ quantity as crude oil 
vii

Report No. 21 of 2016
viii
production is neither in line with international reporting systems nor with the 
practice followed by domestic JVs, in which ONGC has participating interest. 
International consultants, M/s DeGolyer and McNaughton (D&M), appointed 
by ONGC in 2011-12, had pointed out that ‘condensate’ is reported as a separate 
stream wherever there is a gas processing plant. ONGC itself treats ‘condensate’ as 
natural gas while paying royalty to Government on its production yet reports it as 
crude oil production which overstates the crude oil production quantum.
(Paragraph 3.1.)
 The PNG Rules 1959 and the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 define ‘crude ii. 
oil’ as “petroleum in its natural state before it has been refined or otherwise 
treated but from which water and foreign substances have been extracted”. The 
performance contract by which the Company internally sets crude oil production 
targets for individual assets, inter alia, defines crude oil production as ‘the quantity 
after adjustment of Basic Sediment and Water (BS&W)’. The reported production 
in offshore areas is of partially stabilised crude oil, despatched from the offshore 
platforms before removal of off gas and Basic Sediment and Water.  Inclusion of  
off-gas and BS&W, therefore, overstates the crude oil production of the 
Company.
(Paragraph 3.2. and 3.3.)
 Crude oil from the offshore platform is despatched to Uran through two pipelines, iii. 
Mumbai-Uran Trunk line (MUT) and Heera Uran Trunk line (HUT).  At both  
points, the crude oil is measured by Turbine Meters (TM). Test check of the 
measurement data (from August 2014 to August 2015) from Turbine Meters (at 
the offshore outlet and Uran inlet) indicates that for both MUT and HUT pipelines, 
the crude measured by TMs at offshore platform was consistently higher than that 
measured at Uran inlet; the average difference being 4.57 percent for MUT and 
3.09 percent for HUT pipelines. Considering that the measurement by both meters 
were taken under the same conditions of temperature (15oC/60oF) and pressure, the 
volumes measured at both ends of the pipeline ought to be identical. This leaves 
open the likely possibility of human error in measurement/reporting at either or 
both ends.
(Paragraph 3.5.)
 Uran plant maintains electronic and physical logs of the measurements of receipt of iv. 
crude oil. However, at the offshore platform, no logs (either electronic or physical) 

Report No. 21 of 2016
ix
were maintained even though the flow computers have provisions for the same. 
In the absence of audit trail, the accuracy of this production data could not be 
verified. Considering the significant difference recorded in transit of crude oil by 
the MUT and HUT pipelines and no other justification for the same, the concern 
that the production recorded manually was inaccurate/over-stated could not be 
ruled out. The water content in the crude oil measured (Jan 2015 – August 2015)
in offshore platform was consistently lower than that in the crude receipt at Uran, 
the average difference being 0.81 percent for MUT and 1.65 percent for HUT 
pipelines. In 2003, ONGC had appointed a consultant, M/s IHRDC regarding the 
reconciliation differences who had opined that the consistent trend of discrepancy 
points to un-representative sampling on part of ONGC. Audit analysis indicated 
that the situation has persisted for over a decade without being addressed by the 
Company.
(Paragraph 3.6.)
 There was no standard operating procedure for measurement of crude oil in v. 
onshore assets. As such, different onshore assets measure production at different 
points of the value chain and use different set of measurement techniques for the 
purpose. 
(Paragraph 4.1.)
 In Ankleshwar asset, the vi. Daily Production Reports (DPRs) communicated to the 
base office of the Asset was much higher than the data maintained in the physical 
log books of the installation. In  Ahmedabad asset, the quantity reported by the Asset 
office was much higher than the data communicated by the processing facilities to 
the Asset office. In Mehsana asset, the DPR reported a calculated production data 
which was higher than the actual production quantity recorded separately by the 
Asset. The net effect in all three assets was reporting of production that was higher 
than the actual/measured production.
(Paragraph 4.2.)
Crude oil is used by the asset in work over operations for hot oil circulation/vii. 
squeezing jobs to improve productivity of sick wells. In such cases, a part of the 
crude oil is recoverable subsequently from the well. All Western onshore assets used 
to treat the entire quantity used for hot oil circulation/squeezing jobs as internal 
consumption. Recoverable crude oil thus treated as production led to possibility of 
double measurement.
(Paragraph 4.3.)

Report No. 21 of 2016
x
Ahmedabad asset recognised significant quantity of pit oil as closing stock viii. 
(accumulated from 2006-07 to 2009-10). While this increased the production 
quantum for crude oil, the asset did not value this stock in the books of accounts 
and the closing stock quantity pertaining to pit oil was gradually written off.
(Paragraph 4.4.)
 Ankleshwar, Rajahmundry and Cauvery assets have reported significant water ix. 
drainage after processing and before custody transfer to the refinery. Such a high 
quantity of water drainage, post processing, raises doubt on the efficiency of the 
processing installations and contributed to overstatement of crude production.
(Paragraph 4.5.)
 Ankleshwar asset had over-reported production significantly and to adjust this, it x. 
reported a much higher quantum of crude oil theft than actual theft of 550 litres. 
The asset showed a pipeline leakage of 3556 MT which the asset later accepted 
was to adjust the over-reporting of crude oil. The asset also over-stated the closing 
stock of crude oil at processing installations by introducing water/effluent in the 
closing stock taken at financial year end (31 st March) and then drained the water 
in April. This was done to adjust the excess production reported by the asset.
Similarly, it was noticed that the closing stock (31st March) in one of the processing 
installations of Assam asset had significant quantum of water which was drained 
in April for two years, 2013-14 and 2014-15, leading to an over-statement of  
closing stock, thereby over-stating the crude production.
(Paragraph 4.6. and 4.7.)
 Audit noticed various shortcomings in the measurement system of crude oil in xi. 
ONGC. Tank calibration was not carried out every five years as mandated in ONGC. 
In fact, most of the 120 tanks in Assam asset had not been calibrated or cleaned 
after commissioning in 1970s. ONGC implemented the Supervisory Control and 
Data Acquisition (SCADA) system in March 2008 at a cost of `385 crore. Though 
SCADA system had been installed in most installations and tanks, the same is not 
being used for reporting. Manual tank dips continued to be resorted to. In Assam 
asset there were differences in log book and SAP data. SAP ERP has production 
revenue accounting (PRA) module capable of generating the DPR from the stock 
positions, liquid received and despatched at the processing installations. It was 
however noticed that in Western onshore assets, DPR was generated manually 
outside Production Revenue Accounting module of SAP.
(Paragraph 4.8.1. to 4.8.4.)

Report No. 21 of 2016
xi
ONGC signs a MoU with MoPNG regarding performance of the company in which xii. 
crude oil production by the company is a key performance indicator. By including 
BS&W of 3.9 per cent, off-gas of 1 per cent, and recoverable internal consumption 
of 0.12 per cent, the production performance was over stated. If the actual crude oil 
production was reported, the company would not have met its crude oil production 
targets in any of the years (2010-11 to 2014-15). As performance related pay (PRP) 
of its employees is related to achievement of production targets, actual production 
reporting would have resulted in lesser pay-outs of `106.51 crore of PRP to the 
employees. Condensate was also included in the crude production incorrectly.
(Paragraph 5.1.)
The subsidy burden of up-stream companies since 2011-12 was determined as a xiii. 
function of reported production of crude oil. ONGC has borne a subsidy burden 
of 56 USD per barrel of its total production of crude oil. By over-reporting 
its production of crude oil, ONGC has borne additional burden of `18626.74 
crore during the period from 2011-12 to 2014-15. Further, over reporting of 
production in Ankleshwar and Assam Assets (inflating closing stock) has resulted 
in additional subsidy burden of `160.69 crore. 
(Paragraph 5.2.)
The following recommendations are suggested for improvement in the crude oil 
production measurement and reporting system.
The loss/gain during transportation of crude oil through closed pipeline systems 	
should be closely monitored to ensure that the variations are in normal range 
and identify abnormal loss/gain for corrective action. Such reconciliation and 
monitoring as well as corrective actions taken should be adequately documented. 
Asset-specific Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for measurement of crude 	
oil production may be formulated and implemented in all onshore Assets in a time-
bound manner to ensure that uniform measurement practices are followed across all 
production installations of the Company. Asset specific guidelines for segregating 
internal consumption of crude oil into ‘recoverable’ and ‘non-recoverable’ may be 
designed and ‘recoverable’ quantum may not be included as crude oil production. 
Norms for crude oil transit loss should be fixed and cases of abnormal transit loss 
should be investigated and remedial action taken to prevent revenue loss.
The Company should strictly adhere to prescribed schedules laid down for 	
calibration of all crude oil measuring devices, such as storage tanks and Mass Flow 
Meters, Turbine Meters, Auto Samplers, etc. in both offshore and onshore Assets 
to ensure accuracy of their measurement.

Report No. 21 of 2016
xii
Electronic and physical trails in support of measurement of crude oil at various 	
stages of production should be maintained to derive assurance regarding their 
accuracy. SCADA installed in all production installations may be integrated with 
ICE-SAP ERP system for capturing data and to minimise manual intervention and 
improve accuracy of reported information. The production reports for onshore 
Assets should be generated through the SAP-PRA module, in line with the practice 
in offshore Assets, to preclude the possibility of their manual manipulation. 
The Company may report condensate as a separate stream as opined by the 	
international consultant.
 The Company may ensure that items other than crude oil, namely, condensate, off-	
gas, basic sediment and water, etc., may not be reported as crude oil production. 
Considering the difficulties expressed by the Management/Ministry in accurately 
measuring the crude oil at the production point, there appears to be a case for 
shifting the production reporting point to a suitable location where stabilized crude 
(excluding BS&W, off-gas and condensate) can be accurately measured.

Report No. 21 of 2016
1
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1. Introduction
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Limited (the Company) is an integrated oil 
exploration and production company. The Company conducts its exploration activities 
through ‘Basins’ and production activities through ‘Assets’. Presently, the Company 
has 13 crude oil producing Assets 1 in both offshore and onshore areas as indicated in 
Figure-1 below.
Figure-1: Crude oil Producing Assets
Report No.   of 2016 
 
1 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
 
1.1. Introduction 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) Limite d (the Company) is an integrated oil 
exploration and production compa ny. The Company conducts its e xploration activities through 
‘Basins’ and production activities through ‘Assets’. Presen tly, the Company has 13 crude oil 
producing Assets1 in both offshore and onshore areas as indicated in Figure-1 below. 
Figure-1: Crude oil Producing Assets 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The production of crude oil reported by the Comp any for the last five years (2010-11 to 2014-
15) including those from Joint Ventures a nd New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) is 
tabulated below. 
 
 
 
                                                            
 
1Asset: It refers to an entity in ONGC that is involved in production activities from existing we lls and transportation of oil and 
gas on onshore plants. 13Assets are Ahmedabad, Mehsana, An kleshwar, Cambay, Assam, Tripura, Rajahmundry, Cauvery, 
Mumbai High, Neelam-Heera, Bassien-Satellite, Eastern Offshore Asset, Coal Bed Methane- Bokaro. 
Offshore Fields 
 Onshore Fields 
Mumbai High Asset 
Neelam and Heera Asset
Western Onshore Region: 
o Ankleshwar Asset 
o Ahmedabad Asset 
o Mehsana Asset 
o Cambay Asset
North East Region: 
o Assam Asset 
o Tripura Asset
Southern Region: 
o Rajahmundry Asset 
o Cauvery Asset
Eastern Offshore Asset 
Coal Bed Methane: 
o Bokaro 
Bassein & Satellite Asset 
The production of crude oil reported by the Company for the last five years (2010-11 to 
2014-15) including those from Joint Ventures and New Exploration Licensing Policy 
(NELP) is tabulated below.
 
 
 
 
 
1 Asset: It refers to an entity in ONGC that is involved in production activities from existing wells and transportation 
of oil and gas on onshore plants. 13 Assets are Ahmedabad, Mehsana, Ankleshwar, Cambay, Assam, Tripura, 
Rajahmundry, Cauvery, Mumbai High, Neelam-Heera, Bassien-Satellite, Eastern Offshore Asset, Coal Bed 
Methane- Bokaro.

Report No. 21 of 2016
2
Table-1: Crude Oil Production Reported by ONGC
(Figures in MT)
Year Onshore Offshore Production 
of Joint 
Ventures
Onshore 
NELP
Total Production 
of ONGC 
including NELP 
and JVs
Western 
Onshore
North 
Eastern 
Onshore
Southern 
Region
Eastern 
Offshore
Western 
Offshore
2010-11 5756676 1152021 537549 0 16972261 2859771 0 27278278
2011-12 5629262 1204507 550988 38458 16289179 3212953 0 26925347
2012-13 5186507 1224262 532950 44470 15572652 3564767 1506 26127114
2013-14 4916987 1264823 523424 25815 15514874 3747232 951 25994106
2014-15 4512939 1060798 494367 18191 16176615 3678874 986 25942770
Source: Corporate crude tally statement of the Company
Note:  Western Offshore includes Mumbai High, Bassein and Satellite, and Neelam and Heera Assets
The total offshore crude oil production was around 65 per cent  of total reported 
production of the Company.
1.2. Audit Objectives
The objectives of the audit was to:
Assess whether crude oil production has been accurately measured and •	
reported
Estimate the impact of inaccurate measurement and reporting of crude oil •	
production, if any.
1.3. Scope of Audit
Audit examined the measurement and reporting system of crude oil production in nine 
out of the total thirteen Assets owned by the Company for the period 2010-11 to 
2014-15. The Assets covered in the audit are:
Offshore Assets•	 : Mumbai High, Bassein & Satellite, Neelam & Heera.
Onshore Assets•	 : Ankleshwar, Ahmedabad, Mehsana, Assam, Cauvery, 
Rajahmundry.
1.4. Audit Criteria
The criteria for the audit was drawn from:
The Oilfields (Development & Regulation) Act, 1948. (i) 
Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974.(ii) 
Petroleum & Natural Gas Rules (PNG Ru(iii) les), 1959.
 Internal Standard Operating Procedures/circulars/guidelines for measurement (iv) 
of production of crude oil, norms for transit loss.
Domestic and international practices for reporting of crude oil production.(v) 

Report No. 21 of 2016
3
 Industry norms for pipeline loss, permissible variations in meter readings.(vi) 
The policy of the Company for calibration and maintenance of crude oil (vii) 
metering system.
1.5. Audit Methodology
The field audit commenced in August/ September 2015.  Review of records was 
supplemented by field visits to selected field and processing installations. Discussions 
were also held with the Management at different levels during the course of the audit 
to understand the process and limitations of the audited asset. The preliminary audit 
findings were discussed with the Management and thereafter audit observations were 
issued to them for their response. 
After incorporating the responses received, the draft audit report was issued to the 
Management of the Company. Replies to the draft audit report were received on 11 
January 2016. After incorporating the Management response, the revised report was 
issued to Ministry in February 2016 and Ministry’s response was received in April 
2016. The responses of the Ministry have been incorporated in this report. 

Report No. 21 of 2016
4
Chapter 2
Crude Oil Production Measurement and Reporting System
2.1.  Offshore Assets
2.1.1 Production of crude oil in Mumbai offshore Assets
The Mumbai offshore field comprising of Mumbai High, Neelam Heera and Bassien 
& Satellite Assets is the Company’s largest producer of crude oil. In contrast, Eastern 
offshore Asset is a minor contributor, accounting for 0.11 per cent of the offshore crude 
production.
The production facilities in Mumbai offshore field include well head platforms, 
process platforms, onshore terminal and pipelines linking them. The well fluids from 
the offshore well head platforms are transported to the process platforms through 
subsea well fluid lines. At the process platform, the well fluids are separated into 
crude oil, gas and water. The separated, partially stabilized, crude oil is then pumped 
through the trunk lines to the onshore terminal (Uran) for further processing/ 
stabilization before selling to the consumers. Processing facilities at Uran include 
Crude Stabilization Unit (CSU), where water is drained out and off-gas 2 is removed 
and added to gas stream. The stabilized crude from CSU is stored in intermediate 
tanks for further stabilization and then transferred to crude oil floating tanks. The 
crude oil from the floating tanks is dispatched to Trombay terminal and Jawaharlal 
Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) for sale to downstream refineries. Crude from isolated fields 
is produced through Floating Production Storage and Offloading vessel (FPSO) and 
transported through marine tankers to coastal refineries (around 7.90 per cent of total 
offshore crude oil production). The schematic diagram for production of offshore 
crude oil is depicted below: 
Figure-2: Production of crude oil at Mumbai offshore
2 Off gas is dissolved gas in partially stabilized crude oil dispatched from offshore to Uran. It is removed in Uran 
plant during processing and stabilization of crude oil and added to gas production. 
High seas sale to coastal refineries - FPSO 
Chapter 2 
Crude Oil Production Measurement and Reporting System 
 
2.1.  Offshore AssetsProduction of crude oil in Mumbai offshore Assets  
The Mumbai offshore field comprising of Mumbai  High, Neelam Heera a nd Bassien & Satellite 
Assets is the Company’s largest pr oducer of crude oil.  In contrast, Eastern offshore Asset is a 
minor contributor, accounting for 0.11 per cent of the offshore crude production. 
The production facilities in Mumbai offshore field include well head platforms, process 
platforms, onshore terminal and pipelines linking them. The well fluids from the offshore well 
head platforms are transported to the process platforms through subsea well fluid lines. At the 
process platform, the well fluids are separated into crude oil, gas and water. The separated, 
partially stabilized, crude oil is then pumped through the trunk lines to the onshore terminal 
(Uran) for further processing/ stabilization before  selling to the consumers. Processing facilities 
at Uran include Crude Stabilization Unit (CSU ), where water is drained out and off-gas
1 is 
removed and added to gas stream. The stabilized crude from CSU is stored in intermediate tanks 
for further stabilization and then transferred to crude oil floating tanks. The crude oil from the 
floating tanks is dispatched to Trombay terminal  and Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) for 
sale to downstream refineries. Crude from is olated fields is produced through Floating 
Production Storage and Offloading  vessel (FPSO) and transporte d through marine tankers to 
coastal refineries (around 7.90 per cent of total offshore crude oil production). The schematic 
diagram for production of offshore crude oil is depicted below:  
Figure-2: Production of crude oil at Mumbai offshore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
1  Off gas is dissolved gas in partially stabilized crude oil dispatched from offs hore to Uran. It is removed in Uran plant duri ng 
processing and stabilization of crude oil and added to gas production.  
Wells 
 Process 
Platform 
Crude 
Stabilization 
Unit  
Trunk lines 
from 
offshore to 
Uran  
Receipt of 
crude at 
Uran
Intermediate 
tanks  
Floating tanks 
(stabilized crude 
for sale)  
Trombay 
terminal  
HPCL/BPCL refinery
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) Coastal refineries 

Report No. 21 of 2016
5
2.1.2. Measurement of crude oil at Mumbai offshore
Measurement of crude oil produced at Mumbai offshore is carried out at the offshore 
process platform, the Uran plant and the custody transfer point - point of sales to refinery, 
e.g., Trombay terminal and JNPT. The process for measurement and the documents 
maintained at each of these locations are detailed below:
Process platforms: •	 The partially stabilised crude oil dispatched to Uran plant is 
measured using Turbine Meters3 (TM) at the outlet of the process platforms. This 
is the ‘wet crude’. The water content in the crude is separately measured using 
Auto Samplers4. The ‘wet crude’ is adjusted for the water content, so measured, 
to arrive at the ‘dry crude’ dispatched from the offshore process platform which is 
reported as the crude oil production from Mumbai offshore fields. 
The process platforms maintain the Daily production report (DPR) of crude oil 
dispatched in Microsoft Excel sheets. These documents (Excel sheets indicating 
DPR) are prepared manually by recording the production data displayed on the 
Human Machine Interface (HMI) 5 of the Turbine Meters on a real time basis. 
The laboratory report on the water content in the crude oil and its density is also 
separately maintained. No physical or electronic back-up of the production data is 
however taken. The details of the DPR, water cut and density are manually fed into 
the SAP system which calculates the dry crude production by adjusting the water 
content from the crude oil production reported in the DPR. 
Uran Plant•	 : The Uran plant receives offshore crude oil dispatched by offshore 
platforms and measures the quantum of crude oil received at its inlet point using 
Turbine Meters and Auto Samplers. The crude oil is stabilised at Uran plant in 
three stages where off-gas, basic sediment and water (BS&W) and condensate are 
separated. At the outlet of Uran plant, the crude oil dispatched is also measured 
using Turbine Meters.
Uran plant maintains logs of crude oil receipt and water content in it. The data 
regarding crude oil received is noted from the HMI of Turbine Meter at Uran and 
recorded daily in a log sheet, from which Excel sheets are prepared and entered 
into SAP system manually. Unlike the offshore platform, the Uran plant maintains 
electronic logs in the HMI system for previous three months. Apart from this, the 
physical log details are also maintained for previous three years. The lab register 
records manually the water cut and density of crude oil received.  The crude oil 
receipt at Uran plant is calculated after adjusting the water cut from the crude oil 
3 Turbine Meter is a primary device of Electronic Liquid Measurement System.  In operation rotating blades 
generate frequency signal proportion to liquid flow rate which is sensed by the magnetic pick up and transferred 
to real time indicator.
4 Auto Samplers are samplers installed inline in the downstream of Turbine Meters to collect samples of liquid at 
regular intervals. Samples so collected are tested at laboratory to determine the water content in crude oil.
5 HMI is the tertiary device forming part of Electronic Liquid measurement system. It is a flow computer receiving 
information from Primary device (Turbine Meter) and secondary devices measuring Temperature, Pressure 
and Density; Using the programme instructions it calculates the quantity of liquid flowing through the Turbine 
Meters.

Report No. 21 of 2016
6
measurement. The gas separated in CSU (off-gas) is calculated using a standard 
formula of Gas-Oil ratio of 13:1. The water drained in intermediate and main 
storage tanks are not metered, but measured based on dips. At Uran outlet, physical 
log sheets of stabilised crude pumped to Trombay Terminal and Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Trust (JNPT) is maintained. 
Trombay Terminal/JNPT (custody transfer point):•	  The sale of stabilised crude 
oil to refineries is measured at Trombay Terminal and JNPT using ultrasonic 
and Turbine Meters respectively for which electronic and physical logs are 
maintained.  
2.2. Onshore areas
2.2.1.  Production of crude oil in Onshore areas 
Emulsion6 along with associated gas produced from the wells is collected at processing 
installations - Group Gathering Stations (GGS)/Early Production systems (EPS) 
through flow lines/tankers. The liquid7, so received at GGS/EPS, is processed through a 
separator where liquid and gas are separated. The separated liquid (emulsion) is stored 
in tanks and after stabilisation, free water is drained out. The emulsion is transported 
to the designated processing installation for GGS/EPS without processing facility. The 
processing installations will process the emulsion through Heater Treater 8 by adding 
demulsifier9 to separate water and crude oil. The separated crude oil is stored in oil tanks 
at the respective processing installation and after stabilisation, further free water, if any, 
is drained out and crude oil with desired quantum (0.2 per cent) of basic sediment and 
water (BS&W) is dispatched to refineries through trunk pipelines.
Figure-3: Production of Onshore crude oil
6  Emulsion is crude oil inclusive of water
7  Water, Oil and Gas
8 Heater Treater removes emulsified liquids and solids from crude and also use heat and pressure drop to flash 
volatile vapours.
9  Demulsifier is a chemical used in the heater treater to separate water from oil. 
Report No.   of 2016 
 
6 
storage tanks are not metered, but measured based on dips. At Uran outlet, physical log 
sheets of stabilised crude pumped to TrombayTerminal and Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
(JNPT) is maintained.  
x Trombay Terminal/JNPT (custody transfer point):  The sale of stabilised crude oil to 
refineries is measured at TrombayTerminal and JNPT using ultrasonic and Turbine Meters 
respectively for which electronic and physical logs are maintained.   
 
2.2. Onshore areas 
2.2.1.  Production of crude oil in Onshore areas  
Emulsion
8 along with associated gas produced from  the wells is collected at processing 
installations - Group Ga thering Stations (GGS)/Early Prod uction systems (EPS) through flow 
lines/tankers. The liquid 9, so received at GGS/EPS, is processed through a separator where 
liquid and gas are separated. The separated liquid (emulsion) is stored in tanks and after 
stabilisation, free water is drai ned out. The emulsion is transpor ted to the designated processing 
installation for GGS/EPS without processing facility. The proces sing installations will process 
the emulsion through Heater Treater 10 by adding demulsifier 11 to separate water and crude oil. 
The separated crude oil is stored in oil tanks at  the respective processing installation and after 
stabilisation, further free wate r, if any, is drained out and crude oil with desired quantum (0.2 
per cent) of basic sediment and water (BSW) is dispatched to refineries through trunk pipelines. 
Figure-3: Production of Onshore crude oil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
 
8Emulsion is crude oil inclusive of water 
9Water, Oil and Gas 
10Heater Treater removes emulsified liquids and solids from crude and also use heat and pressure drop to flash volatile vapours. 
11Demulsifier is a chemical used in the heater treater to separate water from oil.  
Wells  
Processing 
installation -
GGS/ Early 
Production 
System 
Storage 
tanks 
Separator
Heater 
Treater 
Internal Use
Refinery

Report No. 21 of 2016
7
2.2.2. Measurement of crude oil at onshore Assets
Crude oil is measured at the processing installations and collated at the base office of 
the respective Assets.
Processing installations•	 : The onshore processing installations, viz., Group 
Gathering Station, Central Tank Facility and Desalter Plants maintain log books/
Daily production report (DPR). The measurement of crude is done through tank 
dips, Mass Flow Meters (MFM) and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) at the processing facilities. For ascertaining the volume of liquid in 
a tank, calibration charts of tanks are used. The water cut is ascertained based 
on lab test. The crude measurement and water cut are recorded in physical logs 
which are then manually entered into the SAP system.
Base office: •	 The Base office of the Asset collates the information from all 
processing installations in the Asset and prepares the Daily Production Report 
for the Asset. The quantum of crude oil so recorded is reported as the production 
of the onshore Asset. 
2.3.  Audit findings
Audit findings are discussed in subsequent chapters under the following headings:
Chapter 3:  Audit Findings on Measurement and Reporting in Offshore Assets
Chapter 4:  Audit Findings on Measurement and Reporting in Onshore Assets
Chapter 5:  Impact Assessment
Chapter 6:  Conclusion and Recommendations

Report No. 21 of 2016
8
Chapter 3
Audit Findings on Measurement and Reporting in 
Offshore Assets
The three Western Offshore Assets of ONGC (Mumbai High, Neelam Heera, Bassein & 
Satellite) account for nearly the entire offshore production of crude oil. Audit observed 
the following issues in the crude oil measurement and reporting systems in the Western 
Offshore Assets:
3.1. Reporting of ‘condensate’ as crude
ONGC included ‘ condensate’ production in ‘crude oil’ production.  ‘Condensate’ 
constituted 7.07 percent of the reported ‘crude oil’ production during the period from 
2010-11 to 2014-15.
Section 3(b) of the PNG Rules 1959 and Section 2(e) Oil Industry (Development) Act, 
1974 define ‘crude oil’ as “petroleum in its natural state before it has been refined or 
otherwise treated but from which water and foreign substances have been extracted”. 
‘Condensate’, as defined by ONGC 10 is “ liquid hydrocarbons produced with natural 
gas, separated by cooling and other means”. ‘Condensate’ is thus, distinct from ‘crude 
oil’, by definition. 
Besides, ‘condensate’ is produced from gas fields unlike ‘crude oil’ produced from oil 
fields. Not only is the production process of ‘condensate’ different, its utilisation in 
ONGC is also different from that of crude oil. While ‘crude’ oil is sold to refineries, 
‘condensate’ is not sold and is used internally by the Company for manufacture of value 
added products. 
Audit also noticed that the domestic Joint Ventures (in which ONGC has a participating 
share, e.g., JV operating the Tapti field) reported ‘condensate’ production separately. 
International consultants, M/s DeGolyer and McNaughton (D&M), appointed by ONGC 
in 2011-12, had pointed out that ‘condensate’ is reported as a separate stream wherever 
there is a gas processing plant. Considering that ONGC has separate gas processing 
plants at Uran, Hazira and Gandhar, where its ‘condensate’ is received and processed, 
‘condensate’ ought to have been reported as a separate stream.
Audit also noticed that whereas ONGC treats ‘condensate’ as natural gas while paying 
royalty to Government on its production, it reports ‘condensate’ as ‘crude oil’ production.  
By inclusion of condensate in crude oil production, Company had to bear an additional 
subsidy burden of `16331.96 crore as discussed in Para 5.2 A.
By definition, condensate is separate from crude oil. Production and utilisation of both 
products are also distinctly different. Company itself had admitted (July 2012) to the  
 
10 Annual Report of ONGC.

Report No. 21 of 2016
9
Ministry that condensate is not crude oil nor is it sold and requested for exclusion of 
condensate quantity from crude oil production (reckoned for under recovery burden).
Management/Ministry in reply (January/April 2016) stated that natural gas condensate 
is included in the crude oil production target fixed for the Company in the annual MoU 
signed with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG). Therefore, reporting 
is being done on like to like basis. Further, MoU parameters are under the purview of 
Task Force (constituted by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for negotiating 
MoU) and have been evolving over the years.
The reply of the Management/Ministry is not acceptable in view of the following:
The Company had been reporting condensate production as a separate stream till (i) 
1989-90 and reporting condensate as crude oil production commenced only later.
The reply is also silent regarding non adherence of the Company to international (ii) 
reporting practices as well as the divergence of the Company’s reporting 
practices vis-à-vis other domestic oil  and gas companies.
3.2. ‘Off-gas’ reported as crude
Partially stabilised crude oil dispatched from the offshore platforms is stabilised at the 
Uran plant. At Uran, it is stabilized at the Crude Stabilisation Unit (CSU) which, inter 
alia, separates the dissolved gas in crude oil. This separated gas is the ‘off gas’ which 
is then added to gas stream. Inclusion of ‘off gas’ in the reported crude production has 
resulted in over reporting of crude oil production by the Company. During the period 
from 2010 to 2015, ‘off gas’ production accounted for one per cent of the reported 
crude oil production of the Company. 
Audit also noticed that the Company pays royalty to the Government on ‘off-gas’ 
production at rates applicable for natural gas even though the quantum of production 
is included under crude oil production.  By inclusion of off-gas quantity in crude oil 
production Company had to bear an additional subsidy burden of ` 2294.78 crore as 
discussed in Para 5.2 A. The additional payment of Performance Related Pay (PRP) to 
Company’s employees by inclusion of off-gas quantity in reported crude oil production 
is discussed in Para 5.1.
Ministry stated (April 2016) that, had the processing facilities been available at the 
platform for complete stabilization, this gas would have been liberated at the platform 
and would have formed part of gas production and accordingly royalty was paid as 
gas. Management has also requested (January 2016) Audit to take up the issue with the 
Government for exclusion of CSU off-gas for determination of Company’s share of 
under recoveries. 
Ministry’s reply is not acceptable, as in the absence of sufficient processing facilities at 
offshore, the partially stabilized crude inclusive of dissolved gas is despatched to Uran 
plant where off-gas is liberated during stabilization and added to gas stream and royalty 
is paid as ‘gas’ for this quantity of off-gas. Including the same in crude production has 

Report No. 21 of 2016
10
resulted in over reporting of crude oil production. As off-gas is reported as crude oil 
production, it adds to the Company’s liability for sharing under-recoveries leading to 
higher burden of under recovery to be borne by the Company.
3.3. ‘Basic Sediment and Water (BS&W)’ reported as crude
Partially stabilised crude dispatched from offshore platforms and measured for reporting 
production of crude oil includes BS&W which is removed during the stabilisation 
process at Uran plant. During the period from 2010 to 2015, BS&W included in crude 
oil production accounted for 3.9 per cent of the reported crude oil production of the 
Company.
Section 3(b) of PNG Rules, 1959 and Section 2(e) of the Oil Industry (Development) 
Act, 1974 define crude oil as “petroleum in its natural state before it has been refined or 
otherwise treated but from which water and foreign substances have been extracted ”. 
The Performance Contract11 by which the Company sets crude oil production targets for 
individual Assets defined crude oil production as ‘crude oil would include the portion of 
recoverable oil reserve that is produced and delivered at the custody transfer/delivery 
meter. It includes the quantity after adjustment of Basic Sediment and Water (BS&W)’. 
At the custody transfer point (point of sale to refineries), the crude oil should have less 
than 0.2 percent of BS&W as per Crude Oil Sales Agreement signed by the Company 
with the refineries. Thus, the actual quantum of crude oil would be after adjustment of 
BS&W which has not been done by the Company in reporting production. Audit also 
noticed that the domestic Joint Ventures (where ONGC has participating interest, e.g., 
PMT-JV , Rava-JV , RJ-ON-90/1 JV) report production of crude oil excluding BS&W.  
The additional payment of Performance Related Pay (PRP) to Company’s employees 
by inclusion of BS&W quantity in reported crude oil production is discussed in detail 
in Para 5.1.
Management/Ministry in reply (January 2016/April 2016) stated that complete 
processing/ stabilisation of crude oil is not practically feasible at offshore platforms, 
primarily because of space constraints. The partially stabilised crude is transported 
to land terminal for final processing to meet customer specification. Deduction made 
in crude oil production based on samples to compensate for free water and BS&W 
are not very accurate and leads to additional BS&W draining at Uran end. The 
methodology followed for reporting of production is with the objective of reporting 
production exclusive of BS&W. It was also highlighted that the definition of crude oil 
as per PNG Rules under Oilfields Regulation and Development Act is from the point 
of view of payment of royalty and these statutory provisions do not pertain to reporting 
requirement. 
11 Performance Contract is an annual contract signed by the Chief of Strategic Business Units (SBU) with the 
concerned Director. The performance evaluation of SBU is done based on actual achievement vis-à-vis target set 
for Key Performance Indicators. The methodology followed for evaluation of MoU signed by the ONGC with 
MoPNG is adopted for this purpose.

Report No. 21 of 2016
11
The reply of the Management/Ministry is not acceptable in view of the following:
Though the reply asserts that the objective of the reporting methodology is (i) 
to report crude oil production exclusive of BS&W, a significant quantum of BS&W 
is reported as crude oil production (accounting for 51,69,136 MT of reported crude 
oil production during the period from 2010 to 2015) which has contributed to over-
reporting.
The crude oil production target fixed in the MoU signed with the Ministry does (ii) 
not indicate that crude production is inclusive of BS&W. In the absence of an alternate 
definition of crude oil for the purpose of reporting, the statutory definitions of crude oil 
(as per the OID Act and PNG Rules) ought to be applicable.
It is also pertinent to mention that the domestic JVs in which the Company is a (iii) 
partner, report crude oil production exclusive of BS&W. In fact, ONGC itself used to 
report crude oil production exclusive of BS&W till 1988-89 following which the process 
was changed. Even at present, crude oil production is reckoned excluding BS&W in the 
Company for high seas sale through FPSO. The reporting practice in the Company is 
thus inconsistent with its own practices as well as methodology followed by other oil 
and gas companies in the country.
3.4. Significant differences in reconciliation of crude oil
High seas sales of crude oil account for 7.90 percent of crude oil production from 
offshore areas with the balance transported through pipelines. Flow diagram of crude 
oil production and delivery in the pipeline sector of Mumbai offshore fields (with two 
major trunk lines, MUT: Mumbai Uran Trunk line and HUT: Heera Uran Trunk line) 
is depicted below:
Figure-4: Flow diagram of offshore crude oil production to sale point-  
pipeline sector
The difference in production quantity reported at the outlet of offshore platform and 
quantity sold at custody transfer point was examined in Audit. The results of analysis 
are given below:
Report No.   of 2016 
 
The reply of the Management/Ministryis not acceptable in view of the following: 
(i) Though the reply asserts that the objective of the reporting methodology is to report 
crude oil production exclus ive of BS&W, a significant quantum of BS&W is reported as crude 
oil production (accounting for 51,69,136 MT of re ported crude oil produ ctionduring the period 
from 2010 to 2015) which has contributed to over-reporting. 
(ii) The crude oil production target fixed in th e MoU signed with the Ministry does not 
indicate that crude production is inclusive of BS&W. In the absence of an alternate definition of 
crude oil for the purpose of reporting, the statutor y definitions of crude oil (as per the OID Act 
and PNG Rules) ought to be applicable. 
(iii) It is also pertinent to mention that th e domestic JVs in which the Company is a 
partner,report crude oil producti on exclusive of BS&W . In fact, ONGC itself used to report 
crude oil production exclusive of BS&W till 1988- 89 following which the process was changed. 
Even at present, crude oil production is reck oned excluding BS&W in the Company for high 
seas sale through FPSO. The reporting practice in th e Company is thus inconsistent with its own 
practices as well as methodology followed by other oil and gas companies in the country. 
3.4. Significant differences in reconciliation of crude oil 
High seas sales of crude oil account for 7.90 percent of crude oil production from offshore areas 
with the balance transported through pipelines . Flow diagram of crude oil production and 
delivery in the pipeline sector of Mumbai  offshore fields(with two major trunk lines, MUT: 
Mumbai Uran Trunk line and HUT: HeeraUran Trunk line) is depicted below: 
Figure-4: Flow diagram of offshore crude oil production to sale point- pipeline sector 
 
 
`  MUT 
      H U T  
 
Wells 
 Process 
platform 
Uran 
Plant 
Trombay 
Terminal/ 
JNPT 
Refineries 
Production 
reported Custody 
transferred 

Report No. 21 of 2016
12
Table-2: Reconciliation of pipeline sector of dry12 crude oil at 15oC 
(in percent)
Sectors where differences were 
noticed
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Difference between quantity 
reported at outlet of offshore and 
receipt at Uran inlet 
9.37 8.33 4.17 4.63 4.43
Difference between quantity 
reported at inlet of Uran and outlet 
at Uranrepresenting stabilization of 
crude oil
0.07 0.23 0.42 0.62 1.23
Difference between Uran outlet 
and custody transfer point 
0.36 0.06 0.21 0.40 0.22
Total differences noticed 9.80 8.62 4.80 5.65 5.88
As seen from the table above, the overall differences which had reduced to 4.80 per 
cent in 2012-13 has since increased in 2013-14 and 2014-15. Audit also noticed that 
the differences in 2015-16 (upto August 2015) were 5.93 per cent which confirms the 
increasing trend. It is also seen that the most significant differences arise in the transport 
of crude oil from offshore platform to Uran plant through pipelines. In contrast, the 
processes at Uran plant lead to minor differences and transfer from Uran to custody 
transfer point results in insignificant differences in dry crude oil quantity. 
Management/Ministry replied (January/April 2016) that the oil from offshore is not 
fully stabilized and also not free from emulsified water due to footprint constraints. 
De-emulsifiers get more retention time while oil travels from offshore to Uran via long 
subsea pipeline resulting in breakage of residual emulsion. Final phase of separation 
and stabilization is attained while processing at Uran. It was further stated that the 
reconciliation difference is a result of inaccuracies in water content measurement and 
metering and to overcome these inaccuracies Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) 
on metering and measurement of crude oil has been prepared and issued to all offshore 
assets for implementation.
The reply of the Management/Ministry needs to be viewed in light of the following:
 The major quantity difference occurs during transport of crude oil from (i) 
offshore platforms to Uran plant, in closed pipelines. In comparison, the 
quantity differences at Uran plant, where stabilization processes actually take 
place, are minor. 
 In view of the very significant reconciliation difference, Audit tried to (ii) 
ascertain efforts taken by the Management for review and corrective action. 
In response, Uran plant and Assets stated that such reconciliation meetings 
are held on need basis but minutes of such meetings are usually not issued 
12 In case of offshore crude oil production dry crude oil denotes wet crude oil dispatched from offshore to Uran 
adjusted for water count in wet crude oil based on laboratory test done at offshore.

Report No. 21 of 2016
13
and are not available. In the absence of records, Audit could not ascertain 
the reasons for differences nor draw assurance that adequate steps were being 
taken by the Company for corrective action. 
 Management has accepted that metering and measurement of crude oil and (iii) 
water content has been inaccurate and assured that SOPs have been prepared 
for corrective action. The action of the Management would be reviewed in 
future audits. 
3.5.  Differences in reconciliation for pipeline transfer between offshore fields and Uran
Audit carried out detailed analysis of reconciliation of differences in the light of 
significant differences during transfer of crude oil between offshore platforms and Uran 
plant.  It was noticed that the offshore platforms and Uran inlet are connected through 
closed subsea pipelines, viz., Mumbai Uran Trunk line (MUT) and Heera Uran Trunk 
line (HUT) line.  Since the transfer is through a closed pipeline system, it is expected 
that the quantity of fluid (Crude+water+dissolved gas) dispatched from offshore and 
that received at Uran should tally. The monthly dispatch through Mumbai Uran Trunk 
line (MUT) and Heera Uran Trunk line (HUT) for one-year period from August 2014 to 
August 2015 was analyzed in audit. The results of analysis are tabulated below:
Table-3: Differences in wet crude oil receipt and dispatch
(in cubic meters at temperature of 15o Celsius)
Date
MUT HUT 
Offshore 
dispatch
Uran 
receipt Difference Offshore 
dispatch
Uran 
receipt Difference
M3 M3 M3 % M3 M3 M3 %
Aug-14 8,25,342 7,96,378 28,964 3.51 5,99,031 5,83,439 15,592 2.60
Sep-14 8,05,575 7,66,011 39,564 4.91 5,85,175 5,66,894 18,281 3.12
Oct-14 8,05,054 7,69,406 35,648 4.43 6,01,074 5,81,127 19,947 3.32
Nov-14 8,08,756 7,72,783 35,973 4.45 5,93,772 5,70,678 23,094 3.89
Dec-14 7,43,409 7,14,455 28,954 3.89 5,81,010 5,57,305 23,705 4.08
Jan-15 8,35,592 7,96,061 39,531 4.73 5,90,262 5,68,646 21,616 3.66
Feb-15 7,67,818 7,35,974 31,844 4.15 5,28,355 5,08,708 19,647 3.72
Mar-15 8,61,441 8,22,608 38,833 4.51 5,52,189 5,31,392 20,797 3.77
Apr. 15 8,23,367 7,91,660 31,707 3.85 4,67,987 4,57,361 10,626 2.27
May-15 8,49,233 8,09,459 39,774 4.68 5,44,778 5,23,463 21,315 3.91
Jun-15 8,55,317 8,11,114 44,203 5.17 5,13,798 5,06,394 7,404 1.44
Jul-15 10,46,719 9,96,539 50,180 4.79 3,77,988 3,66,974 11,014 2.91
Aug-15 10,40,076 9,79,540 60,536 5.82 3,88,857 3,87,779 1,078 0.28
Average 1,10,67,699 1,05,61,988 5,05,711 4.57 69,24,276 67,10,160 2,14,116 3.09
As seen from the table above, there was an average difference of 4.57 per cent (MUT) 
and 3.09 per cent (HUT) between quantity dispatched and quantity received. It was also 

Report No. 21 of 2016
14
seen that the quantity reported at the offshore process platform were consistently higher 
than that reported at Uran inlet. Considering that measurements at both ends (offshore 
outlet and Uran inlet) were done at identical conditions of temperature (15 oC), and the 
fluid travelled in a closed pipeline, such significant differences were not expected.
The American Petroleum Institute (API) standard 2560 on “Reconciliation of Liquid 
Pipeline Quantities” states that for pipeline systems, ‘there is no actual physical gain 
or loss, just simply small measurement inaccuracies (a fraction of percentage) and is 
caused by small imperfections in a number of measurements in the system’. The standard 
also states that ‘most pipeline systems typically experience some degree of loss or gain 
over time representing normal loss/gain performance for a system. However, such loss/ 
gain should be monitored for any given system at regular intervals to establish what 
is normal for that system and to identify any abnormal loss/ gain so that corrective 
action can be taken’. The standard, thus, asserts that changes in quantity due to pipeline 
transfers are not expected and in case of differences, their cause ought to be analysed 
to identify whether it is abnormal and corrective action taken. In the instant case, the 
differences noticed are of the order of 3 to 4.5 per cent as against the fraction of a 
percentage difference expected as per the standard and hence abnormal. Considering 
the significant difference between the dispatch and receipt quantity, it is imperative that 
proper controls and monitoring is in place. API standards suggest that such differences 
in pipeline quantities could be due to leakages, manual error in recording data or 
machine errors. 
Mumbai High and Neelam Heera Assets confirmed that there were no reported leakages 
of subsea trunk lines during the period of audit. The calibrations of meters were also 
checked by Audit and its impact was not found significant enough to explain the wide 
and consistent variations noticed. Human error is thus likely to be a reason for the un-
explained differences in quantity. 
Management in reply (January 2016) stated that:
 The API standard 2560 is not intended for non-liquid or mixed phase system. MUT (i) 
and HUT pipelines are not single phase flow because of liberation of some gases 
between offshore and Uran over the 200 kms long pipeline. The API standard does 
not establish industry standards for loss/gain level because each system is unique and 
exhibits its own loss/gain level and/or patterns under normal operating conditions.
 Minor meter imbalances or recurring hourly shortages/overages can be the result (ii) 
of pipeline pressure change, product interfaces, seasonal temperature changes, 
evaporation and volume shrinkage and thus, reasons for variation cannot be fully 
attributed to human error and machine error, as concluded by Audit.
The reply of Management needs to be viewed in the context of the following:
The contention of the Management that transportation in MUT and HUT pipelines (i) 
is not a single phase flow because of liberation of gases between offshore and Uran 

Report No. 21 of 2016
15
is not accurate. Management had appointed a consultant M/s IHRDC, Boston, 
USA (IHRDC) in October 2003 to study the reconciliation differences who had 
concluded that ‘the crude oil in the offshore pipelines is above its bubble point at 
all times between the offshore and onshore meters. Break-out of gas cannot occur 
and therefore is not a factor in metering discrepancies and there is no product phase 
change between the meters’.
Management has explained the reasons for (ii) minor differences between pipeline 
dispatch and receipt. However, the actual differences noticed are significant at 3 to 
4.5 percent. 
Ministry added (April 2016) that typical accuracy ranges for various metering purposes 
vary as per requirement and the metering at platform is mainly for production operations 
and not custody transfer grade. Ministry also pointed out that as per IHRDC, typical 
accuracy range for production purposes ranges at +/- 5 per cent.
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable. The typical accuracy range of +/- 5 percent quoted 
in the response, was suggested by IHRDC in its report of 2003, when the temperature at 
which measurement was recorded at both ends of the pipeline (offshore outlet and Uran 
inlet) was different. IHRDC had in fact recommended that, if temperature compensation 
is applied and meters were proved (calibrated), then differences ought to be within a 
percentage point or two. Presently volumes are measured at standard temperature (15 o 
C) at both ends (offshore despatch/Uran inlet) and thus the differences are expected to 
be much lower than the quoted +/- 5 percent. It is also pertinent to mention that for all 
days of the year (August 2014 to August 2015), there was a short receipt of crude oil at 
Uran when compared with the dispatch from offshore (not +/- scenario as suggested in 
the response). 
The consistent losses, noticed during transportation of crude oil in a closed pipeline 
cannot be explained as typical inaccuracy of metering. Besides, the differences arising 
in the pipeline sector are significant; there being a difference of 7,19,827 cubic meters 
of reported crude oil production during transportation in the MUT and HUT pipelines 
for a year (August 2014-August 2015) alone.
3.6. Measurement of crude oil at offshore platforms
At the offshore platforms, measurement of quantity of crude oil dispatched is done 
using Turbine Meters and Auto Samplers. While Turbine Meters measure the 
quantity of partially stabilized crude (wet crude) pumped into the pipelines (MUT 
and HUT), the Auto Samplers measure the water content in the crude. To arrive at 
the actual quantity of crude oil dispatched (dry crude), the wet crude has to be 
adjusted for the water content. The cumulative quantity of dry crude dispatched 
from offshore platforms is reported as production of crude oil by the Company.  

Report No. 21 of 2016
16
Non-availability of electronic/physical logs/records relating to measurement A. 
of wet crude by Turbine Meters at Offshore platforms
As already highlighted in Para 3.5, the wet crude measured at offshore platforms is 
consistently higher than the receipt at Uran inlet. Measurement at both ends is done 
using Turbine Meters (TMs). The measured quantity of wet crude by TMs is displayed 
by the Human Machine Interface (HMI) system on a real time basis. The readings from 
HMI is then read manually every day at 6.00 am and an Excel sheet containing the daily 
production details is prepared and manually entered in the SAP system. The standard 
volume13 is taken from HMI and SAP uses a preset formula for final calculation of dry 
crude oil (based on water cut as measured by the Auto Samplers and density as reported 
by offshore lab) which is considered for reporting purposes.  
Audit observed that electronic/physical logs/records of production data is not maintained 
at offshore and hence no audit trails were available to verify the correctness and integrity 
of data manually read from the HMI.  While the flow computers have provision for storing 
logs for a period of 35 days, storing data for a longer period was possible by linking 
the flow computers with HMI with limited modifications. Audit observed that this was 
done at Uran plant where crude oil receipt data is maintained on hourly/daily/monthly 
basis for a minimum period of ninety days. Besides, the production data from HMIs is 
recorded in daily log sheets, maintained manually. Thus audit trails both electronic and 
physical, existed at Uran inlet. Audit test checked the records maintained at Uran end 
for the period January to August 2015 against electronic logs of HMI, physical daily 
log sheets, tank logs and SAP data and found them tallying. In the absence of logs/
audit trail for offshore dispatch quantity, reasonable assurance regarding accuracy of 
the recorded production figures at offshore could not be obtained by Audit. 
Management in reply stated (January 2016) that subsequent to audit observations, 
necessary modifications and up-gradation of software in flow computers and HMI 
has been taken up at both Mumbai High and Neelam Heera Assets. Management also 
informed that post modification, back up of data would be available for over six months 
for Neelam Heera and longer periods for Mumbai High. Management also assured that 
post up-gradation, all the relevant audit trails will be available in the system. Ministry 
further stated (April 2016) that steps were being taken to integrate SCADA system with 
ICE SAP-ERP to address the issues brought out by Audit. 
Audit has noted the corrective action taken by the Management and it will be verified 
during future audits.
13 V olume at 15 degree Celsius /60 degreeFahrenheit

Report No. 21 of 2016
17
B.  Differences in measurement of water content by Auto Samplers at offshore 
platforms
The water content in the partially stabilized ‘wet’ crude dispatched from the offshore 
platforms is measured by taking periodic samples of the ‘wet’ crude from the Auto 
Samplers and testing these samples chemically for water content at the offshore 
laboratory. An identical measurement process is followed at Uran plant where the 
water content at Uran inlet is measured based on Auto Samplers installed there. The net 
quantity, after adjusting the water cut is recorded as ‘dry’ crude dispatched and received 
at offshore and Uran respectively. 
Audit noticed that the water content in the crude oil measured at receipt end (Uran 
inlet) has been consistently higher than that measured at the dispatch end (offshore 
platforms) during the period January 2015 to August 2015 as can be seen from the table 
below:
Table-4: Water cut in crude oil at offshore and Uran
Water Cut (WC) expressed as percentage of crude oil
Month,
2015
HUT pipeline (in per cent) MUT pipeline (in per cent)
WC at 
Offshore
WC at 
Uran
Diff. Diff. in 
%
WC at 
Offshore
WC at 
Uran
Diff. Diff. in 
%
January 2.26 3.70 1.44 63.27 2.35 2.56 0.21 8.94
February 2.58 4.02 1.44 55.81 2.05 2.64 0.59 28.78
March 2.53 3.98 1.45 57.31 2.00 2.92 0.92 46.00
April 2.94 4.98 2.04 69.39 1.96 3.15 1.19 60.71
May 2.10 4.59 2.49 119.05 2.01 3.11 1.10 54.73
June 2.69 4.95 2.26 84.01 2.06 2.52 0.46 22.33
July 1.97 3.16 1.19 60.41 2.40 3.19 0.79 32.92
August 2.59 3.53 0.94 36.29 2.32 3.54 1.22 52.59
Average difference 1.65 68.19 0.81 38.37
As seen from the table, the discrepancy between the two measurements (at offshore and 
Uran) was as high as 68 per cent on an average for HUT pipeline (ranging between 36 
to 119 per cent). The differences for MUT pipeline were slightly lower at an average of 
38 per cent (ranging between 9 to 61 per cent). 
Audit also noticed that there were problems in the functioning of Auto Samplers at both 
Mumbai High and Neelam Heera offshore Assets. The Mumbai High Asset (in 2012) 
cited frequent malfunctioning of Auto Samplers. Auto Sampler in Neelam platform did 
not function from September 2014 to October 2014 while the Auto Sampler in Heera  
platform was non-functional from November 2014 to January 2015. In the absence of 
Auto Sampler, the Asset resorts to manual sampling as the Company does not have 
a standby philosophy for Auto Samplers (unlike Turbine Meters). The consistent 
differences between the water cut measured at both ends of the closed pipeline point to 
problems in the functioning of the Auto Sampler. 

Report No. 21 of 2016
18
Management in reply (January 2016) stated the following:
The fields are ageing ones and water cut in the well fluid has increased (i) 
considerably with present average water cut being more than 70 per cent. The 
partially stabilised crude contains water in emulsion and the average residence 
time may not be sufficient to completely break the oil-water emulsion, 
reducing water content to refinery standards before dispatch from offshore. 
During transportation of crude oil from offshore platform to Uran, crude oil 
gets high residence time in the pipeline because of its large volume (200 KM 
pipeline) and consequent large reaction time for emulsion to break and free 
water to segregate in the pipeline . Hence there is compositional difference 
in the form of pure oil-free water at receiving end at Uran when compared to 
offshore end.
 The Auto Sampler, though the best way of collecting representative samples, (ii) 
has some limitations, especially in cases where there is a sharp variation in the 
fluid composition on account of plant/ processing disturbance. 
 In spite of having the most advanced technology for capturing representative (iii) 
sample both at offshore and Uran end for determination of water cut, the 
differences in water cut have arisen due to inevitable technical reasons.
Ministry further added (April 2016) that SOP on metering and measurementof crude oil 
have been prepared and issued by all offshore assets. 
The reply of the Management needs to be viewed in the following context:
 The discrepancy in water cut recorded at offshore and Uran, had been noticed (i) 
earlier when the Company had appointed a consultant, M/s IHRDC in 2003 
to study these differences. The external consultant (M/s IHRDC) in its report 
(October 2003), had concluded that “if representative samples are taken both 
at offshore and onshore locations, their readings must be very close to each 
other regardless of flow velocities and length of these lines . The consistent 
trend of discrepancy points to unrepresentative sampling”. 
 The report (of M/s IHRDC) had also concluded that (ii) “regardless of the type 
of water (free or emulsified) present, the water measurement at the end of 
the closed pipeline should match over longer period of time . The consistent 
discrepancy between these two measurements makes us question the sampling 
points and techniques used both at offshore and onshore facilities”.
 The Mumbai High Asset had pointed to malfunctioning of Auto Sampler (iii) 
at offshore end as contributing to incorrect reporting of water cut in crude 
dispatched from the Asset. 
As admitted by the Management, the present measuring system has limitations/
inaccuracies. The implementation of the Standard Operating Procedures for 
metering and measurement, assured by Management in reply, would be reviewed 
in future audits. 

Report No. 21 of 2016
19
C. Non-adherence to calibration schedule of Turbine Meters
The correctness of the measurement is dependent on the accuracy of the measuring 
equipment. Audit examined the steps taken to ensure accuracy of the Turbine Meters 
(TMs) installed at offshore platforms (dispatch) and at Uran (receipt). The Neelam 
Heera and Mumbai High Assets informed that OEM14 does not prescribe any calibration 
schedule for TMs but a calibration frequency of two years is followed by the Asset. 
Uran plant management also informed that the same calibration frequency of two years 
is adhered to. Management of the Assets further informed that OEM had recommended 
Turbine Meters to be inspected every three to five years unless measurement anomalies 
occur and assured Audit that OEM’s recommendations were being followed. 
Audit observed that while Mumbai High Asset carried out calibration on a regular 
basis, Neelam Heera Asset has not followed the laid down frequency of two years for 
calibration of TMs. Out of four TMs installed in the Asset, three had been calibrated 
after a gap of 4 to 5 years and the balance TM installed in Neelam process complex in 
November 2008 is yet to be calibrated (January 2016). 
Management in reply (January 2016) stated that the execution of Neelam Heera 
Reconstruction Project led to delay in calibration of meters in Neelam Heera Asset. 
Ministry also assured (April 2016) that action for calibration of the balance meter has 
since been initiated. 
The assurance of Management/ Ministry will be verified in future audits. It is also 
stressed that timely calibration of Turbine Meters is necessary for accurate measurement 
of crude oil. 
14 OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer

Report No. 21 of 2016
20
Chapter 4
Audit Findings on Measurement and Reporting  
in Onshore Assets
4.1.  Inconsistency in measurement procedures
Measurement and reporting system of six onshore Assets were reviewed in Audit 
(Ankleshwar, Ahmedabad, Mehsana, Assam, Rajahmundry and Cauvery).  The Assets 
accounted for nearly the entire onshore oil production in ONGC. During the period 
of Audit (2010-2015), there was no standard operating procedure for measurement of 
crude oil in onshore Assets. As such, different Assets measured production at different 
points of the value chain using different measurement techniques for the purpose. 
Audit observed the following disparities in Western onshore region:
In Ankleshwar Asset, crude oil production was measured through tank-dip at the storage 
tanks from which crude oil is dispatched to the refineries. Thus measurement of crude oil 
production was after completion of all processing activities in Ankleshwar. In Mehsana 
Asset, however, crude oil production was measured using mass flow meters at the inlet 
of the Central Tank Farm (CTF), before the crude oil was processed in the CTF. 
The point of measurement was important as the quantity of liquid would necessarily 
measure higher before processing than after removal of water and impurities.   The 
method of measurement and the equipment used for the purpose was also important for 
standard measurement of production quantity. Audit observed need for standardising 
the measurement process in this regard in ONGC.
Management/Ministry stated in reply (January/April 2016) that a corporate standard 
operating procedure (SOP) for crude oil measurement at onshore Assets have been 
issued and Asset specific SOPs based on corporate SOPs have been prepared and 
issued.
Implementation of SOPs for crude oil measurement in onshore Assets would be verified 
in future Audits.
4.2. Mismatch between reported and measured quantity of crude oil in Western 
Onshore Assets
The processing installations of an Asset maintain log books and daily production records 
for crude oil production which are sent to the base office of the Asset. The base office 
of the Asset collates the production data of all processing installations to generate the 
Daily Production Report (DPR) of the entire Asset. The Asset DPRs are consolidated 
at the corporate level. Audit checked the different sets of crude production records 
at three Western onshore Assets (physical logs maintained at processing installations, 
production data communicated by processing installations to base office, production 

Report No. 21 of 2016
21
data reported by the base office of the Asset and the production data of the Asset as 
recorded in the corporate level statement) and noticed the following discrepancies:
Ankleshwar Asset:A.  In Ankleshwar Asset, the processing installations maintained 
physical logbooks recording the production data which were used for preparation 
of DPR at the processing installations. These installation DPRs are communicated 
to the base office of the Asset, daily before 8.00 AM. Audit noticed that the DPR 
of the processing installations (transmitted to base office and incorporated in the 
corporate level production data) was much higher compared to the data maintained 
in the physical log books recording actual production. The difference between the 
reported production (as per DPR of the asset) and the actual production recorded 
in the log books maintained at the processing installations, over the period 2010-
11 to 2014-15 was 6,63,406 MT (10.66 percent of the reported production of the 
Asset). The specific details are at Annexure I.
Ahmedabad Asset: B. The production figures reported by the base office of the 
Asset (incorporated in the corporate level production data) were much higher 
than the production data that was communicated by processing facilities to the 
base office. Audit noticed that the data communicated by the processing facilities 
tallied with the physical log books maintained at these facilities.  However, there 
were differences between the figures pertaining to the facilities reported by the 
base office to the corporate office.  The difference between the reported production 
(as reported by base office to corporate level) and the actual production as seen 
from the log books maintained at the processing installations, over the period 
2010-11 to 2014-15 was 3,75,765 MT (5.02 percent of the reported production of 
the Asset). The specific details are at Annexure I.
Mehsana Asset:C.  In Mehsana Asset, the technical cell at the Asset base reported 
calculated production data to corporate office. The calculation was done on 
the basis of fluid received at Mehsana Central Tank Farm. Mehsana Asset also 
worked out the actual production based on processed crude obtained at the outlet 
of the processing facility, adjusted for actual water drained. Audit noticed that the 
calculated production data reported by the Asset (and incorporated in the corporate 
level production data) was higher than the actual production quantity recorded by 
the Asset.  The difference between the reported production (as reported by base 
office to corporate level) and the actual production over the period 2010-11 to 
2014-15 was 2,62,810 MT (2.29 percent of the reported production of the Asset). 
The specific details are at Annexure I.
Management/Ministry in reply (January/April 2016) accepted the audit observations and 
assured that a host of corrective measures have been set in motion with all stringency. 
Management also stated that these actions namely forward reporting, withdrawal of 
authorization at the base stations, uniformity of reporting time, strict monitoring and 
total reporting based on SAP system (legacy system has been done away) are yielding 
desired results.

Report No. 21 of 2016
22
Audit has noted the Management/Ministry reply and will verify the position in the 
course of future audits.
4.3. Lack of asset specific norms to determine recoverable crude oil used for 
internal consumption
Producing wells may become sick over a period and need to be repaired through work 
over operations. The process of work over operation require hot oil circulation (HOC)/
squeezing job in the well. Crude oil produced is used for the HOC/squeezing job. A 
significant portion of this crude is recoverable and would form part of future production 
from the repaired well. 
Audit however noted that production installations accounted the crude oil used for 
HOC/squeezing jobs as “internal consumption” without indicating the possibility of 
future recovery of the oil, thus over-stating production. 
Review of the records of onshore Assets revealed that Ankleshwar, Ahmedabad and 
Assam Assets depict the entire usage of crude oil for HOC/squeezing jobs as internal 
consumption and do not provide for any ‘recoverable’ component (details in Annexure 
II). Besides, no Asset specific norms have been prescribed to determine ‘recoverable’ 
component of the crude oil used for HOC/ squeezing jobs.
Management in reply (January 2016) stated that though theoretically, most of crude 
oil used for HOC should return back to the installation where that well is flowing, 
this is not practically the case. Amount of crude oil returned depends on a number of 
factors (permeability and pressure of reservoir, distance of well from installation, depth, 
revival, type of wells, etc.) and hence it is difficult to anticipate quantity of recoverable 
crude oil, being a field specific phenomenon. Ministry assured (April 2016) that the 
Asset specific SOPs now implemented, will be addressing the issue.
Ministry has accepted the audit observation and initiated corrective action. The actual 
implementation of corrective action will be reviewed in future audits.
4.4. Accounting of Pit oil stock as crude oil production
Ahmedabad Asset had recognised 1,34,794 MT of crude oil as pit oil 15 stock in the 
closing stock of crude oil for the year 2009-10 (which had accumulated over the period, 
2006-07 to 2009-10). The Asset, however, did not consider this pit oil stock for stock 
valuation in its books of accounts. Subsequently, the Asset accounted a loss of 14,183  
 
 
15 In an effort to realise production from exploratory wells expeditiously such wells are often flogged to make shift 
pits at well sites during initial testing. Oil recovered from effluents was also often stored in wash tanks prior 
to being recovered. Also during period of high stock due to less evacuation of refineries excess oil is stored in 
available storage like wash tanks /effluent tanks. The oil which is not stored in crude oil tanks and does not appear 
in tank stock statement of the Asset is referred to as pit oil.

Report No. 21 of 2016
23
 MT and 10,615 MT during the y ears 2010-11 and 2011-12 respectively due to bio-
remediation16 and reduced it from the pit stock of those years. Later, the Asset reduced 
a further quantity of 39,000 MT in 2012-13 from the closing stock of pit oil stating that 
the said quantity had already been recovered from the pit stock at the Desalter Plant, 
wash tanks and CTF Nawagam during the years 2009-10 to 2012-13. The Asset has 
finally written off the balance quantity of 70,746 MT in the year 2014-15. 
Management/Ministry in reply (January/ April 2016) stated that the matter has already 
been intimated to Audit & Ethics Committee and ONGC Board on 14 February 2015 
and that pit stock has been corrected as per the Board decision. Management also 
assured that, at present, there is no pit stock in Ahmedabad Asset.
The corrective action would be verified during future audits. 
4.5. BS&W and free water drained after reporting crude oil production
Audit noticed that during the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15, 523,338 MT of BS&W 
and free water had been removed from crude oil in Ankleshwar and Mehsana Assets, 
after production had been measured and before custody transfer of crude to refinery. 
It was noticed that a significant quantum of BS&W and free water had to be removed 
at the refinery end before custody transfer. In onshore Assets, crude oil production is 
mostly measured after processing and before its dispatch to refineries. Such quantity 
was expected to contain less than 0.2 percent of BS&W. It was however seen that 
Ankleshwar, Rajahmundry and Cauvery Assets have reported high water drainage at 
the refinery end as shown in the table below:
Table-5:  Free water and BS&W drained at refinery end
Asset Free water and BS&W drained 
at refinery end
Percentage of free water and 
BS&W in the dispatch quantity
Ankleshwar 49,835 MT 0.92 %
Cauvery 11,195 MT 0.95 %
Rajahmundry 15,385 MT 1.30 %
Such a high quantity of drainage of free water and BS&W, post reporting of production 
quantity of crude oil from these Assets has contributed to overstatement of crude 
production of these Assets.
Management/Ministry in reply (January/April 2016) stated that high BS&W losses were 
partially on account of higher water cut, due to lack of adequate processing facilities/
handling facilities at all the installations resulting in dispatch of high BS&W crude oil to 
the refinery where it is given some more retention time to drain excess/free water before  
custody transfer. In case of Rajahmundry Asset, Management stated that the BS&W  
 
16 Bio remediation is the process of naturally/deliberately introducing micro-organisms to consume and break down 
environmental pollutants in order to clean a polluted site. 

Report No. 21 of 2016
24
figures included transit losses and assured that corrective action to report BS&W 
and transit losses separately would be taken in 2015-16.
Management also stated that the high BS&W was partially reported to adjust 
wrongly reported production in Ankleshwar. Management assured that the 
matter has been considered by the Audit & Ethics Committee and Board of 
ONGC and subsequently, control mechanism has been put in place to avoid 
occurrence of such incidents in future. 
Ministry added (April 2016) that 0.20 per cent BS&W is excluding free water 
and accordingly it is maintained in the supply to refineries and steps have been 
taken to increase retention time at tanks by adding new tanks (by 2017) which 
will reduce considerably the water draining at refinery end.
The reply of the Management needs to be viewed in the following context:
 It is noted that the Management has initiated corrective action to avoid (i) 
recurrence of over reporting in future by adjusting BS&W quantity, 
implementation of which will be reviewed in future audits.
 It is however stressed that corrective SOPs would not address the (ii) 
inadequacy of processing facilities which lead to higher water content 
in processed crude or operational constraints in determining accurate 
water cut in reported crude oil production. Hence, a high quantum of 
BS&W may continue in the crude oil after the production reporting 
stage even with revised SOPs. Audit is of the opinion that this 
concern could be addressed by appropriately shifting the production 
reporting point to ensure that production of crude oil is reported after 
adjustment of BS&W. 
4.6. Reporting water in closing stock of Assam and Ankleshwar Assets
Ankleshwar Asset: A. Audit observed that the Ankleshwar Asset over reported 
the crude oil production from 2007-08 onwards by filling the crude oil 
tanks with the effluent or water at the end of the year so as to match the 
actual closing stock of crude oil in different product tanks with the reported 
closing stock of crude oil. During the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15, the 
Ankleshwar Asset overstated the closing stock of crude to adjust a part of 
the over reported production of the Asset by 81,800 MT. 
Management accepted (January 2016) the observation and assured that 
appropriate action has been taken to prevent future cases of this nature.
Assam Asset: B. Test check of log books/DPR of Group Gathering Station-II 
of Rudrasagar field in Assam Asset, for the years 2013-14 and 2014-15,  
revealed that the closing stock (as on 31st March) was increased by 2699.54 
MT (3139 M 3) during the period January to March and was subsequently 
decreased by draining water during the month of April. As a result the 
production of crude oil from this field was over reported by 2699.54 MT.

Report No. 21 of 2016
25
By over reporting of closing stock, Company had to bear additional subsidy burden of 
` 160.69 crore as discussed in Para 5.2.B.
Management in reply (January 2016) accepted the audit observation and assured that 
due care would be taken to avoid such incidents in future.
Ministry stated (April 2016) in reply that post audit observation, Assets have been 
sensitized of the issue and close monitoring of closingstock is being done to avoid 
recurrence of such incidents.
The assurance of Management/ Ministry would be watched in future audits.
4.7. Incorrect reporting of theft of crude oil in Ankleshwar for reconciliation
Crude oil from various fields in Ankleshwar Asset is collected at Central Tank Farm 
(CTF), Ankleshwar and further transported to IOCL Refinery, Koyali through a trunk 
pipeline. It was observed that on 18 February 2013, the said trunk pipeline was punctured 
by miscreants to steal crude. The security team of the Asset reached the site on the same 
day and seized the filled and empty barrels and cans and filed an FIR with the police for 
theft of 550 liters of crude oil. However, in the crude oil tally statement as on 31March 
2013, the Asset indicated pipeline leakage of 3556 MT as against the reported theft of 
550 litres. The excess reporting was done to reconcile the differences between reported 
production and sale of crude oil by the Asset. 
Management accepted (January 2016) that the crude oil theft of 3556 MT was not 
a correct figure and the same was reported to adjust the over reported production of 
crude oil. Management/ Ministry (January/April 2016) also accepted the observation 
and stated that the Asset has been advised to avoid recurrence of such incidents.
4.8. Shortcomings in the measurement system of crude oil in onshore Assets
The measurement of crude oil in onshore systems is mainly carried out through tank 
dips in storage tanks of the Asset. The Company had also installed Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to allow for measurement of the crude oil 
quantity through electronic instruments without manual intervention and tampering as 
well as integration of acquired data with the IT system of the Company and SAP. Audit 
noticed a set of infirmities and shortcomings in the on land crude measurement system 
as detailed below.
4.8.1. Non-calibration of storage tanks in onshore Assets: Tank calibration is the 
process of accurately determining the capacity of a tank and expressing this capacity 
as a volume for a given linear increment or height of liquid. Tank calibration, tank 
inspection and certification of storage tanks at least once every five years was made 
mandatory by the Directorate of Legal Metrology. However, the calibration of the 
storage tanks was not carried out at the required frequency of five years. In cases where 
calibration was done, deficiencies were noticed as discussed below:

Report No. 21 of 2016
26
Assam Asset:(A)  Audit noticed that most of the tanks in Assam Asset were 
commissioned during1970s and re-calibration of these storage tanks have 
not been carried out since their commissioning, i.e., even after 40 years. 
Cleaning of tanks was also not regular (with the exception of 14 tanks out 
of 120 in the Asset).  
The Management replied (September 2015) that the contract for calibration 
of 63 tanks had been awarded in September 2015 to be executed for a 
period of three years. The reply has to be viewed in the context of non-
adherence to the mandatory calibration schedule by the Asset.
Southern Assets:(B)  Audit test checked calibration charts in four installations 
out of 36 in Rajahmundry Asset and Cauvery Asset. It was noticed that the 
tanks had not been re-calibrated since their commissioning.
Western Onshore Assets:(C)  In Western onshore, Audit noticed that the re-
calibration of tanks was not carried out every five years as per the prescribed 
norms. 
Non-adherence to the scheduled calibration may result in incorrect reporting of 
crude oil quantity and reduce the credibility of measurement and reporting.
Management in reply (January 2016), accepted the audit observation and 
assured that steps had already been taken to increase the tankage, as well as 
repair and maintenance of out of service tanks and that annual rate contract/one 
time contract has been placed for repair and maintenance of tanks in Mehsana, 
Ankleshwar, Ahmedabad and Assam. Action taken by the Management would 
be examined during future audits. 
4.8.2. Poor utilization of SCADA system:
The Company implemented the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) system in March 2008 at a cost of  `385 crore for measuring 
production and drilling parameters. SCADA system in onshore Assets was 
installed at Group Gathering Station (GGS), Early Production System (EPS), 
Crude Tank Farm (CTF) and Central Processing Facility (CPF).
Audit observed that though the Company had installed SCADA system in 
most onshore installations and gross volume of crude oil in tanks were being 
captured by the SCADA system, the same was not used in reporting production. 
Production continued to be measured by tank readings based on manual dips. 
In the case of Ankleshwar, even though the SCADA system was integrated with 
SAP, the Asset did not generate production reports based on SCADA readings. 
Management/ Ministry accepted (January 2016/April 2016) the audit observation and 
stated that steps are being taken to integrate SCADA system with ICE SAP-ERP17 to  
 
17 Information Consolidation for Efficiency through implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning, 
i.e., SAP Systems and other IT efforts.

Report No. 21 of 2016
27
address the issues brought out by Audit. The actual implementation of Management assurance 
will be verified in future audits.
4.8.3.  Mismatch between data recorded in log book and SAP in Assam Asset
Crude oil production was manually measured by the Assam Asset (by tank dips) and 
entered in the log books of the processing installations. The same data was subsequently 
entered in the SAP-ERP system. A test check of the log books of production installations, 
and the SAP-ERP data revealed mismatches which raises doubts on the reliability of the 
crude oil production reported through the SAP system.
Management in reply (January 2016) stated that guidelines have been issued in September 
2014 and corporate level SOPs for onshore Assets on metering and measurement of 
crude oil have also been issued. Besides, Assets have been advised to formulate Asset 
specific SOPs based on the corporate level SOPs. Managemental also assured that the 
measurement and reporting system had some identified inefficiencies which are being 
addressed in a continuous manner. Ministry stated (April 2016) that all the Onshore 
Assets have prepared Asset specific SOPs on crude oil measurement. The action taken 
would be verified during future audits.
4.8.4.  Deficiency in using Production Revenue Accounting (PRA) system 
The Company had implemented the PRA module in SAP-ERP system w.e.f. February 
2010. The  PRA system generates daily crude oil production reports (DPR) for a 
processing installation, based on data (quantity along with density, temperature and 
water cut) pertaining to closing stock of crude oil and crude oil dispatch from the 
installation. This forms the basis for the daily, monthly and annual production records 
in SAP. However, in Western onshore Assets, the data was not correctly fed into the 
PRA system. The DPR was generated manually, outside the PRA system, by the Asset 
Technical Cell. A test check of the SAP-DPR figures noticed variation with those 
reported in the manual DPR data. In Assam Asset and Southern Region, discrepancies 
were noticed among different reports generated in SAP which indicated different crude 
production figures.  
Audit noticed that Director (Onshore) of the Company had directed (September 2011) 
that correct production figures should be entered in PRA system on daily basis within 
stipulated time, so that representative figures can be available to ONGC management 
through Business Intelligence (BI) module.  However, the Production and Development 
Directorate (P&DD) of ONGC observed differences in the Asset reported figures and 
BI module figures for the first quarter of 2015-16.
Management in reply (January 2016) stated that the non-matching of data among 
different reports in Assam Asset was on account of wrong methodology adopted by the  
Asset and that corrective actions are being taken. Management/Ministry also stated 
(April 2016) that all Assets have been sensitized to report production data in PRA 
module. The corrective action taken by Management would be verified during future 
audits. 

Report No. 21 of 2016
28
Chapter 5
Impact Assessment 
5.1. Over payment of Performance Related Pay (PRP) due to over reporting 
crude oil production
Department of Public Enterprise (DPE) introduced (November 2008) payment of PRP as 
a variable pay directly linked to the profits of the CPSEs, the performance of the CPSE 
as well as that of the employees18. The performance of the CPSE is measured by its MoU 
(Memorandum of Understanding signed with the respective Ministry) rating. For a CPSE 
having ‘excellent’ rating, 100 percent of PRP is payable to its employees as against 80 
percent for ‘very good’, 60 percent for ‘good’ and 40 percent for ‘fair’ rating. 
Audit noticed that the Company was awarded ‘excellent’ rating during 2011-12 to 2013-
14 and was awarded ‘very good’ in 2014-15. Crude oil production by the Company is a 
parameter for assessing its performance. It was seen that the Company failed to achieve 
the MoU target for crude oil production consistently during this period even though the 
reported crude oil production had been over-stated during these years by inclusion of 
BS&W and off-gas quantity (as mentioned at paras 3.1 and 3.2 of the report). 
Audit reworked the MoU rating of the Company (Annexure III) considering the actual 
crude oil production (i.e. excluding BS&W and off-gas quantity) and observed that 
during the year, 2013-14, the score of the Company changed from 1.476 (Excellent 
rating) to 1.508 (Very Good rating). Hence, for 2013-14, the PRP applicable to 
employees should have been 80 per cent instead of the 100 per cent received by them. 
Considering Company’s estimates of PRP payment under excellent rating of `854.67 
crore, and the eligible amount of `748.16 crore (@ 80 per cent) under Very Good rating, 
the excess payment works out to `106.51 crore (approximately) on PRP payments for 
the financial year 2013-14.
Management replied (January 2016) that the actual production data is reported against 
target exactly in the same line and with same assumptions as are made while formulating 
the target. Management pointed out that in the MoU target, no adjustments of BS&W 
and off-gas was made in formulating the crude oil production targets. The same practice 
was followed in actual reporting too. Hence PRP has been paid by ONGC for the FY 
2013-14 as per DPE guidelines.
The reply of the Management is not convincing in view of following: 
Crude oil production target for 2013-14 was fixed in the Task Force meeting held (i) 
in February 2013. Audit noticed that the crude oil production target did not indicate 
18 Annual PRP amount = Component of PRP (60% from current profit and 40% from incremental profit)*Annual 
Basic Pay* MoU Rating (Excellent-100%, Very Good-80%, Good-60%, Fair-40%)*Grade Incentive (E0 to E3-
40%, E4 to E5-50%, E6 to E7-60%, E8 to E9-70% and E-10-10%, Directors-150%, CMD-200%)* Executive 
Performance Rating*Ratio of required amount available to available amount.

Report No. 21 of 2016
29
that it was inclusive of BS&W and off-gas quantity. The MoU (2013-14) signed 
by the Company with the MoPNG on 25 th March 2013 is also silent regarding 
inclusion of BS&W and off-gas in the crude oil production target. Audit noticed that 
the signed MoU indicated ‘Annual Report 2013-14’ as documentary evidence and 
source/origin of document for evaluation of performance of crude oil production 
target. There was no mention regarding BS&W and off-gas quantity being a part 
of crude oil production quantity in the Annual report of 2013-14.
Besides, with ageing of the Company’s fields, BS&W quantity is progressively (ii) 
increasing. Inclusion of BS&W quantity in the crude oil production target or 
achievement would lead to erroneous target setting and reporting, with the quantum 
of error increasing consistently over time as BS&W quantity increases.
The MoU targets of the Company for crude oil production are distributed among (iii) 
the offshore and onshore Assets. The production targets of the individual Assets 
were fixed in the Performance Contracts signed by them with the Management. 
Audit noticed that these performance contracts defined crude oil production as 
“crude oil would include the portion of recoverable oil reserve that is produced 
and delivered at the custody transfer/delivery meter. It includes the quantity 
after adjustment of Basic Sediment and Water (BS&W) ”. The JVs (in which 
the Company had a participating interest) also reported crude oil production 
exclusive of BS&W and off-gas quantity. This indicates that BS&W and off-gas 
is not intended for consideration as crude oil production within the Company as 
well as other domestic JVs.
Off-gas is a dissolved gas in partially stabilized crude oil dispatched from offshore (iv) 
and same is removed in Uran plant during processing and stabilization of crude 
oil and added to the gas production and sold as natural gas. As such, it should not 
have been reported as crude oil production.
5.2.  Additional subsidy burden borne by the Company
Additional subsidy burden of A. `18626.74 crore due to over-statement of Crude 
Oil production by inclusion of condensate and off-gas
The upstream National Oil Companies (NOCs, viz., ONGC and OIL) shared the under-
recovery of the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) arising from sale of refined petroleum 
products at subsidized rates since October 2003. The methodology for determination 
of subsidy share of upstream NOCs during the period from 2003 to 2011, did not refer 
to the actual production of crude oil by these companies. MoPNG, by its order dated 
9 January 2012, revised the subsidy sharing methodology. As per the revised system, 
the subsidy burden of an NOC would be based on its crude oil production (less basic 
sediment and water, internal consumption and transit loss). Subsidy share of ONGC for 
the period 2011-12 to 2014-15 (upto September 2014) has been worked out based on 
the following formula:

Report No. 21 of 2016
30
USD56 per barrel x Reported crude oil production measured in barrels
For the third quarter of 2014-15 (October to December 2014), the subsidy rate was 
revised to USD 37.50 per barrel which further reduced to ‘nil’ in the last quarter (January 
to March 2015) in view of the falling international crude oil prices.
The Company had to bear a larger share of subsidy due to overstatement of reported 
crude oil production by inclusion of condensate and off-gas (7.06 per cent of condensate 
and 1 per cent of off-gas). The additional subsidy burden borne by the Company was 
`18626.74 crore ( i.e., `16331.96 crore on account of inclusion of condensate and 
`2294.78 crore on account of inclusion of off-gas in crude oil production) during the 
period from 2011-12 to 2014-15 (Annexure-IV).
Management/Ministry replied (January/April 2016) as follows:
The significant implication of inclusion of condensate for determination of (i) 
ONGC’s share of under-recoveries has been taken up with the Government. 
ONGC had appealed to Government that in future only crude oil quantity be 
considered for determination of ONGC’s share of under-recoveries and quantity of 
gas condensate may not be included, as it is neither crude oil nor is it sold. It has 
also been informed that the issue of exclusion of condensate has been taken up by 
ONGC with MoP&NG/MoF at various level/forums over the period from October 
2012 to May 2014. 
The information regarding off-gas was provided by the Company as per the format (ii) 
made available by MoPNG/Petroleum Planning Analysis Cell. Since the off-gas 
quantity (though removed subsequently from the crude oil and added to gas stream) 
is included and reported in gross production of crude oil, the same is considered by 
Government for determination of ONGC’s share of under-recoveries. Since Q3 of 
2015-16 quantity of off gas has been shown separatelyin the crude tally statement 
submitted to MoPNG. 
Government Audit may take up the issue with Government for exclusion of (iii) 
condensate and off-gas for determination of ONGC’s share of under-recoveries.
The reply of the Management/Ministry only strengthens the Audit contention that 
‘condensate’ and ‘off-gas’ ought not to be reported as ‘crude oil’ production. 
The Company had itself stated to the Government (July 2012) that ‘condensate’ is (i) 
‘neither crude oil nor is it sold’. Yet, the Company has been ‘reporting production 
of crude oil inclusive of condensate right from 1990 onwards ’. It is this incorrect 
practice of reporting condensate as crude oil, even as the Company was aware of 
the difference of the two, that has led to the present situation of additional subsidy 
share on this account. 

Report No. 21 of 2016
31
(ii) As the Company itself points out in reply, ‘off-gas’ is removed subsequently from 
the crude oil and added to gas stream. It is later sold as natural gas. As such, 
reporting ‘off-gas’ as crude production is incorrect. It is noticed that while the 
Company had taken up the matter regarding exclusion of ‘condensate’ for working 
out subsidy share, the issue regarding exclusion of ‘off-gas’ had not been raised 
with the Government (except showing it separately after the issue has been flagged 
in Audit).
The additional subsidy burden on condensate and off-gas quantity has arisen on account 
of reporting both items (which are not crude as acknowledged by the Company) as 
crude oil production. 
Excess sharing of subsidy burden ofB.  ` 160.69 crore due to over reporting of 
crude oil production
The impact of excess subsidy borne by the Company in onshore areas due to over 
reporting of closing stock is detailed below:
As discussed at Para 4.6-A, the Company over reported crude oil production •	
in Ankleshwar Asset by way of reporting excess closing stock vis-a-vis actual, 
which resulted in avoidable payment of share of subsidy of `153.48 crore 
(Annexure V). 
As discussed at Para 4.6-B, the Assam Asset over reported crude oil production •	
by 2699.54 MT (3139 M 3) which resulted in avoidable payment of share of 
subsidy of `7.21 crore.  (Annexure-V)
Management agreed (January 2016) with the audit observation on over reporting of 
closing stock crude oil production and stated that closing stock was corrected in January 
2015. In respect of Assam Asset, Management has accepted the audit observation and 
assured that due care would be taken to avoid such incidents in future. Ministry added 
(April 2016) that post audit observation, Assets have been sensitized of the issue and 
close monitoring of closing stock is being done to avoid recurrence of such incidence. 
Audit has noted the corrective action taken by the Management subsequently.

Report No. 21 of 2016
32
Chapter 6
Conclusion and Recommendations
6.1.  Conclusion
ONGC is the largest producer of crude oil, accounting for 69 per cent of the country’s 
production. Significant efforts and resources of the Company are deployed for 
augmenting production of crude oil from its offshore and onshore Assets. Accurate 
measurement and reporting of crude oil production by the Company is of critical 
importance to assess and monitor its performance. 
Audit of the crude oil measurement and reporting system indicated that the Company 
was reporting partially stabilized crude oil as its crude oil production. This led to over-
reporting of crude production by including items other than crude oil, namely, off-
gas, BS&W and recoverable internal consumption. At the same time, the Company has 
reported ‘condensate’ production inappropriately as crude oil production, though both 
products were distinct and treated differently by the Company. A summary of the over-
reporting and incorrect reporting in onshore and offshore areas is given below:
Table-6: Reported crude oil production vis-à-vis actual production
FY Unit Crude Production 
reported by 
the Company 
(including 
Condensate) as per 
MoU (R ) 
Quantity 
of BS&W 
in R
Quantity 
of off-gas 
in R
Quantity of 
recoverable 
internal 
consumption 
in R
Over-
statement 
of R
Quantity of 
Condensate 
incorrectly 
included in 
production - R
  1 2 3 4 5= 2+3+4 6
2010-11 MT 27282278 1455148 268103 29073 1752324 1955360
2011-12 MT 26925347 1373034 263813 26302 1663149 2008340
2012-13 MT 26127115 655562 259128 39507 954197 2109810
2013-14 MT 25994106 843520 263717 32122 1139359 1828311
2014-15 MT 25942270 841871 271136 29671 1142678 1446798
Total MT 132271116 5169135 1325897 156675 6651707 9348619
Other items reported as crude 
expressed as a percentage of reported 
crude oil production
3.91% 1% 0.12% 5.03% 7.07%

Report No. 21 of 2016
33
As seen from the table above, 12.1 per cent of reported crude oil production consists 
of items other than crude oil. Of this, basic sediment and water (3.91 per cent) has 
no financial value at all. The over-reporting and incorrect reporting of crude oil 
production has presented an inaccurate picture of performance of the Company on 
crude oil production and has led to the Company sharing an additional subsidy burden 
of `18,787.43 crore during the year from 2012 to 2015. Besides, over-reporting of 
crude oil production (inclusion of BS&W and off-gas) resulted in over payment of 
performance related pay (PRP) to the executive and staff of the Company as the MoU 
ranking of the Company for 2013-14 had improved from an actual ‘Very Good’ (where 
eligibility of PRP was 80 per cent) to ‘Excellent’ (where eligibility of PRP was 100 per 
cent) through over-reporting of crude oil production.
With ageing of fields (majority being more than 30 years old), there has been an increase 
in water cut. This coupled with lack of adequate handling/processing facilities at the 
production installations resulted in higher proportion of BS&W and off gas in the crude 
oil. The Company, however, reported crude oil production without adjusting these 
elements fully. Considering the fact that with progressive ageing of fields, the BS&W 
proportion is likely to increase, there is a need for adopting a suitable measurement 
system for crude oil so that these elements are suitably adjusted before crude oil 
production is reported. 
Anomalies were also noticed in the measurement practices. In Western offshore, the 
reported production quantity measured at offshore platforms were higher than the actual 
sale quantity with the bulk of the differences in volume arising during transportation of 
crude oil in a closed pipeline.  Where measurements have been taken at both ends of the 
pipeline under identical conditions of temperature, such differences are not expected to 
arise.  Reasons for the differences should have been investigated and corrective action 
taken.   No record of such action taken by the Company was provided to Audit.  Besides, 
audit trail (either in electronic or in physical form) of reported production quantum from 
offshore Assets was not maintained by the Company and hence Audit could not verify the 
accuracy of these reported quantities. In onshore areas, it was noticed that to reconcile 
over-reported production, fictitious inflating of closing stock of crude oil, erroneous 
reporting of theft of crude oil and reporting non-existent pit oil as stock were adopted. 
The Company assured that corrective steps have been/ are being taken in this regard.
The measurement and metering system as well as the reporting system for crude 
oil production in the Company also had several infirmities. Audit noticed that 
the Company did not have a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for metering 
and measurement system and different Assets (particularly in Western onshore) 
followed different measurement practices. Though SCADA system was installed 
in all onshore production installations since 2010 with the objective of single point 
measurement through electronic instruments without manual intervention/changes 
and integration of acquired data with ICE-SAP ERP data, measurement continued to 
be carried out on the basis of manual dips of crude oil tanks. The accuracy of the  

Report No. 21 of 2016
34
manual dips could not be ensured on account of the Company’s non-adherence to the 
calibration schedule. In fact, instances were noticed where crude oil tanks installed 
in 1970 had not been cleaned yet or re-calibrated against the prescribed calibration 
schedule of five years. On being pointed out in Audit, the Company initiated corrective 
measures by formulating SOPs, operationalizing SCADA and integrating it with ICE-
SAP ERP, and initiating repair, maintenance, cleaning and re-calibration of crude oil 
tanks.
6.2. Recommendations
The loss/gain during transportation of crude oil through closed pipeline systems 	
should be closely monitored to ensure that the variations are in normal range and 
identify abnormal loss/gain for corrective action. Such reconciliation and monitoring 
as well as corrective actions taken should be adequately documented. 
Asset-specific Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for measurement of crude 	
oil production may be formulated and implemented in all onshore Assets in a time-
bound manner to ensure that uniform measurement practices are followed across all 
production installations of the Company. Asset specific guidelines for segregating 
internal consumption of crude oil into ‘recoverable’ and ‘non-recoverable’ may be 
designed and ‘recoverable’ quantum may not be included as crude oil production. 
Norms for crude oil transit loss should be fixed and cases of abnormal transit loss 
should be investigated and remedial action taken to prevent revenue loss.
The Company should strictly adhere to prescribed schedules laid down for calibration 	
of all crude oil measuring devices, such as storage tanks and Mass Flow Meters, 
Turbine Meters, Auto Samplers, etc. in both offshore and onshore Assets to ensure 
accuracy of their measurement.
Electronic and physical trails in support of measurement of crude oil at various stages 	
of production should be maintained to derive assurance regarding their accuracy. 
SCADA installed in all production installations may be integrated with ICE-SAP 
ERP system for capturing data and to minimise manual intervention and improve 
accuracy of reported information. The production reports for onshore Assets should 
be generated through the SAP-PRA module, in line with the practice in offshore 
Assets, to preclude the possibility of their manual manipulation. 
The Company may report condensate as a separate stream as opined by the 	
international consultant.

Report No. 21 of 2016
35
The Company may ensure that items other than crude oil, namely, condensate, off-	
gas, basic sediment and water, etc., may not be reported as crude oil production. 
Considering the difficulties expressed by the Management/Ministry in accurately 
measuring the crude oil at the production point, there appears to be a case for 
shifting the production reporting point to a suitable location where stabilized crude 
(excluding BS&W, off-gas and condensate) can be accurately measured.
New Delhi
Dated 19 July 2016
(H. PRADEEP RAO)
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General and 
Chairman, Audit Board
Countersigned
New Delhi
Dated 19 July 2016
(SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India


Report No. 21 of 2016
37
Annexure

Report No. 21 of 2016
38

Report No. 21 of 2016
39
Report No.    of 2016 
36 
 
Annexure-I  
(Referred to in paragraph 4.2.) 
Statement showing over-reported production of Western Onshore Assets during the 
period from 2010-11 to 2014-15 
 
(Figures in MT) 
Year Crude Oil Production 
reported at Corporate 
Level 
Crude Oil Production as per 
Log Books of Processing 
Installations 
Over-reported 
Crude Oil 
Production 
Ankleshwar Asset 
2010-11 16,41,827 15,07,365 1,34,462
2011-12 14,99,747 13,21,831 1,77,916
2012-13 12,73,328 11,27,530 1,45,798
2013-14 10,49,607 8,78,969 1,70,638
2014-15 7,56,486 7,21,894 34,592
Total 62,20,995 55,57,589 6,63,406
Ahmedabad Asset 
2010-11 16,71,932 15,82,164 89,768
2011-12 16,27,900 14,83,560 1,44,340
2012-13 14,62,921 14,08,457 54,464
2013-14 13,95,535 13,28,385 67,150
2014-15 13,17,626 12,97,583 20,043
Total 74,75,914 71,00,149 3,75,765
Mehsana Asset 
2010-11 22,62,862 22,30,716 32,146
2011-12 23,21,590 22,33,842 87,748
2012-13 22,79,541 22,42,370 37,171
2013-14 23,10,380 22,71,007 39,373
2014-15 22,88,771 22,22,399 66,372
Total 1,14,63,144 1,12,00,334 2,62,810
 
Note:Base Office of Mehsana Asset maintains tw o sets of production data in its DPR (1) Production based on the liquid received at 
processing installations and Mehsana CTF and its water cut which is further refined by using trend analysis of actual water 
drained during previous periods. This calculated production is reported as Asset Crude Oil Production.  (2) Production based on 
overall Asset dispatch and stock variation w.r.t. previous day, which however, is not reported. Production figures used in above 
table is as per these calculations. 
  

Report No. 21 of 2016
40
Report No.    of 2016 
37 
 
 
Annexure-II  
Details of crude oil used for HOC/squeezing jobs accounted as “internal consumption” 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.3.) 
 
(Figures in MT) 
Year Total recoverable internal consumption in SAP 
(ZPRAMPVL) 
Ahmedabad Ankleshwar Assam Total 
2010-11 6,167 19,133 3,773 29,073 
2011-12 9,411 13,567 3,323 26,301 
2012-13 17,547 17,427 4,533 39,507 
2013-14 12,837 14,520 4,765 32,122 
2014-15 11,491 13,892 4,289 29,672 
Total 57,453 78,539 20,683 156,675 
 

41
Report No. 21 of 2016
Report No.    of 2016 
38 
 
Annexure-III  
(Referred to in paragraph 5.1.) 
Statement indicating awarded score/rating and revised score/rating for crude oil parameter as well as overall score/rating in 
MoU during 2011-12 to 2014-15 
 
Year 
Weightage for 
crude oil 
production 
Target 
Actual 
Crude oil 
parameter 
Score
Overall Score 
Rating 
BS&W 
Off-gas 
Actual 
Production. 
% of BS&W 
in reported 
qty. 
% of Off-gas 
in reported 
t
% of BS&W 
and Off-gas 
Revised MoU 
Score 
Added to 
Overall score 
Revised 
Overall score 
Revised 
rating 
2011-12 3 27.00 26.925 0.062 1.222 Excellent 1.373 0.263 25.289 5.10 0.98 6.08 0.128 0.066 1.288 Excellent 
2012-13 4 27.54 26.127 0.121 1.32 Excellent 0.655 0.259 25.213 2.51 0.99 3.50 0.148 0.027 1.347 Excellent 
2013-14 4 27.24 25.994 0.117 1.476 Excellent 0.843 0.263 24.888 3.24 1.01 
4.25 0.149 0.032 1.508 
Very 
Good 
2014-15  
7 24.88 23.94 0.19   Very 
Good  
                    
2 2.26 2.003 0.09                       
9 27.14 25.943 0.28 2.22 0.841 0.271 24.831 3.24 1.04 
4.29 0.331 0.051 2.271 
Very 
Good  
Crude Oil MoU target (very good) and raw score and MoU score achieve d considering actual produc tion excluding BS&W and off-
gas quantity from reported production 
Year Excellent 
Very 
Good Good Fair Poor 
Actual 
excl. 
BS&W 
and Off 
gas Raw Score MoU Score 
2011-12 27.54 27.00 25.65 24.3 22.95 25.289 4.2674 0.128 
2012-13 28.03 27.54 26.16 24.79 23.41 25.213 3.6912 0.148 
2013-14 28.60 27.24 25.878 24.516 23.154 24.888 3.7269 0.149 
2014-15 
26.12 24.88 23.63 22.339 21.14 24.831     
2.34 2.26 2.15 2.03 1.92     
  28.46 27.14 25.78 24.369 23.06   3.6726 0.331 
 
41
Year Excellent Very 
Good 
Good Fair Poor Actual 
excl. 
BS&W 
and Off 
gas 
Raw Score MoU Score 
2011-12 27.54 27.00 25.65 24.3 22.95 25.289 4.2674 0.128 
2012-13 28.03 27.54 26.16 24.79 23.41 25.213 3.6912 0.148 
2013-14 28.60 27.24 25.878 24.516 23.154 24.888 3.7269 0.149 
2014-15 
26.12 24.88 23.63 22.339 21.14 24.831     
2.34 2.26 2.15 2.03 1.92     
  28.46 27.14 25.78 24.369 23.06   3.6726 0.331 
 

Report No. 21 of 2016
42
Report No.    of 2016 
39 
 
Annexure-IV 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.2.A) 
Additional subsidy burden due to overstatement of reported crude oil 
production (offshore) 
Subsidy burden due to inclusion of condensate in crude oil production 
Year 
Condensate 
Qty. in bbl 
(Offshore) 
Condensate 
Qty. in bbl 
(Ankleshwar) 
Subsidy 
per bbl 
(in 
USD) 
Exchange 
rate 
(`) 
Subsidy 
burden 
shared by 
ONGC  
(`in crore) 
Excess 
sharing 
subsidy 
burden  
(` in crore) 
2011-12 14893467 426280.47 56 47.95 44465 4113.66 
2012-13 15830546 257443.83 56 54.44 49502 4904.65 
2013-14 13787191 172666.90 56 60.48 56384 4728.04 
2014-15 
(Apr-Sept.) 5702312 37005.50 56 60.79 26842 1953.80 
2014-15 
(Oct- Dec.) 2753046 18502.50 37.5 60.79 9459 631.81 
2014-15 
(Jan-March) 2530705 18502.50 - - - 0 
Total 16331.96 
Note:      Figures of 2014-15 have been shown separately in three phases, since subsidy discount for the 1st & 
2nd quarter is USD 56; for the 3rd quarter it was reduced to USD 37.5. Further, for the 4th quarter 
subsidy details are not available. 
Source: Offshore data for condensate has been taken from crude tally statements. In respect of Ankleshwar 
condensate data has been taken from Asset tally statement. 
 
Subsidy burden due to inclusion of off-gas in crude oil production 
Year 
Off-gas 
Qty. in 
MT  
Off-gas Qty. in 
bbl 
(1MT=7.63bbl) 
Subsidy 
per bbl 
(in USD) 
Exchange 
rate 
(in `) 
Excess sharing 
subsidy burden 
(` in crore) 
2011-12 263813.00 2012893.19 56.00 47.95 540.50 
2012-13 259128.00 1977146.64 56.00 54.44 602.76 
2013-14 263717.00 2012160.71 56.00 60.48 681.49 
2014-15 (Apr-Sept.) 135567.33 1034378.73 56.00 60.79 352.13 
2014-15 (Oct- Dec.) 67783.67 517189.402 37.50 60.79 117.90 
2014-15 (Jan- Mar) 67783.67 517189.402 - - - 
Total 2294.78 
  

Report No. 21 of 2016
43
Report No.    of 2016 
40 
 
 
Annexure-V  
(Referred to in paragraph 5.2.B) 
Additional subsidy burden due to overstatement of reported crude oil production 
(Onshore) 
 
Year  Quantity of over reported 
closing stock of crude oil  
Discount 
per bbl 
Exchange 
rate  
Total amount 
(in MT) (in BBL) (in USD) (in `) (` in crore) 
Ankleshwar 
2011-12 23,033 181,431 56 47.95 48,71,77,758
2012-13 20,852 164,251 56 54.44 50,07,42,169
2013-14 19,574 154,184 56 60.48 52,22,02,706
2014-15 920 7,247 56 60.79 2,46,70,527
Total 64,379 507,113   153,47,93,160
Assam 
2013-14 & 
2014-15 
2,699.54 21,245.38 56 60.63 7,21,34,013
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 21 of 2016
44
Report No.   of 2016 
41 
 
List of Abbreviations 
Sl. No. Term used Description of Abbreviated Term 
1 API  American Petroleum Institute 
2 AS Auto Sampler 
3 BI Business Intelligence 
4 BS&W Basic Sediment and Water 
5 CPSEs Central Public Sector Enterprises 
6 CSU Crude Stabilization Unit  
7 CTF Central Tank Farm 
8 D&M M/s DeGolyer and McNaughton  
9 DPE Department of Public Enterprise 
10 DPR Daily Production Report 
11 EPS Early Production System 
12 FIR First Information Report 
13 FPSO Floating Production Storage and Offloading vessel 
14 GGS Group Gathering Station 
15 HMI Human Machine Interface 
16 HOC Hot Oil Circulation 
17 HUT Heera Uran Trunk line 
18 JNPT Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
19 JV Joint Venture 
20 KPI Key Performance Indicator 
21 M 3 Cubic Meters 
22 MFM Mass Flow Meters 
23 MoF Ministry of Finance 
24 MoPNG Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
25 MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
26 MT Metric Tonne 
27 MUT Mumbai Uran Trunk line 
28 NELP New Exploration Licensing Policy 
29 NOC National Oil Company 
30 OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
31 OID Act Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974 
32 OMC Oil Marketing Companies 
33 ONGC Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Ltd. 
34 ORD Act Oil fields (Development & Regulation) Act, 1948 
35 P&DD Production and Development Directorate 
36 PNG Rules Petroleum & Natural Gas Rules, 1959 
37 PRA Production Revenue Accounting 
38 PRP Performance Related Pay 

Report No. 21 of 2016
45
Report No.   of 2016 
42 
 
39 SBU Strategic Business Unit 
40 SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) 
41 SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
42 TM Turbine Meter 
43 WC Water Cut 

Report No. 21 of 2016
46
Report No.   of 2016 
43 
 
Glossary of Technical Terms 
Sl. No Technical Term Meaning
1 Auto Sampler Auto Samplers are samplers installed inline in the downstream 
of Turbine Meters to collect samples of liquid at regular 
intervals. Samples so collected are tested at laboratory to 
determine the water content in crude oil. 
2 BS&W Abbreviation for basic sediment and water. BS&W is measured 
from a liquid sample of the production stream. It includes free 
water, sediment and emulsion and is measured as a volume 
percentage of the production stream. 
3 Condensate Liquid hydrocarbons produced  with natural gas, separated by 
cooling and other means 
4 Demulsifier Demulsifier is a chemical used in the heater treater to separate 
water from oil 
5 Effluent Treatment 
Plant
To process the effluent received from GGS/CTF installation 
before disposal of effluents as per pollution control norms. The 
critical equipment are Pumps and Tanks. 
6 Emulsion Emulsion is crude oil inclusive of water 
7 Free Water Water produced with oil which is  usually settles once the well 
fluids become stationary. 
8 Heater Treater Heater Treater remove emulsified liquids and solids from crude 
and also use heat and pressure drop to flash volatile vapours 
9 Human Machine 
Interface (HMI) 
HMI is the tertiary device forming part of Electronic Liquid 
measurement system. It is a flow computer receiving 
information from Primary device (Turbine Meter) and 
secondary devices measuring Temperature, Pressure and 
Density; Using the programme instructions it calculates the 
quantity of liquid flowing through the Turbine Meters 
10 Hydrocarbon Organic chemical compounds of hydrogen and carbon atoms. 
There are a vast number of these compounds and they form the 
basis of all petroleum products. They may exist as gases, liquids 
or solids. An example of each is methane, hexane and asphalt.  
11 ICE SAP-ERP Information Consolidation for Efficiency through 
implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning, i.e., SAP 
Systems and other IT efforts 
12 New Exploration 
Licensing Policy 
(NELP)
NELP was formulated by the Government of India in 1997-98 
to provide a level playing field in which all the parties may 
compete on equal terms for the award of exploration acreage.  
This was for accelerating the pace of hydrocarbon exploration 
in the country through which various blocks including deep-
water acreages were offered for competitive bidding. 
13 Off-gas Off-gas is a dissolved gas in crude oil which is separated during 
stabilisation process of crude oil  

Report No. 21 of 2016
47
Report No.   of 2016 
44 
 
14 Performance 
Contract
Performance Contract is annual contract signed by the Chief of 
Strategic Business Units (SBU) with the concerned director. 
The performance evaluation of SBU is done based on actual 
achievement vis-à-vis target  set for Key Performance 
Indicators. The methodology followed for evaluation of MoU 
signed by the ONGC with MoPNG is adopted for this purpose. 
15 Petroleum Crude Oil and/or Natural Gas existing in their natural condition 
but excluding helium occurring in association with Petroleum 
or shale. 
16 Pit Oil In an effort to realise production from exploratory wells 
expeditiously such wells are often flogged to make shift pits at 
well sites during initial testing. Oil recovered from effluents 
was also often stored in wash tanks prior to being recovered. 
Also during period of high stock, due to less evacuation of 
refineries excess oil is stored in available storage like wash 
tanks /effluent tanks. The oil which is not stored in crude oil 
tanks and does not appear in tank stock statement of the Asset is 
referred to as pit oil 
17 Reserve Accretion Addition of hydrocar bon reserves to the existing reserves 
18 Reservoir A naturally occurring di screte accumulation of Petroleum 
19 Rigs It was an equipment used for drilling a well bore. There are 
various types of offshore rigs like jack-up rigs, floaters, 
Modular rigs, etc. In onland, there are two types of rigs, viz., 
mobile rigs and High Floor Mast / Sub structure types of rigs 
20 Turbine Meter Turbine Meter is a primary device of Electronic Liquid 
Measurement System.  In operation rotating blades generate 
frequency signal proportion to liquid  flow rate which is sensed 
by the magnetic pick up and transferred to real time indicator 
21 Well A borehole, made by drilling in the course of Petroleum 
Operations, but does not include a seismic shot hole.  
22 Wet Crude Wet crude is the partially stabilized crude containing crude, 
water and dissolved gas. 