Preface

With the reforms in the economy which took place in the 1990's, Government decided to
liberalise the framework governing the oil and gas Exploration and Production (E&P) sector,
which has earlier been the sole preserve of the Government Sector. After award of small and
medium sized discovered and producing oilfields as well as some exploratory blocks in the
early 1990's, Government formulated the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) in 1997 and
notified this policy in 1999. This policy had the objective of not only attracting private capital
to the E&P Sector but also introducing the technical expertise and efficiency of global players
in this field.

In order to ensure balanced and effective partnerships with global E&P Companies, the
Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) between the Government and the private players were
revised. These contracts were structured in such a fashion that the exploration risk viz. the
cost incurred in searching for oil and natural gas, without certainty of discovery, was to be
borne by the private contractors. The private contractors incur capital expenditure towards
discoveries, irrespective of the fact whether oil or gas is discovered or not. It is only when
hydrocarbons are discovered and assessed to be commercially viable, that the contractor has
the first rights on the revenue streams accruing from sales of oil and gas till his costs are
recovered. The balance revenue, termed as "Profit Petroleum", is shared between the
Government and the contractors, with the contractors generally getting a higher share in the
initial stages since he has to recover contract costs. The Government share of revenues
becomes significant only when the production reaches substantial levels and the contractor
has recovered his accumulated capital cost. Further, under NELP, Government companies and
private players are treated at par.

The principle underlying the PSC model, under the NELP, as it currently stands, involves a scale
for profit sharing between the Government of India and the contractor, based on a critical
parameter —the Investment Multiple (IM). This is essentially an index of the accumulated net
cash flow to the contractor relative to the accumulated expenditure on exploration and
development activities. The objective underlying the PSC is that ideally the operator would
attempt to maximize simultaneously both the government revenues and his own profit by
minimizing contract costs for any level of production.

In order to ensure that the expenditure proposed to be incurred as well as actually incurred by
the operator does not adversely affect the Government's revenue interests, the PSC
contemplates the Management Committee (MC), chaired by a Gol representative, as
responsible for approving field development plans as well as annual work programmes and
budgets for development and production operations. However, operational control of E&P
activities would vest with the Operating Committee, consisting of representatives of the
contractors. =f नि

TAL |
/ 1 4


This audit was conducted in response to a request from the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas for a special audit of PSCs in the context of large Government stake in the
form of profit petroleum and concerns about the capital expenditure being incurred
by some contractors in development of blocks awarded under NELP. We scrutinized
records of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and the Directorate General of
Hydrocarbons (DGH) in respect of a sample of 20 PSCs covering the period from 2003-
04 to 2007-08. In addition we also conducted supplementary scrutiny of records of
operators of 4 blocks/ fields (KG-DWN-98/3, RJ-ON-90/1, Panna-Mukta and Mid &
South Tapti), covering the two year period 2006-07 and 2007-08. Our audit was
interrupted due to difficulties in obtaining access to the records of operators for
supplementary scrutiny, which were later resolved with assistance and cooperation of
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.

This report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India for the year ended March
2011 containing the results of Performance Audit of Hydrocarbons Production Sharing
Contracts has been prepared for submission to the President of India under Article 151
of the Constitution of India.

बा 1 ~—
‘Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSC:

—_



Executive
Summary

Private sector participation in hydrocarbon Exploration and Production (E&P) in India dates
back to the Government of India (Gol) decision of 1991 to invite foreign and domestic private
sector companies to participate in the development of oil and gas fields already discovered or
partly developed by the National Oil Companies such as ONGC. This was followed by three
rounds of bidding for small and medium-sized discovered or producing fields and six rounds of
bidding for “pre-NELP” exploratory blocks.

The New Exploration and Licensing Policy (NELP), announced by Gol in 1997 and notified in
1999, represented a landmark in hydrocarbon E&P in India. For the first time, National Oil
Companies were to compete with private sector companies for obtaining E&P licenses through
a competitive bidding process, instead of getting them on nomination basis. The pre-tax
Investment Multiple for sharing of “profit petroleum” between the Gol and private contractors
was introduced. Royalty rates were standardised on ad valorem basis, and cess as well 35
signature, discovery and production bonuses done away with. Eight rounds of award of
exploration blocks under NELP were completed, while submission of bids for the IX" round has
concluded recently.

The basis for the contractual relationship between the Gol and the private contractors is the
Production Sharing Contract (PSC). The PSC lays out the roles and responsibilities of all parties,
stipulates the detailed procedures to be followed at different stages of exploration,
development and production, and also indicates the fiscal regime (cost recovery, profit sharing
etc.).

Request of Gol for special audit by CAG

In November 2007, the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) requested
the CAG to conduct a special audit of PSCs for eight blocks for which regular audit had already
been carried upto 2003-04/ 2004-05. MoPNG's request was made in the context of large stakes
of the Government in the form of royalty and profit petroleum, and concerns voiced in some
quarters about the capital expenditure being incurred by some contractors in the development
projects awarded under NELP. We agreed to the MoPNG's request for audit, indicating that we
would be covering, in the first instance, five blocks - Panna-Mukta, Tapti, KG-DWN-98/3,
Hazira, and PY-3 - out of the eight blocks for which special audit was requested by MoPNG. We
also subsumed a Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs, covering a sample of discovered/
pre-NELP Production Sharing Contracts and NELP PSCs.

(Para 3.1)

ee ‘Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



The main objectives of the performance audit of hydrocarbon PSCs were to verify whether:

e The systems and procedures of MoPNG and Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) to
monitor and ensure compliance by the operators and contractors of the blocks with the
terms of the PSCs were adequate and effective; and

e The revenue interests of the Government (including royalty and Gol share of profit
petroleum) were properly protected, and adequate and effective mechanisms were in
position for this purpose.

Concerns have been raised in certain quarters as to our conducting “performance audit” of
individual blocks, and the operations of the contractors/ operators thereof. We take this
opportunity to clarify that the scope of our performance audit covered the MoPNG and the
DGH and not the private operators of individual blocks. Consequently, access to the records of
the operators of selected blocks was only supplementary to the scrutiny of records of MoPNG
and DGH.

The purpose of access to, and scrutiny of records of the operators was to verify whether the
Government's revenue in the form of profit petroleum (current and future) and royalty were
correctly calculated, and its revenue interests were properly protected. Towards this larger
objective, we intended to verify (based on access to operators' records for the specified
accounting periods) whether:

e Capital expenditure (capex), operating expenditure (opex), and net cash income and
individual items thereof were accurately and reliably reflected, and these amounts were
supported by adequate documentation;

® The figures of individual items of capex/ opex were reasonable, and also commensurate
with original/revised budgets, plans, feasibility reports or other similar documents; and

e@ There was collateral evidence which would provide assurance regarding the authenticity of
goods and services procured and provided.

(Para 3.2)

Our audit scope covered a twin approach:

® Scrutiny of records at MoPNG and DGH in respect of a sample of 20 PSCs so selected as to
provide a balanced coverage of (a) onshore and offshore (shallow and deepwater) blocks
(b) a cross section of operators (c) fields with oil discoveries and gas discoveries (d) pre-
NELP and NELP and (९) blocks at different stages of E&P — under exploration, relinquished,
discovery, production etc.; this covered the period from 2003-04 to 2007-08.

® Supplementary scrutiny of records of operators of four blocks/ fields (KG-DWN-98/3,
Panna-Mukta, Mid & South Tapti and RJ-ON-90/1) covering the two year period 2006-07

and 2007-08.
(Para 3.3)

Our audit was, however, interrupted due to difficulties in obtaining access to the records of
operators for supplementary scrutiny, which were later resolved with the active assistance and
co-operation of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.

——
= 146. if

(Para 3.5)

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


Production of Records by PMTJV

Despite our repeated efforts, the Panna Mukta Tapti Joint Venture (PMT JV — joint operators
BGEPIL, RIL, and ONGC) did not provide important and relevant records on the ground that
scrutiny of these records did not fall within our audit scope, which was limited to accounting
records in terms of the PSC provisions. The PMT JV also did not respond to the majority of our
preliminary observation memoranda, on the ground that the issues raised therein were
outside the scope of audit rights envisaged in the PSC.

We do not agree with the views expressed by the PMT JV. In our opinion, the records sought by
our audit teams (in particular the procurement-related records) were fully covered by the PSC,
and access to such records was essential for the purpose of our scrutiny. Consequently, our
scrutiny of records of the Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields was incomplete, as also the findings
arising therefrom. After the issue was raised yet again in June and July 2011, the PMT JV
furnished part of the relevant records in July 2011, and assured that they would furnish the
relevant records shortly. The records furnished recently by them as well as the records, in
respect of which assurances have been received, will be covered subsequently, and findings
arising therefrom included in subsequent audit reports.

(Para 3.7.1)
Comments on Audit Scope by Operator

The operator of KG-DWN-98/3 block challenged the scope, extent and coverage of our audit at
various points of time, indicating that the CAG had conducted a “performance audit”, which
was not permitted under the PSCs. It was stated that nothing in the PSC permitted an audit of
the operational, commercial and technical decisions of the operator. Further, an exercise,
whereby the auditor would step into the shoes of the operator and attempt to evaluate
whether the decisions by the operator —taken within his authorized area of operation —were in
accordance with some undefined norms or the processes adhered to by bureaucratized
decision making processes and that too without having the advantage of access to technical
expertise or having the accountability for implementing such projects, was clearly beyond the
provisions of the PSC.

We do not agree with the operator's views. In our opinion, our scrutiny was entirely consistent
with the provisions of the PSC. Further, verification of charges and credits relating to the
contractor's activities and other documents considered necessary to audit and verify the
charges and credits, is not merely limited to an arithmetical totaling of charges and credits or
tracing of charges/ expenses from the accounting statements to the contracts/ expense
vouchers. Such an exercise would extend to verifying whether the costs being depicted in the
PSC accounts by the contractor, which would critically affect the determination of profit
petroleum and Gol's share therein, are correctly determined, and in particular, costs incurred
for procurement of goods and services are determined through a competitive process, so as to
minimize costs (and ultimately maximize the Gol share of profit petroleum). Such verification
does NOT amount to the auditor stepping into the shoes of the operator and evaluating such
decisions in accordance with “bureaucratized” decision making processes as stated by RIL. Our
LL remains restricted to verifying whether Gol's revenue interests (including impact on }
iar a ¢ कर P

पु > &

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



current/ future Gol share of profit petroleum) are properly protected. As stated earlier, we did
not intend to, nor have we conducted a performance audit of the activities of the operators.

Audit also wishes to firmly emphasise that all our enquiries and findings emerge from, and
are limited to the PSC. We do not profess to go into any procedure or policy related aspects
leading to the conclusion of the PSC. Taking the PSC as given, we have merely examined the
contractual obligations of the signatories to the contract, viz., the Government and the
private contractors. Our findings are totally guided by the “written word” of the contract.

(Para 3.8.1)

Main Findings
KG-DWN-98/3 (Operator: RIL)

The KG-DWN-98/3 block, which is operated by RIL, was awarded in the first NELP round in the
year 2000. It has India's largest gas discoveries (Dhirubai-1 and Dhirubai-3 gas fields) and also
has a large oilfield discovery (MA oilfield). Our main findings and recommendations relating to
the KG-DWN-98/3 block are as follows:

Non-relinquishment of area and declaration of entire contract area as discovery area

We found that the contractor was allowed to enter the second and third exploration phases
without relinquishing 25 per cent each of the total contract area at the end of Phase-| and
Phase-lIl as against Articles 4.1 & 4.2 of PSC. Subsequently, in February 2009, Gol also conveyed
approval to treat the entire contract area of 7645 sq.km. as ‘Discovery Area’, thus enabling the
operator to completely avoid relinquishment of area.

‘Discovery Area’ is defined in Article 1.39 of the PSC as “that part of the contract area about
which, based on discovery’ and results obtained from a well or wells drilled in such part, the
contractor is of the opinion that petroleum exists and is likely to be produced in commercial
quantities”. The delineation of ‘discovery area’ is inextricably linked to results obtained from
wells drilled and finding of petroleum deposits recoverable at the surface (which can be
discovered only through drilling of successful wells). At the end of the Exploration Phase-l, the
operator had drilled all wells - in the north-west part of the block only. The sequence of events
between April 2004 and February 2009 clearly demonstrates that:

e Originally DGH did not agree (May 2004) to RIL's proposal (while preparing to proceed from
Exploratory Phase-| to Phase-ll) for not relinquishing any part of the contract area (at the
end of Exploration Phase-l) and reiterated the PSC contractual provisions for
relinquishment of 25 per cent at the end of Phase-I (even identifying “least priority” areas

*Discovery' is defined in Article 1.38 as ‘the finding, during petroleum operations, of a deposit of petroleum not
previously known to have existed, 00072: at the surface in a flow measurable by conventional
—_——— petroleum industry testing methods’. जय: छू —— 32
oe aOR, aoe

ae
mance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs
i



for consideration for relinquishment). DGH, further, stated that none of the existing
discoveries extended beyond ‘priority area-l', and no well had been drilled in ‘priority area-
॥', and hence it was not possible to consider the total block area as the discovery area.

e However, by April/ May 2005, DGH capitulated. While noting that there were “no two
different interpretations possible as far as the definition of discovery provided in the PSC”,
DGH felt it would be “prudent to acquire and interpret the 3D seismic data in the remaining
part of the block ona fast track basis”. Subsequently, “the relinquishment area could also be
worked out in a proper manner”. In the meanwhile, RIL had already moved from Phase-| to
Phase-Il without any area relinquishment, and was notifying its intent to move from Phase-
॥ to Phase-lll, again without any relinquishment. In August 2006, DGH informed MoPNG
that the Management Committee (MC) (chaired by DGH representative) had, in July 2006,
permitted the contractor to enter the next phase without relinquishing any area, since data
showed “continuity of discovery” in the block area (on the basis of RIL's presentation based
onthe results of seismic data acquired).

e Thereafter, there was extensive correspondence between MoPNG and DGH from August
2006. MoPNG raised pertinent questions as to whether the coverage of wells was over the
entire block for DGH to reach the conclusion of discovery extension, but failed to pursue
this aspect further.

e By April 2007, MoPNG felt that the proposal might be considered on getting a certification
from DGH that the whole area had been covered by a reasonable number of wells/ 3D
seismic to substantiate continuity of channels and the extent of discovery area. DGH gave a
certificate in May 2007 to MoPNG.

e  Evenin May 2007, internal notes of MoPNG indicated their awareness that the whole of the
block had been provided as a discovery area on the basis of 3D seismic and not on drilling of
wells, which were mainly confined to the NW part of the block. However, MoPNG now
proposed that on the basis of the proposed discovery area, the operator should be asked to
appraise the area as per appraisal-related PSC provisions. After concerns expressed by the
then Minister, PNG as to whether the decision sought to be ratified was consistent with the
PSC provisions, the case was referred to a committee under the chairmanship of Additional
Secretary, MoPNG. The Committee accepted the contractor's claim (February 2008) and
decided (April 2008) that the timeline for appraisal of discoveries would commence from
11 July 2006 (viz. MC's acceptance of the contractor's claim). This was finally approved by
the Minister in July 2008, but communicated to DGH only in February 2009.

RIL's views at different points of time (that the contractor was “of the opinion that petroleum
was likely to exist”, “the contract area was having hydrocarbon potential”, “ultimately
additional exploratory wells needed to be drilled to establish the additional hydrocarbon
potential in the deeper water area of the block for which they were making efforts to hire ultra-
deepwater rigs” clearly attempted to confuse potential/ prospectivity with actual discovery of
hydrocarbons. Their difficulties in hiring ultra-deepwater rigs for the deep water area of the
block (essentially the SW part, where no discoveries had been made) had no linkage with the
contractual provisions for discovery area and relinquishment.

ee ‘Audit of Hydrocarbon 7565


Thus, RIL's proposal of April 2004 to not relinquish any area and retain the whole contract area
as ‘discovery area’ was submerged in a sea of correspondence between RIL and DGH, without
relinquishment action being taken in terms of the PSC provisions, while RIL was allowed to
proceed from phase to phase. By April/ May 2005, DGH had “waived” its earlier objections, and
now advised/ directed the operator to complete 3D seismic data. By July 2006, DGH completed
its about-turn and agreed (through the MC) to the contractor's proposal. MoPNG was aware of
the flaws in the MC's decision for retention of the entire area, but, instead of reversing the same
(in line with PSC provisions), it chose to accept DGH's certification for such retention.

MoPNG gave a detailed reply (July 2011) regarding acceptance of operator's opinion by DGH
and MoPNG. We, however, do not agree with the reply as allowing the contractor to retain
entire block area as discovery area was not in compliance with PSC provisions. The reply of
MoPNG and our rebuttal thereof are given in detail in Chapter 4.

(Para 4.2.1)

Discovery related issue

In violation of PSC provisions, in the case of 13 out of 19 discoveries between October 2002 and
July 2008, the operator had, without first furnishing the initial particulars of the discoveries in
writing to the MC and Government, directly given written notifications regarding potential
commerciality of the discoveries.

MOoPNG replied (July 2011) that in the beginning, systems and processes were not fully
established, however, over a period of time, the procedures had now been strengthened, and
were being strictly followed for subsequent discoveries as per PSC requirement.

(Para 4.2.4)

D1-D3 gas discovery

The operator submitted an “Initial” Development Plan (IDP) in May 2004 (with estimated
capital expenditure (capex) of USS 2.4 billion). The IDP was followed up with an Addendum to
the IDP (AIDP) in October 2006 (estimated capex of USS 5.2 billion for Phase-| and USS 3.6
billion for Phase-Il). We found that:

e Most procurement activities were undertaken late in line with the schedules of the IDP of
May 2004. By contrast, activities in respect of items in the AIDP were initiated even before
the submission/approval of the AIDP. Clearly, the development activities of the operator
were guided by AIDP, rather than IDP. ' fj nf

(7. sj



e As indicated by the operator, advance action was taken to tie up vendors for timely
development of D1/D3 fields in anticipation of the MC approval of the AIDP. While a view
could, perhaps, be taken that such pre-approval action is at the risk and cost of the
contractor, in reality, this increases the probability of such approvals becoming a fait
accompli.

Since approval of estimates does not constitute acceptance of the cost projections of the
operator, validating the cost incurred by him can be done only after audit of the actual cost
through proper norms. Part of the expenditure in respect of individual items under AIDP
incurred during 2006-07 and 2007-08 has been audited. Remaining expenditure incurred from
2008-09 onwards will be covered in future audits.

(Para 4.3.1)
Procurement-related activities

We found that payments during 2006-07 and 2007-08 revealed instances of huge procurement
contracts where we could not derive assurance as to the reasonableness of costs incurred,
primarily due to lack of adequate competition — award on single financial bids; major revisions
in scope/ quantities/ specifications; post-price bid opening; substantial variation orders - with
consequential adverse implications for cost recovery and Gol's financial take.

In particular, regarding the MA oilfield, we found that well before submission, let alone
approval, of the Field Development Plan (FDP) and Mining Lease (ML) application, the operator
had placed orders for various critical items required for development activities/ production
facilities from 2006 itself. We also found serious deficiencies in the award, on a single financial
bid, of a 10 year hiring contract for USS 1.1 billion for a Floating Production, Storage and
Offloading (FPSO) vessel from Aker Floating Production (AFP).

(Para 4.4)

During our scrutiny of the operator's records, we have come across instances, where multiple
vendors were pre-qualified. However, when technical bids were received, all vendors (except
one) were rejected, and the contract was finally awarded on a single financial bid.

In our opinion, such disqualification of vendors on technical grounds, after a pre-qualification
process and bidders' meetings for technical clarifications, limits the competitiveness which is
not in accordance with the spirit of the procurement procedure given in the PSC. In many
cases, it resulted in no competing financial bids, and the contract was awarded on the basis of a
single financial bid. In such a situation, the letter and spirit of the MC's role at the pre-
qualification stage is vitiated.

Consequently, in our opinion, in cases of procurement (under procedure 'C' — high value
contracts), where pre-qualified bidders are subsequently disqualified/ declared non-
responsive on various technical and other grounds and there is only one financial bid being
considered, the Operator should either go back to the pre-qualification process, and ensure
that more vendors/ parties are pre-qualified. Alternatively, if the operator wishes
consideration of only a single financial bid, the matter has to be necessarily referred back to the
MC (including Gol representatives)/ Gol for ex ante relaxation from PSC stipulated
procurement procedures. Post facto approval of the MC may be provided for in emergent
cases, with adequate justification.

ee ‘Audit of Hydrocarbon 7565


Likewise, extension of contracts (beyond the extension periods already stipulated in the
contract) is not in consonance with PSC provisions. If the operator wishes to extend such
contracts, the matter has to be necessarily referred back to the MC for necessary relaxation.

(Para 4.6)

RJ-ON-90/1 block (Operator: Cairn Energy)

This onland block (mainly in Rajasthan) was awarded in 1995 under the pre-NELP exploratory
rounds, and is currently operated by Cairn Energy. It now has India's largest onland oil
discoveries, and also has significant gas discoveries. The high “pour point” of the crude oil has
necessitated a 660 km oil pipeline with insulation and heating facilities to the Gujarat coast. Our
main findings and recommendations with regard to the RJ-ON-90/1 block are as follows:

e 13 fresh discoveries were made during/ between the appraisal phase and in the
development phase in areas already delineated as development areas. Consequently, in
our opinion, the declaration of fresh discoveries during the appraisal/development phases
within delineated discovery/development areas amounted to irregular extension of
exploration activities, which is not in consonance with the terms of the PSC. This also
indicates that the discovery/development areas were not strictly delineated, and included
excess area.

(Para 5.2.3)

e There were instances of non-compliance with regard to the PSC provisions for notification
of potential commercial interest, appraisal programme, submission of Field Development
Plans etc.

(Para 5.3)
Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti Fields

The Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti fields are offshore shallow water fields in the offshore
Bombay basin, which were initially discovered and operated by ONGC. Subsequently, these
were awarded in 1994 to a consortium of private operators under a JV arrangement with
ONGC.

As already pointed out, our scrutiny of records of the PMT JV and findings arising thereon are
incomplete, due to non-production of records. Based on the limited records made available to
us, our main findings are as follows: के बन

e failing to = oF
as, a I prices, Even the norms for
iciencie: f



© MOoPNG has accepted all our detailed findings relating to calculation of wellhead value of
natural gas, and has agreed to take necessary action thereon.

(Para 6.2.2)

© MoPNG and its nominee for gas purchase (GAIL) failed to comply with the terms of the PSC
during 2005-08 with regard to the pre-determined gas pricing formula. Not honouring the
PSC formula severely affects the sanctity of the contract (which is to be maintained by all
parties), which is highly undesirable from the long-term perspective of all contracting
parties.

(Para 6.3.1)

@ ~The PMTJV had not completed key work commitments in respect of the Mukta Field, which
remained undeveloped (with very low volumes of oil and gas production). The committed
work programme in respect of the Mid & South Tapti fields was also incomplete.

(Para 6.4.1 & 6.5.1)
Compliance and Control Issues

We also found numerous deficiencies in compliance and control vis-a-vis the PSC provisions by
MoPNG/ DGH, notably with regard to:

e Irregular declaration of entire contract area of KG-OSN-2001/2 as discovery area;

® Non-compliance to PSC provisions regarding notification of discovery and submission of
test reports;

Delay in submission/ review of appraisal programme;

e Numerous deficiencies in functioning of the Management Committees for individual
blocks; and

¢ Deficiencies in timely submission of stipulated periodical reports.
(Para 7.2. , 7.3, 7.4, 7.7 & 7.8)

Conclusions and General Recommendations

Our audit indicated that there is considerable scope for improvement in the management of
hydrocarbon E&P with private sector participation.

Structure of PSC

The PSC, as it currently stands, is based on a scaled formula for profit sharing between the Gol
and the private contractors. This is based on a critical parameter — Investment Multiple (IM) —
which is essentially an index of the capital-intensive nature of the E&P project i.e. the amount
of “capex” on exploration and development activities relative to income. The slabs for profit
sharing are so designed that more the capital intensive the project (i.e. lower IM), the lower the
Gol share of “profit petroleum” (which could be as low as 5 to 10 per cent). Contrarily, the
higher the IM (i.e. less capital intensive vis-a-vis income), the higher the Gol share of “profit
petroleum” (which could be as high as 85 per cent).

Re  “- ‘Audit of Hydrocarbon 7565


In practice, however, the private contractors have inadequate incentives to reduce capital
expenditure - and substantial incentive to increase capital expenditure or “front-end” capital
expenditure, so as to retain the IM in the lower slabs or to delay movement to the higher slabs.

The structure of the IM-based profit sharing formula (especially when there is a huge jump in
Gol's profit share from 28 per cent to 85 per cent on an IM slab of 2.5 or more) is such that in
certain scenarios, an increase in capital expenditure, upto a point, could conceivably result in
an increase in the contractor's share of profit petroleum, despite a reduction in the total profit
petroleum as well as Gol's share of profit petroleum. Further, “front-ending” of capital
expenditure (i.e. skewed towards the initial phases) decreases the IM, and postpones the
movement to higher IM slabs; this results in a reduction in Gol share on a discounted cash flow
basis, since the slabs involving higher Gol share come later, rather than earlier.

Operational control of E&P operations is largely with the private operators, and the Gol's
oversight role is restricted essentially to its representation (through MoPNG and/ or DGH) in
the Management Committee for the block, especially in approval of Annual Work Programmes
and Budgets and Field Development Plans, as well as a few approval functions delineated in the
PSC.

Ashok Chawla Committee Report
We are given to understand that the report of the Ashok Chawla Committee on allocation of
natural resources also draws similar conclusions regarding the IM-based profit-sharing
formula. This committee had, inter alia, representatives from MoPNG and the Ministry of
Finance, so it can safely be presumed that its conclusions were well considered. However, the
reportis not currently available in the public domain.
According to media reports, the Committee has stated that the system “gives incentive (toan
operator) to increase his investment, or front-end his work plan in order to see that the
threshold where Government's profit take rises rapidly is not reached”. Citing the example
of KG-DWN-98/3, the Committee has stated that “the relationship between the pre-tax IM
and the share of contractor profit petroleum changes dramatically once the pre-tax IM
crosses 2.5, with the government's share increasing from 28 per cent to 85 per cent. It is
useful to remember that this schedule is bid by the operator, and not determined by the
Government.”
Further, according to the Committee, “a high share of some pre-tax IM will help to win the
bid, depending on the financial mode of evaluation used, but it does raise concerns that
such a radical change would provide very strong incentives for any operator to adopt all
investment and strategies possible to ensure that the pre-tax IM stays within the 2.5 limit”.

The report clearly points out the risks associated with the IM-based formula for sharing of
profit petroleum, especially with a steep jump in profit sharing from one slab to another. In
our view, even the linearity introduced in the sliding scale for IM slabs from NELP-VII onwards
does not fully address these risks.



The oversight/ control of Gol representatives on high value procurement decisions is also very
limited in scope (largely restricted to prior intimation of the list of pre-qualified bidders). In fact,
a comparison of the procurement procedure under PSCs in Bangladesh and India reveals that
the clauses are similar, except that the Bangladesh PSCs require approval by the Management
Committee for high value procurements (typically greater than US$ 500,000). This clause is,
however, strangely missing from the Indian PSCs in almost all its versions.

Our audit review also revealed that, by and large, the MoPNG as also DGH, both through the
Management Committee and otherwise, did not pay adequate attention to protecting - at
every stage of E&P, be it exploration, development or production - Gol's financial interests.
Adequate attention was not paid to specifically how every proposal/ decision would potentially
affect Gol's share of profit petroleum. In addition to their failings, the constraints of adequately
skilled resources with MoPNG/ DGH for monitoring several hundred PSCs simultaneously
cannot also be ignored. By contrast, it is inconceivable that the private contractor would fail to
protect his financial interests, and assess every investment/ operational proposal to see
whether it would result in incremental revenues for him both in terms of cost recovery and
contractor's share of profit petroleum.

Given the similar conclusions that two independent agencies have reached as regards the
adverse impact of the profit sharing mechanism in protecting Gol's share (linked to the IM),
designed in the late 1990s, there does seem to be enough ground to revisit the formula. The
PSCas drawn up then, was with the limited expertise available with the Gol at that point of
time. In view of the fact, albeit by hindsight, that we have gained the knowledge now, there
is need to conclusively address this issue in respect of future PSCs.

(Para 8.1)

Recommendations for Future PSCs

The stated strength of the profit sharing mechanism is the sharing of risks between the
contractor and the Government if the profits are low or non-existent, both parties suffer.

For future PSCs, we recommend that the IM-linkage with the profit sharing formula (even
with the linear sliding scale introduced from NELP-VII onwards) be removed by the Gol.
Instead, the biddable profit-sharing percentage should be a single percentage. This will
reduce the incentive for skewed volume and timing of capital expenditure resulting in very
low Gol share of PP. Further, in order to ensure a modicum of control, very high value
procurement decisions above a specified limit should be subject to approval by the MC,
more specifically the approval of the Gol representatives. Such a mechanism already exists
in PSCs operating in Bangladesh.

(Para 8.2)

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Bid Evaluation Criteria

The Bid Evaluation Criteria (BEC) currently give weightage to technical/ financial ability and two
biddable parameters - committed exploratory work and fiscal package (royalty + Gol share of
profit petroleum). As regards fiscal package, the current evaluation model generally involves
multiple scenarios of oil reserves and oil prices (typically high, medium and low) as well as a
projected profile.

The assumptions based on which calculations of fiscal packages of different bidders are made
are completely hypothetical. In the absence of high quality seismic data, let alone drilling and
discovery findings, estimates of oil/ gas reserves and production profiles, as also projected
capital and operating expenses and even crude oil and natural gas prices, are completely
speculative. Admittedly, the evaluation model is applied consistently across all bidders.
However, when the current system allows multiple bidding points (viz. different Gol shares of
PP for different IM slabs), these hypothetical assumptions can not only make a significant
difference as to who comes out as the winning bidder, but can also convey extremely unrealistic
assumptions about what 5015 share of PP will be (e.g. when will Gol's share of PP reach the
highest IM slab?).

Consequently, we recommend that the bidders should be allowed to make only a single point
bid, which can be compared straightaway without resorting to hypothetical assumptions.

As regards the biddable exploratory work programme, we are generally in agreement with the
bid evaluation process, except for the system of awarding points for well depth. As pointed out
in Chapter 4 (relating to KG-DWN-98/3), it is unrealistic and impractical, without having
accurate and reliable seismic data, to bid upfront how deep the well should be drilled, and then
expect that, notwithstanding geological objectives, the well will be drilled to the committed
depth even if it means a waste of money.

Consequently, in future, while considering the bid evaluation criteria, we recommend that
either no weightage be allocated for well depth, or alternatively, well commitments be
categorised into two groups — wells above and below a specified depth, e.g., 1500 or 2000
metres, and points be awarded accordingly.

(Para 8.3)

MoPNG stated (July 2011) that they are prepared to look at alternative formulas and would
consider the suggestion of the CAG and the Ashok Chawla Committee with an open mind

and take a final view on merits.

Management of existing PSCs

The vast majority of blocks with high prospects for hydrocarbon discovery have already been
awarded through various pre-NELP/ NELP rounds, and Gol has no option but to work within the
constraints of the existing PSC structure and clauses to the fullest extent possible.

Development Plans and Annual Work Programmes and Budgets

Itis inconceivable that a private operator/ contractor will make investments in absolute as well
as incremental terms, in petroleum operations under the PSC without assessing whether such
“investments would result in increased revenues for him in terms of cost recovery and

—— _ अ...
i 7

a

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



contractor's share of profit petroleum. It is necessary for MoPNG and DGH to function in a
similar manner, with regard to Gol's financial interests. Consequently we recommend the
following:

Procurement Acti

Review and approval of development plans should be considered not just from a “technical
perspective” viz. how best can oil and gas be extracted from the reservoirs, but also from a
financial perspective —not only overall (i.e. what is the project NPV, Rate of Return etc.), but
specifically from Gol's point of view (what are the projections of royalty and Gol share of
profit petroleum? What are the risks to these revenues? How will increases/ decreases in
capital expenditure, reserves, reservoir productivity, prices etc. affect Gol's financial take?).

While reviewing and approving development plans, Gol representatives on the MC as well
as DGH and MoPNG should ensure that detailed and appropriately validated estimates of
Gol take and contractor take are included as an integral part of these plans at the approval
stage. A suitable range for Gol take, say + 15, 20 or 25 per cent, as considered appropriate by
MoPNG could be stipulated.

Approval by MoPNG of such development plans should be on the clear stipulation that any
changes in capital and operating expenditure, expenditure commitments, production
quantities and other factors, which have the impact of reducing the Investment Multiple
and Gol share of profit petroleum beyond the stipulated range must be submitted for prior
approval by Gol representatives on the MC, with detailed justification.

Annual Work Programmes and Budgets should be strictly in line with the approved
development plans. Any deviations or changes vis-a-vis the development plan which have
the impact of reducing the IM and Gol share of profit petroleum beyond the stipulated
range must be submitted for prior approval of the MC. Similarly, any significant variations
from the approved Work Programme and Budgets with similar impact beyond the
stipulated range must also be subject to prior approval.

Incurring of any costs which vary from the Development Plans and Annual Work
Programmes & Budgets on an overall basis, as well as in terms of significant line items with
significant adverse impact on IM and Gol share of profit petroleum — beyond the stipulated
range - without prior approval of Gol representatives on MC should automatically be
ineligible for cost recovery.

(Para 8.4.1)

ies

The provisions relating to procurement procedures in the PSCs do not provide for adequate
oversight / control by Gol representatives on procurement processes. However, given the
existing provisions, we recommend the following measures for protecting 6015 financial

interest: |. ; oa 4

tk


© The objective of effective procurement is to ensure optimum, not necessarily lowest, prices
through effective competition. As long as adequate number of 'responsive' financial bids,
typically three or more, from reputed vendors, who are pre-qualified after following due
process, are received and duly considered (i.e., not withdrawn, disqualified on technical or
other grounds, deviations/ non-responsiveness or otherwise not considered), generate
adequate competitive tension, the probability of effective procurement at optimum costs
remains high.

© However, when high value contracts are awarded on the basis of single ‘responsive’
financial bids, in our opinion, these are awarded without competition, effectively on
nomination basis. In all such cases, prior approval of the MC should be necessary for such
awards. Post facto approval, with appropriate justification, for emergent procurement
decisions may also be considered. Similar provisions would also apply to all procurement
decisions involving post-priced bid opening changes to scope, quantities, work, prices,
conditions etc.

© Also, the practice of repeated extensions, subsequent substantial variations in scope etc. of
existing contracts is also not in line with the existing PSC procurement provisions, which
incidentally makes no mention of extensions. Extensions or scope variations for high value
contracts, beyond the contractually stipulated extensions, should also be subject to prior
MC approval, with provisions for post facto approval in emergent cases.

(Para 8.4.2)
Relinquishment of area, and delineation of discovery and development areas

The entire PSC process is designed to ensure that the private contractors fully explore the
contract area within designated timelines, relinquish areas where hydrocarbon prospects
appear poor in a phased manner, and retain only those areas where hydrocarbon discoveries
are made, relinquishing the remaining area for re-allocation — through a competitive bidding
process - to other potential bidders, whose hopes/ views in terms of hydrocarbon prospectivity
differ (either on account of technical and other capabilities or in terms of their risk appetite)
from the contract holders who have relinquished such area. We, therefore, recommend the
following:

The stipulated timelines and processes in the PSC for relinquishment of contract area
should, under no circumstances, be relaxed, and compliance with these provisions should
be invariably ensured.

Further, the discovery and development areas should be rigorously delineated, keeping

strictly to the discoveries made through exploratory and appraisal well drilling and proper
delineation of reservoir boundaries. Attempts by contractors for delineation of excessively
wide discovery/ development areas through elastic (and incorrect interpretation) of
hydrocarbon discovery should be strongly rebutted.

(Para 8.4.3)

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Compliance with other PSC provisions

The PSC is a contractual document, and compliance with every contractual clause is of utmost
importance. It would be inappropriate to distinguish between “major” and “minor” clauses,
and neglect monitoring of compliance with so-called “minor” PSC clauses.

We recommend that DGH, and where necessary, MoPNG should put into place adequate and
effective measures to ensure that compliance with all provisions of the PSC are fully monitored
on a timely basis and appropriately documented, and action taken against operators on a
timely and consistent basis, for non-compliance with PSC provisions. For such purposes,
strengthening of the resource basis of DGH in terms of adequate quantity of skilled resources
may be necessary.

DGH should also consider developing a comprehensive PSC monitoring system, which will not
only provide details of compliance with PSC provisions for any block/ contract at a glance, but
will also enable operators to “file” returns/ documents/ information electronically through the
web and/or e-mail. The cost of developing (and maintaining) such an IT system will be
miniscule, compared to the total Gol Profit Petroleum revenues as well as the potential
(although not exactly quantifiable) gains from more effective and timely monitoring of
compliance.

(Para 8.4.4)
Role of DGH

In our view, the roles and functions of DGH encompass two sets of functions with potential
conflict of interest — an upstream regulatory function, and a function of rendering technical
advice to Gol. While in 1993 (when DGH was set up), there was lack of adequate clarity on the
role and position of regulators in various economic sectors, the need for clear autonomy of
sectoral regulators (from the Executive) is now well recognised.

Consequently, we recommend that the functions currently discharged by the DGH be clearly
demarcated. The technical advisory and related functions should be discharged by a body
completely subordinate in all respects to MoPNG (either a cell/ attached office/ subordinate
office within the MoPNG or a separate entity under MoPNG). Functions of a regulatory nature
(review of hydrocarbon reserves and reservoir management, laying down of norms for
declaration of discoveries, laying down safety and related norms and conducting safety
inspections/ audits etc.) should be discharged by an autonomous body, with an arm's length
relationship with Gol.

(Para 7.1)

MOoPNG has assured that conclusions and recommendations drawn by CAG would be
considered for appropriate action.

ee ‘Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Chapter1- Hydrocarbon Production Sharing Contracts -
An Introduction

1.1 Petroleum Exploration and Production (E&P)
1.1.1 Background

Petroleum covers hydrocarbons in liquid form (viz. crude oil) as well as in gaseous form (viz.
natural gas). While hydrocarbon fields primarily contain either crude oil or natural gas, they
also include associated natural gas (natural gas produced in association with crude oil), as
well as condensate (liquid hydrocarbons segregated from natural gas).

Petroleum Exploration and Production (E&P) operations, also referred to as upstream
operations’, can be broadly grouped into three categories:

Exploration Operations

Development Operations

Production Operations

1.1.2 Petroleum Exploration

The first phase in the process for extraction of petroleum is exploration — the search for oil
and gas deposits beneath the earth’s surface. Such deposits could either be onshore or
offshore. Exploration consists of several sub-phases:

* Downstream operations include refining of crude oil, and marketing of petroleum and gas products.
Midstream operations (which are often included under downstream operations) include storage,
Me and related operations.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Figure 1.1 - Phases of Petroleum Exploration

# Areas thought to contain hydrocarbons are subjected to aerial, geological,

geochemical, topographical and other surveys to detect large scale features of
sub-surface geology.

Initial
Surveys

e After narrowing down the list of potential areas, detailed seismic surveys are
carried out to identify formations with high probability of being petroleum
reservoirs. These work on the principle of the time it takes for reflected sound
waves to travel through matter (rock) of varying densities and using the process
of depth conversion to create a profile of the substructure.

® Typically, the seismic survey involves Acquisition of seismic data, computer-
based Processing of the data (including reprocessing of existing data), and its
Interpretation by geologists to identify formations with high probability of

being reservoirs (the API process). There are different types of seismic surveys —

two dimensional (2D), three dimensional (3D) standard/ high resolution, 4D/4C
etc

When a prospect has been identified and evaluated, and passes the oil
companies selection criteria, an exploration well is drilled to conclusively
determine the presence or absence of oil or gas.
Exploratory ° The well could turn out to be ‘dry Alternatively, hydrocarbons (oil and/or gas)
Well could be "discovered", and a discovery area is delineated.

Once a 'discovery' is made and is considered to be of potential commercial
importance, ‘appraisal’ wells are drilled around the discovery in order to
determine the contours of the reservoir (in terms of thickness and lateral
extent) and its characteristics, and come up with a relatively accurate estimate
of the recoverable oil / gas reserves.

Appraisal
Wells

e If hydrocarbons are considered to be discovered in commercially viable
quantities, a “commercial discovery" is declared (as per contractual provisions)

हु and the commercial discovery area is delineated.
Commercial

Discovery

छा... जाई Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


1.1.3 Development Operations

The next phase in the extraction of potential is the development of field, where a
commercial discovery of hydrocarbons has been made. This will first involve the drawing up
of a field development plan to ensure the most efficient, beneficial and timely extraction of
petroleum, keeping in view engineering, economic, safety and environmental
considerations.

Development will then include the following aspects, among others:
«Drilling of production wells (for producing crude oil and gas);

¢ Drilling of injection wells (for injecting water or gas, in order to sustain or accelerate the
production of hydrocarbons);

¢ Installation of offshore platforms and installations, for handling offshore production of
oil and gas; and

«Laying of gathering lines, and installation of separators, tankages, pumps, artificial lift
facilities, which are required to produce, process, store, and transport petroleum.

1.1.4 Production Operations

Production operations involve operations after the commencement of production from a
developed field. This would typically involve, among others:

* operation and maintenance of existing facilities;

*  workovers;

e plugging and abandonment of wells;

« improved oil recovery; and

e site restoration (after cessation of petroleum operations) etc.

1.2 Private Sector Participation in Petroleum E&P in India

Efforts to involve foreign and domestic private sector companies in the business of
Exploration and Production (E&P) of oil and gas in India began as early as 1973, followed by
three rounds of bidding between 1980 and 1986, which did not yield any concrete results.

In 1991, the Government of India decided to invite foreign and domestic private sector
companies to participate in the development of discovered oil and gas fields, and in some
cases, fields partially developed by the National Oil Companies (NOCs) — Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation Limited (ONGC) and Oil India Limited (OIL). In 1993, the Government
introduced a policy of round-the-year bidding for exploratory blocks. In all, a total of nine
rounds were held:

® One round for medium-sized discovered/ producing fields (1992);

Mm Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e Two rounds for small-sized discovered fields (1991 and 1993); and
Six rounds for pre-NELP exploratory blocks (1993 to 1995)’.

1.3 New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP)

In 1997, the Government announced the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP), under
which NOCs would compete with Private Sector Companies for obtaining E&P licenses
through a bidding process, instead of getting them on nomination basis. The main features
of NELP, which was notified in 1999, are summarised below:

fFeatwe . et लक a

No special The NOCs were required to compete with the private sector for
privileges for obtaining Petroleum Exploration Licenses, instead of getting them on
National Oil nomination basis. There was no mandatory State participation through
(ries lees) the NOCs, nor any “carried interest”? of the State.

०1६11) 9 There would be open availability of exploration acreages, to be
of exploration demarcated on a grid system, to provide a continuous window of
area opportunities to all companies‘.

Sharing of profit Government’s share would be based on pre-tax sharing of profit
petroleum petroleum based on investment multiple achieved. Contractors would
be allowed full cost recovery.

Marketing Contractors were free to market the crude oil and gas in the domestic
freedom market.

Royalty rates Royalty rates were fixed at 12.5 per cent of the wellhead value of
crude oil in onshore areas and 10 per cent for offshore areas, while the
rate was fixed at 10 per cent for natural gas. In addition, to encourage
exploration in deep water and frontier areas, royalty was reduced by
50 per cent for offshore deep water areas for the first 7 years after
commencement of commercial production.

Further, there would be no payment of signature, discovery or
production bonuses, nor would any cess be levied on crude
production.

2 In common parlance, the term “pre-NELP” is applied to the rounds for pre-NELP exploratory blocks

३ Carried interest: An agreement whereby one party (usually the private partner) pays for a portion of the pre-
production costs of the other party (usually the NOC).

* This has not taken place, with acreage still being auctioned in rounds rather than on an open availability
basis.

Performance lh of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Tax Holiday There would be a seven year tax holiday after commencement of
commercial production, and exemption from import duty for goods
imported for petroleum operations.

Empowered An Empowered Committee of Secretaries, consisting of Secretary,
Committee of MoPNG, Finance Secretary and Law Secretary would consider bid
Secretaries (ECS) evaluation criteria, conduct negotiations with the bidders, wherever
necessary, and make recommendations to the Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) on award of blocks.

1.4 Legal Framework

The Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 provides for regulation of oilfields and
development of mineral oil — petroleum and natural gas — resources. The Petroleum and
Natural Gas Rules, 1959 (PNG Rules), which are drawn up under Sections 5 and 6 of the
Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, regulate the grant of exploration licenses and
mining leases in respect of petroleum and natural gas. Under these Rules, Gol has the power
to grant exploration licenses/ mining leases for offshore areas, while the State Governments
are empowered to do so for onland areas.

Rule 5(2) of the PNG Rules specifically empower the Gol to include “additional terms,
covenants and conditions as may be provided in the agreement between the Central
Government and the licensee or the lessee”, after consulting the State Governments (where
onland areas are involved). The Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) between the Gol and
the contractor (s) are signed under the provisions of this rule.

1.5 Organisational Structure

The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) is inter alia responsible for the
exploration and production of petroleum and natural gas, including the administration of
the Oilfields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948. MoPNG is assisted by the Directorate
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH), which was established in April 1993 with the objective of
promoting sound management of Indian petroleum and natural gas resources having a
balanced regard for the environment, safety, technological and economic aspects of
petroleum activities.

1.6 Award of Production Sharing Contracts (pre-NELP/ NELP)
The position of PSCs awarded/ signed under different fiscal regimes was as follows:
© Discovered/ Producing fields rounds— 29;

e  Pre-NELP Exploration Rounds — 28; and

Me NELP Rounds (| to VIII) — 235

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Details are given below:

Table 1.1 - Blocks awarded prior to NELP

Year of offer | Fields/ Offshore Onshore | Blocks Blocks
blocks blocks blocks relinquished/ | converted

awarded awarded awarded | surrendered to Mining
Lease

Discovered/ 1991 23 1 N/A
producing to 1993

fields

6 Pre-NELP 1993 28 11 17 10 1

Exploration to 1995
Rounds

Table 1.2 - Blocks awarded under NELP

Blocks No. of offshore | Onshore | Blocks Discoveries
awarded blocks awarded | blocks relinquished
awarded | /surrendered

Deep Shallow
water water

1999 24 7 16 39
2000 23 8 8 7 17 7
2002 23 9 6 8 1 15
2003 20 10 ० 10 1 re
2005 20 6 2 12 12

हर
2006 52 21 6 25 2
rf

h
2007 41 11 7 23
th

8" 2009 32 8 11 13
Roun
nn का

1.7 Bid Evaluation and Award under NELP - An Overview
1.7.1 Process

The process of award of contracts under the NELP rounds is broadly as follows:

5 Under 97" NELP round (launched in October 2010), Government of India has offered 34 exploratory blocks (19
onland, 8 deep water and 7 shallow water). The NELP Round, for which submission of bids closed on 28 March
2011, attracted a total जी .. 74 bids for 33 out of the 34 blocks on offer.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



© Preparation of data package® and basin information docket’;
« Road shows for publicizing the NELP round;

e Publishing of bid document (which includes the Notice Inviting Offer (NIO), the bid
format, the Model Production Sharing Contract (MPSC), the petroleum tax guide, the
Site Restoration Fund scheme, and price list for information docket, data package etc.);

¢ Purchase of bid document and data package/ basin information docket by contractors;
e Submission of bids, evaluation thereof, and award of blocks; and

« Signing of Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs).

1.7.2 Bid Evaluation Criteria (BEC)

Evaluation of bids is carried out, on weightages based on technical and financial capability,
proposed exploratory work programme, and the fiscal package offered.

fares Biddable inputs

Technical e Production, reserves of oil and gas, and acreage holding of the
Capability companies/consortium.

* Experience of operatorship in oil & gas E&P of the companies/
consortium.

Financial e Net worth
जय © Debt equity ratio

e Average profit before tax for last three years

13,11० | Separately for each exploration phase:

Programme: e API of new seismic data (specifying line kms of 2D seismic surveys
and/or sq. kms. of 3D seismic surveys);

e  Re-processing of existing seismic data;

e technical assessment by the bidders; and

e exploratory drilling - number of exploration wells (with minimum
stated objective depths)

Fiscal Package e Percentage of annual production to be allocated for cost recovery

° Data package contains seismic data, navigation data, relevant maps and well log data for the individual block.

7 Basin information docket is for the basin as a whole, and less detailed than the data package. It contains
information on regional and local geology, status of exploration activities, hydrocarbon potential and a brief
ee on the blocks.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Biddable inputs

e Contractor’s share of Profit Petroleum at various levels of pre-tax
multiples of investment reached.

e (Royalty receivable is also considered for calculation of Government
NPV)

The exact criteria and weightages (in percentage terms) varied between different rounds of
NELP, as summarised below:

Table 1.3 - Weightages of Bid Evaluation Criteria for different NELP

rounds
On- Deep ~~ Onland,_~_—Deep water Onland, Deep On Other Deep
land, water Shallow Shallow water ang Omland, water
Shallow Shallow

Type Type Type Type A B S A BS
B B

A A

6 9 13 15 20 2 - - - 30 30 - - 25
4 6 = |e. -
60 55 2 35 «420 30 40 50 40 15 25 50 50 25
30 30 60 50 60 50 60 50 60 55 45 50 50 50

The qualifying criteria included non-zero score under technical capability®; confirmation to
Minimum Work Programme Commitment; and Certificate from a Chartered Accountant that
net worth was equal to or more than the MWP for Exploration Phase I.

As regards the fiscal package, nine scenarios were envisaged with low, medium and high
reserve sizes and oil/ gas prices. The ratio of Government NPV (Net Present Value) to
Project NPV was calculated, using a discount rate of 10 per cent, in each of the nine
scenarios, and a weighted average was calculated to arrive at the final value offered by the
bidder. The bidder offering the highest Government NPV was given the maximum points,
with other bidders receiving proportionate points.

3 which included acreage holding, operatorship experience, average annual accretion of proved + probable
(2P) reserves, and जी annual production

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



As can be seen, substantial weightage is given to exploration work as part of the bidding
criteria, so as to incentivise an aggressive exploration programme with better prospects
for discovery of new national oil and gas resources.

The exploration programme, which includes both seismic surveys as well as drilling of
exploration wells, is to be carried out in a phased manner within clearly defined
timeframes and similarly phased relinquishment of portions of the contract area. At the
end of the exploration period, the entire area (except for areas where oil and gas has been

discovered, or is being developed) is to be returned to the Government, which can then
re-offer it through a bidding process to other parties. Evidently, the idea is to prevent
hoarding/ accumulation of exploration acreage.

Mm Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



2.1 Non-Tax Receipts of Gol

Details of Non-Tax Receipts under the Major Head 0802- Petroleum during the last six years
are shown below:

THAT 7.1 Petydleam Receipts of कल

Jane =

=
=

ain

iy
Tale

ह॥॥ न
E b=] 2 the
E angie a # दिए कफ
४5 गा हू शत छतएशिए]
0: bs
» a
nh

Pope 2A CUTE CRT एफ) ERED

Source: Finance Accounts for data from 2005-06 to 2009-10, and PAO, MoPNG for 2010-11 data.
2.2 Cost Petroleum and Profit Petroleum under PSCs

The key feature of the PSC is that the contractors bid on the percentage of the reward that
the Gol receives from the hydrocarbon block. The contractor undertakes the initial
exploration risks. If no hydrocarbons are discovered, or the quantities are small, the
revenues generated may not be sufficient to recover the costs incurred; this risk is borne by
the contractor.

The three key issues under the NELP fiscal regime are Cost Recovery, Profit Petroleum, and
Investment Multiple; these are described below:

० 1३ कक The contractor bids the Cost Recovery Factor — i.e. the percentage of
revenues which he is entitled to take in a year to recover his exploration,
development and production costs. This percentage can be up to 100 per
cent. The higher the cost recovery factor that the contractor bids, the
earlier the costs can be recovered; however, in such a situation, his fiscal
package will be relatively unattractive as part of the bid evaluation.

mM Dp Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


The amount of costs recoverable from annual revenues is termed as Cost
Petroleum

Profit After deducting the recoverable costs (Cost Petroleum) from the revenues,
Petroleum the resulting Profit Petroleum is then divided between the Government
and the Contractor. The sharing of profit petroleum, which is linked to the
pre-tax Investment Multiple (IM) of the previous year, is a biddable
parameter, and is evaluated as part of the fiscal package.

Investment The pre-tax Investment Multiple (IM) is the ratio of cumulative Net Cash
Multiple Income? to the cumulative exploration and development costs. The lower
the IM, the more capital-intensive the project. As part of their bid, the
contractors are required to specify the Gol share at different IM slabs e.g.
less than 1.5, 1.5 to less than 2.0 etc. Generally, the contractors bid for a
lower Gol share for the lower IM slabs, and the highest Gol share for IM of
3.5 and above (i.e. where net cash income is highest compared to the
capital expenditure). Also, since capital expenditure in the initial years will
generally be high and will decrease over time, the IM is expected to
increase over time from year to year.

It may be noted that instead of the pre-tax IM (under NELP), the earlier fiscal regimes in
respect of discovered fields or pre-NELP exploratory fields involved post-tax IM or Post Tax
Rate of Return (PTRR).

2.3 Other receipts

1 1 Royalty is payable by the contractor/ licensee’ either at a fixed rate (in
Rent respect of oil produced from discovered fields/ pre-NELP exploratory
blocks) or as a percentage of the “wellhead” value of oil/ gas produced.
For offshore blocks, royalty accrues to Gol, while for onshore blocks,
royalty accrues to the State Governments.

Where no royalty is leviable (usually when there is no oil/ gas
production), dead rent is payable on the area covered by the mining
lease

Under the Oil Industry (Development) Act, 1974, cess is leviable on
indigenous crude oil. The cess on crude oil produced from fields under
PSCs prior to NELP is limited to Rs. 900/ tonne. PSCs under NELP do not

3 Net Cash Income = Cost Petroleum + Contractor's Share of Profit Petroleum (based on last year’s IM) +
Incidental Income — Production Costs — Royalty

*° The entity which holds i Mining Lease under the PNG Rules, 1959

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



| | have any provision for levy of cess.

Petroleum For undertaking exploration activities, the Contractor has to obtain a
Exploration Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) under the provisions of the
License (PEL) Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959:

e From the Central Government in respect of offshore blocks; and

e From the concerned State Government in respect of onland blocks
(with the previous approval of the Central Government).

The PEL fee, which is levied during the exploration period, consists of a
security deposit of Rs. 4,00,000, an initial fee of Rs. 1,00,000, and a
yearly advance license fee increasing from Rs. 200 to Rs. 4000 per sq.
km per year within 5 years.

Mining [111 For extraction of petroleum, the contractor has to obtain a Mining Lease

under the ules from the Central / State Government. The Mining
ML) d PNG Rules from the Central / State 6 The Mini
Lease fee consists of a security deposit of Rs. 8,00,000, an initial fee of
Rs. 2,00,000, and dead Rent or royalty (whichever is higher).

2.4 Comparison of fiscal regimes

A comparison of the fiscal regimes under discovered fields (e.g. Panna-Mukta and Tapti);
pre-NELP exploratory blocks (e.g. RJ-ON-90/1); and NELP (e.g. KG-D6) on key issues is
summarised below:

Table 2.1 - Comparison of Fiscal Regimes for discovered fields, pre-NELP
exploratory blocks, and NELP blocks

Discovered Pre-NELP NELP blocks
fields exploratory
blocks

LEM कह Post-tax Investment Multiple (IM) Biddable pre-tax Investment
profit petroleum or Post Tax Rate of Return (PTRR) Multiple (IM)

2, 101. ..39 100 per cent cost recovery Biddable Cost Recovery Factor
petroleum (CRF) of upto 100 per cent

Liability All 100 per cent All constituent of PSCs according
payment constituents of liability on NOCs (० their Participating Interest
royalty/ cess PSCs according (irrespective of

Me Also referred to as PML (Petroleum Mining Lease)

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Rates of Royalty

Rates of Cess

Custom duty

Marketing
oil/gas

of

Discovered Pre-NELP

fields exploratory
blocks

to their their

Participating participating

Interest interest)

Rs.481/MT for crude oil;

@ 10 per cent of wellhead value
of gas

Rs. 900/ MT for crude oil

Rate of corporate income tax
leviable as per the provisions of
the Income Tax Act for Indian
companies.

NELP blocks

10 per cent of wellhead value of
gas;

For crude oil - 12.5 per cent for
onland areas, and 10 per cent for
offshore areas;

For deepwater areas, royalty is 50
per cent of applicable rates for
first seven years of commercial
production

No cess leviable

There is an income tax holiday in
respect of deepwater block for the
first 7 years”; however, Minimum
Alternative Tax (MAT) is
applicable.

100 per cent deduction allowable
for all expenditure in respect of
exploration and drilling
operations. Also, unsuccessful
exploration costs in respect of
other contracts can also be
deducted 100 per cent.

All equipment imported for petroleum operations exempt from
customs duty on the basis of Essentiality Certificate (EC) issued by DGH

First right of Gol on purchase of

100 per cent oil and gas

Freedom to market the crude

oil/gas discovered in domestic

” Ministry of Finance subsequently clarified that the seven year holiday is only for oil production (and not gas

production)

Performance lh of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Discovered Pre-NELP NELP blocks
fields exploratory
blocks

production market.

Carried interest of BNI 30 per cent Nil
NOCs (without exercisable on
payment by NOC) commercial
discovery
Participating 40 per cent in Up to 40 per NOCs to compete for acreage on
interest by NOCs case of cent “level-playing field’; no
medium sized Participating Interest reserved for
field and Nil in NOCs
case of small
sized fields.

2.5 Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs)

The Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) between the Government of India and the
contractor(s) for specific fields/ blocks provide the contractual basis for petroleum
operations, cost recovery, profit sharing and other aspects. In most PSCs, there are many
contracting parties with varying shares of Participating Interest (PI); one party (usually the
party with the majority Pl) is designated as the “operator”. The constituents of the
contractor have to enter into an “Operating Agreement” for conduct of petroleum
operations. This agreement should provide for, among other things:

e The appointment, resignation, removal and responsibilities of the operator;

© The establishment of an “Operating Committee” (00)/ comprising of an agreed number
of representatives of the Companies chaired by a representative of the operator;

e Functions of the Operating Committee (taking into account the PSC provisions),
procedures for decision making, frequency and place of meetings; and

« Contribution to costs, default, sole risk, disposal of petroleum, and assignments
between the parties to the Operating Agreement.

The content of these PSCs vary substantially between those for discovered fields, pre-NELP
exploratory blocks and NELP blocks, and even within different NELP rounds (with Model

* Termed as “Joint Operating Agreement” in the Panna-Mukta and Tapti PSCs.
Me Termed as “Operator Board” (OB) in the Panna-Mukta and Tapti PSCs.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Production Sharing Contracts (MPSCs) being drawn up for each NELP round). The main
features of the NELP PSCs are summarized below:

Table 2.2 - Main Features of NELP PSCs

Exploration
Period
Phases

Discovery
Development

and

and

The Exploration Period consists of three Exploration Phases for a
total of maximum 7 years; in the case of deepwater areas and
frontier areas, the time frame is extended to 8 years (the first phase
may be up to 4 years).

In each of the exploration phases, the contractor has to commit in
his bid the Mandatory/ Minimum Work Programme (MWP) that he
will undertake during that phase in terms of initial surveys (gravity
and geochemical surveys etc.), seismic programme, and exploration
wells (including depth objective).

If the MWP is not completed, the contractor will have to carry out
additional, substitute or alternate work programme (to match the
bid commitment) or pay the equivalent cost to Government. If the
MWP is not completed, the contractor cannot proceed to the next
phase.

After the 1st Exploration phase, the contractor can retain upto 75
per cent of the contract area (including development and discovery
areas), while after the 2nd Exploration phase, he can retain up to 50
per cent’? of the contract area, and after the 3rd Exploration phase,
he can retain only the Discovery and Development Areas.

Once a discovery of hydrocarbons is made, the Contractor should
inform the Government and Management Committee, run tests to
determine whether the discovery is of potential commercial interest
(meriting appraisal) and inform the Management Committee within
60 days.

If the discovery is of potential commercial interest, the contractor
should submit, within 120 days’®, a proposed Appraisal Programme
(with a Work Programme and Budget) to determine whether the
Discovery is a Commercial Discovery, and also delineate the

5 ॥ the development and discovery areas exceed the stipulated 75/ 50 per cent, the contractor can retain
areas to that extent.

16 One year in the case of Non-Associated Natural Gas (NANG) find.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Development Area.

¢ Within 30 months” of a discovery of crude oil, the Contractor
should notify the Management Committee whether it should be
treated as a Commercial Discovery or not.

* Within 200 days*® of declaration of a commercial discovery, the
contractor should submit a comprehensive development plan, which
should characterize the reservoir, indicate estimates of reserve in
place, possible production magnitude and sustained production
rate, outline the production facilities to be installed, and wells to be
drilled, and estimate the development and production costs.

On submission of the development plan, the contractor should also
submit an application for a Petroleum Mining Lease for the
proposed Development Area. The lease shall be for 20 years with an
extension of 5 years (10 years in the case of natural gas)

e For Associated Natural Gas (ANG) in excess of requirements, if the
contractor does not choose to exploit it, the Government can take it

Provisions) free of charge

e In respect of Non Associated Natural Gas (NANG), on the
Contractor’s submission of a proposal for Commercial Discovery, the
MC shall consider the contractor’s proposal:

“* With reference to commercial utilization or commercial
development of NANG in the domestic market; and

“* In the context of Government’s policy on gas utilization, and the
chain of activities required to bring NANG to potential consumers

e Valuation of Natural Gas would be on the basis of competitive arm’s
length sales in the region for similar sales under similar conditions.
The formula or basis on which prices shall be determined shall be
approved by the Government, which will take into account the
prevailing policy, if any, on pricing of Natural Gas, including any
linkages with traded liquid fuels.

Good The PSC defines GIPIP inter alia as “those practices, methods, standards,
International and procedures generally accepted and followed internationally by

773 years in case of a NANG find.
Me 1 year for a NANG find.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Petroleum prudent, diligent, skilled and experienced operators in Petroleum
Industry Exploration, Development and Production Operations and which, at a
75 11 articular time in question, in the exercise of reasonable judgement and
in light of facts then known at the time a decision was made, would be
expected to accomplish the desired results and goals established in
respect of which the practices, methods, standards, procedures and
safety regulations, as the case may be, were followed; provided,
however, that “Good International Petroleum Industry Practices” is not
intended to be limited to the optimum practices or methods to the
exclusion of all others, but rather to be a spectrum of reasonable and
prudent practices, methods, standards, procedures and safety
regulations. In the event that a question is raised by a party as to what
constitutes GIPIP in a particular circumstance, it shall be agreed to by
the Management Committee and failing which the same shall be
decided by the Government with input from DGH or inputs from
amongst a list of organisations or persons, as decided by the
Government based on recommendations of DGH and its decision shall be
binding provided, however, that in case a party has earlier approved or
agreed to a plan, activity, practice, procedure etc. under this Contract,
then it shall not raise a question about GIPIP on that matter”.

However, GIPIP is not a document, set of documents or standards, and
has not been codified by any internationally recognised organization/
body in the petroleum industries. Enquiries made by us with MoPNG/
DGH did not indicate the existence of any such codified set of GIPIP
standards.

The definition of GIPIP in the NELP PSC itself indicates that what
constitutes Good International Petroleum Industry Practices in a
particular circumstance is subject to agreement by the MC, failing
which decision by Gol with inputs/ recommendations from DGH.
Clearly, GIPIP is not a clear, unambiguous, and self-evident “gold
standard”, but “reasonable judgement” exercised by operators.

Management The Management Committee (MC) for each PSC shall have two
Committee representatives from the Gol and one each from the companies
constituting the contractor’; the Gol representative shall be the
Chairman. If decisions are not unanimous, decisions need majority

29 if the contractor only one company, it shall have two members on the MC

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Gol’s Role

Accounts
Audit

and

Participating Interest (70 per cent or more) with Government
representatives’ positive vote. The MC has two sets of functions —
review/ advisory and approval.

Review/ Advisory functions:

“ Annual Work Programmes and Budgets for Exploration
Operations

* Proposals for surrender/ relinquishment

“ Proposals for appraisal programme

* Declaration of discovery/ commercial discovery

* Actual depth objective for each exploration well

Approval functions:

“ Annual Work Programmes and Budgets for Development and
Production Operations

“ Proposed Development Plans; Determination of Development
Area

“ Yearly Programme Quantity

“Extension of Exploration Phase

“* Abandonment of Exploration Drilling on account of geological
conditions encountered

e Extension of Exploration Period for Appraisal Programme by 30
months”?

e Approval of Development Plans, after rejection by the MC
e Approval of assignment or transfer of participating interest by a

contractor

e Annual audit of accounts shall be carried out by an independent CA
firm. The appointment of the auditor and the scope of audit need
prior approval of MC.

e Further, the Gol shall have the right to audit the accounting records
of the contractor, within 2 years from the end of the financial year:

“ This audit may be undertaken either through its own
representatives or through a qualified firm of CAs or a reputed

Mm 3 years in the case of NANG discovery

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



consulting firm.

“ Any audit exception should be notified to the Contractor in
writing within 120 days, to which the Contractor shall respond
within 120 days.

“ Agreed adjustments resulting from an audit shall be made to the
Government take within 30 days. For amounts claimed but not
accepted by the contractor, the amount shall be deposited in an
escrow account”, pending decision of the sole expert/ arbitral
tribunal.

The Production Sharing Contracts provide elaborate and detailed mechanisms/
procedures for protecting the interests of the Gol. Such procedures/ mechanisms would
not be necessary if the Government’s share was in the nature of royalty, linked only to the
quantity and/or value of gas and oil produced. In such a situation, Government’s concerns
would be limited to obtaining assurance as to the quantity of oil and gas produced and
proper valuation thereof. However, a profit-sharing mechanism inevitably requires
detailed controls and procedures to ensure that the Government's financial interests are
properly protected.

1 The provision relating to depositing the money in an escrow account came into effect from NELP-IV
onwards.

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



3.1 Request for Audit by MoPNG

In November 2007, the Secretary, MoPNG requested the CAG of India to conduct a special
audit of PSCs for eight blocks (viz. Ravva, Panna-Mukta, Tapti, KG-DWN-98/3, RJ-ON-90/1,
Hazira, KG-OSN-2001/3, and PY-3) for which regular audit had already been carried upto
2003-04/ 2004-05. MoPNG’s request was made in the context of large stakes of the
Government in the form of royalty and profit petroleum, and concerns voiced in some
quarters about the capital expenditure being incurred by some contractors in the
development projects awarded under NELP.

In March 2008, we agreed to the MoPNG’s request for audit, indicating that we would be
covering, in the first instance, five blocks - Panna Mukta, Tapti, KG-DWN-98/3, Hazira, and
PY-3 - out of the eight blocks for which special audit was requested by MoPNG (with the
audit of the remaining three blocks to be taken up subsequently in a phased manner). We
also subsumed a Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs, covering a sample of discovered/
pre-NELP PSCs and NELP 75057 (for which an entry conference had been held in November
2007 with the then Secretary, MoPNG) into MoPNG’s audit request.

३.2 Audit Objectives
The main objectives of the Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs were to verify whether:

* The systems and procedures of MoPNG and DGH to monitor and ensure compliance by
the operators and contractors of the blocks with the terms of the PSCs were adequate
and effective; and

The revenue interests of the Government (including royalty and Gol share of profit
petroleum) were properly protected, and adequate and effective mechanisms were in
position for this purpose.

Concerns have been raised in certain quarters as to our conducting “Performance Audit”
of individual blocks, and the operations/ activities of the contractors/ operators thereof.
We take this opportunity to clarify that the scope of our performance audit covered the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and the Directorate General of
Hydrocarbons (DGH) and not the private operators of individual blocks.

Consequently, access to the records of the operators of selected blocks was only

supplementary to the scrutiny of records of MoPNG and DGH.

The purpose of access to, and scrutiny of records of the operators was to verify whether the
Government’s revenue in the form of profit petroleum (current and future”) and royalty

?2 Originally, a sample of 22 PSCs was selected; subsequently, this was modified slightly.

Me Since recovery of costs could affect 6075 future share of profit petroleum.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


was correctly calculated, and its revenue interests were properly protected. Towards this
larger objective, we intended to verify (based on access to operators’ records for the
specified accounting periods) whether:

© Capital expenditure (capex)*, operating expenditure (opex), and net cash income and
individual items thereof were accurately and reliably reflected, and these amounts were
supported by adequate documentation;

e The figures of individual items of capex/ opex were reasonable, and also commensurate
with original/revised budgets, plans, feasibility reports or other similar documents; and

e There was collateral evidence which would provide assurance regarding the authenticity
of goods and services procured and provided.

३.३ Audit Scope
The audit scope covered a twin approach:

® Scrutiny of records at MoPNG and DGH in respect of a sample of 20 PSCs so selected as
to provide a balanced coverage of (a) onshore and offshore (shallow and deepwater)
blocks (b) a cross section of operators (c) fields with oil discoveries and gas discoveries
(d) pre-NELP and NELP and (e) blocks at different stages of E&P - under exploration,
relinquished, discovery, production etc.; this covered the period from 2003-04 to 2007-
08.

e Supplementary scrutiny of records of the operators of four blocks/ fields (KG-DWN-
98/3, Panna-Mukta, Mid & South Tapti and RJ-ON-90/1) covering the two year period
2006-07 and 2007-08.

The blocks selected for the audit review are listed below; details (in brief) are indicated in
Annexure-3.1.

Table 3.1 - Blocks Selected for the Audit Review

Contracting | Operator Block/ Pre- Shallow/ Status
Parties Field NELP/ Deep
NELP water/
Onland

४9 BGEPIL, BGEPIL Mumbai Panna/ Medium Shallow Producing
ONGC & Offshore  Mukta sized water
RIL
BGEPIL & BGEPIL Mumbai Mid & Medium Shallow Producing
ONGC Offshore South sized water
Tapti

261 ९, Investment tl considered under the terms of the PSC for computation of Investment Multiple

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



my

my

my
my

N

my
Bb

Contracting
Parties

CEIL, CEHL &
ONGC
RIL & NIKO

GSPC & GAIL

ONGC

ONGC

RIL & HEPI

OIL & ONGC

RIL & HEPI

RIL

Petrogas,
GAIL, HPCL,
6570 & IOC
RIL

CEIL, Tata
Petrodyne &
ONGC

Operator

CEIL

RIL

GSPC

ONGC

ONGC

Ri

L

OIL

RIL

RIL

Petrogas

RIL

CEIL

Barmer
Rajasthan
Krishna
Godavari

Cambay

Cauvery
Offshore

Pranhita-
Godavari

Krishna
Godavari

Rajasthan

North
Eastern
Coast
Kerala
Konkan

Mumbai
Off.

Mahanadi
-NEC
Offshore
Cambay
offshore

Block/
Field

RJ-ON-
90/1
KG-
DWN-
98/3
cB-
ONN-
2000/1
cy-
OSN-
2000/1
PG-
ONN-
2001/1
KG-
OSN-
2001/2
RU-
ONN-
2002/1
NEC-
DWN-
2002/1
KK-
DWN-
2003/1
MB-
OSN-
2004/2
MN-
DWN-
2004/3
CB-OS-
2
Lakshmi

Pre-
NELP/
NELP

pres
NELP
NELP-I

NELP-II

NELP-II

NELP-III

NELP-III

NELP-IV

NELP-IV

NELP-V

NELP-VI

NELP-VI

Pres
1६1?

Shallow/
Deep
water/
Onland
Onland

Deepwater

Onland

Shallow

water

Onland

Shallow

water

Onland

Deepwater

Deepwater

Shallow

water

Deepwater

Offshore

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

Status

Producing

Developm
ent/Produ
cing

Producing

Relinquish

ed

Exploration

Exploration

Exploration

Exploration

Exploration

Exploration

Exploration

Producing



Contracting | Operator Block/ Pre- Shallow/ Status
Parties Field NELP/ Deep
NELP water/
Onland

है CEIL, Tata CEIL Cambay CB-OS- Pre- Offshore Producing
Petrodyne & offshore 2 NELP
ONGC Gauri
ot} RIL, 1101 & RIL Cambay CB- Pre- Onland Exploration
| OOHL ON/1 NELP
17 Essar Oil © Mumbai Ratna = Small Offshore PSC not
Offshore = R- sized signed
Series
bE: NIKO & NIKO Cambay Hazira Small Onland Producing
| GSPCL sized
ONGC & ONGC Kerala KK- NELP-Il Deepwater Relinquish
GAIL Konkan DWN- ed
2000/2
ONGC &IOC ONGC Mumbai MB- NELP-Il Deepwater Relinquish
offshore DWN- ed
2000/1
21 RIL RIL Mumbai MB- NELP-I Shallow Relinquish
Offshore  OSN- water ed
97/3

3.4 Sources of Audit Criteria

The main sources of audit criteria were the following:

© Oil Fields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948;

© Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959;

e® New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) and subsidiary instructions of MoPNG;

* Bid documents viz, Bid Evaluation Criteria (BEC), Notice Inviting Offers (NIOs) and Model
Production Sharing Contracts (MPSCs) for different NELP rounds; and

* Signed Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs) of selected blocks.
3.5 Difficulties in access to operators’ records

Our audit effort was interrupted, due to difficulties in obtaining access to the records of the
operators. The problem arose initially in July 2008 in respect of the records of the Panna-

5 CB-OS-2 Lakshmi and CB-OS-2 Gauri involve a single PSC, but two separate fields, resulting in a total of 20
PSCs but 21 fields i our audit sample

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Mukta and Tapti fields (PMT Joint Venture) but could not be resolved for an extended
period of time, despite correspondence with MoPNG (and issue of instructions by MoPNG to
the operators) as well as interactions with MoPNG and the operators.

Audit Provisions in the Production Sharing Contract (PSC) - A Summary
Articles 25.4 and 25.5 of the PSC provide that:

e The annual audit of accounts shall be carried out on behalf of the contractor by a
qualified, independent firm of recognized chartered accountants registered in India and
selected by the contractor with the approval of the MC, and a copy of the audited
accounts shall be submitted to the Gol within 30 days of receipt;

The Gol shall have the right to audit the accounting records of the contractor in respect
of petroleum operations as provided in the Accounting Procedure, and for the purpose
of this audit, the contractor shall make available to the auditor all such books, records,
accounts and other documents and information as may be reasonably required by the
auditor.

Further, Section 1.9 — Audit and Inspection Rights of the Government — of the Accounting
Procedure to the PSC provides, inter alia, that:

« The Gol shall have the right to inspect and audit “all records and documents supporting

costs, expenditures, expenses, receipts and income, such as contractor’s accounts, books,
records, invoices, cash vouchers, debit notes, price lists or similar documentation with
respect to petroleum operations conducted in each financial year within two years (or
such longer period as may be required in exceptional circumstances)” from the end of
the relevant financial year;

The Gol may undertake the conduct of audit either through its own representatives or
through a qualified firm of recognized chartered accountants registered in India or a
reputed consulting firm;

In conducting the audit, the Gol or its auditors shall be entitled to examine and verify
“all charges and credits relating to the contractor’s activities under the contract and all
books of account, accounting entries, material records and inventories, vouchers,
payrolls, invoices and any other documents, correspondence and records considered
necessary to audit and verify the charges and credits”.

The procedure for issuing, responding to, and resolving audit exceptions has also been
laid down.

The matter was finally taken up by the CAG in August 2009 with the then Minister,
Petroleum and Natural Gas (PNG) for expediting access to the operators’ records, in
response to which, the then Minister, PNG provided assurances for such access. We are
grateful for this.

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Consequently, in September 2009, in view of the extreme difficulty in access to records of
operators for earlier years (upto 2006-07), we suggested a revised audit approach, whereby
we requested access to the operators of four blocks (Panna-Mukta, Mid & South Tapti, KG-
DWN-98/3 and RJ-ON-90/1) covering a two year period from 2006-07 to 2007-08 (with
access to records of previous years linked to transactions of current years). We also clarified
the scope and extent of our scrutiny of operators’ records, and indicated the initial list of
records required from the operators.

After further correspondence and interaction with MoPNG, and issue of further directions
by MoPNG to the operators on 27 November 2009, the initial records requested by us were
finally provided by the operators and “kick-off’/ preliminary meetings held with the
operators. Subsequently, field scrutiny of the records of the operators of the four blocks
commenced between January and May 2010.

3.6 Audit Methodology

Field scrutiny of records by the audit teams included issue of audit requisitions and
Preliminary Observation Memoranda (POMs)/ Audit Memoranda (AMs) to MoPNG/ DGH as
well as the operators. Discussions were held at various points of audit with MoPNG/ DGH as
well as with the operators during scrutiny of their records. Interactive sessions were held in
June 2011 with the MoPNG and representatives of two operators to discuss certain key
audit issues, on which clarifications were sought.

Thereafter, the draft Audit Report was issued to MoPNG in June 2011, requesting its
response/ comments. Subsequent to the issue of the draft Audit Report, an Exit Conference
was held in July 2011 with MoPNG/ DGH and the operators of the four blocks (Panna-
Mukta, Tapti, KG-DWN-98/3 and RJ-ON-90/1) to discuss the major draft audit findings; at
this Exit Conference, representatives of operators of two blocks (KG-DWN-98/3 and RJ-ON-
90/1) also made detailed presentations, explaining their position on various issues. The Exit
Conference also included a separate session with MoPNG/ DGH to discuss the draft audit
findings relating to the role/ activities of MoPNG/ DGH.

MoPNG provided a detailed response to the draft audit report, and also forwarded copies of
the responses of some of the operators with their comments thereon.

The responses/ comments furnished by MoPNG, as well as responses furnished by the
operators during the Exit Conference, have been duly considered and incorporated, to the
extent deemed appropriate, in this Audit Report.

We acknowledge the co-operation and assistance extended by the Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas, DGH, and the operators of two blocks (RIL and Cairn Energy in respect of

KG-DWN-98/3 and RJ-ON-90/1) during the course of our audit of MoPNG/ DGH and
scrutiny of operators’ records.

ee. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



3.7 Audit Scope Limitation
3.7.1 Production of Records by PMT Joint Venture

In order to fulfill our audit objectives and scope, during scrutiny of the records of the Panna-
Mukta and Tapti blocks, operated by the Panna-Mukta Tapti Joint Venture (PMT JV), we
sought access to records relating to pre and post contract award/ purchase order
documents (e.g. bidding documents, purchase orders, change orders, procurement files and
contracts) relating to two key development projects of these blocks viz. EPOD (Expanded
Plan of Development) for Panna-Mukta and NRPOD (New Revised Plan of Development) for
Mid & South Tapti, and other supplementary documents from British Gas Exploration and
Production India Ltd. (BGEPIL ), a joint operator for the PMT JV being the identified partner
for furnishing records and documents for our field scrutiny.

However, BGEPIL did not produce many of the relevant records on the ground that
Government audit was under Section 1.9 of Appendix C to the PSC, and was therefore
limited to the accounting records of the JV. We do not agree with the views expressed by
the PMT JV. In our opinion, the records sought by our audit teams (in particular the
procurement-related records) were fully covered by Section 1.9 of Accounting Procedure to
the PSC, and access to such records was essential for the purpose of our scrutiny.

In addition to the non-furnishing of critical records, the PMT JV also did not respond to the
majority of our POMs, on the ground that the issues raised therein were outside the scope
of audit rights set out in the PSC.

Consequently, our scrutiny of the records of Panna-Mukta and Tapti blocks for 2006-07 and
2007-08 and findings arising thereon, as reflected in this audit report are incomplete, due to
reasons beyond our control. We were also unable to vouchsafe the reliability of expenditure
stated to have been incurred by the PMT JV during 2006-07 and 2007-08.

Based on the audit scope limitation indicated in the draft report issued to the MoPNG, DGH
again directed PMT JV (22 June 2011) to provide the requested records. During the exit
conference (12 July 2011), the PMT JV offered to provide records under Article 26.8 of the
PSC (relating to inspection of records by the Gol) and not under Article 25 (which cover the
auditing rights of Gol), if Gol made a request to this effect under Article 26.8. However, the
representatives of MoPNG and CAG did not agree to the PMT JV’s offer and insisted on the
production of requested documents/ records under Article 25 of the PSC.

Subsequently, on 14 July 2011, the PMT JV indicated that they would provide the requested
documents that were readily available at the earliest, in any event within the next seven
days to our audit teams. They also indicated their readiness to submit other documents and
records, as may be requested by our audit teams. However, they clarified that the
submission of information would be without prejudice to their position on the scope of
audit i.e. with respect to a financial audit contemplated under the provisions of the PSC in
respect of 2006-07 and 2007-08.

Mm Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


On 20 July 2011, the PMT JV furnished part of the relevant records/documents requested by
our audit teams. Subsequently (22 July 2011) the PMT JV furnished 10 service contracts
(except price bids) in respect of NRPOD/EPOD project and assured that they would be
furnishing the remaining records/documents shortly.

We take note of the assurance provided by PMT JV, as well as the documents provided on
20/22 July 2011 by the PMT JV. However, the records cannot obviously be scrutinised in
time for the relevant findings to be included in this audit report.

The records furnished recently by the PMT JV as well as those records, in respect of which
assurances have been received, will be covered in scrutiny of the records of the operator
(PMT JV) for future years, and audit findings arising thereof included in subsequent audit
reports.

3.7.2 Production of records by other operators

In respect of KG-DWN-98/3, RIL provided all records requested by audit teams, except for:

e Forward linkages to future years of transactions/ payments undertaken in 2006-07 and
2007-08 (period covered for scrutiny of operators’ records);

® Complete accounting data on the SAP IT system (including both the expenditure i.e.
debit side, and the credit side of transactions/ line items); this is described subsequently
in Chapter 4.

No problems were encountered in respect of records requested from the operator of RJ-
ON-90/1 block (Cairn Energy). In fact, the operator also provided extracts of records

relating to periods outside our scope in order to clarify/ explain issues raised by us during
the course of record scrutiny.

3.8 Comments on Audit Scope by Operator(s)
3.8.1 KG-DWN-98/3 block

The operator of KG-DWN-98/3 block (RIL) challenged the scope, extent and coverage of our
audit at various points of time — during the course of field scrutiny of records, in a
presentation at the Exit Conference, and also in written responses furnished by MoPNG.
According to the operator,

e The audit scope was limited by Article 25.5 of the PSC, read with Section 1.9 of the
Accounting Procedure. The right to audit under Section 1.9 of the Accounting Procedure
was limited to verification of charges and credits (authenticity of expenditure) and
inspection of books and records.

e The accounting audit by Government-appointed auditors was to be conducted within
two years from the end of a financial year. The audit rights for 2006-07 had already been
exercised by Gol. MoPNG confirmed (November 2009) that audit was under section 1.9
of the i procedure.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



@ Despite MoPNG’s communication, CAG had conducted a “performance audit”, which
was not permitted under the PSCs, as:

All operational and technical matters were under purview of the Management
Committee (MC), and were governed, regulated and measured by GIPIP (Good
International Petroleum Industry Practices); and

¢ Accounts auditors were not familiar with GIPIP;

%

* Audit was limited to verification of charges and credits. GIPIP, and not audit, was the
measure of performance in a PSC.

e Nothing in the PSC permitted an audit of the operational, commercial and technical
decisions of the operator.

e With regard to one audit objective (verifying reasonableness of figures of individual
items of capex/ opex), the exercise of revisiting either the decisions of the MC or the
wisdom of the decisions of the operator in areas where commercial or technical
decisions or details were left to the judgement of the operator was incompatible with
the terms of the PSC.

e An exercise, whereby the auditor would step into the shoes of the operator and attempt
to evaluate whether the decisions by the operator — taken within his authorized area of
operation — were in accord with some undefined norms or the processes adhered to by
bureaucratized decision making processes and that too without having the advantage of
access to technical expertise or having the accountability for implementing such
projects, was clearly beyond the provisions of the PSC.

e The gold standard prescribed in the PSC was Good International Petroleum Industry
Practice (GIPIP), and a reference to GIPIP was conspicuous by its absence in the audit
report.

aS do not agree with the operator’s views regarding our audit scope, extent and
coverage.

e One of our key audit objectives was to verify whether the revenue interests of the
Government (including royalty and Gol share of profit petroleum) were properly
protected, and for this purpose, verify whether the figures of individual items of capex/
opex were reasonable (and also commensurate with original/revised budgets, plans,
feasibility reports or other similar documents); and also whether there was collateral
evidence which would provide assurance regarding the authenticity of goods and
services procured and provided. In our opinion, this is entirely consistent with Article
25 of the PSC, and Section 1.9 of the Accounting Procedure to the PSC.

¢ “Verification of charges and credits relating to the contractor’s activities and other
documents considered necessary to audit and verify the charges and credits” is not
merely limited to an arithmetical totaling of charges and credits and tracing of

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



i expenses from the accounting statements to the contracts/ expense
vouchers. Such an exercise would extend to verifying whether the costs being depicted
in the PSC accounts by the contractor, which would critically affect the determination
of profit petroleum and Gol’s share therein, are correctly determined, and in particular,
costs incurred for procurement of goods and services are determined through a
competitive process, so as to minimize costs (and ultimately maximize the Gol share of
profit petroleum). Such verification does NOT amount to the auditor stepping into the
shoes of the operator and evaluating such decisions in accordance with
“bureaucratized decision making processes”.

Our objective remains restricted to verifying whether Gol’s revenue interests (including
impact on current/ future Gol share of profit petroleum) are properly protected. As
stated earlier, we have not conducted a performance audit of the activities of the
operators.

e Audit also wishes to firmly emphasise that all our enquiries and findings emerge from
and are limited to the PSC. We do not profess to go into any procedure or policy
related aspects leading to the conclusion of the PSC. Taking the PSC as given, we have
merely examined the contractual obligations of the signatories to the contract, viz.,
the Govt and the private contractors. Our findings are totally guided by the “written
word” of the contract.

e As regards the “gold standard” of GIPIP, we have already pointed out that there is no

such codified document or set of standards brought out by any international body or
organization in the petroleum industry. Rather than being a clear, unambiguous, and
self-evident “gold standard”, GIPIP merely represents “reasonable judgement”
exercised by operators. While not questioning the exercising of professional judgement
by the operators, we have been mandated by the Gol to scrutinize expenses, and the
underlying procurement and related decisions, which impact Gol’s take in terms of
profit petroleum.

The challenge of the Operator with regard to the expertise of the institution of the CAG
in conducting audit of oil and gas Exploration & Production (E&P) is unwarranted. This
institution has been conducting audit of India’s largest E&P Company, ONGC Ltd. as
well as 01 India Ltd. for several decades. The collective audit expertise of our
institution is adequate to meet the challenges of scrutiny of hydrocarbon PSCs.

In its response, MoPNG (July 2011) has agreed that the scope of audit conducted by the
CAG is within the common audit parameters, and indicated that financial/accounting
audit also envisages review of activities and resources contributing to financial events and
the controls thereon.

3.9 Structure of Audit Report

The findings in the जि .. Audit Report are divided into the following parts:

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



¢ Chapters 4 to 6 relate to audit findings relating to four blocks - KE-DWN-98/3, RJ-ON-
90/1, and Panna-Mukta/ Tapti.

The findings in Chapters 4, 5, and 6 relating to the KG-DWN-98/3, RJ-ON-90/1 and Panna-
Mukta-Tapti blocks/ fields include both findings based on audit of the records of MoPNG/

DGH and those audit findings arising out of the scrutiny of the records of the operators of
these blocks/ fields.

Chapter 7 relates to general audit findings (in respect of the other blocks/ fields) relating
to compliance with the terms of the Production Sharing Contracts, and the adequacy
and effectiveness of monitoring and control by MoPNG and DGH thereto;

Chapter 8 relates to conclusions and general recommendations.

Mm Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


4.1 Overview

The KG-DWN-98/3 deepwater block (also referred to as the KG-D6 block), with a contract
area of 7645 sq. km., was awarded in the first NELP round in 2000 to a consortium of
Reliance Industries Limited (RIL), the operator, and Niko Resources Limited (NIKO) with
90:10 participating interests. The PSC was signed in April 2000. The block is classified as a
“deepwater block”, with water depth ranging from 400 m in the NW to 2700 m in the SE. A
total of 19 discoveries (Dhirubhai-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, 18, 19, 22, 23, 26, 29, 30, 31, 34
and 42) have been made in the block between 2002 and 2008, out of which 18 are gas
discoveries, and one is an oil discovery.

After substantial gas discoveries at Dhirubhai-1 and Dhirubhai-3 (D1-D3), a Declaration of
Commercial Discovery (DoC) was notified (D1 in April 2003 and D3 in March 2004) and the
D1-D3 development area, covering an area of 339.41 sq. km. (4.5 per cent of the total block
area) was delineated. An Initial Development Plan (IDP) for delivery of a production rate of
40 mmscmd (million metric standard cubic metres per day) of gas from these two
discoveries, with probable gas reserves of 5.3 tcf (trillion cubic feet), was submitted in May
2004; this envisaged total capital expenditure of USS 2.39 billion with 34 producing wells
(the main components of expenditure being development wells- USS 944 million, and
production facilities-USS 1.35 billion). Operating expenditure of US$ 62 million per annum
was envisaged. The IDP was approved by the MC on 5 November 2004.

However, in October 2006, RIL submitted an Addendum to the IDP (AIDP) for delivery of a
production rate of 80 mmscmd of gas, with increased probable gas reserves of 11.3 tcf; this
envisaged capex of USS 5.2 billion for the initial development phase upto 2008-09 with 22
producing wells (the main components being development wells - USS 1.16 billion and
production facilities - USS 3.74 billion). Later in November 2006, RIL, after technical
meetings/ correspondence with DGH, submitted a revised proposal as Phase - | USS 5.2
billion and Phase — II USS 3.6 billion totalling USS 8.8 billion with 50 producing wells. The
AIDP was approved by the MC on 12 December 2006.

In addition, a DoC was notified for the D-26 (MA Oil field) with a development area of 49.71
sq km. A separate development plan for the MA Oil Discovery, with capex of USS 2.23
billion, was submitted in August 2007, and approved in April 2008. Oil production from the
MA oil field started in September 2008, while gas production from the D1-D3 field started in
April 2009.

Details of individual discoveries in KG-DWN-98/3 are indicated in Annexure 4.1.

One of the main features of this deepwater project is the laying of 450 kilometers of
pipelines and umbilicals. We appreciate the efforts of the operator in executing this world
class mega greenfield deepwater oil and gas infrastructure in India within record time.

Mm f Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


4.2 Exploration and Appraisal Activities

4.2.1 Non-relinquishment of area and declaration of entire contract area as
discovery area

Articles 4.1 and 4.2 of the PSC stipulate phased relinquishment of areas, allowing the
contractor to retain a maximum of 75 percent and 50 per cent of the contract area
(including the discovery and development areas)”° after Exploration Phase-| and Exploration
Phase-ll, before entering the next exploration phase. At the end of the exploration period,
the contractor is permitted to retain only the discovery and development areas.

Acceptance by DGH and MoPNG of entire contract area of KG-DWN-98/3 as discovery area
not in terms of the PSC

We found that contrary to the PSC provisions, the contractor was allowed to enter the
second and third exploration phases without relinquishing 25 per cent each of the total

contract area at the end of Phase-I and Phase-ll. Subsequently, in February 2009, Gol also
conveyed approval to treat the entire contract area of 7645 sq.km. as ‘discovery area’, thus
enabling the operator to completely avoid relinquishment of area.

The chronology of events relating to the approval of the entire contract area of KG-DWN-
98/3 as “discovery area” is given below:

Table 4.1 - Chronology of events relating to Non-relinquishment and
declaration of entire contract area as discovery area

Further Comments of
Date
Audit

DGH informed RIL that as per Article 3.5 of the PSC,
the operator had to give a notice to Gol at least
thirty days prior to the expiry of relevant phase
either to proceed to the next exploration phase or

१401० to relinquish the entire contract area (except for any

04 discovery area and any development area) and to
conduct development and production operations in
relation to any Commercial Discovery. Accordingly,
DGH requested RIL to call an MC meeting before 06
May 2004 to discuss this issue.

2D and 3D seismic surveys
are to be conducted by
e Ten exploratory wells had been drilled in the the operator as per the

block, based on which eight discoveries had committed MWP to

been notified. Commerciality in respect of D-1, identify prospects _ for
exploratory drilling. API of

RIL informed DGH that:

29-Apr-
04

26 If the discovery and development areas exceed 75 percent/ 50 percent of the contract area, the contractor
can retain the entire and discovery areas.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



D-2 and D-3 had been approved by DGH and
Development Plan for D-1 & D-3 was under
finalization and would be submitted for MC
approval.

After examining the potential and nature of the
complexities, the operator believed that huge
potential existed in the block, which deserved an
extensive exploration, and as per Article 3.5 of
PSC, notified its intent to proceed to the 211
Exploration Phase on the expiry of the 1*
Exploration Phase on 6 June 2004.

RIL also submitted that it was not in a position to
identify any area in the block for relinquishment
as required under Article 4 of the PSC due to the
following reasons:

The entire block area had been covered by 2D
during 2001 and based on this, prospective leads
had been identified which spread over the entire
block area. Some of the leads had also been
covered by 3D followed by exploratory drilling.
All the wells drilled till then were hydrocarbon
bearing.

Based on the 2D and 3D coverage so far in this
block, RIL was able to map several independent
channels spreading over the block. The channels
displayed different architecture and continuity,
both laterally and vertically.

RIL had recently completed the acquisition of
additional 3165 sq.km of 3D seismic data in the
block. The data had been sent to Australia for
processing. The complete data set covering 4987
sq km would be processed, which would require
about five to six months time. Further, RIL had
also collected huge information from the 10
wells drilled in the block till then, by way of
various logs, core data, DST (Drill Stem Testing)
ee inversion studies etc. This vast data

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

Further Comments of
Au

2D and 3D data is to be
completed in exploratory
phases only. Once
discovery is made, only
appraisal for delineation

of the reservoir and
consequential
demarcation of

development area is to be
done.

However, without drilling
of wells, the conditions
attached to discovery/
discovery areas, as per the
PSC provisions, are not
fulfilled. All the
discoveries (arising out of
exploratory wells) had
taken place in the North
West (NW) part of the
contract area (in general,
less deep than the South
East (SE) part, where no
discoveries had taken
place). The operator’s
opinion that petroleum
existed in the entire
contract area, without
wells drilled in all parts of
the contract area, was
thus baseless, and DGH
should have forced the
contractor to relinquish
the stipulated 25 per cent
of the contract area,
before entering the 2°
exploration phase on 7
June 2004.



Further Comments of
Au

needed to be analysed and utilized for an in-
depth assessment of their understanding of the
seismic attributes and prospective areas.

> RIL also proposed to reprocess the entire 2D
acquired in the block based on the results of
drilling so far to refine the interpretation and
mapping of the channel system.

> On the basis of additional/reprocessed seismic
data, additional exploratory/appraisal drilling
would be undertaken to cover the entire block
area.

e Based on the above, the operator was of the
opinion that petroleum existed and was likely to
be produced in commercial quantities after an
exhaustive exploratory/appraisal programme
from the entire contract area, which it
considered to be the “Discovery Area”. The
operator would continue with the efforts to
assess the potential of this discovery area during
the second Exploration Phase.

DGH informed RIL that:

e The reasons put forth by RIL did not make a case
for its inability to identify at least 25 per cent of

the area for relinquishment.
ql DGH did not accept the

e Based on 2D seismic interpretation, two priority reasons given by RIL
areas were identified —Priority -1 and Priority — showing its inability to
7-May- ll. The prospective areas based on 2D seismic identify 25 per cent of the
व पु aca awh contract area for
04 interpretation were also within Priority -| and oe
—_ . , . relinquishment.
Priority Il areas. At that time, RIL’s main focus
. . DGH suggested the areas
area from point of further exploration and ovr ५
of low prospectivity which
development was localized within Priority -1 coyig be relinquished.
area. Therefore, the areas of least priority, along
with some other low priority areas, could be
identified for relinquishment.

e Besides, the extension for 12 months was

Performance Audit th Hydrocarbon PSCs



Further Comments of
Au

22-May-
04

granted (September 2003) effective June 2003
to enable the Operator to identify the area(s) for
relinquishment, based on a comprehensive
technical evaluation at the end of the 1* First
Exploration Phase.

Therefore, DGH could not agree to the
operator’s request for not relinquishing any area
prior to entering Phase-II of exploration as it was
against the spirit of the PSC. Consequently, the
operator was advised to relinquish the area(s) as
per the PSC provisions prior to entering Phase-ll
of exploration.

RIL wrote to DGH stating that:

It was true that based on 2D seismic data
interpretation, the operator did identify two
priority areas. That prioritization
influenced by water depth, distance from shore
and development considerations in case of
discovery, apart from prospectivity angle.
Accordingly, most of the efforts were
concentrated on the exploratory initiatives,
particularly in priority 1 where most of the wells
were drilled. Considering the limited period
available under Phase-l, the operator had to
prioritize the areas for exploration, and it did
not mean that the other areas were not
prospective.

was also

Within the short period of 4 years, the operator
had acquired 4987 sq. km. of 3 D data and also
collected huge information from the 10 wells
drilled in the block. They had also planned to
acquire further 3 D data in the balance area. The
reprocessing of the entire 2D and 3D data and
also the detailed analysis of the various logs,
core data, inversion studies etc. would help in
enhancing the understanding of the operator on
me seismic attributes and prospective areas

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

The spirit of NELP is to
maximise exploration
efforts and minimise
hoarding of exploration
acreage. It is the
contractor’s job to
prioritise areas for
exploratory initiatives (in
particular, drilling) within
the PSC-specified
timelines for exploration,
and relinquish areas (as
per his assessment of
relative prospectivity/
prioritisation) in line with
the PSC provisions.

Prospectivity of an area
indicates a higher
probability of finding
petroleum deposits, but is
NOT equivalent to
discovery, which implies
actual finding of
petroleum.

RIL’s belief was contrary
to the PSC provisions. The
relinquishment of area in
line with PSC provisions



Further Comments of
Au

11-June-
04

19-July-
04

indentified on the basis of 2 D. They had also
acquired seismic data in the adjoining blocks
awarded to them, and this would help them in
building a regional geological
mapping the prospectivity on the regional basis.

model and

e It was “perhaps” on that premise that the PSC
allowed the contractor to retain all of the
“Discovery Areas” at the end of the relevant
exploration phase and, by definition, the
“Discovery Area” was based on the contractor’s
opinion which was considered as the entire
block area.

e RIL believed that relinquishment of any area at
that stage without completing the assessment of
the hydrocarbon potential amounted to
premature termination of exploratory initiatives,
and would be detrimental to the spirit of PSC.

e  RiL once again appealed to DGH to reconsider its
view and asked to give them an opportunity to
complete their assessment of the hydrocarbon
potential of that prospective block, considering
the entire contract area to be the “Discovery
Area”.

DGH informed RIL that the operator had notified
eight discoveries in the block located in Priority-|
area. No well had been drilled in the Priority-Il area
to consider it as a discovery area. Therefore, the
whole area could not be considered as a discovery
area, and DGH had no data from RIL to support the
fact that the whole area was a discovery area. Entire
2D and 3D seismic data was not available with them,
and DGH was unable to understand the map
enclosed (by RIL) showing the prospective areas
based on 2D seismic data. As per PSC, RIL was to
surrender at least 25 per cent of the block area
before entering Phase-II of exploration.

DGH, while bringing to RIL’s notice that the issue
was discussed at DGH on th along with

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

was not a “premature”
termination of exploratory
initiatives.

DGH was right to mention

its assessment on
discovery area. However,
DGH should have
prevented RIL from
proceeding to the 2™
Exploration Phase,
without the

relinquishment of 25 per
cent area.

At this point of time, RIL
had already violated the



Further Comments of
Au

RIL’s representatives, clarified that none of the
existing discoveries extended beyond Priority area-
| and no well had been drilled in Priority area-ll.
Therefore, it was not possible to consider the total
block area as the discovery area. Therefore, DGH
requested RIL to relinquish 25 per cent of the block
area at the earliest.

24-July-
04

RIL informed DGH that they had done intrinsic
exploration activities in the block. The extensive
seismic data processing/ reprocessing and
interpretation in the block helped in
understanding of complex deepwater geological
setting in the block besides acquiring a broad
knowledge of KG offshore basin. The exploratory
drilling carried out in channel, mid and distal
levee complexes had resulted in the presence of
a number of hydrocarbon gas bearing sandstone
reservoirs of Plio-Miocene ages. The operator,
based on the seismic and well database, had
critically examined a conceptualized geological
model along with sand development patterns
and associated reservoir complexities.

Integration of outcome of interpretation of
existing 2D and focused 3D seismic along with
complete set of drilled well
including wire line/ LWD-MWD information and
mud logging data indicated that sizeable
quantities of hydrocarbon gas volumes did exist
within the channel sand reservoirs as well as
reservoirs, in the inter-channel areas.

information

RIL said that considering the overall evidence
obtained through the exploration activities
carried out by him, the following could be
summarized:

A series of sub-marine channel complexes had
been mapped, based on the evidence obtained
from the existing and newly acquired 2D and 3D

me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

PSC provisions by entering
phase-ll without
relinquishing 25 per cent
of the block area.

The contractor’s opinion
that petroleum was
“likely” to exist in the
entire contract area and
‘could be produced after
an exhaustive
exploratory/ appraisal
programme’ is not in
consonance with the PSC
definition of ‘discovery
area’, which is centred on
‘existence’ of petroleum,
based on wells drilled in
that part.



Further Comments of
Audit

seismic data.

e Deposits of gas, not previously known to have
existed in the exploration block, had been found
with commercial flow characteristics at the
surface.

e Gas occurrence with multiple Gas Water
Contacts (GWCs) within some of the mapped
channel systems enhanced the possibility of
finding additional and new volumes of gas in
distal fan lobes mapped in the southern and
eastern areas to the existing 3D area.

e Gas reservoirs (both in thin beds and thick
sands) were found within channel sands as well
as inter-channel areas.

e@ Therefore, based upon the discoveries made so
far and the results obtained from the drilled
wells in the contract area, the contractor was of
the opinion that the petroleum was ‘likely’ to
exist and could be produced in commercial
quantities after an exhaustive
exploratory/appraisal programme from the
entire contract area which it considered to be
the “Discovery Area”. The operator would
continue with the efforts to assess the potential
of this Discovery Area during the Second
Exploration Phase.

DGH reiterated that the entire contract area could DGH’s identification of
not be considered as the Discovery Area and in areas for possible
accordance with Article 4.1 of the PSC, RIL had to relinquishment was
relinquish 25 per cent of the block area. correct. However, this
DGH further mentioned that to help RIL in that should have been done

sPANU-S regard, they had identified a few areas of the block before RIL proceeded to

04 for relinquishment as an alternative which RIL could the 2" Exploration Phase,
conveniently agree to relinquish and fulfil its PSC or else, RIL should have
obligations. The alternatives had been taken from been prevented from
their (RIL’s) map. DGH, accordingly, mentioned that Moving into the 2
it would be convenient for them to relinquish 25 per Exploration Phase without
cent of the th out of those alternatives. However, Such relinquishment.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Further Comments of
Audit

RIL was entitled to relinquish any other part of the
block and put up an alternate proposal for
consideration.

DGH sent a reminder to RIL, requesting that the
areas for relinquishment may be identified and a
proposal be put up for consideration of MC to fulfil
the PSC obligation.

19-Oct-
04

While inviting reference to Articles 4.1 & 1.39 of PSC
and technical views exchanged between DGH and
RIL’s  geoscientist, RIL mentioned that in the
meetings it was amply explained by the contractor
regarding the basis for the contractor’s opinion on
the existence of petroleum system in the entire
contract area, through various seismic maps both on
the work stations and paper prints. RIL also stated
that the recent discoveries made by the Contractor
in D6-H1 and D6-G1A further reinforced the
Contractor’s opinion conveyed earlier regarding the
existence of petroleum system in the entire
Contract Area. Further, the contractor had recently
carried out reprocessing of existing 2D seismic data
acquired by the Contractor earlier in 2001 to
improve upon the imaging of deeper events
including the basement. This study had also brought
to light presence of similar bright seismic amplitude
attributes in the entire Contract Area. As per PSC
Provisions, the Contractor’s view was fully in
accordance with the relevant provisions of PSC.

The Operator also enclosed updated stratmap slices,
‘plio-pliestocene sweetness’ amplitude map,
depositional model and deepwater play types
which, according to them, demonstrated extension
of discovery area over the entire contract area.

It was the opinion of the Contractor that the
Discovery Area extended over the entire original
Contract Area, and hence the Contractor shall be
entitled to retain the entire Discovery Area i.e.
entire Contract Area. This opinion of the contractor
was communicated to DGH/Gol in Phase-I itself. As
such, the Contractor was not required to relinquish
any part of the original Contract Area.

In view of the above, RIL reiterated that the
me of the Contractor on the extent of

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

DGH had allowed RIL to
continue exploration work
in the 2" phase for nearly
9 months, while discussing
and debating the
delineation of ‘discovery
area’.

The fact of non-availability
of rigs capable of drilling
to high water depths (as in
the SE part of the contract
area, unlike the NW part
where all the discoveries
had taken place) merely
confirms RIL’s hoarding of
exploration acreage,
without — relinquishment.
Non-availability of drilling
rigs is no reason for
declaring the entire

contract area as ‘discovery
non-

area’, or for
relinquishment.



the Discovery Area in the block KG-DWN-98/3 was
based on sound technical rationale, and was fully in
line with the provisions of the PSC.

RIL, as a prudent Operator had already planned
acquisition of additional 2D/3D seismic data in the
Contract Area and drilled more exploratory wells in
the Discovery Area. Drilling could not be done in
some of these areas due to high water depths
beyond the capacity of the drillship mobilized and
required a higher generation rig.

DGH mentioned that it might be agreed that several
play types were continuing from 3D covered to 2D
covered area, but this did not imply that discovery
was also continuing over the entire contract area.
Further, the continuance of a play type in a
particular area did not necessarily imply
continuance of the discovery also in the same area,
without undertaking certain obvious exploratory
steps. Moreover, there were no two different
interpretations possible as far as the definition of
the discovery provided in the concerned PSC.

However, DGH said that they did agree that the
prospectivity of the remaining part of the block was
also high, based on available 2D seismic data. DGH
further mentioned that as most of the play types in
the contract area were stratigraphic in nature, their
geometry and continuity in the remaining part of
the contract area could be properly established only
through acquisition and interpretation of 3D seismic
data.

Therefore, DGH said that it would be prudent to
acquire and interpret the 3D seismic data in the
remaining part of the block on a fast track basis, so
that the geometry and continuity of play types as
well as relationship between the high amplitude
anomalies observed through available 2D seismic
could be established with the discoveries already
made in the contract area. Subsequently, the
relinquishment area could also be worked out in a
proper manner. Further, clarifications/
interpretations furnished by RIL on various PSC
Articles related to the above matter i.e. Article 4.1
and Article i needed to be reviewed by RIL, as

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

Further Comments of
Au

This evidences the
beginning of the about
turn in the DGH’s opinion,
where, instead of drilling
wells in all parts of the
contract area (with
resulting discoveries), the
emphasis was merely on

acquisition and
interpretation of 30
seismic data in the

remaining part of the
block, with the
“relinquishment to be
worked out in a proper
manner” subsequently.



Further Comments of
Au

13-May-

05
24-May-
05

24-May-
05

the same did not seem to be correctly interpreted
and therefore were not agreeable to DGH.
Consequently, DGH asked RIL about their future
plans with realistic time frames for acquisition of 3D
data in the remaining part of the block, so that the
geometry and continuity of play types could be
properly established in the whole block.

While agreeing to acquire and interpret the 3D
seismic data in remaining part of the block on a fast
track basis, RIL described the other work done and
proposed to be done by them. Further, they
reiterated that based on sound technical rationale,
the contractor was not required to relinquish any
part of the original contract area. However, RIL said
that they were planning additional exploration/
appraisal programme to support their views on the
extent of discovery area.

RIL gave notice to DGH for entering the 37
Exploration Phase for KG-D6 Block giving details of
the work carried out in the 17 and 2" EP. In view of
the extensive exploratory work programme taken
up in the block and their ongoing / planned
exploratory efforts to strengthen their view that the
entire contract area was having hydrocarbon
potential, the Operator (RIL) notified, in pursuance
of Art. 3.5 of the PSC, its intention to proceed to the
37 Exploration Phase without relinquishment of any
part of the contract area as the reasons notified
during entering 20% Exploration Phase still prevailed.

© DGH informed RIL (w.r.t their letter dated 137
May 2005) that:

e By acquiring 700 sq. km. of seismic data as
indicated in their (RIL’s) letter, the total 3D
coverage would be round 70 per cent of the
block area and the remaining 30 per cent area
would be without any 3D coverage for any
meaningful interpretation to demonstrate the
extension of the geobodies / channel levee
complex.

Me DGH again (in furtherance to their letter dated

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

RIL managed to be on
course to proceed to the
ga phase, without
relinquishing any area.

The shift in DGH’s opinion
to just have 3D coverage
of the whole block in
order for the contractor to
retain the whole area is
apparently complete.

DGH was no more
insisting for relinquishing
of any part of the block
area. It was a significant
change in stance.



Further Comments of
Au

20 May 2005) requested RIL to provide a
realistic time frame for acquisition of 3D seismic
data for the remaining area to establish the
geometry and continuity of play types in the
whole block.

e Their (RIL’s) request for retaining the whole
block area would be examined, only after
complete 3D coverage over the block area was
achieved.

RIL forwarded the Operating Committee resolution
dated 10 May 2005 for entering the 3/4 Exploration
Phase and retaining the entire contract area (other
than the Development Area) as the “Discovery Area”
without any relinquishment.

RIL intimated DGH (w.r.t. the issue that retention of

entire block area would be considered after 3D

coverage of the entire block area) that 70 per cent

of the block area had already been covered by 3D

survey, and the balance had been covered by the

original 2D. They were taking steps to cover the

remaining area. Further, they intimated that while

the 3D coverage was expected to further confirm

their opinion regarding continuity of the channel

system throughout the block area, ultimately 961 no longer mentions
additional exploratory wells needed to be drilled to any requirement other
establish the additional hydrocarbon potential in the than 3D seismic coverage
deeper water area of the block for which they (RIL)

were making efforts to hire ultra-deepwater rigs. It

would revert with realistic programme for 3D

seismic acquisition for the remaining KG-D6 area,

after identifying a suitable seismic vessel.

16-June-
05

DGH intimated RIL (in ref. to RIL’s notice dated 24
May 2005 for entering 3 EP) quoting reference of
Art. 4.2 of PSC that the issue of relinquishment of 25
per cent of the block area at the end of Phase — |
had still not been resolved and again requested RIL
to convey a realistic time frame for acquisition of
the 3D seismic over the whole block area.

RIL intimated DGH that they had firmed up the 3D
acquisition programme in RIL’s blocks in the east

Performance lh of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Further Comments of
Au

coast, including KG-D6. The tendering process had
been initiated and the proposed acquisition
programme was likely to commence during the field
season 2005-06 (after monsoon break).

MC, in its meeting, decided that in the light of
results of 3D seismic data acquired in the entire
block as presented by the contractor, they agreed
with the opinion of the contractor that the
prospective geological plays had continuity in the
entire block, and hence no block area needed to be
relinquished pursuant to Article 4 of PSC.

While giving the background for allowing the
operator to retain the whole contract area as
discovery area, DGH informed MoPNG that on the
basis of a technical presentation given by RIL to MC
at its meeting on 11 July 2006, he established the
presence of channel-levee complex associated with
fan system in the southern limit of the block. MC
permitted RIL to enter the next phase without
relinquishing any area, since data showed continuity
of discovery in the block area.

In its letter, DGH mentioned that RIL completed
MWP of Phase-I and entered Phase-Il on 7.6.04. As
per the PSC, they were supposed to relinquish 25
per cent of the block area 1912 sq. km. out of the
total block area of 7645 sq. km. RIL informed DGH
on 29.04.04 about entering the second phase from
7.06.04 without relinquishing 25 per cent area. DGH
did not agree to RIL’s request and asked RIL to
relinquish the stipulated area. However, RIL stated
that it had acquired 4987 sq. km. of 3D seismic data
and on that basis, the geological model prepared by
them depicted that the whole of the block area had
continuity of channel system. DGH examined all the
documents and viewed the data on work stations,
and on 24.05.05 directed RIL to cover the whole
block area with 2D/3D seismic survey for
establishing the extension of plays of reservoir sand
ie. channel and levee complex throughout the
block.

At the directive of DGH, RIL carried out the seismic
survey of 3474 sq. km. of the block, thereby
me almost the whole of the block area. In the

DGH displayed even more
flexibility, and even with a
“remaining small portion
of the block” not being
covered by 30 seismic
survey, MC (with one DGH
representative) permitted
retention of the whole
block area.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Further Comments of
Au

23-Nov-
06

167 MC meeting held on 11.07.06, RIL made a
technical presentation and established presence of
channel-levee complex associated with fan system
in the southern limit of the block. MC directed RIL to
cover the remaining small portion of the block also
with 3D seismic survey and permitted RIL to enter
phase-II] without relinquishing any area, since data
showed continuity of discovery in the block area.
DGH would like to inform MoPNG that RIL had been
permitted to retain the whole of the block area as it
had entered phase-lll.

On coming to know that MC had allowed the
Operator to enter 21356-॥ by retaining the entire
area as a discovery area in contravention of the
PSC provisions, MoPNG asked DGH to clarify the
position in this regard.

In its letter, MoPNG indicated that DGH did not
agree to the contention of RIL to retain area at the
end of phase-l. However, after carrying out 3D
seismic coverage, DGH allowed the contractor to
retain entire area (at this time the contractor
entering into phase-lll).

At the end of phase-|, the contractor had not carried
out 3D in the entire area and that process continued
almost till the end of exploration phase-Il. DGH, only
after entering phase-Ill and based on the data
available then, had allowed retention of the entire
area deeming it as discovery area. The entire 3D
data was not available at the end of phase-l, where
a decision was required on relinquishment of area.
MOoPNG further stated that the discovery area was
prescribed around well or wells, and nowhere it had
been mentioned to decide discovery area. After
discovery area, a number of consequences follow,
such as appraisal of discovery area in a time bound
manner as provided in the PSC. MoPNG mentioned
that it was therefore clear that the PSC provision
had not been complied in allowing retention of
entire area.

While clarifying its position, DGH informed that at
the end of Phase-l, in the block area of 7645 sq. km.,
the contractor had carried out 1000 LKM of
reprocessing, st LKM of 2D API, and 4987 sq. km.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

At this stage, MoPNG
rightly highlighted the
definition of ‘discovery
area’ being around well or
wells, and that the PSC
provisions had not been
complied with, in allowing
retention of the contract
area.

DGH’s statement
regarding the entire
contract area being
“likely” to contain



Further Comments of
Au

8-Ma

of 3D API, and also drilled 10 exploratory wells.
Contractor had made 7 discoveries in Phase-I and on
the basis of reinterpretation of the reprocessed
data, interpretation of the newly acquired 2D &3D
seismic data and data generated from the
exploratory wells drilled, it emerged that the entire
contract area was likely to contain hydrocarbons
and there was a continuation of channel, levee and
over bank deposits, and fan bodies existed in the
entire block area.

DGH further mentioned that to conclude and finally
confirm that there was a continuity of the prospects,
DGH had directed the contractor to cover the whole
block area with 3D API. Contractor agreed with the
suggestion, and he was allowed to proceed to next
phase without relinquishment. It was thought
prudent that a decision on the relinquishment
would be taken, after the whole block area was
covered with API of 3D seismic survey.

At the end of Phase-ll, the contractor had carried
out 1000 LKM of reprocessing, 1434 LKM of 2D API,
and 5991 sq. km. of 3D API and also drilled 15
exploratory wells. Total discoveries were 9. From
the additional 3D data generated and from the data
generated from 5 wells drilled in phase-ll, the level
of confidence in continuation of prospect with
channel and levee increased to a great extent.
Contractor was, therefore, allowed to enter phase-
Ill without relinquishment and with advice to cover
the remaining area with API of 3D. Further, DGH said
that in the blocks where hydrocarbon discovery had
been made and there were indications of
continuation of prospects in the whole block, and
the contractor was prepared to carry out additional
work and cover the whole of the block with API 3D,
the contractors had been allowed to proceed to
next phase without relinquishment.

Based on technical merits and _ technical
justifications and keeping in view interest of
exploration, DGH stated that the contractor was
allowed to proceed to phase-ll and phase-lIll without
relinquishment.

On the basis of DGH’s me MoPNG raised some

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

hydrocarbons, or increase
to a great extent in “level
of confidence in
continuation of the
prospect” is again not in
compliance with the PSC
provisions regarding
discovery area.

MoPNG again flagged the



further questions to DGH regarding

e how much area of the block was covered by 3D
(in terms of area and percentage 3D coverage of
the block area) at the end of Phase-I and II;

e their comments on PSC provisions relating to the
definition of discovery area and the discovery
related provisions;

¢ confirmation whether the coverage of wells was
over the entire block for DGH to reach the
conclusion of discovery extension;

e whether MC was competent to give waiver from
the relinquishment norms in the light of the PSC
provisions.

Further, MoPNG stated that in future, all matters
pertaining to relinquishment not in accordance with
the PSC provisions, technical advice of DGH along-
with the recommendations should be submitted to
the Government for a decision in the matter.

As per the reply, DGH informed MoPNG that on the
basis of drilled wells, 2D and 3D surveys carried out,
the operator claimed that there was continuity of
meandering channels throughout the block and the
contention of the operator had been confirmed by
DGH, based on drilling of the wells and seismic data
acquired. Further, the instant case was well covered
within the definition of discovery area as given in
Article 1.39. The contractor had opined that the
hydrocarbon bearing channels were continuing
throughout the block and had the potentiality to
produce gas in commercial quantities. Channels
responsible for flow of hydrocarbons from discovery
wells in the area were at different stratigraphic/
depth levels and belonged to different pools. The
distribution of such channels extended to almost
entire area indicating favourable prospectivity
perception in the area. That feature had been
confirmed by the technical team of DGH in the work
station at RIL office.

Article 10 of PSC was also followed in that case, as
all जी made later were followed by

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

extent of coverage of
wells over the entire block
to reach the conclusion of
discovery extension.

Importantly, MoPNG also
indicated that in future,
all matters pertaining to
relinquishment not in
accordance with PSC
provisions should be
submitted to Gol for a
decision, perhaps
indicating that this was
one such case.

DGH again referred to
“favourable prospectivity

perception not in
accordance with PSC
provisions.

While we note the

combination of well and
seismic data to prove
continuity, the — fact
remains that all
discoveries were confined
to the NW part of the
block.



Further Comments of
Au

11-Apr-

15-May-

29-May-

commercial
commerciality.

Further, DGH mentioned that it was not necessary
to drill wells in the entire block to establish
continuity of discovery. A well is a calibration tool,
and the seismic survey is an extensional tool. The
combination of both paves the way to prove the
continuity of the discovery area. In the block,
continuity had been established conclusively by
carrying out total 9475 sq. km. of API - 3D and
drilling 28 wells in the block. As regards whether MC
was competent to give waiver from the
relinquishment norms in the light of the PSC
provisions, DGH stated that MC did not violate the
PSC provisions and did not grant any waiver for
relinquishment.

potentiality, appraisal and

A meeting was held in MoPNG to discuss this issue.
It was decided that the proposal might be
considered on getting a certification from DGH that
the whole area had been covered by a reasonable
number of wells/ 3D seismic to substantiate
continuity of channels and the extent of discovery
area.

DGH gave a certificate to MoPNG stating that on the
basis of the existing report, special 3 D seismic
processing (High Frequency Image, AVO, Jainson
inversion), basin and facies modeling, it was
concluded that the hydrocarbon bearing channels
and levees associated with the discoveries were
present and extended throughout the block area
and hence, in accordance with Article 4.2 and 1.39
of the PSC, the whole of the block area was a
discovery area.

While giving the background regarding approval
given by DGH to the operator for entering into next
phase without relinquishment, Under Secretary,
MoPNG submitted the case for seeking approval of
the Hon’ble Minister through IFD of the MoPNG. As
regards the definition of discovery area, it was
noted that Art. 1.39 defined discovery area to mean
“that part of the contract area about which, based
upon discovery and result obtained from a well or
me drilled in such part, the contractor is of the

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

MoPNG evidently
attempted to avoid taking
a clear decision on this
issue in line with PSC
provisions.

While reproducing Article
1.39 (definition of
discovery area), US,
MoPNG noted that the
terming of the whole of
the block as discovery
area by DGH was on the
basis of 3D seismic, and
not on drilling of wells.

However, the focus now



Further Comments of
Au

opinion that petroleum exists and is likely to be shifted to timelines for
produced in commercial quantities”. On the basis of appraisal, evidently taking
special 3D seismic processing, DGH had arrived at the declaration of the
the conclusion that hydrocarbon bearing channels entire area as ‘discovery
and levees associated with the discoveries were area’ as a given.

present and extend throughout the block area. The

whole of the block had been provided as a discovery

area by DGH on the basis of 3D seismic and not on

drilling of wells, which were mainly confined to the

North-West part of the block. The development area

for which ML had been taken by RIL, covered about

339 sq. km. of the northwest part of the Block.

Further, it was noted that with respect to the
discovery areas, there were provisions in Art. 10 of
the PSC prescribing time lines for undertaking
appraisal programme with a work programme and
budget to carry out adequate and effective appraisal
with the objective of determining the boundaries of
the areas to be delineated as the discovery area.
DGH had proposed the entire contract area as the
discovery area in the 3“ phase, which was effective
from 77 June 2005. It was presumed that DGH
would have taken consequential action in terms of
the provisions of the PSC, which prescribed time
lines for undertaking appraisal programme. This had
to be ensured by DGH so that the potential
commercial nature of the discoveries was
established in terms of the timelines provided in the
PSC.

Under-Secretary concluded that DGH, a technical
body of the Ministry, had certified that the entire
contract area was a discovery area in terms of
Article 4.2 and 1.39 of the PSC, and therefore, the
operator could be allowed to proceed to phase-lll
w.e.f. 7.6.05 without relinquishment on the
technical advice of DGH, subject to the operator
agreeing to carrying out the appraisal programme,
including drilling of wells covering the entire
contract area in accordance with the timelines
provided in the PSC for discoveries.

Joint Secretary (E), MoPNG noted that the Ministry
EEE Weg may ratify the decisions taken by DGH with a
07 direction that as the entire block had been certified
to be i area’, DGH may ask the operator to

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Further Comments of
Au

appraise the same, as per the appraisal related
provisions. The PSC envisaged relinquishments at
the end of phase-l and phase-ll barring discovery
areas. But if they were discoveries, they should be
appraised, leading to Declaration of Commerciality
and submission of development plan which had
perhaps not been done. Normally, such a large block
is not approved as the development area.
Therefore, relinquished areas can be recycled in
future rounds.

JS noted that they may approve the proposal with
the above directions for compliance with PSC
provisions.

JS&FA conveyed IFD’s no objection to the course of
action suggested by JS (E), MoPNG, subject to
approval by the competent authority.

Secretary, MoPNG observed on file that DGH had
allowed retention of the entire area at the end of
Phase-l, without reference to Government which
was not proper. Now, it was a case of ratification.
Secretary submitted the case for Minister’s
approval, subject to DGH’s certification that the
whole area had been covered by reasonable number
of wells/ 3D seismic processing to substantiate
continuity of channels and the extent of the
discovery areas, subject to approval by the
competent authority.

Secretary, MoPNG’s
mention of ratification
implied that this was not
in line with the PSC
provisions and needed
“ratification”.

PS to Minister (P&NG) noted that Minister had
desired that the fact of availability or not of the
“Declaration of Commerciality” should be clearly
brought on record. He also noted that the Minister

॥ 70110 had further desired that the concern of JS (६) may

07 be examined by IFD and Secretary, to ensure that
the decision sought to be ratified was consistent
with the PSC and that a “conditional” ex-post-facto
ratification of the manner should perhaps be
avoided.

MoPNG wrote to DGH that DGH had proposed
declaration of entire block area as a discovery area.
29-June- . . . .
07 MoPNG mentioned that in case of discoveries, those
should be appraised leading to declaration of
be and submission of development plan.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Further Comments of
Au

Further while mentioning that there were timelines
given in PSC on various activities that set in after
discovery was announced, it was not clear to them
whether those provisions had been complied with.

DGH was further requested to intimate about the
availability or not of the declaration of
commerciality about discovery area/ areas in the
block in terms of PSC provisions. MoPNG asked DGH
whether the contractor was appraising the entire
block in the light of the fact that the entire block
was being accepted as discovery area.

In reply, DGH intimated that the entire block had
been declared as discovery area as per Article 1.39.
Contractor had made 16 discoveries in the block.
After issuance of notice of discoveries, the
contractor had to declare its potential commercial
within 60 days. Appraisal plan was submitted within
120 days and appraisal could take upto 36 months.
On the basis of appraisal, contractor decided
whether to declare it to be commercial or not, and
thereafter the development plan was to be
submitted. In a block like KG-DWN-98/3 having
multiple discoveries at different time levels, all these
activities ran simultaneously and are at different
stages. However, the timeline prescribed in the PSC
had been followed.

Further, DGH intimated MoPNG that out of 16
discoveries, 11 had been declared commercial and
out of which development plans had been
submitted for two. Development plan could be
submitted for the remaining nine within 12 months,
and there was still time to do so.

24-July-
07

The case was referred to a Committee under the
chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoPNG to
deliberate and take a view on the issue of
regularization of DGH’s decision relating to the
Operator’s entry into phase ॥ and Ill, without
relinquishment of 25 per cent and 50 per cent of the
contract area. The Committee, in its meeting in
February 2008, accepted the operator’s claim of
whole of the block area as discovery area based on
the technical recommendation made by DGH. The
Committee th that no area needed to be

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



relinquished by the operator at the end of
exploration phases | and II

After accepting the contractor's claim regarding the
entire block area as discovery area in February 2008,
the Committee in its meeting on 21 April 2008,
agreed that the three year timeline for appraisal of
the discoveries may be reckoned from 117 July 2006
1.९. the date when MC accepted the claim of the
contractor to enter into subsequent exploration
phases without relinquishment. The committee
accordingly decided that since the entire block area
was accepted as the discovery area, the block area,
therefore, must be appraised within the timeframe
of three years, commencing from 11 July 2006 (and
ending on 10 July 2009).

21-Apr-
08

In view of the recommendations of the Committee,

the following were submitted for seeking approval

of Minister:

* the entire contract area of the Block KG-DWN-
98/3 may be accepted as the discovery area.

e The operator may be allowed retention of entire
contract area of the block KG-DWN-98/3 as
discovery area in the 2 and 3% exploration
phase.

व आर ¢ The timeline for appraisal of the Discoveries may
08 be reckoned from 117 July 2006, i.e. the date
when MC accepted claim of the Contractor to
enter into subsequent exploration phases
without relinquishment.

e Since the entire Block area was accepted as the
Discovery Area, the Block Area, therefore, must
be appraised within time frame of three (3)
years, commencing from the above date.

*® Other terms and conditions of the PSC would
remain unchanged.

After accepting the above mentioned assurances
and with the conditions above, the approval was
me by the Minister.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Date Evel Further Comments of
Audit

24-Fel
09

MOoPNG conveyed Gol’s approval to DGH.

‘Discovery Area’ is defined in Article 1.39 of the PSC as “that part of the contract area about
which, based on discovery”’ and results obtained from a well or wells drilled in such part,
the contractor is of the opinion that petroleum exists and is likely to be produced in
commercial quantities”. The delineation of ‘discovery area’ is inextricably linked to results
obtained from wells drilled and finding of petroleum deposits recoverable at the surface
(which can be discovered only through drilling of successful wells). At the end of the
exploration phase-l, the operator had drilled all wells - in the north-west part of the block
only. The map below depicting the location of discoveries in the block as of January 2010,
clearly confirms our position that allowing the declaration of the entire contract area as
discovery area was not in terms of the PSC as was more or less done as a fait accompli
after repeated examination at different levels.

?7 ‘Discovery’ is defined in Article 1.38 as ‘the finding, during petroleum operations, of a deposit of petroleum
not previously known to have existed, which can be recovered at the surface in a flow measurable by
conventional i industry testing methods’.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Map showing location of discoveries through wells in KG-DWN-98/3 Block (January 2010)

Mm fp Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


= above sequence of events between April 2004 and February 2009 clearly demonstrates
the following:

¢ Originally (May 2004 onwards), DGH did not agree to RIL’s proposal (while preparing
to proceed from Exploratory Phase-I to Phase-il) for not relinquishing any part of the
contract area (at the end of Exploration Phase-I) and reiterated the PSC contractual
provisions for relinquishment of 25 per cent at the end of Phase-I (even identifying
“east priority” areas for consideration for relinquishment). DGH, further, clarified that
none of the existing discoveries extended beyond ‘priority area-l’, and no well had
been drilled in ‘priority area-Il’, and hence it was not possible to consider the total
block area as the discovery area.

© However, by April/ May 2005, DGH undertook an about-turn. While noting that there
were “no two different interpretations possible as far as the definition of discovery
provided in the PSC”, DGH felt it would be “prudent to acquire and interpret the 3D
seismic data in the remaining part of the block on a fast track basis”. Subsequently,
“the relinquishment area could also be worked out in a proper manner”. In the
meanwhile, RIL had already moved from Phase-I to Phase-Il without any area
relinquishment, and was notifying its intent to move from Phase-Il to Phase-lll, again
without any relinquishment. In August 2006, DGH informed MoPNG that the MC
(chaired by DGH representative) had, in July 2006, permitted the contractor to enter
the next phase without relinquishing any area, since data showed “continuity of
discovery” in the block area (on the basis of RIL’s presentation based on the results of
seismic data acquired).

e Thereafter, there was extensive correspondence between MoPNG and DGH from
August 2006. MoPNG raised pertinent questions as to whether the coverage of wells
was over the entire block for DGH to reach the conclusion of discovery extension, but
failed to pursue this aspect further.

e By April 2007, MoPNG felt that the proposal might be considered on getting a
certification from DGH that the whole area had been covered by a reasonable number
of wells/ 3D seismic to substantiate continuity of channels and the extent of discovery
area. DGH gave a certificate in May 2007 to MoPNG.

« Even in May 2007, internal notings of MoPNG indicated their awareness that the
whole of the block had been provided as a discovery area on the basis of 3D seismic
and not on drilling of wells, which were mainly confined to the NW part of the block.
However, MoPNG now proposed that on the basis of the proposed discovery area, the
operator should be asked to appraise the area as per appraisal-related PSC provisions.
After concerns expressed by the then Minister, PNG as to whether the decision sought
to be ratified was consistent with the PSC provisions, the case was referred to a
committee under i chairmanship of Additional Secretary, MoPNG. The Committee

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



ce the contractor’s claim (February 2008) and decided (April 2008) that the
timeline for appraisal of discoveries would commence from 11 July 2006 (viz. MC’s
acceptance of the contractor’s claim). This was finally approved by the Minister in July
2008, but communicated to DGH only in February 2009.

RIL’s views at different points of time (that the contractor was “of the opinion that
petroleum was likely to exist”, “the contract area was having hydrocarbon potential”,
“ultimately additional exploratory wells needed to be drilled to establish the
additional hydrocarbon potential in the deeper water area of the block for which they
were making efforts to hire ultra-deepwater rigs” clearly attempted to confuse
potential/ prospectivity with actual discovery of hydrocarbons. Their difficulties in
hiring ultra-deepwater rigs for the deepwater area of the block (essentially the SW
part, where no discoveries had been made) had no linkage with the contractual
provisions for discovery area and relinquishment.

Thus, RIL’s proposal of April 2004 to not relinquish any area and retain the whole contract
area as ‘discovery area’ was submerged in a sea of correspondence between RIL and DGH,
without relinquishment action being taken in terms of the PSC provisions, while RIL was
allowed to proceed from phase to phase. By April/ May 2005, DGH had “waived” its
earlier objections, and now advised/ directed the operator to complete 3D seismic data.

By July 2006, DGH completed its about-turn and agreed (through the MC) to the
contractor’s proposal. MoPNG was aware of the flaws in the MC’s decision for retention of
the entire area, but, instead of reversing the same (in line with PSC provisions), it chose to
accept DGH’s certification for such retention.

Even the interpretation of declaration of discovery area from July 2006 was not followed
through properly by MoPNG and DGH. Implementation of this interpretation (which is
incorrect, in our opinion) required cessation of exploration activities, commencement of
appraisal from July 2006 and completion thereof by July 2009. After this point of time, the
contractor’s only course of action was to prepare development plans on the basis of
appraisal, identify development areas for development, and relinquish the balance area
forthwith within the PSC-stipulated timelines. This was also not done. DGH and MoPNG
chose to go along with differing interpretations of the operator concurrently — to continue
with exploration activities, side by side with declaration of the entire contract area as
discovery area.

MoPNG gave a detailed reply (July 2011) on this aspect, indicating that “the issue under
examination is highly technical and the Ministry is relying upon the DGH, the only
technical arm of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, whose report is as follows”:-

e ‘Discovery Area’ is defined in Article 1.39 of the PSC as ‘that part of the contract area
about which, based on discovery and results obtained from a well or wells drilled in such

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



part, the contractor is of the opinion that petroleum exists and is likely to be produced in
commercial quantities’.

The contractor had made 8 gas discoveries till the end of Phase-| period (6 June 2004),
including two large size gas discoveries D1 & D3.

On 11 June 2004, DGH intimated the contractor for relinquishment of 25 per cent of the
block area before entering Phase-ll.

RIL, through number of correspondences, mentioned that the operator was of the
opinion that petroleum exists and is likely to be produced in commercial quantities after
an exhaustive exploratory and appraisal programme from the contract area. The
contractor also mentioned that it would be in the overall national interest as any
prematurely relinquished area may be mistaken as non prospective and, consequently,
further exploratory/ appraisal efforts which the contractor plan to undertake in such
area may be either get deferred or may never be under taken.

The relinquishment of 25 per cent of the block area at the end of Phase-| was examined
from the PSC point of view. However, based on the technical data provided and
coverage of entire block area by 2D seismic survey, all the ten wells drilled in phase-|
being gas bearing, it is not unusual to draw the inference to retain the total area as
discovery area at the end of Phase-I period.

Exploration in the KG basin was initiated way back in early sixties, but was mostly
confined to on-land and shallow water areas till the beginning of the year 2000. Geo-
scientific data in the deepwater areas was almost negligible at that time. The beginning
of advanced seismic tools and techniques and evaluation methods, followed by
generation of drilled well data, led to validation of depositional models subsequently.
The area under reference forms part of larger KG deepwater basin. The tertiary
sedimentation in the area is quite enormous and ranges in thickness from 2 to 8 kms.
The sediments in the tertiary system are deposited mainly in the deepwater setting
forming deepwater fan delta systems and channel levee complexes.

Hydrocarbon reservoirs of KG-DWN-98/3 block are of stratigraphic nature, which
resulted in deposition of discrete geo-bodies with wide geographical distribution. The
exploration efforts for such complex deposition types require proper understanding of
hydrocarbons reservoirs with regular refinement through new data set including seismic,
well, core and other petrophysical and reservoir data.

In the KG-DWN-98/3 block, the entire block area was covered by 2D seismic data with
good coverage of 3D seismic data in Phase-1. All the ten wells drilled in phase-1 were
gas bearing. Available geoscientific data indicated that the channel levee and fan
complexes found in the northern part of the area appeared continuing in the southern
part of the block, and seismic signature on 2D and 3D seismic data were similar to those

i Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


seen in the northern part of block wherein all the ten (10) drilled wells in phase-!
encountered gas.

KG D6 discoveries do not constitute a classical discrete reservoir system. Instead they
occur as levees and channels with hydrocarbon geo bodies connected and spread all
over the entire contract area.

Subsequently, DGH, while taking the note of the technicality of basin geological set up
and the Contractor’s proposal that geological plays extended to the entire Contract
Area, advised the Operator vide letter dated 24 May 2005 to acquire additional 3D
seismic data covering the entire Contract Area for additional evidence and assurance.
The contractor subsequently carried out additional 3D seismic survey covering 1004 sq.
km.in Phase-ll (total area 5991 sq.km.)

The extensive seismic data processing/ reprocessing and interpretation in the block
helped in understanding of complex deepwater geological setting in the block, besides
acquiring broad knowledge of the Krishna-Godavari offshore basin. The exploratory
drilling carried out in channel, mid and distal levee complexes has resulted in the
presence of a number of hydrocarbons gas bearing sandstone reservoirs of Plio-Miocene
ages. The Operator, based on the seismic and well database, has critically examined a
conceptualized geological model along with the sand development patterns and the
associated reservoir complexities. The operator has also deployed state of the art
software and hardware available in the industry, particularly for mapping of Geo-bodies
delineation, configuration of sub-marine channel system using spectral decomposition
techniques, stratigraphic sequence slicing using volume interpretation. Advanced
techniques like Sharp-ELAN and anisotropy have been successfully implemented by the
operator for resolving the thin bedded reservoirs from the conventional thick beds.

Integration of outcome of interpretation of existing 2D (speculative, reprocessed and
newly acquired & processed) and focused 3D seismic along with complete set of drilled
well information including wire line/LWD-MWD information and mud logging data
indicated that sizeable quantities of hydrocarbons gas volumes do exist within the
channel sand reservoir (main channel; proximal, mid and distal levee complexes, over
bank/crevasse splay deposits) as well as reservoirs in the inter channel areas.

Based on the outcome of the robust work flow adopted by the Operator, it was
envisaged that the entire Contract Area of Block D6 is characteristically criss-crossed by
a number of submarine channels, out of which only three have been drilled by the
operator. Complexity of the channel geometry has also been demonstrated by the
presence of multiple Gas-Water Contacts (GWCs) encountered in the drilled wells. Wells
drilled in the channel systems to the deeper parts of the basin had encountered GWC at
deeper levels.

Considering the overall evidence obtained through the exploration activities carried out
me the Operator so far, the following can be summarized:

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


“ Aseries of sub marine channel complexes have been mapped based on the evidence
obtained from the existing and newly acquired 2D and 3D seismic data;

* Deposits of gas, not previously known to have existed in the exploration block, have
been found with commercial flow characteristics at the surface;

< Gas occurrence with multiple GWCs within some of the mapped channel systems
enhances the possibility of finding additional and new volumes of gas in distal fan
lobes mapped in the southern and eastern areas to the existing 3D area;

e Gas reservoir (both in thin beds and thick sands) are found within channel sands as well
as inter-channel areas and after technical review of the additional 3D data acquired, the
MC in its meeting held on 11 July 2006 agreed with the opinion of the Contractor that
the prospective geological plays had continuity in the entire block, and hence no block
area needed to be relinquished. Therefore, the opinion of the Contractor, which it had
prior to the expiry of exploration phase-I that entire area was discovery area, was
reconfirmed in the MC.

¢ MOoPNG, in February 2009, conveyed that the entire contract area of the block KG-DWN-
98/3 has been accepted as the discovery area.

e Further, based on the technical merits, the entire block area was considered as
discovery area in some other blocks as well viz. RJ-ON-06 (Operator: FOCUS), and KG-
DWN-98/2 (Operator: ONGC).

«It may be noted that the contractor has already made 19 discoveries in the block, out of
which only 8 discoveries were made in the Pliocene and Pleistocene Formation during
Phase-|. Similarly, 4 more discoveries were made in the Phase-ll period and 7 discoveries
in Phase-lll. The above mentioned discoveries, based on the available seismic, drilled
and petro physical data of the wells, have wide spatial distribution in the block area.
Presently, fifty seven (57) wells in total had been drilled in KG-DWN-98/3 block,
comprising of exploratory, appraisal and development wells.

These discoveries further enabled contractor to submit three development plans (D1 & D3
gas, MA Oil, 9 satellite gas discoveries/ 4 satellite gas discoveries), one declaration of
commerciality (DOC) covering 4 gas discoveries (D 29,30,31 and 34) in addition to one
appraisal plan for one discovery (D-42). These discoveries proved the Contractor’s claim for
entire block area as discovery area.

———— reply of MoPNG is not tenable, and merely restates the opinions of the contractor,
DGH and MoPNG summarized in the chronology indicated at Table 4.1.

The clear definition of discovery area based on discovery (viz. finding of petroleum) and
“results obtained from a well or wells drilled in such part” was sought to be incorrectly
confused with prospectivity/ probability and likelihood of petroleum. Finding of petroleum
(viz. based on wells drilled in “that part” taken together with seismic data) cannot be
equated th searching for petroleum, based on prospectivity. The contractor's discoveries

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



= all in the North West part of the contract area. In fact, the contractor also expressed
its difficulties in, and efforts made to hire ultra-deepwater rigs for exploratory drilling in the
“deeper part” of the contract area (viz. the SE area, as opposed to the NW area) and thus,
clearly acknowledged the need for exploratory drilling in other “parts”, but, at the same
time, held on to its opinion of the entire contract being a ‘discovery area’.

While DGH initially (May 2004) objected to the contractor’s view that it was not ina position
to identify any area for relinquishment, and advised RIL to relinquish 25 per cent area, it
allowed the contractor to proceed from Exploration Phase | to Phase ॥ without such
relinquishment (while continuing to debate and discuss the question of relinquishment). By
April/ May 2005, DGH undertook an about-turn, indicating that “it would be prudent to
acquire and interpret the 3D seismic data in the remaining part of the block on a fast track
basis” and subsequently, ‘the relinquishment area could also be worked out in a proper
manner” Meanwhile, RIL gave notice for moving from the 2 to the 3 phase without any
relinquishment. By July 2006, after a presentation made by RIL, DGH informed MoPNG that
the MC had permitted to enter the next phase without any relinquishment, even when a
“small portion of the area” remained to be covered by 3D seismic.

MoPNG raised pertinent questions as to whether the coverage of well was over the entire
block for DGH to reach the conclusion of discovery extension, but failed to pursue this
aspect further. Instead, they chose to focus on getting a certification from DGH that the
contractor’s claim was correct, and thereafter on timelines for appraisal of discoveries
premised on the MC’s approval of the entire contract area as discovery area on 11 July
2006. After concerns expressed by the Minister, PNG as to consistency with PSC provisions,
the case was referred to a Committee under the Additional Secretary, MoPNG and then
finally approved by the Minister in July 2008, but communicated to DGH only in February
2009.

In its reply, MoPNG has drawn reference to the retention of discovery area in other blocks,
including KG-DWN-98/2 (Operator: ONGC). The maps of discoveries of KG-DWN-98/3 (the
focus of this chapter) and KG-DWN-98/2 shown below indicates that the situation in the two
blocks is not comparable.

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



“wn yao 822०8 .
cc #& 109 en
रतन mur
U-1
16.
1 Wit]
UD
3 is
to oo
i
नि कक i
1 iw dee
88881 artes a “ |
in 4 fot st) ron even 13921

Comparison of maps of ONGC operated KG-DWN-98/2 (left) and RIL operated KG-DWN-98/3 block
(right) clearly indicates that exploratory wells were drilled in the entire contract area of the ONGC.
operated block, whereas these were limited to the north western part of RIL operated block.
Moreover, ONGC had also relinquished a part of the contract area.

pp जाएँ Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



4.2.2 Unjustified extension of exploration phases

Article 3 of the PSC permits only limited extensions to the time period allocated for
exploration phases:

e If, at the end of an exploration phase, the Minimum Work Programme (MWP) for that
phase is not completed, the time for completion of MWP shall be extended, with the
MC’s consent, by a maximum of six months for “technical or other good reasons” shown
by the contractor; this period of extension shall be subtracted from the succeeding
exploration phase;

e If, at the end of an exploration phase, execution of any work programme in addition to
the MWP is in progress, the exploration phase shall be extended by a maximum of six
months, provided that the MWP has been completed or the MC gives its consent to the
said extension.

e In April 2006, Gol introduced a New Extension Policy, according to which:

e The first 6 months extension could be granted by the MC or the Gol in terms of the
provisions of respective PSCs.

e Additional extensions of upto 12 months could be given for different type of proposals
(but excluding any proposed demonstrable excusable delays on account of the
Government approvals/permits/clearances, etc.) on fulfilment of certain conditions such
as furnishing of a bank guarantee and/or cash payment of liquidated damages.

In June 2007, MoPNG, on DGH’s recommendation, granted an extension of 13 months and 9
days for Exploration Phase-ill from 7 June 2007 to 15 July 2008. The operator’s stated
reasons for delay in completion of exploration were:

e Delay of 109 days in grant of Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) during Phase-|; and

* Delays of 173 days and 122 days in Ministry of Defence (MoD) clearance for sending 2D
seismic data and 3D seismic data abroad in December 2000 (Phase-|) and January 2006
(Phase-lll) respectively.

However, we found the first two reasons for delay of 109 and 173 days to be unjustified
because:

* The benefit of delay in grant of PEL had already been availed of by the operator, while
seeking extension under Phase-l.

e While examining the request for extension in Phase-l, DGH considered that MoD granted
permission within a normal period of 2 months after completion of data acquisition job
by the operator, and did not find this a valid ground for extension.

e Both the above reasons did not have any consequential effects, as the work programme
for which Phase-| extension was given had been completed before Phase-lll.

me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the objective of the New Extension Policy of
April 2006 was to stimulate exploration of oil and gas in the country. The entire process of
exploration was highly cost intensive. The letter and spirit of the policy for grant of
extension under excusable delays could be given during the exploration period, not
restricting to any particular phase. Extension granted for excusable delay entitled the
contractor to more time than PSC stipulated normal time, whereas the extension granted on
other grounds would get set off in subsequent phases without prolonging the PSC time.
Therefore, the distinction needs to be made between time extension for excusable delays
and time extension for other reasons. Further, delays in granting permissions/approvals
entitled the contractor for more time. It is difficult to demonstrate presence/absence of
consequential effects and the PSC, as well as the extension policy, do not stipulate
demonstration of consequential effects.

MoPNG’s response does not address the specific issues pointed out by Audit. Giving
extension on the same reason twice (phase-I and phase-lll) indicates undue favour extended
to the operator.

4.2.3 Non-drilling of exploration wells to 4,000/ 5,000 meters depth in KG-DWN-
98/3

The work programme committed under the PSC for KG-DWN-98/3 included drilling of one
exploration well of 4,000 metre depth in Exploration Phase-I, two wells of 4,000 metre
depth each and one well of 5,000 metre depth in Phase-ll, and two wells of 4,000 metre
depth each and two wells of 5,000 metre depth each in Phase-lll (all deepwater). The
significance of the extra-ordinarily high well depth in deepwater exploration, in terms of
both cost and operational complexity, cannot be understated. However, we found that 3
wells of 4,000 metre each in the first two phases and 2 wells of 5,000 metre depth each
were not drilled by the contractor in the last two exploration phases.

In response to an audit enquiry, the Operator stated (April 2010) that:-

e The exact depth of plays identified for drilling was not known correctly at the time of
bid; this got firmed up after building detailed geological model, and therefore,
underwent changes.

e The contractor was required to drill to the depths as per geological objective reviewed
by the MC, which was in the best interest of exploration operations, and was not
required to drill to depths without looking into the merits of exploration operations.

e In 2007, Gol had come out with a policy on substitution of additional metreage against
MWP. While formulating the policy, Gol considered metreage on aggregate basis
without sticking to the depths committed in the PSC or number of wells. The policy
clearly stated that as long as the marks/points computed (as per BEC for NELP) based on
the actual work carried out was more than the marks/points scored for the committed
MWP under the th the drilling metreage is deemed to have been completed based

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



on the revised depth parameters. In the block, the actual number of exploratory wells
drilled in each exploration phase as well as corresponding aggregate drilling metreage is
much higher than the MWP commitments.

From a literal perspective, the PSC mandates drilling to the committed well depths,
notwithstanding the geological objectives and the merits of such exploration operations.
However, in our opinion, the problem lies with the defective system of awarding points at
the bid evaluation stage based on well depth. This acts as a perverse incentive to some
potential bidders to commit to high well depths on a purely hypothetical basis with
extremely basic / limited geological data, knowing fully well that the actual depth

objective can be determined only subsequently after API of seismic data and other
relevant data. We, however, agree that it is impractical to insist on drilling of 4,000 /
5,000 metre wells at this stage, which would only result in infructuous cost to both the
contractors and Gol. In future, if exploratory well drilling is to be retained as a bid
evaluation criteria, we recommend that either no weightage be allocated for well depth,
or alternatively, well commitments be categorised into two groups — wells above and
below a specified depth (e.g. 1500 or 2000 metres) and points awarded accordingly.

We also do not agree with the operator’s response regarding subsequent policy revisions, of
Gol as any revisions in subsequent NELP rounds or Gol’s policies have no relation
whatsoever with the provisions of the PSC already signed for KG-DWN-98/3 block.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the CAG’s comment was well taken. The CAG’s
suggestions on the issue of well depth being considered for bid evaluation would be
examined by Gol and addressed in future bidding rounds in consultation with other
ministries.

4.2.4 Non-compliance to PSC provisions regarding notification of discovery and
submission of test reports

Articles 10.1 & 10.2 of the PSC provide that when a discovery is made within the contract
area, the contractor should:

e Forthwith inform the Management Committee and Government of the discovery and
furnish particulars in writing within 30 days of the discovery;

e “Promptly” run tests to determine whether the discovery is of potential commercial
interest;

e Within 60 days of completion of the tests, submit a report to the Management
Committee with a notification of whether, in the contractor’s opinion, the discovery is of
potential commercial interest and merits appraisal;

e Notify the Government at least 48 hours in advance of any drill stem/ production test
(with Government having the right to have a representative present during the test).

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



We, however, found that in the case of 13 out of 19 discoveries between October 2002 and
July 2008 (Annexure 4.2), the operator had, without first furnishing the initial particulars of
the discoveries in writing to the MC and Government, directly given written notifications
regarding potential commerciality of the discoveries. Clearly, this is in violation of the PSC
provisions, which stipulate clear time frames for various activities in a serially linked fashion.

In response, MoPNG clarified that (July 2011) the first 13 discoveries were the initial
discoveries in NELP-I round in deepwater area which were made within a very short period
of time from the award of the contract. At that point of time, systems and processes were
not fully established. Over a period of time, the same had been refined and improved. The
procedural variation during the initial NELP period does not pose any material impact.
However, the procedure had now been strengthened, and were being strictly followed for
subsequent discoveries as per PSC requirement.

4.2.5 Lack of Appraisal Programme

Articles 21.5.2 and 10.3 of the PSC stipulate that if the contractor notifies the MC that the
discovery is of potential commercial interest, he should submit, within one year in case of
Non Associated Natural Gas (NANG) and 120 days in case of an oil discovery, a proposed
Appraisal Programme (with a Work Programme and Budget) to the MC with the objectives
of:

e@ Determining whether the discovery is a commercial discovery; and
e Determine “with reasonable precision” the boundaries of the Development Area.

e Further, “appraisal programme” is defined as a programme for the purpose of appraising
the discovery and delineating the petroleum reservoirs to which the discovery relates in
terms of thickness and lateral extent and determining the characteristics thereof and the
quantity of recoverable petroleum thereof. A maximum timeframe of 3 years in case of
NANG and 30 months in case of oil is provided from the date of notifying the MC that
the discovery is of potential commercial interest to the submission of proposal of
commercial discovery, which essentially includes the appraisal programme. The MC
should, within 45 days (90 days for gas) of submission of the proposal, review it and
request any other additional information so as to complete the review of the proposal.
The contractor should submit the additional information within 30 days from the date of
the request. The review of the MC should be made and conveyed to the contractor with
in the later of (i) 90 days (150 days for gas) from the date of receipt of the proposal, or
(ii) 45 days (60 days for gas) of receipt of such other information.

Audit, however, noticed that there was no appraisal programme in respect of 14 out of 19
discoveries, notably the D1-D3 gas discoveries and D-26 oil discovery. The operator moved
directly from discovery to commercial discovery without an appraisal programme. Besides
being clearly in violation of the PSC provisions, lack of an appraisal programme, duly
reviewed i the MC in line with PSC provisions, for an “adequate and effective appraisal”

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



of the discovery may result in a high degree of uncertainty regarding the reliability of the
declaration of commercial discovery and the consequential development plan, as well as
the associated estimates of reservoir reserves, production rates, development and
production costs, etc.

Non-submission of Appraisal Programme for D-5 & D-18 Gas discoveries

We also noted that submission of appraisal programme relating to Dhirubhai-5 and
Dhirubhai-18 Gas discoveries was pending since July 2004 and April 2006 respectively.
Although PSC Article 21.5.4 prescribes that if no proposal is submitted to MC by the
Contractor within three years from the discovery, the Contractor should relinquish its rights
to develop such discovery and the area relating to such discovery should be excluded from
the Contract Area, no action in this regard had been taken by DGH/MoPNG.

In response (July 2011), MoPNG stated that as pointed out by CAG, the area of 05 and 018
discoveries would be considered for relinquishment by MC as per PSC provisions as and
when the discovery area for 9/4 satellite gas discoveries was delineated for development.

The reply is not satisfactory as the two discoveries are not covered under the 9 satellite
discoveries. Therefore, not taking action for exclusion of the relevant area since July 2004
and April 2006 is in violation of the PSC provisions.

In reply (July 2011), MoPNG stated that:

e Based on the conventional testing carried out in the discovery wells, the contractor
generated substantial test data which was supported by extensive coring, advance set of
logging for formation evaluation, close grid 3D seismic API data in addition to Q-marine
survey data (Q-marine is highly advanced seismic technology, and delivers added value
through unmatched resolution and repeatability within reservoir required timeframes)
The 3D seismic data/Q-marine has enabled the contractor to demarcate the extent of
the reservoir.

e Besides detailed geo-scientific studies (2D/3D seismic, logging, testing etc), the
contractor appraised D1-D3 and D-26 oil discoveries by drilling three appraisal wells viz.
KGD6-A2, KGD6-B2 and KGD6-MA2 respectively. The G&G data generated from the
above studies enabled the contractor to submit the ‘DOC’ of these discoveries. The
above G&G data was sufficient to delineate the extent of petroleum reservoirs,
satisfying the objective of carrying out appraisal programme.

e These discoveries were further evaluated by the engagement of internationally
renowned independent energy consultants by the contractor, besides in-house
examination by DGH.

MoPNG’s reply is to be viewed in light of the following:

e PSC provisions prescribe formal procedures and timelines for submission, review and
adoption of the appraisal programme and budget. The appraisal programme is also
required to be conducted in the proposed appraisal area within the timelines as per the
Mm appraisal programme to determine the commerciality of discovery/discoveries

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



and finally delineating the development area. However, as per the information collected
from MoPNG/DGH, no formal appraisal programme and budget was submitted by the
contractor in respect of the first 14 discoveries (including D1-D3 and D-26 discoveries) as
per the PSC provisions. In fact, the MA-2 appraisal well was drilled after submission of
DoC proposal for MA field, which is in violation of PSC provisions as commerciality of a
reserve cannot be determined without appraisal/delineation; this also casts doubts on
the robustness and completeness of data supporting the DoC proposal.

e Onone hand, the contractor had not found it necessary to submit any formal appraisal
programme for the first 14 discoveries, and on the other hand, he submitted two
separate formal appraisal programmes in the extended period of phase-lll in respect of
the last five discoveries (one combined appraisal programme for D-29, D-30, D-31 and D-
34 discoveries and the other for D-42 discovery) covering vast appraisal areas.

4.2.6 Delays in submission, review and approval of Appraisal Programme, /
Declaration of Commerciality and Development Plan

PSC prescribes different timelines for submission, review and approval of Appraisal
Programme, Declaration of Commerciality, and Development Plan. However, we noticed
many cases of such delays (Annexure - 4.3).

4.3 Development activities for 01-03
4.3.1 Delayed action after IDP approval for 01-03 Gas Discovery

After declaration of commerciality for the D1-D3 gas discoveries, the operator submitted
(May 2004) an Initial Development Plan (IDP) with an estimated capital expenditure of
USS 2.39 billion. The IDP envisaged gas production of 40 mmscmd (34 producing wells), with
design provision to augment the capacity to 80 mmscmd by installing additional equipment.
As per the schedule, the project was to be completed by July 2006, with first gas production
by August 2006. The IDP was approved by the MC on 5 November 2004.

However, the development activities were not scheduled in-line with project completion
schedule, and by the scheduled date of project commissioning and commercial production,
the operator submitted (20 October 2006) an Addendum to the 107 (Phase-l) with capex of
USS 5.2 billion for phase-I to be completed upto 2008-09. The plan envisaged delivery of a
plateau production rate of 80 MMSCMD with first gas production by mid-2008. The capex
for phase-ll (after 2008-09) was submitted as USS 3.6 billion, adding up to a total of
USS 8.8 billion (50 wells), with facilities upgradeable to production of 120 mmscmd. The
AIDP was approved by MC on 12 December 2006.

In this connection, we observed the following:

e Article 21.5.6 of PSC stipulates the submission of a comprehensive development plan
within one year of DoC. Instead, the operator submitted an “Initial Development Plan” in
May 2004, which was amended through an Addendum to the IDP in less than

ee. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



2% years. While the PSC permits modifications/ revisions to the FDP for “good cause”
with the MC’s approval, the scale of the revision of the IDP through the addendum in
such a short time span (even considering the stated justification of doubling of probable
gas reserves) casts doubts on the robustness of the data and assumptions underlying the
development plan(s). Recent reports, as appearing in the media, indicate the production
coming down to 43 mmscmd that is close to the level of 40 mmscmd envisaged in the
IDP. This raises doubts as to whether the upgradation to 80 mmscmd with substantial
increase in development cost was justified in view of the non-submission of any
appraisal programme for the review of the MC.

Article 21.5.10 of the PSC provides that after approval of the development plan, the gas
discovery should be promptly developed by the Contractor in accordance with the
approved plan. However, after approval (November 2004), progress in field
development work was not as per the schedule of the IDP. The operator did not initiate
immediate action for procurement of major equipment/materials/services for field
development. Instead, development related major tendering activities were initiated in
2006, with target gas production by mid-2008 and by October 2006, most of the
activities were at tender stage or initial mobilisation or initial start stage (Annexure 4.4).

There was a 117 percent increase (i.e. US$ 2.81 billion) in estimated capex from
USS 2.39 billion at IDP stage to USS 5.2 billion at 8107 (Phase-l). Despite shifting of the
time frame from “first gas” production to mid-2008 and most of the orders being placed
by the Operator in line with requirements as per AIDP (even before its approval), gas
production commenced in April 2009.

Information on estimated versus actual spend, scheduled versus actual completions, etc.
for development related contracts was not provided by the Operator, though asked for.
In response to an audit enquiry, the Operator stated that the expenditures for
development operations associated with contracts under the AIDP that were incurred
after March 2008 were not within the current audit scope. As per the expenditure
statement collected from DGH, actual spend till June 2009 was USS 5.07 billion, despite
contracts close-out for many items being still in progress, thus indicating that the cost
would further increase. We observed upward revisions in quantity and rates in AIDP vis-
a-vis IDP, as well as variations and cost escalations in actual spend vis-a-vis cost. Details
of cost variations in terms of quantity, rates as well as other factors in respect of
different cost elements of the project development are highlighted in Annexure 4.5.

Further, we found that the operator had awarded contracts/placed orders for different
major items required for development activities/production facilities relating to D1-D3 field
as per the AIDP even before its submission/approval, (rather than the IDP), as mentioned
below:

The operator awarded the Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Commissioning
me contract for onshore-offshore facilities for Euro 764.085 million only in September

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


2006, although the list of vendors was initially approved by the OC way back in February
2003.

Though there was no provision for Control-cum-Riser Platform (CRP) in the Initial
Development Plan of May 2004, the operator awarded the contract for CRP for USS
329.55 million in September 2006 as per the proposed revised Development Plan.

In response to audit enquiries regarding the justification for submission of the AIDP and
delayed action after approval of IDP, the operator indicated that:

The initial plan was based on the geological reservoir model generated in early 2004
integrating limited data & understanding. The model had a high degree of volumetric
uncertainty mainly due to limited core data, limited understanding of depositional
processes, poor calibration between rock property and seismic etc.

Post IDP approval, work done included extensive studies based on additional data
generated e.g. re-processing & interpretation of data, permeability modelling and
assessment of in-place reserves.

Geological and reservoir understanding keeps on improving as additional well data,
reservoir data and production data becomes available; however, investment decisions
are still taken on the basis of the then understanding.

Progress of development activities could not be scheduled strictly in line with project
schedule as, during Q4 2004 to Q4 2005, studies brought out that the reserve base was
much higher and made the operator to re-think on original plans, in view of huge
demand. Both JV partners decided to propose an option to develop known reserves in
cost effective manner and make available higher volume of gas. Advance action was
taken to tie up vendors for timely development of D1/D3 fields in anticipation of the
MC approval of the AIDP.

IDP clearly indicated that the project schedule was subject to timely approval as well as
receipt of all other statutory clearances relevant to the project. The approval of the plan
and other statutory approvals were, however, delayed. Permission to install gas
pipelines”® was accorded only in March 2006.

The good weather window of 2005-06 was missed due to delayed IDP approval and
production was not achievable in October 2006, but earliest in August 2007.

Due to higher reserve base, it was decided to start working on the revised plan to raise
production level from D1-D3 discoveries to almost double the original plans. The
operator's internal resources were focused on preparation of AIDP which required
extensive re-work on additional data, original concept & FEED studies, plot plans for
higher production and increased handling capacities.

28 The laying of gas pipelines is reportedly being undertaken by Reliance Gas Transportation Infrastructure Ltd.

This does hl form part of the PSC and its activities, and is hence outside the scope of this audit.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e After submission of the IDP in May 2004, the operator expected its approval within one
month of submission, as against the six months prescribed in the PSC. It was necessary
for the operator to plan and project reasonable timelines considering the good weather
window.

e Since purchase orders for major project execution activities were not processed,
immediately from November 2004, processing time taken for other approvals from
different authorities did not, in reality, contribute significantly to project delays.

« While the cost of oil and gas related equipment and services increased dramatically due
to various factors (including the spiralling crude oil prices contributing to dramatic
demand-supply imbalances in the oil and gas industry), the operator’s delay in initiating
procurement activities in 2004 and 2005 contributed, at least partly, to the increased
cost of development.

Further:

e The Mining Lease application was submitted on 4 January 2005 i.e. seven months after
the submission of the IDP (26 May 2004).

e Most procurement activities were undertaken late in line with the schedules of the 107
of May 2004. By contrast, activities in respect of items in the AIDP were initiated even
before the submission/approval of the AIDP. Clearly, the development activities of the
operator were guided by the AIDP, rather than the IDP.

e As indicated by the operator, advance action was taken to tie up vendors for timely
development of D1/D3 fields in anticipation of the MC approval of the AIDP. While a
view could, perhaps, be taken that such pre-approval action is at the risk and cost of the
contractor, in reality, this increases the probability of such approvals becoming a fait
accompli.

Approval of estimates does not constitute acceptance of the operator’s projections of cost
as being payable. The acceptance of the cost incurred by the operator can be certified only
after audit of his expenses through proper norms. Part of the expenditure in respect of
individual items under AIDP incurred during 2006-07 and 2007-08 has been audited.
Remaining expenditure incurred from 2008-09 onwards will be covered in future audits.

4.4 Development/ Procurement activities (MA Field)

The development of MA field is a case of hasty decisions taken by the operator to award
various contracts to four companies of one group in order to start development activities
irregularly without waiting for approval of the DoC and Field Development Plan (FDP). The
Operator awarded contracts at non-competitive rates without ensuring price reasonability
and following procurement procedure and other provisions of PSC in letter and spirit.

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


4.4.1 Chronology of events

The chronology of major procurement and development/ PSC events relating to the MA oil

field is given below:

Table 4.2 - Chronology of major events relating to MA oil field

Procurement-related activities | Date | PSC-related events

EO! for charter hiring of Mobile
Production Facility (MPF) for
various blocks operated by RIL.

No EOI received.

Issue of contract to INTEC for
concept selection, Front End
Engineering Design (FEED) and
validation of Floating Production,
Storage and Offloading (FPSO)
facility engineering for early
production.

Aker Floating Production (AFP)
incorporated (i.e. after invitation of
EOI in January 2006 and before
Vendor Qualification Criteria (VQC)
analysis conducted by Contractor
in September 2006).

AFP listed on Oslo Stock Exchange.

Vendor Qualification Criteria (VQC)
for charter hiring of MPF sent to
OC for approval”’.

VQC approved by OC.
VQC analysis (prepared on the

15-Dec-05

5-Jan-06

12-Jan-06

12-Jan-06

14-Mar-06

24-Jun-06

26-Jun-06
6-Jul-06

7-Jul-06
4-Sep-06

Drilling of 1st Exploratory Well in MA
Oil Field.

Testing of 1st Exploratory Well as oil
bearing.

Notification of oil discovery D-26 to
MC (after the expiry of the PSC
stipulated timeline - 60 days after
testing).

Me This could have been done before inviting EOI, as a fair, transparent and reliable practice.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Procurement-related activities | Date | PsC-related events

basis of details of prospective firms
from the internet®’) sent to OC for
approval.

RFP for charter hiring of FPSO
(issued to 15 firms with bid due
date as 11-Oct-06 (revised in
stages to 25-Oct-06); in between,
after discussions with bidders,
addenda to RFP issued

Unpriced techno-commercial bids
of eight bidders were opened.

Discussions held with two vendors
(AFP and SBM), including meeting
in Oslo in Nov 2006)

Bids were subsequently revised,
based on technical qualifications to
resolve deviations/ exceptions.

AFP declared as single acceptable
bidder, and bids of seven other

bidders rejected on technical
grounds.
LO] issued to AFP for FPSO

(amended on 05.01.2007).

Issue of Project Management
Consultancy contract to Bechtel.

Contract for supply of Subsea

Hardware awarded to Aker
Kvaerner Subsea (USS 356.10
million).

Contract awarded to Aker

Contracting FP (subsidiary of AFP)
with certain modification to LOI
issued to AFP for charter hiring of

*° Supporting i to VQC analysis not found on record by audit.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

21-Sep-06

20-Oct-06

27-Oct-06

14-Nov-06

2 to 6 Dec-06

11-Dec-06

2-Feb-07
24-Mar-07

27-Apr-07

4-May-07

Declaration of Commerciality of
Discovery (DoC) submitted to DGH for
approval, without appraisal of
discovery.

Spudding of 2nd Well for appraisal
(after submission of DoC), completed
on 5-Dec-06.

Review of DoC of MA oil field by MC.



Procurement-related acti

FPSO - US$ 1075 million.

| Date | PsC-related events

FPSO sailed away from Jurong 28-Jul-07
Shipyard.

18-Aug-07 Submission of Initial Development Plan
for MA field to MC.

31-Aug-07 Application for obtaining Mining Lease
submitted.

Contract awarded to ABO (Aker 7-Oct-07
Borgestad Operations) for

operation and maintenance of

FPSO (with certain modifications to

the LOI issued to AFP) - USS 276

million.

Installation of Christmas Trees 24-Feb-08
(XMTs) for MA Field commenced.

17-Apr-08 — Approval of Field Development Plan by
MC.

12-May-08 Mining Lease granted by Gol effective
17-Apr-08.
FPSO sailed away from Singapore 6-Aug-08
Deepwater anchorage.

FPSO reached MA field location 16-Aug-08
after customs clearance.

4.4.2 Irregular action before approvals as required in PSC

As can be seen above, the timing of various procurement related activities, well before PSC-
related approvals, was highly irregular:

e The EO! for hiring of the Mobile Production Facility (MPF) was issued on 5 January 2006
even before the testing of the first exploratory well as oil-bearing on 12 January 2006.

e RFP for charter-hiring of the Floating Production Storage and Offloading (FPSO) vessel
was issued on 21 September 2006 even before submission of DoC to DGH on 20 October
2006, while the Lol to the successful bidder (AFP) was issued on 11 December 2006, well
before the review of the DoC by the MC on 2 February 2007.

e The Initial Development Plan for the MA field was submitted only on 18 August 2007,
with the application for the Mining Lease being submitted on 31 August 2007. The Field
Development Plan was approved by the MC only on 17 April Mm while the Mining

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Lease (ML) was granted by MoPNG on 12 May 2008, but effective from 17 April 2008
(the date of approval of the 707), By this time, the installation of Christmas Trees for
the oil field had already commenced from 24 February 2008, which was in violation of
the OF (RD) Act and the PNG Rules in the absence of a valid Mining Lease.

e Essentiality Certificates (ECs) were irregularly issued by DGH during 2007-08 for
USS 729.38 million for import of goods before approval of FDP and grant of ML for
petroleum operations.

e The Concept Selection Technical Report by INTEC Engineering, which was provided as
FEED for FDP, was received on 21 June 2007 after award of all works to Aker group
companies. The INTEC report, in effect, merely endorsed what already had been
designed and awarded to Aker Group companies.

e The reply of RIL, endorsed by MoPNG, that INTEC Engineering in fact provided technical
inputs to RIL on the concept and technical documents, is unacceptable, as RIL did not
provide any documentary evidence in support. Moreover, RIL itself said that INTEC was
asked to prepare Concept Selection Report when asked by the MC in February 2007
while approving DoC. This clearly indicates that the INTEC report on FEED was obtained
only to comply with the MC’s directive and to justify the contracts already awarded.

4.4.3 Deficiencies in pre-qualification process

For pre-qualification of vendors for issue of Request for Proposal (RFP) for charter hiring of
Floating Production Storage and Offloading facility (FPSO), a VQC analysis was prepared on
the basis of details of prospective firms downloaded from the internet and sent to OC on
4 September 2006 for approval. The supporting documents to this VQC analysis were not
found on record, as they were not maintained by the operator.

Aker Floating Production ASA (AFP)/ Aker Group (the finally successful bidder) was selected
for issuing Request for Proposal (RFP), despite lack of any experience of operating and
maintaining an FPSO. Also, there was no specific criterion for assessment of financial
capability.

Further, AFP should have been disqualified at the RFP stage, as it had not fulfilled many
significant RFP requirements, e.g.:

e Non submission of Technical and Commercial checklists;

« Non submission of preceding three financial years’ audited financial statements; instead,
AFP enclosed the Aker group’s annual report for the last two years;

Aker Floating Production (AFP) was incorporated only on 14 March 2006, i.e. between the

EOI invitation in January 2006 and VQC analysis in September 2006.

37 MoPNG refused to accede to the request for grant of mining lease retrospectively to August 2007, and
granted the ee. effective from the date of FDP approval only.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Some vital information regarding technical competence of the bidder was not submitted
by AFP. This included quality plan, inspection and test plan, and HSE details. Despite
these, AFP was declared technically qualified.

The operator’s response (furnished through MoPNG in July 2011) on these aspects is not
tenable, as explained below:

The operator’s contention that the checklists were enclosed with the RFP mainly to
ensure that the bidders were able to ensure the completeness of their bids, is
unacceptable as the bidder, AFP, had not fulfilled many significant requirements as
indicated in the checklists. The operator obtained the checklist on 4 November 2006, i.e.
after the bid opening date.

The operator’s reply that AFP had submitted the audited financial statements for two
years, which provided three years’ financial results as required in the RFP, is incorrect
and therefore unacceptable. The bidder, AFP, had enclosed financial statements of the
Aker group as a whole for two years (2004 and 2005), while AFP itself was formed only
in 2006. Further, against the column of parent company guarantee, AFP had indicated
that the parent company guarantee would not give RIL remedies against the parent
guarantor beyond the remedies which were available against the contractor under the
contract. Subsequently, AFP became the parent company and contracts were awarded
to its subsidiary companies.

4.4.4 Irregular selection of AFP

Except for the bids of two vendors (AFP and SBM), all the other six bids received by 25
October 2006 were technically rejected on 2.12.2006. We found that:

.

Technical qualification was done (6.12.2006), not of the bids originally received by 25
October 2006, but of the revised bids of AFP and SBM, submitted after discussions held
with them (including a meeting in Oslo in November 2006). In addition to being contrary
to Clause 5.6 of Instruction to Bidders in the RFP, which clearly forbids any revision in
bids after the bid due date, allowing changes to bids by selected (and not all) bidders is
against the spirit of obtaining reasonable prices through competitive tendering.

The operator did not fix a bid opening date in advance, nor were representatives of
bidding firms invited for the bid opening, so as to ensure transparency and fairness.

We did not find the priced bids of technically unqualified bidders sealed or intact, so as
to have assurance that these were not opened.

Interestingly, the priced bid of AFP bid was not signed by the bidder (as required); the
possibility of modification of priced bid cannot be ruled out.

The price quotes for optional items by AFP were left blank for ‘open book’ cooperation
with RIL.

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


RIL’s response, furnished by MoPNG, indicated (July 2011) that, out of the eight bids, seven
bids (including SBM - subsequently) were rejected on the following grounds:

e Permanently moored system offered against requirement for disconnectable system
(Nortech & SBM);

e Various deliverables required as per RFP were not submitted (Fred Olsen);
¢ DP vessel offered instead of a moored system (FPSOcean);

e Silent on safe abandonment of risers in bad weather, FFP not offered, hull life not
determined (Compass Energy EPS);

e Specific details not provided, geo-technical & geo-physical studies not included (EMAS);
and

e Bidder expressed inability to comply with operator's requirement with regards to
scope of work, responsibilities, schedule & commercial mechanism (Sea Production).

This wholesale disqualification leads us to question the entire pre-qualification process. The
contention of the operator (forwarded through MoPNG) regarding selection of AFP over
others is not tenable for the following reasons:

* The information on availability of relevant resources, know-how and expertise within
Aker Group was the subject of public announcements and part of process for Aker's
qualification for listing on the Oslo Stock Exchange, and that the operator had reviewed
the financial background and technical experience for award of contracts is not
acceptable, as the acceptance of qualifications for listing on Stock Exchange is not
related to the fulfillment of qualification and experience criteria specified in the RFQ.

e ABO, a subsidiary of AFP, was also established in July 2006 for operating the FPSO for
AFP; the contract with RIL was their first operation and maintenance contract. All other
bidders, including those experienced in that field, were rejected during technical
evaluation.

e Operator’s reply that AFP had suggested ‘open book’ cooperation for optional items on
the basis that certain salient details could only be finalized during detailed engineering,
is not tenable, as the approved procurement procedure does not provide for it. In any
case, the operator should have finalized the engineering details, before issuing the RFP.

Audit is constrained to make these observations as in terms of the PSC, the full cost is
recoverable by the operator. Hence, it is incumbent on the operator to ensure that a fully
transparent, and cost-effective process is adopted which gives assurance to the
Government that costs have indeed been minimized.

ee. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



4.4.5 Lack of Competition

e MC approved FDP with ‘first oil’ on or before June 2009 with an oil and gas production
profile for 11 years and recommended grant of Petroleum Mining Lease for 20 years.
Though there was sufficient time available with the operator for the field development
and producing ‘first oil’, with regard to the FPSO procurement, the operator insisted on
the first oil date on or before 15 February 2008, which led to insufficient competition
and consequently expected higher costs. Also, one bidder expressed their inability to
commence oil production by the said ‘first oil’ date. Therefore, apparently higher cost
was paid on the logic of completing it on fast track basis. We found that though first oil
production initially started on 17 September 2008, but subsequently, problems
developed at the FPSO and on 9 December 2008, the production stopped. The shutdown
in December 2008, forced some design changes on the FPSO and after three months,
production was resumed in March 2009.

e We do not agree with the reply of RIL, endorsed by MoPNG, that the ‘first oil’ date was
designed to address the national energy needs including the requirement to reduce
import of crude oil. The MC, having representatives of both Gol and the Contractor,
while approving the FDP had fixed the date of production as ‘on or before June 2009’.
RIL’s contention that fixing early production date did not affect the competitiveness of
prices is also unacceptable because the technical bids analysis made by RIL clearly
indicates that Fred Olsen could not bid as it was not able to meet the first oil date. The
successful bidder, AFP, did not reduce the rates for FPSO and subsea hardware, since
special arrangements were made and slots booked for production of these facilities so
as to meet the production deadline. Further, the date of early production could not be
met as it was unrealistic, the production could start only in September 2008.

4.4.6 High Price of FPSO

AFP submitted various sets of rates for different items asked for in the RFP, like charter hire
rate and buy price of FPSO, and supply and installation of subsea hardware. RIL changed the
scope of work a number of times before and after bid opening.

AFP, the only single acceptable bidder to the Operator, quoted charter hire day rates under
various categories e.g. ‘10 year term’, ‘7 years firm + 3 years optional’, ‘5 years firm + 5

years optional’, along with buy option at any time and the ‘buy price’. The ‘buy price’ for
FPSO at the beginning was quoted as USS 601.89 million, as per the scope of work exhibited
in the RFP. In the initial offer, AFP quoted a lump sum amount for Phase-! with option for RIL
to consider Phase-Il on ‘Open Book’ basis. Phase-lII price break-up was submitted by AFP on
8 December 2006. However, the revised proposal submitted by SBM was, however, not
considered. The rates quoted by AFP vis-a-vis estimate made in the DoC are given below:

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


Table4.3 - Different Estimates submitted/considered by RIL for FPSO ‘Buy
price’ and ‘Bare Boat’ Charter Hire Rate’

Stage(Date) Buy Price# Day Rate Day Rate Range (7
Range(10 year year firm+3 year
term)* optional)

| | USS in million

DoC (20.10.06)

601.89@ 486,042 - 526,257
AFP bid dated 970.7 495,763 - 536,782
30.11.

AFP quote 951.7 479,475 -521,765 572,339 - 215,117
dated 11.12.06

579,706 - 216,969

943.6 479,475 -521,765 572,339 - 215,117

745 294,581 355,815
713.8 294,580 355,813 - 91,736

785

733

4# Before completion of mobilization. @ For Phase-I only.

*All day rates show the range from 1 April 2009 as 1° or 2 year to 10" year.
We found that:

Day Rate Range(5
year firm + 5 year
optional)

710,647 - 216,969

724,860 - 219,458

702,162 - 215,117

702,162 - 215,117

436,761

436,758 - 91,736

© As per the DoC, the capital cost of FPSO submitted to the MC was USS 300 million;

¢ Initial ‘buy price before mobilisation’ quoted by AFP was USS 601.89 million which was
later revised to USS 943.6, 951.7, 970 and 745 million at different stages of negotiation

and due to change in scope of work.

e Similarly, the day rates under various charter hire options were also revised. Buy price
mentioned in LOI issued was US$ 943.6 million. Later in the agreement signed with AFP,
the buy price agreed was USS 713.8 million and day rate for 10 years term was USS
294,580. The Operator later finalised the option of charter hiring for 10 year term for

USS 1.075 billion.

e Immediately after the placement of LOI, the operator carried out a further review and
observed that it would be more beneficial to export the produced gas for sale instead of
injecting in to the reservoir. Also, enhancement of gas injection capacity as envisaged in

Phase-ll ih not be required. On review, the facilities envisaged earlier were modified

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



and additional facilities envisaged in phase-Il were either deleted or advanced to phase-
|. After incorporating technical specifications, contract (No. OGF/3627982) was signed
(May 2007) with Aker Contracting FP AS, Norway (ACFP). Also, contract (No. 86759) for
O&M of FPSO for ten years was signed (October 2007) with Aker Borgestad Operations,
Norway (ABO) for USS 276 million. In January 2008, RIL exercised the option to call a 10-
year bare boat ‘contract’ for FPSO for USS 1.075 billion.

The newsletters of Jurong Shipyard indicate that AFP had bought two tankers for
conversion into FPSO for US$ 55 million and awarded conversion contract to Jurong
Shipyard, Singapore for S$ 133 million (US$ 88 million). The FPSO hired by RIL was
converted from tanker ‘Polar Alaska’ to ‘Aker Smart-l’ with a processing capacity of 60000
BLPD and a storage capacity of 1.3 million barrels. Jurong Shipyard had secured a contract
for S$ 200 million (US$ 132 million) for conversion of Very Large Crude Carrier (VLCC)
tanker to a FPSO with processing capacity of 150,000 BOPD and storage capacity of 1.6
million barrels of oil for MODEC. Similarly, it also secured a contract for S$ 99 million (USS
66 million) for conversion of a tanker to FDPSO with drilling and storage capacity of
300,000 barrels. This indicates that the ‘bare boat’ charter hire rate of US$ 107.5 million
per annum finalized with AFP appears to be high and unjustifiable.

We do not agree with the reply of the operator, furnished by MoPNG (July 2011), for the
following reasons:

« The operator’s claim that the estimate submitted in the DoC was only preliminary and
for evaluation purpose is not acceptable because the Operator, being in the E&P
business, should have** sound knowledge of the business and prevailing market prices.
Moreover, RIL had issued RFP for charter hiring of FPSO and subsea hardware supply
and installation one month before submission of the DoC proposal to the MC, and
should have been in possession of robust data regarding estimated costs.

* Operator’s reply that FPSO cost in DoC was net of 40 per cent salvage value appears to
be an after-thought, since there is no mention of 40 per cent salvage value in the DoC
proposal.

The Work Programme and Budget for 2007-08 was delayed and submitted on actual basis
after incurring the expenditure of US$ 808 million. No details were provided thereof. MC,
however, gave post-facto approval.

We do not agree with the operator’s argument, endorsed by the Government, that
expenditure incurred on “pre-development activities” was at the risk of the Operator.
Carrying out pre-development activities before approval of FDP was irregular.

© Operator did not produce to Audit, the Project Completion Report, Quality Surveys and
Systems Audit conducted by it, reviews of Health Safety and Environment (HSE)

Re | as per GIPIP

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



requirements, monthly progress reports, etc by stating that these were technical details
and did not have a bearing on payments.

«List of key personnel as required under Clause 8.6 of the Contract were not produced to
Audit. Operator also did not provide to audit the FPSO mobilization completion report,
production programme, oil production data, actual offloading rate, ‘first certificate of
preliminary acceptance’, performance run time, downtime/ shutdown details, statement
of Classification Society certifying the FPSO as ‘Ready for Hydrocarbon Confirmation’, list
of approved RIL’s representatives as defined in Clause 11.2 of the Contract, Verification
report by the verification society, etc. by stating that these records pertained to the
period beyond audit scope, although, in our opinion, they were necessary to conclude
our audit findings.

4.5 Procurement activities (D1-D3 discoveries)

4.5.1 Cost Plus Contracts for Terminal and Jetty against single bid

The operator invited (January 2006) EOI for construction of Onshore Terminal (OT) and Jetty
on Lump Sum Turnkey (LSTK) basis. The operator received responses for onshore terminal
from three bidders viz. (i) Larsen and Toubro Ltd., (ii) Punj Lloyd Ltd. and (iii) Bechtel and for
Jetty also from three bidders viz. (i) Afcons, (ii) Punj Lloyd and (iii) Bechtel. The operator
invited (May 2006) RFQs on cost plus basis to speed-up the work, as detailed engineering
and FEED update commenced in April 2006. It was observed that two bidders viz. Punj Lloyd
Ltd. and Bechtel expressed their inability to submit their proposals due to their other
commitments, which resulted in only single bidders in both cases i.e. L&T for construction of
Onshore Terminal facilities and Afcons for construction of Jetty. Accordingly, the operator
awarded contract (June 2006) based on single bids to L&T for OT (No.OG8/82505) and to
Afcons for Jetty (No. OG8/82645) at estimated costs of INR 263 crore and INR 24 crore
respectively.

It was also noticed that the operator allowed:

e L&T a compensation of 25 per cent in addition to the actual cost along with
compensation over the value of free issued materials at 12.5 per cent and 25 per cent of
two categories of materials.

e Afcons a compensation of 22 per cent in addition to the actual cost along with 12.5 per
cent on the cost of free issue materials of all category.

After award of contract, during execution, RIL observed slow progress of construction of OT
by L&T and accordingly off-loaded a part of work to Afcons (contract No.OG8/86589) at cost
plus 22 per cent and 12.5 per cent of cost of free materials at estimated cost of INR 80
crore. In our view:

e The initial pre-qualification exercise sheet indicates that two pre-qualified bidders
(Bechtel SA France and Punj Lloyd Ltd.) did not have any previous experience in

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



construction of oil and gas related projects and jetty respectively. Both vendors
responded to EOls and were included in the vendor’s lists, but later responded to RFQs
stating their inability to quote, leading to single bids for both the works. As there was
only one bidder for each of those works left, agreed rates were non-competitive and not
depicting market rates. This further confirms deficiency in competitiveness of the
prices. Further, they were much higher than the prevailing rates of 10-12 per cent.

Comparison of rates for partially off-loaded work of OT to Afcons in June 2007 revealed
that percentage compensation for cost incurred by the contractor and cost of partial RIL
issued free material was higher by 3 per cent and 12.5 per cent respectively for the work
awarded to L&T.

As per the time schedule submitted by L&T at the time of bid, OT was to be handed over
by December 2007; however, based on post bid discussions, time schedule stipulated in
the contract was March 2008. Payments for the work done made till 31 March 2008 to
L&T and Afcons was INR 238.86 crore and INR 27.14 crore respectively. In response to an
audit query to provide latest status of work completion, and final hand-over of OT
complex and payments, the operator informed (May 2010) that the completion of the
work was achieved beyond March 2008 and was therefore, beyond the scope of this
audit. The operator furnished the completion certificate in July 2010, indicating that the
facilities were fully completed on 31 October 2009, though gas production commenced
on 1 April 2009.

The Operator stated in March 2010-in response to an audit enquiry and in July 2011-reply
furnished through MoPNG:

.

The procurement procedure established under the PSC does not preclude inviting bids
on cost plus basis. Rates of vendors cannot be termed as non-competitive, as those were
quoted in a competitive environment, in which three reputed companies were in race to
bid and bidders were unaware that they were the only bidder submitting the offer.

Punj Lloyd and Bechtel had adequate experience in marine works carried out by them.

Completion of the OT and timely readiness of the jetty were critical for the project.
Lump sum bids would be possible only if sufficient engineering was completed. If
engineering for Jetty and OT were to be completed, and RFQ floated thereafter on LSTK
basis, contracts would have been awarded by end 2006 and late 2007 respectively.

The compensation paid to L&T and Afcons for OT should not be compared, as two
separate contracts were awarded with different scopes of activity, at different point of
time and after thorough negotiations. Further, the overall result that mark-up for goods
acquired the contracts was in the range of only 11 per cent to 13 per cent.

We do not agree for the following reasons:

me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


e The inadequate experience of Punj Lloyd and Bechtel was recorded by the operator in
the initial pre-qualification exercise sheet. Thus, the list of the vendors turned out to be
largely meaningless.

e Although the construction of OT was a critical aspect, no action was initiated by the
Operator immediately after approval of IDP in November 2004. Further, if construction
of the jetty was a critical aspect, then it should have been included in the IDP in May
2004 (which it was not). In the opinion of audit, subsequent actions of May-June 2006 to
award cost plus contracts on the grounds of criticality for the project are not justified, as
these contracts were awarded even before approval of AIDP.

e A switch from LSTK to cost-plus mid-way through the contract process, combined with
single bid award on cost plus 25 per cent basis, can in no way be termed as competitive,
as it deprived other potential bidders from bidding on cost plus basis.

Further, the operator, in its reply furnished through MoPNG (July 2011), also enclosed
information relating to material consumed/installed by the contractors. However, item-wise
break-up of material consumed, net compensation paid, deductions on non-allowable
items, wastage and along with project closure reports, and bills/vouchers for verifying the
actual compensation range of 11 per cent to 13 per cent (as stated by the operator) would
be reviewed by audit subsequently.

Such issues should have pro-actively been considered by the operator with the MC, even if
it was not required under the letter of the PSC, merely to give comfort to the Government
of its transparent and contractually acceptable procedure.

4.5.2 Cost escalation due to post-award abnormal man-hours increase for
Detailed Engineering of Onshore Terminal

The operator issued (December 2005) RFQ for the work “Detailed Engineering of Onshore
Terminal” to seven vendors, for completion in three stages viz. Preparation of Design Basis,
FEED Update (for 80 mmscmd capacity) and Detailed Engineering. After evaluation, the
contract was awarded (April 2006) to Aker Kvaerner Australia Pty. Ltd. (AKAP) at an
estimated value of USS 13.78 million and INR 13.73 crore. During execution, four
amendments, proposed by AKAP for various reasons, were issued escalating the cost to US$
23.94 million and INR 36 crore till March 2008. Thus, despite providing necessary inputs at
the RFQ stage, there was 124 per cent escalation in man-hours over the original envisaged
and cost overrun of 90 per cent i.e. US$ 15.11million (@USS1= INR 45) over contract cost
and time overrun of 8 months till March 2008, which is expected to increase further till
completion. Incidentally, we found no evidence of urgency, with the contract process taking
nearly 5 months from December 2005 (issue of RFP) to April 2006 (award of contract).

In response to an audit enquiry, the Operator stated (April 2010) that the initial man-hours
estimated by bidders were based on facilities envisaged in initial FEED for 40 mmscmd and
the increase in man-hours was primarily due to increase in scope based on updating of FEED

ee. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



leading to better understanding of work involved. The Operator further stated (July 2011),
as per the response furnished through MoPNG, that as the development of the D1-D3 fields
was being done as fast-track basis, certain activities were being done in parallel rather than
a strictly sequential basis.

Evidently, the scope of work for “Detailed Engineering” (stage 3), as defined in the RFQ
issued in December 2005/ January 2006 was deficient and incomplete. We still hold the
view that had the scope of work for “Detailed Engineering” been clearly defined before
award of the contract, it would have resulted in better competition and rates.

4.5.3 Rates Revision for EPIC of offshore facilities

The operator issued RFP (March 2006) inviting seven pre-qualified bidders (based on EOI) to
bid for the whole of the Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Commissioning (EPIC)
package for onshore-offshore facilities as part of the D1-D3 field development. Two bidders
declined to submit their offers. The remaining five bidders expressed concerns during pre-
bid meetings held in March and April 2006 regarding undertaking the full scope of work of
the project. After pre-bid meetings and clarifications, an addendum to the RFP was issued
(April 2006) to all the vendors allowing them to bid for one or more of any three sections of
the EPIC package viz. (a) installation in shallow water and river section downstream of
Control-cum-Riser Platform (CRP) including onshore part, (b) fabrication and installation of
CRP in the field, and (c) installation in deepwater section upstream of CRP including
pipelines, manifolds, umbilicals, etc.

Of the remaining five bidders, two bidders viz. Technip and Saipem bid as a consortium,
and three bidders viz. Allseas, Acergy and JRM bid individually. The operator observed (July
2006) that none of the four bidders quoted for the full scope of EPIC work. Out of the four
bidders, Allseas and Acergy were technically accepted for sub-sea scope of work for
installation of Pipelines, Umbilicals, Sub-sea structures, etc. of the EPIC package. Technip-
Saipem consortium submitted the bid for CRP related work and EPIC of offshore
facilities, excluding some scope, and JRM submitted the bid only for CRP.

Bids for CRP were evaluated separately. On evaluation, the Technip-Saipam consortium
was rejected due to quoting longer project schedule and also for not submitting a priced bid
because it was unable to meet the project schedule. The single technically acceptable
bidder for CRP, JRM, quoted USS 317.50 million. But three days after opening of priced bid,
JRM submitted a revised bid (31 August 2006) with net value increase by US$ 12.05 million
to USS 329.55 million and OC approved (1 September 2006) the award of contract (No.
0G8/3611331 and OG8/3391768).

On opening of the priced bid (1 September 2006) for EPIC offshore facilities , Allseas was
lowest with Euro 476.50 million (equivalent to USS 619.45 million) against Acergy’s bid for
USS 1399.47 million, as its bid was for a much lower portion of the scope of work set out in
RFP than the Acergy’s bid. After the priced bid comparison, RIL persuaded Allseas to take
Me a wider scope of work than it had indicated in its bid so that its scope of work

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


corresponded to the scope of work in the RFP. Accordingly, Allseas submitted a revised
priced bid (18 September 2006), for Euro 764.085 million (equivalent to USS 993.311
million). Acergy also submitted (8 September 2006) a revised quote for USS 1444.425
million. Following OC approval, the contract was awarded to Allseas (19 September 2006)
for Euro 764.085 million. On comparison, we observed upward rate revision for different
elements amounting to Euro 166.5 million (excluding Euro 121.09 million for elements for
which price was not quoted in the initial bid).

Giving reasons for price increases, the Operator stated (April 2010 - in reply to our audit
enquiry - and July 2011, as furnished through MoPNG) as under:-

e  Allseas made price adjustment due to (a) an increase in the portion of the work to be
undertaken; (b) conversion of a number of items quoted on a provisional sum basis into
lump sum amounts, as requested by RIL; (c) mobilisation of additional vessels leading to
increased mobilisation and demobilisation costs; (d) inclusion of certain Indian taxes
(except service tax and royalty) in its bid price rather than simply Swiss taxes as in its
initial bid; (e) increase in design engineering and project management costs due to
Allseas agreeing to undertake design engineering, project management etc for
additional work not quoted earlier and taking more risks; (f) Allseas agreeing to take up
dewatering and nitrogen purging not quoted earlier; and (g) withdrawal of certain
technical and commercial deviations, etc.

e JRM revised prices due to (a) increases in the indicative prices of various items earlier
quoted on cost plus basis; (b) shifting of location for transportation of piles and jacket
appurtenances from Indonesia to Dubai leading to suitable adjustments in the indicative
transportation duration; (c) increase in hourly rate for design and detailed engineering
at bidder's office, earlier quoted as cost plus; (d) increase in steel rates and estimated
steel quantity for CRP; (e) inclusion of cost of tools, construction equipment,
consumables in hourly rates, (f) revised estimation for jacket installation; (g) JRM
agreeing to provide a performance bank guarantee for USS 15 million rather than USS
10 million as per initial bid; and (h) JRM agreeing to an overall liability cap at 20 per cent
of contract price rather than 10 per cent as per initial bid etc;

« There was no lack of transparency and fairness. In requesting Allseas to increase its
scope of work (thereby resulting in Allseas revising its price), RIL sought to increase its
chances of obtaining the most competitive price possible from the available qualified
bidders.

We do not agree because the scope of work was described in the RFP. Also, there were pre-
bid meetings with the bidders and an addendum was also issued to clarify scope issues.
Therefore, upward revision in price after opening of priced bids does vitiate the tendering
process and affect its transparency.

i Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


4.5.4 Rates revision for MEG Plant ordered against single bid

The Operator issued (May 2006) RFQ for design and supply of Mono Ethylene Glycol
Regeneration & Reclamation (MEG) Plant at the onshore terminal, to produce 80 mmscmd
of gas in two stages, viz. stage I-study to select optimum technology and stage II-design and
supply. After evaluation of four bids, the Operator decided to award stage-| work to CCR
Technologies and AKPS (Aker Kvaerner Process Systems), but as the non-disclosure
agreement could not be finalised by RIL with CCR, order was placed on AKPS. Based on
stage-| report and stage-ll estimate provided by AKPS, work was awarded, without any
comparison of optimum technology due to single bid, for USS 22.16 million and INR 4.57
crore. In this connection, we observed that:

e Despite rates estimation after study by AKPS, man-hours frozen for engineering
increased by 85 per cent from 31,800 hours to 58,700 hours leading to time and cost
overrun of 1% years and US$ 5.01 million respectively.

e Levy of LD was linked to certain stages of work and not contract completion in all
respects, due to which no LD was levied despite inordinate delay in completion.

e While agreeing to extend the time line as well as frozen man-hours, the Operator could
not ensure extension of the validity of the lower man-hour rates viz. USS 186 extended
for post December 2007 period, leading to additional cost recovery for man-hours spend
subsequently at higher rates of USS 200 per hour; financial impact on cost recovery
would be in post March 2008 period.

In response, the operator stated (March 2010 / July 2011) that:

« Stage-| scope was limited to evaluation of MEG reclamation technologies and estimates
for engineering services were not based on detailed engineering, but as per a similar
project executed previously by the vendor for another client. No contractor, based upon
concept study and the prevailing market condition, would have been likely to have
agreed to accept a cap on its man-hours or to imposition of liquidated damages in the
event that its original time estimates were exceeded.

e It was not possible for the contractor to provide precise estimates upfront based upon a
study for concept selection. In fact, the scope of the work was changed after the
contract was awarded, in order for the requirements of the project to be met.

e As the project was on a fast-track basis, it was not practical to carry out all engineering
and studies needed to better define the scope of work before awarding the contract in
circumstances where the relevant activities were being undertaken in a parallel manner.

e Applicability of LD was linked only to the critical stages of the contract and defining more
milestones was not feasible.

We do not agree for the following reasons:

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


e Despite the fact that the Operator had invited bids from four vendors, three had to be
rejected for various reasons, ultimately leaving AKPS as the only firm which had to
conduct the concept study and submit the proposals for engineering and supply of key
equipments thereafter.

e It was a scenario where both the contracts i.e. (i) study for selection of optimum
technology and (ii) design & supply for the MEG Plant were being carried out by the
same firm, i.e., AKPS (together with its associates).

« The contention of the Operator that no contractor in the prevailing market condition
would have agreed to put a cap on its man-hours or complete the work in the reduced
rates etc., is unfounded and is only an post audit assumption as no records were
available showing that the Operator had ever negotiated with the contractor on these
issues.

© Huge post award revisions in man-hours with consequential increase in cost and time is
not acceptable.

e The contention of the Operator that the project was being carried out in a fast track
basis also does not hold ground, as there was already a time overrun of more than 1%
years as of March 2008.

4.5.5 Other findings relating to procurement activities

Audit findings in respect of other procurement activities in respect of the block are
summarised below:

Table 4.4 - Other findings on procurement activities

Pre-paid Insurance policies for D1-D3 gas field and MA field for the periods 1
insurance September 2006 to 15 July 2008 and 1 August 2007 to 30 June 2008
were obtained at premia of USS 51.99 million and USS 9.22 million
(payable in instalments). However, during 2007-08, the operator paid
premium of USS 48.88 million and USS 8.49 million respectively, and
booked the amount in cost recovery. This included excess booking of
USS 6.97 million of pre-paid insurance for 2007-08, which is admissible
for cost recovery only in 2008-09.

In his response (furnished through MoPNG), the operator stated (July
2011) that, as per Article 25.2 of the PSC, accounting is “based on
generally accepted and recognised accounting principles and modern
petroleum industry practices”. Being a policy taken for the project’s
setup, all payments towards policy were capitalised and recorded as part
of the capital WIP in the year of payment.

We do not agree. Insurance amount only up to March for the financial
th 2007-08 was to be booked in financial statements for the year

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



2007-08, and excess amount paid was to be booked as prepaid insurance
during the period 2007-08.

Excess The operator obtained insurance policy for exploratory and drilling for all
allocation (i) its exploration blocks, including KG-D6. The total premium paid was to
insurance be allocated to the respective blocks based on well depth and water
charges depth of wells drilled during the period, after reduction of special
discounts and admissible low claim rebates. During the period April 2006
to March 2008, the operator allocated USS 6.43 million to KG-DWN-
98/3, instead of actual premium (USS 5.35 million net after
adjustments), leading to excess booking of US$ 1.08 million to cost
recovery.

The operator, in his response (furnished through MoPNG), stated (July
2011) that the nature of the relevant adjustments could not be
calculated until the end of the relevant financial period. This is because
RIL’s eligibility for such adjustments could be ascertained only after the
expiry of the policy, including the completion of all activities in the well
in progress at the time of policy expiry. Accordingly, and in accordance
with the applicable accounting practice, the unadjusted cost of the
policies was properly booked in 2007-08, subject to an appropriate
adjustment subsequently being made to take account of the applicable
discount and rebates once the same are determined. The reversal for
the relevant adjustments were all accounted for in SAP entries on 19/30
March 2010.

In our opinion, such adjustments (if ascertained after the expiry of the
policy) could have been carried out in 2008-09 and not 2009-10. Hence,
the excess amount booked was not entitled for cost recovery up to 31
March 2008.

Asset Urey) Asset usage charges for 2006-07 and 2007-08 were allocated/ charged
charges over a 12/24 months period, instead of allocating over the useful life of
the asset; in the company’s accounts, fixed assets were being
depreciated using the written down value method as per rates
prescribed in the Companies Act. This leads to higher cost recovery, and
adversely affects Gol’s financial interests. The charges allocated upto
March 2008 for KG-DWN-98/3 were USS 3.69 million.

In his response (furnished through MoPNG), the operator stated (July
2011) that the assets were allocated to the blocks at a faster rate than
the depreciation rates provided in the Income Tax Act and Companies
Act to reflect the risk associated with the continuation of the exploration

५ Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Excess cost

booking for
helicopter

Expenditure on
Social
Obligations,
Sponsorship,
Gifts Cost

Freight
forwarding and
transportation
services

Performance Audit th Hydrocarbon PSCs

phase for each block. The useful life of IT assets is very short and rate of
obsolescence on account of technology changes is high. Further, the
methodology for charging asset usage charges for furniture & fixture,
plant & machinery as per Companies Act was implemented from
financial year 2008-09.

We do not agree. The operator cannot arbitrarily fix the useful life of
asset in order to cover its exploration risk. Assets Usage Charges must be
determined, keeping in view the useful life of the block/ field.

Against the actual cost of two helicopters for supply operations of USS
18.781 million, an amount of US$ 19.14 million was booked in the 2007-
08 accounts, leading to excess recoverable cost of US$ 0.36 million. The
operator informed (July 2010) that necessary rectification would be
passed in 2010-11.

Further, although the helicopters were customs cleared at Delhi airport
on 16 December 2007, and certificates of registration issued by DGCA on
9 January 2008, O&M charges of INR 1.29 crore for the period upto
December 2007 were irregularly booked, leading to excess cost
recoverable.

In response (furnished through MoPNG), the operator informed that the
contractor was advised to procure the infrastructure and mobilise the
required manpower on 15 November 2007 and also provided services
like pre-dispatch inspection, approvals and permissions from various
authorities, monitoring of reassembly of helicopter etc. till
commencement of operations as Rajahmundry.

However, we observed that the services provided by the contractor are
neither in the scope of contract nor approved by OC. Further, this
information was not provided earlier, and cannot be verified at this
stage. This will be reviewed subsequently.

Expenditure of USS 57,116 was incurred during 2006-07 and 2007-08 on
social obligations/ programme, sponsorship and gifts. If MoPNG feels
that the expenditure of this nature is eligible for cost recovery, clear
norms/ limits should be specified for such cost recovery (to be applied
transparently across all blocks/ operators).

Post contract award, the operator agreed for higher rates of INR 1,000/
ton (against INR 700/ton “wrongly quoted” by the vendor, Transoceanic
Fagioli, UK) for transportation to Kakinada Port, resulting in additional
payment of INR 2.23 million upto March 2008, with more impact post-



| | March 2008. In our opinion, this is not admissible for cost recovery.

4.6 Violation of PSC-stipulated Procurement Procedure

The main provisions of the PSC related to procurement of goods and services are
summarised below:

e Article 8.3(f) stipulates inter alia that:

“ The contractor shall, having due regard to GIPIP, establish and submit for MC’s
approval appropriate criteria and procedures including tender procedures for the
acquisition of goods and services as provided in Article 23.2 (relating to “Local Goods
and Services”) and for the purchase, lease or rental of machinery, equipment, assets
and facilities required for petroleum operations, based on economic considerations
and generally accepted practices in the international petroleum industry with the
objective of ensuring cost and operational efficiency in the conduct of petroleum
operations.

हे
ब

Notwithstanding provision provided herein, the procedure for acquisition of goods
and services shall be as per Appendix —F, which may be modified or changed with the
approval of the MC, when circumstances so justify.

e Article 23.2 (under Article 23 - Local Goods and Services) directs the contractor to
establish appropriate procedures, including tender procedures for the acquisition of
goods and services which shall ensure that suppliers and subcontractors in India are
given adequate opportunity for the supply of goods and services.

e “Appendix F — Procedure for Acquisition of Goods and Services” indicates that the
objective of these procedures are to ensure that goods and services are acquired at the
optimum cost (taking into consideration all relevant factors including price, quality,
delivery times and the reliability of potential suppliers) and delivered in a timely manner
(taking into consideration the consequences of delays in acquisition on the project as a
whole), and implementation of provisions of Article 23 (Local Goods and Services).

e Three separate procedures (A, 8 and C) have been laid down in Appendix ‘F’ for
acquisition of goods and services depending on value. Procedure ‘C’ (USS 500,000 or
more) indicates inter alia the following:

हि

Publishing invitations for parties to pre-qualify for the proposed contract, and include
those parties who qualify, as per the pre-qualification criteria approved by the OC, in
the list of entities from whom the operator proposed to invite tenders;

“ Provide the MC members with a list of pre-qualified entities qualified for the
proposed contract, as well as entities identified as approved vendors by the OC for
the applicable contract category, and any other entities from whom the operator
proposes to invite tender; and also add any entities requested by a party (i.e. the Gol
Me any of the companies constituting the contractor);

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


“If requested by any party (i.e. the Gol/ companies), the operator should evaluate the
listed entities to assure that they are qualified as per the approved pre-qualification
criteria to perform under the contract;

“ Thereafter, dispatch tendering documents, consider and analyse bids, prepare a
competitive bid analysis, and obtain OC’s approval® to the recommended bid.

As per the PSC, the role of the MC (including the Gol representatives) is thus restricted to
the pre-qualification of vendors for the contract, and does not, in general, extend to the
approval of contract award.

During our scrutiny of the operator’s records, we have come across several instances (e.g.
award of the FPSO contract for the MA oil field), where multiple vendors were pre-

qualified. However, when technical bids were received, all vendors (except one) were
rejected, and the contract was finally awarded on a single financial bid.

In our opinion, such disqualification of vendors on technical grounds, after a pre-
qualification process and bidders’ meetings for technical clarifications, limits the
competitiveness which is not in accordance with the spirit of the procurement procedure
given in the PSC. In many cases, it resulted in no competing financial bids, and the contract
was awarded on the basis of a single financial bid. In such a situation, the letter and spirit of
the MC’s role at the pre-qualification stage is vitiated.

Consequently, in our opinion, in cases of procurement (under procedure ‘C’ — high value
contracts), where pre-qualified bidders are subsequently disqualified/ declared non-
responsive on various technical and other grounds and there is only one financial bid being
considered, the Operator should either go back to the pre-qualification process, and
ensure that more vendors/ parties are pre-qualified. Alternatively, if the operator wishes
consideration of only a single financial bid, the matter has to be necessarily referred back
to the MC (including Gol representatives)/ Gol for ex ante relaxation from PSC stipulated
procurement procedures. Post facto approval of the MC may be provided for in emergent
cases, with adequate justification.

Likewise, extension of contracts (beyond the extension periods already stipulated in the
contract) is not in consonance with Appendix ‘F’. If the operator wishes to extend such
contracts, the matter has to be necessarily referred back to the MC for necessary relaxation.

See therefore, recommend that in the case of the KG-DWN-98/3, MoPNG carefully review
in depth the award of 10 specific contracts (of which 8 were awarded to Aker Group
companies) on the basis of a single financial bid. In this recommendation, we are not even
remotely suggesting that the operator should follow government procurement
procedures, yet any commercially prudent private acquisition would also attempt to

33 However, failing th approval, any company may refer the issue to the MC for decision.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



ee ee ee ee ee competition and thereby obtain the most competitive price. Such concern for a
cost effective acquisition is not perceptible in the aforementioned process.

Incidentally, we have been provided a copy of the MC Resolution in respect of KG-DWN-
98/3 (apparently taken up at the 8" MC meeting on 29 November 2003 at DGH office) and
approved by circulation. The MC resolution states that “pursuant to Article 23.2 of the
PSC”, the operator had submitted the procurement procedure for acquisition of materials
and services for its blocks under NELP rounds, |, ॥ and Ill, and that the procurement
procedure was examined by DGH and discussed in a separate meeting with RIL and DGH
representatives on 22 September 2003, and subsequently deliberated and approved by MC
with the agreed modifications.

The above referred procurement procedure (RIL Document No. ROG-GPP-004) stipulates a
set of detailed procurement procedures. Some interesting features of this document include
the following:

¢ RIL shall award work on single/ nomination basis in several circumstances — urgent
requirement; items/ services of proprietary nature; items/ services of special nature.

e Instead of the pre-qualification process for each “proposed contract” falling under
procedure ‘C’ — (estimated value of US$ 500,000 or more), as stipulated in PSC Appendix
‘F’, an EOI (Expression of Interest) stage has been introduced. The EOI process would be
done only once in 2 years and would cover all blocks in which RIL is the operator; the MC
members were to be involved only at the EOI stage, and not for pre-qualification for
each proposed contract.

e The document provides for technical evaluation of “un-priced bids” (a separate stage
after the EOI stage), and opening of only technically accepted bids; bids of technically
unacceptable bids would not normally be opened.

e Any recommendation not based on the lowest total evaluated price is to be
substantiated with reasoning.

e Extension of contract/ work order period is permissible where the extension is
attributable to RIL or increase in the scope of work, or exercising the option available in
the contract.

The provisions of the above “procurement procedure” (RIL Document No. ROG-GPP-004)
are clearly contrary to the stipulations of Appendix ‘F’ to the PSC. However, the provisions
of the PSC - Article 8.3(f) - are very clear “.... Notwithstanding provision provided herein,
the procedure for acquisition of goods and services... shall be as per Appendix —F”.
Appendix-F has not been modified by the MC. Hence, the provisions of the RIL document,
which has been approved by the MC under Article 23.2 (which relate to procedures for
ensuring adequate opportunity to suppliers and sub-contractors in India) are invalid.

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


We, therefore, recommend that in the case of the KG-DWN-98/3, MoPNG carefully
validate the award of the following contracts on the basis of a single financial bid so as to

draw assurance that government interests have been protected.

PO Date | Order Placed on Original PO | Item Description
Value (USS)
86759 06.10.2007 Aker Borgestad 276,443,000 Operation & Maintenance of
Operations AS FPSO RIL Equipment and
Operation of Subsea Equipment
in connection with production of
Oil & Gas
3627982 04.05.2007 Aker Floating 1,094,002,520 Chartering of FPSO facility in
Production/ Aker connection with extraction and
Contracting FP ASA production of Oil & Gas
3639935 20.09.2007 Aker Installation FP 281,118,779 Installation of Subsea Facilities
AS, Norway
3370813 03.07.2006 Aker KvaernerSubsea 431,284,407 Supply of subsea hardware
AS Norway
310783 27.09.2006 Aker Kvaerner 1,000,000 License Agreement for MEG R&R
Process System Plant
3610783 20.10.2006 Aker KvaernerPower 100,000 Services relating to MEG R&R
Gas / Aker Power Gas Plant
Pvt. Ltd.
th 3610598 15.09.2006 Aker Kvaerner 5,914,800 Engineering of MEG
Process System Regeneration and Reclamation
plant
3392654 30.09.2006 Aker Kvaerner 16,154,400 Supply of key equipment for
Process System MEG Regeneration &
Reclamation package

Legend

Contracts relating to MA oilfield.

Contracts relating to MEG Regeneration & Reclamation package.

| ———— relating to Installation of CRP

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


4.7 Deficiencies in Appointment of Auditors

RIL, the Operator, invited (12 July 2007) quotations from three Chartered Accountants firms
viz. Pricewaterhouse Coopers, S.R. Batliboi & Co. and Haribhakti & Co. for appointment of
auditors for RIL operated blocks with due date 28 July 2007. Pricewaterhouse sent the
quotation on 27 July 2007, but on the last date, based on verbal requests of two firms, the
due date was extended by two weeks. Later, OC/MC approved (August/November 2007)
appointment of Haribhakti & Co. as auditors for 2007-08 for INR 2 million for all the 35
blocks (INR 1.5 million allocated to KG-D6).

Audit observed deficiencies in the approval process viz. (a) evaluation criteria for audit firms
not fixed before bids invitation & evaluation, (b) time extension was allowed for two bidders
after receipt of bid from third firm, and (c) signature/initials of operator’s representative on
the bids indicating date of receipt & opening of bids were not found.

In response to an audit enquiry, the Operator stated (May 2010) that (a) comparative bid
analysis provides the selection criteria i.e. experience in PSC/JOA and experience in Oil/Gas
Accounting, (b) time extension was granted as rate competitiveness would be lost if process
was closed on receipt of one quotation, and (c) quotes were to be sent to the RIL’s Audit
Chief in Head Office and then to be passed on to E&P; thus, there might be variation in
dates of receipt at E&P when compared with actual receipt and hence dates were not
mentioned on the quotes.

The operator’s reply is to be viewed in the light of the following:

e As major development activities for D6 field were carried out in the year 2006-07 and
2007-08, evaluation criteria viz. number of years of experience for E&P companies’ audit
and minimum level of E&P Company with examples like ONGC, OIL, etc. were required
to be fixed before inviting quotations and bids evaluation.

e Recording dates of receipt and opening of priced bids is an important aspect of fairness
and transparency in bid evaluation.

Time extension was granted on the last date by which the quotations were required to be
submitted and after receipt of bid from one firm of auditors. Also on review of the
documents produced to the audit for verification, it was not known, whether the quotations
were in the sealed cover or not, and also when the quotations of each one of the firm were
actually opened.

MOoPNG stated (July 2011) that under the provisions of PSC, the value of bidding involved did
not require MC decision. MC approved the appointment of auditor under Article 25.4 of PSC
as proposed by the Operator and not the evaluation process.

me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


4.8 Incomplete access to SAP System

As per Section 1.9.3 of Appendix C (Accounting Procedure) to PSC, in conducting the audit,
the Government or its auditors shall be entitled to examine and verify, at reasonable times,
all charges and credits relating to the contractor’s activities under the contract and all books
of account, accounting entries, material records and inventories, vouchers, payrolls, invoices
and any other documents, correspondence and records considered necessary by the
Government to audit and verify the charges and credits.

In terms of section 1.4.1 of the Accounting Procedure to PSC, within ninety (90) days of the
Effective Date of the Contract, the Contractor had to submit and discuss with the
Government a proposed outline of Chart of Accounts (CoA). The sequence of related events
in respect of KG-DWN-98/3 is summarised below:

«RIL forwarded the CoA to the DGH on 19 January 2001.

« Subsequently, certain modifications were carried out to the CoA and communicated to
DGH on 26 March 2002. This communication stated that the new CoA would be effective
from the new budget year starting 1 April 2002.

@ DGH on 2 April 2002 requested for specific modifications to the earlier CoA which could
enable them to examine the revised CoA.

e RIL stated on 11 April 2002 that a one-to-one matching of the modification was not
possible and that the changes to the CoA were necessitated because RIL was in process
of implementing SAP software to address the complex reporting requirements under the
PSC.

e Finally on 25 July 2003, RIL stated that all the accounts were being maintained in SAP
ERP System from September 2002 and that the CoA was revised to suit the SAP
parameters. RIL also sought approval for the revision.

e The approval was finally communicated by DGH on 24 September 2003.

RIL, the Operator, maintains one common SAP (Version 4.6) over all its group companies
and accounts of KG-DWN-98/3 and other exploration blocks are maintained in the JV
module.

As part of verification of figures of expenditure up to the year 2007-08, a request was made
to provide complete access to the SAP. Despite repeated requests, however, complete
access was not provided.

—— जाई Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


Instead, the operator informed that the E&P Division being a part of RIL group, it was
not possible to restrict access to only KG-DWN-98/3 and not other modules of SAP,
other than FI (the Financial Accounting module of SAP). Therefore, it was not possible to
provide access to KG-DWN-98/3 block alone. The operator, further, stated that requisite
access to SAP could not be provided as SAP contained information regarding assets held
by RIL other than KG-DWN-98/3 block, which it would not be appropriate to share with
the audit team.

Consequent upon the Operator’s refusal to provide complete access to SAP, the
Operator agreed in a meeting to restore a back-up of the database and extract the data
pertaining to KG-DWN-98/3 block, but later on stated that RIL had a database of more
than 4TBs in size and KG-DWN-98/3 block data may be very small. However, it was
difficult to predict the timeline when such backup system would be ready. The operator,
further, stated that it was difficult to manage and arrange resources required for such
exercise, hence, restoring the database was not feasible.

In view of incomplete access to SAP, we agreed to the operator’s request that line-item
wise breakup of the Cost Recovery Statements would be provided in Microsoft Excel
format. On verification of line items, we observed that total of the detailed breakup did
not match with the total of Trial Balance provided by the Operator. We also observed
that the data provided was incomplete. In reply to our query, the Operator stated that
the line items provided only included the debit side of the transactions and credit side
was not provided. Thus there was incomplete access to SAP, and incomplete data
provided for our analysis.

On comparison of Purchase Orders (POs) details provided in the Excel Sheets format
with the list of 337 orders (valuing over USS 1 Million) provided separately by the
Operator on request, we observed that 222 Purchase orders in the list did not form part
of the data provided in the Excel Sheets format. In reply to an audit enquiry, the
Operator stated that those Purchase Orders related to procurement of material or
common expenditure like shore based activity, common orders allocated on utilization
basis, common transportation costs, hiring of choppers, common HSE cost etc. and
hence would not appear in the expenses ledger (for which the debit side line items was
provided to audit). Thus, on cross-referencing the two set of data base/information
provided by the Operator, the POs details did not match.

As per Article 3.1.8 of the Accounting Procedure, material and equipment held in inventory

shall only be charged to the accounts when such material is removed from inventory and
Cost shall be charged based on the ‘First-in-First-out method’. As per Notes forming part of
the Trial Balance as on 31 March 2007, Drilling Inventory and consumables are valued at

cost based on Weighted Average or net realisable value, whichever is lower. We, however,

observed the following:

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e There was a change in the Trial Balance as on 31 March 2008, stating that Inventory and
consumables were valued at cost based on Weighted Average. The impact of change
was not quantified and reported in the Trial Balance for the year 2007-08. On analysing
the data provided in the Excel Format, we further observed that there were 215782 Line
Items with Material Code valuing US$ 409.76 million during the years 2006-07 and 2007-
08. However, due to limited data/details as well as very restricted SAP access, we were
not able to quantify the impact of adopting Weighted Average method of valuation as
against FIFO method, on the cost booked in the accounts forming part of cumulative
cost approved for recovery as on 31 March 2008.

e The Operator, in reply to our enquiry, referred (March 2010) to Accounting Standard No.
2 and stated that the majority of companies, including RIL, follow Weighted Average
Method of stock valuation and maintaining two different valuation methods, i.e. one for
PSC accounting purpose and the other for Company’s accounting purpose is not worth
pursuing considering the insignificant difference involved in the two methods over time.
We do not agree, in view of the fact that accounting provisions are guided by the PSC for
KG-DWN-98/3 block and not by any other standards.

e The operator did not implement the ‘Audit Information System’ of SAP. Also providing
facility to create queries on SAP was not possible.

Thus, the data provided by the Operator as line-item wise breakup of Cost Recovery
Statements contained only the expenditure side of the transactions. The failure of operator
to provide complete access to SAP as well as provide complete KG-DWN-98/3 block Data
after segregation from the system also indicates deficiencies in the implementation design
of the SAP, in so far as suitability for maintaining PSC related accounting records is
concerned.

In its response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the SAP system had provisions to give
selective ‘read’ authorisation to auditors through appropriate command from master user.
SAP also had standard reports available for downloading in excel or any other desired
format. Audit may take appropriate technical assistance from SAP service providers to get
direct online access to SAP database or to download the output data in desired format.
Reply of MoPNG may be seen in the light of the fact that the issue is not on account of the
technical skills required to access the SAP database, but the extremely restricted access
given to SAP modules, other than the Fl module.

MoPNG also stated that the operator would also be given necessary instructions through
the MC for making changes in system configuration, including configuration of ‘Audit
Information System’ as desired by Audit, to facilitate detailed examination.

i Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


5.1 Overview

This onland block (mainly in Rajasthan, with a small portion in Gujarat) is one of the pre-
NELP exploration blocks awarded in Round IV of the pre-NELP exploration rounds in May
1995 to Shell India Production and Development (BV) (SIPD). The PSC was signed between
Gol, SIPD and ONGC on 15 May 1995. Subsequently, SIPD’s participating interest was
transferred in three phases between September 1998 and June 2003 to Cairn Energy India
Limited and Cairn Energy Hydrocarbons Limited (collectively termed as “Cairn Energy”).

Mm fp Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


Under the terms of the pre-NELP exploration block PSCs, ONGC was the licensee and was
responsible for obtaining the Petroleum Exploration License (PEL) and Mining Lease (ML),
and also payment of royalty and PEL/ ML fees. ONGC also had the right, as the designated
nominee of Gol, to take a Participating Interest (Pl) upto a maximum of 30 per cent in each
Development Area (DA) within 90 days of Declaration of Commercial Discovery (DoC). Till
date, three DAs have been delineated as given below:

Table 5.1 - Development Areas in RJ-ON-90/1 block

Development Date of creation

pating Interest
Area (DA) (grant of ML)

Cairn Energy ONGC

20 June 2005 1859.00 sq km 70 per cent 30 per cent

15 November 2006 430.17sqkm 70 percent 30 per cent
6 November 2007 822.00sqkm_  # #

# ONGC acquired 30 per cent PI in two development areas, while its decision to acquire 30
per cent in DA-3 was under reference to MoPNG.

There have been 25 hydrocarbon discoveries (21 oil and 4 gas) in the block between July
1999 and November 2008. The status of these discoveries is summarised below:

Table 5.2 - Status of discoveries in RJ-ON-90/1 block

Name of the Discovery | Date of | Type
discovery

Guda 23-Jul-99 14 discoveries indicated at
G-R-F-1 (now part of Oil serial nos 1 to 14 were falling
Guda) in DA-1, Mining Lease (ML)
Saraswati 29-Oct-01 Oil for which was granted on 20
Raageshwari Oil 25-Dec-02 Oil June 2005. However, the FDP
Raag Deep gas 25-Dec-02 Gas for DA-1 covered only 5
Kameshwari 21-Sep-03 Oil discoveries (Mangala
Mangala 20-Jan-04 oil including Raageshwari Deep
Aishwariya 5-Mar-04 Oil Gas, Aishwariya, Raageshwari
Vina 28-Aug-04 oil and Saraswati). For the other

Vand. 7-Aug-04 oil nine discoveries, no separate
v “ FDP(s) were yet submitted by
65५ 4-Jul-05 Gas

N-C-West 4-Jul-05 Oil
Mangala Barmer Hill 20-Jan-04 oil
Saraswati-Crest-1 5-May-07 oil
Raageshwari-East- 24-Nov-08 Oil
1z/Tukaram

the operator.

2 |
3 |
[4 |
ES
6
g
fs |
jo |
10 |
11 |
jz |

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Name of the Discovery | Date of | Type
discovery

15 | Bhagyam 7-Aug-04 8 discoveries indicated at
Shakti 18-Apr-04 Oil serial nos 15 to 22 were
N-I 18-May-05 Oil falling in DA-2, ML for which
Bhagyam South 3-Dec-05 Oil was granted on 15 November
N-E 9-Jan-06 oil 2006. FDP for Bhagyam
N-P 6-Apr-06 Oil discovery was submitted and
approved. FDP for Shakti had
not been submitted till date.
In respect of the remaining 6
discoveries, no separate FDPs
were yet submitted by the

b

N

B

Shakti-NE-1 21-Oct-06 Oil
N-I-North 21-Nov-05 Oil

operator.
K-W-2 21-Nov-06 Oil 3 discoveries indicated at
K-W-3 13-Dec-06 Gas serial nos 23 to 25 were
K-W-6 20-Jul-07 Gas falling in DA-3, ML for which

was granted on 6 November
2007. FDP in respect of these
three discoveries was
submitted by the operator in
July 2009. MoPNG stated
(July 2011) that FDP
evaluation of these
discoveries had been
completed and submitted for
MoPNG’s decision.

RJ-ON-90/1 is one of the largest onland oil discoveries in India, with 450 million barrels as
the current estimate of recoverable resource potential. Oil production from the block
started on 29 August 2009. A notable feature of development in this block is the 580
kilometer oil pipeline from Barmer to Salaya (completed) and 80 kilometer Salaya to Bhogat
(in progress), with insulation and heating features to maintain the temperature at 65
degrees C, in view of the high “pour point” of the crude oil (48 degrees C).

5.2 Exploration and Appraisal Activities
5.2.1 Delayed relinquishment of area

The PSC stipulated an exploration period of seven years, also permitting an extension of
upto three years. This extended exploration period expired on 14 May 2005. At this stage,
the operator was required to relinquish the entire area, except for discovery and
Me areas.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



However, out of the original contract area of 11,108 sq.km., a total area of 6678.10 sq.km.
(including extended area of 1708.20 sq. km.) was retained, comprising of:

e 1859 sq. km. of development area in DA-1 field;
© appraisal area of 2884 sq. km. (Northern Appraisal Area); and

* an additional 1935.10 sq. km. of area in the southern part , which was not designated as
a discovery or development area. This area was irregularly retained till 7 November 2007
(due to non-submission of maps by the operator in time), when it was finally
relinquished.

Further, out of the appraisal area of 2884 sq. km. in the Northern Appraisal Area:

© an area of 430.17 sq. km. was converted into Mining Lease (DA-2 development area)™*
on 15 November 2006.

* Out of the remaining area of 2453.83 sq. km., the contractor sought retention of the
entire area for six months (from 15 November 2006), but was allowed by MoPNG to
retain an area of 879.50 sq. km. under PEL from 8 May 2007 till 7 November 2007.

® 822.00 sq. km. of the area of 879.50 sq. km. was converted into Mining Lease (DA-3
development area) on 6 November 2007; however, the balance area of 57.5 sq. km. was
deemed relinquished.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that :

* The delays in relinquishment were procedural and did not have any commercial
implications.

¢ No activity during delays in relinquishment had been reviewed by the MC, which would
have an adverse material impact on the contract.

e Further, DGH had conveyed on 14 November 2006 to the operator/ licensee that except
for the area of 430.17 sq. km., the remaining block area (2453.83 sq. Km.) in the
Northern Appraisal Area stood relinquished from 15 November 2006.

We do not agree. Despite the DGH’s communication of 14 November 2006, an area of
1574.33 sq. km. continued to be retained by the contractor till 7 November 2007, when the
area was deemed to be relinquished.

5.2.2 Extension of Appraisal Period by six months

e MoPNG extended the stipulated exploration period of 7 years by 36 months in June
2002 and, in June 2005, approved another extension of 18 months (15 May 2005 to 14

3 Interestingly, although the initial term of the PSC is only for 25 years (from May 1995 to May 2020 (subject
to extension by mutual agreement pursuant to PSC provisions), the Mining Lease granted by the Government
of Rajasthan for DA-2 (430.17 sq.km) is for 20 years from November 2006 to November 2026 (which is beyond
the initial term of the PSC). The PSC term is, however, subject to extension by mutual agreement as per PSC
provisions.

i Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


November 2006) to complete appraisal of the Bhagyam and Shakti discoveries in the
Northern Appraisal Area (NAA).

« In December 2006, the operator requested a further extension of six months for
completing appraisal work in the NAA*® to cover up the work which was inter alia
hampered for more than three months in view of severe floods in Rajasthan. DGH did
not recommend further extension, since the appraisal work (for which the earlier 18
month extension was sought and agreed to) was already over. However, in May 2007,
MoPNG granted a further extension of 6 months effective from 8 May 20077,
Interestingly, the period of 6 months between 15 November 2006 and 8 May 2007 was
not formally covered by extension.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the Government granted (8 May 2007) six
months extension on the basis of Cairn’s track record with regard to survey, exploration and
discovery, besides the fact that Cairn was quite confident of making more discoveries in the
Northern Appraisal Area. However, the fact remains that this extension was beyond the PSC
provisions.

5.2.3 Irregular extension of exploration activities through fresh discoveries

during appraisal and development phases

Article 1 of the PSC for RJ-ON-90/1 block defines Exploration operations, Exploration well,
Discovery, Discovery Area, Appraisal well and Development area as follows:

Table 5.3 - Definition of key terms in RJ-ON-90/1 PSC

Exploration Operations conducted in the contract area in searching for petroleum
operations and in the course of a programme to appraise any discovery and shall
include but not limited to ...... all work necessarily connected therewith
that is conducted in connection with petroleum exploration.

11111 10 ia A well drilled for the purpose of searching for undiscovered petroleum
accumulations on any geological entity

Discovery The finding of a deposit of petroleum not previously known to have
existed, which can be recovered at the surface in a flow measurable by
conventional petroleum industry testing methods.

Discovery Area An area within the contract area in which there has been a discovery

and over which the contractor is of the opinion that the deposit of

* The request was for an area of 2453.83 sq.km (after excluding an area of 430.17 sq.km under Mining Lease
from the me area under NAA of 2884 sq. km).
36 Covering an area of 879.50 sq.km.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



pet
petroleum discovered could extend, based upon the results of
exploration operations.

Appraisal well A well drilled as part of a work programme carried out following a
discovery of petroleum in the contract area for the purpose of
delineating the petroleum reservoirs to which the discovery relates in
terms of thickness and lateral extent and determining the characteristics
thereof and the quantity of recoverable petroleum therein.

Development An area within the contract area containing one or more commercial
Area discoveries whether or not within a single geological structure (to
include the maximum area of potential petroleum deposits in the
contract area in a simple geometric shape) which the contractor intends
to develop in accordance with a Development Plan which has been
approved in accordance with Article 9 or 21.4.

In our opinion, exploration and development are distinct and successive operations.
Exploration is clearly the “search for petroleum”, discovery is the “finding of petroleum”
and development is the “development of one or more commercial discoveries”. Further,
although the appraisal period falls within the exploration period, appraisal is for delineating
the petroleum reservoir to which the (existing) discovery relates and is, thus, distinct from
exploration, which is the search for petroleum.

However, we found that the operator carried out exploration activities and made new
discoveries within the discovery/ development areas, as summarised below:

Table 5.4- Discoveries made after exploration period

Name of tl Date of | Development
Discovery Discovery Area (DA)

1 N-I 18.05.2005 DA-2 The exploration period ended
EE csv 04.07.2005 DA-1 OIA 2200S वहां
discoveries indicated at serial
|3 | N-C-West 04.07.2005 DA-1 nos 1 to 8 were made after the
la | N-l-North 21.11.2005 DA-2 aualtenetiten (panies) लाई, te.
during the first appraisal period
Bhagyam 03.12.2005 DA-2 from 15 May 2005 to 14
South November 2006.
le | N-E 09.01.2006 DA-2
7 N-P 06.04.2006 DA-2
ls | Shakti-NE-1 21.10.2006 DA-2

Performance lh of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Name of the | Date of | Development
Discovery Discovery Area (DA)

K-W-2 21.11.2006 DA-3 Three discoveries indicated at

serial nos 9 to 11 were made

10 Lee) 42072 2000 | 0४७ during 15 November 2006 to 7
Saraswati- 05.05.2007. DA-2 May 2007, ie. the period

Crest-1 between the first appraisal

period (15 May 2005 to 14
November 2006) and the
second appraisal period (8 May
2007 to 7 November 2007).

12 K-W-6 20.07.2007. + DA-3 This discovery was made during
the second appraisal period
from 8 May 2007 to 7

November 2007.
13 Raageshwari- 24.11.2008  DA-2 This discovery was made during
East-1z/ the development phase.

Tukaram

Consequently, in our opinion, the declaration of fresh discoveries during the
appraisal/development phases within delineated discovery/development areas amounted
to irregular extension of exploration activities, which is not in consonance with the terms
of the PSC. This also indicates that the discovery/development areas were not strictly
delineated, and included excess area.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that there could be exceptional cases when during
delineation of the pool boundary of an existing discovery through appraisal, a new pool
(discovery) could be discovered which was not in hydrodynamic continuity with the existing
pool.

We do not agree with the views of MoPNG. While there could be, as pointed out by MoPNG,
exceptional cases of a discovery being found during delineation of an_ existing
“pool/boundaries” through appraisal, the fact that eight discoveries were made during the
first appraisal period, three discoveries made between two appraisal periods, and one each
during the second appraisal period and development phase, clearly indicates that these
were not “exceptional cases”. This confirms the lack of strict delineation of
development/discovery areas and irregular continuation of exploration activities.

During the exit conference (July 2011), the operator indicated the following aspects:

« The Development Areas hold further exploration potential; the current estimate of the
resource potential was 450 mmbbls recoverable;

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e Continuing exploration in the block was consistent with PSC and the Oil Fields
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 as well as global practices and precedents in
India, also citing global examples of continuing exploration in development areas”

e Continuing exploration was required to realize the full potential of the block to produce
over 300000 bopd.

With regard to the operator’s views (submitted at the exit conference) regarding continuing
exploration in development areas, Section 3 (d) of the Oil Fields (Regulation &
Development) Act, 1948, defines mining lease as “a lease granted for the purpose of
searching for, winning, working, getting, making merchantable, carrying away or disposing
of mineral oils or for purposes connected therewith, and includes an exploring or a
prospecting license”.

However, the PSC itself is covered by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959, which
provide for an agreement between the Government and the licensee with respect to
additional terms and conditions in regard to the licence or lease*®. We believe that the
provisions of the Oil Fields (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948 and the PNG Rules,
1959 cannot be read in isolation, and must be construed within the letter and spirit of the
PSC which provides for the conduct of different petroleum operations (exploration >
appraisal > development > production) in an orderly sequence.

While we take note of the operator’s view that continuing exploration would realize the full
potential of the block, we believe that such extension of exploration activities goes beyond
the provisions of the PSC. Approval by the Gol of such extensions should be on clear
financial quid pro quo - beyond the existing PSC provisions - for the benefit of Gol or its
parties.

5.3 Discovery, Commercial Discovery and Development
5.3.1 Discovery and Potential Commerciality Report

The PSC provides that when a discovery is made within the contract area, the Contractor
should:

e Forthwith inform the Licensee (ONGC) and Government of the discovery and furnish
particulars in writing within 30 days of the discovery;

« “Promptly” run tests to determine whether the discovery is of potential commercial
interest; and

37 indonesia (Offshore SE Sumatra), Nigeria (Block OML-61), Yemen (Block 18 (Marib Al Jawf) and Block 14
(Masila Dev)), Malaysia (PM-08 (EXXON) and Block K), Syria (Deir ez Zor/ Zenoubia West), and India (RJ-ON-
90/1, Ravva, South Bassein (Mumbai Offshore), and Lakwa (Assam)).

* Rule 5 of i Rules, 1959

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e

Within 60 days of completion of the tests, submit a report to the Management
Committee with a notification of whether, in the contractor’s opinion, the discovery is of
potential commercial interest and merits appraisal;

We found the following deficiencies in compliance with the PSC provisions:

Out of 25 discoveries, intimation in respect of 10 discoveries was not given within the
stipulated 30 days of discovery, with delays ranging between 11 and 791 days.

Reports of potential commerciality were not submitted within the stipulated period of
60 days after completion of tests in respect of 13 out of 25 discoveries, with delays
ranging between 2 to 329 days.

Further, we found that out of 25 discoveries:

.

All 25 discoveries had been tested to determine potential commercial interest; however,
no appraisal wells were struck in 7 discoveries. Despite lack of appraisal wells, advice of
commerciality was submitted to the MC in all 7 cases (evidently based directly on test of
potential commercial interests without an appraisal programme). However, DoC
(Declaration of Commercial Discovery) was not declared in six of these cases. In
response, the operator stated that since these discoveries fell within the existing
Development Areas (DA-1 and DA-2), no separate DoC was required.

In 22 cases, advice of DoC was given to the MC, but only 10 DoCs were formally
declared. Delays in DoC approval ranged from 67 to 323 days.

In 10 cases, advice of DoC was given to the MC, even before drilling of the last appraisal
well, and in 4 of these 10 cases, the DoC was actually approved before the drilling of the
last appraisal well. Consequently, the DoC approval is likely to have been based on
incomplete information.

Field Development Plans in respect of only nine discoveries were submitted (five? in DA-
1, one in DA-2, and three in DA-3), of which six were approved; FDPs for three
discoveries in DA-3 are yet to be approved by MC. Of the remaining 16
FDP for one discovery is awaiting the Operating Committee’s approval, while the
remaining 15 discoveries have been clubbed with FDPs for DA-1 (nine) and DA-2 (six).
These 15 discoveries (which were discovered between July 1999 and November 2008)
were still awaiting development. Details are given in Annexure 5.1.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that:

me Mangala, Aishwariya, Raageshwari, Saraswati, and Raageshwari Deep Gas

As regards delay in intimation of 10 discoveries, these discoveries had not been
reviewed by MC; hence the question of intimation did not arise.

As regards the 15 discoveries (clubbed with DA-1 and DA-2) awaiting development, the
timelines would not apply to these discoveries, as these were already in the

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


development area for which the ML had been granted, and efforts to develop MC
reviewed discoveries were being made.

While we note that all discoveries cannot be developed individually (as they may not be
commercially viable on a stand-alone basis), we do not agree with MoPNG’s views regarding
non-applicability of timelines for discoveries in the appraisal / development phases in the
development area for the reasons indicated in para no 5.2.3 above.

5.3.2 Declaration of Commercial Discovery

Article 9.5 of the PSC provides that the MC shall, without any undue delay, and in any event
within forty five days of the date of the notice under article 9.4, consider the proposal of the
contractor and request any other additional information it may reasonably require so as to
reach a decision on whether or not to declare the Discovery as Commercial Discovery. Such
decision shall be made within the later of (a) ninety days of the notice under article 9.4 or
(b) forty five days of receipt of such other information as may be required under article 9.5.

However, we found that there were delays in approval of DoC by the Management
Committee, as given below:

Table 5.5 - Delay in Declaration of Commercial Discovery

Name of the Date of Date of submission of | Date of DoC Delay i
Discovery Discovery | DoC for review by MC oC (days)
67

Saraswati 29.10.2001 11.05.2004 15.10.2004
EB Raageshwari 25.12.2002 11.05.2004 15.10.2004 67
ER Mangala 20.01.2004 11.05.2004 15.10.2004 67
EB aishwariya 05.03.2004 11.05.2004 15.10.2004 67
FEMI) eag deep gas 25.12.2002 11.05.2004 15.10.2004 67
EER) shazyam 07.08.2004 08.02.2006 14.11.2006 189
Shakti 18.04.2004 08.02.2006 14.11.2006 189
EM ५2 21.11.2006 06.11.2007 24.12.2008 323
ER «ws 13.12.2006 06.11.2007 24.12.2008 323
FO ८५८ 20.07.2007 06.11.2007 24.12.2008 323

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that in many cases, the delay was due to non-receipt
of complete information; therefore, approval of DoC was done after the later of 90 days/
4Sdays from the receipt of required information.

We do not agree. The additional information in respect of discoveries was sought after
expiry of the stipulated 90 days time limit. No details were provided in respect of two
discoveries. Further, delays pointed out in the para are after considering the maximum
prescribed timeline of 90 days.

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



5.3.3 Field Development Plans

5.3.3.1 Delays in submission and approval

Field Development Plans in terms of three development areas (DA-1, DA-2, and DA-3) were
submitted and approved (DA-1 and DA-2) by the Management Committee. We found that
there were delays in submission and approval of FDPs:

Table 5.6 - Delays in submission and approvals of FDPs

Delay in submission of | Dela approval of
FDP FDP by MC

Mangala, Aishwariya, Rageshwari 241 days 58 days
and Saraswati (MARS) in the DA-1
area

Bhagyam (DA-2 area) No delay 69 days

Shakti Field (part of DA-2 area) OC approved FDP not न
submitted

Kaameshwari (DA-3) July 2009 Not yet approved

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that in many cases delay was due to non-receipt of
complete information; therefore, approval of FDP was done after later of 90 days/45 days
from receipt of required information. Regarding approval of Kaameshwari (DA-3) FDP, it
stated that evaluation had been completed for decision by MoPNG.

5.3.3.2 Revised FDP for Mangala (including Raageshwari Deep Gas)

The original FDP of Mangala (including Raageshwari Deep Gas) was approved by the MC in
May 2006 at a cost of USS 1241.61 million. A revised FDP was submitted to the MC on 20
March 2009, due to change in delivery point from Barmer to Salaya and later to Bhogat,
which necessitated laying of pipeline. On 30 June 2009, the MC approved the revised FDP at
a cost of US$ 2367.31 million, plus US$ 941.05 million as the cost of the pipeline, plus USS
35.61 million as cost of Mangala EOR; i.e. a total cost of US$ 3343.97 million.

The increase in revised FDP cost was attributed to (i) flood during 2006 in Rajasthan; (ii)
delayed approval for pipeline and terminals; (iii) increase of Upstream Capital Cost index by
98 percent during 2005 to 2007; (iv) increase in Rig Day Rates and other tangibles as per
current contracts; (v) delay in project schedule; (vi) change from gas to steam for power
generation; and (vii) increase in excavation, foundations, construction costs due to plant
relocation, increase in prices of steel and cement, additional road works, construction
camps, increase in equipment and bulks.

Our comparison of individual cost elements for the original and revised FDPs (as approved)
revealed that the main increases in cost were on account of surface facilities (US$ 513.40 to
US$1038.03 million), well construction (US$ 433.08 to US$ 698.80 million) and project

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



management (US$ 67.25 to US$167.52 million); details are indicated in Annexure 5.2. This is
in addition to the cost of the pipeline (US$ 941.05 million).

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that during the period 2005 to 2007, the price level
for E&P services increased substantially and additional scope of work was included to the
Mangala surface facilities in the revised FDP. Further, there were changes in the production
facilities, in view of increased production rates from 100000 bopd to 125000 bopd.

Most of the expenditure under the revised FDP has been/ would be incurred from 2008-09
and thereafter; this would be covered in future audits.

5.4 Procurement Issues

The operator awarded contracts for procurement of goods and services to indigenous and
foreign vendors. During the course of audit, 41 contracts in respect of which payment
valuing more than one million USS was made during the years 2006-07 and 2007-08 were
reviewed. It was observed that:

* in three cases, payment of USS 89.45 million was made against contracts awarded on
nomination or on single financial bid basis;

« in one case, payment of USS 1.94 million was made against the contract awarded
without assessing reasonability of rates; and

e in two cases, payment of US$ 20.63 million was made against contracts extended
beyond contractual provisions, without availing economies of scale.

Details are given in Annexure 5.3.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that any amount assessed by audit in the final report
that should not be considered would be considered for appropriate action for deletion from
contract cost. In this connection, we recommend that MoPNG validate the award of
contracts falling under the categories listed above, so as to draw assurance that
Government's interest was protected.

5.5 Cost Recovery

Production of oil from the RJ-ON-90/1 block commenced only in August 2009. Hence, cost
recovery had not commenced in 2006-07 and 2007-08 (the two years for which records of
the operator were scrutinised). As of March 2008, cumulative recoverable cost amounted to
USS 1088.32 million, of which additions of USS 215.91 million and US$ 401.56 million took
place during 2006 (calendar year) and 2007-08 (15 months). Our review was, thus, confined
to examination of cost-recoverable items incurred during 2006-08.

In our opinion, the following items of cost are not eligible for cost recovery:

ee. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Table 5.7-Items not eligible for cost recovery

301 व. शत व 119.78 million Expenditure of US$ 105.18 million on
in development area DA-1 appraisal wells and USS 14.60 million
towards seismic surveys and activities in DA-
1 (which were not approved by MC) are not
eligible for cost recovery.

Additional work beyond 77.95 million Additional work costing USS 46.41 million
MWP not approved by MC on 16 drilled wells and USS 31.54 million on
seismic activities undertaken beyond MWP
had not been approved by MC (August

2010).
Seismic survey on area 1.59 million Expenditure of US$ 1.59 million up to 14
already relinquished May 2005 was incurred on seismic survey on

area which had already been relinquished;
this cost had not been approved by the MC.
Expenditure on discovery 2.22 million Expenditure of US$ 2.22 million was
well during appraisal incurred on a discovery well KW-I (6) drilled,
period without MC approval, in July 2007 during
the extended appraisal period. Despite
DGH’s objection, MC regularised it, so that it
could be developed along with two other
discoveries (KW-2 and KW-3). # our
opinion, the MC’s regularisation is not in
line with the PSC provisions.

We also found excess expenditure of USS 27.63 million on pre-development and
development activities over the approved budget for 2007-08 of USS 160.56 million, which
had not been ratified by the MC.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that:

expenditure in respect of work program not approved by MC and adversely commented
upon by audit would be disallowed; and

e the audit view on disallowing exploration expenditure incurred after exploration phase
was in line with the stand of DGH on the issue.

We take note of the ministry’s assurance on this issu

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



6.1 Overview
6.1.1 Background to PSCs

The Panna-Mukta field (primarily an oil field) and the Mid & South Tapti field (a gas field),
which are offshore shallow water fields located in the offshore Bombay basin, were initially
discovered and operated by ONGC. In February 1994, these were awarded to a consortium
of Enron Oil & Gas India Ltd (Enron)"° and RIL for development under a production sharing
arrangement. ONGC, Enron and RIL formed a joint venture (PMT JV) with participating
interests of 40, 30, and 30 per cent respectively, and the PSCs for these fields for duration of
25 years were signed in December 1994. In February 2002, Enron’s 30 per cent stake in the
JV was acquired by British Gas Exploration and Production India Ltd. (BGEPIL)“*.

न OMT Joint Venture
Panna - Mukta - Tapti location map | Een tty

50 Me आओ in the Cayman Islands
4 Also incorporated in the Cayman Islands

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


As opposed to the PSCs under the NELP, the distinguishing features of the PSCs for PMT
include the following:

e Development commitments detailed in Appendix G to the PSCs, indicating activity
timelines upto 1996 (assuming a project start date of July 1993) for Panna-Mukta. In
respect of Mid & South Tapti, the activity timelines (assuming a project start date of July
1993) extended upto 2010; however, except for drilling-work over operations and
compressors, other activities were to be completed by 2005.

* Cost Recovery Limits (CRLs) of US$ 577.50 million for Panna-Mukta and USS 545 million
for Mid & South Tapti respectively were stipulated.

e The Investment Multiple was to be calculated on a post-tax basis, with notional Income
Tax liability determined on the basis of a 50 per cent tax rate. The Gol share of profit
petroleum varied with different slabs of IM as follows:

Table 6.1- Investment Multiple - Gol Share and Contractor Share for
Panna-Mukta and Tapti

Investment Multiple Panna-Mukta Mid and South Tapti

(Post-Tax)
Gol share Contractor Gol share Contractor
(per cent) share (per cent) share
(per cent) (per cent)

6.1.2 Development of Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields

The Panna and Mukta fields (comprising of a contract area of 1207 sq. km), which
commenced production in December 1994, was developed by the PMT JV in two phases:

e Initial Plan of Development (IPOD) executed during 1995-99, wherein the PMT JV
installed three wellhead platforms”, along with drilling of development wells and
associated processing and transportation facilities; and

* Expanded Plan of Development (EPOD) executed between November 2004 and March
2007, wherein the PMT JV installed two wellhead platforms”? in the Panna Field and
pipelines.

® Wellhead platforms i PF and PG
® Wellhead platforms PH and PJ

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



The Mid & South Tapti field, which commenced production in 1997-98, was also developed
by the PMT JV in two phases:

e Initial Plan of Development (IPOD) executed during 1995-97, wherein the PMT JV
installed three wellhead platforms“ in the South Tapti field and associated processing
and transportation facilities; and

« New Revised Plan of Development (NRPOD), executed between March 2005 and August
2007, wherein the PMT JV installed one well-head platform’? in the Mid Tapti field and
additional processing and transportation facilities.

Additionally, the PMT JV also installed one wellhead platform”? in the South Tapti field in

August 2006 to maintain the plateau production.

6.1.3 Financial and Operational Performance

A comparison of the operational performance (in terms of cumulative production of crude
oil/ condensate and natural gas) vis-a-vis the envisaged production profile as per the PSCs is
given below:

Table 6.2- Operational Performance of Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields

Crude Oil/ Condensate (million Gas (million cubic metres)
MT)

Envisaged Actual (till Envisaged Actual (till
Production March 2011) Production March 2011)
Profile (as per Profile (as per

PSC) till 2019 PSC) till 2019

Panna-Mukta 19.87 19.13 10170 16850

Mid and So 13.314# 14.694 31389 32709
Tapti

# MMBBL for condensate produced from Tapti

A summary of the sharing of profit petroleum between Gol, ONGC and the private parties
from 2000-01 to 2008-09 in respect of the Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti fields is
given below:

“ Wellhead platforms STA, STB and STC
“Wellhead platform MTA

me Wellhead platform STD

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Table 6.3- Profit Petroleum for Panna-Mukta Field

Investment Profit Petroleum (PP) in USS million

Multiple
PP of private | PP of ONGC PP of Gol | PP of ONGC
contractors + Gol
68 46 6 52

Year

2000-01 1.03
1.23 125 84 a 95

1.48 (1.65) 160 (204) 106 (136) 14 (18) 120 (154)

१15 की 1.73 (1.93) 171 (182)... 114 (121) 15 (16) 129 (137)
PM 1.88 (2.13) 247 (235)... 144 (156) 19 (21) 163 (177)
PEM 1.92 (2.11) 297 (277)... 198 (185) 26 (81)... 224 (266)
2.05 (2.18) 428 (395)... 285 (263). 38 (116). 323 (379)
2007-08 2.14 529 352 155 507
2.06 400 266 118 384

Table 6.4- Profit Petroleum for Mid & South Tapti Field

108-09
Year Investment Profit Petroleum (PP) USS million
Multiple

PP of private PPofONGC PPofGol  PPofGol+
contractors ONGC
1.21 79 53 33 86
| 2001-02 | 1.38 77 51 32 83
| 2002-03 | 1.58 84 56 35 91
2003-04 1.73 77 51 32 83

1.66 (1.77) 72 48 30 78
1.67 (1.76) 84 56 35 91
1.24 (1.46) 5 3 2 5
1.32 192 128 80 208
1.63 402 268 168 436

Note: Figures of IM and PP indicated by MoPNG (after considering the impact of audit
exceptions) are given in brackets; the IM and PP figures outside the brackets are the
calculations furnished by the PMT JV.

eect errant and moved to the second slab (Gol share moving up from 5 to 15 per cent),
while the IM in respect of the Mid & South Tapti field still remains in the lowest slab
(below 2.0 with Gol i of 20 per cent). With more than 13 years of operation of the PSC

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



pee eee March 2008, the IM still remains in the first and second slabs. In our opinion, the
prospect of IM rising to 3.5 (resulting in Gol share of 50 per cent) over the remaining
contract period is remote; this, further, calls into question the appropriateness of the IM
slab-based sharing of profit petroleum.

6.2 Royalty
6.2.1 Contractual Provisions
Royalty is payable on the “wellhead” value of crude oil and natural gas produced:

e@ Under the NELP PSCs - @10 per cent of wellhead value of gas and for crude oil — 12.5 per
cent for onland areas, and 10 per cent for offshore areas. Further, for deepwater areas,
royalty is 50 per cent of applicable rates for the first seven years of commercial
production;

e Under the PSCs for discovered fields/ pre-NELP exploration blocks - @ Rs.481/ MT for
crude oil and @ 10 per cent of the wellhead value of gas.

Wellhead price i.e., the price at wellhead is calculated in backward fashion from the sale
price (i.e. price at delivery point), by deducting post wellhead expenses up to the delivery
point. Any increase in those expenses decreases the wellhead price and, consequentially,
the royalty and vice-versa.

"Post
wellhead
expenses"

Sale price

Wellhead

° At delivery
point

price

6.2.2 Delay in finalization of norms to determine wellhead price of gas for
purposes of royalty

MoPNG decided the norms for determination of wellhead price of crude oil in March 2003,
which retrospectively covered the time period from April 1998 onwards and also stipulated
adjustment(s) for royalty according to those norms. In the absence of a definition of ‘value
at wellhead’, each party to the PSCs worked out ‘wellhead value’ by reckoning different cost
elements viz. processing and transportation charges, operating cost for processing and
transportation, amortization of process and transportation investment, interest on capital
employed, royalty on gas etc.

The norms for determination of post wellhead costs (a key element in the determination of
Mm fp value) were notified by MoPNG only in August 2007, even though natural gas was

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


being produced by PSCs as early as 1997-98. As per this notification, per unit of post
wellhead cost was to be determined based on the actual post wellhead expenditure
reported in the previous year’s audited accounts. Further, oil industry development cess,
depreciation expense, income tax, surcharge thereon, education cess and profit petroleum
were not to be allowed as post wellhead costs.

This undue delay in deciding the components of post wellhead cost to calculate the
wellhead value allowed different PSC operators to follow different practices for calculation
of post wellhead costs, impacting the government take in the form of royalty.

Unlike in the case of the March 2003 notification in respect of norms for wellhead price of
crude oil, the norms of August 2007 for post wellhead costs were not made effective from
the date of commencement of production (although the gas production from Panna-Mukta
and Mid & South Tapti fields commenced in June 1997 and July 1998 respectively).

In our opinion, Gol should have treated the royalty payment from these fields as
provisional, pending the finalization of norms for post-wellhead costs. Even if this not had
been treated as provisional from the start of gas production in 1997/ 1998 (although the
modalities of calculation were reflected in the royalty statements submitted to MoPNG/

DGH and this issue could have been flagged right away), Gol should have treated the
royalty payment as provisional at least from January 2002, when DGH highlighted the
problem for MoPNG’s consideration.

Due to MoPNG’s failure to take prompt action on the issue of royalty, Gol incurred a
substantial loss on account of royalty:

* The amortization of capital expenditure amounting USS 42.96 million was considered as
an item of post wellhead cost during the period from April 2006 to July 2007, with a
resultant loss of royalty of USS 4.30 million to the Government, though this was not
admissible as an item of post wellhead cost as per the subsequent Gol notification of
August 2007.

e The loss for the period from April 1997 to March 2006 could not be quantified in the
absence of details.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the royalty notification should not fall under the
Performance Audit of PSCs, since it was issued under the Oil Field (Regulations and
Development) Act 1948 and tabled in Parliament. We do not agree; the calculation of
royalty is critical to Gol’s take under the PSCs.

Further, MoPNG, while explaining the chronology of royalty notification, stated that
wellhead value/ price is a common terminology, not requiring any norm for determination.
To enable simplicity and to avoid the complex computation of amortization, some items
were disallowed as post well cost deduction, and an exercise was in hand to further simplify
the system.

ee. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



The disputes arising out of post-wellhead expenses and appointment by MoPNG of a
committee to suggest the methodology belie MoPNG’s claim that wellhead value was a
common terminology, not requiring any norm for determination. Further, there were
disputes raised by the operators even after the issue of the August 2007 notification.

We await the results of MoPNG’s efforts to simplify/ clarify the system for calculation of

post-wellhead expenses and remove ambiguities therein.

Our detailed findings on deficiencies in calculation of well-head value of natural gas are
summarized below. MoPNG has accepted all our findings in this regard and has agreed to

take necessary action.

Table 6.5- Deficiencies noticed in calculation of well-head value of

Processing cost e
prior to
transportation

Amortization of हि
CAPEX not based
on upgraded
reserves

natural gas

MOoPNG clarified (April 2008) that
only the cost on post wellhead
transportation up to the delivery
point only was allowable as
Operating expenditure on post
wellhead infrastructure, and that
the processing cost incurred prior
to transportation was not
admissible as post wellhead cost.

However, the PMT JV had
incorrectly considered the
processing cost prior to

transportation as a post-wellhead
cost. We could not quantify the
resulting short payment of royalty,
due to the absence of a breakup
between the pre-transportation

processing cost and the
transportation cost’,
The PMT 1५ applied the

amortization rate considering the
PSC reserves (given in Appendix G-
7) instead of upgraded reserves.

MOoPNG stated (July 2011)
that royalty differential in
respect of Panna-Mukta
and Tapti fields had been
computed for raising
demand notice.
Meanwhile, the contractors
of these two PSCs
(excluding ONGC) had
invoked arbitration on the
issue and applied for
interim relief of stay on any
recovery. The modalities of
handling this issue were
being worked out.

The Ministry agreed (July
2011) with our view, and
stated that the
quantification of the audit

*” By contrast, in respect of the Ravva PSC, the processing cost had correctly been excluded from post well-

Me expenditure for determination and payment of royalty.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Inclusion of cost ft}
of wellhead flow
lines as post
well-head

expenses

Incorrect .
inclusion of
facilities under
execution as of
March 2007

Performance lh of Hydrocarbon PSCs

This resulted in higher
amortization of capex, lower
wellhead value and lower
payment of royalty.

Opex was allocated between post
wellhead and pre-wellhead
Operating cost in the ratio of the
post wellhead capex to the pre-
wellhead capex. Although the
capex of wellhead platforms was
excluded, the capex of wellhead
flow lines laid for carrying of gas
from wellhead to the wellhead
platforms was considered by the
PMT JV for computation of post
wellhead capex, which resulted in
under valuation of wellhead value
and consequently short payment
of royalty.

OPEX was bifurcated between
wellhead cost and post wellhead
cost, based on the ratio of value of
wellhead facilities and value of
post wellhead facilities of the
previous year’s audited figures. In
our view, only the facilities which
were commissioned and used for
the purpose of production and
transportation of natural gas
should have been considered for
calculating this ratio. The JV had,
however, reckoned the facilities
under execution at the end of
March 2007 also for calculating
the above ratio, which was not
correct. This resulted in incorrect
allocation of OPEX and under

exception for the period
prior to August 2007 would
enable direct action on the
part of the Gol. In the
absence of such
quantification, the JV would
be advised to rectify the
mistake and pay differential
royalty, subject to
arbitration proceedings.

The Ministry agreed (July
2011) with our view, and
stated that for the period
subsequent to August 2007,
the cost of facilities would
not constitute part of post
wellhead cost. For the
years 2006-07 and 2007-08
till the date of 2007
notification, quantification
by audit would enable
direct action on the part of
the Government. In the
absence of such

quantification, the JV would
be advised to rectify the
mistake and pay differential
royalty,

subject to


payment of royalty to the
Government by Rs 0.56 crore (USS
0.124 million) for the period from
August 2007 to March 2008.

arbitration proceeding.
However, in our opinion,
the rectification should
extend back to the date of
commencement of gas

Maintenance The JV considered the production (June 1997/
costs of SCADA maintenance costs of the SCADA“ February 1998), since the
facilities facility installed on wellhead same methodology has

included as post

latforms as post wellhead activity
well-head B B y

instead of wellhead activity in
determination of wellhead value.
This resulted in lower valuation of
wellhead value and resultantly
lesser payment of royalty to the
Government.

been adopted by the PMT
JV right through.

6.3 Crude Oil and Gas Sales
6.3.1 Pricing of gas sales from PMT

The PSCs of Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti stipulate a pricing formula for gas sales
with initial floor and ceiling prices of USS 2.11/mmbtu (million metric British Thermal Unit)
and USS 3.11/mmbtu with an option to the contractor to revise the ceiling price after 7
years from the date of first delivery viz. January 1998 for Panna-Mukta and June 1997 for
Mid & South Tapti:

e The gas price reached the initial ceiling price of USS 3.11/ mmbtu in April 2000.

e The period of 7 years from the date of commencement of commercial gas production
ended in June 2004 and February 2005 in respect of the Tapti and Panna-Mukta contract
areas respectively. Consequently, the PMT JV exercised its option to revise the ceiling
prices to USS 5.57/ mmbtu for Tapti and USS 5.73/ mmbtu for Panna-Mukta;

* The gas prices reached these revised ceiling prices in a phased manner between June
2004 and April 2005.

However, GAIL, which was nominated by MoPNG to purchase the entire gas production,

refused to honour the revised gas 970९५”, and continued to pay the gas price at the earlier

ceiling of USS 3.11/ mmbtu till March 2005. The chronology of subsequent events is
summarised below:

58 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition

* On the ground that its gas was allocated to the priority sector — power and fertilizer plants — who might not
me able to absorb the revised gas prices, as their output price was regulated.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e¢ In November 2004, MoPNG directed the PMT JV to supply 6 mmscmd°? (out of the total
gas production of 10.8 mmscmd) to GAIL at USS 3.86/ mmbtu for one year, and allowed
the PMIT JV to market the gas directly at a price higher than USS 3.11/ mmbtu or such
price as may be offered by GAIL. The JV entered into contracts with private customers
for the remaining 4.8 mmscmd at USS 3.96/mmbtu for a three year period upto March
2008.

e In view of the criticality of the supply of PMT gas to the priority sector, MoPNG
reassessed its decision in March 2006. Based on MoPNG’s directives, the PMT JV agreed
to provide all gas in excess of the quantity of 4.8 mmscmd (already committed to private
customers) to GAIL at a “market-driven” price of US$ 4.75/mmbtu for 2 years till March
2008. As regards additional gas from the Phase-Il development of PMT, Gol decided that
a separate meeting would take place at an appropriate time. However, no such meeting
took place.

e With the development of Phase-ll, the production increased to 16.69 mmscmd in 2007.
However, the JV restricted its gas supply at 5.3 mmscmd, with the additional gas
produced being shared by JV partners according to their participating interest and sold
at different prices.

e In November 2007, MoPNG reviewed the position of sale of PMT gas to private
customers. While expressing its displeasure to DGH on not following its directions,
MoPNG directed the PMT JV to cancel all contracts for direct marketing beyond 4.8
mmscmd, It also directed the PMT JV to make available the additional gas to GAIL at PSC
prices and terms, as well as the 4.8 mmscmd of gas hitherto contracted to private
customers after the expiry of the contracts in March 2008. Consequently, from April
2008, all gas was being sold to GAIL at PSC prices.

In response, MoPNG stated (July2011) that the higher price demanded by the JV would have
affected ONGC’s APM gas price and that if the Gol had chosen to sell the gas at PSC prices,
this would have meant either subsidising higher price to be paid by the fertilizer and power
sector, or would have been passed onto customers resulting in higher generation cost and
higher urea cost.

The key issue here is that MoPNG an

its nominee (GAIL) failed to comply with the terms

of the PSC during 2005-08 with regard to the pre-determined pricing formula. Not
honouring the PSC formula severely affects the sanctity of the contract (which is to be
maintained by all parties), which is highly undesirable from the long-term perspective of
all contracting parties.

5° During April and May 2005, GAIL uplifted only 1.5 to 2 mmscmd, against the agreed quantity of 6 mmscmd.
The PMT JV had to shut in Tapti wells, as it had not entered into contracts with other buyers for the quantities
committed to GAIL.

> RIL’s sales to its group companies at US$ 5.58/mmbtu, and ONGC’s sales to Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan
Nigam Ltd lh Torrent Power Generation Ltd. at US$ 4.60/ mmbtu and USS 4.75/mmbtu.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



6.3.2 Condensate loss during transportation

Transportation and processing of PMT gas is being undertaken by ONGC through its South
Bassein-Hazira Trunk gas pipelines and its Hazira facilities, and is governed by a settlement
agreement of December 2005 between ONGC and the PMT JV. Also, ONGC agreed to
purchase all the condensate produced from the Mid & South Tapti field at the “delivery
point”, as per the following process:

® The volume of condensate purchased/ sold is measured at the Tapti offshore platform,
reduced by the Tapti condensate transportation losses.

« The condensate transportation losses from the Tapti delivery point to ONGC’s Hazira
plant were to be determined by a condensate expert, to be jointly appointed by ONGC
and the PMT JV. Pending determination of such losses, it was agreed to treat the
provisional Tapti condensate losses as “zero”. As of March 2010, no condensate expert
had been appointed.

he PSC for Mid and South Tapti is silent on the treatment of condensate.

In our view, the above arrangement is seriously flawed:

e Internally, ONGC had been considering 6 per cent as transportation and processing
losses from condensate. Treating “provisional” losses as “zero” from 2005 onwards
implies that any such losses are to ONGC’s detriment.

e The settlement agreement is defective, as rates for usage of affiliated facilities (including
oil and gas transportation systems) shall be subject to separate agreement with the
Government, as per section 3.1.4(c) of the PSC Accounting Procedure.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the JV had already shortlisted international
agencies for assessment of transportation losses. As the expertise to frame the scope of
work was not available in-house, and this was required to be undertaken for the first time
by ONGC, there had been some unavoidable delay in appointing the expert. As a way
forward, the JV and the Institute of Oil and Gas Petroleum Technology (IOGPT) were
working on the simulation model to firm up the scope of work, results of which were to be
validated by a third party expert. Hence, pending assessment and establishment of losses by
an expert, it may not be correct to agree that treatment of provisional losses was to ONGC’s
detriment. While we do not agree with MoPNG’s views, we will await further progress in
this regard.

As regards the agreement of Gol on the charges of affiliates, MoPNG indicated that the
methodology for working out the processing tariff viz. ‘incremental cost of facilities’ was
indicated in Article 13.1.3(g) (read with Appendix I). We do not agree; in our opinion, as per
Section 3.1.4(c) of the PSC accounting procedure, such rates should be subject to separate
agreement with the Government.

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


6.3.3, Non-signing of Crude Oil Sales Agreement

Article 19 of the Panna-Mukta PSC envisaged formulation of a crude oil sales agreement
(COSA) between the PMT JV and the IOC (the designated nominee of Gol for purchase of
crude oil) under the terms and conditions normally contained in international crude oil sales
agreement of a similar nature. However, despite lapse of more than 16 years after the
signing of the PSC, the COSA was yet to be executed between the parties mainly on account
of non resolution of disputes on delivery point, voyage expenses during monsoon period
and delivery of ‘free crude’ free from water by the PMT JV.

Ministry sta at the suggestions of on would be examined. This issue had
been highlighted in the earlier CAG’s Audit Reports of 1996 and 2005”. We urge that a
quick decision be taken, since nearly 2/3" of the term of the PSC is already over.

6.4 Findings in respect of Panna-Mukta
6.4.1 Non-completion of Development Work Commitments

The PSC for Panna-Mukta specified a Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) of USS 577.5 million, and
also indicated details of committed work programme separately for the Panna and Mukta
fields to be completed by 1996. However, the JV had not completed key work commitments
in respect of the Mukta field, as summarized below:

« Fabrication and installation of the MB jacket;

e Fabrication (or refurbishment) and installation of the MB deck package;

Drilling of 6 directional wells from MB;

e Laying MB-MA wellfluid line; and

e Laying PPA-MA-MB gaslift line

Consequently, the Mukta field (which has 3P reserves of more than 1000 mmboe) remains
largely undeveloped. Till May 2007, the PMT JV could produce only 14 mmboe.
Consequently, there was deferment of production of oil and gas production® of 12 mmboe

and 32,484 mmscf of gas, with consequential deferment of revenue, adverse impact on IM
and Gol PP, and deferment of royalty/ cess to Gol.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the Mukta pay zones were seismically difficult
to map and the performance may not be compared with the Panna field. While we agree
that the Mukta field is more complex, the work commitment made in the PSC should have
been completed within the PSC-stipulated time period (1996). Even after lapse of more

52 Report No. 5 of 1996 (Commercial) and Report No. 6 of 2005 (Commercial)

* Based on the design flow rates adopted by BGEPIL for the Minimum Facilities Study Report (September
2006) for i

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



than a decade, the JV had not completed many of the development activities committed
under Appendix G of the PSC.

In respect of the Panna field, the PMT JV substituted two infill wells drilled in 2005 from the
PD platform instead of the two wells from PD platform indicated in the development work
commitments as per the PSC; this substitution was approved by DGH in October 2007.
However, the MC, while approving (May 2003) the proposal for drilling of infill wells, had
affirmed that the drilling of Panna infill wells was outside the IPOD and Appendix G of the
250.

In response, the Ministry stated that in development parlance, infill and development wells
were the same. We do not agree, since the MC’s affirmation in this regard was to the
contrary.

6.4.2 Cost Recovery
Against the Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) of US$ 577.5 million,

e The cost recovered on the committed works was USS 420 million, as of September 2007.
The PMT JV had estimated that for completing the balance committed work, an
expenditure of US$ 208 million to USS 233 million (average US$ 220 million) would be
additionally required™.

e After deducting the estimated cost of USS 220 million, DGH determined an excess cost
recovery of USS 62.5 million, along with short remittance of Gol PP of USS 6.219 million
for the period 2002-03 to 2004-05. MoPNG issued directives (December 2008) to reverse
the excess cost recovery and remit additional PP to the Gol.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the reversal of cost in excess of CRL was
effected through the National Oil Companies (viz. IOC/ GAIL). We take note of Ministry's
reply.

6.4.3 Instances of excess expenditure

Other instances of excess expenditure, deficiencies in procurement affecting
competitiveness of costs etc. with implication for Gol’s financial take are summarized below:

Expenditure Ci) The acquisition of seismic data by the PMT JV covering approx. 250
acquisition () sq.km of the Panna field at an additional cost of USS 9.36 million
seismic data (calculated on pro rata basis) was irregular, as the MC approval of July
2007 for data acquisition was only for the Mukta field.

Execution of EP! There were enormous delays in finalization of the tender for EPIC’? of
the EPOD Project. Against the Operator Board’s recommendation of

** Since the PSC did not mention the itemized details of cost for the items listed in the PSC, we are unable to
quantify the original estimated cost of the unfinished committed work.

Me EPIC: Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Commissioning

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Project November 2003 that the contract had to be awarded by March 2004
so as to achieve installation of the well platforms by pre-monsoon
2005, the tender was awarded only in November 2004. Let alone pre-
monsoon 2005 completion, even pre-monsoon 2006 completion
could not be achieved. Ultimately, production from the PJ and PH
wells commenced only in February 2007.

Due to inordinate delays in award and execution, the total
expenditure on the project increased from the originally approved
amount of US$ 169.07 million to US$ 329.88 million. Further, in return
from a commitment from the vendor to complete the remaining
scope of work by 24 February 2007, the PMT JV agreed not to impose
LD (amounting to US$ 13.27 million).

VICI ME MCh In respect of major contracts valuing more than USS 100 million (e.g.
1 जम EPOD and Project Hydra-PK and SWP) executed during 2006-08, the
11 है 1 PMT JV invited only limited tenders from short-listed prospective
bidders and did not publish the invitation to bid in Indian newspapers
(as required under Article 6.8 of the JOA).

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the reply of the Operator had been called for
and was awaited. We await further progress in this regard.

6.5 Findings in respect of Mid & South Tapti field

6.5.1 Non-completion of Committed Work Programme and delays

The development commitments under the PSC inter alia included, but were not limited to:
© 10 wellhead platforms”; and

e 35 development wells (with an additional 30 infill wells — not representing a committed
work obligation, but included in the Cost Recovery Limit — if the drainage area of the 35
primary development wells was inadequate).

As against the above:

e The JV installed only 5 wellhead platforms and drilled only 30 development wells. The
committed work in respect of the balance 5 wellhead platforms and 5 development
wells was yet to be executed.

e Even the NRPOD project, for which a draft was initiated in June 1999 (with the first gas
expected from 2003) ran into considerable delays. No development work was
undertaken between March 2001 and November 2003 due to disagreement among JV
partners over approval of early costs, lack of consensus over Original Gas In Place (OGIP)
etc. Early activities for NRPOD were conducted during 2004, the NRPOD project

°° 6 in South Tapti ath 4 in Mid-Tapti

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



approved by the MC in March 2005, contracts awarded during 2005-06, and the first gas
started flowing only in August 2007.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that as and when the need arose, the JV may drill the
wells and the Cost Petroleum would be regulated in accordance with the PSCs.

The fact remains that there were no firm plans for the installation of the remaining 5
wellhead platforms committed in the PSC.

6.5.2 Cost Recovery in excess of Cost Recovery Limit (CRL)

The PSC stipulated a Cost Recovery Limit (CRL) of USS 545 million (excluding costs on site
restoration, exploration/ appraisal drilling, development of satellite fields etc. but including
the cost of the additional 30 infill wells). However, against this CRL:

e The PMT JV incurred expenditure of USS 729.09 million (till December 2007), despite not
completing the full Committed Work Programme, and also recovered these costs.

e After considering estimated costs of US$ 140.26 million on account of the committed
work yet to be executed, there was an excess cost recovery of US$ 324.35 million over
the CRL.

¢ In addition, the PMT JV incorrectly adjusted savings of USS 20.93 million (on account of
the cost of the export pipeline not executed due to a reduction in scope”) from the
excess over the CRL in respect of other items.

The CRLs stipulated in the PSC were based on international market conditions relating to
availability and costs of materials and services in the international petroleum industry at
constant 1993 USS. The PSC stipulated that in the event that the CRLs were exceeded on
account of delays due to delays in obtaining necessary approvals, material change to the
international market conditions of availability and costs, variation to the Development Plan
approved by the MC etc., the MC should consider what, if any, increase in CRLs should be
made to fairly reflect the circumstances. However, the MC shall not be obligated to consider
what, if any increase where, and to the extent that, such delay had been caused by the
companies’ failure to act in a diligent manner.

However, we found that:

*® The PMT JV approached DGH in June 2008 for enhancement of the CRL by USS 324.35
million, which had not been approved. However, notwithstanding the lack of approval of
the enhancement in CRL, the JV had already irregularly undertaken cost recovery of the
excess expenditure over the CRL.

| The CRL included an amount of US$ 66.5 million for laying of an export pipeline from the Tapti process
platform to the onshore terminal at Hazira. Instead, the JV laid a pipeline from the Tapti process platform to
ONGC’s existing gas pipeline from Bassein to Hazira at a cost of USS 45.82 million, resulting in a difference of
me 20.93 million.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


e Incidentally, when the NRPOD project (at a cost of USS 519 million) was approved in
March 2005 by the MC, it was decided that the CRL would be reviewed by a team of
representatives from the PMT JV and DGH within the next three months; however, no
such review was conducted.

¢ The PMT JV had executed certain activities® under the IPOD and NRPOD projects
outside the committed work programme; however, approval for change in the
committed work programme had not been obtained from MoPNG.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that:

e The proposal of the operator for enhancement of CRL, so as to treat the total
expenditure as contract cost, placed before the MC was not agreed upon.

e  Arevised proposal for reversal of USS 365 million towards the excess cost recovered in
respect of development cost and revision of notional income tax and Investment
Multiple calculation had been considered by the Ministry, and was being placed before
Mc.

e Meanwhile, the operator had invoked arbitration on this issue, which would have a
bearing on the final resolution.

With regard to the work done outside the scope of Appendix G, MoPNG directed (May
2011) DGH to obtain the audited report from the PMT JV for the expenditure of USS 346
million incurred on activities outside Appendix G, and permit accordingly towards cost
petroleum.

We await further progress in this rega

6.5.3 Instances of excess expenditure and cost recovery

The PMT JV entered into two contracts for mobile offshore rigs, as summarized below:

Operating | Primary Actual

Day Rate | period deployment

(ODR)
Dec. 55,500 310 days Feb.2004 Option to exercise 3
2003 successive extensions of 6,

3 and 3 months on
mutually agreed terms and

conditions.
Dec. 61,800 270 days Feb. 2005 Right to extend for 3
2004 months at same rates and

terms and conditions

** These included Tapti temporary compression, TCPP platform (excluding compressor) etc. amounting to US$
345.06 million, i were outside the committed work programme.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Both these contracts were extended at higher rates from time to time for various periods
ranging from 3 months to 2 years in the light of the scheduled drilling programme, upward
rig market scenario and shortage of rig availability.

It may be noted that 33 wells were planned to be drilled during 2005-09 as per the
development projects (EPOD, NRPOD, and STD). Also, as per the Work Programmes and
Budgets for 2006-07 and 2008-09, the JV was to drill 27 wells (14 firm and 13 contingent)
and 20 wells (15 firm and 5 contingent) respectively. From a very conservative perspective —
considering only the firm wells — at least one rig should have been hired for the entire
period. If the contract for the cheaper rig (Ensco-50) had been extended for 2 years (while
extending the contract in October 2005) at the ODR of 97,500 instead of for nine months,
additional expenditure of USS 31.85 million could have been avoided.

Other instances of excess expenditure, deficiencies in procurement affecting
competitiveness of costs etc. with implication for Gol’s financial take are summarized below:

Acquisition (i) The PMT JV acquired and processed new 3D seismic data in the mid-
1 नह Tapti area (completed in 2007-08) at a cost of US$ 32.56 million; this
planned f4) was to reduce the risk of placement of wells not only for the lower
ultitia-Wan लागा।र5 sands, but also for the 17 phase wells from MTA wellhead
platform (which had, by then, been installed). However, even before
the API of the new 3D data, 5 out of the 8 wells planned from the
MTA wellhead platform were drilled by December 2007. This negated,
at least partly, the purpose of API of 3D data.

Construction (i The development commitments in the PSC involved installation of 10
STD 11111] wellhead platforms with only 8 drilling slots. However, based on a
11714 « 1 ९ quantitative risk assessment (June 2002), the PMT JV decided to
slots install a new wellhead platform STD with 12 slots by 2003 monsoon
(to maintain deliverability of gas in excess of 200 mmscfd). The
platform was finally completed in August 2006 at a cost of US$ 33.06
million.

In our opinion, the increase in drilling slots from the estimated 8 to
12, with avoidable additional expenditure of USS 7 million (on account
of increased tonnage), was inappropriate:

e Even in the NRPOD, the JV brought out (January 2005) economics
indicating completion of STD with only 5 wells (4 firm + 1
contingent).

© Only 4 wells were drilled in 2006-07, of which only 2 were flowing
५ of March 2010 (with production rates of 40 mmscfd against the

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



fF | projected 120 mmscfd).

71111 39 99.11] In respect of 9 contracts ranging from US$ 3.15 million to USS 86.75
11.1. million, the PMT JV invited only limited tenders from pre-qualified
vel रन vendors and did not publish the invitation to bid in Indian newspapers
(as required under Article 6.8 of the JOA).

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the issues had been flagged to the operators for
their response, and the views of the operators were awaited. We await further progress in
this regard.

6.6 Common issues of excess expenditure and cost recovery relating
Panna-MuKkta and Mid & South Tapti fields

Brief stalls

Non-competitive The PMT JV was operating 17 contracts for third party drilling services
तर during 2006-08; these contracts had been awarded during 2003-05
drilling services and were rolled over on mutually agreed higher rates till August/
September 2009, when the JV finalized fresh tenders on the direction
of the Operator Board (OB). We observed that:

© By extending the contracts periodically over such a long period,
market trends were not explored, and competitive rates not
obtained;

e Even after the OB directed the JV in November 2008 to invite
tenders for ascertaining competitive rates, the JV initiated the
tendering process in March 2009 and finalized the tenders only in
August/ September 2009.

e Pending tender finalization, the JV extended contracts on 2
occasions for 3 and 2 months upto September 2009. In respect of
four services, the rates obtained were lower by 2 to 20 per cent
than the prevailing rates, and the existing contractors emerged L-1
bidders in 3 services.

1 Tele) iv © Production inventory was being charged off by the JV on
of production procurement, instead of actual consumption, which is in violation
inventory of Section 3.1.8(a) of the Accounting Procedure to the PSC. This
assumes greater importance, since the production inventory had
increased to USS i million and USS 10.83 million as of 2008 for

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Brief details

Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields respectively.

e As of March 2008, there was a difference between the drilling
reconciliation/ inventory in the SAP system (USS 258.40 mn) and the trial balance
disposal of (USS 254.91 mn). Although the PMT JV stated (October 2010) that
inventory this had been rectified in SAP, it was yet to work out the impact on
cost recovery (on account of resultant changes in inventory
carrying cost) and adjust the amount in the respective years.

e Delay in disposal of sparable inventory (identified at USS 3.87
million®? by the PMT JV during 2006-08) resulted in avoidable levy
of inventory carrying cost and 1 per cent overhead, with
consequential impact on Gol take.

1 @ The premium paid for offshore package policy by RIL for Oct-Dec.
of insurance 2006 indicated an additional insurance premium of USS 101,900
expenses for Panna-Mukta and a refund of USS 2650 for Tapti for 2004-05;
this was stated to be adjustment for changes in meterage of wells
drilled. However, no such adjustments for 2005-08 were effected
by RIL, and no such adjustments were effected by the other JV
partners for 2006-07 and 2007-08.

e The premium for insurance policy for standard fire and special
perils policy paid by BGEPIL included both JV and non-JV activities,
while the insurance policy for marine cargo and public liability act
and employee related insurance policies did not specifically
mention that they were exclusively for PSC operations. However,
the entire premium for insurance coverages was considered for
cost recovery.

Booking (i) © Time spent by support staff for non-JV activities during April to
payments made to July 2007 (test checked) was not allocated to non-JV activities. Out
support staff of 14,960 hours during these months, we estimated the time on
non-JV activities (based on time spent by their supervisors/
executives) to be 5064 hours; this, in our opinion, would be a
reasonable basis for allocation.

TP) 115 1 1 e 11610 allocated 100 per cent of expatriate costs to the PSCs, even
of expatriates though some time was also devoted for non PSC activities.

me Of which USS 3.54 million purchased prior to April 2005 was lying unutilized.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



The Ministry stated (July 2011) that the issues had been flagged to the operators for their
response and the views of Operators are awaited. We await further progress in this regard.

6.7 Notional Income Tax

The IM in the Panna-Mukta and Tapti PSCs is post-tax. For this purpose, the PSC stipulates
adoption of Income Tax rate of 50 per cent “applicable to petroleum operations”. Since
then, the corporate income tax rates have come down dramatically (33.99 per cent for
domestic companies). However, the calculation of Investment Multiple continues to adopt a
notional Income Tax rate of 50 per cent.

Article 15.7 - Taxes, Royalties, Rentals etc. stipulates that “if any change in or to any Indian
law, rule or regulation by any authority resulted in a material change to the economic
benefits accruing to any of the Parties to the contract after the effective date, the parties
shall consult promptly to make necessary revisions and adjustments to the contract in order
to maintain such expected benefits to each of the parties.”

In view of the change in the corporate taxation rates under the Income Tax Act, which
clearly benefit the JV partners in terms of calculation of post-tax IM, Gol should have
instituted consultations under this provision.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that Government had not invoked Article 15.7 on
fiscal stability as specific benefits were consciously extended to attract investment. MoPNG,
further, added that as the contractor had invoked arbitration against the Government and
claimed benefits under Article 15.7, it was proposed to take up the issue with JV for
consultation.

We strongly urge that the issue of downward revision in corporate income tax rates, and
corresponding benefit to the contractors, should be highlighted and included in the

ongoing arbitration proceedings invoked by the contractors.

6.8 Non-determination of abandonment cost

Article 12.8 of both the Panna-Mukta and Tapti PSCs stipulates that when the contractor
determines that the estimated remaining recoverable reserves (net of operating costs) are
equal to 2% times the estimated abandonment cost, Gol shall take control of the field (and
the abandonment obligation) within 60 days. Failing this, the contractor can recover the
abandonment cost from the remaining production and abandon the field.

However, the PMT JV had not determined (October 2010) the abandonment cost for the
Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields, despite DGH’s direction of May 2008 to do so. Without such
determination, the procedure for abandonment stipulated in the PSC cannot be applied.

In response, MoPNG assured (July 2011) that it would pursue the matter. We await further
progress in this regard.

ee. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Chapter 7- Compliance and Control Issues

Significant compliance and control issues relating to KG-DWN-98/3, RJ-ON-90/1,
Panna-Mukta and Tapti PSCs have been discussed in chapters 4 to 6 of this report.
This chapter deals with compliance and control issues relating to other PSCs, as
well as less significant issues relating to these four PSCs.

7.1 Role of DGH

In April 1993, the Gol decided to set up the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons
(DGH) under the administrative control of MoPNG with the objective of promoting
the sound management of Indian petroleum and natural gas resources, having a
balanced regard for the environment, safety, technological and economic aspects of
the petroleum industry. The Gol resolution of April 1993 constituting the DGH refers
to the need of the MoPNG to have an appropriate agency to (a) regulate and
oversee upstream activities in the petroleum and natural gas sector; and (b) also
advice Gol in these areas.

Besides the Director General, the staff of DGH is drawn on deputation/ tenure basis,
mainly from upstream and other oil PSUs (ONGC, OIL, IOC and BPCL).

The functions of the DGH, as stipulated in the April 1993 resolution fall into two
broad categories:

To advise the Gol on: e Exploration and optimal exploitation of hydrocarbons
within the country, and on the strategy of exploration/
exploitation of reserves abroad by NOCs

e Offering of acreage for exploration, and
relinquishment of acreage by the companies;

e Laying down of safety norms, framing regulations on
safety in oilfield operations, prescribe pollution
control measures, and assist in inspection and periodic
safety audits.

To review: e Exploration plans and development plans for
commercial discoveries of hydrocarbons of
companies, and advise Gol on their adequacy;

e Review and audit concurrently the management of
petroleum reservoirs on operating companies, and
advise on mid-course correction required to ensure
sound reservoir management;

५ Re-assess hydrocarbon reserves discovered and

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



estimated by operating companies (in discussion with
them).

In September 2006, MoPNG issued a fresh notification, indicating that the DGH shall
exercise the following powers and functions:

© Monitoring upstream petroleum operations in India;

® Review and monitor the exploration programme and development plans for
commercial discoveries of hydrocarbon reserves proposed by licensee/ lessee,
with a view to optimising hydrocarbon recovery from a reservoir;

e Review management of petroleum reservoirs by licensee/ lessee and advise
them;

e Ask for and maintain data, reports, information and samples (i.e. a data
repository) from petroleum E&P;

e Review reserves discovered by licensee/ lessee;
e Lay down norms for declaration of discoveries; and

e Exercise powers of Gol under Rules 24, 25, 26 27 and 30° of PNG Rules

In our view, the roles and functions of DGH encompass two sets of functions with
potential conflict of interest - an upstream regulatory function, and a function of
rendering technical advice to Gol. While in 1993 (when DGH was set up), there was
lack of adequate clarity on the role and position of regulators in various economic
sectors, the need for clear autonomy of sectoral regulators (from the Executive) is
now well recognised.

Consequently, we recommend that the functions currently discharged by the DGH
be clearly demarcated. The technical advisory and related functions should be
discharged by a body completely subordinate in all respects to MoPNG (either a
cell/ attached office/ subordinate office within the MoPNG or a separate entity

under MoPNG). Functions of a regulatory nature (review of hydrocarbon reserves
and reservoir management, laying down of norms for declaration of discoveries,
laying down safety and related norms and conducting safety inspections/ audits
etc.) should be discharged by an autonomous body, with an arm’s length
relationship with Gol.

50 These relate to preservation of cores and samples, directions to prevent waste, spacing of wells,
restriction of tl and suspension of production.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



7.2. Exploration/ Appraisal Issues

7.2.1 Irregular declaration of entire contract area of KG-OSN-2001/2
(Operator: RIL) as discovery area

In February 2007, the Operator exercised his option (under the PSC provisions) of
not entering Exploration Phase-ll at the end of Phase-I (March 2007), after availing
two extensions of 6 and 5 % months. Instead, he irregularly declared the entire
contract area of 210 sq. km. as ‘discovery area’ (although there were only two
discoveries in the contract area) and decided to continue appraisal activities in the
whole contract area. Subsequently, in September 2007, the MC approved a
resolution to allow 15 months time up to 15 June 2008 for completion of the
appraisal programme and to retain the whole area.

We noted that:

e The block was divided into two geographical parts (Part ‘A’ and Part ‘B’). Out of
the four wells drilled in the block, two wells (one in Part ‘A’ and the sole well
drilled in Part ‘B’) were dry wells. Thus, treatment of the whole area as a
‘discovery area’ was irregular.

e Even though the contractor did not give a firm proposal for drilling of appraisal
wells, he was still allowed to retain the whole of the contract area, purportedly
for appraisal of two discoveries.

e Since the appraisal programme could not be completed by 15 June 2008, the
contractor requested (July 2008) for further extension of four months up to 15
October 2008. Instead of taking action for relinquishment of area, DGH
recommended (July 2008) to MoPNG for grant of further extension. MoPNG
refused to grant extension and, in December 2009, asked for relinquishment with
effect from 15 June 2008.

e The contractor avoided executing the MWP of drilling of four wells of depth 3500
metres/ basement each, which was a contractual obligation under Exploration
Phase-ll, by the simple expedient of opting out of Phase-ll. Simultaneously, he
managed to retain the entire contract area and avoid any relinquishment, by
designating the entire block as ‘discovery area’.

In reply, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that:

e The proposal for appraisal programme for the discoveries 0-24 and 25 (in part
“Q”) was submitted on 12-07-2006™, and also included declaring the whole area
as discovery area.

® Incidentally, this is just one day after the meeting of the MC of KG-DWN-98/3 on 11 July 2006,
Me agreed to the declaration of the entire contract area as discovery area.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


e During submission of this proposal, Contractor had drilled two wells (D-24 & 25)
and drilling of 3 well was in progress in Part-A of the block. Since all the three
wells were drilled in part-A, the area for retaining both part-A & B could not be
decided. Accordingly, in the MC meeting held on 1 November 2006, it was
decided that the contractor may drill one well in Part-B and on the basis of the
results of the well in Part-B, the decision to appraise both Parts-A & B could be
taken. Subsequently, the Contractor on 02-05-2007 indicated that drilling of one
well (KGIII6-B1) in Part-B on 28-12-2006 indicated the presence of hydrocarbons
during drilling.

e The validity of the geological model in conjunction with petroleum system
modelling can only be proved by drilling of wells. Sometimes, drilling setbacks
necessitate revisiting the geological model which becomes a continuous process
till the production stage of a field. Even a dry well/or well with minor
hydrocarbon indication does not necessarily write off an area. In the current
case, the contractor had claimed that the dry well in part B of the area (where HC
indication was encountered during drilling) was due to non-entrapment and non-
sealing nature of the fault, which did not mean that the area was devoid of
hydrocarbon; even possibility of missing the hydrocarbon zone by a whisker
always existed in rollover set up.

In the case of KG-DWN-98/3, DGH was essentially of the view that drilling of wells
(and successful discoveries) in all parts of the contract area was not necessary for
declaration of the entire contract area as ‘discovery area’. In this case, the
argument for declaring the entire contract area as ‘discovery area’ was that while
the validity of the geological model can only be proved by drilling of wells, a dry
well does not necessarily mean that the area is devoid of hydrocarbons. These
responses are evidently contradictory.

e The contractor had acquired 3D seismic in the whole area in excess of the
committed MWP, which indicated that there was geological continuity in the two
parts of the block.

e The area of Part ‘B’ of the block was about 78 sq. km. Relinquishment of an area
of that size might not be useful for offering in bidding rounds, particularly in
offshore area. On the contrary, carrying out of appraisal activities might give a
chance to establish the continuation of similar hydrocarbon pool.

e MC had allowed retention of the entire/most of the contract area as discovery
area (for appraising discoveries) in the case of ONGC operated block KG-DWN-
98/2 and Focus Energy operated RJ-ON/6.

However, the observations made by CAG would be taken for guidance for future
cases.

गा Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e As there was no provision for extension in submission of DoC, the case was
recommended to MoPNG, validating the technical justifications submitted by the
Contractor. Eventually, since the contractor in the block had not opted to enter
the second exploration phase and DoC in respect of D-24 and 25 discoveries was
not submitted within the stipulated timeline and there was no provision for
extension of Appraisal Phase under the PSC, the contractor was asked on 30
December 2009 to relinquish the block with effect from 15 June 2008.

7.3, Non-compliance to PSC provisions regarding notification of
discovery and submission of test reports

We found non-compliance to provisions regarding notification of discoveries in
respect of KG-OSN-2001/2 block, as detailed below:

e Without first furnishing the initial particulars of the two discoveries viz.
Dhirubhai-24 and Dhirubhai-25 in writing to the MC and Government, the
Operator had directly given written notifications regarding potential
commerciality of the discoveries.

e In the case of Dhirubhai-24 discovery, tests were completed on 4 February 2005,
but the Contractor submitted the report and its opinion regarding potential
commerciality to the MC on 15 December 2005 i.e. after a delay of more than
eight months.

While agreeing to the audit observation regarding non-furnishing of notification of
the two discoveries D-24 and D-25, MoPNG in its response (July 2011) stated that
although the contractor did not provide the notification, DGH representative was
present during the testing of the wells.

As regards the delay in submission of the test report, MoPNG stated that the delay
occurred due to analysis of detailed testing results after observation of positive
indication of hydrocarbon in well D-24, and, subsequently, results were confirmed by
drilling of one more well (D-25). But the post-discovery timelines w.r.t. D-25
discovery was not compromised. MoPNG further mentioned that this practice had
since been streamlined, and proper discovery notifications as per PSC provisions
were being monitored.

7.4 Delay in submission/ review of appraisal programme

We noticed deficiencies relating to appraisal programme in respect of KG-OSN-
2001/2 block

jae | —

० 21011 69 e@ Appraisal Programme and Work Programme and Budget
he RIL) (WP&B) were submitted after a delay of 3 and 16 months
respectively.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Appraisal Programme and WP&B were reviewed after delays
of 13 and 8 months respectively.

In its reply (July 2011), MoPNG stated that there was a
stipulated time period in PSC for submission of declaration of
commerciality after carrying out appraisal programme. Since
the time period for submission of commerciality was fixed,
contractors had to carry out appraisal programme and then
submit DoC as per PSC period. Hence, delayed submission of
appraisal work programme and budget may not affect the
timeline prescribed in PSC for submission of DoC. However,
the observation made by audit in this regard was noted and
would be followed for future cases.

While we take note of MoPNG’s reply that they had noted the
audit observation, in fact the PSC provisions were not
adhered to.

7.5 Submission of Development Plan

Article 9 of Hazira PSC stipulates that within 90 days of the effective date (signing of
PSC i.e. September 1994), contractor was required to submit a Comprehensive
Development Plan. However, the contractor submitted the Field Development Plan
after a delay of seven years.

In reply (July 2011), MoPNG stated that at the time of award, the field had GIIP of 1.9
BCF and only one gas well ( Hazira — |) onland as per Information Docket. Generally,
the extent of the field could not be ascertained on the basis of one well data. Field
delineation was required to prepare the development plan.

The reply appears to be an afterthought, since such views were not found / recorded
in the Minutes of Meeting of MC / records produced to audit at DGH.

7.6 Operating Agreement

The PSC provisions stipulate that within 15 days of the effective date (i.e. the date of
signing of the PSC or the date of grant of the PEL, whichever is later), the
companies constituting the contractor should execute an Operating Agreement; a
copy of this agreement is to be furnished to the Government. We found that:

© or such hl period as agreed to by Government.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



e In the case of the MB-OSN-97/3 block (operator: RIL), we could not find
documented evidence of a copy of the agreement being provided by the
operator to the Government;

e Operating Agreements were executed after delays in CB-ONN-2000/1 block (4
months), KK-DWN-2000/2 (3 % months) and MB-OSN-2004/2 (2 months).

In reply, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the Operating Agreements were made
among the consortium partners. In our opinion, since the provision is stipulated in
the PSC to which Gol is also a party, DGH is required to monitor adherence to all

7 Management Committee

The NELP PSCs provide for nomination of two Gol representatives on the MC. Till
2007, DGH was nominating two of its officers as Gol representatives on the MC.
However, in March 2007, MoPNG clarified to DGH that:

e® The main objective of delegation of powers was to utilise the technical expertise
of DGH for better management of petroleum reservoirs and to function as a
repository of relevant technical data;

e Approving payment for contractors such as unfinished committed work
programme under the PSC and accepting such payments on behalf of Gol fell
within the purview of Gol.

Accordingly, MoPNG appointed its officers as one of the two Gol representatives on
the MC, with the other representative from DGH.

While forwarding (July 2011), the response of the operator of KG-DWN-98/3 to the
draft audit findings, MoPNG has clarified the following:

e The interpretation of the operator that decisions taken by members
representing Gol on the MC is construed to be the approval of Gol is not
correct. The PSC clearly identifies the difference between the approval of
members representing Gol on the PSC, and the approval of Gol of the sovereign
State. The PSC further clarifies that the MC shall not take any decision without
prior approval of Gol, where such approval is required.

e The operator’s statement that all procurement transactions are approved as
per procedures defined by the operator and approved by the MC, is thus
incorrect and should not be taken cognizance of.

e The approval of procurement procedure and the Development Plan, which is
within the purview of MC approving functions cannot be construed to be
approved by the Gol.

Me

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



(including Gol representatives thereon) and approval by Gol are entirely different
and distinct activities under the PSC provisions, and cannot be confused. This is, in

a sense, similar to the participation of Gol nominee/ representatives directors on
the PSU Board of Directors; approval of decisions/ actions by the PSU Board
(including Gol nominees/ representatives) cannot be construed as approval by Gol.

Notwithstanding the above position, the importance of Gol representatives on the
MC cannot be understated. Most actions, which would have a material impact on
Gol’s financial take, are taken at the level of MC (and not the Gol). Hence, the role of
Gol representatives on the MC in protecting Gol’s financial interests (besides
ensuring sound technical management and guidance — appropriate reservoir
management etc.) is critical.

However, we found numerous deficiencies in compliance with the PSC provisions
relating to the Management Committee relating to frequency of meetings,
circulation of notice and agenda to the members, and finalisation of minutes of
meeting:

© Out of 20 PSCs scrutinised by us, we found that MC meetings were not
conducted as per the prescribed frequency in respect of 7 PSCs (KK-
DWN-2003/1, RJ-ONN-2002/1, RJ-ON/90/1, CB-OS/2 and CB-ONN-2000/1, Mid &
South Tapti and Panna-Mukta). Further, due to incomplete records/ incorrect
numbering of the MC meetings/resolutions and non-availability/ non-production
of complete minutes/resolutions, frequency of the meetings could not be
verified in respect of 5 PSCs (Hazira, KG-DWN-98/3, MB-OSN-97/3, NEC-DWN-
2002/1 and MN-DWN-2004/3).

e Adherence to the prescribed procedure regarding issue of notices, circulation of
provisional agenda and finalization of minutes of meeting in a time bound
manner could not be ascertained due to incomplete records in respect of 8 PSCs
(Hazira, CB-OS/2, KG-DWN-98/3, KG-OSN-2001/2, MB-OSN-97/3, NEC-DWN-
2002/1, MN-DWN-2004/3 and RJ-ON-90/1).

In response to an audit enquiry as to why only 12 MC meetings were held in respect
of RJ-ON-90/1 block between May 1995 and June 2009, DGH stated (February 2010)
that it was handling about 250 PSCs and about 350 MLs with manpower strength.
Hence, it was not always possible to strictly adhere to the time schedules of MC
meetings.

Further, MoPNG, in its reply, stated (July 2011) that MC had been granted specific
roles under PSC provisions and adequate meetings were held so as to ensure the role
of MC. Depending on the circumstances, issues and operational requirement, MC
meetings were held. Further, profit sharing mechanism was well defined in the
_ <i of PSC and the quantum of profit flows from the books of accounts.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Auditors were also deployed by Government to get assurance on the integrity of
books of account.

A profit-sharing mechanism (as envisaged in these PSCs, as opposed to a simple
royalty formula) necessitates constant oversight and monitoring, with the role of
the government representatives on the Management Committee becoming critical.

Once this mechanism has been accepted by MoPNG and operationalised in
contractual form, it is incumbent on MoPNG and DGH to ensure that these controls
work effectively and in a timely manner.

7.8 Periodical Reporting

As per the PSC, the contractors were required to submit, within the prescribed time
limit, annual and quarterly reports to DGH covering various aspects such as:

® annual local procurement statements outlining their achievements in utilizing
Indian resources;

® quarterly statements of costs, expenditures and receipts;
® quarterly cost recovery statement; and
e end of year statement etc.

Test check of records, however, revealed deficiencies in this regard in respect of 13
PSCs KK-DWN-2003/1, MB-OSN-97/3, KG-DWN-98/3, KG-OSN-2001/2, MN-DWN-
2004/3, NEC-DWN-2002/1, CB-OS/2, Hazira field, CB-ONN-2000/1, CB-ON/1, KK-
DWN-2000/2, MB-OSN-2004/2 and RJ-ONN-2002/1. Details are given in Annexure
7.1.

In reply, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that the operators had been submitting reports
on utilization of Indian Resources, Quarterly Profit Petroleum Statement, End of Year
Statement, Monthly Report etc. However, the reply is not specific to the deficiencies
pointed out by audit.

7.9 Financial Issues

7.9.1 Submission of bank guarantee, financial and performance guarantee
and legal opinion

As per PSC provisions, the contractors were required to submit (a) a bank guarantee
(b) performance guarantee of the parent company® (c) and a legal opinion that the
guarantees were legally valid, enforceable and binding. If these were not submitted
in time, the PSC may be cancelled by the Government with written notice of 90 days.
Further, the bank guarantees were to be renewed at least 30 days before the expiry

me || or where there is no performance guarantee, from the company itself

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



of the guarantee period. However, we found deficiencies/ delays in the submission
of these guarantees, as summarised below:

Deficiencies

MB-OSN-97/3 e There was a delay of 5 months in submission of
performance guarantee and legal opinion by RIL

e Niko Resources did not furnish the performance guarantee
and legal opinion. It submitted the Bank Guarantee (with 5
months’ validity only upto 15 May 2002) after a delay of 18
months; also, from the available documentation, we could
not verify whether the guarantee was renewed till 18 July
2003 i.e. the date of assignment of Niko Resources’
participating interest to RIL.

KG-OSN-2001/2 e The contractors - HEPI and RIL - submitted the guarantees
after a delay of 82 and 17 days respectively. Further, the
bank guarantee submitted by HEPI, which had expired on
31 March 2004, was not got renewed after the expiry date.

In reply (December 2008), DGH stated that HEP! submitted
a proposal to the Government for assignment of 10 per
cent of its Participating Interest (PI) to M/s RIL on 14 June
2004. This proposal was processed at DGH and was under
consideration of MoPNG; approval of assignment of P! was
communicated by Government on 15 March 2005. Since
the Pl was proposed to be transferred to RIL, HEP! did not
renew the guarantee. The reply is not acceptable, as this
was not in compliance with the PSC provisions, and in any
case, the renewed bank guarantee could be released after
transfer of PI.

NEC-2002/1 e The contractors - RIL and HEP! - submitted the
performance guarantee after delays of 5 and 2 months
respectively. Further, HEPI submitted the bank guarantee
after a delay of 3 months; also, the bank guarantee was
renewed, after its expiry, only up to 14 July2006 instead of
22 July 2008.

KG-DWN-98/3 e From the available records, we could not verify whether
the requisite guarantees were submitted by Niko
i

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



farce | Deficiencies

WINS WSL VER) © There was a delay in submission of performance guarantee
and legal opinion of 2 months by RIL.

CB-ONN-2000/1 e There were delays in submission of performance
guarantee and legal opinion of 2 and 4 months by GSPC
and JTI respectively.

1 111“ ० RIL did not submit the bank guarantee and performance
Mid and South guarantee,
Tapti

Inreply (July 2011),

*e MOoPNG stated (July 2011) that a strong system for monitoring the requisite
guarantee was currently in place.

® Without responding to the deficiencies pointed out by audit, MoPNG mentioned
that MB-OSN-97/3 and KG-OSN-2001/2 blocks had been relinquished. No
justification was also given in respect of NEC-2002/1, MN-DWN-2004/3 and CB-
ONN-2000/1.

e As regards KG-DWN-DWN-98/3, MoPNG sent only a copy of Financial and
Performance Guarantee, copy of legal opinion and bank guarantee were not
furnished.

e As regards Panna-Mukta and Mid and South Tapti, MoPNG stated that since RIL
did not have a parent company, they were not required to submit the financial
and performance guarantee. The reply is not tenable, as Article 29.1 of the PSC
clearly stipulated that each of the companies was required to submit a financial
and performance guarantee

7.9.2 Non-submission of Insurance coverage

The PSC provisions stipulated that the contractors are required to obtain and
maintain insurance coverage for and in relation to petroleum operations™ during the
term of PSC and should furnish to Gol certificates evidencing that such coverage was
in effect. Further, such insurance policies should include Gol as additional insured
and should waive subrogation against the Gol.

84 For such amounts and against such risks as are customarily or prudently insured in the international
Me industry in accordance with Good International Petroleum Industry Practices

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Due to non-production of records relating to insurance coverage, we could not verify
whether requisite insurance coverage in respect of 7 PSCs (CB-ONN-2000/1, CB-
OS/2, Hazira, KG-OSN-2001/2, KK-DWN-2003/1, MB-OSN-97/3 and MN-DWN-
2004/3) was obtained and maintained by the contractors.

In reply, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that Article 24 of NELP PSC extensively deals with
the insurance required to be obtained by contractors and all insurance policies
include Gol as additional insured and waive subrogation against Gol. While informing
that audit exceptions on insurance flagged by Gol appointed auditors were pursued
and resolved, MoPNG further requested audit to advise them for any other issues to
be covered in the Insurance clause. MoPNG’s reply is not specific to the points raised
by audit regarding non- production of records relating to insurance coverage.

Further, in the case of Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti PSCs, each contractor
was securing separate insurance to cover its participating interest for offshore
installation with different types of risks to a different extent, resulting in non-
uniformity in coverage and premium. In response (September 2010), MoPNG stated
that insurance cover was essentially a business decision of the contractor, who had
invested his capital upfront and aimed at protecting his investment, and was also
based on the contractor’s risk perception and degree of risk aversion. If the
insurance policy submitted fulfilled the requirement of PSC, the policy would be
acceptable to the Government. The reply is not acceptable, as MoPNG in February
2007 had instructed DGH to formulate a standardised policy for insurance coverage
for consideration by Government. However, DGH had not formulated any such
policy.

7.10 Royalty

e In respect of CB-OS/2 block, we found that due to delay in notification of norms
for natural gas, the contractor deflated royalty payments by charging high post
wellhead costs during the year 2006-07. Comparative analysis of royalty
remittance statements revealed that during 2006-07, the post well head
expenses ranged from 22 to 41 per cent and during 2007-08, the same ranged
between just 8 and 18 per cent.

e¢ Comparative analysis of monthly production statement and royalty remittance
statement in respect of CB-OS-2 block for the month of March 2008 revealed
that against the payable royalty of Rs. 7.63 crore, the licensee had paid Rs. 6.86
crore to the Government due to wrong adoption of production figure of oil for
the month of March 2008. This resulted in short payment of Rs. 0.77 crore.

In response (July 2011):

i Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


e As regards the issue of deflated royalty payments, MoPNG accepted (July 2011)
audit’s view, indicating that DGH, through close monitoring of statutory levies,
had raised these issues, which had been reported by audit.

e Regarding short payment of Rs. 0.77 crore, MoPNG intimated that ONGC, the
licensee, was yet to comply with the demand for Rs.47 million and USS 3.8
million as short payment of royalty, and had also been advised to provide details
required to calculate the short paid royalty for the years 2004-05 and 2005-06.

e¢ MoPNG’s reply does not address the specific issue of short payment of royalty
due to wrong adoption of production figures of oil for the month of March 2008.

7.11 Measurement of Petroleum

PSC provisions prescribe detailed procedures to ensure accurate measurement of
quantity and determination of quality of petroleum, so as to facilitate accurate
Government revenue from petroleum operations, viz.

e Before commencement of production, the Gol and the contractor should
mutually agree on (a) methods to be employed for measurement of volume of
petroleum production, (b) point(s) at which petroleum should be measured, (c)
frequency of inspections and testing of measurement appliances and relevant
procedures thereto, (d) consequences of determination of error(s) in
measurement.

e The contractor should give MC/ Gol timely notice of its intention to conduct
measuring operations or any agreed alteration for such operations, and Gol has
the right to be present and supervise, directly or through authorised operations,
such operations.

However, due to non-production of complete records in this regard, we could not
verify whether MoPNG/ DGH ensured strict compliance with the PSC provisions in
respect of Hazira field and CB-OS-2 block.

7.12 Accounting and Auditing
7.12.1 Delayed/ non-submission of chart of accounts

As per PSC, within 90 days of the effective date, the contractor should submit and
discuss proposed outline of charts of accounts and Gol should respond within 90
days. Further, Contractor and Gol should agree on chart of accounts within 180 days
from the effective date. Audit, however, observed the following deficiencies in this
regard:

e There was a delay in submission of Chart of Accounts in respect of CB-OS/2 (6
years), RJ-ONN-2002/1 (4 years), MB-OSN-97/3 (4% months) and KG-DWN-98/3
(4% months).

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


Due to incomplete record provided by DGH, the fact regarding Government’s
response and the agreement between Contractor and Government could not be
verified in respect of KG-DWN-98/3, MB-OSN-97/3 and MN-DWN-2004/3 blocks.

Adherence of timelines in respect of any of the above three stipulations could
not be verified in respect of CB-ON/1, MB-OSN-2004/2, KK-DWN-2000/2, KK-
DWN-2003/1, NEC-DWN-2002/1, CB-ONN-2000/1 blocks and Hazira field, as
relevant records were not made available to Audit.

In reply, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that accounts were being regularly submitted by
the contractors of these initial NELP blocks in the format that is adequate to monitor
the accounts. However, compliance with PSC provisions on this requirement had
been streamlined in later NELP rounds.

7.12.2 Delay in submission/adoption/approval of audited accounts

As per PSC provisions, annual audited accounts were to be submitted to the MC
within 60 days of the end of the year. Further, the MC was to approve the auditor’s
report within 30 days of submission. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed the following:

There were delays ranging between 20 to 49 days in submission and between 1
to 9 % months in approval of the audited accounts in respect of 4 blocks (KG-
OSN-2001/2, KK-DWN-2003/1, NEC-DWN-2002/1 and MN-DWN-2004/3).
Although, no time line was provided in the PSC of KG-DWN-98/3 block regarding
adoption/approval of the audited accounts by the MC after their submission,
Audit noted significant delays (ranging between 8 and 20 % months) in approval
of the accounts for the years 2000-01 to 2006-07. Details in this regard are given
in Annexure-7.2 and Annexure-7.3.

The process of approval and adoption of annual audited accounts had not been
completed in respect of RJ-ON-90/1 (2006 and 2007) and CB-ONN-2000/1 (for
2001-02 to 2006-07). Further, the accounts of KG-OSN-2001/2 for 2007-08 were
pending for adoption (November 2008) after 5 months of their submission (June
2008).

In case of Panna-Mukta and Mid & South Tapti contract areas, the accounts had
not been adopted by the MC since inception i.e. 1994-95 due to non resolution
of pending Audit Exceptions.

Timely approval and adoption of audited accounts could not be verified in
respect of NEC-DWN-2002/1 (for 2005-06 and 2007-08) and KK-DWN-2000/2 (for
2002-03 and 2003-04), as supporting documents/MC Resolutions relating to
adoption and approval of audited accounts for those years were not found on
record.

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


In reply (July 2011), MoPNG stated that:

e Accounts of exploratory blocks were being adopted regularly in general.
However, in some cases, due to disagreement on expenditure, work programme
or related issues, the adoption got delayed. Nevertheless, the impact was
immaterial, due to the fact that no cost petroleum was involved during
exploration phase. We do not agree, as non-adherence to the prescribed
timelines is against the spirit of PSCs.

e As regards Panna-Mukta and Tapti, there had been a wide variation in the figures
indicated by the contractor and Government, and the Contractor invoked
arbitration.

7.12.3 Non-compliance with Gol notified audit exceptions

As per PSCs, Gol should notify audit exceptions based on audits conducted by its
representatives or CA/ consulting firms within 120 days following completion of the
audit, and the contractor should answer the notice of exception within 120 days.
Where the contractor failed to answer within the stipulated time, exceptions should
prevail. We, however, observed that:

e In respect of CB-OS/2, DGH had not ensured compliance of audit exceptions for
the years 1998-99 to 2003-04 relating to issues of policy for charging inventory to
cost, parent company overheads, sale of gas etc.

e Accounts of the Panna-Mukta and Tapti JV since inception had not been
approved by the Government, pending settlement of audit objections raised by
the Auditors appointed by the Government.

In response, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that:

e As regards CB-OS-2, while agreeing with audit’s view, the issue was being
addressed in line with PSC provisions for possible reversal. CAG’s advice on the
issue would strengthen Gol claim.

e In respect of Panna-Mukta and Tapti, an amount of USS 80 million was recovered
under Panna Mukta PSC in respect of short paid profit petroleum for the period
2002-06. MoPNG also proposed to recover USS 78 million for the year 2006-07
from Panna Mukta PSC after confirmation from CAG Audit. An amount of USS
0.70 million was also proposed to be recovered from Mid and South Tapti PSC,
subject to arbitration.

7.13 Work Programme and Budget (WP&B)

The PSC provisions stipulate that the annual Work Programme and Budget (WP&B)
for Exploration/ Development and Production Operations were to be submitted by

the Contractor to the Management at least 90 days before the start of the financial

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



year — for review in the case of exploration operations, and for approval in the case
of development and production operations. We, however, found that:

e The delays in submission of WP&B ranging from 1 to 10 months in 12 PSCs (KG-
DWN-98/3, KG-OSN-2001/2, MB-OSN-97/3, NEC-DWN-2002/1, CB-ONN-2000/1,
CB-ON/1, Hazira, CB-OS-2, KK-DWN-2000/2, RJ-ON-90/1, Panna-Mukta and RJ-
ONN-2002/1).

e In respect of 3 blocks (KG-OSN-2001/2, KG-DWN-98/3 and CB-ONN-2000/1),
Exploration & Development WP&B were reviewed/ approved after the end of
the concerned financial year. In fact, in the case of CB-ONN-2000/1, the
exploration budget for 2005-06 was reviewed only in March 2006 and the budget
for 2006-07 was not reviewed even as of July 2008.

Block-wise and year-wise details in this regard are given in Annexure-7.4 and
Annexure 7.5 respectively.

In response to audit enquiries regarding delays in respect of the RJ-ON-90/1 block,
DGH responded (October 2010) that the process of review and approval got delayed
on some occasions, because of delayed submission of Operating Committee (00)
approved WP&B and clarifications thereafter. Further, operations may not be
stopped for want of MC’s final approval; hence, in anticipation of approval, the
operator continued with the work programme based on the OC recommendations.

Further, MoPNG stated (July 2011) that:

e PSC did not envisage day-to-day monitoring or oversight on the part of
government representatives.

e® There were instances where the operator found difficulty in placing budgets
before MC as per time schedule due to factors like dispute in the operating
committee stage. In RJ-ON-90/1, there had been continuous lack of agreement
between ONGC, the licensee and companies, which arise out of the dispute on
royalty liability. There were no quick-fix solutions for these issues.

e The operator was not permitted to drill a well before the well location was
approved by DGH. The onus of obtaining MC approval lay with the operator, and
work programme and associated cost not agreed were not allowed as contract
cost for the purpose of profit computation. Therefore, there was adequate
control over E&P operation in a license/lease area.

In our opinion, timely submission and approval of the Annual Work Programme &

Budget is essential. DGH’s approval for well location, before drilling, is not a
substitute for regular budgetary control.

6 _ of representatives of the contractors only (and not the Government)

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Ashok Chawla Committee Report

We are given to understand that the report of the Ashok Chawla Committee on allocation of
natural resources also draws similar conclusions regarding the IM-based profit-sharing
formula. This committee had, inter alia, representatives from MoPNG and the Ministry of
Finance, so it can safely be presumed that its conclusions were well considered. However,

the report is not currently available in the public domain.

According to media reports, the Committee has stated that the system “gives incentive (to

an operator) to increase his investment, or front-end his work plan in order to see that the

threshold where Government’s profit take rises rapidly is not reached”.

Citing the example of KG-DWN-98/3, the Committee has stated that “the relationship
between the pre-tax IM and the share of contractor profit petroleum changes dramatically
once the pre-tax IM crosses 2.5, with the government’s share increasing from 28 per cent
to 85 per cent. It is useful to remember that this schedule is bid by the operator, and not

determined by the Government.”

Further, according to the Committee, “a high share of some pre-tax IM will help to win the
bid, depending on the financial made of evaluation used, but it does raise concerns that
such a radical change would provide very strang incentives for any operator to adopt all
investment and strategies possible to ensure that the pre-tax IM stays within the 2.5
limit”.

The report clearly points out the risks associated with the IM-based formula for sharing of
profit petroleum, especially with a steep jump in profit sharing from one slab to another.
In our view, even the linearity introduced in the sliding scale for IM slabs from NELP-VII

onwards does not fully address these risks.

The oversight/ control of Gol representatives on high value procurement decisions is also
very limited in scope (largely restricted to prior intimation of the list of pre-qualified
bidders). In fact, a comparison of the procurement procedure under PSCs in Bangladesh and
India reveals that the clauses are similar, except that the Bangladesh PSCs require approval
by the Management Committee for high value procurements (typically greater than USS
500,000). This clause is, however, missing from the Indian PSCs in almost all its versions.

Our audit review also revealed that, by and large, the DGH and the Ministry through the
Management Committee were ill equipped to pay adequate attentiion to protecting - at
every stage of E&P, be it exploration, development or production - Gol’s financial interests.
Adequate attention was not paid as to how every proposal/ decision would potentially
affect Gol’s share of profit petroleum. In addition to their other inadequacies, the
constraints adequately skilled resources with MoPNG/ DGH for monitoring several
hundred PSCs simultaneously cannot also be ignored. By contrast, it is inconceivable that
the private contractor would fail to protect his financial interests, and assess ever

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Private sector participation in hydrocarbon exploration and production in India is now
robustly established, with major crude oil and natural gas discoveries in different basins
putting India firmly on the global E&P map. The Production Sharing Contract (PSC) - the
basis of the contract between the Gol and the (private) contractors — has undergone several
mutations from those in respect of discovered fields to “pre-NELP” exploration blocks to the
blocks under different rounds of the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP). However, our
audit indicated that there is considerable scope for improvement in the management of
hydrocarbon E&P with private sector participation in the light of experience gained by
governmental agencies over the years.

8.1 Structure of PSC

The PSC, as it currently stands, is based on a scaled formula for profit sharing between the
Gol and the private contractors. This is based on a critical parameter — Investment Multiple
(IM) - which is essentially an index of the capital-intensive nature of the E&P project i.e. the
amount of “capex” on exploration and development activities relative to income. The slabs
for profit sharing are so designed that more the capital intensive the project (i.e. lower IM),
the lower the Gol share of “profit petroleum” (which could be as low as 5 to 10 per cent).
Contrarily, the higher the IM (i.e less capital intensive vis-a-vis income), the higher the Gol
share of “profit petroleum” (which could be as high as 85 per cent).

In practice, however, the private contractors seem to have inadequate incentives to reduce
capital expenditure and substantial incentive to increase capital expenditure or “front-end”
capital expenditure, so as to retain the IM in the lower slabs or to delay movement to the
higher slabs.

The structure of the IM-based profit sharing formula (especially when there is a huge jump
in Gol’s profit share from 28 per cent to 85 per cent on an IM slab of 2.5 or more) is such
that in certain scenarios, an increase in capital expenditure, upto a point, could conceivably
result in an increase in the contractor’s share of profit petroleum, despite a reduction in the
total profit petroleum as well as Gol’s share of profit petroleum. Further, “front-ending” of
capital expenditure (i.e. skewed towards the initial phases) decreases the IM, and postpones
the movement to higher IM slabs; this results in a reduction in Gol share on a discounted
cash flow basis, since the slabs involving higher Gol share come later, rather than earlier.

Operational control of E&P operations is largely with the private operators, and the Gol’s
oversight role is restricted essentially to its representation (through MoPNG and/ or DGH) in
the Management Committee for the block, especially in approval of Annual Work
Programmes and Budgets and Field Development Plans, as well as a few approval functions
delineated in the PSC.

Mm Ef Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



investment/ operational proposal to see whether it would result in incremental revenues for
it both in terms of cost recovery and contractor’s share of profit petroleum.

Given the similar conclusions that two independent agencies viz. the Chawla Committee
and Audit have reached as regards the adverse impact of the profit sharing mechanism in
protecting Gol’s share (linked to the IM), designed in the late 1990s, there does seem to be
enough ground to revisit the formula. The PSC as drawn up then, was with the limited

expertise available with the Gol at that point of time. In view of the fact that, we have
now gained the knowledge , there is need to conclusively address this issue in respect of
future PSCs.

MoPNG stated (July 2011) that they were prepared to look at alternative formulas with an
open mind and would consider the suggestion of the CAG and the Ashok Chawla Committee
with an open mind and take a final view on merits.

8.2 Recommendations for Future PSCs

The stated strength of the profit sharing mechanism is the sharing of risks between the
contractor and the Government - the profits are low or non-existent, both parties suffer
equally.

For future PSCs, we recommend that the IM-linkage with the profit sharing formula (even
with the linear sliding scale introduced from NELP-VII onwards) be removed by the Gol.
Instead, the biddable profit-sharing percentage should be a single percentage. This will
reduce the incentive for skewed volume and timing of capital expenditure resulting in very
low Gol share of PP. Further, in order to ensure a modicum of control, very high value
procurement decisions above a specified limit should be subject to approval by the MC,
more specifically the approval of the Gol representatives. Such a mechanism already exists
in PSCs operating in Bangladesh.

8.3 Bid Evaluation Criteria

The bid evaluation criteria currently give weightage to technical/ financial ability and two
biddable parameters - committed exploratory work and fiscal package (royalty + Gol share
of profit petroleum). As regards fiscal package, the current evaluation model generally
involves multiple scenarios of oil reserves and oil prices (typically high, medium and low) as
well as a projected profile.

The assumptions based on which calculations of fiscal packages of different bidders are
made are completely hypothetical. In the absence of high quality seismic data, let alone
drilling and discovery findings, estimates of oil/ gas reserves and production profiles, as also
projected capital and operating expenses and even crude oil and natural gas prices, is
completely speculative. Admittedly, the evaluation model is applied consistently across all
bidders. However, when the current system allows multiple bidding points (viz. different Gol
shares of PP for different IM slabs), these hypothetical assumptions can not only make a

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



significant difference as to who comes out as the winning bidder, but can also convey
extremely unrealistic assumptions about what Gol’s share of PP will be (e.g. when will Gol’s
share of PP reach the highest IM slab?).

Consequently, we recommend that the bidders should be allowed to only make a single
point bid, which can be compared straightaway without resorting to hypothetical
assumptions.

As regards the biddable exploratory work programme, we are generally in agreement with
the bid evaluation process, except for the system of awarding points for well depth. As
pointed out in Chapter 4 (relating to KG-DWN-98/3), it is unrealistic and impractical, without
having accurate and reliable seismic data, to bid upfront how deep the well should be
drilled, and then expect that, notwithstanding geological objectives, the well will be drilled
to the committed depth even if it means a waste of money.

Consequently, in future, while considering the bid evaluation criteria, we recommend that
either no weightage be allocated for well depth, or alternatively, well depth commitments
be categorised into two groups — wells above and below a specified depth, e.g., 1500 or
2000 metres and points be awarded accordingly.

8.4 Management of existing PSCs

The vast majority of blocks with high prospects for hydrocarbon discovery have already
been awarded through various pre-NELP/ NELP rounds, and Gol has no option but to work
within the constraints of the existing PSC structure and clauses to the fullest extent possible.

8.4.1 Development Plans and Annual Work Programmes and Budgets

It is inconceivable that a private operator/ contractor will make investments in absolute as
well as incremental terms, in petroleum operations under the PSC without assessing
whether such investments would result in increased revenues for him in terms of cost
recovery and contractor’s share of profit petroleum. It is necessary for MoPNG and DGH to
function in a similar manner, with regard to Gol’s financial interests. Consequently we
recommend the following:

e Review and approval of development plans should be considered not just from a
“technical perspective” viz. how best can oil and gas be extracted from the reservoirs,
but also from a financial perspective — not only overall (i.e. what is the project NPV, Rate
of Return etc.), but specifically from Gol’s point of view viz. what are the projections of
royalty and Gol share of profit petroleum? What are the risks to these revenues? How
will increases/ decreases in capital expenditure, reserves, reservoir productivity, prices
etc. affect Gol’s financial take?

e While reviewing and approving development plans, Gol representatives on the MC as
well as DGH and MoPNG should ensure that detailed and appropriately validated
estimates of Gol take and contractor take are included as an integral part of these plans

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


at the approval stage. A suitable range for Gol take, say + 15, 20 or 25 per cent, as
considered appropriate by MoPNG, could be stipulated.

Approval by MoPNG of such development plans should be on the clear stipulation that
any changes in capital and operating expenditure, expenditure commitments,
production quantities and other factors, which have the impact of reducing the
Investment Multiple and Gol share of profit petroleum beyond the stipulated range
must be submitted for prior approval by Gol representatives on the MC, with detailed
justification.

Annual Work Programmes and Budgets should be strictly in line with the approved
development plans. Any deviations or changes vis-a-vis the development plan which
have the impact of reducing the IM and Gol share of profit petroleum beyond the

Stipulated range must be submitted for prior approval of the MC. Similarly, any
significant variations from the approved Work Programme and Budgets with similar
impact beyond the stipulated range must also be subject to prior approval.

Incurring of any costs which vary from the Development Plans and Annual Work
Programmes & Budgets on an overall basis, as well as in terms of significant line items
with significant adverse impact on IM and Gol share of profit petroleum — beyond the
stipulated range - without prior approval of Gol representatives on MC should
automatically be ineligible for cost recovery.

While some of these recommendations could be misconstrued as hampering operational

flexibility in petroleum operations by the contractor, the importance of the overall
objective of protecting Gol’s revenue interests cannot be ignored under any circumstances.

8.4.2 Procurement Activities

The provisions relating to procurement procedures in the PSCs do not provide for adequate

oversight / control by Gol representatives on procurement processes. However, given the

existing provisions, we recommend the following measures for protecting Gol’s financial

interest.

.

The objective of effective procurement is to ensure optimum, not necessarily lowest,
prices through effective competition. As long as adequate number of ‘responsive’
financial bids, typically three or more, from reputed vendors, who are pre-qualified after
following due process, are received and duly considered (i.e., not withdrawn,
disqualified on technical or other grounds, deviations/ non-responsiveness or otherwise
not considered), generate adequate competitive tension, the probability of effective
procurement at optimum costs remains high.

However, when high value contracts are awarded on the basis of single ‘responsive’
financial bids, in our opinion, these are awarded without competition, effectively on
nomination basis. In all such cases, prior approval of the MC should be necessary for
Mm awards. Post facto approval, with appropriate justification, for emergent

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


procurement decisions may also be considered. Similar provisions would also apply to all
procurement decisions involving post-priced bid opening changes to scope, quantities,
work, prices, conditions etc.

e Also, the practice of repeated extensions, subsequent substantial variations in scope etc.
of existing contracts is also not in line with the existing PSC procurement provisions,
which incidentally makes no mention of extensions. Extensions or scope variations for
high value contracts, beyond the contractually stipulated extensions, should also be
subject to prior MC approval, with provisions for post facto approval in emergent cases.

8.4.3 Relinquishment of area, and delineation of discovery and development
areas

As pointed out in earlier chapters, the entire PSC process is designed to ensure that the
private contractors fully explore the contract area within designated timelines, relinquish
areas where hydrocarbon prospects appear poor in a phased manner, and retain only those
areas where hydrocarbon discoveries are made, relinquishing the remaining area for re-
allocation — through a competitive bidding process - to other potential bidders, whose
hopes/ views in terms of hydrocarbon prospectivity differ (either on account of technical
and other capabilities or in terms of their risk appetite) from the contract holders who have
relinquished such area. We, therefore, recommend the following:

The stipulated timelines and processes in the PSC for relinquishment of contract area
should, under no circumstances, be relaxed, and compliance with these provisions should
be invariably ensured.

Further, the discovery and development areas should be rigorously delineated, keeping
strictly to the discoveries made through exploratory and appraisal well drilling and proper

delineation of reservoir boundaries. Attempts by contractors for delineation of excessively
wide discovery/ development areas through elastic (and incorrect) interpretation of
hydrocarbon discovery should be strongly rebutted.

8.4.4 Compliance with other PSC provisions

The PSC is a contractual document, and compliance with every contractual clause is of
utmost importance. It would be inappropriate to distinguish between “major” and “minor”
clauses, and neglect monitoring of compliance with so-called “minor” PSC clauses.

We recommend that DGH, and where necessary, MoPNG should put into place adequate
and effective measures to ensure that compliance with all provisions of the PSC are fully
monitored on a timely basis and appropriately documented, and action taken against
operators on a timely and consistent basis, for non-compliance with PSC provisions. For such
purposes, strengthening of the resource basis of DGH in terms of adequate quantity of
skilled resources may be necessary.

DGH should also consider developing a comprehensive PSC monitoring system, which will
not only जज .. details of compliance with PSC provisions for any block/ contract at a

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



glance, but will also enable operators to “file” returns/ documents/ information
electronically through the web and/or e-mail. The cost of developing (and maintaining) such
an IT system will be miniscule, compared to the total Gol PP revenues as well as the
potential (although not exactly quantifiable) gains from more effective and timely
monitoring of compliance.

MoPNG has assured that conclusions and recommendations drawn by CAG would be
considered for appropriate action.

(Anand Mohan Bajaj)

New Delhi Principal Director of Audit
Dated: 18-8-2011 Economic & Service Ministries
Countersigned
Vo bo °
New Delhi (Vinod Rai)
Dated: 24-8-2011 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Mm Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


Annexure 3.1

Details of PSCs covered in Audit Sample

| Name of | Operator
MB-OSN- RIL
97/3
NEC- RIL
DWN-
2002/1
MN- RIL
DWN-
2004/3
KG-OSN- RIL
2001/02
KK-DWN- RIL
Me

Brief description

MB-OSN-97/3 was a shallow water block located in Mumbai
offshore. It was awarded under NELP-I round. The PSC, which was
signed on 12 April 2000 with RIL and Niko with 90 and 10 percent
Participating Interest respectively, was made effective from 7 June
2000. From July 2003, RIL held 100 percent Pl. The total area of
the block was 5740 sq. kms. The operator could not complete the
Minimum Work Programme relating to drilling of two wells and
relinquished the block at the end of Phase-| after availing two
extensions of 12 months each. No discovery was made in the
block.

NEC-DWN-2002/1, an offshore deep water block located in North
East Coast, was awarded to the Joint venture of RIL and HEPI
under NELP-IV round. The PSC was signed on 6 February 2004 with
RIL (with 90 percent Pl) and HEP! (with 10 percent Pl). The
effective date of the PEL is 18 March 2004. HEPI transferred its PI
to RIL, which was approved by MoPNG in July 2008. The total
original area of the block was 25,565 sq. km. The block is under
Exploration Phase-Il and 25 percent area i.e. 6391 sq. km. has been
relinquished by the operator at the end of Phase-I. No discovery
has been made in the block.

MN-DWN2004/3, an offshore deep water block located in
Mahanadi basin, was awarded to RIL under NELP-VI round. The
PSC for the block was signed on 2 March 2007 with RIL. The
effective date of the PEL is 15 May 2007. The total original area of
the block is 11,316 sq. km. The block is under Exploration Phase-I.
No discovery has been made in the block.

KG-OSN-2001/02 is a shallow water block located in Krishna
Godawari basin, which was awarded under NELP-III round to the
consortium of RIL and HEPI with 90 and 10 percent PI respectively.
The PSC was signed on 4 February 2003. The effective date of the
PEL is 3 April 2003. Presently, RIL holds 100 percent PI. The total
original area of the block was 210 sq. km. Two discoveries have
been made in the block. The operator opted not to enter Phase-ll
at the end of Phase-l, and had retained the whole area to carry out
Appraisal Programme after availing two extensions - 6 and 5 %
months.

KK-DWN-2003/1, a deep water block located in the Kerala Konkan
basin, was awarded to RIL under NELP-V round. The PSC for the

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Name of | Operator Brief description

block/
field

block was signed on 23 September 2005. The effective date of the
PEL is 23 January 2006. The total original area of the block is
18,245 sq. km. The block is under Exploration Phase. No discovery
has been made in the block.

CB-ON/1_ RIL The PSC for CB-ON/1, a pre-NELP (7" round) onshore block located
at Cambay basin, was signed with M/s Okland International with
100 percent on 16 July 1998. With effect from 31 March 2005, M/s
Okland assigned 50 percent PI to Tullow India Op. Ltd. (1101), 40
percent PI to RIL and remaining 10 percent PI to Okland Offshore
Holding Ltd. (OOHL). ONGC is the licensee and has 30 percent pre-
emptive right in case of commercial discovery. Presently, RIL is the
operator. PEL for the block is effective from 5 September 2003.
The block is under Exploration Phase-lll and there is no discovery.
In the third phase, the operator has retained 1533 sq. km. i.e. 25
percent of the total 6133 sq. km. original area.

KK-DWN- ONGC KK-DWN-2000/2, an offshore deep water block located in the
2000/2 Kerala Konkan basin was awarded under NELP-Il round to a
consortium of ONGC and GAIL with 85 and 15 percent Pl
respectively. Total area of the block measured 20,998 sq. km. The
PSC was signed on 17 July 2001 and made effective from the date
of issue of PEL i.e. 16 August 2001. After completing the
committed MWP, ONGC relinquished the whole block at the end

of Phase-I.
RJ-ONN- OIL RJ-ONN-2002/1 is an onshore block located in Rajasthan, which
2002/1 was awarded under NELP-IV round to a consortium of OIL and

ONGC with 60 and 40 percent PI respectively. The PSC was signed
on 6 February 2004. The effective date of the contract is 22 June
2004. The block was under Exploration Phase-ll. An extension of 6
months was granted to the contractor at the end of Phase-l. After
relinquishing 2475 sq. km. i.e. 25 percent of the original 9900 sq.
km. area, the consortium had retained 7425 sq. km. area in the 2™
phase.

MB-OSN- Petrogas MB-OSN-2004/2 is a shallow water block located in Mumbai

2004/2 offshore, which was awarded under NELP-VI round to a
consortium of Petrogas, GAIL, IOC, GSPC and HPCL each having 20
percent PI. The PSC was signed on 2 March 2007. The effective
date of the contract is 21 May 2007. Total area of the block is 741
sq. km. The block is under Exploration Phase-|, and no discovery
has been made.

10 CB-OS-2 CEIL CB-OS-2, a pre-NELP exploration offshore block, is located in the

4 Gulf of Khambat on the West coast of India. The PSC for the block
Lakshmi

Performance Audit th Hydrocarbon PSCs



b
5

B

Be
&

CB-OS-2

Gauri

CB-ONN-
2000/1

Hazira

PG-ONN-
2001/1

CY-OSN-
2000/1

MB-
DWN-
2000/1

Name of | Operator

CEIL

GSPC

Niko
Resources

ONGC

ONGC

ONGC

Brief description

was signed with the Joint Venture of ONGC (Licensee), Tata
Petrodyne Limited (TPL) and Cairn Energy India Pty Ltd (CEIL-
Operator) in June 1998 with initial 2 of 10, 45 and 45 percent
respectively. The total contract area of the block was 3534 sq.
kms. There are two major discoveries i.e. Lakshmi Gas and Gauri
Gas. Oil was also discovered subsequently in both the fields.
Lakshmi and Gauri fields are producing gas since November 2003
and April 2004 respectively. Gauri field is producing oil from
October 2006, and Lakshmi from July 2007.

CB-ONN-2000/1, an onland block located at Cambay basin was
awarded under NELP-II round to a consortium of GSPC, GAIL and
JTI with 40, 40 and 20 percent PI respectively. The PSC was signed
in July 2001 and the effective date was 7 January 2002. Presently,
GSPC and GAIL hold 50 percent PI each. Two discoveries have been
made in the block. Out of the original total contract area of 1424
sq. km., the operator has retained 14.1 sq. km. as development
area.

Hazira is a small size producing field located in Cambay basin. The
field was already discovered in 1969. The PSC for the field was
signed on 23 September 1994 with Niko Resources (having 33.33
percent Pl) and GSPCL (with 66.67 percent PI). Out of the total 50
sq. km area of the field, 22.7102 sq. km falls offshore and 27.0214
sq km falls onshore. Mining lease for the field was granted in
October 2005.

PG-ONN-2001/1 exploratory block under NELP-III round awarded
to ONGC with 100% PI. It is an onland block located in KG-PG
basin. The PSC was signed on 4.2.2003 and PEL was granted on
4.7.2003. The block is in exploration phase (June 2008).

CY-OSN-2000/1 exploratory block under NELP-Il round was
awarded to ONGC with 100% PI. It is an offshore block located in
Cauvery basin. The PSC was signed on 17.7.2001 and PEL was
issued on 16.8.2001. The block was relinquished in Phase-Il on
15.2.2007 without completing the committed one well. The cost
for unfinished work progamme of one well was paid to the
Government.

MB-DWN-2000/1 exploratory deep water block in Mumbai
Offshore Basin under NELP-II round was awarded to consortium of
ONGC (85%) and IOC (15%). The PSC was signed on 17.7.2001. The
block was relinquished in Phase-I without drilling the committed
three wells. The cost for unfinished work progamme of one well
was paid to the Government.

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Name of | Operator Brief description

17 Ratna Premier Ratna-R Series fields located in Western Offshore under second

series Oil, UK round of development bidding awarded (1993) to a consortium of
M/s Essar Oil Limited and M/s Premier Oil Pacific Limited, UK
(designed Operator) with a participating interest of 50% and 10%
respectively in March 1996. ONGC is having participating interest
of 40% in the Joint Venture. The Production Sharing Contract is
yet to be signed between GOI and Joint Venture. The field still
remains with ONGC and is at present lying in abandoned
condition.

Summary of blocks selected for supplementary scrutiny of operators’
records

Name __ of | Operator | Brief description

block/ field

KG-DWN- RIL The KG-DWN-98/3 Block (also referred to as KG-D6) was awarded in
98/3 NELP-I in 2000 to the RIL-Niko consortium.

Panna- BGEPIL The fields Panna-Mukta and Tapti were discovered and operated by

Mukta (primary 01 and Natural Gas commission under nomination basis till 1994. In

Operator) January 1994, the Government of India awarded the fields to a

consortium of Enron Oil and Gas India Ltd (30 per cent), Reliance

Mid ent India Limited. (RIL) (30 per cent) and ONGC as Govt. nominee (40 per

cent). The PSC was signed on 22 December 1994. In 2002, the PI of

Enron was taken over by British Gas Exploration and Production
India Limited (BGEPIL).

South Tapti

२॥-013-90/1 ८६ The PSC for this Rajasthan block was signed between GOI, Shell India
Production Development B.V. (SIPD) and ONGC in May 1995.
Subsequently, SIPD assigned its 100 percent PI to Cairn Energy India
Limited (CEIL) between September 1998 to June 2003.

Performance lh of Hydrocarbon PSCs



“Manoosip vO'TT'SO #0:592
2
2 एगरप्पवा$ 7९५ 4ण४५००० #0टा'टट #0%010

354 sad sy

dai jo
uo|ss}wiqns

a
Sd ed sy

dai
yo jenoiddy

5258 uoquor01pAH fo pny aouDWOfiag

६0+%0' 20

उग्फ्ष्पण्०

ग्प्रथ्श्उग्त

६0६0+ट

६00८ Aew

354 sed sy

Dw Aq
jesodoid
30a

Jo mainay

ayy se
“oid
you
गए yexg poniuigns
72007 ‘AON ION
SO'OT'82 . ६0078:

354 ved sy 354 190 sy

lesodosd

AN
auuesBord
yeidde ३०
uosssiuigns
ayea

430} DW Age

yo | wweigoid
eseadde
jo mainay

uorssiwigns
3०. गर्व

sy
ex

OO 67

sisAjeue
pue
ep 3803

Sujureyuo>

|
4

IN. 243 09
1032843409
aur

Aq aiodas yo

uw

le!

10155] 0७५15

1249UOD

Jepuazod jo

Aanoosia
se

uonesynou

yo

aed

quawusenc5

प्र
pue OW ayy
0} 4039e4}U0)

aur
hq ‘unum
uy ‘Asanoasip

3० siejnot
yo. Buiysiuany
३० aye

Ta

(€/86-NMG-Dx) SAlteaoosiq Jo शाप 5

पक aanxauuy



% T 1० Aejap e sem ३1५1

“6002 Ateniga १००७

Jenoidde syeme dai *

“Alanoasip S14} JO dd 243

JO uolssiWigns ul 51९०/

aly) ueyy ueyy रण

३० Aejap e sem aay, ©
‘jesodoud 30a

ay) JO mainas ७ YoU!

VK Tj0 Aejapesemasoyy ©

#0टाटट 50६09. ‘vO'EO'LT EOTULT 50082

payemy 80°L0°bT vOTO'LO ६0502

60ट060

50809. PO'EO'LT = EOTT'ZT = 50782
ypne

ण HOG Aq
paysiuiny
you sem

aly ssavoud

359 290 5४ | osqsadsy

359 3905७ | 253 32१5७

jesodoid
4079e23U0 Ay
hq ow Aq | esau.
elaauiuios |... jesodosd jo
40 u eq
yo. mainay | jo

dad
Jo jenouddy

dad jo
uolssimqns,

uojss}wiqns

onesepag area

359 sad sy

Ow Age
wuesoud
jesjeadde
jo. mainoy

€0'01'8Z

paaugns
qON

€0°OT 87

359 sad sy

auiweszosd
jesjeadde jo

uojssjwiqns
jo area

525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

tO'OT 62

COOL 6

siskjeue
pue
eyep —3s03
Sujuyeyuor
‘OW ग्पा 02
4032243402
aut
‘Aq yoda, jo
uorss}wigns
pue
ysauaqul
Je}saus0>
Jepuayod ३०
Asanonsi

uonesynou

quawuseno5

°
pue 90 ayy
01 4039e4}U0D

aur
fq ‘unum
uy ‘Aranoosip

aur
3० siejnopued
३० Surysusny
yo area



“1-0 ‘91-0 ‘8-0 ‘L-0 9-0 ‘b-d
“लत “ZIA salianoasip ayjjares
S@ so|sanovsp aulu 40)
403 pauiquios ९४ (8002 Ain‘)
एग्रएप्वा$ soyesado ‘Ajjentul

Jesodoud
3०6 ay3 Jo uoIssIUiqns ३०
51९३/ omy Joye EZ PUL ZZ ‘ET
“OT ‘8 ‘2 9 “p-leyqnaiyg “zIA

59[49009510 5४8 ayjares 3YsIa
jo yadsa1 ul jesodoid 3०6
pamainas 3 ०५॥ .

Jesodoid

3०0 ayy Jo mainad ७ (३७०७७

panemy

60°20°60

vOTT'SO

359 sad sy

dad
Jo jenouddy

5258 uoquor01pAH fo pny aouDWOfiag

8060४:

601002

#0.5092

353 sad sy

dad jo

uolssimqns,

मा]

onesepad

801070

BO TOTS 9090 टट

#010/0

359 sed sy

40792130),

Ay Ow Aq
jesodoud
u 300
jo mainay

SOC Pe

90'LO'EZ

६0502

353 sad sy

jesodoid

AY
या]
jo
uorssiuigns
jo area

paywqns
JON

vO'TO'EZ

paauigns
qON

359 sad sy 359 sad sy

auiweszosd
jesjeadde jo
uojssjwiqns

area

Ow Age
wuesoud
jesjeadde
yo mainay | 30

६&010%ट

siskjeue
pue
eyep —3s03
Sujuyeyuor
‘OW ग्पा 02
4032243402
aut
‘Aq yoda, jo
uorss}wigns
pue
ysauaqul
Je}saus0>
Jepuayod ३०
Asanonsi

uonesynou

quawuseno5

°
pue 90 ayy
01 4039e4}U0D

aur
fq ‘unum
uy ‘Aranoosip

aur
3० siejnopued
३० Surysusny
yo area

——

va



enosdde payeme
yaiym ‘¢e-q pue 6-0 ‘9
= ‘Z-G “ZIA SalJ2A02SIp NO} 10
ypadsay ७] 803 paziwindo ue
(6002 2equiazaq) pariwgns

Ww ‘auapuodsasio
pue sfunaaw jo Sulpjoy
jaye ‘Anuanbasqns —“anssi

ay) ssauppe pue 80119०0७
@ auaauod 0} Jo}e1ado
3५३ (6002 YEW) 7०७०:०१०
HOG ‘main jo 100०0 9[030५०99
-OuYysa} ay} ७५०५) a]qeIA-UOU.
aq 0} punoy sem jesodoud
aur sy ez एप९ हट

359 sad sy

dad
Jo jenouddy

353 sad sy

4079e23U0
hq hy

e}p4auui09

4043०

uosssimigns

jo u
onesepad

359 sed sy

Ow Aq
esodosd
300

jo. mainay

353 sad sy

jesodoid
AY

eryawwi0)

jo

uojss}wiqns

jo

area

359 sad sy 359 sad sy

auiweszosd
jesjeadde jo
uojssjwiqns

area

Ow Age
wuesoud
jesjeadde
yo mainay | 30

525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

siskjeue
pue
eyep —3s03
Sujuyeyuor
‘OW ग्पा 02
4032243402
aut
‘Aq yoda, jo
uorss}wigns
pue
ysauaqul
Je}saus0>
Jepuayod ३०
Asanonsi

uonesynou

quawuseno5

°
pue 90 ayy
01 4039e4}U0D

aur
fq ‘unum
uy ‘Aranoosip

aur
3० siejnopued
३० Surysusny
yo area



"३१०१९
# "०४५5 ३९ se sysewias auies

#0:20:60 १०७७४
एग[शश्४ ०७७७७९18०३३ jestesddy

60'2060

602060

60ट2060

359 3905७ | 253 32१5७

dad
Jo jenouddy

5258 uoquor01pAH fo pny aouDWOfiag

80°L0°bT

60'T0'0Z

80°L0°bT

60002

8000४.

6000८

4033०

uolssimqns,

80072

807072

80702

40792130),

Au

मा]

u

onesepad

80107#0

9090 टट

8010#%0

9090 टट

8010%0

9090 टट

359 sed sy

OW Aq
esodosd
300

jo mainay

OCT Pe

£0'S0'60

50दाफट

£0°S0'L0

50 दाकट

90/060

90/060

353 sad sy

jesodoid
AY
या]
jo
uorssiuigns
jo area

ON q

S0°S0'60

paaugns
ION

s0°S0°L0

pamuiqns
3०४

#70:८0.60
2आप्पवा$

20N

y0°L0°60

359 sad sy 359 sad sy

auiweszosd
jesjeadde jo
uojssjwiqns

area

Ow Age
wuesoud
jesjeadde
yo mainay | 30

‘vO'SO'OT

#0.5080

६0000:

६060ण
siskjeue
pue
eyep —3s03
Sujuyeyuor
‘OW ग्पा 02
4032243402
aut
‘Aq yoda, jo
uorss}wigns
pue
ysauaqul
Je}saus0>
Jepuayod ३०
Asanonsi

uonesynou

quawuseno5

°
pue 90 ayy
01 4039e4}U0D

aur
fq ‘unum
uy ‘Aranoosip

aur
3० siejnopued
३० Surysusny
yo area

8-0

so



525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

payiuiqns
8060 8010%0.. 50 टाफट JON
"२0०१९
YON ‘Is 1९ se sysewes owes 60°20'60 60100 «= 80L0TZ = 9090टट.._ 80४0६ = 90'vO'EL —-SO'VO'VT - 6rd
paywgns
- JON
90+%0' हा ०००५७
pareme auweisoig |[९5४३०१ए - - - - 8070६. - 90७ 50707: 8rd
paygiwugns
8070 8010%0. 50 टाफट JON
60°Z0°60 60°T0'0Z 8070८ 9090 टट ८080६: - 5090६. ‘vO'80°VT - 9t-a
paywigns

sishjeue
pue
eyep 3893
Sujuyequor
‘QW aya 07
40322402
ayy | quewusen05
‘Aq yoda, jo 0}

uojssiwigns | pue 500 aya
359 sad sy 359 sad sy 359 4०0 ५४ | 259 3०५ ५४ | 253 4०० ५४ 354 Jad sy pue | 0} 1039e.}U0>

ysaiaqul aur
jesodoid Jezauuos | Aq “unum

उप्फ्यण०3 xy Jenuayod yo | uy ‘Asanoosip
hq 20044 | epseuu0cy| swhqe| euwesfoud |  Asanoos: ayy

elaauiuios |... jesodosd 3० | wuuesSoud | jesjesdde yo Jo suejnomued

dad 4033० | 3० u 3०0 | uolsswqns | jesieadde | uoysswqns | uopesysou | yo Surysiusny

jo enoaddy | uorssiuqns | onesepag | yo mamay| yo area | yo mainay | jo area jo area



“syJUOW OM} Jo Aejap
e Jaye paroidde sem dad

80° VO'LT

800८
Auenigas

60°20°60

60°20°60,

359 3905७ | 253 32१5७

dad
Jo jenouddy

5258 uoquor01pAH fo pny aouDWOfiag

८0808

८&08082

80 60%:

60002

8060४:

60002

4033०
uolssimqns,

L0°20°60

BO TO TZ

80772

40792130),

Au

मा]

u

onesepad

L0°70'20,

LO'COLT

8010#0

9090 टट

8010#70

9090 टट

359 sed sy

OW Aq
esodosd
300

jo mainay

90°0T'0Z

80टापट

0 टाफट

8007छघट

SOC be

80/01६

353 sad sy

jesodoid
AY

eryawwi0)

jo

uojss}wiqns

area

pamjuiqns
ON
= 9005८

pamiwgns
JON

- 90°O1'EZ

payywigns
ION

- 9060६

359 33१ sy 359 2०० sy

Ow Age
wuesoud

auiweszosd
jesjeadde jo
uojssjwiqns

area

esteadde
jo mainay | jo

90°90°97

SOOT v2

५508010

siskjeue
pue
eyep —3s03
Sujuyeyuor
‘OW ग्पा 02
4032243402
aut
‘Aq yoda, jo
uorss}wigns
pue
ysauaqul
Je}saus0>
Jepuayod ३०
Asanonsi

uonesynou

90907#2

quawuseno5

°
pue 90 ayy
01 4039e4}U0D

aur
fq ‘unum
uy ‘Aranoosip

aur
3० siejnopued
३० Surysusny
yo area

97-0



oroz
ysn8ny 3905. Bulpuad
sem 30g jo Mmalnay
5५५०७ % ¢ Jo Aejap

@ Jaye pamalnai sem
awiulesBoud jesiesddy

359 3905७ | 253 32१5७ 359 sed sy

40792130),

मा]

uolssimqns, jo mainay

OT 7Z0'6T

OT'SO'L0

OT 20'6T

OT'v0'6T

OT'20'6T

OT'v0'6T

353 sad sy

jesodoid
AY

eryawwi0)

jo

uojss}wiqns

area

800 VT

LOTT'90

800 PT

LOTT'90

80+%07#ट

LOTT'90

359 sad sy

Ow Age
wuesoud

esteadde

jo malnoy

£0°20°60

80°S0°L0

£0°20°60

80°v0'6T

£0°20°60

80706.

359 2०० sy

auiweszosd
jesjeadde jo
uojssjwiqns

area

525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

£0°S0°80,

&0#%002

&0#002

siskjeue
pue
eyep —3s03
Sujuyeyuor
‘OW ग्पा 02
4032243402
aut
‘Aq yoda, jo
uorss}wigns
pue
ysauaqul
Je}saus0>
Jepuayod ३०
Asanonsi

uonesynou

L0°€0'60

८0ख0घ्ट

LO20'EZ

quawuseno5

°
pue 90 ayy
01 4039e4}U0D

aur
fq ‘unum
uy ‘Aranoosip

aur
3० siejnopued
३० Surysusny
yo area



5258 uoquor01pAH fo pny aouDWOfiag

511०७ % T Jo Aejap
2 saye pamainai sem
auiuiedBoid jesiesddy «
“ot0z

Aenuer aouls suipuad pamaynes
sem 300 jo Mainay © जज ७८०ण
5५५०७ % ५1० Aejap
@ Jaye pamalnai sem
awiulesBoud jesiesddy

- - - प्ाष्ण्ण

- - - 071090 O1'20°80

359 3905७ | 253 32१5७ 359 290 5४ | 358 421 5७

jesodoid

4079e23U0 Ky

hq hy Ww Aq | epseuw0s

शुभ्रग्प्परष्पघ०० | —jesodod jo

dad 4033० | 3० u 3०0 | uolssjuigns

Jo jenosddy | uojsstugns | onesejeq | yo mamay| yo area

BO'7T OE

80171

807072

LOTT'90

359 sad sy

Ow Age
wuesoud

esteadde

jo malnoy

—

8060४:

60600:

£0°20°60

80°20°80

359 sad sy

auiweszosd
jesjeadde jo

uojssjwiqns
jo area

80601

&06060

siskjeue
pue
eyep —3s03
Sujuyeyuor
‘OW ग्पा 02
4032243402
aut
‘Aq yoda, jo
uorss}wigns
pue
ysauaqul
Je}saus0>
Jepuayod ३०
Asanonsi

uonesynou

80/060

6050४:

quawuseno5

°
pue 90 ayy
01 4039e4}U0D

aur
fq ‘unum
uy ‘Aranoosip

aur
3० siejnopued
३० Surysusny
yo area

tbo

ved



Annexure 4.2

Non-compliance to PSC provisions regarding notification
of discovery and submission of test reports

S.No. Name of discovery Date of written Date of notification regarding
intimation of potential commerciality
discovery
1 Dhirubhai 1 | eC 29.10.2002
2 Dhirubhai 2 fe 29.10.2002
[3 | Dhirubhai3 | 7.  [ 29.10.2002
[4 | Dhirubhai4 |: [; 24.01.2003
5 Dhirubhai 5 | | 10.07.2003
[6 _| Dhirubhaié | [| 10.07.2003
7 Dhirubhai 7 Ds 08.05.2004
[8 | Dhirubhai 8 | eis 10.05.2004
[9 | Dhirubhai 16 [eC 14.08.2004
10 Dhirubhai 18 | | 14.04.2005
11 Dhirubhai 19 | 7. [ 14.04.2005
12 Dhirubhai 22 jl -". । 01.08.2005
13 Dhirubhai 23 fed 24.10.2005
14 Dhirubhai 26 24.06.2006 26.06.2006
15 Dhirubhai 29 23.02.2007 20.04.2007
16 Dhirubhai 30 23.02.2007 20.04.2007
17 Dhirubhai 31 09.03.2007 08.05.2007
18 Dhirubhai 34 14.05.2007 09.07.2007
19 Dhirubhai 42 07.07.2008 11.07.2008

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 4.3

Delays in submission /review or approval of Appraisal
Programme / Declaration of Commerciality/ Development Plan

Audit Observations Reply of MoPNG (July | Audit Remarks
2011)

Appraisal
Programme)

Commerci
al
Discovery

There was a delay
in review — of
Appraisal

programme = and
work programme
and budget in
respect of
Dhirubhai- 42 gas

discovery (1%
month) and
Dhirubhai- 29, 30,
31 and 34 gas
discoveries (5%
months).

Timeline

prescribed in
Article 21.5.3 of
PSC was 10

adhered to in this
case.

The Management
Committee
reviewed (January
2008) the 00९
proposal
(December 2005)
in respect of eight
satellite gas
discoveries viz.
Dhirubhai-4, 6, 7,
8, 16, 19, 22 and
23 after two years
of submission of
the DoC proposal.
DoC proposals in

respect of
me and 3
discoveries were

reviewed (January

MoPNG stated that

reviews of the
discoveries were
delayed as the

contractor submitted
the required data on
piece meal basis.
However, since the
contractor had to
carryout appraisal
programme as per PSC
timeline, the delayed
review may not affect

the timeline णि
submission of DOC.
However, MoPNG
stated that they had
noted the audit
observations for
future course रण
action.

While giving reasons
for delays in review of
DoC in respect of the
discoveries, _MoPNG
stated that evaluation
of DoCs took more
time due to
incomplete / partial /
piecemeal submission
of data by the
contractor.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

Reply is
satisfactory. The
timeline for

submission of DOC is
linked to the date of
notification of a
discovery and not to
the date of review.
The delayed review
may affect ९
timeline for
submission of DOC.
Therefore, it does
affect the objective
of doing prompt
exploration work.

The reply is not
satisfactory, as non-
adherence to the
prescribed timelines
indicates lack of
coordination

between DGH and
contractor and also
in view of the fact
that such delays
defeat the objective
of achieving timely
development/

production of
petroleum resources
of the country.



Submission fi}
/approval
of FDP

2004) after a delay

of 1% month.
Reviews of DoC
were awaiting in
respect of
Dhirubhai- 29, 30
and 31 = (since
August 2010) and
Dhirubhai- 34
(since January
2010).

Timelines
prescribed in
Article 21.5.5 of
PSC ४४७५. not

adhered to in
these cases.

The operator
submitted (July
2008) a combined
FDP for 116
discoveries as
satellite

discoveries viz. D-2
(submitted three
years after the due
date of March

2005) D-4, D-6, D-
7, D-8, D-16, D-19,
D-22 and 0-23.
Since FDP proposal
was found to be
non-viable — from
the techno-
economic point of
view, DGH
informed (March
2009) the operator
to convene a
meeting and
address the issue.
Subsequently,
after holding of
meetings/correspo
ndences between
RIL th DGH, RIL
submitted

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs

MoPNG stated (July ¢

2011) that the satellite
discoveries were of
small pools located in
different water depth
and scattered across

the block. Due to
sheer small size of the
discoveries and

considerable inter
discovery distances it
required a detailed
technical and financial

evaluation. After
detailed in-house
evaluation and series
of deliberation,
technical meetings
with contractor
besides engaging
reputed consultant,
the FDP had been

finally evaluated at
DGH. Evaluation of
FDP took more time
due to
incomplete/partial/pie
cemeal submission of
data by the
contractor.

The delays are not in
consonance with PSC
provisions. Further,
the delay in
submission of FDP in
respect of 9-2
discovery had not
been explained by
MoPNG.



(December 2009)
an optimized FDP
in respect of four
discoveries viz. D-
2, D-6, D-19 and D-
22, which awaited
approval.

FDP of Dhirubhai-
26 discovery was
approved (April
2008) after 2
months of the due
date on account of

delay in
submission of
clarification by
contractor and
signing of
Resolution by MC.
Timelines
prescribed in
Articles 21.5.6,
21.5.7 and 10.8 of
PSC were not

followed in these
cases.

As regards approval of
FDP of Dhirubhai 26
discovery, MoPNG
stated that evaluation
of FDP was completed
at DGH on 20.12.07
and the same day they
communicated to the
operator to convene
MC Meeting on
28.02.08. After series
of clarification /
communication —_ for
finalisation of draft
MC Resolution, MC
Resolution was signed
on 17.04.08. From
this, it could be seen
that evaluation of FDP
at DGH, MC meeting
to deliberate/approve
the FDP was convened
within 25९ timeline
but the MC Resolution
was signed on
17.04.08.

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 4.4

Details of activities showing delay in taking action as
per time line approved in the IDP for D-1 & D-3 Gas
Fields

Major development related aspects to be completed as per approved plan and were
as under:-

© Drilling of 14 wells in the initial phase till commencement of production to reach
the plateau production of 40 millions cubic meter per day (MMSCMD).

e Installation of all subsea facilities, including well flow-lines, Subsea manifolds,
Deepwater Pipelines End Manifold (DWPLEMS), Shallow Water Pipelines End
Manifold (SWPLEMS), Gas Evacuation pipelines from DWPLEMS to SWPLEMS,
Gas Evacuation pipelines SWPLEMS to onshore Terminal, infield Pipelines from
manifold to Deepwater Pipelines End Manifold (DWPLEMS), MEG (Methanol E
Glycols) lines.

© Onshore Terminal (OT) and Processing Trains.

Audit observed that major activities carried out by the contractor after approval of
Development plan till October 2006 which were not in-line with the time schedule of
the approved plan were as follows:

Concept and FEED

e Work for concept and FEED was completed in February 2004. However,
instead of starting the work as per FEED and the approved development plan
in November 2004, contractor initiated FEED up-dation in January 2006.

Project Consultancy

e RFQs for appointment of Project Management Consultant was issued in
December 2005 and work awarded in January 2006.

Drilling of development wells

e Well proposal for drilling two development wells D6-A10 and 06-87, was
submitted to MC on 2" April 2005, which was approved on 17" May 2005.
Drilling of two development wells D6 A-10A and D6-B7 was completed on
25" October 2005 and 117 December 2005 respectively.

e Well proposals for drilling of four wells D6-A9, D6-A16, D6-A13 and D6-B13
was submitted to the MC and approved by the MC on 167 August 2006.

. tl and Tubulars for Development drilling ordered in April 2006.

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Work for Design of Well Completions was awarded in April 2006 and design
freeze for well completions was done in October 2006.

Onshore Terminal and Associated Facilities

Work for dredging for extraction of fill material at Onshore Terminal (OT) site
was awarded on 247 October 2005 and work commenced at the site on 30
March 2006 and major work was completed on 28" August 2006.

RFQs for detailed engineering for OT were issued on 20" December 2005 and
work for construction of On shore facilities and associated work was awarded
on 297 May 2006.

RFQs for MEG Regeneration/Reclamation and Slug Catchers were issued in
May 2006 and work awarded in August 2006.

RFQs Gas Dehyderation and TEG Regeneration issued in June 2006 and work
awarded in September 2006

RFQs for Turbine generators were issued in July 2006.

Offshore Production Facilities

RFQs for long lead packages 1& 2 and package 3 (line pipes) were issued in
January 2006 and work awarded in April 2006 and May 2006 respectively.

RFQs for offshore installations were issued in March 2006 and work awarded
in September 2006.

Work for Reservoir Monitoring system was awarded in September 2006.

Xmas Trees ordered in June 2006 with expected deliveries in October 2007-
February 2008.

Subsea control system, Umbilicals ordered in June 2006 with expected
delivery in November 2007.

Subsea structures and Tie-in including manifolds, valves and structures
ordered with expected deliveries in end 2007 and early 2008.

me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs


525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

“papinoud you 21am
uupny Aq 40} pajjes squauiaja 49५10 40) saseasout ३502 Jo sjieiag
“Suny jeaw-a2ald 051४ pue sayea Aep Jamo ye Suu 30॥99 daap 1०
31५ J2U2YD 4०) *५०.३४३॥७७] spiq Jaye ‘sapuay Jo UO!
Sem 3509 4०५9५ 404 a/q/suodsay s1039e} ०५३३० १७० ३९५३ PayNUap!
pny “sjanaj 3502 403 Woy ajqnop ueYyy ai0W 3509 |शाउउ९
31 १७०॥७० 8:95 $51 |19M 190 1509 aBerene Yat GO,UNT IIH एगाएए
Ayenpe 1am sjjem gt “sYLINY 'एणा।एप्प #6'ट5 $M Or UO!
86४2 $SM 0४०५३ paseasul SEM [Jam Jad ३५०० आप ‘ddd Pas|ros
9५३ UL ZZ ० 9६ ७४०५ Sijam Jo JaquINU ayy ७॥ ७०७२॥०३/ sem 9००५1:

#'टटण

688८6

svezy | १४शा

52776

12M
qwawdojanea |_ ६

5८धा

86'टा.

ae 99%

607

बढ
uonajduio>
pue
॥०/७०४०४ |Z

au
puemy 3981309 15०4 ‘sa}puaIyag ssaz0dd BuLlapual ‘uNy
3350 ०७७॥ ‘SuOISioY ०१९४ ‘suOISInaY AyRUEND ५४५७ 3>edWII 1509

($91 ५०॥१४ ७] ५०३३) 9५२०५ pue 1509 |९३०॥)

60,प्णा

o dn
60.unt
adn
puads

604eW 3509 3s09

प्र

प्री 80000८._ धण = 380 WON wun

602eW 8022५ 9002,20 ए्‌7ण९४०५०

ग्र

oydn ‘ayy Aq paritugns dai 0} wnpuappy sad

dn 90००5... puads —_se suauiaja 1509 s0fem yo dn-yeaug 3509

suun
3s09 w jo 309
eo = 509M ON HUN
yooz Aew
uy soye1ado ayy Aq paruigns dal sad
se squauia|a 15०3 J0few Jo dn-yeasa 35०0

ms 9:99

suondyoseg

51प्रगा>9 10{ewl Jo पठशुतार्व्र०0 1500 yUaUIdOJaAag :ddIV ‘SA ddl -€d-1da

Gp aanxauuy



5356 uoquos0ipay fo upny a2uoUofiad

“upny 03 papinoid you a1am asoasouy 3509
fo syorag ‘sjanay dag uby2 ajdia isowyo 3509 'ग] ‘pjofiuous sad
५०॥८४ #0'87 $SN 02 paspasout Jayrinf puads jpNy20 os|y “uo!
STT SSN 0} ४०॥७४ Ly $51 ५४०४ pasoaiau! pjofjuDU 4ad ३5००

ang 9 थ 07 ५४०५ spjofiupw fo saquinu uy uopanpas som asoys | 528८ 528८ ६62६ 180८ gir 589 or spjofuow | "4
‘payowinut you 21am aipny Aq J0f parsanbai asoas2uy 3509
fo siioxap pun poay-qns अदा 4apun puads jom2y ‘sjana] dad पक
ajqnop ३०७७० 3s0 pazowinsa suo;oGAsanul [021Uy29}-025 «
‘papinosd you 390०10भ०1
24am upny Aq 40f pay} sjanaj कद प॥क्र २०००७ 3502 fo आणग्द puawuosjaua
‘sjana] dad wouf ००॥॥४ 99°T 550 Aq 5०००७ puadsjonoye | 6090 [६090 [६090 | व्श्धा ore 20० shauns |e

“38 “Ayar 1९ए०७७३०॥ ००15-५0 ‘sauljadid 40९6
930 ‘SIeDNIAWA 5२००1 5९७४-०६ (४०३४५ ॥०1५०० eas-qns ‘GHD
‘9143 ‘UBIsaq (89.99५893 405 र2९1३७०३ Jo ४०२०७ pue pieMe
‘duuapuay 0} Sunejai sanss| paniasqo ypny ‘sanamoy जाए
0} papiaoud you 31900 ३82५ 903 pasinas 9५३ pue 2805 dad ye pasn
squawnoop Sunuoddns yum quawaja 1509 yea 40} suonewnsa
4© 55९४8 “UOIIIIW SST $s Aq paseasoul sayzNy GO,UNF ॥9 90२०५
5६८६ $5N1 02 (J0nay
GET $91 ५७०७ 3509 ७३ ७०५५७/ premdn jeuOUgY

604eW
2 6 dn
602eW

oO

dn puads

80-2007
802०५

प्प्र्षा

puads

3809

1०

won
9007.30 Ul Jove1ado

aya Ag parwqns gai oy wnpuappy sed
se syuauia|a 3809 40[eW 40 dn-yeasg 1500

3802
13०1

uy soye1ado ay Aq parmugns dal sad
se squauiaja 1503 10feW Jo dn-yeasg 3509

suun

sanyped
uonanpodd

suondussag oN 15


525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

"ys09 204814
ye sadid jo aseypind osje pue uopenaul spiq 40ye ‘soujfadid
उ० 3०97० Jo yuouia2e|d ul Aejap sem aseou9U 1509 404 suOsEOI ०५३
4o १७०३९५३ Pansasqo pny (१३१४०, पाए 03 papinoad ou aiam
seuljedid seyemdeeq 40) puads je101 pue १७] ‘ayes ‘Aynuenb auijadig
40 siwereq ६०१० 404 Woy १५७०० ५७९५३ ००५४ Aq aseasoul ४०० | 16901६ | ५६६४७८ | ८9५8 | zeeze 14421 Jaemdaag |_ 9

“upny 01 papinosd you 21200 09100 50747
sypyaq ‘Jana] das wosf ajqnop uDYy3 asow asnazou; 3503 :6ए॥००1 «

“upny 03 papinosd you aam asoasoul 3509 fo 501g ‘ana] dad
wouf sauna २५५० ०५४ azo asoasou 3509 :suojavauuoy/staduiny «

‘puads sayB1y 40f suosoas aya fo auo sp uojojnasa ४02 pom syooqiquin
-asod pup suoysinas pig ysod pansasqo wpny “anamoH “upny 2५०. warshs
0} papinosd you १1०७ jana} dad woif asoasu 3502 fo आगन्द you1u09
‘Jana] dad ५४०५ aqnop ५४०५2 asow Aq asvasuy 1507 payownsy « | 79८99 5029 1५६५६ 6टट८ 1085६ basqns 9

“upny 03 papinoid you 9४2७ asoasouy 3509 fo ज्पग्द एन्तग
dag wouf ajqnop uoy १०७ asoasous 1509 :WaTd s210mde0q «

“upny 03 papinosd you asam aspasout 309 fo ॥००० ‘sjana}
dag wouf satura anyf Aq asvasouy ys09 :sauyjadid १००१६ ,ZT *

upnY
ग papinoud you a4am asnau9U 3509 fo sj101aq ‘sjaAa] dad wos
souipy 25 uoys asow Aq ०००००७ 350) : हक 2'T - soutjadid 9310 ,9 ©

vauyadid oz

27५१० 3502 ays Guipnjoxa ‘ajdia uoya asowi Aq asnasu! 1502 som
31०५1 4०700 5००॥ ay43 BulADy SD jJaM 59 Saspyaund sof sazD4 SO
[12m sp Burhny sauyadid sof pasnbas aus ‘sadid Jo 6000० ‘sadid
fo Ayqupnb ay3 ut uorsinas paomdn som asayy :sauyadid ,pz *

“dad panosddo SINFId
Ajjpi uy 50 2500 ७०५३ ajd}43 suo 1509 payouinsy pasinay « | ५9672 | Zv'EOL 6198६ | 6906 Stee pup sauyjadid | _ 2

suun
60.unr = 65072 3809 suun 3809 ४०० w 40 3809
o dno पी 80:200८ ० 3507 WON 2०० भणी BIOL. «809, ON ON UN

6o.unp G02 BOE 9002990 ul Joverado ‘vooz Kew
ordn प्र oydn aya Ag parwqns gai oy wnpuappy sed uy soye1ado ay Aq parmugns dal sad
puads dp puads — puads —_se squawiaja 1500 JofeW jo dn-yeaug २४००. 5९ squauiaja 500 40feW Jo dn-yeaig3soy ——suondussag ON IS



5258 uoquor01pAH fo pny aouDWOfiag

+38835 dad pasinal ye uIsapay | 0 0 0 0

996:

5001559100000

“upny 03 papinoud you

‘219m peay-qhs ayy JapuN syUBUID]9 3509 3U910441p 40} puads e203
pue ain ‘9321 ‘AylUenb Jo sjie30q ‘sow jIeY ९ 9७४ omy ७९४३ ०१००७
295९81901 3509 (299 5०.३॥०९, UOISso1dWOD 10 ‘syS09 ००फथाथश्ण
९45 ‘uopequauun.asut ‘Bujdid 8५1901200) ३5०0 49५30 «

“aseaioUl 1509 10) suosead १६३३० ०४०
‘sem 49५०1९० 91|5 ७ 404 19040 ३९३००। Jo ३७७७७३०९|१-७०७ pariasqo
आशाए “sjana] dad 4४१ adi ७०००९ ३४०० :49493e9 आ[5 *

“upny 03 papinoid ou as0m १४४००७ १४००० भायग्त
*S]9A2] 403 ७४०१) a[d1.) ०९५३ २३००४ aSeaJDU! 1503 :s}UaWUdINbI 10 «

2९१0७] aul se jjam se ३5०9
urney s1apio ०8५९३ /suoIsinas pieme ३9811903 asod paniasqo
sje uIpny 'ऋश्प snjd ys03 Uo ०92० pue 90१ pariid ०8०७ jo siseq

ayy uo saziid aAaduod-UoU ye |eUIWIa| BJOYSU 4०) ॥०४११४००
40 paeme Sem aseasou! 1503 104 suOseas 9६३३० 9७० ३९५३ paniasqo
aupny ०० panoudde gag jeniu ayy sawn snoy ueYs १०५७

sem 6002 unr ॥३ puads jenq2e (1०५1-03 “PO,AON UI ३४09 panoidde
403 24} 0} uosedwod ७॥ dad Pasinas ay} UI ajdi4y some १५०० e | GEO'ELL 80६६1/

60.8. 3809 sun 3809
2 dn lol 3809 WON JOON भणी
6022 907,320 ul Jove1ado
Puemy 3981309 15०4 ५91०५)! pues ‘ung, प्र aya Ag parwqns gai oy wnpuappy sed
42A0 aul ‘suoIsinay arey ‘SuoIsinay AnUeND "y4°M ed] SOD dn puads se syuauia|a 3809 40[eW 40 dn-yeasg 1500

suun

3509 W 40-3809

कण. 3509 ON ON UN
‘poz Aew

uy soye1ado ay Aq parmugns dal sad
se squauiaja 1503 10feW Jo dn-yeasg 3509

1९७॥७७७०॥
as0ysuo

suondiioseq



525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

“papinoud you “1anamoy,
‘sem YDIYM 4७०७०७७ ३809 ६०७३ Japun puads |यण pue awa
‘saved (30९10 Jo ५॥९३०० २५३ apiaosd ०1 payse sem Joye1ado ३५1

“aseaiouy juad1ed TOT Buymoys "गाए तक ssn sem
8002 पथ IST [13 TUNOWE parliq शाउ९ eA UCD ay) U! pared|pU
एण॥प्प 0८98 $57 Jo ३9.39 aya asUIESe sy "ए०1९९०४३ 1503

Jo yeduyy 80.0५ ‘stapso a8uey2/suo|sinaa paeme ysod as9m ०1०५३
३९५३ pansasqo ypny :Buyayseyeas pue ynopeo| uoeDiqed ©

“quaoiad ८6 oadn
qua24ad pT ७७०५३ 998084३9९1100० ayy UI sUFeSe-a1ay 91९००
29110 ayy SIA-2-SIA Sal}IAI}Ie ३७३७७४३॥३०५० ३७३०३०))॥० 10} 8002
प्रथा 3ST 119 एगा।व jNOWe a4 UI 9901800 asea.ou! aBeqUarIag
>४०प९४०६३ 3509 Jo 12200] Burney १301० aBuey>/suo|sinas

paeme ३०8110०9 ysod 21908 ०/०५३३९५॥ Paniasqo apy :swuauidinba
1g swsoy! pase} Jo ३09.७३॥3044 pue 9,2०6 /seueUayNddy

9B Sold /3992e! 404 syINq pue [9245 Jo ३090७9113076 ©

“quaoiad got oadn juaziad st wos
paSues 12811009 ०५३ ७] 15७॥९8४-३३०५३ paye>!pul sanoy-ueW ayy
चमक sanianoe yuawaSeueW yafoid yuasaysip 30) 8002 Auenaqa4
॥ए uads sinoy-uew 40} pasnou aseaioul aBeyuariag *७०३४|४०५७
3509 40 32290] Suyney ‘ssaps0 a8uey>/suorsinas p1eme 33e2}U09
ysod a1am 21०५३ ३९५३ paniasqo yipny AuauiadeueW wafold «

>3589100 yuaaied Ts"es Sumoys
७५ 2८:9६ SSN SEM 8002 ५०7०१ IST ॥प TUNOW paliiq jent2e
428110०२ ayy UI pare>1pUl ५०॥७ ZG'EZSSN Jo १०4 aya 180९३
Sy “uo}e|e982 1509 Jo 22001] BuIAeY *549910 aBUeYD/suO!
pueme ३५०७ 91910 91913 3९६३ panuasqo आए :80]193:

uae

“aq pasinas ayn ut panoudde ३५०० ayy ७५०५; 07 3०५१००७
‘Aq paseasout 6002 aunr jf puads [३०४ “ayn शा; व By
ynoyym pauue|d sem uonanpoud pue 4४3 १९०१० 04 एश५ OU sem

2/8:6६5

60,unr
o dn
60,unr
adn
puads

प्रट'5६5

60.8.
2 dn
6022
प्र
dn puads

६8977

3809 sun 3809
lol 3809 WON JOON भणी
9007.30 Ul Jove1ado

aya Ag parwqns gai oy wnpuappy sed
se syuauia|a 3809 40[eW 40 dn-yeasg 1500

suun

3509 W 40-3809

कण. 3509 ON ON UN
‘poz Aew

uy soye1ado ay Aq parmugns dal sad
se squauiaja 1503 10feW Jo dn-yeasg 3509

७०,1९१ 4०9
wna _॥0110०0

suoy



5356 uoquos0ipay fo upny a2uoUofiad

छगग्प्फण

sve re 190 996 0 ४०७९७७५०)७।

Fy

0 0 0 0 0 ४०५४००7७९१४
“upny 03 papinoud ou 92०0 puads
उम्पभप Ajjewouge ३० sjtexap osje pue जग) dad pasinas pue dad
३४ UOHJEUINISA JO SISEG "५०१० ७04 Pas|Aas ७४०५ 5०७४ 9944} ००५२

34000 708 jana} dad Woy ४०७७७ any ४७९५३ ०४०७४ Aq aseasou! 1४०० | ८008 | 90:6८ wer | soz set veo

wonsaioid

x4 घट 960 ev 8ST 023

5०9 dQ pasinas ०५३ ७९५३ ००७४ %6६ yso2

sem puads jemse 4०५1203 “p00Z,AON u! panoudde ३5० day “y4"M quawo8euew

%S8 ४९४३ १2०0४ Aq 9002,226 ७] panoudde 1502 १५३ ७॥ aseaioul | ८५५७2 | sever | srsst__| ट9टाट 14411 22०48
ny 03 papinoad

OU ३190 ३५०५४०|० 3502 ay} JapuN puads samo] 401 suoseay | 668 20८ ८८7? ६967 OTT 3502 VAD
“pedusy uonejeasa 1807 Bumney

‘SUo|s}Aad pueme ३5०७४ panasqo IPNY *O0Z,AON Ul 1509 panodde ys02

403 120६ ७०॥५४ 6 sn 4५ aseosou! 6002 २७॥॥ [19 7५००५ enV | ८67 9६67 ६0५7 ६५65 70.07 80॥1990]803
“upny 03

papinoud ३०५ asam yuawiaja ३५03 ayy sepun puads je30} pue aula gowaa

‘sayes ‘Aynuenb jo sjjejaq “sew snoy ७९५३ ०3०0७ aseasru! 3500 | 18६62 LU LEC 80४६ 6899६ 8116 "800 |३5५०/
क0#०४६ ut panoudde

463 tad se pasinbos you sem youm ‘poppe wowaj mon | etzzy | etzzy | ery 58 टा. 0 wiarshs ua,

60,unr

2 dn
60,unp

adn,

604eW
2 6 dn
602eW
oO

80-2007
802०५
प्प्र्षा

३४09
1०

suun
3809-3509 W 40-3809
09 WON JOON भणी ०. 350 OM ०४ भणी
9002,390 Ul Joye1ado ‘poz Aew

aya Ag parwqns gai oy wnpuappy sed uy soye1ado ay Aq parmugns dal sad

puads

dn puads

puads

se squauia|a 309 Joe ३० dn-yeasg 1500. 5७ squaUiaja 3509 10९0५ ३० dn-yeag 15०0

suondiioseq



525 uoqsor01pAH fo pny aguDWOfiag

9v'9sos z'ssey | 6८552 | 99615 8806 ६2 1९३०] ९५४५७

wey

peag/aa4
0 tro oro 0 o eouasr/IW | eT

wye9/ss07
Lt 259- azo o asueyaxa | zt

“EPNY 0} papinoid you asam

peay-qns aya sapun puads jenaoe pue 51809 rd
panoidde dad pasines pue 303 Jo sewed | 0 o o 0 ८8% @ 7९०५४०५० | IT

saxdootjaH

9०९. [955०

'फशाए 01 papinoid you ३1०७६ 8002 पथ vonuaniayuy

‘oydn puads ४०॥प 1६0८ $sN Jo जग pue "yoddns
403 pasinas ayy uy panoudde 1502 jo syieiaq | 8५6 896 1०८ | ost 0 paumo | ot

“upny 03 papinod quea

you a1am puads samo} 10) suosead pue ‘anndea
day pasinas ay ७॥ panoudde 1509 40 5॥९3०0 | 1८02 986: | ८०8 | 96४5 0 ४/९७॥॥९) | 6

s58001q Suapual ‘uny 3300 १५७ ‘SUO|s|Aay
‘eu ‘suosinay Aguend "yum yeduu 3509

60.0४ 03 थी.

60.0थ
1]

602W
2 dn

60JeW 01
dn puads

80-2002,

8042.
ovdn
puads

swun
40 “ON

3809

1४०1... ४००. won wun
9002.90
uy zoxeredo ays Aq panjwigns बता ण wnpuappy

Jad se syuauiaj9 1500 sofew Jo dn-yeasa 350

sun
w 40
30 on ON

3809
3809 j2301 un
‘vo0z AeW ul ore18do ays Aq panwAns dal
Jad se squauiaja 1500 101९ Jo dn-yeasa 150)

suonduasoq



5258 uoquor01pAH fo pny aouDWOfiag

ayiwgns
2 oo 9007 TTT | 700Z'90'V0 vOOz TE LT #00ट7%0टट..__ vOOZ'VO'TZ | #00८50श- #00ट%0 श. meus 6
g00z'E0'BT | LOOZ'OT'TT | 9007 TTT | boo OT Tz 9002°20'vT #0028052._ #002800: | #0076090 #00280:60 wehseyg 8
$00@'OT'ZT $007'0T'80 #00260 ६८. 70076020 | #00260 22 #002'80'82
900ट८50/८ | 5002ट70६ | VOOT'OT'ST | #00ट%#00६ 5007%0 व. vooz'eo'er | #002६060 | #007%0+%0 #002६050 eAuemysiy 9
900250 62 | s00z'zr'0E | vOOz'OT'ST | #0०८६००- 9002'T0'90 vooelOTe | #00८10 ६८ | vO0Z'Z0'6T #00ट100:2 ना] 5
PATIL [19m

€007'Z1's0 | Jesteudde on EOOTTT'VL — EOOZ'OL'EL | ६००८० €002°60'1Z emysauey, v

(epn5

v002'70'90 700ट10'5: €007 TT'TO go wed) 1-3४9
900z'so'Zz | SoOz'zT'0E | vOOT'OT'ST | €00z"E0'8z s00z’v0'20 €002'20'20 — €00Z'Z0'V0 | E00Z'TO'vz 200z'2T'sz ॥0 Hemysaseey €
900z'S0'zz | 500टटा.0६ | vOOz'OT'ST | ZOOz TO TT #002'६0 8८ 100८2. 00८79 | 700ट782 10020: 6८ 1800581९5 z
aigeieneyon | 5002:60'82 666T'GO'OL | 666:8010 | 6661 80°77 6661 LO'EZ epny T

(9sd 39 #6
apmy) 119M
yestesdde 4se|
३० uo}ajdwio0> ysaa qu!
daye 3४0 0} Jelssauiwi0>
Auanorsip 40 Jenuajod
Aqyersauiui0> Ss! Asanoosip
ynoge a3210u 4ayyoyM

(259
216 spmy

(254

Aq Sunum ६6 apy) aulwuayep lenpy and

uy = 40}e4ado jam jesiesdde 353}
3033० 3033० ०0. Aq 93)]#फ्र प्रण19|00५००
leaouddy uojssjuiqng 1०... गरश्त ३० गरथ्त गरथ्ठ uoReWU! Jo ग्रथ्त ३० ग्रथ्व ग्पा jo aweN ०७५

(3543० १16 ajay) isnoosia Asanoosia

S9L19AOISIp 1० शभारए1००

I'S aanxauuy


5254 ००१५०००५७////० ypny 22७00010//१०

wieseyn | /2T-1se3
paiwiqns on | 0:02'806: BOOT TT'6 — 800Z'ZT'9T | 800Z'2T'vz 800e LT've emysageey | Sz
panoidde payjup jam
70N 6002'20'80 | 800टटाकट | 400z'60'eT | leslesdde on LOOz'LO'~%Z ~—«-L00Z'80'0T | £007'80'6T L007'L0'0z OM]  v%
एगाएए॥०७
८002/08:.| 1९॥४1००९ on 4002८90ट1..._ /002८907: | (00290%0 Zooz'so'so | 1-159>-परश5९३४९५ | घट
panoidde
JON 6002'40'80 | 800टटाफट | £002'Z0'90 L002'80'vT 900टटाफट._ /002८5060 | 00८10: 9002°Z1'€L EM]  @7
ParIHP [12m
Zo0z'€0°60 | Iesteadde on 900z'zt'v0 =» LO0Z'Z0'vT | SOOZ'ZT' Tz sOOz'IT'TZ YYONT-N | TZ
panoidde
JON 6002'40'80 | 800टटाफट | £002'20'90 £002'90'92 900 TTL  — 900Z'ZT'9T | 900z'2T' Lz 900¢ LE'TZ TM] 0८
PayIHP [2M
८0020 टट._| testeadde on 900८1. 9O0Z'TT'ET | 900Z'TT'0z 9002 OL Tz Tan pieys | 6T.
payywans yon | 600ट८100८ 900z'Z0'ST — 900Z"¥0'0Z | vOOZ'Z0'ET voor toe =| Jauueg ejesuew | 8
Z00¢°20'90 9002'90'97 900ट%0टट.._ 900z'v0'0z | 900८5090 900८%090 aN] हा
9002'90°9T 9007'TO'TE gooz'to'’z~ | 900z'T0'6t | 900z'20'80 9002८1060 IN| 9;
एगाएए॥०७
600टट0 टट lestesdde on 9007 '21'2L 5002टाहट८ | 900८0 ८0 5002 टा६0 प05 ७४९/७९५६४ ST
7१॥७० ॥०७
900ट10#ट._| 1एञ्९1००९ on S007'80'TL — SO0Z'TT'80 | ५500८80६0 s002"Z0'v0 ३9०7-10 | oT
900ट८10%८ 9002'80'90 sooz0r'0z | S00z'TT'80 | S00z'80"E0 s002°L0"v0 ASO | घा
9002'TO'vz §002°80'TZ s007'90'60 | S007'90°9T | S007'90°ZT 500250 8 IN| 2
$002°90'TZ 5002608&0 #00ट८कट._ s00z'S0°6T | #0056090 #00280:60 euepuen | TT
900ट८5062 | SOOz'ZT'0€ | vOOZ'OT'St | €00z'E0'8z 9002'€0'ST €007'Z0'L0 — SOOZ'TO'TE | €00Z'L0'vz Z007'Z1'SzZ se3deaq 8९९४ | OT



Annexure 5.2

Cost estimates as per original and revised FDP

(US$ million)
५० |
approved

poor | Seismic 26.70 32.75
|०० | Development Studies 27.37 43.57 16.20
Ea Well construction 433.08 698.80 265.72
[०० | Project management 67.25 167.52 100.27
DO7 Engineering 59.93 91.37 31.44
Dos Surface facilities 513.40 1038.03 524.63
|०० | Commissioning 15.80 13.51 -2.29
poi | Re-operations 18.53 76.30 57.77
D21 Land 4.81 5.47 0.66
jos | Insurance 3.67 5.28 1.61
po9s | Base Office cost 14.11 18.41 4.30
098 G&A 34.76 42.31 7.55
psubtotal | 1219.41 2233.31 1013.90
CONTINGENCY 22.20 111.67 89.47
fsubtotal 1241.61 2344.98 1103.37
[०9 | PCO = 22.33 22.33
| | Mangala field Dev.cost - 2367.31 2367.31
|| Mangala pipeline cost - 941.05 941.05
|| Mangala EOR pilot cost 35.61 35.61

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 5.3

Observations on award of contracts

Contracts awarded on nomination / single source basis

Brief of observation Amount Paid

till 31.03.2008
(USS million)

The operator issued (May 2007) tenders for supply, erection and commissioning of 6.04
steam system package (shop fabricated skid mounted integral package boilers) to

seven parties shortlisted on the basis of expression of interest, to which ten parties

had responded. Four of the seven bidders, however, declined with only three

remaining in the fray. Bids were evaluated technically. Thermax emerged as the sole

technically qualified bidder to undertake the scope of work. Operator awarded

(October 2007) the contract (s) to Thermax at Rs 683,531,100 for supply and Rs

101,348,720 for erection and supervision services during commissioning. Amount

paid till 31 March 2008 was USS 6,039,993.

The operator received only one bid from JP Kenny, against the tender issued to 8 14.50
bidders, for provision of Oil Export Pipeline Conceptual Design Study for Barmer
Salaya Pipeline (BSPL) Project. The bid of JP Kenny was accepted and the contract was
awarded for Pre-Front End Engineering Design (Pre-FEED)/BSPL Project. The
expenditure incurred on pre-FEED was USS 1.30 million.

Thereafter, two more contracts viz: (i) FEED (basically a detailed design development
sufficient to prepare Long Lead Item procurement Packages); and (ii) for supply of
Project Personnel to the proposed Pipeline Integrated Project Management Team
were awarded to JP Kenny for USS 15.18 million and USS 10 million respectively,
inter-alia, stating that the contractor was involved since early concept stages. The
approval / review of OC/MC were required for contracts on single source/nomination
basis for awards in excess of USS 0.50 million, which was not obtained. Further, by
splitting work, the advantage of economies of scale was not availed.

Contract for Detailed Design & Engineering (DDE) for Mangala Oil & Raageshwari Gas 68.91
Development Project was awarded to Mustang Engineering (Mustang) for USS 62.6

million for a three year period, Mustang being the only bidder. The operator sent a

team to Mustang’s location in America to assess their capability, and the team

assessed that Mustang, with a very experienced Project Management Team, had a

very clear view of how the project could be organized to complete it on a fast track

basis. However, subsequently, due to slow progress of work (little more than 60%),

the contract was terminated, as slippage in progress would have a detrimental impact

on construction operations.

Total 89.45

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Contract awarded without assessing reasonability of rates

Brief of observation Amount

(uss
million)

The operator issued tenders for Supply of High Capacity Pump Packages to six bidders. 1.94

Four parties declined, one did not respond and the remaining one (DMW) requested for
extension of bid submission date, which was extended to 23 March 2007. However, no
response was received from them also. Operator approached GE Oil & Gas-Kirloskar (GE)
and DMW for their interest in submitting proposal. GE submitted (May 2007) their bid and
award was made (September 2007) on them for USS 19.45 million (revised budgeted cost
estimated at US$ 9.00 million). Reasons for wide difference between the revised
estimated cost and awarded cost were not available in the records.

Extensions beyond contractual provisions/non-availing of economies of
scale

Brief of observation Amount

(७५$
million)

A contract for work over/service rigs was awarded (May 2004) to John Energy for a 7.12
primary period of twelve months at a cost of US$ 2.20 million. The contract was extended

five times till 14 April 2007, in contravention of contractual provisions which provided for

only two extensions of six months each.

Against tender for provision of drilling and completion fluids and solid control equipments 13.51
and services, four bids were received and were found technically qualified. Price bids were
opened, with Baker Hughes emerging the lowest bidder and contract at a cost of US$ 5.72
million was awarded on 26 July 2004 for six months with option of three extensions of six
months each.
It was observed that the contract was extended eight times, besides 11 variations, till 25
January 2008. Total payment made to Baker was USS 13.51 million. Thus benefit of
economies of scale, which were likely to accrue for a contract/extension of longer
duration, remained to be availed. The total cost of contract including extensions and
variations was USS 20.22 million.

Total

20.63

Grand Total 112.02

ee Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 7.1

Deficiencies regarding submission of reports

Name of Deficiencies regarding submission of reports

block

KK-DWN- © Out of nine quarterly reports, which were due for submission during April 2006
2003/1 to April 2008, only two reports were found on record.

Annual local procurement statement for 2006-07 was not found on record.
MB-OSN- Only one local procurement statement for 2002-03 was found on record, which
97/3 was also submitted after a delay of one year.

© Only one End of Year statement was found on record, which was submitted
after a delay of 23 days.

* Only a few quarterly reports pertaining to the block were found on record,
some of which were also submitted after delays ranging between 1 % to 5

months.
KG-DWN- © There were delays in submission of annual reports outlining contractor's
98/3 achievement in utilizing Indian resources (3 and 4 months for 2004-05 and

2006-07 respectively).

KG-OSN- e There were delays in submission of annual reports outlining contractor's
2001/2 achievement in utilizing Indian resources (4 and 1 % months for 2006-07 and
2007-08 respectively).

MN-DWN- There was a delay in submission of annual reports outlining contractor’s
2004/3 achievement in utilizing Indian resources (1 %& month for 2007-08)

NEC-DWN- « There were delays of 1 % to 4 months in submission of annual report outlining
2002/1 contractor's achievement in utilizing Indian resources.

Due to non-production of cost recovery statements, statements of cost,
expenditure/receipts etc. to audit timely submission thereof could not be
verified.

CB-OS/2 ® Only 2 to 15 percent of contracts were awarded to Indian Vendors during
2001-02, 2002-03 and 2004-05 (records for 2003-04 were not furnished). In
August 2005, the contractor had reported that he would take necessary steps
to improve its achievements, however, compliance in this regard could not be
verified in audit, as no further reports were submitted by the contractor for the
years 2005-06 and 2006-07 as on April 2008.

Hazira Compliance regarding submission of annual local procurement statements
not be verified, as relevant records were not made available to audit.

CB-ONN-

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Name © Deficiencies regarding submission of reports
block

2000/1

0 CB-ON/1 Timely submission of quarterly and annual reports could not be verified in

respect of these blocks, due to non-production of relevant records to audit.
KK-DWN-

2000/2

2 MB-OSN-
2004/2

RJ-ONN-
2002/1

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 7.2

Statement showing delays in submission of Annual Audited

Accounts
KG-OSN-2001/2 2004-05 12.07.05 42 days
2006-07 16.07.07 45 days
2007-08 23.06.08 23 days
2006-07 26.6.07 25 days
2007-08 23.6.08 22 days
NEC-DWN-2002/1 2004-05 12.7.05 42days
2005-06 23.6.06 23 days
2006-07 19.7.07 49 days
2007-08 23.6.08 23 days
MN-DWN-2004/3 2007-08 20.6.08 20 days

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 7.3

Statement showing Delays in approval of Audited Accounts

Name o f the bl Date of | Date Delay in approval
submi pproval

2003-04 25.05.04 6.08.05 १४ month
2004-05 12.07.05 8.12.05 4 months

2006-07 16.07.07 3.06.08 9 १४ months
॥ 0) 0024 । ६ 1 Me 2005-06 30.5.06 7.9.06 2 months
2006-07 26.6.07 24,9.07 2 months

7A 2004-05 12.7.05 18.11.05 3 months
2006-07. 19.7.07 15.10.07 2 months
2007-08  20.6.08 20.8.08 1 month
KG-DWN-98/3 2000-01... 21.9.02 29.12.03 14 months
2001-02... 21.9.02 29.12.03 14 months
2002-03 28.5.03 17.3.05 20 % months
2003-04 25.5.04 7.1.06 18 months
2004-05 12.7.05 10.4.06 8 months
2006-07 16.7.07 14.11.08 15 months

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 7.4

Delays in submission of Annual Work Programmes and
Budget

Name of the Exploration/ Date of Delay in submission
block Appraisal/ submission
Develop

ment/Produc
tion Budget

Exploration 2004-05 5.2.04 1 month

2005-06 14.2.05 1% month

2006-07 31.3.06 3 months

Development 2005-06 27.10.05 10 months

2007-08 23.2.07 2 months

Hazira Development/ 2003-04 6.5.03 4 months
Production 2004-05 27.7.04 7 months

2005-06 17.2.05 1 १४ months

2006-07 31.3.06 3 months

Development/ 2004-05 4.3.04 2 months

Production 4995-06 8.4.05 3 months

2006-07 9.3.06 2 months

2007-08 9.3.07 2 months

KG-OSN- Exploration 2004-05 26.2.04 2 months
2001/2 2005-06 1.3.05 2 months
2006-07 18.2.06 34 months

|४8-05900-97/3 Exploration 2005-06 14.2.05 1% months
NEC-DWN- Exploration 2005-06 31.1.05 1 month
2002/1 2006-07 17.5.06 34 months
CB-ONN- Exploration. 2003-04 15.04.03 3 % months
2000/1 2004-05 21.06.04 5% months
2005-06 01.04.05 3 months

2006-07 24.07.06 6 4 months

Exploration 2004-05 4.03.04 2 months

ts 5 months

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



KK-DWN-
2000/2

RJ-ON-90/1

Panna-Mukta

RJ-ONN-
2002/1

Exploration

Development

Production
Operations

Exploration

2006-07
2007-08
2002-03

2006
2007

2006-07

2007-08

14.06.06 5 % months
13.03.07 2% months
11.02.02 1% month
5.4.06 6 months
8.12.06 2 months

(In these cases, due date
of submission was 30
September)

21.02.06 2 months

28.2.07 2 months

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Annexure 7.5

Delays in review/approval of Annual Work Programme and
Budget

Name of Nature of Delay in review/approval

block WP&B

KG-OSN- Exploration 2004-05 6.8.05 (reviewed after closure of the financial

2001/2 (RE) year)
2005-06 5.5.06 (reviewed after closure of the financial
(RE) year)
KG-DWN- | Exploration 2004-05 25.5.05 (reviewed after closure of the financial
98/3 (RE) year)
2006-07 23.7.07 (reviewed after closure of the financial
(RE) year)
Development | 2006-07 23.7.07 (approved after closure of the financial
(RE) year)
CB-ONN- Exploration 2003-04 21.06.04 (reviewed after closure of the
2000/1 (BE) financial year)
2004-05 02.06.05 (reviewed after closure of the
(BE) financial year)
2005-06 22.3.06 (reviewed in the last month of financial
(BE) year)
2006-07 Not reviewed as of July 2008
(BE)

जी .. Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



Glossary

a Seismic

A petroleum exploration method that shows the seismic reflectors
in three dimensions. It is usually displayed on a computer monitor.
The record can be rotated and slices (time or horizontal slices) taken
out at various levels.

46 Seismic

A seismic survey that records not only the usual compressional
waves (P waves) but also shear waves (S waves). It is used to better
determine rock types and locate fractures.

a Seismic

The seismic difference between several 3D seismic surveys run at
different times over the same reservoir during production from that
oil field. Changes in seismic responses from the reservoir such
amplitude can show the flow of fluids through the reservoir.

Appraisal Well

A well drilled out from the side of a discovery well to determine the
area of a new field.

Associated gas

Natural gas that is in contact with crude oil in the reservoir.

Barrel A quantity or unit equal to 158.9074 litres (42 United States gallons)
liquid measure, at a temperature of sixty degrees Fahrenheit and
under one atmosphere pressure.

Barrels of oil | The amount of natural gas that has the same heat content as an

equivalent average barrel of oil. It is about 6000 cf of gas.

Basement rock

Unproductive rocks underlying sedimentary rocks. It is usually an
igneous or metamorphic rock.

Christmas tree

A subsea production system similar to a conventional land tree
except it is assembled complete for remote installation on the sea
floor with or without diver assistance. The marine tree is installed
from the drilling platform; it is lowered into position on guide cables
anchored to foundation legs implanted in the ocean floor. The tree
is then latched mechanically or hydraulically to the well head by
remote control.

Condensate

A hydrocarbon mixture composed primarily of molecules with 5, 6
and 7 carbon atoms. It is liquid under surface conditions but is a gas
mixed with natural gas under subsurface reservoir conditions.
Condensate is very light in density and is transparent to yellowish in
color. It is almost pure gasoline in composition.

Crude Oil

A liquid composed of over one hundred different types of
Me molecules. The molecules range from 5 to more than
60 carbon atoms in length. Crude oil colors range from black to

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



greenish to yellowish to transparent.

Deepwater

Beyond 400 metre bathymetry.

Delineation well

A well drilled to the side of a discovery well to determine the extent
of the new field.

Development well

A well drilled in the known extent of a field.

Discovery well An exploratory well that encounters a new and previously untapped
hydrocarbon deposit; a successful wildcat well.

Electrical log A wireline resistivity log. It is often run with a spontaneous
potential or natural gamma ray log.

Exploration The phase in which a possible hydrocarbon region is being
investigated, either by geological or geophysical surveys or by
exploratory drilling. Successful exploration is followed by appraisal
and development.

Exploration Operations conducted in the contract area pursuant to the contract

operations in searching for Petroleum and in the course of an Appraisal

Programme and shall include but not be limited to aerial, geological,
geophysical, geochemical, _palaeontological, _ palynological,
topographical and seismic surveys, analysis, studies and their
interpretation, investigations relating to the subsurface geology
including structural test drilling, stratigraphic test drilling, drilling of
Exploration Wells and Appraisal Wells and other related activities
such as surveying, drill site preparation and all work necessarily
connected therewith that is conducted in connection with
Petroleum exploration.

Exploration well

A well drilled for the purpose of searching for undiscovered
Petroleum accumulations on any geological entity (be it of
structural, stratigraphic, facies or pressure nature) to at least a
depth or stratigraphic level specified in the Work Programme.

Facies || A distinctive part of a rock layer such as a sandstone facies.

- A break in the rocks along which there has been movement of one
side relative to the other side. Faults are either dip-slip or strike
slip.

we The surface area directly above one or more producing reservoirs
on the same trap such as an anticline.

FPSO vessel i ship that is stationed above or near an offshore oil field. Produced

fluids from subsea completion wells are brought by flowlines to the

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



vessel where they are separated and treated.

Gas in place The amount of gas in the pores of a reservoir.

Geologist A scientist who identifies and studies rocks. A petroleum geologist
searches for and exploits oil and gas deposits.

Geology The science that deals with the history of the earth and its life as
recorded in the rocks.

Geophysical The search for geological structures favourable to the accumulation

exploration

of hydrocarbons by means of geophysical devices, such as the
gravimeter, the magnetometer and the seismometer.

Geophysics

The application of certain familiar physical principles: magnetic
attraction, gravitational pull, speed of sound waves, the behavior of
electric currents - to the science of geology.

Hydrate

A snow-like substance that can form from water in a flowline as the
temperature of natural gas falls. It is composed of ice with methane
in the ice crystals.

Hydrocarbons

Organic chemical compounds of hydrogen and carbon atoms. There
are a vast number of these compounds and they form the basis of
all petroleum products. They may exist as gases, liquids or solids.
An example of each is methane, hexane and asphalt.

Improved oil

recovery

The methods of water flood and enhanced oil recovery that are
used to produce more oil from a depleted reservoir.

Infill drilling

Drilling between producing wells in a developed field to produce
petroleum at a faster rate.

Joint venture

A business or enterprise entered into by two or more partners.
Joint venture leasing is a common practice. Usually the partner with
the largest interest in the venture will be the operator.

[Mesozoic An era of geological time from 248 to 65 million years ago.
fre | A hydrocarbon composed of CH. It is a gas under surface conditions
and is a major component of natural gas (C1).
wee | An epoch of time from 24 to 5.3 million years ago. It is part of the

Tertiary Period.
Natural gas Gaseous forms of petroleum consisting of mixtures of hydrocarbon

Me and vapors, the more important of which are methane,
ethane, propane, butane, pentane, and hexane; gas produced from

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



a gas well.

Oligocene An epoch of time from 34 to 24 million years ago. It is part of the
Tertiary Period.

Operator The Company who (9) is responsible for maintaining a producing
lease & (b) is in charge of operations in working interest area.

Paleocene An epoch of geological time from 65 to 55 million years ago. It is
part of the Tertiary Period.

Pleistocene An epoch of time, from about 1.8 million years ago to 10,000 years
ago, during which glaciers occupied much of the land area. It is part
of the Quaternary Period.

Pliocene An epoch of geological time from 5.3 to 1.8 million years ago. It isa

part of Tertiary Period.

Production Sharing
Contract

The contract between Government and International/National E&P
Company. The E&P Company bears the entire cost of exploration,
drilling and production. The E&P Company is reimbursed for
expenditures from the oil/gas that is produced. After
reimbursement, the oil/gas proceed is split by an agreed formula.

oil Produced oil that split between a host company and a multinational
company by an agreed formula after the multinational company has
been reimbursed for expenditure.

Prospect A location where both geological and economic conditions favor

drilling a well.

Recoverable oil

The amount of oil that can be produced from a reservoir under
current economic conditions. It is a fraction of the oil in place.

Recovery factor

The percentage of oil and/or gas in place that will be produced from
a reservoir.

Reserves

The calculated amount of gas and/or oil that is expected to
produced from a well /wells or a field. Proven reserves are
calculated with reasonable certainty. Developed reserves can be
produced from existing wells whereas undeveloped reserves
cannot. Unproven reserves are not as certain due to technical and
economic reasons as proven reserves. Probable and possible
reserves are even less certain.

Reservoir

A porous and permeable sedimentary rock (sandstone, limestone,
etc.), containing quantities of oil and/or gas enclosed or
surrounded by layers of less permeable or impervious rock; a

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



structural trap; a stratigraphic trap.

Royalty Usually a fixed percentage of a specified crude or gas value per unit
produced, to be paid to the host government. It is a fixed charge
independent of profit or loss.

fe A very common sedimentary rock composed of clay-sized particles.

Black shales are source rocks for petroleum.

Shallow water

Upto 400 metre bathymetry.

Tertiary A period of geological time from 65 to 1.8 million years ago. It is
part of the Cenozoic Era.

री A hole drilled or bored into the earth, usually cased with metal pipe
for the production of gas or oil. Also, a hole for the injection under
pressure of water or gas into a subsurface rock formation.

Well log A continuous record of rock properties measured in a well. Some
types are sample, mud and wireline.

Wellhead The forged or cast steel fitting on the top of a well. It consists of
casing heads located on the bottom and a tubing head on the top.
It is bolted or welded to the top of the surface casing.

ae over To have a service Company do work (a workover) such as pullrods or

sand cleanout on a producing well. A production rig, either a
workover rig or a smaller service or pulling unit is used.

me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



List of Abbreviations

2D Two dimensional

3D Three dimensional

4९ Four Channel

a Four Dimensional

ABO Aker Borgestad Operations

AFP. Aker Floating Production

AIDP Addendum to Initial Development Plan
AKAP Aker Kvaerner Australia Pty Ltd.

AM Audit memoranda

ANG Associated Natural Gas

API Acquisition, Processing and Interpretation of seismic data
APM Administered Price Mechanism

BEC Bid Evaluation Criteria

BGEPIL British Gas Exploration and Production (India) Limited
BLPD Barrels of Liquid Per Day

BOPD Barrels of Oil Per Day

BPCL Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited
BWPD Barrels of Water Per Day

CA Chartered Accountant

CAPEX Capital expenditure

CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CEHL Cain Energy Hydrocarbons Limited
(छा Cairn Energy India Limited

CoA Chart of Accounts

COSA Crude Oil Sales Agreement

CRF Cost Recovery Factor

CRL Cost Recovery Limit

CRP Control-cum-Riser Platform

DA Development Area

DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation
DGH tl General of Hydrocarbon
Doc Declaration of Commerciality

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



cap | Exploration and Production

EC Essentiality Certificate

‘cor | Expression of Interest

ie | Exploration Phase

EPIC Engineering, Procurement, Installation and Commissioning
‘EpoD | Expanded Plan of Development

FDP Field Development Plan

FDPSO Floating Drilling, Production, Storage and Offloading Vessel
FEED Front End Engineering Design

FI Financial

FIFO First In First Out

FPSO Floating Production, Storage and Offloading Vessel
G&G Geological & Geophysical

GAIL Gail (India) Limited

icip | Gas initial in place

GIPIP Good International Petroleum Industry Practices
Gol Government of India

GWC Gas water Contact

HC Hydrocarbon

HPCL Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited

HSE Health Safety and Environment

‘ie | Initial Development Plan

im | Investment Multiple

‘ine | Indian Rupee

10८ Indian Oil Corporation

|OGPT Institute of Oil and Gas Petroleum Technology
(900 | Initial Plan of Development

JOA Joint Operating Agreement

JS Joint Secretary

L&T Larsen and Toubro

LD Liquidated damages

LKM Line Kilo Metre

me Natural Gas

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



LOA Letter of Acceptance

LOI Letter of intent

LSTK Lump Sum Turnkey

1७४० Logging while drilling

MAT Minimum Alternative Tax

Mc Management Committee

MCM Management Committee Meeting
MEG Mono Ethylene Glycol Regeneration & Reclamation
ML Mining Lease

MMBBL Million barrel

‘mmBoE | Million barrels of oil equivalent
MMBTU Million Metric British Thermal Unit
MMSCF Million standard cubic feet
MMSCMD Million Standard Cubic Meter Per Day
‘mop Ministry of Defence

MoPNG Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
शक | Mobile Production Facility

MPSC Model Production Sharing Contract
MT Metric Tonne

MWD Measurement while drilling

MWP. Minimum Work Programme

NAA Northern Appraisal Area

NANG Non Associated Natural Gas

NELP New Exploration and Licensing Policy
‘NiO | Notice Inviting Offer

NOC National Oil Companies

NPV Net Present Value

NRPOD New Revised Plan of Development
NW North West

foam | Operation & Maintenance

op | Operator Board

0९ Operating Committee

[09 | i day rate

Performance Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs



OF (RD) Oil Fields (Regulation & Development)
OGIP Original Gas in Place

for | Oil India Limited

ONGC Oil & Natural Gas Corporation

OPEX Operating Expenditure

oT Onshore Terminal

PEL Petroleum Exploration License
P| Participating Interest

PMT JV Panna-Mukta Tapti Joint Venture
[PNG Rules | Rules | Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules
po Purchase Order

Pom | Preliminary observation memoranda
pp Profit Petroleum

Psc Production Sharing Contract

PTRR Post tax Rate of Return

RFP Request for Proposal

RIL Reliance Industries Limited

55 Singapore Dollars

SCADA Supervisory Control & Data Acquisition
[ss South East

SIPD Shell India Production and Development
TCF Trillion Cubic Feet

७५ Under Secretary

USS United States Dollars

VLCC Very Large Crude Carrier

vac Vendor Qualification criteria

WIP Work in Progress

WP&B Work Programme & Budget

XMT Christmas tree

Me Audit of Hydrocarbon PSCs