Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Implementation of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 
(Pratyaksh Hanstantrit Labh Yojana) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the period ended 31 March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial) 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Report No. 25 of 2016 
(Compliance Audit)
  
 

 
 
Contents 
 
Chapter Particulars Page No. 
 Preface i 
 Executive Summary iii to vii 
1 Introduction 1 
2 PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 5 
3 Removing Incentive for Diversion 13 
4 Weeding out Fake/Duplicate Connections 16 
5 Delivery of Cylinders to Genuine Users 35 
6 Protection of Entitlement and Ensuring Subsidy 38 
7 Self-selection in Subsidy 42 
8 Other Issues 43 
9 Savings in Subsidy through PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 45 
10 Conclusion and Recommendations 51 
 Annexures 55 
 Abbreviations and Glossary of Special Terms 60 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016      
 
 
i 
 
Preface 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the President of India under Arti cle 151 of the Constitution of 
India for being laid before the Parliament.  The au dit has been conducted in 
conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by th e Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
The Report contains results of audit of ‘Implementa tion of Pratyaksh Hastantrit 
Labh Yojana (PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme)’ introduced by Go vernment of India in 
November 2014 for transfer of subsidy on Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) 
directly to the consumers linking their Aadhaar Num ber, Bank account and LPG 
Consumer ID.  The Scheme is implemented by three Go vernment of India 
owned Oil Marketing Companies, viz., Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) and Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL).  The Scheme involves 16 .17 crore domestic LPG 
consumers serviced by 16,781 LPG distributors of th e three Oil Marketing 
Companies.  Given the significance of the Scheme an d its widespread impact, an 
audit of its implementation was taken up. 
 
The Report highlights few concerns noticed in imple mentation of the PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme and also addresses the financial impact of the Scheme. 
 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation extende d by the three Oil 
Marketing Companies (BPCL, HPCL and IOCL) and Minis try of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas in providing records, information and c larification in completing the 
audit.        
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
iii 
Executive Summary 
 
Introduction: 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) is a clean fuel and h ence Government of India (GoI) wanted 
to popularise use of this fuel for domestic use by making it affordable for the consumer. 
Subsidised supply of domestic LPG was intended to p rotect the consumers from highly 
volatile international prices. The under-recoveries of Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), viz., 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Bharat Petro leum Corporation Limited (BPCL) and 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) aris ing from subsidising were 
compensated partly through budgetary support from G oI and partly through subsidy given  
by upstream companies on purchase of crude.  GoI in troduced “Pratyaksh Hanstantrit Labh 
Yojana” (PAHAL (Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG) Sc heme) for transferring the subsidy on 
LPG directly to the consumers on 15 November 2014 i n 54 districts (1 st Phase) and in the 
remaining 622 districts on 1 January 2015 (2 nd phase).  Aadhaar number was not mandatory 
for a customer to avail of subsidy benefit under the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme.  
Objectives of PAHAL Scheme:  
The objectives of the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme were to: 
• Remove incentive for diversion 
• Weed out fake/duplicate connections 
• Protect entitlement and ensure subsidy to the customer 
• Improve availability/delivery of LPG cylinders to genuine users 
• Allow self-selection in subsidy. 
PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme envisaged curbing pilferage and  diversion in domestic LPG 
distribution system of OMCs by affecting transfer o f subsidy directly into the Bank account 
of eligible consumers.  The Scheme is being implemented by the OMCs through  its network 
of LPG distributors who constitute the interface with customers.   
Highlights  
While PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme appears to have addressed  the concern regarding diversion 
of subsidised LPG cylinders to commercial consumers , the risk of diversion of non-
subsidised domestic LPG to commercial consumers sti ll remains.  Audit observed that the 
number of domestic consumers consuming more than 24  cylinders in the first seven months 
of 2015-16 is 2.6 times that in the whole year of 2 014-15.  It was also noticed that 23,104 
domestic consumers in IOCL, 5,662 in HPCL and 7,993  in BPCL had consumed more than 
12 cylinders in the first seven months of 2015-16.   Since there is a significant difference in 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
iv 
cost of non-subsidised domestic LPG and commercial LPG on account of differential taxes 
and duties levied on the two categories of consumer s, there is a risk of diversion associated 
with higher consumption of domestic non-subsidised cylinders.    
(Paragraph 3.1 & 3.2) 
Audit noticed multiple LPG connections having the s ame Aadhaar number or same Bank 
account in the consumer database maintained by the OMCs. In some of the multiple 
connections, two or more than two connections const ituting the multiple connections drew 
subsidy and Permanent Advance whereas in the remain ing cases, one of the multiple 
connections remained ‘active’ while the other conne ctions were indicated as ‘transferred’ or 
‘in-transit’. Though, subsidy was paid only for the  ‘active’ connection, the possibility of 
payment of subsidy to ‘transferred’ or ‘in-transit’ connections in future cannot be ruled out. 
(Paragraph 4.1.1 (i) & (ii)) 
Considering that the de-duplication exercise carrie d out by National Informatics Centre is 
presently on a real time basis, it was reasonable t o expect that the database of consumers 
provided by the OMCs would not have any duplicate c onnection bearing ‘Same Name Same 
Address’ (SNSA).  Audit scrutinised a sample of 34 per cent of the distributor database and 
found a number of exact matches (100 per cent match) of SNSA cases.  This was noticed in 
all the three OMCs.  Further, Audit also verified e xistence of connections with ‘Same Name, 
Same Date of Birth and Same Registered Mobile Number’ to identify multiple connections in 
the database.  Audit examination indicated presence  of multiple connections on the basis of 
these parameters.  A total of 15,885 consumers link ed with 34,729 connections were noticed 
against the first parameter across the OMCs, 11,171  consumers linked with 24,329 
connections were noticed against the second parameter. 
 (Paragraph 4.1.1 (iii) & (iv)) 
Audit verified existence of multiple connections be aring ‘Same Aadhaar Number’ and ‘Same 
Bank IFSC and Same Bank Account Number’.  The verif ication identified 74,180 LPG 
customers linked to 37,090 Aadhaar numbers indicati ng existence of multiple connections.  
In the case of ‘Same Bank IFSC and Same Bank Accoun t Number’, 17,694  LPG ‘active’ 
customer IDs were linked with 8,847 same bank IFSC and same bank account number. 
(Paragraph 4.1.2 (i) & (ii)) 
Audit noticed that the Date of Birth of consumers w ere not accurately captured in the LPG 
Database.  Further, LPG connections were issued to minors in violation of the LPG Control 
Order.  Audit scrutiny also revealed incorrect capt ure of PIN codes, Aadhaar numbers, and 
incorrect seeding of IFS Codes in the consumer data base of OMCs indicating lack of 
appropriate input controls.  Such inconsistencies i n the consumer database is evidence of 
invalid entries in the database and poor input cont rols, which compromises the authenticity 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
v 
and integrity of the consumer database.  Further, t his may also lead to consumers being 
unable to avail of the subsidy benefit under the Scheme.  
 (Paragraph 4.4) 
While the OMCs have addressed most of the Scheme related complaints of the customers, the 
target of redressal within seven days could not be achieved.  Audit observed that the 
achievement rate of redressal within seven days was  86 per cent in IOCL, 76 per cent in 
HPCL and 82 per cent in BPCL.   The overall rate of achievement was, ho wever, 97.8 per 
cent of the complaints received regarding PAHAL (DBTL) S cheme from 1 January 2015 to 
15 August 2015 as per data furnished to Audit. Ther e were however instances where time 
taken to resolve the complaints ranged from one mon th to more than six months (1,611 cases 
in IOCL; 2,292 in HPCL and 11,740 in BPCL).   
(Paragraph 5.1) 
Issue of subsidised LPG cylinders beyond the quota of 12 cylinders per annum and instances 
of payment of Permanent Advance to multiple connect ions were noticed in audit 
examination.  In 2014-15, the cap of 12 subsidised cylinders per annum had been violated 
and 15.57 lakh active domestic consumers had receiv ed more than 12 subsidised cylinders 
from April 2014 to 31  March 2015 leading to excess payment of subsidy.  I n the sample 
checked, intra-OMC de-duplication indicated that 37 ,499 consumers during the year 2014-15 
and 8,707 consumers during the year 2015-16 (up to 31 October 2015) having multiple 
connections had availed more than their quota of 12  subsidised cylinders.  Besides, 51,443 
consumers had received permanent advance amounting to `1.30 crore on multiple 
connections. 
(Paragraph 5.2) 
Audit noticed that the reason for failure of 485 ou t of 751 failed transactions was attributable 
to distributors which emphasises the need for effec tive monitoring of data entry by OMCs 
and adequate input controls and validations in the database to ensure its accuracy. Moreover, 
some transactions failed as some of the Grameen Ban ks were not on National Payment 
Corporation of India’s (NPCI) system.  There is a n eed to ensure synchronisation of all 
customer banks with the payment bridge of NPCI.  
(Paragraph 6.1)   
Though customers have joined the PAHAL (DBTL) Schem e and linked their Bank account 
and in some cases Aadhaar number to the domestic cu stomer database, transactions for 
transferring the Permanent Advance have failed.  Au dit examination of the same indicated 
that a total of 47.23 lakh consumers did not receiv e Permanent Advance amounting to 
`169.09 crore as on 31 October 2015.  Since the purp ose of payment of Permanent Advance 
is to assist the consumer in purchasing LPG cylinde rs at market price without any financial 
burden, it is imperative that all the eligible LPG consumers receive the advance upon their 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
vi 
first refill booking. Non-transfer of permanent adv ance to consumers defeated the objective 
of providing for permanent advance under the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme. 
(Paragraph 6.2)   
Non-Cash Transfer Compliant (NCTC) consumers are th ose, who have not joined the 
PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme.  A marketing research agency e ngaged by BPCL (May 2015) 
indicated that as many as 77 per cent  of the NCTC consumers wished to be a part of the 
Scheme but were deterred by lack of knowledge, leng thy process, low process clarity, time 
taken for processing, etc. This underlines the possibility that more efforts may be essential for 
the outreach to all LPG consumers so that deserving  consumers are not deprived of subsidy, 
particularly considering that 28 per cent of the NCTC consumers are rural consumers. 
(Paragraph 7.1)  
A one-time Permanent Advance is given to the domest ic LPG consumer so as to enable the 
consumer to pay for the first cylinder delivered at  market rates on joining the PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme. This advance is meant to remain with  the consumer till the connection is 
terminated, when the advance would be recovered fro m the security deposit lying with the 
OMCs. Audit noticed that the security deposit held by the OMC was much lower than the 
advance paid in 29.92 lakh cases; the amount of sho rtfall being `68.39 crore. As such, 
recovery of the Permanent Advance (PA) would not be  possible in these cases.   Moreover, 
PA continued to be held by the consumer even when t he consumer’s status changes to Non 
Cash Transfer Compliant (NCTC).  Audit noticed 9.58  lakh NCTC consumers holding 
`49.21 crore as Permanent Advance collectively.  
(Paragraph 8.1)  
MoPNG estimated (February 2016) potential savings i n LPG subsidy for 2015-16 at `9,211 
crore while the OMCs estimated the savings for the same period at `5,107.48 crore. The 
methodologies adopted by the Ministry and the OMCs were different. In both estimations, 
however, Audit noticed inherent inconsistencies whi ch would lower the estimated savings. 
MoPNG assumed that the inactive or blocked consumer s, who were not eligible for subsidy 
would have availed the entire quota of 12 cylinders  against the national average per capita 
consumption of 6.27 cylinders in 2014-15.  Consider ing the national average off take of 6.27 
cylinders (as used by OMCs in their estimation), the estimated savings in subsidy for the year 
2015-16 would be `4,813 crore only.  
(Paragraph 9.1)  
IOCL (the coordinating agency of OMCs for LPG) cons idered the average subsidy rate in 
2014-15 while working out the subsidy savings for 2 015-16. This has led to an  
over-statement of savings in subsidy, in view of th e sharp fall in prices in 2015-16 vis-à-vis 
2014-15.  If the average subsidy of `169.45 per cylinder in 2015-16 was considered (as u sed 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
vii 
by MoPNG in their estimation), and after considerin g the savings in subsidy due to opting 
‘Give-it Up’ by 67.27 lakh consumers (as on 29 Febr uary 2016), the subsidy savings would 
reduce to `3,473.48 crore, instead of `5,107.48 crore estimated by the OMCs.   
(Paragraph 9.2)  
The actual subsidy payout during the period from Ap ril 2015 to December 2015 was 
`12,084.24 crore as against `35,400.46 crore during April 2014 to December 2014.  The 
significant reduction of ` 23,316.21 crore in subsidy payout was on account o f the combined 
effect of decrease in off take of subsidised cylind ers by consumers and lower subsidy rates 
arising from the sharp fall in crude prices in 2015 -16.  Audit examination indicated that 
reduced subsidy rate on account of fall in crude oi l price resulted in reduced subsidy payout 
of `21,552.28 crore, while the effect on the same due t o reduced offtake of cylinders by 
consumers worked out to `1,763.93 crore. Therefore, it is evident that the lower subsidy ra tes 
in 2015-16 is, by far, the most significant factor resulted in subsidy savings. 
 (Paragraph 9.3)  
Audit suggests the following recommendations in ord er to address the issues highlighted in 
this Report: 
(i) Effective steps may need to be taken to dis-incenti vise diversion of non-subsidised 
domestic LPG cylinders to the commercial segment.  
(ii) Considering that audit scrutiny of the selected sam ple revealed existence of multiple 
connections, the entire database needs to be scruti nised by the OMCs and effective 
action should be ensured. The integrity of the data base needs to be maintained. 
While the OMCs have assured institution of appropri ate checks for new additions to 
the consumer database, there is an urgent need to e nsure correctness and integrity of 
the existing database. Appropriate and transparent documentation of blocking and 
un-blocking of suspected multiple connections also needs to be ensured. 
(iii) Appropriate input controls, data validations and st rict oversight is essential at the 
distributer interface to ensure correctness of data  entry at their end which would not 
only improve the integrity of the consumer database  but also eliminate failed 
transactions arising from incorrect information. 
(iv) Audit has noted the decrease in the number of Non-C ash Transfer Compliant 
consumers. However, more focussed outreach efforts may be necessary to ensure 
that deserving consumers are not deprived of subsid y for want of knowledge of the 
Scheme or clarity regarding its processes. 
(v) Appropriate policy decisions may be necessary to ad dress the blocking of Permanent 
Advance with Non Cash Transfer Compliant consumers and recovery of Permanent 
Advance from consumers having a lower security deposit compared to it. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
1 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
 
1.1. Introduction 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) is a clean fuel.  Gov ernment of India (GoI) has been 
subsidising the domestic supply of LPG to popularise the use of this fuel for domestic use and 
render it affordable to the domestic consumers. Tra ditionally, LPG was made available to 
domestic consumers by the Government of India owned  Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) 
at a subsidised price.  The under-recoveries of OMC s arising from subsidising LPG were 
compensated partly through budgetary support from G oI and partly through subsidy given by 
upstream companies on purchase of crude.  GoI intro duced (15 November 2014) “Pratyaksh 
Hanstantrit Labh Yojana” (PAHAL (Direct Benefit Tra nsfer for LPG) Scheme) for 
transferring the subsidy on LPG gas directly to the  consumers.  The Scheme is being 
implemented by three OMCs, viz., Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) and Bharat Pet roleum Corporation Limited (BPCL) 
through their network of LPG distributors. Considering the significance of the Scheme and its 
implementation, an audit was carried out for examin ation of the implementation of PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme. 
1.2. Audit objective and scope 
The audit objectives includes whether the implementation of the Scheme: 
• Effectively removed incentive for diversion of LPG cylinders; 
• Weeded out fake/duplicate LPG connections effectively; 
• Provided for protecting entitlement and ensuring subsidy to the consumers; 
• Effectively improved availability/delivery of LPG cylinders to genuine users; 
• Allowed self-selection in subsidy (i.e., subsidy giving up); 
• Was carried out efficiently and in compliance with the laid down process.   
 
Audit covered the implementation of the Scheme by t he three OMCs for the period from 1 
January 2015 to 31 October 2015. 
1.3. Audit sample and sampling methodology 
As on 31 October 2015, there were 16,781 LPG distri butors in the country servicing 19.26 
crore registered domestic LPG consumers.  The OMC-w ise LPG distributors and consumers 
are indicated in the table below: 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
2 
Table-1: Details of OMC-wise LPG distributors and consumers 
Particulars IOCL HPCL BPCL Total 
Total number of LPG distributors 8,343 4,271 4,167 16,781 
Number of active LPG domestic consumers (in crore) 
Aadhaar Cash Transfer Compliant (ACTC) consumers 4.17 2.08 2.25 8.50 
Bank Cash Transfer Compliant (BCTC) consumers 2.82 1.58 1.55 5.95 
Total Cash Transfer Compliant (CTC) consumers 6.99 3.66 3.81 14.45 
Non-Cash Transfer Compliant (NCTC) consumers 0.83 0.40 0.48 1.72 
Total active domestic LPG consumers 7.82 4.06 4.29 16.17 
Number of other than active consumers 1.58 0.76 0.74 3.09 
Total registered domestic LPG consumers 9.40 4.82 5.03 19.26 
Cash Transfer Compliant to total active consumers (%) 89.34 90.08 88.75 89.37 
Non-Cash Transfer Compliant to total active consumers (%) 10.66 9.92 11.25 10.63 
Audit adopted risk based sampling and selected 34 per cent of the LPG distributors for 
further scrutiny.   
The risk parameters considered for such selection were: 
• Subsidy pay-outs pertaining to the distributor with  distributors accounting for higher 
subsidy pay-outs being considered as higher risk category. 
• The number of Bank Cash Transfer Compliant (BCTC) c onsumers with distributors 
having a higher number of BCTC consumers being cons idered higher risk category 
since such consumers do not have the added safeguard of Aadhaar number check. 
• Changes made to name, address or bank account based  on probability that higher the 
frequency of changes, the higher the perceived risk. 
• Number of complaints with higher number of complaints receiving the higher th e 
risk. 
• Number of failed transactions 1; higher the number of failed transactions, higher th e 
risk of consumers being deprived of advance or subsidy. 
While selecting the distributors, due consideration  was given to representation of 
geographical regions in the sample.  The database o f each OMC was ordered zone-wise 
(north, south, east and west) and a sample of the t op 34 per cent was selected.  It was also 
ensured that distributors were in each OMC was repr esented in the sample to the extent the 
Company’s market share.  IOCL accounts for half the  distributors while the other two OMCs 
have one-fourth share each and this ratio was maintained in the selection of sample.  
                                                           
1  Any transaction which is returned/rejected by Bank /National Payment Corporation of India is classified  as a Failed 
Transaction 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
3 
The data obtained from the central servers of the t hree OMCs as on 31 October 2015 was 
ordered as per the above-mentioned risk parameters and the top 34 per cent distributors were 
selected.  
Top one per cent of distributors (165 LPG distributors) were also se lected for detailed 
verification at the distributors’ end. 
In the case of LPG consumers, audit examination was  carried out on a sample of 11.89 crore 
domestic LPG consumers (comprising 9.94 crore activ e and 1.95 crore other than active 
consumers) coming under the selected 34 per cent distributors out of a total population size 
of 19.26 crore consumers.  The details of the sampl e selected for examination in audit is 
given in the table below: 
Table-2:  OMC-wise sample selected for audit 
Name 
of OMC 
Number of LPG 
Distributors  
Registered LPG 
domestic consumers  
(in crore) 
Total Selected % Total Selected  % 
IOCL 8,343 2,840 34.04 9.40 5.80 61.70 
BPCL 4,271 1,460 34.18 4.82 3.25 64.61 
HPCL 4,167 1,416 33.98 5.03 2.84 56.46 
Total 16,781 5,716 34.06 19.26 11.89 61.73 
 
1.4. Audit criteria 
The criteria for the audit was drawn from provisions of: 
i) Handbook on -‘PAHAL’ Pratyaksh Hanstantrit Labh Dir ect Benefits Transfer For LPG 
(DBTL) Consumers Scheme (version 2) published by Mi nistry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas  
ii) Dhande Committee Report on  Review of Direct Benefi t Transfer for LPG Scheme 
(May 2014) 
iii) Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Regulation of Supply and D istribution) Order, 2000 and 
Amendment’s thereto vide Liquefied Petroleum Gas (R egulation of Supply and 
Distribution) Order, 2009. 
iv) Office Memoranda and Circulars issued by Ministry o f Petroleum and Natural Gas and 
Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell  (PPAC) regarding implementation and operation 
of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme. 
 
1.5. Audit methodology 
The data from central server (being the central poi nt of implementation of PAHAL (DBTL) 
Scheme) as provided by three OMCs in respect of 34 per cent  LPG distributors was test 
checked and analysed in audit.   Initially one per cent of the population of distributors as on 
15 August 2015 was selected for audit scrutiny.  In stances of multiple connections in this 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
4 
sample necessitated detailed analysis of a larger s ample size and hence, the sample size was 
subsequently increased to 34 per cent with the balance 33 per cent pertaining to data as on  
31 October 2015. The data analysis was carried out with the help of Interactive Data 
Extraction and Analysis (IDEA) software.   
Audit checked the uniqueness and correctness of customer database, adequacy of systems put 
in place by OMCs to ensure de-duplication, and corr ectness of the transactions relating to 
release of Permanent Advances and refill subsidy to  Cash Transfer Compliant customers.  
Audit also conducted physical verification of records of 165 LPG distributors (one per cent of 
total population of LPG distributors) spread across  the four regions of country and three 
OMCs to examine the procedures followed and documen tation maintained at the distributors 
end.  The sample of ‘active consumers’ were used fo r audit examination in general, while the 
data in respect of ‘other than active consumers’ in  combination with the data in respect of 
‘active consumers’ were used for specific checks on multiple connections. 
Audit also attempted to validate the overall financ ial impact of the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 
as worked out by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and OMCs.  
The draft audit report containing audit findings was issued to the three OMCs on 22 February 
2016.  Replies to the draft audit report were recei ved in April 2016 (BPCL) and May 2016 
(IOCL and HPCL), which were duly incorporated in th is Report.  The draft audit report was 
issued (June 2016) to the Ministry of Petroleum and  Natural Gas (MoPNG).  The reply 
furnished (June 2016) were also duly incorporated in this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
5 
Chapter 2 
PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 
 
2.1.  Introduction of Direct Benefit Transfer for L PG Scheme 
In 2011, a Task Force was set up to suggest ways an d means to tackle the problem of 
increasing under recoveries to OMCs and diversion o f domestic subsidised cylinder 
to the commercial sector having bearing on subsidy outgo. The terms of reference of 
the Task Force included identification of a framewo rk for direct transfer of subsidy to 
the consumers based on Aadhaar Number. The Task For ce in its report (July 2011) 
recommended the implementation of LPG subsidy in three phases as follows: 
Phase I:    Impose cap on consumption of subsidised cylinders.  
Phase II:   Direct transfer of subsidy to consumers into Aadhaar enabled bank account 
Phase III: Target segmented consumers to restrict subsidy only to intended beneficiaries. 
Direct Bank Transfer for LPG (DBTL) Scheme was laun ched (1 June  2013) by GoI with a 
cap of nine cylinders to achieve efficient subsidy administration.  This cap was revised to 11 
in February 2014 and to 12 for 2014-15.  The Scheme  envisaged curbing pilferage in and 
diversion of domestic LPG distribution system of OMCs by effecting cash transfer of subsidy 
directly into the bank account of the eligible cons umers.  The Scheme envisaged payment of 
market price for the domestic cylinders by LPG cons umers and the transfer of subsidy 
amount directly to consumer’s bank account.  Domest ic LPG consumers were required as per 
the Scheme to link their Aadhaar Number and Bank Ac count Numbers with their LPG 
consumer ID to avail the subsidy on domestic LPG cy linders.  The consumers who linked 
their Bank account and Aadhaar number to their LPG consumer ID were termed Cash 
Transfer Compliant (CTC) and were eligible to recei ve a one-time Permanent Advance (PA) 
of `435/- to enable them to pay market price of the fir st cylinder and subsequently the 
applicable subsidy amount on delivery of refills.  The Scheme was implemented in 291 
districts of the country. 
2.2.  Suspension of DBTL Scheme 
Having an Aadhaar number was a pre-requisite for availing subsidy under the DBTL Scheme.  
This led to consumer grievances, particularly in di stricts where Aadhaar penetration was low. 
The DBTL Scheme was suspended in March 2014 and a c ommittee headed by Shri S. G. 
Dhande was constituted (March 2014) to review the f unctioning of the Scheme.  
Subsequently, on 15 November 2014, direct benefit t ransfer for subsidy on domestic LPG 
was re-introduced under the “Pratyaksh Hanstantrit Labh Yojana”  ( PAHAL (DBTL) 
Scheme).  
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
6 
 
2.3. Introduction of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme  
The PAHAL (DBTL ) Scheme was introduced on 15 November 2014 in 54 di stricts  
(1st phase) and subsequently extended to the remaining 6221 districts on 1 January 2015  
(2nd phase). Unlike DBTL Scheme, Aadhaar number was not  mandatory for a consumer to 
avail of subsidy benefit under the PAHAL Scheme. An  LPG consumer had the option of 
linking her/his bank account to her/his LPG consume r ID without quoting the Aadhaar 
number and receive subsidy in that bank account. 
The PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme is being implemented by the  Oil Marketing Companies 
(OMCs) through its network of LPG distributors who constitute the interface with consumers. 
The distributors maintain the LPG consumer database  (containing the particulars of the 
domestic LPG consumer, including a unique LPG ID, n ame, address, date of birth, bank 
account details and Aadhaar number in case availabl e) for the area earmarked for the 
distributorship and periodically synchronises the s ame to the central system maintained by 
the OMCs.  The distributors deliver LPG cylinders i n response to a request from the 
consumer at market prices and uploads proof of rece ipt by the consumer (indicating 
completion of the transaction) to the central syste m. The action for reimbursement of subsidy 
to the consumer is initiated by the OMC (central sy stem) which sends the advice to the 
sponsor bank (State Bank of India) and onward to th e National Payment Corporation of India 
(NPCI) enabled payment platform for crediting the b ank account of the LPG consumer. The 
information regarding transfer of subsidy to the consumer is received by the central system of 
the OMCs who then prefer a subsidy claim with the Government for reimbursement.  
2.4.  Features of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 
• Objectives of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme are:  
a. Remove incentive for diversion. 
b. Weed out fake/duplicate connections. 
c. Protect entitlement and ensure subsidy to the consumer. 
d. Improve availability/delivery of LPG cylinders to genuine users. 
e. Allow self-selection in subsidy. 
• The conditions for receipt of subsidy under the Scheme are as follows: 
Consumers who wished to join the Scheme had to be C ash Transfer Compliant 
(CTC) to receive LPG subsidy amount and had two options:  
▪ Option I (Primary):  
Wherever Aadhaar number is available; it would rema in the medium of 
cash transfer. Thus, an LPG consumer who has an Aad haar Number has to 
link it to their Bank account number and LPG consum er number. These 
                                                           
1  The Scheme was extended to all districts in the c ountry on 01 January 2015.  But OMCs were authorized  to exclude some 
districts/part of district or distributors from the  Scheme for reasons like connectivity issues, etc. with the prior approval of 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.   

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
7 
consumers would be referred as ACTC (Aadhaar Cash Transfer 
Compliant) consumers. 
▪ Option II (Secondary):  
If an LPG consumer does not have an Aadhaar number,  then he/she can 
directly receive subsidy in his/her Bank account wi thout the use of 
Aadhaar number.  These consumers would be referred as BCTC (Bank 
Cash Transfer Compliant) consumers. 
• Domestic LPG consumers who have already joined the earlier DBTL Scheme by 
linking their Aadhaar number and Bank account numbe r to the LPG database would 
not need to take fresh action for receiving subsidy  since the subsidy would be 
transferred to their Bank accounts via Aadhaar numb er based on the previous 
seeding.  
• In the districts where the Scheme has been launched , domestic LPG cylinders would 
be sold at market determined price ( i.e., price which does not include subsidy) from 
the date of launch of the Scheme. 
• The total cash  applicable on LPG cylinder (‘total cash’ is the dif ference between 
market determined price and the subsidised retail s elling price as applicable on the 
date of delivery) would then be transferred to the Bank account of CTC consumer for 
each subsidised cylinder delivered up to the cap of  12 cylinders for the whole year as 
per his/her entitlement.  
• Non-CTC consumers were allowed 3 months’ grace peri od (up to 14 February 2015 
for 1 st phase and 31 March 2015 for 2 nd phase) from the date of launch of PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme to become CTC. During this period, su ch consumers would receive 
their entitled  cylinders at the then applicable subsidised retail selling price.  
• After the grace period of three months, all non-CTC  LPG consumers got an 
additional three-month parking period ( i.e., up to 14 May 2015 for 1 st phase and 30 
June 2015 for 2 nd phase), during which time, the sale would be at market det ermined 
price for all LPG consumers.  During this period, the CTC consumers would get their 
subsidy in their bank account and the subsidy perta ining to transactions of non-CTC 
consumers would be held back with the respective OM C. This withheld subsidy 
amount would be transferred to such LPG consumers w ho became CTC anytime 
during this parking period. The withheld subsidy am ount relating to such LPG 
consumers who did not become CTC during the parking  period would lapse and sale 
of refill cylinders to them would continue at marke t determined price till such time 
the consumer attains CTC status. 
• A one-time permanent advance (PA) would be credited  in the bank account of the 
consumer who joined the Scheme after booking of fir st refill. The advance would be 
notified, from time to time, and would be paid as soon as the consumer made the first 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
8 
booking for a cylinder after joining the Scheme to ensure that the consumer had 
sufficient money required to pay for the first LPG cylinder. The PA amount was 
`568/- for the period 15 November 2014 to 31 March 2 015.  Thereafter, the PA 
amount has been revised every month and it varied from region to region1. 
• LPG consumers who were provided permanent advance o n a previous scale would 
not be eligible for any differential payment on acc ount of the revision in the 
permanent advance 
 
2.5. Payment process of the Scheme 
The process of transfer of advance and subsidy to t he consumer under the Scheme is 
represented in the flow charts below:  
 
 
                                                           
1 Price varies from sales location to location depending upon transportation charges involved in view of distance from supply 
point and also State as well as local taxes applicable to that particular sales location. 


Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
9 
 
 
2.6. Procedure for settlement of PAHAL (DBTL) claim s of OMCs 
OMCs were allowed to claim PA in respect of all CTC consumers at the time of launch of the 
Scheme, but subsequently PA claim was to be made on ly after disbursement for PA amount 
to the additional consumers that joined the Scheme.  Similarly, OMCs were required to lodge 
claims with GoI, on quarterly basis, towards subsid y amount successfully transferred to the 
Bank account of the LPG consumers. However, while l odging such claim OMCs are not 
entitled to claim the entire subsidy amount transferred to the consumers.  OMCs were entitled 
to claim subsidy amount only after deducting uncomp ensated cost 1. Additionally, OMCs  
are also entitled to claim Project Management Expen diture2 on quarterly basis, restricted to 
`50 lakh per district. 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG/Minist ry) vide letter dated 7 August 2015 
introduced monthly settlement mechanism for PAHAL ( DBTL) subsidy from the year 2015-
16, wherein OMCs were required to open a separate B ank account called ‘Buffer Account’ 
for receiving the cash subsidy.  OMCs then had to s ubmit Audited statement of DBTL sales 
made on all India basis to Petroleum Planning and A nalysis Cell (PPAC) that would 
scrutinize the sales figure communicated by OMCs and forward to the Ministry. MoPNG was 
                                                           
1 Uncompensated cost are the cost elements such as i mport loss/non-revision loss etc. which are not inc luded in the 
methodology of cost price determination as mentioned in the appendix attached to the scheme. 
2 Project Management Expenses includes Seeding expen diture, Software charges/upgrade, Expenditure on fo rms/ 
SMS/seeding, Aadhaar generation camps, etc. 


Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
10 
to process and send the proposal along with its rec ommendation to Integrated Finance 
Division (IFD) of MoPNG, which after examination would give its concurrence for release of 
cash subsidy applicable for each month.  MoPNG woul d release the amounts to the Buffer 
Account of each OMC.  Each OMC will be allowed to w ithdraw the subsidy amount from 
Buffer Account based on the quantity of LPG sold under PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme during the 
period.  The status of various claims lodged by the  OMCs with MoPNG under 
DBTL/PAHAL Scheme and the subsidy amount sanctioned  by Government of India (GoI), 
for credit to Buffer Account is indicated in Annexure I. 
In response to Chapter 10, MoPNG stated (June 2016)  that Permanent Advance has been 
discontinued with effect from 1 April 2016.  Department of Expenditure approved adjustment 
of `6702.96 crore of one-time cash incentive (Permanent  Advance) paid by the OMCs in the 
year 2013-14 and 2014-15 to the consumers under the  Scheme from the surplus available in 
the Buffer Account.   
2.7. Coverage under the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 
The PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme intends to cover all domest ic LPG consumers which stood at 
16.17 crore serviced by 16,781 distributors as on 3 1 October 2015. Indian Oil Corporation 
Ltd. (IOCL) accounts for approximately half the mar ket share with 7.82 crore consumers and 
8,343 distributors. The other two OMCs cover the ba lance consumers with the market share 
divided nearly equally between them (i.e., Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) having 
4.06 crore consumers serviced by 4271 distributors and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Ltd. (HPCL) having 4.29 crore consumers serviced by  4167 distributors). Of the total of 
16.17 crore domestic LPG consumers, 10.63 per cent have not joined the Scheme and were 
designated (31 October 2015) as Non Cash Transfer C ompliant (NCTC) consumers. Of the 
14.45 crore CTC consumers, 8.50 crore (59 per cent ) were Aadhaar compliant (ACTC 
consumers). The balance 5.95 crore CTC consumers (4 1 per cent) had furnished only Bank 
account details and were BCTC consumers (31 October 2015). 
2.8. IT Systems for implementing PAHAL (DBTL) Schem e 
The three OMCs (IOCL, BPCL and HPCL) had different IT systems and IT architecture for 
implementing the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme. IOCL and HPCL  had a de-centralised server 
architecture, a server at the distributor end and a  central server with the OMC. The software 
used on the distributor servers of IOCL is Indsoft while the software used by HPCL is 
Distributor and Consumer Management System (DCMS). Each distributor maintains the 
consumer database pertinent to her/ his distributor ship and carries out transactions on the 
server operating on the specified software system (Indsoft for IOCL and DCMS for HPCL).   
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
11 
In the case of IOCL, any consumer creation/change r equests are received at distributor 
premises based on the consumer request and such req uests get pushed to Central Server for 
execution. The Central Server authorizes such reque sts, executes them based on the business 
logic and creates/changes the consumer’s data first  at Central Server. Subsequently, the 
changes are percolated back to the distributor soft ware along with the request execution 
status. This mechanism ensures no unauthorized chan ge happens to consumer database at the 
distributor level and the Central Server always has  first information on creation/change of 
customer details. The transaction data at the distr ibutor end is synchronised with the central 
server at periodic intervals.  
In the case of HPCL, any consumer creation/change r equests are received at distributor 
premises based on the consumer request and action i s taken in local DCMS system.  
Periodically, the requests gets synchronised to the  central server.  As per this process, all 
changes are made to consumer database at distributo r level and then the data is synchronised 
to the central server on periodic basis.  The centr al server is used for accumulation of 
transactions and for generating various periodic and MIS reports.   
BPCL, on the other hand, has a single integrated ce ntralised server which operates on 
software, LPGNext and maintains the consumer master  data as well as the record of day to 
day transactions of the distributors on a real time basis. 
2.9. Audit findings 
It may be noted that the magnitude of inconsistenci es in data highlighted in the observations 
may not be material in terms of the number of cases  or amounts involved when compared 
with the sample size checked in audit.  However, th e findings are reported to indicate the 
extent of achievement of the Scheme objectives and to highlight certain inconsistencies from 
system perspective so that the Scheme and the syste ms can be fine-tuned for even better 
delivery of services to LPG consumers.  Audit is of  the opinion that any beneficiary in a 
social security and welfare measure like PAHAL (DBT L) Scheme should not be denied of 
his/her legitimate benefit only because of inconsis tency in data processing and management 
or in the framework within which it is being implemented.   
The audit findings on each objective of PAHAL (DBTL ) Scheme are grouped under the 
following chapters. 
Chapter 3: Removing Incentive for Diversion 
Chapter 4: Weeding out Fake/Duplicate Connections 
Chapter 5: Delivery of Cylinders to Genuine Users 
Chapter 6: Protection of Entitlement and Ensuring S ubsidy 
Chapter 7: Self-selection in Subsidy 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
12 
Chapter 8: Other Issues 
Chapter 9: Savings in Subsidy through PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 
Chapter 10: Conclusion and Recommendations  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
13 
Chapter 3 
Removing Incentive for Diversion 
 
3.1. Increase in growth rate of commercial LPG and decline in growth rate of 
domestic LPG  
LPG cylinders in the country are sold to three broa d categories of consumers, viz., domestic 
consumers, non-domestic non-exempt (NDNE) consumers  and auto LPG consumers. Audit 
compared the sales pattern of these three categorie s in terms of their growth in sales during 
the period from April to October 2015 (post impleme ntation of the Scheme) against an 
identical period in 2014. The results are tabulated below: 
Table-3: Growth in sales across different categorie s of consumers during 
April-October 2014-15 vis-a-vis April-October 2015-16 
(In per cent) 
Month Domestic sale  NDNE packed sale1  Auto LPG sale 
2014-15 2015-16 2014-15 2015-16 2014-15 2015-16 
April 12.0 7.8 -13.3 41.2 -23.0  14.5 
May 17.4 3.5 -11.0 37.0 -24.8  10.2 
June 12.8 10.3 -11.1 28.3 -21.3  6.5 
July 5.8 9.6 -15.8 38.8 -26.0  6.2 
August 11.1 5.2 -13.3 43.7 -25.8  4.5 
September 17.2 2.5 -3.7 40.0 -20.1  7.8 
October 7.5 10.4 -9.9 66.3 -23.8  7.2 
There has been a sharp growth in offtake of NDNE an d auto LPG cylinders after introduction 
of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme. The negative growth rate of  NDNE and of auto LPG categories 
in the year 2014-15 turned positive in 2015-16 and NDNE sales rose significantly.  This is 
accompanied by decline in the growth of sales in th e domestic segment particularly after the 
end of the parking period of the Scheme, i.e., w.e.f. July 2015.  
The changes in the sales pattern of the different consumer categories indicating an increase in 
offtake in the non-domestic segment vis-à-vis domes tic segment could in the opinion of 
Audit be due to the positive effect of PAHAL (DBTL)  Scheme since it has done away with 
dual pricing thereby curbing the incentive for dive rsion of domestic LPG cylinders for non-
domestic use. 
While replies of IOCL and HPCL (May 2016) were sile nt on this issue, BPCL agreed  
(April 2016) with the findings of Audit. 
 
                                                           
1  Sale of LPG in filled cylinders is known as packe d sale. In case of Non Domestic Non Exempt (NDNE) c onsumers sale of 
LPG is made either as packed sale ( i.e., in cylinders) or as Bulk sale ( i.e., through tankers- mainly to industrial 
consumers).   

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
14 
3.2. Large scale offtake of non-subsidised domestic  LPG  
A domestic CTC consumer is entitled to receive subsidy on 12 cylinders per annum under the 
PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme.  A consumer can consume more t han the quota of 12, but for the 
consumption in excess of 12 cylinders the consumer has to pay market prices and he/she 
would not be entitled to receive the subsidy.  Cons idering that the national average 
consumption of domestic LPG cylinders per household  was 6.27 in 2014-15, it may be 
reasonable to assume that the requirement of LPG in  a household would not, in general, 
exceed 24 cylinders in a year (double the quota all owed for subsidy).  Increase in offtake of 
non-subsidised LPG cylinders by domestic consumers prima facie points to positive outcome 
of the Scheme objective subject to removal of incentive for diversion. 
Audit noticed a significant increase in the offtake  of domestic non-subsidised cylinders 
during the year 2015-16 compared to 2014-15 in the 34 per cent sample examined in audit.  
The number of domestic consumers consuming more tha n 24 LPG cylinders during the first 
seven months of 2015-16 (April to October 2015) exc eeded the corresponding numbers for 
the entire year of 2014-15 by 261.34 per cent as shown below. 
Table-3: Details of offtake of non-subsidised domes tic LPG cylinders 
during April-October 2014-15  vis-à-vis April-October  
2015-16 
 
Thus, the number of domestic consumers consuming more than 24 cylinders in the first seven 
months of 2015-16 is 2.6 times that of the entire year of 2014-15.  It was also noticed in audit 
that 23,104 number of domestic consumers (with a mi nimum consumption of 12 cylinders 
during 2014-15) in IOCL, 5,662 in HPCL and 7,993 in  BPCL had consumed more than 12 
cylinders and their consumption during the first se ven months of 2015-16 was higher than 
that of the entire year of 2014-15. 
Audit would however highlight the risk associated with higher consumption of domestic non-
subsidised LPG cylinders since there is a significa nt price difference between the price of 
commercial and domestic non-subsidised LPG on account of additional duties and levies (i.e., 
customs duty, excise duty, and value added tax diff erentials).  Considering the duty 
differential, an equivalent 14.2 kg LPG cylinder wo uld cost `233.20 higher for the 
Name of 
OMC 
No. of active LPG 
domestic consumers 
who consumed more 
than 24 cylinders 
during 2014-15 
No. of active LPG domestic consumers 
who consumed more than 24 cylinders  
in the first seven months of 2015-16 
(April to October 2015) 
IOCL 1,506 5,056 
HPCL 353 1,332 
BPCL 1,211 1,635 
Total 3,070 8,023 
Percentage increase in consumption              261.34 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
15 
commercial consumer vis-à-vis the domestic non-subsidised consumer (at prices applicable to 
Mumbai in October 2015).  This difference was much higher than the price difference 
between subsidised and non-subsidised domestic LPG cylinder, which in October 2015 stood 
at ` 99.86. There is, therefore, the risk of diversion of non-subsidised domestic LPG for 
commercial uses. 
The OMCs, in their reply (April/May 2016), stated t hat the consumers have not consumed 
more than 12 subsidised cylinders in the prescribed  period, which is the capping limit as per 
control order. HPCL further stated that the consume rs had taken more cylinders as their 
consumption is high and that distributors have been  advised to monitor such consumers to 
establish their genuineness. BPCL added that the ca ses where the consumption has been very 
high were reticulated consumers with a higher quota based on the number of households. 
The reply of BPCL is factually incorrect as Audit h ad specifically filtered the sample data to 
weed out reticulated consumers. The contention of t he OMCs that the cap of 12 subsidised 
LPG cylinders has not been exceeded is well appreci ated. However, the need to address the 
possibility of diversion of non-subsidized domestic  cylinders to commercial consumers, 
given the significant price difference between the two is reiterated. 
In response to the conclusion made in Chapter 10 on  the above aspects, MoPNG stated (June 
2016) that sale of commercial LPG cylinders registe red a growth rate of 39.3 per cent in the 
period from April 2015 to March 2016 compared to th e corresponding period last year, while 
that of domestic LPG cylinders registered only 7.1 per cent  growth.  This might be 
attributable to curtailing diversion of domestic su bsidized LPG with the implementation of 
PAHAL (DBTAL) Scheme.   
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that tho ugh there was growth in commercial LPG 
cylinders, there was also significant growth regist ered in respect of domestic non-subsidised 
cylinders during the year 2015-16 as compared to 20 14-15.  Such being the case, Audit 
highlighted the risk associated with higher consump tion of domestic non-subsidised LPG 
cylinders in view of the price difference between t he commercial and domestic non-
subsidised LPG.   
Audit noticed a marked growth in sale of LPG cylind ers to commercial consumers post 
implementation of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme.  However, th ere has also been a sharp 
increase in offtake of domestic LPG cylinders not e ntitled to receive subsidy, which 
increases the risk of diversion, particularly consi dering the significant price difference 
between domestic LPG cylinders not entitled to rece ive subsidy and commercial LPG 
cylinder on account of differential taxes and dutie s levied on the two categories of 
consumers.  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
16 
Chapter 4 
Weeding out Fake/Duplicate Connections 
 
The LPG Control Order, 2000 (as amended) permits si ngle LPG cooking gas connection to a 
household and restricts possession of more than one  LPG connection by a household under 
the public distribution system. Each domestic LPG c onnection has a unique consumer ID 
with uniqueness maintained across all three OMCs. T he parameters recorded in the domestic 
LPG consumer database include, inter alia, the name, address, Aadhaar number and Bank 
account number.  Multiple connections arise when tw o or more LPG consumer IDs are found 
linked to the same consumer which can be identified  through identical Aadhaar number, 
Bank account number, Name and Address. To implement  the control order and restrict 
subsidy outgo, it is necessary to identify multiple  connections receiving subsidy on LPG and 
take necessary steps for blocking/terminating such connections. 
Audit checked the existence of multiple connections  of consumers in a  sample covering 34 
per cent of distributors. The de-duplication exercise was co nducted by Audit on the basis of 
the following parameters: 
• ‘Same Aadhaar number’,  
• ‘Same Bank account number and IFSC1’,  
• ‘Same Name and Same Address’, 
•  ‘Same Name, Date of birth and Registered mobile number’. 
Audit findings on multiple LPG connections on the b asis of the analysis using the above 
criteria are discussed below: 
4.1. Identification of multiple connections on the basis of same Aadhaar number and 
same Bank account number 
With introduction of the PAHAL Scheme, consumers ne cessarily need to link their bank 
account details with the LPG consumer database in o rder to avail subsidy.  In case the 
consumer has an Aadhaar number, this should also be  linked to the consumer database.  Such 
consumers are designated as Cash Transfer Compliant  (CTC) consumers who become 
eligible for transfer of subsidy to their designated bank account.  
To ensure identification of multiple connections, O MCs started a de-duplication exercise in 
May 2013 within their respective databases (intra O MC de-duplication) on the basis of 
Aadhaar number.  Post introduction of PAHAL, the OM Cs also introduced an inter-OMC  
de-duplication exercise on Aadhaar number which sta rted in May 2014.  Later Bank IFSC 
and account number de-duplication was also included in 2015.  
                                                           
1  IFSC stands for ‘Indian Financial System Code’ 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
17 
Considering the fact that OMCs have been carrying o ut intra and inter OMC de-duplication 
on Aadhaar number and Bank account number, multiple connections were not expected in the 
consumer database received by Audit from the OMCs. However, Audit noticed instances of 
multiple connections in the sample selected (34 per cent distributors of the OMCs).  
4.1.1. Intra OMC de-duplication  
Audit noticed multiple LPG connections having the s ame Aadhaar number and bank account 
number in the respective databases of the OMCs. It was seen that in some cases, one of the 
multiple connections remained ‘active’ while the ot her connections were indicated as 
‘transferred’ or ‘in-transit’.  Subsidy in these ca ses was paid only for the ‘active’ connection 
even though the risk of the consumer availing of su ch subsidy in future could not be ruled 
out. Where two or more of the multiple connections were ‘active’, the cylinders continued to 
be delivered and subsidy transferred in respect of these ‘active’ multiple connections.   
(i) Multiple connections having same Aadhaar number - It was noticed that the 
sample checked in HPCL had 1400 LPG consumers linke d with 700 Aadhaar numbers 
indicating duplicate connections. The break-up of t hese duplicate connections is indicated in 
the Pie Chart below.  
Figure-3: Break-up of duplicate LPG connections in HPCL 
As seen from the Chart, the status of 
nearly half of the duplicate 
connections, i.e., 48.43 per cent  was 
“Active”, while 32.14  per cent  and 
19.43 per cent of duplicate connections 
have ‘transferred’ and ‘in-transit’ status 
respectively. All these duplicate 
connections could avail supply of 
subsidised refills and thus get undue 
benefit.  
The sample checked in BPCL did not 
indicate any multiple ‘active’ connections linked with the same Aadhaar number. 
The data made available (December 2015/January 2016 ) by IOCL indicated presence of 
multiple connections for the same Aadhaar number. H owever, IOCL in reply (April/May 
2016)  clarified that the data provided to Audit ha d been from a Data warehouse (Sybase IQ) 
and that these multiple connections have been weeded out from the Oracle production data by 
applying a unique constraint on the Aadhaar number field. The contention of IOCL has been 
verified by Audit and found acceptable. As such, mu ltiple connections for the same Aadhaar 
number were not seen in the production server of IO CL. It however needs to be noted that 
Active
48.43%
Transferred
32.14%
In-Transit
19.43%
Status of Duplicate Connections

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
18 
when sample data was solicited from IOCL, the accur ate set of data ought to have been 
provided to Audit. Besides, the rationale behind ma intenance of different data for the same 
set of consumers in multiple databases was not clear to Audit. 
HPCL in its reply (April/May 2016) stated that in r espect of duplicate connections identified, 
the duplicate consumers have been terminated and pa yment of subsidy has been stopped.  
Further, the Aadhaar number was said to have been corrected and show cause notice issued to 
distributors for wrong seeding. 
Audit noted that HPCL has accepted the audit observ ation and initiated remedial action in 
cases where both the duplicate connections were ‘ac tive’. It is stressed that in other cases 
where only one of the duplicate connections was ‘ac tive’ and the other was ‘transferred’ or 
‘in-transit’, the possibility of future duplicate s ubsidy pay-outs could not be ruled out.  
Specific safeguards in this regard are essential to forestall such future eventuality.   
(ii) Multiple connections having the Same Bank IFSC and Same Bank Account 
Number 
In the sample selected from IOCL database, 43,323 L PG consumer IDs were found linked 
with 21,504 bank IFSC and Bank account numbers. Aud it noticed instances where more than 
two connections were linked to the same bank IFSC a nd Same Bank account number. This 
included four distinct bank accounts linked with 12  active LPG consumer IDs, two cases 
where a bank account was linked to 11 and 16 ‘activ e’ LPG IDs respectively . The break-up 
of the duplicate connections is indicated in the Pie Chart below.  
Figure-4: Break-up of duplicate connections (IOCL) 
As seen from the Chart, 49.64 per cent 
of duplicate connections were 
“Active”, while remaining 50.36 per 
cent of duplicate connections were 
having ‘transferred’ status. All these 
duplicate connections could avail 
supply of subsidised refills and thus get 
undue benefit.  
In the sample selected in HPCL, 14,198 
LPG consumer IDs were found linked 
with 6,614 bank IFSC and account 
numbers. In the case of HPCL also, 
Audit noticed instances where more than two connections were linked to the same bank IFSC 
and same bank account number.  Further scrutiny rev ealed that out of 7,584 duplicate 
connections, 7,561 connections (99.70 per cent) were having “Active” status while remaining 
Active
49.64%Transferred
50.36%
Status of Duplicate Connections

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
19 
23 connections were having “Transferred/In-Transit”  status. These duplicate connections 
could avail supply of subsidised refills and thus get undue benefit. 
The sample checked in BPCL did not indicate multipl e active LPG connections having same 
bank IFSC and same bank account number. 
IOCL in its reply (April/May 2016) stated that at t he time of commencement of PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme, no restriction had been imposed on s eeding same bank account for multiple 
consumers.  Considering that the above system was p rone to misuse, de-duplication exercise 
with bank account number as a unique field was subs equently carried out on intra and inter-
company basis.  After analysis of the data, OMCs st arted blocking multiple connections 
identified on the basis of same bank account in the  month of May 2015. Presently, one to one 
relationship between bank’s account number and LPG consumer ID (for domestic  category 
only) has been enforced.  However, there were NDEC 1 consumers, for whom field officers 
were authorized to approve request for connecting m ultiple connections to same bank IFSC 
and account number, after field verification.  
HPCL replied (April/May 2016) that these cases were due to:  
(i) Multiple connections with consumers having conn ections in both/other distributors that 
have now been blocked, 
(ii) Few consumers were Aadhaar Cash Transfer Compl iant consumers with common bank 
account seeded against two consumers due to erroneo us entries by bank and absence of de-
duplication/validation check in the earlier phases of Scheme implementation.  Such 
consumers have now been asked to seed the correct A adhaar number in their bank accounts.  
In some cases, distributor was said to have taken action by re-seeding the revised bank details 
in their system. HPCL further stated that all dupli cate bank accounts as identified by Audit, 
have been blocked and were being activated only aft er due verification, on a case to case 
basis, as some accounts might be valid, in case of beneficiaries being joint account owners or 
consumers with different households. Such consumers  were being advised to provide 
individual account numbers. HPCL assured to complete this exercise by 31 May 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Non-Domestic Exempt Category (NDEC) consumers include  hospitals, hostels, supplies for Mid-day Meal sche mes, 
Government Office canteens, Messes of Police, Borde r Security Force(BSF),Central Industrial Security For ce (CISF), 
Defence Establishments, charitable institutions, etc.  NDNE customers are not eligible for subsidy on LPG cylinders. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
20 
The reply of the OMCs is to be viewed in the light of the following: 
/head2right The IOCL contention that one to one relation of ban k IFSC and bank account number 
and consumer ID has been ensured is not acceptable as the multiple connections 
identified by Audit pertain to January 2016, much a fter May 2014 the date from which 
Management stated that blocking of multiple connect ions had been implemented. 
Besides only domestic LPG consumer database has bee n considered by Audit and thus 
the possibility of inclusion of NDEC consumers as stated in reply was remote.  
/head2right The corrective action taken by HPCL at the instance of Audit is noted. 
Audit reiterates the need for ensuring that a singl e bank IFSC and bank account number is 
mapped to a single LPG consumer ID. Besides, there is a need for addressing the significant 
number of multiple connections designated as ‘trans ferred’ where the possibility of payment 
of subsidy in future cannot be ruled out.   
(iii) Identification of duplicate connections on the basis of same name and address  
National Informatics Centre (NIC) commenced a de-du plication exercise in June, 2012 on 
two parameters, namely, Same Name Same Address (SNSA) and Different Name S ame 
Address (DNSA) in order to identify households with  duplicate connections.  Since July 
2015, this de-duplication was carried out online an d on a real time basis for new LPG 
connections.  
For carrying out the de-duplication on the specific  parameters of name and address, NIC 
obtained the data from the three OMCs and converted  it into a unified format, standardised 
the same and determined the sufficiency of the avai lable information against name and 
address to carry out the de-duplication exercise. A  “fuzzy logic” algorithm was then used to 
segregate consumers into ‘Same Name Same Address’ ( SNSA) and ‘Different Name Same 
Address’ (DNSA) categories with a sub-category of near and far under each. The result of the 
de-duplication exercise was periodically communicat ed to the OMCs as a ‘suspect list’ for 
further verification of ‘Know Your Customer’ (KYC1). 
Considering that the de-duplication exercise has been carried out (since July 2015) by NIC on 
a real time basis, it could be expected that the da tabase provided by the OMCs would not 
have any duplicates on these parameters (SNSA and D NSA). Audit scrutinised a sample of 
34 per cent of the distributor database on SNSA and found a nu mber of exact matches (100 
per cent) of same name and same address. This was noticed i n all the three OMCs, the details 
of which are as given below: 
 
 
                                                           
1  Know Your Customer (KYC) consists of information on POA- Proof of Address and POI- Proof of Identity with 
supporting documents.   

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
21 
Table-4: Details of SNSA duplicates across OMCs 
Name of OMC Number of consumers 
with SNSA 
Number of LPG connections linked to 
consumers in Column 2 
(1) (2)        (3) 
IOCL 6,364 13,949 
HPCL 586 1,193 
BPCL 8,935 19,587 
Total 15,885 34,729 
Audit considered only ‘active’ LPG consumers while identifying multiple connections 
bearing same name and address.  
The OMCs replied (April/May 2016): 
• IOCL stated that by visually checking the list prov ided by Audit, it could be inferred 
that the data available in the ‘address’ field was not sufficient in many cases to 
identify the connection as SNSA.  For these consume rs whose addresses were 
insufficient, KYC need to be completed only after w hich, de-duplication results 
would show the correct ‘suspect list’.  They further informed that the connections 
identified by Audit have been blocked from the cent ral server so that fresh KYCs 
could be accepted from the consumers concerned and only upon field verification, 
would they be regularized. 
• BPCL stated that the legacy data that has been migr ated into current system did not 
had the complete name and address and with this lim ited data, it was not possible to 
conclude whether these were multiple connections.  KYC for these consumers need to 
be completed and only then, it could carry out the de-duplication process. 
• HPCL stated that all the cases identified by Audit have either been corrected or 
blocked. 
As can be seen from the responses, the OMCs have st ressed the insufficiency of information 
in the ‘name’ and ‘address’ fields which renders th e de-duplication exercise by NIC 
incomplete.  Therefore, there is an urgent need for  correction of the consumer database to 
ensure accurate consumer information for an efficie nt de-duplication of the consumers, 
considering that the de-duplication exercise was started as early as June 2012. 
The corrective action taken by HPCL at the instance of Audit is noted. 
(iv) Identification of multiple connections on the basis  of Name, Date of Birth, 
Registered Mobile Number of consumers  
The de-duplication exercise carried out by NIC has been on two essential parameters, namely, 
‘name’ and ‘address’ of the consumer.  The OMCs als o carried out intra and inter OMC de-
duplication on Aadhaar number and Bank IFSC and Bank account number.  Audit considered 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
22 
a different combination of parameters to verify the  existence of multiple connections in the 
database.  The parameters considered by Audit were ‘Same Name, Same Date of Birth 
(DOB)’ and ‘Same Registered Mobile Number’.  This combination of parameters was chosen 
as it was expected that a combination of these thre e parameters is highly likely to be unique 
to an individual.  A check of such combination in t he 34 per cent of the selected sample 
indicated presence of multiple connections as tabul ated below.  Audit considered only 
‘active’ consumers for the analysis.  
Table-5: Break-up of connections having Same Name, DOB and 
Mobile Number across OMCs 
Name of OMC Number of 
consumers  with 
common parameter 
Number of LPG connections available 
with consumers at Column 2 
(1) (2)     (3) 
IOCL 6,322 13,163 
HPCL 4,830 11,128 
BPCL 19 38 
Total 11,171 24,329 
 
The OMCs replied (April/May 2016) as follows: 
(i) IOCL stated that many of the suspects in the list p rovided by Audit have same name 
but different address and hence these connections w ere not identified in the current de-
duplication system of NIC.  IOCL further stated tha t as per present de-duplication process, 
mobile numbers were not used to identify a suspect.  Besides, the Date of Birth (DOB) was 
not properly captured in the system because legacy data had been migrated into the current 
system without cleansing the data and thus DOB coul d not be used as a field for de-
duplication.  IOCL, while accepting that the above combination may lead to identification of 
multiple suspected connections,  further informed that on field verification of the cases shared 
by audit, they found that: 
a) Some cases were genuine.  
b) Dummy data was uploaded by the distributor in some cases, since mobile number and 
DOB were mandatory fields. 
c) Wherever there were multiple connections, the Compa ny assured that action was 
being taken. 
(ii) BPCL pointed out that the number of cases identifie d by Audit were very few.  It was 
also stated that a separate master of mobile number s was being updated and the legacy 
mobile numbers were no longer in use.  BPCL also st ated that DOB captured in the database 
was not reliable for carrying out de-duplication. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
23 
(iii)  HPCL informed that all consumers with same n ame and different connections with 
the same distributor have been blocked and after ve rification of multiple connections, all 
duplicate connections shall be terminated.  It was further explained that the consumers were 
from rural areas with common names and the distributor had uploaded common dates of birth 
while registering the consumers.  Further, the cyli nder booking was stated to have been done 
by consumers, from the same number as they were not  conversant with the Interactive Voice 
Response System (IVRS) of the OMCs.  HPCL assured t o carry out corrections in the dates 
of birth, mobile numbers and to train the users on IVRS usage.    
The replies of the OMCs need to be viewed in light of the following: 
(i) All the three OMCs have highlighted the poor qualit y of the database, particularly the 
date of birth and the mobile number of the LPG cons umer. There is a need for maintaining 
integrity of the database before de-duplication is done to weed out multiple connections. 
(ii) Audit has carried out its analysis on the database provided by the OMCs.  In case 
BPCL has a different database for mobile number of consumers, the same ought to have been 
made available to Audit rather than the incorrect legacy data. 
(iii) The replies of IOCL and HPCL imply that distributor s were permitted to seed dummy 
data or own data in the consumer database at least in some cases.  Therefore, remedial 
measures need to be urgently put in place to ensure  accuracy of the database.  However, the 
corrective action taken by HPCL at the instance of Audit is noted. 
4.1.2. Inter OMC de-duplication 
The three OMCs maintain distinct consumer databases  and hence the need to check for 
multiple LPG connections across OMCs. 
(i) Multiple connections having same Aadhaar number  
In the selected sample of 34 per cent , Audit noticed that there were multiple connection s 
having the same Aadhaar number across different OMC s which were ‘active’.   It was seen 
that 74,180 LPG consumer IDs had been linked to 37, 090 Aadhaar numbers indicating 
multiple connections, details of which are tabulated below: 
 
Table-6: Details of connections having same Aadhaar number across OMCs 
Combination of 
OMCs 
No. of Aadhaar 
numbers 
No. of LPG unique consumer IDs 
HPCL & IOCL 13,698 27,396 
IOCL & BPCL 10,640 21,280  
BPCL & HPCL 12,752 25,504 
Total  37,090 74,180 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
24 
Audit also noticed that 23 Aadhaar numbers were lin ked to 69 ‘active’ domestic LPG IDs in 
all the three different OMCs (one LPG ID in each OMC).  
The OMCs replied (April/May 2016) as below: 
/head2right IOCL stated that the Aadhaar lookup was done for ev ery consumer before subsidy 
payment for intra and inter OMC de-duplication against Aadhaar numbers.  
/head2right BPCL stated that inter OMCs online de-duplication f or Aadhaar and bank account 
numbers was presently being carried out and that th e cases quoted by Audit were the 
ones where the transfers were made prior to the com mencement of this de-duplication 
process.  The Company also informed that only the o ldest connection has been 
retained on identification of multiple connections with the others being blocked. 
/head2right HPCL assured that the duplicate consumers identifie d by Audit have been blocked 
and unblocking was being done only after surrender of the duplicate connection of 
another OMC. 
The reply of the OMCs (April/May 2016) is to be viewed in the light of the following: 
(i) The contention of IOCL that Aadhaar lookup would id entify duplicates is not tenable as 
the lookup table was specific to IOCL database and could not identify duplicates across 
OMCs. This was borne out by the existence of multip le domestic ‘active’ connections 
across different OMCs, as reported by Audit. 
(ii) The response of BPCL that the instances reported by  Audit pertained to the period prior 
to the inter OMC de-duplication process is not accu rate as the database considered by 
Audit pertains to 31 October 2015 whereas the inter -OMC de-duplication commenced in 
May 2014.  
(iii) Corrective action taken by HPCL at the instance of Audit is noted. 
(iv) It is also important to note that while the web ser vice recently introduced by the OMCs 
for identification of duplicate Aadhaar numbers (ac ross all OMCs) would act as a check 
for prospective consumers, it would not detect dupl icates in the existing database of the 
OMCs for which specific efforts need to be undertaken to weed out such duplicates. 
(ii) Multiple connections having same bank IFSC and Bank account number  
Audit noticed instances of multiple connections hav ing same bank account across OMCs.  In 
the selected sample, 17,694  ‘active’ LPG consumer IDs were noticed against 8,84 7 bank 
IFSC and bank account numbers indicating multiple c onnections. The details are tabulated 
below: 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
25 
Table-7: Details of multiple connections having same bank IFSC and 
account number across OMCs 
Combination of 
OMCs 
No. of bank 
accounts 
No. of LPG unique consumer IDs 
HPCL & IOCL 3,471 6,942 
IOCL & BPCL 3,010 6,020 
BPCL & HPCL 2,366 4,732 
Total  8,847 17,694 
 
Audit also observed that 21 Unique LPG IDs that wer e active have been linked with 7 bank 
IFSC and account numbers across the three OMCs. 
IOCL stated (April/May 2016) that they carried out online de-duplication process on the data 
provided by Audit upon which 5710 records were foun d to be still duplicate. These bank 
accounts have been deseeded and the connections have been blocked. 
BPCL stated (April 2016) that inter-OMC multiple co nnections were being identified 
presently and action initiated and that the instanc es highlighted by Audit pertained to the 
period prior to the inter-OMC de-duplication process.  
The corrective action taken by IOCL at the instance  of Audit is noted.  The reply of BPCL, 
however, is not tenable as Audit had identified dup licate bank IFSC and account numbers 
across OMCs in the database pertaining to 30 Octobe r 2015, after the commencement of 
inter-OMC de-duplication exercise in May 2014.  Mea nwhile, HPCL did not specifically 
reply to this issue (May 2016). 
4.2. Status of action taken by OMCs on multiple con nections identified 
Multiple LPG connections were identified through de -duplication exercise on the basis of 
‘name and address’ carried out by NIC and on ‘Aadha ar number and bank IFSC and bank 
account number’ carried out by the OMCs.  The suspe ct list of multiple connections received 
from NIC was first verified by the OMCs against inf ormation submitted by these consumers 
as part of KYC procedures along with proof of ident ity and address.  If the connections were 
established as multiple,  the first connection was retained and all subsequen t connections 
taken by the consumer were blocked. No cylinder was  delivered or subsidy transferred on 
blocked connections.  Such blocked connections, how ever, could later be un-blocked based 
on the revised/corrected KYC submitted by the consu mer to prove that the blocked 
connection was a unique one.  In case multiple conn ections were identified by OMCs 
themselves, the blocking of duplicate connections w as done immediately without waiting for 
verification of information supplied as part of KYC procedure. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
26 
OMC-wise status of multiple connections identified,  blocked, regularised and terminated 
since commencement of de-duplication exercise from June 2012 and up to 30 October 2015 
was as under:   
Table-8: Multiple connections identified, blocked, regularised and terminated 
from June 2012 and up to 30 October 2015 across OMCs 
(In numbers) 
Name of 
OMC 
No. of 
suspected 
multiple 
connections 
identified 
No. of 
connections 
blocked 
No. of connections 
regularised after 
submission of 
KYC 
No. of connections 
terminated 
IOCL 2,67,06,353 64,40,445 77,21,680 2,02,869 
HPCL 69,86,654 18,73,936 46,26,931 41,485 
BPCL 1,10,67,453 15,10,351 77,12,503 5,712 
Total 4,47,60,460 98,24,732 2,00,61,114 2,50,066 
The analysis of the table above indicated the following: 
• While 4.48 crore multiple connections were identified by OMCs from June 2012 to 30 
October 2015, only 0.98 crore connections remained blocked with 2.01 crore 
connections having been regularised after submissio n of KYC forms by the 
consumers. Only limited number of connections, i.e., only 2.50 lakh, (till October 
2015) have actually been terminated on this account . The majority of the connections 
which had been blocked due to suspected multiple co nnections have, thus, been 
subsequently un-blocked.  
• A connection could be blocked for reasons other tha n being a suspected multiple 
connection. Yet, against 4.48 crore connections sus pected to be multiple connections, 
the total number of blocked, regularised and termin ated connections was only 3.01 
crore (as on 30 October 2015) indicating that in re spect of 1.46 crore connections, 
blocking, regularising or termination had not been carried out.  
The OMCs in their reply (April/May 2016) confirmed that all suspected multiple connections 
were not blocked.  BPCL and IOCL pointed out that t he ‘Different Name Same Address’ 
(DNSA) category of consumers was not blocked by the OMCs.  IOCL also stated that in their 
modified process, all inactive connections would be included in the category ‘blocking due to 
multiple connections’.  
As per the response of the OMCs, the DNSA category of suspected multiple connections 
identified by NIC were not blocked.  As such, recti fication measure was not taken by the 
OMC to verify these DNSA connections identified. Th e practice of considering all inactive 
connections as being blocked due to multiple connec tions, as indicated by IOCL would give 
an incorrect picture of action taken by the OMCs on identified multiple connections.  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
27 
4.3. Process of blocking and un-blocking connection s 
Audit assessed the process of blocking and subseque nt un-blocking of LPG connections in 
the 34 per cent sample selected.  It was noticed that though a majority of blocked connections 
were eventually un-blocked, the reasons for blockin g and un-blocking and the dates of 
blocking and un-blocking of the connections were not sufficiently documented. 
• In IOCL, 57.95 lakh connections had been blocked, o f which 30.81 lakh (53.16 per 
cent) were subsequently un-blocked. The date of blockin g had not been recorded in 
24.04 lakh cases (41.48 per cent) and in another 6.71 lakh cases (11.58 per cent) an 
invalid date (01/02/1900) was recorded. The date of  un-blocking was also reported 
incorrectly as 01/02/1900 in 9.62 lakh of the conne ctions (31.22 per cent) un-blocked.  
Besides it was seen that reasons for un-blocking ha d not been recorded in any of the 
30.81 lakh cases un-blocked. 
• In HPCL, 1.09 crore connections had been blocked, o f which 67.07 lakh connection 
(61.53 per cent) was subsequently un-blocked. The date of blocking  was not mentioned 
in 68.14 lakh cases (62.51 per cent) while the date of un-blocking had an invalid date in 
320 cases. The reason for blocking was not indicate d in 74.19 lakh cases (68.06 per 
cent) blocked while 19.37 lakh of connections un-blocke d (28.88 per cent ) indicated 
reasons for un-blocking as ‘others’. 
• In BPCL, 47.14 lakh connections had been blocked of  which 31.06 lakh connections 
(65.88 per cent ) have been subsequently un-blocked. The date of bl ocking was not 
mentioned in case of 4.93 lakh connections (10 per cent), while the date of blocking 
and reasons thereof was not mentioned in 0.67 lakh cases.  In case of 17.15 lakh 
connections (36 per cent) blocked cases, reason for blocking was recorded as ‘others’. 
Field audit of the blocking and un-blocking process  in the selected one per cent of 
distributors (165 distributors) indicated that: 
• In 27 cases, connections were un-blocked on the bas is of termination voucher of 
another OMC indicating the closure of the duplicate connection. In such cases, though 
the Permanent Advance of terminated connection was recovered, the additional 
subsidy availed due to multiple connections was not  recovered. Considering that the 
number of subsidised cylinders which has been consu med by a consumer was 
indicated on the termination voucher, this ought to  have been adjusted against the 
continuing LPG connection. 
The OMCs replied (April/May 2016) to Audit on the following lines: 
(i) IOCL stated that the actual date of blocking and un -blocking was determined from a 
separate table (TBL_ADMIN_ACTION) rather than the table made available to Audit 
for analysis (MST_CONSUMER).  It was also stated th at the centralised Indsoft 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
28 
System was populated from legacy data and the data corresponding to ‘new’ blocking 
and un-blocking had been investigated and found to be correct.  
(ii) HPCL stated that blocking and un-blocking of connec tions were carried out in the 
system through various sources like directly at dis tributor level, blocking by Sales 
Officers through Web application and central blocking of bulk customers.  The date of 
blocking and un-blocking was a system stamp data an d captured automatically in 
system. It was also assured that consumers were bei ng unblocked by distributors only 
after obtaining necessary KYC documents and on surr ender of duplicate connections, 
if any. 
(iii) BPCL stated that prior to 2013, data was maintained  in the decentralised distributor 
server and for these cases there was a possibility of date of blocking not being 
recorded in the system.  After migration to the cen tralised server, system logs were 
maintained for capturing the blocking and un-blocki ng dates. It was added that post 
migration, the reasons for blocking were maintained  at an optimum level and reasons, 
codes not found notionally relevant were clubbed under ‘others’.  
(iv) The OMCs acknowledged that at present there is no s ystem for adjustment of 
subsidised refill consumed by a consumer through multiple connections. However, the 
Audit suggestion for clubbing consumption of multip le connections at the time of 
surrender was well taken and would be incorporated during subsequent development. 
The replies of the OMCs need to be considered in the following context: 
(i) The IOCL contention regarding existence of differen t sets of databases with different 
values for dates of blocking and un-blocking is subject to risk.  ‘Date’ being a specific 
field data ought to be captured at a single point, automatically, by the system and 
populated in all relevant tables.  It is unclear wh y different values exist for the same 
field in different tables and needs to be appropriately addressed.  
(ii) While appreciating the steps being taken by HPCL fo r ensuring automatic capture of 
the dates of blocking and unblocking, further action is required for presenting accurate 
and transparent documentation regarding blocking an d un-blocking of connections in 
the light of significant number of cases noticed by Audit without essential details.  
(iii) While the problems with legacy data as indicated by  BPCL is appreciated, there is a 
need for its correction now, particularly consideri ng that the migration to the 
centralised system had taken place in 2013.  Consid ering that the reason for blocking 
of as many as 17.15 lakh consumers in the 34 per cent sample checked have been 
recorded as ‘others’, there is a need for assigning  more definite reasons for blocking 
and subsequent un-blocking to maintain transparency  of the database and trigger 
further action. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
29 
The assurance of the OMCs regarding proposed adjust ment of subsidised refill consumed by 
a consumer through multiple connections during term ination of one of the connections is 
noted. 
4.4. Integrity of the consumer database 
It is essential to ensure integrity of the consumer  database to weed out fake and duplicate 
connections.  Audit noticed invalid entries in the database which points to poor input control 
and therefore, compromises the authenticity and integrity of the consumer database. 
4.4.1. Non recording/improper recording of date of birth of consumers 
The LPG Control Order lays down that LPG connection  can only be provided to a consumer 
who is 18 years of age and above.  It is, therefore , important to accurately capture the date of 
birth of the consumer in the LPG consumer database.  
Audit noticed that out of the total sample of 9.94 crore consumers, date of birth was not 
captured in respect of 3.40 crore domestic consumer s (0.30 crore in IOCL, 1.09 crore in 
HPCL and 2.01 crore in BPCL).  Another 55,407 LPG c onsumers were seen to be minors 
(48,405 in IOCL; 7001 in HPCL and one in BPCL).  Be sides, 73.50 lakh (73.43 lakh in 
IOCL; 0.06 lakh in HPCL and 0.01 lakh in BPCL) cons umers had a date of birth between 
January and December 1900 which seems unlikely.  Ye t another 2100 consumers (1,047 in 
IOCL and 1,053 in HPCL) indicated a future date of birth which was evidently inaccurate. 
IOCL in its reply (April/May 2016) stated that the date of birth was not proper in the  system 
as the legacy data was migrated into the current sy stem without data cleansing. This was 
reiterated by BPCL.  HPCL (April/May 2016) stated t hat their database was very old and has 
been migrated from time to time and hence date of b irth was not maintained appropriately in 
all cases.  All OMCs assured that steps were being taken towards correction.  The OMCs 
further stated the following: 
• IOCL accepted mistakes in capturing valid entries f or Date of Birth and that the age 
validation logic was not checking the minimum date selected. IOCL further stated that 
system restriction would be incorporated so that ye ar of birth before 1899 or invalid 
DOB cannot be entered. The reply also assured that an action plan was being taken up 
for connections to minors.  Field force would be se nsitised and distributors advised 
against issuing connections to minors.  The list gi ven by Audit would be shared with 
field for verification and action would be taken on  erring distributors if connections 
were found issued to minors which would be subseque ntly blocked. It has also been 
informed that system checks were being put in place  to ensure that LPG connections 
were not issued to minors.  Additionally, measures for validation and updation of 
valid Date of Birth and PIN codes both in their Con sumer Master at Central Server 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
30 
and in the Client Database, a case in point being “ date validation logic” was now 
being initiated. 
• BPCL informed that recently DOB field has been made mandatory and the  field was 
being correctly captured for all new connections re leased.  System control has been 
put in to ensure that the applicant was a major. Co nnection issued to minor has been 
terminated and action has been initiated against th e distributor as per Marketing 
Discipline Guidelines (MDG). 
• HPCL (May 2016) has stated that distributors have b een advised to correct dates of 
birth in the system after verifying with documents. 
OMCs have accepted the Audit finding and assured co rrective action and the specific steps 
taken by them in this regard are noted. 
4.4.2. Incorrect capture of PIN codes in addresses 
Audit noticed that 83.34 lakh domestic LPG consumer s (83.22 lakh in IOCL; 2,969 in HPCL 
and 8,904 in BPCL) had addresses that bore an army PIN code.  In another 80.25 lakh cases 
(2.20 lakh in HPCL and 78.05 lakh in BPCL), the PIN  codes have not been captured at all, 
and in another 3.39 lakh cases (45,332 in IOCL; 275  in HPCL and 2.93 lakh in BPCL), PIN 
codes of less than six digits were documented. 
IOCL in reply (April/May 2016) stated that system c hecks would be ensured for the future 
new connections to pre-empt these aberrations.  BPC L assured (April 2016) that system 
checks have been ensured to accept only six digit numbers as PIN code and that data has been 
obtained from Census 2011 which shall be incorporated into the system to ensure accuracy of 
district-wise PIN codes.  HPCL stated (April 2016) that their LPG consumer database was 
very old and has been migrated from time to time an d hence PIN codes were unavailable or 
improperly maintained.  HPCL assured that they were  in the process of upgrading the current 
software in centralized database with enhanced feat ures and controls which would eliminate 
the errors gradually over a period of time.  HPCL ( May 2016) further stated that distributors 
have now uploaded the correct PIN codes in the system after verifying with documents. 
OMCs accepted the observation and initiated correct ive action at the instance of Audit which 
is noted.  
4.4.3. Incorrect capture of Aadhaar numbers in the consumer database 
Aadhaar number uniquely identifies an individual.  Accurate recording of this data is 
essential for ensuring the uniqueness of the consum er database.  An Aadhaar number 
necessarily has 12 digits and it never starts with ‘0’ or ‘1’.  Audit noticed instances of 
incorrect capture of Aadhaar numbers in the sample test checked as under: 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
31 
• Aadhaar number starting with ‘1’ has been captured in the system in respect of 188 
LPG consumers of IOCL, 258 LPG consumers of BPCL an d 252 LPG consumers of 
HPCL.  Additionally, 62 consumers of BPCL were foun d linked to Aadhaar numbers 
starting with ‘0’. 
• The system used by IOCL and HPCL permitted the capt ure of Aadhaar numbers with 
less than the stipulated 12 digits.  42 such cases were noticed in IOCL and 14 in 
HPCL.  
• In respect of 19,538 active LPG domestic consumers in HPCL, the Aadhaar number 
was not recorded, though these consumers were depic ted as ACTC consumers in the 
database.  
• Besides, in some cases, incorrect capture of Aadhaa r numbers was noticed while 
conducting field audit of the distributors. (Details at Chapter 6, para 6.1). 
IOCL in its reply (April/May 2016) while pointing o ut that the error was marginal (being 
noticed in only 45 entries of 8 crore entries) acce pted that there was no check implemented 
for ruling out entry of Aadhaar numbers starting wi th ‘1’. It assured that action has already 
been taken to deseed these consumer Unique IDs and system check has now been 
incorporated to address such invalid entries.  
BPCL stated (April 2016) that action has already be en taken to correct the incorrect Aadhaar 
numbers that were seeded and it has system controls  to ensure that the length of Aadhaar 
number is restricted to 12.  
HPCL stated (May 2016) that the incidence of non-av ailability of Aadhaar against Aadhaar 
Cash Transfer Compliant (ACTC) consumer was found i n cases where Aadhaar number was 
deseeded from the system before generating the Tran sfer Voucher.  HPCL assured that such 
practise has currently been discontinued and in cas e of null and wrong entries, distributors 
were taking remedial action by way of re-seeding th e correct Aadhaar numbers in their 
system after verification with documents.  
OMCs have initiated corrective action on being poin ted out by Audit.  It is reiterated, 
however, that the results of audit pertain to only 34 per cent of the distributors scrutinised and 
hence the OMCs would need to carry out verification  in the entire database and initiate 
corrective action.  OMCs need to ensure accurate se eding of Aadhaar numbers in the 
consumer database as it is a key input for smooth functioning of the Scheme.   
  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
32 
4.4.4. Non-linking of available Aadhaar numbers with LPG I Ds in the consumer 
database  
In course of field audit of the selected sample of 165 distributors, Audit noticed that in 104 
cases, the Aadhaar number of consumers was not link ed by the distributor with relevant LPG 
IDs despite being available.    
IOCL and BPCL in reply (April/May 2016) stated that  with the launch of PAHAL (DBTL) 
Scheme from January 2015, all efforts were made to reach the desired CTC target before the 
end of Parking Period so that subsidy of the willin g consumers did not lapse.  For ATC 
consumers to be cash transfer compliant, Aadhaar se eding was necessary to be done in both 
LPG database and the consumer bank and the OMCs/dis tributors/consumers faced many 
issues related to Aadhaar seeding with the banks; the gap between Aadhaar seeded consumers 
and cash transfer compliant consumers being 10-15 per cent resulting in the possibility of 
these consumers facing problems with Aadhaar linking in bank. The OMCs informed that the 
matter had been raised with MoPNG and OMCs were per mitted to seed bank account for 
consumers facing problems with linking Aadhaar to b ank accounts to reduce consumer 
inconvenience. The OMCs also stated that after Nove mber 2015, all distributors have been 
strongly advised to seed Aadhaar in LPG database an d resultantly the Aadhaar seeding in the 
LPG database has improved by March 2016. 
The difficulties highlighted by OMCs and consumers in linking of Aadhaar numbers to the 
respective bank accounts are appreciated.  However,  simultaneous linking of Aadhaar 
number to consumer database and bank account is a m ore secure method of ensuring 
uniqueness of the database and hence all out effort s are essential to ensure maximum 
coverage of ATC consumers in the LPG database for d omestic consumers. Audit notes the 
assurance of the OMCs that efforts were now being m ade for higher percentage of Aadhaar 
seeding. 
The reply of HPCL (May 2016) did not include response on this issue. 
4.4.5. Incorrect seeding of IFSC in the consumer database 
The Indian Financial System Code (IFSC) of the cons umer bank is essential information for 
effecting direct transfer of LPG subsidy to the con sumer.  It is an eleven character code with 
first four being alphabetic characters representing  the bank name, fifth being ‘0’ and the last 
six characters indicating the bank branch.  Audit n oticed the following cases of incorrect 
seeding of bank IFSC in the sample checked. 
• For 17,852 LPG domestic consumers of IOCL and 3,714  consumers of BPCL, the 
bank IFSC has been recorded with less than eleven digit, non-alphanumeric value. 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
33 
• For another 12,762 LPG domestic consumers of IOCL a nd 4,725 LPG consumers of 
HPCL, the first four alphabetic characters represen ting the bank name were found 
missing in the bank IFSC.  Of these, in case of 253  consumers, the bank IFSC had six 
numeric characters while another 4,472 consumers, t he IFSC had nine numeric 
characters only.  
• In addition, in another 1,691 active LPG domestic c onsumers of HPCL, no value has 
been recorded against their IFSC and bank account n umber though they have BCTC 
status.   
It was noticed that the bank account number of cons umers were also not accurately recorded. 
Account numbers with less than six digits, alphanum eric characters, special characters were 
noticed. Such anomalies in recording of IFSC and ba nk account number of consumers would 
lead to consumers being unable to avail of the subsidy benefit.  
IOCL in reply (April/May 2016) stated that the 16,5 82 cases have been identified and traced 
back to an issue in the seeding process where the l ast digit was truncated for certain IFSCs 
and assured that the cases were being identified fo r the total master data would be corrected.  
IOCL also stated that invalid entries could be part ly attributed to manual seeding done at 
distributor end, for whom bank verification was not  carried out, in order to speed up the 
seeding process. Further, cases where the first fou r alphabetic characters representing the 
bank name were found missing, were a result of bank  account data being seeded by banks 
and sent to IOCL, one such bank being Punjab Mahara shtra Co-operative Bank (PMCB) that 
had sent a wrong set of IFSCs and these cases were being corrected now. 
BPCL stated (April 2016) that prior to the receipt of IFSC master data from National 
Payment Corporation of India, BPCL had uploaded the  IFSC master available from the RBI 
site.  BPCL requested Audit to share the data to enable BPCL to verify the 3,714 cases. 
HPCL assured (May 2016) to check and correct the IF S Codes in co-ordination with banks 
and consumers. It also stated that all consumers wi th invalid bank account numbers had been 
converted to ACTC, after carrying out corrections. 
The desired information has been provided by Audit to BPCL. Audit notes the efforts being 
made by the OMCs for correction of the databases, a t the instance of Audit.  Inaccurate 
seeding of IFSC and bank account number could depri ve genuine LPG consumers from 
availing subsidy benefit under the Scheme and needs  to be urgently corrected.  It may be 
mentioned here that of the 16,582 cases of incorrec t seeding of IFSC, 12,678 cases noticed in 
IOCL as well as the 1,691 cases of ‘Null’ entries i n HPCL pertain to active Bank Cash 
Transfer Compliant (BCTC) domestic consumers.  Inco rrect seeding has resulted in non-
payment of subsidy in these cases which needs to be  quantified and corrective action is 
required to be taken by the OMCs. It is pertinent t o note that these aberrations noticed could 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
34 
easily be rectified by mandating a set of input dat a controls to ensure the validity and 
accuracy of the consumer database. 
MoPNG, in response to the conclusion made on the ab ove aspects in Chapter 10, stated (June 
2016) that OMCs were continually undertaking Inter and Intra company de-duplication 
process for issuing new LPG connections.  As on 2 M ay 2016, total 3.49 crore LPG 
connections had been blocked after de-duplication.   
The reply is to be viewed in the light of the fact that deficiencies were noticed in the de-
duplication process carried out by the OMCs, as multiple connections existed both within and 
between OMCs even after de-duplication exercise.  S everal instances of data integrity and 
validation deficiencies were also noticed.  
Even though National Informatics Centre and the OMC s had carried out  
de-duplication checks on the domestic LPG consumer database, Audit noticed 
instances of multiple connections existing both wit hin and between OMC.  Besides, 
connections blocked on suspicion of being multiple connections were often un-blocked 
without maintaining adequate documentation of justi fication for such un-blocking.  
Scrutiny of the selected sample indicated that ther e were inadequate input checks for 
the domestic LPG consumer database, which adversely  affected its accuracy and 
integrity.

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
35 
Chapter 5 
Delivery of Cylinders to Genuine Users 
 
5.1. Complaints of consumers and their redressal 
Audit reviewed redressal of consumer grievances by the OMCs to assess the satisfaction of 
domestic LPG consumers post implementation of PAHAL  (DBTL) Scheme.  The Scheme 
provided that a consumer can register a complaint through a toll free number of the respective 
OMC, or physically send their complaints to the LPG  distributor or use the web based OMC 
portal.  The handbook of PAHAL (DBTL) prescribed th at 98 per cent of the consumer 
grievances had to be disposed of within seven days.  A review in audit of the consumer 
grievances on PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme received through the three modes indicated that the 
OMCs could not achieve the targeted redressal rate of 98 per cent within seven days.  Audit 
observed that the achieved rate was 86 per cent in IOCL, 76 per cent in HPCL and 82 per 
cent in BPCL.   The overall rate of achievement was, ho wever, 97.8 per cent of the 
complaints received regarding PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme f rom 1 January 2015 to 15 August 
2015 as per data furnished to Audit. There were, ho wever, instances where time taken to 
resolve the complaints ranged from one month to mor e than six months (1,611 cases in 
IOCL; 2,292 in HPCL and 11,740 in BPCL). 
IOCL in its reply (April/May 2016) stated that 89 per cent of the complaints pertaining to 
IOC related issues were resolved within 7 days.  Of  the balance 11 per cent complaints, 7 per 
cent get closed between 7 -15 days and only 4 per cent complaints took more than 15 days.  It 
was also stated that it was possible that the actua l complaint resolution was done earlier but 
the status was updated later indicating a delay, du e to absence of check on input date of 
closure in their system that was said to have been incorporated later. 
BPCL stated (April/May 2016) that most of the griev ances were on account of issues  
pending with banks, National Payment Corporation of  India (NPCI) and Unique 
Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) and only a few pertained to BPCL for which it  
took needful action. 
HPCL stated (May 2016) that the closure period of c onsumer grievances ranged up to one 
week because some issues like correction of bank account numbers/IFS Code took lesser time 
in resolution while others like changing the prefer red mode of cash transfer from one bank to 
another, might have taken more time.  However, all grievances pertaining to the PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme were closed and that there was no open complaint. 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
36 
While the effort of the OMCs for redressal of consu mer grievances is appreciated, there is a 
need for speedier resolution.  Besides, considering  that a number of agencies were involved 
in the resolution of consumer complaints, there is a case for coordinated approach of all 
stakeholders in this regard, viz., OMCs, NPCI, UIDAI and banks. 
5.2. Violation of quota of subsidy payable on 12 cy linders per year 
The annual cap on domestic LPG cylinders on which s ubsidy would be payable was fixed at 
12 w.e.f. 1 April 2014. Audit noticed that the cap of 12 subsidised cylinders had been 
violated in the following cases: 
(i) In 2014-15, the cap of 12 cylinders per annum on wh ich subsidy would be payable 
had been violated and 15.57 lakh active domestic co nsumers (1,881 in IOCL; 365 in HPCL 
and 15.55 lakh in BPCL) had received subsidy on mor e than 12 subsidised cylinders from 
April 2014 to 31 March 2015 leading to excess payment of subsidy.  
(ii) Audit noticed that some consumers were identified a s multiple connections on the 
basis of intra-OMC de-duplication exercise done on ‘Aadhaar number’, ‘Bank account 
number and IFSC’, ‘Same Name, Same Address’ and ‘Sa me Name, Same Date of Birth and 
Same Registered mobile number’ during test check of  the sample (as commented at para 
4.1.1 above). These consumers received subsidy on m ore than 12 cylinders considering all 
the multiple connections the consumers had and henc e were paid additional subsidy.  Some 
of these consumers were also paid permanent advance  on their multiple connections and thus 
received additional advance.  In the sample checked, intra-OMC de-duplication indicated that 
37,499 consumers (20,389 of IOCL, 3,772 of BPCL and 13,338 of HPCL) during the year 
2014-15 and 8,707 consumers (4,449 of IOCL, 1,293 o f BPCL and 2,965 of HPCL) during 
the year 2015-16 (up to 31 October 2015) having mul tiple connections had availed subsidy 
on more than 12 cylinders.  Besides, 51,443 consume rs (27,631 of IOCL, 6,788 of BPCL and 
17,024 of HPCL) had received permanent advance on multiple connections. The details are at 
Annexure II.  
Multiple connections having same Aadhaar number and  bank IFSC and account number had 
also been noticed during inter-OMC de-duplication o f the sample test checked.  Of these, the 
consumers who had availed subsidy on more than 12 c ylinders numbered 38,286 in 2014-15 
and 6,488 in 2015-16 (up to 31 October 2015).  Besi des, 65,498 consumers of the identified 
inter-OMC duplicates in the sample had availed of p ermanent advance twice amounting to 
`1.30 crore on multiple connections (details at Annexure II). 
OMCs in their reply (April/May 2016) stated that th e consumers have not consumed more 
than 12 subsidised cylinders in the prescribed peri od, which was the capping limit as per the 
LPG Control Order.  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
37 
The reply of OMCs is to be viewed against the fact that audit analysis for 2014-15 indicated a 
significant number of instances where the capping l imit has been violated.  In the case of 
multiple connections, the consumer has not violated  the cap of 12 cylinders for each 
connection, but combined consumption on multiple co nnections of the same consumer 
exceeded the intended cap of 12 cylinders per year. 
5.3. Discrepancy noticed in central server leading to incorrect count of cylinders on 
which subsidy availed 
During the course of field audit of the distributors, it was noticed that in a distributor of IOCL 
in the Northern Region, the quota count was erroneo usly displaying a lower count than 
cylinders actually delivered to the consumers on wh ich subsidy was payable.  This was 
noticed in eight cases which occurred because the quota count repeated itself (for example the 
count of four was displayed twice in a case) leadin g to the anomaly.  Further, in 82 cases, the 
number of refills delivered on which subsidy was pa yable as reflecting in business portal did 
not match with the subsidy payment details in delivery history. 
IOCL in its reply (April/May 2016) stated that the eight cases pertained to consumers who 
had ordered one or more refills during the Parking Period, for whom subsidy amount was 
parked. Since, quota was stamped at the time of refill booking, these refills were accounted in 
subsidised cylinder quota (12 cylinders) for that c onsumer.  But subsequently, at the time of 
his next refill consumption after Parking Period, t hese refills were accounted or excluded 
based on CTC conversion in Parking Period. 
However, reply is not tenable, as the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme does not allow consumption 
of more than 12 cylinders in a financial year on wh ich subsidy is payable and the system 
should have adjusted the consumption of such cylinders during the Parking Period. 
MoPNG, as a response to Chapter 10, stated (June 20 16) that the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism was being reviewed continuously.  Technol ogy planforms like Mobile Apps and 
Social Media were also being used to redress grievances related to LPG.   
However, the fact remains that the OMCs were not ab le to meet the targeted achievement for 
grievance redressal. 
The OMCs have addressed the bulk of PAHAL (DBTL) Sc heme related complaints 
though the target of seven days for redressal could not be achieved.  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
38 
Chapter 6 
Protection of Entitlement and Ensuring Subsidy 
 
6.1. Failed transactions  
The smooth operation of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme and pro tection of entitlement of the 
consumer depend on seamless transfer of advance and  subsidy to the account of the entitled 
domestic LPG consumer. However, cash transfer to th e consumer is not effected when a 
transaction is treated as failed transaction.  A tr ansaction is considered as failed one when the 
transaction is returned or rejected by bank or Nati onal Payment Corporation of India (NPCI).  
In such cases, the bank credits the unpaid amount b ack to the account of the OMCs. The 
major reasons for transaction failures and the non- payment of Permanent Advance (PA) to 
LPG consumers (as noticed from field audit of limited test check) are indicated below: 
Table-9: Details of reasons for failed transactions from 1 January to 15 August 2015 
Reasons Number of cases 
IOCL HPCL BPCL Total 
Bank account wrongly entered by the distributor 161  70 39 270 
Other data entry errors (Name, Aadhaar number, 
IFSC, etc.) by the distributor 
80 12 29 121 
Pending action at the distributor’s end 38 40 16 94  
Incorrect data given by consumer 69 2 13 84 
Other reasons for failed transactions1 52 15 115 182 
Total 400 139 212 751 
 
As can be seen from the above table, 485 out of 751  failed transactions (representing 64  per 
cent) were due to reasons attributable to distributors,  which emphasises the requirement of 
effective monitoring by OMCs and adequate input con trols and validations in the database to 
ensure its accuracy.  
In addition to the above, it was noticed that some transactions failed as some of Grameen 
Banks were not on the system of NPCI.  In the case of Aryavart Kshetriya Grameen Bank, 
only one IFS Code was mapped to the entire bank.  Besides, erratic payments of refill subsidy 
were noticed in respect of Purvanchal Grameen Bank.   It is, therefore, necessary that the 
OMCs contemplate adequate efforts to ensure synchronisation of all consumer banks with the 
payment bridge of NPCI. 
 
                                                           
1 Inactive Aadhaar number, Difference in name in OMC database and Bank account, Account name changed in Bank. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
39 
IOCL and BPCL stated (April/May 2016) that the cons umer becomes eligible for subsidy 
transfer only after suitable verification.  For ACT C consumers, the Aadhaar number seeded 
in the LPG database was looked up in the NPCI datab ase for availability of bank account 
information and only on its availability, subsidy w as triggered.  For BCTC consumers, the 
bank account and IFSC seeded in the LPG database was verified with the bank concerned and 
subsidy was transferred only after successful verification.  In case of errors in data entry, such 
consumers would remain non-compliant for subsidy tr ansfer.  This process of verification 
had, however, been made inactive during the period December 2014 and March 2015 as per 
the Control Order which has contributed to the high  failure rate.  Transactions also failed 
even after successful mapping, reasons for which co uld be seen from NPCI portal. The 
OMCs also pointed out that transactions failed as b ank seeding was earlier not restricted to 
NACH/APB1 compliant banks linked to NPCI (e.g. Grameen banks ) which has now been 
modified to accept bank seeding only from NPCI linked banks. 
HPCL replied (May 2016) that necessary corrective a ction has already been instituted in the 
system to prevent failure of transactions and that the current status has improved drastically. 
The replies of IOCL and BPCL substantiate the steps  taken by them to seed only NPCI 
compliant bank accounts. While this would reduce the number of failed transactions, it would 
also deprive a number of genuine consumers from sub sidy benefit as their banks (e.g., 
Grameen banks) are not linked to NPCI. There is a n eed for expanding the coverage of NPCI 
linked banks to ensure smooth cash transfer to the deserving consumers.  It is also noted that 
the OMCs have not addressed the need to streamline the data entry mechanism at the 
distributor’s end to ensure accurate seeding of ban k details to enable the consumer derive 
benefits of the Scheme.  Further, corrective action  taken by HPCL at the instance of Audit is 
noted. 
6.2. Non-transfer of permanent advance 
Audit noticed that though consumers have joined the  PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme and linked 
their bank account and in some cases Aadhaar number  to the domestic consumer database, 
transactions for transferring the permanent advance  have failed. In the sample studied in 
Audit, there were 47.23 lakh active domestic LPG co nsumers who had failed to receive 
Permanent Advance as on 31 October 2015 as indicated in the table below: 
  
                                                           
1 National Automated Clearing House (NACH) and Aadhaar Payment Bridge (APB). 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
40 
Table-10: Details of LPG Consumers and PA pending for transfer 
Name of  
OMC 
Number of active LPG domestic 
consumers not received PA after 
becoming CTC 
Amount of pending PA for 
transfer to consumers account 
(` in crore) 
IOCL 35,60,916 127.48* 
BPCL 2,59,596 9.31 
HPCL 9,02,277 32.30* 
Total 47,22,789 169.09 
 *As amount of PA pending for transfer to consumers of IOCL & HPCL was not contained in the data furnished to  
Audit, average PA amount of BPCL (`` ``    358/-) has been adopted while working out the amount. 
Since the purpose of payment of Permanent Advance ( PA) was to assist the consumer in 
purchasing LPG cylinders at market price without any financial burden, it was imperative that 
all the eligible LPG consumers received their PA up on their first refill booking. Non-transfer 
of PA, therefore, defeated the objective of providing for permanent advance. 
The OMCs responded (April/May 2016) on the following lines: 
(i) IOCL stated that interim analysis revealed the foll owing reasons for non-triggering 
of Permanent Advance to CTC compliant consumers:  
• The PA was triggered to a CTC compliant consumer on ly on making first 
booking. There were a number of cases in the sample where consumer has become 
compliant but was yet to book a refill. 
• In some cases, PA was not triggered even after issu e of the first refill.  This was 
due to the fact that either the bank data was not c omplete/not verified/put on 
hold/deseeded or the consumer had converted to NCTC . (UID Master not 
complete). IOCL also attributed the non-transfer of  PA to system issues like 
downtime of Change Data Capture Service, for which it assured to take corrective 
action.  Moreover, it was informed that triggering of PA had been put on hold vide 
Finance Ministry’s letter dated 8 March 2016. 
(ii) BPCL stated that PAs were withheld on account of pe nding Accounts Verification 
response or negative response received from the ban ks for BCTC Consumers or in case 
of Aadhaar Inactive Status for ACTC consumers.  All  such consumers were advised to 
rectify the same.  Once the error was rectified the  payment would be triggered as per re-
trigger cycle.  BPCL also asserted that both advanc e and subsidy were on hold for 
consumers where corrective action was pending. 
(iii) HPCL stated (May 2016) that on a sample review, it was found that:   
a. Some consumers had given wrong bank account details , which were accepted 
by the portal initially, but rejected later by bank  after verification and were 
later converted to NCTC from CTC.  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
41 
b. In some cases, the wrong bank account details were corrected and payment 
transferred subsequently, as per refills. 
HPCL assured that since Aadhaar numbers for these c ases were readily available with 
the distributor, consumers were being advised to up date their Aadhaar numbers in the 
banks also in order to make them CTC and that corrective action would be taken. 
The replies of OMCs need to be viewed in the following context: 
• While Audit appreciates IOCL response that in some cases the PA had not been 
triggered as refills had not been booked, there wer e a total of 20.73 lakh cases where 
PA has not been triggered even after the first refi ll issued to the consumer.   IOCL’s 
contention that PA could not be triggered because b ank data was incomplete/incorrect 
is not tenable as subsidy was being transferred to the same consumers.  While the 
system issues are appreciated, they need to be redr essed within a specified period, 
given the implications of non-transfer of PA. Audit  notes the assurance of IOCL 
regarding corrective action. 
• The reply of BPCL is not factually correct as audit  analysis of the sample indicated 
that there were 8,509 (2014-15) and 18,394 (2015-16 ) consumers who had not 
received their PA after becoming CTC though they re ceived subsidy to the tune of 
`28.19 lakh during the year 2014-15 and `98.61 lakh during the year 2015-16 
respectively. 
• While appreciating the efforts being taken by HPCL for seeding Aadhaar number of 
consumers, wherever available, in order to make them CTC, it may be stated that after 
correction of bank account numbers, where payment f or refills taken was transferred, 
steps ought to have been taken for transfer of Perm anent Advance also to these 
consumers. 
A significant quantum of failed transactions was no ticed which is a matter of 
concern as it could deprive the genuine LPG consume rs of their legitimate subsidy. 
Audit noticed that a major reason for failure of tr ansactions was inaccurate data 
entry by distributors 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
42 
Chapter 7 
Self-selection in Subsidy  
 
7.1. Non Cash Transfer Compliant (NCTC) consumers 
 Non-cash transfer compliant (NCTC) consumers are th ose who have not joined PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme.  The details of bank account and/or Aadhaar number of these consumers 
are not linked to their consumer IDs and they do no t receive any subsidy on LPG 
consumption. The number of NCTC consumers as on 31 October 2015 was 1.72 crore.  Audit 
appreciates that NCTC consumers may include fake/mu ltiple LPG connections that have 
rightly been weeded out.  However, as pointed out i n a report of M/s Neilson (marketing 
research agency) engaged by BPCL to obtain a feedba ck from LPG consumers regarding 
PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme implementation (May 2015), as m any as 77 per cent of the NCTC 
consumers wished to be a part of the Scheme, but we re deterred by lack of knowledge, 
lengthy process, low process clarity, time taken fo r processing, etc.  This underlines the 
possibility that more efforts may be essential for outreach to all LPG consumers so that 
deserving consumers are not deprived of subsidy, pa rticularly considering that 28 per cent of 
NCTC consumers are rural consumers.  In this context, Audit notes that the number of NCTC 
consumers is on the decline having reduced to 1.55 crore as on 31 December 2015. However, 
more efforts may be essential to ensure protection of entitlement and subsidy of the deserving 
domestic LPG consumer. 
7.2. Give- it up initiative  
The Give-it up campaign was launched as a part of P AHAL (DBTL) Scheme in order to 
encourage the affluent consumers who could pay the market price of LPG supply, for opting 
out of subsidy. This exercise would also  significantly reduce under-recoveries for OMCs and 
subsidy outflow for the government.    
It was noticed that the number of consumers giving up subsidy had gone up significantly 
from 0.22 lakh consumers in January 2015 to 1.67 la kh in March 2015, which further 
increased to 67.27 lakh in February 2016.  
As on 31 December 2015, there were 1.55 crore non-c ash transfer compliant 
consumers. The possibility that this includes consu mers who deserve the subsidy 
cannot be ruled out. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
43 
Chapter 8 
Other Issues 
 
8.1. Recovery of Permanent Advance given to the con sumers  
The one-time advance given to enable the domestic L PG consumer to pay for the first 
cylinder delivered at market rates on joining the P AHAL (DBTL) Scheme is termed 
‘Permanent Advance’ (PA). This advance would remain  with the consumer till the 
connection is terminated, when the advance would be  recovered from the security deposit 
lying with the OMCs.  It was, however, noticed that  in 29.92 lakh cases (16.68 lakh in IOCL, 
5.95 lakh in HPCL and 7.29 lakh in BPCL cases), the  security deposit held by the OMC was 
much lower than the advance paid; the amount of sho rtfall being `68.39 crore (`35.70 crore 
in IOCL, `15.77 crore in HPCL and `16.92 crore in BPCL).  As such, recovery of the PA 
would not be possible in these cases.  
Audit also noticed that PA continues to be held by the consumer even when the consumer’s 
status changes to Non Cash Transfer Compliant (NCTC ).  Audit noticed 9.58 lakh (7.92 lakh 
in IOCL, 0.53 lakh in HPCL and 1.13 lakh in BPCL) s uch NCTC consumers in the three 
OMCs holding `49.21 crore (`41.09 crore in IOCL, `2.82 crore in HPCL and `5.30 crore in 
BPCL) as Permanent Advance (PA) collectively.  As s uch consumers were not eligible for 
PA under the Scheme, this led to blocking of funds. 
The OMCs replied (April/May 2016) as follows: 
(i) IOCL and BPCL stated that for old connections and c onnections issued to BPL 
families with zero security deposit, security depos it was inadequate to cover PA.  The 
OMCs also stressed that issuance of PA to all consu mers was as per the PAHAL 
policy. Regarding transfer of PA to Non Cash Transf er Compliant consumers, IOCL 
and BPCL stated that all these consumers were CTC a t the time of transfer of PA and 
had subsequently became NCTC.  
(ii) IOCL added that in case the consumer becomes CTC su bsequently, by seeding 
Aadhaar or bank account number, further payment of PA was not triggered.  At the 
time of transfer, advance amount was recovered eith er by adjusting it against security 
deposit or by means of cash, if security deposit was less than the recoverable amount.   
(iii) BPCL also suggested that these issues could be taken up with MoP&NG. 
(iv) HPCL stated that there was no relation between secu rity deposit of cylinder and 
regulator, and PA.  These were maintained in differ ent account heads and therefore, 
the question of inadequacy of security deposit for recovery of PA did not arise.  
Regarding continuing PA with Non-Cash Transfer Comp liant (NCTC) consumers, 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
44 
HPCL stated that advance was paid to a consumer on becoming CTC and was 
retained till termination.  Subsequently if a consu mer becomes NCTC due to removal 
of Aadhaar in NPCI mapper or closure of bank accoun t, the data would indicate 
payment of PA to NCTC consumer and that there was no irregularity in the matter.  
The replies of the OMCs need to be considered in view of the following: 
• That security deposit and Permanent Advance (PA) we re maintained in separate 
accounts, as pointed out by HPCL, is well appreciated.  Audit has only highlighted the 
problem that would be faced by the OMCs in recovering PA at the time of termination 
of connection in cases where the security deposit w as inadequate.  Moreover, IOCL 
has been adjusting PA against security deposit, as stated in its reply. 
• The HPCL reply that when a CTC consumer changes int o NCTC, PA would remain 
and there was no irregularity needs to be viewed ag ainst the fact that the purpose of 
PA was to enable the eligible domestic LPG consumer to purchase the first cylinder at 
market price without any extra financial burden.  W hen the status of consumer 
changes from CTC to NCTC, the very purpose for whic h the PA was released gets 
defeated resulting in blocking of funds which could  be diverted to much eligible LPG 
consumers to purchase their first LPG cylinder at market price. 
 
In the sample scrutinised, Audit noticed that non-c ash transfer compliant consumers 
hold `` ``49.21 crore as Permanent Advance.  As these consume rs were not eligible for 
advance, this led to blocking of funds.  Besides, A udit noticed that the security deposit 
of a significant number of consumers was much lower  than the Permanent Advance 
paid to them.  As the Permanent Advance is expected to be recovered from the security 
deposit when the connection is terminated, its recovery in such cases remain doubtful. 
  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
45 
Chapter 9 
Savings in Subsidy through PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme 
 
The PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme was expected, inter alia , to weed out fake/duplicate 
connections, address the concern regarding diversio n and promote self-selection in subsidy.  
This, in turn, would reduce the diversion of domest ic LPG cylinders for commercial use, 
decrease of subsidy outgo and thereby generate savi ngs for the Government.  The PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme commenced on 15 November 2014 in 54 d istricts and was subsequently 
extended to the remaining 622 districts on 1 Januar y 2015.  The Scheme had a three month 
grace period.  As such, the specific effect of the Scheme for the year 2014-15 would be 
confined to 54 districts for the period 15 February  to 31 March 2015, which may not be very 
significant.  Quantification of savings for 2015-16  was obtained from MoPNG and OMCs 
and the following were noticed: 
9.1. Savings on account of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme esti mated by Government of 
India for 2015-16  
MoPNG estimated (February 2016) that the potential savings in LPG subsidy for 2015-16 
would be `9,211 crore.  This has been worked out after consid ering that 4.53 crore domestic 
LPG consumers would not avail of subsidised cylinde rs during 2015-16 (including 1.42 crore 
domestic consumers who had not joined the Scheme and hence not eligible to receive subsidy 
and 3.11 crore blocked/inactive consumers).  It has  also been assumed that all of these 
consumers would have availed 12 subsidised cylinder s @ `169.45 subsidy per cylinder 
(being the average subsidy in 2015-16 in Delhi State).  The details of subsidy savings worked 
out by MoPNG is shown below: 
4.53 crore domestic LPG consumers not joined the Sc heme/blocked/ 
inactive x 12 cylinders per year x `` ``169.45 being the average  
subsidy = `` `` 9,211 crore 
The results of analysis of the savings in subsidy e stimated by GoI in audit is depicted in the 
graph given below.  In this regard, the following aspects need to be considered: 
(i) The national average per capita 
consumption of domestic LPG cylinders in 
2014-15 was 6.27 cylinders. As such, the 
underlying assumption made while working out 
the subsidy savings that blocked/inactive 
consumers would have availed the maximum 
quota of 12 cylinders on which subsidy is 
9,211
4,813
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
GoI Audit
Figure-5: Estimated savings in 
subsidy by GoI vs. Audit (` ` ` ` in crore)

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
46 
payable appears to be an overstatement.  Considerin g the national average offtake of 6.27 
cylinders (2014-15 average), the estimated subsidy savings for 2015-16, as per the 
methodology adopted by the Ministry, would be `4,8131 crore.  The difference in subsidy 
savings on account of adoption of higher national a verage per capita consumption alone is 
`4,398 crore.  The actual subsidy savings, however, are as reported in Para 9.3 below. 
(ii) While the 1.42 crore domestic consumers who have no t joined the PAHAL (DBTL) 
Scheme have contributed to subsidy savings of `1508.68 crore (1.42 crore consumers x 
`169.45 per cylinder x 6.27 cylinders per year) whic h was indeed a direct outcome of the 
Scheme implementation in 2015-16, the savings from 3.11 crore blocked/inactive consumers 
cannot be attributed entirely to implementation of the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme in 2015-16.  
In fact, it was noticed that the number of blocked/ inactive domestic consumers as on  1 April 
2015 was 3.34 crore which decreased to 3.11 crore (19 February 2016).  
MoPNG stated (June 2016) that an intensive exercise  was carried out for identifying 
duplicate/ fake/ghost/inactive domestic LPG connect ions and, as of 1 April 2016, 3.46 crore 
such consumers had been blocked.  As a result of im plementation of DBTL mechanism, it 
became possible to block these consumers, as the su bsidy was transferred in the accounts of 
only those consumers who had registered under PAHAL  and who have cleared after  
de-duplication exercise.  In addition, 1.33 crore c onsumers were not availing subsidy and the 
total works to 4.79 crore consumers, and for these consumers who were outside the subsidy 
net, the estimated savings would be `9740 crore (i.e., 4.79 crore consumers x 12 cylinde rs x 
`169.45 being the average subsidy per cylinder for 2 015-16).  It was further added that the 
principle applied was a sound one, since the past e xperience was that the full quota of 12 
cylinders would have been drawn by the suspect cons umers who were diverting domestic 
cylinders. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  de-duplication was carried out by the 
OMCs through National Informatics Centre in June 20 12, and as a result of which the 
duplicate/ fake/ghost/inactive domestic LPG connect ions were blocked.  On the other hand, 
the DBTL Scheme was launched in June 2013 and PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme was launched in 
November 2014.  As such, the entire blocking of fak e, duplicate, or inactive consumers 
cannot be attributed to the outcome of PAHAL (DBTL)  Scheme.  In other words, as pointed 
out by Audit above, the real outcome of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme was the subsidy savings on 
account of 1.33 crore consumers not linking their Aadhaar number and Bank account with the 
Scheme.  Further, Audit is of the view that the nat ional per capita consumption of 6.27 
cylinders per annum is a more appropriate and reali stic parameter than the full permissible 
quota of 12 cylinders for calculation of estimated savings. 
 
                                                           
1 4.53 crore consumers x `169.45 per cylinder x 6.27 cylinders per year. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
47 
9.2. Savings estimated by OMCs for 2015-16 
Audit observed that the OMCs worked out the projected subsidy savings for the year 2015-16 
differently.  IOCL (the coordinating agency of OMCs  with GoI for LPG) estimated subsidy 
savings of `5107.48 crore in its submission to Petroleum Planni ng and Analysis Cell (PPAC) 
by considering the following: 
• Savings due to reduction in domestic LPG consumption (by considering the 
increase in domestic consumer base in 2015-16 compa red to 2014-15 
coupled with the reduction in offtake of domestic cylinders): `` ``1036 crore 
• Savings due to non-subsidised sales to 1.73 crore d omestic consumers 
(non-cash transfer compliant consumers as on Septem ber 2015): `` ``3672 
crore 
• Additional taxes/duties due to rise in sale of non- domestic non-exempt 
(NDNE) LPG cylinders: `` ``399.48 crore 
 
Audit analysed the assumptions applied by the OMCs and calculation of estimated subsidy 
savings.  The results of analysis is depicted in th e Chart alongside.   In this regard, the 
following aspects need to be considered:  
(i) While working out the subsidy savings 1, OMCs considered an average annual 
consumption of 6.27 cylinders per consumer and aver age subsidy of `338 per cylinder 
(average 
subsidy rate 
applicable to 
Delhi market in 
2014-15).  
While the 
assumption of 
annual 
consumption of 
6.27 cylinders 
per consumer 
based on the 
average national 
offtake of 2014-15 was reasonable, consideration of average subsidy rates of 2014-15 at 
`338 
per cylinder led to an over-statement of savings, i n view of the sharp fall in prices during 
2015-16 vis-à-vis 2014-15.  In fact, if the average  subsidy of `169.45 per cylinder for  
                                                           
1 Subsidy savings pertaining to reduction in domestic LPG consumption and non-subsidized sale to domestic consumers. 
1036.00
3672.00
399.48
0.00
5107.48
519.56
1839.72
399.48 714.72
3473.48
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Reduced offtake
of domestic
cyliners
Non-subsidised
sales to NCTC
Additional
taxes/duties on
NDNE sale
Give it up Total
Savings in subsidy estimated by OMCs vs. Audit ( `` `` in crore)
OMCs Audit

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
48 
2015-16 was considered (as used by MoPNG in their e stimation), the estimated subsidy 
savings would reduce to `2359.28 crore (`1839.72 crore + `519.56 crore) adopting the same 
methodology as the OMCs except for the value of subsidy.  
(ii) Alongside implementation of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme, a ‘Give it Up Campaign’ has 
been operational which has resulted in 67.27 lakh domestic consumers having opted out as on 
29 February 2016.  This would have also led to esti mated savings in subsidy of `714.721 
crore.  Thus, the total estimated subsidy savings p rojected for 2015-16 would work out to 
`3473.482 crore (details are at Annexure-III).  
(iii) It may also be noted that the OMCs have assumed 1.7 3 crore Non Cash Transfer 
Compliant (NCTC) domestic consumers (as on Septembe r 2015). However, their number has 
reduced to 1.42 crore as on February 2016 as stated  by MoPNG. As such, the savings in 
subsidy on account of NCTC consumers, as worked out  by the OMCs may need to be 
rationalised. 
The difference in estimated savings on account of i nconsistencies in estimation pointed out at 
(i), (ii), and (iii) above alone is ` 1,634 crore.  The actual subsidy savings, however,  are as 
reported in Para 9.3 below.  The subsidy savings, a s worked out by the OMCs at `5107.48 
crore and as revised by Audit to `3473.48 crore (in line with the comments made at (i ), (ii)  
and (iii) above) is at Annexure – III.   
While BPCL (April 2016) agreed with findings of Aud it, HPCL did not offer (May 2016) 
specific response on this issue.  On the other hand , though IOCL did not offer any specific 
response on this issue, it forwarded (May 2016) a r eply given on behalf of the OMCs to 
MoPNG with regard to a Parliamentary Question on “S avings on LPG subsidy”. Scrutiny of 
the same revealed that while calculating the saving s on LPG subsidy, IOCL followed a 
similar approach as adopted by MoPNG (refer Para 9. 1 above) as updated up to 31 March 
2016 (considering 4.87 crore blocked/inactive consu mers, offtake of 12 cylinders per annum 
per customer and average subsidy of `156.48 per cylinder in 2015-16 thereby the savings 
worked out to `9,144 crore). The shortcomings of this methodology has already been 
highlighted in the said para above. 
9.3. Actual subsidy savings in the first three quar ters of 2015-16 (April to December  
2015) vis-à-vis comparable period of 2014-15  
Audit compared the actual subsidy payout during Apr il 2015 to December 2015 against the 
same during April 2014 to December 2014.  It was no ticed that subsidy paid during April 
2015 to December 2015 was `12,084.23 crore, as against the subsidy of `35,400.44 crore 
during similar period in 2014-15.  The fall in subs idy payout in 2015-16 compared to  
                                                           
1   67.27  lakh consumers x `169.45 subsidy per cylinder x 6.27 cylinder per year = `714.72 crore 
2  `2359.28 crore + `714.72 crore + `399.48 crore (additional tax/duties on NDNE sale)  = `3473.48 crore. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
49 
2014-15 (worked out for nine months period from Apr il to December 2015) was a combined 
effect of decrease in off take of domestic cylinder s on which subsidy was paid and the lower 
subsidy rates arising from the sharp fall in crude prices in 2015-16.  
The total decrease in subsidy in 2015-16 (April – D ecember 2015) compared to 2014-15 
(April – December  2014) was `23,316.21 crore (i.e., `35,400.44 crore - `12,084.23 crore).  
The contribution of lower subsidy rates and lower o ff take in quantity causing this reduction 
in subsidy payout is summarized below (the detailed calculation are at Annexure IV).  
• To arrive at the effect of reduced subsidy rates on  lower subsidy payouts in 2015-16, 
the consumption levels of 2015-16 had been consider ed while applying the difference 
in the subsidy rates between 2014-15 and 2015-16, w hich works out to `21,552.28 
crore.  
• To arrive at the effect of reduced quantity of offt ake of subsidised LPG, the subsidy 
rates were held constant at 2014-15 levels while co nsidering the decrease in 
consumption levels in 2015-16 over 2014-15, which w as an outcome of the PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme. This works out to `1,763.93 crore.  
It is evident from the above analysis that the effe ct of lower subsidy rates in 2015-16 was by 
far the most significant factor resulting in subsid y savings.  While the reduced off take of 
subsidised LPG, which could be considered to be an outcome of implementation of PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme, has contributed to savings in subsidy, its effect was not as significant.  
From the above, the following issues emerge: 
(i) While working out subsidy savings in a year as an o utcome of efforts made during 
that year, it may be reasonable to compare the savi ngs achieved in that year vis-à-vis savings 
of previous year(s) after considering the changes i n external parameters like change in crude 
prices. As such, it may not be correct to attribute  the number of blocked/inactive consumers 
in a year to efforts made entirely during that year. 
(ii) While working out/estimating the savings in subsidy, the average off take of cylinders 
by domestic consumers and average subsidy rates for  the year need to be considered. This 
assumes particular importance as the average off ta ke of cylinders was slightly higher than 
half the cap allowed under the Scheme (average off take of 6.27 against the cap of 12) and 
subsidy rates being halved (as against average subsidy of `338 per cylinder in 2014-15, it was 
`169.45 per cylinder (average for the period from April to December 2015) in 2015-16). 
 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
50 
(iii) Comparing the actual subsidy payouts in 2015-16 (Ap ril – December 201 5) over a 
comparable period of 2014-15, a high quantum of subsidy savings was noticed.  However, 92 
per cent  of such savings could be attributed to the fall in subsidy rates alone. While 
implementation of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme coupled with the ‘Give-it up’ campaign resulted 
in reduction of off take of domestic subsidised LPG cylinders, the resultant subsidy savings 
was not significant compared to the savings generated through fall of subsidy rates. 
 
The subsidy burden over the period from April 2015 to December 2015 was lower than 
that for the comparable period in 2014 by `` ``23,316.21 crore. However, this was a 
combined effect of decrease in off-take of subsidised cylinders by consumers ( `` ``1,763.93 
crore) and lower subsidy rates arising from the sharp fall in crude prices ( `` ``21,552.28 
crore) in 2015-16. While implementation of the PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme coupled with 
the ‘Give it up’ campaign has resulted in the reduction of offtake of domestic subsidised 
LPG cylinders, the resultant subsidy savings was not as significant as that generated 
through fall of subsidy rates. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
51 
  
Chapter 10 
Conclusion and Recommendations 
 
10.1. Conclusion 
The PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme, introduced in November 201 4 and extended to the entire 
country in January 2015, intends to dis-incentivise  diversion, weed out fake and duplicate 
connections, protect entitlement, improve availability of LPG cylinders and ensure subsidy to 
domestic consumers while allowing self-selection in  subsidy. Audit appreciates the 
implementation of the Scheme covering 19.26 crore r egistered domestic LPG consumers 
(16.17 crore active and 3.09 crore other than active consumers) and 16,781 distributors across 
the three Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs), viz., Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), 
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL), and  Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (BPCL). The following conclusions emerge fr om the audit of implementation of the 
Scheme: 
• Audit noticed a marked growth in sale of LPG cylind ers to commercial consumers 
post implementation of PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme.  Howeve r, there has also been a 
sharp increase in offtake of domestic LPG cylinders  not entitled to receive subsidy, 
which increases the risk of diversion, particularly  considering the significant price 
difference between domestic LPG cylinders not entit led to receive subsidy and 
commercial LPG cylinder on account of differential taxes and duties levied on the two 
categories of consumers.  
• Even though National Informatics Centre and the OMC s had carried out de-
duplication checks on the domestic LPG consumer dat abase, Audit noticed instances 
of multiple connections existing both within and be tween OMC.  Besides, 
connections blocked on suspicion of being multiple connections were often un-
blocked without maintaining adequate documentation of justification for such un-
blocking.  Scrutiny of the selected sample indicate d that there were inadequate input 
checks for the domestic LPG consumer database, whic h adversely affected its 
accuracy and integrity. 
• The OMCs have addressed the bulk of PAHAL (DBTL) Sc heme related complaints 
though the target of seven days for redressal could not be achieved.  
• A significant quantum of failed transactions was no ticed which is a matter of concern 
as it could deprive the genuine LPG consumers of th eir legitimate subsidy. Audit 
noticed that a major reason for failure of transact ions was inaccurate data entry by 
distributors. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
52 
• As on 31 December 2015, there were 1.55 crore non-c ash transfer compliant 
consumers. The possibility that this includes consu mers who deserve the subsidy 
cannot be ruled out. 
• In the sample scrutinised, Audit noticed that non-c ash transfer compliant consumers 
hold `49.21 crore as Permanent Advance.  As these consume rs were not eligible for 
advance, this led to blocking of funds.  Besides, A udit noticed that the security 
deposit of a significant number of consumers was mu ch lower than the Permanent 
Advance paid to them.  As the Permanent Advance is expected to be recovered from 
the security deposit when the connection is termina ted, its recovery in such cases 
remain doubtful. 
• The subsidy burden over the period from April 2015 to December 2015 was lower 
than that for the comparable period in 2014 by `23,316.21 crore. However, this was a 
combined effect of decrease in off-take of subsidis ed cylinders by consumers 
(`1,763.93 crore) and lower subsidy rates arising fro m the sharp fall in crude prices 
(`21,552.28 crore) in 2015-16. While implementation o f the PAHAL (DBTL) 
Scheme coupled with the ‘Give it up’ campaign has r esulted in the reduction of 
offtake of domestic subsidised LPG cylinders, the r esultant subsidy savings was not 
as significant as that generated through fall of subsidy rates.   
10.2 Recommendations 
Audit suggests the following recommendations in ord er to address the issues highlighted in 
this Report.  
(i) Effective steps may need to be taken to dis-incenti vise diversion of non-subsidised 
domestic LPG cylinders to the commercial segment.   
(ii) Considering that audit scrutiny of the selected sam ple revealed existence of multiple 
connections, the entire database needs to be scruti nised by the OMCs and effective 
action should be ensured.  The integrity of the dat abase needs to be maintained.  
While the OMCs assured institution of appropriate c hecks for new additions to the 
consumer database, there is an urgent need to ensur e correctness and integrity of the 
existing database. Appropriate and transparent docu mentation of blocking and un-
blocking of suspected multiple connections also needs to be ensured. 
(iii) Appropriate input control, data validation and stri ct oversight is essential at the 
distributor interface to ensure correctness of data  entry at their end, which would not 
only improve the integrity of the consumer database  but also eliminate failed 
transactions arising from incorrect information. 
(iv) Audit has noted the decrease in the number of Non C ash Transfer Compliant 
consumers.  However, more focussed outreach efforts  may be necessary to ensure  
that deserving consumers are not deprived of subsid y for want of knowledge of the 
Scheme or clarity regarding its processes. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
53 
(v) Appropriate policy decisions may be necessary to ad dress the blocking of Permanent 
Advance with Non Cash Transfer Compliant consumers and recovery of Permanent 
Advance from consumers having a lower security deposit compared to it. 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 
  

 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
55 
Annexure I 
(As referred to in Para 2.6) 
(A) Status of various claims under DBTL Scheme (June 2013 to February/March 2014)               (`` `` in crore) 
 
OMC Permanent advance claims Subsidy claims Project Management expenditure claims 
Amount 
claimed 
Amount 
received 
Amount 
outstanding as 
on 31.3.2014 
Total amount 
claimed 
Amount 
received 
Amount 
outstanding as 
on 31.3.2014 
Total amount 
claimed 
Amount 
received 
Amount 
outstanding as on  
31.3.2014 
IOCL 529.17 529.17 0.00 1,600.06 1,586.96 13.10 16.82 16.82 0.00 
BPCL 300.11 300.11 0.00 866.58 859.92 6.67 16.87 16.87 0.00 
HPCL 404.91 404.91 0.00 1,401.90 1,390.12 11.78 9.85 9.33 0.52 
Total 1,234.19 1,234.19 0.00 3,868.54 3,836.70 31.84 43.54 43.02 0.52 
 
(B) Status of various claims under PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme (November 2014 to March 2016) (`` `` in crore) 
 
OMC Permanent advance claims Subsidy claims *Project Management expenditure claims 
Amount 
claimed 
Amount 
received 
Amount 
outstanding as 
on 31.3.2016 
Total amount 
claimed 
Amount 
received 
Amount 
outstanding as 
on 31.3.2016 
Total 
amount 
claimed 
Amount 
received 
Amount 
outstanding as on 
31.3.2016 
IOCL 2,731.15 2,349.62 381.53 10,122.93 7,31 3.14 2,809.79 149.35 55.23@ 94.12 
BPCL 1,386.12 1,166.81 219.31 4,880.63 3,519. 03 1361.6 71.20 56.01 15.19 
HPCL 1,256.27 1,004.29 251.98 5,029.33 3,65 3.66 1,375.67 83.86 54.22 29.64 
Total 5,345.54 4,520.72 824.82 20,032.89 14,485.83 4,573.61 304.41 165.46 138.95 
* Includes expenditure on “Give it up” and employee rewards                               @ ` 23.94 crore received on 02.4.2016   
 
(C) Status of Buffer Account as on 31 March 2016 
 (`` `` in crore) 
Name of OMC Subsidy amount sanctioned by GoI for credit to Buffer Account Subsidy amount withdrawn by OMC from Buffer Account # 
IOCL 8,482.77 8,289.17 
BPCL 4,279.62 3,963.22 
HPCL 4,406.70 4,017.49 
Total 17,169.09 16,269.88 
# It also includes ` 2,878.80 crore (IOCL), ` 1,466.93 crores (BPCL) and `1,409.19 crore (HPCL) on account of one time incentive towards Permanent Advance. 
Note: GoI has not yet sanctioned any amount for credit in Buffer Account in respect of subsidy claims for the month of December 2015 to March 2016.  
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
56 
Annexure II 
(As referred to in Para 5.2) 
 
(A) Effect of Intra-OMC Duplicates on payment of re fill subsidy (due to delivery 
of excess subsidised cylinders) 
Particulars of the Multiple 
Connection identified 
No. of multiple active connections availing more than 12 cylinders 
IOCL BPCL HPCL 
2014-15 2015-16 
(up to Oct. 
2015) 
2014-15 2015-16 
(up to Oct. 
2015) 
2014-15 2015-16 
(up to 
Oct.2015) 
Multiple connections for the 
same Aadhaar no. (intra) 
- - 0  0 146 10 
Multiple connections for same 
IFSC and bank account no. 
12,236 1,730 0  0 8,301 1.271 
Multiple connections ‘Same 
Name Same Address’ 
3,099
 1,417 3,764  1,293 384 64 
Multiple connections (Same 
Name, DOB and registered 
mobile number) 
5,054
 1,302 8  0 4,507 1,620 
Total 20,389 4,449 3,772 1,293 13,338 2,965 
 
(B)  Effect of Intra-OMC Duplicates on payment of Permanent Advance (PA) 
Particulars of the Multiple 
Connection identified 
No. of multiple active connections having availed PA twice in 
IOCL BPCL HPCL 
Multiple connections for the same 
Aadhaar no. (intra) 
- 0 80 
Multiple connections for same 
IFSC and bank account no. 
15,819 0 10,238 
Multiple connections ( SNSA) 6,367 6,780 314 
Multiple connections(Same Name, 
DOB and registered mobile 
number) 
5,445 8 6,392 
Total 27,631 6,788 17,024 
 
(C) Effect of Inter-OMC Duplicates on payment of refill subsidy (due to delivery of 
excess subsidised cylinders) 
Particulars of the Multiple 
Connection identified 
No. of multiple active connections availing more than 12 cylinders 
IOCL & BPCL BPCL & HPCL HPCL & IOCL 
2014-15 2015-16 
(up to 
Oct.2015) 
2014-15 2015-16 
(up to 
Oct.2015) 
2014-15 2015-16 
(up to 
Oct.2015) 
Multiple connections for the 
same Aadhaar no. (inter) 
9,332 1,942 10,926 1,708 12,370 2,172 
Multiple connections for same 
IFSC and bank account no. 
1,400 152 1,910 254 2,348 260 
Total 10,732 2,094 12,836 1,962 14,718 2,432 
 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
57 
 
(D)  Effect of Inter-OMC Duplicates on payment of Permanent Advance (PA) 
Particulars of the 
Multiple Connection 
identified 
Multiple active connections having availed PA twice in 
IOCL & BPCL BPCL & HPCL HPCL & IOCL 
No. of 
multiple 
connections 
Amount 
of PA (`` `` 
in lakh) 
No. of 
multiple 
connections 
Amount 
of PA (`` `` 
in lakh) 
No. of 
multiple 
connections 
Amount 
of PA  
(`` `` in 
lakh) 
Multiple connections for 
the same Aadhaar no. 
(inter) 
14,114 39.60 18,704 28.29 20,108 38.68
 
Multiple connections for 
same IFSC and bank 
account no. 
3,946 9.08 3,528 7.68 5,098 6.23
 
Total 18,060 48.68 22,232 35.97 25,206 44.91 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
58 
Annexure-III 
(As referred to in Para 9.2) 
 
Statement of Projected savings due to PAHAL (DBTL) Scheme for the year 2015-16 
 
Particulars Savings as 
per OMCs  
Savings as 
per Audit  
a) Savings due to reduction in Domestic LPG Consumption   
By consumption pattern of 2014-15 , 94 per cent cylinder were sold 
within cap, so reduction in subsidies sale (No. of cylinders ) 
1,53,30,493 1,53,30,493 
Subsidy saving for 6 months considering average subsidy (in ` crore) 518* 259.78** 
Projected Annual Savings (`` `` in crore) (a) 1,036.00 519.56 
b)  Saving due to Non-Subsidised Sales to Domestic Consumers (NCTC) 
No. of NCTC consumers in September 2015 drawing non -subsidised 
cylinders 1,73,15,837 1,73,15,837 
Projected savings considering average subsidy (in `` `` crore) (b) 
(Considering average per capita consumption of 6.27  cylinders for 
the year 2015-16) 
3,672.00* 1,839.72** 
c) Additional Taxes/Duties due to rise in NDNE sale 
Sale in April – September 2014 ( MT)  4,70,854 4,70,854 
Sale in April – September 2015 ( MT)  6,50,501 6,50,501 
Increase in NDNE sale compared to previous year fro m April - 
September (MT)  1,79,647 1,79,647 
Average Price of NDNE per MT (`) 42,000 42,000 
Customs Duty @ 5 per cent of Refinery Transfer Price (`) 1,250 1,250 
Total price after Excise Duty @ 8.33 per cent  of average price of 
NDNE (x) (`) 45,498.6 45,498.6 
Total price after VAT @ 14 per cent of x (`) 51,868.4 51,868.4 
So, total contribution per MT by ( customs+ excise + VAT) (`) 11,118.4 11,118.4 
Annual gain in NDNE sale (`` `` in crore) (c) 399.48 399.48 
d) Savings due to ‘Give it Up’ campaign 
Total LPG domestic consumers opted out   (February 2016) Not 
considered 
by OMCs 
67,27,130 
Projected  saving due to ‘Give it Up’ (`` `` in crore) (d) 
(considering average per capita consumption of 6.27 cylinders for 
2015-16 ) 
714.72** 
Projected Annual Saving for GoI  ( a+b+c+d) (`` `` in crore) 5,107.48 3,473.48 
     * Considering ` 338/- per cylinder (weighted average of 2014-15)  
      ** Considering ` 169.45 per cylinder [weighted average of 2015-16 (December 15)]  
 
  

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
59 
Annexure –IV 
(As referred to in Para 9.3) 
 
 
A. Change in total subsidy in 2015-16 compared to 2 014-15 due to reduction in 
subsidy rates keeping the quantity of 2015-16 constant: 
Month Qty. of LPG 
on which 
subsidy paid  
in 2015-16 (in 
MT)* 
Average 
subsidy per 
MT in 2014-
15  (in `` ``)* 
Average 
subsidy per 
MT in 2015-
16 (in `` ``)* 
 
Decrease in 
average 
subsidy/ MT  
(in `` ``) 
Amount  
(`` `` in crore) 
Q` S S` s = (S-S`) sQ` 
April 1159831 33528 13132 20396 2,365.59 
May 1195246 31864 12990 18874 2,255.91 
June 1187242 34188 14978 19210 2,280.69 
July 1225906 33057 11498 21559 2,642.93 
August 1214751 32580 9818 22762 2,765.02 
September 1241519 30227 10878 19349 2,402.22 
October 1305094 27184 6456 20728 2,705.20 
November 1254082 25673 6903 18770 2,353.91 
December 1386063 24170 11322 12848 1,780.81 
Total 21,552.28 
* Actual for 2014 and 2015 
 
B.  Change in total subsidy in 2015-16 compared to 2014-15 on account of reduced 
offtake of subsidised cylinders keeping the subsidy rate of 2014-15 constant: 
Month Average 
subsidy per 
MT in 2014-
15  (in `` ``)* 
Qty. of LPG 
on which 
subsidy paid  
in 2014-15 (in 
MT)* 
Qty. of LPG 
on which 
subsidy paid  
in 2015-16 (in 
MT)* 
Decrease in 
quantity (in 
MT) 
Amount  
(`` `` in crore) 
S Q Q` q = (Q-Q`) Sq 
April 33528 1205900 1159831 46069 154.46 
May 31864 1268860 1195246 73614 234.56 
June 34188 1182600 1187242 -4642 -15.87 
July 33057 1257180 1225906 31274 103.38 
August 32580 1275580 1214751 60829 198.18 
September 30227 1374860 1241519 133341 403.05 
October 27184 1324750 1305094 19656 53.43 
November 25673 1402730 1254082 148648 381.62 
December 24170 1489960 1386063 103897 251.12 
Total 1,763.93 
* Actual for 2014 and 2015 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
60 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Sl. No. Abbreviation Description of Abbreviated Term 
1 A C T  C Aadhaar CashTransfer Compliant 
2 APB Aadhaar Payment Bridge 
3 BCTC Bank Cash Transfer Compliant 
4 BPCL Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
5 CTC Cash Transfer Compliant 
6 DBTL Direct Benefits Transfer for LPG Consumers 
7 DNSA Different Name Same Address 
8 DOB Date of Birth 
9 GoI Government of India 
10 HPCL Hindustan Petroleum Company Limited 
11 IFD Integrated Finance Division of MoPNG 
12 IFSC Indian Financial System Code 
13 IOCL Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
14 IVRS Interactive Voice Response System 
15 KYC Know Your Customer 
16 LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
17 MoF Ministry of Finance 
18 MoPNG Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
19 MT Metric Tonne 
20 NACH National Automated Clearing House 
21 NCTC Non Cash Transfer Compliant 
22 NDEC Non Domestic Exempt category 
23 NDNE Non Domestic Non Exempt  
24 NIC National Informatics Centre 
25 NPCI National Payment Corporation of India 
26 OMC Oil Marketing Companies 
27 PA Permanent Advance 
28 PAHAL Pratyaksh Hanstantrit Labh Yojana 
29 PMCB Punjab Maharashtra Co-operative Bank 
30 PPAC Petroleum Planning and Analysis Cell 
31 SBI State Bank of India 
32 SNSA Same Name Same Address 
33 TV Transfer/Termination Voucher 
34 UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India 
 
 
 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
61 
Glossary of Special Terms 
 
Term Meaning 
Aadhaar Number Aadhaar is a 12 digit individual identification num ber issued by the 
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI). 
Active Consumer Consumer who is taking refill of LPG cylinders at p rescribed 
intervals. 
Auto LPG 
Consumers 
Consumers who use LPG as fuel in their automobiles. 
Buffer Account A separate Bank Account opened by State owned Oil M arketing 
Companies to receive cash subsidy towards domestic LPG from 
Government of India. 
Commercial Use LPG used for carrying out business with aim to earn profit. 
CTC Cash Transfer Compliant: A' consumer who has joined  the PAHAL 
(DBTL) Scheme by any of the following two ways and is ready to 
receive LPG subsidy directly into his bank account. 
ACTC (Aadhaar Cash Transfer Compliant) - If LPG con sumer has 
linked his/her Aadhaar number to both LPG consumer number and 
to the bank account 
Or 
BCTC (Bank Cash Transfer Compliant) - If LPG consum er has 
linked his/her bank account number to LPG IDs 
DCMS Distributor and Consumer Management System (DCMS) i s a 
software used by LPG distributors of HPCL. 
De-duplication Exercise done to identify duplicate/multiple connections. 
Domestic 
Consumer 
Consumer using LPG in household for cooking purpose. 
Failed Transactions Any transaction which is returned/rejected by Bank/NPCI is 
Classified as a "Failed Transaction 
Give-it up Scheme Scheme launched by Government of India to encourage  affluent 
consumers to opt out of subsidy voluntarily. 
Grace Period Period of 3 months from the date of launch of the S cheme to LPG 
consumer not having CTC status to become CTC. 
Indsoft Indsoft is a software used by LPG distributors of IOCL. 
Interactive Voice 
Response System 
Self-answering telecommunication system used by LPG  consumers 
for refill booking, complaint, etc. 
Know Your 
Consumer 
Procedure followed for obtaining information on Pro of of Address 
(POA) and Proof of Identity (POI) with supporting documents. 
LPG Next LPG Next is software provided by BPCL to their LPG distributors 
as interface. 

Report No. 25 of 2016 
 
62 
Term Meaning 
NCTC Non Cash Transfer Compliant: An LPG consumer who ha s not 
linked his/her Aadhaar number to either LPG consume r or bank 
account or both LPG consumer number and bank account 
Or 
An LPG consumer who has not linked his/her bank acc ount number 
to LPG consumer number 
PAHAL DBTL (Direct Benefits Transfer for LPG Consumers) S cheme has 
been named as 'PAHAL' which means "Initiative". It is an 
acronym based on Hindi translation of the Scheme: " Pratyaksh 
(Direct) Hastantarit (Transferred) Labh (Benefit) "  
 
 
 