 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies 
under  
Department of Science and Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
(Department of Science and Technology) 
Report No. 26 of 2016 
(Compliance Audit) 
 

Contents  
 
 Paragraphs Pages 
Preface  i 
Executive Summary  iii 
CHAPTER 1- INTRODUCTION   
Background 1.1 1 
Audit Objective 1.2 2 
Audit Criteria 1.3 2 
Audit Sample, Scope and Methodology 1.4 2 
Structure of Audit Report 1.5 3 
Acknowledgement 1.6 3 
CHAPTER 2- REGULATORY FRAMEWORK OF AUTONOMOUS BODIES  
Background 2.1 4 
Formation of Autonomous Bodies 2.2 4 
Governance 2.3 6 
Conclusion 2.4 7 
Recommendations 2.5 7 
CHAPTER 3- ADMINISTRATIVE FUNCTIONING OF AUTONOMOUS BODIES 
Introduction 3.1 8 
Non-inclusion of restrictive clause in the Rules and Bye laws 3.2 8 
Creation of posts 3.3 9 
Recruitments 3.4 10 
Promotion of employees 3.5 17 
Entitlements of employees 3.6 20 
Retirement of employees 3.7 23 
Outsourcing of services 3.8 24 
Conclusion 3.9 24 
Recommendations 3.10 25 

CHAPTER 4- OVERSIGHT FUNCTIONS OF DST 
Introduction 4.1 26 
Non-conduct of peer review 4.2 26 
Lack of control in release of grants-in-aid 4.3 26 
Monitoring of Utilisation Certificates 4.4 27 
Deficiencies in Internal Audit 4.5 27 
Conclusion 4.6 28 
Recommendations 4.7 28 
Annexures 30 – 46 
Glossary of terms 47 – 49 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            i 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
The report contains results of compliance audit of the 
Administrative Functioning of Autonomous Bodies und er 
Department of Science and Technology. The instances mentioned 
in this report are those which came to notice in the course of test 
audit for the period from 2009 to 2014 as well as those that came 
to notice in earlier years; matters relating to the period 
subsequent to March 2014 have also been included, wherever 
necessary.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            iii 
 
Executive Summary  
 
Introduction 
Department of Science and Technology (DST) was established in May 1971 under Ministry of 
Science and Technology (MST), with the objective of promoting new areas of Science and 
Technology (S&T) and to play the role of a nodal department for organising, coordinating 
and promoting S&T activities in the country. There are 28 Autonomous Bodies (ABs) under 
the administrative control and substantially funded by DST, located in different parts of the 
country.   
In view of the substantial dependence of the ABs on public money which necessitates 
compliance with Government rules and instructions in conducting their affairs, a compliance 
audit of administrative functioning of 19 selected ABs of DST was conducted, covering the 
period from 2009 to 2014. 
Main findings 
Significant audit findings on administrative functioning of selected ABs are as follows: 
Regulatory framework of Autonomous Bodies 
As per Rule 208 of General Financial Rules, no new autonomous institution should be 
created by Ministries or Departments without the approval of the Cabinet. International 
Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy, Hyderabad was registered as a society 
without the approval of the Cabinet. DST sanctioned funds of ` 241.04 crore between 
2009-14 to the Centre. 
(Para 2.2.1) 
Bose Institute, Kolkata, which was registered under the Societies Act 1860, did not comply 
with the provisions of West Bengal Societies Act 1961.  In spite of this, DST released grants-
in-aid to the Institute. 
(Para 2.2.2) 
During the period from 1988 to 2011, the Governing Body of Technology Information and 
Forecasting Assessment Council, Delhi was reconstituted four times.  However, approval of 
the Competent authority for such reconstitution, as required under Memorandum of 
Association of the Council was not obtained on three of the four occasions.  
(Para 2.3.1) 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
 
iv           Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies 
The 17 selected ABs failed to comply with instructions of Ministry of Finance to incorporate 
restrictive clauses in their Rules and Bye laws relating to the powers of the Governing Bodies 
in matters having financial implications.  
(Para 3.2) 
Though ABs have no powers to create/upgrade posts, 486 posts were created/upgraded by 
11 ABs.  
(Para 3.3.1) 
There were deviations from prescribed Government rules and orders in the Recruitment 
Rules framed by 13 ABs for which approval of Ministry of Finance was not obtained. 
(Para 3.4.3) 
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram and 
Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bengaluru failed to adhere to the 
guidelines/instructions issued by University Grants Commission (UGC) on adoption of pay 
structure of academic staff. Adoption of higher pay scales and fixation of pay at higher 
stages resulted in excess expenditure of `  6.43 crore on recruitments and promotions of 
academic staff.  
(Para 3.4.6, 3.4.7 (b) and 3.5.1 ii) 
Irregularities in grant of promotion to Scientists under Flexible Complementing Scheme by 
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram 
resulted in inadmissible payment of ` 8.70 crore.  
(Para 3.5.4) 
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram 
unauthorisedly paid Clinical Research Allowance and Learning Resource Allowance to its 
staff, resulting in irregular expenditure of ` 6.86 crore. The Institute also paid ` 1.53 crore as 
Hospital Patient Care Allowance without obtaining approval of DST.  
(Para 3.6.1 and 3.6.2) 
Three ABs granted extension of service to retired staff without approval of competent 
authority, which resulted in inadmissible payment of ` 3.41 crore.  
(Para 3.7.2) 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            v 
 
Oversight functions of DST 
No peer review was conducted by DST for any of its 17 selected ABs as envisaged in Rule 
208 (vi) of General Financial Rules. 
(Para 4.2) 
Nature of grants, viz. recurring or non-recurring was not segregated in the sanction letters 
issued by DST to the ABs as envisaged in Rule 209(5) of General Financial Rules.  
(Para 4.3) 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) submitted by the ABs to DST did not contain achievements 
about specified, quantified and qualitative targets as well as the actual expenditure incurred 
and the loans and advances given to suppliers of stores and assets, construction agencies, 
staff for house building and purchase of conveyance etc. as envisaged in General Financial 
Rules.  
(Para 4.4) 
There was shortfall in conducting internal audit of ABs ranging from 39 per cent to  
61 per cent as against the target fixed by DST for annual audit.  
(Para 4.5) 
Conclusion 
The Audit disclosed establishment of one AB without the approval of the Cabinet and non-
adoption of the requisite provisions of the applicable State Societies Registration Act by an 
AB, due to which there were inconsistencies in compliance of the provisions of the State 
Act.  DST continued to release grants to these ABs in a routine manner without examining 
the adherence to legal requirements by these ABs. A dministrative functioning of the 
selected ABs did not conform to the applicable rules and regulations. The extant rules and 
orders were violated in creation of posts, recruitments, promotion policies for scientists, 
staff entitlements, retirement matters and outsourcing of services. The oversight role of DST 
was weak. No peer review was conducted as per the provisions of GFRs, due to which the 
performance of the ABs was not evaluated. Sanction letters for payment of grants by DST 
did not specify the nature of grants.  Monitoring of submission of UCs by ABs was lax. None 
of the UCs submitted by the 19 ABs to DST contained  achievement about specified, 
quantified and qualitative targets. There was shortfall in conduct of internal audit by DST. 
 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
 
vi           Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
Summary of Recommendations 
DST may obtain ex-post facto approval of the Cabinet for establishment of International 
Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, Hyderabad as an 
Autonomous Body for regularisation of its continuance and ensure that prescribed 
procedures are followed for creation of Autonomous Bodies.  
DST may review Memorandum of Association and Regulations of all the Autonomous Bodies 
and ensure that provisions of the same are in conformity with the applicable Central/State 
Societies Registration Act. 
DST may ensure that Autonomous Bodies incorporate relevant clauses in the Bye-Laws 
specifying the powers enjoyed by the Governing Bodies/Council of the said Autonomous 
Body in matters of creation of posts, recruitments,  promotions, retirements, staff 
entitlements and other administrative issues. 
DST may ensure that Autonomous Bodies, recognised as Deemed Universities, follow the 
UGC guidelines on pay structures. 
DST may evolve a mechanism for conduct of peer review of all the Autonomous Bodies 
under its administrative control. DST may strengthen its internal audit mechanism. 
 
 

Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            1 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Background 
Department of Science and Technology (DST) was established in May 1971 under 
Ministry of Science and Technology (MST), with the objective of promoting new areas 
of Science and Technology (S&T) and to play the role of a nodal Department for 
organising, coordinating and promoting S&T activities in the country. DST supports 
research and development by providing Grants-in-Aid to Scientific Research 
Institutions, Scientific Associations and Bodies. 
Autonomous Bodies (ABs) are legal entities established either by an Act of the 
Parliament or by registration under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or the 
relevant State Societies Registration Acts, as applicable and subsequent amendments. 
As of June 2016, there were 28 ABs under administrative control of DST (Annexure I). 
The ABs are managed by Governing Body (GB)/ Governi ng Council (GC), which 
includes representatives of the AB and DST as well as experts from external agencies. 
Directors of the ABs function as the Chief Executives of ABs. 
The ABs are substantially funded by DST through Government grants. The grants 
released to the ABs by DST for the years 2009-10 to 2014-15 is given in Chart 1. 
Chart 1: Grants released to ABs by DST 
 
1 
CHAPTER  
Introduction 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
2             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
The substantial funding provided to these ABs from Government grants necessitates 
compliance with Government rules and instructions in conducting their affairs. 
1.2 Audit Objectives 
Audit was conducted with a view to evaluate: 
i. Whether the ABs complied with the legal and regulat ory framework 
applicable to them; 
ii. Whether the administrative and entitlements functions of the ABs were in 
accordance with applicable rules and regulations; and  
iii. Whether DST exercised adequate oversight on the functioning of ABs.  
1.3 Audit criteria  
The criteria were derived from the followings: 
1. Societies Registration Act, 1860, State Societies Registration Acts and 
subsequent amendments; 
2. Memorandum of Association, Regulation, Bye laws of the ABs; 
3. Office Memoranda issued by Ministry of Finance (MoF) applicable to ABs; 
4. Office Memoranda issued by Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) 
applicable to ABs; 
5. General Financial Rules and other Government rules applicable for ABs; 
and 
6. Act of Parliament under which the ABs were established and subsequent 
rules and regulations derived from the provisions of the Act. 
1.4 Audit Sample, Scope and Methodology 
Of the 28 ABs of DST, 19 ABs were selected on the basis of factors such as period since 
establishment of the AB, geographic spread, grants received from DST and at 
suggestions of DST. During the period 2009-14, the 19 selected ABs received grants of 
` 2,962.94 crore from DST and incurred expenditure of ` 3,795.46 crore. The details of 
grants and expenditure are given in Annexure II.  
Audit was conducted during September 2014 to September 2015 covering the period 
from Financial Years (FYs) 2009-10 to 2013-14. However, records prior to the year 
2009 were also examined wherever required. In some cases, records relating to the 
formation of the AB were examined, wherever relevant.  
The scope of audit involved scrutiny of records of the selected ABs and DST. Entry 
meeting was held on 21 November 2014 at DST, New Delhi wherein the sample, scope 
and objective for audit was discussed. Exit meeting was held on 13 May 2016 in which 
the audit findings were discussed with the Secretary, DST and unit heads of DST. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            3 
 
Response to the audit findings as recorded in the minutes of the meeting have been 
incorporated in the Audit Report under the relevant  paras. Besides, the 
recommendations to the audit findings were also issued to the Secretary along with 
the minutes of exit meeting which were accepted by DST. DST further stated (June 
2016) that replies to the draft report were either not received from the concerned AB 
or were insufficient to be provided to us and has confirmed that same would be 
conveyed at Action Taken Note stage. 
1.5 Structure of Audit report 
The layout of the Report is as under: - 
Chapter 2- Regulatory framework of the Autonomous Bodies; 
Chapter 3- Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies; and 
Chapter 4 - Oversight functions of DST. 
1.6  Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation extended by DST and the 19 selected ABs during the 
conduct of our audit.  
  

Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            5 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Background 
ABs established under an Act of Parliament are governed by the regulations contained 
in the said Act, while ABs registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or the 
relevant State Societies Registration Acts, as applicable, are required to comply with 
the provisions of the latter.  
Of the 19 selected ABs, 17 were Societies registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860/ State Societies Registration Act and two ABs were formed under separate 
Acts of Parliament. This chapter highlights observations on deviations from the 
regulatory provisions governing the 17 selected ABs that were registered as Societies. 
2.2 Formation of Autonomous Bodies 
2.2.1 Autonomous body set up without Cabinet approval 
As per Rule 208 of General Financial Rules (GFRs), no new autonomous institution 
should be created by the Ministries or Departments without approval of the Cabinet.  
DST submitted (May 1989) a proposal before the Expe nditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) for the approval of a project “Establishment of Advanced Research Centre for 
Powder Metallurgy” under Integrated Long Term Programme 1at Hyderabad at a cost 
of ` 46.27 crore for the years 1989-95.  The project was envisaged as a joint venture 
between India and USSR. The project was approved (M ay 1990) by the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs and the approval was communicated on 1 November 
1990.  
Meanwhile, DST formed a Society ‘Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy’ 
through a MoA signed by seven members and registere d in October 1990 under 
Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Public Societies Registration Act.  The Society was 
renamed as ‘Indo-Soviet Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy’ on 7 
November 1991 and later due to dissolution of USSR,  changed to ‘International 
Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials’ (ARCI) with 
effect from 17 March 1994. DST released funds of ` 241.04 crore during 2009-14 to 
ARCI.  
                                                           
1 The Government of India and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) 
agreed upon the Integrated Long Term Programme of Scientific and Technical co-operation between 
the two countries in July 1987. 
2 
CHAPTER  
Regulatory framework of 
Autonomous Bodies 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
6             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
The project, “Establishment of Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy”, 
was closed in March 1995, however, ARCI continued to function as an AB. 
We observed that establishment of ARCI as an AB was  not mentioned in the EFC 
memorandum submitted to the Cabinet. The approval accorded by the Cabinet was 
for the project and a fixed duration from 1989 to 1995. Establishment of ARCI as an AB 
and continuing funding to it was irregular as its formation was not approved by the 
Cabinet as required under GFRs.  
ARCI accepted (February 2015) that no communication  was received from DST 
conferring autonomous status to ARCI except internal notes. 
DST stated (May 2016) during exit conference that status of ARCI would be checked 
again. 
2.2.2 MoA and regulations of AB not in conformity with required legislation 
The Societies Registration Act, 1860 stipulated that MoA of a Society should contain 
the name of the Society, its objectives, the names, address and occupation of the 
Governors, Council, Directors, Committee or other Governing Body to whom, by the 
rules of the Society, the management of its affairs was entrusted. The MoA and a copy 
of regulations of the Society, certified to be correct copy by not less than three of the 
members of the GB, was to be filed for registration of the society.   
Subsequently, the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 was passed by the 
West Bengal Legislature to provide for registration of societies or Non-Government 
Organisations (NGOs) whose head office was situated in the state of West Bengal. It 
also provided that any society previously registered under the Bare Act 1860 would be 
deemed to have been registered under the new Act, p rovided the MoA and 
regulations as mentioned in the former Act were in conformity with the latter Act. If 
any inconsistency was found the same was to be set right within six months from the 
promulgation of the new Act. In case the inconsistencies were not set right within the 
stipulated period, to the extent of the inconsistency, these documents would be 
deemed to be void.   
Bose Institute, Kolkata (BI) was registered (May 1918) as a Society under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 and had accordingly filed its MoA and regulations. The 
Regulations of BI were subsequently revised in March 1945. 
We observed that BI did not amend its MoA and regulations in accordance with the 
provisions of the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961. As a result, a number 
of inconsistencies as listed in Table 1 remained in the MoA and regulations of BI.  
  

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            7 
 
Table 1: Inconsistencies found in the MoA and regulations of BI with the provisions of West 
Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 
Requirement as per  
(WB Societies Registration Act 1961) 
Inconsistency observed in MoA and 
Regulations 
1. The MoA should contain the objects of the 
Society. 
Objectives were placed in the 
Regulations instead of MoA. 
2. Safe custody of property of the Society 
including in particular the manner of keeping 
or investing any moneys of the Society.   
No provision regarding ‘manner of 
keeping or investing any moneys’ 
was given in the Regulations. 
3. The procedure for holding meetings of the 
Society, quorum, the method of voting, the 
period of notice for meetings and the manner 
of voting by proxy, where such voting is 
allowed.  Disqualification for being member of 
the GB if he has convicted any offence in 
connection with the formation, promotion, 
management or conduct of the affairs of a 
Society. 
 
 
 
 
 
No such provision was incorporated 
in the Regulations. 
 
 
 
 
4. The maintenance of a register of members 
and facilities for inspection thereof by the 
members. 
5. The maintenance and audit of accounts of the 
Society. 
 
6. The inspection of accounts and of the 
proceedings of the meetings, by the members 
of the Society. 
7. The admission to membership and resignation 
and removal of members. 
Thus, BI had failed to regularise these inconsistencies within the stipulated period of 
six months from the promulgation of the new Act.   
While accepting the audit observation, DST stated (May 2016) that the matter would 
be taken up with the Registrar of the Society for regularisation. 
2.3 Governance 
2.3.1 Unauthorised constitution of Governing Body  
Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council, New Delhi (TIFAC) is a 
society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.  MoA and Rules of TIFAC 
were approved in 1988. Para 10 of MoA stipulates that initial nomination of Members 
of the GB including office bearers was to be done by the Secretary, DST, with the 
approval of the Prime Minister. The term of membership of the GB was normally three 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
8             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
years. Changes in the composition of GB within three years’ term, if any, could be 
done by Chairman of the GB.  Nominations for the successive GBs after completion of 
the term could be done by Secretary, DST with the approval of the Prime Minister.  
As per the term of membership of GB, the GB should have been reconstituted nine 
times between 1988 and 2015.  Records however, revealed that during the period 
from 1988 to 2011, GB of TIFAC was reconstituted only four times i.e. in 1993, 1997, 
2005 and 2011.  Of these, approval of the Prime Minister was recorded only in one 
case of the GB being reconstituted in 1997. There were no records to indicate that 
approval of Prime Minister was obtained for reconstituting GB on the other occasions.  
DST accepted (May 2016) the audit observation in exit conference.  
2.4  Conclusion 
International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, 
Hyderabad was established without the approval of the Cabinet and therefore its 
formation was irregular.  In another case, the Bose Institute, Kolkata initially 
registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860 and subsequently coming under 
the purview of State Societies Registration Act 1961, did not adopt the requisite 
provisions of State Act due to which there were inconsistencies in compliance of the 
provisions of the State Act.  DST continued to release grants to these ABs in a routine 
manner without examining the adherence to legal req uirements by these ABs. 
Further, Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council, New Delhi 
constituted Governing Body without approval of the competent authority.  
2.5 Recommendations 
1. DST may obtain ex-post facto approval of the Cabinet for establishment of 
International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New 
Materials, Hyderabad as an Autonomous Body for regu larisation of its 
continuance and ensure that the prescribed procedures are followed for 
creation of Autonomous Bodies.  
2. DST may review Memorandum of Association and Regula tions of all the 
Autonomous Bodies and ensure that provisions of the same are in conformity 
with the applicable Central/State Societies Registration Act. 
  

Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            9 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Introduction 
Matters relating to creation of posts, recruitment, promotions, superannuation, pay 
and allowances, other entitlements and any other in ABs under DST are regulated by 
GFRs, Fundamental Rules and Supplementary Rules (FR SR), Delegation of Financial 
Powers Rules (DFPR) and extant orders of the MoF and DoPT. 
As per Rule 13(2) of DFPR, a department of Central Government may, by general or 
special order, confer powers, not exceeding those vested in that Department upon an 
administrator or head of department or any other sub-ordinate authority in respect of 
any matter covered by these rules provided that no power under this sub rule shall be 
re-delegated in respect of (a) creation of posts; (b) write off of losses; and  
(c) re-appropriation of funds exceeding 10 per cent of the original budget provision for 
either of the primary units of appropriation or sub head, whichever is less. MST 
reiterated (January 1999) these instructions to the ABs under its control. 
Observations on compliance with extant instructions by the selected ABs are 
discussed in this chapter. 
3.2 Non- inclusion of restrictive clause in the Rules and Bye laws 
MoF issued (October 1984) instructions that rules and Bye laws of ABs which are fully 
and partly funded by the Government of India (GoI) should invariably incorporate 
restrictive clauses relating to the powers of the GBs of such organisations in matters 
of creation of posts, revision of pay and allowances of their staff and similar 
establishment expenditure and provide for prior approval of the Central Government 
in specific cases. The further clause was required to be incorporated in the relevant 
Bye laws/Rules/Regulations of the ABs that proposal s relating to employment 
structure i.e. adoption of pay scales, allowances and revision thereof and creation of 
post above a specified pay level would need the prior approval of GoI in consultation 
with MoF. 
MST further elaborated (January 1999) that the Scie ntific Departments enjoy 
operational freedom regarding Group B, C and D post s but they are subject to 
DoPT/MoF guidelines in case of Group A posts. It further clarified that the GB/GC of 
the Autonomous R&D institutions might exercise powers upto the limit of powers 
3 
CHAPTER  
Administrative functioning of 
Autonomous Bodies 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
10             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
enjoyed by the Administrative Ministry/Department concerned except with regard to 
creation of posts. 
Audit examination of the Rules and Bye laws of the 17 ABs registered as societies 
revealed that the Bye laws/Rules/Regulations of 162ABs did not contain any restrictive 
clauses regarding creation of posts. Only International Advanced Research Centre for 
Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, Hyderabad (ARCI) had included the necessary 
restrictive clauses in its Bye laws. We also observed that necessary amendments in the 
Rules/ Bye laws/Regulations relating to employment structure were not made in the 
17 test checked ABs. The status in respect of this provision is given in Annexure III. 
Non-inclusion of restrictive provisions in the Rules/ Bye laws/Regulations resulted in 
irregular creation of posts and relaxation in promotion of staff of the ABs as discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs.  
DST accepted (May 2016) the audit observation.  
3.3 Creation of posts 
3.3.1 Irregular creation of posts 
During 2009-14, 486 posts were created/upgraded by the GB/GC of 11 ABs (IACS
3, BI4, 
ARCI5, IIA6, SNBNCBS 7 , NASI8, BSIP9, WIHG 10, IAS11 , JNCASR 12 and TIFAC 13 ) in violation 
of instructions of MoF/MST. The details of the 486 posts created are in Annexure IV. 
Creation of posts by the GB/GC of the ABs without a pproval of DST and MoF was 
irregular.  
ARCI justified the appointments stating (November 2014) that activities grew manifold 
and there was dearth of scientific staff.  SNBNCBS stated (November 2014) that since 
the matter was discussed during the respective GB meetings and had been approved 
by the Chairman, GB who was also the Secretary, DST, no further separate approval 
was required. IIA stated (January 2015) that they did not have the details of the 
sanctioned posts under various categories of posts. NASI (March 2015) stated that the 
up-gradation of posts was made by the Council.     
                                                           
2  IACS, BI, ARI, ARIES, BSIP, CNSMS, IIA, IIG, INSA, IAS, JNCASR, NASI, RRI, SNBNCBS, TIFAC and WIHG 
3 Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata 
4  Bose Institute, Kolkata 
5  International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, Hyderabad 
6 Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru 
7  Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata 
8 National Institute of Science-India, Allahabad 
9 Birbal Sahni Institute of Paleobotany, Lucknow 
10 Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 
11  Indian Academy of Sciences, Bengaluru 
12 Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bengaluru 
13  Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council, New Delhi 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            11 
 
The justifications are not tenable, as the ABs were not empowered to create posts on 
their own. DST stated (May 2016) in exit conference  that the issue had been 
recognised and a Committee had already been constituted to look into such matters 
and assured that the relevant clause would be incorporated in the Bye laws and 
approval of MoF where necessary would be taken.  
3.4 Recruitments 
3.4.1 Deviations in Bye laws/Rules/Regulations from orders of DoPT 
DoPT issued (2006) orders stating that for appointment at the level of Director or 
above for ABs (excluding those constituted by separate Acts of Parliament), Search-
cum-Selection Committee were to be constituted mandatorily, the composition of 
which was required to be approved by DoPT in each case. The norms and criteria for 
selection could be finalised by the autonomous institutions with the concurrence of 
the concerned Ministry.  The instructions further stated that for all appointments to 
the post of Chief Executive and for all appointments carrying a pay scale of ` 18,400-
22,400, approval of Appointment Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) was required.   
Accordingly, all autonomous institutions were required to modify their Memoranda 
and Articles of Association, Bye laws, etc. with the approval of Registrar of the Society 
and incorporate the guidelines.  
We observed that 
i. Three ABs (ARIES 14, BSIP, CNSMS15) did not incorporate the provisions 
relating to composition of Search-cum-Selection Committee in their Bye 
laws. 
ii. In three ABs (IACS, IIA, ARCI), the Bye laws did not have a specific 
mention of the composition and role of Search-cum-S election 
Committee or authority of ACC. It had a general restriction to the effect 
of complying with GoI instructions regarding recruitment rules and 
procedures. 
iii. 11 ABs (JNCASR, SNBNCBS, BI, RRI 16, NASI, IAS, INSA17 , TIFAC, WIHG, 
IIG18and ARI) did not incorporate provisions relating to creation and 
method of composition of Search-cum-Selection Committee. 
The details of deviations in Bye laws/Rules/Regulations is given in Annexure V.   
                                                           
14  Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences, Nainital 
15 Centre for Nano and Soft Matter Sciences, Bengaluru 
16 Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru 
17  Indian National Science Academy, Delhi 
18 Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Mumbai 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
12             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
Thus, none of the 17 ABs fully complied with the instructions of DoPT. This led to 
irregular appointments in these posts as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
While agreeing to look into the matter, DST stated (May 2016) that the formulation of 
provisions would have to be such that it would not need frequent modifications of the 
Rules and Regulation and Bye laws. 
The reply is viewed in the context of DoPT instructions (July 2007) that requires all 
autonomous institutions to incorporate fully the guidelines of DoPT in their MoA and 
Bye laws.  
3.4.1.1 Irregular appointment of Chief Executive 
There was no regular Director at Agharkar Research Institute, Pune (ARI) since January 
2009. The vacant post was filled (August 2009) with the approval of MST/DoPT by 
appointing an Officiating Director initially for a period of one year with effect from 
1 January 2009 and subsequently extended upto 30 Ju ne 2010. Thereafter, ARI 
appointed two persons as officiating Director from 1 July 2010 till 30 April 2013 and 
from 1 May 2013 till 31 January 2015 respectively i nitially for duration of three 
months with the approval of GC of the Institute. 
We observed that neither Search-cum-Selection Committee was constituted nor 
approval of ACC obtained for appointment of Officiating Director, which was irregular, 
as the post of Director was equivalent to post of Chief Executive. Further, granting 
extensions by GC without the approval of ACC was also irregular. 
ARI stated (January 2015) that as per its Bye laws, GC was the Appointing Authority for 
the post of Director. The reply was not acceptable, as the provision of Bye laws was in 
contravention of Government instructions. 
3.4.1.2 Irregular constitution of Selection Committee  
International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials, 
Hyderabad (ARCI) appointed two senior Scientists in the scale of ` 18,400-22,400 in 
February 2006 and October 2010 respectively.  We ob served that in both cases, 
Recruitment Committee was constituted by the Counci l/Director without being 
approved by DoPT, which was irregular.  ARCI incurred expenditure of ` 73 lakh on 
pay and allowances of the officers for the period s ince their recruitment till  
March 2015.   
ARCI stated (February 2015) that recruitment of the officers was done as per the 
provisions of the Rules/Regulations of the Institute.  The reply is not acceptable as the 
provisions of Rules and Regulations of ARCI were in violation of DoPT instructions and 
hence irregular. 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            13 
 
3.4.1.3  Irregular up-gradation of pay scale 
Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi (INSA) appointed (May 1991) a person to 
the post of Executive Secretary (ES) in the pay scale of ` 5,100-6,300 (revised to 
` 16,400-20,000 w.e.f. 1996 after implementation of recommendations of Fifth 
Central Pay Commission). Based on the recommendations of Resource Management 
Committee (RMC), the scale of pay of ES was proposed (August 1998) for up-gradation 
to ` 18,400-22,400, which was approved ex-post-facto by DST in December 2000.  
Up-gradation of post is equivalent to creation of post and Group A posts can only be 
created with approval of MoF. Further, appointment to a post carrying pay scale of 
` 18,400-22,400 could be done only with the approval of ACC. The term of the officer 
was also extended for a further period of two years from July 2006 to June 2008.  
However, ARCI did not obtain approval of MoF and ACC for up-gradation of the post, 
which was irregular. 
Thus, up-gradation/creation of the post of Executive Secretary to the pay scale of 
` 18,400-22,400 and appointment to the post was in violation of DoPT directions. 
3.4.2 Deficiencies in framing and implementation of Recruitment Rules 
According to instructions (December 2010) of DoPT, as soon as a decision is taken to 
create a new post/service or to upgrade any post or restructure any service, action 
should be taken immediately by the administrative Ministry/Department concerned to 
frame Recruitment Rules (RR)/service rules. RRs should be framed for all posts which 
are likely to last for one year or more.   
We observed that  
i.
 Bose Institute, Kolkata (BI) framed RRs in October 1980 for all categories of 
staff without approval of DST. 
ii. Similarly, Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru (IIA) framed (October 
2000) ‘Norms and Guidelines for Recruitment’, which were approved by GC 
but approval of DST and MoF was not obtained.     
iii. Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata (IACS) was established 
in 1876. Up to 21 December 2005, IACS had no RRs for Gr A, B, C and D posts.  
GC of IACS approved (December 2005) the report of S tructural Reforms 
Committee constituted by it, which recommended the pay structure and 
career advancement scheme for Academic, Administrative and Technical staff 
of IACS.  Recommendations of the Committee were sent to DST for approval. 
DST intimated (June 2006) that salary structure for the post of Director and 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
14             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
Group ‘A’ Administrative staff19 were to be approved by MoF. DST however, 
approved recommendations for pay scales of other staff subject to finalisation 
of RRs by the GC of IACS. RRs of IACS were subseque ntly finalised and 
approved (July 2006) in a Special General Body meeting.  
We observed that RRs of IACS were approved in a Spe cial General Body 
meeting and not by the GC, as directed by DST. In the said Special General 
Body meeting, out of total 12 members of GC, only the four internal members 
from IACS were present and all the external eight members were absent. 
Hence approval for the RRs was irregular. 
We further observed that though DST stated that app roval of MoF was 
required for implementation of scales of Group ‘A’ Administrative posts as 
recommended by the Structural Reforms Committee, IACS implemented these 
scales and incorporated the same in its RRs without approval of MoF, which 
was irregular.  
IACS stated (January 2015) that RRs was a part of their Bye laws which was 
approved by the GC in December 2006.  We, however, observed that the RRs 
was not finalised by the GC. In fact, minutes of the said meeting of GC do not 
record any discussion of RRs or Bye laws.  
3.4.3 Deviations in Recruitment Rules 
Rule 209 (6)(iv)(a) of GFR stipulates that all grantee institutions or organisations which 
receive grants-in-aid of more than fifty per cent of their recurring expenditure should 
ordinarily formulate terms and conditions of service of their employees which are by 
and large not higher than those applicable to similar categories of employees in 
Central Government. In exceptional cases relaxation could be made in consultation 
with the MoF. 
Scrutiny of records of the selected ABs revealed that RRs were not framed by one AB 
viz. RRI. Further, there were deviations in the RRs framed by 13 ABs (CNSMS, WIHG, 
JNCASR, ARIES, IACS, SNBNCBS, BI, NASI, BSIP, IIA, ARCI, IAS and IIG) vis-a-vis the 
provisions in the DoPT instructions as well as with GFR that implied grant of higher 
benefits to the persons appointed in these ABs. The details of deviations in RRs are 
given in Annexure VI. 
We observed that approval of MoF for deviations from the Government prescribed 
RRs was not taken in any of the cases.  
                                                           
19 ` 8,000-13,500 for Assistant Registrar; ` 10,500-15,200 for Sr. Assistant Registrar; ` 12,000-16,500 
for Deputy Registrar; ` 14,000-18,300 for Sr. Deputy Registrar and ` 16,400-20,000 for Registrar. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            15 
 
DST stated (May 2016) that once Bye laws of the ABs were revised, the Recruitment 
Rules would be suitably modified and placed appropriately in the same. 
Specific cases of irregular appointments and grant of higher benefits observed in audit 
and are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
3.4.4 Deficiencies in recruitment process 
(a) As per DoPT instructions (December 2010), RRs were to stipulate the selection 
criteria for each position, requirements of educational qualification, experience and 
reservation roster, age limit, composition of the selection committee, manner of 
selection, details of competent authorities to approve various stages of recruitments, 
etc. 
We observed that Indian Academy of Sciences, Bengaluru (IAS) had been conducting 
recruitment for all the posts without adopting the norms prescribed by DoPT. Though 
IAS amended its ‘Rules for the administration and management of Indian Academy of 
Science’ in 2013, the norms and the selection criterion as envisaged in the instruction 
of DoPT were not included. In view of absence of prescribed criteria, deficiencies were 
noticed in the process of recruitment the details of which are detailed in Annexure 
VII. Some major persistent deficiencies in appointment of personnel are given below: 
Screening of the applications: 
i. IAS had not constituted any committee for screening of applications received 
for any of the posts. Even the signature of the official who had screened the 
applications was not available in the sheet in which names of the shortlisted 
candidates were mentioned.  
ii. While screening the applications, ineligible candidates were also shortlisted for 
interview and finally selected. 
iii. We further observed that there was no uniformity in the screening process. In 
most of the cases the information pertaining to the number of applications 
received and the details of such applications viz. name of the applicant, date of 
receipt of the application etc. were not available.  
iv. Approval of the Competent Authority for the shortlisted candidates was also 
not obtained. 
v. Further, the criteria adopted for screening the applications and the basis on 
which the applications were rejected in individual cases was not mentioned 
except in one case. 
Thus, screening was not done in the prescribed manner. 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
16             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
Selection Process: 
i. Selection Committee of the Academy was to define the criteria to be followed 
for selection. However, the Committee did not mention the criteria to be 
adopted for selecting candidates. Thus, the basis on which the committee 
selected or rejected the candidates was not documented and hence could not 
be verified. 
ii. Academy had not maintained attendance sheet for the  candidates who 
appeared in the interview. As per the minutes of selection committee, the 
short listed candidates did not attend the interview. In the absence of 
attendance sheet, we could not ascertain whether th e candidates had 
appeared for the interview or not.  
Qualification:  
 We observed that the qualifications prescribed for  posts at lower level were 
higher than that prescribed for posts at higher level in the same hierarchy. The 
qualification prescribed for the post of ES in the Academy (2008) was a 
Bachelor degree, however for Executive Editors, the lower level post, the 
qualification prescribed was Master degree. Similarly, for Accounts Assistant 
(in 2013-14), the essential qualification prescribed was Bachelor/Master 
degree with five years’ experience while for the position of Accounts Officer in 
2010-11, a higher level post, the qualification prescribed was a Bachelor 
degree only. 
(b)  Audit scrutiny of 16 recruitment files of regular staff and 11 temporary staff in 
IIA revealed that the recruitment process followed by the institute for the recruitment 
of its regular staff did not follow the due process prescribed for recruitments in 
Central Government.  The irregularities were of the following categories: 
i. Recruitments were made without open advertisement i n violation of 
instructions of DoPT.  
ii. Candidates were selected without having prescribed experience. 
iii. Appointment of Director was made without constitution of search-cum-
selection committee. 
iv. Approval of ACC was not obtained for appointment of acting Director. 
Details of irregularities observed are given in Annexure VIII.   
 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            17 
 
3.4.5 Recruitments made in contravention of provisions of RRs 
(a) As per RRs of BI, the post of Dy. Registrar is to be filled by Direct Recruitment 
through issue of advertisements. Audit examination revealed that BI recruited Dy. 
Registrar in September 2006 without advertising for the post which was irregular.  BI 
stated in July 2015 that the advertisement for the said post was not published to save 
time and money which is not acceptable as it was not as per their RRs.  
(b) IACS recruited 17 Assistant Professors, four Technical Assistants and three 
administrative staff during 2009-14.  We examined 10 cases (six Assistant Professors, 
two technical staff and two administrative staff) and observed that five of the six 
Assistant Professors recruited were allowed a fixed allowance equivalent to two 
increments which was not as per the RRs of IACS.  This resulted in an excess recurring 
monthly expenditure of ` 1,780 for each Assistant Professor.  IACS stated (January 
2015) that the Selection Committee for recruitment of Assistant Professor 
recommended for two additional increments during the initial recruitment which was 
approved by the GC.  The reply is not acceptable since grant of financial benefit in 
initial pay fixation is not within the authority of the GC and required approval by MoF.  
3.4.6 Irregular adoption of provisions relating to recruitments 
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute of Medical Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram 
(SCTIMST) was included in the list of University Grants Commission (UGC) recognised 
Universities and Institutions/deemed to be Universities and Institutes of national 
importance in India since 31 March 2006.  As such, SCTIMST was to follow the pay 
structures notified by UGC from time to time.  
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MHFW) issued  instructions (January 2010) 
revising pay scales of faculty of autonomous institutions of medical education under 
MHFW, following the implementation of recommendatio ns of Sixth Central Pay 
Commission. The GB of SCTIMST, in the same month, a pproved the revised pay 
structure for its own faculty at par with All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), 
an AB under the administrative control of MHFW. Prior to this, SCTIMST had adopted 
the Central Government pay structure as approved by its GB. The pay structure 
approve by GB for academic staff was not in accordance with the UGC pay structure, 
as shown in Table 2.  
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
18             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
Table 2: Difference between pay structure approved by GB of SCTIMST and Central 
Government (MST) approved pay structure 
Designation Pay scale 
(`` ``) 
Pay structure approved by 
GB prior to 2010 
Pay structure 
adopted by SCTIMST 
Grade pay according to 
MST approved pay 
structure (`` ``) 
Academic grade pay 
drawn 
(`` ``) 
Scientist D/Engineer D 15,600-39,100 7,600 8,000 
Scientist E/ Engineer E 37,400-67,000 8,700 9,000 
Scientist F/ Engineer F  37,400-67,000 8,900 9,500 
Scientist G/ Engineer G 37,400-67,000 10,000 10,500 
Assistant Professor 15,600-39,100 6,600 8,000 
Associate Professor 37,400-67,000 8,700 9,000 
Additional Professor 37,400-67,000 8,900 9,500 
Professor  37,400-67,000 10,000 10,500 
Adoption of irregular pay structure by SCTIMST resulted in incurring of excess 
expenditure in basic pay and Grade Pay (GP). 
22 medical staff/Scientists were appointed on direct recruitment during the period 
2009-14 as Assistant Professors, Additional/Associate Professors/Professors/Scientist 
D whose initial pay were fixed at enhanced pay and higher GP resulting in excess 
expenditure of ` 2.67 crore as of March 2014. 
DST agreed (May 2016) to look into the issue. 
3.4.7 Irregular grant of advance increments on initial recruitment   
(a)  Provisions of FR-27 stipulated that any authority might grant a premature 
increment on a time- scale of pay if it had power to create a post in the same cadre on 
the same scale of pay. DST instructions (January 1999) on delegation of powers to ABs 
specified that heads of ABs did not have the power to create posts and hence ABs did 
not have the power to grant premature increments. 
We observed that seven employees of three ABs viz. IAS, BI and BSIP were granted 
one to 16 advance increments at the time of joining  service, without obtaining 
approval of DST and MoF. This was irregular as none of the ABs had the power to 
create posts and therefore to sanction advance increments.  
(b) Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bengaluru (JNCASR) 
was declared (August 2002) as deemed University by Ministry of Human Resources 
Development (MHRD) subject to the condition that the centre would adhere to the 
guidelines/instructions issued by UGC from time to time as applicable to deemed 
Universities. As per instructions of MHRD (December 2008), the pay structure of 
different categories of Teachers and equivalent positions in the Universities and 
Colleges under UGC would be in three categories viz. Assistant Professors, Associate 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            19 
 
Professors and Professors.  Accordingly, direct recruitment could be done in the post 
of Assistant Professors carrying Pay Band ` 15,600-39,100 with Academic Grade Pay 
(AGP) ` 6,000, Associate Professor carrying Pay Band ` 37,400-67,000 with an AGP of 
` 9,000 and Professor carrying Pay Band ` 37,400-67,000 with AGP ` 10,000 with 
minimum Pay of ` 43,000.  Further, five non-compounded advance increments would 
be admissible at the entry level of recruitment as Assistant Professor to persons 
possessing degree of Ph.D. DST instructed (August 2014) the centre to follow the UGC 
Regulations 2010.   
JNCASR recruited seven personnel between June 2009 and July 2013, of which we 
scrutinised five cases of those who possessed Ph.D degree at the time of initial 
appointment. We observed that although these incumbents were eligible for grant of 
five advance increments only, they were granted eight advance increments by JNCASR 
which was in contravention of UGC guidelines. Consequently, due to fixation of salary 
on higher side at the initial stage, JNCASR incurred extra expenditure of ` 61 lakh up 
to March 2015.  
3.5 Promotion of employees 
3.5.1 Irregular adoption of promotion policy in academic cadre 
DST conveyed (February 1989) the approval of GoI to the extension of UGC packages 
of pay, allowances and all other terms and conditions of service to academic staff of 
ABs and also directed ABs covered by the UGC packages should not follow the Flexible 
Complementing Scheme 20 (FCS) applicable to scientific staff.  We observed deviations 
from these instructions in two ABs as detailed below: 
i. Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, Kolkata (IACS) convened a 
special general meeting (December 1989) and by reso lution, adopted a 
separate promotional rule for its academic staff in violation of the above 
instruction of DST. Subsequently, GC of IACS constituted (October 2004) a 
Structural Reforms Committee (SRC) with the approval of DST, to introduce pay 
scales, promotional avenues and other research benefits for its academic and 
non-academic staff.  DST agreed and approved the recommendation of the SRC 
in April 2006. 
Audit examination of the pay scales, promotional avenues etc. given to the 
academic staff of IACS revealed deviations from the UGC pay structures. We 
observed that IACS academic staff enjoyed higher pay scales/lesser residency 
                                                           
20 DST introduced Flexible Complementing Scheme in Ma y 1986.  Subsequently, DoPT issued 
instructions from 1998 onwards in supersession to the order of DST (1986) in which minimum 
residency period for carreer advancement pertaining to promotion of scientific staff from one grade 
to another was mentioned. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
20             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
period than the employees of the Central Universities under UGC. Details of 
deviation in residency period is given in Annexure IX. 
The creation of higher pay structure in respect of Gr ‘A’ post without the 
approval of MoF/DoPT was in violation of MoF instructions 199421 as well as 
MST’s instruction issued in 1999 22. Further, DST approved the 
recommendations of SRC which were not in compliance  with the above 
instructions, without consultation with DoPT/MoF.  
ii. Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bengaluru (JNCASR) 
was declared (August 2002) Deemed University by MHR D subject to the 
condition that it would adhere to the guidelines/instructions issued by UGC 
from time to time as applicable to Deemed Universities. We observed that 
JNCASR adopted higher pay scales as per the pay structure in Indian Institute 
of Science, Bengaluru (an AB under MHRD) from 2002 which were not in 
accordance with UGC pay packages. Approval of DST and DoPT/MoF to the pay 
scales was not obtained.  
During 2009-14, 19 academic staff were promoted and in nine cases randomly 
selected, JNCASR incurred excess expenditure of ` 3.15 crore towards pay and 
allowances by adoption of higher pay scales. 
JNCASR stated (December 2014) that it was presently in the process of forming 
guidelines of promotional policy to be approved by the appropriate authority.  
The reply is not tenable as instructions of MHRD/DST to follow the UGC 
guidelines applicable for Deemed University were already in existence.   
3.5.2 Irregular promotion of academic staff  
Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru (RRI) adopted the Central Government pay 
scales for its scientific staff. Test check of service books of seven scientific staff 
revealed deviations which are detailed below: 
i. The Scientists were offered designation of Associate Professor instead of 
'Scientist' at the time of initial appointment/promotion.  The designation of 
Associate Professor was applicable only in the UGC pay scales, which were not 
adopted and hence were not applicable to RRI. 
ii. Three Scientists were appointed in the pre-revised scale of pay of ` 10,000-
325-15,200. We observed that the Scientists were granted two advance 
increments at the time of initial appointment and their pay fixed at ` 10,650, 
                                                           
21 Posts equivalent to Group ‘A’ could be created in ABs with the approval of Secretary (Expenditure), 
MoF through Financial Advisor of the Ministry concerned. 
22 The Scientific Departments enjoy operational freedom regarding Group ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts while 
they are subject to DoPT/MoF’s Guidelines in case of Group ‘A’ posts. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            21 
 
which was irregular as there was no such provision in Central Government pay 
structure. 
iii. In the case of one Scientist, the initial pay was fixed at ` 32,320 with GP of 
` 7,600 which was much higher than the required minimum of the time scale 
of ` 15,600 – 39,100 with GP ` 7,600.  
iv. Promotion was granted to one Scientist before completing the applicable 
residency period of five years.  
RRI stated (April 2015) that it had not formulated any separate recruitment and 
promotion rules for its staff. The reply is not acceptable as RRI is required to follow 
Central Government pay scales as specified by DoPT for its scientific staff. 
3.5.3 Irregular adoption of promotion policy in non-academic cadre  
Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru (IIA) was required to follow the 
promotional policy of FCS as introduced by DST/DoPT for its scientific staff. We 
observed that the promotion policy framed by IIA was not in accordance with the 
orders applicable to Central Government employees and did not have the approval of 
DST/ DoPT and MoF as required.  Audit scrutiny further revealed that IIA did not even 
follow its own promotion policy, which was irregular, as detailed in Table 3. 
Table 3: Violation of provisions in promotion policy by IIA 
Provision in promotion policy of IIA Violation of promotion policy by IIA 
Cases of officials who were not promoted were 
to be taken up for reassessment normally after 
two years. 
In two cases, reassessment and promotion 
before completion of two years were found. 
Recommendations of review committee 
constituted for assessment of the promotion 
cases were to be scrutinized by other senior 
committees. 
In 21 cases, promotions of staff were granted 
without scrutiny of senior committees. 
Promotions could not be granted with 
retrospective effect. 
31 promotions were granted with retrospective 
effect resulting in irregular benefit of ` 18 lakh 
between 2009 and 2014. 
Director was to constitute a Normalizing 
Committee to review and recommend the 
Assessment Committee recommendations for 
promotions.   
The institute did not fix the powers of the 
Normalising Committee to review the 
recommendations of the assessment committees 
including the powers over and above the 
assessment committees.    
Review committee was to examine the 
confidential reports, work reports and conduct 
personal interview to assess the work and 
performance of the staff members selected by 
the screening committee.   
The Review committee recommended the official 
for promotion without obtaining the work and 
performance reports and conducting personal 
interview.   
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
22             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
3.5.4 Irregular grant of promotions under Flexible Complementing Scheme 
DoPT introduced (November 1998) FCS for scientists wherein promotion could be 
granted to scientists after consideration by Assessment Boards constituted for the 
purpose, which would meet at least once a year. DoPT clarified (July 2002) that in FCS 
cases promotions may not be granted with retrospective effect and further reiterated 
(September 2012) the same stating that giving the benefit of promotions from a 
retrospective date without timely assessment as prescribed in the guidelines of FCS 
would dilute the spirit of FCS instructions on rigorous assessment and would be akin 
to granting of financial up-gradation as in other such schemes.   
Our scrutiny revealed that 74 scientists were granted promotion with retrospective 
effect under FCS on the basis of approval of GC in Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for 
Medical Science and Technology, Thiruvanthapuram (SCTIMST), in violation of the 
DoPT orders. Grant of promotion with retrospective effect resulted in inadmissible 
payment of ` 8.70 crore between 2009 and 2014 to these employees.  
3.5.5 Irregular revision of pension  
Finance Committee of IACS decided (June 2009) that those Professors in the pay scale 
of ` 14,300 - 22,400 (Fifth Central Pay Commission) who retired prior to 1 January 
2006 and were drawing basic pay exceeding ` 18,400 would be placed in the post of 
Sr. Professor in the scale of ` 18,400 - 22,400 (Fifth Central Pay Commission) and 
those drawing less than ` 18,400 were placed in the post of Professor in the scale of 
` 16,400 - 20,000 (Fifth Central Pay Commission). Accordingly, the pension of 20 such 
retired Professors and the family pension in five cases was notionally revised with 
effect from 1 January 2006.  
We observed that the revision of pension in the upgraded pay scale was in violation of 
Department of Pension and Pensioners Welfare orders (February 2009) which stated 
that pension should be revised with respect to pay in the pay band plus grade pay 
corresponding to the pre-revised pay scale from which the pensioner had retired. 
Hence, the benefit of up-gradation of post subsequent to retirement would not be 
admissible to the pre-2006 pensioners. 
IACS accepted (April 2015) that the persons whose pensions/family pensions were 
revised to Sr. Professors had never served in that scale.  
 
 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            23 
 
 
3.6 Entitlements of employees 
Entitlements issues relating to grant of Travelling Allowances (TA)23, Leave Travel 
Concession (LTC)24, House Building Advances (HBA)25, sanction of leave26 and other 
loans and advances27  were examined. Our observations on these areas are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.6.1 Irregular expenditure on grant of allowances to academic staff 
We observed the following irregularities in grant of allowances to academic staff of 
SCTIMST: 
(a) Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Science and Technology, 
Thiruvanthapuram (SCTIMST) granted Clinical Research Allowance (CRA) to its 
academic staff at the rate of ` 2,500 per month and academic allowance at the rate of 
` 250 per month to all Group A officers from April 1999.  The CRA was revised to 
` 10,000 per month from April 2011 by the GB of the I nstitute. During 2009-14, 
SCTIMST paid an amount of ` 4.63 crore to its employees towards CRA and academic 
allowance.  
We observed that there was no such allowance in the Central Government Rules. 
Payment of allowances of ` 4.63 crore to employees without approval of 
administrative Ministry and MoF was irregular.  
(b) GB of SCTIMST decided (May 2002) to introduce Lear ning Research Allowance 
(LRA) for purchase of books, journals and other resource material like floppies, CDs, 
Video films, transparencies, colour films for making slides, developing and mounting 
charges of slides, etc. to the academic staff of the institute subject to a maximum of 
` 20,000 in each financial year.  A similar allowance was being paid in AIIMS, which 
was rejected by MHFW (July 2004), directing that LRA should be stopped immediately 
and instead faculty members/Group A officers might be allowed to send requisition to 
the Library administration for purchasing books/journals relating to their work. AIIMS, 
however, continued to pay LRA to its Faculty/Group A officers and hence considering 
payment of LRA by AIIMS, SCTIMST enhanced (April 20 11) the rate of LRA from 
` 20,000 to ` 60,000 per annum to the faculty members and ` 10,000 to ` 30,000 per 
annum for all Group A officers.   
                                                           
23 GFR-48 (Part II) read with SR Part II 
24 GFR-52(Part II) read with LTC Rules  
25 GFR-86, (Part II) HBA Rules 
26 FR 54 to 104 read with SR Part III 
27  Part II GFR 2012 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
24             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
Audit scrutiny revealed that during 2009-14 SCTIMST paid an amount of ` 2.23 crore 
towards LRA to its Faculty/Group A officers. Payment of LRA without approval of 
Government was irregular. 
DST agreed (May 2016) to take remedial measures on the above irregularities. 
3.6.2  Grant of Hospital Patient Care Allowance to ineligible staff  
MoHFW introduced grant of Hospital Patient Care Allowance (HPCA) at the rate of 
` 700 per month to Group C and D (non-ministerial) employees working in hospitals 
and whose regular duties involved continuous and routine contact with patients 
infected with communicable disease or those who had to routinely handle, as their 
primary duty, infected materials, instruments and equipment which could spread 
infection as their primary duty.  MoF further clarified that HPCA should not be allowed 
to those categories of employees whose contact with patients or exposures to 
infected materials was of an occasional nature.   
SCTIMST is a hospital having 253 beds and serves as tertiary referral centre for cardio 
vascular, thoracic and neurologic diseases. SCTIMST granted HPCA to all its Group C 
and D employees.  Audit scrutiny revealed that during 2009 - 2014 (except 2012-13) 
SCTIMST paid HPCA of ` 1.53 crore to its staff without approval of DST and MoF. 
Grant of HPCA to employees without obtaining approv al of DST and MoF was 
irregular.  
3.6.3 Inadmissible allowances to Scientists 
GC of International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New 
Materials, Hyderabad (ARCI) requested (March 2003) DST to obtain approval of MoF 
for grant of Special Pay and Update Allowance to its Scientists.  However, ARCI paid 
` 32.23 lakh as Update Allowance to its Scientific staff for the period from 2007-14 
without obtaining/waiting for approval from MoF. 
ARCI stated (2015) that grant of allowances was approved by the GC.  The reply is not 
acceptable since proposal involving financial implication required prior approval of 
MoF and GC had also recommended approval of MoF. 
3.6.4 Excess payment of allowances to staff 
As per extant orders, House Rent Allowance (HRA) is to be paid at the rate of 30 per 
cent, 20 per cent and 10 per cent of basic pay as per the classification of the city into 
the category of X, Y and Z, respectively. Other unclassified cities were to be treated as 
‘Z’ category. Similarly, Transport Allowance (TA) was also admissible as per the 
classification of cities.  

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            25 
 
We observed that during 2009-14, Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru (IIA) 
paid HRA and TA in respect of its employees posted at Hoskote (an unclassified city) at 
the rate applicable to Bengaluru city (category X). Payment of the HRA and TA at 
higher rate was irregular and the Institute incurred excess expenditure of ` 74.35 lakh 
towards such payment.  
3.6.5 Inadmissible payment of Festival Advance 
Provisions of GFR stipulates that non-gazetted employees whose GP does not exceed 
` 4,800 are eligible to draw Festival Advance for an amount ` 3,000 effective from 
October 2008. The rate of Festival Advance from January 2011 was enhanced to 
` 3,750 and from January 2014 to ` 4,500.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that between 2009 and 2015 Bose Institute, Kolkata (BI) paid 
Festival Advance to both gazetted and non-gazetted employees. This resulted in grant 
of Festival Advance of ` 1.31 crore to ineligible employees.  
DST accepted (May 2016) the audit observation.  
3.6.6 Irregular leave benefits to employees 
According to Government Rules, Sabbatical Leave was admissible to teachers in 
Central Universities/Colleges to undertake study or research or other academic 
pursuits to increase their proficiency and usefulness to the University and higher 
education system.  The duration of leave should not exceed one year at a time and 
two years in the entire career of the employee.  We observed that Satyendra Nath 
Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata (SNBNCBS) incorporated a provision 
in its Bye laws for grant of Sabbatical Leave for four years. Further, it granted the 
Sabbatical leave to one Scientist for more than five years and hence granted leave for 
excess period.  An excess payment of ` 36.13 lakh was made to the Scientist on this 
account. 
3.7 Retirement of employees 
3.7.1 Rules and Regulations relating to retirement  
Of the 17 selected ABs, the rules and regulations framed by three ABs (INSA, IIG and 
ARI) were in conformity with extant Government rules. The remaining 14 ABs had also 
framed their rules but the rules were at variance with the extant Government 
regulations. However, as prescribed, approval of DST and MoF was not found on 
record. The deviations in the rules are given in Annexure X. 
 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
26             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
3.7.2 Irregular grant of extension of service 
DoPT (July 2006) issued instructions that the authority for approval of extension in 
tenure of Chief Executives of ABs vests with the ACC.  Extension in tenure of officers 
other than the Chief Executives carrying scale of pay ` 18,400-22,400 and above was 
to be considered by Search-cum-Selection Committee (SSC) and their 
recommendations were to be implemented by the Minis try/Department. Any 
deviation would require approval of the ACC. The following three ABs violated the 
instructions of DoPT as shown in the Table 4. 
Table 4:   Inadmissible payment due to irregular extension of service 
AB Particulars  Scale of pay Month of 
superann
uation 
Extended 
upto 
Audit 
observation 
Irregular 
payment  
`` ``    in crore 
SNBNCBS Scientific 
staff 
37,400-67,000 
with GP 10,000 
April 2006 May 2010 Approval for 
extension was 
not routed 
through SSC 
0.37 
SNBNCBS Chief 
Executive 
80,000 Fixed February 
2012 
September 
2014 
Approval of 
ACC for 
extension of 
service from 
March to 
September 
2014 was not 
taken 
0.11 
IAS Executive 
Secretary 
37,400-67,000 
with GP 8,900 
November 
2013 
April 2016 Approval of 
ACC was not 
obtained 
0.23 
IIA Engineer G  37,400-67,000 
with GP 10,000 
July 2009 July 2011 Absence of 
approval of 
SSC/ACC 
2.70 
Senior 
Professors 
37,400-67,000 
with GP 10,000 
June 2014 June 2016 
January 
2009 
January 
2011 
May 2009 May 2011 
 
December 
2010 
December 
2014 
Professor 37,400-67,000 
with GP 8,900 
May 2010 May 2012 
Director 67,000-79,000 June 2010 June 2012 
Total  3.41 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            27 
 
Violation of Government orders resulted in inadmissible payment of ` 3.41 crore 
towards extension of service of the academic staff.  
While accepting the observation DST stated (May 2016) that extension of service was 
granted very selectively and judiciously after thorough peer review and only against 
the posts that were lying vacant. The fact remained that approval of Ministry of 
Finance was not obtained in cases that were in deviation of GoI instructions.  
3.8 Outsourcing of services 
3.8.1 Remunerations to consultants 
DoPT order (April 2009) stated that with a view of bringing about uniformity in all 
cases of engagement of consultants, provisions as envisaged in GFR shall apply. 
Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Kolkata (SNBNCBS) appointed 
47 persons on contractual basis during the period 2010-14 and paid consolidated 
monthly remunerations with an annual increment of three per cent, DA and HRA as 
applicable to regular employees. Besides payment of fixed monthly remuneration they 
were also allowed other incidental benefits such as leave encashment for a maximum 
of 30 days in a year on the basis of last pay drawn and reimbursable medical expenses. 
The payment of remuneration and other benefits to contractual staff violated the 
provision of GFRs. 
3.8.2 Engagement of contractual staff in excess of sanctioned strength 
As on March 2006, IACS had one sanctioned post of Registrar in the scale of ` 12,000-
16,500 and one sanctioned post of Deputy Registrar in the scale of ` 10,000-15,200.  
In October 2007, IACS appointed one consultant against the post of Registrar in the 
scale of pay ` 14,300-18,300 though there was no sanction for that pay scale in IACS 
for the post of Registrar. The incumbent resigned from IACS in August 2009. IACS paid 
an amount of ` 15.24 lakh during the period October 2007 to August 2009 which was 
irregular. 
3.9 Conclusion 
Administrative functioning of the selected ABs was not in conformity to the applicable 
rules and regulations. The extant rules and orders were violated in creation of posts, 
recruitments, promotion policies for scientists, staff entitlements, retirement matters 
and outsourcing of services.  
 
 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
28             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
3.10 Recommendations 
1. DST may ensure that Autonomous Bodies incorporate relevant clauses in the 
Bye laws specifying the powers enjoyed by the Governing Bodies/Council of 
the said Autonomous Body in matters of creation of posts, recruitments, 
promotions, retirements, staff entitlements and other administrative issues. 
2. DST may ensure that Autonomous Bodies, recognised as Deemed Universities, 
follow the UGC guidelines on pay structures. 

Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            29 
 
 
 
 
4.1  Introduction 
Though ABs have autonomy in their day-to-day functi oning, the administrative 
Ministries/ Departments have oversight role in matters of general direction and 
supervision. Our observations on shortcomings in the oversight role of DST are 
discussed in this chapter.  
4.2 Non-conduct of Peer Review  
Rule 208(v) of GFR stipulates that a system of external or peer review of autonomous 
organisations every three or five years depending on the size and nature of activity 
should be put in place. Such a review should focus inter alia on (a) the objective for 
which the AB was set up and whether these objective s had been or were being 
achieved; (b) whether the activities should be continued at all, either because they 
were no longer relevant or had been completed or if there had been a substantial 
failure in achievement of objectives; (c) whether the nature of activities was such that 
these need to be performed only by an AB; and (d) w hether similar functions were 
also being undertaken by other organisations, be it in the Central Government or 
State Governments or the private sector, and if so, whether there was scope for 
merging or winding up the organisations under review, etc.   
We observed that no external or peer review of any of the ABs was conducted to 
ensure compliance of above mentioned objectives by DST during 2009-14.  
While accepting the audit observation, DST stated (May 2016) that performance of 
the ABs was being assessed and reviewed by several committees.  DST, however, 
assured that peer review of 16 research institutes would be completed within this 
financial year and for remaining eight ABs, peer review would be conducted in the 
next financial year.  
4.3 Lack of control in release of grants-in-aid 
As per Rule 209(5) of GFR, every order sanctioning a grant should indicate whether it 
was recurring or non-recurring and specify clearly the object for which it was being 
given and the general and special conditions, if any, attached to the grant. In the case 
of non-recurring grants for specified object, the order should also specify the time 
limit within which the grant or each instalment of it was to be spent. 
4 
CHAPTER  
Oversight functions of DST 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
30             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
We scrutinised 443 sanction orders valuing ` 1,386.14 crore furnished by 11 ABs and 
found that in none of the sanction orders details such as nature of the grant i.e. 
whether recurring/non-recurring, object for which grant was released and time limit 
within which the grant or each instalment of it was to be spent were mentioned.  
DST stated (May 2015) that majority of grants were given under Plan and a very small 
amount of two per cent was given under Non-Plan. It added that grants-in-aid 
released to ABs were meant for incurring expenditure on salary of the employees, 
general expenditure and creation of capital assets etc. to run an establishment in a 
particular financial year.  
The fact remained that sanction orders were not issued with these details as required 
under provisions of GFR.  
4.4 Monitoring of Utilisation Certificates 
As per GFR 212(1), Ministry/Department including Go vernment Institutes were 
required to obtain Utilisation Certificate (UC) from grantee institutions/organisations 
in a prescribed format indicating that the grant had been utilised for the purpose for 
which it was sanctioned. GFR also stipulated that UCs should disclose whether the 
specified, quantified and qualitative targets prescribed against the amount utilised 
were in fact reached and if not, the reasons were to be mentioned.  The UCs should 
also disclose separately the actual expenditure incurred and loans and advances given 
to suppliers of stores and assets, construction agencies, staff for house building and 
purchase of conveyance etc. which should be treated as unutilised grants but allowed 
to be carried forward.  While regulating the grants for the subsequent years, the 
amount carried forward should also be taken into account.  
We observed that none of the UCs submitted by the 17 selected ABs to DST contained 
details of achievement of specified, quantified and qualitative targets, reasons for 
non-achievement of targets, output based performance assessment, details of actual 
expenditure incurred and loans and advances given to suppliers of stores and assets, 
construction agencies, staff for house building and purchase of conveyance etc. As a 
result, the UCs did not state whether the purpose for which grants-in-aid were given 
was actually utilised. 
DST stated (May 2016) that setting of targets was difficult due to inherently uncertain 
nature of work performed by the ABs but assured tha t various outputs may be 
included in the format of UCs. 
 
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology            31 
 
4.5 Deficiencies in internal audit 
4.5.1  Shortfall in internal audit 
Rule 211(1) of GFRs stipulates that the accounts of  all grantee institutions or 
organisations should be open for inspection by the sanctioning authority and audit, 
both by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India under the provisions of CAG’s 
(DPC) Act 1971 and internal audit by the Principal Accounts Office of the Ministry or 
Department, whenever the institution or organisation is called upon to do so and a 
provision to this effect should invariably be incorporated in all orders sanctioning 
grants-in-aid. DST fixes a target for annual internal audit of its ABs.  Target and 
achievement for the years 2013-14 and 2014-15 is detailed in Table 5. 
Table 5: Status of Internal Audit of ABs 
Year ABs under 
the control 
of DST 
Target fixed 
for Internal 
Audit  
(in number of 
units) 
Achievement 
against target 
Units not 
covered 
under 
target 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
in target 
2013-14 28 28 11 17 61 
2014-15 28 28 17 11 39 
Details for the earlier period were not available. The table shows that there was a 
shortfall of 61 per cent and 39 per cent against target fixed by DST during 2013-14 and 
2014-15 respectively. Due to the above shortfall, assessment of internal controls and 
implementation of remedial measures could not be carried out.  
DST stated (May 2016) that internal audit of all units could not be done due to 
shortage of manpower. The reply is not acceptable as DST would have been fully 
aware of the staff shortage when fixing targets. 
4.6 Conclusion 
The oversight role of DST was weak. No peer review was conducted as per the 
provisions of GFRs, due to which the performance of the ABs was not evaluated. 
Sanction letters for payment of grants by DST did not specify the nature of grants.  
Monitoring of submission of Utilisation Certificates (UC) by ABs was lax. None of the 
UCs submitted by the 19 ABs to DST contained achiev ement about specified, 
quantified and qualitative targets. There was shortfall in conduct of internal audit by 
DST. 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
32             Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
4.7 Recommendations 
DST may evolve a mechanism for conduct of peer revi ew of all the Autonomous 
Bodies under its administrative control. DST may strengthen its internal audit 
mechanism.  
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    33 
 
Annexure I (Refer to paragraph 1.1)  
List of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
Autonomous Body  Year of 
establishment 
Registered under Act  
1.  Agharkar Research Institute, Pune  1946  The Societies Registration 
(Maharashtra) Rules, 1971 
2.  Aryabhatta Research Institute of 
Observational Sciences, Nainital 
1954  The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
3.  Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeobotany, 
Lucknow 
1946  The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
4.  Bose Institute, Kolkata  1917  West Bengal Societies 
Registration Act, 1961  
5.  Centre for Nano and Soft Matter 
Sciences, Bengaluru 
1991  The Karnataka Societies 
Registration Act, 1960 
6.  Indian Association for the Cultivation 
of Science, Kolkata  
1876  West Bengal Societies 
Registration Act, 1961 
7.  Indian Institute of Astrophysics, 
Bengaluru 
1786  The Karnataka Societies 
Registration Act, 1960 
8.  Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, 
Mumbai  
1971  The Societies Registration 
(Maharashtra) Rules, 1971 
9.  International Advanced Research 
Centre for Powder Metallurgy and 
New Materials, Hyderabad  
1997  The Andhra Pradesh Societies 
Registration Act, 2001 
10.  Institute of Nano Science and 
Technology, Mohali  
2013  So cieties Registration Act, 1860  
11.  Institute of Advanced Study in Science 
and Technology, Guwahati 
1979  Societies Registration Act, 1860  
12.  Indian National Academy of 
Engineering, New Delhi  
1987  The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
13.  Indian National Science Academy, New 
Delhi  
1935 The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
14.  Indian Academy of Sciences, Bengaluru  1934 The Karnataka Societies 
Registration Act, 1960 
15.  Indian Science Congress Association, 
Kolkata  
1914 West Bengal Societies 
Registration Act, 1961 
16.  Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced 
Scientific Research, Bengaluru 
1989 The Karnataka Societies 
Registration Act, 1960 
17.  National Accreditation Board for 
Testing and Calibration Laboratories, 
New Delhi  
1981 Societies Registration Act, 1860 
18.  Nation Innovation Foundation, 
Ahmedabad  
2000 Societies Registration Act, 1860 
19.  National Academy of Sciences – India, 
Allahabad  
1930 The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
34               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
20.  North East Centre for Technology 
Application and Research, New Delhi  
2012 The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
21.  Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru 1948 The Karnataka Societies 
Registration Act, 1960 
22.  Science and Engineering Research 
Board, New Delhi 
2008 Act of Parliament  
23.  Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre 
for Basic Science, Kolkata  
1986 West Bengal Societies 
Registration Act, 1961 
24.  Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for 
Medical Science and Technology, 
Thiruvananthapuram  
1973 Act of Parliament 
25.  Technology Development Board, New 
Delhi 
1996  Act of Parliament  
26.  Technology Information, Forecasting 
and Assessment Council, New Delhi 
1988  The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
27.  Vigyan Prasar, Noida 1989  The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
28.  Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, 
Dehradun 
1968  The Uttar Pradesh Societies 
Registration Rules, 1976 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    35 
 
Annexure II (Refer to paragraph 1.4)  
Grants in aid and expenditure incurred by the Autonomous Bodies 
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
Autonomous Body  Grants -in -aid 
received 
during  
2009-14 
 
Expenditure 
incurred during 
2009-14 
 
1.  Agharkar Research Institute, Pune  69.53  72.06  
2.  Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational 
Sciences, Nainital  
158.23  140.21  
3.  Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeobotany, Lucknow  104.91  116.96  
4.  Bose Institute, Kolkata  253.22  259.79  
5.  Centre for Nano and Soft Matter Sciences, Bengaluru  23.92  24.96  
6.  Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science, 
Kolkata  
281.02  314.08  
7.  Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru 243.26  242.46  
8.  Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Mumbai  136.08  144.68  
9.  International Advanced Research Centre for Powder 
Metallurgy and New Materials, Hyderabad  
241.04  257.0 3 
10.  Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi  67.49  81.08  
11.  Indian Academy of Sciences, Bengaluru 49. 80  52.01  
12.  Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific 
Research, Bengaluru 
253.22  278.48  
13.  National Academy of Sciences – India, Allahabad  43.99  43.99  
14.  Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru  183.27  188.63  
15.  Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Basic Science, 
Kolkata  
148.25  153.88  
16.  Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Science and 
Technology, Trivandrum  
451.15  777.04  
17.  Technology Development Board, New Delhi  41.00  416.60  
18.  Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment 
Council, New Delhi  
81.69  94.95  
19.  Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun  131.87  136.57  
TOTAL  2,962.94  3,795.46  

Report No. 26 of 2016 
36               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
Annexure III (Refer to paragraph 3.2)  
Status of inclusion of restrictive clauses in the Rules/Bye laws/Regulations of Autonomous 
Bodies that proposals relating to emoluments structure and revision thereof would need 
the prior approval of the GoI in consultation with the MoF 
Autonomous 
Body 
Details of existing clause in the Rules/Bye laws/Regulations of Autonomous Bodies  
RRI, CNSMS, 
JNCASR, 
ARIES, IIA 
The Council should fix the scale of pay and allowances of the staff of the Institute from time 
to time. This would in general follow the Central Government norms in respect of Central 
Government employees of corresponding categories. 
SNBNCBS/ 
NASI 
The emoluments structure including pay and allowances and other terms and conditions of 
service of the employees of the centre would generally follow the pattern adopted by the 
Government of India for the Central Government employees. 
WIHG The scales of pay for the various posts under the Institute should be specified in the 
schedule contained in the Bye laws.  Structure of allowances would be applicable as same to 
the Central Government employees. 
BI The scales of pay of the regular employees of th e Institute would be determined from time 
to time in consultation with the Government of India.  
BSIP Employees of the Institute would be governed b y the rules framed by the Governing Body in 
respect of their emoluments allowances conditions of service and other related matters 
subject to any standing orders which might be issued by the authorities of the Institute from 
time to time. 
IACS The Council shall make all appointments includ ed in the Group A category and fix their 
remuneration as per the existing Government of India rule. 
ARCI The Institute will adopt pay structure as per CCS (Pay Rules) as amended by Government of 
India from time to time. 
IAS The scales of pay, allowances and other conditi ons of service of the employees of the 
Academy shall be governed by the Rules framed by the Council, keeping in view the orders 
of the Government in this regard. 
INSA To follow the Central Government Rules provide d that to consider revisions/adoption of pay 
scale, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the employees which affects 
the service conditions and finances and make recommendations to the Council. 
IIG The scales of pay and allowances of all posts s hall normally be as laid down by the Institute 
Council from time to time and broadly confirm to the Central Government pattern. 
ARI The designations, scales of pay and allowances of all posts shall normally be as laid down by 
the Institute Council from time to time. Prior approval is required for revision of scales of 
pay from DST. 
TIFAC The scales of pay, allowances and other condi tions of service shall be governed by the Staff 
Rule framed by the Governing Body. 
  

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    37 
 
Annexure IV (Refer to paragraph 3.3.1) 
Details of posts created irregularly by Governing Councils/Governing Bodies of 11 ABs 
AB Posts created/ 
upgraded 
Name of the post 
upgraded 
Level Expenditure 
incurred on 
salaries  
(`` `` in lakh) 
Reply of AB to audit 
observation 
IACS 19 Sr. Professor Group A 40.00 1 No  reply  
BI 12 Sr. Professor Group A 16.00 No  reply  
BI 13 12 Jr. Laboratory 
Assistant and 1 Jr. 
Overseer-cum-
Caretaker 
Group C 34.00 No  reply  
ARCI 
 
13 Scientist Group A 437.00 ARCI justified the 
appointments stating 
(November 2014) that 
activities grew 
manifold and there 
was dearth of 
scientific staff.   
5 Scientist B Group A 193.00 
71 Technician A, 
Technical Assistant 
A, Technical 
Assistant B, Lab 
Assistant, Driver 
Group A 
to  
Group C 
594.64 
IIA 84 66 Technical/ 
Administrative,  
28 Academic staff 
Group A 
to  
Group C 
977.00 
2 IIA stated (January 
2015) that they did 
not have the details of 
the sanctioned posts 
under various 
categories of posts. 
SNBNCBS 
 
12 Academic Group A 327.00 SNBNCBS stated 
(November 2014) that 
since the matter was 
discussed during the 
respective GB 
meetings and had 
been approved by the 
Chairman, GB who 
was also the 
Secretary, DST, no 
further separate 
approval was 
required. 
4 Non-academic Group A 13.71 3 
NASI 3 Administrative Group A 75.46 NASI (March 201 5) 
stated that the up-
gradation of posts was 
made by the Council.   
                                                           
1 ` 40 lakh was worked out only for eight scientific posts out of 19 
2     For 2013-14 only 
3  ` 13.71 lakh worked out for two non-academic staff only 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
38               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
AB Posts created/ 
upgraded 
Name of the post 
upgraded 
Level Expenditure 
incurred on 
salaries  
(`` `` in lakh) 
Reply of AB to audit 
observation 
BSIP 10 Scientists Group A Details not 
available 
No  reply  
WIHG 147 Scientific/ 
Technical/ 
Administrative 
Group A 
to  
Group C 
337.00 
4 WIHG stated (May 
2015) that the 
information regarding 
creation of posts by 
the Institute was 
intimated to DST 
number of times since 
April 2004.   
IAS 11 Publication 
/Administration 
Group A 
to  
Group C 
Details not 
available 
No  reply  
JNCASR 26 Academic Group A Details not 
available 
No  reply  
36 Non-academic Group A 
to  
Group C 
Details not 
available 
No  reply  
TIFAC 20 Technical/ Non-
technical 
Group A Details not 
available 
No  reply  
Total 486   3,044.81  
  
                                                           
4 ` 3.37 crore was worked out only for eight scientific posts out of 147 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    39 
 
Annexure V (Refer to paragraph 3.4.1) 
Deviations in Bye-laws/Rules/Regulations of selected ABs regarding recruitment of Chief 
Executive 
AB  Particulars of existing control  Whether 
existed control 
satisfied the 
instruction of 
DoPT  
Remarks  
BSIP The Search-cum-Selection Committee would be 
constituted in accordance with the instructions 
issued by DoPT.  The composition of the 
Committee should not be more than five 
members.  Members of the Committee would be 
experts of eminence preferably from the field of 
specialization.  The composition of the Committee 
would be approved by DoPT.   
Partially  The duration of one year of the 
panel to be recommended by the 
Committee was not prescribed. 
IACS The Council shall appoint the Director with the 
prior approval of Central Government and 
following Recruitment Rules and procedures 
prescribed by the Government  of India from time 
to time. 
No No mention was made about 
Search-Cum-Selection 
Committee as envisaged in the 
instruction of DoPT.  
ARIES, 
CNSMS 
Appointment to the post of Director will be made 
by the Council with the prior approval of the 
Central Government on the basis of the 
recommendations of a Search-cum-Selection 
Committee.  The Search-cum-Selection Committee 
shall also be constituted by the Council with the 
prior approval of the Central Government.  The 
Secretary, DST shall be the chairman of the Search-
cum-Selection Committee. 
No The composition of the 
Committee consisting of not 
more than five members 
including the Chairman and at 
least one outside expert of 
eminence was not prescribed. 
The duration of one year of the 
panel to be recommended by the 
Committee was not prescribed. 
JNCASR/ 
SNBNCBS/ 
BI/RRI/ 
NASI  
Appointment to be made by the Council of 
Management of the Centre:/ By invitation by the 
Governing Body on the recommendation of 
Search-cum-Selection Committee to be set up by 
the Governing Body/By the Council on the 
recommendation of Selection Committee within 
the Institute./ Trust may lay down the procedure 
for the appointment/15 years’ experience at 
responsible position in an R&D institution, 
management and coordination of S&T programme. 
No No mention of composition of 
the Search-cum-Selection 
Committee, the said Committee 
would mandatorily include at 
least one outside expert of 
eminence from the relevant field, 
finalisation of norms and criteria 
for such selection by the AB and 
modification of Memoranda and 
Articles of Association, and Bye 
Laws etc. would fully incorporate 
the guidelines of DoPT. This was 
absent.  
IAS All appointments in the Academy should be made 
by the President who is the head of the Council. No 
INSA Search-cum-Selection Committee. No 
IIG Appointment to the post of Director will be made 
by the Governing Council.  The appointment will, 
however, be made with the prior approval of the 
Government of India. 
No 
ARI The appointment of the Director shall be made by 
the Governing Body, with the concurrence of the 
Central Government.  
No 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
40               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
AB  Particulars of existing control  Whether 
existed control 
satisfied the 
instruction of 
DoPT  
Remarks  
TIFAC The appointing authority of Director is the GB of 
TIFAC. 
No 
WIHG The Director of the Institute shall be a 
distinguished Earth Scientist and shall be 
appointed by GB. 
No 
IIA, ARCI Appointment made by the Governing Council with 
prior approval of Government of India. 
No There was no mention of Search-
Cum-Selection Committee as 
envisaged in the instruction of 
DoPT.
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    41 
 
Annexure VI (Refer to paragraph 3.4.3) 
Deviations in provisions incorporated in Recruitment rules of ABs from Government 
Recruitment rules  
AB Provision in Central Government Recruitment 
Rules 
Deviations in recruitment rules by the ABs 
CNSMS Upper age limit of recruitment  
Scientist C-35 years 
Scientist D-40 years 
Scientist E-45 years 
Upper age limit of recruitment in the cadre 
of Scientist C to E was relaxed by five years. 
WIHG Upper age limit of recruitment  
Scientist C-35 years 
Scientist D-40 years 
Scientist E-45 years 
Upper age limit of recruitment in the cadre 
of Scientist C to E was relaxed by five years. 
JNCASR Educational qualifications  
Professor- Eminent scholar with Ph.D. 
qualification and 10 years of teaching 
experience. 
Associate Professor-Master Degree with at 
least 55 per cent  marks with Ph.D. Degree and 
having 8 years of teaching experience. 
No essential and desirable educational 
qualifications and upper age limit was 
incorporated for fellow and support staff. 
ARIES Age limit of recruitment, qualifications and 
experience 
Scientist C-35 years 
Scientist D-40 years 
Scientist E-45 years 
Scientist F-50 years 
Scientist G-50 years 
Registrar-Master Degree with at least 55 per 
cent  marks, 15 years of administrative 
experience of which 8 years as Dy. Registrar 
Dy. Registrar- Master Degree with at least 55 
per cent  marks, 5 years of administrative 
experience as Assistant Registrar 
No upper age limit of recruitment in the 
cadre of Scientist/Engineer was specified. 
Terms and conditions for appointment of 
Registrar, Deputy/Asstt. Registrar and 
supporting staff were not found.  
IACS No existence of post of Sr. Professor. 
Qualifications and experience: 
Registrar-Master Degree with at least 55 per 
cent  marks, 15 years of administrative 
experience of which 8 years as Dy. Registrar 
Dy. Registrar- Master Degree with at least 55 
per cent  marks, 5 years of administrative 
experience as Assistant Registrar 
Qualifications for Sr. Professor and 
Professor were not prescribed though the 
same are required as per Central 
Government recruitment rules.  Required 
percentage of marks was not prescribed for 
recruitment of Registrar and Deputy 
Registrar. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
42               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology 
 
AB Provision in Central Government Recruitment 
Rules 
Deviations in recruitment rules by the ABs 
SNBNCBS The recruitment rules provided for parallel 
recruitment of both Scientist and Academic 
staff which is not available in the central 
government RR. 
Scientist B – GP 5,400 
No existence of post of Sr. Professor. 
RRs provided for parallel recruitment of 
both Scientist and Academic staff which is 
not available in the Central Government RR. 
The rules also had provision for initial 
recruitment of Scientists in the GP of 
` 6,600 which is not prescribed in Central 
Government recruitment rules.  Further, RR 
also had provision for direct recruitment of 
Sr. Professors although the same is not 
available in the Central Government 
recruitment rules.   
BI In case of recruitment of Professor, the 
essential qualification is eminent Ph.D. Scholar 
with a minimum of ten publications as books 
and/or research/policy papers also 
contribution to design of technology.  
The essential qualification of Professor was 
doctorate degree and published work of 
high standard.  Further, while the upper age 
limit for each category of staff was fixed on 
the one hand, the Institute kept one general 
clause disclosing that in the case of direct 
recruitment, age limit, qualifications and 
other requirements for any posts might be 
relaxed at the discretion of the appointing 
authorities in respect of candidates 
otherwise well qualified, and that in case of 
applicants only in the service in BI, the age 
restriction should not apply, on the other.  
There is no provision for recruitment of Sr. 
Lecturer. 
Provision of direct recruitment for Sr. 
Lecturer was incorporated in the RR. 
The essential educational qualification for 
Registrar/ Dy. Registrar is Masters’ degree 
with at least 55 per cent of marks. 
The prescribed qualification was only 
degree of a recognised University. 
NASI In Scientist E/F  grades Ph.D. is essential. Essential qualification was prescribed as 
Post Graduate degree.   
BSIP Age limit: 
Scientist C-35 years 
Scientist D-40 years 
Scientist E-45 years 
Scientist F-50 years 
Scientist G-50 years 
There was an age relaxation of five years for 
Scientist ‘C’ to Scientist ‘G’.   
Qualifications: 
Doctorate Degree in Natural or Agricultural 
Science 
Upper age limit for technical staff In the GP of 
` 4600 is 30 years. 
Registrar-Master Degree with at least 55 per 
cent marks, 15 years of administrative 
experience of which 8 years as Dy. Registrar. 
 
In the recruitment of Scientist ‘E’ and 
Scientist ‘F’ the prescribed essential 
qualification of Ph. D is not mandatory.  Also 
for the recruitment of technical staff age 
relaxation was prescribed.  In case of 
recruitment of Registrar no essential 
educational qualification was prescribed. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    43 
 
AB Provision in Central Government Recruitment 
Rules 
Deviations in recruitment rules by the ABs 
IIA Age limit: 
Scientist C-35 years 
Scientist D-40 years 
Scientist E-45 years 
Scientist F-50 years 
Scientist G-50 years 
Qualifications: 
Registrar-Master Degree with at least 55 per 
cent  marks, 15 years of administrative 
experience of which 8 years as Dy. Registrar. 
Dy. Registrar- Master Degree with at least 55 
per cent  marks, 5 years of administrative 
experience as Assistant Registrar. 
No upper age limit for scientific/technical 
posts was prescribed.  Prescribed required 
experience was less than that of central 
government RR in respect of the post 
Scientist B, Scientist C and Scientist D.   
Registrar-Master Degree with at least 55 per 
cent  marks, 15 years of administrative 
experience of which 8 years as Dy. Registrar. 
Dy. Registrar- Master Degree with at least 55 
per cent  marks, 5 years of administrative 
experience as Asstt. Registrar. 
In the post of Registrar, no prescribed 
essential educational qualification.    
ARCI Age limit: 
Scientist C-35 years 
Scientist D-40 years 
Scientist E-45 years 
Scientist F-50 years 
Scientist G-50 years 
Qualifications: 
Registrar-Master Degree with at least 55 per 
cent  marks, 15 years of administrative 
experience of which 8 years as Dy. Registrar. 
Dy. Registrar- Master Degree with at least 55 
per cent  marks, 5 years of administrative 
experience as Asstt. Registrar. 
No educational and other qualification were 
prescribed for the scale of pay of ` 18400-
22400. Minimum age limit relaxed by 5 
years. 
IAS Age limit: 
Scientist C-35 years 
Scientist D-40 years 
Scientist E-45 years 
Scientist F-50 years 
Scientist G-50 years 
Qualifications: 
Registrar-Master Degree with at least 55 per 
cent  marks, 15 years of administrative 
experience of which 8 years as Dy. Registrar.
 
 
No age criteria, No prescribed 
essential/desirable qualification available.  
Application for appointment also 
considered on recommendation of the 
Fellows of the Academy. 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
44               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
AB Provision in Central Government Recruitment 
Rules 
Deviations in recruitment rules by the ABs 
Dy. Registrar- Master Degree with at least 55 
per cent  marks, 5 years of administrative 
experience as Asstt. Registrar. 
IIG According to UGC pay scales, the scales of 
different posts were Professor [ ` 4,500-
7,300], Lecturer (Sr.)/Reader [ ` 3,700-5,700], 
Lecturer (Sr.)[ ` 3,000-5,000] and Lecturer 
[` 2,200-4,000]. 
The scales of pay as per recruitment rules 
were Professor (G)[ ` 5,900-6,700], 
Professor (F)[ ` 5,100-6,300], Professor 
(E)[ ` 4,500-5,700], Associate Professor 
[` 3,700-5,000], Reader[ ` 3,000-4,500] and 
Fellow [ ` 2,200-4,000]. 
 
  

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    45 
 
Annexure VII (Refer to paragraph 3.4.4 (a))  
Deficiencies in the process of recruitments at Indian Academy of Science 
Year  Post  Audit observation  
2013-14 
Accounts 
Assistant 
The sheet containing details of applications received was not signed. Criteria adopted to 
screen the applications were not on record. No marks were awarded by the selection 
committee to the applicants.  
Assistant 
Executive Editor 
Information such as the total number of applications received and the criteria adopted to 
shortlist the candidates etc. was not on record. As per the advertisement, the applicant was 
required to have over 15 years of relevant experience. Out of 12 shortlisted applicants only 
two candidates fulfilled the criterion but neither attended interview. The candidate finally 
selected for the post had only 12 years of experience and thus was not eligible for the post.  
2012-13 
Assistant 
Executive 
Secretary 
The number of posts was not mentioned in the advertisement. The sheet containing details 
of applications was not signed. As per the advertisement, age of the applicant should be not 
more than 52 years. One applicant who was an internal candidate was over aged therefore 
not eligible for the post. However, the application was not rejected either at screening stage 
or at interview stage.  
Executive Editor The number of posts was not mentioned in the advertisement. The sheet containing details 
of applications received was not signed. As per the advertisement, the age of applicant 
should have been not more than 52 years. It was observed that age of one of the ineligible 
candidates was shown as 52 years while actual age on closing date was 52 years one month 
and 11 days. Thus, correct figure was misrepresented.  
Administrative 
Assistant 
The number of posts was not mentioned in the advertisement. The sheet containing details 
of applications received was not signed. As per the advertisement, the candidates should 
have typing speed of 30 words per minute. There was no record pertaining to typing test if 
any, undertaken by the Academy. Further, three applications were rejected on ground of 
less experience although all had more than three years of experience as prescribed in the 
advertisement to the post.   
Deputy Executive 
Secretary 
As per the advertisement, the candidate should have over 20 years of experience in 
administration in a Government/ Semi-Government/ autonomous organization/ educational 
institutions of higher learning of which at least 10 years should have been in a supervisory 
position. None of the nine candidates who applied had requisite experience as per the 
advertisement. However, Academy short listed three candidates and selected a person for 
the post in spite of not fulfilling the eligibility criterion.  2010-11 
Accounts Officer, 
Copy Editor and 
Administrative 
Assistant 
Academy received 135 applications for the post of Accounts Officer and short listed 12 
applications. Similarly, in case of Copy Editors Academy received 122 applications out of 
which 13 applications were shortlisted and for the post of Administrative Assistant 148 
applications were received and 13 applications were shortlisted. There was no criterion on 
record based on which such a large number of applications were rejected by the Academy. 
Executive 
Secretary  
Academy invited application to the post of Executive Secretary by open advertisement. The 
advertisement did not contain any information about the maximum age of the applicant. 
The President of the Academy constituted a Selection Committee of seven members to 
interview the candidates.  However, criteria adopted by the committee to screen the 
applications was not on record.  
2009-10 
Publication 
personnel 
The Academy issued advertisement (March 2007) for experienced publication personnel for 
editing, proof reading and general production of its journal. However, details of the position 
to be filled, number of posts, whether temporary or permanent, age limit etc. was not 
mentioned. Against the advertisement 14 applications were received. There was no record 
available in respect of screening of the applications, recommended candidates, details of 
the interview by selection committee, etc. 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
46               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
Annexure VIII (Refer to paragraph 3.4.4 (b))  
Issues in recruitments at Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru 
Issue Audit observation 
Recruitment made 
without open 
Advertisement 
Recruitment of one Associate Professor and six Readers was done during the period 2009-10 to 
2013-14, however in none of the cases advertisement indicating the eligibility criteria, age, 
education qualifications number of vacancies etc. for inviting applications for the academic 
positions was released. As a result, only one person applied to the post of Associate Professor 
and was selected. IIA received 11 applications towards the recruitment of readers, of which 
four candidates were recommended by Screening Committee.  However, the Selection 
Committee considered a candidate for the post of Reader who was at fourth position and was 
appointed in spite of not having requisite five years of experience. 
Recruitment of in-
eligible candidates 
Institute invited applications for filling up one post of Driver (Unreserved) at Leh and issued 
advertisement in April 2013. 23 applications were received. As per the advertisement 
qualification for the post was SSLC (10 
th ) and age prescribed was below 28 years. Minimum 
qualification could be relaxed in cases where the candidates had more than five years of 
experience in driving at high altitude and hilly areas. Screening Committee recommended eight 
candidates for interview of which one candidate was given relaxation in age. We observed that 
three out of eight recommended candidates did not have the minimum qualification. 
Subsequently, Selection Committee of the Institute interviewed six candidates and 
recommended one candidate for the post and two candidates in waiting list. However, the 
appointment was offered to the person in the waiting list instead of the person recommended 
by the Selection Committee, which was irregular.  
Further, the person initially recommended for selection was also offered appointment 
subsequently, by stating that the post advertised was for General quota and the post had been 
filled in by appointing ST candidate on urgent basis. Further scrutiny of the summary of roster 
for the posts revealed that there was no vacancy in any category other than OBC category. 
Thus appointment of ST candidate against the vacancy of OBC category was also irregular. 
Recruitment of top 
management without 
following due 
process 
DST appointed Director of the Institute with the approval of ACC in January 2006 without 
constituting Search-cum-selection committee (which were to be constituted with the approval 
of DoPT).  Subsequently, Acting Director was appointed for one year (from 01 July 2012 to 30 
June 2013). However, approval of ACC was not obtained for appointing Acting Director also.  
 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    47 
 
Annexure IX (Refer to paragraph 3.5.1 i)  
Deviation in minimum residency period for promotion at Indian Association for the 
Cultivation of Science, Kolkata 
Category of 
Academic 
Staff 
Minimum 
residency 
period 
Scale of 
pay (`` ``) 
Minimum 
residency 
period 
Scale of 
pay (`` ``) 
Minimum 
residency 
period 
Scale of  
pay (`` ``) 
Minimum 
residency 
period 
Scale of 
pay (`` ``) 
UGC norms 1998-2004 Practice in IACS 1998-2004 UGC norms 2004 onwards Practice in IACS 2004 
onwards 
Director  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  - 26,000 
(fixed) 
Chair 
Professor 
Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  - 22,400 -
24,500 
Sr. 
Professor 
Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  Not defined  5 years.  
In case of 
extraordinary 
performance 
after 4  years. 
18,400 -
22,400 
Professor  
 
 
8 years of 
service as 
Reader 
16,400 -
22,400 
7 years.  
In case of 
extraordinary 
performance 
5 years. 
16,400 -
22,400 
8 years of 
service as 
Reader 
16,400 -
22,400 
5 years.  
In case of 
extraordinary 
performance 
after 4  years. 
16,400 -
20,000 
Reader/  
Lecturer  
 
5 years of 
service in 
the Sr. 
Scale 
12,000 -
18,300 
7 years.   
In case of 
extraordinary 
performance 
5 years. 
12,000 -
18,300 
5 years of 
service in 
the Sr. 
Scale 
12,000 -
18,300 
5 years.  
In case of 
extraordinary 
performance 
after 4  years. 
14,300 -
18,300  
(as 
Associate 
Professor) 
Sr. Lecturer  
 
6 years 
with 
relaxation 
of one year 
and two 
years for 
those with 
M.Phil and 
Ph.D. 
10,000 -
15,200 
5 years.  
In case of at 
least 2 years 
of Post-
doctoral 
experience 
then on 
completion of 
3 years. 
10,000 -
15,200 
6 years 
with 
relaxation 
of one year 
and two 
years, for 
those with 
M.Phil and 
Ph.D. 
10,000 -
15,200 
4 years.  
In case of 
extraordinary 
performance 
after 3  years. 
12,000 -
18,000  
(as 
Assistant 
Professor) 
Lecturer  
 
 
- 
8,000 -
13,500 
- 
8,000 -
13,500 
- 
8,000 - 
13,500 
- 
10,000 -
15,200  
(as Faculty 
Fellow) 
 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
48               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
 Annexure X (Refer to paragraph 3.7.1) 
Existence of provisions of retirement in the Bye-laws of Autonomous Bodies 
AB  Incorporation of provisions  in the 
Bye Laws as per extant Central 
Government Rules   
Provisions different from extant 
Government Rules made by GB/GC  for 
which approval of DST and MoF was 
not found on record 
Provisions not incorporated  
ARCI  Superannuation, Voluntary 
retirement, extension, Gratuity, EPF 
Retirement on medical ground, 
Termination 
Nil 
ARI  age of superannuation, termination 
of service, retirement on medical 
ground, voluntary/compulsory 
retirement, Gratuity, GPF/CPF, 
Extension 
Nil Nil 
ARIES  Superannuation , extension, GPF, 
Pension, Gratuity, 
Voluntary/compulsory retirement 
Retirement on medical ground  
 
Termination of service  
BI  Nil Superannuation, extension, termination 
and Provident Fund 
Pension, Gratuity, Voluntary/  
compulsory retirement, 
retirement on medical ground 
BSIP  Superannuation, Voluntary 
retirement, Pension, Gratuity, 
Extension 
Termination, Retirement on medical 
ground, Compulsory retirement, GPF 
Nil 
CNSMS  Superannuation, gratuity/CPF, 
voluntary/compulsory retirement, 
extension beyond superannuation  
Termination of service  Retirement on medical ground  
IACS  Extension  Pension, Provident Fund, Retiring 
benefits, Voluntary retirement 
Superannuation, terminatio n, 
retirement on medical ground, 
compulsory retirement, Gratuity 
IAS  Nil Extension, GPF, Pension, Age of 
Superannuation 
Voluntary retirement , Retirement 
on medical ground 
IIA  Pension, Provident Fund, 
Superannuation 
Extension  Termination, Retirement on 
medical ground, Compulsory 
retirement, Voluntary retirement 
IIG  age of superannuation, termination 
of service, retirement on medical 
ground, voluntary/compulsory 
retirement, Gratuity, GPF/CPF, 
Extension 
Nil Nil 
INSA  age of superannuation, termination 
of service, retirement on medical 
ground, voluntary/compulsory 
retirement, Gratuity, GPF/CPF 
Nil Nil 
JNCASR  Nil Retirement benefit, extension, 
termination of service, retirement on 
medical ground and voluntary 
retirement 
Superannuation, GPF/CPF  
NASI  Superannuation, termination, pre -
mature retirement,  retirement 
benefits 
Extension of service  GPF/CPF  
RRI  Nil Superannuation, Extension, GPF/CPF, 
termination, retirement benefits, 
Gratuity 
Retirement on medical ground, 
voluntary/compulsory retirement 
SNBNCBS  Superannuation  Compulsory retirement, provident fund, 
Gratuity 
Extension, voluntary retirement, 
retirement on medical ground, 
GPF/CPF, Termination of service 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    49 
 
AB  Incorporation of provisions  in the 
Bye Laws as per extant Central 
Government Rules   
Provisions different from extant 
Government Rules made by GB/GC  for 
which approval of DST and MoF was 
not found on record 
Provisions not incorporated  
TIFAC  Age of Superannuation  Extension, Termination  Retirement on medical ground, 
voluntary/compulsory  
retirement, Gratuity, GPF/CPF.  
WIHG  Pension, Gratuity and GPF  Retirement including Superannuation, 
Compulsory and Voluntary retirement 
Extension, termination, 
retirement on medical ground. 
  

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    51 
 
Glossary of terms 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
AB Autonomous Body 
ACP Assured Career Progression 
AGP Academic Grade Pay 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
ARCI International Advanced Research Centre for Pow der Metallurgy 
and New Materials, Hyderabad 
ARI Agharkar Research Institute, Pune 
ARIES Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observationa l Sciences, Nainital 
BI Bose Institute, Kolkata 
BSIP Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeobotany, Luckno w 
CNSMS Centre for Nano and Soft Matter Sciences, Ben galuru 
DFPR Delegation of Financial Powers Rules 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EPF Employees Provident Fund 
ES Executive Secretary 
FCS Flexible Complementing Scheme 
FRSR Fundamental Rules and Supplementary Rules 
GB Governing Body 
GC Governing Council 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GoI Government of India 
GP Grade Pay 
HBA House Building Advance 
HPCA Hospital Patient Care Allowance 
HRA House Rent Allowance 
IACS Indian Association for the Cultivation of Scie nce, Kolkata 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
52               Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department  of Science and Technology  
 
Abbreviation Full form 
IAS Indian Academy of Sciences, Bengaluru 
IIA Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bengaluru 
IIG Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Mumbai 
INSA Indian National Science Academy, New Delhi 
JNCASR Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scienti fic Research, 
Bengaluru 
LC Letter of Credit 
LRA Learning Research Allowance 
LTC Leave Travel Concession 
MACP Modified Assured Career Progression 
MHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MHRD Ministry of Human Resources Development  
MoA Memorandum of Association 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MST Ministry of Science and Technology 
NASI National Academy of Sciences-India, Allahabad 
NGO Non-Government Organisation 
NPA Non-Practicing Allowance 
OM Office Memorandum 
R&D Research and Development 
RMC Resource Management Committee 
RRI Raman Research Institute, Bengaluru 
RR Recruitment Rules 
S&T Science and Technology 
SCTIMST Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Science and Technology, 
Thiruvanthapuram 
SNBNCBS Satyendra Nath Bose National Centre for Bas ic Sciences, Kolkata 
SRC Structural Reforms Committee 
SR Supplementary Rules 
SSC Search-cum-Selection Committee 
TA Travelling Allowance 

Report No. 26 of 2016 
Administrative functioning of Autonomous Bodies under Department of Science and Technology                    53 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
TDB Technology Development Board, Delhi 
TIFAC Technology Information, Forecasting and Asses sment Council, 
Delhi 
UC Utilisation Certificate 
UGC University Grants Commission 
USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
WIHG Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun  
 
  