Preface
his Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
T India contains the results of the performance audit of the 
Activities of Corporate Social Responsibility undertaken by 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) and Rashtriya Ispat 
Nigam Limited (RINL) during the period from April 2004 to 
March 2010.
iiiPerformance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Executive Summary
ron and Steel industry is the most polluting and resource intensive industry. As it consumes 
Ihuge amount of natural resources like coal, iron ore, etc., as raw material, it has to be 
responsible towards environment protection and peripheral development. SAIL and RINL being 
profit making companies have adequate resources to discharge these responsibilities. 
Performance audit of these companies was conducted with a view to assess whether they were 
discharging their corporate social responsibility (CSR) in an effective and efficient manner 
towards environmental protection, safety of its employees and social development. 
SAIL has a CSR policy, however it was not comprehensive as it did not cover objectives, scope, 
strategy and areas of focus of CSR activities like that of RINL. While the companies were 
providing two per cent of their distributable profit for CSR activities but the same was not 
transferred to a 'separate fund' due to which the unspent funds lapsed at the end of the year. In 
fact RINL was able to utilise only 45 percent of the budget provided by it during 2006-07 to 
2009-10, while SAIL, by and large, utilized the budget.
SAIL and RINL were implementing Environment Management Systems (EMS) to evaluate and 
continually improve their environmental performance at their different plants and units for 
environmental protection.  EMS certification, i.e., ISO 14001 has been accredited to RINL and 
1
only to one  plant of SAIL, out of total five  plants. 
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), the iron and steel industry accounts for 
approximately 4-5 per cent of total world carbon dioxide (CO ) emissions. On an average, 1.9 2
tonnes of CO  is emitted for every tonne of steel produced globally. The average CO  emitted by 2 2
3
SAIL and RINL during 2008-09 was 2.99 t/tcs  and 3.18 t/tcs respectively as against the average 
of 2.09 t/tcs of CO  emitted by Tata Steel. SAIL and RINL have not fixed any target for reduction 2
of CO  whereas Tata Steel set a target of reduction in CO  emission to less than 1.7 t/tcs by 2012. 2 2
SAIL and RINL were found not to have even analysed the reasons for their higher CO  emission.2
CSR Policy Framework
Environmental Responsibilities 
2
vPerformance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 
1
 Bhilai Steel Plant
2
 Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) in Jharkhand, Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) in Chattisgarh, Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) in Orissa, Durgapur 
Steel Plant (DSP) and IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) in West Bengal.
3
 tonne per tonne of crude steel
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

As against the world average of energy consumption of 4.5 to 5.5 giga calories per tonne of 
crude steel (G.cal/tcs), the consumption was 6.72 G.cal/tcs in SAIL, 6.84 G.cal/tcs in RINL and 
6.17 G.cal/tcs in Tata Steel during 2009-10. 
The world average for raw material used to produce one tonne of crude steel is 2.6 tonne.  The 
consumption of raw materials in SAIL ranged between 3.26 t/tcs and 3.38 t/tcs and in RINL it 
ranged between 3.04 t/tcs and 3.10 t/tcs. 
4
Water consumption in SAIL (except ISP) & RINL was within the prescribed norms. The RSPM  
level which may pose higher risk for respiratory diseases was higher than the norm in three 
5
plants of SAIL and RINL whereas SPM  level was within the prescribed norm.
Utilisation of solid waste {Blast Furnace (BF) & Steel Melting Shop (SMS) slag} in SAIL during the 
year 2009-10 was 82.02 per cent and 75.25 per cent respectively. In RINL, utilisation of SMS 
6
slag during the year 2009-10 was 54 per cent. Two  plants of SAIL did not have proper facility 
for disposal of hazardous waste though other plants of SAIL and RINL have proper facilities for 
disposal of the same. 
Trees are a natural sink for CO  gas. On an average, a tree can absorb CO  at the rate of 6 kg/year 2 2
and SAIL and RINL emit 40 million tonne and 10 million tonne of CO  per year respectively. 2
Therefore, on an average 6700 million trees are required for absorbing CO  generated by SAIL 2
and 1645 million trees are required for RINL against which inventory of trees in SAIL was 14.32 
million and 4.59 million in RINL. 
Despite substantial utilisation of the budget for this purpose by both SAIL and RINL, the number 
of fatal accidents began to rise during 2008-09 and 2009-10. 
The companies did not achieve the target of 'zero accidents' fixed by them due to inadequate 
house-keeping and safety equipment.
Though SAIL and RINL have occupational health centres at their plants, the companies were not 
complying with the rule of periodic medical examination (once in every 12 months) of 
employees. Further, the percentage of employees turning up for health check up was very low.
Both SAIL and RINL have been contributing to social development through community welfare 
programmes, medical camps, vocational training, sports facilities, medical facilities, free 
education in the company's schools to the steel township and neighbourhood children. SAIL 
adopted 79 villages in eight states for comprehensive development as Model Steel Villages 
(MSVs). RINL adopted seven villages in its periphery for development as MSVs. 
Safety
Social Development
vi Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 
4
 Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter
5
 Suspended Particulate Matter
6
 BSP and RSP
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

The companies were not doing any need assessment survey in the periphery of their plants to 
assess their requirements and were not planning for CSR activities in a structured manner to 
utilise the funds efficiently. Also the companies were not evaluating the impact of the CSR 
activities on the society. 
Significant recommendations to improve the performance of the Companies on CSR front are:
n The Companies should fix specific targets for reduction of CO  emission.2
n Both companies must put in place a reliable and eco-friendly mechanism for 
disposal of hazardous wastes.
n SAIL should set and implement specific targets for afforestation.
n Awareness should be created among employees about safety and medical 
examination through various measures, e.g., trainings, hoardings, showing films, 
etc.
n The companies should evolve a system of need assessment and impact assessment 
while undertaking CSR activities in a particular area.
Recommendations
viiPerformance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Public Sector Enterprises have legal responsibilities to maximize shareholder profits; but a shift in 
corporate mindset led by social expectations and pressure is causing business leaders to rethink their 
responsibilities with respect to corporate performance measured in terms of economic impact, social 
impact and environmental impact – commonly called the Triple Bottom Line.
The Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is seen as a concept in which companies voluntarily 
integrate social and environmental concerns into their business operations. The idea of being a socially 
responsible company means doing more than comply with the law by taking concrete measures to 
address environmental and social concerns. Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is a concept whereby 
organizations serve the interests of society by taking responsibility for the impact of their activities on all 
stakeholders including environment in all aspects of their operations. 
Corporate Social Responsibility is a Company's commitment to operate in an economically, socially and 
environmentally sustainable manner, while recognizing the interests of its stakeholders. This 
commitment is beyond statutory requirements. Corporate Social Responsibility is, therefore, closely 
linked with the practice of Sustainable Development. Corporate Social Responsibility extends beyond 
philanthropic activities and reaches out to the integration of social and business goals. These activities 
need to be seen as those which would, in the long term, help secure a sustainable competitive 
advantage.
Steel manufacturing has a variety of impacts on the environment. The main impacts come from the use 
of energy and raw materials, which result in the emission of carbon dioxide (CO ), sulfur-oxides (SOx), 2
nitrogen oxides (NOx) and dust to air, as well as water usage and associated emissions. Iron and steel 
industry contributes 15 per cent of CO  emission from industry sector in India. Steel plants generate huge 2
quantity of waste materials including hazardous waste.  Steel Industry poses one of the most difficult 
challenges in the area of safety, health when compared to many other industries due to complex nature 
of its operations and maintenance activities and wide range of hazards associated with them. 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) is the leading steel-producing company in India. It has 
five  integrated steel plants with production capacity of 13 Million Metric Tonne (MMT). During the year 
2009-10 it recorded gross sales of ` 43,935 crore with net profit of 6,754 crore.  The product profile of 
the company comprises of pig iron, wire rods, rounds, reinforcement bars, angles, channels, beams, 
coils, pipes, billets, blooms, rails and wheels and axles for Indian Railway. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 
(RINL) known as 'Vizag Steel', is one of the major steel producers in India. It has a plant in 
Vishakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh with production capacity of 3 MMT and it is the only shore based 
steel plant in India. The turnover of RINL in 2009-2010 was ` 10,635 Crore and net profit was ` 797 
crore. 
The SAIL and RINL being the profit making companies have sufficient resources to discharge these 
responsibilities. 
1.21
` 
Introduction
Chapter
1
1.1 Corporate Social Responsibility
1
 Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL) in Jharkhand, Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) in Chattisgarh, Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) in Orissa, Durgapur 
Steel Plant (DSP) and IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) in West Bengal.
1Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Audit Approach
Chapter
2
2.3 Audit criteria
2.2 Audit objectives
2.1 Rationale and Scope of Audit
Iron and Steel industry is the most polluting and resource intensive industry. It consumes huge amount of 
natural resources like coal, iron ore etc. as raw material. Therefore, the companies in iron and steel 
industry have the responsibility towards environment protection and peripheral development. 
The present performance audit covers the CSR activities of these companies for the period from 2004-05 
to 2009-10. Implementation of CSR activities were reviewed broadly with reference to resource 
allocation for CSR activities, environmental care, safety and peripheral development. 
The Performance Audit on activities of CSR undertaken by SAIL and RINL was taken up with the objective 
of assessing whether:
The Companies have formulated CSR policy which adequately  addresses CSR concerns and 
whether adequate resources for CSR have been provided;
The companies have an appropriate Environmental Management Plan and System to 
discharge environment related responsibilities such as pollution control, management of 
waste and compliance with laws;
The safety practices prevailing in the companies conform to the norms/standards, rules 
prescribed; and
The companies have been able to fulfill their social responsibility in an effective and efficient 
manner towards peripheral development such as medical & health care, education, 
livelihood generation, infrastructure development and rehabilitation & resettlement. 
n
n
n
n
The following audit criteria were used for assessing the performance of the Companies:
Environment Policies of SAIL & RINL and instructions for fund allocation for CSR
Action points relating to 'Integrated Iron & Steel Industry' provided in 'Charter on Corporate 
Responsibility for Environmental Protection' (CREP) issued by the Ministry of Environment 
and Forest (MOEF) in 2003.
Global steel industry data published by World Steel Association.
Hazardous Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1989 as amended from time to time. 
Standards for handling of bio-medical waste provided as per EPA notification dated 
20/07/1998.
n
n
n
n
n
3Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981.
Norms for noise level prescribed under Noise Pollution (Regulation & Control) Rules, 2000.
Provisions regarding health of workers and safety measures as stipulated in the Factories 
Act, 1948. 
Safety policies of the companies and instructions as per Standard Operating Practices.
CSR Policy and Plan.
MOU with the administrative Ministry.
n
n
n
n
n
n
Ambient air quality standards as per notification of 11/04/1994 issued under section 16(2) 
2.4
2.5
2.6
Audit methodology
Audit Findings
Acknowledgement
Audit examined relevant records based on which preliminary observations were issued to the 
Management of SAIL and RINL and after receipt of response from the Managements exit conferences 
were held in December 2010. The response of Ministry of Steel was also suitably incorporated while 
drawing audit conclusions which are discussed in subsequent chapters.
Audit findings are discussed in four chapters as detailed below:
includes issues relating to CSR policy and implementation set up
highlights concerns regarding air emission, conservation of energy & natural 
resources and management of waste etc.
flags the issues of employees safety, fatal accidents and in-adequate house 
keeping
discusses the issues of social development like Education, Medical facilities, 
absence of need assessment/ survey of society for planning CSR activities and 
impact assessment of CSR activities.
n
n Chapter 4: 
n Chapter 5: 
n Chapter 6: 
Chapter 3: 
We acknowledge the cooperation and assistance extended by the Managements of the companies at 
different levels, which facilitated the completion of this performance audit.
4 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

CSR Policy Framework
Chapter
3
3.2 CSR budget and utilization
SAIL and RINL have made commitments through board resolution and CSR policy respectively to the 
cause of CSR and have earmarked 2 per cent of the distributable surplus from the year 2006-07 for CSR 
Each business entity is expected to formulate a CSR policy to guide its strategic planning and 
provide a roadmap for its CSR initiatives, which should be an integral part of overall business 
policy and goals. The CSR initiatives should include identification of projects/activities, setting 
measurable physical targets with timeframes, organizational mechanism and responsibilities to 
implement CSR initiatives, budget, and monitoring set-up.
3.1 CSR policy 
The Board of Directors of the SAIL approved the Policy on CSR in July 2009. The company through its 
policy recognizes that its business activities have direct and indirect impact on the society. The company 
strives to integrate its business values and operations in an ethical and transparent manner to 
demonstrate its commitment to sustainable development and to meet the interest of its stakeholders. 
Audit however noticed that CSR policy of the company is not comprehensive as it does not address the 
following key issues:
The areas to be covered under the CSR 
The scope of the CSR activities, e.g., Environment, Safety, Education, Peripheral 
Development etc.
Detailed methodology for conducting CSR activities
The budget/ source of funds for CSR activities 
The implementation and monitoring system for CSR activities
While the CSR policy of RINL is comprehensive and covers objectives, scope, strategy and areas of focus of 
CSR activities the policy also lays down the budget allocation and implementation machinery for CSR 
related activities.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that CSR Policy of SAIL is a document which demonstrates SAIL's 
commitments to sustainable development and to meet the interest of its stakeholders and covers the 
Guiding principle of CSR policy. Further, a separate set of document known as “SAIL CSR Guidelines” in 
line with CSR Guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) is under process of approval of 
the competent authority which covers the suggestions made by the Audit. 
n
n
n
n
n
In short, SAIL should adopt a detailed guidelines/policy covering vital issues relating to scope of CSR 
activities, methodology for conducting CSR activities, funding arrangements and implementation and 
monitoring set-up. 5Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

activities. This amount is utilized for social development and so far as environment and safety issues are 
concerned, the resources were provided from the overall budget. Details of budget and expenditure 
incurred for the period 2004-05 to 2009-10 are given below:
Year
2004-05
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
Total
26
95
114
80
315
6.78
27.27
38.85
12.75
85.65
3.47
13.81
12.21
9.37
38.86
19.78
119.61
83.03
78.79
301.21
Requirement of 2% was effective 
from 2006-07
RINL started CSR activities from 
the year 2006-07
SAIL
Budget Provision Budget ProvisionActual Expenditure Actual Expenditure
RINL
(` in crore)
We observed the following:
SAIL was to provide fund at the rate of 2 per cent of the distributable profit for CSR as per 
the Board of Directors' decision (March 2006) to which SAIL complied with except during 
the year 2006-07. 
While RINL provided funds as intended but utilized only about 45 percent of funds, thus, 
allowing their CSR activities to unfulfilled. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that in SAIL the expenditure of allocated CSR budget is being 
monitored by the authorities on regular basis. In RINL to expedite all projects a monitoring mechanism 
has been put into place where by both progress and expenditure on CSR projects are monitored by 
committee of Directors headed by CMD every month.  Presently, the performance and utilization of CSR 
funds is in excess or at par with the MOU targets on month to month basis.
n
n
3.3 Separate Fund for CSR activities
n
n
budget was reallocated to different plants and units of SAIL. But as the SAIL was not 
transferring this amount to a separate CSR fund, therefore, unspent fund lapsed at the end 
of each year.
In RINL also, the company did not create any separate CSR fund. The company made 
commitments out of the budget provision and the uncommitted/unspent amount lapsed at 
the end of the year.
The Ministry in its reply (December 2010) remained silent on the issue in case of SAIL while for RINL stated 
that action has been initiated for creation of a non lapsable CSR pool fund.  Further, SAIL Management 
during exit conference (December 2010) did not agree for creation of CSR fund and stated that in future 
while preparing the budget, the unspent balance if any, would be carried forwarded and added to the 
next year budget.
SAIL allocates budget of two percent of their distributable surplus for CSR activities. This 
The contention of the Management is not acceptable as DPE in its guidelines (April 2010) also 
emphasized that CSR Budget should be transferred to a CSR Fund. Therefore, a CSR fund, separate from 
the mainline budget, may be created by SAIL and RINL so as to avoid lapse of unspent fund and ensure 
better monitoring.
6 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

3.4
3.5
CSR Implementation set up
Conclusion
SAIL is having a CSR cell at corporate level headed by General Manager. There are CSR cells at plant level 
also which are supervised by the Managing Directors of the respective plants. The plans are prepared at 
plant level and also incorporated in the annual budget. 
For implementation of CSR activities, RINL has established a charitable trust named RINL Foundation 
which is administered by a Committee consisting of CMD, Director (Finance) and Director (Personnel). 
The Committee is the Apex Policy making Body to lay down guidelines for allocation of budget under 
various heads of CSR like Peripheral Development, Education, Community Health Care, Sports & Games, 
Self-Employment Programmes etc. The Apex committee is assisted by Personnel (Welfare & CSR) 
Department in formulating the guidelines and its implementation.
The Ministry while replying (December 2010) confirmed the facts.
Though SAIL was providing sufficient funds and was having proper implementation set up, the company 
was not having detailed CSR policy for execution of CSR activities effectively. While RINL has a detailed 
CSR policy and also established separate set up for implementation of CSR activities but the company did 
not utilize full earmarked budget. The companies were not transferring the budget provided for CSR 
activities to a separate fund due to which the unspent amount was being lapsed.
The impact of these inadequacies has been analysed and discussed in succeeding chapters.
Recommendations
(i) A dedicated CSR fund, separate from the mainline budget, may be created by 
SAIL and RINL so as to avoid lapse of fund and ensure full utilisation of dedicated 
funds.
7Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Environmental 
Responsibilities 
Chapter
4
4.2 Environmental Management System
Environmental management system (EMS) refers to the management of an organisation's 
environmental programs in a comprehensive, systematic, planned and documented manner. It 
includes the organisational structure, planning and resources for developing, implementing 
and maintaining policy for environmental protection. An EMS serves as a tool to improve 
environmental performance and provides a systematic way of managing an organization's 
environmental affairs. EMS gives order and consistency for organizations to address 
environmental concerns through the allocation of resources, assignment of responsibility and 
ongoing evaluation of practices, procedures and processes.
4.1 Environmental Legislative Framework
The Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) is the nodal agency in the administrative structure of the 
Central Government, for the planning, promotion, co-ordination and overseeing the implementation of 
environmental and forestry programmes. MoEF is also the Nodal agency in the country for the United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). The principal activities undertaken by MoEF consist of 
conservation & survey of flora, fauna, forests and wildlife, prevention & control of pollution, 
afforestation & regeneration of degraded areas and protection of environment, in the framework of 
legislations.
Under the provisions of The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, the Central Government 
constituted the 'Central Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution' in September 1974. The 
name of the Central Board was changed to Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) under the Water 
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Amendment Act 1988. 
The main functions of CPCB, as spelt out in The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, 
and The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, are: 
(i) To promote cleanliness of streams and wells in different areas of the States through 
prevention, control and abatement of water pollution; and, 
(ii) To improve the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country. 
State Pollution Control Boards, were constituted under the provisions of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. This was the first initiative taken by the Government of India for the 
prevention and control of water pollution with a view to maintain and restore wholesomeness of the 
water. During the subsequent years, many more federal enactments related to environmental protection 
came into force, with the State Pollution Control Boards being designated as the implementing authority 
within the geographical boundary of respective states. 
Several regulations have been introduced in the recent past covering Hazardous Wastes, Coke Ovens, 
Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) such as Environment Protection Act, 1986 (EPA),  Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, Hazardous Waste Rules, 1989, Noise Pollution (Regulation & Control) 
Rules, 2000 etc. These regulations are applicable to steel industries.
9Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11
SAIL and RINL are building environment management systems at its different plants and units for 
environmental protection, including acquisition of certification under the international standard ISO 

14001 to reduce the environmental impact of its activities. The areas covered in ISO 14001 certification 
include Environmental policy, environmental aspects and related impacts, legal and other requirements, 
Environmental management programmes, training awareness and competence, environmental 
management system documentation, monitoring and measurement, environmental management 
system audit, management review etc. 
EMS certification i.e. ISO 14001 has been accredited to the BSP (whole plant), BSL (10 units), DSP (19 
units), RSP (8 units) and ISP (1 unit). There is no plan at present in BSL, DSP and RSP for accreditation of 
ISO 14001 for remaining units. However, ISP has decided to implement Integrated Management System 
in all the new units including the units that will remain after implementation of the expansion plan. 
RINL has got ISO 14001 certification for whole company (including production & production supporting 
service departments).
The Ministry while accepting (December 2010) the audit observation stated that SAIL is having no plan at 
present for accreditation of ISO 14001 for remaining units of BSL, DSP and RSP. 
SAIL should take early action to get ISO 14001 certification for the remaining units as EMS enables an 
organisation to evaluate and continually improve its environmental performance and operating 
efficiency.
4.3 Environmental Management Plan implementation and 
monitoring set-up
The production of steel causes air, water and noise pollution and generation of solid wastes including 
hazardous waste. The main units of steel industry causing pollution are coke oven and by-product plant, 
steel melting shop, sintering plant, blast furnace, refractory material plant and captive thermal power 
plant. In India most of the causes of higher pollution are attributed to usage of old technologies besides 
inherent quality raw material constraints. Therefore, it is necessary to have Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) in place to address the environmental concern. 
SAIL has Environment Management Division (EMD) at Kolkata for controlling, monitoring and advising 
plants/units on the environmental issues. The Environment Policy of SAIL emphasizes on "conducting 
operations in an environmentally responsible manner to comply with applicable legal and other 
requirements related to its environmental aspects and strive to go beyond". 
Audit noticed that it did not have any structured Environment Management Plan or monitoring 
mechanism. EMD takes up environment issues faced by the plants, on a case to case basis and monitors 
the environmental issues at plants through monthly/quarterly reports sent by Environmental Control 
Division of the plants. No regular visit either monthly or quarterly is conducted by technical executives of 
EMD at different plants to monitor/guide, educate and to identify the action plans for the steel plants.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that Annual Business Plan (ABP) is made at all the units which also 
take into account the environmental priorities and the progress of these plans are reviewed at the plant 
level as also at the corporate level at regular intervals. Further, the Ministry while agreeing stated that 
Preparation of environmental management plan is required for formulation, implementation 
and monitoring of environmental protection measures during and after commissioning of 
projects. The EMP helps reaching identified goals in systematic and cost effective manner. The 
plan should specify key activities, milestones with timeframe, cost and implementation and 
monitoring setup.
10 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

technical executives of EMD make plant visit on need based basis and of late, plant visits are being made 
regularly by the respective desk officers.
RINL established EMD in January 1995 to (i) control air, water and noise pollution (ii) maintain essential 
dust extraction systems (iii) monitor, control and submit data to pollution control board.
RINL prepares Annual Sustainability Plan as a part of Environmental Management System (EMS). The 
Management sets the targets for the completion of environmental projects. While setting the targets, 
Management fixes responsibility to the heads of the respective zones for the implementation of the 
projects as per the schedule specified in the Sustainability Plan.
The Company (SAIL) should prepare EMP at the corporate level to mitigate the possible adverse impact of 
plant operations and for maintaining the existing environmental quality in a structured manner. The EMP 
should also specify key activities, milestones with timeframe and cost.
4.4 Air Emission Management
The greenhouse gas of most relevance to the world steel industry is carbon dioxide (CO ). Much of the 2
CO  arising from iron production comes directly from the burning of coke or charcoal as fuel and 2
reductant for the blast furnace. Yet more carbon dioxide is produced when limestone is added to the 
blast furnace to act as a flux. Steel production essentially involves the reduction of the amount of carbon 
in the iron and this refining process again produces some carbon dioxide. Blast Furnace produces BF gas 
which contains oxygen, carbon Monoxide, carbon dioxide and nitrogen. They are used as fuel for 
industrial heating in downstream, upstream processes and in power generation or burnt in air. As of now 
the BF gas is not being utilized fully as fuel but burnt in air which releases CO  gas. 2
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), the iron and steel industry accounts for 
approximately 4-5 per cent of total world CO  emissions. On an average (world average), 1.9 2
tonnes of CO  is emitted for every tonne of steel produced. Over 90 per cent  of steel industry CO  2 2
emissions come from iron production in nine countries or regions: Brazil, China, the European 
Union (EU), India, Japan, Korea, Russia, Ukraine and the US.
Audit analysis revealed that during the years 2004-05 to 2009-10; SAIL and RINL emitted 233.80 million 
tonne and 59.21 million tonne of CO  respectively. The average CO  emitted by SAIL and RINL during 2 2
2008-09 was 2.99 t/tcs  and 3.18 t/tcs respectively as against the average of 2.09 t/tcs of CO  emitted by 2
Tata steel which is another steel major in the private sector. Further, audit noticed that SAIL & RINL have 
not set any targets for reduction in CO  emission while on the other hand, Tata Steel set a target of 2
reduction in CO  emission to less than 1.7 tonnes per tonne of crude steel by 2012.2
The companies were not making any reason wise analysis as regards higher CO  emission. However, the 2
several factors determine the CO  emission such as specific energy consumption, coke rate for iron 2
making, quality of raw material (coal and iron) and type of fuel used for generation of power. The 
quantum of excess CO  emitted by SAIL and RINL due to excess consumption of energy and coke has been 2
dealt with in para 3.6.1 and 3.6.2. 
The Ministry while agreeing with audit stated (December 2010) that consumption of energy and carbon 
emissions are interlinked and any effort for the reduction of energy consumption has a significant impact 
on the reduction of CO  emissions. As most of the SAIL steel plants are very old and were set with old 2
energy intensive technologies, the specific energy consumption at SAIL was higher compared to the 
newly installed other steel plants in India. Further, the Ministry also stated that major technological 
initiatives are being taken at SAIL plants which would have an impact on the CO  emissions reduction. 2
2
2
  tonne per tonne of crude steel
11Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

RSPM or PM10 is the dust particulates having diameter less than 10 µm (micron) and they are 
small enough to be inhaled and may enter deep into respiratory tract and pulmonary system of 
human beings. PM10 is generated in Raw Material Handling Plants, coke oven Batteries, sinter 
plants, steel melting shops etc. RSPM because of its small size poses health hazard due to easy 
inhalation and deep penetration in respiratory system during breathing. Mostly diseases of 
lungs like asthma, bronchitis, allergic disorders etc. are caused by inhalation of respirable dust.
Ministry further added that RINL installed various cleaner technologies which not only reduced energy 
consumption but also reduced CO  emissions.  Further, RINL is planning to fix targets for reduction of CO  2 2
emission commensurate with specific energy consumption as part of sustainability plan 2011-12. 
In conclusion, though SAIL and RINL have taken various initiatives for reduction of CO  emission but it did 2
not map any specific plan to facilitate further reduction in CO  emission.2
4.5 Air quality
(i) Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter (RSPM)
As per the Notification of 1994 issued by the CPCB, norm for industrial RSPM on 24 hourly basis is 150 3
microgram / cubic meter (µg/m ). 
We observed that:
In BSP, as per management plan, the RSPM sample was required to be taken once in week 
from five specified locations; however, sample for RSPM was not taken as per plan of the 
management. Out of the total available 164 weeks from January 2007 to March 2010, 
percentage of sample taken from the three locations was ranging between 73 and 79. Out 
of the 378 samples taken during this period, in 146 cases RSPM concentration was more 3
than the norms of 150 µg/m .  
3
In RSP out of six locations, RSPM exceeded the norm of 150 µg/m  in two locations during 
2004-05, in four locations during 2005-06 and in two locations during 
2008-09.
RSPM level in ISP (except in 2009-10), BSL & DSP was within the norm during the years 
2004-05 to 2009-10. 
At RINL, RSPM recorded at one location only where it exceeded the norm in 100 out of 419 
samples taken during June 2007 and March 2010. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that installation of new air pollution control facilities in shops and 
augmenting the capacity of the existing ones at integrated steel plants of SAIL have resulted in improving 
the air quality both inside and outside the plant premises and the RSPM level has been found to be in the 3
range of 20 – 100 µg/m  which was within stipulated norm. In case of RINL the Ministry did not give 
specific reply to the issue of excess level of RSPM over the norms, it only stated that Pollution control 
equipments are being maintained as per requirement of Quality Management System & Environmental 
Management System by all the Departments.
n
n
n
n
The fact remains that RINL could not maintain the RSPM level with in the norm which may pose higher 
risk for respiratory diseases to the employees and the people living in the vicinity of the plant.
12 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

SPM are the particulate having diameter less than 100 µm that tend to remain suspended in the 
atmosphere for a longer period of time.  The   atmospheric suspended particulate affect the 
environment by lowering the visibility, producing hazy condition, participating  in secondary 
reactions in atmosphere and affecting biotic population directly or indirectly.
(ii) Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM)
(i) Energy Consumption 
3
As per the Notification of 1994 issued by CPCB, norm for industrial SPM on 24 hourly basis is 500 µg/m . 
SPM level in SAIL plants and RINL was within the norm during the years 2004-05 to 2009-10.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that SPM content continues to be within norm in all the steel 
plants.
4.6 Conservation of energy and natural resources
Steel industry is a resource intensive industry. The extraction, transport and production of raw materials 
for steel making have an impact on the environment. Efficient use of these natural resources is critical to 
the sustainability of the steel industry.  Key raw material inputs needed in steel making include iron ore, 
coal, limestone and recycled steel. On an average 2.6 tonne of raw material  is used to produce a 
tonne of crude steel. The consumption of raw materials in SAIL ranged between 3.26 t/tcs and 3.38 
t/tcs. Though there has been reduction in consumption of raw materials over the years, SAIL is lagging 
behind Tata Steel which consumed 3.00 t/tcs in 2008-09. In RINL it ranged between 3.04 t/tcs and 3.10 
t/tcs. 
3
The energy consumption per tonne of crude steel in SAIL & RINL vis-à-vis Tata Steel and world average 
during last six years ending 2009-10 is depicted below:
3
 4
 
 1,725 kg of iron ore, 645 kg of coal, 150 kg of limestone, and 138 kg of recycled steel
 Giga calories per tonne of crude steel
As against the international average of energy consumption of 4.5 to 5.5 G.cal/tcs , the consumption 
was 6.72 G.cal/tcs in SAIL and 6.84 G.cal/tcs in RINL during 2009-10.
4
13Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
Energy Consumption
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
2004-05
G. Cal/tcs
7.29
6.52
5.50
6.97
2005-06
7.24
6.45
5.50 5.50 5.50 5.50 5.50
6.96
2006-07
7.17
6.72
6.53
6.66
6.59
6.17
2007-08
6.95
6.59
2008-09
6.74
6.86
2009-10
6.72
6.84
SAIL RINL TATA WORLD AVERAGE
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Coke Consumption
480
495
510
525
540
555
2004-05
488 486
493
496
519
495
517521
533
541543
549
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
SAIL RINL
(ii) Coke consumption 
Coke is a very important ingredient (as a fuel) for the functioning of the Blast Furnace to produce hot 
metal. Coke rate is denoted in terms of consumption of coke in kilogram per tonne of hot metal (kg/thm) 
produced. A lower coke rate indicates better performance. 
The coke consumption per tonne of hot metal in SAIL & RINL during the years 2004-05 to 2009-10 is 
shown below:
against the commitment of reduction of one per cent per year in specific energy 
consumption, the actual consumption, on the contrary, increased by one to four per cent 
year after year during the four years 2006–2010. 
While energy consumption was lowest in DSP (6.55 G.cal/tcs), in ISP it was the highest (8.18 
G.cal/tcs) during 2009-10. BSL and RSP made improvement by consistently decreasing the 
energy consumption. The energy consumption per tonne of crude steel vis-à-vis norms in 
SAIL plants and in RINL during the years 2004-05 to 2009-10 are given in Annexure I.
SAIL consumed an extra energy of 118.33 million G.cal during 2004-05 to 2009-10 which 
contributed to increase in CO  emission by 62.10 million tonnes during this period.2
In RINL, excess consumption of 23.83 lakh G.cal of energy contributed to increase in CO  2
emission by 12.51 lakh tonnes during the years from 2004-05 to 2009-10. 
Reasons for consumption of energy in excess of the norms included high fuel rate, coke 
screening losses in blast furnaces, stoppage of LD gas recovery due to rupture of seal of LD 
gas holder in SMS and non-availability of gas holder for storing Coke oven & BF gas.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that energy consumption in ISP has been higher as compared to 
other integrated steel plants of SAIL due to age and prevalence of obsolete technologies and fixation of 
target for energy consumption is done by SAIL management keeping in view maximum possible 
operational improvement and adoption of new technology, if any.  RINL is adopting BS EN: 16001 Energy 
Management System across the steel works which is expected to reduce energy consumption and CO  2
emissions.
n
n
n
n
n
The SAIL has not fixed any specific targets for reduction in energy consumption. In RINL, 
We do not agree with the Ministry because SAIL could not achieve the plant wise energy consumption 
target and RINL could not meet the commitment of reduction of specific energy consumption by one per 
cent per year which impacted the emission of CO .2
14 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
Kg. per tonne of hot metal
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

We observed that:
the years 2004-05 to 2009-10 and it was on decreasing trend. Whereas in BSP it was 
varying between 491 to 509 kg/thm.  In ISP it was ranging between 778 and 816 kg/thm. 
Consumption of coke in other plants was also more than actual consumption of BSP. 
In RINL coke consumption was ranging from 486 kg/thm to 519 kg/thm during the years 
from 2004-05 to 2009-10 and it was on increasing trend. However in the year 2009-10 it 
was decreased to 494.6 kg/thm. 
In comparison with RINL (486 kg/thm in 2005-06) SAIL consumed excess coke of 40.8 lakh 
tonne during 2004-05 to 2009-10 (Annexure II).
On an average the reduction of one kg in coke rate results in reduction of CO  emission by 2
3.4 kg. Thus, due to excess consumption of 4.08 million tonnes of coke by SAIL resulted in 
excess emission of 13.87 million tonnes of CO  in the atmosphere and RINL emitted excess 2
CO  of 0.78 million tonnes due to excess consumption of 0.23 million tonnes of coke. 2
The excess consumption of coke was due to adverse quality of input materials such as iron 
ore and coke and low blast temperature.
n
n
n
n
n
The Consumption of coke in SAIL was ranging between 549 Kg. and 517 Kg. per thm during 
The Ministry reply (December 2010) did not address the issue of excess consumption of coke. Since 
excess consumption of coke has an adverse impact on the overall financial viability of the Company as 
well as on environment, therefore, it should take all necessary  steps to reduce the consumption of coke.
4.7 Solid Waste Management
Wastes are substances or objects, which are intended to be disposed of, or are required to be disposed by 
the provisions of national laws. Additionally, wastes are such items which people are required to discard, 
for example, by law because of their hazardous properties. 
Municipal waste is generated by households and consists of paper, organic waste, metals etc. The 
production processes, households and commercial activities generating waste are hazardous waste. Bio-
medical waste is waste generated by hospitals and other health providers and consists of discarded 
drugs, waste sharps, microbiology & biotechnology waste, human anatomical waste, animal waste etc. 
Waste represents a threat to the environment and human health if not handled or disposed of properly. 
According to United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), waste management includes 
both the components of prevention and disposal of waste. Thus, strategies for waste 
Considering the importance of water conservation, CREP  provided norm for limiting the water 3 3
consumption to 5 m /tcs for long products and 8 m /tcs for flat products plant. 
3
We observed that water consumption in ISP was more than the norm during 2004-05 (8.59 m /tcs) 3
2005-06 (6.96 m3/tcs) and 2008-09 (5.58 m /tcs). The actual consumption of water in other SAIL plants 
& RINL during the last six years ending 2009-10 was within the norm.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that overall specific water consumption at SAIL plants decreased by 3 3
30 per cent during last 6 years from 5.64 m /tcs to 3.96 m /tcs in 2009-10.
We appreciate the action taken by the management to reduce the water consumption and expect that 
the same efforts would be continued.
5
(iii) Water Consumption
5
  Charter on Corporate Responsibility for Environment Protection
15Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

disposal should focus on waste prevention and minimization through the '3 Rs' - Reduce, 
Reuse and Recycle.
In the process of iron and steel making, huge quantity of BF and SMS slag wastes are generated which are 
to be re-used or disposed of.
BF slag is granulated and sold to cement plants whereas the unprocessed BF slag and SMS slag are used 
for refilling of low lying areas. As per CREP, BF and SMS slag were to be utilized to the extent of 70 per cent 
by 2004, 80 per cent by 2006 and 100 per cent by 2008. 
Though SAIL and RINL have plans to utilize slag which include interface with cement 
manufacturers, soil conditioners and setting up of cement plants etc., utilization of slag in 
SAIL & RINL was less than the CREP requirement. 
In SAIL, utilization of BF slag ranged between 54.49 percent and 84.41 per cent during the 
years 2004-05 to 2009-10 whereas utilization of SMS slag ranged between 56.22 per cent 
and 75.24 per cent during this period. Similarly in RINL, utilization of BF slag was in the 
range of 62 per cent and 107 per cent   whereas in respect of SMS slag, the utilization 
ranged between 35 per cent and 82 per cent during 2004-05 to 2009-10.
In respect of utilization of BF slag, BSL is far behind the CREP commitment. So far as 
utilization of SMS slag is concerned, none of the plant could meet the target of CREP and at 
ISP the disposal of SMS slag is nil. 
Concept of 3Rs (Reduce, Reuse and Recycle) emphasizes more on reduction in waste 
generation. Although there has been reduction in BF slag generation per tonne of crude 
steel production in DSP and ISP, there has been increase in generation of BF slag from 374 
kg/tcs in 2004-05 to 431 kg/tcs in 2009-10 in BSP and from 415 kg/tcs in 2004-05 to 431 
kg/tcs in 2009-10 in BSL. 
The reasons for low utilisation of BF slag in BSL was lack of adequate facility (only two out of 
five BFs have granulation facility) to granulate the BF slag which has huge demand in the 
market, non existence of cement plant in nearby areas etc. which resulted in no/less off take 
of BF slag. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that SAIL plants have effectively adopted waste minimization 
strategies including conservation at source, recovery and recycling. Further, at ISP, total SMS slag 
generation is from Twin Hearth Furnace (THF). The physio-chemical characteristics of this slag are such 
that it finds no use. However, after completion of the on-going modernisation at ISP expected by Dec. 
2011, the operating THFs shall be phased out and the total steel making would be from Linze Donawitz 
(LD) converters. Work order for installation of Cast House Slag Granulation Plant for the other three Blast 
Furnaces at BSL has already been placed. All these plants are expected to be commissioned by the end of 
2012.
n
n
n
n
n
Though SAIL and RINL have taken action to utilise the slag but they were still lagging behind the CREP 
target of utilization of SMS and BF slag.
(i) Blast Furnace and Steel Melting Slag
Steel plant generates hazardous wastes such as tar sludge, used batteries, benzol acid sludge, used oil 
etc. Disposal of such waste on land affects the soil & water and leads to environmental problems. 
As per Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rule 1989, the occupier or operator of a facility 
(steel plants in this case) shall be responsible for identifying sites for establishing hazardous wastes 
disposal facility. Considering the seriousness of the environmental pollution being caused by the 
hazardous waste, the Supreme Court of India issued (October 2003) comprehensive directives on 
(ii) Hazardous waste
16 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

hazardous waste. As per directives, MoEF also constituted a Supreme Court Monitoring Committee in 
November 2003 which had set time limit for setting up of common facilities for land filling of hazardous 
waste latest by June 2006. 
In this regard we observed that:
In BSL secured landfill is in operation and for DSP and ISP agreement has been made with 
West Bengal Waste Management Limited for disposal of the hazardous waste at a common 
place.
BSP is yet to construct secured landfill for storage of hazardous waste despite getting 
regular show cause notices from Chhattisgarh Environment Conservation Board (CECB).  
For handling hazardous waste, the plant obtains authorization from CPCB in every three 
years. As per the terms and conditions of this authorization, BSP has to display on- line data 
outside the factory gate on quantity and nature of hazardous chemicals being used in the 
plant, water & air pollution and solid waste generated within the factory premises. 
However, BSP has not fulfilled this condition so far. 
In RSP clearance has been obtained from State Pollution Control Board for development of 
new secured land fill facility.
RINL has not constructed secured landfill as all hazardous waste generated in the company 
are either recycled or sold to authorized parties as per Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control 
Board directive.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that actions have already been initiated for construction of secured 
landfill at BSP. Display board has been installed at the factory main gate of BSP, where the quantity and 
nature of hazardous chemicals and other details are being displayed.
n
n
n
n
The Companies should take early action for proper disposal of hazardous waste as dumping of such 
waste on land affects the soil & water which could lead to environmental problems. 
In 2000, under the powers conferred by the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the Municipal Solid 
Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules were notified which made every municipality, within its 
territorial jurisdiction, responsible for management and handling of solid waste.  Since SAIL and RINL are 
responsible for maintenance of their townships, they need to make proper arrangements for disposal of 
municipal waste.
In SAIL (except DSP where handling and disposal of municipal waste is done by Durgapur 
Municipal Corporation) the municipal waste is not disposed of properly. There was no waste 
processing and disposal facility required as per Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and 
Handling) Rules.
RINL was having proper facility for collection, transportation and disposal of municipal 
waste.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that in SAIL adequate facilities exist at all the steel townships for 
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal wastes.
n
n
The Ministry's contention was not acceptable as municipal waste was not properly disposed at BSL, ISP 
and RSP, as the required facilities for disposal were not available at these plants. 
The Company should make expeditious arrangements for proper disposal of municipal waste to avoid 
any kind of disease outspread.
(iii) Municipal Waste
17Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

To ensure proper management of bio-medical waste, Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, were notified in 1998 with amendments in 2000 and 2003. Under the rules, the institutions 
generating bio-medical waste were responsible for management and handling of bio-medical waste.
In SAIL (BSP, DSP and ISP) and RINL disposal of bio medical waste was assigned to private 
party authorised by state pollution control boards. 
In RSP disposal of bio medical waste was as per norms whereas the BSL has not complied 
with the requirement of Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board to install a two stage 
incinerator of adequate capacity for processing of bio medical waste.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that action has been initiated for installation of bio-medical 
incinerator at BSL, which is expected to be completed by June 2011.
n
n
We observed that:
In RSP the suspended solid exceeded the norm in 2005-06 although in other years it was 
within the norm.
In DSP elements like phenol, ammonia & cyanide at outfall number 5 were much above the 
prescribed norm despite censure and imposition of penalty by SPCB and CPCB during 2007-
08. However, the effluent discharge level in 2009-10 was within the norms.
n
n
n
In BSL, BSP & ISP Effluent discharge level was within the norm.
(iv) Bio-Medical Waste
4.8 Effluent Discharge
Used water in the steel plant contains harmful contents viz. phenol, cyanide, ammonia, oil & grease etc. 
These chemical contents have adverse effect on human beings as stated below:
Phenol: Drinking water containing phenol for a long period of time can cause diarrhea, mouth sores, 
corrosive damage and death. If skin comes into contact with phenol for a long time, people may get liver 
or kidney damage, dark urine, damage to the red blood cells etc. 
Cyanide is acutely toxic to humans and it makes the cells of an organism unable to use oxygen. 
Ammonia can affect respiratory system and repeated exposure can cause respiratory tract irritation. 
To maintain quality of water for re-use, the prescribed norms as per EPA notification dated 24/10/1989 
are given below:  
Parameters
6
pH
Suspended solids
Phenol
Cyanide
BOD
COD
Ammonical Nitrogen
Oil and grease
6.0 to 8.5
100
1.0
0.2
30
250
50
10
Std-Concentration in milligram/liter (mg/ltr) 
except pH (not to exceed)
18 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
6
  measure of the acidity or basicity of a soluiton
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Ammonical Nitrogen which was ranging between 76.2 to 87.2 mg/ltr as against the 
statutory norm of 50 mg/ltr. For this the Russian supplier suggested (August 2002) 
modifications to the effluent treatment plant, which were yet to be done by the company.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that all the SAIL plants are meticulously maintaining the various 
Effluent Treatment Plants so that the effluent quality is well within the stipulated norms when let out 
from the plant boundary to the receiving bodies. In RINL Modifications to the effluent treatment plant as 
suggested by Russian supplier is at final stages of commissioning and stabilization at the total estimated 
cost of Rs. 46 crore.
n In RINL the effluents were within the norms during the years 2004-05 to 2009-10 except 
RINL should commission the effluent treatment plant at the earliest and the Companies should make 
continuous efforts to keep the level of the quality of effluent in the water discharged from the plants 
within the norm to avoid adverse effect of these chemicals.
4.9 Noise Pollution
Since noise pollution has deleterious effects  on human health and the psychological well being of the 
people, MoEF issued (February 2000) the 'Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules 2000' and 
specified the AAQ standards for noise. As per section 4 of the said rule, the noise levels in any area/zone 
shall not exceed the specified limits as detailed below:
7
Category of Area/Zone
Industrial area
Commercial area
Residential area
Silence Zone
8
Limits in dB(A) Leq 
Day Time
75
65
55
50
Night Time
70
55
45
40
We observed that:
and ISP. In BSL, noise level was more than the norm (75 dB) during the period 2004-05 to 
2009-10 in the various shops particularly in blast furnaces, sintering plant, slabbing mill, 
SMS, hot rolled coil finishing and coke oven & by product plant. In RSP, noise level remained 
well within the norm except in SMS during 2009-10. DSP started measuring noise level in 
industrial area only from 2009-10, which was well within the norm. However, noise 
monitoring in other areas in DSP was not done.
As against the norm of maximum noise level of 55 dB(A) for residential areas in day time, 
actual level in RINL during the review period was ranging between 43 dB(A) and 69.3 dB(A). 
The rules also stipulated that the ambient noise levels in respect of industrial and residential 
areas are to be measured during night time. The Company, however, started measuring the 
noise levels in respect of industrial area and residential areas during night time from 2007-
08 and 2009-10 respectively and the same were within the norm.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that SAIL has taken up ambitious expansion/ modernisation 
projects at all the integrated steel plants under which state-of-the-art technology is being implemented 
in most of the work zone areas. After completion of these on-going projects, the noise levels are 
expected to come down below the prescribed noise levels in all the areas.
n
n
Noise level was more than the prescribed level in residential and silence zone areas in BSP 
The Ministry has not indicated any time frame for completion of the projects. There is an urgent need to 
control the noise level as per MoEF regulations.
7
 
   8
 
 Noise induced hearing loss, increased heart respiration rate, elevated blood pressure, psychological disturbances like 
sleeplessness, tinnitus, annoyance,  poor work performance etc.
 Db(A) Leq denotes the time weighted average of the level of sound in decibels on Scale A which is relatable to human hearing.
19Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

4.10 Tree Plantation
Trees are natural sink for CO  gas. The green belt developed by afforestation adds to aesthetic 2
environment which also become dust and noise barrier as well as heat absorber. On an average, a tree 
can absorb CO  at the rate of 6 kg/year and SAIL and RINL emit 40 million tonne and 10 million 2
tonne of CO  per year respectively. Therefore, on an average 6700 million trees are required for 2
absorbing CO  generated by SAIL and 1645 million trees are required for RINL. As this is not 2
possible, both the companies need to reduce CO  emission considerably.2
We observed that:
Though SAIL in its corporate environment policy has emphasized on increasing greenery in 
and around plant and afforestation programme on a company wide basis is included in the 
annual business Plan, it has not set any target for tree plantation for the year 2004-
2009.
During the years 2004-05 to 2009-10, SAIL has planted 8.95 lakh trees. 
The total inventory of trees in SAIL plants was 14.32 million trees as on 31 March 2010.
RINL has planted 8.39 lakh trees during the years 2004-05 to 2009-10 against the target of 
30.72 lakhs. 
The total inventory of trees in RINL as on 31 March 2010 was 4.59 million trees.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that with increased thrust on environment protection, SAIL 
plant/unit level targets for tree plantation are kept and performance monitored on a regular basis. During 
the year 2009-10, 2.1 lakh trees were planted against the target of 2.88 lakh and in 2010-11, 1.44 lakh 
tree were planted (upto September 2010) against the target of 1.95 lakh. RINL is maintaining green belt 
as per norms of MoEF and has fixed the target of 2.5 lakh trees per year for the years 2010-11 and 
2011-12.
n
n
n
n
n
The targets for tree plantation set by the Companies were not commensurate with the quantum of CO  2
emitted by them and even SAIL could not met the target set by it for the year 2009-10. Therefore, the 
Companies should step up the tree plantation and also take effective measures to reduce the CO  2
emission.
4.11 Clean Development Mechanism
To tackle climate change through reduction of GHGs emission, Kyoto Protocol came into force in 
February 2005, which sets limits to the maximum amount of emission of GHGs by developed countries. 
To meet the emission reduction target, Kyoto protocol, inter-alia, provided market based mechanism 
called Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). In CDM, entities in developing countries can set up a GHG 
reduction project, get it approved by United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) and earn carbon credits, which can be bought by entities of developed countries with emission 
reduction targets. Implementation of CDM projects not only results in reduction of GHGs but also yields 
revenue by selling carbon credits. 
In this regard we observed that:
SAIL and RINL have no company level CDM or Carbon policy.  
SAIL identified 71 CDM projects, categorized as Category A (38 nos) and Category-B (33 
nos) in its five steel plants. SAIL acted belatedly (May 2007) and took 32 months from 
February 2005 (Date of Kyoto protocol) in appointment of consultant (November 2007) for 
category A projects. Consultants for category B projects have not been appointed as yet. 
n
n
20 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

It was observed that SAIL could complete only six projects (March 2010) and is lagging 
behind the schedule. Since Kyoto Protocol is going to expire in 2012 and Copenhagen 
climate change summit has failed to take any decision on extension of Kyoto Protocol 
agreement beyond 2012, accruing of benefits of carbon credit from these projects was 
uncertain.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that in SAIL six projects out of 38 projects of Category A were 
validated in the year 2009. Out of these, three projects were verified and action has been initiated for 
monetisation. For other projects (Category B), tenders were floated four times for appointment of CDM 
consultant. However, no suitable offer was received from these tenders. The tender document has been 
recently modified for re-tendering. In RINL claiming CDM benefits has been expedited.
n
n
RINL identified 27 projects as CDM and appointed consultant belatedly in October 2010.
Efforts need to be made for early completion of CDM projects so that carbon credit could be earned and 
sold before expiry of Kyoto protocol in 2012.
4.12
4.13
Charter on Corporate Responsibility for Environment Protection
Conclusion
“Charter on Corporate Responsibility for Environment Protection” (CREP) released by the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest (MoEF) in 2 003 for compliance of pollution control norms identified iron and 
steel sector as one of the 17 major polluting industries. SAIL and RINL have agreed to adopt the 
guidelines as set in the CREP. The compliance status of the clauses incorporated in the CREP by SAIL and 
RINL as on 31 March 2010 has been detailed in Annexure – III.
In essence the energy consumption in SAIL and RINL was more than the world average and Tata Steel. 
SAIL has not set any target for reduction in energy consumption whereas RINL could not meet the targets 
set by it for reduction in consumption of energy resultantly the average CO  emission in both the 2
Companies was higher as compared to Tata steel (2.09 t/tcs) and world average  (1.9 t/tcs). Further, the 
tree plantation by the Companies was also not commensurate with the amount of CO  emitted by these 2
companies. Therefore, the companies have to step up the tree plantation and take the concrete measures 
for reduction of CO  emission.2
Recommendation
ii. The Companies should fix specific targets for reduction of CO  emission.2
iii. The possibility of slag transportation to the abandoned mines to fill up the 
cavities may be examined. 
iv. The effective measures for reduction in generation of slag should be taken.
v. The SAIL should set specific targets for tree plantation and RINL should take 
concrete steps to achieve the targeted afforestation.
21Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Safety Issues
Chapter
5
Safety is an important aspect in the functioning of any industry. It is important not only for its 
employees and workers but also for the environment and the nation. Steel Industry poses one 
of the most difficult challenges in the area of safety, health and environment when compared to 
many other industries due to complex nature of its operations and maintenance activities and 
wide range of hazards associated with them. Despite tremendous technological progress, the 
safety culture and safety at work still are serious issues. Therefore, maintaining of high 
standards of health, safety and environment in Steel Industry is of paramount importance.
5.1 Safety Policy
SAIL has a safety policy which states that the company is committed to safety of its employees and the 
people associated with it including those living in the neighborhood of its plants, mines and units. All the 
plants are having their own Occupation Health and Safety Policy.
RINL is having combined policy on Quality, Environment, Health and Safety.   
SAIL Safety Organization (SSO) was created in 1988 as a corporate body with headquarter at Ranchi, for 
giving overall direction to the efforts in the area of Safety & Occupational health aspects of the company. 
The goal & target of SSO, as the primary facilitating agency, is to make all efforts to continuously improve 
the Safety environment of the company and to bring fatal accident rate to zero. In addition, each plant of 
SAIL has a full-fledged Safety Engineering Department (SED) to look after safety management of the 
respective plant. Safety at the shop floor is closely taken care of by departmental safety officers.
RINL is having Safety Engineering Department which was started in 1987 with the objective to assist and 
advise the departments in fulfilling all the statutory requirements of safety and establishing safety 
systems, procedures and achieving zero accident rate. 
In SAIL and RINL the utilization of safety budget during the period 2004-05 to 2009-10 was as depicted 
below:
23Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
Safety budget and Utilisation - SAIL Safety budget and Utilisation - RINL
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
2004-05 2004-05
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16(` in crore)
(` in crore)
2005-06 2005-062006-07 2006-072007-08 2007-082008-09 2008-092009-10 2009-10
Budget Utilisation Budget Utilisation
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Fatal Accidents
CSR activities. 
In the five integrated plants of SAIL the expenditure incurred towards safety during the 
period 2004-05 to 2009-10 was ` 51.38 crore against the budgeted expenditure of 59.66 
crore .
In RINL, the expenditure incurred on safety was ` 10.82 crore against the budget of  
` 11.71 crore. 
SAIL & RINL utilized the budget substantially but not fully. Utilisation of budget in ISP was 
very poor and was ranging between 31 per cent (2005-06) and 51 per cent (2004-05). 
The Ministry while accepting the audit observation stated (December 2010) that SAIL plants have 
initiated suitable action to ensure effective utilization of allotted safety budget
n
n
n
n
The safety budget provided by the companies was in addition to the budget provided for 
` 
2004-05 to 2009-10. 
SAIL and RINL did not achieve the zero accident rate. In SAIL and RINL, there was decreasing 
trend in number of fatal accidents between 2005-06 and 2007-08 which changed in 2008-
09 and 2009-10. The decreasing trend was noticed in Reportable and Non –Reportable 
cases (Annexure IV).
Analysis  of reasons for fatal accidents revealed that majority of the  fatal accidents were 
due to heat/caught/press between stationary/moving objects; road and rail accidents, fall 
from height; burns, suffocation/buried under, electrocution, lack of communication, 
deployment of unskilled labour, lack of SOP etc. This indicates that the fatal accidents could 
have been avoided to a great extent, had proper and adequate steps been taken by the 
management.
n
n
n
There were 100 fatal accidents in last six years in SAIL and 19 in RINL during the years from 
5.2 Accident reporting
The different types of accidental hazards are Fire, Explosion, Fall from height, Slip and Fall, Struck by 
object, Caught between Objects, Contact with Hot Metal / Hot Slag / Hot substances etc.
The details of the fatal accidents during 2004-05 to 2009-10 are shown in the chart below:
24 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
0
5
10
15
20
25
2004-05
11
20
17
13
2019
3
5
2
45
0
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
SAIL RINL
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

The Ministry stated (December 2010) that the issue of recent spurt in fatal accidents has been viewed 
seriously by the top management and necessary guidelines were being issued as & when required for 
ensuring compliance to safety norms by all concerned. Concerted efforts were being made with proper 
thrust on improving housekeeping standards and ensuring availability of proper safety equipments, 
PPEs, different process related safety gadgets,  warning devices etc.,  to control the incidence of fatal 
accidents and gradually bring them to 'Zero level'.
The fact remains that the Companies have not been able to achieve the 'Zero Accident'.
Occupational Health & Safety Assessment Series (OHSAS) standard specifies requirement for an 
Occupational health and safety management system to enable an organization to control its 
occupational health and safety risks and improve its Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) performance. 
The requirements include establishment of OHS policy, hazard identification, implementation and 
operation, checking, management review etc. OHSAS is not mandatory. However, as to improve the 
safety measures, image of the company and to improve its employees' performance, the companies 
obtain OHSAS certificate.
SAIL in four plants (BSP, RSP, BSL and DSP) and RINL have obtained OHSAS – 18001 
certification after fulfilling the requirements of OHSAS. 
In respect of ISP of SAIL, implementation of OHSAS was in progress. 
n
n
5.3
5.4
Safety Audit
Occupational Health & Safety Assessment Series 
Safety Audit in SAIL
Safety Audit is conducted by SSO officials associating members from sister plants. For this purpose, 
Annual Performance Plan is prepared in consultation with plants. After each audit, a Safety Audit Report 
is submitted to the concerned departments indicating deficiencies on various issues such as availability of 
SOPs, compliance to statutory requirement, housekeeping and first aid & emergency facilities. 
However, we observed that SAIL has not adhered to safety audit plan as would be evident from the fact 
that SSO conducted audit of 9 units against 24 units planned during 2008-09 and 21 units against 18 
units planned during 2009-10. The recommendations made in the audit reports were not implemented 
by the concerned plants fully. 
The Ministry while confirming the audit observation stated (December 2010) that SSO and plant's safety 
departments makes every effort to ensure that shops and departments are adequately covered in terms 
of their audit requirements through audits done internally (by plants), by SSO and through external 
agencies.
Safety Audit in RINL
Apart from internal safety audit that is being done by SED in Occupational Health and Safety 
Management System, continuous audit on all the safety aspects including implementation of joint 
investigation report, recommendations and compliance of the same is being ensured.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that the safety audit is conducted by external safety auditors 
(approved by the Factories dept) every year and recommendations are implemented with time frame. 
Compliance report on the same is submitted to the Factories department.
The companies should conduct safety audit regularly and the recommendations contained in safety 
audit reports should be complied with to ensure the safety of the employees.
25Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

5.5 Occupational health service
The whole process of production of iron and steel right from the raw material to the finished products is 
ridden with many inherent hazards and risks. Hazards are also associated with the very nature of the 
shape and size of operation, reactors and machines. There are physical hazards (noise, vibration, heat 
and coal stress, radiation), chemical hazards (inhalable gases/ vapour/dust/fumes, asbestos, insulation 
wools etc.), safety hazards (limited space, electrical/ mechanical/ hydraulic/pneumatic sources of energy, 
machineries prone to accident including cranes and hoist, falling weights and dangerous objects, slips, 
trips and falls) etc.
We observed that:
The list of occupational diseases and the profession/occupation responsible for them has 
not been displayed in BSP and ISP in works area to make the people aware of hazardous 
effect of their working. The other plants of SAIL (BSL, DSP and RSP) and RINL are displaying 
the list of occupational diseases. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that the list of occupational diseases has been prepared and 
displayed in BSP and in ISP the same was being displayed.
SAIL and RINL were having occupational health centre (OHC) at their plants.  These OHCs 
were meeting the occupational health related requirements of the employees except the 
following:
i. In SAIL the percentage of employees who attended health check up against the 
strength varied from 24 to 35 at BSL, 4 to 29 at ISP, 19 to 48 at DSP, 6 to 43 at BSP and 
24 to 78 at RSP during 2004-05 to 2009-10. In RINL, the percentage of employees who 
attended health checkup was ranging from 33 to 45 during 2004-05 to 2009-10. 
Due to low show up of employees for medical check-up, it is difficult to establish any 
trend about disease because of occupational hazards. Further, in absence of regular 
medical examination of all the employees, companies are unable to know about the 
fitness of the employees.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that various actions have been taken by SAIL and 
RINL to improve employee's turn up for health check up.
ii. As per section 41-C (C) of the Factories Act 1948, workers employed in the hazardous 
factory are to be medically examined once in every 12 months. However, in ISP, RSP & 
BSP, medical examination of workers in hazardous factories was not done once in every 
12 months. In DSP & BSL, medical examination of workers in hazardous factories was 
done once in every 12 months. 
In RINL, in eight out of ten hazardous departments, the interval in conducting medical 
examination was between 13 and 25 months during the year 2008-09 and between 13 
and 29 months during the year 2009-10. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that persons deployed in hazardous areas at DSP 
and BSL were medically examined once in a year and in RSP all employees were 
medically examined throughout the year in rotation. Actions were under progress and 
proposals have been moved for posting of required medical officers & other manpower 
in OHC at BSP & ISP respectively. This would in turn, facilitate them in fulfilling this 
statutory obligation. In RINL the interval in conducting medical examination is less than 
4 months.
n
n
26 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

In case of RINL the Ministry reply is not tenable as interval in conducting the medical 
examination less than four months is based on time gap between the date of th th
completion 9  round and date of commencement of 10  round. The period of interval 
has to be calculated at time gap between commencements of two rounds.
iii. In BSP only 3 medical officers were posted against requirement of 9 medical officers for 
occupational health centre. At DSP and BSL also there were shortages of two and one 
medical officers respectively. In ISP and RSP of SAIL and in RINL, the sufficient numbers 
of medical officers were posted.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that in BSP and BSL proposal for appointment of 
more medical officers is under consideration of the management and at DSP there is no 
shortage of medical officer at present.
The contention of the Ministry is not acceptable as at DSP against the requirement of 
seven doctors there were six doctors. 
Mock drill is an emergency exercise which is not real but appearing or pretending to be 
exactly like something real. Mock drill is conducted to ensure whether the organization is 
prepared to deal with any emergency situation. As per the provisions prescribed under “The 
manufacture, storage and import of hazardous chemical Rules, 1989” mock drill of the on-
site emergency plan should be conducted every six months. In SAIL and RINL mock drills 
were conducted as per norms.
The management is not implementing rotation of jobs, i.e., from hot zone to cold zone for 
ensuring good health of the employees at ISP, DSP, BSL and RSP. However at BSP 30 
employees have been redeployed on the above aspect during 2004-05 to 2009-10. In RINL, 
there was no policy for transferring employees from hot to cold zone.
The Ministry while agreeing with audit observation stated (December 2010) that job 
rotation is one of the most recommended administrative control measures in the workplace 
hazard control would be of immense help in reducing the daily overexposure of an 
individual to hazards beyond the permissible limits. Further, the SAIL plants have the policy 
of job rotation based on various factors. However, feasibility would be explored regarding 
possibility & extent of job rotation based on medical grounds in plants as per the 
recommendations of the audit. In RINL rotation of employees from Hot Zone to cold zone is 
being done within the department as per consultation with unions and personnel 
department. These modalities of rotation are different from department to department.
The SAIL and RINL should take early action for medical examination of workers at least 
once in 12 months to ensure the safety of the workers.
Though in RINL there was rotation of employees from hot to cold zone but the Company 
has not framed any policy for transferring the employees from hot to cold zone.
n
n
5.6 House keeping
Section 38 of The Factories Act 1948 provides that in every factory, all practicable measures shall be taken 
to prevent outbreak of fire and its spread, both internally and externally, and to provide & maintain the 
necessary equipment and facilities for extinguishing fire. Though, SAIL & RINL follow the norms of 
Standing Fire Advisory Committee, Oil Industries Safety Directorate, National Building Code, Factories 
Act 1948 and Bureau of Indian Standard, we observed that:
(i) Fire Incidence 
27Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

SAIL and RINL were having adequate fire fighting equipments except the cases noticed below:
In BSL, two fire incidents occurred (September 2007) in Tandem Mill I of Cold Rolling Mill 
causing damage (` 6.08 crore) to the assets of the company. There were no fire alarm or 
smoke sensor devices inside the Tandem Mill. Electrical apparatus such as cables, motors 
etc. were loosely connected with unsafe conditions, such as no flame proof cover at 
connectors were provided, sludge was not cleaned. Fire detection and Alarm System was 
either defective or not working. Out of 465 nos. of hydrants installed, 29 were not in 
working condition. Similarly, out of 1541 internal hydrants installed in 46 places, 56 were 
not in working condition. Some of the extinguishers were found not kept at their place of 
installation, many of them were found removed from brackets.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that all loose connections in electrical apparatus 
inside the Tandem Mill have been rectified and installation of Fire Detection and Alarm (FDA) 
system and fire retardant paints for cables for total plant including Tandem Mill was in 
progress.
In BSP there was no fire detection and alarm system installed at Continuous Casting Shop of 
SMS-II. A major fire accident was occurred (February 2010) in power and blowing station 
due to short-circuit causing stoppages of major production activities for a week  which 
resulted in loss of production of 1.59 lakh tonne of  saleable steel leading to loss of revenue 
of ` 513.97 crore. This indicates that there was lacunae in the fire prevention system as one 
of the reasons of the accident was limited accessibility for fire fighting equipments and poor 
house keeping in nearby areas.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that wireless fire detector system at SMS-2 Converter 
was expected shortly for installation as order has been placed on the supplier.
In ISP fire alarm systems were not installed at all fire prone areas to ensure safety of 
employees and property. 31 fire hydrants were damaged or out of order. It was further 2
observed that available pressure at the outlet of hydrant varied from 2.5 to 4.5 kg/ cm  2
against the required pressure of 4 to 6 kg/ cm .
n
n
n
(ii) Fire Fighting Equipments
there was no major fire accident. 
The minor fire accident occurrence decreased from 574 (2004-05) to 250 (2009-10) in SAIL 
and from 182 (2004-05) to 63 (2009-10) in RINL. 
Majority of the accidents were due to electric faults and other reasons were  hot 
metal/slag/scale/liquid steel spark/hot coke metal spark,  open flame,   welding, over heat 
friction /gas cutting,  etc., which shows that there was inadequate maintenance of electrical 
appliances and upkeep of plant & machineries.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that in industries, particularly Iron & Steel Industry, Operational fire 
involves a considerable risk in terms of financial losses and loss of life of employees. This is due to the fact 
that innumerable number of combustible substances are stored, handled or used in the associated 
processes of making steel. As such, chances of minor and major fires always exist in plants in 
case of slightest deviation from the prescribed safety norms. SAIL recognizes this well and 
undertakes a number of fire prevention, protection and control measures at its plants.
n
n
n
There were nine major fire accidents during the years 2004-05 to 2009-10 in SAIL. In RINL 
The contention of Ministry is not acceptable as majority of the accidents were due to inadequate 
maintenance of electrical appliances and upkeep of plant & machineries.
28 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

The Ministry stated (December 2010) that in ISP feasibility of installation of fire alarm system 
in the open areas like Gas Holder, Benzol Plant & Power House is being studied. Fire hydrants 
are checked regularly and repairing of defective fire hydrants are being done as per 
requirement. Water leakage in the supply pipe line of hydrants has been stopped.
In DSP the fire alarm systems were installed at production units during 1991 to 1994 but the 
same were defunct since 2004. Records revealed that three fire tenders were suffering from 
problems viz. low compression of engine, non functioning of priming unit and were not 
roadworthy. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that proposal for revival/ replacement of old / defunct 
fire alarm systems has been obtained from reputed parties after site survey and the same is 
under consideration and procurement of new fire tenders is in progress.
n
Fire detection and alarm system should be provided in all the fire prone and sensitive places, shops etc., 
and fire hydrant & fire tenders should always be kept in working condition. 
A proper public address system to ensure safety against fire and other threats is essentially to be 
established in the plant. Non-installation of communication/public addressing system in fire prone areas 
indicates deficiency in the system to ensure safety of employees and plant.
At ISP, Public Address system existed only at Rolling Mills area without UPS facility; and other 
important fire/gas/fume prone areas had no proper communication system. 
In RSP, public address system were available at main gate, CCD control and fire service 
control room in addition to gas cleaning plant of blast furnace.
In DSP public Address system was installed at Gate No. 1 & 2 and on mobile fire tender. 
In BSP, Public address system was installed  at entrance gates and in all the conference halls 
spread throughout the plant
In BSL, a portable public address system was available with fire service department.
RINL had provided Fire Alarm and Public Address Systems at 11 identified fire prone 
departments. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that action has been initiated to install public address system in 
other important fire prone areas in ISP. 
n
n
n
n
n
n
Public address system should be provided at important installations and fire prone areas to facilitate 
proper communication.
(iii) Communication system  
5.7 Conclusion
Although the companies were having safety policy and were providing sufficient fund for safety of its 
employees, but they were not able to control the fatal accidents even if there was decreasing trend in 
total number of accidents. The fatal accidents decreased from 20 (2005-06) to 13 (2007-08) in SAIL and 
5 (2005-06) to 2 (2007-08) in RINL and subsequently these increased to 20 and 3 in SAIL and RINL during 
2009-10. The companies did not achieve the target of 'zero accidents' fixed by them due to inadequate 
house-keeping and safety equipments.
29Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Recommendations
vi. The companies should conduct safety audit regularly and the 
recommendations contained in safety audit reports should be complied with to 
ensure the safety of the employees.
vii. Proper maintenance of entire gas network system should be ensured so that 
leakage of harmful gases can be avoided.
viii. Standard operating Procedure (SOP) should be adhered. 
ix. Awareness should be created among employees about safety and medical 
examination through trainings, hoardings and showing films etc.
30 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Social Development
Chapter
6
6.1
6.2
Activities undertaken by SAIL and RINL
Planning for CSR activities
SAIL has been contributing to social development by community welfare programme, medical camps, 
vocational training, sports facility, medical facilities, free education in the company's schools to the steel 
township and neighborhood children, provided access to 73.31 lakh people across 435 villages by 
constructing and repairing roads, installed 5,153 water sources to provide water to 38.64 lakh people, 
has opened 54 primary health centers, 17 hospitals, 7 super specialty hospitals, 12 Reproduction & Child  
Health Care (RCH) center to provide health care to 26.7 million people. For CSR activities and efforts, 
Bhilai Steel Plant has won the prestigious Golden Peacock Award-2008. 
RINL has also been contributing to social development by conducting medical camps, vocational 
training, sports facilities, medical facilities, education etc. During the review period within its periphery 
the RINL had extended free education to 0.47 lakh students, conducted 27 medical camps duly 
extending free medical aid to 0.97 lakh patients, identified seven villages as model steel villages for 
development of schools, hospitals, bus shelters, community halls etc. 
The provisioning of CSR budget and utilization of the same by SAIL and RINL has been discussed in 
chapter 3. Component wise utilization of fund in respect of SAIL plants and RINL during last six years was 
as under:
* includes vocational training, assistance to handicapped, social upliftment, development of sports etc.
Plant
BSP 2004-10
2004-10
2004-10
2006-10
2007-10
2004-10
2006-10
25.11
18.39
3.00
26.00
5.98
21.71
18.72
5.35
3.87
1.95
13.39
0.99
2.62
4.34
12.13
5.46
3.84
2.46
1.92
1.11
6.97
5.89
1.43
12.02
N.A.
N.A.
3.76
8.83
RSP
DSP
BSL
ISP
S A I L
CMO
RINL
Period Peripheral Medical Education Others*
A long-term Corporate Social Responsibility Plan needs to be prepared matching with the long 
term business plan. This may be broken down into short term and medium term plans, 
specifying activities to be undertaken, budgets allocated, responsibilities and authorities 
defined, and measurable results expected. The plans should be prepared after conducting need 
assessment of the targeted community/area.
project for model steel villages and which are continuing from previous period.
n In SAIL CSR activities were not planned in advance except those cases which are related to 
31Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
(` in crore)
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

6.3 Model Steel Villages
provide financial assistance for undertaking different CSR activities. After getting request 
from different agencies the companies scrutinize and shortlist these requests on their 
merits and requirement of the community. These shortlisted requests constitute the CSR 
plan for the year or for a specific period. Further, in case of activities undertaken by plants in 
their respective peripheral area the requirement of the community is assessed by 
implementing agency (SAIL/NGO/other organisation) in consultation with local 
community. 
The SAIL was not doing any need assessment / survey of the society for preparing the CSR 
plan.
In RINL the CSR plan was prepared based on the request received from the local people, 
local bodies, state organizations, people's representatives, NGOs etc. and a road map for 
allocation of budget was prepared based on the Apex Committee approvals. 
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that SAIL was in the process of evolving a system of need 
assessment/ impact assessment for CSR projects. In RINL earlier need assessment and impact assessment 
was done by National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) in 2007 and action initiated to re-assess the 
need and impact of CSR through Andhra University, Visakhapatnam.
n
n
n
NGOs/ Organisations/Trust/ Civil Societies etc. approach the company with a request to 
The companies should map their CSR plan after assessing the needs of the society in order to fulfill the 
essential requirement of the society.
SAIL adopted 79 villages in eight states  for comprehensive development as Model Steel Villages (MSVs). 
The development has been planned in phased manner spanning three years. RINL adopted seven villages 
in its periphery for development as MSVs. The development work undertaken in these villages includes 
promotion and sustenance of:
Medical and Health Services
Education
Roads and Connectivity 
Sanitation 
Sports facilities and Community Centers
Livelihood promotion
Self help groups
Though SAIL and RINL have completed 54 and 1 MSVs respectively up to 31 March 2010 but the 
companies did not have any policy relating to selection and development MSVs. Such a policy/ guideline 
would help in targeted development.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that the decision to undertake the developmental work of 79 
villages as Model Steel Villages in SAIL was taken by Secretary, Steel in a meeting held (August 2007) at 
Ministry of Steel, New Delhi. As per the decision in above meeting, SAIL, has identified 79 villages in the 
periphery of plants/units across 8 State to be developed as Modal Steel Villages in a phased manner in 
consultation with local representative of villages, Distt. Administration, etc. 
In RINL the villages were identified through an independent survey by an external agency (NIRD) and the 
Company is now following the CSR Guidelines prescribed (April 2010) by DPE. CSR activities including 
development of peripheral villages will be taken up as per the new CSR guidelines only.
9
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
The Companies should have uniform laid down policy for selection and development of MSVs.
9
  Bihar, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and West Bengal.
32 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

6.4
6.5
Education
Medical and Health Care
SAIL has not framed education policy for providing education to the underprivileged people living in the 
vicinity of its plants.  RINL's policy focuses on promotion of literacy, promotion of girl child education, 
special attention on education, training & rehabilitation of mentally & physically challenged children/ 
persons etc. in schools in the surrounding areas.
We observe that:
SAIL has opened 138 schools up to 2008-09 in the steel townships which increased to 146 
in 2009-10 and provide education to 73,925 students in 2008-09 and 69,184 students in 
2009-10. The SAIL has provided assistance to 269 schools of villages surrounding its units in 
2008-09 which increased to 286 schools in 2009-10 but students were drastically reduced 
to 13,770 in 2009-10 from 55,839 students in 2008-09. 
RINL provided financial assistance of ` 5.06 crore for providing education to 47,718 
students during the years 2006-10. 
n
n
The SAIL should formulate an education policy and ensure that the benefits of financial assistance given 
to schools flow to maximum number of students. 
SAIL has not formulated a detailed policy to provide medical & health care facilities to the underprivileged 
people of society, however RINL has a detailed policy in this regard.
We observe that:
SAIL has set up health centres at BSP, DSP, BSL, RSP and ISP to provide medical care to the 
poor and needy persons, where free treatment is being provided including medicines.
Ten Mobile medicare units were provided in each of the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 to 
different organisations.
RINL has given (2007-08) financial support of 3 crore to Sankhar Foundation, 
Visakhapatnam for providing free eye treatment to the poor people and ` 1.15 crore (2008-
09) to Lions Cancer Hospital – 'Sanjeevan Mobile Clinic'.
RINL was also constructing a blood bank for International Red Cross Society at a cost of 
` 2.80 crore.
n
n
n
n
While the medical facilities provided by the SAIL and RINL are appreciable the SAIL should formulate a 
policy for identification and fulfillment of the medical needs of the under privileged.
(i) Medical Facilities
SAIL and RINL organized 5989 medical camps, spent 17.41 crore and treated 17.45 lakh patients 
during the four years ending 2009-10 as detailed below: 
` 
(ii) Health Camps
33Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

We observe that:
excessively high amount (82 per cent) on other activities than the medicines. Out of total 
expenditure of ` 10.56 crore a major portion was incurred on hiring of helicopters for the 
then Minister of Steel (` 1.31 crore), public relation activities (` 5.62 crore). Only 18 per cent 
was spent on medicines which resulted in defeating the basic purpose of organizing 
medical camps which was to provide medical facilities to the underprivileged people of the 
society living in the periphery of the plants.
BSP treated 1.72 lakh patients out of which 1.26 lakh belonged to other states.
RINL organized 27 medical camps including 26 in the state and treated 0.97 lakh patients at 
an expenditure of ` 0.20 crore, of which ` 0.15 crore was on medicine.
n
n
n
SAIL spent more amounts on 'other activities' than medicines. BSL in particular spent 
The Ministry while replying stated (December 2010) that the SAIL would adhere to the 
recommendations of audit with regard to organising medical camps i.e. while organizing the medical 
camps the major of expenditure should be incurred on main activities (medicine, treatment of patients 
etc.).
No. of patients Treated (in lakh)Plant
BSL
BSP
RSP
DSP
CMO
ISP
Total SAIL
RINL
Grand  Total
79
518
4272
670
7
416
5962
27
5989
8
506
4268
653
-
416
5851
26
5877
1.91
0.72
0.44
0.49
0.34
0.49
4.39
0.15
4.54
8.65
1.30
1.17
0.14
1.22
0.34
12.82
0.05
12.87
10.56
2.02
1.61
0.63
1.56
0.83
17.21
0.20
17.41
9.98
1.72
2.47
0.55
1.29
0.47
16.48
0.97
17.45
0.22
0.46
2.19
0.18
0.00
0.47
3.52
0.72
4.24
No. of camps organised
Total In the vicinity Medicines other activities Total Total from the vacinity
Amount spent on (` in crores) 
6.6 CSR monitoring and impact assessment 
n
n
n
n
SAIL prepares a report on its CSR activities every year. 
The company was not doing any overall impact assessment of the CSR activities undertaken by it. 
In RINL Personnel (Welfare & CSR) Department is putting up periodical reports on progress of 
implementation of CSR projects to the Management. Apart from the above, company also sends 
quarterly progress reports to the Ministry of Steel. RINL does not prepare any separate annual report 
on CSR related activities.
The Ministry stated (December 2010) that SAIL and RINL were in the process of evolving a system of need 
assessment/ impact assessment for CSR projects.
In SAIL the implementation is reviewed / monitored and corrective measures are taken. 
The companies should evaluate impact on the society of these CSR activities which would also help the 
Companies in future planning of CSR initiatives.
34 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Recommendations
x. The companies should evolve a system of need assessment and impact 
assessment while undertaking CSR activities.
xi. The companies should disseminate information on CSR policy, activities and 
progress in a structured manner to all their stakeholders and the public at large 
through their website, annual reports, and other communication media.
6.7 Conclusion
SAIL and RINL were contributing to social development by community welfare programme, medical 
camps, vocational training, sports facility, medical facilities, free education, providing access to lakhs of 
people by constructing and repairing roads and adopting villages for development as model steel 
villages. SAIL while organising health camps spent more amount on 'other activities' than medicines.  But 
the companies were not doing any need assessment survey in the periphery of their plants to assess the 
requirements of the society and were not planning in structured manner to utilise the funds efficiently. 
The companies were also not evaluating the impact on the society due their CSR activities.
35Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Conclusion and 
Recommendations
Chapter
7
7.1 Conclusion
In discharge of their corporate social 
responsibilities, SAIL and RINL were 
contributing to social development by 
v a r i o u s  c o m m u n i t y  w e l f a r e  
programme, medical facilities, free 
education, adopting villages for 
development as model steel villages 
etc. Though SAIL was providing 
sufficient funds and was having 
proper implementation set up, the 
company was not having detailed CSR 
policy for execution of CSR activities 
effectively. While RINL had a detailed CSR policy it did not utilize earmarked budget fully. The companies 
were not transferring the budget provided for CSR activities to a separate fund due to which the unspent 
amount lapsed. The companies were not doing any need assessment survey in the periphery of their 
plants to assess the requirements of the society and were also not assessing  the impact of their CSR 
activities on the society.
Steel manufacturing has various impacts on the environment. The main impact comes from the use of 
energy and raw materials, which result in the emission of carbon dioxide. Energy and raw material 
consumption in both the Companies was significantly higher than the average global consumption per 
tonne of crude steel. SAIL has not set any target for reduction in energy consumption whereas the RINL 
could not meet the targets set by it for reduction in consumption of energy resultantly the average CO  2
emission in both the Companies was 
also higher as compared to Tata steel  
and global average CO   emission by 2
steel plants. Further, the tree 
plantation by the Companies was also 
not commensurate with the amount 
of CO  emitted by these companies 2
which underscores the need to step up 
the tree plantation and to take the 
concrete measures for reduction of 
CO  emission.2
The companies were having safety 
policy and were providing sufficient funds for safety of their employees. Though there was decreasing 
trend in total number of accidents, the companies did not achieve the target of 'zero accidents' fixed by 
them due to inadequate house-keeping and safety equipments. 
37Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Recommendations
Some of the important recommendations are summarized below:
i. A dedicated CSR fund, separate from the mainline budget, may be created by SAIL and RINL so 
as to avoid lapse of fund and ensure full utilisation of dedicated funds.
ii. The Companies should fix specific targets for reduction of CO  emission as also for tree 2
plantation.
iii. The possibility of slag transportation to the abandoned mines to fill up the cavities may be 
examined. 
iv. Awareness should be created among employees about safety and medical examination 
through trainings, hoardings and showing films etc.
v. The companies should evolve a system of need assessment and impact assessment while 
undertaking CSR activities in a particular area.
New Delhi
Dated :
New Delhi
Dated :
 (SUNIL VERMA)
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General
and Chairman, Audit Board
  (VINOD RAI)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Countersigned
38 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Energy consumption per tonne of crude steel in
SAIL & RINL vis-à-vis norms during the last six 
years ending 2009-10
(As referred in paragraph 4.6 (i))
Annexure
I
BSP
BSL
DSP
RSP
ISP
RINL
Normal
Actual
Normal
Actual
Normal
Actual
Normal
Actual
Normal
Actual
Normal
Actual
6.85
6.84
7.30
7.23
6.88
7.29
8.54
8.69
8.66
8.69
6.55
6.52
6.84
6.79
7.10
7.08
6.80
7.37
8.59
8.47
8.55
8.46
6.48
6.45
6.82
6.82
7.00
7.09
6.86
7.07
8.40
7.98
8.00
8.19
6.37
6.53
6.75
6.72
6.88
6.89
6.80
6.85
7.74
7.39
7.99
8.14
6.37
6.59
6.45
6.50
6.65
6.83
6.40
6.51
7.10
7.09
8.10
8.18
6.53
6.86
6.45
6.56
6.74
6.74
6.45
6.55
7.05
6.97
8.00
8.18
6.79
6.84
G.cal/tcsPlant 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
40 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Excess consumption of Coke
(As referred in paragraph 4.6 (ii))
Annexure
II
770
760
725
745
760
780
494
496
505
515
520
530
540
550
580
585
580
580
475
490
512
530
520
535
ISP
BSL
RSP
DSP
778
783
816
807
786
784
506
518
512
520
523
531
534
548
566
577
607
633
506
500
522
525
559
544
2009-10
2008-09
2007-08
2006-07
2005-06
2004-05
2009-10
2008-09
2007-08
2006-07
2005-06
2004-05
2009-10
2008-09
2007-08
2006-07
2005-06
2004-05
2009-10
2008-09
2007-08
2006-07
2005-06
2004-05
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
486
502133
597729
639800
775266
779560
683553
4065568
4021000
4658000
4588000
4706000
4132000
2267765
2200015
2229410
2123936
1778063
1690744
2173953
2111127
2186507
2063801
1953003
2016920
292
297
330
321
300
298
20
32
26
34
37
45
48
62
80
91
121
147
20
14
36
39
73
58
146623
177526
211134
248860
233868
203699
81311
128672
121108
155992
174122
185940
108853
136401
178353
193278
215146
248539
43479
29556
78714
80488
142569
116981
12.22
8.47
10.80
4.92
1221710
847145
1080570
491788
Total
Total
Total
Total
Norm (Kg/
Tonne)
Plant Actual coke
rate (kg/
tonne) 
Year RINL Actual
coke  Rate 
in 2005-06 
(kg/tonne)
Hot metal 
Production 
(tonne)
Diff in 
coke rate   
(kg/tonne)       
Excess 
consumption 
of coke 
at Plants in 
comparison 
to RINL   
(tonne)         
Total in 
lakh tonne
(c)(a) (d)(b) (e) (f) (g) = (d-e) (h)=(f x g)/1000 (i)
487
490
484
485
480
500
BSP
498
491
509
509
497
499
2009-10
2008-09
2007-08
2006-07
2005-06
2004-05
486
486
486
486
486
486
5370002
5387180
5267670
4816773
5178269
4511179
12
05
23
23
11
13
64440
26936
121156
110786
56961
58645
4.39
40.80
438924
4080137
Total
Grand Total
41Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Annexure - II
RINL
2.28228204.35Total
Norm (Kg/
Tonne)
Plant Actual coke
rate (kg/
tonne) 
Year RINL Actual
coke  Rate 
in 2005-06 
(kg/tonne)
Hot metal 
Production 
(tonne)
Diff in 
coke rate   
(kg/tonne)       
Excess 
consumption 
of coke 
at Plants in 
comparison 
to RINL   
(tonne)         
Total in 
lakh tonne
488
486
493.2
496.4
519
494.6
486
486
486
486
486
486
3920339
4152621
4045697
3912750
3545501
3900060
2
0
7.2
10.4
33
8.6
7840.68
0.00
29129.02
40692.60
117001.53
33540.52
42 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited
(c)(a) (d)(b) (e) (f) (g) = (d-e) (h)=f x g)/100 (i)
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08
2008-09
2009-10
2004-05
Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Compliance Status of Charter on Corporate 
Responsibility for Environment Protection
(As referred in paragraph 4.12)
Annexure
III
Compliance by SAIL Compliance by RINLS.No. Parameters
Coke Oven Plants
(i) To meet the parameters 10
PLD ,  PLL  and PLO  of the 
notified standards under EPA 
within three years (by 
December 2005).
11 12
Steel Melting Shop
Fugitive emissions - To reduce 
30% by March 2004 and 100% 
by March 2008 (including 
installation of secondary 
dedusting facilities).
Blast Furnace
Direct inject of reducing agents 
by June 2013.
(ii) To rebuild at least 40% of the 
coke oven batteries in next 
10 years (by December 
2012).
1.
2.
3.
PLL, PLO & PLD were within the norms in BSL, 
BSP, DSP. PLD and PLO level in RSP was within 
norm. PLL level in battery No. 2, 3 and 4 was 
beyond the norm during 2004-05 to 2007-08. 
Although PLD, PLL in ISP were within the norms 
during the year 2004-05 to 2009-10 there was 
an excess emission of PLO during 2004-05, 
2005-06 and 2007-08 which ranged between 
4.2 per cent and 15.3 per cent against a norm 
of 4 per cent.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that PLL, PLO 
& PLD were within the norms in all SAIL plants 
since 2008-09.
Out of the 30 batteries SAIL has already rebuilt 
3 batteries and 7 batteries are under rebuilding. 
It has a plan to install a new battery by 2011 in 
place of 2 batteries.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that out of the 
25 batteries in operation, 5 batteries have been 
rebuilt since March 2003 and 4 batteries are 
under rebuilding which is expected to be 
completed by Dec. 2012. One battery is under 
cold repair and SAIL has planned to install a 
new battery by 2011 in place of 2 old batteries.
100 per cent reduction could not be achieved in 
any of the SAIL plant.
Secondary dedusting facilities are yet to be 
installed at SAIL plants.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that effective 
actions have been taken at the steel plants to 
install secondary de-dusting facilities so as to 
minimise fugitive emission.
Out of 24 blast furnaces Coal Dust Injection 
facility has been installed in six blast furnaces 
and Coal Tar Injection facilities have been 
installed in four blast furnaces.  But the 
intended benefits of these facilities were yet to 
be achieved.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that out of 19 
operating blast furnaces, Coal Dust Injection 
facility has been installed in 10 blast furnaces 
and Coal Tar Injection facilities have been 
installed in 5 blast furnaces but the reply did 
not address the issue of not achieving the 
intended benefits from these facilities.
PLL, PLO & PLD were within 
the norms.
100 per cent reduction could 
not be achieved.
Secondary de-dusting facilities 
are yet to be installed.
RINL had proposal to install CDI 
facility in both the blast 
furnaces by December 2009 but 
the same was yet to be 
completed (November 2010).
Ministry stated (December 
2010) that provision of CDI 
facilities are in progress in BF 1 
& 2 with target date of March 
2011 and the facility is 
envisaged in BF-3 (Expansion) 
and target date is last quarter 
of 2010-11. 
Ministry stated (December 
2010) that Secondary dedusting 
facilities are envisaged in SMS-2  
(Expansion) and target date is 
Dec' 2011. In existing SMS-1 
facilities will be taken up during 
revamping and target date is 
Dec'2013.
Out of 3 batteries RINL has a 
plan to rebuild one battery in 
2013 i.e. beyond the CREP 
schedule.
Ministry stated (December 
2010) that Batteries are in good 
health, hence, rebuilding of 
batteries will be taken up from 
the year 2014 onwards after 
commissioning of Battery – 5.
9
   10
 11
 
Percent leaking doors
Percent leaking lids
Percent leaking off take
43Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Annexure - III
Compliance by SAIL Compliance by RINLS.No. Parameters
* By 2004 - 70%
* By 2006 – 80% and
* By 2007 – 100 %.
Hazardous Wastes
- Charge of tar sludge/ ETP 
sludge to Coke Oven by June 
2003.
- Inventorization of the 
Hazardous waste as per 
Hazardous Waste (M& H), 
Rules, 1989 as amended in 
2000 and implementation of 
the Rules by Dec. 2003).
Being charged  in coke oven
Status has been detailed in para 4.7.2
Being charged in coke oven.
Status has been detailed in para 
4.7.2
Water Conservation/ Water 
Pollution
(i) To reduce specific water  
consumption to 5 m3/t for 
long products and 8 m3/t for 
flat products by December 
2005.
(ii) To operate the Co-BP effluent 
treatment plant efficiently to 
achieve the notified effluent 
discharge standards by June 
2003.
Installation of Continuous stack 
monitoring system  (CSMS) & its 
calibration in major stacks and 
setting up of the online ambient 
air quality (AAQ) monitoring 
stations by June 2005.
To operate the existing pollution 
control equipment efficiently 
and to keep proper record of run 
hours, failure time and efficiency 
with immediate effect. 
Compliance report in this regard 
be submitted to CPCB/SPCB 
every three months.
5.
6.
7.
Status has been detailed in para 
4.6.3
CSMS and AAQ have been 
installed in RINL.
Proper records are being 
maintained and compliance 
reports are being submitted to 
the respective SPCB and CPCB.
Status has been detailed in para 
4.8
Status has been detailed in para 4.6.3
CSMS has been installed in SAIL plants except 
ISP.
AAQ has been installed in RSP, BSP and ISP. In 
DSP and BSL AAQ is yet to be installed.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that the two 
numbers of CSMS installed recently in ISP were 
presently under calibration/ stabilization and 
installation of Continuous AAQ monitoring 
station at DSP and BSL was in progress.
Proper records were being maintained and 
compliance reports were being submitted to 
the respective SPCB and CPCB.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that plants are 
maintaining records and compliance reports are 
sent to CPCB/SPCB on regular basis
Status has been detailed in para 4.8
Solid Waste /Hazardous Waste 
Management
Utilization of Steel/ Melting shop 
(SMS)/ Blast Furnace (BF) Slag as 
per the following schedule:
4. Status has been detailed in para 4.7.1. Status has been detailed in para 
4.7.1 
44 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11

Annexure - III
Compliance by SAIL Compliance by RINLS.No. Parameters
To implement the 
recommendations of Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA) study 
sponsored by MoEF by 
December 2003.
8. Major recommendations have 
already been implemented.
Major recommendations have already been 
implemented. Technically feasible 
recommendations have been envisaged in 
Technology Plan for expansion/ modernization 
of SAIL plants.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that 
recommendations of CREP/ Audit observations 
have been complied with at BSP, DSP, RSP and 
BSL. At ISP all the recommendations are being 
implemented in the on-going modernisation/ 
expansion project.
To implement clean technologies 
measures to improve the 
performance of industry towards 
production, energy, land and 
environment.
9. Many of the mentioned clean 
technologies are already in 
practice. 
Many of the mentioned clean technologies are 
already in practice. Others like Rain Water 
Harvesting, Ozone Depleting Substance 
replacement, reduction in GHGs were under 
implementation.
Ministry stated (December 2010) that many 
clean technologies measures have been 
adopted and some are under implementation
45Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam LimitedReport No. 27 of 2010-11

Details of Accidents
(As referred in paragraph 5.2)
Annexure
IV
Year
YEAR
2004-05 (R+C)
2005-06 (R+C)
2006-07 (R+C)
2007-08 (R+C)
2008-09 (R+C)
2009-10 (R+C)
SAIL
RINL
BSP
1
3
4
4
6
2
BSP
3
2
2
2
2
11
BSP
56
51
45
48
44
34
DSP
3
3
3
0
1
1
DSP
13
88
24
9
2
2
DSP
27
23
168
33
13
25
RSP
3
3
3
1
4
4
RSP
37
38
33
31
14
16
RSP
40
36
38
31
25
18
BSL
3
9
5
4
4
10
BSL
25
18
14
16
21
12
BSL
177
115
64
73
19
16
ISP
1
2
2
4
4
3
ISP
2
112
120
17
20
10
ISP
0
0
1
0
0
0
Total
11
20
17
13
19
20
Total
80
258
193
75
59
51
Total
300 391
225 503
316 526
185 273
101 179
93 164
FATAL
FATAL
NIL
5
4
2
5
3
REPORTABLE
REPORTABLE
75
62
60
56
44
42
NON-REPORTABLE
NON-REPORTABLE
15
14
16
02
03
02
Total
TOTAL
90
81
80
60
52
47
2004
(R+C)
2005
(R+C)
2006
(R+C)
2007
(R+C)
2008
(R+C)
(R = Regular,  C=Contractual)
(R = Regular,  C=Contractual)
2009
46 Performance Audit on Corporate Social Responsibility of
Steel Authority of India Limited and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Report No. 27 of 2010-11