Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 i 
 
Executive Summary 
Introduction 
In June 2009 Ministry of Defence informed the Comptroller & Auditor General of India 
that consequent to a case having been regi stered by Central Bureau of Investigation 
(CBI) against Shri Sudipta Ghosh, former Di rector General Ordnance Factories involving 
serious charges of corrupt practices, CBI ha d requested the Ministry to examine whether 
there were irregularities in the procurement cases finalized during the tenure of the 
former Director General. Since 
a proper analysis of the procurement cases would require 
in-depth examination and cons iderable professional skills, Ministry requested CAG to 
undertake a special audit of all the procurement contracts during the period by a suitable 
team of officers from the Indian Audit & Accounts Department. 
Averring that the matter of involvement of th e former DGOF in corrupt practices needs to 
be examined by the investigative agencies  through criminal investigation and the 
institution of the office of the CAG is neither empowered nor equipped to carry out 
investigations of a forensic nature, CAG nevertheless authorised review of the 
procurements of stores and machineries by the OFB and Ordnance Factories as a follow 
up audit of the previous Report No 19 of 2007 on OFB procurements. 
A team of 19 officers conducted the audit between September 2009 and February 2010. 
It was conducted in Department of Defence Production, Ordnance Factory Board, 
Ordnance Equipment Group Headquarters , Kanpur, Armoured Vehicles Group 
Headquarters, Avadi and 18 Ordnance Factories. The audit broadly covered procurement 
during the period from 2006-07 to 2008-09, but in several cases in order to analyze 
current procurement decisions, decisions ta ken in earlier years were examined. Apart 
from examining files and documents in Ministry and OFB, 1291 supply orders valuing Rs 
4434 crore were examined by the team during the audit of the Board and Factories. This 
Report contains the findings of the Audit. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 ii 
 
 
Audit Findings 
Procurement by Ministry of Defence and Ordnance 
Factory Board 
Nalanda Factory 
Transfer of Technology 
Cabinet Committee on Security accorded sanction in November 2001 for setting up 
facilities at Nalanda in Bihar at an estimated cost of Rs 941.13 crore to manufacture two 
lakh Bi Modular Charge System (BMCS) per year. The approval included transfer of 
technology (TOT) from Denel, a South African firm at a cost of Rs 60.51 crore. The 
technology was to be acquired along with procurement of 4 lakh modules to meet the 
Army’s immediate requirement from Somchem. The estimated cost of the factory was 
revised to Rs 2161 crore in January 2009. The overall progress of Nalanda factory has 
been dismal despite an expenditure of Rs 786 crore till March 2010. 
Contract agreement for transfer of technology was signed between OFB and Denel on 15 
March 2002. It envisaged supply and delivery of TOT documents which comprised 
Product specifications including detailed dimensional drawings and designs, Quality and 
Inspection procedures, Process descriptions and Production methods in respect of raw 
materials, intermediate products and fina l products. The Seller’s warranty and the 
Performance Bank Guarantee provided by Denel have expired on 31 March 2010. 
Establishment of the Factory. 
The factory comprises three plants, two of which are for producing Nitro Cellulose and 
Nitro Glycerin, which are to provide inputs to the main plant to produce BMCS. It was 
decided that the main BMCS plant would be procured as a package. The plants for the 
manufacturing of primary ingredients Nitro-gl ycerin (NG) and Nitro-cellulose (NC) being 
standard plants were to be procured separately on turn-key basis. The project of setting 
up of the factory was effectively converted into three independent and uncoordinated 
procurement decisions. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 iii 
 
This was a fundamentally flawed strategy which led to the situation where contracts for 
two feeder plants have been awarded but the main BMCS plant which will use output of 
these plants is nowhere in sight.  
The factory has also been mired in controve rsies. All dealings with the technology 
provider Denel was put on hold in June 2005  due to allegations of corruption. By that 
time, however, Denel supplied all the requ ired documents and re ceived payments for 
them. Further work on factory was also put on hold from June 2005 to July 2006, which 
required retendering for all the plants, which led to sharp hike in price. 
The contract with IMI Israel for the ma in BMCS plant has now been mired in 
controversies and corruption charges and has put the future of the Nalanda plant in 
jeopardy.  
Contract of the Main BMCS Plant to IMI Israel 
Tender Enquiry for BMCS plant was issued first in March 2004. The price bid was opened 
in October 2004. IMI Israel emerged as the L-1 firm at a cost of Rs 571.71 crore. The 
matter did not progress since project was kept in abeyance by Ministry in June 2005.  
After the project was restarted in July 2006, IMI was called for negotiation meeting in 
August 2006 and asked to reduce the price as assessed by a committee constituted by 
OFB. IMI however insisted on a price increase from original 2004 price of Rs 571.71 
crore to Rs 654.79 crore. OFB decided to issue global tender enquiry to generate more 
competition. 
Fresh Tenders were issued in February 2007. However, hardly any fresh competition was 
generated as a result of the fresh tenders. Against five companies to whom tenders were 
issued, only three responded within time. One of them, DMP Italy refused to sign the 
Integrity Pact and to pay the earnest money deposit of Rs 3 crore. As a result only two 
companies namely IMI, Israel and Simmel Di fesa, Italy remained in consideration. The 
price bid was opened on 28 January 2008. The offer of IMI Israel was the lowest at Rs 
1090.83 crore and the next higher quote of Simmel Difesa was at Rs 1885 crore.  
During the earlier negotiations, the escalation demanded by the IMI was 15 per cent over 
a period of two years from July 2004 to August 2006. Against the fresh tender, the 
escalation was 67 per cent over a period of one year. The scope of supply in the quotes 
in March 2004, September 2006 and February 2007 remained the same. 
Internal assessment indicated that the rate quoted by IMI was very high 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 iv 
 
The internal assessment of OFB also indicate d that compared to the quotation of IMI 
Israel in 2004, the rates quoted by IMI in January 2008 was on a high side. By adding 
escalation factors to the estimates quoted in October 2004, the base price came to Rs 
800.34 crore as against Rs 1050.01 crore quoted by IMI in the fresh tender. Another 
estimate carried out by University Institute of Chemical Technology Mumbai arrived at a 
cost of Rs 832.22 crore. For the Single Base Propellant Plant, Ordnance Factory 
Bhandara calculated the basic cost at Rs 269.1 crore as against the cost of Rs 747.23 
crore demanded by IMI. 
Cost Negotiations Committee did not recommend any firm negotiated price for 
procurement of BMCS Plant 
Against this background, MOD constituted a Cost Negotiation Committee (CNC) on 27 
March 2008 with DGOF as Chairman. The basic objective of the CNC was to negotiate 
price and other commercial terms and conditions. However, CNC did not take any firm 
decision regarding the final negotiated cost of the plant.  
Cabinet approval to the procurement of the BMCS Plant was assumed as implicit in the 
approval of the cost revision of the project 
The Competent Financial Authority for approv ing the contract of the BMCS plant was 
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS). Ministry of Defence in December 2008 put up a 
note to Cabinet seeking approval for revision of the estimated cost of project from Rs 
941.13 crore to Rs 2160.51 crore. The “approval para” of the note to the Cabinet did not 
refer to the BMCS plant at all and sought on ly the approval of the revised costs of the 
project. In the note, the facts of the increase d cost of the BMCS plant and IMI’s offer of 
reduction of only US $ 3 million were mentioned as contributing reasons to the 
escalation of the costs. The lack of re solution on the issue in the CNC was not 
mentioned. Similarly, the issue of the pric e variation formula was not brought to the 
notice of the Cabinet. CCS approved the revision of cost of the project. 
Ministry took this approval as “implicit approval” by the CCS of the procurement of BMCS 
plant and conveyed to OFB on 5 February 2009 sanction for the revised cost of project. 
OFB in a fax on 6 February 2009 requested to authorize it to conclude contract for BMCS 
plant “at the rate negotiated and approved by the Competent Financial Authority.” 
Ministry on 10 February 2009 informed OFB that the revision of the cost of the project as 
a whole has been approved by the compet ent authority and OFB may conclude the 
contract for BMCS plant “at the approved and negotiated cost.” Neither the Ministry nor 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 v 
 
the OFB clarified in their correspondence at any time as to what exactly was the 
“negotiated and approved cost.” 
Deputy Director General New Capital in the OFB in his note dated 10 February 2009 
which was endorsed and approved by the fo rmer DG, clearly stated that “from the 
minutes of the meeting of CNC dated 22 July 2008, it is seen that the CNC did not make 
a n y  c o n c l u s i v e  d e c i s i o n  o r  r e c o m m e n d a t i o n  t o  M O D  w i t h  r e g a r d  t o  a c c e p t a n c e  o f  t h e  
negotiated price. Also the terms for advance payment of 20  per cent demanded by IMI in 
their offer were not specifically referred to MOD for approval (being beyond OFB powers), 
it may be presumed that MOD has considered the entire issue covering all aspects in its 
totality and conveyed their sanction accordingly.” The note was endorsed by the former 
DG. 
Interestingly, Ministry took the stand that CNC was aware of such an advance demanded 
and therefore should be treated as integral part of the CNC proceedings. Seeking a 
separate approval for the payment of advance beyond admissible limit was considered a 
“redundant exercise”. In no meeting, did CNC consider the issue of recommending the 
payment of advance. 
Thus based on the “presumption” regarding th e negotiated cost having been approved 
by the Competent Financial Authority, which in  this case was the Cabinet, OFB concluded 
the contract for the BMCS plant IMI Israel in March 2009 at the total cost of Rs 1175 
crore. It also paid an advance of Rs 174 crore to IMI in March 2009 which would remain 
idle as transactions with IMI were put on hold in June 2009 by Ministry. 
The main audit findings relating to the contract are : 
(a) In order to execute the contract of main BMCS plant for Nalanda factory, the normal 
procedures were significantly undermined; 
(b) OFB’s refusal to accept the revised offer of IMI of Rs 654.79 crore and the consequent 
decision to retender to generate more competition was ill advised. Both OFB and 
Ministry were aware that the number of firms capable and willing to supply BMCS 
plant were very few; 
(c) OFB and Ministry executed the contract with  IMI despite the steep increase in costs 
from the previous quotations ignoring avai lable internal assessments that the hike 
was unreasonable; 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 vi 
 
(d) Ministry took the doubtful stand that the a pproval of the Cabinet to revision of costs 
of the entire project amounted to “implicit approval” of the procurement of main 
BMCS plant; 
(e) Ministry misled Ministry of Finance stating that no escalation is foreseen knowing 
fully well that IMI has insisted on price va riation formula for the Indian portion of the 
project; 
(f) Ministry and OFB between themselves ob fuscated the issue of “negotiated and 
approved cost.” While Ministry did not hesitate to even put up before Cabinet that 
such price has been negotiated by CNC, OFB took the stand that CNC did not 
recommend any “negotiated and approved” cost to the Ministry; and  
(g) Ministry allowed payment of 20 per cent advance arguing that CNC was aware of the 
issue and therefore it should be treated as integral part of the CNC considerations on 
the whole issue. OFB took the stand that this was not recommended by the CNC. In 
fact, the issue indeed was never considered by the CNC;  
In the case of all three plants, decisions were taken to retender to generate more 
competition. In all three cases, the retendered cost was much higher than the negotiated 
price. 
Dealings between Singapore Technologies and OFB on procurement of 
Close Quarter Battle Carbines by Ministry of Home Affairs 
On 12 Jun 2008, OFB received a communication from the Singapore Technologies 
Kinetics (STK) addressed to the former DG. In this, a meeting in September 2007 was 
referred to in which discussions had taken place regarding collaboration between OFB 
and STK on offset arrangements for selected programmes of the Ministry. It was stated 
i n  t h a t  l e t t e r  t h a t  S T K  h a d  t h e n  r e c e i v e d  f rom Ministry, RFPs for Close Quarter Battle 
Carbines and ammunition and also other items like Light weight Howitzer and Towed Gun 
system. STK requested OFB to offer the draft terms and conditions for provision of offset.  
In the backdrop of the above, a meeting took place on 8 July 2008 between former DG 
and other officials of OFB Headquarters and the representatives of STK at OFB. STK 
informed that Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA ) was likely to make outright purchase of 
CQB carbine and they would like to participate in the same. Chairman / OFB stated that 
the subject matter can be taken up with MHA stating that “an offset agreement has been 
signed between OFB and STK and the latter has developed the carbine using Indian 
components so that the indigenization process becomes faster for supply to MHA”.  

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 vii 
 
Falsification of facts by OFB before Ministry of Home Affairs 
The decision to "take up" the matter with th e Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs 
stating that "an offset agreement has been signed between OFB and STK and that STK 
has developed the Carbine by using Indian Components so that the indigenization 
process becomes faster for supply to MHA" was incorrect and amounted to falsification 
of facts. The fact was that as on that date, neither any offset agreement had been signed 
nor had STK developed any carbine "by usin g Indian Components". As subsequent 
developments would indicate, this was the beginning of a web of falsifications and 
conspiracy that surrounded the deal between STK and OFB. 
Though it was further decided in that meetin g that the above can be taken up with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs only when the Carbine with Indian Component is developed and 
test fired in India in the presence of OFB, subsequent actions of the OFB belied that 
decision and confirmed the intention to mislead the MHA. 
Close on the heels of this meeting, another meeting took place between MHA and 
officers from the OFB Headquarters on 24 July 2008. MHA expressed the need for 
acquiring 5.56 mm Carbine on most urgent basi s as the plan for modernization of police 
forces was coming to an end on 31 March 2010. It was pointed out that 5.56mm carbine 
provided by OFB earlier for carrying out trial evaluation had failed. OFB officials informed 
that fresh trials for ammunition would take place soon but OFB’s representative also 
suggested that they can supply for trial 5 No s Carbine developed by "one Singapore firm" 
with which OFB "will have Transfer of Technology (TOT) arrangements".  
In an internal note on 29 July 2008, on a proposal whether OFB should provide the 
carbines offered by STK for trials by MHA, it was opined by Member (Ammunition & 
Explosives) and Member (Weapons, Vehicles & Equipments) that the carbines should not 
be offered to MHA since they had not been evaluated by the Ordnance Factories. The 
former DG on that note directed to call STK for a meeting. 
The meeting was convened on 11 August 2 008. In Phase I of the meeting which was 
internal, it was decided to offer to MHA the STK carbine having minimum 50  per cent  
work share with OFB along with OFB's own AMOGH carbine. In the Phase II of the meeting 
in which STK participated, it was decided that six carbines should be provided by STK out 
of which five should be offered to the MH A. STK assured that they would send two 
carbines immediately by 25 August which coul d be used by Ordnance Factories for their 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 viii 
 
trials. To facilitate import, it was decide d to sign the end user agreement and non 
disclosure agreement "today (11 August 2008) itself".  
 
The Performance of the Carbine differed widely in  trials by Small Arms Factory Kanpur and by 
paramilitary forces 
Arrangements were then made for carrying out trials of the two STK SAR 21 MMS 1 
carbines at SAF 2 Kanpur on 15 September 2008. Trials were conducted at 50 m and 
200m range beyond which facilities were not avai lable. Ability to fire with One Hand grip 
was found "Not suitable". Sustained firing was conducted where 720 rounds were fired in 
10 minutes. Overheating was noticed at various points. At the end of the firing, safety 
lever became loose and could not be rectified on the spot. At the drop test at 5 metres, 
major misalignment problem was observed in one machine and it became non-
functional. In case of the other machine, minor problems cropped up which, however 
c o u l d  b e  r e c t i f i e d  o n  t h e  s p o t .  E f f e c t  o f  d u s t  a s  i n  a  d e s e r t  l i k e  c o n d i t i o n  w a s  n o t  
evaluated. 
MHA trials were held from 17 November to 21 November 2008 at NSG premises at 
Manesar. Prior to the trials STK apprehended that there might be technical complications 
if their carbine is subjected to reliability test specifications as spelt out in the MHA’s trial 
directive and requested for safety certificate from OFB. This would be required as the 
carbines were being offered as OFB’s carbin es that would be produced through a TOT 
arrangements. OFB did not hesitate to provide the required safety certificate and other 
certificates for recoil forces, noise levels etc. that were issued by DDG/R&D based on the 
certificate issued by STK. Without formal  collaboration with STK, issuing safety 
certificates by OFB to facilitate trial by  MHA was incorrect as the carbine was fully 
imported and it had failed on several parameters when tested in SAF Kanpur.  
On several parameters, in which SAR 21 was found deficient in SAF Kanpur, NSG trials 
found the carbine completely satisfactory. The dr op test was done at the height of 5 feet 
as against 5 meter tested at SAF. While SAF complained of smoke, NSG trial did not find 
any trace of smoke. NSG also found that the weapon could easily be handled and fired 
with one hand.  
                                                      
1 Singapore Assault Rifles Modular Mounting System 
2 Small Arms Factory, Kanpur  

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 ix 
 
DDG/R&D who was nominated as OFB’s represen tative at MHA trial brought out that 
large numbers of stoppages were observed during the firing of OFB’s own ‘AMOGH’ 
carbine of Small Arms Factory being fielded by OFB. These stoppages were primarily on 
the account of defective feeding of ammuni tion by the magazine. DDG opined that the 
gun has otherwise performed satisfactorily as far as accuracy, consistency and other 
parameters are concerned. He further observed that " Poor performance of SAF Carbine 
during trials of NSG could have been avoide d, had SAF taken more care in preparing the 
Weapons Systems before sending to NSG." 
In a meeting in the MHA on 18 February 2009 regarding procurement of Carbines, OFB 
committed that they can supply the first batch of 2627 carbines on 1.9.2009, 18369 by 
31.3.2010 at the same monthly rate and the total quantity by 28 February 2011. BSF 
opted to procure the weapon from the OFB. CRPF also agreed with that.  
It was only after this commitment, the issue to undertake productionization of STK make 
Carbine was deliberated in the Board meeting held on 26 February 2009 which passed 
the following resolution: 
"Production of 5.56 mm Carbine of Singapor e Technology with 45mm chamber length 
would be undertaken subject to (a) MOD’s approval of collaborative instrument with 
Singapore Technologies and (b) MHA’s commitment to procure economically viable 
quantities from Ordnance Factories. Th e background of selection of Singapore 
Technologies for obtaining technology for pr oduction of 5.56 mm carbine inter-alia 
bringing out that no RFP was issued to iden tify the collaborator would be spelt out to 
MOD at the time of sending the collaborative instrument for their approval."  
The cost of STK carbine was likely to be more than six times the cost of in-house 
developed carbine.  
The case could not proceed further as the transaction with STK was put on hold in June 
2009 by MOD after STK had indirectly been mentioned in the FIR registered by the CBI 
against former DGOF. 
On the day OFB committed supply of carbines to MHA, OFB did not have any production 
arrangements with STK for production of thes e in India. There was no authorization from 
the Ministry to commence any production arrangements. OFB by committing the supply 
to the MHA, created a fait accompli  situation to facilitate STK to supply the carbines 
piggybacking Ordnance Factories. While MHA could avoid floating the normal tendering 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 x 
 
procedures by procuring it from OFB, the fact is that OFB in absence of any co production 
arrangements would have supplied carbines produced by STK. The process amounted to 
a sophisticated connivance by OFB and STK to sell STK carbines to MHA without going 
through the approved laid down procedures. 
Assertion of OFB before MHA that it will ha ve TOT arrangements was not based on facts 
and was intended to mislead the MHA. Even  the rudimentary terms and conditions of 
TOT and co-production arrangements had not been contemplated at that stage. OFB 
falsely presented before MHA the SAR 21 MMS as OFB’s offer, with production and TOT 
arrangements with STK. The officials from the MHA and the Para Military forces accepted 
OFB’s offer without any further examination or investigation. Such lack of diligence was 
unbecoming of senior manage ment dealing with such proc urements. Officials from the 
MHA never enquired about the production faci lities knowing fully well that SAR 21 MMS 
is not an indigenous carbine. 
Ministry of Defence was not even aware of these developments. They came to know only 
after the receipt of two anonymous compla ints in February 2009 through MHA and 
initiated disciplinary action thereafter. 
Dealings between Defence Corporation Russia and OFB 
In a similar case, Ministry of Defence issued two RFPs for the procurement of Light Bullet 
Proof Vehicles (BPV) and Light Strike Vehicle (LSV) with accessories in June 2008 and 
August 2008 respectively. Against the above backdrop, Defence Corporation Russia 
(CDR) showed interest in a letter dated 8 Oc tober 2008 in formulating strategic alliance 
with OFB for joint production of BPV and LSV in India. OFB invited CDR on 13
 October 
2008 to a meeting on 23 October 2008. The decision for collaboration with CDR for 
participation on BPV was taken in the OFB Meeting dated 31 October 2008. Thus, the 
whole exercise was concluded in one month at an astonishing speed. Two Collaboration 
Agreements (CAs) were signed on 15 April 2009 between CDR and OFB to enter into 
strategic long-term collaboration  for the production and supply of the LSV and BPV to 
OFB.  
Such collaborative arrangements with CDR were entered into by the OFB without 
exploring the market. The work share arrangem ents also did not favour OFB in any way. 
Work-share in respect of LSV was distributed between CDR and OFB as 84.87  per cent  
and 15.13 per cent respectively. Similarly, in respect of BPVs, the share of CDR and OFB 
was distributed as 64.92  per cent  and 35.08  per cent  respectively. It included all the 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xi 
 
above low technology items. OFB was not to get any benefit from these CAs from 
technology point of view as all the major components were to be supplied by CDR and 
only to be assembled by OFB. On the other hand, CDR would supply their product at the 
cost fixed by them and without entering into any competitive bids. It was noted that there 
was no oversight by the Ministry of Defence to ensure that such actions are scrutinized at 
different levels. 
Procurement by Factories 
Procurement through Open Tender Enquiry and Limited Tender Enquiry 
Ordnance Factories normally resort to two chan nels to procure stores. Limited Tender Enquiry 
(LTE) is issued to established suppliers who are registered with the factory concerned. Open 
tender enquiry (OTE) is open to any supplier. OTE channel is designed to encourage new 
suppliers to participate in the Ordnance Factory procurement process and thus to expand the 
base of suppliers to the Ordnance Factories. However, established suppliers are not barred from 
quoting against open tender enquiries. For materials which are proprietary or are not available 
widely in the open market, Single Tender Enquiry (STE) is issued. 
According to Paragrap h 4.6.1.1 of MMPM
3, 80 per cent  of annual ordering quantity is to be 
procured through Limited Tender Enquiry (LTE) from established sources and 20 per cent  
quantity is to be procured through Open Tender  Enquiry (OTE) with wider publicity for source 
development.  
Scrutiny in audit indicated that LTE channel continued to be the dominant channel of 
procurement and a miniscule part of procurement was carried out through OTE channel. Out the 
18 Factories selected, the information on the OT E / LTE/ STE was available in the database of 
seven Factories only. The data of OTE in these seven Factories during the last three years was 
meagre and varied from 0.07 per cent to 1.91 per cent only.  
The system of open tender enquiry has been so distorted that in Ordnance Factory Khamaria the 
response to the OTE ranged from Re. 0.07 (7 paise) to Rs. 3700.00. Two companies namely 
Hyderabad Precision Co and Mech Components Lt d, both located in Hyderabad, quoted 7 paise 
only. Both these companies were otherwise establis hed suppliers. The last purchase rate of the 
item was Rs. 4401.90 per set through LTE and the lowest offer of Re 0.07 per set was obviously 
“freak”. Despite this the factory placed in September 2008 supply orders for the item on these 
two firms for 4289 and 4288 sets respectively at an absurd price of 7 paise. Needless to say, no 
supply of the item has been received from either  of the firms. Incidentally, both the companies 
shared the same fax number for another tender enquiry in Ammunition Factory, Kirkee. 
                                                     
 
3 Material Management Procurement Manual is OFB’s Procurement Manual. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xii 
 
Tell-tale evidence of collusion of suppliers ignored 
As per Rule 142 (ii) of General Financial Rules (GFR), credentials of the suppliers should be 
carefully verified before registration of the supp liers. Further as per Rule 142 (iv) of the GFR, 
performance and conduct of every registered supp lier is to be watched by the Department. The 
suppliers are liable to be removed from the list  of approved suppliers if they make any false 
declaration to the Government or for any ground, which in the opinion of the Government is not in 
public interest.  
Scrutiny of the procurement files of the past th ree years indicated that the Ordnance Factories 
registered and placed orders on a large number  of companies which shared the same telephone 
numbers, or fax numbers or registered addresses. 23 such cases are listed in Annexure III. Such 
cases indicate on one hand, lack of basic verification of the credentials of the companies and 
lack of application of mind by the authorities in the Factories on the other. It is apparent that 
many shadow firms were operating and cornering supply orders from various Factories. The 
factory authorities however did not take into ac count even the most obvi ous evidence of such 
malpractices which enabled the suppliers to manipulate the prices 
Several individual cases of such collusion are narrated in Paragraph 6.4 of this report. 
Cases of clear cartelization ignored by the Factory Officials 
During audit at least 108 cases were seen in diff erent Factories, where firms from different cities 
have quoted the same price for same item. All we re through limited tender channel. Details are 
at Annexure IV. As an example, in the first case  in Annexure IV, in Or dnance Factory Khamaria, 
five firms from Mumbai, Delhi, Pune, Gurgaon and NOIDA quoted exactly the price of Rs 398 per 
item for ball insert. Supply order was placed on all firms and the tendered quantity was equally 
distributed.  
In order to stop cartelization, OFB on 18 July 2007 introduced a new measure. It prescribed that 
L2 and L3 tenderers should also be allowed to supply provided they accept the counteroffer of 
the rate quoted by L1 at a ratio of 50:30:20. However the measure did little to improve the 
situation as the suppliers quoted the same rate and all became L1 as a result. 
One of the reasons why firms registered themselves under different names was the usual 
practice of Ordnance Factories to distribute the ordered quantity among different suppliers if they 
were found to have quoted same rate or accepted, being L2 or L3, a counter offer of the L1 rate. 
Such firms who operate under different names, in the event of equal distribution of tendered 
quantity will get a larger share through a sister concern or a ghost firm. In one extreme case, 
Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjahanpur placed supply orders on 13 suppliers at the same rate 
by distributing the quantity of Yarn Woolen 450 Tex Type Natural Grey. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xiii 
 
Unwillingness of TPC 4s headed by the Head of the factory and comprising other senior factory 
officials to take action on blatant cases of pr ice manipulation by suppliers and in some cases 
their active connivance to favour suppliers, absence of independent assessment of the rates 
quoted and treating the last purchase rate as th e only benchmark coupled with the practice of 
distributing the ordered quantity among all supplie rs reinforced and encouraged the practice of 
cartelization even more. 
It also came to notice that prices quoted under OTE were significantly lower than the prices under 
LTE. The opinion among the factory officials was that suppliers quoted cheaper rates to grab the 
contracts as the first step to enter into the supply chain of the Ordnance Factories. While this 
may be partially true, many cases were seen in which established suppliers also participated in 
open tender enquiries and quoted cheaper rates. The belief also presupposes that suppliers will 
be making losses to make entry through the open tender channel which may not be wholly true. 
Cases were seen that suppliers through shadow firms also were able to suppress effective 
competition.  
In none of the cases mentioned in Annexure IV , where cartelization was prima facie evident, 
Ministry or OFB or the concerned factory made any enquiries or took any effective action. On the 
other hand, such a situation was allowed to continue  in almost all the Factories. In factory after 
factory the same firms responded to various tend er enquiries both through LTE and OTE channel 
and manipulated the prices, as would be evident from Chapter VII of the Report. In many cases, 
in replies to audit observations the Factories justified the action by the fact that they were 
following the provisions of the MMPM. No initia tive was taken by Ministry, OFB or the factory 
officials to stop the brazen manipulation of the system. 
Price Discovery process in procurement 
To achieve the best price in competitive tend ering, open and competitive tendering is the sine 
qua non. Dependence on the limited tender, cartelization, lack of independent assessment of the 
reasonableness of pricing and very high delegati on among different levels of officials in an 
environment which has little internal control have  created a situation in the Ordnance Factories 
in which the possibility of a fair price through competitive bidding was remote. During audit, a 
large number of cases were seen where the prices have been manipulated and the officials had 
not taken any effective action to ameliorate the situation. This has emerged as the fundamental 
flaw in the system.  
Paragraphs 6.18 and 6.18.1 of MMPM lay down  the elaborate guidelines to determine the 
reasonableness of prices for procurement in case of competitive tendering where two or more 
suppliers are competing independently to secur e a contract. The Manual envisages that the 
                                                      
4 Tender Purchase Committees 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xiv 
 
reasonability of price proposed has to be esta blished by taking into account the competition 
observed from the responses from the trade, la st purchase price, estimated value, database 
maintained on costs based on past contracts en tered into, market price wherever available, 
changes in the indices of various raw materials, electricity, wholesale price index and statutory 
changes in the wage rates etc.  
Para 6.18. (e) also required that the reasonability of price be examined by resorting to Cost 
analysis in situations where there is wide variance over the Last Purchase Purchase not 
explained by corresponding changes in the indices. 
Further, as per Paragraph 9.17 of MMPM, OFB was to make arrangement for data base on past 
contracts showing details of the items procured, th eir essential specifications, unit rate, quantity, 
total value, mode of tender enquiry, number of tenders received, number of tenders considered 
acceptable, reasons for exclusion of overlooked te nders, un-negotiated rates of L-1, and contract 
rates were to be maintained to help in ascertaining reasonability of price of future procurements. 
The data in respect of supply orders in excess of Rs 20 lakh was to be made available in OFB 
website for information of all Factories. Further, as per the Manual, database maintained on 
costs based on concluded contracts, prices of pr oducts available through market should also be 
used to assess reasonableness of prices offered.  
It was noticed during audit that neither the Factories nor OFB had maintained any database as 
per OFB Manual. The Factories do not have any da tabase of the estimate d cost of the stores 
procured or the prices of the product available through market. The various TPCs determined the 
reasonability of the rates with reference to the last paid rate (LPR) only.  
In most of the Factories, LPR was the main index to assess price reasonableness. There was no 
cost expert either at the OFB level or at the fa ctory level. In one or two Factories rudimentary 
efforts were made in a few cases to independently arrive at an estimate.
 
Contract Management 
Rule 158 of the General Financial Rules stipul ates that “to ensure due performance of the 
contract, performance security is to be obta ined from the successful bidder awarded the 
contract. Performance security is to be obtained from every successful bidd er irrespective of its 
registration status. Performance Securi ty should be for an amount of 5-10  per cent  of the value 
of the contract.” It further stipulates that “Per formance security should remain valid for a period 
of sixty days beyond the date of completion of al l contractual obligations of the supplier including 
warranty obligations.” 
It was noticed in audit that in many cases the Factories did not take security deposit. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xv 
 
Similarly, cases were noticed about non-inclus ion of option clause which favoured the 
suppliers. In HVF Avadi, Audit noticed that option clause was manipulated to favour R K 
Machine Tools. 
Internal Control 
Internal Audit and Vigilance 
It was seen that internal control mechanisms both at the Board and Factory level were allowed to 
collapse and become dysfunctional. 
The Chief Internal Auditor of the Factories in a response to a query in audit on the functioning of 
the internal audit mechanism admitted that the in ternal audit teams could not raise objections 
against Ordnance factory organizations, as they functioned under their administrative and 
functional control of the executive. He stated  in November 2009 that during 2006-07 to 2008-
09, the internal audit mechanism failed to uncove r any financial irregularities both at factory 
level and at the level of OFB.  
The malaise was however deeper and structural. Between 2006-07 and 2008-09, the Internal 
Audit was under the control of OFB. The Chief Internal Auditor (Factories) was under direct 
functional and administrative control of the Memb e r  ( F i n a n c e )  o f  O F B .  H e  f u n c t i o n e d  w i t h  t h e  
help of five Regional Internal Audit Officers (R IAO) who were primarily responsible for functions 
relating to finance and accounts  and only additionally, Internal  Audit. The Material Planning 
Sheet
5 was required to be approved by the Local Aud it Officer (LAO), who was also the accounts 
officer in the factory. The RIAO were under functi onal and administrative control of the respective 
GMs/Sr. GMs of the Ordnance Factories. Such an arrangement violated the fundamental 
principles of independence of internal audit. Th e internal audit wing did not develop any Manual, 
checklists or guidelines for conduct of such audit and functioned in an ad hoc manner.  
The dysfunctional state of internal audit was reflec ted in the fact that as of March 2010, a total 
of 2137 audit objections were still outstandin g. At the OFB level, there is a Networking 
Committee chaired by one DDG to monitor the internal audit objections. Only two meetings of the 
Committee were held in two years. As of November 2009, the last meeting was held in March 
2008. At the Factory level, even though there was an ad-hoc Committee in each factory under the 
Chairmanship of Sr GM/GM and these committees  were required to meet quarterly, such 
meetings were infrequent. In the past 15 quarte rs from quarter ending December 2005 to June 
2009 in 39 Factories, 585 such meetings should have been held. Only 120 meetings were held. 
                                                     
 
5 Material Planning Sheet is required to be generated by every factory to initiate procurement action. It 
shows the requirement, existing stock and dues in from previous supply orders if any to arrive at the net 
requirement for which procurement action is to be initiated. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xvi 
 
80 per cent of the meetings required to be held were never held. In some of the Factories, from 
2005-06 to date, only one or two meetings had taken place. 
As with Internal Audit, in case of Internal Vigi lance also, the dysfunctional state of vigilance was 
reflected in the fact that 15 Factories submitted to the Board ‘Nil’ reports on 18 vigilance sub 
topics continuously for the past three years. Even  these ‘Nil’ reports were usually delayed by six 
to nine months indicating lack of attention to the reports by the CVO and the OFB. Three 
Factories did not even submit these reports.
 
Delegation of financial powers without Internal Audit and Vigilance 
It is in the backdrop of collapsing internal control that Ministry of Defence in December 
2006 issued orders significantly enhancing the fina ncial powers of the Ordnance Factory Board. 
The objective of such enhancement of powers  was to enhance autonomy and increase the 
efficiency of the Ordnance Factories in its day-to-day functioning. Following this, OFB on 11th 
April 2007 enhanced financial powers of variou s functionaries in Ordnance Factories for 
procurement of stores, plant and machineries. For procurement of stores through open tender or 
limited tender which is the main source of procur ement of stores in the Factories, the power of 
GM was enhanced from Rs 1 crore to Rs 20 cr ore. For procurement of Plants and Machinery 
through limited tender or open tender in replacement of BER 6 Plants and Machinery, against 
projects sanctioned by government  or to improve production under NC 7, the powers of General 
Managers were enhanced from Rs 10-25 lakh to Rs 20 crore. 
Tender Purchase Committee exercising functions of Competent Financial 
Authority 
Procurement through Tender Purchase Committees in the Factories represented a structural 
problem of decision making in the Factories. TPCs performed the functions of the CFA 8. While 
such TPCs were headed by the CFA, the procur ement cases were not considered separately on 
files based on the recommendations of the TPCs and no separate sanction order was issued for 
these procurements. While it promoted collegiate  decision making, the accountability of the 
individual CFA could not be established in this process. 
                                                      
6 Beyond Economic Repair 
7 New Capital 
8 Competent Financial Authority 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xvii 
 
 
Recommendations 
1. Ministry should review the role a nd composition of the Ordnance Factory 
Board. The Board should be expanded to include senior representatives of 
Department of Defence Production, In tegrated Finance, DRDO and Army 
Headquarters. The Factories and the OF Secretariat should be Board 
managed.  
Ministry accepted the recommendation. 
2. The responsibility of the Board should be to oversee the functioning of the 
Ordnance Factories rather than taking decisions relating to procurement 
and the day to day functioning of the Factories. In other words, Board 
should function similar to a Board of a company. 
Ministry accepted the recommendation. 
3. Day to day running of Factories includ ing procurements should be function 
of the DGOF, who should be assisted by the Members and other officials. 
The decisions taken by DG should be subject to the review by the Board. DG 
should function as the CEO with responsibility and accountability 
commensurate with CEO of any Organization.  
Ministry accepted the recommendation. 
4. In view of the fact that the internal control in the Ordnance Factories 
including OFB Headquarters has become dysfunctional, there exists a case 
for completely overhauling the same. Ministry may review the position and 
put in place a comprehensive and functi onal internal cont rol system in the 
Ordnance Factories. 
Ministry stated that it would be incorrect to say that the internal control system has 
become dysfunctional. The performance of Factories is closely monitored by the 
Members concerned as well as Board level. The performance of the OFB is also 
monitored by the Ministry. A comprehensive  e-procurement system has been put in 
place which would become operational from 01 August 2010. This would enable, the 
Ministry stated, to make the procurement procedures of Ordnance Factories 
transparent and accountable. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xviii 
 
Appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry, it  is stated that the in ternal control in an 
organization denotes a robust control en vironment, which sets the tone of the 
organization including tone at the top, ri sk assessment, control activities which 
comprise policies and procedures that help  ensure that management directives are 
carried out. It also requires disseminatio n of pertinent information and continuous 
monitoring. 
Ministry should broad base the concept of the internal control beyond narrow 
supervisory controls, which as would be evident from the present audit report, failed 
completely.  
5. The Chief Internal Auditor (Factories) should have his own dedicated set up 
and should be completely independent from DGOF and Factories. He should 
report directly to the Board. Copies  of his reports should be invariably 
endorsed to the Secretary, Department of Defence Production.  
Acknowledging that the internal audit syst em needed to be strengthened, Ministry 
stated that action will be taken in consultation with the CGDA who is responsible for 
internal audit. 
6. Secretary, Department of Defence Prod uction should immediately form a 
standing audit committee to monitor the internal audit reports.  
Ministry agreed to form an audit committe e. The recommendation of audit would be 
considered to include suitable external representatives in the audit committee. 
7. The Chief Vigilance Officer of the Ordnance Factories should have complete 
independence and should preferably be  from outside the Indian Ordnance 
Factory Service. The guidelines issued by the CVC should be followed 
strictly. 
Ministry informed that an officer of Railway Engineering Service has been appointed as 
Chief Vigilance Officer of the OFB. 
8. The MMPM should be reviewed thoroughly to ensure procurement in 
accordance with the General Financial Rules. The artificial restrictions on 
the firms coming through OTE channel should be reviewed.  
Ministry informed that the procurement ma nual is under complete revision According 
to the proposed revised manual, the Minist ry stated, procuremen t would hereafter be 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xix 
 
made mainly through open tenders and limited tenders will be resorted to avoid stock 
out situations and to meet unforeseen requirement of armed forces. 
9. The roles and responsibilities of comp etent financial authority and tender 
purchase committee should be separated. Accountability of individual CFA 
both at DG level and factory level should be established. The role of the 
tender purchase committees should be recommendatory. 
Ministry assured to examine the recommendation. 
10. Ministry may review the composition of tender purchase committees and 
reduce the levels of such committees. Inclusion of representative from 
another factory in the same location should be considered.  
Ministry assured to examine the recommendation. 
11. Separate sanction order should be i ssued for each procurement and copies 
of such orders should be endorsed to all concerned in terms of General 
Financial Rules. 
Ministry accepted the recommendation. It as sured that separate sanction order will be 
issued in all procurement cases. 
12. The present system of procurement through the channel of Memorandum of 
Understanding should be discontinued forthwith. Co-production, Co-
development and Collaboration agreements should be subjected to prior 
approval of Ministry of Defence or the reconstituted Board. The user 
directorate and DRDO should be involved in these decisions. 
Ministry stated a standard operating proced ure for cases of collaboration has recently 
been prepared. In all cases in  which foreign technology collaboration is involved, prior 
approval of the Ministry of Defence would be required. The user directorate and DRDO 
would also be consulted, if necessary. 
13. Ministry should on a priority basis invest required resources to computerize 
the procurement process completely in line with the e-procurement initiative 
of Government of India and ensure that all Factories maintain compatible 
databases. Suitable procurement application also should be developed. 
Ministry stated that action is under way and it is in accordance with the 
recommendations made by Audit. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xx 
 
14. All databases should be networked so th at Factories can reap the benefits of 
networked databases in proc urement. Suitable trigge rs should be included 
in the procurement application so that unusual cases according to pre 
determined parameters are thrown up by the system itself. 
Ministry agreed to initiate action according to the above recommendation. 
15. Generic and widely available items sh ould be identified and should be 
procured through open tenders only. List of such items should be published 
in the website of OFB. Such open tenders should be published in the 
websites of OFB and Ministry of Defence. 
Ministry stated that the procurement manu al were under revision and open tender 
channel would be the main channel for procurement. 
16. The proposed independent CVO and Int ernal Audit should investigate all 
cases where a number of firms quote the same price. 
Ministry agreed to include stringent meas ures against cartelization in the revised 
procurement manual. 
17. A cost audit cell should immediately be set up and procurement must be 
done, specially in cases of limited tender and single tender taking into 
account the advice of the cost audit cell. 
While noting the recommendation and acknowled ging that induction of qualified cost 
accountants will help, Ministry noted that th ere are industrial engineering units within 
the Ordnance Factories.  
18. OFB should recheck the credentials of all the vendors registered with the 
Factories, so that ghost firms can be rejected. Such check should include a 
one time check of the owners of the firms, their addresses and other details 
and most importantly, their manufac turing capacity by site visits/ 
inspections. 
Ministry agreed with the recommendation. 
19. OFB should also place a list of all such vendors with all details about their 
ownerships, nature of business etc. in its website. 

Executive Summary of Audit Report on Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
 xxi 
 
Ministry stated that action would be take n to include the details in the upcoming e-
procurement portal of OFB. 
20. Ministry should instruct OFB Headqua rters and Factories that subject to 
compulsions of national interest, all limited and single tenders should be 
published on the website till the time limited tender channel is used for 
procurement. 
Ministry stated that all tenders would be  published in the upcoming e-procurement 
portal. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 89 
 
 
Recommendations 
1. Ministry should review the role and composition of the Ordnance 
Factory Board. The Board should be expanded to include senior 
representatives of Department of  Defence Production, Integrated 
Finance, DRDO and Army Headquarters. The Factories and the OF 
Secretariat should be Board managed.  
Ministry accepted the recommendation. 
2. The responsibility of the Board shou ld be to oversee the functioning 
of the Ordnance Factories rather than taking decisions relating to 
procurement and the day to day f unctioning of the Factories. In 
other words, Board should function similar to a Board of a 
company. 
Ministry accepted the recommendation. 
3. Day to day running of Factories including procurements should be 
function of the DGOF, who should be assisted by the Members and 
other officials. The decisions taken by DG should be subject to the 
review by the Board. DG should function as the CEO with 
responsibility and accountability commensurate with CEO of any 
Organization.  
Ministry accepted the recommendation. 
4. In view of the fact that the in ternal control in the Ordnance 
Factories including OFB Headquarters has become dysfunctional, 
there exists a case for completely overhauling the same. Ministry 
may review the position and put in place a comprehensive and 
functional internal control system in the Ordnance Factories. 
Ministry stated that it would be incorrect to say that the internal control system 
has become dysfunctional. The performance of Factories is closely monitored by 
the Members concerned as well as Board level. The performance of the OFB is 
also monitored by the Ministry. A comprehensive e-procurement system has 
been put in place which would become operational from 01 August 2010. This 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 90 
 
would enable, the Ministry stated, to make the procurement procedures of 
Ordnance Factories transparent and accountable. 
Appreciating the steps taken by the Mini stry, it is stated that the internal 
control in an organization denotes a robust control environment, which sets the 
tone of the organization including tone at the top, risk assessment, control 
activities which comprise policies and procedures that help ensure that 
management directives are carried out.  It also requires dissemination of 
pertinent information and continuous monitoring. 
Ministry should broad base the concept of the internal control beyond narrow 
supervisory controls, which as would be evident from the present audit report, 
failed completely.  
5. The Chief Internal Auditor (Factories) should have his own 
dedicated set up and should be completely independent from DGOF 
and Factories. He should report directly to the Board. Copies of his 
reports should be invariably endorsed to the Secretary, Department 
of Defence Production.  
Acknowledging that the internal audit system needed to be strengthened, 
Ministry stated that action will be taken in consultation with the CGDA who is 
responsible for internal audit. 
6. Secretary, Department of Defence Production should immediately 
form a standing audit committee to monitor the internal audit 
reports.  
Ministry agreed to form an audit co mmittee. The recommendation of audit 
would be considered to include suitable external representatives in the audit 
committee. 
7. The Chief Vigilance Officer of th e Ordnance Factories should have 
complete independence and should preferably be from outside the 
Indian Ordnance Factory Service. The guidelines issued by the CVC 
should be followed strictly. 
Ministry informed that an officer of  Railway Engineering Service has been 
appointed as Chief Vigilance Officer of the OFB. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 91 
 
8. The MMPM should be reviewed th oroughly to ensure procurement 
in accordance with the General Financial Rules. The artificial 
restrictions on the firms coming through OTE channel should be 
reviewed.  
Ministry informed that the procurement manual is under complete revision 
According to the proposed revised manual, the Ministry stated, procurement 
would hereafter be made mainly through open tenders and limited tenders will 
be resorted to avoid stock out situations  and to meet unforeseen requirement of 
armed forces. 
9. The roles and responsibilities of competent financial authority and 
tender purchase committee should be separated. Accountability of 
individual CFA both at DG level and factory level should be 
established. The role of the tender purchase committees should be 
recommendatory. 
Ministry assured to examine the recommendation. 
10. Ministry may review the composition of tender purchase committees 
and reduce the levels of such committees. Inclusion of representative 
from another factory in the same location should be considered.  
Ministry assured to examine the recommendation. 
11. Separate sanction order should be issued for each procurement and 
copies of such orders should be endorsed to all concerned in terms of 
General Financial Rules. 
Ministry accepted the recommendation. It assured that separate sanction order 
will be issued in all procurement cases. 
12. The present system of procurement through the channel of 
Memorandum of Understanding shou ld be discontinued forthwith. 
Co-production, Co-development and Collaboration agreements 
should be subjected to prior approval of Ministry of Defence or the 
reconstituted Board. The user directorate and DRDO should be 
involved in these decisions. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 92 
 
Ministry stated a standard operating pr ocedure for cases of collaboration has 
recently been prepared. In all cases in which foreign technology collaboration is 
involved, prior approval of the Ministry of Defence would be required. The user 
directorate and DRDO would also be consulted, if necessary. 
13. Ministry should on a priority basis invest required resources to 
computerize the procurement process completely in line with the e-
procurement initiative of Governme nt of India and ensure that all 
Factories maintain compatible databases. Suitable procurement 
application also should be developed. 
Ministry stated that action is under way and it is in accordance with the 
recommendations made by Audit. 
14. All databases should be networke d so that Factories can reap the 
benefits of networked databases in  procurement. Suitable triggers 
should be included in the procu rement application so that unusual 
cases according to pre determined parameters are thrown up by the 
system itself. 
Ministry agreed to initiate action according to the above recommendation. 
15. Generic and widely available items should be identified and should 
be procured through open tenders on ly. List of such items should be 
published in the website of OFB.  Such open tenders should be 
published in the websites of OFB and Ministry of Defence. 
Ministry stated that the procurement manual were under revision and open 
tender channel would be the main channel for procurement. 
16. The proposed independent CVO and Internal Audit should 
investigate all cases where a number of firms quote the same price. 
Ministry agreed to include stringent measures against cartelization in the 
revised procurement manual. 
17. A cost audit cell should immediately be set up and procurement 
must be done, specially in cases of limited tender and single tender 
taking into account the advice of the cost audit cell. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 93 
 
While noting the recommendation and acknowledging that induction of 
qualified cost accountants will help, Ministry noted that there are industrial 
engineering units within the Ordnance Factories.  
18. OFB should recheck th e credentials of all the vendors registered 
with the Factories, so that ghost firms can be rejected. Such check 
should include a one time check of  the owners of the firms, their 
addresses and other details and most importantly, their 
manufacturing capacity by site visits/ inspections. 
Ministry agreed with the recommendation. 
19. OFB should also place a list of all such vendors with all details about 
their ownerships, nature of business etc. in its website. 
Ministry stated that action would be  taken to include the details in the 
upcoming e-procurement portal of OFB. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 94 
 
 
20. Ministry should instruct OFB Headquarters and Factories that 
subject to compulsions of national interest, all limited and single 
tenders should be published on th e website till the time limited 
tender channel is used for procurement. 
Ministry stated that all tenders would be published in the upcoming e-
procurement portal. 
 
 
 
(Gautam Guha) 
Director General of Audit 
Defence Services 
New Delhi 
Dated           July 2010 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Vinod Rai) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
New Delhi 
Dated          July 2010 

 
Chapter I: Introduction 
1.1 Background of the Special Audit 
In June 2009, Ministry of Defence Depa rtment of Defence Production informed the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India (CAG ) that a case had been registered by 
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) ag ainst Shri Sudipta Ghosh, the former 
Director General Ordnance Fa ctories involving serious charges of corrupt practices. 
CBI had requested the Ministry to examine whether there were irregularities in the 
procurement cases finalized during the tenure of the former DGOF. Ministry 
informed CAG that a proper analysis of the procurement cases finalized during the 
above period would require in-depth examination and considerable professional 
skills. Secretary, Department of Defence Production
1 therefore requested that a 
special audit of all the procurement contracts during the tenure of the former DG 
may be conducted by a suitable team of officers from the Indian Audit & Accounts 
Department.  
Averring that the matter of involvement of the former DG in corrupt practices needs 
to be examined by the investigative agencies through criminal investigation and the 
institution of the office of the CAG is neither empowered nor equipped to carry out 
investigations of forensic nature, CAG nevertheless authorised review of the 
procurements of stores and machineries by the OFB and Ordnance Factories as a 
follow up audit of the previous Audit Report No 19 of 2007 on OFB procurements. 
It was pointed out to the Ministry that the earlier Report had highlighted a number of 
serious irregularities in the procurement system of the Ordnance Factories but it was 
yet to take effective action on the recommendations made in the Audit Report to 
address the deficiencies in the OF procurement system.  
Ordnance Factories together are the la rgest departmentalized manufacturing 
enterprise in the government sector. On one hand, the functioning of the Factories 
has to have the flexibility to respond to demands typical of a manufacturing industry 
and on the other it is controlled by th e government rules and regulations. Such a 
                                                 
1 Through this report, Ministry would denote Department of Defence Production, Ministry of 
Defence. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 2 
 
scale of manufacturing requires deft management of huge manpower, huge 
inventories and large scale procurement of services, raw materials and semi finished 
goods to maintain almost a punishing round-the-clock production schedule. Much of 
the materials procured by the Organization, because they need to meet the stringent 
specifications of Defence, are not widely available in the domestic market. The 
increasing technological complexities a nd demands for newer products require 
constant innovations in technology as well as industrial practices. 
1.2 Organisation of Ordnance Factories 
There are at present 39 Ordnance Factories at 24 different locations. Two more 
Factories are being set up at Nalanda in Bihar and Korwa in Uttar Pradesh. The 
existing Factories are engaged in manufacture of arms, ammunitions, equipment, 
armored vehicles and personnel carriers, cl othing and general stores items. At the 
apex is the Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) headed by the DG, who is the Chairman 
of the Board. The Board comprises, in addition, two additional DGs and seven 
members. It controls the executive functions of the organization. Apart from the 
overall management of the Factories which includes laying down policies and 
procedures on the functioning of the Factories, it monitors receipt of orders from the 
Services and Para-Military Forces, determines annual targets for Factories and 
converts orders into extracts for the Factories to manufacture. It controls the budget 
and provides required resources to the Factories. The OFB functions under the 
administrative control of the Department of Defence Production of the Ministry of 
Defence.  
The cost of production of thirty nine Ordnance Factories in 2006-07 was Rs 7957.53 
crore. In 2007-08, it was Rs 9312.61 crore and in 2008-09, it stood at Rs 10610.40 
crore.  
1.3 Scope of audit and audit objective 
A team of 19 officers conducted the audit between September  2009 and February 
2010. It was conducted in Department of  Defence Production, Ordnance Factory 
Board, Ordnance Equipment Group Hea dquarters, Kanpur, Armoured Vehicles 
Group Headquarters, Avadi and 18 Ordnance Factories. Though the audit covered 
procurement during the period from 2006-07 to 2008-09, in several cases in order to 
analyze current procurement decisions, decisions taken in earlier years were 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 3 
 
examined. Apart from examining files and documents in Ministry and OFB, 1291 
supply orders valuing Rs 4434 crore were examined by the team during the audit of 
the Board and Factories. 
For the purpose of audit and this report, the Factories audited have been put under 
four groups as follows:2 
Sl No Group Factories audited 
1 Avadi Heavy Vehicles Factory, Avadi (HVF); Ordnance Factory 
Medak (OFMK); Ordnance Factory, Trichi (OFT)  
2. Kirkee Ammmunition Factory Kirkee (AFK); High Explosive 
Factory, Kirkee (HEF);  Ordnance Factory Dehu Road 
(OFDR), Ordnance Factory Ambernath (OFA) 
3. Kanpur Ordnance Factory Kanpur (OFC); Small Arms Factory 
Kanpur (SAF); Ordnance Equipment Factory, Kanpur 
(OEFC); Ordnance Parachute Factory Kanpur (OPF), 
Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjahanpur (OCFS); Opto 
Electronics Factory Dehradun (OLF); 
4. Jabalpur Gun Carriage Factory, Jabalpur (GCF); Vehicle Factory, 
Jabalpur (VFJ); Ordnance Factory Khamaria (OFK); 
Ordnance Factory Ambajhari (OFAJ); Ordnance Factory, 
Chanda (OFCH); 
 
The breakup of the supply orders audited, region-wise are:- 
Table 1: Number of Supply Orders audited and their value 
Group Cases audited Value of stores audited 
(Rs in crore) 
Kirkee 424 1063 
Jabalpur 352 1892 
Kanpur 290 199 
Avadi 225 1280 
Total 1291 4434 
 
                                                 
2 For ease of reading, on most of the occasions, the Factories have been in this report be referred to 
by their shortened names. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 4 
 
The threshold value of supply orders taken up for examination in audit in different 
Factories was determined with reference to the volume of such orders in these 
Factories. All orders more than Rs 1 crore were selected in Avadi and Jabalpur group 
of Factories due to high number of orders in this category. In Kirkee group of 
Factories, the supply orders of more than  Rs 10 lakh were selected for audit. In 
Kanpur group of Factories, the orders were selected using a computer aided tool, to 
identify erratic fluctuations in the rates of each item procured in the past three years. 
During the three years from 2006-07 to 2008-09, 39 Ordnance Factories spent Rs 
19,697 crore for procurement of stores and machineries. Out of this, 18 Factories 
selected for audit spent Rs. 10,299 crore.  
The special audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• The Internal control and monitoring system are in place both at MOD and 
OFB level to ensure timely procurement of quality stores and machinery in 
an efficient and economic manner; 
• The policies and procedures on procurement were appropriate and adequate; 
• The requirement of stores and machinery as assessed by the Ordnance 
Factories was realistic, based on thei r estimated needs to meet production 
targets;  
• The orders for stores and machinery were finalized so as to ensure 
procurement from the right source, at the right price and in the right quantity; 
1.4 Audit criteria 
The audit criteria were adopted to evaluate procurement activities in the Ministry, 
OFB and 18 Factories were: 
• General Financial Rules 
• Material Management and Procurement Manual
3 
• Other orders issued by various authorities in Government of India 
including Central Vigilance Commission. 
1.5 About this Report 
This report is the results of audit of a large number of individual procurement cases 
approved by Ministry of Defence, OFB and officials of Ordnance Factories. It is 
                                                 
3 OFB has revised the MMPM in 2009. Since this audit concentrated on procurements from 2006 to 
31 March 2009, the earlier version of MMPM published in 2005 has been referred to. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 5 
 
divided into three parts. Part I includes the procurement decisions taken at the level 
of Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production and Ordnance Factory 
Board. Part II covers the procurements made in the Factories. Because of delegation 
of financial powers several such cases we re referred to OFB and the Ministry for 
approval. Such cases have been included in Part II as they related to procurement for 
specific Factories. Part III deals with th e general control environment affecting the 
procurement actions at the levels of Ministry, OFB and Factories. 
Ordnance Factories place supply orders in thousands every year. While reporting 
cases in this report, the aspect of materiality has been kept in mind. Such materiality 
has been decided not only on the monetary value of the individual procurement, but 
also on several other factors. These factors included prima facie evidence of serious 
abuse of procedures as laid down in the General Financial Rules, Manuals and other 
orders, acts of bad faith and possibilities of fraud. 
The fact that a particular kind of infraction has been reported in one or two Factories 
does not suggest that such cases were absent  in other Factories. It is recommended 
that Ministry should take this report as a comprehensive feedback and initiate 
reforms on a wider scale. 
1.6 Recommendations 
Normally, recommendations are made at the end of each topic, if applicable. 
However, in this report, 20 recommendations have been made at the end of the report 
as the topics are interrelated. In respect of cases which are under investigations, only 
audit observations have been reported. No recommendations in such cases have been 
made. 
Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production accepted all the 
recommendations. 
1.7  Acknowledgement 
The Defence Secretary, Secretary, Department of Defence Production, DG, 
Members and officials of OFB, Senior General Managers/ Ge neral Managers and 
their officers and staff of all 18 Ordna nce Factories had extended unstinted co-
operation and courtesies during the audit which is gratefully acknowledged.  

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 7 
 
 
Chapter II: Nalanda Factory 
 
2.1 Transfer of Technology of  Bi modular Charge System  
The Indian Army after conducting trials of different types of propellants had 
recommended in 1998-99 procurement of Bi-modular charge system (BMCS) from 
Somchem, a division of 4Denel, South Africa. The company was the only known 
manufacturer of BMCS at that time. Ministry of Defence entered into a contract with 
the company for procuring 4 lakh BMCS  modules in April 2002. The contract 
envisaged transfer of technology (TOT) fo r indigenous production of the propellant 
by OFB. 
Cabinet Committee on Security accorded approval in November 2001 for setting up 
a factory at Nalanda in Bihar at an estima ted cost of Rs 941.13 crore to manufacture 
2 lakh BMCS (8 lakh modules) per year. The approval included transfer of 
technology (TOT) from Denel at a cost of Rs 60.51 crore. The technology was to be 
acquired along with procurement of 4 lakh modules to meet the Army’s immediate 
requirement from the Somchem. 
Contract agreement for transfer of technology was signed between OFB and Denel 
on 15 March 2002. The effective date of the commencement of the contract was 15 
March 2003. It envisaged supply and delivery of TOT documents which comprised 
Product specifications including detailed di mensional drawings and designs, Quality 
and Inspection procedures, Process descri ptions and Production methods in respect 
of raw materials, intermediate products a nd final products. The total cost of the TOT 
package was of US $ 13.99 million which included US $11.86 million as license fee, 
US $ 1.25 million for Technical and manufacturing data pack and US $ 0.88 million 
for training.  
The contract was to remain valid for a period of five years from the effective date 
i.e. 15 March 2003.. Two important conditions were to be valid for seven years. The 
first was the seller’s warranty that if the product at semi stage have been duly 
accepted in accordance with the relevant quality assurance and inspection and 
                                                
 
4 For ease of reading, all companies, firms, partnership firms have been referred to only by name 
without using M/S. They are not individuals.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 8 
 
acceptance criteria as set out in the TOT document and that these semi stage 
products have been properly assembled and tested in accordance with the provisions 
in the same document by a competent, experienced and skilled manufacturer of 
products, then the final product will conform to the performance specifications set 
out in the Contract. The second one was the performance bank guarantee which was 
10 per cent  of the contract value of US $ 13.99 million. Both the warranty and 
guarantee had lapsed in March 2010.  
2.2  Establishment of Nalanda Factory 
In order to ensure single point responsibilit y of the supplier, it was decided that the 
main plant for BMCS which comprised of Combustible Cartridge Case Plant, Single 
Base Propellant Plant, Triple Base Propell ant Plant, Nitro-cellulose/ Nitro glycerin 
paste plant and Propellant Charge Assembly plant would be procured as a package. 
The plants for the manufacturing of primary ingredients Nitro-glycerin (NG) and 
Nitro-cellulose (NC) being standard plants were to be procured separately on turn-
key basis. It was to be ensured that the output from these plants complied with the 
specifications laid down in TOT documents. The project of setting up of the factory 
was thus effectively converted into three independent and uncoordinated 
procurement decisions. 
As subsequent events would prove, this was a fundamentally flawed strategy which 
led to the situation where contracts for two feeder plants have been awarded but the 
main BMCS plant which will use output of these plants is nowhere in sight. The 
contract with IMI Israel for the main  BMCS plant has now been mired in 
controversies and corruption charges and has put the future of the Nalanda plant in 
jeopardy. The overall progress of the factory has been dismal despite an expenditure 
of Rs 786 crore till March 2010. 
On the earlier occasion, Ministry had also decided to cancel all contracts with Denel 
in June 2005 due to allegations of corrup tions in some other case. The contribution 
of Denel to the project was to supply the TOT documents, which by that time had 
already been done and payment made. The Nalanda project was also kept in 
abeyance from June 2005 to July 2006. By the time, the project was stalled, tenders 
were received for all the three plants, namely the feeder Nitro-cellulose and Nitro-
glycerin Plants and the main BMCS plant. The decision to keep the project in 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 9 
 
abeyance as also subsequent delay in finalizing contracts has led to considerable cost 
and time overrun as would be evident from the fact that the estimated cost has gone 
up from Rs 941 crore as originally sanctioned to Rs 2161 crore as per the revised 
sanction. As a result of the expiry of the warranty period for the transfer of 
technology, the delay has also resulted in a situation in which the manufacturing 
processes and outputs would be without any cover of warranty by the provider of the 
technology.  
2.3 C ontract of Main BMCS Plant to IMI Israel 
Tender Enquiry for BMCS plant was issued for the first time on 29 March 2004. 
Technical bid was opened on 12 July 2004 and price bid on 26 October 2004. IMI 
Israel emerged as the L-1 firm at a cost of Rs 571.71 crore. The matter did not 
progress since project was kept in abeyance by Ministry in June 2005.  
After the project was restarted in July 2006, IMI was called for negotiation meeting 
on 2 nd/3rd August 2006 at OFB and asked to reduce the price as assessed by a 
committee constituted by OFB. IMI however insisted on a price increase from 
original 2004 price of Rs 571.71 crore to Rs 654.79 crore. OFB refused to accept the 
increased price and decided to issue global tender enquiry to generate more 
competition. 
Fresh Tender Enquiry was issued on 26 February 2007. However, hardly any fresh 
competition was generated as a result of that. Against five companies to whom 
tenders were issued, only three responded within time. One of them, DMP Italy 
refused to sign integrity pact and to pay the earnest money deposit of Rs 3 crore. As 
a result only two companies namely IMI, Israel and Simmel Difesa, Italy remained 
in consideration. The price bid was opened on 28 January 2008. The offer of IMI 
Israel was the lowest at Rs 1090.83 crore and the next higher quote of Simmel Difesa 
was at Rs 1885 crore. During the earlie r negotiations, the escalation demanded by 
the IMI was 15 per cent over a period of two years from July 2004 to August 2006. 
Against the fresh tender, the escalation was 67 per cent over a period of one year. 
The scope of supply in the quotes in March 2004, September 2006 and February 
2007 remained the same. 
Internal assessment indicated that the rate quoted by IMI was very high 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 10 
 
The internal assessment of OFB indicate d that compared to the quotation of IMI 
Israel in 2004, the rates quoted by IMI in January 2008 was on a high side. By 
adding escalation factors to the estimates quoted in October 2004, the base price 
came to Rs 800.34 crore as against Rs 1050.01 crore quoted by IMI in the fresh 
tender. Another estimate carried out by University Institute of Chemical Technology 
Mumbai arrived at a cost of Rs 832.22 crore. For the single base propellant plant, 
Ordnance Factory Bhandara calculated the basic cost at Rs 269.1 crore as against the 
cost of Rs 747.23 crore demanded by IMI. 
Against this background, MOD constituted Cost Negotiation Committee (CNC) on 
27 March 2008 with former DGOF as Chairman. Four meetings CNC meetings were 
held on 10 April 2008, 30 April & 1 May 2008, 21 May 2008 and 22 July 2008.  
CNC did not make any firm and final recommendation 
The basic objective of the CNC was to ne gotiate price and other commercial terms 
and conditions. However, in no meeting, CNC took any firm decision regarding the 
final negotiated cost of the plant. The indecisiveness of the CNC will be apparent 
from the following records of discussions in the CNC: 
Meeting on 10 April 2008 
Decisions and conclusions: 
1. IMI was requested to give a presentation in the next meeting about the 
new features incorporated in the current proposal which are much more 
technologically advanced as compared to the offer of 2004 and whether this 
has resulted in savings arising out of usage of input material, fuel, power, 
water and cost of manpower; 
2. IMI was requested to indicate the source for the major 
machine/equipment in the presentation and justify the higher cost quoted by 
them in the present offer; 
3. IMI was asked for the reasons for high escalation in the cost of Design 
Documents, Erection and Commissioning costs quoted by them in the present 
offer; and 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 11 
 
4. CNC desired that the justification in  cost escalation should be supported 
with indices of the major input materials and foreign exchange currency 
movements in the related currencies. 
Meeting on 30 April and 01 May 2008 
Decisions and conclusions 
(1) IMI offered a reduction of 3 million Euro. CNC however raised several 
issues relating to high prices. IMI aske d for time for offering clarifications 
and justifications on the issues raised by CNC. 
Meeting on 21 May 2008 
Decisions and conclusions 
(1) CNC decided to adjourn the meeting as no headway was being made in 
the negotiations; 
(2) CNC also felt that there were only a few suppliers in the world, who not 
only have the capability but also are willing to supply the BMCS Plant. IMI 
had emerged as the lowest bidder twice in response to the global tender 
enquiry. It further felt that the past retendering action indicated that any 
further re-tendering action of the BMCS plant was not likely to yield any 
reduction in prices. Further it might lead to a single supplier situation; and  
(3) CNC also decided that Ministry of Defence, higher management would 
be apprised about the current position on file  prior to proceeding further for 
negotiations. 
Meeting on 22 July 2008 (Last meeting of CNC) 
Chairman of the CNC requested the representatives of IMI to 
(1) Extend the validity of the offer up to 31 Oct 2008; 
(2) The price to be reduced to the minimum. 
IMI representative informed the CNC that  there was no scope for reducing the price 
of BMCS plant as the cost of input materials for the manufacturing of the plant had 
increased substantially. In fact, the firm also brought in the issue of introduction of a 
price variation clause for the Indian comp onent of the plant. While discussing the 
issue of extension of validity of their offer, IMI informed that their Indian partner 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 12 
 
has sought incorporation of a price variation formula to protect themselves from the 
losses arising out of steep hike in the pric es of steel, cement etc. The price variation 
formula was to be based on prices as on 01 July 2008 and would be applicable on the 
Rupee content of the contract.  
The meeting was adjourned for ten minutes. On re-assembly, IMI informed that their 
Indian partner has been consulted and they were not in a position to extend the 
validity without the price variation formul a. Since the Request for Proposal for the 
BMCS plant was based on firm and fixed pr ices, it was decided by the CNC not to 
include price variation formula “ at this stage” . IMI representative intimated that 
they would revert back in a few days after consulting their Indian Partner to 
the project. However, on the same day, another meeting was held among Director 
(P&C), Ministry of Defenc e, DDG (New Capital) of OFB and Director Business 
Development IMI. IMI agreed to extend the validity of the commercial offer up to 31 
October 2008. It was also stated in the minutes of the meeting that “the price 
variation formula, for the rupee content of the contract would be applicable from 01 
August 2008 till the date of the first advance payment. This is subject to 
confirmation by both the parties.” 
Cabinet decision for revision of estimated costs of the factory was interpreted 
by Ministry as “implicit approval” for the procurement. This was incorrect. 
The Competent Financial Authority for approval of procurement of BMCS plant was 
Cabinet Committee on Security. It was also the competent financial authority for 
approving the revised cost. These two were different issues though the increased cost 
of BMCS plant inter-alia led to increasing the cost of the project as a whole.  
Ministry of Defence in December 2008 put  up the note to Cabinet seeking approval 
for revision of the estimated cost of project from Rs 941.13 crore to Rs 2160.51 
crore. The “approval para” of the note to the Cabinet did not refer to the BMCS plant 
at all and sought only the approval of the revi sed costs of the project. In the note, the 
facts of the increased cost of the BMCS plant and IMI’s offer of reduction of only 
US $ 3 million were mentioned as contributi ng reasons to the escalation of the costs. 
The lack of resolution on the issue in the CNC was not mentioned. Similarly, the 
issue of introduction of the price variation formula was not brought into the notice of 
the Cabinet.  

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 13 
 
Ministry on 5 February 2009 conveyed to OFB sanction for the revised cost of 
project. OFB in a fax on 6 February 2009 requested to authorize it to conclude 
contract for BMCS plant “at the rate negotiated and approved by the Competent 
Financial Authority.” Ministry on 10 February informed OFB that the revision of the 
cost of the project as a whole has been approved by the competent authority and 
OFB may conclude the contract for BMCS plant “at the approved and negotiated 
cost.” Neither the Ministry nor the OFB clarified in their correspondence as to what 
exactly was the “negotiated and approved cost.” 
Deputy Director General New Capital in the OFB in his note dated 10 February 2009 
which was endorsed and approved by the former DG, clearly stated that “from the 
minutes of the meeting of CNC dated 22 July 2008, it is seen that the CNC did not 
make any conclusive decision or recommendation to MOD with regard to acceptance 
of the negotiated price. Also the terms for advance payment of 20 per cent demanded 
by M/S IMI in their offer were not specif ically referred to MOD for approval (being 
beyond OFB powers), it may be presumed that MOD has considered the entire issue 
covering all aspects in its totality and conveyed their sanction accordingly.” The note 
was endorsed by the former DG. 
Thus based on the “presumption” regard ing the negotiated cost having been 
approved by the Competent Financial Authority, which in this case was the Cabinet, 
OFB concluded the contract for the BMCS plant with IMI Israel in March 2009 at 
the total cost of Rs 1175 crore. It also pa id an advance of Rs 174 crore to IMI in 
March 2009, which would remain idle as all the transactions with IMI were put on 
hold in June 2009 by Ministry. 
As per the existing orders on the subject normally only 15  per cent  advance was 
admissible. However, IMI sought an advance of 20  per cent  of the Euro cost of the 
project. The same was allowed on the ground that CNC was aware that such an 
advance demanded and therefore should be treated as integral part of the CNC 
proceedings. Seeking a separate approval for the payment of advance beyond 
admissible limit was considered a “redundant exercise”. In no meeting, did CNC 
consider the issue of recommending the payment of advance. OFB, on the other 
hand, “presumed” that “the Ministry has considered the entire issue covering all 
aspects in its totality and conveyed their sanction accordingly.” 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 14 
 
On the draft note to the Cabinet, Ministry of Finance (MOF) wanted Ministry of 
Defence to confirm in the CCS note that the cost and time projected now were firm 
and there would be no further escalation. Ministry confirmed that the “revised 
project estimates are based on the negotiated price cost for main Plants and 
Machinery. Therefore, no further cost and time overrun is foreseen.” The assertion 
by the Ministry was untrue as it was fully aware that in the last meeting of the CNC, 
IMI had insisted on the price variation clause on the Indian content of the contract. 
Two junior officers- one from the Ministry and another from OFB – had also reached 
agreements with IMI that price variation formula would be applicable from 1 August 
2008. 
The deal with IMI Israel has been put on hold. Meanwhile, IMI has already been 
paid Rs 174 crore as advance which has been retained by the Company. The prospect 
of Nalanda factory coming up in foreseeable future is remote. 
To sum up,  
(i) OFB’s refusal to accept th e revised offer of IMI of Rs 654.79 crore and 
the consequent decision to retender to generate more competition was ill 
advised. Both OFB and Ministry were aware that the number of firms 
capable and willing to supply BMCS plant was very few. 
(ii) Ministry took the doubtful stand that the approval of the Cabinet to 
revision of costs of the entire projec t amounted to “implicit approval” of 
the procurement of main BMCS plant. 
(iii) Ministry misled MOF stating that no escalation is foreseen knowing 
fully well that IMI has insisted on pr ice variation formula for the Indian 
portion of the project. 
(iv) CNC headed by the former DG did not take any decision on the two 
critical aspects namely extension of the offer up to 31 October 2008 and 
introduction of the price variation formula. It also did not recommended a 
final price for the BMCS plant. The final contract was entered into on the 
basis of many presumptions and assumptions. 
(v) Ministry and OFB between themselves obfuscated the issue of 
“negotiated and approved cost.” While Ministry did not hesitate to inform 
the Cabinet that such price has been  negotiated by CNC, OFB took the 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 15 
 
stand that CNC had not recommende d any “negotiated and approved” 
price to the Ministry. 
(vi) Ministry allowed payment of 20  per cent  advance against the Euro cost 
of the project arguing that CNC was aw are of the issue and therefore it 
should be treated as integral part of the CNC considerations on the whole 
issue. OFB took the stand that this was not recommended by the CNC. In 
fact, the issue indeed was never considered by the CNC.  
Thus, in order to execute the contra ct of main BMCS plant for Nalanda 
factory, laid down procedures and approved processes and procedures were 
significantly undermined.  
Ministry stated in its reply that there were valid and unavoidable reasons for the 
cost and time overrun. Ministry further stat ed that it would not be correct to say 
that the project had been converted into three independent and uncoordinated 
procurements. Separate tenders had to be issued for different plants as these were 
from different OEMs. Similarly, there had to be a separate tender for the main 
BMCS plant as the OEM supplying the plant would have to ensure integrated 
functioning of all the plants. 
Ministry in its reply also stated that IMI in April 2008 provided a list of 
enhanced number of equipments whic h included Indoor Fire Detection & 
Suppression system, Explosion proof Air Conditioning Equipment system in the 
offer to create a more safe working atmo sphere. It further stated that IMI gave 
various reasons of not giving sufficient discount considering 30 per cent increase 
in salaries for increase in scope of engineering man hours needed for the project 
due to reassessment of design and documentation requirement, to set up pre-
production facilities, inclusion of Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) equipment 
separately, price increase in travel, boarding & lodging facilities expenses etc. 
Ministry’s reply about three different te nders for three plants is appreciated. 
However, the fact remains that there was no coordination in timing and award of 
these contracts. Two contracts for the feeder plants were awarded without even 
finalizing the contract for the main plant which was to use the outputs of these 
plants. The situation as of now is that wh ile construction of the two feeder plants 
is in progress, the plant that will use the outputs is nowhere in sight. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 16 
 
On cost overrun, Ministry’s reply must be  viewed against the fact that the rates 
quoted were 67 per cent higher than the price demanded by IMI about a year ago. 
The internal assessments also took into account the escalation factors. Most 
importantly, however, the CNC itself reques ted IMI time and again to justify the 
higher costs quoted by them but did not get any cogent explanation. In its 
meeting on 21 May 2008, “CNC intimated to the representatives of IMI that 
there has been no change in the scope of supply and the capacity of the plant 
from 2004 to 2008. The increase in price could be allowed on account of three 
elements which were omitted by IMI in their 2004 offer namely (i) increase in air 
conditioning heat load, (ii) installation of fire fighting equipment and (iii) 
inclusion of pre production test for process validation. However” the CNC 
further observed “the price is substantially higher compared to the previous offer 
of 2004, when the elements were considered.” Notably, CNC did not consider 
the fact that the process technology was tr ansferred as part of the transfer of 
technology agreement. Ministry’s reply also ignores the observation of the CNC 
in the last meeting that “since no headway was being made in the negotiations, it 
was decided to adjourn the meeting”. 
Regarding refusal to accept the higher quoted price in 2006, the Ministry replied 
that on restarting the project, the firm was called for negotia tions and asked to 
reduce their price. However, instead of reducing their price, the firm asked for 
increase in price to Rs 654.79 crore. Since as per prevailing guidelines there was 
no provision to accept such increase against fixed price tender, OFB decided to 
issue global tender enquiry to generate more competition.  
IMI’s tender was originally submitted in July 2004. OFB called them for 
negotiations in August 2006. It would be extraordinarily naïve to expect that 
even after two years have passed by, the firm would actually reduce the price and 
there would not be any cost increase. As  subsequent events unfolded, OFB and 
Ministry refused to accept a 15 per cent  increase over a two year period but 
accepted a 67 per cent increase over one year. 
In the other two plants i.e. NC Plant and NG Plant, the same pattern was seen. 
Firms which had quoted in 2004, were ca lled for negotiations in 2006 and their 
proposal for increase was not acceded to . Global tenders were called for and in 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 17 
 
both cases, OFB accepted a price which was much higher that the negotiated cost 
demanded by the suppliers in 2006. 
As regards the implicit approval by the Cabinet, Ministry stated in its reply that 
the Cabinet was intimated about the completion of negotiation for the BMCS 
plant and the revised cost of the project was based on the negotiated cost of the 
main plant and machinery. Since the revised cost of the project included the 
negotiated cost of BMCS plant, it was cl ear that approval of CCS for revision of 
project cost from Rs 941.13 crore to Rs 2160.51 crore also constitutes the 
approval for BMCS plant. 
Ministry’s contention is not correct. In this case, the CCS was the Competent 
Financial Authority, the “approval para” in the Note for the Cabinet did not 
indicate approval for procurement of the BMCS plant. “Implicit approval” by the 
Cabinet as mentioned in the internal notes of the Ministry cannot be assumed as 
the Cabinet Secretariat did not communicate specific approval of the 
procurement. 
On the issue of CNC not making any firm recommendations, the Ministry stated 
that “It is not correct to say that CNC did not make any firm recommendations. 
When it was found that negotiations with M/S IMI were not resulting in any 
further reduction of the cost, the case was brought to the notice of the RM. It was 
noted that the offer of the L-II bidder was about 50 per cent higher than that of 
IMI and it was considered that it might not be prudent or useful to go for a fresh 
tender. It was decided to seek the approval of CCS for the negotiated cost.” 
Ministry’s reply confirms that the decision to approach the Cabinet on the basis 
of the quoted price with a discount of 3 million Euro was an internal decision and 
not the final decision of the CNC. In fact, as the minutes would indicate, even in 
the last meeting, the CNC did not reach any firm decision. This is further 
reinforced by the fact that even after the decision of the Cabinet and 
communication of approval to OFB by the Ministry, OFB was not clear about the 
“negotiated and approved cost”.  
Regarding price variation clause, Ministry stated that the clause was not included 
at any point in the process of procurement. While it is true that contract entered 
with IMI Israel did not include the price variation clause, Ministry had entered 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 18 
 
into an understanding that the price variation clause will be implemented in 
future. The fact was not brought into the notice of either the Cabinet or the 
Ministry of Finance. 
2.4 NG and NC Plant 
Nitro Glycerin (NG) Plant 
For the NG Plant, Biazzi of Switzerland emerged as the lowest tenderer when the 
price bids were opened in January 2004. Letter of intent was issued at Rs 30.06 crore 
in August 2004 to the Company. However, the matter did not progress any further as 
the project was kept in abeyance. After the project was restored in July 2006, Biazzi 
did not accept the earlier quoted price. OFB decided on 30 August 2006 to re-tender 
the case and OFB TPC
5 finalized the case in November 2007. The order was placed 
on Biazzi at the total cost of Rs 40.10 crore in June 2008. A payment of Rs 9.14 
crore has been made till January 2010. 
Nitro Cellulose (NC) Plant 
As regards the NC Plant, Josef of Germany emerged as a lowest tenderer at a cost of 
Rs 106.06 crore against the tender enquiry issued in November 2004. On restarting 
the project in July 2006, Josef increased the price to Rs 136.27 crore when called for 
negotiations. The firm was asked to match the price with the offer of NC Plant to 
Ordnance Factory Bhandara, which was Rs 87.72 crore.  
On refusal by the firm, global tender enquiry was issued in two phases. In the first 
phase, global tender was floated in October 2006 for supplier selection and short 
listing of firms. Three firms, namely Josef, Germany, DMP, Italy and Bowas, 
Austria responded and tender enquiry was issued to them in February 2007 in the 
second phase.  
The tender enquiry did not have any provision of signing of integrity pact. The 
Technical Evaluation Committee of OFB however decided in its meeting on 14 
August 2007 that both the short listed firms namely Josef and Bowas should provide 
integrity pact in terms of DPP
6 2006 before their price bids were opened. Both the 
                                                 
5 Tender Purchase Committee 
6 Defence Procurement Procedure 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 19 
 
companies confirmed that they would provide OFB with integrity pact and Earnest 
Money Deposit(EMD) if they are found to be L17 on opening of the price bids.  
The TPC in its meeting on 3 October 2007 allowed the price bids to be opened. The 
price bids were opened on 15 October 2007 after almost eight months from the date 
the tender enquiry was issued. The lowest offer of Josef, Germany was at Rs 134.26 
crore. However, the firm backed out citing that they had applied for export licence 
without which they could not provide the integrity pact and EMD. They also stated 
that their suppliers were booked for next two years, inflation had reached at 3  per 
cent and they could not extend the validity period without an increase of 5.5  per cent 
for equipment, machinery and spares, 4  per cent  for supervision charges and an 
increase of 3 months in delivery time. It was decided by OFB TPC to retender the 
case. 
Against the fresh tender enquiry issued in January 2008, Ministry accorded sanction 
in October 2008 for Rs 186.46 crore for procurement of NC Plant. The contract was 
concluded by OFB with Bowas in January 2009. A payment of Rs 49.15 crore has 
been made to the firm till March 2010. 
Normally if a supplier reneges on the conditions and commitments provided at the 
time of submission of tender documents, a serious view would be taken. However, in 
this case, despite the fact that Josef had backed out after opening of the price bids, 
the TPC decided to issue the tender enquiry again to the company in January 2008. 
The company, however, did not respond to the enquiry. The cost of the plant went up 
by almost 80 per cent on account of various delays in decision making. 
DPP 2006 was applicable to all capital acquisitions undertaken by the Ministry 
of Defence. DRDO, OFB and DPSUs, we re however, allowed to continue to 
follow their own procedures. The TEC
8 had no authority to introduce a 
condition after tender enquiries were float ed and technical bids were opened. 
The TPC again did not have the authority to relax the condition and allow the 
price bids to be opened. The matt er was not referred to the Competent 
Financial Authority i.e. the Ministry. The decision to issue the tender enquiry 
again to the company, who only a few months back reneged on commitments 
and delayed the procurement, was also incorrect. 
                                                 
7 L1 represents the lowest tenderer on opening of the price bids. 
8 Tender Evaluation Committee 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 20 
 
In case of NG Plant, when Ministry had allowed OFB on 22 April 2008 to conclude 
a contract with the firm concerned, an instruction was issued to restrict the 
expenditure to the amount already approved by the Cabinet. Remaining expenditure 
was to be incurred only after approval of the Cabinet to the revised costs. In this 
particular case, no such instruction was issued despite the fact that Cabinet approval 
to the revised cost was still not processed.  
Ministry in its reply stated that TEC introduc ed the condition of integrity pact on the 
basis of directives issued by MOD(Fina nce) in February 2006 for inclusion of 
“Integrity Pact” as standard condition of  contract. The condition was relaxed on the 
assurance of the firm that they would submit it before opening of price bid. On their 
failure to do so , TPC decided to retender the case. 
As regards issue of tender enquiry again to  Josef, Germany despite backing out after 
opening of the price bid on earlier occasion, the Ministry replied that worldwide 
there were a few manufacturers of this type of plant and out of them only a handful 
are willing to part with the technology. Thus, the Ministry stated, in order to have 
sufficient competition, Josef Germany was issued tender enquiry again. 
Ministry’s reply did not indicate on w hose authority TPC decided to relax the 
condition of the integrity pact. 
As would also be evident, competition or lack of it has been used as a factor by OFB 
to influence the tender processes. The decision to retender in 2006 in case of all the 
plants was to generate more competition.  While it was well known that there were 
only a limited number of suppliers in the world, the retender did not any case 
generate significantly more competition but it increased the price substantially. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 21 
 
 
Chapter III: Co Production Arrangements, 
Collaboration Agreements and Memorandum 
of Understanding 
 
3.1  Dealings with Singapor e Technologies to supply CQB 9 
Carbine to Paramilitary forces 
OFB is the nominated industry for production of Carbines both for Protective and 
Close Quarter Combat role and is capabl e of absorbing technology and produce any 
type of Carbine.  
On 12 Jun 2008, OFB received a communication from the Singapore Technologies 
Kinetics (STK) addressed to the former DG.  In this, a meeting in September 2007 
was referred to in which discussions ha d taken place regarding collaboration 
between OFB and STK on offset arrangements for selected programmes of the 
Ministry. It was stated in that letter that STK had now received from Ministry RFPs 
for Close Quarter Battle Carbines and ammunition and also other items like Light 
weight Howitzer and Towed Gun system. STK requested OFB to offer the draft 
terms and conditions for provision of offset.  
In the backdrop of the above, a meeting took place on 8 July 2008 between former 
DG and other officials of OFB Headquarters and the representatives of STK at OFB. 
ST informed that Ministry  of Home Affairs (MHA) was likely to make outright 
purchase of CQB carbine and they would like to participate in the same. Chairman / 
OFB stated that the subject matter can be taken up with MHA stating that “an offset 
agreement has been signed between OFB and STK and the latter has developed the 
carbine using Indian components so that the indigenization process becomes faster 
for supply to MHA”.  
The decision to "take up" the matter with the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home 
Affairs stating that "an offset agreement has been signed between OFB and STK and 
that STK has developed the Carbine by using Indian Components so that the 
indigenization process" was incorrect and amounted to falsification of facts. The fact 
was that as on that date, neither any offset agreement had been signed nor had STK 
                                                
 
9 Close Quarter Battle Carbine 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 22 
 
developed any carbine "by using Indian Components". Even the most rudimentary 
details of such a contractual arrangement for such co-development and co-production 
had not been thought of. As subsequent developments would indicate, this was the 
beginning of a web of falsifications and co nspiracy that surrounded the deal between 
STK and OFB. 
Though it was further decided in that meeting that the above can be taken up with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs only when the Carbine with Indian Component is 
developed and test fired in India in the pr esence of OFB, subsequent actions of the 
OFB belied that decision and confirmed the intention to mislead the MHA. 
Close on the heels of this meeting, another meeting took place between MHA and 
officers from the OFB Headquarters on 24 July 2008. MHA expressed the need for 
acquiring 5.56 mm Carbine on most urgent basis as the plan for modernization of 
police forces was coming to an end on 31 March 2010. It was pointed out that 
5.56mm carbine provided by OFB earlier for carrying out trial evaluation had failed. 
OFB officials informed that fresh trials for ammunition would take place on 25 July 
2008 in which representatives of the Para M ilitary Forces would be present. If the 
trials were successful, OFB would provide sample by end of August and trials could 
take place by 15 September 2008. OFB’s repres entative also suggested that they can 
supply 5 Nos Carbine developed by "one Singapore firm" with which OFB "will 
have Transfer of Technology (TOT) arrang ements". The representative’s promise of 
TOT was at that stage only a promise. 
In an internal note on 29 July 2008, on a proposal whether OFB should provide the 
carbines offered by STK for trials by MHA, it was opined by Member (Ammunition 
& Explosives) and Member (Weapons, Vehicl es & Equipment) that the carbines 
should not be offered to MHA since they had not been evaluated by the Ordnance 
Factories. The former DG on that note directed to call STK for a meeting. 
The meeting was convened on 11 August 2008. In Phase I of the meeting which was 
internal, it was decided to offer to MHA the STK carbine having minimum 50  per 
cent work share with OFB along with OFB's own AMOGH carbine. In the Phase II 
of the meeting in which STK participated, it was decided that six carbines should be 
provided by STK out of which five should be offered to the MHA. STK assured that 
they would send two carbines immediately by 25 August which could be used by 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 23 
 
Ordnance Factories for their trials. To facilitate import, it was decided to sign the end 
user agreement and non disclosure agreement "today ( 11 August 2008) itself".  
It was also informed in that meeting that "supply to MHA needed to start within 6 
months after the placement of order and th e supply of 50,000 carbines would have to 
be completed within 18 months thereafter. OFB would like to take up the component 
which could be productionized in 6 months time by making use of OFB's existing 
facilities." For the purpose of progressing the project in a time bound fashion two 
committees – a commercial committee and a technical committee were also formed. 
Arrangements were then made for carryi ng out trials of the two STK SAR 21 
MMS10 carbines at SAF 11 Kanpur on 15 September 2008. Trials were conducted at 
50 m and 200m range beyond which facilities we re not available. Ability to fire with 
One Hand grip was found "Not suitable". Sustained firing was conducted where 720 
rounds were fired in 10 minutes. Overheat ing was noticed at various points. At the 
end of the firing, safety lever became loose and could not be rectified on the spot. At 
the drop test at 5 metres, major misalignment problem was observed in one machine 
and it became non-functional. In case of the other machine, minor problems cropped 
up which, however could be rectified on the spot. Effect of dust as in a desert like 
condition was not evaluated. 
MHA trials were held from 17 November to 21 November 2008 at NSG premises at 
Manesar. Prior to the trials STK apprehended that there might be technical 
complications if their carbine is subjected to reliability test specifications as spelt out 
in the MHA’s trial directive and requested for safety certificate from OFB. This 
would be required as the carbines were be ing offered as OFB’s carbines that would 
be produced through a TOT arrangements. OFB did not hesitate to provide the 
required safety certificate and other certificates for recoil forces, noise levels etc. that 
were issued by DDG/R&D based on the cer tificate issued by STK. Without formal 
collaboration with STK, issuing safety certificates by OFB to facilitate trial by MHA 
was incorrect as the carbine was fully imported and it had failed on several 
parameters when tested in SAF Kanpur.  
On several parameters, in which SAR 21 was found deficient in SAF Kanpur, NSG 
trials found the carbine comp letely satisfactory. The drop test was done at the height 
                                                
 
10 Singapore Assault Rifles Modular Mounting System 
11 Small Arms Factory, Kanpur  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 24 
 
of 5 feet as against 5 metre tested at SAF. While SAF complained of smoke, NSG 
trial did not find any trace of smoke. NSG also found that the weapon could easily be 
handled and fired with one hand.  
DDG/R&D who was nominated as OFB’s re presentative at MHA trial brought out 
that large number of stoppages were ob served during the firing of OFB ‘AMOGH’ 
carbine of Small Arms Factory being fielded by OFB. These stoppages were 
primarily on the account of defective feeding of ammunition by the magazine. DDG 
opined that the gun has otherwise performed satisfactorily as far as accuracy, 
consistency and other parameters are co ncerned. He further observed that " Poor 
performance of SAF Carbine during tria ls of NSG could have been avoided, 
had SAF taken more care in preparing the Weapons Systems before sending to 
NSG." 
In a meeting in the MHA on 18 February 2009 regarding procurement of carbines, 
OFB committed that they can supply the first batch of 2627 carbines on 1.9.2009, 
18,369 by 31.3.2010 at the same monthly rate and the total quantity by 28 February 
2011. BSF opted to procure the weapon from the OFB. CRPF also agreed with that.  
It was only after this commitment, the issue to undertake productionization of STK 
make Carbine was deliberated in the Board meeting held on 26 February 2009 which 
passed the following resolution: 
"Production of 5.56 mm Carbine of Singapore Technology with 45mm chamber 
length would be undertaken subject to (a) MOD’s approval of collaborative 
instrument with Singapore Technologies and (b) MHA’s commitment to procure 
economically viable quantities from Ordnance Factories. The background of 
selection of Singapore Technologies for obtaining technology for production of 5.56 
mm carbine inter-alia bringing out that no RFP was issued to identify the 
collaborator would be spelt out to MOD at the time of sending the collaborative 
instrument for their approval."  
The cost of STK carbine was likely to be  more than six times cost of in-house 
developed carbine.  
The case could not proceed further as the transaction with STK was put on hold in 
June 2009 by MOD after STK had indirectly been mentioned in the FIR registered 
by the CBI against former DGOF. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 25 
 
On the day on which OFB committed supply of carbines to MHA, OFB did not have 
any production arrangements with STK for production of these in India. There was 
no authorization from the Ministry to commence any production arrangements. OFB 
by committing the supply to the MHA, created a fait accompli situation to facilitate 
STK to supply the carbines piggybacking Ordnance Factories. While MHA could 
avoid floating the normal tendering procedures by procuring it from OFB, the fact is 
that OFB in absence of any co production arrangements would have supplied 
carbines produced by STK. The process amounted to a sophisticated connivance by 
OFB and STK to sell STK carbines to MHA without going through the approved 
laid down procedures. 
Assertion of OFB before MHA that it will have TOT arrangements was not based on 
facts and was intended to mislead the MHA. Even the rudimentary terms and 
conditions of TOT and co-production arrangements had not been contemplated at 
that stage. OFB falsely presented before MHA the SAR 21 MMS as OFB’s offer, 
with production and TOT arrangements with STK. The officials from the MHA and 
the Paramilitary forces accepted OFB’s of fer without any further examination or 
investigation. Such lack of diligence was unbecoming of senior management dealing 
with such procurement. Officials from the MHA never enquired about the production 
facilities knowing fully well that SAR 21 MMS is not an indigenous carbine. 
OFB’s decision to approach the Ministry of Defence at a very late stage for approval 
of collaborative instrument between STK and OFB amounted to a fait accompli 
situation in which little alternative was available. If the proposal was rejected, the 
supply to MHA would have been jeopardize d and the modernization of paramilitary 
forces would have been adversely affected.  
Strangely, Ministry of Defence was not even aware of these developments. They 
came to know only after the receipt of two anonymous complaints in February 2009 
through MHA and initiated disciplinary action thereafter. 
Incidentally, SAR 21 MMS is a well respected carbine internationally and is in use 
in armies of several countries. Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence 
should review the procedures and analyze the reasons why such procurements could 
not be made in a transparent manner without so much of falsities and lies. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 26 
 
To sum up: 
(i) OFB continuously presented to Ministry of Home Affairs as if it has already 
entered into a co-production arrangements with Singapore Technologies, 
which was intentional falsification of facts; 
(ii) Officials of the Ministry of Home Affairs also did not enquire about the 
capacity of the Ordnance Factories to produce such Carbines; 
(iii)Ministry of Defence was in complete dark about the activities of the OFB 
with regard to the offer to MHA. 
Ministry in its reply accepted that the fo llowing serious and substantive lapses have 
been committed by OFB in this case: 
(i) STK’s carbines were offered to MHA without going through the due process. 
No assessment of their capabilities or track record was seen to have been 
made; 
(ii) Even after the failure of the STK carbine in the drop test during trials, it was 
decided to offer it to MHA despite the valid objections raised by the 
Members of OFB. The sample size of two carbines was also inadequate; 
(iii)Offering a defective carbine which had failed in critical test during trials to 
the paramilitary forces was another serious aspect. Acceptance of the 
carbine would have serious adverse implications in terms of national 
security. 
Ministry informed that it had taken a very serious view of the matter and decided to 
initiate disciplinary proceedings agains t officers who were responsible. CVC was 
approached for first stage advice and they have endorsed the stand by the Ministry. 
3.2 Collaboration agreement with CDR Russia 
In a similar case, Ministry of Defence issued two RFPs for the procurement of Light 
Bullet Proof Vehicles (BPV) and Light Strike vehicle (LSV) with accessories in June 
2008 and August 2008 respectively. Against the above backdrop, Defence 
Corporation Russia (CDR) showed interest in a letter dated 8 October 2008 in 
formulating strategic alliance with OFB for joint production of BPV and LSV in 
India. CDR expressed their intention to OFB to send a team of expert to explore the 
various avenues of co-operation and finali ze the Teaming Agreement. OFB invited 
CDR on 13
 October 2008 to a meeting on 23 October 2008. The decision for 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 27 
 
collaboration with CDR for participation on BPV was taken in the Board Meeting 
dated 31 October 2008. Thus, the whole exercise was concluded in one month at an 
astonishing speed. Two Collaboration Agreements(CAs) were signed on 15 April 
2009 between CDR and OFB to enter into strategic long-term collaboration  for the 
production and supply of the LSV and BPV to OFB.  
It was noticed in audit that such CAs were entered into by the OFB with exploring 
the market. The work share arrangements did not favour OFB in any way as work-
share in respect of light strike vehicle (LSV) was distributed between CDR and OFB 
as 84.87 per cent and 15.13 per cent respectively. The share of OFB included items, 
which can be purchased from trade by outsourcing (wheel, tyres, lighting system, 
battery, assembly, painting etc.). Similarly, in respect of BPVs, the share of CDR 
and OFB was distributed as 64.92  per cent  and 35.08  per cent  respectively. It 
included all the above low technology items. OFB was not to get any benefit from 
these CAs from technology point of view as all the major components were to be 
supplied by CDR and only to be assemble d by OFB. On the other hand, CDR would 
supply their product at the cost fixed by them and without entering into any 
competitive bids.  
The CAs entered by OFB with a foreign company violated the laid down procedures 
for procurement of such services. The intense speed with which the agreement was 
finalized was also suspect. It was noted th at there was no oversight by the Ministry 
of Defence to ensure that such actions are scrutinized at different levels. 
Ministry in its reply stated that OFB was always tight on time while participating 
against RFP with a foreign partner. In these cases 82 days and 84 days were 
available to respond to the RFP issued by Ministry of Defence. Hence fast actions 
are pre requisite for successful participation in RFP. 
It is however to be noted that the work share arrangements were such that Ordnance 
Factories instead of producing were actual ly selling a foreign product under the garb 
of the Ordnance Factory produce. The modus operendi  is very similar to the one 
adopted in case of Close Quarter Battle Carbine. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 28 
 
 
3.3 Co-production arrangements for FSAPDS 12 with IMI 
A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) entered into on 26 October 2003 by and 
between OFB and IMI for production of following types of products:- 
Type A Products : Products which shall be pioneered and introduced for the first 
time through collaboration between IMI and OFB. 
Type B Products : Products that have already been established by IMI, but shall be 
jointly produced by IMI and OFB with their respective resources, so that owing to 
this synergy the same product though already established by IMI can be produced at 
a lower cost without compromising the quality. 
Against the above background, OFB entered into a co-production arrangement with 
IMI Israel to produce FSAPDS ammunition. In the phase I, the work share of OFB 
was to provide Primer and Igniter (US$ 17), Stub Case (US$ 41), Assembly of 
complete round, Test (US$ 56), Packaging, Transportation and Proof Cost (US$ 40). 
Compared to this, IMI was required to supply complete penetrator assembly (US$ 
508) and Combustible Cartridge Case and Propellant (US$ 227). In Phase II, IMI 
was required to supply blank penetrator  (US$ 278). Machining & complete 
penetrator assembly (US$ 215) was required to be done by the OFB. Thus in effect, 
in phase I, OFB was essentially required to assemble the final product. 
A contract agreement was signed between OFB and IMI Israel in September 2004 
for supply of 15,000 units MK-I FSAPDS 125mm anti-tank ammunition in two 
phases. The first batch assembled in India was subjected to proof test in May 2005. 
Controller of Quality Assurance (Ammunition) did not accord Bulk Production 
Clearance as it failed in the proof test. Meanwhile, in the Target Fixation meeting for 
2005-06 held in January 2005, it was decided that OFB would supply further 30,000 
of the ammunition during 2005-06 (cumulative 45,000). Though the consignment of 
15,000 units was awaiting Bulk Production Clearance from inspectorate authority, 
OFB imported further 30,000 units in September 2005 valuing Rs 99.34 crore (US$ 
22 million) at the Phase-I rate. 45,000 units valuing Rs 141 crore were still lying idle 
as of May 2010.  
                                                
 
12 FSAPDS : Fin Stabilized Armour Piercing Discarding Sabot 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 29 
 
Without stabilizing the co-production of FSAPDS from the first consignment of 
imported components, OFB’s procurement of 30,000 additional units worth Rs 99.34 
crore and MOD’s sanction thereof was a case of wrong judgment. 
Though it was repeatedly mentioned by OFB and MOD at the time of processing of 
case that the agreement was meant for ‘c o-production and co-development’ of 125 
mm FSAPDS, the details of work-share worked out by OFB indicated that it was 
neither a co-development nor co-production in the initial phases. The share of IMI to 
OFB was 83 per cent to 17 per cent. Further, the 17 per cent contribution of OFB 
was insignificant.  
Between 2001 and 2003, Army had directly procured 46000 rounds of 125 mm 
FSAPDS from IMI Israel without any probl em relating to quality. DGQA was the 
Inspection authority also for imported ammunition. The ammunition was acceptable 
both DGQA and Army. However, when the ammunition against the agreement dated 
September 2004 was received by OFB, both DGQA and Army could not clear the 
ammunition. Ministry remained the silent spectator during the whole process and 
failed to resolve the issue which resulted in 45000 units of FSAPDS worth Rs 141 
crore lying idle. The ammunitions procured by OFB and Army were proven products 
and were supplied by the same supplier. 
Ministry replied that bulk production clea rance was accorded in June 2009 and in 
view of the selective permission for busin ess dealings with IMI, the preparatory 
action was being taken. 
Ministry’s reply was silent as to why the procurement was done for the second 
phase, when the bulk production clearance was not given even for first phase. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 30 
 
Chapter IV: Provisioning 
4.1 Background 
For manufacturing organisations like Ordna nce Factories, provisioning is an 
important function involving estimations of requirements of raw materials and semi 
finished goods to ensure production schedule meet the production targets. Over 
provisioning would result in accumulation of inventories blocking scarce resources. 
Under provisioning on the other hand would disrupt the production schedule. 
Provisioning also is the first step for effective procurement management. 
Paragraph 3.1.1 of the MMPM 13 lays down that the provisioning action should 
commence with 100 per cent of the target for the ensuing financial year plus 25  per 
cent for the first quarter of the following year. The net requirement of stores (for a 
maximum period of 15 months) is then arrived at duly taking into account the 
existing stock, dues in 14 and work-in-progress. As regards actual holding of 
inventories, Paragraph 3.4 of the MMPM lays down the overall inventory holding of 
the factory at not more than the maximum level of three to six months requirements 
at any point of time. 
The OFB finalizes the annual producti on programme for various items in 
consultation with the users before commencement of each financial year and 
communicates the production target to the Ordnance Factories. The Factories then 
draw up production plans based on such annual  targets and initiate provisioning and 
procurement of raw material and compone nts required. Material planning sheets 
generated by the Factories are based on production programme and standard estimate 
for an item and indicate the net requirement after taking into account the stock and 
dues.
15 
4.2 Over provisioning approved by OFB  
During the audit at OFB Headquarters and Mi nistry of Defence, it was noticed that 
11 cases were approved between January 2007 to December 2008 in which the basic 
norms of provisioning were violated. The requirements projected through these 11 
                                                 
13 Material Management and Procurement Manual: OFB’s procurement manual 
14 Dues in a term used to denote supplies due but for which the supply orders have already been 
placed. 
15 Paragraph 3.8 of MMPM 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 31 
 
proposals worth Rs 224 crore for procurement of stores by different Ordnance 
Factories were much more than the laid down provisioning norms of 15 months and 
was ranging from 24 to 36 months. These were sanctioned by the OFB or Ministry 
of Defence and resulted in excess proc urement worth Rs. 137 crore over and above 
the provisioning norms. The details are given in Annexure I. 
It was also noticed that 8 sanctions wo rth Rs. 229 crore were accorded by OFB 
between February 2007 and April 2007 w ithout initiation of Material Planning 
Sheet. These eight cases mostly involved single tenders. The suppliers were  ROE 16 
(6 cases), Sundaram Clayton (one case) and  R K Machine Tools, TS Kissan and 
Kew Industries (one case).The details are given in Annexure II. 
Ministry replied that most of the items were  marked by factors such as difficulty to 
procure, longer lead time, highly volatile prices, limited sources etc. There were 
cases in which procurement in restricted lo ts would lead to higher prices and stock 
out situations resulting in overall loss to the state. There would hardly be an instance 
where an item would remain unutilized.  
Ministry’s reply is generic in nature and does not address the specific cases 
mentioned. The provisioning norms for 16 months take into account these factors 
already. Audit did not come across any evidence to justify deviations from the 
provisioning norms. 
Case 1: Excess procurement from Private firms 
In one particular case, OFB accorded sanction in July 2008 for procurement of Shell 
105 mm IFG
17 at the total cost of Rs 51.42 crore. The eventual suppliers were T S 
Kissan, R.K Machine Tools and KEW. OFB finalized the case during 2008-09 
taking into account the requirement for 2007-08 whereas the stock in hand and dues 
were sufficient to meet even the requirement for 2008-09. The requirement was thus 
artificially inflated in order to facilitate the unnecessary procurement. The value of 
excess procurement was Rs 36.63 crore. 
Ministry replied in June 2010 that as the in-house manufacturing capacity of 105 mm 
shell in Ordnance Factory Kanpur and Ordnance Factory Ambajhari during the year 
2008-09 was inadequate, it was decided to restrict the supplies from Ordnance 
                                                
 
16 M/S Rosoboronexport Russia 
17 Indian Field Gun 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 32 
 
Factory Kanpur to 2 lakh and Ordnance Factory Ambajhari was not given any 
production programme.  
Ministry’s reply needs to be considered in  the backdrop of the following facts. The 
Store Holder’s Inability Sheet, which the TPC considered in May 2008, was raised in 
November 2007. According to the TPC minutes after taking the full requirement of 
2007-08 and 2008-09 and considering dues in etc. the deficiency for OF Chanda was 
calculated at 226383 and for Ordnance Factory Bolangir was calculated at 30750. 
The IFD procurement was provisioned at 130000 shells from OF Kanpur and the 
provision for trade procurement was 127130 shells based on requirements from OF 
Chanda of 231586 shells and for OF Bolangir of 100400 shells during 2008-09. 
Actual production figures in the Factories as in the printed annual accounts for 2008-
09 depicted a different picture. OF Kanpur produced 191988 shells during the year 
and OF Ambajhari produced 30202 totaling 222190 shells. The final production of 
OF Chanda was however at 153765 and that of OF Bolangir was 104989 totaling 
258754 shells.  
This will indicate that trade procurement of at least 90566 shells worth Rs 36.63 
crore was in excess of actual requirement. 
Case 2: Excess procurement from a subsidiary of BEL 
In yet another case, OFB accorded sanction for procurement of 4248 Image 
Intensifier Tubes for OLF
18, to be procured from BELOP, Pune a subsidiary of BEL 
at the total cost of Rs. 56.49 crore (wit hout Customs Duty) and Rs. 71.69 crore (with 
Customs Duty). The original proposal of OLF was for the procurement of 4944 I I 
Tubes. OFB Level TPC-I held in May 2008 worked out the requirement as 4248. 
The above deficiency was calculated ta king full production target of 2008-09 and 
2009-10. As per norms, only 25  per cent of the requirement of 2009-10 should have 
been taken into account and the deficiency should have been worked out to 2345 
only. The excess procurement amounted to Rs. 25.30 crore. 
Ministry in its reply stated that it was difficult to procure the item for which very few 
manufacturers are available world-wide. It also confirmed that about 90 per cent of 
the Tubes have been used by 2009-10 and balance 10 per cent  would be used in 
2010-11.  
                                                 
18 Opto Electronics Factory Dehradun 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 33 
 
Ministry’s reply confirms the audit point of over provisioning. 
4.3 Questionable and unnece ssary trade procurement by 
Factories 
Case 1 : Undue favour to a private firm by Ordnance Factory Ambernath 
Ammunition Factory Kirkee placed an IFD 19 on Ordnance Factory Ambernath 
(OFA) in November 2005 for supply of 37 MT of steel cups KF 38 required for AK-
47 Ammunition. Accordingly, OFA placed an IFD on MSF 20 for supply of 125 MT 
of steel strips. Later cups manufactured by  OFA were rejected at AFK. AFK short 
closed the IFD in June 2007 and required on ly 14 MT of steel cups for Pre Despatch 
Inspection and commissioning of an imported machine. 
Despite this, in October 2007, OFA placed a supply order on Paras Engineering 
Company, Mumbai for supply of 165.11 Metric Tons of Cold Rolled Steel sheets in 
two sizes worth Rs. 3.24 crore. According to the terms and condition of supply 
o r d e r ,  f i v e  c o i l s  o f  e a c h  s i z e  w e r e  t o  b e  s u p p l i e d  a s  a  p i l o t  s a m p l e s .  C u p s  
manufactured out of the pilot coils were to be test fired at AFK. Only after successful 
trials, bulk production clearance was to be given. 
The cups were never test fired by AFK,  but bulk production clearance was given by 
OFA to the firm in April 2008 to supply the remaining sheets. 
138.338 MT of Steel sheets worth Rs 2.72 crore are lying in OFA. Possibility of 
their further use is remote as there is no further requirement of the steel cases for AK 
47 ammunition. Undue favour was thus granted to the supplier at the cost of the 
national exchequer. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that OFB would take immediate action to ensure that 
the steel is utilized without any further delay. It also informed that explanation of 
officers concerned will be called for procuring the steel in spite of reduction in 
demand.  
Case 2 : Unnecessary procurement of  brass cups at Ammunition Factory 
Kirkee 
AFK requires brass cups for manufacture of 5.56 mm ammunition and their 
requirements were met by OFA. During ammunition review meeting held at OFB on 
                                                
 
19 Inter Factory Demand‐ where one factory procures from another 
20 Metal and Steel Factory 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 34 
 
11/12 June 2008, it was decided that 2300 MT brass cups for 5.56 mm ammunition 
was required against which OFA would supply 2100 MT brass cups. AFK was 
directed to procure balance requirement of  2008-09 plus three months opening stock 
of brass cups from trade .Accordingly AFK placed a supply order on Rashtriya Metal 
Industries for supply of 157 MT of brass c ups valuing Rs 8.09 crore with delivery 
period up to 31 March 2009.  
The firm failed to supply store within the delivery period. AFK finally extended it up 
to 31 August 2010. In the meanwhile AFK met the target for 08-09 and 09-10 
without trade support, which is indicative of the fact that AFK did not require the 
supply from the vendor. AFK however, did not cancel the supply order. The 
additional expenditure as a result of procurement from the trade amounted to Rs 1.33 
crore compared to the cost of manufacturing of the cups in the factory in 2008-09. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that the requirement of 5.56 mm ammunition was 
phenomenally high and had been increasing. The supply order was placed on the 
trade due to non availability of brass cups from the sister Factories. Ministry also 
stated that as against a target of 1206.56 lakh rounds in 2008-09, AFK achieved 
production of 1147.64 lakh rounds. Similarly in 2009-10, against a target of 1217.52 
lakh rounds, the factory achieved production of 1200 lakh rounds. Ministry further 
stated that the procurement price from trade was Rs 515.55 per kilogram against the 
IFD price of Rs 570 per kilogram. 
Ministry’s reply does not acknowledge the fact that despite the failure of the vendor 
to supply the brass cups and continuous extension of the delivery date by the factory, 
the shortfall in production during the last two years has been only marginal. Further, 
as per OFB’s own guidelines, only the difference in material cost would affect the 
decision to procure from the trade. Though the IFD issue price was Rs 570, the 
material cost was Rs 431 and the total production cost was Rs 470. 
Case 3: Procurement of Fuze from privat e firm when OFAJ had the capacity to 
produce 
OFB in October1997 instructed all the Factories that in the event of the price of an 
IFD store being higher than trade cost, higher price alone should not be considered 
by the Factories as the only factor for deciding to order on trade overlooking the 
capacity of sister factory to produce such st ore. However, if the material price alone 
of the IFD (supplying) factory was more than  the total cost of the store obtained ex-

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 35 
 
trade, the buying factory has the option to go  to trade. Further, as per OFB’s policy 
(12/06) guidelines for determining interdepartmental production vis-a-vis trade 
procurement, all Factories should first explore the possibility of getting items from 
sister Factories, receiving factory would go for cost breakup of the item from IFD 
supplying factory before going for trade.  
Ordnance Factory Ambajhari (OFAJ) has a production capacity of 1,00,000 Nos. per 
year of the Fuze MG-25 required for 23mm Schilka. During the three years from 
2006-07 to 2008-09, OF Khamaria (OFK) procured 5,51,592 Fuzes at the unit rate 
ranging from Rs. 411 to Rs 418. During the same period, it also placed an order for 
2,40,000 fuzes from OFAJ against Inter Factory Demand. OFAJ could supply only 
1,29,806 units. The material cost of the product in OFAJ ranged from Rs 110 to Rs 
117  
It was noticed in audit that OFB fixed the target of only 25,000 in 2006-07 for 
OFAJ. No target was given in 2007-08 and in 2008-09 a target of 1,00,000 was 
fixed. The factory claimed to have fulf illed all targets. While OFK placed the 
procurement order on the trade, OFAJ had the capacity up to 1,00,000 per year, it 
would appear due to OFB fixing less target, the factory could not supply to its full 
capacity. 
Ministry replied in June 2010 that there was enough IFD placed on OFAJ but the 
factory could not supply the full quantity. This however contradicts the claim of 
OFAJ in November 2009 that from 2006-07 to 2008-09, all targets have been 
fulfilled. In 2006-07, for example, according to OFAJ, a target of 25,000 was set, 
which the factory fulfilled. In 2007-08, no target was set and in 2008-09, a target of 
1,00,000 was set against which 24,646 were issued. The balance quantity was under 
proof.  
Ministry further stated that OFB would take immediate steps to verify the actual 
capacity for production of fuze MG-25 on OF Ambajhari and ensure that the in 
house capacity is fully utilized before placing order on trade. 
Case 4: Excess raw materials issued to a private firm by Ordnance Factory 
Trichy 
Ordnance Factory, Trichy placed an order in April 2009 on M/s. Anang Enterprise, 
Kolkata for supply of 26,862 Units of Piston Extension at a unit rate of Rs 325 with 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 36 
 
stipulation to supply 3500 Units per month. Raw material for the subject work was to 
be issued by the factory and the supply to be completed by the firm in April 2010. 
On receipt of the item from the firm, further machining on the item was to be done at 
the factory, before using the same in production of the rifles. The firm could not 
supply the items as per the agreed monthly delivery schedule though raw materials 
were issued by the factory as per schedule. As of October 2009 the factory had 
issued raw material for 21,175 Units but the firm supplied only 14,023 items. As 
monthly supply of the item by the firm was ranging from 1000 to 3400 Units only 
affecting the production target of the rifl es, the factory short-closed the order in 
November 2009. The excess raw materials issued to the firm for supply of the 
remaining 7152 Units were lying with them at the time audit was conducted. 
Ministry in June 2010 confirmed that the items had been received in full in March 
2010. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 37 
 
 
Chapter V : Tendering 
5.1 Procurement through Open Tender 
Broadly, procurement by Ordnance Factories is conducted through three channels. A 
Limited Tender Enquiry (LTE) is issued to established suppliers who are registered 
with the factory concerned. Open tender enquiry (OTE) is open to any supplier. OTE 
channel is designed to encourage new suppliers to participate in the Ordnance 
Factory procurement process and thus to expand the base of suppliers to the 
Ordnance Factories. However, established suppliers are also allowed to quote against 
open tender enquiries. For materials which are proprietary or are not available 
widely in the open market, Single Tender Enquiry (STE) is issued. 
According to Paragraph 4.6.1.1 of MMPM, 80 per cent of annual ordering quantity 
is to be procured through Limited Tend er Enquiry (LTE) from established sources 
and 20 per cent quantity is to be procured through Open Tender Enquiry (OTE) with 
wider publicity for source development.  
Scrutiny in audit indicated that LTE channel continued to be the dominant channel of 
procurement and a miniscule part of procurement was carried out through OTE 
channel. Out the 18 Factorie s selected, the information on the OTE / LTE/ STE was 
available in the database of seven Factories only. The data of OTE in these seven 
Factories during the last three years was meagre and varied from 0.07 per cent  to 
1.91 per cent only.  
Even when new suppliers were registered, it was seen that they were not encouraged. 
Ordnance Parachute Factory Kanpur regi stered 21 new suppliers since 2006 for 
supply of different stores. The factory howev er did not issue any tender to these new 
suppliers despite capacity verification and registration by the factory. 
5.2 Cases of malpractices relating to OTE 
Several cases were noticed where Ordnance Factories ignored the companies which 
came through OTE channel or allowed the established companies to take advantage 
of the OTE channel by various methods.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 38 
 
Case 1 Abnormally low rate accepted through the OTE channel 
Ordnance Factory Khamaria issued an OTE for 8577 sets of ‘Time & Impact Fuze 
447 in January 2007 in order to develop more sources. The response to the OTE 
ranged from Re. 0.07 (7 paise) to Rs. 3700.00. Two companies namely Hyderabad 
Precision Co and Mech Components Ltd, both located in Hyderabad, quoted 7 paise 
only. Both these companies were otherwise established suppliers. The last purchase 
rate of the item was Rs. 4401.90 per set, and the lowest offer of Re 0.07 per set was 
obviously “freak”. Despite this the factory placed in September 2008 supply orders 
for the item on these two firms for 4289 sets and 4288 respectively at an absurd price 
of 7 paise. Since both the firms were found technically acceptable and are regular 
suppliers to several Factories, obviously such rates were quoted to block entry of 
other suppliers. Needless to say, no supply of  the item has been received from either 
of the firms. Incidentally, both the companies shared the same fax number for 
another tender enquiry in Ammunition Factory, Kirkee. 
Ministry replied that disciplinary action would be initiated against the officers 
responsible for placing orders on these tw o firms on abnormally low price. Action 
would also be initiated to blacklist these two firms. Ministry further committed that 
appropriate provisions would be included in the revised procurement manual of OFB 
to prevent recurrence of such practices. 
Case 2: Order not placed on a firm despite lower rates through OTE channel 
In Ordnance Factory Kanpur, proof machined body of 51mm bomb was procured 
from May 2004 to August 2008 from two firms namely RK Machine Tools and 
Mukesh Industries through LTE channel. A third company namely Lucky 
Engineering got two supply orders on 06 May 2004 and 22 December 2006 through 
the OTE channel. The rate of Lucky Engineering was Rs 77 per body on 06 May 
2004, the rates charged by RK Machine Tools and Mukesh were Rs 165 per body on 
16 June 2004. Similarly, in December 2006, Lucky Engineering charged Rs 124 per 
body whereas in February 2007, the rate charged by RK Machine Tools and Mukesh 
was Rs 188. Yet only the above two s upply orders were placed on Lucky 
Engineering and bulk of the procurement continued to be carried out through LTE 
channels through these two companies. The difference between the OTE rates and 
LTE rates in respect of all the supply orders from May 2004 to August 2008 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 39 
 
amounted to Rs 6.17 crore compared to the available prices charged by Lucky 
Engineering. 
Ministry replied in June 2010 that subsequently Lucky Engineering has become an 
established supplier in 2008 and the increa sed competition has led to better rates. 
Ministry’s reply was however silent as to the reasons why supply order continued to 
be placed on RK Machine Tools and Mukesh at higher prices despite the fact that 
Lucky Engineering was quoting lower prices on more than one occasion. 
Case 3 : Even packing boxes were procured through limited tender 
As per Paragraph 4.3.3 of MMPM, OTE should be resorted to for all generic items. 
In practice, this provision was hardly followed. During the last 3 years Ammunition 
Factory Kirkee procured even packing material through LTE from only two 
suppliers - Stuti Enterprises. & Embee International. In Vehicle Factory Jabalpur, for 
transportation contracts, LTE was resorted rather than going for OTE. During 2006 
to 2008, contracts worth Rs 16.38 crore were given to four firms only.  
Ministry stated in June 2010 that packi ng materials like wooden boxes and paper 
cartons cannot be considered as generic it ems as they are required for ammunitions. 
However, it is felt in audit that such low technology items like packing boxes can 
easily be procured through open tender channels. The specifications of these boxes 
did not indicate any special characteristics that would require specialized technology. 
Case 4: Loss due to non-issue of tender to a supplier who had supplied at lower 
rate earlier 
In Ordnance Parachute Factory Kanpur, a supply order for 40,000 metres webbing 
nylon was placed on 24 October 2008 on Swadeshi Newar Cotton Mills Kanpur 
through OTE channel. The company completed the supply on 24 March 2009. 
However, the store was not brought on charge due to delay in inspection. When LTE 
for 9,14,755 metres of the same store was issued on 31 March 2009, the LTE was 
not issued to the company on the ground that full quantity was not brought on 
charge. Going by the rate quoted by the company in October 2008, the excess 
expenditure incurred on the supply order through LTE amounted to Rs 72.04 lakh.  
Ministry stated in June 2010 that testing of supplied materials takes some time and 
therefore the company could not be treated as an established vendor on the day the 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 40 
 
limited tender was issued. While the claim of the Ministry was technically correct, 
the fact remains that this caused a loss of Rs 72 .04 lakh to the exchequer. 
Case 5: Loss due to non issue of tender to supplier who had supplied at lower 
rate  
Fabric Nylon was procured regularly by Ordnance Parachute Factory, Kanpur (OPF). 
In October 2007, Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjahanpur (OCFS) initiated 
procurement action for 1,27,920 metres of the fabric. OCFS obtained the list of four 
suppliers from OPF. The latter factory also intimated that supply order was placed on 
Shalon Rs 76.50 per metre in August 2006 against OTE. Quantity Enhancement 
Clause was also exercised by OPF for this contract. OCFS, however, did not even 
issue tender enquiry to Shalon. LTE was issued to other four firms intimated by the 
OPF. All four firms quoted, out of which the lowest tender was by two firms, both of 
whom had quoted the exact rate of Rs 133 per metre. Subsequently OCFS placed 
order in November 2008 at Rs 48 per metre against OTE which clearly showed the 
downward trend in rates and also the actual pr icing/ rate of the item. The loss to the 
exchequer amounted to Rs 1.08 crore. 
Ministry replied in June 2010 that the vendor selection for issue of the limited tender 
was done on 4 October 2007 and as on that day, Shalon did not supply 50 per cent of 
the quantity. It could not, therefore be treate d as an established vendor. Ministry also 
stated that when OTE is issued for source development, very low rates are received 
as they are entry rates for new vendors.  
Ministry did not however indicate as to how the quantity enhancement clause could 
be operated on Shalon. The fact also remains that despite knowing that Shalon has 
been supplying at a lower price, the Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjahanpur did 
not even issue tender enquiry to them.  
Overall, Ministry in its reply has taken a technical view about issuing tender enquiry 
on limited tender basis and open tender basis. The primary objective of the tender 
process is to encourage fair competition le ading to fair price. During audit, enough 
evidence came to light- narrated in subseque nt paragraphs- to indicate that strong 
collusive relationship exists between many suppliers. Consistently ignoring the much 
lower prices through the OTE channel and placing supply orders on the higher prices 
through the LTE channel has only reinforced the grip of the select group of suppliers 
on the procurement processes in the Ordnance Factories. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 41 
 
5.3 Tell-tale evidence of coll usion of suppliers ignored 
As per Rule 142 (ii) of GFR, credentials of  the suppliers should be carefully verified 
before registration of the suppliers. Fu rther as per Rule 142 (iv) of the GFR 
performance and conduct of every register ed supplier is to be watched by the 
Department. The suppliers are liable to  be removed from the list of approved 
suppliers if they make any false declaration to the Government or for any ground 
which in the opinion is not in public interest.  
Scrutiny of the procurement files of the past three years revealed that the Ordnance 
Factories registered and placed orders on a large number of companies which shared 
the same telephone numbers, or fax numbers or registered addresses. 23 such cases 
are listed in Annexure III. Such cases indicate  on one hand, lack of basic verification 
of the credentials of the companies and lack  application of mind by the authorities in 
the Factories on the other. It is apparent that many shadow firms were operating and 
cornering supply orders from various Factor ies. The factory authorities however did 
not take into account even the most obvious evidence of such malpractices which 
enabled the suppliers to manipulate the prices which would be apparent in the 
present and the following chapter. 
5.4  Individual cases of collu sion and/or shadow firms 
Ammunition Factory Kirkee 
Case 1 
Ammunition Factory Kirkee sent fax messages on 21 April 2009 to Mukesh 
Industries and KEW Industries at the same fax number giving counter offer to both 
the firms being L2 and L3. Both the companies replied from the same fax number on 
26 April 2009 at 2235 and 2237 hrs. The ordered quantity was distributed among 
three firms. While the supply order on the first firm was placed on 22 April 2009, the 
supply orders were placed on these two firms on 3 May 2009.  
Case 2 
Ammunition Factory Kirkee invited limited tender enquiry for Fuze Percussion 
DA5A (Empty) from Hyderabad Precision Mfg Co Pvt Ltd and Mech Components 
Pvt Ltd. Both these companies were located in Hyderabad. The firms were registered 
by AF Kirkee for the same items on 6 and 7 July 2006. An amendment to the tender 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 42 
 
enquiry was faxed to both the companies at the same fax address which were 
responded to.  
During audit, at least 4 other fax messages from Mech Component Pvt Ltd were 
received by AF Kirkee from the fax number which belonged to Hyderabad Precision 
Pvt Ltd.  
In case of OF Khamaria, these two companies were issued supply order at the 
freakish rate of 7 paise as mentioned at Case 1 under Paragraph 6.2 of this report. 
Case 3 
In Ammunition Factory, Kirkee, two firms got themselves registered. The firm 
Precision Engineering was owned Shri Anil Kumar Agarwal whose residence was 30 
Ayodhya Enclave, Cheshire Home Road Ranchi. The owner of other firm Alcast was 
Shri Sashi Kant Agarwal, who also indicated the same address. They shared the 
same mobile number, fax number and telephone number. Both of them were given 
supply orders and the factory corresponded with the firm from the same fax number 
without raising any issue of collusion between the firms. 
Case 4 
In another case, in the same factory, two Kolkata based companies having different 
addresses corresponded from the same fax number. In response to a tender enquiry 
for Cartridge Training for 81 mm Mortar Bomb, Asha Industries having address at 
Tarpan Ghat Road, Kolkata and Tirupati Industries at Ram Saran Poddar Lane, 
Kolkata despatched their tenders through Speed Post which were posted on the same 
day at the same time at the same post office. The tender of Tirupati Industries was 
posted from Kolkata GPO on 12 January 2007 at 1907 hrs with a serial number EE 
50714823. The tender of Asha Industries was despatched from the same post office 
on the same date at 1907 hrs with a serial number E 50714824. Both the companies 
again posted tenders against a later tender enquiry from the same post office on the 
same date at the same time with consecutive serial numbers for speed post. On both 
the occasions, supply orders were placed on both the companies without examining 
the possibility of collusion. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 43 
 
Case 5 
High Explosives Factory, Kirkee 
In High Explosives Factory Kirkee in case of a transportation contract, , tenders were 
received among others from Gauri Roadlines and Vijay Roadlines. Both had the 
same telephone number. The contract was awarded to Vijay Roadlines. Similarly, in 
Ammunition Factory Kirkee two firms namely Veekay Enterprise and Sheth &Co 
quoted against another tender in which both the firms showed the same fax number. 
While partner of one firm was Shri BV Sh eth, the partner of the second firm was 
Shri AV Sheth. 
Case 6 
Ordnance Factory Ambernath and Ordnance Factory Kanpur 
Cases were also noticed in Ordnance Factory Ambernath, Ordnance Equipment 
factory, Kanpur where such firms operated with collusive possibilities. In Ordnance 
Equipment Factory Kanpur, four firms base d in Tamil Nadu with identical telephone 
number participated in the tender process.  Two of these firms had same address as 
well. 
Case 7 
Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjahanpur 
In Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjahanpur, large number of supply orders were 
placed on 10 firms from Panipat and Ludhiana from 1997 for Yarn Woolen 450 Tex 
Natural Grey. These firms were  
(a) RSM Woolen Mills,  
(b) Mittal Woollen and Cotton Mills  
(c) Prestige Spinners Ludhiana  
(d) Punjab Wool Syndicate Ludhiana  
(e) AAA Spinners Panipat  
(f) Siddharth Woolen Mills Panipat  
(g) Raghav International Ludhiana  
(h) Maheswari Woollen Mills Ludhiana  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 44 
 
(i) Vikas Udyog Ludhiana and (j) Geeta Woollen Mills Ludhiana.  
Audit scrutiny indicated that  
(a) RSM Woolen Mills and Mittal Woolen and Cotton Mills had the same telephone 
number.  
(b) Prestige Spinners and Punjab Wool Syndicate had identical telephone and fax 
numbers. They also had identical address.  
(c) AAA Spinners and Siddharth Woollen Mills had identical telephone and fax 
number, identical e-mail address and identical address.  
(d) Raghav International and Maheswari Woolen Mills had identical fax number and 
identical address.  
(e) Vikas Udyog and Geeta Woollen Mills had same telephone number. 
Thus competition among these Factories was suspect but the factory refused to act 
on the aspect and kept on placing the supply orders. 
Case 8 
Ordnance Parachute Factory, Kanpur 
For procurement of 29,275 Nos. of Universal Member, an item for tent, in Ordnance 
Parachute Factory, Kanpur four firms namely Bishmber Dayal Onkar Pershad Delhi,  
Standard Niwar Mills Kanpur, VK Brothe rs Kanpur and AVR Enterprises Kanpur 
responded. From the three quotations received from Kanpur based firms, it was 
noticed that the Fax number of Standard Niwar Mills Kanpur & AVR Enterprises 
Kanpur was identical. Their e-mail address was also the same. Tender enquiries to 
Standard Niwar Mills Kanpur & VK Brot hers Kanpur were issued to the same 
address. They also had the same phone numbers. 
Examination in audit of the three quotations received from three companies indicated 
that all of them had the same format and had been typed from the same document 
from the computer. Against the date of delivery, the blank spaces were underlined 
and were filled by hand. The length of the underlines in all the quotations was 
exactly the same viz. 1.4 cm and 2.1 cm. The handwriting in all the three quotations 
was the same.  

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 45 
 
Bishmber Dayal Onkar Pershad Delhi quoted a rate of Rs 163.63 per number with 4  
per cent  UP Trade Tax. VK Brothers Kanpur became the L-I as it quoted Rs Rs 
158.00 per number with 4  per cent  UP Trade Tax. However, against Taxes and 
Duties: Excise Duty, whatever was written was covered with a black sketch pen. The 
supply order SO No.60049 was placed on the firm on 17-05-2006 for Rs 48.10 lakh 
through a process which was to say the leas t suspect. In another factory namely 
Ordnance Equipment Factory Kanpur, the same three firms were involved in the 
tender enquiry 20080183/PV/4142 dated 10 June 2008. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 46 
 
 
 
 
 
Handwriting 
same in all 
the three 
quotations 
Handwriting 
same in all 
the three 
quotations 
Length of 
lines same at 
1.4 cm and 
2.1 cm  

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 47 
 
 
 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 48 
 
 
 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 49 
 
 
Ministry stated that Ordnance Factory Boar d would conduct a detailed enquiry into 
the cases. A fresh capacity verification of th e firms involved would be conducted  to 
see whether they have separate production facilities. Explanation of the officers 
would also be called for. 
The other replies of the Ministry seek to establish that all these firms were 
independent entities and hold separate registration numbers etc. However, the 
issue is not whether they have separate identities or have separate production 
facilities. There was enough evidence to suggest that these firms are colluding 
with each other to suppress competition in the procurement process. Ministry’s 
replies do not comment on the tell tale evidence of such collusion. If counter 
offers are being made by two companies fr om the same fax at the same time or 
tenders are being posted together or the same handwriting appears on 
quotations by different firms, they cannot be treated as mere coincidences.  
5.5 Manipulation of procedures to avoid single tender situation 
Case 1 
In Vehicle Factory Jabalpur, against a tend er enquiry for manufacture and supply of 
Frame side member Drilled RH along with Frame Filtch RH for Stallion vehicle, two 
firms namely Simplex Metallica and Simple x Auto Industries responded. From 2004 
onwards, one or the other of these two firms had been awarded the supply orders. 
Audit scrutiny indicated that both these firms are located at the same address. Their 
telephone numbers and fax numbers were the same. In one of tender opening 
meeting on 13 January 2009, the same individual represented both the firms. By 
adopting this malpractice, potential single tender situation was avoided. 
Case 2 
Ordnance Equipment Factory Kanpur issued a two bid global tender enquiry for 
procurement of 2 Light Duty Splitting Ma chines in January 2007. Only two firms - 
Anurag Trading Co. Kanpur and Panna Marketing (P) Ltd. Kanpur responded. Both 
of them had identical telephone numbers,  fax numbers. The e-mail address of 
Anurag was shyam_meh@rediffmail.com
 and that of Panna was 
shyammeh@rediffmail.com. Their addresses we re different. Apart from the fact that 
the factory corresponded with both the firms at the same fax number, it did not 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 50 
 
enquire into how the same land line telephone number could be installed in two 
different premises. This however, enabled the factory to avoid a potential single 
tender situation.  
Case 3 
In another case, Ordnance Parachute factory Kanpur issued in April 2006 an open 
tender enquiry for procurement of 30 Single needle flat bed chain stitch industrial 
sewing machines. The case was re-tendered in July 2006. Three bids were received 
and after technical evaluation, only two remained in the competition. These firms 
were Star International Pvt Ltd and New India Sewing Machine Company, Kanpur. 
Supply order was placed on Star International Pvt Ltd for Rs 24.95 lakh. 
Both Star International Pvt Ltd and New India Sewing Machines Company Kanpur 
had the same fax number. It was also seen that the factory letter dated 01 December 
2006 to both the parties were faxed to the same number. 
Case 4 
In Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjahanpur, against an open tender enquiry of 
December 2007 for procurement of two numbers of Warping machines, two firms – 
M/s Keshar Corporation, Ahmedabad and M/s Tech Mech Engineers Ahmedabad 
responded. The Fax numbers of both the firms in the correspondences were found to 
be identical. Despite the similar identities of the firms which resulted in single tender 
situation and vitiating tendering process, TPC decided to place order on M/s Tech 
Mech Engineers Ahmedabad at a cost of Rs 34.66 lakh.  
Ministry stated that Ordnance Factory Boar d would conduct a detailed enquiry into 
the cases. A fresh capacity verification of the firms involved would be conducted  to 
see whether they have separate production facilities. Explanation of the officers 
would also be called for. 
5.6  Cases of cartelization by quoting the same price 
During audit at least 108 cases were seen in different Factories, where firms from 
different cities have quoted the same price for same item. All were through limited 
tender channel. Details are at Annexure IV. As an example, in the first case in 
Annexure IV, in Ordnance Factory Khamar ia, five firms from Mumbai, Delhi, Pune, 
Gurgaon and NOIDA quoted exactly the pr ice of Rs 398 per item for ball insert. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 51 
 
Supply order was placed on all firms and the tendered quantity was equally 
distributed.  
In order to stop cartelization, OFB on 18 July 2007 introduced a new measure. It 
prescribed that L2 and L3 tenderers should also be allowed to supply provided they 
accept the counteroffer of the rate quoted by L1 at a ratio of 50:30:20. However the 
measure did little to improve the situation as the suppliers quoted the same rate and 
all became L1 as a result. 
One of the reasons why firms registered themselves under different names was the 
usual practice of Ordnance Factories to distribute the ordered quantity among 
different suppliers if they were found to have quoted same rate or accepted, being L2 
or L3, a counter offer of the L1 rate. Su ch firms who operate under different names, 
in the event of equal distribution of tender ed quantity will get a larger share through 
a sister concern or a ghost firm. In one extreme case, Ordnance Clothing Factory 
Shahjahanpur placed supply orders on 13 suppliers at the same rate by distributing 
the quantity of Yarn Woolen 450 Tex Type Natural Grey. 
Unwillingness of TPC
21s headed by the Head of the factory and comprising other 
senior factory officials to take action on blatant cases of price manipulation by 
suppliers and in some cases their active connivance to favour suppliers, absence of 
independent assessment of the rates quoted and treating the last purchase rate as the 
only benchmark coupled with the practice of distributing the ordered quantity among 
all suppliers reinforced and encouraged the practice of cartelization even more. 
It also came to notice that prices quoted under OTE were significantly lower than the 
prices under LTE. The opinion among the fact ory officials was that suppliers quoted 
cheaper rates to grab the contracts as the first step to enter into the supply chain of 
the Ordnance Factories. While this may be partially true, many cases were seen in 
which established suppliers also participated in open tender enquiries and quoted 
cheaper rates. The belief also presupposes that suppliers will be making losses to 
make entry through the open tender channel which may not be wholly true. Cases 
were seen that suppliers through shadow fi rms also were able to suppress effective 
competition.  
                                                
 
21 Tender Purchase Committees 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 52 
 
In none of the cases mentioned in Annexur e IV, where cartelization was prima facie 
evident, Ministry or OFB or the factory concerned made any enquiries or took any 
effective action. On the other hand, such a situation was allowed to continue in 
almost all the Factories. In factory after factory the same firms responded to various 
tender enquiries both through LTE and OTE channel and manipulated the prices, as 
would be evident from the next chapter. In many cases, in replies to audit 
observations the Factories justified the action by the fact that they were following the 
provisions of the MMPM. No initiative was taken by Ministry, OFB or the factory 
officials to stop the brazen manipulation of the system. 
Distribution of ordered quantity vitiated the tendering process itself 
Case 1:  
OFB’s circular dated 18 July 2007 stated that wherever Ordnance Factories would 
like to distribute the quantity under procurement to more than one supplier for 
strategic reasons to have better and assu red supply prospect, a decision will be taken 
in advance whether order would be placed on two or three firms. The circular further 
stated that accordingly a clause should be included in the tender enquiry. 
Small Arms Factory Kanpur issued a limited tender enquiry in November 2008 to 
three firms for procurement of 138844 Nos Magazine Assembly (30 rounds). In the 
tender enquiry itself, it was mentioned that order will be placed on three firms at L1, 
L2 and L3 at the pre determined ratio of 50:30:20. There was no strategic reasons for 
dividing the quantity and in fact there were several other firms who were awarded 
supply orders earlier to whom tender enquiries were not issued. The LPR rate was Rs 
114.50 in March 2008. L1 firm Ajit Chemic als quoted a price of Rs 119.50 per item 
for 50 per cent of the quantity, L2 firm Nityanand Udyog quoted Rs 119.75 for full 
quantity and L3 Miltech Industries quoted a rate of Rs 120, again for full quantity. 
Supply orders were placed on all the three at the ratio of 50:30:20 at the rate of Rs 
119.50. All the supply orders had a QEC
22 of 25 per cent. 
As would be seen in the case, limited tender enquiry was issued to only three firms 
with a condition that orders will be placed  on all three. Thus the three firms would 
have known beforehand that they would be awarded the contract. The uncanny 
similarities in the rates quoted would also be indicative of that fact.  
                                                 
22 Quantity Enhancement Clause‐ an option clause for repeat order at the contracted price 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 53 
 
Case 2:  
In another case in Ordnance Parachute Factory Kanpur, the process was subverted 
even further. In April 2009, the factory was declared as nodal factory for 
procurement of Fabric for Olive Green Dresses. Sunil Industries of Mumbai on 15 
April 2009 addressed a letter to the factory that the firm had come to know that the 
factory had recently finalized the list of approved suppliers for the above product but 
the name of their firm has not been included. Even though, OEF Headquarters 
Kanpur reminded the GM OPF on 6 May 2009 to issue the limited tender enquiry as 
time has been lost and more than three established suppliers were available, the 
limited enquiry was issued on 26 May 2009 after 20 days. It was issued to five firms 
including Sunil Industries as by that time the capacity verification of the firm was 
completed. A similar condition of division of quantity in the ratio of 50:30:20 was 
mentioned in the enquiry itself. 
All the five firms responded. The L1 firm S Kumar Nationwide quoted Rs 82.80 per 
metre for full quantity. Two firms (Reliance India Ltd and Sangam India ) quoted Rs 
90 per metre. The remaining two firms (Grasim Bhiwani Textiles and Sunil 
Industries) quoted Rs 90.25 per metre. Thus one firm was L1, two firms were L2 and 
two at L3. Supply orders were placed on all the five firms in the ratio of 
50:15:15:10:10. 
Ministry replied that disciplinary cases would be initiated against the officers 
responsible. 
Case 3 
Small Arms Factory Kanpur issued a limited tender enquiry in April 2007 for 
procurement of 7956 Bipod Assembly consisting of 20 Compartments to 12 
suppliers. All the firms quoted and Nation al Tools Limited Kolkata became the 
lowest tenderer at Rs 2446 per unit. The TPC approved placement of order on the 
firm. However, some of the other firms complained that National Tools was not an 
established supplier and hence should not have been issued the limited tender 
enquiry. The factory decided to retender. In the second tender, 11 firms quoted the 
same rate of Rs 2440 per unit. The factory placed supply orders in June 2007 on all 
the firms by distributing the ordered quantity.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 54 
 
Against the OTE, in March 2007, supply or ders were placed on Ashoka Moulders 
Kolkata and Nityanand Udyog Nagpur at a ra te of Rs 1099 per item. The loss to the 
exchequer was Rs 1.06 crore. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that sour ce development rates are not used for 
comparison as firms grossly under quoted to get entry into the category of 
established suppliers. 
Ministry’s reply was silent about the collusive aspect of the tendering process. 
5.7 Communication with the suppliers 
To provide equal opportunities to all suppliers and to generate maximum 
competition in an environment in which tender enquiries are issued only to limited 
number of suppliers and there exists tell-tale evidence of cartel, it is of utmost 
importance that all suppliers receive the enquiries. During audit, however, in several 
Factories, cases were seen of different and irregular modes of communication. Gun 
Carriage Factory Jabalpur issued tender  enquiries to some suppliers through 
Registered Post while others through normal post in respect of the same tender 
enquiry. Ordnance Factory Ambajhari issued tender enquiry under Posting 
Certificates. In Gun Carriage Factory, it was further observed that in some cases no 
postal stamp expenses were incurred while issuing such notices to some firms. While 
the factory replied that this was due to clubbing of more than one TE in one 
envelope, the risks of these notices not being issued or being handed over to the 
firms cannot be ruled out.  
Audit also came across a few cases in which quotations sent by fax were accepted 
and supply order placed on the basis of that. As per MMPM, a quotation by fax may 
be considered as regular tender if the same  is followed by a formal tender within 7 
days from the date of opening of tenders provided the copy by fax is complete in all 
respect.  
Audit scrutiny indicated that against a tender enquiry in Ordnance Equipment 
Factory Kanpur, three suppliers submitted  their quotations through FAX without 
follow up by the formal tender. Factory considered all three FAX quotations and 
decided to place supply order on a firm, whic h was irregular. A few such cases were 
seen also in Vehicle Factory Jabalpur, Ordnance Factory Khamaria and Ordnance 
Factory Ambajhari. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 55 
 
Ministry stated that explanation of th e officers would be called for accepting 
quotations through fax which were not followed by regular sealed tenders in the 
Factories. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 56 
 
 
Chapter VI: Price Discovery Process for 
Procurement 
6.1 Background 
To achieve the best price in competitive tendering, open and competitive tendering is 
the sine qua non . Dependence on the limited tender, cartelization, lack of 
independent assessment of the reasonableness of pricing and very high delegation 
among different levels of officials in an e nvironment which has little internal control 
have created a situation in the Ordnance Factories in which the possibility of a fair 
price through competitive bidding was remote. During audit, a large number of cases 
were seen where the prices have been manipulated and the officials had not taken 
any effective action to ameliorate the situa tion. This has emerged as the fundamental 
flaw in the system.  
Paragraphs 6.18 and 6.18.1 of MMPM lay down the elaborate guidelines to 
determine the reasonableness of prices for procurement in case of competitive 
tendering where two or more suppliers are competing independently to secure a 
contract. The Manual envisages that the reasonability of price proposed has to be 
established by taking into account the competition observed from the responses from 
the trade, last purchase price, estimated value, database maintained on costs based on 
past contracts entered into, market price wherever available, changes in the indices 
of various raw materials, electricity, whol esale price index and statutory changes in 
the wage rates etc.  
Para 6.18 (e) also required that the reasonability of price be examined by resorting to 
Cost analysis in situations where there is wide variance over the Last Purchase Price 
(LPR) not explained by corresponding changes in the indices. 
Further, as per Paragraph 9.17 of MMPM, OFB was to make arrangement for data 
base on past contracts showing details of the items procured, their essential 
specifications, unit rate, quantity, total value, mode of tender enquiry, number of 
tenders received, number of tenders considered acceptable, reasons for exclusion of 
overlooked tenders, un-negotiated rates of L-1, and contract rates were to be 
maintained to help in ascertaining reasonabi lity of price of future procurements. The 
data in respect of supply orders in excess of Rs 20 lakh was to be made available in 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 57 
 
OFB website for information of all Factories. Further, as per the Manual, database 
maintained on costs based on concluded contracts, prices of products available 
through market should also be used to assess reasonableness of prices offered.  
It was noticed during audit that neither the Factories nor OFB had maintained any 
database as per the Manual. The Factories do not have any database of the estimated 
cost of the stores procured or the prices  of the product available through market. The 
various TPCs determined the reasonability of the rates with reference to the last paid 
rate (LPR) only.  
In most of the Factories, LPR was the main index to assess price reasonableness. 
There was no cost expert either at the OFB level or at the factory level. In one or two 
Factories rudimentary efforts were made in a few cases to independently arrive at an 
estimate.  
Ministry while noting the observations of  Audit stated that OFB’s procurement 
manual was under revision. 
6.2 Proactive initiative by factor y officials to help a particular 
supplier 
Case 1 
L1 Overlooked 
Engine Factory Avadi issued a tender enquiry in May 2007 for supply of 1364 
number of Connecting Rod for manufacture of engines for tanks. Echjay Forgings 
offered a unit rate of Rs 2269 for the full supply. The total cost would have come to 
Rs 37,13,108. Second lowest offer of T S Kissan was of unit rate of Rs 1999 for 450 
Units and Rs 2450 for the remaining 914 Units with a total cost of Rs 37,65,819 . The 
factory asked T.S. Kissan whether it could supply the entire quantity at the unit rate 
of Rs 1999. The firm accepted and the supply order was placed in August 2007.  
Echjay Forgings was not issued any counter offer. The firm’s unilateral counter offer 
of Rs 1999 per unit for the full supply was treated as “unsolicited offer” and hence 
was not considered. Firms quoting a higher rate coupled with their readiness to lower 
the price significantly would indicate that the rates were inflated. 
Ministry replied that disciplinary action would be initiated against the officers 
responsible for irregular acceptance of higher offers. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 58 
 
Case 2 
Undue favour to a private firm 
Ordnance Parachute Factory Kanpur issued a two bid open tender enquiry for 192 
High Speed Single needle Lock Stitch Industrial Sewing machines. The last date for 
purchase of tender documents was 13 September 2005 and due date for opening of 
the technical bids was 6 October 2005  
The factory received a letter dated 17 September 2005 from Star International Pvt 
Ltd. It enclosed a demand draft dated 21 September 2005 of Rs 200 and requested to 
issue tender forms to the firm. Obviously the letter was backdated and the factory 
officials did not take any notice of it. As a special case, GM on 22 September 2005 
authorised issue of tender documents even  though the last date for issuing tender 
documents had already expired. 
In the original tender enquiry, 8 brands of sewing machines were mentioned as 
“Make acceptable”. In a meeting on 29 September 2005, a committee of senior 
officers constituted by Additional DG, OEF reviewed the aspect of introducing new 
brands. One of the brands introduced was “Golden Wheel”. 
When the bids were opened, it was seen that the tender submitted by Star 
International Pvt Ltd had quoted for the brand “Golden wheel” in its bid dated 28 
September 2005. After opening the price bids, it was seen that the rate quoted by the 
firm was the lowest. Supply order was placed on Star International Pvt. Ltd. Kanpur 
at the cost of Rs. 65.76 lakh.  
Obviously, the factory officials knew that the firm had quoted the brand Golden 
Wheel, which otherwise was supposed to be secret. The factory took elaborate 
measures like forming committees to consid er post tender issues, but all decisions 
eventually helped the supplier. This is a clear case of tender process being 
manipulated to favour a particular supplier. 
Ministry informed that disciplinary action would be initiated against those 
responsible for issuing tender forms after the last date and manipulating the tender 
process. 
6.3 Assessment of reason ability of price absent 
Case 1: Wide price variation under LTE and OTE by the same supplier 
Ordnance Clothing factory Shahjahanpur issued an OTE in November 2008 and LTE 
in March 2009 for procurement of Shirting Angola. The OTE was a two bid tender 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 59 
 
whereas the LTE was a single bid one. In response to the OTE, eight firms 
responded. The LTE was issued to six firms and five responded. Three firms were 
common to both OTE and LTE.  
Price bids of seven firms received under OTE were opened on 15 April 2009. The 
price bids of five firms received unde r LTE were opened on 28 April 2009. Under 
the OTE channel, Essma Woolen emerged as L1 at Rs 138.40 per metre whereas 
against the LTE channel, Bansal Spinning Mills emerged as L1 at Rs 159.80 per 
metre. The supply orders were placed on Essma Woolen on 23 April 2009 for 75036 
metres at the rate of Rs 138.40 per metre and on Bansal Spinning Mills and OCM 
India Limited at the rate of Rs 152.50 for 2,23,586 metres. The difference in amount 
between the OTE and LTE rate was Rs 31.53 lakh for the volume ordered under LTE 
channel. 
This case indicated: 
(a) The number of suppliers responding to OTE was more than the number to whom 
LTE were issued; 
(b) Three firms were common to both OTE and LTE; 
(c) Same firms quoted lower rates for OTE than for LTE. For example, Bansal quoted Rs 
144.45 per metre under OTE. Essma quoted Rs 138.40 per metre under LTE; 
(d) The  Tender  Purchase  Committees  who  considered  both  the  cases  and  in  which 
many members were common was aware of the most recent rate of Essma under 
OTE but did not consider the same for negotiations. It considered the Last Purchase 
rate of LTE which was one year old. 
Ministry replied that the Factory resorted to OTE as there was only one established 
firm. Normally OTE takes long time to fina lize as capacity verification was to be 
done for new firms. Before OTE case coul d be decided, further requirement arose 
and relevant TPC found that by that time capacity verification of 5 more firms have 
been completed and they were found to be complying with composite mill status. 
Ministry’s reply pointed towards the inherent weaknesses in the procurement system. 
It was not clear why the capacity verification could not be done earlier.  
Case 2: Cartel among suppliers helped to manipulate prices across Factories 
Containers with disc required for 81 mm bomb were being procured by Ammunition 
Factory Kirkee, Ordnance Factory Dehu Road and Ordnance Factory Chanda. The 
rates at which the Factories procured this item in different years are given below: 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 60 
 
Table 2: Procurement of Container with Disc Different Price in Different Factories 
Year Name of Ord. 
 Factory  
Name of Firm Rate Qty (Nos.)  Total Value 
(Rs. In lakh) 
2005-06 AFK Sheth & Co. 13.15 283200 37.24 
  Vee Kay Enterprises 13.15 283200 37.24 
  Sai Industries, Pune 13.15 283200 37.24 
  Shree Polymers 13.15 283200 37.24 
  Mac. Polymers 13.15 283200 37.24 
 OFDR Sheth & Co. 15.90 52850 8.40 
  Vee Kay Enterprises 15.90 52850 8.40 
  Sai Industries, Pune 15.90 52850 8.40 
  Shree Polymers 15.90 52850 8.40 
  Miltech Industries Pvt. 
Ltd. 
15.90 52850 8.40 
  Nityanand Udyog Pvt. 
Ltd. 
15.90 52850 8.40 
 OFCH Sheth & Co. 14.57 97500 14.21 
  Vee Kay Enterprises 14.57 97500 14.21 
  Shree Polymers 15.90 294775 46.87 
2006-07 AFK Sai Enterprises 16.55 637317 105.47 
  Sai Industries Pune 16.55 355798 58.88 
  Sheth & Co. 16.55 481285 79.65 
 OFDR Sai Industries Pune 16.55 281520 46.59 
 OFCH Nityanand Udyog 16.55 671646 111.15 
  Miltech Industries 16.55 646646 107.02 
  Sheth & Co. 16.55 195040 32.27 
  Vee Kay Enterprises 16.55 796646 131.84 
2007-08 AFK - - - - 
 OFDR - - - - 
 OFCH Sai Industries 6.24 1067512 66.61 
  Shree Polymers 6.24 640507 39.97 
  Sai Enterprises 6.24 427004 26.64 
2008-09 AFK Shree Polymers 6.24 203000 12.66 
 OFDR Sai Industries 6.24 140086 8.74 
  Sai Enterprises 6.24 420261 26.22 
  Narendra Explosive 
Ltd. 
6.24 70380 4.39 
 OFCH Sai Trading 14.75 530538 78.25 
2009-10 OF CH Sai Industries 9.50 404111 38.39 
  Shree polymer 9.50 242466 23.03 
  Sai Enterprises 9.50 161644 15.36 
As would be seen from the above table, th e item was being procured by the three 
Factories at the rate of Rs 16.55 per item.  It was seen in audit that in January 2008, 
three firms namely Sai Industries Pune, Shree Polymers Pune and Sai Enterprises 
Pune quoted all inclusive rates ranging from Rs 6.24 to Rs 6.60 in OFCH. The 
supply orders were finally placed by the factory on all the three at a rate of Rs 6.24 
all inclusive. All the three firms were reported to be sister concerns. Eventually all 
the firms also completed the supply order. In the same month, in Ammunition 
Factory Kirkee, Shree Polymers quoted Rs 15.91 per piece. Co-ordination among the 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 61 
 
Factories helped to discover the wide variat ion and most of the suppliers supplied at 
the reduced rate.  
Against a limited tender enquiry issued by Ordnance Factory Chanda in September 
2008, none of the above mentioned companies responded. The lowest quotation was 
that of Seth and Co, Mumbai at Rs 24.50. After price negotiations, the firm reduced 
the rate to Rs 15.75, a reduction of 35  per cent . The factory decided to re tender. 
Against retendering, three firms Nityanand Udyog, Seth & Co and  Sai Trading 
Thane quoted the same rate of Rs 14.95 (all inclusive). After “prolonged” 
negotiations, the rates were reduced to Rs 14.75 (all inclusive) by Sai Trading, 
Thane. 
Next year in 2009-10, the three firms namely Sai Industries, Shree Polymers and Sai 
Enterprises came back and quoted Rs 14.74 per item. It however came to light that 
these firms were supplying the same items to Ordnance Factory Dehu Road at Rs 
9.50 per item. Against counter offer, the three firms accepted the rate and supply 
orders were placed on them. 
The case illustrates the complete lack of transparency in pricing and the 
unwillingness of the factory officials in d ealing with this in the absence of any 
mechanism of independently arriving at the reasonability of prices. Cartel among the 
suppliers also helped them to manipulate the prices of the item. 
Case 3 
Cartel formation in supply of magazine assembly 
In Small Arms Factory Kanpur, a limited te nder enquiry for Magazine Assembly (30 
rounds) was issued in January 2007 to four firms namely Militech Industries, 
Nityanand Udyog, Sheth & Co and Ajit Chemicals. All the firms quoted the same 
rate of Rs 115.50 per Unit. The Last Purchase Rate for the item was Rs 115.50 in 
June 2006. The parties quoted exactly at the last Purchase Rate. The factory called 
all four firms for negotiations and all of th em reduced prices by Re 1. Supply orders 
were placed on all four.  
This case illustrates how in a system of limited tendering, a cartel can defeat the 
spirit of competition. 
Ministry replied that the procedures and rules were followed in both letter and spirit. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 62 
 
Case 4: Lack of coordination in procurement of Nylon cord 
Cord nylon OG 1785 N was procured by both Ordnance Equipment Factory, Kanpur 
and Ordnance Clothing Factory, Shahjahanpur. The OCFS have been procuring the 
item at rates of Rs 1.01 to Rs 1.30 per meter since 2004. However OEFC procured 
the item at rates from Rs 1.20 in 2004 to Rs 1.80 in 2008-09. Even the same supplier 
e.g. Viraj Sintex was supplying the same item to both Factories but at widely 
different rates.  
Ministry stated in June 2010 that there was enough competition and the relevant TPC 
found the L1 price reasonable. 
Case 5 Wide difference between the budgetary quote and tender quote against 
single tender 
Larsen & Toubro Ltd Lucknow vide letter dated 20 June 2006 to Ordnance Factory 
Kanpur quoted price of Copper Welding Wire (Cupromig conforming to Mil-E-
45829 A (MU) size 2.4 mm) at Rs. 975.00 per Kg. In July 2006, just after a month, 
against a single tender to the company, the same firm quoted the rate of Rs.1925 for 
the same item. The increase in the rates within one month worked to 97 per cent. The 
supply order for 210 Kg was placed on the firm in August 2006 at Rs 1925 totaling 
Rs 4.81 lakh. Subsequently OFC placed supply orders on single tender basis on 
Innovative Marketing Agencies (stockist of L&T) during the period between August 
2006 and February 2008 at the rates given in the table. In comparison to the original 
price indicated in June 2006, the difference was Rs. 84.65 lakh as detailed in Table 
3:- 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 63 
 
 
Table 3: Different Rates for Copper Welding Wire 
Sl. 
No. 
SO NO.& Date Qty ( in 
Kg)
 
Rate in 
Rs. Per 
Kg 
Rate quoted 
by the firm 
in 06/06 (in 
Rs)
 
Difference w.r.t 
rate in 06/06
 
( in Rs.) 
1. 487 dt. 
08-08-06 
210 1925 975 950 
2. 0168 dt. 
24-05-07 
360 2271 975 1296 
3. 0456 dt. 
22-08-07 
1800 2292.34 975 1317.34 
4. 0856 dt. 
02-12-07 
1800 2292.34 975 1317.34 
5. 1195 dt. 
22-02-08 
450 2292.34 975 1317.34 
6. 5128 dt. 
06-02-08 
1872 2292.34 975 1317.34 
 
During the same period, the price of copper in international market fluctuated only 
by 10 per cent . The factory did not take any notice of the international price nor 
undertook any cost analysis before going fo r procurement of these items on single 
tender basis. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that the vendor had apologized for quoting 
inadvertently. Ministry also stated that it would be incorrect to state that the factory 
did not take any notice of the international price and the audit contention that 
international prices fluctuated by only 10 per cent was incorrect. 
Ministry’s replies are not borne by facts.  Table 4 indicates the facts: 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 64 
 
 
 
Table 4 Comparison of the rate quoted with LME rate of Copper in the same 
month: 
SO No & Date Rate quoted per Kg 
in Indian Rupees 
LME Rate per 
tonne of Copper in 
US $ in the month 
of the SO
 
Exchange rate for 
Indian Rupee 
487 dated 08 
August 2006 
1925 7695 46.95 
168 dated 24 May 
2007
 
2271 7682 41.08 
456 dated 22 
August 2007 
2292.34 7513 40.79 
856 dated 02 
December 2007
 
2292.34 6587 39.60 
1195 dated 22 
February 2008 
2292.34 7887 39.51 
5128 dated 06 
February 2008 
2292.34 7887 39.51 
 
The fact that the wide variation between the budgetary quote and the actual quotation 
was not even recognized by the factory till it was pointed out in audit is enough 
indication of the casualness with which the matter was dealt with. It also should be 
apparent that the prices quoted and paid ha d no relationship with the LME price. For 
example, the LME rate and exchange rate came down sharply between August 2007 
and December 2007, but the prices paid by the factory remained the same. 
Case 6: Transportation cost 70  per cent  of consignment value and Loss of Rs. 
56.91 lakh due to error of judgment 
Ordnance Factory Khamaria issued in March 2007, a limited tender enquiry for 
procurement of 59,000 Kg of Propellant powder 5/7 for production of 23 mm 
Schilka APIT/HEIT ammunition. The quantity was calculated based on the 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 65 
 
requirement for OFK at 53924 Kg and for Ordnance factory Bolangir at 15,000 Kg 
with 25  per cent  additional provision. Dues in and supply from another OF were 
calculated at 27,196 Kg. The Last Purchase  Rate as per the Supply order dated 02 
May 2005 was US $ 13.90 CIF. 
On the day of opening of the tender on 15 June 2007, quotations from two firms 
namely Tasco Export Ukraine and Russian Tech Centre, Delhi were received. On the 
same date, one more sealed quotation of Kint ex Bulgaria was available at the time of 
opening of the tender. The envelop of this quotation had two seals i.e. one received 
at GM’s  Secretariat from the firm at 1020 hrs on 15 June 2007 and another received 
at Gate No 1 of the factory on the same date at 1400 hrs. The tender was marked late 
and not opened. 
A note was put up to GM for advice on whether to include the Kintex quotation in 
the present tender enquiry. In the noting it was stated that the fax quotation of Kintex 
Bulgaria was received in the factory well  before the scheduled date and time of 
opening of tenders. The GM constituted a team of two officers to examine and 
submit the report by 18 June 2007. 
The team submitted report on 18 June 2007 recommending to process the fax 
quotation in normal manner as regular tender received in time and suggested 
remedial measures for future. 
Again, on the next tender opening day on 19 June 2007, it was noticed that one 
envelop from BBT Poland containing quotation for the same tender was there in the 
tender opening box. On this envelop, there was a stamp of receipt dated 9 June 2007. 
Hence it appeared that the tender was received well before the tender opening date 
and time. The General Manager constituted another team which recommended that 
this tender also should also be treated as  a valid one. The quotation of BBT Poland 
was opened on 26 June 2007 and was included in the present tender enquiry. 
Four firms quoted the unit rates of the item as under: 
Table 5: Rates for Propellant powder 5/7 
1 Kintex Bulgaria US $ 12.10FOB; US $ 13.70 CIF  
2 Tasko Export Ukraine US $ 13.00 FOB; US $ 14.00  CIF 
3 RTC   New Delhi 1020.00 per kg. CIF Basis 
4 B.B.T. Poland   US $ 22.27 FOB 
 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 66 
 
The first meeting of the Tender Purchase Committee of the factory took place on 26 
June 2007. It was decided that Supply Order be placed on FOB basis only and the 
transportation of the propellant could be arranged by SCI in normal manner. It was 
also decided that Ordnance Factory Bhandara should be consulted once again 
regarding the exact quantity that they would be able to supply. Ordnance Factory 
Bhandara informed that their production target has been revised and they would be 
able to supply 20000 Kg by February 2008, in addition to 13000 Kg already 
supplied. It further informed that another 27000 Kg of proof passed materials would 
be supplied by December 2007. Thus, the total requirement of the propellant as 
projected in the LTE would have been supplied by February 2008.  
The TPC in its meeting on 24 August 2007 reduced the requirement to 20000 Kg and 
decided to place the order on Kintex Bulgaria on FOB basis. OFK placed the supply 
order for 20000 Kg of the item @ Rs.12.10 US $ on FOB basis on Kintex Bulgaria 
at the total contract value of US $ 2,42,000. The factory also had to spend Euro 
1,08.000 for shipment of the item through Shipping Corporation of India. The firm 
was to supply the full quantity by December 2007. However, the propellant could 
reach the factory only in July 2008.  
The case would indicate the factory was extremely casual about receiving and 
properly registering the tenders from the suppliers. The tenders were opened on three 
different dates, thus vitiating the process.  The TPC despite knowing the fact that the 
LPR of May 2005 included the CIF rates and required quantity was drastically 
reduced due to increased intra factory supply by OF Bhandara, recommended FOB 
rates without verifying the cost of shipping. As later events would prove, the 
shipping cost that the factory had to bear was 70  per cent  of the total cost of 
procurement. 
Case 7: Similar case in OF Chanda 
Similarly while importing 40000 sets of combustible cartridge cases filled for 
125mm ammunition from Ukraine, Ordnance Factory Chanda suffered a loss of Rs 
1.06 crore due to opting for FOB rate rather than the CIF rate. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that clause 7.5 of the MMPM stated that with a view to 
ensuring that the cargo was carried by Indian Shipping lines, import contracts should 
as a rule be made on FOB basis. It was mandatory on the part of the Factories to get 
their consignments transported through Shipping Corporation of India only. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 67 
 
Accordingly, contract was made on FOB basis and the consignments were 
transported through Shipping Corporation of India. 
Ministry’s contention was incorrect as OF Khamaria placed 11 supply orders during 
2006-07 to 2008-09 on CIF basis. OF Chanda also placed three supply orders on CIF 
basis during this period. 
Case 8: Unwanted airlifting of stores  
An offer from M/s RBE, Russia was obtained in September 2006 for supply of 145 
deficient items for assembly of the fi ve T 90 tanks on CIP-Airport basis. OFB 
accorded sanction in January 2007 for the import proposal on CIP-Airport basis with 
a condition that contract should be concluded only if supply of the items could be 
completed by February 2007. Otherwise fresh offer from the firm on FOB-Seaport 
basis should be obtained and contract concluded.  
As the firm refused to supply the items by February 2007, HVF obtained a fresh 
commercial offer from the firm in March 2007 for supply of 239 items. But the rates 
of the offer were on CIP-Airport basis even though HVF called for the rates on FOB-
Seaport basis. As the rates quoted by the firm was considered very high, Chairman 
OFB constituted a Tender Purchase committ ee in March 2007 to negotiate the price 
and conclude a contract for product su pport required for T-90 tanks during 2007-08 
and 2008-09. This committee consisted of five officers, which visited Russia in April 
2007, negotiated and reduced the prices against only two items. Against, the offer 
received for 239 items to rebuild five CKD tanks only the prices of two items viz., 
Gear Box LH & RH was negotiated and price reduced. The Committee empowered 
to negotiate and conclude contract did not consider the issue of mode of 
transportation at all. Finally supply order was placed on the basis of air 
transportation only. Audit worked out an additional expenditure of Rs.85.74 lakh as 
the differential cost between air and sea transportation. 
On receipt of stores, against the planned schedule of production of the last 5 CKD 
tanks in the year 2005-06, HVF issued the tanks only in 2008-09. Thus there was no 
urgency to justify the air lifting of the stores. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that airlifting of these items was necessitated for early 
completion and issue of tanks to the army. It was however noted in audit that the 
tanks were issued from October 2008 to February 2009. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 68 
 
Case 9: Wide variation in quoted price not analysed 
Ordnance Equipment Factory Kanpur placed a supply order in December 2006 on 
Sangam India Ltd for procurement of fabric 410 gms OG WP PV Dope dyed at the 
rate of Rs 123.30 per metre. On 7 Marc h 2007, another supply order was placed on 
the firm for the same material at the rate of Rs 142 per metre. The difference for the 
order quantity in March 2007 amounted to Rs 3.58 crore. While the TPC during 
negotiations brought down the price from Rs  152.01 per metre as originally quoted 
to Rs 142 per metre, there was no analysis done to assess the reasons which 
increased the price by more than Rs 18 per metre. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that there were enough competition and all possible 
efforts had been made by the TPC to bring down the rate. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 69 
 
 
Case 10: Undue benefit of Rs.10.36 crore  to a private party in procurement of 
Motor Tube  
 
OF Ambajhari procured ‘Pinaka Motor Tube Flow Formed’, in 2006-07 by 
conversion of Pre-Form Blanks where the re quired quantity of Pre-Form Blanks was 
to be procured by the factory from another Ordnance factory namely Metal and Steel 
factory against Inter Factory Demand. Th ese were then provided to a private 
company HYT Pune under civil trade for conversion. However, during 2007-08 
OFAJ procured the same item from the same private firm through outright purchase 
where the responsibility of procuring Pre-Form Blanks rested with the firm. In 2008-
09, the factory procured the said item th rough both conversion and outright purchase 
routes. As seen from the comparative cost statement of conversion route and outright 
purchase route of Pinaka Motor Tube, th e cost through conversion route and the 
outright purchase route was Rs.22,194 .80 per unit and Rs.38,190.11 per unit 
respectively. The private company however, procured the Pre form blanks from the 
same Metal and Steel factory, Ishapore wh ich otherwise could have been done by 
OFAJ as they did in 2006-07. By deciding on outright purchase, OFAJ incurred an 
additional expenditure of Rs 10.36 crore for two years while giving an undue benefit 
to a private firm. 
Ministry replied in June 2010 that there was no additional expenditure involved in 
the decision as MSF estimated Pre formed  cost was Rs 65,000 and the conversion 
cost was Rs 56,353 which came to Rs 1.21 lakh. Ministry contended that placing 
order on HYT Pune at Rs 1.16 lakh thus was cheaper. 
The cost of Pre form at Metal & Steel Factory was not Rs 65,000 and was only Rs 
34,847 as per the annual accounts of Metal and Steel factory. Thus, the information 
provided by the Ministry was incorrect. 
Case 11 Huge increase from the LPR ignored 
Opto Electronics Factory, Dehradun floated a tender enquiry in February 2006 to 6 
foreign firms out of which offers were  received from BBT Poland and Topaz, 
Ukraine only. Examination of the details of offer submitted by the firms indicated 
that the increase over last purchase rate in respect of 11 items were ranging from 62  
per cent to 5207 per cent.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 70 
 
Strangely, Rosoboronexport (RBE), Russ ia which was the OEM’s nominated 
supplier of different items of T-72 tanks did not even quote. The reasons for such 
huge increases were neither assessed nor brought on board. OFB allowed OLF to 
place the supply order on BBT Poland for most of the items after BBT Poland 
brought down the rates for each item by US $ 0.50. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that the factory made all possible efforts to get the best 
possible rate ex-import. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 71 
 
 
Chapter VII: Contract Management 
7.1 Linking of Price Variatio n Formula to WPI of wrong 
group led to huge loss 
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) and Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co. 
(TELCO) entered into an “ Agreement” in September 1998 granting OFB rights for 
producing 2.5 Ton pay load model LPTA 713(4x4) vehicle ‘the product’ at Vehicle 
Factory, Jabalpur (VFJ) from the CKD/SKD vehicles to be supplied from the firm. 
The agreement included inter alia the following two conditions: 
(a) The  prices  of  the  Product,  its  aggregates,  and  items  of  itemised  price  list  of 
components/sub‐assembly/other  materials  would  be  subject  to  the  “price 
variation formula”.  
(b) In case of reduction in price of  any vehicle model identical to the one under that 
agreement, the benefits in reduction in prices would be passed on to OFB/VFJ. 
OFB and TELCO entered into supplemental agreements on 07 August 2001 and 04 
December 2006 to amend certain articles of the Principal Agreement/Supplemental 
agreements. It included that the obligation of TML (Tata Motors Limited formerly 
known as TELCO) would extend up to fourteen years from the effective date of the 
Principal Agreement i.e. 4 September 1998. 
The price variation formula of the above agreements was linked to the WPI 
(wholesale price Index) of the sub-group ‘Basic Metals and Alloy’ instead of the 
WPI for the appropriate sub-group ‘Motor Vehicles, Motorcycles, Scooters, Bicycles 
& Parts’. The trend analysis of WPI for above two sub groups for September 
(designated month of price variation formul a of the agreements) indicated that from 
September 2003 onwards, the WPI for the sub-group ‘Basic Metals and Alloys’ was 
rising steeply in comparison of the WP I for the sub-group ‘Motor Vehicles, 
Motorcycles, Scooters, Bicycles & Parts’ as depicted below: -  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 72 
 
 
 
During the audit of supply orders valuing Rs 1 crore and above placed on the TML 
during the period 1 April 2006 to 31 March 2009 the total additional payment made 
to the TML in respect of the supply orde rs under the Principal Agreement and its 
supplemental worked out to Rs.105 crore plus taxes and excise duty thereon due to 
adoption of WPI for sub-group “Basic Metal and Alloys” rather than for “Motor 
Vehicles etc. and parts” for calculating the price variation. 
Similarly, OFB and Ashok Leyland Ltd. entered into an agreement on 10 August 
1998 granting OFB rights for producing STALLION Mk III Model 5/7.5 Ton 
payload 4x4 version at Vehicle Factory, Jabalpur and /or any other Ordnance Factory 
under the control of OFB. The prices of the Product, its aggregates, and items of 
itemized price list of components/sub-asse mbly/other materials were subject to a 
similar price variation formula with minor variations in the weightage of various 
factors. The agreement also had a similar fall clause. 
OFB and Ashok Leyland entered into supplemental agreements on 09 April 2003, 
16th December 2005, and 17th October, 2006 to amend certain Articles of the 
Principal Agreement/Supplemental agreements. It included that the Principal 
Agreement would be in vogue during a period of fourteen years from the date of the 
signing the (Principal) Agreement i.e. 10 August 1998. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 73 
 
The price variation formula of the above agreements also adopted WPI for the sub-
group ‘Basic Metals and Alloy’ instead of the WPI of the appropriate sub-group 
‘Motor Vehicles, Motorcycles, Scooters, and Bicycles & Parts’. The trend analysis 
of WPI of above two sub groups for the for month of March (designated month of 
price variation formula of the agreements) indicated the same trend of steep rise in 
“Basic Metals and Alloys” compared to “Motor Vehicles etc. and parts”. 
From supply orders valuing Rupees One crore and above placed on the M/s Ashok 
Leyland during the period 1 April, 2006 to 31 March, 2009 the total additional 
payment that had to be made to the Ashok Leyland in these supply orders worked 
out to Rs.148 crore plus taxes and excise duty thereon due to adoption of WPI for 
wrong sub-group for the “price variation formula”. 
In reply to the observation made regarding the excess payment the factory mainly 
stressed that the sub-group (for WPI) sugge sted by audit was not covering vehicles 
of exclusive Military use which were technically quite different from the commercial 
ones. It also stated that the WPI which was perceived to be more suitable was 
decided at the time of agreement as it could not be anticipated in advance, that which 
index would move which direction in the future. Ministry’s reply confirmed the 
above replies of the factory. 
The factory’s reply was not tenable as the vehicles under the agreements were 
actually truck and basic material of commercial truck and military truck are almost 
similar. Further the agreement itself had a fall clause that should there be a reduction 
in price of any vehicle model identical to the one covered by the agreement, the 
benefit in reduction in prices would be passed on to OFB/VFJ.  
7.2 Non furnishing of Performance Security Deposit 
Rule 158 of the General Financial Rules sti pulates that “to ensure due performance 
of the contract, performance security is to  be obtained from the successful bidder 
awarded the contract. Performance security is to be obtained from every successful 
bidder irrespective of its regi stration status. Performance Security should be for an 
amount of 5-10  per cent  of the value of the contract.” It further stipulates that 
“Performance security should remain valid for a period of sixty days beyond the date 
of completion of all contractual obligations of the supplier including warranty 
obligations.” 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 74 
 
Paragraph 5.2 of the MMPM also stipulates that Performance Security Deposit is 
payable to the purchaser by the supplier in the form of bank guarantee issued by a 
scheduled bank within 30 days of the contract The BG is to be returned to the 
supplier on successful completion of all obligations under the contract. According to 
the manual, the performance security deposit is to be paid by all firms irrespective of 
the registration status with DGS&D and NSIC. MMPM also stipulated the 
performance security deposit at 10  per cent, but OFB later in October 2006 brought 
the amount down to 5 per cent, the lowest point of the range provided in the GFR. 
The MMPM however, exempted the PSUs and firms supplying proprietary items 
from payment of performance security. Apart from the fact that such exemption is 
not authorised by the GFR, there is no rationale also for such exemption. 
Performance security is designed to protect the purchaser from the risks of non 
supply of stores at the right time and such risks are present even when the suppliers 
are PSUs or single source. Incidentally Railways have not exempted the PSUs from 
payment of security deposit.  
 It was noticed in audit that in many cases the Factories did not take security deposit.  
In Ammunition Factory Kirkee, in several cases the factory did not insist on the 
security deposit and finally orders were not successfully executed by the firm.  
Following is an illustrative list of firms which did not deposit the security deposit 
and also did not supply the store so far is shown in the following table:- 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 75 
 
 
Table 6: Cases of Performance Security Deposit waived or not insisted upon 
Name of the 
firm s 
SO No & 
date 
Name of the item Oty. 
Ordered 
Oty. 
Receiv
ed 
Total 
value 
Remarks 
 
RK Machine 
tools 
800455 dt 
28-04-09 
Mine APM 10015 set NIL 9894820 Waived 
Hydrabad 
precision 
800937 dt 
25-03-09 
Mine APM 550 set NIL 5508250 Waived 
Naveen Tools 900116 dt  
30-04-09 
Mine APM 988 set NIL 5936892 Waived 
Ashoka 
Industries 
900111 dt 
28-04-09 
Mine APM 988 set NIL 5936892 Waived 
Shiva Plastic 800478 dt 
11-10-08 
Ammn. 
Container 
37600 Nos NIL 860288 Not deposited 
Pandit Engg 
Pune 
700344 dt 7-
6-07 
Air bolt 1000 NIL 731250 Not deposited 
Stuti 
Enterprises 
800784 dt 
17-2-09 
Separators for 
cartoon 23 A 
525000 NIL 645750 Not deposited 
Unipack 
Industries 
701386 dt 
15-3-08 
Box M 20 A/L 3000 NIL 582000 Not deposited 
Alcast 800722 dt 
27-1-09 
Notched coil 25500 NIL 561000 Not deposited 
Precision 
Engg 
800721 dt 
27-1-09 
Notched coil 25500 NIL 561000 Not deposited 
 
Ministry replied that in the revised Procurement manual, the provisions regarding 
waiver of Performance Security Deposit would be made more stringent.  
7.3 Management of the option clause  
Option clause for quantity enhancement is included in a contract to reap the benefit 
of the present price against future demand.  The purchaser through this clause gains 
an option to procure part of the goods if required in future at a cheaper rate, if the 
market prices go up. 
Paragraph 9.15 of the MMPM lays down detailed guidelines for operation of the 
option clause. Factories are required to indica te at the stage of tender enquiry itself 
the decision regarding inclusion of the opt ion clause in the supply order. While the 
Manual provides that the tenderers should be directed to quote for quantities 
mentioned in the tender as well as give consent for up to 100  per cent  enhanced 
quantities against option clause. Subsequent exercise of the option clause, according 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 76 
 
to the Manual would be decided on the standard factors like existence of 
requirement, market trend, quality and quant ity of supplies received etc. up to the 
point of time of exercising the option with due care to avoid over provisioning. 
A large number of cases were seen in di fferent Factories indicating extremely poor 
management of option clauses. 
Ministry stated that though the audit observation is in line with the Procurement 
Manual, inclusion of option clause in the tend er enquiry has its effect on the price as 
the firm has to supply items with longer delivery period. Accordingly, the firm may 
keep the price high so as to accommodate any market fluctuation. 
Option clause is a standard contract condition widely prevalent. The reply of the 
Ministry does not conform to this. 
Case 1 
Undue favour to firms due to non exercise of option clause 
In Ordnance Factory Dehu Road, it was noticed that for procurement of Fuze 213P 
MK (M-3) empty for 81 mm Illuminating, 10 supply orders were placed on different 
firms as detailed in the following table 
Table 7: Procurement of Fuze 213P MK (M-3) empty for 81 mm Illuminating 
Sl 
No  
SO No & date Name of the firms Ord qty 
(nos) 
Rate (Rs) 25 per 
cent 
option 
qty (nos) 
1 2005SP0173 dt 2/8/05 IST N.delhi 20500 1223/- 5125  
2 2005SP0759 dt 8/3/06 MI 16400 1285/- 4100 
3 2005SP0760 dt 8/3/06 IST  16400 1285/- 4100 
4 2005SP0761 dt 8/3/06 VXL 16400 1285/- 4100 
5 2006SP0807 dt 30/3/07 MI 12300 1410/- 3075 
6 2006SP0808 dt 30/3/07 IST 12300 1410/- 3075 
7 2006SP0809dt 30/3/07 VXL 12300 1410/- 3075 
8 2007SP0636 dt 31/12/08 VXL 23210 1736.28/- 5802 
9 2007SP0637 dt 31/12/08 IST 21100 1736.28/- 5275 
10 2008SP0478 dt 22/12/08 IST 10550 1789/-  
 
It was observed that though the demands were available, there was no declining 
trend in the price and the supply orders had the option clause, the factory did not 
exercise the option clause even though factory purchased the stores from the same 
suppliers at higher rates. Due to non operation of QEC, the factory incurred an 
additional expenditure of Rs.54.52 lakh. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 77 
 
In reply the factory stated that as per the Manual, option clause is normally exercised 
after receipt of 50 per cent quantity and in these cases, 50  per cent quantity was not 
supplied within the original delivery period. Such a literal interpretation of the 
manual provisions belies the judgment expected of the senior management of the 
factory, as they did not hesitate to place fresh supply orders on the same firms at a 
higher rate. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that the firms supplied small quantities during the 
original delivery period and bulk supplies were made during the extended delivery 
period. As the manual provides that option clause could be exercised during original 
delivery period, such clause could not be exercised.  
Case 2 
Non-inclusion of option clause by HVF Avadi 
Heavy Vehicles Factory placed a supply order in January 2006 on ASL Systems, 
Bangalore for procurement of 132 Navigational GPS Satellite Sets by October 2006 
at a rate of Rs 133621. No option clause was provided for in the tender enquiry and 
in the supply order, Material Planning Sheet generated in July 2006, which was 
within the validity period of the supply order, indicated a total requirement of 167 
Units after taking into account the dues in from the earlier supply order. In August 
2006, however, the Factory decided to procure 134 sets.  
The factory placed another supply order on the firm in March 2007 for the 134 sets 
to be supplied by Mar 2008 at a higher unit rate of Rs 1,50,696. Though option 
clause for 50  per cent  was provided for in the tender enquiry for the fresh 
requirement of 134 sets and HVF and AV HQ recommended for inclusion of the 
option clause, OFB TPC while approving th e proposal did not specifically mention 
the option clause. Hence the option clause was not included in the supply order. 
Within currency of this second order (of March 2007), requirement arose in 
November 2007 for another 74 sets. As no option clause was available in the order of 
March 2007, the factory had to again place one more supply order on the same firm 
in July 2008 for procurement of 74 sets at a higher rate of Rs 1,52,170. But the 
factory included the option clause for 50  per cent  this time in the supply order of 
July 2008 and availed of the same in May 2009.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 78 
 
The factory informed Audit that as there was no specific mention in the approval of 
OFB on inclusion of the option clause, the same was not included in the two supply 
orders of January 2006 and March 2007. The reply is not justified as inclusion of 
option clause is a manualized provision. Failu re of the Factory to include the option 
clause (for 25 per cent in the first case and 50 per cent in the second case) resulted in 
an extra expenditure of Rs 6.62 lakh. 
Case 3 
Non-inclusion of option clause by OF Medak 
Ordnance Factory, Medak placed a supply order in July 2006 on Bhaskara 
Dynamics, Bangalore for supply of 59 Units of Assembly Track Guard at a unit rate 
of Rs 194625. Even though the tender enquiry provided for option clause for 25  per 
cent, yet the same was not incorporated in the supply order. Even before placement 
of the supply order in July 2006, a further requirement of 10 Units of the item arose 
in June 2006. As the order did not contain the option clause, the additional 
requirement of 10 Units had to be procured at a higher rate of Rs 243000 through 
another supply order of August 2008 placed on the same firm, resulting in delay and 
an extra expenditure of Rs 483750. The factory informed Audit that the order was to 
be placed for 59 Units of the item and the balance requirement was to be developed 
in-house and therefore the option clause was not incorporated in the order of July 
2006. The fact remains that no in house development took place and besides it would 
have been prudent to include the mandatory provision of option clause in the supply 
order particularly when the clause was included in the tender enquiry.  
Case 4 
Option clause not exercised by HVF Avadi 
Heavy Vehicles Factory placed a supply order in February 2006 on Universal 
Radiators for supply of 68 Units of Rack with Radiators at a unit rate of Rs 2,49,812 
by March/September 2007 with an option clause for supply of 17 Units (25  per 
cent). Material Planning Sheet genera ted in September 2006 indicated a net 
requirement of 92 Units. When the accounts authorities vetted a requirement of 50 
Units, the factory did not avail the option clause available in the supply order of 
February 2006 to procure 17 Units at the rate of Rs 2,49,812. Instead it placed 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 79 
 
another supply order in June 2007 on Halgona Radiators, Bangalore for procurement 
of 50 Units at a unit rate of Rs 3,28,753.  
HVF replied to Audit that as action for procurement of 17 Units had already been 
initiated through OTE, option clause av ailable in the order of Feb 2006 was not 
availed of. However, the reply overlooks the fact that the requirement was more than 
17 and hence the benefit of the option clause could well have been derived. Failure 
to do so involved an additional expenditure of Rs 13.41 lakh. 
Case 5 
Delay in exercise of option clause 
HVF placed a supply order in October 2006 on  BEMCO Ltd for supply of 114 Units 
(LH) and 125 Units (RH) of Distributing Me chanism at a rate of Rs 67,500 with a 
delivery period up to November 2007 later extended up to December 2008. An 
option clause for 25 per cent was included in the supply order. The firm supplied all 
the items by August 2008. Material Planning Sheet of June 2008 indicated a 
requirement of 352 Units in Jun 2008. However HVF took two months to process the 
case for availing the option clause. By the time it decided to avail the same, the firm 
completed the supplies by Aug 2008. HVF, th erefore, had to place another order on 
the same firm in Mar 2009 for the 352 Units at a higher rate of Rs 87,674. 
HVF replied to Audit that option clause could not be exercised since the firm had 
completed the supplies. Delay on the part of the factory to avail of the option clause 
resulted in an extra expenditure incurred was Rs 24.21 lakh. 
Case 6 Refusal to accept discount by OLF Dehradun resulted in loss  
Opto Electronics Factory Dehradun placed a supply order in June 2008 on  Belop 
Pune for 4248 Units of High Performance Super Gen Image Intensifier tube at the 
rate of Euro 1935. It floated another tender enquiry in January 2009 for a further 
quantity of 2400 Units. AV Headquarters advised the factory in April 2009 to take 
up with the firm for acceptance of 25  per cent option clause. The firm while refusing 
to accept the option clause agreed to supply 25 per cent  of the earlier quantity 
provided a discount of Euro 10 per unit is withdrawn from the second offer. Despite 
the recommendations of AV Headquarters , OFB refused. The refusal of OFB 
resulted in an extra expenditure of Rs 18.43 lakh taking into account the discounted 
rate of Euro 2025 per Unit with an exchange rate of Rs 64.26 for each Euro.  

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 80 
 
7.4 Arbitrary management of op tion clause to favour RK 
Machine Tools 
Case 1 
Heavy Vehicles Factory placed a supply order in March 2006 for supply of 300 
Units of Track Assembly at a rate of Rs 3.55 lakh by Dec 2006 extended up to June 
2007. The supply order incorporated an option clause for a further quantity of 76 
Units. When action was initiated by HVF to avail of the option quantity of 76 sets at 
the rate of Rs 3.52 lakh, a reduction in price agreed to by the firm earlier, OFB 
decided in April 2007 to avail of the option clause for nine sets only (25  per cent of 
the balance quantity ) since as per MMPM manual, during the extended period of 
validity of the contract, option clause could be utilized for 25  per cent of the balance 
quantity only. OFB took the decision despite the fact that the factory was holding nil 
balance of the item in its stock. The nine sets were procured in May 2009. 
Case 2 
OFB however took an exactly opposite pos ition in June 2007 in case of another 
supply order which was placed by the Factory on the same firm in August 2006 for 
122 sets of Track Assembly by March 2007 extended up to June 2007 at a unit rate 
of Rs 352000. The order included option clause for 30 sets. When HVF initiated 
action in Jun 2007 (during the extended peri od) to procure all the 30 sets under the 
option clause, OFB approved the same . As per rules applicable in the earlier case, 
OFB should have approved 25  per cent of the balance quantity. This was despite the 
fact that the factory was holding in the month of June Units ranging from 29 to 78 as 
against average monthly consumption of 17 Units. 
The option clause was used to favour the firm. 
Case 3 
As on 31 July 2008, the holding of Track Assembly by Heavy Vehicles Factory was 
106 Units. Between 01 August 2008 to 05 December 2008, 23 Units were issued. 
Despite this the factory placed one more supply order on the firm on 14 Oct 2008 for 
144 sets of Track Assembly to be supplied by 28 Feb 2009. Option clause for 50  per 
cent (72 Nos) was included in the order.  
The firm supplied 90 sets on  the next day , i.e. on 15 October 2008 and 35 sets on 
the second day  i.e. on 16 October 2008 for inspection. The firm requested the 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 81 
 
factory on the sixth day  i.e. on 20 October 2008, to exercise the option clause. The 
factory, however, exercised the option clause in December 2008 with a stipulation 
that the firm should supply the option quantity after 31 March 2009 citing its 
budgetary constraints in 2008-09. By that time the factory was holding 173 sets of 
the item in its stock catering to for nearly 10 months’ average requirement when it 
exercised the option clause. But the firm supplied the option quantity in January 
2009 itself informing the factory that additional funds were already allotted to the 
factory by the OFB. When Audit sought clar ifications, HVF clarified that the firm, 
being the sole supplier of the item, was having more than one supply order at any 
day and therefore it supplied the items immediately. However, the fact remains that 
instead of the option clause proposal to be initiated by the factory based on its actual 
requirement, the firm requested the factory to exercise the option clause in the instant 
case, that too within six days from placing the order. HVF exercised the option 
clause when it was holding 173 sets of the item (catering to nearly 10 months’ 
requirement). The above facts indicated that the option clause in the instant case 
(having financial implication of Rs 3.57 cror e) was exercised to enable the firm to 
supply the item even though those were not immediately required by the factory. 
Case 4 
HVF placed a supply order on the firm in September 2006 for supply of 41,367 sets 
of Track Shoe Assembly (a part of Track assembly) at a unit rate of Rs 3442. The 
delivery period was initially up to September 2007, which was extended to 
December 2007. Though HVF at the time of initiating the procurement proposal, 
recommended for inclusion of the option clause for 100  per cent , sanction of the 
CFA i.e. Ministry was silent on the issue. Nevertheless, the factory included the 
option clause for 25  per cent  in the supply order placed in Sep 2006. The firm 
completed the supply by December 2007. 
In the meantime requirement of further quantities of 330 and 9170 sets arose in 
January 2007 and July 2007 respectively. HVF initiated action in December 2007 to 
procure the total additional requirement of 9500 sets under option clause. However, 
OFB refused to avail the option clause on the grounds that the MOD’s sanction did 
not contain the option clause and the firm had already supplied all the ordered 
quantity of 41,367 Units by that time. This was despite the fact that all concerned 
were aware of the fact that prices against a fresh tender would go up due to upward 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 82 
 
trend of the cost of the item. When HVF subsequently floated fresh tender enquiry 
for 9500 Units, a unit rate of Rs 3771 with price variation clause was received from 
the same firm. However, no order could be placed on the firm due to Ministry’s 
orders to put on hold any further order on the firm. 
Ministry stated in reply that option cl ause could be used any time after 50 per cent 
have been supplied against a supply order.  
Ministry should investigate the brazen favouritism shown to the firm in excercising 
the option clause. 
7.5 Liquidated damages and penalty 
Case 1 
Ordnance Factory Board approved in April 2007 a supplementary agreement 
between Gun Carriage Factory Jabalpur a nd RosoboronExports Russia for supply of 
50 sets of Article 2A46M with SPTA on 1:1 basis required for T-90 guns at the unit 
rate of US$ 1,26,000. The delivery was to be completed in two batches within 11 
months from the date of transfer of advance payment, which was done on 7 August 
2007. The delivery therefore was to be completed by the supplier by 6 July 2008.  
The original contract signed in April 2001 envisaged payment of liquidated damages 
at the rate of 0.07  per cent  of the value of stores per day supplied later than one 
month of the stipulated last date of delivery up to maximum 5 per cent. 
The second consignment of 25 Units arrived at the designated port, Chennai, in 
January 2009. However in stead of recovering liquidated damages as per the contract 
conditions, GCF actually extended the delivery period to December 2008. 
Ministry stated in June 2010 that ROE is a government company of Russia and is an 
exclusive supplier of defence equipments. General Manager of the factory had 
exercised his delegated authority in waiving the LD and had taken a composite view 
to ensure deliveries. 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 83 
 
 
Chapter VIII: Internal Control 
 
8.1 Internal Audit 
The importance of robust internal control mechanism for a manufacturing 
Organization like Ordnance Factories ca nnot be overemphasized. Government rules 
and regulations do provide for internal c ontrol mechanisms like internal audit, 
vigilance, control by Ministry and superior authorities. As would be evident, it was 
seen that many such internal control mechanisms were allowed to collapse and 
become dysfunctional. 
The Chief Internal Auditor of the Factories in a response to a query by audit on the 
functioning of the internal audit mechanism admitted that the internal audit teams 
could not raise objections against Ordnance factory organizations, as they functioned 
under their administrative and functional control of the executive. He stated in 
November 2009 that during 2006-07 to 2008-09, the internal audit mechanism failed 
to uncover any financial irregularities both at factory level and at the level of OFB.  
The malaise was however deeper and structural. Between 2006-07 and 2008-09, the 
Internal Audit was under the control of OF B. The Chief Internal Auditor (Factories) 
was under direct functional and administrative control of the Member (Finance) of 
OFB. He functioned with the help of five Regional Internal Audit Officers (RIAO) 
who were primarily responsible for functions relating to finance and accounts and 
only additionally, Internal Audit. The Material Planning Sheet
23 was required to be 
approved by the Local Audit Officer (LAO), who was also the accounts officer in the 
factory. The RIAO were under functional and administrative control of the 
respective GMs/Sr. GMs of the Ordnance Factories. Such an arrangement violated 
the fundamental principles of independence of internal audit. The internal audit wing 
did not develop any manual, checklists or guidelines for conduct of such audit and 
functioned in an ad hoc manner.  
                                                
 
23 Material Planning Sheet is required to be generated by every factory to initiate procurement 
action. It shows the requirement, existing stock and dues in from previous supply orders if any to 
arrive at the net requirement for which procurement action is to be initiated. 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 84 
 
The dysfunctional state of internal audit wa s reflected in the fact that as of March 
2010, a total of 2137 audit objections were still outstanding. At the OFB level, there 
is a Networking Committee chaired by one DDG to monitor the internal audit 
objections. Only two meetings of the Committee were held in two years. As of 
November 2009, the last meeting was held in March 2008. At the Factory level, even 
though there was an ad-hoc Committee in each factory under the Chairmanship of Sr 
GM/GM and these committees were required to meet quarterly, such meetings were 
infrequent. In the past 15 quarters from quarter ending December 2005 to June 2009 
in 39 Factories, 585 such meetings should have been held. Only 120 meetings were 
held. 80 per cent of the meetings required to be held were never held. In some of the 
Factories, from 2005-06 to date, only one or two meetings had taken place. 
Analysis of the range of internal audit obs ervations indicated that the focus was less 
on procurement and management of stores. In 18 Factories, only 9  per cent  
observations related to procurement.  
8.2 Internal Vigilance 
As in the case of internal audit, the state of internal vigilance was also poor. The 
vigilance set up in Ordnance Factories organization is headed by the Chief Vigilance 
Officer (CVO) at the Corporate Headquarters. He is assisted by two Directors. In 
addition, there were two Group Vigilance Officers (GVOs) at Kolkata and Avadi.  
The foundation of the internal vigilance activi ties is on the vigilance officers at the 
factory level. These vigilance officers were  required to undertake surprise vigilance 
inspection, implement preventive vigilance measures and also aid and advise the 
General Managers of the factory in vigilance matters. However, there was no 
dedicated vigilance officer in the Factories and they were invariably entrusted with a 
number of activities, including purchase and recruitment. The deployment of 
Vigilance Officers of the same organization on production, purchase, maintenance, 
day-to-day administration etc had direct conflict of interest with the vigilance 
responsibilities. The OFB and the CVO OFB failed in executive control of 
implementing the subject CVC directive. 
CVC’s guidelines, among other things, envisage that the CVO should not be from 
the same organization and he should not hold the charge relating to recruitment and 
purchase. However, at all levels - from Ministry down to the Factories, such conflict 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 85 
 
of interest was noticed. In the Ministry, Joint Secretary (OF) who was responsible 
for processing cases of procurement within  the domain of Ministry's powers also 
acted as the Chief Vigilance Officer for the Ordnance Factories. 
The dysfunctional state of vigilance was reflected in the fact that 15 Factories 
submitted “Nil” reports on 18 vigilance sub topics continuously for the past three 
years. Even these “Nil” reports were usually delayed by six to nine months 
indicating lack of attention to the reports  by the CVO and the OFB. Three Factories 
did not even submit these reports. 
8.3 Delegation of Financial Powers  from Ministry to OFB without 
any control mechanism in place 
Ministry of Defence in December 2006 issued orders significantly enhancing the 
financial powers of the Ordnance Factory Bo ard. The objective of such enhancement 
of powers was to enhance autonomy and increase the efficiency of the Ordnance 
Factories in its day-to-day functioning. Th e salient features of enhanced delegation 
as approved by the Ministry were 
(1) All proposals concerning a particular factory should be finalized at the 
factory level wherein representative of OFB may be a member of PNC 
/CNC
24 for high value cases. 
(2) Clubbing the proposals for input materials, required by more than one factory 
for realization of the benefit of bulk purchases leveraging quantity discount. 
(3) In case of procurement where the price increase has been more than 8  per 
cent of LPR, then the matter should be  put up to OFB for information along 
with justification; and 
(4) Procurement from Rosoboronexport would not be treated as single vender 
case. 
Following this, OFB on 11 April 2007 enhanced financial powers of various 
functionaries in Ordnance Factories for procurement of stores, plant and 
machineries. Such delegation increased fina ncial powers of factory officials by as 
much as 9900 per cent in some cases. For procurement of stores through open tender 
or limited tender which is the main source of procurement of stores in the Factories, 
                                                 
24 Price Negotiations Committee/ Cost Negotiations Committee 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 86 
 
the power of GM was enhanced by 1900  per cent from Rs one crore to Rs 20 crore, 
that of Joint GM by 400 per cent. Even the powers of floor level Works Manager 
were increased by 525  per cent . For procurement of Plants and machinery through 
limited tender or open tender in replacement of BER 25 Plants and machinery, against 
projects sanctioned by government or to improve production under NC 26, the powers 
of General Managers were enhanced by 9900 per cent from Rs 10-25 lakh to Rs 20 
crore. 
However justified was such excessive delegation on a wide scale, it was carried 
out without any attention to the weak  control environment and without any 
effort to improve the same. Ministry wh ile delegating powers did not make any 
effort to put in practice enhanced cont rol measures. With a collapsing internal 
audit, ineffective vigilance mechanisms and virtually no control by the Ministry, 
the control environment became even weak er with such vast powers at the field 
level. 
An examination in audit of the nature and extent of delegation of financial power by 
OFB to Ordnance Factories indicated that the same was not in accordance with the 
letter and spirit of the order on the subject issued under MOD letter dated 20 
December 2006. The Ministry for example stipulated that in cases of bigger 
purchases the PNC/CNC should consist of a representative of Ordnance Factories 
Board. However, OFB order dated 6 March 2007 delegating powers up to Rs 20 
crore for purchase of stores and up to Rs  25 crore for Plant & Machinery to various 
functionaries in Ordnance Factories envi saged reconstituted Tender Purchase 
Committee (TPCs) which did not include any representative from Ordnance Factory 
Board. Ministry did not take any action to ensure that its intent was implemented. 
Procurement through TPCs in the Factor ies represented a structural problem 
of decision making in the Factories.  TPCs performed the functions of the 
CFA
27. While such TPCs were headed by the CFA, the procurement cases were 
not considered separately on files based on the recommendations of the TPCs 
and no separate sanction order was issued for these procurements. While it 
                                                 
25 Beyond Economic Repair 
26 New Capital 
27 Competent Financial Authority 

Procurement of Stores and Machinery in Ordnance Factories 
 
Report No 15 of 2010‐2011 87 
 
promoted collegiate decision making, the accountability of the individual CFA 
could not be established in this process.  
Ministry of Defence while delegating the financial powers also specifically advised 
on the price reasonableness and where ever the increase in prices was more than 8  
per cent of the Last Purchase Price, the cases were required to be sent to OFB for 
information with justification. Based on Ministry’s letter dated 20.12.2006, the OFB 
vide their letter 10/6/MM/(P&C) dated 24.4.2007 to all the GMs directed that all 
efforts are to be made to keep the prices  in control and increase if any should be 
within 8  per cent of LPR. It was seen in audit that such cases were not reported by 
the General Managers nor were they checked by the OFB members. For cases 
finalized with more than 8  per cent  price increase, reports along with justification 
duly linking with market indices, base metal price increases etc were to be submitted 
to concerned Member / operating division, with a copy to OFB / MM (P&C) division 
on monthly basis by fifth of the following month. At least 14 Factories did not 
furnish the reports since May 2007. OFB also did not monitor the reports.  
8.4 Role of the TPCs 
Rule 137 of the General Financial Rules re quires every authority delegated with 
financial powers of procuring goods in pub lic interest to own responsibility and 
accountability to bring efficiency, economy, transparency in matters relating to 
public procurement and for fa ir and equitable treatment of suppliers and promotion 
of competition in public procurement. 
Rule 22 of the GFRs further states that no authority may incur any expenditure 
unless the same has been sanctioned by the competent authority. GFRs also envisage 
issue of sanction orders and lay down pro cedures for communicating such orders to 
accounting and auditing authorities. 
OFB has laid down several layers of Tender Purchase Committees both at the 
headquarters and factory levels. Such purchase committees are invariably headed by 
the authority who otherwise would be the competent financial authority in that 
specific procurement case. Altogether 4 levels of TPCs are laid in OFB Headquarters 
and another four levels are laid at the factory level. 
Paragraph 6.22 of the MMPM provides that TPC recommendations/decisions  will 
provide necessary authority for placing orders after the minutes of the TPC 

Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
Report Number 15 of 2010‐2011 88 
 
proceedings clearly bringing out its recommendations/ decisions are signed by all the 
members. 
While it encourages collegiate decisions,  in all Factories, the TPC minutes were 
treated as the final approval of the procurement decisions. No separate sanction 
orders conveying the sanction of the Competent Financial Authority were issued. 
This diluted accountability of the CFA. 

ANNEXURE‐‘I’ 
Provisioning in excess of permissible limits 
Sl. 
No 
OFB /MOD 
Sanction No. 
and date 
Value of  
sanction 
(Rs in 
crore) 
Factory Item Qty/ Rate 
in Rs/ 
Firm’s 
name 
Total 
requirement 
as per rule 
(15 months) 
(Qty in Nos) 
Sufficiency 
+ Dues 
(Qty in 
Nos) 
Net 
quantity 
required 
Qty 
actually 
provisioned
/ Period of 
provision 
Qty excess 
provisioned 
Value of 
excess 
provisioning 
(Rs in crore)/ 
Period of 
over 
provision 
(1
) 
(2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) =  
(7)-(8) 
(10) (11) = 
 (10)-(9) 
(12)= 
(6)*(11) 
1.   01/ Shell 105 
mm/IFG/ 
OFCH/08/MM/ 
INDG/00I 
dated 24-07 
2008 (LTE)  
51.42 OFCH Shell 105 
mm IFG  
127130/  
4044.70  
T S Kisan 
RK 
Machine 
KEW 
414983  382534  32449  127130  
(27 months) 
94681  38.30 
(12 months) 
2.  13/ OFK/ 
08/CST-0139/ 
08/MM/ INDG 
dated 01-12-
2008 (S T) 
2.75 OF KH Piezo 
Electric 
Generator 
Assy. 
10200 sets/ 
2699.60 
CEL 
Shahibaba
d 
37500  47550  NIL 10200  
(27 months) 
10200  2.75 
(12 months) 
3.   59/06-
07/SSO(STOR
ES)/P/HV 
dated 17-01-
2007 
1.40 HVF  Assembly 
Valve 
Exhaust 
with Disc 
Lock 
19314 nos 
725.80 
Kar 
Mobiles 
Bangalore 
 
13308  2163  11145  19314  
(24 months) 
8169  0.59 
(9 months) 
4.   54/06-
07/SO(STORE
S)/P/HV dated 
31.1.07   
5.89 EFA Fuel 
Injection 
Pump 
399 nos 
1.47 lakh 
RBE,Russi
a. 
293  62  231  399  
(24 Months) 
168  2.47 
(9 months) 
5.   05/08­09/SO 
(STORES)/P/
HV  dated 
21.7.08 
56.49  OLF.    I.I. Tube   4248 nos. 
1.33 lakh 
Belop, 
Pune 
3263   918   2345   4248  
(24 
months) 
1903   25.30 
(9 months) 

Annexure I continued 
Sl. 
No 
OFB /MOD 
Sanction No. 
and date 
Value of  
sanctio
n (Rs in 
crore) 
Factory  Item  Qty/ Rate/ 
Firm’s 
name 
Total 
requireme
nt as per 
rule (15 
months) 
(Qty in 
Nos) 
Sufficiency 
+ Dues 
Net 
quantity 
required 
Qty actually 
provisioned
/ Period of 
provision 
Qty 
excess 
provision
ed 
Value of 
excess 
provisioning 
(Rs in crore)/ 
Period of 
over 
provision 
(1)  (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) =  
(7)-(8) 
(10) (11) = 
 (10)-(9) 
(12)= (6)*(11) 
6.   4043/IND/AF
K/MM/DP/223
7 dated 23.3.07 
1.73 AFK  Cartg. Trg 
for 81 mm 
39744  
435/- 
9 firms 
1639 . NIL 1639  39744  
(27 months) 
38105  1.66 
(12 months) 
7.  4042/IND/AF
K/MM/DP/223
6 dated 19.4.07 
2.53 AFK Mine 
APM 16 
1A  
24000 nos. 
1053/- 
3 firms 
25113. 31090  NIL 24000  
(27 months) 
24000  2.53 
(12 months) 
8.  4039/IND/AF
K/MM/DP/223
4 dated 19.4.07 
1.79 AFK Fuze Mine 
combinati
on 
48840 nos. 
366.62 
3 firms 
138511. 208188  NIL 48840  
(27 months) 
48840  1.79 
(12 months) 
9.  4038/IND/AF
K/MM/DP/223
3 dated 18.4.07 
3.38 AFK Fuze 
Percn. DA 
5A 
81920 nos. 
413/- 
5 firms 
449746. 599320  NIL 81920  
(27 months) 
 
81920  3.38 
(12 months) 
10.  4030/IND/OF
CH/MM/DP/2
229 dated 
3.5.07 
3.05 OFCH Bomb 
Body 81 
mm 
42060 nos. 
725.84 
3 firms 
155738. 225904  NIL  42060  
(27 months) 
42060  3.05 
(12 months) 
11.  MOD No. 
2(6)/836/2004/
DP(Plg-III) 
dated 30.4.07 
93.92 HVF Radio sets 795 nos. 
Rs 11.81 
lakh 
M/s 
Tadiran 
Communic
ation, 
Israel 
331  NIL 331  795  
(36 months) 
464  54.81 
(21 months) 
  Total  224.35              136.64 
 
 

ANNEXURE – ‘II’ 
Procurement made without ascertaining the actual requirement 
 
Sl. 
No
. 
OFB Sanction No. and 
date 
Value of 
sanction 
(Rs in 
crore)/ 
Qty 
Factory Item Firm’s name Over- provisioned 
quantity/ Value of 
over provision in 
Rs 
Remarks 
1.  72/ 06-07/SO (Stores) / 
P/HV dated 12-02 2007 (S 
T) 
15.07 
145 items 
HVF  Items for T-90 
Tank 
M/S RBE, 
Moscow 
145 items 
(15.07 crore) 
The items were earlier purchased along with CKD for T-
90 . But CKD could not be assembled. The reason behind 
the repurchase was not mentioned in the proposal.  
2.  71/06-07/ SO(Stores)/ P/ 
HV/ dated 12-02-2007 (S 
T)   
1.83 
111 items 
HVF Items for T-90 
Tank  
M/S RBE, 
Moscow. 
111 items 
( 1.83 crore) 
----Same as above. 
3. OFB No. 67/ 06-07/ SO 
(Stores) / P/HV dated 
12.2-2007 (S T) 
1.41 
180 sets 
OFMK Items for OH 
BMP –II 
M/S Sundaram 
Clayton  
130 sets 
( 1.02 crore) 
The requirement as per production programme  was for 
50 vehicles. Sanction accorded by OFB  for 180 vehicles 
without deliberation and assigning any reason thereby 
led to over-provisioning.  
4. 3081/IND/OFCH/MM/H
E 1A dated 23.2.07 
2.09 
10000 nos. 
 
OFCH Bomb 120mm 
HE 1A 
R.K. Machine 
Tools, T.S. 
Kishan and 
KEW 
Industries 
4861 nos 
( 1.01 crore) 
Against the requirement of 5139 nos, OFB sanctioned for 
a quantity of 10000  thereby led to over-provisioning.  
5. 84/06-
07/SO(STORES)/P/HV 
dated 13.4.07 
93.26 
20 and 30 
nos. 
 
HVF Hull complete 
and Hull 
welded 
M/S RBE 
Moscow 
20 and 30 nos. 
( 93.26 crore) 
No Material Planning Sheet prepared by HVF. Thus 
without bringing to light the programme/ target, 
procurement proposal of HVF, OFB approved the 
quantity in toto. 
6. 86/06-07/SO (STORES) / 
P/HV dated 13.4.07 
91.15 
9 items 
HVF Track, 
Radiator etc. 
M/S RBE 
Moscow 
9 items 
( 91.15 crore) 
Same as above. 
7. 88/06-07/SO(STORES)/ 
P/HV dated 23.4.07 
14.72 
30 and 50 
sets 
HVF Completing 
Articles 
Components & 
Turret items 
M/S RBE 
Moscow 
30 and 50 sets 
( 14.72 crore) 
Same as above. 
8. OFB TPC-II held in 
March 2007 
9.85 
30 sets/ 53 
sets/ 53 
sets  
HVF Turret, Hull 
and 
Transmission 
items 
M/S RBE 
Moscow 
30 sets/ 53 sets/ 53 
sets 
( 9.85 crore) 
Same as above. 
 Total 229.38   Total 227.91  
 

Annexure III
Annexure III : Evidence of Collusion among different firms
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
AFK No 800995 M/s Mukesh industries Ludhiana 0181-2459777 & 
2225715.
Identical 
handwriting in 
both quotations
Opened on 
07.04.09
 M/s KEW Ludhiana 0181-2459777 & 
2225715
-do-
AFK No 800117 dt 
03.06.09
M/ Hydrabad  Precision Hyderabad 0140-23079342
M/S Mech componenets Hyderabad 0140-23079342
AFK No 701217 dt 
25.01.08
M/s Raj Industrial 
Corporation
New Delhi 011-25724732
M/s Singhal Industries New Delhi 011-25724732
AFK & HEF No 701185 dt 
11.01.08t 
11.01.08
M/s Alcast Ranchi 065-2275867 9431115661 Identical 
handwriting in 
both quotation 
AD 28000015 dt 
26.02.08
 M/s Precision Engg 
works
Ranchi 065-2275867 9431115661 -do-
AFK 800813 dt 
16.01.09
M/s Asha Industries Kolkata 0133-24002098 TE has been 
dispatched at the 
same time from 
same post office
M/s Tirupati Industries Kolkata 0133-24002098

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
HEF TR No 
29000021 dt 
11.02.09
M/S Vijay Roadlines Pune 020-27111003 & 
27111005
 M/S Gauri Road-lines Pune 020-27111003 & 
27111005
AFK 800868 dt 
30.01.09
M/s Veekay Mumbai 022-26237710
M/s Seth Mumbai
M/s Chowdhury 
Packagers 
Nagpur Management 
accepted that the 
office address of 
the both firm is 
same.
OFA M/s  Safety Packagers Nagpur
Aabha Packaging Badlapur Management 
agreed that both 
the firm are 
owned by same 
firm.
Shanti  Packaging Kalyan
HEF 29000276 dt 
1.04.09
M/s Supreme packages Mumbai Both the 
companies 
transmitted the 
quotations 
through same 
FAX .
 M/s Super pack Mumbai

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
OCFS 2007000313 dt 
1.03.08
M/s RSM Woolen Mills Panipat 0180-2630340 Identical text in 
both the 
quotations
M/s Mittal Woolen & 
Cotton Mills
Panipat 0180-2630340
M/s Prestige Spinners (P) 
Ltd. 
Ludhiana 0161-2609926 0161-2609921 Identical address 
of Head Office- 
186, Industrial 
Area A, 
Ludhiana
M/s Punjab Wool 
Syndicate
Ludhiana 0161-2609926 0161-2609921
M/s AAA Spinners Panipat 0180-2650717 0180-3292271 jains-
puneet@yahoo.co.i
n
Identical address 
of Head Office- 
E-33, Industrial 
Area, Panipat
M/s Siddhartha Woolen 
Mills
Panipat 0180-2650717 0180-3292271 jains-
puneet@yahoo.co.i
n

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
M/s Raghav International Ludhiana 0161-743457 Identical address 
of Works Office- 
32, Netaji Nagar, 
Ludhiana
M/s Maheshwari Woolen 
Mills
Ludhiana 0161-2743457
M/s Vikas Udyog Ludhiana 0161-5069865
M/s Geeta Woolen Mills Ludhiana 0161-5069865
OEFC 20070807/PV/1
806 dt 25.08.07
M/s PJ Technocrat Jabalpur 2432256 
(Residence)
M/s General Errectors & 
Fabricators Corporation
Jabalpur 2432256 
(Residence)
20080183/PV/4
142 dt 10.06.08
M/s Standard Niwar Mill Kanpur 0512-2692497 2691070 & 
2546449
D-24, Panki 
Industrial Estate
All three 
quotations with 
identical text and 
handwriting
M/s AVR Enterprise Kanpur 0512-2692497 2691070 & 
2546449
D-23, Panki 
Industrial Estate
M/s VK Brothers Kanpur 2691070 D-21, Panki 
Industrial Estate

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
20061502/PV/2
616 dt 
01.03.2007
M/s D.Rajamanickam & 
Co.
Bodinayakanur 
(Tamilnadu)
04546-280328 04546-280288 1/202, Pudur South 
Street
(i) Identical text
in quotations and
handwriting 
including 
signatures            
M/s P.Duraiappa Nadar 
Sons
Bodinayakanur 
(Tamilnadu)
04546-280328 04546-280288 1/201, Pudur South 
Street
(ii) Identical date 
seal on 
quotations (iii) 
Final Quotation 
mentioned on 
top of quotations 
M/s Saravanan Industries Theni 
(Tamilnadu)
04546-280288 57, Cumbum Road
M/s Sri Duraiappa 
Ginning Factory
Theni 
(Tamilnadu)
04546-280328 04546-280288 57, Cumbum Road
20061065/PV/1
400 dt 
04.01.2007
M/s Jupiter Rubber Pvt. 
Ltd.
Kolkata 24980359 24455039 
(Office) & 
30955760 
(Factory)
Block-A, House 
N.6, New Alipore 
(Office) & Bibirhat 
Road, P.O. 
Rashpunji, South 
24 Paraganas 
(Factory)
Identical text in 
quotations and 
handwriting 
including 
signatures            

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
M/s Poly Fill Industries Kolkata 24980359 24455039 
(Office) & 
32955760 
(Factory)
Block-A, House 
N.6, New Alipore 
(Office) & Bibirhat 
Road, P.O. 
Rashpunji, South 
24 Paraganas 
(Factory)
OPF 20071010/PRO
V/TENDER dt 
15.03.08
M/s B.K.R.Engineers Ludhiana 0161-5045270 0161-2537432  
& 0161-
5012765 
Identical text in 
quotations and 
office telephone 
nos. of M/s BKR 
Engineers were 
mentioned as 
FAX no. by 
other two firms 
M/s Daya Industries Ludhiana 0161-5012765 0161-2542848
M/s Rattan Industries 
(India)
Ludhiana 0161-2537432
M/s Samraat Enterprises Kanpur Identical format 
and text used in 
quotations and 
identical 
handwriting
M/s Quality Engineering Kanpur

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
20060609/PRO
V dt 19.12.06
M/s Oriental Synthetic & 
Rayon Mills Pvt.Ltd.
Thane 27615616 27630071, 
27681140 & 
27683332
D-64, T.T.C. MIDC 
Turbhe
Identical format 
and text used in 
quotations
M/s Paithan Silk Mills Thane 27615616 27630071, 
27681140 & 
27683332
D-64, T.T.C. 
Industrial Area, 
Turbhe
20050840/PRO
V dt 29.03.06
M/s Bansal Wool Traders Ludhiana 0161-2511226 0161-2510771
sanjaybansal_bsml@
yahoo.co.in (E-mail 
ID) 
Identical format 
and text used in 
quotations
M/s Bansal Spinning 
Mills Ltd.
Ludhiana 0161-2511226 0161-2510771
sanjaybansal_bsml@
yahoo.co.in (E-mail 
ID) 
M/s KKK Mills Ludhiana 2674793 2451236 (Res) 
& 2552852 
(Res)
145, Industrial Area 
A (City Office) & 
B-40, Focal Point, 
Phase V (Works 
Office)
Identical format 
and text used in 
quotations
M/s Vikas Udyog Ludhiana 2674793 2451236 (Res) B-40/1, Focal 
Point, Phase V 
(Works Office) 
M/s Geeta Woolen Mills Ludhiana 2552852 (Res) 145, Industrial Area 
A (City Office) & 
B-40/2, Focal 
Point, Phase V 
(Works Office)

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
SAF 2603001906 dt 
29.01.09
M/s Sandeep Metal 
Crafts (P) Ltd.
Nagpur (07104)236860 (07104)23787
8 & 235165
info@sandeepmetalc
raft.com  ( E-mail ID 
of office) and 
09823064146 ( 
Mobile No. of Office) 
as per VRRF
As per VRRF 
Shri Avinash 
Deshpande, 
Director was 
proprietor but he 
signed for M/s 
Priya Preci-
Comp Pvt Ltd
M/s Priya Preci- Comp 
Pvt.Ltd.
Nagpur (07104)235483 (07104)23501
7 & 234811 
and 
09823037009 
(Mobile No.)
shyam@sandeepmet
alcraft.com ( E-mail 
ID of Proprietor) and 
09823064146 
(Mobile No. of 
Proprietor) as per 
VRRF
As per VRRF 
Shri Shyam 
Agrawal,MD 
was proprietor 
but the quotation 
was signed by 
Shri Avinash 
Deshpande, 
Director
M/s Shanti Arms- Tech 
Pvt.Ltd.
Nagpur (07104)235410 (07104)23504
7
OFC B20092130/PV/
2009-10 dt 
06.08.09
M/s Oxeeco 
Technologies Pvt.Ltd.
Hyderabad (040)27203742 B-6/4, 
I.D.A.,UPPAL
Identical FAX 
nos. and 
identical 
handwriting in 
both the 
quotations
M/s Spanex Products Hyderabad (040)27203742 B-6/1, 
I.D.A.,UPPAL

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
20072476/LP-
5/PV-B dt 
20.03.08
M/s R.K. International Kanpur (0512)2232913 Identical FAX 
nos. and 
identical 
handwriting in 
both the 
quotations
M/s V.S. Chemical 
Trading Co.
Kanpur (0512)2232913
A20070373/LP-
21/PV(A)/2007-
08 dt 05.12.07
M/s M.B.Traders Kanpur Identical text 
and handwriting 
in both the 
quotations 
M/s Indo Synthetics Kanpur
OPF 20050749 dated 
2.3.2006
M/S Standard Niwar Mill Kanpur 0512 -2692497 1. same FAX 
No.at different 
location
M/S FVR Enterprises    
M/s. V.K. Brothers
Kanpur 0512-2692497 1. OPF issued 
Tender 
document to 
M/S Standard 
Niwar Mills & 
M/S VK 
Brothers 
i.e.105/696,Cha
manganj 
Bhannanpurva   
2. All three firm 
use same word 
format

Annexure III
Name of the 
factory
TE No & date Name of the firm Location of the 
firm
Fax No Telephone 
Numbers
E-mail  id/ address Remarks
VFJ 08/3778/VMM/ 
A/VFJ due on 
Dec. 2008
Simplex Auto Industries  Jabalpur 0761-4032995 2423944  
4032992
Simplex Estate 
Nagpur Road 
Jabalpur
Tender Opening 
attended by Shri 
J.B. Singh for 
both firms
Simplex Metalica Jabalpur 0761-4032995 2423944  
4032992
Simplex Estate 
Nagpur Road 
Jabalpur
 
VFJ 08/3779/VMM/ 
A/VFJ dated Dec. 
2008
Simplex Auto Industries  Jabalpur 0761-4032995 2423944  
4032992
Simplex Estate 
Nagpur Road 
Jabalpur
Tender Opening 
attended by Shri 
J.B. Singh for 
both firms
Simplex Metalica Jabalpur 0761-4032995 2423944  
4032992
Simplex Estate 
Nagpur Road 
Jabalpur
 

Annexure IV
Annexure IV
Statement Showing the details wherein firms quoted Identical Rates.
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
  Ordnance  Factory Khamaria
10 5 ‐CST ‐0909 Dt 
02‐01‐06
Ball Insert M/s.  Manisha Rubber Mumbai 398.00 LP064034 6/3/2006 25.85
M/s Kamal Rubplast Delhi 398.00 LP064035 6/3/2006 25.85
M/s Rohit Rubber Pune 398.00 LP064036 6/3/2006 25.85
M/s V.K.Rubplast Gurgaon 398.00 LP064037 6/3/2006 25.85
M/s Vikas Extrusion Noida 398.00 LP064038 6/3/2006 25.85
2 06CST ‐0358 dt. 
29/07/2006
Ball Insert Front M/s.  Manisha Rubber Mumbai 417.00 LP064093 9/9/2006 18.06
M/s Kamal Rubplast Delhi 417.00 LP064092 9/9/2006 18.06
M/s Rohit Rubber Pune 417.00 LP064094 9/9/2006 18.06
M/s V.K.Rubplast Gurgaon 417.00 LP064095 9/9/2006 18.06
M/s Vikas Extrusion NOIDA 417.00 LP064096 9/9/2006 18.06
3 06CST ‐0839 dt. 
16/12/2006
Base Plate 7.8 mm /8.5 
mm
M/s Castiplast Pvt. Kolkata 70.00 LP064169 1/8/2007
26.87
M/s Galaxi EPOXY CAST Pune. 70.00 LP064170 1/8/2007 26.87
M/S D.K. Insulation, Bhopal 70.00 LP064171 1/8/2007 26.87
4 06CST ‐0933 dt. 
03/01/2007
Slipping Ring M/s  V.K.Rubplast Gurgaon 43.80 LP064194 2/6/2007 17.94
M/s Rohit Rubber Product Pune 43.80 LP064196 2/6/2007 17.94
M/s Paramount Plastic New Delhi 43.80 LP064195 2/6/2007 17.94
M/s Mechanical Seals & pack Mumbai 43.80 LP064197 2/6/2007 17.94
5 06CST-0840 dt. 
16/12/2006
Base Plate M/s  Castiplast Pvt. Kolkata 70.00 LP064211 2/18/2007 37.31
M/s Galaxi EPOXY CAST Pune. 70.00 LP064213 2/18/2007 37.31
M/s D.K.Insulation Bhopal 70.00 LP064212 2/18/2007 37.31

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
6 06CST-1002 dt. 
18/12/2006
Fuse Empty for 23mm 
Schilka
M/s Sandeep Metalcraft Nagpur 423.00 LP064225 3/10/2007 356.13
M/s Vxl Technologies Faridabad 423.00 LP064226 3/13/2007 356.13
M/s Meen components, Hyderabad 423.00   356.13
M/s Hydrabad Precision Hydrabad 423.00 LP064227 3/13/2007 356.13
M/s Naveen Tools Calcutta 423.00 356.13
M/s Ashoka Industries Calcutta 423.00 LP064228 356.13
7 06CST-0844 dt. 
20/12/2006
Carrier Ammunition  IA M/s  Paramount Plastic New Delhi 318.00 LP064238 3/15/2007 22.51
M/s Bihani Udyog, Jabalpur 318.00 LP064239 3/15/2007 22.51
M/s Seth & Co. Mumbai 318.00 LP064240 3/15/2007 22.51
M/s Nilkamal Crates Mumbai 318.00 LP064240 3/15/2007 22.51
M/s V.K. Rub plast Gurgaon 318.00 LP064241 3/15/2007 14.7
8 06CST-0843 dt 
11/01/2007
Carrier Ammunition  
I2A( Plastic)
M/s Paramount Plastic New Delhi 325.00 LP064255 3/24/2007 23.54
M/s Bihani Udyog, Jabalpur 325.00 LP064256 3/24/2007 23.54
M/s Nilkamal Crates Mumbai 325.00 LP064254 3/24/2007 23.54
M/s V.K. Rub plast Gurgaon 325.00 LP064253 3/24/2007 23.54
M/s Sai Industries Thane 325.00 LP064249 3/24/2007 23.54
M/s Nityanand Udyog  Nagpur 325.00 LP064252 3/24/2007 23.54
M/s Miltech Industries Nagpur 325.00 LP064251 3/24/2007 23.54
M/s Seth & Co. Mumbai 325.00 LP064250 3/24/2007 23.54
9 06CST-0842 dt 
20/12/2006
Ball Insert Front M/s.  Manisha Rubber Mumbai 417.00 LP064258 3/24/2007 32.05
M/s Kamal RubplastDelhi 417.00 LP064257 3/24/2007 40.06
M/s Rohit Rubber Pune 417.00 LP064259 3/24/2007 40.06
M/s V.K. Rubplast, Gurgaon 417.00 LP064261 3/24/2007 40.06
M/s. Vikas Enterprises NOIDA 417.00 LP064260 3/24/2007 40.06

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
10 06CST-0841 dt 
20/12/2006
Bangalore Torpedo M/s.  Priya Preci Co. Nagpur 1,695.00 LP074056 6/20/2007 38.11
M/s. Pandit Engg. Pune 1,695.00 LP074057 6/20/2007 38.11
M/s. Sandip Metal Nagpur 1,695.00 LP074058 6/20/2007 38.11
M/s. CNC Components Kolkata 1,695.00 LP074059 6/20/2007 38.11
M/s. Shanti Arms Nagpur 1,695.00 LP074060 6/20/2007 38.11
M/s. Raj Industries New Delhi 1,695.00 0
11 07 ‐CST‐852 Dt. 
19.12.07
Base Plate 7.8 mm M/s.  Galaxy Epogy Cast Pune 70.00 LP074060 6/20/2007 71.07
M/s. D.K. Industries Bhopal 70.00 LP074060 6/20/2007 48.05
M/s. Castiplast Pvt. Ltd. Kolkata 70.00 LP074060 6/20/2007 30.03
12 08 ‐CST‐574 dt 
13.09.08
Base Plate 7.8 mm M/s.  Galaxy Epogy Cast Pune 82.00 LP084169 12/26/2008 56.06
M/s. D.K. Industries Bhopal 82.00 LP084168 12/26/2008 56.06
M/s. Castiplast Pvt. Ltd. Kolkata 82.00 LP084170 12/26/2008 56.06
13 08 ‐CST‐579 Base  Plate8.5 mm M/s.  Galaxy Epogy Cast Pune 82.00 LP084172 12/26/2008 0
M/s. D.K. Industries Bhopal 82.00 LP084171 12/26/2008 16.02
M/s. Castiplast Pvt. Ltd. Kolkata 82.00 LP084173 12/26/2008 20.02
14 07CST-1018 dt 
19/01/2008
Slipping  Ring M.s.  V.K. Rubplast (I) Pvt. Ltd. Gurgaon 43.70 0
M/s. Rohit Rubber Product Pune 43.70 LP074241 3/12/2008 63.8
M/s. Paramount Plastic New Delhi 43.70 LP074242 3/12/2008 26.95
M/s. Mechanical   Seals & Pack. Industries 
Mumbai
43.70 LP074243 3/12/2008 36.84
M/s. Corrosin Engg Ahmedabad 43.70 0
M/s. Seth & Co. Mumbai 43.70 0
M/s. Pooja Enterprises New Delhi. 43.70 0

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
15 07CST-0848 dt 
18/12/2007
Ball Insert M/s.  Kamal Robplast Inds. Delhi 451.00 LP074246 3/12/2008 62.9
M/s. Manisha Rubber Mumbai 451.00 0
M/s. Rohit Rubber Pune 451.00 LP074248 3/12/2008 25.16
M/s. Vikas Extrusion Noida 451.00 0
M/s. V.K. Rubplast India Gurgaon 451.00 LP074247 3/12/2008 37.74
16 08CST-0034 dt 
07/05/2008
Time & Impact Fuze 
FFV‐447 EMPT ASY
M/s. Micron Instrument Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi 3,419.78 LP084052 6/26/2008 107.76
M/s. VXL Technologies 3,419.78 LP084053 6/26/2008 72.54
M/s. Sandeep Metalcraft Pvt. Ltd. 3,419.78 LP084054 6/26/2008 72.54
17 08-CST-0575  dt. 
04.10.08
Ball Insert Front & Rear M/s.  Rohit Rubber Product Pune 495.00 LP084132 11/5/2008 35.52
M/s. Vikas Extrusion (P) Ltd. 495.00 LP084133 11/5/2008 23.68
M/s. Manisha Rubber Enterprises Mumbai LP084131 11/5/2008 59.19
Ordnance  Factory Chanda
18 200700029/A dt 
9.4.2007
Mortar Bomb 120 mm 
Empty
Kew Industries Ltd. Jalandhar 1,995.00 1071142/A1 124.92
T.S. Kisan Faridabad 1,995.00 0
R.K. Machine Tools Ludhiana 1,995.00 0
19 200600994/A dt 
28.03..2007
Fuze Percn.DA 162 (M‐
2)
Naveen Tools Co. Kolkata 595.00 1071195/A1 8/10/2007 124.85
Priya Precision Co. Ltd. Nagpur 595.00 1071197/A1 8/10/2007 124.85
Sandeep Metal craft Ltd.Nagpur 595.00 1071198/A1 8/10/2007 124.85
Shanti Arms ‐TechLtd.Nagpur 595.00 1071199/A1 8/10/2007 124.85
Tirupati Industries Kolkata 595.00 1071196/A1 8/10/2007 124.85
Ashoka INDUSTRIES Kolkata 595.00 1071194/A1 8/10/2007 124.85
Asha Industries Kolkata 595.00 1071192/A1 8/10/2007 124.85

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
Hyderabad Precision  Co. Hydradabad 595.00 1071193/A1 8/10/2007 124.85

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
20 200600995/A dt 
28.03..2007
Ammunition Container  
Box C‐44A
Lakshmi Industries New Delhi 1,098.00 1071137/A4 39247 72.88
United Steel & Allied Industries 1,098.00 1071136/A4 39247 91.09
New Delhi
Vaman B Purohit Pune 1,098.00 1071138/A4 39247 72.87
21 200800630/A dt 
12.12.2008
Container with Disc Nityanand  Udyog Nagpur 14.95 1081360/A1 1/25/2009 117.38
Seth & Co. Mumbai 14.95 1081359/A1 1/25/2009 195.63
Sai Industries Thane 14.95 1081361/A1 1/25/2009 78.25
22 200800634/A dt 
15.12.2008
Primer Electric 1A/L Asha  Industries Kolkata 370.00 1081327/A1 12/30/2008 35.52
CNC Components Kolkata 370.00 1081328/A1 12/30/2008 46.76
Sandip Metal Craft Nagpur 370.00 1081329/A1 12/30/2008 46.76
Ashoka Industries Kolkata 370.00 1081330/A1 12/30/2008 46.76
Mech Components Pvt. Ltd. Hyderabad 370.00 1081331/A1 12/30/2008 46.76
23 200600660/A dt 
21.12.2006
FRP Packing Box for 
Influence Mine
Kombyne Transpack Pvt. Ltd. Pune 11,351.00 1061439/A1 39156 116.92
Nilkamal Crates Mumbai 11,351.00 0
24 200600605/A dt 
08.12.2006
Container with Disc Miltech  Industries Nagpur 16.65 1061449/A1 3/16/2007 107
Mach Polymer Pune 16.65 0
Nityanand Udyog Nagpur 16.65 1061448/A1 3/16/2007 111.12
Seth & Co. Mumbai 16.65 1061450/A1 3/16/2007 32.27
Sai Industries Pune 16.65
VK Enterprises Mumbai 16.65 1061451/A1 3/16/2007 131.79
25 200600606/A dt 
08.12.2006
Ammn. Container Box 
40 A/L
Vedant Paper Craft Pvt. Ltd. Nagpur 150.00 0
Vidushi Technical & Commercial Nagpur 150.00
Sharad Paper Products Nagpur 150.00 1061429/A1 3/14/2007 47.99
Shrinivas Paper Converter Vishakhapatnam 150.00 0

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
Uma Limited Product Hyderabad 150.00 1061430/A1 3/14/2007 47.99
Eastern India Vishakhapatnam 150.00 0
Unicon Products Chennai 150.00 0
Packwell Paper Tube New Delhi 150.00 1061428/A1 3/14/2007 47.99

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
26 200600602/A dt. 
08.12.2006
Mine A/T 1A/L Empty Jarikela  Lumberman Kolkata 190.00 1061377/A1 2/24/2007 27.02
Hari Narayan Bihani Jaipur 190.00 1061378/A1 2/24/2007 27.02
Miltech Industries Nagpur 190.00 1061379/A1 2/24/2007 27.02
Seth & Co. Mumbai 190.00 1061380/A1 2/24/2007 27.02
Nilkamal Crates Mumbai 190.00 1061381/A1 2/24/2007 27.02
Nityanand Udyog Nagpur 190.00 1061382/A1 2/24/2007 27.02
27 200600601/A dt. 
08.12.2006
Container with Disc Seth  & Co. Mumbai 53.00 1061368/A1 2/22/2007 52.5
Sai Industries Pune 53.00 1061369/A1 2/22/2007 52.5
VEEKAY Enterprises Mumbai 53.00 1061370/A1 2/22/2007 52.5
28 200600598/A dt 
07.12.2006
Mine APRS M‐14 Miltech  Industries Nagpur 64.00 1061409/A1 3/7/2007 31.87
Nityanand Udyog Nagpur 64.00 1061410/A1 3/7/2007 31.87
Shyam Udyog Kolkata 64.00 1061412/A1 3/7/2007 31.87
Synthetic Modular Limited 64.00 1061411/A1 3/7/2007 31.87
29 200600599/A dt 
07.12.2006
Mine AT 4DND Empty 
Assy.
Miltech Industries Nagpur 547.40 1061384/A1 2/24/2007 43.66
Nilkamal Crates& Bins Mumbai 547.40 1061383/A1 2/24/2007 43.66
Nityanand Udyog Nagpur 547.40 1061385/A1 2/24/2007 43.66
Seth & Co. Mumbai 547.40 1061387/A1 2/24/2007 43.66
VEEKAY Enterprises Mumbai 547.40 1061386/A1 2/24/2007 43.66
30 200600603/A dt 
08.12.2006
120 mm HE 1A Empty 
body
 KEW Industries Jalandhar 1,725.00 1061347/A1 2/6/2007 83.47
R.K.Machine Tools Ludhiana 1,725.00 1061348/A1 2/6/2007 83.47
T.S.Kisan & Co. Faridabad 1,725.00 1061349/A1 2/6/2007 41.73
31 200500740/A dt 
05.01.2006
Ammn Contai‐ ner 40A/ 
L
Uma Laiminated Products Hyderabad 128.90 1061117/A2 5/4/2006 101.6
Eastern India Container Vishakhapatnam 128.90 1061119/A2 5/4/2006 20.32

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
Sharda Paper Products Pvt. Ltd. Nagpur 128.90 1061120/A2 5/4/2006 122.12
Vedant Paper Craft Nagpur 128.90 0
Srinivas Paper Converters Vishakhapatnam 128.90 0
Packwell Paper Tube New Delhi 128.90 1061118/A2 5/4/2006 41.91
K. Cone Products Chennai 142.00 0

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
32 200700068/A dt 
27.04.2007
Carrier Ammn 10C Shanti  Udyog Jabalpur 297.00 1071098/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Baijnath Plastic Products Thane 297.00 1071099/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Bajaj Engg. & Consultants Bahadurgarh 297.00 1071100/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Dhingra Enterprieses Modinagar 297.00 1071101/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Ajit Chemicals Pvt.. Ltd. Kanpur 297.00 1071102/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Harinarayan Bihani Jabalpur 297.00 1071103/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
V.K. Ruberplast India Ltd. Haryana 297.00 1071104/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Miltech Industries Nagpur 297.00 1071105/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Nilkamal Crates and BINS Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai 297.00 1071106/A4 5/11/2007 30.32
Nityanand Udyog Nagpur 297.00 1071107/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Paramount Plastic Industries New Delhi 297.00 1071108/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
Sai Trading Thane 297.00 1071109/A4 5/11/2007 39.45
33 200600180/A dt. 
15.06.2006
Container to Drg. No. 4‐
24929
AKAY Udyog Nagpur 372.00 1061233/A4 9/26/2006 12.66
Industry & Private Ltd. Gurgaon 372.00 1061231/A4 9/26/2006 13.69
Jaspal Industries Mumbai 372.00 1061232/A4 9/26/2006 13.69
Laxmi Ishwar Industries New Delhi 372.00 1061234/A4 9/26/2006 13.69
Miltech Industries Ltd. Nagpur 372.00 1061236/A4 9/26/2006 13.69
Precision Steels New Delhi 372.00 1061237/A4 9/26/2006 13.69
Sandip Metal Craft Nagpur 372.00 1061238/A4 9/26/2006 13.69
United Steel & Alloy Industries New Delhi. 372.00 1061235/A4 9/26/2006 13.69
34 200600888/A dt 
19.02.2007
Primer Electric 1A/L 
Empty
Ashoka Industries Kolkata 337.50 1071155/A1 7/4/2007 19.49
Asha Industries Kolkata 337.50 1071153/A1 7/4/2007 24.36
CNC Componens Pvt. Ltd. Kolkata 337.50 1071154/A1 7/4/2007 19.49

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
Hyderabad Precision Co. Hyderabad 337.50 1071156/A1 7/4/2007 19.49
MECH Components Hyderabad 337.50 1071158/A1 7/4/2007 19.49
Tirupati Industries Hyderabad 337.50 1071157/A1 7/4/2007 24.36
35 200700326/A dt 
17.08.2007
Ammn. Container Box 
M 41A
Ashok Timber Industries Haryana 576.00  & 
613.00
1071263/A4 11/16/2007 22.91
Unipack Industries AR Chhacharauli 576.00  & 
613.00
1071264/A4 11/16/2007 22.47

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
36 200500727/A dt 
29.12.2005
Carrier Ammn. 10C Bihani  Udyog Jaipur 261.00 1061050/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
Rajnath Plastic Products Mumbai 261.00 1061046/A2 4/12/2006 44.36
Hari Narayan Bihani Jaipur 261.00 1061047/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
Miltech Industries Nagpur 261.00 1061048/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
Nityanand Udyog Nagpur 261.00 1061051/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
Paramount Plastic Industries New Delhi 261.00 1061053/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
Seth & Co. Mumbai 261.00 1061054/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
Sai Trading Mumbai 261.00 1061055/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
VEEKAY Enterprises Mumbai 261.00 1061056/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
VK Rubplast Gurgaon 261.00 1061052/A2 4/12/2006 44.81
37 200600600/A dt 
07.12.2006
Pressure Pad Type A Manisha  Rubber Enterprises Mumbai 108.00 1061363/A1 2/15/2007 41.53
Rohit Rubber Product Pune 108.00 1061364/A1 2/15/2007 41.72
VK Rubplast Haryana 108.00 1061365/A1 2/15/2007 52.17
38 200500737/A dt 
05.01.2006
Primer Electric 1A/L Ashoka  Industries Kolkata 333.00 1061030/A1 4/10/2006 31.5
Asha Industries Kolkata 333.00 1061029/A1 4/10/2006 31.5
CNC Components Kolkata 333.00 1061031/A1 4/10/2006 31.5
Navin Tools Kolkata 333.00 1061033/A1 4/10/2006 31.5
Tirupati Industries Kolkata 333.00 1061032/A1 4/10/2006 31.5
39 200500741/A dt 
05.01.2006
Ammn. Contai‐ ner 
36A/L
Easter India Vishakhapatnam 253.00
Packwell Paper Tube Ind. New Delhi 253.00 1061122/A2 5/4/2006 69
Sharad Paper Product Nagpur 253.00 1061123/A2 5/4/2006 196.43
Srinivasa Paper Converter Vishakhapatnam 253.00 1061121/A2 5/4/2006 23
Uma Laminated Product Hyderabad 253.00 0

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
Vedant Paper Nagpur 253.00 0
Vidushi Technical & Commercial Nagpur 253.00 0
40 200700009/A dt. 
05.04.2007
Ammunition Container 
Box M 43A
Dada Dharamnath Timber Co. Nagpur 945.00 0
Gopal Enterprises Nagpur 945.00 1071122/A4 5/31/2007 30.13
Shanti Timber Products Nagpur 945.00 1071124/A4 5/31/2007 51.69
Wood Preserver Nagpur 945.00 1071123/A4 5/31/2007 51.69
41 200800706/A dt 
11.01.2009
Bomb 120 mm HE 1A 
Empty
KEW Industries Jalandhar 1,890.00 1081446/A1 3/29/2009 237.99
RK Machine Tools Ludhiana 1,890.00 1081445/A1 3/29/2009 317.32
T.S. Kisan & Co. Haryana 1,890.00 1081447/A1 3/29/2009 126.92
42 200800324/A dt 
07.08.2008
Primer Electric 1A/L 
Empty
Ashoka Industries Kolkata 370.40 1081214/A1 10/5/2008 57.85
Asha Industries Kolkata 370.40 1081213/A1 10/5/2008 57.85
Mech Components Hyderabad 370.40 1081212/A1 05 ‐10‐20087 57.85
43 200800639/A dt. 
16.12.2008
Packing Box Wooden Shanti  Timber Nagpur 1,450.00 1081441/A4 3/29/2009 53.41
Universal Timber Haryana 1,450.00 1081443/A4 3/29/2009 21.37
Wood Preservers Nagpur 1,450.00 1081442/A4 3/29/2009 53.41
44 200800167/A dt. 
24.6.2008
Mine APERs M‐1A with 
fuze
Castiplast Pvt.Ltd. Kolkata 72.00 1081217/A1 10/7/2008 200.8
Nityanand Udyog Nagpur 72.00 1081216/A1 10/7/2008 200.8
Synthetic Modular Ltd. 72.00 1081215/A1 10/7/2008 200.8
45 200800667/A dt. 
27.12.2008
Set of combustible 
Cartg. Case of FSAPDS
Maspack Ltd. Hyderabad 3,400.00 1081439/A3 3/29/2009 101.02
SM Pulp Packing New Delhi. 3,400.00 1081440/A3 3/29/2009 67.36
46 200800054/A dt. 
03.05.2008
Set of combustible 
Cartg. Case of FSAPDS
Maspack Ltd. Hyderabad 3,400.00 1081198/A3 9/26/2008 79.17

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
SM Pulp Packing New Delhi. 3,400.00 1081199/A3 9/26/2008 118.74
Ordnance Factory Ambajhari
47 FS2280084 dt 
24.07.2008
Conversion Motor Tube 
to Liner Assy.
ALLEN REINFORCE Plastic (P) Ltd. Hyderabad 18,000.00 FS3280169 12.12.2008 1618.66
VALETH Tightech Composits Pvt. Ltd. Chennai 18,000.00 FS3280165 06.12.2008 539.55
48 FS22600067 dt 
28.10.2006
Conversion Motor Tube 
to Liner Assy.
ALLEN REINFORCE Plastic (P) Ltd. Hyderabad 16,000.00 FS3260108 24.12.2007 317.14
VALETH Tightech Composits Pvt. Ltd. Chennai 16,000.00 FS3260109 24.12.2007 317.14

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
Ordnance Clothing Factory 
Shahjahanpur
49 2007000034 Dt29-
05-07
Yarn woollen 450 Tex M/S  KK Mills Ludhiana 79.04 2007000144 7/19/2007 27.96
M/S Mahesweri woollen Mills Ludhiana 79.04 2007000145 7/19/2007 27.98
M/SPrestige Spinners (P) Ltd Ludhiana 79.04 2007000146 7/19/2007 29.09
M/SRK Woolen Mills Ludhiana 79.04 2007000147 7/19/2007 29.35
M/S Hariana Woolen Mills Panipat 79.04 2007000148 7/19/2007 27.96
M/S Geeta Woolen Mills Ludhiana 79.04 2007000149 7/19/2007 27.96
M/SRSM Woolen Mills Ludhiana 79.04 2007000150 7/19/2007 29.35
M/SMahavir woollen Mills Panipat 79.04 2007000151 7/19/2007 29.35
M/SCAPITAL Woolen  Mills Panipat 79.04 2007000152 7/19/2007 29.35
M/S Siddarth Woolen mills Panipat 79.04 2007000153 7/19/2007 27.96
M/SKanhia Textiles Mills Panipat 79.04 2007000154 7/19/2007 27.96
M/S The Goel Engg & Woolen Works panipat 79.04 2007000155 7/19/2007 27.96
M/S Bansal Spinning Mills Ltd Ludhiana 79.04 2007000156 7/19/2007 41.85
50 2006000330 dt 
30.12.06
Yarn Worsted 55 Tex M/s  Jainson Hosiery Ludhiana 615.00 20070211 9/11/2007 87.16
M/S KK Mills Ludhiana 615.00 20070212 9/11/2007 87.39
M/s Sankeshwar Synthetic ltd Ludhiana 615.00 20070213 9/11/2007 83.45
51 2007000173 dt. 
29.10.07
Fabric Nylon 75 GSM M/s  Kusumgar Corporates Mumbai 133.00 20070370 1/14/2008 106.33
133.00 20070371 1/14/2008 85.01
52 200700158 dt. 
19.10.07
Fabric blanket Wool M/s  Jainson Hosiery Ludhiana 238.00 429 3/6/2008 101.26
M/S KK Mills Ludhiana 238.00 430 3/6/2008 101.36
53 2007000313 dt. 
01.03.08
Yarn Woolen 450 Tex M/SPrestige  Spinners (P) Ltd Ludhiana 79.30 475 2/27/2008 34.1
M/SCAPITAL Woolen  Mills Panipat 79.30 476 2/27/2008 199.3

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
54 2007000311 dt. 
01.03.08
Cloth Cotton CW M/S  MS Textiles Mumbai 95.00 9 4/18/2008 68
M/S Universal Yarn & Textiles Mumbai 95.00 10 4/18/2008 66.4
55 2008000108 dt. 
21.08.08
Pile Fabric Polyster m/S  Youngman Woolen Mills Ludhiana 103.00 192 10/25/2008 39.87
M/S Sunrise International Jalandhar 103.00 193 10/25/2008 31.89
56 2008000107 dt. 
20.08.08
Yarn worsted 80 Tex M/SPrestige  Spinners (P) Ltd Ludhiana 360.00 195 10/25/2008 37.44
M/S KK Mills Ludhiana 360.00 195 10/25/2008 58.84

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
57 2008000110 dt. 
22.08.08
Fabric blanket Wool M/s  Jainson Hosiery Ludhiana 251.00 213 11/17/2008 57.73
M/S Bansal Spinning Mills Ltd Ludhiana 251.00 214 11/17/2008 57.73
M/S KK Mills Ludhiana 251.00 215 11/17/2008 57.73
58 2008000132 dt. 
11.09.08
Shirting Angola M/s  Jainson Hosiery Ludhiana 147.49 246 12/21/2008 59.1
M/S Bansal Spinning Mills Ltd ludhiana 147.49 247 12/21/2008 59.1
59 2008000294 dt. 
30.03.09
Yarn Woolen 450 Tex M/S  Bansal Spinning Mills Ltd Ludhiana 84.50 31 5/28/2009 294.83
M/S Hariyana Woolen & General Mills Panipat 84.50 32 5/28/2009 366.9
Ord. Parachute Factory, Kanpur
60 20080524  dt. 
25.01.09
Fabric Nylon M/s  Kusumgar Corporates Mumbai 165.00 20080734 2/26/2009 21.58
M/S Oriental Synthetic & Ryon Ltd Mumbai 165.00 20080735 2/26/2009 22.53
Small Arms Factory, Kanpur
61 2803001587  dt. 
23.01.09
Case Assy of 9 mm 
Magazine
M/S National Industries Kanpur 81.00 28042152 3/10/2009 5.32
M/S Bee Kay Precision Kanpur 81.00 28042151 3/10/2009 7.98
M/S US Industries Kanpur 81.00 28042150 3/10/2009 13.3
62 2803000210  dt. 
06.05.08
Monopod Assy for LMG 
5.56
M/S Sandeep Metal  Craft Nagpur 2,196.00 28040701 6/12/2008 52.66
M/S CNC Components Kolkata 2,196.00 28040702 6/12/2008 35.09
Ordnance Equipment Factory, 
Kanpur
63 4143  dt 06.08 Three  way Joint with 
base plate for tent 
extendable
M/S Industrial Enterprises Kanpur 259.00 80333 8/9/2008 94.66

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
M/S P. N. Sons Kanpur 259.00 80334 8/9/2008 94.66
64 4144  dt. 06‐08 Four  Way Joint For 
Tent Extendable Frame 
Supported
M/S Shanker Metals works Kanpur 260.75 80335 39669 78.57
M/S Vishwa Traders Kanpur 260.75 80336 39669 78.57
M/S  Nutesh Industries Lucknow 260.75 80337 39669 78.57
M/S Superior Fabrics Kanpur 260.75 80338 39669 78.57

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
65 3488  dt. 05.08 Leather  Buff Vegetable 
Tanned Sole bend
M/S Shewan tannery Kanpur 205 80247 39633 149.51
M/S Malik Company Kanpur 205 80248 39633 149.51
Ordnance Factory Trichi
66 8416D42730  
dt.28/10/2008
Mfg. and supply of 
Barrel extension
AANAG Enterprises (P) Ltd Kolkata 308.00 8641  D61874 10/1/2009 6.57
   SUBAH Engr (P) Ltd Chennai 308.00 8641  D61875 10/1/2009 6.57
67 8411D42130  
dt.04/05/2008
Mfg. and supply of Stud 
Change Lever
Precision Transmission Chain, Hoogly 14.00 8211  D61193 6/4/2008 1.49
  Universal Steel Products, Kolkata 14.00 8211  D61194 6/4/2008 2.18
68 8391D43195  
dt.04/02/2009
Mfg. and supply of Stud 
Change Lever
Precision Transmission Chain, Hoogly 14 8391  D 62077 2/26/2009 2.31
    Universal Steel Products, Kolkata 14 8391  D 62078 2/26/2009 3.47
69 7641D41163  
dt.06‐03‐2008
Mfg. and supply of 
Piston Extn VII
Sri Konark Precision Tools (P) Ltd, Hyderabad 390 8641  D 61026 4/11/2008 38.03
    SKM Tech PVT Ltd, Hyderabad 390 8641  D 61027 4/11/2008 12.68
  Engn Accessories (P) Ltd, Chennai 390.00 8641  D61028 4/11/2008 11.41
   AANAG Enterprises (P) Ltd Kolkata 390.00 8641  D61029 4/11/2008 5.07
70 8221D42987  
dt.16‐12‐2008
Modified Retainer Sring 
Recoil
AANAG Enterprises (P) Ltd Kolkata 45.85 8221  D 
61872
1/10/2009 26.13
   Rohini Auto Electricals (P) Ltd, Hyderabad 45.85 8221  D  1/10/2009 13.94
71 7181G41078  
dt.16/02/2008
Sling Assy ARDE 
SK/3303
Delite Buff Indst, Mumbai 72.80 7181  G60015 3/6/2008 5.08
   Indrakala Udhyog, Kolkata 72.80 7181  G60016 3/6/2008 5.08
   Indian Fine Blank, Kolkata 72.80 7181  G60017 3/6/2008 12.69

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
72 8181G43331  
dt.17/02/2009
Sling Assy ARDE 
SK/3303
Indrakala Udhyog, Kolkata 83.00 9181  G63108 4/28/2009 8.3
   Indian Fine Blank, Kolkata 83.00 9181  G63109 4/28/2009 13.83
   Starline Indst, Kolkata 83.00 9181  G63110 4/28/2009 4.42
73 8181G43307  
dt.17/02/2009
Pull Through for 5.56 
MM TA/94
A.K.Ghosal & Sons, Kolkata 14.48 9181  G63021 4/7/2009 1.72
   Central Brush Works, Kolkata 14.48 9181  G63022 4/7/2009 3.23
74 8181E42772  
dt.05/11/2008
Pin Firing SK 3143/33 Mahapravu  Moulding Works, Howrah 49.00 8181  E 61769 8/12/2008 3.57
   Pivot Fabrique HP, Solan 49.00 8181  E 61770 8/12/2008 6.69
75 8181E43118  
dt.23/01/2009
Pin Firing SK 3143/33 Mahapravu  Moulding Works, Howrah 49.00 8181  E 62025 2/13/2009 8.6
   Pivot Fabrique HP, Solan 49.00 8181  E 62026 2/13/2009 12.84
76 8181E43279  dt. 
17/02/2009
Pin Firing SK 3143/33 Mahapravu  Moulding Works, Howrah 49.00 8181  E 62279 3/30/2009 11.59
   Pivot Fabrique HP, Solan 49.00 8181  E 62280 3/30/2009 21.73
77 8211E43343  dt. 
18/02/2009
Cover for 5.56 MM 
Rifle INSAS
US Engrs, Kanpur 126.00 8211  E 62223 3/21/2009 9.19
   Deep Dies & Tools, Lucknow 126.00 8211  E 62224 3/21/2009 13.78
78 8391E42434  dt. 
24/07/2008
Hammer Blanks for 
5.56 MM
Rohini Auto Electricals (P) Ltd, Hyderabad 135.00 8391  E 61461 8/27/2008 2.7
   SUBAH Engr (P) Ltd Chennai 135.00 8391  E 61462 8/27/2008 21.16
79 8391E43392  dt. 
25/02/2009
Hammer Blanks for 
5.56 MM
AM Diamond Engg Works, Howrah 135.00 8391  E 62263 3/26/2009 11.73
   SUBAH Engr (P) Ltd Chennai 135.00 8391  E 62262 3/26/2009 24.44
   Rohini Auto Electricals (P) Ltd, Hyderabad 135.00 8391  E 62264 3/26/2009 7.82

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
80 8391E43482  dt. 
06‐03‐2009
Block Rear Blanks for 
5.56 MM
Associated Tools, Hlwrah 187.00 9391  E 63114 4/29/2009 21.05
   Das & Co, Howrah 187.00 9391  E 63115 4/29/2009 31.57
81 8331E43114  dt. 
20/01/2009
Cylinder Gas for 5.56 
MM INSAS
SUBAH Engr (P) Ltd Chennai 288.00 8331  E 62014 2/12/2009 25.01
   Laxmi Konark Precision Technics, Hyderabad 288.00 8331  E 62015 2/12/2009 15
   Pricihole Machine Tools (P) Ltd, Thane 288.00 8331  E 62016 2/12/2009 8
82 7181G40217  dt. 
17/05/2007
Chest Rifle 5.56 MM 
Wooden (10) Hold
Maurya Timbers, Yamuna Nagar 2,800.00 7181  G59841 1/4/2008 9.44
   Ashok Timber Indst, Yamuna Nagar 2,800.00 7181  G59842 1/4/2008 6.3
   Krishna Indst, Kanpur 2,800.00 7181  G59843 1/4/2008 9.44
   Md Khalil, Md Bashir, Kanpur 2,800.00 7181  G59844 1/4/2008 6.3
   Universal Timber Corpn, Yamuna Nagar 2,800.00 7181  G59845 1/4/2008 9.44
   Wood Preservers Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 2,800.00 7181  G59846 1/4/2008 6.3

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
83 8181E42164  dt. 
13/05/2008
Flash Absorber SK 
3143/40
Anil Enterprises 125.00 8181  E 61202 6/6/2008 8.28
   Precision Fastners (I) Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 125.00 8181  E 61203 6/6/2008 8.28
   Southern Guages & Fine Components,  125.00 8181  E 61204 6/6/2008 8.28
   Universal Steel Products, Kolkata 125.00 8181  E 61205 6/6/2008 8.28
84 8181E42999  dt. 
19/12/2008
Flash Absorber SK 
3143/40
Abinav Yantrik Udhyog Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 74.00 8181  E 62021 2/13/2009 3.27
   India Trade Centre, Kolkata 74.00 8181  E 62022 2/13/2009 4.91
85 7181E40996  dt. 
07/02/2008
Grip Pistol ARDE SK 
2689/11
Miltech Indst Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 41.13 7181  E 59998 3/4/2008 1.91
   Nilkamal Ltd, Mumbai 41.13 7181  E 59999 3/4/2008 1.91
   Nityanand Udyog Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 41.13 7181  E 60000 3/4/2008 1.91
86 8181E42882  dt. 
21/11/2008
Grip Pistol ARDE SK 
2689/11
Miltech Indst Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 41.13 8181  E 61923 1/20/2009 3.28
   Nilkamal Ltd, Mumbai 41.13 8181  E 61924 1/20/2009 2.46
   Nityanand Udyog Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 41.13 8181  E 61925 1/20/2009 1.31
87 8181F43122  dt. 
25/01/2009
Grip Pistol ARDE SK 
2689/11
Miltech Indst Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 41.13 8181  F 62018 2/13/2009 2.75
   Nilkamal Ltd, Mumbai 41.13 8181  F 62019 2/13/2009 1.1
   Nityanand Udyog Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 41.13 8181  F 62020 2/13/2009 1.1
88 7181F41066  dt. 
14/02/2008
Butt Plastic (MOD) SK 
454/6/1
Miltech Indst Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 192.34 7181  F 59976 2/23/2008 8.73
    Nilkamal Ltd, Mumbai 192.34 7181  F 59977 2/23/2008 39.18
    Mahabir Plastic Indst, Kolkata 192.34 7181  F 59978 2/23/2008 5.82
    Nityanand Udyog Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 192.34 7181  F 59979 2/23/2008 5.82
89 8181F43144  dt. 
29/01/2009
Butt Plastic (MOD) SK 
454/6/1
Miltech Indst Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 192.34 8181  F 62036 2/13/2009 12.89

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
    Nilkamal Ltd, Mumbai 192.34 8181  F 62037 2/13/2009 7.72
    Nityanand Udyog Pvt Ltd, Nagpur 192.34 8181  F 62038 2/13/2009 9.67
Ordnance Factory Dehuroad
90 2008000566 Fuze  213 MK‐5 M‐3 Micron Instruments 1,390.00 2008SP0586 15/2/2009 327.54
dt. 19‐12‐2008
VXL Technologies Ltd 1,390.00 2008SP0587 15/2/2009 291.15

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
91 2007000418 Empty  components Raj Industrial Corporation New Delhi 435.00 2007SP0374 12/1/2008 48.94
dt. 17‐11‐2007 lower  set Hanuman Engineering Works, Pune 435.00 2007SP0375 12/1/2008 48.94
Sainath Engineering Works 435.00 2007SP0376 12/1/2008 48.94
Mech Components Pvt Ltd 435.00 2007SP0381 12/1/2008 48.94
Hyderabad
Shanti Arms‐Tech Pvt Ltd 435.00 2007SP0378 12/1/2008 48.94
Ashoka Industries, Kolkata 435.00 2007SP0382 12/1/2008 48.94
Sandeep Metal Kraft Pvt Ltd 435.00 2007SP0379 12/1/2008 48.94
Hyderabad Precision 435.00 2007SP0380 12/1/2008 48.94
Alcast, Ranchi 435.00 2007SP0383 12/1/2008 48.94
Precision Engineering, Ranchi 435.00 2007SP0384 12/1/2008 39.15
Priya Preci‐comp Pvt Ltd 435.00 2007SP0377 12/1/2008 48.94
92 2007000420 Set  of 5 components Raj Industrial Corporation, New Delhi 84.00 2007SP0355 11/1/2008 82.73
dt. 20‐11‐07 upper  set Singhal Industries, New Delhi 84.00 2007SP0356 11/1/2008 33.09
Union Steel Ind. 84.00 2007SP0357 11/1/2008 49.63
93 2007000360 Spring  with link Press tools & Co 43.70 2007SP0491 15/1/08 14.73
dt. 3‐11‐07 Eloquent Engg 43.70 2007SP0492 15/1/08 9.18
94 2007000388 Body  lower for 81 mm Sainath Engineering Works 600.00 2007SP0385 13/1/08 149.76
dt. 6‐11‐07 Ashoka Moulders 600.00 2007SP0386 13/1/08 99.84
95 2008000284 Body  lower for 81 mm Sainath Engineering Works 600.00 2008SP0326 12/11/2008 135.83
dt. 16‐9‐08 Ashoka Moulders 600.00 2008SP0327 12/11/2008 90.55
96 2007000377 Body  upper for 81 mm Hanuman Engineering Works Pune 385.00 2007SP0393 13/1/08 83.53
dt. 5‐11‐07 Ashoka Moulders 385.00 2007SP0394 13/1/08 27.84
CNC Components Pvt Ltd 385.00 2007SP0395 13/1/08 27.84
Naveen Tools Mfg Co Pvt Ltd Kolkata 385.00 2007SP0396 13/1/08 27.84
97 2008000789 Body  upper & lower Hanuman Engineering Works Pune 2,575.00 2009SP0002 24/4/09 49.21
dt. 12‐3‐09 Singhal Industries, New Delhi 2,575.00 2009SP0003 24/4/09 32.78
98 2008000272 Adaptor  Nose Sainath Engineering Works 225.00 2008SP0377 20/11/08 17.73
dt. 16‐9‐08 Ashoka Moulders 225.00 2008SP0378 20/11/08 17.73
Singhal Industries, New Delhi 225.00 2008SP0379 20/11/08 8.87

Annexure IV
Sl No TE  No.& Dt Item  Name Name  & Address of the firms Rate  quoted 
(In Rupees)
S.O.No   Date Value  (Rs. In 
lakh)
99 2007000705 Delay  holder Ashoka Moulders 34.00 2008SP0009 23/4/08 7.56
dt. 10‐3‐08 Precision Engineering, Ranchi 34.00 2008SP0011 23/4/08 10.08
100 2008000152 Tail  unit 11A Eloquent Engg Works 315.00 2008SP0215  4/9/08 28.76
dt. 23‐6‐08 Hanuman Engineering Works Pune 315.00 2008SP0216  4/9/08 21.57
Ashoka Industries, Kolkata 315.00 2008SP0217  4/9/08 11.5
101 2007000387 Tail  unit 11A Sainath Engineering Works 220.00 2007SP0418 14/1/08 40.92
dt. 6‐11‐07 Ashoka Industries, Kolkata 220.00 2007SP0419 14/1/08 32.74
Eloquent Engg Works 220.00 2007SP0420 14/1/08 16.37
102 2007000706 Body  upper & lower Hanuman Engineering Works Pune 2,700.00 2008SP0025 2/5/2008 29.67
dt.11‐3‐08 Singhal Industries, New Delhi 2,700.00 2008SP0026 2/5/2008 17.78
Sainath Engineering Works 2,700.00 2008SP0027 2/5/2008 11.84
103 2007000684 Body  Aluminium Sainath Engineering Works 740.00 2008SP0038 6/5/2008 17.24
dt. 29‐2‐08 Sumak Engineers 740.00 2008SP0039 6/5/2008 10.34
Precision Engineering, Ranchi 740.00 2008SP0040 6/5/2008 6.89
104 2007000749 Ammunition   Seth and Company 23.90 2008SP0001  5/4/08 20.83
dt.  30‐3‐08 Container   69 A Veekay Enterprises 23.90 2008SP0002  5/4/08 34.71
Miltech Industries, Nagpur 23.90 2008SP0003  5/4/08 13.88
105 2007000379 Container  with disc Sai Enterprises 16.55 2008SP0078 23/4/08 26.22
dt.  5/11/07 Sai Industries 16.55 2008SP0079 23/4/08 8.74
106 2008000333 Bottom  plate   Eloquent Engg Works 126.00 2008SP0450  10/12/08 8.49
dt. 22‐9‐08 with  swivel Hanuman Engineering Works Pune 126.00 2008SP0451  10/12/08 5.09
107 2007000359 Cover  empty Singhal Industries, New Delhi 36.23 2007SP0546 25/1/08 11.15
dt. 3‐11‐07 Union Steel Ind. 36.23 2007SP0546 25/1/08 6.69
108 2007000373 Set  of 8 components Union Steel Ind. 240.00 2007SP0542 25/1/08 39.79
dt. 4‐11‐07 Priya Preci‐comp Pvt Ltd 240.00 2007SP0543 25/1/08 19.1
Sandeep Metal Kraft Pvt Ltd 240.00 2007SP0544 25/1/08 12.73
21403.93