iii Report No. 28 of 2010-11PREFACE
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India contains the results of the 
performance audit of Joint Venture 
Operations of ONGC Videsh Limited for the 
period April 2004 to March 2010 based on 
test audit of records available in India 
relating to acquisition, exploration, 
development and production of oil and gas 
fields overseas through its Joint Ventures 
and subsidiaries.
Preface

ONGC Videsh Limited (Company) is a wholly owned overseas arm of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited. It is engaged in oil and gas exploration and production (E&P) projects, 
with the objective of ensuring energy security for the country. Up to March 2010, the Company 
had acquired a total of 45 E&P assets with an investment of  ` 52,491.90 crore in 16 countries 
worldwide. The Company has consistently earned increasing profits during five of the last six 
years. In 2009-10 its profit declined sharply to  ` 4004 crore.
1
Performance audit  of 20 of the Company's 45 E & P assets for the period April 2004 to March 
2010 identified two areas of its working that require strengthening, viz., the Company's 
systems for evaluation of investment opportunities for acquiring E&P assets and for formation 
of  joint ventures as also its internal control systems.
Executive Summary
Investment in exploratory assets involves low cost but high risk.  Out of 36 assets that the 
Company acquired at the exploration stage at an investment of  ` 6,206.83 crore, only five have 
been successful.  Eight of these assets with an investment of ` 1,066.17 crore had to be 
abandoned (in three of these abandoned assets, the company was the sole owner and 
operator) and the remaining 23 projects were still in the process of exploration. The Company is 
yet to succeed as an operator. 
The Company's major investment of  ` 46,285 crore (88 per cent) was in nine assets that were 
acquired at producing/discovered stage. As exploration & production is a high risk and capital 
intensive business, it is essential to mitigate the investment risk by exercising due diligence vis-
à-vis investment opportunities and formation of joint ventures.  It is desirable to have a 
documented and structured policy for evaluation as also for formation of JVs detailing the 
extent of acquisition of participation interest in offered E&P assets and farming-in and 
farming-out of participation interest. The Company, however, did not have such a policy which 
would have provided a framework for decision making and brought about greater consistency, 
assurance and transparency in the system.
In audit, inadequacies were noticed in nine out of 20 test cases, in the evaluation process of 
investment opportunities and formation of joint ventures. Significant shortcomings were:
n The Company acquired exploration Block-5 B in Sudan despite its consultant's 
reservations on limited availability of reserve data as also security problems. The 
consortium could not implement the scheduled seismic and drilling plan and, in view of 
no hydrocarbon discovery, the block had to be relinquished resulting in unfruitful 
expenditure of  ` 423.84 crore.
n The Company relied on the oil reserves estimated by Qatar Petroleum without 
revalidation of maps and data from an independent technical consultant in Najwat 
Najem Block, in Qatar. The drilling disclosed commercially unviable discovery of oil and 
the block had to be relinquished resulting in unfruitful expenditure of  ` 369.45 crore.  
Evaluation of Investment opportunities and formation of 
Joint Ventures
1
 based on the records available in India
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
v Report No. 28 of 2010-11EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

vi Report No. 28 of 2010-11EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
The investment risk could have been mitigated at the initial stage itself if the Company 
had followed international best practices as laid down in  the standard guidelines of 
Petroleum Resources Management System which dwells upon a prudent and consistent 
approach to reserve estimation and evaluation of developed projects. 
n In case of a producing asset acquired by the Company in Russian Federation (Imperial 
Energy Corporation Plc.) at a cost of  ` 10,320 crore, the Company has been able to 
achieve production of only 15,803 barrels of oil per day (bopd) as against the envisaged 
production level of 35,000 bopd and has therefore, incurred a loss of  ` 1182.14 crore 
during 15 months from January 2009 to March 2010.
n In case of a joint venture in Nigeria, the Company could not secure its interests against 
the violation of local law by the JV partner which had a financial implication of  ` 77.63 
crore and in yet another case, it decided to appraise the block by itself without formation 
of a JV and exposed itself to an avoidable risk.
n The Joint Venture agreements contained provisions for partners audit in all the cases. 
However, out of 29 E&P assets which were under JV arrangement, the Company 
exercised partner's audit rights available to it in 11 JVs after an average delay of one to 
three years. This resulted in irregularities not being noticed in time and consequently 
impacted timely corrective action.
n The internal audit system of the Company needs to be strengthened in view of the 
Company's presence in 16 countries in varied political environments and diverse array of 
portfolio, to provide assurance to the stakeholders.
n The Company should formulate a policy and prepare standard guidelines in line with 
practices of Petroleum Resources Management System for evaluation of investment 
opportunities for acquisition of producing, discovered and exploration assets so as to 
mitigate the risks.
n The Company should frame a policy and prepare guidelines for formation of Joint 
Ventures so as to mitigate the risk, leverage the combined financial strength and share 
experience of the Joint Venture partner.
n As Exploration and Production business is high risk and capital intensive, there is an 
urgent requirement for the Company to strengthen its internal control system including 
its internal audit and ensure a strong monitoring mechanism with multi level controls for 
financial and operational activities. Also, the Company should put in place timely audit 
arrangements for audit of the JV   partners.
Internal Control
Recommendations:

Introduction
Chapter
1

NGC Videsh Limited (Company) was renamed on 15th June 1989 from the erstwhile 
OHydrocarbons India Private Limited, which was incorporated on 5th March, 1965 as a wholly-
owned subsidiary of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC). The Company is the 
international arm of ONGC and is engaged in prospecting, acquisition, exploration, development 
and production of oil and gas acreages abroad with its operations spanning in Commonwealth of 
Independent States (CIS), Far East, Middle East, Africa and Latin America. The Company has 
incorporated/acquired four overseas wholly owned subsidiaries (ONGC Nile Ganga B.V., ONGC 
Narmada Limited, ONGC Amazon Alaknanda Limited and Jarpeno Limited) and one JV Company 
(ONGC Mittal Energy Limited) for acquiring stake in various blocks at producing, exploration and 
development stages. The Company had acquired 45 exploration and production (E&P) assets up to 
March 2010 (details in Annexure) as detailed below: 
Out of 45 assets as above, 14 were producing, developing/discovered assets, 23 assets were under 
exploration and remaining eight had been abandoned by the Company up to March 2010 due to 
non-discovery of hydrocarbons. Producing and developed assets of the Company had proven 
hydrocarbon reserves of 185.995 Million Metric Tonne Oil Equivalent (MMTOE). 
The affairs of the Company as of March 2010 were being managed by a Board of Directors consisting 
of 13 Directors including four functional directors, two Government Nominee Directors and seven 
part time directors who are whole time directors on the Board of ONGC.  The Chairman and 
Managing Director (CMD) of ONGC is also the Chairman of the Company. 
Excluding ` 850.81 crore on account of Farsi Project and Sudan Pipeline project. These projects are not covered in the Performance audit 
report because these are service contract and non-E&P project respectively.
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
3 Report No. 28 of 2010-11INTRODUCTION
IntroductionChapter 1
Direct Holding 100 per cent
Direct Holding 100 per cent through overseas Subsidiary
Direct Holding through Un-incorporated JV
Incorporated JV through Subsidiary Company 
Un-Incorporated JV through Subsidiary Company
Un-Incorporated JV through Subsidiary Company of Joint Venture Company
Abandoned Assets (including 3 Direct Holding 100 per cent)
10
3
13
3
6
2
8
968.78
11,342.76
22,667.06
5,175.73
10,703.36
568.04
1,066.17
52491.9045 1

2004-05
2004-05
2005-06
2005-06
2006-07
2006-07
2007-08
2007-08
2008-09
Production of Crude (including Condensate) and
Gas in Million metric tonne of Oil Equivalent
2008-09
2009-10
2009-10
6.513
14894
4004
2.357
CAGR 12.42%
CAGR 26.06%
Turnover
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
4 Report No. 28 of 2010-11INTRODUCTION
The growth in production, turnover and profit over past six years ending 2009-10 is depicted in the 
graphs given below. The production increased at Cumulative Average Growth Rate (CAGR) of 12.42 
per cent while the corresponding rise in CAGR in the turnover was 26.06 per cent indicating a rise in 
price line in addition to production.
The Company acquired 36 assets having an investment of ` 6,206.83 crore at exploration stage and 
achieved success in only five projects (only one project is producing and remaining four are still 
under development) where it was the non-operator. Eight projects with a cost of ` 1,066.17 crore 
had to be abandoned and remaining 23 projects were still in the process of exploration. Thus, as a 
sole operator, the Company has not achieved any success so far and needs to improve its core 
competence in the evaluation of investment opportunities.
* 1BCM Gas = 1 MMTOE
** excluding construction contract revenue and transportation & other services.

Audit Framework
Chapter
2

he performance audit of joint venture operations of the Company was taken up for the first 
Ttime because since incorporation in 1965 to March 2004, the Company had acquired only eight 
Exploration and Producing (E&P) assets and its turnover was just ` 3,245 crore in 2003-04. However, 
during the period 2004-10, a total of 37 new E&P assets were acquired by the Company. Also, out of 
eight assets abandoned by the Company since incorporation, seven assets were abandoned during 
this period due to non discovery of hydrocarbons and after incurring an expenditure of ` 997.66 
crore.
Audit reviewed the Company's transactions, on the basis of records available in India, relating to 
acquisition, exploration, development and production of oil and gas fields abroad through Joint 
Ventures (JVs) and through its subsidiary or JV Companies for the period from 2004-05 to 2009-10 
and examined the adequacy of the systems for due diligence, formation of joint ventures and 
internal controls in respect of these overseas Exploration and Producing (E&P) assets.
The Performance audit was  conducted  to assess: 
The adequacy of due diligence process for identification, appraisal and evaluation of 
investment opportunities in the E&P assets;
The rationale behind formation of JVs and adequacy and reasonableness of terms and 
conditions of Joint Operating Agreement (JOA) and Exploration and Production Sharing 
Agreement (EPSA)/Production Sharing Contract (PSC) governing JV operations to 
safeguard financial interests of the Company; and
The adequacy of internal control and internal audit arrangement to provide a reasonable 
assurance to the stakeholders on the investment.
n
n
n
The following audit criteria were used;
policies and guidelines of the Company and the Government of India for acquisition of 
E&P assets; 
legal provisions, rules and regulations of the host countries; 
terms and conditions of the contracts/agreements; and
international best practices as per the standard guidelines of Petroleum Resources 
Management System.
Audit examined the records relating to acquisition of the blocks, processing and interpretation of 
seismic data and reserve estimation along with Agenda & Board Minutes, opinions of technical, 
legal and financial consultants, JOA, EPSA/PSC and records available at Corporate Office of the 
n
n
n
n
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
7 Report No. 28 of 2010-11AUDIT FRAMEWORK
Audit Framework
Scope of Audit
Audit objectives
Audit criteria and methodology
Chapter 2
2.1
2.2
2.3

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
8 Report No. 28 of 2010-11AUDIT FRAMEWORK
Company. Subsequently, it was felt that the audit findings were required to be benchmarked with 
the standard practices followed by other E&P companies for acquisition of stakes in E&P blocks. 
Accordingly, two technical experts viz. Shri Y.B.Sinha, Ex-Director (Exploration), ONGC Ltd. and Shri 
P.K. Chandra, Former Vice Chairman and Advisor to ONGC Ltd were engaged who provided their 
expert opinion on the technical issues of this review. Their views have been appropriately 
incorporated in the performance audit report. After receipt of responses from the Ministry, a 
meeting was held on 24th November 2010 with the Ministry and Management and further 
clarifications and comments made by them during this interaction were also considered while 
finalizing this report.
A sample of 20 out of 45 E&P assets were taken up in Audit on Judgmental sample basis, classifying 
E&P assets into Producing, Developing, Exploration and Abandoned categories up to March 2010 as 
detailed below: 
Representative samples of the blocks were selected based on investment and risk factors involved. 
It was not possible to go for statistical sampling, as the risks involved between purchase of an 
exploration asset, a developing asset and a producing asset varied from very high to extremely low 
respectively.
In conclusion, the audit covered more than 50 per cent of the investment in producing, developing, 
exploration and abandoned E&P assets because producing and developing E&P assets led to 
maximum investment, while exploration assets which had a potential of an extremely high return 
on investment led to minimum expenditure and so did abandoned assets. 
Audit is appreciative of the co-operation received from the Management of the Company with 
regard to providing information, records, clarifications, and for arranging discussions with the 
concerned officers from time to time.
Acknowledgement
Audit findings
2.4
2.5
Audit findings are  discussed in three Chapters as detailed below:
Chapter 3 : flags due diligence processes  relating to evaluation of Investment 
Opportunities
Chapter 4 :  discusses   issues while  forming   Joint Ventures
Chapter 5 :  highlights inadequacies in the  Internal Control System
n
n
n
Producing,
Developing/Discovered
14 749,195.79 44,196.06 89.84
Exploration 23 72,229.94 1,242.81 55.73
Abandoned 8 61,066.17 978.88 91.81
Total 45 2052,491.90 46,417.75 88.43

Evaluation of 
Investment Opportunities 
Chapter
3

he Company got investment opportunities through international bidding rounds invited by the 
Thost countries for exploration and production (E&P) activities, offers for farm out of 
participation interest from the existing consortium partners of a Block, information from 
empanelled Merchant Bankers/Consultants of the Company and diplomatic and other channels. 
The Company, for acquisition of E&P assets, does not have a defined/documented policy. However, 
it constituted an Internal Multi Disciplinary team to evaluate the opportunities available to it and 
simultaneously engaged Legal, Technical and Financial consultants. The Multi Disciplinary team's 
advice along with the findings of the consultants is presented to the Management of the Company 
for decision making and approval by the Board for bidding in respect of those E&P assets which 
prima facie appeared viable to the Company. In case, the investment amount exceeded the 
financial competence of the Company i.e. USD 75 Million or ` 300 crore whichever is less, the 
proposal is forwarded for approval of Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECS) and Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). 
The Ministry stated (October 2010) that there was neither a need nor was it considered desirable to 
have a defined procedure/policy for acquisition of oil and gas opportunities as each opportunity 
was a unique case. 
The reply is not tenable as a documented policy will define the basic parameters around which the 
due diligence process could be carried out to appropriately mitigate the risk , as E&P business is 
capital intensive with uncertain returns.
Audit reviewed evaluation of investment opportunities in 20 out of 45 E&P assets. Certain 
inadequacies were noticed in evaluation of seven investment opportunities as discussed below. 
The Company acquired (May 2004) Block-5 B, Sudan with 23.5 per cent participation interest at USD 
24.06 million (` 109.44 crore) with “carry over finance” of 3.72 per cent participation interest of 
Sudapet (National oil Company of Sudan), as per sale/purchase condition, from OMV 
Aktiengesellschaft, Austria. Audit noticed that pre-acquisition technical study by the consultants - 
Gaffney, Cline & Associates (GCA), brought out that the assessed reserve in the block was based on 
limited data made available by the seller, without permission to copy data from the data room, 
limited available time (only two days) for review of data; and also pointed out the prevalent security 
problems in the designated Block area. Despite these reservations expressed by the consultant, the 
Company acquired this risky asset without revalidating the data.
Audit observed that the consortium upto the year 2006, could not implement the scheduled 
seismic and drilling plan for want of accessibility to the area and restrictions by the local authorities. 
Non-implementation of Minimum Work Commitment (MWC) led to additional security charges, 
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
11
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Evaluation of 
Investment Opportunities 
Evaluation Process 
Inadequate technical study and non-revalidation of data
Chapter 3
3.1
3.2

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
12
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
idle hiring charges for drilling rig, other incidental and operational charges after acquisition of the 
block. 
GCA had also prioritized three prospects for drilling namely; Wan Machar, Barada-I and Kasafa-I 
with “un-risked speculative recovery” potential of 1267.2 Metric Million Stock Tank Barrel 
(MMstb), 317.1 MMstb and 26.4 MMstb respectively. The operator drilled only one prioritized 
swamp “Wan Machar” in addition to two wells (Munny Deng and Nyal) in non- prioritized swamp 
during 2008. The drilling of two prioritized swamp wells was dropped due to less prospectivity of 
reserves in Kasafa-I and allotment of Barada-I to third party by the local authorities. The three wells 
drilled brought no hydrocarbon discovery, and thus forced the Company to relinquish the block (19 
February 2009) after incurring an expenditure of USD 89.5 Million equivalent to ` 423.84 crore.
The Management stated (January 2010) that due diligence has to be carried out with limitation of 
time and on the basis of available data and seeking different opinions is neither feasible nor 
desirable as there is no specific technology which can predict availability of hydrocarbons at 
particular locations except by drilling. Further, the security risks of the Block were known at the time 
of acquisition and this was factored in while negotiating the acquisition price. 
The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management.
We do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as reasons for overlooking significant 
reservations expressed by the consultant were not available on record. Considering the limitation 
of time and non availability of technical data, as the Company was not in a position to conduct due 
diligence, it should not have gone ahead in acquiring this asset which caused high risk. 
Our technical expert opined that the Company's reply that security risk in the stock was known at 
the time of acquisition and was duly factored in;  was not corroborated in view of  increase in cost 
from USD 34 million to USD 89.5 million which showed lack of understanding of ground realities and 
project planning. The prospects are prioritized not by only un-risked resources but with due 
consideration of chance of success, i.e., risked resources.  If Barada area had been allotted to third 
party by local authorities in violation of PSC and it had un-risked resources higher than Munny Deng 
and Nyal; then the Company should have asked for reduction in work commitment. This would have 
substantially reduced the Company's risk and money outgo.    
Daewoo International Corporation (DIC) offered 20:10:10 farm-out participation interest (July 
2008) out of its 100 per cent stake in Block AD7, Myanmar to its JV partners, i.e., the Company, 
KOGAS (Korean Gas Corporation) and GAIL respectively. Company's technical team of geoscientists 
assessed (11 August 2008) potential reserves of 6.5 Trillion Cubic Feet (TCF) but on the other hand 
its Geologist & Geophysicists (G&G) Group opined (18 August 2008) that sands, considered for 
reserve estimates, had shaled out in major part of A1/A3 block as a result of which established pools 
were not expected to be present and reserves evaluated by the technical team were based on 
untested and un-established sand and on thin study.
However, the Company approved (September 2008) acquisition of 20 per cent participation 
interest  by ignoring the opinion of G&G Group, with investment up to USD 20.8 million (` 93.6 
crore) including “past cost” under Minimum Work Commitment (MWC) with an exploration period 
of six years.
Incorrect analysis and interpretation of data 3.3

The operator drilled two exploratory wells under MWC and had given low priority to the third 
prospect based on the discouraging results of the drilled wells and the low reserve estimates of the 
third prospect. However, the Company before relinquishing the block, got seismic data and drilling 
results of two wells re-examined from its G&G Group, who reconfirmed its earlier recommendation 
that block did not seem attractive from the point of view of hydrocarbon discovery. The Company 
decided (January 2009) not to enter into the next exploration phase and relinquished the block 
after incurring an expenditure of US$ 15.26 million (equivalent to ` 74.99 crore).
The Management stated (January 2010) that G&G team opined that G3, G5 and G6 sands which 
were gas bearing in the Blocks A1 and A3 were not seen in Block AD7. The G7 Sand which was the 
target in Block AD7 was not established and not tested in that area. According to G&G team, the 
technical evaluation team had taken 233 square km area and 20 metre thickness of reservoir for 
computation of reserves, which prima-facie appeared to be a maximum reserve case. Thus, there 
was no contradiction in views of G&G Group and Technical team. 
The Ministry added (October 2010) that the block was taken with the knowledge that the gas 
bearing pools in A1 and A3 sands were not extending to AD7 and primarily required for establishing 
a potential new pool in AD7.
We do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as G&G Group had clearly informed in 
August 2008 that established pools of gas were not expected to be present. Further, our technical 
expert also opined that G3, G5 and G6 sands which were gas bearing in Blocks A1 and A3 were not 
extending to AD7 Block; hence the risk in hydrocarbon prospectivity of the Block in view of only 
single stratigraphic G7 play was very high. Further, he opined that the observations of G&G group 
contradicted the Technical Group and were not considered in the subsequent approval process.
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
13
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
The technical team of the Company after visiting data room of the Operator Turkish Petroleum 
Overseas Company (TPOC) found both blocks, NC-188 and NC-189 in Libya, attractive with higher 
discovery and larger potential reserves in NC-188 as compared to NC-189 with presence of a good 
number of leads and recommended further detailing thereof.
The Company without further detailing or revalidation of team's report from an independent 
consultant approved (January 2002) acquisition of 49 per cent participation interest in the above 
assets and entered into farm-in agreement with TPOC (22 August 2002) on payment (April 2003) of 
USD 0.15 million for study expenses and USD 3.5 million towards 49 per cent of past cost. The 
operator after drilling two wells during November 2003 to June 2004 in Block NC-188 found it 
bearing high exploration risks with only small limited reserve structures and therefore, decided to 
relinquish it. The in-house technical team of the Company re-evaluated the data and opined (March 
2008)  that the Block did not have any significant left over potential and recommended no further 
activity.  The Company decided (May 2008) to relinquish its 49 per cent participation interest in NC-
188 after incurring total expenditure of ` 68.51 crore on survey, drilling and other miscellaneous 
activities, which could have been avoided had the recommendation of the technical team been 
revalidated before acquiring the block.
The Ministry stated (October 2010) that the team that visited Ankara in October 2001 had made 
preliminary evaluations and recommended further detailing for each block. However, another 
team that visited Ankara in January 2002 found that several leads identified earlier had been 
confirmed as prospects and did not recommend further detailing. 
Inadequate technical evaluation of Block in Libya3.4

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
14
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
We do not agree with the Ministry's viewpoint as the Company did not engage any technical 
consultant to validate the prospects of the project assessed by the in-house team. Our technical 
expert also agreed with Audit and opined that the decision of the Management to go for Block NC-
188 without further detailing, in view of no activity since 1993, was not a prudent decision. 
The Company received (July 2006) farm in offer for 30 per cent participation interest in Blocks 11 
and 12, Offshore, Turkmenistan from Tristone Capital, advisor to Maersk Oil (MO). At the time of 
offer the consortium (Maersk Oil & Wintershall) provided seismic data acquired by it from Western 
Geco in 2003 and drilling report of the first well (Garadashlyk-I) which was abandoned without 
testing in 2006 due to mechanical problems. The in-house team of the Company analyzed (August 
2006) the seismic data & the information of the region as provided by the operator and felt 
sufficient hydrocarbon had migrated to the Garadashlyk prospect and also identified two large 
scale prospects with recoverable reserves of 186 Million barrel (MMb) of oil and recommended 
that the proposal was worth pursuing.
Audit noticed that the Company instead of following its prescribed procedure for evaluation of this 
investment opportunity through technical, legal and financial consultants,   got the same evaluated 
by its in-house team which studied only old data and drilling report of first well which was 
abandoned without testing in respect of which no test report was available. 
Had the Company done due diligence, the absence or presence of basic elements like charge, seal 
and reservoir in E&P assets, which are necessary for availability of viable reserves of hydrocarbons 
in a particular region or block could have been ascertained well in advance. However, the Company 
could find the absence of these basic elements only after drilling of the second prospect i.e. Darta 
Deniz-1 well. 
The Management stated (January 2010) that detailed independent techno-economic analysis of 
the identified prospects based on the understanding of the prospectivity of Blocks 11 and 12 by the 
Company's technical team was carried out, and the latest technical data acquired by the seller was 
subsequently  studied during due diligence by the Company's technical team. 
The Ministry added (October 2010) that the technical team had discussed the hydrocarbon 
potential based on the parameters like reservoir quality, trap integrity, source and migration of 
hydrocarbon into the trap and prolific hydrocarbon presence towards south of the Block 11 and 12 
was a valid indication that the block was within known possible hydrocarbon province. Since the 
OVL team was technically sound, the necessity to hire consultants was not felt.
We do not agree with the Management/Ministry's viewpoint as possible prospects available in 
Garadashlyk structure could not be tested in the abandoned well. The above facts revealed that the 
decision to acquire 30 per cent stake in 2006 based on estimated 186 MMb of oil recoverable 
reserves of the seller, was done without associating technical, legal and financial consultants for 
evaluation of an investment opportunity. Further, this was also based on old seismic data of 2003 
and by relying only on drilling report of the first well which was abandoned without testing;  
thereby rendering the entire expenditure of USD 14.96 million (` 67.32 crore) unfruitful.
Our technical expert, while agreeing with the audit observation felt that basic elements like 
presence of charge, seal and reservoir were required to be necessarily present in any block but in 
this case, none of the three elements were present and hence,  due diligence itself was defective.
Unfruitful expenditure due to improper evaluation of 
reserve estimates
3.5

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
15
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
The Company acquired 100 per cent participation interest through signing Appraisal, Development 
and Production Sharing Agreement (Agreement) (2005) with Qatar Government represented by 
Qatar Petroleum for Najwat Najem Block, (NN) Qatar which permitted only extraction of Crude Oil 
in case of discovery from the designated block and in case gas or any other mineral was discovered, 
access to that was contractually not allowed to the Company. Audit noticed that at the time of 
signing the agreement, the Company estimated volume of Original Oil in Place (OOIP) at 187.72 
million metric barrel of oil equivalent (MMBO) (Proved Oil-98.159 MMBO + Possible Oil-89.561 
MMBO). The estimation of  Oil reserves was solely based on maps and data provided by Qatar 
Petroleum without revalidation of Company's estimated reserves from an independent technical 
consultant especially when the Company was aware that it does not have contractual right on gas, if 
any, discovered. 
The Company on drilling discovered that two layers were bearing non-producible oil to the tune of 
17.68 MMBO and 21.31 MMBO, one layer had only 14.6 MMBO oil as proved, out of that only 2.24 
MMBO was recoverable, one was water bearing and another three layers were gas bearing on 
which contractually the Company did not have any right. Moreover, actual recoverable crude oil 
discovery of 2.24 MMBO as compared to its estimated OOIP of 187.72 MMBO was significantly low. 
As a result of commercially unviable discovery of oil and no contractual right on the gas, the block 
was relinquished (May 2008) rendering entire expenditure of ` 369.45 crore (USD 82.10 million @  
` 45/USD) infructuous, which could have been avoided had the Company preferred revalidation of 
the data for vetting of its estimated reserves from an independent technical consultant rather than 
solely relying on the maps and data provided by the Qatar Petroleum.
The Management stated (January 2010) that estimated 187.72 MMBO OIIP (Oil Initially in Place) 
(Proved Oil -98.159 MMBO + Possible Oil -89.561 MMBO) based on the data made available by 
Qatar Petroleum and the system used for estimation of reserves was as per industry standard and 
practice. One cannot specify beforehand as to how much deviation are permitted. 
The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management.
We do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as reserves estimation by the 
Company were solely based on maps and data provided by Qatar Petroleum and despite knowing 
that the deviation can not be specified, the Management did not go for revalidation of data from 
independent technical consultant. Further, internationally accepted Petroleum Resources 
Management System also indicates that the resource evaluation process consists of identifying a 
project associated with petroleum accumulation(s), estimation of  the quantities of Petroleum 
Initially-in-Place, estimating that portion of those in-place quantities that can be recovered by each 
project; while  the Company estimated only reserves of oil  and not gas and that too , exclusively 
based on maps and data provided by Qatar Petroleum. 
Our technical expert opined that analysis estimated by the Company on 2D data indicated OIIP of 
the order of 188 MMBO out of which 98 MMBO was placed in proved category which got reduced to 
less than 15 MMBO on drilling of appraisal well. Such a situation is not expected in standard 
industry practice. Risk in final analysis could have been mitigated in the initial stage itself if standard 
definitions and guidelines of Petroleum Resource Management System had been practiced by the 
Company. 
Wasteful expenditure 3.6

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
16
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
The Company acquired (February 2007) 20 per cent Participating Interest (PI) from ENI (Operator), 
who was holding 60 per cent PI in Block “Mer Tres Profonde Node” (MTPN) in Congo by swapping 
with ONGC's 34 per cent PI in Block MN-DWN – 2002/1 in India based on equitable technical worth 
and not governed by financial worth.
At the time of swapping, the Block was in 3rd phase of exploration with commitment of one well. Till 
the end of phase-II the consortium drilled two wells i.e. HTNM-I, and ZULU MARINE-I but both were 
plugged and abandoned due to non-discovery of hydrocarbons. 
Audit noticed that in-house team while evaluating the investment opportunity mentioned in their 
report that Operator had provided 2D & 3D seismic data only for view purpose, and the parameters 
considered by them for volumetrics and estimated volumes calculated were based on earlier (2002) 
interpretation. With this limitation the team had estimated the total reserve of 634.75 MMb for the 
block as estimated by the operator in respect of five prioritized prospects i.e. Hiti East, Hiti Central, 
Nkasu, Ntangu and Tehitebi.
Despite these reservations expressed by the in-house team as well as disappointing results of 
earlier drilled two wells, the Company acquired this risky asset without revalidating the data, 
deviated from its prescribed procedure for evaluation of investment opportunity through 
technical, legal and financial consultants.
Further, it was observed that after revalidation of 3D data, operator had replaced the earlier 
prioritized five prospects as mentioned above with another prospect i.e. HVAM-1 and estimated 
total reserve of 322.8 MBOE in 5 layers in view of the discouraging results of already prioritized 
prospects. However, on drilling of HVAM-I prospect operator discovered only a reserve of 20.22 
MBOE in one layer. The operator also could not achieve the targeted depth of 5024 meters due to 
operational problem as drilling was stopped at a target depth of 4,516 meters. Therefore, the 
potential of the Oligocene section of the Paloukou Formation which was a secondary exploration 
target was not explored. 
As a result of commercially unviable discovery of oil, the block was relinquished (December 2009), 
thereby  rendering the entire expenditure of USD 11.59 million equivalent to ` 67.78 crore by the 
Company and USD 8.65 Million equivalent to ` 36.11 crore by ONGC (USD 8.65 million @ ` 45/USD) 
infructuous, which could have been avoided, had the Company preferred revalidation of the data 
from an independent technical consultant rather than solely relying on the estimated reserve as 
provided by the operator.
Management stated (Dec. 2010) that the operator is the custodian of all data generated in a block 
and in any consortium both partners and host government rely on data/information generated by 
operator. Further, being a swap deal, the company decided to carry out internal technical 
evaluations without appointing a third party consultant and the company engages technical, 
financial and legal consultants for due diligence of only producing/discovered assets of significant 
value. As the investment in this exploration acreage is comparatively lower in comparison to 
discovered or producing assets, it was considered adequate to rely on in house assessment. 
We do not agree with the Management's viewpoint as reserve estimation by the Company was 
solely based on data provided by the operator, which was only for viewing purposes while the latest 
data was also not provided for evaluation. Further, despite knowing the discouraging results of two 
drilled wells in the block, the Company relied on the old data provided by the operator without 
revalidation from outside consultants. The fact  that technical, legal and financial consultants are 
Inadequate technical study and non-revalidation of data 3.7

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
17
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
engaged  by the company for due diligence of only producing/discovered assets of significant value 
and not for exploration blocks, is not correct as the Company had engaged outside consultants for 
evaluation of many of its previous exploration blocks.
The technical expert while confirming the audit observation opined that swap deal done by the 
Company was on the basis of visual assessment of seismic data and the calculations were based on 
old 2002 data, while the deal took place only in 2007. The Company's in-house assessment was 
based primarily on the operators approach instead of going through third party consultation. 
Further, the Company ought to have a differential approach for a totally unexplored area vis-a-vis 
areas already having unfruitful results.
Mansarovar Energy Columbia Limited (MECL), a 50:50 JVC with Sinopec (National Oil Company of 
China) was formed by the Company to acquire E&P assets of Omimex de Columbia in Columbia for 
USD 875 million, of which OVL's share was USD 437.5 million. 
Before acquisition, Denton Wilde and Sapte, the consultant appointed by the Company for due 
diligence pointed out that the loss of Ecopetrol (National Oil Company of Columbia) as a sole buyer 
of the produce of Omimex field might be detrimental to field production; the seller did not have any 
ownership right over a part of real estate as the complete title including rights and obligations 
attached with the assets transferred from the erstwhile owner had not been passed to them.
Despite being aware of these points of caution expressed by the consultant, the Company went 
ahead with the acquisition but failed to insert an appropriate clause in agreement for safeguarding 
its interest in the event of non-lifting of crude oil by Ecopetrol in view of Ecopetrol being a single 
buyer of the entire production from the Omimex field. 
In the absence of appropriate clause in the agreement, MECL had to defer production of 2,10,000 
barrels of crude oil (Company's share was 1,05,000 barrels being 50 per cent) during 2009 due to 
non-lifting of crude oil by Ecopetrol on account of non-functioning of its refinery. Ecopetrol also 
expressed its inability to lift the entire quantity of heavy crude oil from the Omimex field in 2010.  
The Management stated (January 2010) that the observations of due dilligence report as brought 
out, had never caused any operational problem in the field and the Company did not face any 
production restriction due to the same. 
The Ministry stated (October 2010) that daily production of the field was affected due to an 
accident in the refinery, restrictions on the lifting of the product from the Ecopetrol refinery due to 
fall in the water level of the river. 
We do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as the Company did not safeguard its 
interests despite a caution from the consultant that any loss of Ecopetrol Refinery as a buyer of the 
field production would be a significant detriment to the Company. 
Our technical expert felt that the Company had never faced any operational problem in the field nor 
faced any production restriction but the same does not rule out the possibility. Production due to 
non lifting of crude by Ecopetrol was a loss to the Company on account of non/delayed realisation of 
revenue. 
Deferment of production due to overlooking of due 
diligence during evaluation
3.8

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
18
Report No. 28 of 2010-11EVALUATION OF INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES
In conclusion, certain inadequacies were noticed in due 
diligence process for evaluation of investment opportunities by 
the Company. As a result, the Company incurred loss of ` 1108 
crore. These inadequacies could be attributed to absence of 
documented policy/procedures for evaluation of investment 
opportunities and non compliance of basic tenets of the standard 
guidelines and practices of Petroleum Resources Management 
System for mitigating the risks.
Recommendation # 1
The Company should formulate a policy and prepare standard guidelines in line with 
practices of Petroleum Resources Management System for evaluation of investment 
opportunities for acquisition of producing, discovered and exploration assets so as to 
mitigate the risks.

Formation of Joint Ventures
Chapter
4

lobally Joint Ventures are formed with the core intention of risk and experience sharing with 
Gjoint ventures (JV) partners and the mode of formation varies strategically from country to 
country depending on the law of the land. Internationally, Incorporated/ Unincorporated Joint 
Ventures/Subsidiaries are created based on host country's statutory requirements; their 
petroleum laws; Production Sharing Contracts. Additionally, the structure for holding a 
participation interest in a particular asset is also a function of tax laws wherein the companies strive 
to determine the best structure for avoidance of double taxation considering Bilateral Investment 
Protection Agreements, Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements.
As exploration and production (E&P) business is high risk and capital intensive, so the Company also 
managed it either through incorporated or unincorporated JV to mitigate the risk, leverage the 
combined financial strength and share experience of the JV partner. JVs are also entered into for 
getting access to the resources of the JV partners which could be rigs, logistics, existing contracts, 
etc. 
Every joint venture operation is always governed through a joint operating agreement (JOA) and a 
unanimous decision by the JV partners, but in E&P business the operator has ultimate control on 
each activity of the operation and other partners act as only non-operators and participate only in 
the Technical, Operational, Administrative and Financial meetings for decision making. Operator 
also has the authority to take the decisions on day-to-day activities and take assistance from its 
affiliated companies. E&P JVs are a jointly controlled operation but the role of other partners being 
passive is fraught with the risk of unilateral decisions being made for operating activities without 
the unanimous consent of the JV partners. Also other risks are violation of mandatory regulations of 
the regulator by the JV partner entailing unreasonable financial burden on the JV partners, non-
compliance of the terms and conditions of JOA, etc. 
The Company formed incorporated or unincorporated Joint Ventures in 29 E&P assets while the 
remaining assets remained wholly owned by the Company. Review also revealed that the Company 
had no specific policy detailing the considerations for extent of acquisition of participation interest 
in offered E&P assets. For farming-in and faming-out of participation interest, the Company was 
solely dependent on either participation interest offered to it or its own perception of risk and 
reward.
Out of 45 E&P assets, Audit reviewed 15 joint ventures and five owned E&P assets involving an 
investment of  ` 46,417.75 crore. Inadequacies noticed in three are discussed below. 
The Company acquired (January 2009) Imperial Energy Corporation Plc, (IEC) an Exploration and 
Production Company, which was operating in Tomskh region of Russian Federation through its 
subsidiary Jarpeno Limited, Cyprus, at a cost of USD 2.12 billion (Rs 10,320 crore) with CCEA 
approval (August 2008) subject to stipulation that the IRR should be more than 10 per cent and an 
option to farm out a part of its stake to a Russian firm.
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
21
Report No. 28 of 2010-11FORMATION OF JOINT VENTURES
Introduction
Un-realistic estimation of reserves/production
Formation of
Joint VenturesChapter 4
4.1
4.2

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
22
Report No. 28 of 2010-11FORMATION OF JOINT VENTURES
Before acquisition, the technical consultant and the Company had estimated the 2P reserves of IEL 
at 790 MMBOE and 826 MMBOE respectively. With these estimates of reserves and long term 
crude price at USD 85/bbl, the Company assessed the project as viable with the average daily rate of 
production of 35,000 barrel oil per day (bopd) for 2009 and thereafter , to enhance  the production 
upto 80,000 bopd by 2011 .
During review, it was observed that at the time of reassessment of the viability of the project due to 
fall in crude price, the actual daily rate of production for 2008 as on 20th October 2008 was only 
about 5,634 bopd as against the projected production of 11,000 bopd (which was what the Board 
was informed in April 2008 at the time of appraisal). Further , the actual average production during 
2009 and 2010 (till August) was 9067 bopd and 14,724 bopd respectively against the projected 
production of 35,000 bopd, due to tight reserve position and delay in drilling the wells as envisaged 
even after 18 months of its acquisition. The Company also did not exercise the option of farming out 
a part of its stake to a local partner to leverage their combined financial strength and shared 
experience of the JV partner. This resulted in financial loss to the Company as discussed below. 
Consequent to low production, the Company could not achieve IRR of 10 per cent and incurred 
losses of USD 37.892 million (Rs.174.15 crore @ Rs 45.983/USD) & USD 212.464 million (Rs 1007.99 
crore @ Rs 47.443/USD) for the years 2008-09 & 2009-10 respectively. Besides, due to non-
achievement of targeted production, the Company also suffered a production loss of about 10.8 
million barrel. Moreover, the Company had to reduce the proven reserve size of the asset during 
2009-10 by 1.527 Million Metric Tonne (MMT) indicating the inflated size of reserves as estimated 
by the Company at the time of its acquisition. The Company did not address the reservations 
expressed in 2007 by Russian Resources Ministry regarding inflated reserve position declared by 
IEC, at the time of evaluation of investment opportunity in 2008. 
Thus, un-realistic estimation of reserves/production rate resulted in a huge loss of 
` 1182.14 crore during the period 2008-09 (January to March' 09) to 2009-10 which could have 
been mitigated if the Company had farmed out a part of its stake to a local firm.
Management replied (Dec. 2010) that due to discouraging and very different drilling results of 28 
wells in three fields in 2008 & 2009; production could not be achieved as envisaged at the time of 
acquisition. As a result of poor production, project cash flows were impacted and losses were 
incurred. Therefore, the Company is carrying out various studies to identify the problem which 
resulted in poor performance of the 28 drilled wells and to find solution. Unless these studies give 
some conclusive results, a realistic production profile can not be generated and hence an economic 
analysis can not be carried out to comment on a likely IRR. Further, management replied that there 
was no reason to doubt the correctness of reserves data used by OVL and reported to the 
Government as the reserves were calculated by companies of international repute. 
Management's reply is not tenable as the subsequent drilling results and reduction of proved 
reserve size by 1.527 MMT during 2009-10 raises doubt about the reserve size of the IEC and 
economic viability of the take over. The fact that the Company even now is not in a position to 
generate a realistic production profile and bring out an economic analysis confirms that all the 
problems associated with these fields were not properly assessed at the time of evaluation of 
opportunity which led to poor production performance and consequent losses. Investment risk in 
the final analysis could have been mitigated in the initial stage itself by farming out a part of its stake 
and in view of discouraging results now, it will be difficult for the Company to farm out a part of its 
stake to a local firm. Thus,   not creating a joint venture by farming out a part of its stake has worked 
to the detriment of the Company's interests here and left it to bear a loss of 
` 1182.14 crore during 2008-09 to 2009-10 and; also the poor performance of the wells drilled 

during 2008-09 has left the Company in a position of unlikely generation of a realistic production 
profile and IRR.
The technical consultant while confirming the audit observation opined that it is a known fact that 
tight reservoir had poor productivity and also poorer recovery in comparison to a normal one. The 
prediction for production levels was highly optimistic rather than realistic. Therefore, the Company 
should have been more cautious when the seller had indicated a very rosy picture especially when 
Russian Ministry had expressed doubts about the reserves quoted by the seller.
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
23
Report No. 28 of 2010-11FORMATION OF JOINT VENTURES
ONGC Mittal Energy Limited, Cyprus (OMEL) signed an MOU (November 2005) with Nigerian 
Government with an investment commitment of US$ 6.0 billion in the downstream project and 
other strategic sectors like railways, power, road, etc. in Nigeria for participating in the forthcoming 
exploration licensing in April 2006. In terms of MOU, OMEL was awarded (June 2006) two blocks viz. 
OPL 212 (now OPL 285) and OPL 209 (now OPL-279).
Block-279 with 40 per cent participation interest was awarded to OMEL along with 60 per cent carry 
finance condition of participation interest held by Exploration and Production Limited (EMO) at 
overall financial commitment of US$ 140 Million from OMEL. The Board of the Company approved 
(June 2006) its share of investment of US$ 44.63 million as signature bonus and Minimum Work 
Commitment (MWC) in the First Exploration Phase with an understanding of likely distribution of 
37.5 per cent stake in favour of Shell and TOTAL (a French Oil Company). 
OMEL signed an agreement with EMO for acquisition of additional 20 per cent participation interest 
(24 February 2007) for consideration of US$ 50 million within seven days from the date of PSC and 
the Board of the Company had to approve (26 February 2007) the same to avoid commitment 
failure on the part of OMEL. However, the additional stake increased the financial commitment of 
the Company to US$ 96.90 million, which was beyond the financial powers of the Company i.e ` 300 
crore or US$ 75 million, whichever was less.
OMEL transferred (23 May 2007) 14.5 per cent participation interest along with proportionate carry 
finance share to TOTAL for US$ 29.07 million worked out at weighted average cost of its earlier 40 
per cent participation interest and additional 20 per cent participation interest including carry 
finance participation interest of EMO without approval of CCEA/GOI. Transfer of 14.5 per cent 
participation interest at weighted average cost instead of higher cost of additional 20 per cent 
participation interest resulted in loss of US$ 7.18 million (` 32.31 crore). Audit noticed that transfer 
of stake to TOTAL by OMEL and formation of an unincorporated JV with TOTAL was done without 
mandatory prior approval of the Nigerian National Petroleum Company (Regulator).
TOTAL was authorized to carry out Geological & Geographical (G&G) activities as it had Nigeria Deep 
water terrain expertise. TOTAL carried out G&G activities in France which resulted in violation of 
Nigerian Law and led to disallowance of an expenditure of US$ 9.87 million for cost recovery 
purposes. Similar disallowance of equivalent amount was noticed in another Block OPL 212 (now 
OPL 285) which led to overall disallowance of US$ 19.74 million of which the Company's share was 
US$ 10.07 million equivalent to ` 45.32 crore @ ` 45/US$. Ultimately OMEL had to establish its own 
G&G centre at Lagos, Nigeria. 
The Management stated (January 2010) that the Board approved participation in OPL-279 
considering that the amount involved is within the approved limit as the JVC was in discussion with 
Formation of JV without prior approval resulted in 
cost rejection
4.3

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
24
Report No. 28 of 2010-11FORMATION OF JOINT VENTURES
TOTAL for farm-in of the block. The Management further stated that pro-rata share including carry 
finance was charged from TOTAL to utilize their over 40 years E&P experience in the Nigerian basins. 
The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management.
We do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as the formation of JV with TOTAL by 
transfer of part stake at lower price by ` 32.31 crore with an aim to exploit TOTAL's 40 years of 
experience in Nigerian Basin also did not fructify because TOTAL carried out G&G activities outside 
Nigeria in contravention of Nigerian Law leading to cost rejection of ` 45.32 crore by the host 
Government. Also, ultimately to avoid further cost rejection; the Company had to set up a G&G 
centre in Nigeria. The Ministry/Management's reply that the Company approved the investment 
while probable transfer of participation interest to TOTAL was in the process of discussion indicates 
that investment beyond its financial powers was approved by the Management on the ground that 
total investment net of probable transfer of part participation interest would be within its financial 
competence. 
Our technical consultant also opined that investment profile was known to the Company and 
approval of CCEA should have been obtained prior to signing of contract. Further, execution of G&G 
activities outside Nigeria in spite of TOTAL's long work experience in Nigeria brought out weak 
planning, project Management and lack of study/adherence to guidelines. Goodwill of TOTAL could 
not be equated with financial loss to the Company.  
The Company acquired 100 per cent participation interest in Najwat Najem Block, (NN) Qatar and 
estimated volume of Original Oil in Place (OOIP) at 187.72 million metric barrel of oil equivalent 
(MMBO) (Proved Oil-98.159 MMBO + Possible Oil-89.561 MMBO) and also noticed a risk of pre-
existing poor event continuity attached with its reserves estimations. 
Further, it was also noticed that the Company decided to appraise the block by itself despite 
knowing the fact that about 12-16 leading E&P international oil companies were interested in the 
Block as they had purchased bid documents in view of the potential of the field with huge reserves. 
Thus, the Company had a fair chance to mitigate the possible risk of poor event continuity attached 
with its own estimation of oil reserves through formation of a JV by transferring its part 
participation interest at a good price along with carry finance of its own share which was a prevalent 
practice in the international exploration business. 
Hence, decision of the Company to appraise the block by itself despite knowing the risk and interest 
shown by other E&P international oil companies, was not prudent. This not only deprived the 
Company of mitigating the impact of risk known to it, leveraging the combined financial strength 
and sharing experience of the JV partners but also resulted in financial loss as discussed in para 3.6 
(Supra).
The Management stated (January 2010) that the decision to share the risk or reward in respect of 
any project is always based on Geo-scientific studies and was project specific. Najwat Najem, Qatar 
Project was a discovered field, the Company decided to appraise the project itself and if found 
commercial to develop the same. 
The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the reply of the Management.
Avoidable exposure to risk due to non-forming of JV4.4

We do not agree with the Ministry/Management's viewpoint as risk sharing and experience sharing 
was more a matter of prudent financial management, particularly in projects involving high 
exploration risk and huge capital investment. The Company being aware of pre-existing poor event 
continuity should have sold out a part of its risk at a good price along with carry finance as it was a 
discovered field and could have minimized its losses.
Our technical expert opined that the estimate of 187.72 MMBO of OIIP with proved OIIP 
component of 98.159 MMBO does not conform to standards of petroleum resources management 
system. The investment risk in final analysis, could have been mitigated in the initial stage itself if 
standard definitions and guidelines of Petroleum Resource Management System had been 
practiced by the Company for reserve estimation and prospect evaluation.
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
25
Report No. 28 of 2010-11FORMATION OF JOINT VENTURES
In essence, in the absence of structured documented policy for 
exercise of due diligence process for formation of joint ventures, 
the Company was not able to mitigate the risk and  leverage  the 
benefits  from the combined financial strength and expertise of 
the JV partners. 
Recommendation # 2
The Company should prepare guidelines for formation of Joint Ventures so as to 
mitigate the risk, leverage the combined financial strength and share experience of 
the Joint Venture partner.

Internal Control System
Chapter
5

n the international exploration and production business operations, partners safeguard their 
Ifinancial and non financial interests by ensuring a specific provision for partners' audit in the Joint 
Operating Agreement. The Company also followed this principle for its E&P assets acquired either 
through JVs or its subsidiary JVs.
In total,  29 E&P assets involving high risk and cost were acquired by the Company either through 
incorporated or unincorporated JVs or its subsidiary JVs, and 16 E&P assets were acquired with 100 
per cent stake by itself or through its subsidiary. As the Company is not an operator in all these 
cases, it has to ensure that the decision of Operator is in line with broad parameters as fixed by the 
Government/other agencies and the assets acquired through JVs are secured. Hence, for such 
arrangements, internal control mechanism needs to be robust and should have inbuilt checks and 
balances on transactions/operations. Therefore, the rights, powers and periodicity of partners' 
audit as defined in the Joint Operating Agreements should be timely and effectively exercised by 
the Company either through its internal audit wing or through an external agency. As the Company 
was a non-operator in a majority of E&P assets and relied on the decision of the operator, there was 
a risk of losses arising out of unilateral imprudent decisions by the operator. Hence, in order to 
secure its interests, the Company should have a system of identification of key risks, mitigation plan 
as also monitoring of implementation and review. 
The Ministry stated (October 2010) that a risk register consisting of ten risks along with the root 
causes and mitigation factors was compiled with the involvement of M/s KPMG and OVL team. 
We do not agree with the reply of the Ministry because as per the papers furnished to Audit, while 
the Company had only identified the risk and mitigation factors; the action plan and 
implementation targets thereof were not formulated.
Inadequacies noticed in audit in the internal control system are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. These inadequacies led to irregularities not being noticed in time and consequently 
corrective action got delayed.
Review of records revealed that the Company despite being in the high risk and capital intensive 
overseas exploration and production business with a total investment of ` 52,491.90 crore had not 
formulated any risk mitigation plan (August 2010).
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
29
Report No. 28 of 2010-11INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM
Internal Control System
Introduction
Non formulation of risk mitigation plan
Chapter 5
5.1
5.2
Review of details of partners' audit in respect of 25 E&P assets where the Company was Non/Joint-
Operator revealed that in 11 E&P assets, there was an average delay  of one to three years in 
conducting partner's audit, though there was well defined provision and periodicity for partners' 
audit in JOA.
 Non-exercising of partners' audit rights in time5.3

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
30
Report No. 28 of 2010-11INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM
In Block 6 Egypt, we noticed that delay in conducting audit by the Company was attributable mainly 
to non-cooperative attitude of the operator and failure on its part to assert its contractual rights. 
Analysis of Draft Statement of Assets and Liabilities, as on 31 December 2008, submitted by 
Auditors revealed that contribution of IPR Energy (Joint Venture partner) for joint operations was 
not in proportion to its participation interest. 
The Company contributed US$ 40.94 million against its share of US$ 34.78 million leading 
to excess funding of US$ 6.16 million. 
During 2008, IPR Energy transferred US$ 1.91 million out of Joint Venture account to its 
own different affiliated companies without intimating the Company.
Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation (EGPC), Egypt suspended reimbursement of the 
cost of US$ 9.89 million incurred by the joint venture, as it was incurred without their 
approval or without registration of the seismic contractor with the EGPC.
The Management stated (January, 2010) that partner's audit timings are decided based on the level 
of activities in the project, materiality of expenditure incurred, suitability of audit window to the 
other non operator parties, etc. 
The Ministry added (October 2010) that the observations indicated in the above para had been 
taken up with the operator.
In sum, the fact is that the focus of partners' audit is not always on financial aspects and 
sometimes irregularities relating to non financial decisions do impact the project operations. 
Therefore, it is very essential to ensure regular audit to provide assurance to the stakeholders. 
Our technical experts also opined that for conducting partners' audit; periodicity needs to be 
fixed.
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
Inadequate budgetary control 
An examination of the internal audit report of the Company for the year 2009-10 disclosed 
that the budget figures mapped in SAP was either 'NIL' or more or lesser than the budget 
approved by the Board, which shows wrong mapping of budget in SAP which was fraught 
with the risk of releasing excess payment or unnecessarily rejecting the payment. 
Release of payment beyond financial authority
Delegation of financial powers of the Company empowered the Board to sanction/ approve 
project wise investment upto ` 300 crore or US$ 75 million, whichever is less. 
In Block-5B Sudan, the Board approved the planned expenditure of US$ 56.94 million 
ignoring expenditure of US$ 47.53 million already incurred till the date of approval and 
also released ` 48.71 crore over and above ` 300 crore without obtaining prior approval of 
CCEA. 
In Block 279 Nigeria, the financial commitment to the tune of US$ 96.90 million, was 
approved by the Board of Directors on anticipated transfer of part stake to TOTAL (French 
Oil Company) and Shell.
The Management stated (January 2010) that the total investment by OVL exceeded the Board's 
delegated power on account of deterioration in security situation in Block 5B, Sudan. After the 
irregularity came to the notice the same was got ratified by the Board, ECS and CCEA by disclosing 
all the relevant facts. 
Financial control5.4

The Ministry endorsed (October 2010) the Management's reply.
We do not agree with the Ministry's reply as the system of subsequent ratification not only deprived 
ECS and CCEA from deliberation on the issue but also bound them to approve the same. Moreover, 
above instances are indicative of a weak internal control system. 
Our technical consultant while agreeing with the audit opined that there should be a strong 
monitoring system with multi level control at operational centre in order to avoid such recurrences. 
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
31
Report No. 28 of 2010-11INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM
The Company does not have a documented Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) and/or Business 
Continuity Plan (BCP) to enable it to respond to a disaster situation. In the event of a natural disaster 
or other business interruption, a comprehensive Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan 
will help the Company to continue/resume its operations in a planned manner and ensure timely 
recovery of the IT systems within a reasonable period of time. Absence of a Business Continuity 
Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan could delay any damage control exercise and may lead to significant 
disruption of operations causing loss of business and revenue to client operations.
The Ministry stated (October 2010) that the Company runs its business transactions on SAP which is 
hosted in ONGC Data Center, Delhi with Disaster Recovery center at Baroda.
The fact remains that the Company is not having its own documented Disaster Recovery/ Business 
Continuity Plan.
Absence of Disaster Recovery Plan and/or 
Business Continuity Plan
5.5
To conclude, the Company despite being in high and capital 
intensive business did not formulate a risk mitigation plan and 
also failed to conduct partner's audit in time, which resulted in 
irregularities remaining unnoticed/unattended by the 
Management. These inadequacies could be attributed to lack of 
documented risk management plan and absence of robust 
internal control system including internal audit.
Recommendation # 3
In view of its presence in 16 countries and significant investment as non-operator, the 
Company should strengthen its internal audit and control system and put in place 
timely audit arrangements for audit of the Joint Ventures.

Conclusion and 
Recommendations
Chapter
6

ut of 36 assets acquired at a cost of 6,206.83 crore at exploration stage, the company 
Oachieved success in five projects of which four were under development stage and only one 
project was producing, eight projects with a cost of ` 1,066.17 crore had to be abandoned and 
remaining 23 projects were still in the process of exploration. Producing and developed assets of 
the Company had proven hydrocarbon reserves of 185.995 Million Metric Tonne Oil Equivalent.
 The Company had been consistently making profit during the last six years, mainly due to rise in 
prices of the crude oil. Production of crude oil and gas increased in 2004-05 to 2007-08 and 
remained almost constant thereafter.  The profit of the Company was mainly from seven out of nine 
producing assets, of which eight assets (having an investment of ` 46,086.19 crore) were acquired 
at producing/ discovered stage. The Company has not been successful in discovering hydrocarbons 
in any of the blocks (excluding service contracts) as sole operator. The Company did not have 
documented policy for evaluation of investment opportunities and guidelines for formation of joint 
ventures. As a result, the Company was unable to reap the benefits of risk mitigation and incurred 
an unfruitful expenditure of ` 2367.77 crore. 
In essence, in the absence of structured documented policy for exercise of due diligence process for 
evaluation of investment opportunities as also for formation of joint ventures , the Company was 
not able  to mitigate the  risk and  leverage  the  benefits  from the combined financial strength and 
expertise of the JV partners. Further, although joint operating agreements did contain provisions for 
audit arrangements, the Company could not adequately secure its financial interests due to delayed 
exercise of their audit rights. The fact that the Company operates in a varied political and 
operational environment, it is essential for the company to have a robust internal control system 
including effective internal audit mechanism to provide assurance to the stakeholders. Though the 
Company is performing profitably, inadequacies noticed in audit indicate that there is a scope of 
improvement and the Company needs to have more professional approach in conducting its 
operations.
` 
ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
35
Report No. 28 of 2010-11CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Conclusion6.1
Conclusion and 
RecommendationsChapter 6

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
36
Report No. 28 of 2010-11CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
New Delhi
Dated :
New Delhi
Dated :
 (SUNIL VERMA)
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General
and Chairman, Audit Board
  (VINOD RAI)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Countersigned
Recommendation # 4
Based on the significant audit findings, the following recommendations are 
proposed:
n The Company should formulate a policy and prepare standard guidelines in line 
with practices of Petroleum Resource Management System for evaluation of 
investment opportunities for acquisition of producing, discovered and 
exploration assets so as to mitigate the risks.
n The Company should prepare guidelines for formation of Joint Ventures so as to 
mitigate the risk, leverage the combined financial strength and share 
experience of the Joint Venture partner.
n In view of its presence in 16 countries and significant investment as non-
operator, the Company should strengthen its internal audit and control system 
and put in place timely audit arrangements for audit of the Joint Ventures.

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
ANNEXURE
38
Report No. 28 of 2010-11 Sakhalin-1 
Block 06.1, Vietnam
Block 5A Sudan
Block A 1, Myanmar
Block A 3, Myanmar
Block 6, Egypt (North Ramadan)
NEMED, Egypt
Block 24, Syria
Block NC 189, Libya
Block 25-29, 35 (part) & 36, Cuba
Block-1A, 1B, 2, 2B & 4, GNPOC Sudan  
AFPC Project, Syria 
RC-8, Colombia  
RC-9, Colombia  
RC-10, Colombia 
Mansarovar Project, Columbia 
Block BC-10, Brazil 
Block 2, JDZ Nigeria 
Block 279 Nigeria 
Block 285 Nigeria
San Cristobal 
BM-BAR-1
BM-SEAL-4
SSJN-7, Colombia
BMS-73, Brazil
BM-ES-42,  Brazil
Block 8 Iraq
Vietnam 127
Vietnam 128
Block 34 & 35 Cuba
Producing
Producing
Producing
Development
Development
Discovered
Discovered
Discovered
Exploration
Exploration
Producing
Producing
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Producing
Producing
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Producing
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Joint-Operator
Joint-Operator
Operator
Non-Operator
Operator
Joint-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Operator
Operator
Joint Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Owned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
17,472.96
1,163.44
1,830.80
376.82
277.00
198.88
962.32
131.14
119.10
99.77
7,899.31
1,189.11
6.67
17.21
10.95
3,154.46
2,456.06
100.35
284.02
284.02
832.16
242.87
2.09
2.68
25.33
66.10
4.87
226.47
202.65
178.72
Name of the E&P Assets
(Referred to in Chapter 1)

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
ANNEXURE
39
Report No. 28 of 2010-11
Libya 81-1
Block 43 Libya
Myanmar AD-2
Myanmar AD-3
Myanmar AD-9
Imperial
CPO-5, Colombia
Block NC 188, Libya
Block 5B, Sudan
Block-11, 12 Turkmenistan
Australia
Ivory Coast
Myanmar AD-7
Najwat Najem Block, Qatar
MTPN, Congo
Total
92.10
161.15
57.76
21.83
17.70
11,251.33
5.53
68.51
417.55
51.92
34.69
52.60
55.67
317.45
67.78
52,491.90
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Exploration
Producing
Exploration
Abandoned
Abandoned
Abandoned
Abandoned
Abandoned
Abandoned
Abandoned
Abandoned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Owned
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Non-Operator
Owned
Owned
Non-Operator
Owned
Non-Operator
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Name of the E&P Assets

ONGC Videsh Limited - Joint Venture Operations
Performance Audit
GLOSSARY
40
Report No. 28 of 2010-11
1 ” ” Carried interest is an agreement under which one party (carrying party) 
agrees to pay for a portion or for all of exploration and development of another party (carried 
party) on a property in which both own a portion of the working interest. The carrying party is 
able to recover a specified amount of costs from the carried party's share of the revenue from 
the production of petroleum, if any, from the property. In case carry finance is given by two or 
more parties, their respective shares in carry financing are termed as “Carry finance share”.   
2 “ ” refers to resource figures in which possibility of success is not risked. 
3 “ ” refers to undiscovered resources that may occur either in known 
types of deposits in favorable geologic settings where mineral discoveries have not been 
made, or in types of deposits as yet unrecognized for their economic potential. If exploration 
confirms their existence and reveals enough information about their quantity, grade and 
quality, they will be classified as identified resources (reference: definition in USGS website)
4 “ ” refers to the cost which has already been incurred by the existing owner(s) and is 
intended to be passed on to the subsequent buyer.
5 “ ” refers to the classification system for 
petroleum resources and related definitions developed by Society of Petroleum Evaluation 
Engineers, American Association of Petroleum Geologists and World Petroleum Council. This 
is used internally within the Petroleum industry and provided a consistent approach to 
estimating petroleum quantities, evaluating development projects, and presenting results 
within a comprehensive classification framework.
6 “ ” refers to an arrangement in which the owner or lessee of mineral rights (the first 
party) assigns its interest to another party (the second party) for a consideration. The 
arrangement from the viewpoint of the second party is termed a "  arrangement."
Carry finance
Un-risked
Speculative resources
Past cost
Petroleum Resource Management System
Farm-out
farm-in
Glossary of Technical Terms