Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India v
PREFACE 
 This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2011 
containing the results of the Performance Audit of Water Pollution in India has been prepared for 
submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution.  
 The Performance Audit was conducted during July 2010 to February 2011 through document 
analysis, collection of responses to questionnaires, physical collection and testing of samples. Records 
and documents relating to the issues in the Performance Audit were examined: 
x in the Ministry of  Environment and Forests, Central Pollution Control Board, Ministry of 
Water Resources and Central Ground Water Board  between July 2010 to February 2011. 
x in 25 States and State Pollution Control Boards, State Environment Departments, State 
Urban Local Bodies, Nodal Departments and implementing agencies for National River 
Conservation Plan and National Lake Conservation Plan and selected blocks in districts for 
ground water. The sample consisted of 140 river projects, 22 lakes and 116 ground water 
blocks in 25 States.  
 The results of audit, both at the Ce ntral level and the State level, were taken into account for 
arriving at audit conclusions. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India vii
Executive Summary 
Why did we decide to examine this issue? 
In July 2009, various stakeholders working in the field of environment flagged water pollution 
as the most important environmental issue that concerns us. We also held a detailed two-day 
International Conference on Environment Audit - Concerns about Water Pollution in March 
2010. This conference was attended by various civil society organisations, government 
agencies, international agencies and regulatory bodies. The heads of Supreme Audit Institutions 
from Austria, Bhutan, Maldives and Bangladesh also shared their concerns about water 
pollution. The Conference flagged many important areas of concern with regard to river, lake 
and ground water pollution. Further, we put out advertisements in various national and local 
newspapers all across India, inviting suggestions from the general public regarding the water 
pollution problems faced by them. Based on feedback from these consultations, we decided to 
take up a Performance Audit of Water Pollution in India during 2010-11. 
 What were our audit objectives? 
The review was undertaken to ascertain whether: 
x Inventory of water sources has been prepared and whether the overall status of 
quality of water in rivers, lakes and groundwater has been adequately assessed in 
India;
x Risks of polluted water to health of living organisms and the impact on environment 
have been adequately assessed; 
x Adequate policies, legislations and programmes have been formulated and effective 
institutions been put into place for pollution prevention, treatment and restoration of 
polluted water in rivers, lakes and ground water;
x Programmes for pollution prevention, treatment and restoration of polluted water in 
rivers, lakes and ground water have been planned, implemented and monitored 
efficiently and effectively; 
x Funds were utlised in an efficient and economic manner to further the aim of reduction 
of water pollution;  
x Adequate mechanisms have been put in place by the government to sustain measures 
to tackle water pollution; and 
x Programmes for the control of pollution had succeeded in reducing pollution levels in 
ground water and surface water and restoring water quality.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India viii
What did our performance audit reveal? 
Our Performance Audit revealed that: 

Legislative and 
Policy
framework
Water pollution has not been adequately addressed in any policy in India, 
both at the central and the State level. In the absence of a specific water 
pollution policy which would also incorporate prevention of pollution, 
treatment of polluted water and ecological restoration of polluted water 
bodies, government efforts in these areas would not get the required 
emphasis and thrust.
(Paragraph 2.1, 2.3)
Planning for 
control of 
pollution of 
rivers, lakes and 
ground water 
It was observed that MoEF and a number of States:   
x did not undertake complete inventorisation of  rivers/lakes and 
keystone species associated with them.  
(Paragraph 3.1)
x did not carry out identification of existing pollution levels in rivers and 
lakes in terms of biological indicators. 
(Paragraph 3.2)
x had not identified and quantified contaminants in rivers, lakes and 
ground water.  
(Paragraph 3.3)
x were yet to identify and quantify human activities that impact water 
quality.
(Paragraph 3.4)
x had not assessed the risks of polluted water to health and 
environment.  
(Paragraph 3.5)
x had not adopted the basin level approach for control of pollution.  
(Paragraph 3.6)
x had not developed water quality goals, corresponding parameters for 
each river/lake and failed to enforce these. 
(Paragraph 3.7)
As such, overall planning for the control of pollution on part of MoEF and the 
States falls short of an ideal situation. This would have repercussions on 
implementation of programmes for control of pollution and their outcomes 
as discussed later in the report. 
Implementation
of programmes 
for control of 
pollution of 
rivers, lakes and 
ground water 
With regard to implementation of programmes for control of pollution of 
rivers, lakes and ground water, it was observed that: 
x Current programmes for control of pollution of rivers, lakes and 
ground water were insufficient. 
(Paragraph 4.1)
x Institutional set-up to manage programmes for control of pollution in 
rivers, lakes and ground water was inadequate. 
(Paragraph 4.2)

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India ix
x Inclusion of rivers and lakes into National River Conservation Plan and 
National Lake Conservation Plan, respectively, was flawed. 
(Paragraph 4.2 & 4.3)
x Performance of projects undertaken under NRCP was unsatisfactory. 
82 per cent of the projects were completed after the scheduled date 
of completion. 28 projects costing ` 251.27 crore were constructed 
but not utilised as yet. States implementing the projects faced 
problems in land acquisition, getting requisite permissions, especially 
forest clearances, technical problems, problems from contractors etc. 
(Paragraph 4.4)
x NLCP as a programme has been ineffective in achieving the objective 
of conservation and restoration of lakes in India. Only two of the 
sampled 22 projects had been completed and the rest were either 
continuing beyond the sanction date of completion or had been 
abandoned. Problems like resistance from locals over proposed 
construction of STPs etc., dispute over site, inability to arrest sewage 
flow, non-availability of land etc., have contributed to non-completion 
of the projects.  
(Paragraph 4.5)
Thus, programmes to control pollution of rivers and lakes in India have not 
had the desired results.
Monitoring of 
programmes for 
control of 
pollution of 
rivers, lakes and 
ground water 
Inspection and monitoring of projects being implemented under NRCP and 
NLCP was inadequate at all three levels, i.e., local level, State level and 
Central level.  
(Paragraph 5.1  )
There was paucity of network for tracking pollution of rivers, lakes and 
ground water as there were inadequate number of monitoring stations, no 
real- time monitoring of water quality was taking place and the data on 
water quality had not been disseminated adequately. 
(Paragraph 5.2)
As such, monitoring of programmes was inadequate which points to weak  
internal controls existing at all levels of government. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India x
Results of 
programmes for 
control of 
pollution in 
India 
River cleaning and control of pollution programmes for our polluted rivers 
are being implemented since 1985. The programmes seek to address 
pollution from point and non-point sources through construction of Sewage 
Treatment Plants, low cost sanitation, electric crematoria etc. However, the 
data on the results of these programmes are not very encouraging.  
Ganga in certain stretches, Yamuna, Gomti, Godavari, Musi, Cauvery, 
Cooum, Mahananda, Khan, Kshipra, Vaigai, Chambal, Rani Chu, Mandovi, 
Sabarmati, Subarnarekha, Bhadra/Tungabhadra, Pennar, Pamba, Betwa, 
Krishna, Sutlej etc., continue to be plagued by high levels of organic 
pollution, low level of oxygen availability for aquatic organisms and 
bacteria, protozoa and viruses which have faecal-origin and which cause 
illnesses.
(Paragraph 6.1) 
Most lakes in India are under threat from nutrient overloading which is 
causing their eutrophication and their eventual choking up from the weeds 
proliferating in the nutrient-rich water. Implementation of NLCP in 
conserving these lakes has had no discernible effect.  
 Pichola, Pushkar, Dimsagar, Banjara, Kotekere, Bellandur, Veli Akkulam, 
Shivpuri, Powai, Rankala, Twin lakes, Bindusagar, Mansagar, Mansiganga, 
Rabindra Sarovar, Mirik, Kodaikanal lake, Dal lake, Durgabari lake, 
Laxminarayanbari Lake, Dimsagar Lake etc., have shown poor water quality. 
However, there have been some success stories like Nainital lake, Kotekere 
lake, Sharanabasaveshwara lake and Mansagar where water quality has 
improved after completion of conservation programmes.  
(Paragraph 6.2)
Resources and 
Utilisation of 
Funds 
Funds available for control and prevention of water pollution and 
restoration of wholesomeness of water were not adequate. 
 (Paragraph 7.1)
Overall
conclusion 
We began the audit of Water Pollution in India with certain audit 
objectives (in Page 5) which sought to examine the broad contours of 
policy, programmes, institutions and initiatives taken by MoEF to address 
water pollution in India. We also sought to examine availability of data 
regarding water pollution, assessment of risks to health and environment 
and sustainability of measures to address water pollution in India. Finally, 
we also examined whether the efforts to clean up rivers and lakes in India 
have lead to any improvements in water quality.  Our audit examination 
extended to 140 projects across 24 polluted stretches of rivers, 22 lakes 
and 116 blocks across 25 States of India.  All the findings, discussed in 
Chapter 2 to 8, lead us to conclude the following against the objectives set 
out for the study: 
x Inventory of water sources has not been prepared and the overall 
status of quality of water in rivers, lakes and groundwater has not 
been adequately assessed in India; 
x Risks of polluted water to health of living organisms and the impact 
on environment have been not been adequately assessed; 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India xi
x Adequate policies, legislations and programmes have not been 
formulated and effective institutions have not been put into place for 
pollution prevention, treatment and restoration of polluted water in 
rivers, lakes and ground water;
x Programmes for pollution prevention, treatment and restoration of 
polluted water in rivers, lakes and ground water have not been 
planned, implemented and monitored efficiently and effectively; 
x Funds were not utlised in an efficient and economic manner to further 
the aim of reduction of water pollution;  
x Adequate mechanisms have not been put in place by the government 
to sustain measures to tackle water pollution; and 
x Programmes for the control of pollution have not succeeded in 
reducing pollution levels in ground water and surface water and 
restoring water quality.
What do we recommend? 
x MoEF/States, in the policy on water pollution, need to specifically take into account 
prevention and control of water pollution as well as ecological restoration of degraded 
water bodies. 
x MoEF/CPCB should initiate steps, along with Ministry of Water Resources and all the 
States to draw up a comprehensive inventory of all rivers, lakes and ground water 
sources in India. It should also undertake a survey to list all the keystone species 
associated with each river and lake in India. This should also be placed in the public 
domain.
x MoEF/CPCB should intensify its efforts in developing biological indicators which would 
shed light on whether the functional integrity of aquatic ecosystems are safeguarded. 
x MoEF should take into account the basin approach while planning for reduction of 
pollution of all rivers and lakes in the country.  
x With respect to lakes, all three attributes  of the lake, i.e., the basin, the water body and 
the command area need to be conserved instead of the present focus of NLCP on the 
water body only.
x MoEF needs to establish enforceable water quality standards for lakes, rivers and ground 
water that would help protect human and ecosystem health. Penalties need to be levied 
for violations of water quality standards. Further, MoEF, in conjunction with Ministry of 
Agriculture, needs to develop standards for pollutants like nitrogen, phosphorus etc., 
which arise from agricultural practices, use of pesticides and fertilisers as pollution from 
agricultural sources is one of the biggest non-point source of pollution. 
x The Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission is already funding sewerage 
projects in some of the same States where funds are being provided by MoEF for the 
same purpose. It needs to focus on projects which seek to regenerate and conserve the 
river instead of those which focus largely on treatment of sewage. MoEF/States should 
conceive programmes which address different sources of pollution flowing into rivers, 
lakes and ground water with focus being not only on prevention of pollution but also 
conservation and ecological restoration of our water bodies.
x Right now, there are multiple agencies involved in river and lake conservation, right from 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India xii
planning to implementation and monitoring. There is a need to consolidate all these 
functions under an umbrella agency for better coordination and accountability. 
x In conjunction with the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), MoEF and the State 
should plan drainage for the city as a whole instead of piecemeal approval of random 
STPs and I&Ds. Further, funding for these projects should come from MoUD as the 
implementing agencies work under the control of MoUD. MoEF should be involved in the 
design stage and in monitoring the treated effluents if they are being discharged into the 
river.
x MoEF/States need to ensure that projects for source control of all kind of pollutants 
entering the lakes is included in projects for conservation and restoration of lakes, 
especially sewage and agriculture runoff which leads to nutrient over-loading of the lake. 
x MoEF should ensure that all lakes facing encroachment and resultant filling up are 
included in NLCP. Further, all State governments should declare bio-conservation zones 
around lakes so that encroachment of shoreline is prevented.  
x The Water Quality Assessment Authority at the central level and the Water Quality 
Review Committee in the States should be revitalized and strengthened so that it can act 
as a cross-sectoral nodal body for water pollution issues. 
x States should involve citizens in proposing and monitoring programmes to control 
pollution of rivers and lakes. This will help in mobilizing support in civil society for the 
proposed projects and thus the projects will face less resistance from local people. 
Citizens Monitoring Committee and Local level lake monitoring committees need to be 
constituted to provide feedback for more effective implementation.  
x MoEF/CPCB, in conjunction with the States, should conduct a city-wise assessment of 
the levels of pollution in our rivers and lakes. They should also evaluate the success of 
projects undertaken under NRCP in terms of pre-defined indicators developed by 
MoEF/CPCB. Such impact assessment should be done in a continuous manner so that 
data is generated to judge whether the programme is meeting its stated objectives.
What was the response of Ministry of Environment and Forests to ou r
recommendations?
MoEF in May 2011 constituted a Committee to consider the recommendations/observations 
made in the report by Audit and prepared a roadmap for implementation of 
recommendations/observations accepted. The Committee consists of representatives of CPCB 
and representatives from Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of Urban Development and a 
representative of CAG. The Committee proposed, inter alia , a time-bound action plan to 
address capacity issues related to sewage treatment, an amendment to the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 to link penalties for contravention of the  Act, strengthening of Water 
Quality Assessment Authority and constitution of a State-level Monitoring Committee.

“Every
1.1
Clean, s
smooth
Water P
concent
ecosyst
disease
Liveliho
quality.
pollutio
Water
lead t o
animals
allow f o
and con
plants a
y year, more
About Wa
safe and a d
h functionin
Pollution is 
trations to 
tems that s
es kill million
oods such a
. Biodiversi
on.
is very im p
o serious p r
s. Water p o
or healthy 
ntrol of wa
and vegetat
C
e people di
ater Reso
dequate fre
ng of ecosy s
the presen
make it u n
support h u
ns people, p
as agricultu
ty, especi a
portant to l
roblems wi
ollution pr e
growth an d
ter pollutio
tion, human
Water
Chapter
ie from the 
of violen
urces 
eshwater is 
stems, com
nce of harm
nfit for use.
uman healt
particularly 
re, fishing 
ally of fres h
ife and pol
th disease 
evention h e
d develop m
on assures t
ns and anim
r Pollution in
1: Intr o
consequen
ce, includin
vital to th e
mmunities a
mful and obj
 Water co n
h, food pr o
those unde
and anima
hwater ec o
luted wat e
and death
elps to ens u
ment of the 
that the w a
mals.
n India
oductio
ces of unsaf
ng war”
e survival o
nd econom
ectionable
ntamination
oduction a
er the age o
l husbandr y
osystems i s
er is a hug e
 of plants 
ure that th
earth, hu m
ater can re m
Repo
on
afe water th
of all living 
mies. Water
provide
services
well-be
alleviat
i
and r e
(such a
are cri t
vital e c
that de
to peo
p
fresh
particu
l
service
indirec
t
water
signific
a
educati
spiritua
provid
e
opportu
recreati
material in
n weakens o
nd biodive
of five, wor
y are affec
s under th r
e concern. P
and veget a
ere is eno u
mans and a
main safe f
ort No. 21 of
han from al
organisms 
-based eco
e a dive r
s vital for 
ing and 
ion. Su p
egulating
as nutrient 
tical to s u
cosystem f u
liver many 
ple. The de
water
larly i m
both dire c
tly. In a
sources 
ant a e
onal, cult u
l value s
e in v
unities 
ion and tou
 water in s u
or destroys
rsity. Wat e
ld-wide eve
ted by po o
reat due t o
Polluted w a
ation, hum
ugh clean w
nimals. Pr e
for consum
f 2011-12
1
ll forms 
and the 
systems 
rsity of 
human
poverty
pporting 
services
cycling) 
ustaining
unctions
benefits 
livery of 
is a 
mportant
ctly and 
addition,
have
esthetic,
ural and 
s and 
valuable
for
urism.
ufficient 
s natural 
er-borne
ery year.  
or water 
o water 
ater can 
ans and 
water to 
evention 
ption of 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 2
1.2  Water pollution in India 
India’s 14 major, 55 minor and several hundred small rivers receive millions of litres of 
sewage, industrial and agricultural wastes. The most polluting source for rivers is the city 
sewage and industrial waste discharge. Presently, only about 10 per cent of the waste water 
generated is treated; the rest is discharged as it is into our water bodies. Due to this, 
pollutants enter rivers, lakes and groundwater.
Such water, which ultimately ends up in our households, is often highly contaminated and 
carries disease-causing microbes. Agricultural run-off, or the water from the fields that 
drains into rivers, is another major water pollutant as it contains fertilizers and pesticides. 
Ground water accounts for nearly 80 per cent of the rural domestic water needs and 50  per 
cent of the urban water needs in India. It is generally less susceptible to contamination and 
pollution when compared to surface water bodies.  
1.3 Water quality criteria in India 
To set the standard for the desired quality of a water body, it is essential to identify the uses 
of water in that water body. In India, Central Pollution Control Board has developed a 
concept of designated best use.
According to this concept, out of the several uses of water of a particular body, the use 
which demands highest quality is termed its designated best use . Five designated best uses
have been identified. This classification helps the water quality managers and planners to 
set water quality targets and design suitable restoration programmes for various water 
bodies.
What is water pollution? 
It is the presence of harmful material in water in sufficient concentrations to make it
unfit for use.
Categories of water pollution
Point source pollution occurs when harmful substances are emitted directly into a body 
of water. It is easy to monitor and regulate. 
Non-point source pollution occurs when pollutants are delivered indirectly through 
transport or environmental change. Non-point sources are difficult to monitor and 
control. Today, they account for the majority of contaminants in ground water, streams 
and lakes. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 3
Table 1: Water quality criteria in India
Designated Best Use Class of water Criteria
Drinking water source without 
conventional treatment but after 
disinfection
A  Total Coliforms Organism1 MPN2/100ml shall 
be 50 or less  
 pH3 between 6.5 and 8.5  
 Dissolved Oxygen(DO)4 6mg/l or more  
 Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)5 - five days 
20°C 2mg/l or less  
Outdoor bathing (Organised) B  Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100ml shall be 
500 or less  
 pH between 6.5 and 8.5  
 Dissolved Oxygen 5mg/l or more 
 Biochemical Oxygen Demand - five days 20°C 
3mg/l or less 
Drinking water source after 
conventional treatment and 
disinfection
C  Total Coliforms Organism MPN/100ml shall be 
5000 or less  
 pH between six to nine  
 Dissolved Oxygen 4mg/l or more  
 Biochemical Oxygen Demand - five days 20°C 
3mg/l or less  
Propagation of Wildlife and 
Fisheries
D  pH between 6.5 to 8.5 
 Dissolved Oxygen 4mg/l or more  
 Free Ammonia (as N) 1.2 mg/l or less  
Irrigation, Industrial Cooling, 
Controlled Waste disposal 
E  pH between 6.0 to 8.5 
 Electrical Conductivity at 25°C micro mhos/cm 
Max.2250  
 Sodium absorption Ratio Max. 26  
 Boron Max. 2mg/l
Below E Not Meeting A, B, C, D & E Criteria 
Source: Central Pollution Control Board
1.4 Audit scope  
At the Centre, audit scope covered the programmes and schemes for control of pollution 
of rivers, lakes and ground water in MoEF/MoWR. It also covered functioning of NRCD, its 
role in planning, implementation/monitoring and monitoring activities of CPCB/CGWB, 
relating to river, lake and ground water pollution relating to the period 2006-07 and 2010-
11. Records of Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) were also examined in light of 
the responsibilities allocated to them.
In the States, audit scope covered adequacy of data relating to river, lake and ground 
water pollution. It also extended to the study of the implementation and monitoring of 
                                                           
1 Coliforms organisms like faecal bacteria are an indicator of water quality.  
2 Most Probable Number.
3 It is a measure of the acidity or basicity of a solution. Since pH can be affected by chemicals in the water, pH is an 
important indicator of water that is changing chemically.  
4 DO is a relative measure of the amount of oxygen that is dissolved or carried in the water body. Adequate dissolved 
oxygen is needed and necessary for good water quality. 
5 BOD is a chemical procedure for determining the uptake rate of dissolved oxygen by the biological organisms in a body of 
water and is widely used as an indication of the quality of water.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 4
programmes (NRCP and NLCP) for the control of pollution of rivers and lakes by the 
designated agencies. Audit scope related to the States also covered implementation and 
monitoring of schemes, if any, for the control of pollution of ground water.  
For this, we test-checked records of the State governments, implementing agencies 
(mainly municipalities and lake development authorities), State Pollution Control Boards 
and WQRC in the States covering the period 2006-07 to 2010-11.
1.5   Audit methodology  
The audit methodology was guided by the following:
(a)  Stakeholders’ Conference on Environment Audit 
In July 2009, the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India organised a 
Stakeholders’ Conference on Environment Audit to flag major environmental issues in India 
and to identify significant areas for audit enquiry in the future. Experts from Civil Society 
organisations, from Ministries of Environment & Forests and Urban Development, from the 
Indian Meteorology Department and representatives/corporate bodies working in the field 
of environment attended the Conference.
Some vital issues highlighted during the Conference were: 
x Audit should look at issues of ecological sustainability, equity in distribution of 
environmental resources and efficiency of environmental programmes.
x Audits should take place during the process of implementation of the programmes so 
that inputs can be provided to improve performance.
x Need to evolve standards for involvement of public/public participation in agencies 
handling environment as well as in the audit of the environment.
x Need to emphasize on social audit where involvement of local communities in the audit 
process is important. 
x Need to disseminate audit reports more widely. 
 (b) International Conference on Environment Audit-Concerns about Water Pollution 
Once the topic had been identified, we held a two-day International Conference on 
Environment Audit-Concerns about Water Pollution  in March 2010. This conference was 
attended by members of various Civil Society Organisations, Government Agencies, 
International Agencies and Regulatory Bodies like Jheel Samrakshan Samity, Arghyam, 
Tarun Bharat Sangh, WaterAid India, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Central 
Pollution Control Board, Central Ground Water Board, Jammu & Kashmir Lakes & 
Waterways Development Authority, International Union for the Conservation of Nature, 
Food and Agriculture Organisation, GTZ etc. The Heads of Supreme Audit Institutions from 
Austria, Bhutan, Maldives and Bangladesh also shared their concerns about water 
pollution.
The Conference flagged important areas of concern with regard to river, lake and ground 
water pollution. Some of the issues raised during the Conference were: 
x Lack of coordination and ownership between the different agencies that are involved 
in its implementation;

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 5
x Need for the government to review the low levels of budgetary priority given to 
environment programmes in the country; 
x Need to strengthen truly representative public participation in governmental 
programmes;
x Need to co-relate the reality that the number of citizens dependent on water bodies 
for livelihood with the creation of programmes for conservation; 
x The imperatives of a comprehensive river basin approach for curbing river pollution as 
opposed to the extant town-based approach;  
x The requirement of legislations for maintaining minimum amount of water/flow in 
lakes and setting standards for nitrogen and phosphorus as measures of water quality; 
x Commitment from Supreme Audit Institutions to carry their mandate of environment 
audit forward and be more proactive in the field of environment audit.
(c) Advertisement in newspapers 
We put out advertisements in various national and local newspapers all across India, 
inviting suggestions from the general public regarding the water pollution problems faced 
by them. We received more than 500 e-mails and letters. All these inputs facilitated us in 
the framing of audit objectives, sub-objectives and questionnaires for our Performance 
Audit. Some of the issues raised by the public were: 
x Pollution of River Chandrabhaga 
x Pollution of River Yamuna 
x Pollution of groundwater in Maharashtra 
x Pollution of Bellandur Lake 
x Pollution of Dal Lake 
x Depletion of groundwater in Kerala 
Once areas of audit enquiry and audit questions were framed, our audit methodology 
consisted of document analysis, responses to questionnaires, examination of reports & 
records at various levels to collect audit evidence. Based on the feedback from these 
consultations, we decided to take up a Performance Audit of “Water Pollution in India” 
during 2010-11. 
An Entry Conference with the Ministry of Environment & Forests was held on 30 July 2010 
wherein the audit objectives, scope of audit, audit criteria and audit methodology were 
discussed. Exit Conference on 6 June, 2011 was held with MoEF where audit findings were 
discussed.
1.6  Audit Objectives 
The review was undertaken to ascertain whether: 
x Inventory of water sources has been prepared and whether the overall status of quality of 
water in rivers, lakes and groundwater has been adequately assessed in India; 
x Risks of polluted water to health of living organisms and the impact on environment have 
been adequately assessed; 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 6
x Adequate policies, legislations and programmes have been formulated and effective 
institutions been put into place for pollution prevention, tr eatment and restoration of 
polluted water in rivers, lakes and ground water;  
x Programmes for pollution prevention, treatment and restoration of polluted water in rivers, 
lakes and ground water have been planned, implemented and monitored efficiently and 
effectively;
x Funds were utilised in an efficient and economic manner to further the aim of reduction of 
water pollution;  
x Adequate mechanisms have been put in place by the government to sustain measures to 
tackle water pollution; and 
x Programmes for the control of pollution had succeeded in reducing pollution levels in ground 
water and surface water and restoring water quality.
1.7  Audit criteria  
The following audit criteria were utilised: 
a. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974.
b. Agenda 21 document of the World Commission on Sustainable Development of the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, held in Rio in June 1992. 
c. Guidelines for implementation and monitoring of National River Conservation Plan and 
National Lake Conservation Plan. 
d. National Water Policy, 2002.
e. National Environment Policy 2006. 
f. Implementation guidelines for Integrated Water Resources Management, specifically 
Integrated River Basin Management and Integrated Lake Basin Management. 
g. Guidelines of United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 
1.8  Audit sample 
We selected the audit sample on the basis of assessment of risks like expenditure, criticality 
of the project in pollution control and feedback received from the public to the 
advertisement placed in newspapers.  
x Out of 1079 projects for pollution control of 24 rivers across 19 States being 
implemented, we scrutinized 140 projects being implemented for control of pollution 
for 24 rivers. 
x Out of projects for conservation of 58 lakes in 14 States, we studied 22 projects for 
conservation of lakes across 14 States.
x Out of a total of 6053 blocks across India, we examined 116 blocks for implementation 
and monitoring programmes relating to ground water pollution.
x Audit also studied the administrative structures and activities related to water pollution 
in 25 States of India.
Details of sample selected are attached as Annexure 1.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 7
Legislation
•Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974
•Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) 
Rules, 1975
•The water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Cess 
Act, 1977
•Environment ( Protection) 
Act, 1986
•Environment ( Protection) 
Rules 1986
Policy
•National Water Policy, 2002
•National Environment 
Policy, 2006
Programmes
•National River Conservation 
Plan
•National Lake Conservation 
Plan
•Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission**
•Urban Infrastructure 
Development Scheme for 
Small and Medium Towns**
Chapter 2:  Legislative, policy and institutional framework 
Legislations, policies and programmes for water pollution in India
**Note: Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for 
Small and Medium Towns are schemes implemented by the Ministry of Urban Development.  
2.1  Legislative framework 
The goal of compliance to environmental laws is to assure the average citizen that natural 
values are protected that specific violators can be identified and that they comply with legal 
provisions. This is needed in order to safeguard human health and environment and to 
deter future violations. Legal and institutional frameworks for water quality protection must 
evolve from the present fractured and often unenforceable, guidelines to a comprehensive 
approach to pollution prevention and source water protection.
2.1.2 At the Centre 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act was enacted in 1974  under article 252 of 
Constitution which provides power to the Parliament to legislate for two or more States by 
consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State. The Act provides for the 
prevention and control of water pollution and for the maintaining or restoring of 
wholesomeness of water in the country.
To achieve this objective, the Act provided for establishing Boards at the Central and State 
level for the prevention and control of water pollution and conferred and assigned powers 
and functions relating this to these Boards.
It lays down a system of consent whereby no industry or operator process or any treatment 
and disposal system can be established without the previous consent of the State Board.  
Table 2: Policies, legislations and programmes for water pollution in India 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 8
Similarly, no industry or process can discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well 
or sewer or land in excess of the standards.  
Contravention of the provisions of this Act is punishable in monetary as well non-monetary 
terms.
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977  provides for the levy of 
cess on use of water by various users of water i.e. industry and local authorities which are 
entrusted with duty of supplying of water under the law.  This cess was meant to augment 
the funds required by State pollution Boards for their effective functioning in discharge of 
duties  under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. 
The cess is collected by the State Government concerned and paid to the Central 
Government.  The proceeds are credited to the Consolidated Fund of India. After this, the 
Central Government, after due appropriation made by Parliament by Law, disburses such 
sums of money as if may think fit to the Central Board and the State Boards, having regard 
to the amount of cess collected by the State Government concerned.  
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  provides for the protection and improvement of 
environment and for matters connected there with. The definition of “environment" 
includes water, air and land and the inter-relationship which exists among and between 
water, air and land, and human beings, other living creatures, plants, micro-organism and 
property.
The Central Government has the power to take all such measures as it deems necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving the quality of the environment and 
preventing controlling and abating environmental pollution. Thus, MOEF has the 
responsibility of controlling water pollution under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act foresees a balance of strategies to 
ensure compliance: education and assistance; monitoring and inspections; communication 
and outreach. However, it falls short in the vital aspect of developing fair and differentiated 
responses to non-compliance. There is little evidence of the design of enforcement 
programmes to deter illegal conduct by creating negative consequences.  
Inadequate penalty provisions  
The penalty provisions under various Acts relating to control and prevention of water 
pollution is given in the table below. 
Name of the 
Act/
Provision
The Water (Prevention 
and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974 
The Water (Prevention 
and Control of 
Pollution) Cess Act, 
1977
The Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986
Provision
relating to 
penalty
Failure to comply with 
provisions or for 
contravention of the 
provisions of the act 
and the rules, orders 
and directions shall, in 
respect of each such 
Failure to comply with 
provisions or for 
contravention of the 
provisions of the act and 
the rules, orders and 
directions shall, in 
respect of each such 
Failure to comply with 
provisions or for 
contravention of the 
provisions of the act 
and the rules, orders 
and directions shall, in 
respect of each such 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 9
failure or 
contravention, be 
punishable with
failure or contravention, 
be punishable with
failure or 
contravention, be 
punishable with
x Imprisonment for 
a term which may 
extend to three 
months to six 
years
x Fine which may 
extend to ` 10
thousand   and In 
case of the failure 
continues, with an 
additional fine 
which may extend 
to ` five thousand 
for every day 
during which such 
failure continues 
after the 
conviction for the 
first such failure. 
x Imprisonment
which may extend 
to six months 
x Fine which may 
extend to ` one
thousand
x Or with both. 
x Imprisonment
for a term which 
may extend to 
five/seven years
x Fine which may 
extend to ` one
lakh, continued 
failure or 
contravention,
with additional 
fine which may 
extend to ` five
thousand for 
every day during 
which such 
failure or 
contravention
continues after 
the conviction 
for the first such 
failure or 
contravention.
x Or with both. 
We observed that the maximum penalty prescribed under The Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution)  Cess Act, 1977  was only ` one thousand, while the same under The 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 was ` 10 thousand rupees.  The 
maximum penalty under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 was ` one lakh. However, 
in the case of water pollution, the fine or penalty prescribed under The Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 would be applicable as per sub section 2 of section 24 
of the Environment Protection Act 1986.     Thus, the maximum penalty/fine is limited to `
10 thousand for case relating to water pollution.
 We observed that powers relating to filing of cases of violations are exercised by the SPCBs, 
While CPCB conducts random checks of Industries or other stake holders contributing to 
water pollutions and cases of violations are reported to the respective SPCBs for their action 
and in cases of serious violations are dealt with for notice of closure or closure under 
section 5 of the Environment Protection Act 1986. The CPCB/MOEF did not compile any 
information on cases of violations relating to water pollution filed by the SPCBs and amount 
of penalty/fine realized.  The information relating to the cases , where the closure notices or 
final closure were ordered  by CPCB was awaited. In absence of information on the extent of 
violations of  provisions of Acts relating to water pollution in various States, it was not clear 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 10
how the effectiveness of implementation of these Acts were analyzed and monitored by the 
CPCB/MOEF in relation to water pollution. Thus, CPCB/MOEF was not aware of how the 
provisions, particularly provision of the levy of penalty under The Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution)  Cess Act, 1977  and The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974  were being enforced, extent of violations compared to total users and extent of 
enforcement etc . We felt that the low quantum of penalty of ` 10 thousand as also the 
failure of the State in enforcing the provisions of the Act strictly to secure prevention and 
control of water pollution, has led to the situation where the cost of non compliance 
became significantly lower than the cost of compliance with the provisions of rules and 
orders under the Acts. Thus, there was need to strictly enforce the provisions of the Acts , 
while reviewing the quantum of penalty as also the  wide disparity prevailing under the 
various Acts which ranged from ` 10 thousand to ` one lakh prescribed in Environment
Protection Act 1986. 
MoEF stated in its reply of June 2011 that it had enacted legislations like Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act and the Environment Protection Act for control of water 
pollution in India. It further stated that as per sections 25/26 of the Water Act, 1974 no 
industry or operator process or any treatment and disposal system can be established 
(which is likely to discharge sewage or effluents) without the previous consent of the State 
Board and no industry or process can discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream, well, 
sewer or land in excess of the standards and without the consent of the Board.
2.1.2 In the States 
x Of the 25 States test checked, Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974
was adopted by all the 25 States and States pollution Control Board/ committee   were 
framed  in all these States. 
While the responsibility of management and development of ground water rests with CGWB, 
the prevention of water pollution comes under the purview of MOEF.  
While the Act envisages both monetary and non-monetary penalties, ultimately, a highly 
tolerant inspection regime of th e SPCBs ensures that the  costs of defiance, non-adherence 
and violations are lower than the costs of compliance. 
MoEF has not framed any legislation which specifically identifies pollution as an 
environmental offence and restoration of water bodies as a priority action.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 11
2.2  International Best practices 
Several international conferences have been held to address the issue of water pollution 
world-wide. The following are particularly notable as they set the global agenda for 
management of water bodies. India also participated in these deliberations and concurred 
with their findings.
2.3  Policy framework 
Strong policy framework is an essential first step in effectively regulating water quality. Lack 
of a comprehensive approach has often led to costly and ineffective water policies. Good 
and enforceable regulations must follow creation of an overall water quality policy. With 
respect to policy formulation by the government, we observed the following at the Central 
and State levels.
2.3.1 At the Centre 
The National Water Policy was adopted in 1987 and was reviewed and updated by National 
Water Policy 2002 by the Ministry of Water Resources in 2002. This policy aimed at meeting 
the challenges that have emerged in the develop ment and management of water resources 
including water pollution.  The following are the salient features of National Water Policy 
relating to water pollution: 
Table 3: International conferences on water quality 
International Conferences Main issue
UN Conference on Human Environment, 
Stockholm, 1972 
Preservation and enhancement of human environment 
UN Conference on Water, Mar del Plata, 
1977 
Assessment of water resources, water use and efficiency
International Conference on  Water and 
Environment, Dublin, 1992 
Water and sustainable development 
UN Conference on Environment and 
Development (UNCED, Earth Summit), Rio 
de Janeiro, 1992 
Agenda 21, holistic management of freshwater and 
integration of sectoral water plans programmes within the 
framework of national economic and social policy 
First World Water Forum, Marrakech, 1997 Water and sanitation, management of shared waters, 
preserving ecosystems, to encourage the efficient 
use of water 
International Conference on Water and 
Sustainable Development Paris, 1998 
Management, protection and equitable use of freshwater 
resources 
Second World Water Forum, The Hague, 
2000 
World Water Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business
International Conference on Freshwater, 
Bonn, 2001 
Water – key to sustainable development 
Third World Water Forum, Kyoto, 2003; 
Fourth World Water Forum, Mexico, 2006; 
5th World Water Forum Instanbul, 2009.  
Raise the importance of water on the political agenda, 
support the deepening of discussions towards the solution of 
international water issues in the 21st century, formulate 
concrete proposals and bring their importance to the world's 
attention and generate political commitment.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 12
x Both surface water and ground water should be regularly monitored for quality. A 
phased programme should be undertaken for improvements in water quality. 
x Effluents should be treated to acceptable levels and standards before discharging 
them into natural streams. 
x Minimum flow should be ensured in the perennial streams for maintaining ecology 
and social considerations. 
x Principle of ‘polluter pays’ should be followed in management of polluted water. 
x Necessary legislation is to be made for preservation of existing water bodies by 
preventing encroachment and deterioration of water quality. 
x As maintenance of water resource schemes is under non-plan budget, it is generally 
being neglected. The institutional arrangements should be such that this vital aspect is 
given importance equal or even more than that of new constructions. 
x Improvements in existing strategies, innovation of new techniques resting on a strong 
science and technology base are needed to eliminate the pollution of surface and 
ground water resources, to improve water quality. Science and technology and 
training have to play important roles in water resources development and 
management in general. It emphasises on water quality and recycling and re-use of 
water.
“National Conservation Strategy and Policy Statement on Environment” and “National 
Environment Policy” were enacted in 1992 and 2006 respectively which are broad policy 
frameworks on environmental issues. 
National Environment Policy 2006 has outlined following elements of an action plan to 
address the water pollution. 
x Develop and implement, initially on a pilot scale, public-private partnership models for 
setting up and operating effluent and sewage treatment plants. Once the models are 
validated, progressively use public resources, including external assistance, to catalyze 
such partnerships. Enhance the capacities of municipalities for recovery of user charges 
for water and sewage systems. 
x Prepare and implement action plans for major cities for addressing water pollution, 
comprising regulatory systems relying on a appropriate combination of fiats and 
incentive based instruments, projects implemented through public agencies as well as 
public-private partnerships for treatment, reuse, and recycle where applicable, of 
sewage and wastewater from municipal and industrial sources, before final discharge to 
water bodies. 
x Take measures to prevent pollution of water bodies from other sources, especially 
waste disposal on lands. 
x Enhance capacities for spatial planning among the State and Local Governments, with 
adequate participation by local communities, to ensure clustering of polluting industries 
to facilitate setting up of common effluent treatment plants, to be operated on cost 
recovery basis. Ensure that legal entity status is available for common effluent 
treatment plants to facilitate investments, and enable enforcement of standards. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 13
x Promote R&D in development of low cost technologies for sewage treatment at 
different scales, in particular, replication of the East Kolkata wetlands and other bio-
processing based models for sewage treatment, to yield multiple benefits. 
x Take explicit account of ground water pollution in pricing policies of agricultural inputs, 
especially pesticides, and dissemination of agronomy practices.
The 2006 policy deals with water quality pointing out that improvement in existing 
strategies and innovations are needed to eliminate pollution of surface and ground water 
resources. It also States that resources should be conserved and availability augmented by 
maximising retention, eliminating pollution and minimising losses. Thus, addressing water 
pollution is one of the thrust areas of National Water and Environment Policy. 
In June 2011, MoEF stated that the National Environment Policy declared by MoEF in 2006 
briefly describes the key environmental cha llenges currently and prospectively facing the 
country, the objectives of environment policy, normative principles underlying policy action, 
strategic themes for intervention, broad indications of the legislative and institutional 
development needed to accomplish the strategic themes, and mechanisms for 
implementation and review.  
2.3.2 In the States
National Water Policy 2002 envisaged that within a time bound manner, say a period of two 
years, States would frame and adopt State Water Policy. With respect to State water policy 
formulations, it was observed that 18 States have framed water policy and in the remaining 
seven States, water policy was yet to be finalised. Only Kerala formulated a separate policy 
to deal with water pollution . Further water policy of most of the States also does not give 
adequate emphasis on prevention and control of water pollution. 
Any policy is only as good as its implementation. The National Environment Policy outlines 
a significant number of new and continuing  initiatives for enhancing environmental 
conservation.  A formal, periodic high level review of implementation of the different 
elements of the National Environment Policy is essential at least once a year.  The findings 
of the review should be publicly disclosed, so that stakeholders are assured of the 
seriousness of the Government in ensuring implementation of the Policy. However, no 
such review has taken place. 
The State government of Kerala has formulated a separate policy for addressing water 
pollution.
The policy addresses pollution issues by stating “There shall be specific plan of action for 
implementing location specific sewerage in all urban areas and appropriate sanitation 
system in all rural areas.  Appropri ate sanitation sub policy and action plan shall be 
formulated and implemented. The potential for recycling and reuse of water shall be 
recognized and all water users shall be di rected to adopt meas ure to recycle for 
incremental reduction in water extraction.”

2.4
2.4.1 
2.4.2 
Specific
through
vary fro
In most
Control
2.4.3 
Water
(
CPCB:
x Pla
aba
x Col
me
x Dis
and
x Lay
sta
P
M
C
W
Institutio
At the Cent
In the State
c programm
h NRCP/NLC
om State to 
t States, the
 Boards, an
Central Pol
(Prevention
n and cause
atement of 
llect, com p
easures dev
sseminate i n
d control; a
y down, mo
ndards for 
Policy-maki
For river/lake
Ministry of Env
& Forests (
Central Polluti
Board (C
For ground
pollution: M
Envrironment
(MoEF),  Mi
Water Resourc
Central Grou
Board (C
nal arrang
tre:
es:
mes for rive
CP are exe c
State.
e responsib
nd not speci
llution Cont
n and Contr
e to be exe
water;
pile and pu
ised for the
nformation
nd,
odify or ann
stream or w
ng
e pollution: 
vrironment
(MoEF),
ion Control 
CPCB)
d water 
Ministry of 
t & Forests 
inistry of 
ces (MoWR)
und Water 
CGWB)
Table 4
Water
gements f
r or lake p o
cuted throu
bility of cont
ifically to St
trol Board (
ol of Pollut
cuted, a na
blish tech n
eir effective 
 in respec t
ul, in consu
well 
Im
: Institutiona
r Pollution in
for manag
ollution con
ugh differen
trol of wate
tate governm
(CPCB):
ion) Act, 19
tion-wide p
nical and s t
prevention
t of matter s
ultation wit
mplementat
For River/
Pollution: Na
River Conser
Directora
For Grou
water:MO
MoWR
l arrangemen
n India
ging wate
ntrol, abatem
nt State go v
er pollution
ment depar
974 lays dow
programme
tatistical d a
n, control or
s relating t
h the State
tion
/lake
ational
rvation
ate
und
OEF,
R
nts for water p
Repo
r pollutio
ment or re s
vernment d
n is assigned
rtments.
wn the follo
for the pre
ata relating 
r abatemen
o water a n
 Governme
p
A
pollution in In
ort No. 21 of
n in India 
storation of
departments
d to State P
owing funct
evention, co
to water 
nt;
nd their pr e
ents concern
Monitoring
For River/
pollution: NRC
For ground w
pollution: C
Water Qua
Assessment A
ndia
f 2011-12
14
f quality 
s. These 
Pollution
tions for 
ontrol or 
and the 
evention 
ned, the 
g
lake
CD/CPCB
water
CGWB
ality
uthority

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 15
x Provide technical assistance and guidance to State Boards, carry out and sponsor 
investigations and research relating to problems of water pollution and prevention, 
control or abatement of water pollution.  
State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) 
The Act laid down important functions that the SPCB would perform. Some of the important 
ones are as follows:
x To plan and execute programmes for prevention, control and abatement of pollution of 
streams and wells in the State. 
x To collect and disseminate information on pollution; 
x To conduct investigations relating to problems of pollution; 
x To inspect sewage or industrial effluents and review the systems for the disposal of the 
same;
x To lay down, modify or annul effluent standards for sewage and trade effluents; 
x To evolve economical methods of sewage and effluent disposal and treatment.
x SPCBs are empowered by the Act to obtain information, to take samples of water for 
the purpose of analysing effluent discharge from any stream or well and to enter and 
inspect any place in relation to the duties entrusted to the SPCB.  
We observed that CPCB and SPCBs are autonomous of each other. While CPCB is under the 
administrative control of the MoEF and responsible for overall policy, planning and 
coordination , the SPCBs are under their respective State governments and are expected to 
work under the overall policy frame work of CPCB, MoEF and responsible for 
implementation of provisions of various  environmental Acts relating to Water pollution at 
the ground level. This dichotomy of control finds its source in the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, which further entrusts the SPCB with the critical functions 
of compliance to and enforcement of pollution control  related activities, whereas CPCB is 
given an advisory and coordination role. SPCBs are not empowered to generate adequate 
financial resources of its own to effectively discharge its mandate and are dependent on 
Central Government and State Government for grants even for expenditure on normal 
monitoring of pollution levels.
2.4.4 Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA):  
The Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) was set up at the central level in May, 
2001 for exercising powers under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 relating to issuing 
directions for protection and conservation of the environment and preventing, controlling 
Thus, while the outputs of the actions of CPCB and SPCBs are co-related, there is no 
functional co-relation between them at the input stage. This dichotomy of control causes a 
situation whereby there is no single agency to take charge of the issue of control of water 
pollution on a nation-wide basis. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 16
and abating pollution and to direct agencies (government/ local bodies/non-governmental) 
in the field of water pollution.
The mandate of this Authority is to direct agencies to standardize water quality monitoring 
methods, ensure proper treatment of wastewater to restore the water quality of surface 
and ground waters, take up R&D activity related to water quality management and promote 
recycling and reuse of treated wastewater.
Till date WQAA had issued only Uniform Monitoring Protocol (UMP) in 2005 for uniform 
procedure for sampling, analysis, data storage and reporting amongst the agencies 
operating Water Quality monitoring networks in the country. It also set up a Task Force 
which has made recommendations for development of Water Quality data information 
system and recommends steps for co-ordination in collection, use and dissemination of 
data; to review of Water Quality Monitoring network and recommend optimum network for 
the country and a system for accreditation of water quality laboratories in the country.
Apart from this, it had not taken any action towards promoting recycling/re-use of 
sewage/trade effluents, drawing up action plans for quality improvements in water bodies, 
schemes for restriction of water abstraction, reviewing the status of national water 
resources, identifying hotspots etc.
The Water Quality Review Committees  were constituted in some States with an objective 
to improve coordination amongst the Central and State agencies. They were to 
review/assess schemes launched/to be launched, to improve quality of water resources, 
review water quality data analysis and interpretation in order to identify problem areas. 
Their remit also included developing action plans for improving quality on a sustainable 
basis, identify hot spots for surveillance monitoring.
Conclusion 
While India has the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974 in place, the law 
does not address the issue of restoration of the polluted water bodies. It also does not 
define stricter financial and non-financial penalties to environmental offenders.  
Although the concerns related to water pollution have been adequately addressed in 
National Water Policy  and National Environment policy in India, both at the central and 
the State level,  provisions for generation of resources for  prevention of pollution, 
treatment of polluted water and ecological restoration of polluted water bodies are not 
adequate.
Since 2001 only seven meetings of Water Quality Assessment Authority have taken place.  
Water Quality Review Committees have been set up in  Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra ,Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, 
Tripura, UP and West Bengal. 
But the Committee has met regularly only in Maharashtra and Himachal Pradesh. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 17
Recommendation 1 
MoEF/States, in the policy on water pollution, need to specifically take into account 
prevention and control of water pollution as well as ecological restoration of degraded 
water bodies. There is a need to strictly enforce the provisions of the Acts, and review the 
existing levels of penalty in various Acts relating to control and prevention of water 
pollution.
Recommendation 2 
Legislations should be introduced by MoEF/States to specifically prevent water pollution. 
Further, it needs to craft a well thought out legislation for control of pollution which takes 
into account pollution from both point and non-point sources. It should also introduce 
legislations for restoration of degraded water bodies so that these degraded water bodies 
do not pose risks to ecological environment and human health. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 18
Chapter 3:  Planning for control of pollution of rivers, lakes 
and ground water 
A prerequisite of efficient protection of water resources against pollution is the preparation 
of a comprehensive and detailed plan of protection which takes into consideration all point 
and diffuse sources of pollution, pollution processes and movements, consequences and all 
possible structural and administrative measures of protection against pollution.  
Assessment of the quantity and quality of water resources includes identification of 
potential sources of freshwater supply and determination of sources, extent, dependability 
and quality of water resources and of the human activities that affect those resources. 
However, for assessing surface water and ground water resources, governments require 
adequate and comparable information. This data on water resources, both quantitative and 
qualitative, becomes the basis of sound decisions. 
Polluted water in rivers, lakes and ground water poses risks to environment as well as 
health of people exposed to the polluted water. The basin approach is being recognised as a 
comprehensive basis for managing water resources more sustainably and will lead to social, 
economic and environmental benefits. Water quality goals are the minimum acceptable 
standard of quality of surface water and ground water. These goals, in the nature of 
standards, are minimum acceptable standards which are enforceable by water pollution 
control agencies.
The identification of various indicators of water pollution for rivers and lakes were 
examined in audit and a summary position of the compliance for 25 States test checked is 
shown in the chart below: 
*
Out of 25 States test checked
4
3
2
12
6
7
0
2
6
8
9
6
15
0
1
6
8
02468 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6
Impact of Human activities - Uncontrolled disposal of human waste
Impact of Human activities - Water system infrastructure
Impact of Human activities - Mining
Impact of Human activities - Industry
Impact of Human activities- Agriculture
Identification of risk to human health
Identification of risk to aquatic species
Identification of risk to wetland
Quantification of Human produced Chemicals
Quantification of Pathogenic Organism
Quantification of Nutrients
Identification Biological Indicators
Identification of Chemical Indicators
Inventory  of water resources
Identification of Keystone species 
Preparation of list
Survey
Indicators for Rivers  Assessed and compliance thereto  (by Number of 
States*) out of 25 test checked States

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 19
In the case of the chart pertaining to rivers,  shows that out of 25 States test checked, the 
compliance to relevant indicators in terms of enumeration/identification/quantification etc. 
has been very dismal. At the best, in the case of one indicator namely identification of 
chemical indicators, there was compliance by 60 per cent of the States test checked. In the 
case of two indicators namely inventory of water resources and identification of risk to 
aquatic species, not a single State in the country had been able to comply with the 
standard.
*
Out of 25 States test checked 
In the case of the chart pertaining to lakes, shows an even more dismal position with regard 
to enumeration/identification/quantification of the relevant indicators. In the case of 
quantification of nutrients in the lakes, the compliance was by 28 percent of the States, in 
the case of three out of 13 indicators namely preparation of list, identification of Keystone 
species and identification of risk to aquatic species there was no compliance by any of the 
States.
The succeeding paragraph brings out the position in terms of individual States and the 
position obtaining at the Centre. 
2
6
3
0
2
4
6
7
4
6
0
0
4
012345678
Impact of Human activities - Uncontrolled disposal of human 
waste
Impact of Human activities - Industry
Impact of Human activities- Agriculture
Identification of risk to aquatic species
Identification of risk to wetland
Quantification of Human produced Chemicals
Quantification of Pathogenic Organism
Quantification of nutrients
Identification of Biological Indicators
Identification of Chemical Indicators
Identification of Keystone species 
Preparation of list
Survey
Indicators for Lakes Assessed and compliance thereto (by Number of 
States*) out of 25 Sampled States

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 20
3.1  Inventory of rivers/lakes and keystone species associated with them 
3.1.1 Preparation of inventory of rivers, lakes and ground water 
In order to make comprehensive and workable plans to tackle water pollution, it is 
necessary to establish databases on the availability of all types of hydrologic data at the 
national level and to identify surface and ground water resources and potential sources of 
water supply and prepare national profiles. In this regard, we observed that 
At the Centre 
Detailed inventory of rivers and lakes had not been made by MoEF. MoEF stated that no 
survey to identify all rivers and lakes was done and no identification and classification of 
rivers and lakes as major/minor rivers and lakes had been done by it.
It also stated that since assessment of ground water resources in the country was not in the 
mandate of MoEF the same has not been done. Audit observed however that the Ministry 
of Water Resources operates a Ground Water Information System which maps, among 
other things, hydrological boundaries, land use, drainage and water level.
In the States 
With respect to inventory of rivers, lakes and ground water  resources and identification of 
keystone species audit scrutiny showed that:
x Only eight States, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra and West Bengal, had carried out a survey to identify rivers in their States 
and six States, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Orissa had prepared 
an exhaustive list of rivers running in their States.
x Only four States, J&K, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal had carried out a survey to 
identify the lakes in their States.
x 14 States, Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Delhi and Rajasthan 
had carried out district-wise assessment of ground water resources.
In the absence of an inventory for rivers and lakes, MoEF, which is the nodal ministry for 
pollution related issues in India, would not have adequate knowledge and information on 
the water resources which is the key part of the platform for setting objectives for water 
pollution prevention and control and implementing responses to it. 
 The absence of such an inventory will also hamper the water pollution management by the 
States.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 21
3.1.2 Preparation of inventory of keystone species 
A keystone species is a species so critical to an ecosystem that its removal could potentially 
destroy the entire system. The concept of keystone species has become an important issue 
in conservation today as the loss or decline of keystone species may have far-reaching 
consequences for the structure and functioning of the eco-systems in which they live. 
At the Centre 
MoEF has not identified keystone species associated with each river and lake for major river 
systems and lakes in India. This has been done only in the case of Ganga River where river 
dolphin was identified as a keystone species. Such identification is imperative as it would 
not only act as indicator of the health of the eco-system but would also help MoEF to design 
programmes to protect species threatened by water pollution. 
In the States 
x Only Himachal Pradesh had identified keystone species associated with some of the 
rivers running in their States.
x No State had identified keystone species asso ciated with lakes in their States. Himachal 
Pradesh had identified some species of flies like Perlidae, Taenioperygidae, 
Ephemerellidae, Heptageneiidae and Hydropsychidae which live in streams. However, 
these were not keystone species. 
In June 2011, MoEF stated that identification of keystone species was location-specific and 
need-based. Further, MoEF stated that it had notified the Gangetic River Dolphin as the 
national aquatic animal. However, the reply was silent about preparation of inventory of 
keystone species for other major river systems and lakes in India.  
3.2  Identification of existing pollution levels in terms of chemical and 
biological indicators 
Chemical indicators like BOD, COD, faecal coliform and total coliform are traditional 
methods of water quality which provide an indication of organic pollution. However, due to 
complexity of effluents now entering the water bodies and the inability to develop analytical 
methods for each and every pollutant, use of biological indicators
6 is now assuming 
importance. Biological monitoring goes beyond the conventional measures of water quality 
to address questions of ecosystem function and integrity. 
3.2.1 At the Centre 
x Identification of chemical indicators of water pollution like faecal coliform, total 
coliform, dissolved oxygen and biochemical oxygen demand in rivers and lakes was 
                                                           
6 It involves the measurement of species or a group of species like invertebrates whose population is used to 
determine environmental integrity 
Absence of inventory of water bodies and keystone species associated with them leads to an 
incomplete understanding of water quantity and quality. The absence of such a database 
weakens the process of planning comprehensive and effective pollution control programmes. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 22
done by MoEF under the National River Conservation Programme and by CPCB under 
the Monitoring of Indian National Aquatic Resources (MINARs) programme. 
x CPCB had also identified chemical indicators of pollution of ground water in the country 
like arsenic, nitrate, iron, fluoride and salinity. Identification of indicators of pollution by 
industries which emit contaminants had been done by CPCB by means of indicators like 
anions, other inorganic ions and micro pollutants. However, these were tested only 
once a year. 
x This assumes significance in terms of the high levels of industrial pollutants which are 
being discharged into rivers, lakes and ground water in India as discussed later in this 
report.
x It was observed that CPCB has identified biological indicators (benthic macro-
invertebrates) for some rivers in India such as Yamuna, Narmada, Krishna, Cauvery, 
Tungabhadra, Gomti, Kosi, Mahanadi and Brahmani.  However such identification was 
not done for each river in India due to insufficient infrastructure facilities. 
MoEF stated in its reply of June 2011 that it had carried out studies relating to biological 
indicators and identified some limitations of such indicators. It also stated that biological 
indicators can supplement but not replace the chemical indicators. Also, agreeing with  
audit conclusions, MoEF stated that biological indicators reflect the effect of pollution on 
the water bodies.  
The reply of MoEF has to be seen in light of the fact that biological indicators go beyond the 
conventional measures of water quality to address questions of ecosystem function and 
integrity and give a complete picture of the extent of pollution of rivers, lakes and ground 
water in India.
3.2.2 In the States 
Audit scrutiny revealed that:
x 15 States, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, J&K, Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Delhi and 
Kerala had identified some chemical indicators of pollution of rivers while only six  
States, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand and West Bengal had 
done so for lakes. 
x Biological indicators of pollution for some rivers had been developed by six States: 
Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar (for only two rivers), Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and 
West Bengal while only four States, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttarakhand had done for some of the lakes in the State. 
x With respect to ground water, 17 States, Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Delhi and Rajasthan had identified existing 
pollution levels in terms of arsenic, nitrate, salinity etc.
Biological indicators had not been identified for any lake in India by MoEF/CPCB. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 23
3.3  Identification and quantification of contaminants  
A wide range of human and natural processes affect the biological, chemical, and physical 
characteristics of water and thus impact water quality. Contaminants 7 can harm aquatic 
ecosystems and make water unsuitable for human use.
 3.3.1 At the Centre 
Identification and quantification of contaminants like nutrients, erosion and sedimentation, 
water temperature, acidification, salinity, pathogenic organisms (bacteria, protozoa and 
viruses), human produced chemicals and other toxins, introduced species and other 
biological disruptions etc., had not been done in respect of any river or lake in India by 
MoEF, CPCB or by MoWR.  
Identification and quantification of pollution levels in ground water  in terms of arsenic, 
nitrate, iron, fluoride and salinity in ground water for each of the States in India has been 
done by CGWB. However, no identification and quantification has been done regarding 
presence of nutrients, human produced chemicals and other toxins in ground water.
3.3.2 In the States
With respect to identification and quantification of contaminants, audit scrutiny revealed: 
x Nine States, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal had identified and quantified nutrients in some 
rivers.
x Six States, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal had 
identified and quantified human produced chemicals in some rivers. 
x Eight States, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal had identified and quantified pathogenic organisms 
affecting quality of water in some of the rivers.   
x Seven  States, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Kerala, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and 
West Bengal had identified and quantified nutrients in respect of lakes. 
x Four States, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal had identified 
and quantified human-produced chemicals in some lakes and
                                                           
7 Contaminants like nutrients, erosion and sedimentation, acidification, salinity, pathogenic organisms 
(bacteria, protozoa and viruses), human produced chemicals and other toxins, introduced species and other 
biological disruptions etc 
The scenario of identification of chemical and biological indicators of pollution in rivers and 
lakes in the States reveals a particularly dismal position in respect of biological indicators.  
This also indicates that the planning process cannot be symmetrical as no comprehensive 
data is available to give a holistic picture of the nature and quantum of pollution in India’s 
surface water bodies. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 24
x Six States, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Uttarakhand and West Bengal 
had identified  pathogenic organism affecting quality of water in some of the lakes in 
their respective States.  
In June 2011, MoEF stated that CPCB had undertaken comprehensive studies/inventories of 
pollution sources and their effect in river basins like Ganga, Brahmaputra, Brahmini, 
Sabarmati etc., and published a document on assessment of industrial pollution which 
provided the pollution load from major industries.  
MoEF also stated that control of agricultural pollution was difficult and Ministry of 
Agriculture needs to devise suitable policy in this regard.
3.4  Identification and quantification of human activities that impact water 
quality 
Numerous human activities including agriculture, industry, mining, disposal of human waste, 
population growth, urbanisation, climate change etc. impact water quality. Agriculture can 
cause nutrient and pesticide contamination and increased salinity and nutrient enrichment 
has become one of the most widespread water quality problems of the planet. 
3.4.1 At the Centre 
MoEF/CPCB/MoWR have not carried out assessment and quantification of the effect of 
activities which affect the quality of water in rivers and lakes from an activity-based 
perspective such as mining or agriculture, or industrial sector. The water quality monitoring 
is presently carried out by CPCB’s 1700 monitoring stations including 490 locations for 
ground water on the basis of 28 parameters consisting of physio-chemical and 
bacteriological parameters.  
Further, CGWB had carried out only a few special studies regarding the effect of human 
activities on ground water like agriculture and uncontrolled disposal of human waste on the 
quality of ground water.
3.4.2 In the States 
With respect to assessment and quantification of the effect of activities which affect the 
quality of water in rivers and lakes, audit scrutiny revealed that with regard to 
CPCB had conducted studies on pollution sources and their effects. However, these studies 
took place between 1980 to 1995 and did not cover all rivers and all sources of pollutants.  
As such, these studies have not taken into account the impact of the rapid pace of industrial 
development which has added complexity to the quantity and type of pollutants.
No studies have been carried out by MoEF/CPCB to probe the effects of industrial activities 
like paper mills, pharmaceutical industry, chemical plants, distilleries, tanneries, oil 
refineries, sugar factories and mining. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 25
Quality of water in rivers:
x Effect of agriculture had been assessed only by six States: Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Goa, 
Odisha, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal;  
x Effects of industrial activities  had been assessed only by 12 States: Delhi, Haryana, 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand and West Bengal;
x Effects of mining had been analysed by only two States: Goa and Odisha; 
x Effects on the water system infrastructure has been assessed only by three States:
Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu; 
x Effects of uncontrolled disposal of human waste  had been assessed by only four States: 
Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and West Bengal. 
Quality of water in lakes:
x Effect of agriculture had been assessed by three States: Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu 
and West Bengal; 
x Effects of industrial activities had been assessed by six States: Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal; and
x Effects of uncontrolled disposal of human waste  had been assessed only by two States: 
Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal.
Quality of ground water:
x Effects of agriculture had been assessed only by seven States: Punjab, Haryana, Andhra 
Pradesh, Goa, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal; 
x Effects of industrial activities had been assessed only by nine States: Haryana, Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Delhi; 
x Effects of uncontrolled disposal of human waste on quality of water in the ground water 
had been assessed only by four States: Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala and West 
Bengal.
x Effect of mining on the quality of ground water had not been assessed by any State.
In June 2011, MoEF stated that the entire impact of human activities had been assessed by 
CPCB and for sewage generation, collection, treatment and disposal, separate documents 
had been produced.
The reply of MoEF needs to be viewed in light of the fact that the CPCB reports have 
essentially focussed on only one of the human activities, i.e., uncontrolled disposal of 
human waste which affect the quality of river water. Further, the reports do not address the 
impact of other human activities such as agriculture, mining etc., which impact the quality of 
water. Further these studies are more than two decades old and have not been done with 
respect to all the rivers, lakes and ground water sources in India. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 26
3.5  Assessment of risks of polluted water to environment and health 
Polluted water in rivers, lakes and ground water poses risks to environment as well as health 
of people exposed to the polluted water. With respect to assessment of risks, audit scrutiny 
revealed the following: 
3.5.1 At the Centre 
MoEF had not identified wetlands associated with each river/lake and no identifications of 
risks to these wetlands due to pollution of river water/lake water had been carried out by 
MoEF/CPCB. Further, MoEF/CPCB had not identified the major aquatic species, birds, plants 
and animals facing risks due to pollution of rivers and lakes. As such, MoEF/CPCB was 
unaware of the risks being faced by the environment as a result of pollution of rivers and 
lakes.
We observed in audit that risks to human health from water borne diseases and water 
based diseases as a result of pollution of  rivers and lakes has not been assessed by 
MoEF/CPCB.
With respect to assessment of risks to human health from pollution of  ground water, 
MoEF/CPCB stated that it had not been done while CGWB stated that such risk assessment 
was outside its purview. Thus, MoEF/CPCB/CGWB were unaware of the risks to human 
health being posed by polluted rivers, lakes and ground water.
3.5.2 In the States 
x Risks to wetlands from pollution of rivers and lakes have been assessed by only two 
States: Punjab and Tamil Nadu. 
x None of the States in India have identified the major aquatic species, birds, plants and 
animals facing risks due to pollution of rivers. 
x Risks to human health from water-borne diseases and water-based diseases as a result 
of pollution of rivers had been assessed by only seven States: Goa, Haryana, Jharkhand, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Odisha.  
x Risks to human health from arsenic, zinc, iron, mercury, copper, chromium, cadmium, 
lead, persistent organic pollutants like dioxins, furans and polychlorinated biphenyls as 
a result of pollution of ground water had been assessed by only two States: Assam and 
Karnataka.
In June 2011, MoEF stated that risk assessment was taken into account while developing the 
water quality objectives, criteria and standards. It also stated that diseases caused as a 
result of contamination of water are well known and such incidents are also well 
documented.
In 2009, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare reported that 1.14 crore cases of acute 
diarrheal diseases occurred in India. 
Both Union and State governments have failed to conduct comprehensive assessment of risks 
to environment and health. Such studies on risk assessment would have enabled them to put 
in place preventive measures to lessen the deleterious impacts of water pollution on human 
health as well as the fragile freshwater ecosystem. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 27
3.6  Basin level approach for control of pollution  
The basin approach 8 is recognized as a comprehensive basis for managing water resources 
more sustainably and will lead to social, economic and environmental benefits.
For the river Ganga, the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) was constituted in 
February 2009. We, however, observed that only government level stakeholders namely, 
Ministers of Urban Development, Water Resources, Deputy Chairman, Planning 
Commission and Minister of State for Environment were involved in consultations while 
setting up NGRBA. MoEF had taken very limited action on integration of policies, decisions 
and costs across sectoral interests relating to pollution such as industry, agriculture, urban 
development, navigation, fisheries management and conservation, including through 
poverty reduction strategies.  
Further, it did not engage in strategic decision-making at the river basin scale which guided 
actions at sub-basin or local levels. No involvement of private sector/civil society in 
investment decisions in the planning process was found. With respect to lakes, no planning 
was found to have been done according to the basin approach. 
In June 2011, MoEF stated that the need for a river basin approach for conservation had 
been already recognised by the Central Government and National Ganga River Basin 
Authority (NGRBA) had been set up as an empowered planning, financing, monitoring and 
coordinating authority for the Ganga River with new institutional structures. It further 
stated that the objective was to have the river basin as the unit of planning, to shift from 
town-centric to river-basin approach and to have a comprehensive response covering water 
quality and flow, sustainable access, environment management, prevention and control of 
pollution in the form of a national mission.
Audit acknowledges the fact that the basin approach has been adopted for conservation of 
river Ganga and MoEF must now start planning similar basin approaches for all the river 
basins in India, starting with the ones which are the most polluted like River Yamuna.  
3.7  Development of water quality goals, corresponding parameters for 
each river/lake and their enforcement 
Water quality goals are the minimum acceptable standard of quality of surface water and 
ground water. These goals, in the nature of standards, are minimum acceptable standards 
which are enforceable by water pollution control agencies. Action should be taken against 
agencies that violate such standards.
                                                           
8 Basin approach promotes the coordinated development an d management of water, land and related 
resources of the whole river basin to maximize the resultant economic and social welfare in an equitable 
manner without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems.
With respect to planning for control of pollution at the basin level, we observed that MoEF 
established a long-term vision for only Ganga river basin as against the 24 major river basins 
existing in India. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 28
In this regard, it was observed that MoEF had failed in development of water quality goals 
and corresponding parameters for each river and lake . MoEF also had not established 
enforceable water quality standards that protect human and ecosystem health. It had only 
developed water quality criteria for five activities and general standards under Environment 
Protection Act, 1986 for wastewater discharge to a water body, land and sea.
The Environment (Protection) Act (EPA) introduced in 1986 sought to take steps for the 
protection of environment and prevention of hazards to human beings, other living 
creatures, plants and property.
Section 15 the act laid down that “ whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the 
provisions of this Act, or the rules made or orders or directions issued there under shall in 
respect of each such failure or contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or both, 
and in case the failure or contravention continues, with additional fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention continues 
after the conviction for the first such failure or contravention.”  
With respect to ground water, it was observed that standards for agricultural practices and 
runoff pollutant levels for ground water had not been set by either MoEF or CGWB. CGWB 
stated that it was outside its purview. No monitoring of pollution caused by agricultural 
practices and runoff pollutant levels were being done by MoEF/CPCB/CGWB. While MoEF 
stated that information was available with Ministry of Agriculture and Departments like 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research, CGWB stated it was outside its purview. Enforceable 
water quality standards that protect human and ecosystem health have not been set by 
MoEF. CGWB stated that it was outside its purview. 
Conclusions 
The compliance in terms of enumeration/identification/quantification of indicators have 
been very dismal by the States. The absence of a comprehensive inventory of rivers/lakes 
and keystone species associated with them, which form a key step in planning the control 
of pollution in aquatic resources, reflects deficiencies in the planning process.
The Ministry failed to adopt a wide-ranging approach towards identifying pollution levels 
in different water bodies. This was so because of its focus on chemical indicators and its 
lack of attention to biological indicators.  
The risk assessment procedures of MoEF/CPCB and the States were deficient as they failed 
to carry out comprehensive identification and quantification of human activities which  
impact water quality and the different sources which affect water quality. No agency in 
the country has assessed the risks of polluted water in rivers/lakes/ground water to health 
and environment.
MoEF/CPCB have set no water quality goals for the country. They have also not set any 
standards for agricultural practices and runoff pollutant levels for rivers and lakes. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 29
The enforcement of standards of water quality are bound to meet with limited success 
given that MoEF has not adopted the basin-level approach for control of pollution of rivers 
and lakes. It has also not developed water quality goals and corresponding parameters for 
each river/lake. 
As such, overall planning for the control of pollution on part of MoEF and the States was 
inadequate which would have concomit ant repercussions on implementation of 
programmes for control of pollution and their outcomes as discussed in the succeeding 
chapters.
Recommendation 3 
MoEF/CPCB should initiate steps, along with other client ministries like Ministry of Water 
Resources and all the States to draw up a comprehensive inventory of all rivers, lakes and 
ground water sources in India. It should also undertake a survey to list all the keystone 
species associated with each river and lake in India. This inventory should also be placed in 
the public domain. 
Recommendation 4 
MoEF/CPCB and most States need to intensify their efforts in developing biological 
indicators to ensure that the functional integrity of aquatic ecosystems are safeguarded. 
Recommendation 5 
MoEF/CPCB and most States need to undertake a comprehensive assessment to identify 
and quantify the contaminants present in each river and lake in India. This would not only 
help MoEF and States in designing regulations for their control but also help in safeguarding 
health of humans as well as the ecosystem. Identification and quantification of nutrients, 
pesticides etc., need greater priority due to immense damage they cause to health of 
ecosystems as well as human health. This process of identification and quantification should 
also be taken up on priority basis as a high proportion of ground water is used for potable 
supply.
Recommendation 6 
MoEF and most of the States need to also take steps to identify and quantify the effect that 
human activities like industries, agriculture, mining, urbanisation etc., have on water quality 
of rivers, lakes and ground water. This will enable MoEF and States to design targeted 
programmes which would seek to regulate those human activities which are causing the 
most pollution. 
Recommendation 7 
MoEF and CPCB, along with most States need to undertake assessment of risks posed to 
health and environment due to pollution of rivers, lakes and ground water in India. MoEF 
can also coordinate with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  in assessment of risks to 
health posed by polluted water and get diseases caused by water pollution included in the 
Health Status Indicators published by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Recommendation 8  
MoEF should take into account the basin approach while planning for reduction of pollution 
of all rivers and lakes in the country. The basin approach will allow it to address the 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 30
pollution of rivers and lakes holistically and integrate policies and plans with other 
ministries and civil society/research organisation which will be more effective in tackling 
pollution issues in the long run.
Recommendation 9
With respect to lakes, all three attributes of the lake, i.e., the basin, the water body and the 
command area need to be conserved instead of the present focus of NLCP on the water 
body only.
Recommendation 10 
MoEF/ States needs to develop water quality goals and corresponding parameters for each 
river and lake which is essential for regulating ecosystem health and integrity.
Recommendation 11 
MoEF also needs to establish enforceable water quality standards for rivers, lakes and 
ground water that would help protect human and ecosystem health. Penalties need to be 
levied for violations of water quality standards. Further, MoEF, in conjunction with Ministry 
of Agriculture, needs to develop standards for pollutants like nitrogen, phosphorus etc., 
which arise from agricultural practices, use of pesticides and fertilisers as pollution from 
agricultural sources is one of the biggest non-point source of pollution. 

Cha
4.1 Pro
4.1.1 
With re
we obs
In the 
launche
Ganga.
were i
n
program
For lake
2001 fo
urban a
waste w
Inte
Sew
Low
Riv
apter 4: 
pol
ogramme
At the Cent
espect to p
erved the f
case of ri v
ed Ganga A
Subsequen
ncluded in 
mme is ongo
Table 5
es, MoEF h
or conservat
areas of th
water into la
erception an
wor
wage Treatm
w Cost Sanit
Electric Cre
ver Front De
Wor
Public aw
Human Re
Develop
 Implem
lution o
s for cont
tre
programme
following: 
vers Minist
ction Plan (
ntly, the p r
National R
oing.
: Activities c
has implem
tion and m
e country w
akes.
nd Diversio
ks
ment plants
tation work
ematoria
evelopment
rks
areness
esources 
pment
Water
mentati
of rivers
trol of pol
s for sour c
ry of Envir
(GAP) Phase
rogramme w
River Cons e
covered und
ented the 
anagement
where deg r
•to
o
on
•fos
•toks
•to
cr
•imt
•th
•ca
co
r Pollution in
ion of p
s, lakes 
lution of r
ce protectio
onment a n
e-I in 1985
was exten d
ervation Pl
er National 
National L a
t of polluted
radation w
o capture the 
pen drains an
or treating the
o prevent ope
o conserve th
remation of b
mprovement o
hrough media
apacity buildi
onservation
n India
rogram
and gro
rivers, lak
on, treatm e
nd Forests (
to address 
ded to oth e
an (NRCP) 
River Conser
ake Conser v
d and degra
as primaril y
raw sewage f
nd divert them
e diverted sew
en defecation 
e use of wood
bodies brough
of bathing gha
a and other ou
ng, training an
Repo
mmes for
ound wa
kes and gr
ent and re s
(MoEF), G o
the issue o
er rivers a n
in Decem b
rvation Plan
vation Plan 
aded lakes 
y on acco u
flowing into th
m for treatmen
wage
on riverbanks
d and help in e
t to the burni
ats
utreach progra
nd research in
ort No. 21 of
r contro
ater
round wat
storation o f
overnment
of pollution 
nd all the p
ber 1996 a
n
(NLCP) sin
in urban an
unt of disc h
he river throu
nt
s
ensuring prop
ng ghats
ammes
n the area of r
f 2011-12
31
ol of 
ter
f rivers,
of India 
of river 
projects
and the 
ce June 
nd semi-
harge of 
ugh
per
river

Agricult
fertilize
into ri v
rivers/la
For the
Accordi
the pur
from a g
Program
point so
The Mi
restorat
launche
States.
water
quantit
4.1.2 
Audit s
c
x Only
lake
Preve
In-s
Catch
Lake f
P
H
No pr
rivers
synth
Tab
ture is wid
er runoff, c h
vers/lakes.
akes and ch
 mitigation
ing to MoE
rview of Mo
griculture s
mmes for s o
ource pollut
nistry of W
tion of wa
ed in 2005, 
Its goals ar
bodies, an
ative than q
In the State
crutiny on t
y Tamil N a
es;
ntion of po
point sou
situ measur
cleanin
hment area
front eco-de
Public  awa
Human Res
Developm
rogrammes 
s and lakes 
hetic pesticid
ble 6: Activit
ely practic e
hemical pe
This has 
hoking them
 of pollutio
F, the Non -
oEF. Awaren
sector and 
ource wate
tion of grou
Water Reso u
ter bodies 
has been s
e to improv
d increase 
qualitative f
es
this issue re
adu had fr a
llution from
urces 
res of lake 
ng
a treatment
evelopmen
reness 
ources 
ment
have been i
by measur e
des and ferti
Water
ties covered
ed in our m
sticides ru n
contribute
m with weed
on of ground
-point sourc
ness progra
the same w
r protectio
undwater h
urces has i
with dom
anctioned i
ve select ta
water us e
focus.
evealed:
amed prog r
•sewerag
area
m
•desilting
manipula
•afforestat
•strengthnt
•outreach
•capacity
conserva
ntroduced f
es like pro m
ilizers, integ
r Pollution in
under Natio
major river 
noff seep i n
d significa
ds and caus
d water, we
ce from ag r
mmes of M
would hav e
n of ground
ave been in
mplemente
estic as w
in respect o
nk systems 
e efficienc y
rammes fo r
ge and sewage
g, deweeding, 
ation, nutrien
ation, storm w
hening of bund
h programme
y building, trai
ation
for tackling a
moting the 
rated pest m
n India
onal Lake Co
basins an d
nto the gr o
ntly to in f
ing eutroph
e observed 
ricultural pr
oEF are pro
e t o  b e  d ea
dwater and
ntroduced b
ed a sche m
ell as exte
of 1098 wat
and their c
y. This sc h
r source w
e treatment fo
bio remediat
nt reduction, c
water drainag
d, lake fencing
s with citizens
ning and rese
agricultural n
use of org a
management
Repo
nservation P
d runoff fr o
ound water 
fusion of 
hication.
the followi
ractices doe
ojecting the
alt by Mini s
d for tackli n
by MoEF.
me for repa
rnal assist a
ter bodies i
catchment a
heme, how
ater prote c
or the entire la
ion- aeration,
constructed w
e, silt traps et
g, shoreline de
s of different 
earch in the ar
non-point so
anic manur e
t.
ort No. 21 of
Plan 
om agricult
or flow u n
nitrogen i n
ing:
es not com
e issues of p
stry of Agri
ng agricultu
ir, renovat
ance. This 
n 26 distric
areas, recha
ever, has 
ction of ri v
ake's catchme
, bio-
wetland appro
tc.
evelopment e
age groups
rea of lake 
ource pollut
e, banning u
f 2011-12
32
ure like 
ntreated 
nto our 
e under 
pollution
culture.
ral non-
ion and 
scheme
cts of 15 
arge the 
a more 
vers and 
ent
ach
etc.
ion of 
use of 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 33
x Programmes have been framed for pollution prevention of rivers by only five States: 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam,  Delhi, Haryana and Kerala; 
x Only Kerala and Tamil Nadu had designed programmes for pollution prevention of 
lakes;
x Only Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Kerala and Sikkim had framed programmes for tackling 
agricultural non-point source pollution of rivers; 
x Only Goa, Sikkim and Kerala had framed programmes for tackling agricultural non-point 
source pollution of lakes; and
x Only Andhra Pradesh, Goa and Kerala had framed programmes for tackling non-point 
source pollution of ground water. 
MoEF stated in June 2011 that pollution from industrial sources was required to be tackled 
through enforcement of pollution control laws by the State Pollution Control Boards by 
means of obtaining consent to establish and operate from the concerned Pollution Control 
Board.
It also stated that action was to be initiated against the defaulters by the concerned SPCB 
under the provisions of the Water Act 1974 and EPA Act 1986. However the fact remains 
that these were not included under NRCP and various reports of CPCB illustrate the fact that 
these standards were not strictly enforced and industrial effluents continued to pollute river 
and lake water. 
 4.1.3  Criteria laid down by NRCD  for selecting a river/lake for Conservation:
A lake/river may be selected for conservation under the NRCP/NLCP if
x The water body-river, lake or the sea is so degraded that it cannot be put to its 
traditional and desired use. 
x The people are strongly aware of the degradation. 
x They highly value the restoration of the water body. 
x lakes smaller than 10 hectares and less than three metres depth or temporary/seasonal 
lakes which dry up every year should not be covered. 
4.1.4  Criteria for selecting towns for taking up Conservation of rivers and lakes 
Works may be proposed in a town if :
x The town is located on the bank of river or lake or is a coastal town. 
x The population of the town is at least one lakh. 
x The water body (river/lake) is highly degraded and cannot be put to its 
traditional/designated use because of: 
x Discharge of domestic waste water/industrial waste 
x municipal solid waste 
x other non-point sources of pollution 

x The
x Wr
sed
x The
the
con
x The
con
exp
x The
and
x The
wil
wil
4.2 Th
The pro
1. Iden
2
e flood plain
rong land u
diment tran
ere is high l
e water bo
nservation m
e citizens a
ntribution o
penses of O
e local bod y
d implemen
e residents
ling to cont
ling to cont
e process
ocess of incl
ntification of
2. List of poll
3 (i) Sta
aim to c
by CPCB
Al
fo
n is heavily 
use in viol a
sport to the
level of awa
dy leading 
measures.
re willing t
of a mini m
& M and ot
y is willing 
nting the pr
 of the to w
tribute a mi
tribute a mi
s of inclusi
lusion of riv
T
f polluted riv
luted river st
ates  prepare
control pollu
B and send to
lternately: 3(
und polluted
4. NRCD
revision
Water
encroached
ation of t h
e water bod
areness abo
to the de
o demonst
mum of 10 %
ther heads.
to make it
oject and ca
wn, the lo c
inimum of 3
nimum of 1
ion of rive
vers into NR
Table 7: incl
ver stretches
tretches sen
e DPRs for pr
ution of river 
o NRCD
(ii) States sen
d by the State
approves D
r Pollution in
d.
he Master 
dy.
out the city 
mand fro m
rably raise 
% of the p
s contribut
arrying out 
cal body a
30% of the p
10% of the p
ers under 
RCP is show
usion of rive
s by CPCB
nt to States
ojects like I&
stretches ide
nd DPRs for r
e as per NRCD
DPR or sends
n India
Plan leadi n
being the m
m the resid e
additional
project cos t
ion and ta k
O&M at its
nd the St a
project cost
project cost
NRCP 
n in the gra
ers into NRC
&D, STP, LCS w
entified as po
rivers not in C
D criteria
s it back to St
Repo
ng to heav y
major cause
ents of th e
resources a
t and to m
ke responsi
s own cost. 
ate Govern m
t, out of wh
t
aph below: 
P
which
olluted
CPCB list but
tates for 
ort No. 21 of
y soil eros
e of degrad
e town to 
and make f
meet the r e
bility for p r
ment toge t
hich the citiz
t
f 2011-12
34
ion and 
dation of 
take up 
financial
ecurring 
reparing 
ther are 
zens are 


Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 35
Audit findings:
4.2.1 Selection of rivers 
At the Centre 
Assessment of pollution of rivers from different sources not comprehensive 
There was no comprehensive assessment of the pollution levels of all the rivers in India from 
the different sources before MoEF initiated NRCP. The pollution load discharged by cities 
and towns in Ganga river basin was worked out in 1984.  In 1988-89, CPCB identified 10 
polluted river stretches to concentrate the pollution control efforts. The study of polluted 
river stretches formed the basis for formulation of River Action Plan. CPCB identified 39 
polluted river stretches during the year 1992 and subsequently increased to 139 polluted 
river stretches in 2006 and to 150 polluted river stretches in 2008. The pollution load 
generated by Class I Cities and Class II towns, river basin-wise, was first worked out and 
published in the document in the year 2003.
CPCB has laid down the liquid effluent discharge standards for 42 industries. These include 
battery manufacturing, dairy, fertilisers, hotels, oil drilling and refining tanneries and 
thermal plants. However, it had not quantified the effluent load in all the rivers by each 
source. That is to say, it did not take into account small, medium and large industries, 
distilleries, mines, oil refineries, tanneries, paper and pulp industries, sugar factories, 
agriculture runoff, pesticides and insecticides sprayed on crops as potential causes of 
pollution.
In June 2011, MoEF affirmed Audit’s conclusions stating that the projects for abatement of 
pollution on rivers had been selected by NRCD on the basis of quality of water. The project 
proposals submitted by the State Governments contained information on details of waste 
water generated in the town/city, the extent of treatment capacity available and details of 
industrial pollution. Further, MoEF stated that detailed guidelines for the preparation of 
DPRs under NRCP hitherto followed have now been revised.   
Further, NRCP focussed on sewage and crematoria as the sources of pollution of rivers. 
Other kinds of pollution (like industrial pollution) were not considered which had an equal, if 
not more, adverse effect on health and environment. 
In the States 
x Only Bihar, Goa, Odisha and Punjab had conducted a survey to quantify pollution 
caused by sewage to all the rivers by all the towns/cities situated on banks of rivers 
flowing in the State.
x Only Odisha and Punjab had made some attempts to quantify pollution caused by 
industries and agriculture runoff flowing into its rivers.
Although CPCB has created a list of the sources of pollution, MoEF has not created 
programmes to prevent effluents entering the rivers.  NRCD projects deal only with 
stretches where pollution has already occurred. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 36
x Only eight States, Bihar, Delhi, Haryana, Kerala, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttarakhand, had sent a list of polluted rivers in the State, based on assessment of 
amount of pollution, to MoEF for inclusion under NRCP.
x Of the 20 States in which rivers have been included in NRCP, the State governments in 
only eight States, viz., Bihar, Goa, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu 
and Uttarakhand planned to address the complete reduction of pollution of the river.   
In June 2011, MoEF stated that the collection of sewage and providing adequate 
infrastructure for its treatment and disposal was the responsibility of the State 
Governments. It further stated that MoEF was not mandated to carry out projects for 
providing sewerage facilities in the States and MoEF was only supplementing efforts of State 
Governments by providing financial assistance.   
It also stated that with the modest resources allocated for the programme, only certain 
rivers and certain cities could be taken up for implementing pollution abatement 
programmes which was dependant on the proposals received from the State Government 
with their willingness to provide the required 30 per cent share of project cost and 
commitment for operation and maintenance of created assets. MoEF also stated that it was 
primarily the responsibility of the industry concerned to adhere to the effluent standards 
prescribed, which was being monitored by the State Pollution Control Boards under the 
provisions of the Water (prevention and control of pollution) Act 1974.
MoEF's reply fails to address the concerns raised by audit regarding the planning of 
pollution control programmes. While it is an undisputed fact that the responsibility for 
creating infrastructure for collection, treatment and disposal of sewage rests with the 
States, as per Section 16(2) (f) of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, 
it is the responsibility of CPCB to collect, compile and publish data relating to water 
pollution and devise measures for its effective prevention and control.  
Further, there is no comprehensive database on the pollution load entering water bodies 
across the country. Also, data on sewage generation published by CPCB in December 2009  
pertains only to Class I and II towns while the rural hinterland remains unrepresented. 
Similarly, the data on Common Effluent Treatment  Plant ( CETP)  pertains to 78 CETPs in this 
country relating to the period 2002-2005. The reply is silent on these issues of identification 
of towns and cities which were most responsible for polluting the rivers flowing through and 
MoEF has shifted the onus of responsibility for such identification onto SPCB. It is agreed 
that industry-specific effluent standards and action plans have been devised by CPCB, 
however, there is no indication that such data has been used to plan the programme for 
reduction of pollution of rivers.
4.2.2 Inclusion of rivers under NRCP not based on their pollution levels
As mentioned in para 4.1.3 and 4.1.4,  priority is to be accorded to those stretches of a river 
which has been identified by CPCB as being most polluted. The projects are formulated on 
City Sanitation Plan. The emphasis is on the entire town, rather than the entire river, even 
though a token nod is made for the need to adopt a holistic approach. Since projects are 
being selected in a fragmented manner and not primarily for reduction of pollution of the 
entire river, the efforts to clean up the river are bound to only yield fractional results.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 37
x Audit scrutiny showed that rivers in States like Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Tripura, Chhattisgarh, Meghalaya and Puducherry figured in the list of polluted river 
stretches but no river was selected for inclusion under NRCP.  
x Similarly, in the case of Goa, river Mandovi was not identified as most polluted stretch 
but was included in NRCP.
x It was also observed that in Kerala, the most polluted stretches were along rivers 
Karamana, Puzhackal and Kadambayar but Pamba, which did not figure in this list, was 
selected under NRCP.
x Similarly in Uttarakhand,  most polluted stretches were along river Kosi, Dhela and 
Kichha and Bahalla  but Ganga, which does not figure in this list was selected.
x Two rivers namely, Mandovi and Beehar did not figure in any survey of polluted 
stretches and the lists of polluted rivers produced by CPCB over the years.
CPCB stated that the polluted stretches were identified based on the network of 980 
monitoring stations on rivers. It also stated that since all the streams in the country were 
not monitored, it was not possible to conclude that all the polluted stretches of rivers in the 
country were identified. The reply reveals that rivers were to be included under NRCP only if 
they figured in the list of most polluted rivers and illustrates the fact that CPCB surveys were 
not comprehensive.
In June 2011, MoEF stated that water bodies not meeting the desired water quality criteria 
had been identified as polluted. While 10 river stretches not meeting the desired criteria 
were identified during 1988-89, 37 were identified in 1992 and 150 were identified in 2008. 
Towns and cities were included under NRCP for abatement of pollution of rivers on the basis 
of proposal received from the State Governments and approved under NRCP on the basis of 
funds available under the Plan from time to time.
The reply of MoEF needs to be viewed in light of the fact that given that CPCB data is 
accessible, or indeed, under the control of MoEF, this data was not utilised to point out the 
discrepancies to State governments while scrutinising their proposals . This is an indicator of 
the fact that mere preparation of database is not a sufficient condition for the efficient 
implementation of a programme. Audit found no evidence to show that the said data was 
being co-related to the DPRs being forwarded by States.
Audit observed instances where polluted rivers  were not selected und er NRCP and others, 
which were less polluted,  were selected for pollution control. 
The State-wise selection of rivers in NRCP was as ymmetrical. For example, 69 projects for 
Madhya Pradesh and 83 for Tamil Nadu were appr oved under NRCP. By comparison, only 69 
were approved for Maharashtra, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh put together, despite the fact 
that the latter group had more number of polluted rivers.

4.3
The pro
4.3.1 
Prior to
highly d
were p
were pr
4.3.1.1
Quantif
industri
agricult
this info
by thes
4.3.1.2
In orde
at the 
prepar
e
prioritie
done o
(based
public
d
share).
The res
the se l
governm
in their 
1. Iden
2
The proce
ocess of incl
At the Cent
o introducti
degraded u
rioritized a
roposed for
Quantificat
fication of 
ies, distill e
tural runoff
ormation, M
e sources.
Inclusion o
r to identify
instance o
ed under t h
es for lakes 
n the basis 
on CPCB’s “
demand a n
sponse of t h
lection of 
ments, MoE
States.  
ntification of 
2. List of pollu
3.  States  p
lakes ident
O
po
ess of incl
lusion of lak
tre
on of NLC P
urban lakes
nd 10 poll
r conservati
tion of pollu
pollution
eries, min e
f, pesticides
MoEF would
of lakes und
y polluted a
of Planning 
he study. I n
in their Sta
of hydrolo
“Designated
nd if stake h
he States w
lakes for 
EF again re q
polluted lake
uted lakes se
prepare DPRs
ified as pollu
r 3. State sen
olluted by th
4. NRCD 
Water
usion of l
kes under N
Table 8: incl
P, a Nation a
 for conse r
uted & de g
ion.
ution of all 
of all the
es, tanneri e
s/insecticide
d not be a b
der NLCP wh
and degrade
Commissio
n Novembe
ates for con
gical data (
d Best Use’’
holders pro
was limited 
conservati
quested Sta
es by CPCB
ent to States
s for projects
uted by CPCB
nd DPRs for la
e State as pe
approves  D
r Pollution in
akes unde
NLCP is show
lusion of lak
al Committe
rvation an d
graded urb
the lakes n
 lakes in
es, paper 
es was not 
ble to target
hich were n
ed lakes ac
on. A list o
r 2002, M o
nsideration
(relating to 
’ norms) an
mised to b
so, in Jun e
on and t o
ates to tak e
s which aim t
 and send to 
akes not in C
er NRCD crite
PR or sends i
n India
er NLCP 
wn in the ch
kes into NLCP
ee set up b y
d manage m
an lakes h a
not done 
terms of 
and pulp 
done by M
t the reduct
not included
ross the co
of 62 lake s
oEF asked a
under NLCP
the quanti
d Administr
bear 10% o f
e 2004, in o
o consider 
e up the ex
o control po
NRCD
CPCB list but f
eria
it back to Sta
Repo
hart below: 
P
y MoEF in 
ment. Later 
aving som e
sewage, s m
industries
MoEF/CPCB.
tion of poll
d in the prio
untry, a stu
s requiring 
ll State Go v
P. This prior
ty of wate r
rative criter
f the costs 
order to de v
the prior i
ercise of p r
llution
found
ates for revisi
ort No. 21 of
1993, ident
in 1994, t h
e tourism p
mall/mediu
s, sugar f a
. In the ab s
ution being
ority list
udy was car
conservati
vernments
ritisation w
r), scientific
ria (based o
out of th e
velop objec
ities of th
rioritizing th
ion
f 2011-12
38
tified 21 
he lakes 
potential
m/large
actories,
sence of 
g caused 
ried out 
ion was 
to send 
as to be 
c criteria 
on heavy 
e State’s 
ctivity in 
e State 
he lakes 


Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 39
Further, 12 projects covering 23 lakes were included under NLCP even though these did not 
figure in the priority list of lakes prepared by the States concerned.  
Scrutiny also showed that although seven States 9 had sent MoEF a priority list of lakes to be 
included under NLCP, MoEF sanctioned no funds to these States. It was also observed that 
out of 28 States and seven Union territories in India, NRCD had funded projects in only 14 
States. Out of 58 lakes, 16 lakes were funded in Karnataka, 14 in Maharashtra and five each 
in Uttarakhand and Rajasthan.
Chart showing number of lakes prioritized by state and out of those number of lakes 
sanctioned under NLCP 
4.3.2 In the States  
x Seven States, namely, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Andaman and 
Nicobar, Manipur and Assam had furnished priority list but no lake was funded in these 
seven States.
x Six States namely Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Uttaranchal, West Bengal, Tripura and 
Nagaland had not furnished their priority list of lakes but NRCD funded eight projects 
covering 15 lakes in these States and  
x 12 projects covering 23 lakes were funded even though these were not included in the 
priority list of lakes furnished by the respective States.
In June 2011, MoEF stated that in order to identify polluted and degraded lakes across the 
country and at the instance of Planning Commission, a study was carried out by it in 
November 2003 as a result of which, a list of 62 lakes across the country requiring 
                                                           
9 Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar, Manipur and Assam
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Nos of 
lakes
prioritized
by state
Nos of 
lakes
sanctioned
under
NLCP from 
state
priority list
The consolidated priority list furnished by MoEF to audit in respect of all the 
States/UTs revealed that only 12 States/UTs had prioritized their lakes which 
indicated the low priority attached by the States to this vital activity. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 40
Some details to be contained in DPRs: 
x Review of the status of the river/lake system. 
x Identification of degraded stretches & towns 
responsible for it. 
x Selection of Towns in order of priority where 
conservation works should be taken up and 
the justification for their selection. 
x Information about the river/lake and basin/ 
catchment useful for system and component 
design. 
x Investigation carried out for DPR Preparation. 
x Design of system and components. 
x Human, physical and financial resources 
required for Operation & Maintenance and 
the manner in which they will be ensured. 
x Plan for Public Awareness & Public 
participation. 
x Monitoring & Evaluation plan. 
x Cost Estimates with drawings and 
specifications. 
conservation was prepared. State Governments were asked to review this list and to 
prioritize the lakes in their States for submission of proposals under NLCP. MoEF further 
stated that while States like Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Manipur, Assam etc, 
furnished priority lists but either did not submit any proposal for consideration under NLCP, 
or the same were not found meeting NLCP guidelines, other States sent their proposals, 
which were examined by MoEF and approved for funding under NLCP.
The reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that selection of lakes was not based on 
objective pollution-related criteria. MoEF, while confirming the position outlined by audit, is 
silent on the specific reasons as to why certain proposals were approved/not approved. The 
fact remains that there was no quantification of pollution load of each lake by way of 
sewage, industrial effluents or agricultural runoff and as a result, it is likely that some lakes 
which were more polluted than the ones selected for abatement, were not included under 
NLCP. As the nodal agency for pollution prevention in India, MoEF should have played a 
more proactive role in selection of polluted lakes, based on pollution-related criteria, under 
NLCP.
4.4 Performance of projects undertaken under NRCP
4.4.1  No technical evaluation of DPRs  
The DPRs were appraised in-house by MoEF and were not sent to a specialist task 
force/panel of scientists from reputed institute for evaluation. As a result, expert feedback 
was not available while sanctioning projects under NRCP. From the evidence made available 
to Audit, it is not clear how MoEF ensured that the DPRs  were complete, that they 
addressed the right concerns and would ensure effective and efficient implementation. 
MoEF had not fixed any time limit for preparation and submission of DPRs by the States to 
MoEF and for approval of DPRs by MoEF.
In June 2011, MoEF endorsed the audit 
findings and stated that the project 
proposals submitted by State 
Governments were being examined by the 
NRCD scientists till recently. MoEF also 
stated that presently projects are being 
appraised by independent appraisal 
institutions after which these are taken for 
approval before the competent 
authorities.
While it is recognised that MoEF now has 
the DPRs vetted by technical experts, the 
fact remains that DPRs sent to it since the 
1980s have been scrutinised by MoEF in-
house. To that extent, the assessment of 
the DPRs and the plan of implementation 
contained in the DPRs may not have been 
a process informed by technical know-how 
and therefore, could end up contributing 
to less than optimal outcome.

4.4.2 In
plants 
As alrea
primary
evaluat
under
perform
rated g
satisfac
utilisati
remov
a
sludge
observ
e
unquali
result t
wide. T
Char
t
As is e v
Bangalo
checked
generat
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
nadequacies
ady discusse
y focus of p
ted the pe
NRCP in 2
mance of 4 6
good, while 
ctory. The 
on was i n
al was the 
handling f
ed that the 
ified staff fo
he gap betw
he chart be
t showing t
vident, ev e
ore only a m
d in audit,
ted.
140
170
90
45
s in perfo r
ed, the trea
projects se
rformance
2007. Acco
6 STPs was 
the perfo r
CPCB Rep o
nadequate.
most neg l
acilities be
task of op
or the task,
ween total 
elow brings 
town-wise q
en the Nat i
miniscule 10
 only the 
200
235
236
104
82
Water
rmance of 
atment of s
lected und e
of 84 of 
rding to t
poor or v e
rmance of t
ort pointe d
 It also s
lected are a
ing out of 
erating the
 which was
generation
out the pos
quantity of 
actua
ional Capit a
0 per cent a
city of Ah 236
250
290
69
135
129
r Pollution in
sewage t r
ewage has 
er NRCD. C
the 175 S T
his evalua t
ery poor, ei
the balanc e
d out that 
stated tha
a with mo s
order. Th e
e STPs was g
s a factor i n
of sewage 
sition.
sewage ge
ally treated 
al was tre a
and Hydera
medabad h
410
426
129
300
162
n India
reatment 
been the 
CPCB had 
TPs built 
tion, the 
ght were 
e 30 was 
capacity 
t sludge 
st of the 
e Report 
given to c o
n the poor p
and what is
enerated (m
(mld)
ating 62 pe
abad 43 per
had the c a
496
650
203
650
Repo
ontractors w
performanc
s actually tr
mld) and qua
er cen t of s
r cent. Amo
apacity to 731
950
1200
481
407
54%
Table 9: 
STPs as 
go
sat
po
ort No. 21 of
who were d
ce of the S T
reated is ex
antity of se
sewage ge n
ong the lar g
fully treat 1200
2906
120
1816
Q
o
se
g
d
to
(m
Q
o
s
e
a
tr
(m
10%
36%%
Performance
per CPCB, 200
ood
tisfactory
oor/very poor
f 2011-12
41
deputing
TPs. As a 
xtremely 
ewage
nerated;
ge cities, 
sewage
Quantity
f
ewage
enerate
 in the 
own
mld)
Quantity
f
ewage
ctually
reated
mld)
%
%
e of 
07

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 42
Thus, STPs which were the mainstay of NRCP, were not achieving the objectives set out for 
them.
In June 2011, MoEF endorsed the audit findings and stated that due to a variety of 
unforeseen reasons, full utilisation of installed capacity is not possible. It further stated that 
one of the reasons for under-utilisation of capacity was inadequate collection of sewage 
from city due to incomplete network of sewers. MoEF’s reply highlights the urgent need for 
holistic view of sewage treatment which requires not just construction of STP, but also 
assessment of sewer drains, efficiency of sewage collection, removal of sludge around STP 
and the need for uninterrupted power supply to them. 
4.4.3 In the States 
Audit test checked 140 projects across 19 States and 41 towns situated on banks of 24 rivers 
for detailed scrutiny. Results of audit scrutiny of implementation of these projects are 
discussed below:
x Out of 140 projects test checked, 75 per cent (105 projects)  were completed. 30 
remained incomplete, work was stopped in two projects, two projects were abandoned 
and no information was available to verify the status of one project. 
x Out of 105 completed projects, 86 projects were completed after the scheduled date of 
completion. The extent of delay in completion is given in the table below: 
Table 10
Extent of delay Number of projects 
Between 1 month and 1 year 26
More than 1 year to upto 2 years 11
More than 2 years to upto 3 years 6
More than 3 years to upto 5 years 26
5 years and above 17
x  Out of 94 completed projects  pertaining to STP, I&D, MPS, LCS, SWM, Sewer Line, 
Crematoria, Disinfection Plant etc, 50 projects were able to perform as envisaged, in  14 
projects, performance was hampered due to infrastructural problems and for 
remaining 30 projects, information was not available to verify the status. 
x Of the completed projects, 28 projects costing `251.27 crore were constructed but  
not utilised as yet. The list of projects constructed but not utilised is attached as 
Annexure 2. 
x Out of the 105 completed projects, only in 14 projects, the State governments had 
assessed whether installed capacity was fully utilised. For 62 projects, this information 
was not available and for remaining 53 projects, the State governments had not 
assessed whether installed capacity was fully utilised. 
x Of the 47 STPs test checked, 37 STPs were completed. Out of 37 completed projects,  
targets for effluents treatment were met in 13 STPs  and in seven projects, targets were 
met partially. Two projects were shut down due to infrastructural problems and for 
remaining 15 projects, information was not available to verify the status.   

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 43
 Detailed Audit findings with regard to implementation of NRCP projects of 19 States are 
discussed below 
Andhra Pradesh 
Audit test checked six projects for cleaning up Godavari and Musi rivers in Rajamundry, 
Ramagundam and Hyderabad. We found that none of the projects  test checked  had met 
their intended objectives of pollution control.
Bihar
We test checked six projects in the cities of Barahaya and Patna sanctioned for control of 
pollution of Ganga river. None of these projects met their objectives of controlling pollution 
entering the Ganga. 
Delhi
In Delhi, 10 projects which aimed to control pollution in river Yamuna were  test checked. 
x In Ramagundam town, two STPs were not wo rking according to installed capacity. The 
interception and diversion project was not servi ng its purpose as pumps were found 
missing and the pump house was not put to use.   
x In Rajahmundry town, one te st checked project was comp leted after a delay of more 
than 5 years.  
x In Hyderabad, one test checked completed project, levels of Faecal Coliform had 
increased in Musi after  leaving  Hyderabad.  
x Two of the projects, viz., construction of diesel crematoria at Danapur and River Front 
Development of GulbiGhat, Patna remained incomplete.  
x In Patna, ghats constructed in 2003 were either defunct or not being maintained.  
x Another River Front Develo pment at Danapur was also in  a deplorable condition and 
was not being used.  
x The project for River Front Development at Barahaya completed in July 2002 was not 
found to be existing as the course of Ganga has shifted from the proposed sites. Both 
the ghats  were completely destroyed due to erosion.
x Capacity of the test checked STP at Sen Nursin g home was 10 mld whereas the total 
sewage generated was around 60-70 mld; the rest of 50-60 mld untreated sewage was 
being discharged into the Yamuna river.  
x In respect of test checked STP at Delhi Ga te Nala, capacity of created STP was 10 mld 
whereas total sewage generated was around 40-50 mld. Remaining 30-40 mld 
untreated sewage was falling into the Yamuna river.  
x Two other STPs were designed to treat 3 mld of sewage each, but each of them was  
treating 1 mld of sewage, the rest being discharged into the Yamuna.  
x Another STP of 2 mld was constructed but the plant had been shut down since 2007 
and all the sewage (2 mld) was being discharged into river Yamuna through 
drain/nallah without treating.  
x Another STP was still not complete.  
x Low Cost Sanitation project completed in 2003, envisaged construction of 1146 units 
but only 959 units were built, out of which only 471 were functioning. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 44
Goa
In Goa, out of five sanctioned projects for control of pollution of Mandovi river in Panaji 
town, four were test checked by Audit.
Gujarat 
In Gujarat, out of 13 projects selected for control of pollution of Sabarmati in Ahmedabad, 
nine projects were test checked by Audit. 
Haryana
In Haryana, Audit selected 10 projects in the cities of Faridabad and Panipat for detailed 
scrutiny.
Jharkhand
Four projects which aimed to control pollution of river Subarnarekha in Jamshedpur and 
Ranchi cities were test checked in audit. 
Karnataka
Audit test checked three projects for control of pollution of Bhadra, Tungabhadra and 
Pennar rivers in the citites of Bhadravati, Devanagare and Bangalore.
x Two projects were completed and were functioning as envisaged.  
x No information  was available regarding completion date of the remaining 2 projects. 
x All the test checked project s were completed and were working as envisaged. The 
capacity of the STP is higher than the quantity of sewage generated. Currently, no sewage 
flows  into the Sabarmati from the city. 
x Seven test checked projects were completed after delay of up to a year.  
x In Faridabad city, STP was constructed to treat 20 mld of sewage but was treating only 14 
mld and the rest 6 mld was flowing into the Yamuna.  
x In Panipat, no information was available regarding the utilisation of the test checked 
projects. 
x In Ranchi, one test checked project has not yet been completed. 
x In Jamshedpur, the projects involving construction of low-cost sanitation and river front 
development projects were still incomplete. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 45
Kerala
In Kerala, all the six projects sanctioned for control of pollution of river Pamba being 
implemented in Pamba city were test- checked in Audit. 
Madhya Pradesh 
Eight projects for control of pollution of rivers Khan at Indore, Betwa at Vidisha and Kshipra 
at Ujjain were test-checked in Audit.
Maharashtra
In Maharashtra, nine projects to control pollution of Krishna and Godavari rivers in the 
towns of Karad, Nashik, Sangli and Nanded were test checked. 
x Interception and diversion project for Bhadra  river in Bhadravati city scheduled to be 
completed in July 2005 was still not complete. 
x STP in Davanagere was built after a delay of 4 years due to delay in handing over of land. 
x In Bangalore, the I&D Environment Action Plan for rehabilitation of sewers was not yet 
complete.
x The total sewage generated in Bangalo re was 1200 mld and  only about 10 per cent (120 
mld) of this sewage was currently being diverted for treatment. 
x Two of the test checked projects had not yet begun though the se were scheduled to be 
completed by 2007.
x Construction of STPs at Pamba and Sabar imala have not yet co mmenced due to non-
availability of forest land and changes in design of STP. 
x All projects were completed but after significant delays of 3-5 years.  
x STP in Indore was treating only 40 mld of sewage and 50 mld of untreated sewage was 
being discharged into river Khan.  
x In Vidisha, STP was not treating the sewa ge according to its capacity and 1.8 mld of 
sewage was flowing directly into Betwa.  
x In Ujjain, the STP was not being maintained properly and 5 MLD of untreated sewage was 
being discharged into Kshipra. 
x While seven projects were completed after delays, two were not yet complete. 
x  In Karad, all the projects was delayed.  
x In Sangli city, construction of STP and I&D wa s not yet complete and the entire 27 mld of 
untreated sewage of Sangli city was being discharged into the river Krishna.  
x In Nashik, STP at Chehdi did not perform to  its full treatment capacity and the STP 
treated only 15 mld sewage.  
x In Nanded, the whole int ercepting sewer was submerged during the rainy season, 
increasing   possibility/chances  of mixing of sewage with river water.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 46
Odisha
In Odisha, Audit test checked seven projects to control of pollution of Mahanadi in Cuttack 
city and coastal areas in Puri. 
Punjab
In Punjab, eight projects for control of pollution of Sutlej river in Ludhiana and Jalandhar 
were test checked by Audit. It was observed that projects were completed after delays of 
more than four years.
Rajasthan
In Rajasthan, four projects being implemented for control of pollution of Chambal river in 
Kota city were test-checked. 
Sikkim
Two projects for control of pollution of Rani Chu river being implemented in Gangtok city 
were test checked by Audit. 
x In Jalandhar city, STP at Garha (Pholriwal) was constructed to treat 100 mld of sewage 
but was treating only 82 mld sewage. 
x STPs at Baloke in Ludhiana was also treating  only 74 mld of sewage while the STP 
capacity was 152 mld. 
x STP at Jamalpur, Ludhiana was affected due to inflow of industrial waste, delay in 
chlorination work and non-availability of uninterrupted power.  
x Main Pumping Stations at Jamalpur and Baloke were shut frequently due  to power 
cuts, thus affecting their capacity to pump sewage into STPs. 
x One project was still in progress. 
x The projects involving construction of improved wood crematoria /river front 
development and LCS were completed and working as planned. 
x All the projects except those in Puri were completed af ter significant delays of more 
than 3 years.  
x In respect of STP constructed in Matagajpur, Cuttack, 42.5 mld of untreated sewage was 
still being discharged into the Mahanadi.  
x In Puri, the project, which included construction of I&D, STP & MPS, was scheduled to 
be completed in 2006 was not yet complete. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 47
Tamil Nadu 
Audit test checked 11 projects in Tamil Nadu for control of pollution of Adyar and Cooum 
river being implemented in Chennai town, for control of pollution of Cauvery river being 
implemented in Tiruchirapally and for control of pollution of Vaigai river being implemented 
in Madurai city. 
Uttar Pradesh 
14 projects for control of pollution of Yamuna river in the city of Ghaziabad, for control of 
pollution of Ganga river in Kanpur city and for control of pollution of Gomti river in Lucknow 
city were test checked by Audit. 
x One project was completed after a delay of  2 years 10 months , the other project was 
still incomplete, despite scheduled for completion in 2010.  
x STP built in Gangtok did not achieve its pu rpose as sewage of 11 mld was reaching the 
STP as against the STP capacity of 8 mld and 3 mld of sewage still being discharged into 
Rani chu.  
x The other test checked project ‘Rehabilitation of Main Sewer Line and construction of 
STP is still going on though it was Stated to be completed in July 2010.  
x Four STPs built to check the flow of untreated sewage from Chennai city in Adyar/Cooum 
were working as envisaged. However, it was observed that the combined sewage 
treatment capacity of all the 4 STPs was 481 mld which was inadequate as the estimated 
sewage flow from Chennai was 731 mld.  
x Both the STP and interception and diversion projects in Tiruchirappalli-Srirangam were 
delayed by two years and 8 months. 
x One project in Madurai city for control of pollution of Vaigai river was not completed and 
work of STP phase 2  was dropped  due to non identification of  land for STP  under 
NRCD, which was later  taken u
p by Corporation under JNNURM.
x Only 9 of these 14 projects were complete and the rest were ongoing, beyond the 
scheduled date of completion.  
x 5 out of 6 projects in Kanpur remained incomplete and con tinued withou t extension 
from MoEF.
x In Ghaziabad, two STPs, at Hindon and in Trans-Hindon were not functioning as per 
prescribed standards of SPCB , as a result of  which the entire untreated sewage was 
directly being discharged into river Yamuna/Hindon.  
x In Lucknow, STP at Daulatganj was not being utilised at its full capacity and was treating 
only 34 mld of sewage against designed capac ity of 42 mld. Further, the treated sewage 
did not meet standards prescribed by NRCD indicating that the entire un treated sewage 
of 34 mld was discharged into river Gomti.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 48
Uttarakhand
Nine projects were test checked in Uttarakhand which aimed to control pollution of river 
Ganga in Haridwar/Rishikesh, Srinagar and Uttarkashi. 
West Bengal
10 projects for the control of pollution of river Ganga in Barrackpore, Gayeshpur, Halilshar & 
Kancharapara and control of pollution of river Mahananda in Siliguri were test-checked in 
Audit.
In June 2011, MoEF endorsed the audit findings and stated that after approval of the 
project, implementation of the project including tendering, execution of works etc., was 
done by the State Implementing Agency. It further stated that cost and time overruns in 
projects were due to a variety of reasons which include lack of inter-agency coordination at 
field level, delays in acquisition of land for STPs & pumping stations, contractual problems, 
court cases, etc.
MoEF also stated that it had taken several steps to prevent time and cost overrun like 
signing Memorandum of Understanding and tripartite agreements between the 
implementing agency, State nodal agency and local body to avoid time and cost escalation.
x 7 of 9 projects were completed and the remain ing 2 were not yet complete though the 
scheduled completion date was October 2009.  
x In Haridwar/Rishikesh, the project for I&D an d STP works at Lakhshman Jhula and Swarg 
Ashram were scheduled to be completed in October 2009 but were yet to be completed  
x STP at Bhopatwala in Haridwar on river Ganga was to be completed in October 2009 but 
project was yet to start due to non-transfer of land from UP Irrigation Department. 
As a result of delay in construction of this ST P, it was observed th at the I&D work at 
Loknath Nala at Bhupatwala was affected.  
x In Srinagar, all projects were completed after delays.  
x In Uttarkashi, the capacity of the STP Part I on river Bhagirathi planned to treat 0.25 mld 
but actually no sewage was being treated. 
x In Siliguri, one project was completed after delay while the status of another project was 
not clear. The STP was not completed thoug h scheduled date of completion was June 
2011. The Main Pumping Station (MPS) for STP-I, II & III was scheduled for completion in 
October 2007 but was   still not complete. 
x In Barrackpore, it was observed that though the river front development project 
(Kolkata) was completed, it was not yet commissioned and was lying unused. Similarly, 
though the Main Pumping Station was complete, it was not yet commissioned due to the 
fact that the linked project, i.e., interception and diversion work was not yet complete.  
x In Gayespur/Halilshar, the Lifting Stations was yet to be commissioned though these 
were completed in 2004-2009.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 49
The reply of MoEF needs to be viewed in light of the fact that almost 83 per cent  of the 
completed projects were delayed which points to the fact that measures taken by MoEF to 
prevent time and cost overruns were ineffective. MoEF’s reply also highlights concerns 
which plague the implementation of projects by State governments which have been 
planned and funded by the Central government.
4.5 Performance of projects undertaken under NLCP
Details of these projects may be seen in relevant State-specific chapters. 
4.5.1 At the Centre 
4.5.1.1 Inadequate Inspection of projects by MoEF 
Projects being implemented by the States under NLCP were not being regularly inspected by 
MoEF. As such, MoEF would be unaware of the difficulties faced during implementation and 
the opportunity to make mid-course corrections was lost. Out of 22 lakes project test 
checked, all were not monitored regularly, with most projects being monitored only once 
during the implementation.  
4.5.1.2  In the States 
22 lake projects included under NLCP for restoration and conservation across 14 States were 
test checked by Audit for detailed scrutiny. We observed that out of the test checked 22 
projects:
x Only projects relating to two lakes viz, Kotekere and Powai Lake were completed. 
Projects relating to 18 lakes remained incomplete beyond the date of completion and 
one lake project was abandoned.  The targeted date of completion of one projects 
(Twin lakes in Mokokchung, Nagaland) was still not over. The extent of delay is depicted 
in the table below: 
Table 11
Extent of delay Number of projects   
Between one month and  1 year  Pushkar, Dal lake 10
More than 1 year to up to 2 years Shivpuri lake, Mansi ganga 
More than 2 years to up to 3 years Rankala lake 
More than 3 years to up to 5 years Banjara, Sharanabasaveshwara, Veli Akkulam, 
Bindusagar, Laxminarayanbari, Nainital, Kotekere,  
Durgabari,  Dimsagar lake  
More than 5 years  Mansagar, Ravindra Sarovar, Kodaikanal, Mirik lake 
x Projects relating to Bellandur lake were abandoned while projects relating to two lakes, 
viz., Laxminarayanbari and Durgabari lakes in Agartala were yet to commence.
x Of the two completed projects, it was observed that water quality after implementation 
of the project was restored to the criteria for Designated Best Use classification for B 
class waters in case of Kotekere lake, while in the case of Nainital Lake, the water 
quality report of December 2010 revealed that criteria for designated best use 
classification for B class water for all parameters was achieved except Total Coliform 
(TC) and Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). Further, in case of Sharanabasaveshwara 
lake also, there was significant improvement its water quality after the ongoing 
restoration works. 
                                                           
10Has been extended upto 2012. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 50
x Out of test checked lakes, in the case of three lakes namely, Kotekere, Nainital and Twin 
lakes, Bio-conservation zones around the lake for better safeguard of the lake 
surroundings from the growing pollution potential and encroachments had not been 
notified. No information was available for the rest of the projects. 
Nainital Lake 
The success story of the Project to restore Nainital lake: 
x Transparency of the lake has increased. 
x Decrease in concentrations of toxic gases li ke carbon dioxide, ammonia, hydrogen sulphide 
and methane. 
x Decrease in concentrations of nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus. 
x No algae bloom observed after aeration. 
x Suitable conditions for the growth  and breeding of environment friendly fish species like 
mahseer. 
x Concentrations of dissolved oxygen in the lake ha ve increased from the bott om of the lake 
to the surface. 
x No fish fatalities have occurred after the aeration work. 
x BOD levels came down from 21mg/lt to 6.8 mg/lt and improvements in other parameters. 
x Whole lake catchment area has been covered by sewer line. No sewage is entering the lake. 
x Open defecation has been controlled by constructing the community toilets. 
x After launching Mission Butterfly, solid waste, garbage of the whole town is being managed 
in a more sustainable way. 
x There is improvement in aesthetic view within periphery of lake.


Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 51
Details of implementation of all the test checked lakes/projects are discussed below: 
Banjara Lake – Andhra Pradesh 
In February 2005 NRCD sanctioned the project ‘Rehabilitation and Rejuvenation of Banjara 
lake’ at a total cost of 
` 2.76 crore with scheduled date of completion by August 2006. Work 
on the project involved activities like construction of STP, lake rejuvenation, lake front 
development area, establishment of compost plant/laboratory and diversion of storm water 
drain.
Dal Lake – Jammu and Kashmir
The project was approved / sanctioned at a cost of 
` 298.76 crore and the target date of its 
completion was March 2010, which was extended upto March 2012. The project has two 
components viz. Lake Conservation Programme and Rehabilitation Programme. 
Bellandur Lake – Karnataka 
The project for restoration and conservation of Bellandur lake was sanctioned in January 
2003 and was slated for completion in August 2004. 
Kotekere Lake – Karnataka
The activities to be undertaken for restoration and conservation of Kotekere lake comprised 
of construction of STP, Low Cost sanitation, de-silting, de-weeding, lake fencing etc.  The 
Project not completed due to dispute over the proposed site for sewage treatment plant 
which was an essential component of the project. 
Work on the project suffered due to problems like infirmities in the DPR, inefficient working 
of Sewage Treatment Plants, non-development of housing colonies under Rehabilitation 
Programme etc. 
x Lake Development Authority, Bangalore (LDA) in June 2004, entrusted execution of  
work to a contractor, to be completed by January 2005 with commitment that it would 
take responsibility for stoppage/diversion of sewage entering the lake.  
x However, LDA failed to stop/ divert the inflow of sewage in th e lake and as a result, 
oxygenation of the lake pro ved inadequate and ineffective  and rendered the lake non-
conducive for bio-remedial treatment.  
x The contractor complained in April 2005 against failure to stop sewage inflow. Experts 
from Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore in May 2005 attributed failure of the project 
mainly due to discharge of untreated sewage directly into the lake.  
x In April 2006, LDA decided to suspend the project till stoppage of sewage inflow was 
achieved and to go for arbitrati on regarding the contract and thereafter challenge the 
arbitral award in High Court of Karnataka. As a result, execution  of the project  was 
remained suspended. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 52
originally sanctioned date of completion of the project was March 2006 but the project was 
actually completed in May 2009. 
Sharanbasaveshwara Lake - Karnataka 
The activities to be undertaken for restoration and conservation of Sharanabasaveshwara 
lake comprised of construction of STP, interception and diversion works, low cost sanitation 
etc., at a sanctioned cost of ` 4.89 crore. The originally sanctioned date of completion of the 
project was September 2006 but the project is still on going and the date of completion had 
not been revised. 
VeliAkkulam Lake – Kerala  
The activities to be undertaken for restoration of VeliAkkulam lake included construction of 
STPs at Ulloor & Valiathura, dredging, bioremediation etc., at a cost of `24.56 crore, to be 
shared  70:30 ratio between the Centre and State. The project was sanctioned in August 
2005 and scheduled to be completed in August 2007. 
Shivpuri Lake – Madhya Pradesh 
Project under NLCP was sanctioned at a cost of 
` 51.99 crore for restoration and 
conservation of Shivpuri lake for completion by August 2009. 
x Delay in completion of the project: due to increase in scope of work of de-silting the lake 
and heavy rains disrupting desilting of lake.  
x Activities like construction of STP, construction of low cost sanitation, strengthening of 
bund, lake-fencing, and shoreline developme nt, de-silting and de-weeding carried out as 
planned.  
x Water quality in Kotekere lake after implement ation of the project wa s restored to the 
criteria for Designated Best Use classification for B class waters.  
x As such, the project had achieved its ob jective of conservation and restoration of 
Kotekere lake.  
x The project was incomplete due to heavy dewatering and de-silting of the lake. 
x Water quality of the lake had improved due to diversion of sewage by the underground 
drainage system.
x No work had begun and funds released by Mo EF had been deposited into Savings Bank 
Account in 2006.  
x An MoEF site visit report of September 2010 revealed that the de-weeding and de-silting 
work was under progress but no other activities had been undertaken. 
x Work on the project involved activities like de-weeding, de-silting, storm water drains, 
construction of low-cost sanitation, bathing ghats, lake- front development, and public 
participation. All of these were still incomplete. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 53
Powai Lake – Maharashtra  
The project for restoration and conservation of Powai Lake was sanctioned in June 2001 at 
an estimated cost of 
` 6.62 crore with a scheduled date of completion by April 2003. The 
activities for conservation and restoration included water treatment and bioremediation 
through de-weeding, de-sludging, aeration, applying special bio-products for treatment and 
revival of the lake etc. 
Rankala Lake - Maharashtra 
In October, 2006, MoEF sanctioned a project for restoration and conservation of Rankala 
Lake to Kolhapur Municipal Corporation at an estimated cost of 
` 8.65 crore with 
completion scheduled for January 2009. Some of the activities envisaged under the project 
included demarcation of lake boundaries, cleaning and removal of aquatic weeds, aquatic 
plants etc., removing sediments in the lake, desilting of feeder canals, treatment of lake 
body and lake peripherals etc. 
Twin Lakes (
Amok Lushi and Yimdong Awatsung) – Nagaland
The total cost of the project was ` 25.83 crore, to be shared in the ratio 90:10 by 
Government of India and Government of Nagaland. The project involved construction of 
sewers and manholes, sewage pumping unit, de-weeding, de-silting, storm water 
management, building check dams/silt traps, measures for shore line 
protection/stabilization, inlet and outlet management, low cost sanitation works, lake front 
development, aquaculture etc. The first instalment was sanctioned in October 2009 and the 
project was scheduled to be completed in two years. The States’ share of ` 0.65 crore was 
released in April 2010. 
x The project was declared completed by MoEF despite non-submission of project 
completion report along with final utilization certificate by the implementing agency 
(Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai) to MoEF.  
x Therefore, it is not possible to comment whether the water quality of Powai Lake was 
restored to the criteria for Designated Best Use classification for B class waters after 
im
plementation of the project. 
Though the sanctioned  period of the project had expired in January 2009, project was still 
continuing without any extension. 
x The two Lakes were selected for this program me even though they did not qualify for 
selection under NLCP based on the  requisite depth criterion, nor on the basis of scientific 
criteria of  discharge of industrial and domestic waste water into the lake and 
degradation of quality of lake water. 
x Joint inspection of the lake site by Audit and St ate government showed that there was no 
discharge of any domestic, industrial or municipal waste water into the lake.  
x The Nagaland Government could incur an expenditure of ` 6.46 crore upto March 2011. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 54
Bindusagar Lake – Odisha 
Bindusagar Lake in Odisha was selected under NLCP for restoration and conservation at the 
sanctioned cost of `3.36 crore. Activities envisaged for restoration and conservation of the 
lake were providing simple & biological treatment using aquaculture; providing sanitary 
facilities for pilgrims and community members; restoration of the lake by de-weeding, de-
watering & de-silting; aesthetic development & beautification; setting up of an 
Interpretation Centre etc. The project was to end in 2007 but it was not yet complete.
Mansagar Lake - Rajasthan 
The project for conservation and restoration of Mansagar Lake was sanctioned in 
September 2002 by MoEF at an estimated cost of 
`22.39 crore. This was revised to ` 24.72 
crore in December 2002.  The activities for restoration and conservation of Mansagar lake 
included construction of lake front promenade, construction of check dam in forest valley, 
construction of three nesting islands, installation of physio-chemical treatment plant, 
construction of artificial wetland and in-situ bio-remediation system. The scheduled date of 
completion was March 2004 which was revised to March 2007 but the project is still not 
declared commissioned /completed. An expenditure of 
`24.72 crore was incurred upto May 
2011.
Pushkar Lake – Rajasthan
Pushkar lake was facing problems due to siltation, scanty rains, lack of facilities for tourist 
and consequent degradation of water quality. Hence, it was included under NLCP and a 
project was sanctioned for its restoration and conservation. The restoration involved 
activities like de-silting, lake front development, aeration with ozoniser, afforestation, inlet-
outlet arrangement etc. The scheduled date of completion was August 2010, but the work 
was still incomplete.
Pichola Lake – Rajasthan  
Pichola lake in Udaipur was being subject to heavy anthropogenic pressure by Udaipur city. 
As such, it was included under NLCP and the Project for conservation and sustainable 
management of Pichola Lake System was sanctioned in February 2009 at an estimated cost 
of
` 84.75 crore with scheduled date of completion by February 2012.
x Low cost sanitation had not yet been built and the construction of the interception and 
diversion sewers was also not complete.  
x The State government did not provide reasons for non-completion of the project. 
x Project delayed due to delay non- availability of land for construction of physio chemical 
Treatment Plant.    
x BOD levels had improved, but they were still above the danger level indicating high 
organic pollution. 
x Until November 2010 the de-silting work and building of toilets, aeration, construction of 
inlet-outlet and settling tank was completed.  
x The lake front development works, works relating to afforestation were  still on going.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 55
Kodaikanal Lake - Tamilnadu 
The project was sanctioned at the cost of ` 5.13 crore and was scheduled to be completed 
by December 2002. MoEF included it under NLCP and sanctioned a project for its 
conservation and restoration as domestic sewage from Kodaikanal city was polluting 
Kodaikanal lake.
Dimsagar Lake – Tripura
The project for restoration and conservation of Dimsagar Lake envisaged activities like 
building of a pathway, retaining wall, drain, weeding, de-silting, sitting arrangement, 
fencing, landscaping etc. Sanctioned cost of the project was ` 0.69 crore and a total of  ` 
0.43 crore had been spent till date. The project was envisaged to be completed in March 
2006 but it was still in progress. 
Laxminarayanbari & Durgabari Lakes- Tripura 
Both lakes were included under NLCP with sanctioned cost of `0.70 and `0.63 crore 
respectively. Activities for restoration of Laxminarayanbari and Durgabari lakes envisaged 
construction of pathway, weeding, de-silting, seating arrangement, fencing, landscaping, 
building of toilets etc. 
x The original site for location of STP for the project for interception and diversion of 
sewage from 19 outfalls and carry the same to STP was at a site situated near the lake.  
x A citizens’ group filed a writ petition on th e plea that the location of STP would pollute 
the lake.  
x Similar objections were raised on two more locations. As a result, land for the project is 
yet to be acquired. 
x Dimsagar Lake was 3.3 acres and dept h was only 1.70 meters and did not qualify for 
selection under NLCP.  
x Approved DPR envisaged the construction of a surface drain from the surrounding 
residences responsible for pollu tion of the lake but the Agartala Municipal Corporation 
could not construct the drain due to encroachments.  
x 85 per cent of the total expenditure till date had been incurred on beautification and 
landscaping works and rest 15 per cent incurred on measures to control pollution. 
x Laxminarayanbari was not as polluted as other lakes in Tripura.  
x Activities for restoration of the lakes could not commence as a heritage building (royal 
palace of erstwhile kings’ of Tripura) was in close proximity of the lakes. 
x An expenditure of `3.84 crore  was incurred and  further  progress was not made due to 
stay granted by the Court for STP land and not demarcating  the lake boundry by the 
Water Resource Department. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 56
Mansi Ganga – Uttar Pradesh 
The project for restoration and conservation of Mansi Ganga Lake was sanctioned in March 
2007 and was slated for completion in March 2009. Activities under this project included 
construction of Low Cost Sanitation, lake front development, construction of STP etc. It was 
observed that the project was still ongoing even though the sanction period of the project 
had expired. 
Ravindra Sarovar – West Bengal
With a view to improve the quality of water and also to save the lake from further 
degradation, MoEF sanctioned in October 2002, a project for “Revival of Ravindra Sarovar, 
Kolkata in West Bengal” at a total cost of 
` 6.96 crore with scheduled date of completion 
being March 2004. The expenditure was to be incurred on components like bio-remediation, 
upkeep, Lake bank protection and fencing and lake beautification.
Mirik Lake – West Bengal 
In August 2004, NRCD sanctioned a project for ‘Revival of Mirik lake’, Darjeeling in West 
Bengal at total cost of 
` 4.01 crore with scheduled date of completion being February 2006. 
The expenditure was to be incurred on components like bank protection, fencing work, 
construction of silt & debris arrestor, afforestation, de-siltation and public participation. 
x With respect to construction of STP, 90 per cent progress of the work has been reported 
till November 2010 by the implementing agency.  
x With respect to LCS, only 8 out of the plann ed 10 LCS units/toilet blocks had been 
completed till November 2010 as land was not available for remaining 2 units.  
x Lake front development wo rk  has not yet started and  with respect to afforestation , 
only 40 per cent had been completed till November 2010. 
x The delay in implementation of the project was due to non-release of funds by NRCD, 
delay in obtaining permission from Forest Department, land acquisition for STP. 
x Though bio-remediation was originally proposed for improvement of water quality of 
Ravindra Sarovar as huge num bers of slum squatters were using the lake water for 
bathing & washing of clothes, the work was not initiated.  
x Water quality reports of Jadavpur Univ ersity Sea Explorers’ Institute, and West Bengal 
Pollution Control Board for the year of 2007, 2009 and 2010 revealed the presence of 
BOD, TC and FC in excess of permissible limits. 
x MoEF released the first instalment to Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority 
(KMDA) which could not be spent.  
x KMDA had also not submitted any progress reports to MoEF.  
x In September 2008, NRCD intimated the Urban Development Department, Government of 
West Bengal regarding slow progress of the proje ct and had also requested it to issue 
instructions for refund of unspent balance to MoEF to prevent any further parking of 
funds. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 57
4.6  Performance of programmes for control of pollution of ground water
At the central level, MoEF does not implement any programme for treatment and 
restoration of ground water. 
The schemes operated by MoWR focus on exploration, monitoring of the ground water 
regime through 15640 ground water monitoring wells located all over the country. This data 
is used for assessment of ground water resources and changes in the ground water regime. 
Similarly, CGWB seeks to regulate withdrawal of ground water and identify critical and over-
exploited areas. However, none of its programmes or studies specifically address the issue 
of pollution of ground water.  
As the ground water in Tamil Nadu contained contaminants like fluoride, salinity, chloride, 
iron, nitrate etc., it was observed that the State government had initiated Fluorisis 
Mitigation Project in June 2010 in districts like Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri which were 
endemic with respect to excess fluoride content in the ground water because of which there 
was high prevalence of fluorisis in these districts. The scheduled date of completion of the 
programme was May 2013.The programme is now being implemented with assistance from 
Japan international Cooperation Agency and was being executed by the Tamil Nadu Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board. The sanctioned cost of the project was 
`28.44 crore. The 
technology for fluoride mitigation was adopted by the implementing agency after 
appropriate study which proved its efficacy. Regular inspection of the facilities set up was 
taking place by the implementing agency and follow-up was taking place as and when 
required.
Conclusions  
Neither MoEF nor the States have introd uced any programme s to prevent pollution of 
ground water. They have also not addressed the concerns of pollution from agricultural 
sources.  
Although accountability structures at the central level have been established for 
management of pollution of rivers and lakes, the situation is more complicated with 
respect to groundwater with no central agency taking complete responsibility for ground 
water pollution. Also, the control activities which ensure accountability of technical and 
financial aspects of the projects are weak. 
Although CPCB has created a list of the sources of pollution, MoEF has not created 
programmes to prevent effluents entering the rivers.  NRCD projects dealt only with 
stretches where pollution has already occurred.  
Inclusion of rivers and lakes into NRCP and NLCP was flawed as MoEF/CPCB/ States did 
not conduct a comprehensive survey to assess pollution levels in rivers/lakes all across the 
country. The total amount of pollutants being discharged into all the rivers of India from 
sources like industries, mining, tanneries, distilleries etc., was also not worked out before 
initiation of NRCP/NLCP. Selection of rivers/lakes under NRCP/NLCP was not based on 
No State had introduced any specific programmes  for the restoration  and treatment of 
ground water. Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan have initiated programmes which address the issue 
of polluted ground water, but these are restricted to a few specific areas.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 58
pollution level of the river/lake and NRCP/NLCP was not planned by MoEF to address the 
reduction of entire pollution of selected rivers and lakes. 
At the level of the States, implementation of the projects was very unsatisfactory. Projects 
were delayed beyond the scheduled completion dates and many of them were not 
completed even as of now, though they were sanctioned more than five years back.
Out of the completed projects, 82 per cent of the projects under NRCP were completed 
after the scheduled date of completion. 28 projects costing `251.27 crore were constructed 
but not utilised as yet. States implementing the projects faced problems in land 
acquisition, getting requisite permissions, especially forest clearances, technical problems, 
problems from contractors etc.  
Many projects faced resistance from local populace, especially for building of STPs. 
Projects like STPs, LCS, interception and diversion projects failed to function as envisaged, 
thus being unable to achieve the objectives of pollution control of rivers.  
Implementation was especially poor in States like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Haryana, Delhi, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab,  
Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.
NLCP as a programme has been ineffective in achieving the objective of conservation and 
restoration of lakes in India. Only two of the test checked 22 projects had been completed 
and the rest were either continuing beyond the sanction date of completion or had been 
abandoned. Problems like resistance from locals over proposed construction of STPs etc., 
dispute over site, inability to arrest sewage flow, non-availability of land etc., have 
contributed to non-completion of the projects.  
As a result, water quality parameters of only three lakes namely Sharanabasaveshwara, 
Nainital lake and Kotekere lake has been restored to the designated criteria, while these 
parameters in respect of other lakes like Banjara, Dal, Bellandur, Veli Akkulam, Shivpuri, 
Powai, Rankala, Mansagar, Pichola, Pushkar, Kodaikanal, Twin Lakes, Bindusagar, 
Durgabari , Dimsagar and Laxminarayanbari, Mansi Gang and Rabindra Sarovar could not 
be restored to the designated criteria.  
Bio-conservation zones have not been notified around the lake to prevent encroachment 
of lake shoreline.
As such programmes to control pollution of rivers and lakes in India have not been 
implemented adequately.  
Recommendation 12 
The Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission is already funding sewerage projects 
in some of the same States where funds are being provided by MoEF for the same purpose. 
MoEF, therefore, needs to focus on projects which seek to regenerate and conserve the 
river instead of those which focus on treatment of sewage. MoEF/States should conceive 
programmes which address different sources of pollution flowing into rivers, lakes and 
ground water with focus being not only on prevention of pollution but also conservation 
and ecological restoration of our water bodies.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 59
Recommendation 13
At present, there are multiple agencies involved in river and lake conservation, right from 
planning to implementation and monitoring. There is a need to consolidate all these 
functions and entrust their execution to an umbrella agency for better coordination and 
accountability. 
Recommendation 14
In conjunction with the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), MoEF and the State should 
plan drainage for the city as a whole instead of piecemeal approval of random STPs and 
I&Ds. Further, funding for these projects should come from MoUD as the implementing 
agencies work under the control of MoUD. MoEF should be involved in the design stage and 
in monitoring the treated effluents if they are being discharged into the river.  
Recommendation 15 
NRCP should be remodelled to first collect data on the problems affecting each river and 
then tailor different programmes for each river, depending on the socio-economic context 
of the area around that river as well as the sources of pollution most affecting the river.  
Recommendation 16 
MoEF/States need to ensure that projects for source control of all kind of pollutants 
entering the lakes is included in projects for conservation and restoration of lakes, especially 
sewage and agriculture runoff which leads to nutrient over-loading of the lake.  
Recommendation 17 
States should prepare the Detailed Project Reports for river and lake conservation projects 
taking into account all the sources of pollution as well as issues like land acquisition while 
preparing DPRs so that projects are not delayed once started. 
Recommendation 18
MoEF should ensure that all lakes facing encroachment and resultant filling up are included 
in NLCP. Further, all State governments should declare bio-conservation zones around lakes 
so that encroachment of shoreline is prevented.
Recommendation 19 
MoEF should lay down a time-bound programme in consultation with other Central 
Ministries, CPCB, States and implementing agencies to ensure that projects are completed 
in time. There should also be a mechanism for discussions on problems in implementation 
so that suitable interventions can be made to complete projects in time.  

C
The ta r
effectiv
For the
micro m
level. O
monito
monito
5.1
5.1.1  A
x The
con
are
Jun
e
x Mon
con
prog
obs
last
x A S
t
revi
the
Na
M
Chapter
pol
rgeted imp a
ve implem e
e monitorin
monitoring
On the ot h
ring syste m
ring project
Monitorin
At the Centr
T
 National R
duct a six-m
the membe
e 2003. The
nitoring Co
duct a qu a
gramme a s
erved that 
meeting  th
tanding Com
ew perform
committee
tional Rive
Auth
Monitoring
Standing C
Steering C
5:  Mon
lution o
act of sch e
entation. In 
g to be eff
at the gro
her hand, 
m is worki n
ts under NR
ng of proj
re
Table 12: Mon
River Cons e
monthly rev
ers of this C
ereafter, no
mmittee he
arterly revi e
s well as t h
the 31st me
he 32nd one
mmittee he
mance of th
e was held in
r Conservat
hority
g Committe
Committee
Committee
Water
nitoring
of rivers
emes or pr o
turn, effe c
ective, an o
und level o
macro mo
ng effectiv e
RCP and NLC
ects for co
nitoring of pr
ervation A u
view of prog
Committee.
 meeting of
eaded by M
ew of the 
he impact o
eeting of t h
e  of the Com
eaded by t h
he projects o
n March 20
• He
•Ta
•La
tion
•He
•Ta
•La
e
•He
•Ta
•La
•He
•Ta
•La
r Pollution in
g of prog
s, lakes 
ograms ca n
ctive moni t
organisation
of impleme
nitoring a t
ely. The di
CP are depic
ontrol of 
rojects under 
uthority (N R
gress. The C
However th
f NRCA was
Member Env
progress o f
of works o
he Committ
mmittee wa
he Union M
on a quarte
03.
eaded by Prim
ask: Six-month
st meeting: Ju
eaded by Mem
ask: Quarterly
st meeting: A
eaded by Unio
ask: Quarterly
st meeting: M
eaded by Secr
ask: Quarterly
st meeting: D
n India
gramme
and gro
n be achie v
toring can a
n develops
ntation i.e.
t the apex 
fferent lev
cted in the 
pollution
NRCP/NLCP a
RCA), head e
Chief Minist
he last mee
 convened.
vironment,
f scientific 
n the rive r
tee was he
as held in Ap
Minister of E
erly basis. T
me Minister
hly review of 
une 2003
mber, Plannin
y review of pro
April 2002
on Minister, E
y review of pro
March 2003
retary, MoEF
y review of pro
December 200
Repo
es for co
ound wa
ved only w i
aid effecti v
the syste m
 at the im p
level will 
els and a g
table below
in rivers a
at central leve
ed by Prim
ers concern
eting of NRC
Planning C
and techn i
r water qu a
ld in Dece m
pril 2002.
Environmen
The fourth a
progress
ng Commissio
ogress
Environment &
ogress
ogress
07
ort No. 21 of
ontrol o
ater
ith the pro
ve implem e
m which co v
plementing
ensure t h
gencies inv o
w.
and lakes
el
e Minister,
ned, among
CA was held
Commission
ical aspect s
ality. Howe
mber 2001 
t & Forest s
and last me
on
& Forests
f 2011-12
60
of
per and 
entation.
vers the 
g agency 
hat such 
olved in 
 was to 
g others, 
d on 16th
n was to 
s of the 
ver, we 
and the 
s was to 
eting of 


x A S t
revi
the
con
are
a
Com
The fou
each o t
difficult
commit
being t
Imple
m
 5.1.2 
[*Note: t
** As see
With re
x Ou
rev
imp
x Ou
pro
Revi
St
Hi
Inter
La
Divisi
teering Co m
ew of the p
implement
cerned and
as as its m
mmittee of t
ur Committe
ther. Ther e
t for Audit 
ttees were 
aken on th
menting Age
 In the St
the periodicity
en in "Guidelin
egards to m
t of 140 p
view of p r
plementing
t of 140 p r
ojects were 
ew by noda
age
tate Steerin
igh Powere
r -departme
ake-Specific
Comm
onal Projec
(DP
mmittee h e
progress of 
ting agenc i
d experts i n
members. B
the NRCP w
ees listed a
e i s  n o  f un
to assess 
being sha r
e same. T h
ncies.
ates
Table 13: Mo
y of review va
nes for NLCP"]
onitoring, it
rojects un d
rogress w a
agency onl
rojects unde
periodically
al impleme
ency
ng Committ
d  Committ
ental Comm
c Coordinati
mittee
ct Monitorin
PMC)
Water
eaded by S e
various pro
ies. This C o
n the Publi c
Between 2 0
were held an
bove do no
nctional co n
whether t h
red with t h
here was n o
onitoring of p
aried from Stat
"]
t was obser
der NRCP w
as conduc t
ly in 40 per 
er NRCP t e
y reviewed 
•Ta
nting 
• He
• Ta
tee
•He
• Ta
tee
•He
the
• Ta
mon
mittee
•Mo
ion
 •Th
dis
ng Cell 
r Pollution in
ecretary of 
ogrammes/
ommittee a
c Health En g
002 and 2
nd the last m
ot exist in a 
nnect bet w
he findings 
he next hi g
o evidence 
projects under
te to State.  
rved at the 
which wer e
ted at th e
cent of the 
est checked
by Division
ask: *Periodica
eaded by the 
ask: *Periodic
eaded by Chie
ask: *Periodic
eaded by the C
Departments
ask : to  ensure
nitoring of pro
onthly review
his was propo
strict level.**
n India
the Minist
projects an
also has C h
gineering D
010 only s
meeting too
hierarchy a
ween the C
and reco m
gher level, 
of sharing 
r NRCP/NLCP 
State level t
e test che c
e Chief E x
projects.
for monito
al Project M
al review
Chief Secreta
cal review 
ef Minister of 
cal review 
Chief Secretary
concerned
e timely imple
ogramme even
w of progress 
sed as an alte
Repo
ry was to c
d give nece
hief Secret a
Department
six meetin g
ok place in D
and operate
Committees
mmendation
and wheth
in the oth e
at State level
that:
cked for m o
xecutive le v
oring, only 
Monitoring C
ary of the Stat
the State
y with Principa
ementation & 
n after its exec
by Chief Exec
ernative mech
ort No. 21 of
carry out q
essary direc
aries of th e
t and other 
gs of the S
December 2
e independ
. It was t h
ns of the d
er any act i
er directio n
l
onitoring, m
vel of th e
13 per cen
Cells. 
te
al Secretaries o
effective
cution.
cutive
hanism at the
f 2011-12
61
uarterly
ctions to 
e States 
related 
Steering 
2007.
ently of 
herefore 
different
ion was 
n to the 
monthly 
e nodal 
t of the 
of
e

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 62
x Periodical review of progress was conducted by the State Steering Committee chaired 
by the concerned Chief Secretaries only in 19 per cent  of the test checked NRCP 
projects.
x Only 14 per cent  of the test checked NRCP projects were reviewed by a High Powered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Minister.
x  Inter-Departmental coordination committee was constituted at the State level to 
ensure effective monitoring of NLCP only in 36 per cent of the test checked projects.
x Only four out of test checked 14 States constituted Steering Committee at the district 
level to ensure effective monitoring of NLCP. 
x  Lake specific Monitoring Committee was constituted at the local level by the State 
government to ensure effective monitoring of the programme in only 36 per cent of the 
test checked projects.
x Water quality monitoring plans were prepared by the State governments only for three
of the 22 test checked lakes. 
x Pesticides monitoring was not included by Lake Development Authority of the 
State/implementing agency in any of the projects.  
x For only two out of the test checked 22 lakes, a conservation plan was prepared by the 
Lake Development Authority of the State/implementing agency to ensure that the 
water quality after implementation of the project was restored to the criteria for 
Designated Best Use classification for B class waters.
The project-wise detailed break-up of monitoring of rivers and lakes by different agencies in test 
checked projects are given in Annexure 4. 
In June 2011, MoEF stated that Monitoring Committees at the State level have been 
constituted by most of the States, whereas the Committees at local levels viz. City Level 
Monitoring Committees (CLMCs) have been constituted in some States to directly monitor 
implementation of lake conservation works.
Further, at the Central level, regular review of NLCP as a scheme and also with the individual 
States, have been conducted at various levels. Also, site visits to the lakes, both before and 
during implementation, have been carried out by NRCD officers from time to time.
The reply of MoEF needs to be viewed in light of the fact that regular meetings of National 
River Conservation Authority, Steering Committee, Standing Committee and Monitoring 
Committee headed by Member Environment, Planning Commission were not held. Further, 
MoEF was also silent about the names of States which had constituted Monitoring 
committees at the State level and at the City Level. Constitution of local level committees 
would have helped solve problems raised by locals living in and around the river/lakes and 
would have made them stakeholders in the conservation efforts. Poor monitoring is an 
example of weak internal control and inevitably reflects on overall atmosphere of 
accountability within the organisation.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 63
5.2 Paucity of network for tracking pollution of rivers, lakes and ground 
water
5.2.1  Insufficient number of monitoring stations  
Under NRCP, water quality monitoring locations on rivers had been identified for manual 
monitoring and a total of 158 locations were being monitored for 10 rivers by different 
Universities & Research Institutes in the country.  
Further, CPCB also monitored river water quality through 980 monitoring locations on 353 
rivers for the assessment of river water quality all across the country. It was observed that 
the average distance between monitoring locations was 49 kilometres for major rivers and 
was 45 kilometres for tributary streams and medium & minor rivers. CPCB stated that the 
existing stations cannot achieve the objective as desired and CPCB had presented the 
requirement of expansion of monitoring network to MoEF for reducing the distance to 10-
20 kilometres. 
With respect to lakes, CPCB had established 117 monitoring locations on 107 lakes till 2010 
all across the country for the assessment of water quality of lakes in terms of chemical 
parameters. It was observed that the average area covered by monitoring locations was 
40,000 hectares.
CPCB stated that the existing stations cannot achieve the objective as desired and CPCB had 
presented the requirement of expansion of monitoring network to MoEF for reducing the 
area covered to 10,000 hectares.  
With respect to ground water , CPCB had established a network of 490 groundwater 
locations under National Water Quality Monitoring Programme (NWQMP). Further, CGWB 
had 15640 observation wells all across the country from which samples are collected once a 
year.
5.2.2 Lack of classification of locations
According to UNEP and the Hydrology Project of Ministry of Water Resources, all monitoring 
stations have to be classified as baseline, trend and flux stations.
x Baseline stations are established in areas away from human influence, these give data 
for comparison purposes.
x The purpose of trend stations is to test for long-term changes in water quality and 
identify trends of pollution.  
x Flux stations determine fluctuations of critical pollutants from river basin to ocean or 
regional sea. 
It was observed that MoEF/CPCB had classified 475 locations on rivers and 108 locations on
lakes as baseline stations. Another 499 locations on rivers and 9 stations on lakes were 
classified as trend stations and CPCB stated that these also functioned as flux stations.
But this contention of CPCB was not correct as trend stations could be set up anywhere on 
the river/lakes whereas flux stations needed to be established on mouth of major rivers. 
Also, the purpose of both the stations was different. As such, MoEF/CPCB had not clearly 
distinguished between the three kinds of stations which would have an effect on the 
reliability and validity of data generated from these stations.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 64
x No monitoring of pollution from agricultural non-point sources was being done.
x With respect to ground water  also it was observed that monitoring locations had 
not been classified as baseline or trend stations by CGWB as required under the 
monitoring guidelines.
5.2.3 Lack of real-time monitoring of water pollution 
CPCB/CGWB do not carry out real-time monitoring of water pollution in rivers, lakes and 
ground water . According to CGWB, the required set up for real-time monitoring is not 
available at present (January 2011).
MoEF in its reply in June 2011 stated that automatic water quality monitoring stations are 
being established on river Ganga and Yamuna under a World Bank-assisted project by 
Ministry of Water Resources.
5.2.4 Lack of assessment of trophic status of rivers and assessment of 
ecological/biological indices  of rivers/lakes  
Trophic status is a measure of biological productivity of lakes/rivers, which simply is a 
measure of how many plants and animals are in the lake/river. Thus, it is an indicator of 
health of a river. MoEF had not assessed whether there was improvement in trophic status 
of rivers during implementation/completion of projects under NRCP. It had also not 
assessed whether there was measureable improvement in ecological and biological indices 
of rivers during implementation/completion of projects under NRCP.  
In its reply in June 2011, MoEF stated that water quality monitoring for rivers has presently 
been restricted to physio-chemical & bacterial parameters and that biological parameters 
including biological indices & trophic status can supplement the existing monitoring in 
providing a more comprehensive status of the river. While endorsing the audit observation, 
MoEF stated that it required more finances and technical expertise to do this and it 
proposed to revamp the monitoring protocol for river Ganga to include bio-monitoring 
along with other physio-chemical parameters. While revising the monitoring protocol for 
river Ganga by including bio-monitoring is a good first step, MoEF needs to take this process 
forward and devise measurements of trophic status for all major rivers and lakes in India.  
5.2.5   Lack of revision and updating parameters of water quality 
Regular updating and revision of parameters of water quality being monitored by 
MoEF/CPCB is essential to identify the new and emerging sources of pollution, especially 
those which have an industrial base. As new manufacturing methods and new technological 
advances are being made, the nature and kinds of pollutants entering our water bodies are 
also changing.  It was observed that MoEF/CPCB did not carry out regular updating and 
revision of its standards for water quality.  
MoEF in its reply in June 2011 stated that CPCB had been monitoring 64 parameters in 
river/ lake/ ground water samples taken from rivers, lakes, ponds, creeks etc and station 
specific parameter is selected on the basis of source in the vicinity of monitoring station. It 
further stated that for inclusion of new parameters, toxicity study is carried out in the 
laboratory before taking it up for regular monitoring.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 65
However, the fact remains that no actual updating and revision of parameters of water 
quality has taken place and revised parameters should be based on identification of new 
toxins entering water bodies.
5.2.6  Poor quality of data on water  
With regard to dissemination of data on Water Quality Monitoring, we observed that 
besides CPCB and NRCD, CWC, CGWB, State government departments of irrigation and 
ground water were involved in monitoring of water quality. As per the Uniform Protocol on 
Water Quality Monitoring Order, 2005, “Each monitoring agency shall process the analytical 
data and report the data after validation to the Data Centre at the Central Pollution Control 
Board. The Central Pollution Control Board shall store the data and disseminate through 
website or electronic mail to various users on demand” . However, it was observed in audit 
that:
x CPCB had established Environmental Data Bank but CPCB had not received any data 
from Water Quality Monitoring agencies other than SPCBs as yet.   
x The data received in Environmental Data Bank was in public domain and anyone can 
access the data by accessing the website of CPCB (http://cpcbedb.nic.in/). Since March 
2010, the link to Environment Data Bank has not been working as the system was 
hacked. 
The data collected by CPCB is thus not accessible to any agency at present. 
5.2.7  Inspection of the projects by MoEF 
Projects being implemented by the States under NRCP were to be regularly inspected by 
MoEF; however, these projects were not inspected by MoEF. As such, MoEF would not be in 
a good position to be aware of the difficulties faced during implementation and the 
opportunity to make mid-course corrections was lost. 
In June 2011, MoEF stated that projects under execution were being monitored by the 
officers of the MoEF at regular intervals and observations were communicated to the 
implementing agency/ State Government for appropriate action. The reply was not 
acceptable in audit as substantial number of   projects were either not inspected by MoEF 
even once during implementation or after completion. 
5.2.8  Availability of Completion Reports 
Once the project was complete, the State government has to send a completion report to 
MoEF to certify that the project was complete. However, it was observed that completion 
reports of projects being implemented under NRCP were not available for all the projects. 
Out of 105 completed river projects test checked, MOEF did not provide information for 15 
projects. Out of the remaining, completion reports were not received by MoEF for 67 
projects. As such, MoEF was not able to insist on timely submission of project completion 
Out of 140 river projects test checked, MOEF submitted information only in respect of 99 
projects.  Of these, 25 per cent of the projects were not inspected by MoEF even once during 
implementation. Out of 105 projects completed, MOEF submitted information in respect of 
77 projects. MoEF had not inspected 43 per cent of these projects after completion. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 66
report by State Government /implementing agency and could not ensure whether the 
projects had met the timelines and objectives of the projects.
In its reply of June 2011, MoEF was silent about this issue. 
Conclusions
Inspection and monitoring of projects being implemented under NRCP and NLCP was 
inadequate at all three levels, i.e., local level, State level and Central level. It was observed 
that the data for monitoring the schemes as available in MoEF provides a user-friendly 
means of understanding the current status of the relevant policy and is reasonably cost-
effective to operate. However, it did not describe in detail the stages or events used for 
rating progress (when this method was used). It also did not provide a rationale for how 
future performance targets were being set in the Ministry.
Poor monitoring of network to track pollution of water in rivers and lakes, failure to 
update and revise water quality parameters, absence of database, poor dissemination of 
data: these are all indicators of the system of internal controls which frame such a vital 
activity. In turn, poor internal controls reveal the low level of transparency in the activities 
of the Ministry and their impact on its overall accountability.    
Recommendation 20 
The Water Quality Assessment Authority at the central level and the Water Quality Review 
Committee at the level of the States should be revitalized and strengthened so that it can 
act as a cross-sectoral nodal body for water pollution issues. 
Recommendation 21
States should involve citizens and other stakeholders in proposing and monitoring 
programmes to control pollution of rivers and lakes. This will help in mobilizing support in 
civil society for the proposed projects and thus the projects will face less resistance from 
local people. Citizens Monitoring Committee and Local level lake monitoring committees 
need to be constituted to provide feedback for more effective implementation.
Recommendation 22 
Monitoring network should be strengthened by converting all monitoring locations into 
stations and reclassifying them as baseline, trend and flux stations for achieving better 
quality data.  MoEF should also start real time monitoring so that red flags are raised 
immediately when pollution levels rise alarmingly and remedial action can be taken in time. 
Recommendation 23 
MoEF should immediately take steps to increase the frequency of inspections carried out by 
it and by the States so as to assess the efficiency of the implementation of its programmes.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 67
Chapter 6:  Results of programmes for control of pollution in 
India
Assessment of results is an important step in reaching a conclusion about efficacy of any 
programme. It is undertaken to ensure that projects, programmes and policies are 
economically viable, socially equitable and environmentally stable and delivering the 
intended results.
6.1  Change in water quality of rivers as a result of implementation of NRCP
Ganga Action Plan (GAP) was introduced in 1985 and was subsequently extended to other 
rivers under NRCP in 1996. As such programmes for preventing and cleaning up of major 
rivers in India have been in operation for more than 20 years now. Hence, it is important to 
assess whether NRCP has achieved its major aim of improvement in the water quality of the 
major rivers. Issues relating to impact of NRCP/NLCP on our rivers and lakes at the central 
and State level are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
When queried about improvement in water quality of rivers included under NRCP, MoEF 
stated that it monitored water quality of rivers which was analysed for Biochemical Oxygen 
Demand (BOD), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), pH, suspended solids (SS) and coliform 
etc., which were indicators of pollution and that river water quality reflected the impact of 
project in the vicinity. It stated that Ganga river water quality data from 1986 to 2009 
indicated improvement in water quality between Kannauj and Varanasi.
CPCB stated that the natural flow in rivers and streams has reduced drastically due to 
diversion of water for irrigation from all the reservoirs in the country and there is little fresh 
water flow or flow generated due to discharge of sewage and industrial effluents. It also 
stated that the improvement in various environmental components could not be quantified. 
6.1.1 How did the cities fare?
In the course of audit, we looked at the quality of water in test checked rivers in terms of 
BOD, Dissolved Oxygen (DO) and Total Coliform (TC). These are indicators of organic 
pollution, of whether the water can sustain aquatic life and presence of harmful, faecal-
related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illnesses respectively.  
These reports assessed quality of water in the river after it leaves the city where 
interventions like STPs have taken place. As such, if the interventions are effective, the 
quality of water in these rivers after they leave the cities should meet the class B criteria 
(Bathing standards) of CPCB (which is TC-500 MPN/100 ml or less, DO-5 mg/l or more and 
BOD- 5 days 20
0 C 3 mg/l or less). 
DO is a relative measure of the amount of oxygen that is dissolved or carried in the water 
body. Adequate dissolved oxygen is needed and necessary for good water quality. This is 
important to the sustainability of a particular ecosystem. Insufficient oxygen in lakes 
and rivers, tends to suppress the presence of aerobic organisms such as fish. Deoxygenation 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 68
increases the relative population of anaerobic organisms such as plants and some bacteria, 
resulting in fish kills and other adverse events. If water is too warm, there may not be 
enough oxygen in it. When there are too many bacteria or aquatic animal in the area, they 
may overpopulate, using DO in great amounts. Oxygen levels also can get reduced through 
overfertilization of water plants by run-off from farm fields containing phosphates and 
nitrates (the ingredients in fertilizers). Under these conditions, the numbers and size of 
water plants increase. Then, if the weather becomes cloudy for several days, respiring plants 
will use much of the available DO. When these plants die, they become food for bacteria, 
which in turn multiply and use large amounts of oxygen. As evident from the chart below 
the level of Dissolved Oxygen was precariously low in the Sabarmati at Ahmedabad, Yamuna 
at Delhi, Musi at Hyderabad, Yamuna at Ghaziabad, Adyar at Chennai and Gomti at 
Lucknow.
Chart Showing Actual DO in mg/l Against Norms 
BOD is a chemical procedure for determining the uptake rate of dissolved oxygen by the 
biological organisms in a body of water and is widely used as an indication of the quality of 
10.4
8.5
8.4
7.9
7.8
7.8
7.6
7.5
7.4
7.3
6.9
6.6
6.5
6.2
6
5.6
5.4
5.2
3.2
2.3
1.6
1.2
1
0
0
0
02468 1 0 1 2
Ganga/ Patna
Godavari/ Ramagundam
Mahanadi/ Cuttack
Subarnarekha/ Jamshedpur
Cauvery/ Tiruchirappalli
Ganga/ Rishikesh
Ganga/ Uttarkashi
Ganga/ Haridwar
Ganga/ Srinagar
Tungabhadra/ Devanagare
Bhadra/ Bhadravati
Godavari/ Rajamundry
Chambal/ Kota
Ganga/ Kanpur
Rani Chu/ Gangtok 
Godavari/ Nashik
Sutlej/ Jallandhar
Sutlej/ Ludhiana
Mahananda/ Siliguri
Godavari/Nanded
Gomti/ Lucknow
Adyar / Chennai
Yamuna/ Ghaziabad
Musi/ Hyderabad
Yamuna/Delhi
Sabarmati/Ahmedabad
DO in mg/l 
below
norms
DO in mg/l 
above
norms
Norms for 
DO : 5 mg/l 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 69
water. It can be used as an indicator of the efficiency of sewage treatment plants. As can be 
seen from the chart below, the levels of BOD in some major towns was at alarming levels. 
Thermal discharges, such as water used to cool machinery in a manufacturing plant or a 
power plant, raise the temperature of water and lower its oxygen content.  Fish kills and an 
invasion and growth of certain types of weeds can cause dramatic changes in a stream or 
other body of water. Natural sources of organic matter include plant decay and leaf fall. 
However, plant growth and decay may be unnaturally accelerated when nutrients and 
sunlight are overly abundant due to human influence. Urban runoff carries pet wastes from 
streets and sidewalks; nutrients from lawn fertilizers; leaves, grass clippings, and paper from 
residential areas, which increase oxygen demand.  
Chart Showing Actual BOD in mg/l Against Norms
TC: Coliforms organisms like fecal bacteria are an indicator of water quality. Coliform 
bacteria may not cause disease, but can be indicators of pathogenic organisms that cause 
diseases. The latter could cause intestinal infections, dysentery, hepatitis, typhoid fever, 
0.7
0.8
0.8
1
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.6
2.5
2.8
3
3.6
4
4.2
5
5.4
7
9.4
10
11
21
25.8
31.2
45
55
82
115
0 50 100 150
Ganga/ Uttarkashi
Subarnarekha/ Jamshedpur
Ganga/ Srinagar
Godavari/ Rajamundry
Ganga/ Rishikesh
Mahanadi/ Cuttack
Cauvery/ Tiruchirappalli
Ganga/ Haridwar
Rani Chu/ Gangtok 
Ganga/ Patna
Tungabhadra/ Devanagare
Godavari/ Ramagundam
Sutlej/ Ludhiana
Ganga/ Kanpur
Bhadra/ Bhadravati
Chambal/ Kota
Sutlej/ Jallandhar
Godavari/ Nashik
Kshipra/ Ujjain
Gomti/ Lucknow
Yamuna/Delhi
Godavari/Nanded
Yamuna/ Ghaziabad
Mahananda/ Siliguri
Adyar / Chennai
Sabarmati/Ahmedabad
Musi/ Hyderabad
BOD in 
mg/l 
below
norms
BOD in 
mg/l 
above
norms
Norms
for BOD 
: 3 mg/l

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 70
cholera and other illnesses. Coliform bacteria are organisms that are present in the 
environment and in the feces of all warm-blooded animals and humans. Coliform bacteria 
will not likely cause illness. However, their presence in drinking water indicates that disease-
causing organisms (pathogens) could be in the water system. These can also occur due to 
soil, vegetation, sediment, insects entering the water, and their presence indicates that the 
source is, or recently has been compromised by surface water. 
Chart Showing Actual TC in MPN/100 ml Against Norms
The charts above show a particularly dismal position with regard to breach of norms in 
terms of the three criteria- BOD, DO and TC in the case of Yamuna at Ghaziabad/Delhi, 
Gomti at Lucknow and Sabarmati at Ahmedabad. In the case of Musi at Hyderabad, for 
which data on BOD and DO was available, the pollution levels was far beyond the norms.
20
36
38.3
40
250
460
500
1100
1600
2400
3000
3967
9000
15000
17000
22000
43000
50000
140000
210000
0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000
Rani Chu/ Gangtok 
Ganga/ Uttarkashi
Godavari/ Nashik
Ganga/ Srinagar
Ganga/ Rishikesh
Godavari/ Rajamundry
Ganga/ Haridwar
Pamba/ Pamba
Godavari/ Ramagundam
Chambal/ Kota
Tungabhadra/ Devanagare
Mahanadi/ Cuttack
Bhadra/ Bhadravati
Sabarmati/Ahmedabad
Ganga/ Patna
Sutlej/ Ludhiana
Ganga/ Kanpur
Sutlej/ Jallandhar
Gomti/ Lucknow
Yamuna/ Ghaziabad
TC in mpn/l 
below norms
TC in 
mpn/100 ml 
above norms
Norms for TC 
: 500 
mpn/100 ml

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 71
Table 14: Quality of Water in test checked river stretches
State River/Town Quality of water  
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Godavari/
Ramagundam 
BOD is on the slightly higher side but TC is more than 3.2 
times the criteria, indicating the water of Godavari after 
leaving Ramagundam city is contaminated by harmful, faecal-
related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness.  
Musi/ Hyderabad Data regarding TC was not available. DO was 0 which 
indicated inability of Musi to support any aquatic life.  
Further, BOD was more than 38 times the criteria, indicating 
high levels of organic pollution of Musi river after it leaves 
Hyderabad. 
Godavari/
Rajamundry 
River quality met desired criteria. 
Bihar Ganga/ Patna TC was 34 times the criteria in Ganga after it leaves Patna, 
indicating the presence of disease causing, faecal-related 
bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi  Data regarding TC were not availa ble. DO was 0 which 
indicated inability of Yamuna to support any aquatic life. BOD 
was more than seven times the criteria, indicating high levels 
of organic pollution of Yamuna river after it leaves Delhi. 
Gujarat Ahmedabad/ 
Sabarmati 
BOD and TC were more than 27 times and 30 times the 
criteria indicating high levels of organic pollution as well as 
the presence of disease causing, faecal-related bacteria, 
viruses and protozoa which cause illness in Sabarmati as it 
leaves Ahmedabad city. Further, DO levels in Sabarmati were 
0, indicating its inability to support aquatic life.  
Haryana Yamuna/ Faridabad No data was available.  
Yamuna/ Panipat No data was available. 
Jharkhand Subarnarekha/ 
Ranchi 
No data was available 
Subarnarekha/ 
Jamshedpur 
While levels of TC were not measured, it was observed that 
levels of BOD met the criteria. 
Karnataka Bhadra/ Bhadravati TC was 18 times the criteria, indicating the presence of 
disease causing faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa 
which cause illness as the Bhadra river leaves Bhadravati.  
Tungabhadra/ 
Devanagare
TC in Tungabhadra river after it leaves Devanagare town is six  
times the criteria, indicating the presence of disease causing, 
faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause 
illness.
Pennar/ Bangalore No data was available.  
Kerala Pamba/ Pamba While BOD and DO were not measured, TC in Pamba was 2.2 
times the criteria as it leaves Pamba town indicating the 
presence of disease causing faecal-related bacteria, viruses 
and protozoa which cause illness. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Betwa/ Vidisha No information was available. 
Maharashtra Krishna/ Karad BOD and DO were not measured while TC levels met the 
criteria in Krishna river as it left Karad city.  
Godavari/ Nashik While DO and TC met the criteria, BOD was more than 3 times 
the criteria, indicating high levels of organic pollution in 
Godavari river after it left Nashik.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 72
Krishna/ Sangli No information was available  
Nanded/Godavari Levels of TC in the river Godavari after it left Nanded city were 
not available.  Levels of BOD were more than eight times the 
criteria. Further, DO was less than criteria indicating 
availability of insufficient amount of oxygen for survival of 
aquatic life indicating loss of ability of river Godavari to 
support aquatic life after it left Nanded.
Odisha Mahanadi/ Cuttack TC was almost eight times the criteria in Mahanadi after it left 
Cuttack city, indicating the presence of disease causing, 
faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause 
illness.
Coastal area/ Puri No information was available. 
Punjab Sutlej/ Jalandhar While BOD was 2.3 times the criteria, TC was 100 times the 
criteria in Sutlej as it left Jalandhar. This indicated organic 
pollution as well as presence of disease causing, faecal-related 
bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
Sutlej/ Ludhiana While BOD exceeded the criteria  and DO did not exceed the 
criteria, TC was 44 times the criteria in Sutlej river as it left 
Ludhiana city, indicating the presence of a large number 
disease causing, faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa 
which cause illness. 
Rajasthan Chambal/ Kota While BOD did not meet the criteria and DO met the criteria, 
TC was almost five times the criteria in Chambal river as it left 
Kota city indicating the presence of a large number disease 
causing, faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which 
cause illness. 
Sikkim Rani Chu/ Gangtok  BOD and TC met the criteria while DO is less than the required 
criteria, indicating organic pollution in river Rani Chu as it left 
Gangtok town.  
Tamil Nadu Adyar & Cooum/ 
Chennai 
BOD was 18 times & seven times the criteria in Adyar & 
Cooum river respectively, indicating high levels of organic 
pollution. Further, the DO was less than the criteria indicating 
insufficient oxygen being available for survival of aquatic life. 
Further, the TC was much h igher than the criteria, indicating 
that Adyar & Cooum were full of disease causing, faecal-
related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
Cauvery/
Tiruchirapalli 
BOD is 1.37 which is less than the criteria indicating that 
Cauvery was full of disease causing, faecal related bacteria, 
viruses & protozoa which cause illness. 
Vaigai/ Madurai No information was available.  
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Yamuna/
Ghaziabad 
BOD was more than 10 times the criteria in Yamuna river, 
indicating high levels of organic pollution. Further, the DO was 
less than the criteria indicating insufficient oxygen being 
available for survival of aquatic life. Further, the TC was 420 
times the criteria, indicating that Yamuna, after leaving 
Ghaziabad, was full of disease causing, faecal-related bacteria, 
viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
Ganga/ Kanpur BOD was almost 1.4 times the criteria in Ganga river after 
Kanpur, indicating high levels of organic pollution. Further, 
the TC was 86 times the criteria, indicating that Ganga, after 
leaving Kanpur, was full of disease causing, faecal-related 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 73
The table is indicator of the fact that despite more than 26 years of implementation of 
programme to control pollution in our rivers, water in our rivers remains critically polluted. 
The levels of BOD, DO and TC are indicators of high levels of organic pollution in our rivers, 
the inability of our rivers to sustain aquatic life due to presence of pollutants and high levels 
of disease causing, faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness; all of 
which point to failure of the efforts of the government to control pollution in our rivers 
through NRCP. 
In its reply of June 2011, MoEF stated that: 
x In respect of water quality of the river Ganga, the BOD in the year 2010 ranged 
between 1.48 to 5.51 mg/litre in major monitoring locations as compared to BOD 
values ranging between 1.7 to 15.5 mg/litre in 1986.
x Levels of bacterial contamination in terms of faecal coliform are reported to be 
exceeding the maximum permissible limit at a number of locations along the river 
Ganga. MoEF also stated while water quality in the stretch of the river Yamuna from 
Tajewala to Palla in Haryana is found to be within the prescribed limits, Yamuna river in 
the vicinity of Delhi and in parts of Uttar Pradesh does not meet the standards in terms 
of BOD.
x Water quality of Yamuna had not shown the desired improvement owing to large gap 
between the demand and availability of sewage treatment capacity and lack of fresh 
water in the river.
x Pollution load on rivers had increased over the years due to rapid urbanisation and 
industrialization and abstraction of water for irrigation, drinking, industrial use, power 
and other purposes compounds the challenge. Also, MoEF was silent about impact of 
NRCP on water quality of other rivers.  
bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
Gomti/ Lucknow BOD was more than 3.6 times the criteria in Gomti river, after 
Lucknow, indicating high l evels of organic pollution. Further, 
the DO was less than the criteria indicating insufficient oxygen 
being available for survival of aquatic life. Further, the TC was 
280 times the criteria, indicating that Ganga, after leaving 
Lucknow, was full of disease causing, faecal-related bacteria, 
viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
Uttarakhand 
Ganga/ Rishikesh River quality met the desired criteria. 
Ganga/ Haridwar River quality met the desired criteria. 
Ganga/ Srinagar River quality met the desired criteria. 
Ganga/ Uttarkashi River quality met the desired criteria. 
West Bengal Ganga/ Barrakpore Not measured.  
Ganga/ Gayeshpur, 
Halilshar & 
Kancharapara 
No information was available.  
Mahananda/Siliguri The level of BOD was 15 times in Mahananda river after 
Siliguri, indicating high levels of organic pollution. Further DO 
was less than the criteria indicating insufficient oxygen being 
available for survival of aquatic life. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 74
x Conservation of rivers was a collective effort of Central and State Governments and the 
central Government was supplementing efforts of the State Governments in river 
conservation through the centrally sponsored NRCP. It also stated that creation of 
infrastructure for sewage management and disposal was also being undertaken 
through other central schemes, such as JNNURM and UIDSSMT, as well as under State 
schemes. 
The reply of MoEF corroborated our observation that improvement of water quality had not 
taken place in all the rivers covered in the sample, barring Ganga in some stretches. Water 
quality challenges have been exacerbated by abstraction of water for different uses and 
these reinforce the fact that MoEF needs to move towards basin approach for management 
of water quality problems as a result of water abstraction for different uses.
Further, the Outcome Budget of MoEF for 2010-11 reflects MoEF's efforts towards building 
STPs, CETPs, water quality monitoring stations etc., without clear exposition of outcomes 
achieved. With respect to MoEF's statement that conservation of rivers was a collective 
effort of the Central and State government, as the primary funding agency for this 
programmes as well as its mandate as the nodal agency for pollution issues, MoEF cannot 
avoid its responsibility in ensuring that the programme for conservation and pollution 
control meets its desired outcomes.
6.2 Change in water quality of lakes as a result of implementation of NLCP
NLCP which aimed to restore and conserve the polluted and degraded lakes of the country 
was initiated in 2001. It has been in operation for more than 10 years now and it is now 
imperative to take stock of whether the aim of restoring and conserving the polluted and 
degraded lakes of the country has been achieved.
MoEF/CPCB had not assessed whether there was measurable improvement in chemical 
parameters of lakes during implementation/completion of the project.  Audit analysed the 
testing reports of CPCB regarding quality of water in test checked lakes in terms of 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Dissolved Oxygen (DO) and Total Coliform (TC). These 
are indicators of organic pollution, of whether the water can sustain aquatic life and 
presence of harmful, faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illnesses 
respectively. The results are depicted in the table below: 
Table 15: quality of water in test checked lakes 
State Lake Quality of water 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Banjara Project still in progress 
Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Dal Lake Quality of water deteriorated even during 
implementation of project. 
Karnataka Bellandur Project abandoned 
Kotekere Met 'B' class water criteria 
Sharanabasaveshwara Met 'B' class water criteria 
Kerala Veli Akkulum Project still in progress
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Shivpuri lake Project still in progress
Maharashtra Powai Not being monitored 
Rankala Project still in progress
Nagaland Twin lakes Project still in progress

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 75
Odisha Bindusagar lake Project still in progress
Rajasthan Mansagar Levels of BOD had come down after implementation 
of project 
Pushkar Project still in progress 
Pichola Project still in progress
Tamil Nadu Kodaikanal Project still in progress
Tripura Dimsagar (Agartala) Project still in progress
Laxminarayanbari
(Agartala)
Project still in progress
Durgabari (Agartala) Project still in progress
Uttar Pradesh Mansi Ganga Project still in progress
Uttarakhand Nainital lake Levels of BOD had come down, D.O increased 
West Bengal Rabindra Sarovar Project still in progress
Mirik Project still in progress
In its reply in June 2011, MoEF stated that water is a State subject and pollution prevention 
and conservation of water bodies including lakes remains the domain of State 
Governments. National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) in MoEF is supplementing 
efforts of the State Governments in conservation of lakes through centrally sponsored 
scheme of NLCP for conservation and management of polluted and degraded lakes in urban 
and semi-urban areas of the country.
MoEF also stated that evaluation of NLCP together with NRCP, is presently being carried out 
by independent agencies engaged by MoEF. This reply needs to be viewed in light of the 
fact that MoEF being the primary funding agency as well as being mandated for prevention 
of pollution needs to take greater responsibility for the projects funded by it. Further, MoEF 
did not provide any evaluation reports of NLCP carried out by independent agencies. The 
Ministry in its reply was silent about the impact of NLCP in improving the quality of water in 
the lakes across India.
6.3 Change in water quality as a result of implementation of programmes 
for control of pollution of ground water 
Despite increasing pollution of ground water sources and the presence of contaminants like 
arsenic, nitrate, fluoride, salinity etc., no programmes at the Central level and the State 
level were being implemented for control of pollution and restoration of ground water. 
Hence, no impact assessment was possible in the absence of programmes.  
In West Bengal we observed that the State Government was monitoring groundwater 
pollution in six blocks but ground water quality monitoring was not taking place regularly in 
five blocks.  It was also found that water quality monitoring laboratories were established in 
five blocks but the groundwater sources were not being tested more than once in a year by 
these laboratories in five out of six blocks. 
The quality of water in Kotekere &  Sharanabasaveshwara in Karnataka, Mansagar in Rajasthan 
& Nainital lake in Uttarakhand had improved as per indicators of organic pollution laid down 
by CPCB.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 76
It was observed that the Tamilnadu government had initiated Fluorisis Mitigation Project in 
June 2010 in Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri districts which were endemic with respect to 
excess fluoride content in the ground water. The scheduled date of completion was May 
2013. The programme, being implemented with assistance from Japan International 
Cooperation Agency, was being executed by Tamilnadu Water Supply and Drainage Board. 
The sanctioned cost of the project was ` 28.44 crore. The technology for fluoride mitigation 
was adopted by the implementing agency after appropriate study which proved its efficacy. 
Regular inspection of the facilities set up was taking place by the implementing agency and 
follow-up was taking place as and when required.  
Conclusion
It is important to continuously monitor programmes to confirm whether programmes are 
achieving the objectives set out for them. River cleaning and control of pollution 
programmes for polluted rivers are being implemented since 1985.
The thrust of these programmes has been to  stop sewage from polluting our rivers. The 
programmes have also tried to stop non-point sources of pollution through construction of 
low cost sanitation, electric crematoria etc., however, the data on the success of these 
programmes are not very encouraging.  
With the Exception of Ganga in certain stretches, all the other  rivers test checked by us 
i.e., Yamuna, Gomti, Godavari, Musi, Cauvery, Cooum, Mahananda, Khan, Kshipra, Vaigai, 
Chambal, Rani Chu, Mandovi, Sabarmati, Subarnarekha, Bhadra/Tungabhadra, Pennar, 
Pamba, Betwa, Krishna, Sutlej etc., continue to be plagued by high levels of organic 
pollution, low level of oxygen availability for aquatic organisms and bacteria, protozoa 
and viruses which have faecal-origin and which cause illnesses. These rivers are the lifeline 
of India and its States and people depend on them not just for water but also for 
livelihood.
With respect to lakes across India, many of them have disappeared due to drying up of 
their catchment areas which have been reclaimed for uses like urbanisation. Most lakes in 
India are under threat from nutrient overloading which is causing their eutrophication and 
their eventual choking up from the weeds proliferating in the nutrient-rich water.  
Implementation of NLCP in conserving these lakes has had no discernible effect. Lakes 
support not only humans for livelihood like tourism and fishing but also support very 
diverse biodiversity which is disappearing from the levels of pollution entering our lakes.
All the lakes test checked by us i.e., Pichola, Pushkar, Dimsagar, Banjara, Kotekere, 
Bellandur, Veli Akkulam, Shivpuri, Powai, Rankala, Twin lakes, Bindusagar, Mansagar, 
Mansiganga, Rabindra Sarovar, Mirik, Kodaikanal lake, Dal lake, Laxminarayanbari Lake, 
Durgabari Lakei, Nainital lake etc., not only support livelihood but are unique eco-systems 
supporting a wealth of biodiversity. 
There is no nation-wide impact assessment relating to the pollution of ground water.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 77
Recommendation 24 
MoEF/CPCB, in conjunction with the States, should conduct a city-wise assessment of the 
levels of pollution in our rivers. They should also evaluate the success of projects 
undertaken under NRCP in terms of pre-defined indicators developed by MoEF/CPCB. Such 
impact assessment should be done in a continuous manner so that data is generated to 
judge whether the programme is meeting its stated objectives.  
Recommendation 25 
MoEF/CPCB along with the States should carry out a comprehensive assessment of levels of 
pollution in the lakes across the country and also assess the impact NLCP has had in 
improving the water quality of those lakes on the basis of key indicators laid down by MoEF. 
Impact assessment should be a regular exercise so that data is generated to judge whether 
the programme is meeting its stated objectives.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 78
Chapter 7:   Resources and Utilisation of funds 
Financial resources for control and prevention of water pollution comes from Government 
budgetary support and Water Cess collected under the provisions of the water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977. The Central Government pays the Central 
Pollution Control Board and State Pollution Control Boards such amount of money as it may 
think fit for being utilised under the water (prevention and control of pollution) Act 1974  
from the proceeds of  Water Cess collected after  deducting the expenses on collection. 
MOEF being nodal ministry is responsible for protection of environment including 
environmental threats arising from Water pollution.  
Funds allocated by the government to MOEF and  its various agencies for implementation of 
programmes relating to prevention of pollution of rivers, lakes and ground water all over 
the country need to be spent effectively, efficiently and economically for the purpose for 
which it was allocated. This is especially important as funds are transferred directly from the 
Central government (MoEF) to implementing agencies of State Government such as 
municipalities, Jal Boards, Sewerage Boards, Lake Development Agencies etc for 
implementation at the ground level instead of being routed through State Government  as 
was done prior to June 2003. 
 7.1 Resources generated from Water Cess for control and prevention of 
water pollution
 The objective of control and prevention of water pollution is achieved through CPCB, SPCBs 
and various programs of MOEF such as NRCP, NLCP under NRCD etc. The resources 
generated through Water Cess under the provisions of the water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 and grants disbursed to CPCB and SPCB from cess so collected 
during last five years are placed below: 
Table 16: Details of Water Cess collected and grants disbursed
(` in crore)
Year Water Cess 
collected 
Grants to SPCB Grants to CPCB Total
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (3) + (4)
2005-06 56.4 76.52 47.04 123.56
2006-07 170.3* 76.51 47.12 123.63
2007-08 190.84 130.34 47.96 178.30
2008-09 228.99 79.80 50.63 130.43
2009-10 207.01 209.96 54.77 264.73
Total 853.54 573.13 247.52 820.65 
[Source: Detailed Demand of Grants of MoEF and Finance Accounts of Union Government of concerned years]  
* Inclusive of other cess 
We observed that resources generated from Water Cess for control and prevention of water 
pollution was very meagre and was distributed to CPCB and SPCB for meeting their 
administrative expenses mainly for monitoring of pollution level of   water, air and other 
areas. CPCB and SPCB did not have any schemes for reducing water pollution and 
restoration of quality of water and water bodies. We observed that based on 28 States and 
seven Union territories, funds allocated from Water Cess comes to only `3.28 crores per 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 79
State/Union Territories per year during last five years. This miniscule amount of allocation 
was barely sufficient for monitoring of pollution level.
The Water Cess under the provision of Water (prevention and Control of pollution) Cess Act 
1977 was revised two times during the last 34 years in 1992 and 2003. The  water cess  is 
payable by  various users at the rate  ranging  from two paisa to fifteen paisa per kiloliter 
and  defaulters failure to  comply with the  orders/direction issued under provision of Water 
(prevention and Control of pollution)  Act 1974 or Environment Protection Act 1986 are 
liable to pay higher rate of three paise to thirty paisa per kiloliter. Water Cess rates are set 
nationally with an extremely low rate structure. There is need of an in depth review of 
system of collection of Water Cess to ensure that the higher rate of Water Cess from 
defaulters is effectively recovered. There is also a need to revisit and revise the Water Cess 
rates keeping in view reasonable resources requirement of CPCB and SPCBs for monitoring, 
prevention and control of water pollution across the country. 
Thus, there is a need to explore resources either by improving effectiveness in realization of 
cess, increasing the rate of Water Cess or exploring other sources of revenue for control of 
water pollution.
7.2 Expenditure on control and prevention of water pollution  
The table below gives the expenditure incurred on control and prevention of water pollution 
and total budget of MOEF during last five years. 
Table 17: Expenditure incurred on control and prevention of water pollution
(` in crore)
Year Expenditure 
on NRCP 
Expenditure 
on NLCP 
Grants to 
SPCBs 
Grants to CPCB Total
expenditure on 
water pollution 
Total
expenditure of 
MoEF 
2005-06 274.21 56.22 76.52 47.04 453.99 1254.51
2006-07 275.92 52.66 76.51 47.12 452.21 1371.23
2007-08 252.98 63.20 130.34 47.46 493.98 1583.24
2008-09 271.00 45.00 79.80 50.63 446.43 1710.01
2009-10 360.99 45.00 209.96 54.77 670.72 2019.75
Total 1435.10 262.08 573.13 247.02 2517.33 7938.74 
Source: MIS and detailed demand of grants of MoEF for respective years. 
We observed that 26 to 36 per cent of MOEF budget was spent on control and prevention of 
water pollution. It can be seen that out of total expenditure of ` 2517.33 crore on control 
and prevention of water pollution, `1697.18 crore were spent on programs of NRCP/NLCP 
and `820.65 crore were given as grants to SPCB and CPCB. The funding patterns of 
NRCP/NLCP and utilisation of funds allotted to these programmes are discussed below.
Funds available for control and prevention  of water pollution and restoration of 
wholesomeness of water were not ad equate for the country as a whole. The total Water Cess 
of ` 853.54 crore collected during last five years constituted 10.75 per cent of total 
expenditure of MOEF. The disbursements to CPCB and SPCBs, amounted to `  820.65 crore 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 80
7.3 Funding pattern of NRCP/NLCP programme 
7.3.1 Funding Pattern of NRCP 
The funding pattern for the river cleaning programme has undergone several changes. GAP I 
which started in 1985 was a 100 per cent  centrally funded scheme. The funding pattern 
changed to 50:50 between Central Government and State Government for phase II in 1993. 
This was revised again to 100 per cent GOI funding from 1997. Finally, from 1
st April 2001, 
the funding pattern for new projects was changed to 70: 30. As per NRCD guidelines: 
x  NRCD/Government of India shall bear upto 70% of the Project cost. 
x States and Local Bodies shall bear 30% of the Project cost of which the share of public 
would be a minimum of 10% to ensure public participation in the project. 
x The O&M shall be a part of the project and the costs thereon shall be borne entirely by 
the State and local bodies for which additional resources have to be demonstrably 
raised and committed to O&M. 
x The Local Bodies may raise loans from financial institutions such as HUDCO to 
contribute their share. 
x If there is a cost overrun in a project because of delay, inflation or any other reason, the 
contribution of NRCD/Government shall be limited to its contribution amount initially 
agreed. Any additional expense on account of any increase in cost shall be borne by the 
concerned State Government. 
x In addition NRCD/Government of India may undertake itself or commission projects to 
other institutions, voluntary agencies etc. also. 
7.3.2  Funding Pattern of NLCP 
Initially the scheme was approved with 100 per cent  central funding. The funding pattern 
changed from February 2002 to 70:30.   
x NRCD/Government of India shall bear upto 70% of the Project cost. 
x The States shall bear 30% of the project cost, of which the share of the local body 
would be up to 10% to ensure public participation in the project. A commitment to this 
effect also to be provided by the State Government. 
x For the lake catchment where sewerage & sewage treatment is being posed/funded 
from other sources, appropriate synergy of the two programmes is to be ensured. In 
case, the proposal also includes the internal sewerage as one of the components, the 
funding pattern shall be 60:40 between the Centre and the respective State. As far as 
possible, Government land may be identified for creation of infrastructure. 
x The O&M shall be a part of the project and the costs thereon shall be borne entirely by 
the State / local bodies for which additional resources have to be demonstrably raised 
and committed to O&M. The O&M Plan must reveal the dedicated streams for revenue 
generation to meet O&M expenses and the same has to be passed as a resolution by 
the concerned local body. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 81
x If there is a cost overrun in a project because of delay, inflation or any other reason, the 
contribution of NRCD/Government of India shall be limited to the amount initially 
agreed to in the Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction Order. 
x Certain R&D activities considered to be necessary and an integral part of the project, 
may be undertaken by the State Government through academic institutions within the 
scheduled time frame of the project. 
 7.4 Budgeted expenditure under NRCD 
7.4.1  NRCP 
Since Ganga Action Plan II started in 1993 and its scope was widened into National River 
Conservation Programme, 1079 projects for ` 4724.24 crore had been sanctioned by MoEF 
against which the funds of ` 3041.91 crore had been released up to March 2010. Breakup of 
funds sanctioned under budget estimates, revised estimates and utilised in form of releases 
during last ten years (2000-2010) is given below: 
Table 18
(` in crore)
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Funds released 
2000-01 193.50 121.64*љ 121.39 
2001-02 174.95 279.17*ј 283.28 
2002-03 254.00 278.26 278.26 
2003-04 244.00 234.00 219.09 
2004-05 304.20 319.00 292.66 
2005-06 347.50 297.20*љ 274.21 
2006-07 363.00 275.41 275.92 
2007-08 264.00 256.69 252.98 
2008-09 249.00 271.00 271.00 
2009-10 511.00 361.00*љ 360.99  
Total 2905.15 2693.17 2629.79 
*Years in which budget estimates were revised by more than 20 per cent 
We observed that out of 10 years scrutinised by audit, budget estimates were revised by 
more than 20 per cent  in four years.  Out of these four years, in three years budget 
estimates were revised downwards by 24 per cent to 37 per cent, while in one year budget 
estimates were revised upwards by 60 per cent. This indicated that NRCD was not able to 
capture accurately assumptions on which budget estimates were based. In the remaining 
years, revision ranged between three to 14 per cent.
7.4.2  NLCP 
58 projects for 
` 883.96 crore has been sanctioned by MoEF and against which the funds of 
`327.89 crore had been released up to March 2010. Breakup of funds sanctioned under the 
budget estimates, revised estimates and utilised in form of release during last ten years 
(2000-2010) is given below: 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 82
Table  19            
(` in crore)
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Funds released  
2000-01 10.00 7.00*љ 0.20
2001-02 10.00 10.00 10.00
2002-03 30.00 12.19*љ 12.19
2003-04 45.00 44.16 20.00
2004-05 45.00 30.00*љ 23.42
2005-06 68.00 56.22 56.22
2006-07 60.00 58.54 52.66
2007-08 100.00 63.21*љ 63.20
2008-09 80.00 45.00*љ 45.00
2009-10 45.00 45.00 45.00
Total 493 371.32 327.89
We observed that out of 10 years reviewed by audit, budget estimates were revised by 
more than 20 per cent in five years. In these five years, budget estimates were revised 
downwards by 30 per cent to 59 per cent indicating that NRCD was not able to capture the 
assumptions on which the budget estimates were based. In the remaining years, revision 
ranged between 0 to 17 per cent.
We further observed that in three years (2000-01, 2003-04 and 2004-05), there was 
significant variation even in the revised estimates and final expenditure.  In these three 
years, expenditure was lower by 28 per cent  to 98 per cent  as compared to revised 
estimates, indicating that progress in projects relating to lakes was very slow and 
implementing agencies were not seeking further release of installments. Thus, NRCD could 
not reasonably capture progress of works and requirement of funds even in the revised 
estimates, impacting the financial management and budgetary control. 
7.5  Utilisation of funds
7.5.1  Utilisation of funds released under NRCP 
The State-wise details of projects sanctioned, projects test checked, funds released and 
expenditure on all project and projects test checked in respect of NRCP since initiation of 
Ganga Action Plan II up to March 2010 is given in Annexure  5 . 
We observed that out of 20 States, total expenditure in respect of 10 States was less than 
the amount released by NRCD. These States are indicated by an asterisk (*) in the Annexure
5. The total expenditure of these 10 States was 
` 540.14 crore out of ` 652.11 crore. This 
indicated that the progress of expenditure was slow and surplus out of NRCD funds 
amounting to 
` 111.97 crore in addition to  30 per cent share of State was lying in interest-
earning accounts of banks as per the  terms of sanction and release of MOEF.
In the remaining States, we observed that total expenditure in respect of seven States was 
less than combined total of funds released by NRCD and State share. Only two States i.e.  
Out of `3041.91 crore released to 20 States,  87 per cent  of total release amounting to 
`2660.01 crore  was  given to eight States namely Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana , 
Maharashtra, Punjab , Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 83
Goa and Punjab have spent funds equal or more than total of funds released by NRCD and 
State share. NRCD could not furnish the information in respect of funds released for test 
checked projects separately as funds were released directly to implementing agency for 
clusters of project and not project-wise.
While verifying UCs, we observed that there was no uniformity in submission of UCs by the 
implementing agency as some implementing agencies had submitted  combined UCs for all 
the projects, while others did so on the basis of individual projects. This had led to 
ineffective monitoring at NRCD, while affording various options to the implementing agency 
to conceal crucial financial information and facts as disaggregated data was not required to 
be disclosed. 
In its present format, the system of collecting and analysing data is incapable of detecting 
diversion of funds, inefficient utilisation of funds, failure to contribute matching share, 
balances lying unspent from completed projects, interest income earned but credited to 
account of implementing agency and not disclosed in UCs for adjustment in further release, 
booking of inadmissible charges/expenditure, cost escalations and overruns.  
Out of 1079 projects sanctioned by NRCD, Audit test checked 140 projects costing 
` 2117.66
crore across 19 States and 41 towns situated on banks of 24 rivers for detailed scrutiny. 
Audit observations of projects checked in audit are given below.  
7.5.1. (a) Diversion of funds   
Funds sanctioned by MoEF were to be spent only on items approved in the project. 
However, in some cases it was observed that implementing agencies in the States had spent 
funds on items of expenditure not included in DPRs. Some of the cases are discussed below: 
x In Bihar,  Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad, Bihar had constructed three low cost sanitation 
projects at a total cost of ` 9.77 lakh in Government high schools and in certain colony 
at Barahaya, instead at the banks of River Ganga which was in contravention to NRCD 
guidelines.
x In Goa, Department of Science Technology and Environment diverted funds of ` 74.28
lakh on procurement of a transformer ( ` 44.65 lakh) and construction of five excess 
staff quarters (` 29.63 lakh). In June 2011, MoEF stated that the State Government has 
been communicated to take necessary corrective measures.  
x
In Punjab, the Implementing agency (Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board) had 
diverted ` 6.91 crore on schemes which had not been included as items of expenditure 
under the projects approved. It expended ` 5.11 crore on salaries and ` 1.80 crore on 
operation and maintenance, which were not covered under NRCP.
In June 2011 MoEF stated that replies had been sought from the State government, 
however, the response was still awaited.
x In Punjab, land acquisition cost booked on MoEF account : ` 74.98 crore was spent on 
land acquisition in Ludhiana, Jalandhar, Phagwara and Phillaur out of which ` 2.38 crore 
incurred on land acquisition up to 31 March 1997 was booked as central share. 
However, the actual expenditure incurred on land acquisition up to 31 March 1997 was 
` 1.55 crore only which was to be shared on 50 per cent basis i.e. ` 0.77 crore was the 
central share instead of ` 2.38 crore. After being pointed out by audit, in June 2011, 
MoEF stated that Punjab Water Supply and  Sewerage Board is being requested to 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 84
credit back the amount to NRCD with only ` 0.77 crore being eligible as GoI share for 
land acquisition.
x In Tamil Nadu , the cost of land was to be borne by the State government. However, 
land cost of ` 71.44 lakh for pumping stations for Trichy-Srirangam Underground 
Sewerage System was charged to works expenditure.
In June 2011, MoEF stated that the State Government had informed that out of ` 71.44
lakh charged  towards cost of land, a sum of ` 58.68 lakh has already been withdrawn 
and added  as share of Government of Tamil Nadu/ Local Body. The balance amount of 
` 12.76 lakh would also be withdrawn.
x In Uttarakhand , Implementing agency (Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam) had diverted 
` 146.38 lakh on items of work (viz., excess centage, work charged establishment, 
contingency, special tools and plant charges, sub pumping stations,  Purchase of 
Pumping and generator set etc.) which had not been included as items of expenditure 
under the projects approved.
In June 2011, MoEF stated that the State Government has been communicated to take 
necessary corrective measures.
7.5.1 (b) Failure to contribute Matching Grants: 
As per the funding pattern, Government of India (GOI) was to bear up to 70 per cent cost of 
the project and the rest 30 per cent  was to be borne by the State Government. During 
examination following shortcomings were noticed in certain specific projects test-checked 
under NRCP: 
x In Bihar,  for survey and investigation and preparation of Pre-Feasibility Reports, an 
amount of `10 lakh was sanctioned by NRCD and matching share of ` 10 lakh was to 
be met by the State Government. However, the State government of Bihar did not 
release the same. 
x In Uttar Pradesh, under Gomti Action Plan Phase-I NRCD released ` 33.36 crore of its 
share during 2000-2010 whereas the Government of Uttar Pradesh released ` 8.29 
crore instead of ` 14.30 crore,  entailing a short release of ` 6.01 crore of its matching 
share.
7.5.1 (c) Unspent balances from projects completed /funds lying idle  
As per General Financial Rules as well as sanctions for the projects, any fund left over after 
implementation of the project had to be refunded to the fund-granting agency, in this case 
MoEF.  Funds were to be kept in interest-bearing accounts of entities implementing projects 
as per conditions of sanction. However, in the cases discussed below, it was observed that 
even though the projects were completed, funds lying unutilised with the implementing 
agency were not refunded to MoEF. 
x In Jharkhand, Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad transferred (November 2005) unspent balance of 
` 61.85 lakh to Mineral Area Development Authority (MADA) of Jharkhand for 
implementation of the project under the Subarnarekha plan. However, this said amount 
were lying unspent with MADA since October 2005. In June 2011, MoEF stated that 
MADA is being advised to indicate their plan to utilise this balance funds towards the 
completion of the balance projects. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 85
x In Bihar, ` 13.72 lakh was released by NRCD for preparation of DPRs under GAP-II 
(Supreme Court towns) out of which only ` 6.87 lakh was spent and balance ` 8.75 lakh 
(including interest amount of ` 1.90 lakh) was kept idle with the Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad 
(BRJP) since 1996. 
x In Bihar, Out of `199 lakh released by the State Government to Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad 
(BRJP) for special repairs of assets created under GAP-I, only `121.44 lakh was spent 
during the period 2003-2008. Out of ` 14.75 lakh earned as interest, `12.96 lakh was 
transferred to revenue/establishment account of BRJP. The balance amount of ` 79.35 
lakh was lying idle in savings/FD account with BRJP. This amount could have been 
utilised after MoEF approval towards the repair of STP, Chapra which was not 
functioning since 2003 and STPs at Patna (Pahari, Saidpur and Beur) and Bhagalpur 
which are not operating at full capacity. 
x In Madhya Pradesh, `113.36 lakh was sanctioned for acquisition of land in May 1996 
by NRCD  which was transferred to Collector of Indore, Madhya Pradesh for 
construction of STP. However, the land was not acquired and STP was built on 
Government land at Katib Kheri  instead of private land at Shakker Kheri . But the fund 
was not returned to NRCD and  are lying with the Collectors office, Indore since 1996. 
x In Odisha , the matching share of State Government of ` two crore was kept in non-
interest bearing Civil Deposit with Treasury since 2002-03. After being pointed in audit, 
the released amount had now been kept in interest bearing account.
x In Tamil Nadu,  unspent balance of `1.99 crore was lying with Chennai Metropolitan 
Water Supply and Sewerage Board Tamil Nadu since September 2008. In June 2011, 
MoEF stated that the implementing agency would be requested to refund the balance 
amount without awaiting recouping of funds by the Local Body.
7.5.1 (d) Interest income earned but not disclosed in UCs
According to guidelines of NRCP, a separate interest bearing bank account had to be opened 
to receive the funds from MoEF. Further, the interest so earned should be credited to the 
project account and reflected in the Utilisation Certificates. However, in the cases discussed 
below it was observed that the implementing agencies did not report the interest earned to 
MoEF:
x In Goa, Department of Science, Technology and Environment, which also served as an 
Implementing Agency had earned interest of ` 0.81 crore during 2003-2010 but did not 
report it to the NRCD. 
x In Kerala, Kerala Water Authority (KWA) received ` 2.75 crore from the GOI under 
Pamba Action Plan, which was deposited in a separate account. The interest accrued 
was ` 17.36 lakh but the same was neither transferred to project account, nor reported 
to the NRCD. Further, out of this ` 8.82 lakh was transferred to NEERI Nagpur for 
tender evaluation, and the balance amount of ` 8.54 lakh was still lying with KWA.
x In Tamil Nadu , the implementing agency (Chennai Metro Metropolitan Water Supply 
and Sewage Board, CMWSSB) of Tamil Nadu did not report to NRCD interest of ` 14.76 
crore earned out of the Government grant and  credited  the entire interest in its 
accounts. In June 2011, MoEF stated that the interest amount was not reflected in the 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 86
UCs submitted by the State. This has been taken up with the CMWSSB and the State 
Government.
x In Uttar Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam had earned interest of ` 11.86 crore but the 
same was neither credited to the project account, nor reflected in the UCs. 
7.5.1 (e) Other points of interest 
Some other points of interest are discussed below:  
x In Odisha: Meeting extra expenditure from NRCP funds:  As per terms and conditions 
stipulated in the sanction, extra expenditure incurred on the project was to be borne by 
the respective State governments. Contrary to the above provision , on construction of 
STP at Cuttack extra expenditure of ` 83.90 lakh  incurred on the project was met from 
NRCP funds ( quantity variation ` 54.16 lakh and price variation ` 29.74 lakh).  
x In Tamil Nadu:  Failure to release of GOI funds by Government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN):
NRCD released ` 9.35 crore for works of five towns directly to the GoTN up to March 
2000. Of this, the GoTN released  only ` 8.86 crore to the implementing agencies and 
the balance amount of ` 49.60 lakh was lying with GOTN (January 2008).  In another 
case, the share of ` 56.91 lakh of GoTN at 50 per cent of the expenditure incurred up to 
March 1997 was also not released by GoTN. Thus a total amount of ` 1.07 crore was 
not released by the GoTN from March 2000. 
x In Uttar Pradesh: Outstanding advance:  Implementing agency of Uttar Pradesh had 
made an advance payment of ` 50 lakh to contractor for construction of MPS in 
September 2006. Though the sanctioned duration of the project expired in March 2007, 
it was not adjusted even after a lapse of four years. In June 2011, MOEF stated that the 
advance has since been adjusted and the MPS has also been commissioned in the year 
2010.
x In Uttar Pradesh: Gomti Pollution Control Unit, Lucknow under Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam 
did not incur any expenditure under Gomti Action Plan Phase I in four years from 2000-
01 to 2003-04 while it received ` 26.78 crore ( ` 5.18 crore in 2000-01, ` five crore in 
2001-02, ` 13.60 crore in 2002-03 and ` three crore in 2003-04). Similarly, no 
expenditure was incurred by this unit in two years (2003-04 and 2004-05) although it 
had received ` 25.71 crore under Gomti Action Plan Phase II ( ` 18 crore Central share 
and ` 7.71 crore State share). 
7.5.1 (f)  Cost escalations and overruns which were not to be shared by NRCD
Due to delays, there were cost overruns in 54 projects out of the test checked 140. The 
project wise details are given in Annexure 3.  The total cost over run in these projects was 
`
129.19 crore and  in 21 projects, cost over run exceeded more than `one crore  ranging 
from `1.10 crore to ` 34.59 crore.
7.5.2  Utilisation of funds released under NLCP 
The State-wise details of project sanctioned, project test checked, funds released and 
expenditure on projects test checked   in respect of NLCP since initiation of NLCP up to 
March 2010 is given in Annexure 6.
The figures pertaining to expenditure on test checked projects reflected in Annexure 6 have 
been compiled by Audit from implementing agencies.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 87
We compiled the expenditure on test checked projects but could not compare the same 
with project-wise releases as NLCP could not furnish information in respect of funds 
released for the test checked projects separately in the cases where one implementing 
agency was implementing more than one project as funds were released to implementing 
agency for clusters of projects. Thus, the system was not devised to enable tracking of the 
last Rupee, thereby hampering effective monitoring of utilisation of funds by implementing 
agency.
 We observed that in absence of effective monitoring of use of funds, NRCD also could not 
verify diversion of funds, inefficient utilisation of funds, failure of States to contribute their 
matching share, balance lying unspent from completed projects, interest income earned 
credited to account of implementing agency but not disclosed in UCs for adjustment in 
further release etc., as in the case of NRCP.
Further, NRCD did not devise any effective system to exercise proper and effective due 
diligence in function of financial management and also failed in ensuring that all relevant 
information was furnished by the implementing agency to enable it to exercise adequate 
and effective control on utilisation of funds.  
Out of projects of 58 lakes sanctioned by NLCP, Audit test checked projects of 22 lakes 
costing `692.06 crore across 14 States for detailed scrutiny. Audit observations relating to 
test checked projects are given below: 
7.5.2 (a) Diversion of funds  
Funds sanctioned by MoEF were to be spent only on items approved in the project. 
However, in some cases it was observed that the implementing agencies in the States had 
spent funds on unapproved items of expenditure. Some of the cases are discussed below: 
x In Jammu and Kashmir , of `143.55 crore released, Implementing agency of Jammu & 
Kashmir diverted funds on un-approved items of work of `2.70 crore (operation & 
maintenance costs, rent, miscellaneous items and wages). MoEF stated that response 
from the State Government is still awaited.
x In Karnataka, the Implementing agency had diverted `64.63 lakh on un-approved items 
of work i.e., chain link fencing, cattle pond, parking lot, bore well, pump etc. In June 
2011, MoEF stated that the factual position was being ascertained from the State 
Government and action shall be taken accordingly.
Out of `883.96 crore of  sanctioned projects  to 14 States,  58 per cent of  total  sanctioned 
projects  amounting to `513.73 crore  were sanctioned to only  two States namely Jammu and 
Kashmir and  Rajasthan. 
Although NLCP compiled information on approved cost of projects and funds released, it did 
not compile information relating to project-wise expenditure and total expenditure on all 
projects based on UCs received from States.  
Therefore, we could not compare total expenditu re on all projects with total release of 
funds.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 88
x In Rajasthan, the Implementing Agency diverted `17.15 lakh to meet expenditure on 
un-approved items of work (construction of Pucca wall at Nag Pahar). In June 2011, 
MoEF stated that since this was not as per approved scope of work, the State 
Government has been asked not to book the expenditure of this component under 
NLCP project.
x In Uttarakhand, Implementing agency of Uttarakhand  diverted `5.83 crore towards 
construction of new bridge-cum-bypass and solid waste management ( ` five crore) and 
(`83.16 lakh) on four unapproved items:
 repairs and renovation of Nainital Lake through Public Works Department (PWD);
 repairs, renovation and railing work of Nainital-Almora B-2 road through PWD;
 installation of closed-circuit TV cameras in and around Nainital Lake and
 construction of small parking areas, boundary wall and motor road in 
Commissioners office through Kumaon Mandal Vidyut Nigam.
In June 2011, MoEF stated that it has been reported by the State Government that diversion 
of funds has been carried out keeping in mind the prevailing scenario of lake conservation 
only, and after the prior approval of the State level Project Monitoring Committee (PMC). It 
also stated that the State Government has been requested to explain the detailed reasons 
for funds diversion and take corrective measures accordingly and that it would be ensured 
that excess cost, if any, incurred on the project will be borne by the State Government.  
7.5.2 (b) Failure of State Governments to contribute proportionate share 
The funding pattern of NLCP was changed from February 2002 and NRCD was to bear up to 
70 per cent  cost of the project and the rest 30 per cent  was to be borne by the State 
Government. Examination of projects revealed that NRCD released instalments to State 
Government without ensuring that State Governments also released their share 
simultaneously. As a result, in seven lakes out of the 22 test checked in audit, we observed 
that the State Governments did not release their matching share of ` 7.77 crore as depicted 
in table below: 
Table 20 
(`in crore)
Name of the State Name of the 
Project/ 
Lake 
Funds 
released by 
NRCD
Funds released by State 
Amount due Amount
released 
Pending 
amount
Karnataka Bellandur 2.63 1.13 1.10 0.03 (S) 
Andhra Pradesh Banjara 0.80 0.34 0.00 0.34 (P) 
Tamil Nadu Kodaikanal 2.00 0.86 0.00 0.86 (P) 
Kerala Veli Akkulam 4.30 1.84 0.00 1.84 (NS) 
West Bengal Mirik 1.00 0.43 0.00 0.43 (P) 
Odisha Bindusagar 2.21 0.95 0.00 0.95 (P) 
Madhya Pradesh Shivpuri 7.75 3.32 0.00 3.32 (P) 
Total 20.69 8.87 1.10 7.77
[Note: Status of the project is indicated as (S)=Suspended; (P)=Pending; (NS)=Not started] 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 89
7.5.2 (c) Unspent balances of completed projects/funds lying idle    
As per General Financial Rules as well as sanctions for the projects, any funds left over after 
implementation of the project has to be refunded to the fund-granting agency, in this case 
MoEF. However, in the cases discussed below, it was observed that even though the 
projects were completed, funds lying unutilised with the implementing agency were not 
refunded to MoEF. 
x In Jammu and Kashmir , J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority (LAWDA) 
had paid interest free mobilization advance of ` 34.64 crore to M/s Thermax for 
construction of STPs due to which it suffered a loss of interest of ` 47.96 lakh 
(calculated on simple interest @6 per cent annum).
x In Karnataka, Unspent balance of `1.81 crore ( `1.25 crore Central share and ` 0.56 
crore of State share) was lying with the Implementing agency Lake Development 
Authority, Bangalore (since January 2005) which was released for restoration and 
conservation of Bellandur Lake.
x In Kerala, it was observed that `4.30 crore released to Kerala Sustainable Urban 
Development Project was deposited in the Special Treasury saving Bank Account and 
subsequently transferred to Sub Treasury at Vellayambalam. This fund was lying with 
government treasury account and no interest was realised on this amount from May 
2006 to May 2009. The implementing agency suffered loss of interest of `1.34 crore up 
to December 2010 by not investing the same in the interest bearing account with 
accredited banks. In June 2011, MoEF stated that despite repeated requests, MoEF was 
not informed of the physical and financial progress of the project by the State 
Government and the State Government had since been requested to refund the funds 
released along with the interest accrued so far.
x In Maharashtra, in the case of Powai lakes, unspent balance of `93.84 lakh was lying 
with Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM), Maharashtra since April 2006. 
In June 2011, MoEF stated that factual position was being ascertained from the State 
Government and action shall be taken accordingly. 
x In Andhra Pradesh in the case of Banjara Lake, an amount of `80 lakh was released to 
Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation, Hyderabad (APTDC) in April 2005. 
Later, the execution of the project was transferred to Hyderabad Metropolitan Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board (HMWS&SB). APTDC was supposed to transfer unspent 
balance of ` 62.40 lakhs  to HMWS&SB. However, APTDC had transferred only ` 31.20
lakh to HMWS&SB and remaining amount of `31.20 lakh was still lying with it. 
x In Madhya Pradesh ` 6 crore was released to Municipal Corporation, Shivpuri in 
October 2007 for implementation of the project for Shivpuri lake. An expenditure of 
` 25.45 lakh was incurred on tendering and advertising, subsequently the work was 
transferred to Public Health Engineering Division (PHED), in September 2009. However, 
the balance fund were lying the Municipal Corporation, Shivpuri and was yet to be 
transferred to PHED. 
x In Rajasthan, `2.91 crore was transferred to Forest Department for afforestation work 
in catchment area of Pichola lake. The Forest Department utilised only ` 99.53 lakh and 
the remaining amount of `1.92 crore was lying idle with the Forest Department. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 90
 7.5.2 (d) Interest income earned but not disclosed in UCs
In all cases of funds being received under NLCP,  a separate interest-bearing bank account 
had to be opened to receive the funds from MoEF. Further, the interest so earned should be 
credited to the project account and reflected in the Utilisation Certificates. However, in the 
cases discussed below it was observed that the implementing agencies did not report the 
interest earned to MoEF:  
x In Madhya Pradesh , Municipal Corporation, Shivpuri, kept `5.90 crore in short-term 
deposits for different periods and earned interest of more than `57.18 lakh.  However, 
the same was not reported to MoEF. 
MoEF stated in its reply in June 2011 that efforts would be made to ensure compliance of 
terms and conditions of sanctions. Action would be taken for refund to MoEF by the 
implementing agencies of unspent balances, if any, after completion of projects. MoEF also 
stated that several new measures had been initiated for effective utilisation of funds and 
improved implementation of project. These include 
x Public consultation in project formulation and implementation,
x Signing of tripartite MoAs with States and urban local bodies,  
x Appraisal of projects by independent institutions,  
x Third Party Inspection to review and monitor performance of the projects funded under 
NRCP & NGRBA on the basis of detailed on-site review, examination of documents 
through the entire lifecycle stages of the projects namely pre-construction, 
construction, commissioning & trial run and post-construction. 
 As regards improving monitoring for effective utilisation of funds, MoEF stated that it has 
taken up a project for online reporting and monitoring system for monitoring of NRCP and 
NLCP programmes which  is likely to be operational shortly. 
Conclusion  
Utilisation of funds 
Funds available for control and prevention of water pollution and restoration of 
wholesomeness of water were not adequate for the country as a whole. There were 
instances of poor financial management like di version of funds, non-disclosure of accrued 
interest, funds not utilised for implementation, funds parked in bank accounts, unspent 
balances not refunded etc., in the implementation of the projects. The quality of utilisation 
certificates was poor. 
Further, due to tardy implementation, the government had to spend more funds on these 
projects than originally sanctioned.  As such, MoEF needs to exercise greater oversight 
over utilisation of funds to ensure that funds are spent timely and for the purpose it was 
sanctioned.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 91
Recommendation 26 
There is a need to augment financial resources either by improving effectiveness in 
realization of cess, increasing the rate of Water Cess or exploring other sources of revenue 
for control of water pollution.
Recommendation 27 
There is a need to strengthen the monitoring system of utilisation of funds.  MoEF needs to 
exercise greater oversight over utilisation of funds to ensure that funds are spent timely and 
for the purpose for which they were sanctioned. MoEF need to place specific thrust on 
diversion of funds through improving the system of utilisation certificates in its oversight 
function.

Chapter: 8
State Specific Findings

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 95
State: Andhra Pradesh 
1.  Background 
 The major two rivers of Andhra Pradesh are Krishna and Godavari stretching thousands of 
square kilometres of land and creating largest perennial cultivated area in the country. Musi 
river is a tributary of 
Krishna and it flows 
through a major portion 
of Hyderabad. Some of 
the lakes in Andhra 
Pradesh are: Kolleru 
lake, Hussainsagar Lake, 
Banjara lake Palair lake, 
Shamirpet lake, Durgam 
Cheruvu etc. According 
to Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB), 
annual replenishable 
ground water resource 
in Andhra Pradesh is 
36.50 Billion Cubic 
meters (BCM) while the 
net annual ground 
water availability is 32.95 
BCM. Out of 1125 
mandals, ground water in 219 mandals is over-exploited, 77 mandals is critical and in 175 
mandals, it is semi-critical. Ground water in Andhra Pradesh is contaminated by salinity, 
fluoride, chloride, iron and nitrate.
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, Municipal 
Administration and Urban Development, Government of Andhra Pradesh is the nodal 
department for NRCP and the implementing agencies are Public Health Engineering 
Department (PHED) and Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply & Sewerage Board 
(HMWS&SB). Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation (APTDC), Hyderabad is the 
implementing agency for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Andhra Pradesh is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Done Could not be verified Done 
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Not Done Done (arsenic, 
nitrate, iron, 
fluoride and 
salinity)
Rivers and lakes test checked in Andhra Pradesh

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 96
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Done Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Done Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: 
Done, Industry: Done, 
Mining: could not be 
verified, Dam: Done, 
Uncontrolled disposal of 
human waste: Could not 
be verified)  
Partially (Agriculture: 
Done, Industry: 
Done, Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste: could not be 
verified)
Partially
(Agriculture: 
Done, Industry: 
Done, Mining: 
could not be 
verified)
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: could not be 
verified, Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Done)   
Could not be verified Done 
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
could not be verified
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Andhra Pradesh  
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Cla ss II cities of Andhra Pradesh is 1978.19, out of 
which treatment capacity is available for only 664.42 mld. 
34% (664.42 mld)
66% (1313.77 mld) 
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of Andhra 
Pradesh (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 97
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1  NRCP 
Godavari and Musi rivers had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the 
National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects are being implemented in five 
cities11 on river Godavari and in Hyderabad on river Musi.  25 projects 12 in these five towns 
were sanctioned under NRCP and sanctioned cost of all the projects was `367.51 crore. 
Expenditure of ` 342.48 crore was incurred under NRCP as of March 2010. 
6 projects13 being implemented under NRCP at a cost of ` 351.54 crore were test checked 
for detailed examination. Results of audit examination are discussed below: 
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/ location 
Name of 
the project 
Sanctioned 
cost 
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore ) 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of completion
Godavari at 
Ramagundam
STP Zone I 0.36 0.16 June 2004 June 2008 
I&D 2.62 1.50 September 
2004 
Work stopped due to 
objections raised for safety 
of coal mines in April 2006 
STP Zone II 1.19 0.82 December 
2003 
January 2005 
STP WSP 
14 
0.79 0.45 October 2004 Work stopped due to 
objections raised for safety 
of coal mines in April 2006 
Godavari at 
Rajamundry
STP 10.92 10.48 September 
2004 
March 2010 
Musi at 
Hyderabad 
4 STPs, 16 
I&Ds and 
10 Sewer 
lines
335.6614 281.50 August 2008 For STPs: February 2009, 
November 2009, June 2009 
and one still ongoing  
For 16 I&Ds and 10 Sewer 
lines: four  delayed  
(ii) Performance of projects 
(a) Ramagundam 
The average sewage generated in the city of Ramagundam is 15 mld. However, only 4.5 mld 
is treated and the rest 10.5 mld is discharged into the Godavari. Details of four projects test 
checked in Ramagundam which aim to improve the quality of water in Godavari are 
discussed below: 
Project  Findings 
STP x This project scheduled for completion by June 2004 was completed in 
                                                           
11 viz. Bhadrachalam, Mancherial, Rajamundry,Hyderabad and Ramagundam 
12 The project on Musi River consist of 30 sub-projects (4 STPs, 16 I&Ds and 10 Sewer lines) 
13 Five projects on Godavari river and one project (consisting of 30 sub-projects) on Musi river
14 Including land acquisition at a cost of ` 37.03 crore

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 98
Zone 1 June 2008 after a delay of four years. No information was available 
regarding submission of completion report and final utilisation certificate 
to MoEF.
x Separate information was not available with the State regarding actual 
funds spent on the project.
x This project was delayed due to water logging conditions, shortage of 
labour and land acquisition issues.
x Though STP capacity was four mld, only one mld was being treated and 
the rest three mld was flowing into Godavari. No information was 
available whether the treated sewage met the standards for pH, Total 
Suspended solids (TSS), Oil & Grease, BOD and COD. The pump sets were 
not working which hampered the operation of the STP. After its 
completion, it was not assessed whether the STP was meeting the 
performance criteria set for it.  
As such, it is evident that the STP was not fulfilling the purpose for which it was 
constructed.
STP
Zone 2 
x The project was completed in January 2005 after a delay of one year and 
one month. The completion certificate was submitted to MoEF in 
December 2005 but final Utilisation Certificates have not yet been 
submitted.
x This project was delayed due to problems in acquisition of land. 
x Though the STP was constructed to treat 14 mld of sewage, it was treating 
only 3.5 mld and the rest 10.5 mld was flowing untreated into the 
Godavari. No separate information was available whether the treated 
sewage met the pH, Total Suspended Solids (TSS), Oil & Grease, BOD and 
COD standards. Pump sets were not working which hampered the 
operation of the STP.  
As such, it is evident that the STP was not fulfilling the purpose for which it was 
constructed.
I&D x Though the project was originally to be completed by December 2000 , it 
was extended upto September 2004.
x The work was stopped in April 2006 due to objection raised for safety for 
coal mines by authorities of Singareni Collieries Company Limited. 
x In Zone-I the pumps were not in running condition and in Zone-II, the 
pumps were found missing and the pump house was not put to use.The 
State government had not taken any action to rectify the problem.  
x 1443 RMT of pipes were to be laid under the project, however, only 888 
RMT were laid as yet.
As such, the project failed to fulfill the purpose for which it was constructed.
STP
WSP 14 
The project was abandoned due to objection raised for safety of coal mines by 
the authorities of Singareni Collieries Company Limited in April 2006. 
(b) Rajamundry 
The daily average sewage generated in the city of Rajamundry is 30 mld and the entire 30 
mld is treated. Details of project test checked in Rajamundry city which aim to improve the 
quality of water in Godavari are discussed below: 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 99
Project  Findings 
STP x The project scheduled for completion by September 2004 was completed 
in March 2010 after a delay of five and a half years. No information was 
available regarding submission of completion report and final UCs to MoEF, 
even though the project was completed.
x The delay was due to submerging of site, unavoidable climatic conditions 
like heavy rains, scarcity of skilled labour for this type of specialized work 
etc.
x It was proposed to generate biogas from the STP, however, this was not 
done due to non-connection of household sewage to the STP through the 
underground drainage network.
 (c) Hyderabad 
The average daily sewage generated in Hyderabad city is 950 mld, however, treatment 
capacity exists only for 541 mld but only 407 mld of sewage is treated. As a result, 543 mld 
of sewage daily flows into Musi river. 23 drains from Hyderabad city open into the Musi but 
only 17 have been intercepted and six drains were yet to be intercepted.  Under NRCP, 
projects consisting of construction of four STPs, 16 I&Ds & 10 sewer lines were sanctioned in 
April 2004 at an estimated cost of ` 335.66
15 crore. Some of the projects test checked in 
Hyderabad which aimed at improving the quality of water of Musi River are discussed 
below:
Project name Findings 
STP, Nagole x The project scheduled for completion by August 2008 was finally 
completed in November 2009 after a delay of one year & three 
months.
x Against the original cost of ` 47.64 crore, expenditure of ` 59.47 
crore was incurred on the project. The cost of the project also 
escalated by 11.83 crore due to increase in quantities of 
mechanical, electrical, safety and civil works. 
x  The project was delayed due to delay in procurement of bio-gas 
set with improved designs and specifications from Austria. 
x The constructed STP with a capacity of 172 mld was treating only 
150 mld due to the daily generation of sewage being less than 
capacity created. 114 mld of untreated sewage from Murki Nala, 
which was supposed to be diverted to STP Nagole was being let 
out into Musi River without treatment. 
Consent was taken from SPCB for construction and operation 
and it was regularly being inspected by it.  
STP,
Nallacheruvu
x The project was completed in February 2009 after a delay of six 
months.
x Against the original cost of ` 11.33 crore, expenditure of ` 15.77 
crore was incurred on the project. The cost of the project 
escalated by ` 4.44 crore due to revision of rates. 
                                                           
15 Includes cost of land acquisition 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 100
x The project was delayed due to delay in preparation of structural 
drawings, increase in quantities and supplementary items of 
work, delay in handing over of site etc. 
x The STP capacity created was 30 mld but the STP was treating 
only 14 mld due to less receipt of sewage.
STP, Amberpet x This was completed in June 2009 after a delay of 10 months. 
Against the original cost of ` 93.51 crore, expenditure of `
112.94 crore was incurred on the project. The cost of the project 
escalated by ` 19.43 crore due to reasons like providing power 
distribution scheme, laying of power cables, construction of 
administrative building, painting for gas dome etc.
x The project was delayed due to problems in land acquisition, 
increase in quantum of work, hard rock excavation in lagoon, 
heavy seepage and heavy rains etc.  
x Though the capacity of the STP was to treat 339 mld of sewage, 
it was treating only 241 mld and 178 mld was being discharged 
into Musi. This was due to non-completion of I&D project at 
Surplus nala. 
STP, Attapur x This project was envisaged to be completed in August 2008 but 
is still not complete.
x Against the original cost of ` 23.55 crore, expenditure of ` 4.50 
crore was incurred on the project.
x The project was delayed due to land acquisition issues and non-
availability of approach road to STP site 
x Because of non-completion of STP, three I&D structures were 
not being put to use and 82.7 mld of untreated sewage was 
being discharged into Musi river daily. 
I&D, Surplus Nala x This was scheduled to be completed in August 2008 but is still 
not complete.
x Total expenditure of ` 2.10 crore was incurred on the project. 
x The project was delayed due to objection from grass growers at 
the site, heavy seepage and hard rock, frequent rains and 
reformation of coffer dam which collapsed due to abnormal 
flood along the length of nala.  
x  Due to delay in its construction, STP Amberpet was affected and 
178 mld of sewage was being discharged into Musi without 
treatment due to non-completion of I&D.  
I&D, Murkinala 
near Chaderghat 
Bridge
x This I&D work to divert sewage to STP Nagole for treatment was 
completed in February 2008. 
x  An expenditure of `0.86 crore was incurred on th project. 
x The I&D work was not put to use due to laying of pipe lines 
under another work under JNNURM programme. As a result, 114 
mld of untreated sewage was being let into river Musi, rendering 
the entire expenditure of `0.86 crore unfruitful, besides 
polluting Musi river.  

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 101
I&D,Bahadurpura
and Mughal ka 
nala
x Bahadurpura nala and Mughal ka nala were completed in July 
2008.
x  An expenditure of ` 0.61 crore and ` 0.35 crore was incurred. 
x Pumping stations, each having capacity of 40 mld and 30 mld 
created under the project were not being utilized due to non 
completion of STP at Attapur. 
Thus, projects sanctioned to control pollution of Godavari and Musi rivers had not 
adequately achieved their objectives.
Blocked I&D at Murinala in Hyderabad
Blocked I&D  works at Afzal Sagar I&D in Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 102
4.2  NLCP 
One project being implemented under NLCP at a cost of ` 4.30 crore was test checked for 
detailed examination.  
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
lake
Sanctioned cost 
(` in crore ) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(` in crore ) 
Scheduled date of 
completion
Actual date of 
completion
Banjara lake 2.76, revised to  
4.30
0.18 August 2006 revised 
to May 2010 
On-going 
The project is discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
Banjara Lake 
in Hyderabad
x The work on the project involved activities like construction of STP, lake 
rejuvenation, lake front development, establishment of compost plant/ 
laboratory and diversion of storm water drain.  
x The project was to be completed by August 2006 which was revised to 
May 2010. However, it was still ongoing. 
x The sanctioned cost of the project was` 2.76 crore which was revised in 
May 2009 by NRCD to ` 4.30 crore. Against release of ` 80 lakh, 
expenditure of ` 17.61 lakh was incurred on the project and balance of 
` 62.39 lakh was lying unspent.
x  The project was not completed due to dispute over the proposed site 
for sewage treatment plant which was an essential component of the 
project. The STP was also not completed.  
x Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation (APTDC), 
Hyderabad was the implementing agency for the project. The work was 
transferred to the Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (HMWS&SB), Hyderabad during March 2010 for 
execution. An amount of ` 31.20 lakh was remitted by APTDC to 
HMWS&SB, Hyderabad in August 2010 and a balance of ` 31.20 lakh 
(along with interest) was still lying with APTDC. The actual execution of 
project has commenced from August 2010 by HMWS&SB.  
Thus, the work of conserving the Banjara lake was incomplete even 
after extension of period by four years and seven months.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 103
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional Project 
monitoring Cell 
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
1 out of 6 projects 1 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 
5.2 NLCP 
By inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 
5.3 Ground water (in test checked six blocks) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats
Yes Yes  Yes Yes 
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
(a) Water quality of Godavari after 
Ramagundam
Status of Godavari on entering and leaving 
Ramagundam in terms of DO and BOD is 
shown in the chart alongside.  It can be seen 
that BOD actually rises after Godavari leaves 
Ramagundam, highlighting the inadequate 
sewage treatment facilities.  
BOD is on the slightly higher side but TC is 
more than 3.2 times the criteria indicating the 
water of Godavari after leaving Ramagundam 
city is contaminated by harmful, fecal-related 
bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause 
illness
(b) Water quality of Godavari after 
Rajamundry
Status of Godavari entering and leaving 
Rajamundry in terms of DO and BOD is shown 
in the chart opposite.
8.5
3.6
9
2.8
02468 1 0
DO
BOD
Status of Godavari entering Ramagundam
status of Godavari leaving Ramagundam 
6.6
1
7.4
1
02468
DO
BOD
Status of Godavari entering Rajamundry
Status of Godavari leaving Rajamundry

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 104
(c) Water quality of Musi after Hyderabad 
Status of Musi entering and leaving 
Hyderabad in terms of levels of BOD and COD 
is shown in the chart opposite. Further, levels 
of Fecal Coliform increase in Musi after 
Hyderabad; indicating contamination of the 
water by fecal matter. Further, the Dissolved 
Oxygen of Musi river falls to 0 after it leaves 
Hyderabad, indicting the inability of Musi to 
support any aquatic life.  BOD was more than 
38 times the criteria, indicating high levels of 
organic pollution of Musi river after it leaves 
Hyderabad.
6.2 NLCP 
As the project on improving water quality of Banjara lake is still in progress, no conclusions 
could be drawn about impact of NLCP in restoring the lake. 
0
115
2.5
32
DO
BOD
Status of Musi entering Hyderabad
Status of Musi leaving Hyderabad

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 105
State: Assam 
1. Background 
Some of the important rivers of 
Assam are Brahmaputra, 
Burhidihing, Dhansiri, Dihing, 
Manas etc. Some of the lakes in 
Assam are Deepor Beel, 
Sareswar beel, Morikolang 
beel, Maguri beel, Diplai beel, 
Hakma beel, Sivasagar and Joy 
Sagar etc. According to central 
Ground Water Board, the 
annual replenishable ground 
water resource in the State is 
27.23 BCM and net annual 
ground water availability is 
24.89 BCM. Out of 23 districts 
in the State, none of them are 
over-exploited, critical or semi-critical with regard to ground water. Contaminants like 
fluoride, iron and arsenic affect parts of some districts in Assam.
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Assam is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: 
Done, Industry: Done, 
Mining: Could not be 
verified, Dam: Not Done, 
Uncontrolled disposal of 
human waste: Not Done) 
Could not be verified Partially
(Agriculture: 
Not Done, 
Industry: Done, 
Mining: Not 
Done) 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Not Done Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Not Done Could not be verified Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
 No river and lake under NLCP and NRCP selected

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 106
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not Done, 
Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Not Done) 
Could not be verified Partially
(Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non 
point sources: 
Not Done) 
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
 Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Assam 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Assam is 386.60 mld, for which no 
treatment capacity is available. 
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Even though two rivers in Assam, Bharalu and Kalong figured in the list of most polluted 
rivers in India, these rivers were not selected under NRCP.
4.2 NLCP 
Lakes like Dhir beel, Dighali beel and Sareswar beel were identified by NRCD in its list of  
polluted lakes. Further, the State in addition to the above-mentioned lakes, had also 
identified lakes like Morikolang beel, Maguri beel, Diplai beel, Hakma beel, Sivasagar and 
Joy Sagar as polluted. However, none of these lakes were included for restoration and 
conservation under NLCP. 
100%  (386.6 mld) 
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of Assam 
(%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 107
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 Ground water (in test checked six blocks) 
System for 
monitoring 
Whether monitoring 
done 
Whether laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing Kits 
issued
System
existed in 
four blocks 
Partially (taking place 
in four blocks, not 
being done in one 
block,could not be 
verified in one block) 
Partially (established in 
five out of six blocks 
and for one block, no 
information was 
available ) 
Partially (made available to all 
the panchayats in four blocks, 
sufficient FTKs were not 
supplied in one block and no 
information was made available 
in one block.) 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 108
State: Bihar 
1.  Background 
Ganga is the main river of Bihar. Some other rivers are Saryu (Ghaghra), Gandak, Budhi 
Gandak, Bagmati, 
Kamla-Balan, 
Mahananda, Sone, 
Uttari Koyal, 
Punpun, Panchane 
and Karmnasha. 
Some of the lakes in 
Bihar are Kanwar 
lake, Upper lake and 
Lower lake, 
Muchilinda Lake, 
Sagar Pokhar, Harahi 
Pond, Kabar Tal etc. 
According to CGWB, 
the annual 
replenishable
ground water 
resource in Bihar is 
29.19 BCM and the 
Net Annual ground water 
availability is 27.42 BCM. 
In none of the blocks in Bihar is the ground water over-exploited, critical or semi-critical.  
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, Department 
of Urban Development, Government of Bihar is the nodal department and the implementing 
agency is Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad (BRJB), Bihar for NRCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Bihar is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes Ground water
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Done
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical 
Indicators 
Done Could not be verified Done
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Done (for two rivers) Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Quantification 
of contaminants 
Partially (Nutrients: Could 
not be verified, Pathogenic 
organism: Done, Human 
produced chemicals: Done) 
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
Rivers test checked in Bihar

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 109
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to 
aquatic species 
Not Done Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Risks to 
human health  
Not Done Could not be verified Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Bihar 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Bihar is 1117.12 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is available for only 137.50 mld. 
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1  NRCP 
(a) Planning for NRCP 
Ganga river had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the National River 
Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects were being implemented in 14 cities
16. 18 
                                                           
16 viz. Arrah, Barahaya, Barh, Bhagalpur, Begusarai, Buxar, Chapra, Fatwah, Hazipur, Kahelgaon, Mokamah, Munger, Patna 
and Sultanganj. 
12% (137.50 mld)
88% (979.62 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of  Bihar (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 110
projects in these 14 cities were sanctioned und er NRCP. The total sanctioned cost of all the 
projects was ` 3.95 crore.
Six projects17 being implemented under NRCP at a cost of ` 2.17 crore were test checked 
for detailed examination.
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of the 
Project  
Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Ganga at 
Barahaya
LCS Barahaya 0.10 0.10 August 1997 revised 
to February 2003 
December 2002
RFD Barahaya 0.30 0.28 August 1997 revised 
to February 2003  
February 2003
Ganga at Patna RFD, Patna 0.75 0.65 September 1996 
revised to February 
2003 
April 2003 
RFD Danapur 0.30 0.29 December 2002 May 2007 
RFD Gulbi 
Ghat, Patna 
0.19 0.15 December 2002 Yet to be completed 
Diesel
crematoria,
Danapur 
0.53 0 September2003 Yet to commence
(ii) Performance of the projects 
(a) Barahaya 
The average sewage generated in the city of Barahaya is 4.5 mld, none of which is treated. 
However no amount is discharged into the Ganga river, since Ganga river has moved away 
from the city and as reported the city has around 25 drains which fall in a ditch away from 
the city. Details of two projects test checked in Barahaya which aim to improve the quality 
of Ganga‘s water quality are discussed below: 
Project Findings 
LCS x The project was to be completed in August 1997 but the date was revised 
to February 2003.The project was actually completed in December 2002. 
The final UC was submitted to MoEF in April 2008.
x The total number of LCS units set up was three units of five seats each and 
all were found to be functioning.
x In contravention to NRCD guidelines, LCSs were constructed in Government 
high schools and in certain colony instead of at the banks of River Ganga. 
The responsibility for O&M of each asset created under NRCP was allocated 
by the State to Nagar Punchayat, Barahaya and it carried out regular 
operation and maintenance. There was no information on the assessment 
of the completed projects by the State on basis of set targets/ performance 
milestones.
 RFD x Originally sanctioned date of completion of the project was August 1997 
which was revised to February 2003.The project was actually completed in 
February 2003 . 
                                                           
17 Two projects in Barahaya and four projects in Patna.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 111
x Under the project two ghats were constructed (Vijaygarh ghat and 
Sojikipari ghat). But both the ghats are not existing as the course of Ganga 
has shifted from the purported sites and both the ghats were completely 
destroyed and non existing due to erosion. 
(b) Patna 
The daily average sewage generated in the city of Patna is 236 mld and the total sewage 
treated is 68.67 mld. The amount of untreated sewage discharged into the river Ganga is 
167.33 mld. Total numbers of drains falling into the river were 29 while a total of three 
drains intercepted. Details of four projects test checked in Patna which aim to improve the 
quality of Ganga‘s water are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
 RFD,Patna x The originally sanctioned date of completion of the project was 
September 1996 but the same was revised to February 2003 and 
was actually completed in April 2003.
x 7 ghats were created under the project but River Ganga had 
shifted from Kurjee Ghat, Rajendra Ghat and Indira Ghat and 
these ghats are defunct. The Collectorate Ghat and Narkat Ghat, 
where Ganga is still flowing, are not maintained and, thus, in 
deplorable condition. Mahavir ghat, which was constructed under 
this project was destroyed and is being redeveloped under 
another scheme.
x The reasons given for lack of proper maintenance of the assets 
created were that Patna Municipal Corporation was not 
maintaining these ghats, there was encroachment of river banks 
and the River Ganga has shifted.
 RFD,Danapur x The originally sanctioned date of completion of the project was 
December 2002 and it was actually completed in May 2007 but 
the completion report was not sent to NRCD. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in publishing NIT and 
awarding contract and delay in release of fund for electrification. 
x The river front is not being maintained properly and it was not 
handed over to Danapur Cantonment Board (local body).
x RFD is now completely defunct, the changing room was in a dire 
state, staircases have been buried under thick layer of sand/mud 
and the electric poles have been uprooted and electric lamps are 
broken.
RFD, Gulbi Ghat x The sanctioned date of completion of the project was December 
2002. However, the project was incomplete. 
x The reasons for the delay in completion were delay in publishing 
NIT and award of contract, non- inclusion of approach road in the 
original DPR and the revised cost estimate not being sent to 
NRCD.
Diesel
Crematoria
x The originally sanctioned date of completion was September 2003 
but the project has not yet been undertaken due to indecision of 
the State and NRCD whether to install diesel crematoria or electric 
crematoria. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 112
Incomplete RFD at Gulbi ghat, Patna 
LCS at Barahaya
4.2 NLCP 
There was no lake in Bihar in the list of polluted lakes as issued by the MoEF, but there were 
three lakes listed as polluted by the State government which was sent to MoEF.  These were 
Motijheel at Motihari, Baraila chaur at Vaishali and Manjheel at Muzaffarpur. However, 
none of these lakes were selected for conservation and restoration under NLCP. 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 113
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
 5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional Project 
monitoring Cell 
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
5 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 
5.2 Ground water (in test checked six blocks) 
Six blocks were chosen for assessment of monitoring network with respect to ground water. 
These were: Simri (arsenic affected), Katoria (fluoride affected), Barauni (industrial cluster), 
Mushahari (industrial cluster), Maner (randomly selected) and Biraul (randomly selected). 
Whether system 
exists for 
monitoring of 
groundwater
Pollution 
Whether
regular 
monitoring 
done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing Kits issued 
to all the panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes, Qualified staff 
was appointed in 
these laboratories 
except in Katoria 
block.  
Yes, made available to all the 
panchayats in the block/district by 
the State government except for 
Katoria and Mushahari block but 
these were not utilised by the 
panchayats. 
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
 (a) Water quality of Ganga after Patna: 
Dissolved oxygen (DO), Bio chemical Oxygen 
demand (BOD) measured in the river at the 
time of its entering the city and its leaving the 
city is shown in the graph alongside. Total 
Coliform was 34 times the criteria in Ganga 
after it leaves Patna, indicating the presence 
of disease causing, fecal-related bacteria, 
viruses and protozoa which cause illness.  
10.35
2.84
9.95
2.37
0 5 10 15
DO
BOD
Status of Ganga entering Patna
status of Ganga leaving Patna

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 114
 State: Chhattisgarh  
1. Background 
Mahanadi and Narmada 
are the principal rivers 
of Chhattisgarh. Other 
rivers of the State are 
Godavari, Brahmani,   
Sheonath, Indravati etc. 
Some of the lakes in 
Chhattisgarh are 
Vivekananda lake (Burra 
Talao), Khamhardih 
lake, Telibandha pond, 
Maharajabandh pond, 
Tikarapara pond, etc. 
According to Central 
Ground Water Board, 
annual replenishable 
ground water resource 
in Chhattisgarh is 14.93 
BCM while the net 
annual ground water availability is 13.68 BCM. Out of 146 blocks in Chhattisgarh, ground 
water is not over-exploited or critical in any of the blocks, while in eight blocks it is semi-
critical. Ground water in Chhattisgarh is contaminated by fluoride, iron, arsenic and nitrate. 
Institutional arrangements in the state : No river/lake has been selected for restoration 
under NRCP/NLCP in the state.  
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Chhattisgarh is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes Ground water
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Not Done Not Done
except for 
nitrate 
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
3. Identification 
of risks to 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
 No river or lake selected under NRCP and NLCP in Chhattisgarh

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 115
environment 
and health 
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Could not be 
verified, Industry: Could 
not be verified, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Could not be 
verified)
Could not be verified Partially
(Industry: Not 
Done, 
Agriculture non 
point sources: 
Could not be 
verified)
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Not Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Chattisgarh 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Chattisgarh is 391.29 mld, of 
which treatment capacity is available for only 69 mld. 
17% (69 mld)
83% (322.29 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of
Chattisgarh (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment facility exists
% of sewage for which no treatment facility exists

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 116
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution
4.1 NRCP
No rivers were included under NRCP.  
4.2 NLCP 
Vivekananda lake (Burra Talao) was identified by NRCD in its list of polluted lakes. Further, in 
addition the State government had also identified four other lakes as polluted. These were 
Khamardih lake, Telibandha pond, Maharajabandh pond, and Tikarapara pond. However, 
none of these lakes were included for restoration and conservation under NLCP. 
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 Ground water (in test checked six blocks) 
Six blocks were chosen for assessment of monitoring network with respect to ground water. 
These were: Bastar, Chowki (fluoride/arsenic affected) Kartala, Baikunthpur, Bagicha 
(randomly selected) and Korba (selection from industrial cluster). Out of these six blocks, 
Korba ranks 5
th in most polluted in the list of industrial clusters18 which are severely affected 
by pollution.
Whether system exists 
for monitoring of 
groundwater Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water quality 
laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
                                                           
18 According to CPCB

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 117
State: Delhi 
1.  Background 
Delhi is situated on the 
western banks of river 
Yamuna. The other major 
sources of water include 
the Agra Canal, Hindu Canal 
and the Western Canal. 
Some of the lakes in Delhi 
are Bhalswa lake, Purana 
Qila lake, Roshnara Garden 
tank etc. According to 
Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB), the annual 
replenishable ground water 
resource in Delhi is 0.30 
Billion Cubic Meters (BCM) 
while the net annual 
ground water availability is 
0.28 BCM. Out of 9  districts 
in Delhi, ground water is 
over-exploited in 7 blocks. Some of the contaminants that affect ground water in Delhi are 
salinity, fluoride, chloride and nitrate.  
Insitutional arrangements in the State:   As per information provided by MoEF, the nodal 
agency was Government of NCT, Delhi and the implementing agencies for NRCP were Delhi 
Jal Board and Municipal Corporation of Delhi. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Delhi is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes Ground water
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Not Done Not Done Done
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Not Done Done
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified.
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: Not 
Done, Industry: Done, 
Mining: Not Done, Dam: 
Not Done Partially
(Agriculture: 
Not Done, 
 Test checked river in Delhi

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 118
Not Done, Uncontrolled 
disposal of human waste: 
Not Done) 
Industry: Done, 
Mining: Not 
Done) 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not Done, 
Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Not Done)
Not Done Partially 
(Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non 
point sources: 
Not Done) 
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Not Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
 Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Delhi 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Delhi is 3800 mld, of which treatment capacity is available for 
only 2330 mld.  
61% (2330 mld)%
39%(1470 mld)%
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Delhi (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 119
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution
4.1  NRCP 
Yamuna River had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the National River 
Conservation Programme (NRCP). 23 projects in Delhi were sanctioned under NRCP out of 
which 12 were completed as of March 2010. The total sanctioned cost of all the projects 
was ` 650 crore. 10 projects  being implemented under NRCP at a cost of ` 89.77 crore 
were test checked for detailed examination.
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of the Project Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure  
(`  in crore) 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Yamuna/ 
Delhi
STP Sen Nursing 
Home
6.21 5.39 December 1996 September 
2001 
STP Delhi Gate Nala 7.57 6.31 December 1996 January 2002
Electric Crematoria 1.45 revised 
to 1.78 
1.78 March 2002 June 2002
STP 3 mld FAB 
technology
1.78 1.83 March 2002 December 
2002 
STP 3 mld SAFF 
technology
1.86 1.93 March 2002 December 
2002 
STP 2 mld SAFF 
technology
1.47 1.28 March 2002 March 2003
LCS 1.49 1.65 March 2002 February 2003
2 mld disinfection 
plant at Sen Nursing 
Home
0.42 0.45 February 2002 March 2002
Public Participation 
and Awareness 
2.16 1.26 March 2002 ongoing
STP  135 mld 65.03 79.54 June 2010 On going
(ii) Performance of the projects 
Details of ten projects test checked in Delhi which aim to improve the quality of water in the 
Yamuna are discussed below: 
Project
name
Findings 
10 mld STP 
at Sen 
Nursing
Home
x The project was scheduled for completion by December 1996 but it 
was actually completed in September 2001 after a delay of more than 
four years and nine months. 
x The project was delayed due to non-approval of layout plan & 
hydraulic flow design, shortage of cement at central cement stores, 
heavy rains etc.
x The capacity of created STP was 10 mld where as the total sewage 
generated was around 60-70 mld.This indicated that rest of 50-60 mld 
untreated sewage was being discharged into the river. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 120
STP, Delhi 
Gate Nala 
x The STP was required to be completed by December 1996 but it was 
completed in January 2002 after a delay of more than five years.
x The project was delayed due to non-availability of site, delay in 
approval of lay out plan, monsoon period and non-availability of 
cement at Central Cement Stores.
x The capacity of created STP was 10 mld where as the total sewage 
generated was around 40-50 mld.  This indicated that rest of 30-40 
untreated sewage was falling into the river. 
Electric
Crematoria
x Though, the construction of Electric Crematoria was to be completed 
by March 2002 but it was actually completed by June 2002. 
x There was a cost overrun of ` 0.33 crore for which reasons could not 
be ascertained.  
x The constructed crematorium was handed over in June 2006 to Arya 
Samaj, Lodhi Road for operation and maintenance. 
STP 3 mld 
FAB
technology
x The STP was required to be completed by March 2002 but it was 
completed in December 2002 after a delay of nine months.
x The project was delayed due to non getting of approval of plot plan 
and single line diagram, space constraint and blockage of approach 
road etc.
x Against three mld created capacity, present utilisation of STP was 
around only one mld (as of November 2010) and daily sewage 
generation was 1.6 mld. This indicated that 0.6 mld of untreated 
sewage was falling into Yamuna 
STP 3 mld 
SAFF
technology
x The project was scheduled for completion by March 2002  but it was  
actually completed  in December 2002 after a delay of nine months. 
x  The project was delayed due to delay in clearance of site, non-
approval of plot plan, delay in conducting reliability test due to 
insufficient & non-consistent sewage etc. 
x The STP treated only one mld against the designed capacity of three 
mld.
STP 2 mld 
SAFF
technology
x The project was scheduled for completion by March 2002 but it was 
actually completed in March 2003 after a delay of 12 months. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in handing over of site, revision 
in hydraulic and structural design and additional work etc. 
x The plant had been shut down since 2007 and all the sewage (2 mld) 
was being discharged into the Yamuna through a drain/nallah without 
treatment.
LCS x The project was to be completed in March 2002 but it was actually 
completed in February 2003 after a delay of eleven months. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 121
x 959 Low Cost Sanitation units were constructed under the project 
against the target of 1146. Out of these, only 49 per cent  were 
functioning and the rest were non-functional. 60 LCS Units were 
encroached, 223 were lying abandoned and 33 were completely 
demolished. A proposal for utilizing the space where LCS Units were 
demolished was being considered by MCD.
2 mld 
Disinfection
Plant at  Sen 
Nursing
Home
x The original sanctioned date of completion of the project was 
February 2002 but it was finally completed in March 2002.
x The STP capacity created under the project was two mld but the plant 
is lying non functional at present. 
Public
Participation 
and
Awareness 
x Asian Center for Organization Research and Development (ACORD) 
was appointed as apex NGO for implementation of the public 
participation programme. No agreement was signed between MCD 
and ACORD for implementation of the project. MCD had not settled 
the accounts of ACORD due to certain discrepancies found in the 
utilization certificate furnished by ACORD. 
x The completion certificate, final utilization certificate furnished to 
MoEF and date on which completed were also not found. 
STP 135 mld x The project was sanctioned in June 2006 at a cost of ` 65.03 crore. 
The sanctioned date for completion of project was June 2010 but it 
has still not been completed.
x An expenditure of ` 79.54 crore was incurred on the project as on 
March 2011, thereby cost overrun of ` 14.51 crore took place. 
Thus, all of the projects for control of pollution of Yamuna river test checked by audit did not 
achieve the objectives of pollution control of Yamuna. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 122
10 mld STP at Delhi Gate nallah (Untreated sewage passing into yamuna) 
10 mld STP at sen Nursing Home (untreated sewage flowing to yamuna)


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 123
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
 5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing
agency
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief 
Secretary of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
No details of monitoring of the projects sanctioned under NRCP for control of pollution of 
Yamuna river was available for all the 10 projects. 
5.2 NLCP 
No lakes from Delhi had been included for restoration and conservation under NLCP. 
5.3 Ground water (in test checked six blocks) 
6 blocks were chosen for assessment of monitoring network with respect to ground water. 
These were: Gandhinagar, Model Town, Anand Parvat, Wazirpur, Defence Colony and 
Rajouri Garden. Anand Parvat and Wazirpur lie in the Nazafgarh drain basin which is ranked 
11
th in CPCB’s list of crirtically polluted areas. 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of 
groundwater Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
No No 
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP
Status of Yamuna on entering Delhi and after 
leaving Delhi in terms of levels of DO and 
BOD is shown in the chart alongside. It can be 
seen that levels of BOD actually rises after 
Yamuna leaves Delhi highlighting the 
inadequate sewage treatment facilities. 
Further, the Dissolved Oxygen in Yamuna falls 
to zero after it leaves Delhi, pointing to 
inability of Yamuna to sustain aquatic life. As 
such, Yamuna is dead by the time it leaves 
Delhi. Levels of Total Coliform are not being 
measured.
0
21
10
2.5
0 5 10 15 20 25
DO
BOD
Status of Yamuna entering Delhi
Status of Yamuna leaving Delhi 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 124
State: Goa 
1.  Background 
The major rivers of Goa are Terekhol, Chapora, Baga, Mandovi, Zuari, Sal, Saleri, Talpona, 
Galgibag. Some of the lakes in 
Goa are Mayem Lake, 
Carambolin Lake, Curtorim lake 
etc. According to Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB), 
the annual replenishable 
ground water resource in Goa 
is 0.28 BCM and the net annual 
ground water availability is 0.27 
BCM.
Insitutional arrangements in 
the State: As per information 
provided by MoEF, 
implementing  agency for NRCP 
was Department of Science, 
Technology and Environment, 
Government of Goa.
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Goa is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Inventory of water resources Done Could not be 
verified
Could not be verified
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a)  Chemical Indicators Done Not Done Done (arsenic, nitrate, 
iron, fluoride and 
salinity)
b)  Biodiversity indicators Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c)  Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially (done 
for nutrients, 
acidification and 
temperature) 
Not Done Partially (nutrients, 
salinity and 
acidification)
d)  Assessment of Impact 
of human activities 
Partially (done 
for Agriculture, 
mining) 
Not Done Partially (Agriculture: 
Done, Industrial 
activities: Done) 
3. Identification of 
risks to 
environment and 
health 
a) Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to human health Done Done No information
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
Test checked river in Goa

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 125
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Partially (done 
only for 
agriculture)   
Partially (done 
only for 
agriculture) 
No information
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Goa 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Goa is 23.68 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is not available for 9.79 mld. 
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Mandovi river had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the National River 
Conservation Programme (NRCP) in only one city, Panaji. Five projects were sanctioned 
under NRCP at a cost of ` 14.10 crore. Four projects being implemented under NRCP at a 
cost of ` 14.07 crore (excluding land acquisition at a cost of ` three lakh) were test checked 
for detailed examination.  
59% (13.89 mld)
41% (9.79 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of Goa (%) 
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 126
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Scheduled
date of 
completion 
Actual date of completion
Mandovi/Panaji I & D 14.10* 14.47* July 2004 May 2005, except sewer 
line of 162 m which was 
completed in April 2009 
STP 12.50 mld 
STP renovation 
and re-
modeling
No information was 
available.
LCS Construction of five seater 
community toilets costing  
(` 3.50 lakh was not taken 
up as the land for this was 
not available and the said 
amount was not refunded 
to MoEF 
* Consolidated figure for the Scheme of Environmental Upgradation Phase-I of Panaji City
(ii) Performance of the projects 
The average sewage generated in the city of Panaji is 11.5 mld (actual of 2006-07) and it is 
entirely treated. Details of the projects test checked in Panaji which aim to improve the 
water quality of Mandovi river are discussed below: 
Project  Findings 
 I&D x The original sanctioned date for completion of the project was 
July 2004 but it was completed in May 2005, except sewer line of 
162 meters which was completed in April 2009.
x The delay was due to late issue of work order. 
x The number of pumping stations constructed/ commissioned was 
one with capacity of 0.5 mld and it was entirely utilized. 
 STP 12.50 mld x The originally sanctioned date of completion of the project was 
July 2004 and the actual date of completion of the project was 
May 2005, except sewer line of 162 meters which was completed 
in April 2009.
x The delay was due to late issue of work order.  
x No untreated sewage was being discharged into Mandovi.
 STP renovation 
and re-
modeling
Details of performance of project were not available.  
LCS Construction of five seater community toilets costing  3.50 lakh 
was not taken up as the land for this was not available and the 
said amount was not refunded to MoEF 
4.2   NLCP
No lake in Goa has been funded under NLCP. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 127
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1   NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
In 1 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects 
5.2    Ground water (in test checked three Blocks) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
No Yes No Yes 
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP
Water quality of Mandovi after Panaji 
No information was available regarding levels of Dissolved Oxygen and Biochemical Oxygen 
Demand on Mandovi before it entered and left Panaji. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 128
State: Gujarat 
1.  Background 
The major rivers of 
central and northern 
Gujarat include Narmada, 
Sabarmati, and Mahi. 
Rivers flowing through 
the Saurashtra region are 
Mithi, Khari, Bhadar, 
Shetrunji and Bhogavo. 
Rivers in the southern 
part of the State include 
Narmada, Tapi, Purna, 
Ambika, Auranga and 
Damanganga. Some of 
the lakes in Gujarat are 
Kankaria, Vastrapur Lake, 
Chandola Lake, 
Gaurishankar Lake, etc. 
According to Central 
Ground Water Board, 
annual replenishable ground water resource in Gujarat is 15.81 BCM while the net annual 
ground water availability is 15.02 BCM. Out of 184 talukas, ground water in 31 talukas is 
over-exploited, in 12 talukas it is critical and in 69 talukas, it is semi-critical. Ground water in 
Gujarat is contaminated by salinity, fluoride, chloride, iron and nitrate.
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, Urban 
Development and Urban Housing Department, Government of Gujarat is the nodal 
department for NRCP and the implementing agency is Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. 
2.  Planning for water pollution 
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Gujarat is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Done Could not be 
verified   
Done 
2. Assessment 
of water 
quality  
a) According to chemical 
Indicators 
Done Could not be 
verified   
Done
b) According to 
Biodiversity indicators 
Not done Not done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially Partially
(Nutrients: could 
not be verified,  
Pathogenic
organism: Done, 
Human produced 
Could not be 
verified
Test checked river in Gujarat

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 129
chemicals: Not 
Done) 
d) Assessment of impact 
of human activities 
Partially (Agriculture: 
Not Done, Industry: 
Done, Mining: Not 
Done, Dam: Not 
Done, Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste: Not Done) 
Partially
(Agriculture: Not 
Done, Industry: 
Done, 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste: Not Done) 
Partially
(Agriculture: 
Not Done, 
Industry: Done, 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of 
human waste 
Not Done) 
3.
Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic species Not done Not applicable Not applicable
c) Risks to human health Not  done Not done Not done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not  done Not  done Not  done
5. Programmes for prevention and control 
of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not 
verifiable, Industry: 
Could not be verified, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Not done)
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not 
Done Industry: 
Could not be 
verified,
Agriculture non 
point sources: Not 
Done) 
   
Partially
( Industry: 
Could not be 
verified,
Agriculture non 
point sources: 
Not Done)   
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Gujarat 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
41% (782.50 mld )
59% (1125.97 mld) 
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of  Gujarat  
(%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 130
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Gujarat is 1908.47 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is available for only 782.50 mld. 
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP
Only Sabarmati river in Gujarat had been selected for pollution abatement projects under 
the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). 13 Projects were being implemented in 
one city i.e., Ahmedabad and the total sanctioned cost of these projects was ` 101.96 crore.  
Nine projects costing ` 96.15 crore were test checked out of 13 completed projects for 
audit scrutiny.  
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/
location
Name of the 
Project
Sanctioned cost
(` in crore)
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore)
Scheduled date 
of completion
Actual date of 
completion 
Sabarmati,
Ahmedabad
 STP at Pirana 31.22 28.14 January 2003 October 2003
STP at Vasna 34.75 31.59 November 2003 December 2004
LCS 1.06 0.73 September 2000 September 
2001 
Renovation of 
sewage pumping 
station Zone-1 &3 
3.11 2.48 December 1999 Project 
completed but 
date of 
completion was 
not available 
Renovation of 
sewage pumping 
station Zone 2 
4.01 2.04 December 1999 Project
completed but 
date of 
completion was 
not available 
I&D De-silting of 
sewer
1.01 0.94 June 2001 Project 
completed but 
date of 
completion was 
not available 
I&D WTS Zone V 
Part I 
1.68 1.85 October 1997 May 1998
I&D ETS Zone IV 
Part I 
6.40 6.30 December 1998 Project 
completed but 
date of 
completion was 
not available 
Western Trunk 
Sewer Zone 5 
Part II 
12.91 14.82 May 2001 May 2003
(ii) Performance of the projects 
 Ahmedabad 
The average daily sewage generated in the city is 650 mld and the entire 650 mld of sewage 
is treated as the government has built capacity to treat 730 mld of sewage. As such, no 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 131
sewage flows directly into the Sabarmati from the city right now. Details of some of the 
projects test checked in Ahmedabad city which aim to improve the quality of water in 
Sabarmati are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
STP at Pirana & 
STP at Vasna 
x These were completed in October 2003 and December 2004 
respectively after a delay of nine months and one year and one 
month respectively. No information was available regarding 
submission of completion report of the project by State 
government to NRCD. 
x The installed capacity of STP at Pirana was 106 mld and that of STP 
at Vasna was 126 mld, both of which were being fully utilized. 
Regular inspections were being carried out by Gujarat Pollution 
Control Board and O&M of these STPs were entrusted to 
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) and preventive 
maintenance and cleaning was taking place of the STP.
LCS x This was completed in September 2001 after a delay of a year. No 
information was available when the completion report for the 
project was sent by the State government to NRCD. 
x The project was delayed due to encroachment of site and threat 
by local residents. 34 LCS units were constructed under the 
project but only 28 were in use. The remaining six required 
repairing due to age of construction and tender for the same had 
already been invited. 
Renovation of 
Sewage 
Pumping
Stations Zone 
1&3 and Zone 2 
x These were completed but the date of completion was not 
available. These were working as envisaged. No information was 
available when the completion report for the project was sent by 
the State government to NRCD. 
x  Under the project, renovation of three sewage pumping stations 
and seven pumping  stations respectively was envisaged. 
However, no information was found to indicate the created 
capacity.  
I&D De-silting 
of sewer, I&D
WTS Zone V 
Part I, I&D ETS 
Zone IV Part I, 
Western Trunk 
Sewer Zone 5 
Part II 
x All these four projects were completed. However, completion date 
for I&D De-silting of sewer and I&D ETS Zone IV Part I were not 
available.
x I&D WTS Zone V Part I and Western Trunk Sewer Zone 5 Part II 
were completed in May 1998 and May 2003 respectively after a 
delay of seven months and two years respectively.
x All these projects were performing as envisaged. 
4.2 NLCP 
No lake in Gujarat has been funded under NLCP

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 132
5.  Monitoring of the programmes for control of water pollution 
5.1 NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
9 out of 9 projects 0 out of 9 projects 0 out of 9 projects 0 out of 9 projects 
5.2 Ground water (in test checked six Blocks) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
6. Outcomes
6.1  NRCP 
Status of Sabarmati on entering 
Ahmedabad and after leaving 
Ahmedabad in terms of DO and BOD is 
shown in the chart alongside.  The levels 
of TC rise from 93 when Sabarmati enters 
Ahmedabad but rises alarmingly to 
15,000 when Sabarmati leaves 
Ahmedabad showing that harmful germs 
like viruses, bacteria and parasites might 
also be found out in the water.
0
82
7.1
5.0
DO
BOD
Status of Sabarmati before entering Ahmedabad
Status of Sabarmati after leaving Ahmedabad

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 133
State: Haryana 
1.  Background 
The main rivers that flow 
through the State are river 
Yamuna and river Ghaggar. 
Some of the major lakes in 
Haryana are Sukhna Lake, 
Badhkal Lake, Damdama 
Lake etc. According to 
Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB), the annual 
replenishable ground 
water resources in the 
State are 9.31 Billion Cubic 
Meters (BCM), while the 
net annual ground water 
availability is 8.63 BCM. 
Out of 108 blocks in 
Haryana, 55 blocks are 
over-exploited, 11 blocks 
are critical and five blocks 
are semi-critical with 
regard to ground water development and management. Further, according to CGWB, 
ground water is contaminated by pollutants like fluoride, chloride, iron, nitrate and salinity.
Insitutional arrangements in the State: As per information provided by MoEF, Public Health 
Engineering Department (PHED), Government of Haryana is the nodal department as well as 
the implementing agency for NRCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Haryana is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Not Done Could not be verifid Done 
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical 
Indicators 
Partially Could not be verified Done (arsenic, 
nitrate, iron, 
fluoride and 
salinity)
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Quantification 
of contaminants 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
Partially (Agriculture: 
Could not be verified, 
Could not be verified Partially
(Agriculture: 
Test checked rIver in Haryana

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 134
activities Industry: Done, Mining: 
Could not be verified, 
Dam: Could not be 
verified, Uncontrolled 
disposal of human waste: 
Could not be verified) 
Done, Industry: 
Done, Mining: 
Could not be 
verified,
Uncontrolled 
disposal of 
human waste: 
Done) 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
b) Risks to 
aquatic species 
Could not be verified Not applicable Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Done Done Could not be 
verified
4. Policy for water pollution  Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Could not be 
verified, Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Could not be 
verified)   
Could not be verified  Partially   ( 
Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non 
point sources 
Could not be 
verified)   
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Gujarat
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Haryana is 670.21 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is available for only 312 mld. 
47%  (312 mld)
53% (358.21 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of 
Haryana (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 135
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
In Haryana, Yamuna, the main river, had been selected for pollution abatement under the 
national River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects are being implemented in 12 
towns19 situated on the banks of river Yamuna. 127 projects in these 12 towns were 
sanctioned under NRCP and total sanctioned cost of all the projects was ` 305.63 crore.
10 projects being implemented under NRCP in the towns of Panipat and Faridabad were test 
checked for detailed examination. The total sanctioned cost of these projects was ` 24.73 
crore.
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/
location
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctioned 
cost 
 (` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Yamuna at 
Faridabad
Pilot Plant at 
20 mld STP 
Zone I 
1.04 1.04 March 2002 Commissioned in 
March, 2002 and 
stabilized In 
March 2003. 
LCS 2.75 2.73 February 2002 November 2002
I&D 2.76 2.76 December 2001 March 2002
Sewer Lines 
Phase—
II/Stage II 
8.33 9.29 April, 2009 March 2009
Public
Participation
and
Awareness 
4.10 3.56 May 2010 July 2010 
Yamuna at 
Panipat
LCS 0.28 0.28 December 2001 March 2002
I&D 1.43 1.44 March 2002 March 2002
Drying Beds 0.25 0.25 December 2001 February 2002
Sewer Lines 
Phase
II/Stage II 
1.97 1.77 February 2009 March, 2009
Additional 
Sewerage
Works
1.82 1.77 February 2008 March, 2009
Details of towns test checked under NRCP are discussed below: 
(a) Faridabad: 
Daily average sewage generated in Faridabad was 200 mld. Currently, only 115 mld capacity 
to treat sewage is available. The sewage actually treated is 104 mld and balance 96 mld of 
untreated sewage is discharged into Yamuna.  
                                                           
19 Chhachhrauli, Faridabad, Gharaunda, Gohana, Gurgaon, Indri, Karnal, Palwal, Panipat, Radaur, Sonepat and 
Yamunanagar-Jagdri

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 136
Details of some of the projects test checked in Faridabad town are discussed below: 
Project  Findings 
Pilot Plant at 
20 mld STP 
Zone I 
x It was scheduled to be completed in March 2002 and 
commissioned in March 2002. However, it could be stabilized only 
in March 2003. No information was made available regarding 
submission of Utilisation Certificates to MoEF. 
x Even though the STP was to treat 20 mld of sewage, it was treating 
only 14 mld and the rest six mld was flowing into the river. No 
information was available regarding the treated sewage meeting 
the prescribed standards in relation to pH, Total Suspended Solids 
(TSS), Oil & Grease, BOD and COD.  
LCS x The LCS which consisted of 23 units started functioning in 
November 2002 instead of scheduled month of February 2002 
after a delay of nine months. 
x The project was not assessed after completion and operation and 
maintenance of the LCS was transferred to M/s Sulabh 
International, a private body.
(b) Panipat: 
Daily average sewage generated in Panipat is 90 mld. Currently, only 45 mld capacity to 
treat sewage is available and 45 mld of untreated sewage is discharged into Yamuna.  
Details of some of the projects test checked in Panipat are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
I&D project at 
Panipat
x It was completed in March 2002.  
x Its cost escalated from ` 1.43 crore to `1.44 crore due to increase 
in length of sewer lines, increase in scope of work and increase in 
rates above ceiling rates. 
x No information was available regarding its linking to some 
pumping station.
LCS x   This was completed in March 2002 after a delay of three months 
due to shortage of material. 
x   Three LCS units were constructed and were transferred to a 
private agency, M/s Sulabh international. PHED stated that they 
had no information whether it was functioning at present.  
4.2 NLCP 
No lake in Haryana was included for conservation and restoration under NLCP. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 137
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1   NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
No information for all 10 
projects 
No information for 
all 10 projects 
No information for all 10 
projects 
No information for 
all 10 projects 
5.2   Ground water (in test checked six Blocks) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes (2 blocks) Yes (4 blocks) 
6. Outcomes 
6.1    NRCP 
(a) Water quality of Yamuna after Faridabad 
Status of water quality of Yamuna entering Faridabad and after leaving Faridabad town in 
terms of Biochemical Oxygen Demand, Dissolved oxygen and Total Coliform were not made 
available to audit.
(b)  Water quality of Yamuna after Panipat 
No information was made available by the State government regarding status of water 
quality of Yamuna entering Panipat and after leaving Panipat town in terms of Biochemical 
Oxygen Demand, Dissolved oxygen and Total Coliform to audit. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 138
State: Himachal Pradesh 
1.  Background 
 Some of the major rivers in Himachal Pradesh are Sutlej, Beas, Ravi, Parbati, Sukhna etc and 
some of the major lakes are Renuka, Rewalsar, Khajjiar, Dal, Dashir, Brighu, Prashar, Kareri, 
Gobind Sagar, Nako etc. 
The annual 
replenishable ground 
water resource in 
Himachal Pradesh is 
0.43 BCM while the net 
annual ground water 
availability is 0.39 BCM. 
According to CGWB, in 
none of the 69 blocks is 
the ground water over-
exploited, critical or 
semi-critical and the 
quality of ground water 
is generally good. 
Institutional 
arrangements in the 
state: No river/lake has 
been selected for 
restoration under NRCP/NLCP in the state.  
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Himachal Pradesh is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1.Inventory of water resources Could not be 
verified
Not Done Not Done
2.Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Done Done (arsenic, 
nitrate, iron and 
fluoride
b) According to 
Biodiversity indicators 
Done Done Not applicable
c)  Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially
(Nutrients-Done  
Pathogenic
organism- Could 
not be verified, 
Human produced 
chemicals-Not
Done) 
Partially
(Nutrients-
Done.
Pathogenic
organism-
Could not be 
verified.
Human
produced 
Could not be 
verified
No river or lake selected under NLCP and NRCP in Himachal Pradesh

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 139
chemicals-Not
Done) 
d)  Impact of human 
activities
Partially
(Agriculture-Not 
Done 
Industry-Done 
Mining-Not Done 
Dam-Done 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste-Done)
Partially
(Agriculture-
Not Done. 
Industry-Done. 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of 
human waste-
Done.) 
Partially
(Agriculture-Not 
Done. 
Industry-Done. 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste-Done.)
3. Identification of 
risks to environment 
and health 
a)      Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Done Done Not Done  
4.   Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5.  Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable : Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Himachal Pradesh 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Himachal Pradesh is 28.94 mld, of 
which treatment capacity is available for entire 28.94 mld.  
100% (28.94 mld) 
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of Himachal 
Pradesh (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available 
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 140
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Even though some stretches of rivers Sukhna, Markanda and Beas were in the list of 
polluted rivers, they were not included under NRCP for control of pollution projects.
4.2 NLCP 
It was observed that lakes like Khajjiar lake, Renuka sagar and Rewalsar lake were identified 
by NRCD in its list of polluted lakes, however projects for their conservation and restoration 
were not sanctioned under NLCP. 
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 Ground water (in test checked six blocks)  
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of 
groundwater Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes (except in one 
block) 
No information for four 
blocks, Yes in one block, 
No in one block 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 141
State: Jammu and Kashmir 
1.  Background 
The main rivers of Jammu and Kashmir are Jhelum, Chenab and Indus draining through the 
regions of Jammu, 
Kashmir and Ladakh.  
The largest lake in the 
J&K State is Pengong 
Tso. Wullar and Dal lakes 
are other important 
water bodies of the 
State. According to 
CGWB, the annual 
replenishable ground 
water resource in J&K is 
2.70 BCM while the net 
annual ground water 
availability is 2.43 BCM. 
Further, in none of the 
districts of J&K is the 
groundwater over-
exploited, critical or semi-
critical and according to CBWB, the ground water is generally potable.  
Insitutional arrangement in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, Housing and 
Urban Development is the nodal agency for implementation of NRCP. Jammu & Kashmir 
Lakes and Waterways Development is the implementing agency for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Jammu and Kashmir is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground 
water
1. Preparation of inventory of water resources Not Done Done Not Done
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to chemical 
Indicators 
Done Done Not Done
(arsenic, 
nitrate, iron, 
fluoride and 
salinity)
b) According to Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not
applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Partially   Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of impact of 
human activities 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
3. Identification 
of risks to 
a) Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not
applicable
Lake test checked in Jammu and Kashmir

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 142
environment 
and health 
b) Risks to aquatic species Not Done Not Done Not
applicable
c) Risks to human health Could not be 
verified
Could not be 
verified
Could not be 
verified
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Could not be 
verified
Partially Not Done   
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Not Done
[ Note: Not applicable : Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
 Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of J&K 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of J&K is 241.79 mld, for which no 
treatment capacity is available.  
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
Water Resources (Regulation and management ) Act in October 2010 was passed in J&K 
which  envisages among other things, management of works with respect to water storage, 
conservation and protection, irrigation, water supply, drainage, flood control and prevention; 
improvement in flow of water; protection and improvement in the physical integrity of water 
resources, lakes and springs; safety and surveillance  of dams etc. It  also envisaged the 
establishment of State Water Resources Regulator y Authority for regulating water resources, 
ensuring judicious, equitable and sustainable management etc. As per the Act, the 
Regulatory Authority within thr ee months from the com mencement of the said Act. 
However, the Authority had not been established till date.
100% (241.79 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of J&K (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 143
4.1 NRCP 
In February 1998, sanction for ` five lakh was accorded for survey and preparation of pre-
feasibility report for “Jhelum River Action Plan”. The pre-feasibility report was prepared at a 
cost of `6.28 lakh and sent to MoEF in the same year. MoEF had not released the funds upto 
Nov 2009 due to utilization certificate pending from J&K Lakes and Waterways Development 
Authority (LAWDA). LAWDA furnished the utilization certificate in Nov 2009 but funds were 
not transferred till date.  As a result, the project did not take off and deprived the State from 
availing `17.14 crore sanctioned for the project.
4.2 NLCP 
Dal is the only lake included in NLCP by MoEF and is unique in the sense that people live 
inside the lake in hamlets and houseboats and make their living by cultivating on floating 
gardens. In 1977, the State Government had launched a Project “Conservation of Dal–
Nigeen Lake” for improving water quality of Dal lake and saving it from further degradation. 
Work on the project was started through the State Urban Environmental Engineering 
Department (UEED) in 1996-97 and in March 1997, the project was transferred to LAWDA. 
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the lake Sanctioned cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
 (` in crore) 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion  
Dal Lake 298.76 154.18 March 2010 
revised to March 
2012
Ongoing 
(ii) Performance of the project 
Project name Findings 
Dal Lake x The project was sanctioned by NRCD in September 2005 at a cost of 
`298.76 crore and the target date of its completion was March 2010 
which has been extended upto March 2012. The Detailed Project 
Report (DPR) on the programme was prepared by the MoEF through 
Alternate Hydro Energy Centre, Roorkee (AHEC) and was approved by 
the MoEF at a cost of `1.54 crore. The project has two components 
viz. Lake Conservation Programme 20 funded by MoEF and 
Rehabilitation Programme21 funded by State government. 
x Inefficient working of STP costing `11.05 crore: Six STPs at Hazratbal, 
Laam, Habbak, Brari Nambal, Nala Amir Khan and Hotel Welcome 
were projected to be constructed in a phased manner. Construction of 
two STPs at Brari Nambal and Nala Amir Khan was under progress and 
STP at Hotel Welcome was amalgamated with Brari Nambal. STP at 
Hazratbal and Habbak were commissioned in February 2006 and April 
2006 respectively. Work on STP Laam was completed by October 
2006. However, the STP did not work according to its design criteria 
                                                           
20 Conservation Programme includes sewerage treatment, hydraulic works, restoration and development 
works, solid waste management etc.
21 resettlement/ rehabilitation of families living in and around the lake

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 144
and concentration of nutrients increased at the outflow stage vis-à-vis 
inflow stage despite receiving treatment at the STPs. Further tests in 
2008, 2009 and 2010 continued to reveal its inefficiency. Levels of 
phosphorus were also high.
The Scientific Advisory Committee of LAWDA constituted for Dal Lake 
also felt concerned over the presence of inorganic nutrients like 
Nitrate-nitrogen discharged by these STPS untreated.  
In June 2009, it was decided to either to install de-nitrification units of 
the STPs or create artificial wet lands. No steps were taken to arrest 
the problem. Besides, the treated effluents also did not meet the 
water chemistry / parameters of the lake.  
x Non appointment of Project Management Consultant (PMC):  To 
ensure effective implementation of the project, a PMC was to be 
appointed. Despite lapse of more than five years, LAWDA has failed to 
appoint a PMC.
Waste floating on Dal lake 
Untreated sewage on periphery of Dal lake 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 145
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1   NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
coordination 
committee
By Steering 
Committee at the 
district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring 
Committee
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
No river was included under NRCP in Jammu and Kashmir. 
6.2 NLCP 
(a) Changes in the water quality of Dal Lake: Data reveals that there is a drastic change in 
the water quality which was attributed to intensified release of nutrients due to soil erosion, 
run-off from immediate catchment area and discharge of urban wastes including inorganic 
fertilizers. The increase in the values of Total dissolved solids indicated continued siltation, 
failure of retention of silt by partially commissioned Settling  basin and high ingress of 
sewage into the lake and mineralization process of organic matter.
(b) Dwindling of local fish species in the lake:  Notable fish species common in Dal Lake 
were Schizothorax esocinus, Schizothorax niger, Schizothorax curvifons, Schizothorax. 
micropogon, Labeo dera, Carassius carassius.  It was observed that their number has 
declined sharply in the last thirty years and local species have been since outnumbered by 
Carpiodes. The decline in fish diversity and yield has been attributed to the changes in 
hydrological regime and loss of critical habitats. The changes in the species richness has also 
been attributed to heavy loads of incoming sewage thereby leading to increased 
eutrophication and impacting on the growth and development of sensitive fish species like 
Schizothorax. The introduction of carp and pollution of lake has resulted in alteration in the 
balance of local species richness.
(c) Invasion of exotic species in the lake: Azolla, the exotic species of weed is the new 
invader to the lake and has assumed the greater area of the lake.   The same has been 
attributed to significant changes in the vegetational pattern of the Dal Lake and its prolific 
growth in the open areas is attributed to unabated inflow of effluents channels, drains, raw 
sewage and enrichment of the lake sediments particularly due to heavy load of organic 
nitrogen and phosphates. 
(d) Entrapping of phosphorous and in-organic nitrogen in the lake: It has been assessed 
that 156.62 tonnes of phosphorus inflows into the lake from non-point/point sources out of 
which about 80.62 tonnes of total phosphorus leaves the lake, mainly through two outlets. 
This has resulted in entrapping of about 76.0 tons of total phosphorus in the lake on an 
annual basis. Similarly, 241.18 tonnes of inorganic nitrogen inflows into the lake from non-
point/point sources out of which about 109.22 tonnes inorganic nitrogen outflow from the 
lake. This has resulted in entrapping of about 131.96 tons of inorganic nitrogen within the 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 146
lake system. This nutrient load has been attributed to sewage from the catchment area, 
agricultural practices in the catchment area, urbanization and waste discharge.
(e) Poor efficiency of settling basin: Water from catchment area / melting glaciers has to 
pass through settling basin before its entry into Dal Lake. The purpose of the settling basin is 
to retain sediments of water entering into the lake. It was, however, observed that settling 
basin was able to retain sediment load ranging from 53-58 per cent , only. This indicated 
poor efficiency / partial working of the settling basin. In-efficiency of the settling basin in 
holding the sediment load results in decrease in the depth of the lake and enrichment of its 
bed with the nutrient and consequently increase in the weeds etc.  

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 147
State: Jharkhand 
1.  Background 
The major rivers of State Jharkhand are Ganga, Subarnarekha, Damodar, Mayurakshi, 
Barakar, Koyal, Sone etc. Some of the lakes in Jharkhand are Ranchi Lake, Topchanchi lake, 
Hazaribagh Lake, Kanke reservoir, Getalsud reservoir, Sitarampur etc.  
According to Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB), the 
annual replenishable ground 
water resource in Jharkhand is 
5.58 Billion Cubic Meters 
(BCM) and the net annual 
ground water available is 5.25 
BCM. In none of the blocks of 
Jharkhand is the ground water 
over-exploited, critical or semi-
critical. The contaminants 
found in ground water in 
Jharkhand are fluoride, iron 
and nitrate.
Insitutional arrangements in 
the State: As per information 
provided by MoEF, Department of Urban Development, Government of Jharkhand was the 
nodal agency and the Mineral Area Development Authority (MADA) was assigned the 
responsibility of being the implementing agency for NRCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Jharkhand is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Not Done Not Done Done 
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Not Done Done  
b) According to 
Biodiversity indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Not Done Not Done Not Done
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Could not be verified Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Done Done Could not be 
verified
Test checked river in Jharkhand

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 148
100%(908.68 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment in Class I and II cities of Jharkhand 
(%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and control 
of water pollution 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Not Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
  Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Jharkhand 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Jharkhand is 908.68 mld, for which 
no treatment capacity is available.  
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Ganga, Damodar and Subarnarekha rivers had been selected for pollution abatement 
projects under the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). 15 projects in 12 
towns
22 were undertaken at a sanctioned cost of `4.38 crore.
4 projects being implemented in cities of Jamshedpur and Ranchi for control of pollution of 
Subarnarekha river under NRCP at a cost of ` 2.20 crore were test checked for detailed 
examination.  
                                                           
22 Ghatshilla, Jamshedpur, Ranchi, Bokaro-Kargali, Chirkunda, Dugdha, Jharia, Ramgarh, Sahebganj, Sindri, Sudamdih and 
Telmachu

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 149
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/
location
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctioned 
Cost
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled
date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Subarnarekha 
at
Jamshedpur 
Crematoria 0.54 Nil September
1996 
Yet to commence 
LCS 0.35 0 August 1997 Not yet completed
RFD 0.85 0.38 May 1997 2002-03 Construction 
of three Ghats were 
not undertaken 
Subarnarekha 
at Ranchi 
RFD 0.46 0.36 July, 1997 Four out of five ghats 
were completed & 
handed over to Ranchi 
Municipal Corporation 
in October 2001 
(ii) Performance of the project
a) Jamshedpur 
No information received from the State regarding sewage generated and 
treated/discharged into river Subarnarekha. Details of three projects test checked in 
Jamshedpur which aim to improve the quality of water in Subarnarekha’s are discussed 
below:
Project  Findings 
Crematoria
(Electric and wood) 
x This project was scheduled to be completed by September 1996 
but it was not yet commenced. The project was handed over to 
Parvati Ghat Samiti, Jamshedpur by the Bihar Government In 
March 1997 and a sum of ` 12.50 lakh was released to the Samiti 
through the Deputy Commissioner, East Singhbhum. After that no 
further fund was made available to the Samiti by the State 
government till October 2005. 
x The nodal department had raised doubt regarding execution of 
the work and sought progress report and utilization of the work 
and said that till receipt of the same, no further amount would be 
released to the Samiti. 
LCS x The project was scheduled to for completion by August 1997 but 
project has not yet been completed in all respect and revised date 
of completion, if any, could not be verified.
x The reasons for delay were non-execution of boring work, failure 
of boring due to ash and filled soil etc.
x 8 LCS were sanctioned for construction.  However, work of four 
LCS was not taken up till date. Of four LCS taken up, only 
construction work has been completed but not yet functional.
RFD x   The project was scheduled to be completed by May 1997 but has 
not yet been completed. 
x 3 Ghats i.e. Baroda Ghat, River Meet Point and Mango Ghat out of 
proposed six ghats were completed & handed over to concerned 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 150
local bodies between July 2002 to April 2003. It could not be 
ascertained whether remaining three ghats were completed or 
not.
  (b) Ranchi 
No information was available regarding sewage generated and treated/discharged into the 
Subarnarekha. Details of one project test checked in Ranchi which aims to improve the 
quality of water in Subarnarekha river are discussed below: 
Project Findings 
RFD x The project was to be completed in July 1997 but out of proposed 
five ghats, only four ghats i.e. Hatia bridge, Kachnar Toli, Near 
Subarnarekha bridge and at Namkum (Khijri) bridge were completed 
and handed over to Ranchi Municipal Corporation in October 2001.
x The project was delayed due to delay in publishing NIT and award of 
contract.
Thus all the test checked projects for control of pollution did not completely achieve their 
intended objectives.
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
0 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects 
5.2 Ground water (in test checked six Blocks) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
No for 5 out of 6 blocks No for 5 out of 6 
blocks 
Yes  (in concerned 
districts of 4 blocks) 
No information 
6. Outcomes  
6.1 NRCP 
(a) Water quality of Subarnarekha after 
Jamshedpur   
While levels of Total Coliform were not 
measured, it was observed that levels of 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand met the 
criteria.
(b) Water quality of Subarnarekha after 
Ranchi
No information was available regarding 
levels of Dissolved Oxygen and Biochemical Oxygen Demand on Subarnarekha before it 
entered and left Ranchi.
7.9
0.8
7.2
0.9
02468 1 0
DO
BOD
Status of Subarnarekha entering Jamshedpur
Status of Subarnarekha leaving Jamshedpur 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 151
State: Karnataka  
1.  Background 
The river basins in Karnataka are formed by the Krishna, Cauvery, Godavari, Tungabhadra, 
North Pennar, South 
Pennar & Palar. Some of 
the lakes in Karnataka are 
Bellandur Lake, Kotekere 
Lake,
Sharanabasaveshwara 
Lake, Bhishma Lake, 
Channapatna Lake etc.   
According to Central 
Ground Water Board, the 
annual replenishable 
ground water resource in 
the State is 15.93 Billion 
Cubic meters (BCM) and 
the net annual ground 
water availability is 15.30 
BCM. Out of 175 talukas in 
the State, in 65 talukas, 
the ground water is over 
exploited, in three talukas 
it is critical and in 14 talukas it is semi-critical. The ground water in Karnataka has 
contaminants like salinity, fluoride, chloride, iron and nitrate.  
Insitutional arrangements in the State: As per information provided by MoEF, Forests, 
Ecology and Environment Department, Government of Karnataka and Office of Chief 
Secretary were the nodal departments for NRCP and the implementing agencies were 
Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board and Karnataka State Pollution Control 
Board. Lake Development Authority, Government of Karnataka is the implementing agency 
for NLCP.
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Karnataka is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground 
water
1. Preparation of inventory of water resources Done Could not be 
verified
Done 
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to chemical 
Indicators 
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
Done
(arsenic, 
nitrate, iron, 
fluoride and 
salinity)
b) According to 
Biodiversity indicators 
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
Not
applicable
Rivers and lakes test checked in Karnataka

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 152
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially  (Nutrients: 
Could not be verified, 
Pathogenic organism: 
Done,  Human 
produced chemicals: 
Done) 
Partially
(Nutrients: Could 
not be verified, 
Pathogenic
organism: Done,  
Human produced 
chemicals: Done) 
Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of impact 
of human activities 
Not Done Could not be 
verified
Could not be 
verified
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
Not
applicable
b) Risks to aquatic species Not Done Not Done Not
applicable
c) Risks to human health Not Done Not Done Done 
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Could not 
be verified, Industry: 
Could not be verified, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Done)   
Could not be 
verified
Partially          
( industry: 
Could not be 
verified,
Agriculture 
non point 
sources:
Done)   
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Karnataka 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Karnataka is 2023.77 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is available for only 55.62 mld.  
3%  (55.62 mld)
97%(1968.15 mld)
%
Capacity  for sewage treatment in Class I &II cities of Karnataka (%)
% of sewage for which treatment capacity is available 
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 153
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Rivers Bhadra, Tungabhadra, Cauvery, Tunga and Pennar had been selected for pollution 
abatement projects under the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects are 
being implemented in nine cities 23. 42 projects in these nine cities were sanctioned under 
NRCP out of which 28 were completed as of March 2010. The total sanctioned cost of all the 
projects was ` 66.25 crore. Three projects
24 being implemented under NRCP at a cost of `
50.54 crore were test checked for detailed examination.
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/
location
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctioned cost
 (`  in crore)
Actual
Expenditure 
 (` in crore) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Bhadra at 
Bhadravati
I&D 1.30 revised to 
1.91 
2.29 July 2005 Not yet complete
Tungabhadra 
at Davanagere
STP based on 
WSP 
2.36 1.86 November 
2001 
November 2005
Pennar at  
Bangalore
I&D 46.27 47.20 August  2004 Not yet complete
(ii) Performance of the projects 
(a)   Bhadravati
The average sewage generated in the city of Bhadravati is 4.6 mld. The STP capacity 
available in Bhadravati to treat sewage is 5.83 mld. However, the STP is treating only 1.49 
mld due to non-completion of three wet wells and as a result, 3.11 mld of untreated sewage 
is being discharged into the river Bhadra. Details of the Project test checked in Bhadravati 
city which aim to improve the quality of water in Bhadra is discussed below:
Project name Findings 
I&D project for Bhadra 
River
x The project was scheduled to be completed in July 2005 but it 
was still not complete. There was a delay of more than five 
years.
x Total expenditure of ` 2.29 crore was incurred on the project 
as on September 2010. There was a cost overrun of ` 99 lakhs 
which was due to increase in scope of work, increase in tender 
premium and change in designs etc.  
x The project was delayed due to non obtaining of approval of 
the revised estimate by the State Government and also 
obtaining clearance from PWD authorities to lay the pipeline.  
x 6 pumping stations were created under the project but these 
were not energized.Out of the total sewage generated of 4.60 
mld,only 1.49 mld was being treated which was due to non 
completion of I&D work. 
                                                           
23 viz. Bhadravati, Davangere, Harihara, KR Nagar, Kollegal, Nanjangud, Shimoga, Srirangapatna and Bangalore 
24 one each on Bhadra, Tungabhadra and Pennar rivers

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 154
(b) Davanagere 
The average sewage generated in the city of Davanagere is 48 mld.The STP capacity 
available in Davanagere city can only treat 19.45 mld but no sewage is actually treated due 
to non functioning of STP. As a result, the entire 48 mld of sewage generated by Davanagere 
city flows into the river Tungabhadra.
Details of the project test checked in Davanagere city which aim to improve the quality of 
water in Tungabhadra are discussed below: 
Project  Findings 
STP based on WSP x The STP was built in November 2005 after a delay of 
more than four years. 
x The project was delayed due to handing over of land by 
City Corporation of Davanagere. 
x The STP was constructed to treat 19.45 mld of sewage 
but no sewage was actually being treated.  
x The STP was handed over to City Corporation, 
Davanagere. The Karnataka Urban Water Supply & 
Drainage Board was not maintaining and also not 
monitoring the functioning of STPs in Davanagere city. 
(c) Bangalore city 
Average sewage generated in the city of Bangalore is 1200 mld and STP capacity available in 
Bangalore city can only treat 463 mld of sewage. However, only 120 mld of sewage is 
actually treated and 1080 mld of sewage is not treated. Bangalore is not situated on the 
bank of any river and the sewage is generated in three different valleys and joins Vellanbur 
lake and Vrishabhavathy stream which ultimately join river Pennar and Cauvery respectively. 
As a result, untreated sewage of 1080 mld actually ends up polluting water of the rivers 
Pennar and Cauvery.
Details of the project test checked in Bangalore city which aim to improve the quality of 
water in Pennar are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
I&D Environment Action 
Plan in Bangalore city 
x This comprised of rehabilitation of sewers. The project 
was supposed to be completed in August 2004. In 
January 2010, NRCD extended the project duration upto 
July 2010 without any revision in project cost.  
x There was a cost overrun of `  0.93 crore which was due 
to increase in scope of work and cost escalation. 
x The project was delayed due to land problems and 
litigations by the contractor.
x The total sewage generated in the city (1200 mld) was 
too huge to be intercepted and diverted for treatment 
out of funds under NRCP.  
Thus the projects undertaken for pollution control of Bhadra in Bhadravati city were yet to 
be completed, while the projects envisaged for control of pollution of Tungabhadra river 
in Davanagere town were not working as envisaged. Further, the project sanctioned for 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 155
control of pollution of Pennar river in Bangalore was not sufficient to meet the objective 
of reduction of pollution in Pennar river. 
Flow of untreated sewage into River Bhadra in Bhadravati
 Blocked I&D at Davanagere
4.2 NLCP 
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the lake Sanctioned cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion  
Bellandur 5.54 1.91 August 2004 Abandoned 
Kotekere 5.64 5.73 March 2006 May 2009 
Sharanbhasveshwara 4.89 4.21 September 2006 On going 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 156
(ii) Performance of the projects 
Project name Findings 
Bellandur Lake x The project for restoration and conservation of Bellandur lake 
was sanctioned in January 2003 for 18 months and was slated 
for completion in August 2004.  
x In January 2004, Lake Development Authority, Bangalore (LDA) 
which was implementing this project, entrusted execution of 
the work to a contractor for completion by January 2005, after 
committing that it would be responsible for stopping and 
diverting  sewage entering into the lake. However, LDA failed 
to stop/ divert the inflow of sewage in the lake which 
promoted prolific growth of weeds in the lake. As a result, 
oxygenation of the lake proved inadequate and ineffective and 
rendered the lake non-conducive for bio-remedial treatment.
x The contractor complained in April 2005 against non-stoppage 
of sewage inflow and experts from Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore in May 2005 attributed failure of the project mainly 
due to discharge of untreated sewage directly into the lake. In 
April 2006, LDA decided to suspend the project till stoppage of 
sewage inflow was achieved by suitable means and to go for 
arbitration regarding the contract. LDA decided to take the 
opinion of the Law Department and challenge the arbitral 
award in High Court of Karnataka.
Further, LDA decided to terminate the project, till the Master 
Plan for sewage treatment in the catchment of Bellandur was 
implemented.   
x The unspent balance of ` 1.81 crore (` 1.25 crore Centre share 
and ` 0.56 crore of State share) was lying with the 
Implementing agency (since January 2005). 
Thus, the project failed to achieve its objective of restoration 
and conservation of Bellandur Lake, despite an expenditure of 
`1. 91 crore.
Kotekere x The activities to be undertaken for restoration and 
conservation of Kotekere lake comprised of construction of 
STP, Low Cost sanitation, de-silting, de-weeding, lake fencing 
etc.
x The originally sanctioned date of completion was March 2006 
but the project was actually completed in May 2009. The delay 
was due to increase in scope of work of desilting the lake and 
heavy rains disrupting desilting of lake. 
x Details of activities undertaken for restoration and 
conservation of Kotekere lake were as follows: 
x Construction of I&D:  three drains opened into the lake 
and all three were intercepted under the project. 4.80 
kms of sewer lines were laid, as envisaged.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 157
x Programmes for strengthening of bund, lake fencing, and 
shoreline development had been carried out as 
envisaged in the approved project proposal. 
x Lake was desilted and deweeded as per DPR. 
The completion report for the project was submitted to NRCD 
in November 2009 and final UC was submitted in March 2010. 
Sharanbhas-
veshwara lake 
x The lake measured 64 acres and had a depth of 2.1 meters. As 
such, it did not meet the criteria of depth defined by MoEF 
according to which the lake to be selected.
x The activities to be undertaken for restoration and 
conservation of the lake comprised of construction of STP, 
interception and diversion works, low cost sanitation etc.  
x The originally sanctioned date of completion of the project was 
September 2006 but the project was still ongoing.  
x Details of major activities undertaken for restoration and 
conservation of Sharanabasaveshwara lake were as below: 
- Desilting and dredging: 3.34 lakh cubic meter of silt was 
evacuated from the lake, which was substantially higher 
than the quantity considered in the DPR.
- I&D: A sewer line was constructed to prevent entry of 
sewage into the lake.
x The O&M of the lake was entrusted to four private agencies. 
 Untreated effluents entering Bellandur Lake


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 158
Kotekere lake: Before (left) and after (right) conservation efforts
Sharanbhasveshwara lake before (left) and after (right) after co nservation efforts. These photographs are a clear 
testimony of sincere efforts producing results and having the desired impact. 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 159
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
2 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 
5.2   NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
coordination 
committee
By Steering 
Committee at the 
district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring 
Committee
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 
5.3 Ground water (in six Blocks test checked) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes (5 out of 6) Yes (5 out of 6) 
6.   Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
(a) Water quality of Bhadra after Bhadravati 
Water quality of Bhadra on entering Bhadravati and 
after leaving Bhadravati in terms of DO and BOD is 
shown in the chart alongside. TC was 18 times the 
criteria, indicating the presence of disease causing 
fecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which 
cause illness as the Bhadra river leaves Bhadravati.
(b) Water quality of Tungabhadra after Davanagere 
Water quality of Tungabhadra on entering 
Davanagere and after leaving Davanagere in terms of 
DO and BOD is shown in the chart alongside. TC in 
the river rises from 700 at the time of entering 
Davanagere to 3000 at the time Tungabhadra leaves 
Davanagere and is six times the criteria, indicating 
the presence of disease causing, fecal-related 
bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
6.9
5
7.2
1
02468
DO
BOD
Status of Bhadra entering Bhadravati
status of Bhadra leaving Bhadravati 
7.3
3
8
2
05 1 0
DO
BOD
Status of Tungabhadra 
entering Devanagare
status of Tungabhadra leaving 
Devanagare

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 160
(c)  Water quality of Pennar after Bangalore   
No information was available regarding status of Pennar river after Bangalore.
6.2 NLCP 
Lake Water quality status 
Bellandur Work on restoration of the lake has stopped midway.  
Kotekere It was observed that water quality in Kotekere lake after 
implementation of the project was restored to the criteria for 
Designated Best Use classification for B class waters. As such, the 
project had achieved its objective of conservation and restoration 
of Kotekere lake. 
Sharanbhasveshwara It was observed that water quality in Sharanbhasveshwara lake 
after implementation of the project was restored to the criteria 
for Designated Best Use classification for B class waters. As such, 
the project had achieved its objective of conservation and 
restoration of Sharanbhasveshwara lake. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 161
State: Kerala 
1.  Background 
The important rivers in Kerala are Valapattanam, Chaliyar, Bharathapuzha, Periyar, Pamba. 
Some of the lakes in Kerala are: Veli Akkulum Lake, Ashtamudi Lake, Kuttanad Lake, Paravur 
Kayal, Punnamada Lake, 
Vembanad Lake etc 
According to Central 
Ground Water Board 
(CGWB), annual 
replenishable ground 
water resource in Kerala 
is 6.84 Billion Cubic 
Meters (BCM) while the 
net annual ground water 
availability is 6.23 BCM. 
Out of 152 blocks, 
ground water in five 
blocks is over-exploited, 
in 15 blocks it is critical 
and in 30 blocks, it is 
semi-critical. Ground 
water in Kerala is 
contaminated by salinity, 
fluoride, iron and nitrate.
Insitutional arrangements in the State: As per information provided by MoEF, Kerala Water 
Authority was the nodal department for projects under NRCP but was subsequently replaced 
by Pamba River Basin Authority in October 2009. Travancore Devaswom Board and Irrigation 
Department was the nodal implementing agency. Theerapatham Urban Development Project 
and Tourists Resort Kerala Ltd. were the implementing agencies for NLCP.  
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Kerala is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes  Ground water  
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Done Done Done 
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Not Done Done  
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially (Nutrients: 
Done, Pathogenic 
organism: Done, Human 
Partially
(Nutrients: Done. 
Pathogenic
Could not be 
verified
Test checked rivers and lakes in Kerala

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 162
100% (806.49 MLD)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available
produced chemicals: Not 
Done) 
organism: Done. 
Human produced 
chemicals: Not 
Done.) 
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: Not 
Done, Industry: Done, 
Mining: Not Done, Dam: 
Not Done, Uncontrolled 
disposal of human waste: 
Not Done) 
Partially
(Agriculture: Not 
Done.
Industry: Done. 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste: Not Done.) 
Partially
(Agriculture: Done, 
Industry: Not 
Done. 
Mining:Not Done. 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste: Done.) 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Done Partially Not Done 
4. Policy for water pollution  Done Done Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Could not be 
verified, Industry: Done, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Done)   
Partially
 (Source water 
protection: Not 
Done. 
Industry: Done. 
Agriculture non 
point sources: 
Done.)   
Done 6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Kerala 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
Capacity for sewage treatment in Class I & Class II cities of Kerala (%) 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 163
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Kerala is 806.49 mld, for which no 
treatment capacity is available.  
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Pamba river had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the NRCP. Six 
projects were being implemented in only Pamba city for cleaning up river Pamba of which 
two were completed as of March 2010. The total sanctioned cost of all the projects was `
18.45 crore. 
All the six projects being implemented under NRCP at a cost of ` 18.45 crore were test 
checked for detailed examination.
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/
location
Name of the 
Project  
Sanctioned 
cost 
 (` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure 
 (` in crore) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Pamba/
Sabarimala
LCS 4.60 1.43 May 2007 Completed
I&D 5.60 No expenditure May 2007 Not yet commenced
Public
participation
0.25 0.27 May 2007 Completed
River front 
Development  
0.43 1.39 May 2007 Completed 
STP 4.47 No expenditure May 2007 Not yet commenced
SWM  3.10 0.17 May 2007 Completed
(ii) Performance of the projects 
Pamba and Sabarimala 
The daily average sewage generated in Pamba town was seven mld and 3.5 mld of 
untreated sewage was being discharged into the Pamba river. The daily average sewage 
generated in Sabarimala was 10 mld and the entire 10 mld of untreated sewage was being 
discharged into the river.  
Project  Findings 
LCS x Only 160 LCS were constructed at Pamba against target of 300. At 
Sabarimala, 320 LCS and 80 bathrooms were constructed against the 
target of 400 and 100 respectively.
x The shortfall was due to non-availability of forest land.
I&D works x These works were to be completed by 2007 but had not yet 
commenced (March 2010).
SWM x According to MoEF inspection report of September 2010, these had 
been completed but no details were available. 
RFD x These were to be completed by May 2007. According to inspection 
by MoEF in September 2010, these had been completed but no 
details were available. 
STP x The project scheduled for completion by May 2007 has not
commenced as yet.  

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 164
x The project was delayed due to non availability of forest land and 
changes in design of STP as the initial draft engineering report was 
not based on detailed survey and investigation and this necessitated 
change.
Thus, projects to prevent pollution entering Pamba river have not succeeded in their 
objectives.
4.2 NLCP 
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the lake Sanctioned 
Cost
 (` in crore)  
Actual Expenditure 
 (` in crore)  
Scheduled date o f
completion
Actual date of 
completion
Veli Akkulam lake 24.56 Not available August 2007 Ongoing 
(ii) Performance of the project 
Project
name
Findings 
Veli
Akkulam
lake
x  Activities to be undertaken for restoration of Veli-Akkulam lake 
included (i) construction of 12 mld and 13 mld STP at Ulloor and 
Valiathura respectively (ii) dredging including bioremediation and 
sewage system for Akkulam catchment (iii) site protection and 
beautification works 
x The sanctioned cost of the project was ` 24.56 crore and was 
sanctioned in August 2005 with scheduled completion date of August 
2007.
x The project was entrusted to the Department of Tourism, Government 
Sewage storage tank at Cheriyanavattom which over flows and sewage reaches the Njunangar stream

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 165
of Kerala as the nodal agency and implementation was assigned to 
Kerala State Urban Development Project. Kerala government in January 
2006 appointed Theerapadham Urban Development Project as the 
nodal agency and the Kerala Water Authority and Irrigation Department 
as implementing agencies. Theerapadham Urban Development Project 
was merged with Kerala Sustainable Urban Development Project. 
x In May 2006  MoEF had released ` 4.30 crore for the project. 
x In September 2009, the State government ordered that the 
regeneration work of the lake would be undertaken by funds allotted by 
the 12th Finance commission for special projects and the required funds 
were obtained from it and awarded to three public sector undertakings. 
It was also observed that in the meantime, an STP out of JNNURM funds 
was to be constructed for management of sewage of 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation area and so the construction of STPs 
proposed for regeneration of Veli-Akkulam was dropped.
x A site visit by MoEF in September 2010 revealed that the de-weeding 
and de-silting work were under progress. MoEF also noted that 
Irrigation department which has been appointed as the nodal agency by 
the State government should regularly monitor the implementation of 
works.
Thus, the project for restoration and conservation of Velli-Akkulam lake had 
not achieved its objectives as yet.  
Amayizhanjan canal carries municipal waste of Thir uvananthapuram city to Veli-Akkulam lake. A view near 
Kannammoola Bridge. 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 166
5.  Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution 
5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
0 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 0 out of 6 projects 
5.2 NLCP 
By inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 
6.  Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
Pamba/
Pamba
While BOD and DO were not measured, TC in Pamba was 2.2 times the 
criteria as it leaves Pamba town indicating the presence of disease causing 
faecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
6.2 NLCP
As the project on improving water quality of Veli Akkulam lake has not started, no 
conclusions could be drawn about impact of NLCP in restoring the lake.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 167
State: Madhya Pradesh 
1.  Background 
Madhya Pradesh has numerous rivers, the important ones being Narmada, Chambal, Betwa, 
Kshipra, Sone, Mahanadi, Khan, Indrawati, Tapti, Wain Ganga, Beehar and Mandakini. Some 
of the lakes in Madhya 
Pradesh are Tawa 
Reservoir, Upper Lake 
(Bhopal), Lower lake 
(chhota Talab), Kapur Talao, 
Moti sarovar, Ranguan lake, 
Shivpuri Lake, Sakhya sagar 
lake etc. According to 
Central Ground Water 
Board, annual replenishable 
ground water resource in 
Madhya Pradesh is 37.19 
BCM while the net annual 
ground water availability is 
35.33 BCM. Out of 459 
blocks, in 24 blocks ground 
water is over-exploited, in 
five blocks it is critical and 
in 19 blocks, it is semi-critical. Ground water in Madhya Pradesh is contaminated by salinity, 
fluoride, chloride, iron and nitrate.
Insitutional arrangements in the State: As per information provided by MoEF, Housing and 
Environment Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh is the nodal department for 
NRCP and the implementing agencies are Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Public 
Health Engineering Department and Environment Planning & Coordination Organization 
(EPCO). Environmental Planning and Coordination Organisation is the implementing agency 
for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Madhya Pradesh is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes  Ground water
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Done 
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Done 
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified)
Could not be 
verified
Test checked rivers and lakes in Madhya Pradesh

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 168
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: 
Could not be verified, 
Industry: Done, Mining: 
Not Done, Dam: Not 
Done, Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste: Could not be 
verified)
Could not be verified Partially
(Agriculture: 
Could not be 
verified,
Industry: Could 
not be verified, 
Mining: Not 
Done) 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Done Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not Done, 
Industry: Could not be 
verified, Agriculture 
non point sources 
Could not be verified)   
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not Done. 
Industry: Could not be 
verified.
Agriculture non-point 
sources: Could not be 
verified.)   
Could not be 
verified
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Could not be verified
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Madhya Pradesh 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Madhya Pradesh is 1379.62 mld, 
of which treatment capacity is available for only 195.10 mld. 
14%(195.10 mld)
86%(1184.52 MLD)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of 
Madhya Pradesh (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available 
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 169
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Rivers Betwa, Tapti, Wain Ganga, Khan, Narmada, Chambal, Kshipra, Beehar and Mandakini 
had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the National River Conservation 
Programme (NRCP). Projects were being implemented in 14 towns 25. 69 projects in these 14 
towns were sanctioned under NRCP out of which 57 were completed as of March 2010. The 
total sanctioned cost of all the projects was ` 115.38 crore. 
Eight projects being implemented in cities of Indore, Vidisha and Ujjain at a cost of ` 52.32
crore were test checked for detailed examination. 
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of 
the Project
Sanctioned 
cost 
(` in crore)
Actual
Expenditure
(` in crore)
Scheduled date of 
completion 
Actual date of completion
Khan/ Indore MPS 4.33 4.69 December 2001 February 2005 
I&D Part II 2.53 2.84 December 2001 January 2007 
STP 27.80 26.82 August 2004 April 2008 
Betwa/
Vidisha 
I&D 2.59 2.58 January 2000, revised 
to January 2006 
January 2007 
STP 1.08 1.06 September 2001 January 2007 
Kshipra/ 
Ujjain 
I&D 6.41 6.40 May 2000 December 2003
STP 2.78 2.87 July 2000 December 2003
I&D Part II 4.80 5.06 July 2000 December 2003
(ii) Performance of the projects 
(a) Indore 
The average sewage generated in the city of Indore is 140 mld. However, only 90 mld is 
treated and the rest 50 mld is discharged into the Khan river. Details of projects test 
checked in Indore which aim to improve the water quality of Khan are discussed below: 
Project Findings 
MPS x The project was completed in February 2005 after a delay of three years 
and two months.
x No information was available whether the created assets under the 
project were performing as envisaged.
I&D
Part II
x The project was completed in January 2007 after a delay of more than five 
years. The completion report and final Utilization Certificate for the 
project were sent to MoEF in August 2007. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in land acquisition, funds not being 
received in time, delay in getting power connection from electricity Board 
and heavy rains.
x No assessment was carried out whether the project was actually meeting 
                                                           
25 viz. Bhopal, Burhanpur, Chapara, Indore, Jabalpur, Keolari, Mandideep, Nagda, Seoni, Ujjain, Vidisha, Hoshangabad, Rewa and 
Chitrakut.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 170
the objectives for which it was constructed. 
STP x The project was completed in April 2008 after a delay of three years and 
eight months. 
x STP capacity created under the project was 90 mld but it was also 
observed that 50 mld of untreated sewage was flowing into the river Khan. 
As per analysis report, the treated sewage was meeting the standards of 
discharge in terms of BOD. However, levels of oil & grease and COD were 
not measured.
(b) Vidisha 
The average sewage generated in the city of Vidisha is nine mld. However, only 7.2 mld is 
treated and the rest 1.8 mld is discharged into the Betwa river. Details of two projects test 
checked in Vidisha which aim to improve the water quality of Betwa are discussed below: 
Project Findings 
I&D x The project was completed in January 2007 after a delay of seven years. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in tender process, delay in obtaining 
permission from Railway Department and non-availability of funds. 
x STP of nine mld capacity was sanctioned under NRCP; however, STP of 7.2 
mld capacity only was created. Though 9955 meters of sewer lines were to 
be laid under the project, only 6490 meters was actually laid.
STP x This was competed after a delay of five years and four months due to delay 
in tender process and non-availability of power.
x STP capacity sanctioned for Vidisha was of nine mld whereas STP of only 
7.2 mld was created.The entire fund for the STP was utilized for creating 
STP of 7.2 mld.  Therefore STP of 1.8 mld could not be created.The treated 
sewage was being disposed according to Karnal Technology which involves 
growing trees on ridges and disposing the sewage in furrows.   
x Though Madhya Pradesh State Pollution Control Board stated that 
inspections of the STP were conducted regularly, copies of the inspection 
reports were not made available. As such, actual performance of the STP 
could not be verified.
(c) Ujjain 
The average sewage generated in the city of Ujjain is 57 mld. STP capacity in the city is 52.74 
mld and sewage actually being treated is 47.74 mld. As such 9.26 mld of sewage is flowing 
untreated into the river Kshipra. Details of three projects test checked in Ujjain which aim to 
improve the water quality of Kshipra are discussed below: 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 171
Project Findings 
I&D x The project was completed in December 2003 after a delay of three years 
and seven months. The final UC was submitted in 2006 though the project 
was completed in 2003. 
x  The project was delayed due to delay in obtaining sanction from the local 
bodies for carrying out certain works such as road cutting, shifting of 
electrical line etc.  
x The total length of sewers to be laid under the project was 2199 meters, 
however, only 1256.50 meters of sewer were actually laid. Five drains 
were intercepted under this project and two pumping stations were also 
constructed.
x Due to shortage of electricity, manpower and lack of funds, the I&D works 
were not performing as envisaged. Further, O&M was being carried out by 
untrained labourers on daily wages though the PHED had written letters to 
the Government for providing funds for proper O&M of the assets. 
STP x The project was completed in December 2003 after a delay of three years 
and five months. 
x The project was delayed due to the fact that part of the land on which the 
gravity sewer was to be laid had gone into litigation therefore work was 
delayed till the decision of court.Delay also occurred due to legal 
formalities and getting due sanction from local bodies for carrying out 
certain work such as road cutting, shifting of electrical line etc.  
x It was observed that proper operation and maintenance of the assets was 
not being carried out due to lack of funds and deficiency of trained staff. 
Out of 27 sewage pumps installed in Phase-I and Phase-II of NRCP, 12 
pumps were not in working condition as of December 2010.Even though 
52.74 mld STP capacity was created, it was noticed that only 47.74 mld 
was being treated and five mld was being discharged into Kshipra.  The 
treated sewage also did not meet prescribed limits and BOD and COD 
were above acceptable limits.  
Thus, the STP was not meeting the envisaged objectives and did not serve to 
improve the water quality of Kshipra. 
I&D
Part II
x  The project was completed in December 2003 after a delay of three years 
and five months.  The completion certificate was sent to MoEF only in 
2004 and final UC was sent only in 2006. 
x  The project was delayed due to delays in land acquisition and delay in 
obtaining sanction from local bodies for carrying out certain work such as 
road cutting, shifting of electrical line etc.  
x 3865 meters of sewer lines were to be laid, only 2531 meters were laid. 
Three pumping stations were also planned but actual capacity created was 
not available.It was observed that shortage of electricity, manpower and 
lack of funds were hampering its full utilisation and performance. 
As such, performance of the I&D project did not meet its envisaged objectives. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 172
Sewage overflowing (after interception) and discharging directly into river Kshipra 
Sewage accumulation due to waste stablisation pond not being cleaned in for STP, Kshipra River, Ujjain


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 173
4.2 NLCP 
(a) Planning for NLCP 
Audit test checked Shivpuri lake for scrutiny as it had the highest sanctioned cost among the 
four lakes
26 selected under NLCP.
      (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
lake
Sanctioned Cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion
Actual date of 
completion
Shivpuri lake 51.99 1.79 August 2009 On-going 
(ii) Performance of the project 
Project
name
Findings 
Shivpuri
lake
x Work on the project which involved activities like de-weeding, de-silting, 
storm water drains, LCS, bathing ghats, lake front development, public 
participation, etc.
x The project was scheduled to be completed in August 2009 but it was  
still incomplete.
x An expenditure of `25.43 lakh was incurred for advertisement of tender 
notices in the newspapers but subsequently three components of the 
project (1) Sewerage Network (2) Sewage Pumping Station (3) STP were 
transferred to PHED, Shivpuri in September 2009.  No fund for the 
implementation of the project has yet been released to PHED, Shivpuri. 
x Information regarding submission of regular progress reports by 
implementing agency was unavailable and progress of the project was 
not being assessed periodically by the State government also. 
Thus, project for restoration and conservation of Shivpuri lake has not yet 
been completed, though scheduled for completion in August 2009. 
5.  Monitoring of programmes for control of water
5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
8 out of 8 projects 8 out of 8 projects 8 out of 8 projects 8 out of 8 projects 
5.2 NLCP 
By inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
1 out of 1 project 1 out of 1 project 1 out of 1 project 1 out of 1 project 
                                                           
26 Rani Talab, Sagar, Shivpuri and Chandpatha. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 174
5.3 Ground water (for six blocks test checked) 
6 blocks were test checked for assessment of monitoring network with respect to ground 
water. These were: Indore, Pithampur (industrial cluster), Jabalpur (industrial cluster), 
Ratlam (fluoride), Khargone (fluoride) and Jhabua (fluoride).  
6. Outcomes 
6.1  NRCP 
(a) Betwa after leaving Vidisha 
No analysis had been carried out by Public Health Engineering Department, Vidisha to test 
the quality of Betwa on entering Vidisha and after leaving Vidisha in terms of DO, BOD and 
TC. As such, there is no way to assess whether the projects undertaken for restoration of 
the Betwa were actually working.
(b) Kshipra after leaving Ujjain 
With regard to water quality of river 
Kshipra, levels of DO and TC were not 
being measured and quality in terms of 
BOD and COD is depicted in the graph 
alongside. This shows an improvement 
in the status of water quality of Kshipra 
after it leaves Ujjain. However, in the 
absence of other indicators like TC and 
DO, no real conclusions regarding the 
quality of water in Kshipra can be 
derived.
6.2 NLCP 
Activities relating to restoration and conservation of Shivpuri lake were not complete, as 
such no conclusion about outcomes could be reached. 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats
Yes Yes Yes Yes, in 6 blocks 
45
10
120
22
COD
BOD
Quality of water of Kshipra on entering Ujjain
Quality of water of Kshipra on leaving Ujjain

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 175
State: Maharashtra  
1.  Background 
The major rivers of Maharashtra are Godavari, Krishna, Tapti and Narmada. Some of the 
lakes in Maharashtra are Lonar Lake, Tulsi Lake, Powai Lake, Tansa Lake, Upwan Rankala 
Lake etc. According to Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), annual replenishable ground 
water resource in 
Maharashtra is 32.96 
Billion Cubic Meters 
(BCM) while the net 
annual ground water 
availability is 31.21 
BCM.  Out of 231 
talukas, in seven 
talukas ground water 
is over-exploited, in 
one taluka it is critical 
and in 23 talukas it is 
semi-critical.
Contaminants like 
salinity, fluoride, iron 
and nitrate are 
present in some of the 
districts of 
Maharashtra.
Insitutional arrangements in the State: As per information provided by MoEF, the 
Environment Department, Government of Maharashtra was the nodal department for NRCP 
and the implementing agencies were Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran and Nashik Municipal 
Corporation, Maharashtra. Department of Environment, Government of Maharashtra and 
Kolhapur Municipal Corporation are the implementing agencies for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Maharashtra is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes  Ground water  
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Done Not Done Done 
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Not Done Not Done Done (arsenic, 
nitrate, iron, 
fluoride and 
salinity)
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
Test checked rivers and lakes in Maharashtra

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 176
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially (Nutrients: 
Done, Pathogenic 
organism: Done, 
Human produced 
chemicals: Not Done) 
Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: 
Not Done, Industry: Not 
Done, Mining: Not 
Done, Dam: Not Done, 
Uncontrolled disposal 
of human waste: Done) 
Not Done Not Done
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.   Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Maharashtra 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Maharashtra is 10199 mld, of 
which treatment capacity is available for only 4254 mld. 
42% (4254 mld)
58%(5945 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of 
Maharashtra (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 177
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Krishna, Godavari and Tapi rivers had been selected for pollution abatement projects under 
the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects were being implemented in 
seven cities
27. 31 projects in these seven towns were sanctioned under NRCP and the total 
sanctioned cost of all the projects was ` 192.60 crore. Nine projects 28 being implemented 
under NRCP at a cost of ` 100.74 crore were test checked for detailed examination.
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of 
the Project
Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Sechduled
date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Krishna/ Karad STP 0.55 0.86 June 2002 December 2006
I&D 2.64 2.28 June 2002 December 2006
Godavari/
Nashik 
I&D 31.46 29.69 March 2003 July 2006 
STP 78 mld 
at Tapovan 
20.82 20.90 March 2003 April 2004 
STP 22 mld 
at Chehdi 
7.00 6.99 March 2003 June 2007 
Krishna/ Sangli I & D 21.06 18.91 March 2007 Not completed
STP 2.96 revised 
to 4.49 
4.23 August 2004 
revised to 
October 2006 
Not completed
Godavari/
Nanded 
STP 2.52 revised 
to 2.77 
2.44 March 2000 
revised to 
June 2005 
Commissioned-June
2006 
I&D 6.50 revised 
to 9.95 
9.92 March 2000 
revised to 
June 2005 
Commissioned-June
2006 
ii) Performance of the projects 
(a) Karad
The daily average estimated sewage generated in the city of Karad is 7.5 mld and STP 
capacity of 7.5 mld is available in the city. As such, the entire daily average sewage is treated 
and no untreated sewage is discharged into the Krishna river. Details of four projects test 
checked in Karad which aim to improve the quality of water in Krishna are discussed 
below:
Project Findings 
STP x The project was completed in December 2006 after a delay of four years 
and six months. 
x The project was delayed due to change in the type of work.  
x SPCB regularly monitored the performance of the STP and the treated 
effluents from the STP met the standards prescribed by NRCD.
I&D x The project was completed in December 2006 after a delay of four years 
and six months. 
                                                           
27 Karad, Nashik, Nanded, Trimbakeshwar, Prakkasha, Kolhapur and Sangli on rivers Krishna, Godavari, Tapi and 
Panchganga 
28 Five projects on Godavari river and four projects on Krishna river

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 178
x The project was delayed due to change in the type of work.  
x 4330 meters sewer lines were laid under the project. Further, four pumping 
stations of 173 LPS capacity were installed under the project. There was no 
information available to verify the capacity at which those pumping 
stations were being utilized. The performance of the work was not 
assessed after completion of the project.  
 (b)  Nashik 
The daily average estimated sewage generated in the city of Nashik is 250 mld and 130-140 
mld of sewage is treated and the rest of the 110-120 mld untreated sewage is discharged 
into the River Godavari. Details of four projects test checked in Nashik which aim to 
improve the quality of water in Godavari are discussed below:
Project Findings 
I&D x The project was completed in July 2006 after a delay of three years and 
four months.
x The project was delayed due to delay in completion of some minor 
works of Takli Pumping Station. The project completion reports along 
with final utilization certificate were yet to be submitted to NRCD.  
STP at 
Tapovan
x The project was completed in April 2004 after a delay of one year and 
one month. The project completion report along with the utilization 
certificate was yet to be submitted to NRCD.
x The State government had not taken mandatory consent from SPCB for 
installation of STP.
STP at 
Chehdi
x The project was completed in June 2007 after a delay of four years and 
three months.
x The project was delayed due to non-acquisition of land, change in 
designand increase in span of rainy seasons etc.
x The STP did not perform full treatment capacity due to non-pumping of 
adequate quantity of sewage and the STP treated only 15 mld sewage. 
The rest of the seven mld of sewage remained untreated and was being 
discharged into Godavari river. 
 (c) Sangli 
The daily average estimated sewage generated in the city of Sangli is 26.47 mld and STP 
capacity available in the city was adequate to treat 13 mld of sewage. However, no sewage 
was actually being treated and the entire 26.47 mld of untreated sewage was being 
discharged into River Krishna. Details of four projects test checked in Sangli which aim to 
improve the quality of water in Krishna are discussed below:
Project Findings 
I&D x The project was scheduled for completion by March 2007.Only 54 per cent 
of works have been completed as of March 2010 defeating the purpose for 
which the project was sanctioned.
x The project was delayed due to litigation.  
STP x The project was scheduled for completion by August 2004, it was still in 
progress as of March 2011. No reasons for the delay were available in files. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 179
x Even after time overrun of more than six years, only 70 per cent of work 
was completed. 
Thus, the entire untreated sewage of Sangli city was being discharged into 
the river Krishna, defeating the purpose for which the project was 
sanctioned.
(d) Nanded
The daily average sewage generated in the city of Nanded is 60 mld and no STP is available 
in the city. As such, the entire untreated sewage is discharged into the Godavari river. 
Details of two projects test checked in Nanded which aim to improve the quality of water 
in Godavari are discussed below: 
Project Findings 
STP x The project was completed and commissioned in June 2006 after a delay of 
six years and three months. 
x The project was delayed due to land litigation, rainy season and shifting of 
High Tension power line of Maharashtra State Electricity Board etc.
x Entire structure of STP including stabilisation pond, inlet outlet 
arrangement and canal work were demolished and dismantled by NWMC 
and work for a new STP of 87 mld proposed under JNNURM was in 
progress on at the same site. Thus, the entire expenditure of ` 2.44 crore 
incurred on 26 mld STP under NRCP was rendered unfruitful besides non-
achieving of desired benefits and water pollution abatement objectives of 
the scheme.
x Avoidable expenditure of ` 54.52 lakh was incurred by MJP on watch and 
ward arrangement on the non-functional STP during June 2006 to 
December 2010. 
I&D x The project was commissioned in June 2006 after a delay of six years and 
three months. The completion report was not submitted to NRCD. 
x The project was delayed due to land litigation, heavy rains etc.
x All the 19 drains trapped under NRCP were trapped near the bank of 
Godavari River well below High Flood Line by way of intercepting sewer line 
lying adjacent and parallel to the river bank in the backwaters zone; the 
same remained submerged during high flow. Thus, a polluting nerve in the 
form of intercepting sewer was created just adjacent to river whose 
pollution was to be abated.  The whole intercepting sewer was submerged 
in rainy season, increasing the chances of mixing of sewage with river 
water.
x  During joint inspection in January 2011, it was found that pumping station 
and machinery created under the project at a cost of ` 1.60 crore were 
lying in a very neglected condition and the mobile generator set, electrical 
panel were found in damaged condition.  The building glass and electrical 
fitting were also found in damaged condition. Some parts/spares were 
stolen from the pumping station. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 180
Untreated sewage from STP in Karad flowing into Krishna 
Abandoned works in Sangli
4.2 NLCP 
Works relating to restoration and conservation of two lakes, i.e., Powai lake and Rankala 
lake were selected for detailed examination.
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the
lake
Sanctioned cost  
(` in crore)  
Actual Expenditure 
 (` in crore)  
Scheduled date o f
completion
Actual date of 
completion
Powai 6.62 4.32 April 2003 April 2003 
Rankala 8.65 2.39 January, 2009 Work in progress 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 181
(ii) Performance of the projects 
Project
name
Findings 
Powai x The activities for conservation and restoration included water 
treatment and bioremediation through de-weeding, de-sludging, 
aeration, applying special bio-products for treatment and revival of 
the lake etc.  
x The project was sanctioned in June 2001 at an estimated cost of `
6.62 crore with a scheduled date of completion by April, 2003 and 
was completed in time after incurring the expenditure of ` 4.32 
crore. The project completion report along with final utilization 
certificate were yet to be submitted by Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Mumbai (MCGM) to NRCD. The project was also declared 
completed by NRCD. However, documents disclosed that the final 
payment of the contractor was yet to be paid which indicated that 
the project was still ongoing.
x Unspent balance of ` 93.84 lakh was retained by Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM).
Rankala x In October, 2006, NRCD sanctioned a project to Kolhapur Municipal 
Corporation at an estimated cost of ` 8.65 crore with a scheduled 
date of completion by January 2009. Even though the sanction 
period of the project had expired in January 2009, the project was 
still continuing without any extension. 
x NRCD released ` 2.50 crore to the implementing agency, an 
expenditure of ` 2.39 crore was incurred on the project as of March 
2010.
 Thus, the project to restore and conserve Rankala lake did not meet its 
objectives.
Proliferation of weeds in Powai lake


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 182
Polluted shoreline of Powai Lake
5.  Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution 
5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
0 out of 9 projects 0 out of 9 projects 0 out of 9 projects 0 out of 9 projects 
5.2 NLCP 
By inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 2 projects 1 out of 2 projects 2 out of 2 projects 0 out of 2 projects 
5.3 Ground water (for six blocks test checked) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes, in 5 blocks Yes, in 5 blocks Yes Yes, in 4 blocks 
6. Outcomes 
6.1   NRCP 
(a) Water quality of Krishna after Karad
The daily average estimated sewage generated in the city of Karad is 7.5 mld and STP 
capacity of 7.5 mld is available in the city. As such, the entire daily average sewage is treated 
and no untreated sewage is discharged into the Krishna river.  


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 183
(b) Water quality of Krishna after Sangli 
The Dissolved oxygen (DO), Bio chemical 
Oxygen demand (BOD) and Total coli form 
(TC) of Krishna when it enters Sangli city 
and after lit leaves Sangli city had not 
been measured. As such, no indicators 
existed for arriving at any conclusions 
regarding quality of water in Krishna. 
(c) Water quality of Godavari after Nashik 
The status of Godavari river entering and 
leaving Nashik in terms of DO and BOD is shown in the chart opposite.  TC at the time of 
river entering and leaving the town was 22.7 and 38.3 respectively. It can be seen that BOD 
rises by 49 per cent  and TC increased by 68 per cent  after Godavari leaves Nashik.  This 
indicated that system of sewage treatment was inadequate.
(d) Water quality of Godavari after 
Nanded
Dissolved oxygen (DO) and Bio chemical 
Oxygen demand (BOD) of Godavari river 
when it enters Nanded city was 4.78 and 
6.8 respectively and after the river 
Godavari leaves Nanded city, DO and BOD 
was measured as 2.27 and 25.83 
respectively indicating worsening position. 
However, the TC had not been measured at 
the time of the river either entering or 
leaving the town. 
6.2   NLCP 
As the project on improving water quality of Rankala is still in progress, no conclusions could 
be drawn about impact of NLCP in restoring the lake. Powai lake water quality was not being 
monitored by Central Pollution Control Board. 
5.2
9.4
6.0
6.3
DO
BOD
Status of Godavari entering Nasik
Status of Godavari leaving Nasik
2.27
25.83
4.78
6.8
DO
BOD
Status of Godavari entering Nanded
Status of Godavari leaving Nanded

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 184
State: Nagaland 
1.  Background 
The main rivers flowing through Nagaland are Dhansiri, Doyang, Dikhu and Jhanji. Nagaland 
has lakes likes Shilloi which 
is the largest natural lake 
in Nagaland. There is also a 
landslide lake, Twin lake, 
Dzudu and Oxbow lakes. 
The annual replenishable 
ground water resource is 
0.36 BCM while the net 
annual ground water 
availability is 0.32 BCM. 
According to CGWB, the 
status of ground water in 
Nagaland is generally 
good.
Insitutional arrangements 
in the State: As per 
information provided by 
MoEF, the Department of 
Public Health & Engineering, Government of Nagaland was the nodal department for NRCP. 
Department of Public Health & Engineering, Government of Nagaland is the implementing 
agency for NLCP.
2.   Planning for water pollution  
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Nagaland is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes  Ground water  
1. Preparation of inventory of water resources Could not be 
verified
Could not be 
verified
Not Done
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to chemical 
Indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
b) According to Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification o f
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of impact of 
human activities 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic species Could not be 
verified
Could not be 
verified
Not applicable
c) Risks to human health Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
Test checked lakes in Nagaland

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 185
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Not Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Nagaland 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06] 
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Nagaland is 14.98 mld, for which 
no treatment capacity is available.  
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP
Even though Diphu has been selected for cleaning up under NRCP, it was observed that this 
river did not figure in the list of polluted rivers prepared by CPCB and this was not critically 
polluted. As such, taking up this river under NRCP was not justified. 
4.2 NLCP 
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the lake Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure  
(` in crore)  
Scheduled date of 
completion  
Actual date of 
completion 
Twin lake 
(Amok Lushi 
and Yimdong  
Awatsung) 
25.83 6.46 October 2011 Not completed 
100 % (14.98 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment in Class I and Class II cities in Nagaland 
(%)
% of sewage for which treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 186
(iii) Performance of the project 
Project name Findings 
Twin lake (Amok 
Lushi and 
Yimdong
Awatsung)
x The selection of Twin lakes under NLCP did not meet the selection 
criteria set out by MoEF with respect to physical parameters. It was 
observed that Amok Lushi and Yimdong Awatsung were only 1.85 
acres and 0.85 acres respectively. Further, their depth was only 1.65 
meters and 1.8 meters respectively. As such, they did not qualify for 
selection under NLCP. Further, according to MoEF, scientific criteria 
like discharge of industrial and domestic waste water into the lake 
and degradation of quality of lake water should be used to select a 
lake. It was observed that no such data on scientific criteria was 
available with Nagaland, yet the twin lakes were selected under 
NLCP. There was no discharge of any domestic, industrial or 
municipal waste water into the lakes. As such, the selection of the 
lakes under NLCP was not justified.
x The project involved construction of sewers and manholes, sewage 
pumping unit, de-weeding, de-silting, storm water management, 
building check dams/silt traps, measures for shore line protection/ 
stabilization, inlet and outlet management, low cost sanitation 
works, lake front development, aquaculture etc.  
x The total cost of the project was ` 25.83 crore to be shared in the 
ratio 90:10 by Government of India and Government of Nagaland. 
The project was scheduled to be completed in October 2011. The 
Central Share of ` 5.81 crore and the State share of ` 0.65 crore 
were released in October 2009 and March 2010 respectively.
x The Nagaland Government could incur an expenditure of `6.46 crore 
upto March 2011. 
Lake Omuklushi


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 187
5.  Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution 
5.1 NLCP 
By inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By  Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NLCP 
Since the programme to restore and clean up the Twin Lake was still ongoing, no 
conclusions can be drawn about its impact on improving the quality of water. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 188
State: Odisha 
1.  Background 
Mahanadi, Subarnarekha and Brahmani are the major rivers of Odisha. Some of the lakes in 
Odisha are Chillika Lake,
Bindusagar Lake etc. 
According to Central 
Ground Water Board, the 
annual replenishable 
ground water resource in 
the State is 23.09 BCM and 
the net annual ground 
water availability is 21.01 
BCM. Out of the 314 blocks 
in the State, in none of 
them is the ground water 
over-exploited, critical or 
semi-critical. Some of the 
contaminants affecting 
ground water in Odisha are 
fluoride, iron and nitrate.
Insitutional arrangements 
in the State: As per 
information provided by MoEF, Housing & Urban Development Department, Government of 
Odisha is the nodal department for NRCP and the implementing agency is Odisha Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board. Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC) is the 
implementing agency for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Odisha is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes  Ground water  
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Done Could not be 
verified
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable 
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially (Nutrients: 
Done, Pathogenic 
organism: Could not be 
verified, Human 
produced chemicals: 
Done) 
Partially (Nutrients: 
Done, Pathogenic 
organism: Could not 
be verified, Human 
produced chemicals: 
Could not be verified) 
Could not be 
verified
Test checked rivers and lakes in Odisha


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 189
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: 
Done, Industry: Done, 
Mining: Done, Dam: 
Could not be verified, 
Uncontrolled disposal 
of human waste: Done) 
Not Done Could not be 
verified
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Could not be verified Could not be verified  Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Done Partially Could not be 
verified
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Could not be verified Could not be verified  Could not be 
verified
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Odisha 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Odisha is 739.15 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is available for only 53 mld. 
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Brahmani and Mahanadi rivers and the coastal area of Puri had been selected for pollution 
abatement projects under the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects 
were being implemented in five cities viz. Chandbali, Cuttack, Dharamshala, Talcher and Puri 
on rivers Brahmani and Mahanadi and Puri coastal area. 22 projects in these five cities were 
sanctioned under NRCP out of which 13 were completed as of March 2010. The total 
7%(53 mld)
93%(686.15 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of  Odisha 
(%)
% sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 190
sanctioned cost of all the projects was ` 92.74 crore. Seven projects being implemented 
under NRCP at a cost of ` 81.01 crore were test checked for detailed examination.
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of  
the project 
Sanctioned cost (`
in crore)  
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Mahanadi/ 
Cuttack 
I&D Part II 1.20 1.40 September 2005 September 
2008 
STP,
Matagajpur 
3.51 3.65 March 2003 August 2006
I&D Part I 3.20 2.46 March 2003 September 
2008 
LCS 0.13 0.18 March 2001 December 2002
Coastal area/ 
Puri 
I&D 51.80 Consolidated
expenditure 
of  48.66 (as 
on January, 
2010) for the 
Project titled 
‘Sewage 
collection
and
Treatment
System for 
Puri Town in 
Odisha’
March  2006 
(Original), March 
2009 (Revised) 
The project is 
not completed 
as a whole 
MPS 9.95
STP 11.22
(ii) Performance of the projects 
(a) Cuttack 
The daily average sewage generated in the city of Cuttack is estimated to be 80 mld. 
However, only 37.5 mld is treated and the rest 42.5 mld is discharged into the Mahanadi.
Details of the projects test checked for improving water quality of Mahanadi river are 
discussed below: 
Project
name
Findings 
I&D Part II x The project was completed in September 2008 after a delay of three 
years. Information regarding submission of completion report and final 
UC to MoEF was not available. 
x The project was delayed due to interference by public as a result of 
which the contractor could not complete the work in time.  
x No infrastructural problem was hampering its performance. The 
responsibility for O&M of the created asset was allocated to Cuttack 
Municipal Corporation.
STP,
Matagajpur
x The project was completed in August 2006 after a delay of three years 
and five months due to which the project cost escalated by almost `
14 lakh. 
x The project was delayed due to change in design of the STP.
x The STP capacity was being fully utilised.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 191
I&D Part I x The project was completed in September 2008 after a delay of five 
years and six months. Further, information regarding submission of 
completion report and final UC to MoEF was not available. 
x The project was delayed due to interference by public as a result of 
which the contractor could not complete the work in time.  
x Against the target of 2435 meters of sewer lines to be laid under the 
project, only 2264 meters were laid. 
x Even though the project had been completed by 2008, it was yet to be 
taken over by Cuttack Municipal Corporation which was the agency 
designated for its operation and maintenance.
LCS x The project was completed in December 2002 after a delay of one year 
and nine months 
x The project was delayed due to delay in handing over site, labour 
problems and non-availability of material in rainy season.  
x No infrastructural problem was hindering the operation of the LCS.
(b) Puri 
The daily average sewage generated in the city of Puri is estimated to be 28 mld. However, 
only five mld STP capacity is available and no sewage is actually treated. As such, the entire 
28 mld of sewage is discharged into the Bay of Bengal. Details of the project test checked in 
Puri which aimed to stop the Bay of Bengal from getting contaminated from sewage is 
discussed below: 
Project
name
Findings 
Sewage 
collection
and
Treatment
System
x The project, which included construction of I&D, STP & MPS, was 
scheduled to be completed in March 2006. Though the scheduled date 
of completion was revised to March 2009, the project is still not 
complete.
x The project was delayed due to (i) Submission of incorrect original DPR 
prepared by NEERI, Nagpur, (ii) Unfavourable site conditions and other 
technical reasons in Zone-B & C-I, (iii) Average soil condition (iv) High 
water level condition and (v) Delay in obtaining clearance from Odisha 
State Coastal Zone Management Authority (CSCZMA) etc. Further, delay 
in construction of I&D impacted the progress of STP proposed under 
the project.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 192
Untreated sewage flowing into the Mahanadi
Untreated sewage flowing directly from STP into Bay of Bengal in Puri


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 193
4.2 NLCP 
(a) Planning for NLCP 
Bindusagar lake, which was the only lake in Odisha in the list of polluted lakes prepared by 
CPCB was selected under NLCP.
Name of the
lake
Sanctioned cost 
(` in crore) 
Actual Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date o f
completion
Actual date of 
completion
Bindusagar 
lake
3.36 1.21 March 2007 Not completed 
The project is discussed below: 
Project
name
Findings 
Bindusagar
lake
x Activities envisaged for restoration and conservation of the 
Bindusagar lake were providing simple and biological treatment using 
aquaculture, providing sanitary facilities for pilgrims and community 
members, restoration of the lake by de-weeding, de-watering & de-
silting; aesthetic development and beautification, setting up of an 
Interpretation Centre etc.
x The project was to be completed by March 2007 but it was not yet 
complete as the low cost sanitation had not yet been built and the 
construction of the interception and diversion sewers was also not 
complete. Further, it was observed that no remedial action was taken 
to start the non-functioning Bioremediation Plant and to connect all 
the septic tanks to the new sewerage system.  
x The State government did not provide reasons for non-completion of 
the project. 
5.  Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution 
5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
Implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
Committee under 
CM
0 out of 7 projects 0 out of 7 projects 0 out of 7 projects 3 out of 7 projects 
5.2 NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water Quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 0 out of 1 project 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 194
5.3 Ground water (in six blocks test checked) 
Whether system exists 
for monitoring of 
groundwater Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes Yes 
6. Outcomes 
6.1   NRCP 
(a) Water quality in Mahanadi after Cuttack 
The daily average sewage generated in 
the city of Cuttack is estimated to be 80 
mld. However, only 37.5 mld is treated 
and the rest 42.5 mld is discharged into 
the Mahanadi.Five drains open into the 
river out of which four have been 
intercepted and one still needs to be 
intercepted. Status of Mahanadi on 
entering Cuttack and after leaving 
Cuttack in terms of DO and BOD is 
shown in the chart alongside.  It can be 
seen that BOD actually rises after Mahanadi leaves Cuttack, highlighting the inadequate 
sewage treatment facilities. Further TC also rises from 1287 mpn/100ml at the time of 
entering Cuttack to 3967 mpn/100ml when Mahanadi leaves Cuttack. 
6.2   NLCP 
As the project on improving water quality of Bindusagar lake is still in progress, no 
conclusions could be drawn about impact of NLCP in restoring the lake. 
8.4
1.4
8
1.1
DO
BOD
Status of Mahanadi entering Cuttack
Status of Mahanadi leaving Cuttack

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 195
State: Punjab 
1.  Background 
The State of Punjab 
derives its name from 
'Punj' and 'Aab' i.e. the 
land of five rivers namely 
Sutlej, Beas, Ravi, Jhelum 
and Chenab that flowed 
through the erstwhile 
Punjab.
According to the Central 
Ground Water Board, the 
annual replenishable 
ground water resources 
in the State are 23.78 
Billion Cubic Meters 
(BCM), while the net 
annual ground water 
availability is 21.44 BCM. 
Ground water resources 
in the State are being used 
for drinking and irrigation to a large extent. The ground water is contaminated by salinity 
and presence of fluoride, chloride, iron and nitrate.
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, the 
Department of Local Government, Government of Punjab was the nodal department and 
Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (PWSSB) was the nodal implementing agency for 
NRCP in the State. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Punjab is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Done Could not be 
verified
Done 
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Could not be 
verified
Done (arsenic, 
nitrate, iron, 
fluoride and 
salinity)
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Done Could not be 
verified
Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Could not be 
verified
Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
Not Done Could not be 
verified
Partially
(Agriculture: Done, 
Test checked rivers in Punjab

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 196
activities Industry: Not 
Done, 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste Not Done) 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Done Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Not Done Not applicable Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Could not be 
verified, Industry: Could 
not be verified, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Not done)
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not 
Done Industry: 
Could not be 
verified,
Agriculture non 
point sources: Not 
Done)   
Partially (Industry: 
Could not be 
verified,
Agriculture non 
point sources: Not 
Done)   
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Punjab 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
27% (453.80 mld)
73% (1231.86 mld)
% of  sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of  Punjab 
(%)

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 197
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Punjab is 1685.66 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is available for only 453.80 mld.  
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Sutlej river had been selected for pollution abatement under the National River 
Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects are being implemented in six cities 29  situated on 
the banks of river Sutlej.  60 projects in these six towns were sanctioned under NRCP out of 
which 50 were completed as of March 2010. The total sanctioned cost of all the projects 
was ` 215.68 crore. Eight projects
30 being implemented under NRCP at a sanctioned cost 
of `141.52 crore were test checked for detailed examination.
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of the project  Sanctioned cost 
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Sutlej/ 
Jalandhar
100 mld STP at 
Pholriwal
22.84 29.14 November
2004 
March 2008
MPS at Garha  8.79 8.79 August 2003 August 2005
Sutlej/ 
Ludhiana
111 mld STP at 
Bhattian 
34.85 37.59 December 
2004 
March 2008
152 mld STP at 
Balloke
34.79 42.67 January 2005 March 2008
48 mld STP at 
Jamalpur 
13.46 14.56 September 
2005 
March 2008
MPS at Bhattian 8.03 7.50 August 2003 August 2003
MPS at Balloke 14.92 15.27 August 2003 August 2003
MPS at Jamalpur  3.84 3.23 August 2003 August 2003
(ii)  Performance of the projects 
(a) Jalandhar town   
The average sewage generated in Jalandhar is 235 mld. However, treatment capacity is only 
100 mld and only 82 mld of sewage is treated, leaving 153 mld of waste water to be 
discharged into the Sutlej. Details of projects test checked in Jalandhar town to control 
pollution of Sutlej river are discussed below:
Project name Findings 
STP at Garha 
(Pholriwal)
x The project was completed in March 2008 after a delay of three 
years and four months. The Implementing Agency had not 
submitted the completion report and final utilisation certificate 
to NRCD.
x An expenditure of ` 29.14 crore was incurred against a 
sanctioned cost of ` 22.84 crore resulting in cost overrun of `
6.3 crore. The reasons for cost overrun were late acquisition of 
land and increase in price of land.
                                                           
29 Ludhiana (District Ludhiana), Jalandhar, Phagwara, and Phillaur (District Jalandhar), Kapurthala and 
Sultanpur Lodhi (District Kapurthala) 
30 Two at Jalandhar and six at Ludhiana.  

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 198
x The project was delayed due to late acquisition of land.
x The STP was constructed to treat 100 mld of sewage but it was 
treating only 82 mld sewage and rest 18 mld was flowing 
untreated into the river. The State government did not initiate 
any action to address the problem of underutilization. Resource 
recovery from the STP was also not taking place.  
x BOD was above prescribed limit in the months of April, June, 
July and October 2010. TSS was above prescribed limit in the 
month of June 2010 and pH and COD were within the 
prescribed limit whereas Oil & Grease were not being tested. 
MPS at Garha: x The project was completed in August 2005 after a delay of two 
years 
x  The MPS received sewage of 125 mld (against designed 
capacity of 100 mld), however it pumped only 81.42 mld 
sewage to STP.
(b) Ludhiana 
The average sewage generated in Ludhiana is 496 mld, however, sewage treatment capacity 
is only 311 mld and only 203 mld gets treated. As a result, 293 mld of untreated sewage is 
discharged into the Sutlej. Details of projects test checked in Ludhiana town to control 
pollution of Sutlej river are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
STP at Bhattian x The project was completed in March 2008 after a delay of three 
years and three months. The Implementing Agency had not 
submitted the completion report and final utilisation certificate 
to NRCD.
x An expenditure of ` 37.59 crore was incurred on the project 
against the sanctioned cost of ` 34.85 crore, resulting in a cost 
escalation of ` 2.74 crore.
x The project was delayed due to late acquisition of land.
x Though the STP capacity was 111 mld, it was underutilized as it 
was treating only 81 mld of sewage. The treated sewage is 
meeting the prescribed standards in relation to pH, BOD, COD 
and TSS. However, oil and grease were not being tested. 
STP at Balloke x The project was completed in March 2008 after a delay of three 
years and two months. The Implementing Agency had not 
submitted the completion report and final utilisation certificate 
to NRCD.
x An expenditure of ` 42.67 crore was incurred on the project 
against the sanctioned cost of ` 34.79 crore, resulting in a cost 
escalation of ` 7.88 crore. 
x The project was delayed due to late acquisition of land and 
abandonment of work by contractual agency and re-tendering 
of work.
x Though the STP capacity was 152 mld, it was treating only 74 
mld of sewage. Further STP was receiving dairy waste i.e cow 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 199
dung, wheat husk and green fodder which was affecting the 
performance of the STP. The BOD was above prescribed limit in 
the month of August 2010. TSS, pH and COD were within 
prescribed limit whereas oil & grease were not being tested. 
STP at Jamalpur x The project was completed in March 2008 after a delay of two 
years and six months. The Implementing Agency had not 
submitted the completion report and final utilisation certificate 
to NRCD.
x An expenditure of ` 14.56 crore was incurred on the project 
against the sanctioned cost of ` 13.46 crore resulting in cost 
escalation of `1.10 crore. 
x The project was delayed due to non clearance of site by 
Municipal Corporation. 
x The STP’s capacity was 48 mld and it was treating 48 mld of 
waste water. The performance of the STP was being affected 
due to inflow of industrial waste, delay in chlorination work and 
non availability of uninterrupted power. BOD and TSS were 
above prescribed limit in the month of August 2010.  
MPS at Bhattian x The project scheduled for completion in August 2003 was 
completed on time. 
x The MPS has been receiving untreated industrial effluents due to 
which it was overloaded and its condition had deteriorated its 
performance. The MPS had to be shut down frequently due to 
power cuts and the case for hot line connection for electricity 
was pending due to want of fund from Municipal Corporation, 
Ludhiana.
MPS at Balloke x The project scheduled for completion in August 2003 was 
completed on time. 
x An expenditure incurred on the project was ` 15.27 crore 
against a sanctioned cost of ` 14.92 crore resulting in cost 
escalation of ` 35 lakh. 
x The MPS was receiving dairy waste that is cow dung, wheat 
husk and green fodder from the nearby dairy complex which 
was affecting its performance. 
MPS at Jamalpur x The project was scheduled for completion in August 2003 was 
completed on time. 
x The MPS was receiving untreated industrial effluents affecting 
its performance and deteriorating its performance. The MPS 
had to be shut down frequently due to power cuts and the case 
for hot line connection for electricity was pending due to want 
of fund from MC Ludhiana.
 Thus, the sewerage treatment facilities installed projects for prevention of pollution of 
Sutlej in the towns of Jalandhar and Ludhiana were not working to full potential as 
envisaged. 
4.2 NLCP 
No lake in Punjab was included for conservation and renovation under NLCP. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 200
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project
monitoring Cell 
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief 
Secretary of State 
High powered 
Committee under 
CM
0 out of 8 projects  0 out of 8 projects 8 out of 8 projects  8 out of 8 projects
5.2 Ground water (in six blocks test checked)  
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes 1 out of 6 Yes Yes 
6.  Outcomes 
6.1    NRCP 
(a)  Water quality of Sutlej after Jalandhar 
Status of water quality of river in terms of BOD and 
DO before entering Jalandhar and after leaving 
Jalandhar town is shown in the figure alongside. 
Apart from BOD and DO, the TC count of Sutlej falls 
from 1500000 to 50000 after it leaves Jalandhar. 
While there was improvement in water quality, 
BOD was still 2.3 times the criteria, TC was 100 
times the criteria in Sutlej as it left Jalandhar. This 
indicated organic pollution as well as presence of disease causing, fecal-related bacteria, 
viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
(b) Water quality of Sutlej after Ludhiana 
Status of water quality of Sutlej in terms of BOD 
and DO before entering Ludhiana and after leaving 
Ludhiana town is shown in the figure alongside. 
Apart from BOD and DO, the TC count of Sutlej 
increases from 500 at the time of entering 
Ludhiana to 22,000 after it leaves Ludhiana which 
shows decline in water quality. While DO did not 
exceed the criteria, TC was 44 times the criteria in 
Sutlej river as it left Ludhiana city, indicating the 
presence of a large number disease causing, fecal-
related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause 
illness.
5.2
4
5.9
6.4
DO
BOD
Status of Sutlej when it enters Ludhiana
Status of Sutlej when it leaves Ludhiana
5.4
7
4.2
58
DO
BOD
Status when Sutlej enters Jallandhar
Status when Sutlej leaves Jallandhar

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 201
State: Rajasthan 
1.  Background 
Some of the rivers in Rajasthan are Arvari River, Banas River, Berach River, Chambal River, 
Ghaggar-Hakra river, Gomati River, Kali Sindh River, Luni River, Mithari River, Sabarmati 
River, etc. Some of the lakes in Rajasthan are Ana Sagar lake, Balsamand lake, Man Sagar 
Lake, Nakki Lake, Lake Pichola, 
Pushkar Lake, Rajsamand Lake,  
Sambhar Salt Lake etc. 
According to Central Ground 
Water Board, the annual 
replenishable ground water 
resources in Rajasthan was 
11.56 Billion Cubic Meters 
(BCM) and the net annual 
ground water available was 
10.38 BCM. Out of 236 blocks, 
in 140 blocks in Rajasthan the 
ground water was over-
exploited, in 50 blocks it was 
critical and 14 blocks the 
ground water was semi-critical. 
Contaminants like salinity, 
fluoride, chloride, iron and 
nitrate affected ground water.
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, Local Self 
Government Department, Government of Rajasthan was the nodal department while 
implementing agencies are Public Health Engineering Department and Rajasthan Urban 
Infrastructure Development Project for NRCP. Jaipur Development Authority and Rajasthan 
Urban Infrastructure Development Project (RUIDP), Government of Rajasthan is the 
implementing agency for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Rajasthan is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water resources Could not be 
verified
Could not be 
verified
Done 
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to chemical 
Indicators 
Not Done Not Done Done 
b) According to 
Biodiversity indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of impact 
of human activities 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
Test checked rivers and lakes in Rajasthan

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 202
3. Identification of 
risks to 
environment and 
health 
a) Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic species Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to human health Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Partially
(Source water  
protection: Not 
Done, Industry: 
Not Done, 
Agriculture non 
point sources: 
Not Done) 
Not Done Not Done6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Could not be verified
[Note: Not applicable : Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Rajasthan 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Rajasthan is 1530.16 mld, of which 
treatment capacity is available for only 54 mld.  
4.  Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1  NRCP 
River Chambal Kota had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the National 
River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects are being implemented in two cities viz. 
Kota and Keshoraipattan.Eight projects in these two towns were sanctioned under NRCP out 
of which five were completed as of March 2010. The total sanctioned cost of all the projects 
was ` 150.95 crore. Four projects being implemented under NRCP at a cost of ` 150.23
crore were test checked for detailed examination. 
4%( 54 mld)
96% (1476.16 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of 
Rajasthan (%)
% of sewage for which treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 203
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/
location
Name of 
project  
Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure 
 (` in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Chambal/
Kota
STP 30 & 6 
mld and I&D  
149.59 25.33 March 2015 On going 
LCS 0.55 0.46 March 2001 Completed but
date of completion 
not available 
 RFD  0.07 0.13 December 2000 December 2000
Improved
Wood
crematoria 
0.02 0.02 April 2000 April 2000 
(ii) Performance of the projects 
(a) Kota 
The average sewage generated in the city of Kota is 97.29 mld. The STP capacity available 
was only 20 mld. However, the entire 97.29 mld untreated sewage is discharged into the 
Chambal.  22 drains are falling into the river. However, all drains were yet to be intercepted. 
Details of four projects test checked in Kota which aim to improve the quality of water in 
Chambal are discussed below:
Project Findings 
STP 30 & 6 mld 
and I & D
x The project was sanctioned in October 2009 with scheduled date 
of completion by March 2015.
x An expenditure of ` 25.33 crore was incurred on the project upto 
June 2011 and the project was still ongoing.
LCS x The project was completed after incurring an expenditure of 
`46.44 lakh. 
RFD x The project was completed on time in December 2000. 
x An expenditure of ` 12.54 lakh on the project against the 
sanctioned cost of ` 6.80 lakh, resulting in cost escalation of ` 5.74
lakh. The excess expenditure had been incurred in larger public 
interest by Nagar Nigam Kota from its own resources.
Improved
Wood
Crematoria
The project was completed on time in April 2000. 
4.2 NLCP 
Five lakes namely Mansagar lake, Annasagar lake, Pushkar lake, Fatehsagar lake and Pichola 
lake had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the National Lake 
Conservation Programme (NLCP). Out of these, three lakes having sanctioned cost of `
157.83 crore were test checked for detailed
 examination. 
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of 
lake
Sanctioned cost 
 (` in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion  
Actual date of 
completion

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 204
Mansagar 22.39 revised to 
24.72
24.72 March 2004 revised to 
March 2007 
Ongoing 
Pushkar 48.36 27.14 August 2010 Ongoing 
Pichola 84.75 3.84 February 2012 Ongoing 
These projects are discussed below: 
Project
name
Findings 
Mansagar
Lake
x The activities for restoration and conservation of Mansagar lake 
included construction of lake front promenade, construction of check 
dam in forest valley, construction of three nesting islands, installation 
of physico-chemical treatment plant, construction of artificial wetland 
and in-situ bio-remediation system.
x The scheduled date of completion was March 2004 which was revised 
to March 2007 but the project is still not declared commissioned/ 
completed. The commissioning of in-situ Bioremediation and Wetlands 
was still pending for want of achieving desired quality parameters. 
x The project was delayed due to land acquisition for setting up 
constructed wetlands approved as an integral component under the 
project. However, scrutiny revealed that there was delay in availability 
of land for construction of physico chemical treatment plant.  
x An expenditure of ` 24.72 crore was incurred upto May 2011.
x The levels of Biochemical Oxygen Demand had come down after 
implementation of the project for conservation and restoration of 
Mansagar lake, however, they were still above the criteria, signifying 
high levels of organic pollution in the lake. 
Pushkar
Lake
x The restoration and conservation of Pushkar Lake involved activities 
like de-silting, lake front development, aeration with ozoniser, 
afforestation, inlet-outlet arrangement etc.  
x The project was scheduled to be completed by August 2010 but it was 
not yet complete. Till November 2010, the de-silting work and building 
of toilets, aeration, construction of inlet-outlet and settling tank were 
completed. The lake front development works, works relating to 
afforestation were still ongoing. 
x The works for conservation of Pushkar lake included hydraulic 
improvement of feeders including Pushkar Feeder with most of its 
stretch in Forest area. The required clearance from the Forest 
Department was delayed and could be obtained only in December 
2010. The work order for that component was issued in December 
2010. As informed by the State Government, the project was now 
scheduled for completion in December 2011. 
Pichola
lake
x The restoration and conservation of Pichola Lake involved activities like 
de-silting, storm water management and development of artificial 
wetland, hydraulic improvement of feeder and other channels, shore 
line demarcation and protection etc.
x The scheduled date of completion of the project is February 2012. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 205
x An expenditure of ` 3.84 crore was incurred on the project up to May 
2011.
x The I&D works could not be taken up due to stay granted by Hon’ble 
High Court on the STP land. Further, the proposal of M/s Hindustan 
Zinc Ltd. to establish 20 mld STP at the available site was presently 
under consideration by the project proponents. For other works like 
de-weeding, water quality monitoring, aeration etc, tenders were 
invited 2-3 times to select technically responsible bidders. Delay in 
project implementation was also due to demarcation of Lake Boundary 
not completed by Water Resources Department. 
5.  M onitoring of programmes fo r control of water pollution
 5.1 NRCP
By Chief E xecutive of 
Implementing Agency 
By Divisional Project 
Monitoring Cell 
Steering Committee chaired 
by Chief Secretary of State 
High powered 
Committee under CM 
1 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects In 1 out of 4 projects 0 out of 4 projects
5.2 NLCP 
By Inter-D epartmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee at 
the district level 
By L ake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
3 out of 3 projects 3 out of 3 projects 3 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects
5.3 Ground water (in five blocks test checked)
5 blocks were chosen for assessment of monitoring network with respect to ground water. 
These were Udaipur, Jalore, Jaipur, Pali and Tonk.
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Partially (Yes for two blocks, no 
information for two blocks and 
absent in remaining 2) 
Partially (Yes in 4 
blocks, Not Done in 
two blocks) 
Yes Could not be verified 
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
Quality of water in Chambal after Kota 
Status of Chambal on entering Kota in 
terms of DO and BOD is shown in the chart 
alongside. It can be seen that BOD actually 
rises after Chambal leaves Kota, 
highlighting the inadequate sewage 
treatment facilities. TC was also almost 
five times the criteria in Chambal river as it 
left Kota city indicating the presence of a 
large number disease causing, fecal-
related bacteria, viruses and protozoa. 
6.5
5.4
6.2
0
DO
BOD
Status of Chambal entering Kota
Status of Chambal leaving Kota

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 206
6.2  NLCP 
As the projects on improving water quality of Pichola and Pushkar lake are still in progress, 
no conclusions could be drawn about impact of NLCP in restoring these lakes. It was 
observed that the levels of Biochemical oxygen Demand had come down after 
implementation of the project for conservation and restoration of Mansagar lake.
7.  M onitoring network for tracking pollution of ground water 
(i) Implementation of Rajasthan Integrated Fluorosis Mitigation Programme (RIFMP). 
To achieve the prevention and control measures for mitigation of fluorosis, the Rajasthan 
Integrated Fluorosis Mitigation Programme was conceived in which the fluoride affected 
villages were planned to be covered in three phases 
x I Phase started in March 2005 and completed in February 2008 
x II phase started in 17 August 2006 and still in progress 
x III phase has not yet been started 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
x There was tardy progress in execution of the scheme as the phase I of the project 
envisaged to provide fluoride free drinking water to 2643 villages and dhanis through 
OHSR, HP attached defluoriedunits and DDFUs upto March 2005. But only 1681 
villages/habitations (64%) were benefited upto February 2008.
x There was wasteful expenditure of ` 79.25 lakh on installation of handpump 
attached defluoridation units (HPADFUs) 
x Funds amounting to ` 51.87 lakh were blocked due to non-distribution of domestic 
defluoridation units. 
x Domestic defluoridation units were not maintained properly as the chemical 
(activated alumina) were not provided to the users. 
x 100 roof top rainwater harvesting structures were proposed to be constructed in 
village/habitation having population less than 100 souls. However, these were not 
constructed in any of the village/habitation. 
x Guidelines of National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) envisaged that 
Field Testing Kits (FTKs) will be provided to each Gram Panchayat for testing the 
quality of water being made available to villagers to know about the existence of 
various chemicals including fluoride
. It was observed that against the total 
requirement of 318316 FTKs (Chemical and Bacteriological), 100665 FTKs were short 
purchased.  Further, out of 217651 FTKs purchased, 27152 FTKs were short 
distributed, due to which the purpose of the scheme to provide safe and fluoride 
free water to about 40 per cent population could not be achieved. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 207
State: Sikkim 
1.  Background 
Teesta & Rangit are the 
major rivers of the State. 
Some of the major lakes in 
Sikkim are Khecheoperi, 
Gurudungmar, Lam 
Pokhari, Changu, Laxmi 
Pokhari etc. According to 
Central Ground Water 
Board, annual 
replenishable ground water 
resource in Sikkim is 0.08 
Billion Cubic Meters (BCM) 
while the net annual 
ground water availability is 
0.08 BCM. In none of the 
blocks is the ground water 
over-exploited, critical 
or semi-critical.
Insitutional arrangement in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, the nodal 
agency for implementation of NRCP was Water Security & Public Health Engineering 
Department, Government of Sikkim. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in Sikkim is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes  Ground water  
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
2. Assessment 
of water quality 
a) According to 
chemical 
Indicators 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification 
of contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment 
of impact of 
human activities 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health
a) Risks to 
wetlands
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to 
aquatic species 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to Not Done Not Done Not Done
Rivers test checked in Sikkim

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 208
human health  
4. Policy for water pollution Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution
Partially
(Source water 
protection: Could not be 
verified, Industry: Could 
not be verified, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Done) 
Partially
(Source water 
protection: Could not 
be verified, Industry: 
Could not be verified, 
Agriculture non point 
sources: Done) 
Could not be 
verified
6. Constitution of Water Quality 
Review Committee
Done
[Note: Not applicable : Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
3.1 NRCP 
In Sikkim, Rani Chu river had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the 
National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects were being implemented in three 
cities viz., Gangtok, Singtom and Raniphool. Six projects in these three towns were 
sanctioned under NRCP out of which one was completed as of March 2010. The total 
sanctioned cost of all the projects was `114.31 crore. Two projects being implemented 
under NRCP in Gangtok at a cost of ` 25.16 crore were test checked for detailed 
examination.
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of project  Sanctioned 
cost
(` in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion
Actual date 
of
completion
Rani-Chu/ 
Gangtok
Sewerage and STP 15.81
revised to 
17.17
17.12 March 2008 January 2011 
Rehabilitation of 
Main Sewer Line 
including
construction of STP 
7.99 5.93 July 2010 Not 
completed 
(ii) Performance of the projects 
(a) Gangtok:   
The average sewage generated in the city of Gangtok is 11 mld. However, only eight mld is 
treated and the rest three mld is discharged into the Rani Chu.
Details of two projects test checked in Gangtok which aim to improve the quality of Rani 
Chu’s water quality are discussed below
:
Project  Findings 
Sewerage and STP x The project was completed in January 2011 after a delay of 
two years and ten months.
x The project was delayed due to reasons like frequent 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 209
blockage of roads, budgetary constraints due to delay in 
release of State share, unexpected hard rock during 
excavation of foundation etc.  
x The completion of the project had not yet been assessed by 
the State on basis of set targets/ performance milestones.
Rehabilitation of 
Main Sewer Line and 
construction of STP 
x The project scheduled for completion in July 2010 was not yet 
complete.
x The project was delayed due to reasons like unforeseen 
blockage of roads and time taken for finalization of 
appropriate technology for STP.
Thus both the test checked projects had failed to meet the objectives of controlling 
pollution of Rani Chu river. 
Direct dumping of household waste into Rani Chu
Direct dumping of waste into Rani chu


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 210
6
5
6.1
3
DO
BOD
Status of Rani Chu entering Gangtok
Status of Rani Chu leaving Gangtok
3.2 NLCP 
Despite presence of many lakes in Sikkim, none of them were taken up for restoration under 
NLCP.  None of the lakes in Sikkim however figured in the list of polluted lakes identified by 
CPCB.
4. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
 4.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project 
monitoring Cell 
Steering Committee chaired by 
Chief Secretary of State 
High Powered 
Committee under 
CM
2 out of 2 projects 0 out of 2 
projects 
2 out of 2 projects 0 out of 2 projects 
 4.2 Ground water 
No programmes or monitoring network by the State government exists due to absence of 
ground water pollution in the State. 
5. Outcomes 
5.1 NRCP 
a) Water quality of Rani Chu after 
Gangtok
Status of Rani Chu on entering Gangtok 
and after leaving Gangtok in terms of DO, 
and BOD is shown in the chart alongside. 
The DO met the required criteria. 
However, the value of BOD actually rises 
after Rani Chu leaves Gangtok signifying 
inadequate sewage treatment facility.   

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 211
State: Tamil Nadu
1.  Background 
The major rivers in Tamil Nadu are Cauveri, Palar, Pennar, Vaigai, Cooum, Vennar and 
Tamiraparani. Some of 
the important lakes in 
Tamil Nadu are Berijam 
Lake,
Chembarambakkam
Lake,  Kodaikanal Lake, 
Ooty Lake, Pulicat Lake, 
Veeranam Lake etc.  
According to Central 
Ground Water Board, 
the annual 
replenishable ground 
water resources in the 
State are 23.07 Billion 
Cubic Meters (BCM) 
out of which the net 
annual ground water 
availability is 20.76 
BCM.  Out of 384 blocks 
in the State, in 142 
blocks the ground water is over-exploited, in 33 blocks it is critical and in 57 blocks it is semi-
critical.
Insitutional arrangement in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF,  Department 
of Environment & Forests, Government of Tamil Nadu and, Municipal Administration & 
Water Supply Department (MAWSD) Department Government of Tamil Nadu were the 
nodal departments and Environmental Management Agency of Tamil Nadu, Chennai 
Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (CMWSSB), Tamil Nadu Water Supply and 
Drainage Board and Commissioner of Municipal Administration were the implementing 
agencies for NRCP. Environment Management Agency is the implementing agency for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Tamil Nadu discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Could not be verified Done Done 
2. Assessment 
of water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Done Done   
b) According to 
Biodiversity 
indicators 
Done Done Not applicable
Test checked rivers and lakes in Maharashtra

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 212
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially  (Nutrients: 
Done, Pathogenic 
organism: Not Done,  
Human produced 
chemicals: Done) 
Partially (Nutrients: 
Done, Pathogenic 
organism: Not Done,  
Human produced 
chemicals: Done) 
Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Agriculture: 
Done, Industry: Done, 
Mining: Could not be 
verified, Dam: Done, 
Uncontrolled disposal 
of human waste: Not 
Done) 
Partially (Agriculture: 
Done,  Industry: 
Done, Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste: Not Done ) 
Partially
(Agriculture: 
Done,  
Industry: 
Done) 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Done Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Could not be verified Could not be verified Not applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
4. Policy for water pollution  Could not be verified Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
5. Programmes for prevention and 
control of water pollution 
Partially (Source water  
protection: Done, 
Industry: Not Done, 
Agriculture non point 
sources Could not be 
verified)   
Partially (Source 
water  protection: 
Done, Industry: Done  
Agriculture non point 
sources Could not be 
verified)   
Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Not Done
[Note: Not applicable : Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Tamilnadu
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Tamilnadu is 1261.88 mld, of 
which treatment capacity is available for only 362.72 mld. 
29% (362.72 mld)
71% (899.16 mld) 
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of
TamilNadu (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 213
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Cauvery, Adyar, Cooum, Vennar, Vaigai and Tambrabarani rivers had been included under 
the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP) for pollution abatement projects. 
Projects were being implemented in 13 cities
31. 83 projects in these 13 cities were 
sanctioned under NRCP out of which 52 were completed as of March 2010. The total 
sanctioned cost of all the projects was ` 915.93 crore. 11 projects 32 being implemented 
under NRCP at a cost of ` 408.01 crore were test checked for detailed examination.
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/location
Name of the 
project 
Sanctioned 
Cost
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Adyar & 
Cooum/
Chennai
STP at 
Koymbedu  (60 
mld)
27.21 25.02 March 2005 April 2005
STP at 
Kodungaiyur 
(110 mld) 
41.56 45.96 March 2005 July 2006
STP at 
Perungundi 
36.88 31.04 March 2005 July 2006
STP at 
Nesapakkam 
21.21 19.16 March 2005 May 2006
I& D package  
VII
14.74 12.44 September 2003 September 
2004 
I&D Package VIII 19.49 14.49 September 2003 August 2004
Cauvery/
Tiruchirappalli 
I&D and STP 116.67 114.85 September 2006 May 2008
Vaigai/
Madurai 
I&D Part I 42.53 46.65 March 2003 July 2005
I&D Part II 70.25 70.24 October 2005  Februry2010
I&D Phase IV 7.32 9.66 July 2008 Ongoing
STP Phase II 10.15 Work dropped 
from NRCD and 
taken up under 
JNNURM 
Not applicable Not applicable
(ii) Performance of the Projects 
(a) Chennai 
The average estimated sewage generated in the city of Chennai is 731 mld. However, only 
481 mld is treated and the rest 250 mld is discharged into the Adyar/Cooum. Out of 638 
                                                           
31 Bhawani, Chennai, Erode, Kumarapalayam, Pallipalayam, Trichy, Karur, Kumakonam, Mayiladuthurai, 
Tirichirapalli, Thanjavur, Madurai and Tirunelveli 
32 Six projects pertaining to Adyar & Cooum in Chennai, one proj ect in Tiruchirappalli for river Cauvery and four projects at 
Madurai pertaining to river Vaigai.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 214
drains opening into the Adyar/Cooum, only 307 have been intercepted and 331 remain to 
be intercepted. Details of projects test checked in Chennai which aim to improve the 
quality of water in Adyar/Cooum are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
STPs at 
Koymbedu,
Kodungaiyur,
Perungundi and 
Nesapakkam
x One STP at Koymbedu was constructed after a delay of one 
month; another at Kodungaiyur got delayed for one year and four 
months due to unprecedented rains, tsunami and problems due to 
inaccessibility of the site.
x The STP at Perungundi also got delayed for one year and four 
months due to delay in getting permission for laying gravity main 
in the absence of an alternate route. 
x The construction of the STP at Nesapakkam got delayed by one 
year and two months due to additional soil strengthening 
measures suggested by Anna University.
x All the STPs were working at their envisaged capacity and no 
problems were reported in their functioning.
x Completion reports and final utilisation certificates of all the four 
STPs had not yet been submitted to MoEF despite their 
completion during 2005-07.
x The combined sewage treatment capacity of all the four STPs was 
481 mld which was inadequate as the estimated sewage flow from 
Chennai was 731 mld and hence 250 mld of sewage was left 
untreated and which flowed into the Adyar/Cooum.  
I&D package VII 
and VIII
x The projects were completed in September 2004 and August 2004 
respectively after a delay of almost one year.  
x Funds received from MoEF for both the projects were not kept in 
saving bank Account and the interest of `3.34 crore earned on 
mobilization advance was credited to Board’s account instead of 
the Project Account. 
x Rehabilitation of slum families was envisaged which was not done. 
Also, sewage outfall outside Chennai area was not assessed as 
envisaged. On completion, performance of the projects had not 
been assessed by the State on basis of set targets/ performance 
milestones.
(b) Tiruchirappalli- Srirangam 
The average estimated sewage generated in the city of Tiruchirappalli- Srirangam is 40.50 
mld and the same is totally treated.
Details of one projects test checked in Tiruchirappalli- Srirangam which aim to improve the 
quality of water in Cauvery is discussed below: 
Project  Findings 
I&D and STP  x The projects were completed in May 2008 after a delay of one 
year and eight months.  
x The project was delayed due to high water table in Srirangam area 
and delay in laying deeper sewer.  

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 215
x The land cost of ` 71.44 lakh for the pumping stations for Trichy-
Srirangam UGSS was charged to the works expenditure reported 
to NRCD and of which ` 47.41 lakh was met from the funds of GOI 
which was unauthorized. In May 2011, Government of Tamil Nadu 
replied that out of `  71.44 lakh towards land cost a sum of ` 58.68 
lakh had already been withdrawn and added to Government of 
Tamil Nadu/Local Body share. For the balance amount of `  12.76 
lakh, necessary instructions had been issued to the concerned 
authorities to withdraw the amount from GOI share. 
x Certain areas were not covered by providing House Service 
Connections (HSCs). 
(c) Madurai 
The average estimated sewage generated in the city of Madurai is 170 mld. However, only 
45 mld is treated and the rest 125 mld is discharged into the Vaigai river. Out of 20 drains 
opening into the Vaigai river, only six have been intercepted and 14 remaining to be 
intercepted.  
Details of four projects test checked in Madurai which aim to improve the quality of water 
in Vaigai are discussed below:
Project  Findings 
I&D Part I and 
I&D Part II 
x The project I&D Part I was completed in July 2005 after a delay 
of two years and four months. 
x An expenditure of ` 46.65 crore was incurred on the project 
against the sanctioned cost of ` 42.53 crore resulting in cost 
overrun of ` 4.12 crore which was due to price escalation and 
railway crossing work.  
x The project was delayed due to delay in carrying out the 
railways crossing work.
x Under of the project, 122.44 kms of pipes were to be laid but 
only 107.03 kms were actually laid. The created capacity of the 
pumping station was 16 mld but only eight mld capacity was 
being utilised till date. 
x The project I&D Part II was completed in February 2010 after a 
delay of four years and four months.
x The project was delayed due to delay in handing over of the site 
(National Highway/ State Highway) for construction of pumping 
station and execution of additional length of collection system.  
x The pumping station of 36 mld was built under the project but 
only 26 mld was being utilised. The infrastructure created has 
been handed over to the Madurai Corporation. 
x The State Government did not assess the performance of both 
the projects on the basis of set targets due to non -completion 
of Phase III. 
I&D Phase IV x The project scheduled to be completed by July 2008, was yet to 
commence.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 216
x The project was delayed due to lack of response by contractors 
to successive tenders. 
STP-Phase II x The work was dropped under NRCD due to non-identification of 
huge land for STP and was taken up by the Corporation under 
JNNURM.
x The infrastructure created for I&D projects (I&D Phase Part I, 
Part II and Part IV) under NRCD at a cost of ` 116.89 crore were 
being kept idle for want of completion and commissioning of 
STP.
Thus projects in Tiruchirappalli- Srirangam, Chennai and Madurai to control pollution of 
Cauvery, Adyar/Cooum and Vaigai rivers respectively had not completely achieved their 
objectives.
4.2 NLCP 
Out of the two lakes of Tamil Nadu in the polluted list, one of them, Kodaikanal lake was 
selected for detailed audit scrutiny.  
(i) Physical and financial performance 
Name of the lake Sanctioned 
cost
(` in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date of 
completion
Actual date of 
completion  
Kodaikanal 5.13
revised to 
10.42
2.22 December 2002 revised 
to January 2009 
On going 
(ii) The project is discussed below: 
The activities sanctioned for restoration and conservation of Kodaikanal Lake and its 
progress was as follows:   
Project name Findings 
Kodaikanal
Lake
x The project was originally scheduled to be completed by 
December 2002. In January 2007 the project duration was 
extended upto January 2009. The start of the project was delayed 
due to litigation and court stay order. The expenditure on the 
project till October 2010 was ` 2.22 crore.
Details of implementation of activities under the project are discussed 
below:
(i) Interception and diversion of sewage from 19 outfalls and carry the 
same to STP to be built with FAB reactor:
This was to be implemented by Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board.  The original site for location of STP was at KKR Kalai Arangam, 
near the lake. Therefore, the United Citizen Council of Kodaikanal filed a 
writ petition on the plea that the location of STP would pollute the lake. 
Similar objections were raised on two more locations. This was due to 
non-consultation with local public regarding location of STP. Further, 
there was no coordination between the different implementing agencies 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 217
which led to non- completion of the project. Land for the STP had not 
been acquired as yet. 
(ii) In-situ cleaning of the lake using bio-remediation technology: 
This was to be implemented by Public Works Department. The court had 
stopped construction of the STP and as the in-situ cleaning of the lake 
was independent of construction of the STP and the implementing agency 
could have sought permission from the courts to proceed with the in-situ 
works. However, this was not done and the work of de-weeding and bio-
remediation remained incomplete, causing an increase in fecal coliform 
levels as reported by MINARS.  
(iii) Low cost sanitation, de-silting and removal of weeding: 
This was to be implemented by the local body but work had not been 
taken up as yet.
Thus, the project taken up for restoration and conservation of Kodaikanal lake had failed to 
meet its objectives and the water in the lake remained polluted and no measures were in 
place to prevent any more pollution of the lake.
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
Implementing agency 
By Divisional Project 
Monitoring Cell 
Steering Committee chaired 
by Chief Secretary of State 
High Powered 
committee under CM 
11 out of 11 projects 1 out of 11 projects 0 out of 11 projects 0 out of 11 projects
5.2   NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 1 projects 0 out of 1 projects 0 out of 1 projects 1 out of 1 projects
5.3 Ground water (in six blocks test checked)  
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water quality 
laboratories established 
Whether Field Testing Kits 
issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Yes Yes in 3 out of 6 
It was also observed that the CPCB conducted the survey to identify the critically polluted 
industrial clusters as early in December 2009 and Cuddalore industrial cluster was identified 
as one among them with 77.45 Score. We noticed that a draft action plan was prepared by 
TNPCB and submitted to its Board during August 2010 for approval. However, approval was 
still pending. Trade effluents discharged by M/s CUSECS had exceeded the quality pollution 
parameters prescribed most of the times endangering the health of the people in the 
impact zone of habitations and finally due to the intervention of the Hon’ble Madras High 
Court, the operation of M/s CUSECS was stopped vide order dated 21/3/2010. On perusal of 
renewal of Consent mechanisms of the industries, it was observed in audit that the renewal 
of consents were given to the industries most of the time even though they did not satisfy 
completely all the pollution parameters prescribed by the Board. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 218
6.  Outcomes 
6.1   NRCP 
 (a) Water quality of Adyar/Cooum after 
Chennai
Status of Adyar/Cooum on entering Chennai 
and after leaving Chennai in terms of DO and 
BOD is shown in the chart alongside. BOD was 
more than 18 times and seven times the 
criteria in Adyar & Cooum river respectively, 
indicating high levels of organic pollution. 
Further, the DO was less than the criteria 
indicating insufficient oxygen being available 
for survival of aquatic life. Further, the TC was 
higher than the criteria, indicating that Adyar 
& Cooum, were full of disease causing, fecal-
related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which 
cause illness. 
(b) Water quality of Cauvery river after 
Tiruchirappalli- Srirangam
 Status of Cauvery river on entering 
Tiruchirappalli and after leaving 
Tiruchirappalli in terms of DO and BOD is 
shown in the chart alongside. The value of 
BOD actually rises after Cauvery leaves 
Tiruchirappalli signifying inadequate sewage 
treatment facility. While DO met the criteria 
TC was much higher than the 
criteria,indicating that Cauvery was full of 
disease causing, faecal-related bacteria, 
viruses and protozoa which causes illness. 
6.2  NLCP
Since work was not yet complete, no impact 
of NLCP was felt on the quality of water in 
Kodaikanal lake, which remained poor.  
1.5
21
1.2
55
DO
BOD
Status of Cooum entering Chennai
Status of  Cooum leaving Chennai 
7.8
1.37
7.7
1.15
DO
BOD
Status of Cauvery entering Tiruchirapalli
Status of  Cauvery leaving Tiruchirapalli
1.2
55
9.1
13
DO
BOD
Status of Adyar entering Chennai
Status of  Adyar leaving Chennai 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 219
7.  Monitoring network for tracking pollution of ground water 
 (i) Implementation of Fluoride Mitigation Programme 
The ground water in Tamil Nadu contained contaminants like fluoride, salinity, chloride, 
iron, nitrate 33 etc. it was observed that the State government had initiated Fluorisis 
Mitigation Project in June 2010 in districts like Dharmapuri and Krishnagiri which were 
endemic with respect to excess fluoride content in the ground water because of which there 
was high prevalence of fluorisis in these districts. The scheduled date of completion was 
May 2013.The programme is now being implemented with assistance from Japan 
International Cooperation Agency and was being executed by TWAD Board. The sanctioned 
cost of the project was ` 28.44 crore. The technology for fluoride mitigation was adopted by 
the implementing agency after appropriate study which proved its efficacy. Regular 
inspection of the facilities set up was taking place by the implementing agency and follow-
up was taking place as and when required.
                                                           
33 According to CGWB

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 220
State: Tripura 
1.  Background 
Some of the rivers flowing 
in Tripura are Longai, Juri, 
Dhalai, Gomati, Manu, 
Khowai, Haora etc. Tripura 
is blessed with a large 
number of natural and 
artificial lakes like Dumboor 
lake, Durgabari lake, 
Dimsagar Lake, 
Laxminarayanbari lake, 
Rudrasagar Lake, Kamala 
Sagar etc. According to 
Central Ground Water 
Board, the annual 
replenishable ground water 
resource in Tripura is 2.19 
Billion Cubic Meters (BCM) 
and net annual ground 
water availability is 1.97 BCM. Some of the districts in Tripura are affected by iron.
Institutional arrangements in the state : As per information provided by MoEF, the nodal 
agency for implementation of NLCP was Urban Develpment Department and Agartala 
Municipal Council (AMC) is the implementing agency. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Tripura is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water resources Not Done Not Done Not Done
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a)  According  to Chemical 
indicators
Not Done Not Done Not Done 
b)  According to 
Biodiversity indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c)  Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of impact 
of human activities 
Not Done Could not be 
verified
Not Done 
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic species Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Risks to human health Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
Lakes test checked in Tripura

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 221
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water. Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Tripura
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Tripura is 24 mld, of which no 
treatment capacity is available.
4.   Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution
4.1  NRCP 
Though Tripura State Pollution Control Board (TSPCB) had identified polluted stretch in 
downstream of river Haora in Agartala as polluted, no rivers in Tripura had been included 
under NRCP. 
4.2  NLCP 
3 lakes in Tripura, Dimsagar, Laxminarayanbari and Durgabari were selected under NLCP for 
restoration and conservation. However, selection of the three lakes under NLCP did not 
meet the selection criteria set out by MoEF with respect to physical parameters and were 
also not identified by TSPCB as polluted. According to MoEF, only those lakes were to be 
selected which were more than 10 hectares (25 acres) and which were at least three meters 
deep. It was observed that Dimsagar was 3.3 acres, Laxminarayanbari was 7.2 acres and 
Durgabari was 7.3 acres. Further, the lake depths of Dimsagar and Durgabari were only 1.70 
meters and 2.50 meters respectively whereas Laxminarayanbari met the depth criteria as it 
was three meters deep. As such, two of the lakes did not qualify for selection under NLCP.  
100% (24 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of  Tripura 
(%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 222
Before initiation of NLCP, Tripura government conducted a study of 20 lakes of Tripura 
through a consultant and collected data with regard to their characteristics. After discussion 
with Urban Development Department, Tripura Government, a list of seven lakes was 
finalised for investigation, project preparation and submission for inclusion under NLCP. The 
survey concluded that all the seven lakes in the list were polluted while the level of pollution 
in Durgabari Lake and Laxminarayanbari lake was lower. The main sources of pollution 
identified were waste water influx, bathing, washing with use of detergents, ceremonial 
dumping of idols and use of lakes for dumping solid waste. All the lakes were also found to 
be weed-infested.
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the lake Sanctioned 
cost
(` in crore) 
Actual Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion  
Dimsagar 0.69 0.43 March  2006 In progress 
Laxminarayanbari 0.70 N.A. March  2006 Yet to commence 
Durgabari 0.63 N.A. March  2006 Yet to commence 
(ii) Performance of projects: 
Project name Findings 
Dimsagar lake x The project envisaged activities like building of a pathway, 
retaining wall, drain, weeding, desilting, sitting arrangement, 
fencing, landscaping etc.  
x The project was scheduled to be completed by March 2006 but it 
was still in progress.
x The project was delayed due to encroachment of the east, west 
and north banks of the lake by unauthorized occupants but no 
records showing steps taken to evict the unauthorized occupants 
and the extent of encroached land was made available to Audit.
x 85 per cent of the total expenditure till date had been incurred on 
beautification and landscaping works and rest 15 per cent was 
incurred on measures to control pollution. 
x Further instead of awarding the contract for the project to a 
single contractor, the Executive Engineer of Agartala Municipal 
Corporation split the work of Dimsagar Lake into small groups, 
each costing less than ` 30,000 each and awarded the contracts 
without inviting tenders. This was also contrary of Monitoring 
Committee’s recommendation to award the tender to technical 
firms by inviting tenders. As such, the decision to award contracts 
without bidding was against provisions of GFR. 
Laxminarayanbari
and Durgabari lake 
x Comparison with other lakes showed that Laxminarayanbari was 
not as polluted as other lakes in Tripura.
x Activities for restoration of Laxminarayanbari and Durgabari lake 
envisaged construction of pathway, weeding, desilting, seating 
arrangement, fencing, landscaping, building of toilets etc.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 223
x The activities envisaged in the DPR could not commence due to 
the fact that a heritage building (royal palace of erstwhile kings’ 
of Tripura) was in close proximity of the lakes and experts had 
suggested that re-excavation and dredging of these water bodies 
might cause severe damage to the heritage building. This also 
points to the fact that the State government did not carry out a 
comprehensive survey before initiating the programme which 
would have indicated the feasibility of taking up projects relating 
to these two lakes.
As such, despite the scheduled completion date of March 2006, the 
project for restoration and conservation of Laxminarayanbari and 
Durgabari lakes had still not commenced. 
Thus, restoration and conservation of Dimsagar, Laxminarayanbari and Durgabari lakes had 
not taken place as envisaged as these projects were still incomplete.
Untreated sewage flowing into Dimsagar lake


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 224
Durgabari Lake 
Laxminarayanbari Lake
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1   NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
coordination 
committee
By Steering 
Committee at the 
district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring 
Committee
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
1 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 0 out of 3 projects 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 225
5.2 Ground water 
Whether system exists 
for monitoring of 
groundwater Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
No information  No information  No information  No information  
6.   Outcomes 
6.1 NLCP
Since the activities to restore and clean up Laxminarayanbari and Durgabari lake did not 
begin, no conclusions can be drawn about its impact on improving the quality of water in 
the lakes selected under NLCP. Further, despite spending ` 0.43 crore, the objective of 
restoration of Dimsagar lake could not be achieved. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 226
State: Uttar Pradesh 
1.  Background 
Uttar Pradesh has main rivers namely Ganga and Yamuna. Some of the other rivers that flow 
in Uttar Pradesh are Ramganga, Gomti and Ghaghara. Some of the lakes in Uttar Pradesh 
are Keetham Lake, Belasagar 
Lake, Barua Sagar Tal, Bhadi 
Tal, Nachan Tal, Mansiganga 
Lake, Sheikha Jheel etc. 
According to Central Ground 
Water Board, annual 
replenishable ground water 
resource in Uttar Pradesh is 
76.35 Billion Cubic Meters 
(BCM) while the net annual 
ground water availability is 
70.18 BCM. Ground water in 
37 blocks is over-exploited, in 
13 blocks it is critical and in 
88 blocks it is semi-critical. 
Ground water in Uttar 
Pradesh is contaminated by 
salinity, fluoride, chloride, 
iron, nitrate and arsenic.  
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, the Urban 
Development Department was a nodal Department and the UP Jal Nigam was the 
implementing agency in the State for NRCP. Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam is the implementing 
agency for NLCP.
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Uttar Pradesh is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes Ground water 
1. Preparation of inventory of water resources Could not be 
verified
Could not be verified Not Done
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to chemical 
Indicators 
Not Done Could not be verified Not Done
b) According to Biodiversity 
indicators 
Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of impact of 
human activities 
Not Done Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Could not be 
verified
Could not be verified Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic species Could not be 
verified
Could not be verified Not applicable
Test checked rivers and lakes in Uttar Pradesh

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 227
c) Risks to human health Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Could not be 
verified
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Could not be 
verified
Could not be verified Could not be 
verified
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable : Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Uttar Pradesh
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Uttar Pradesh is 3851.71 mld, of 
which treatment capacity is available for only 1252.74 mld.  
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Ganga, Yamuna and Gomti rivers had been selected for pollution abatement projects under 
the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects are being implemented in 23 
cities
34 viz., 257 projects in these 23 towns were sanctioned under NRCP out of which 216 
were completed as of March 2010. The total sanctioned cost of all the projects was ` 914.66 
crore. 14 projects35 being implemented under NRCP at a cost of ` 404.08 crore were test 
checked for detailed examination.
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
                                                           
34 Agra, Allahabad, Anupshaher, Bijnor, Chunar, Etawah, Farrukkabad, Garhmukteshwar, Ghaziabad, Ghazipur, Jaunpur, 
Kanpur, Lucknow, Mathura, Mirzapur, Mughal Sarai, Muzaffarnagar, Noida, Saharanpur, Saidpur, Sultanpur, Varanasi and 
Vrindavan
35Six projects on Ganga  river, four on Yamuna and four on Gomti river
33% (1252.74 mld)
67% (2598.97 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of  Uttar 
Pradesh (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 228
Name of 
the river/ 
location
Name of the 
Project 
Sanctioned 
cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Sanctioned date 
of completion 
Actual project end 
date 
Yamuna 
at
Ghaziabad
STP Cis Hindon 
Area
16.60 
revised to 
17.78 
18.63 March 1999 November 2002 
STP trans Hindon 
Area
15.11 15.12 March 1999 November 2002 
I&D in Ghaziabad 2.69 2.69 December 2002 January 2003 
LCS at Ghaziabad 2.52 2.11 March 2002 March 2002 
Ganga at 
Kanpur 
Intermediate 
Pumping Station 
Munsi Punwa P-III 
7.96 revised 
to 12.71 
9.15 June 2003 
Extended to 
March 2011 
Not commissioned
Intermediate 
Pumping Station 
at Rakhimandi  
9.38 revised 
to 18.74 
15.19 June 2003 
Extended to 
January 2009 
Not commissioned
Relieving sewer 
for Bakermandi to 
Rakhimandi 
5.90 revised 
to 10.81 
14.85 October 2001 Ongoing 
SWM Part II 2.86              2.59 September 2004 September 2007 
MPS & Campus 
Development 
18.58 
revised to 
37.37 
16.31 September 2007 Not yet complete
I & D of Ganda 
Nala and Halwa 
Khanda at Pandu 
/Ganga
10.50 
revised to 
15.21 
13.89 August 2005 
Extended upto 
March 2010 
Not yet complete
Gomti / 
Lucknow 
STP at Daulatganj 14.05 14.60 August 2003 January 2002 
STP USAB 104.22 
revised to 
169.71 
138.81 March 2007 
Extended upto 
July 2010 
January 2011 
I&D of GH Canal 
Drain
31.42 27.64 March 2007 January 2011 
MPS at Gwari 
Culvert 
30.10 
revised to 
53.10 
39.98 March 2007 
Extended upto 
June 2010 
January 2011 
(ii)  Performance of the projects  
(a) Kanpur 
The average sewage generated in the city of Kanpur is 426 mld. However, only 162 mld is 
treated and the rest 264 mld is discharged into the Ganga.   23 drains were required to be 
intercepted against which 19 drains were intercepted and the remaining four drains were 
yet to be intercepted for treatment. Details of six projects test checked in Kanpur which 
aimed to improve the quality of water in Ganga are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
Intermediate
Pumping
Station at 
Munsipunwa, 
x The project was originally scheduled for completion by June 2003 
but was extended upto March 2011. All the major works under 
the project were completed but the commissioning had been 
postponed due to non completion of STP at Bingawan. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 229
Kanpur x The project was delayed due to non-construction of over-bridge 
adjoining to pumping station and non-availability of permission of 
road cutting for laying rising main/sewer line on the road.  
Intermediate
Pumping
Station at 
Rakhimandi,
Kanpur
x The project was originally scheduled to be completed by June 
2003 but it was actually extended upto January 2009. All the 
major works under the project were completed but the 
commissioning had been postponed due to non completion of STP 
at Bingawan. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in possession of land from 
railways, encroachment and non-grant of permission by railways 
for laying the rising main under the Juhi Railway Bridge. 
Relieving Sewer 
from
Bakermandi to 
Rakhimandi
x The project scheduled for completion by October 2001 was 
continuing as of December 2010 without any extension of time. 
x There was a cost overrun of ` 8.95 crore which was due to faulty 
alignment and nine gaps of length of 1000 metres. 
x The project was delayed due to non-acquisition of land, delay in 
finalization of tendering process and re-alignment of sewer 
passing through busiest road/narrow lanes/lanes having 
multistoried buildings. 
x Only three drains were intercepted out of five drains.  
Main Pumping 
Station & 
Campus
Development
x The project scheduled for completion by September 2007 was 
continuing without any extension.
x The project was delayed due to non-availability of land and delay 
in tendering. The land could be acquired in October 2006 and 
possession was taken in December 2006.
Solid waste 
Management
(SWM Part II)
x The project was completed in September 2007, after a delay of 
three years. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in finalization of tender. 
x It could not be verified whether the project had been assessed by 
the State on basis of set targets/ performance milestones. 
I&D  of Ganda 
Nala and Halwa 
Khanda Nala
x The project was scheduled for completion by August 2005 but was 
extended upto March 2010. However, it was not yet complete. 
x There was a cost overrun of ` 3.39 crore due to increase in labour 
and material costs. 
(b) Ghaziabad 
The daily average sewage generated in the city of Gaziabad is 290 mld but only 129 mld of 
sewage is treated and the remaining 161 mld of untreated sewage was discharged into the 
river Hindon which confluences with river Yamuna. The details of four test checked projects 
being implemented at Ghaziaba d city with the aim to improve the quality of Y amuna’s 
water are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
STPs at Cis 
Hindon Area 
x The project was completed in November 2002, after a delay of 
three years and eight months. 
x There was cost overrun of ` 2.03 crore. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 230
x The project was delayed due to non –availability of land. 
x The STP was not functioning as per prescribed standards as a 
result of which the entire untreated sewage was discharged into 
river Yamuna/Hindon defeating the purpose for which it was 
constructed.
x Further, it was envisaged in the DPR that electricity would be 
generated from biogas from the STP. However, this was also not 
happening due to non-functioning of gas holder, gas scrubbing 
system and power generation units of the plant.
As such, the STP totally failed to meet its objectives.
STP Trans 
Hindon Area 
x The project was completed in November 2002, after a delay of 
three years and eight months. 
x The project was delayed due to non –availability of land. 
x It was observed that the STP was not functioning as per prescribed 
standards of SPCB as a result of which the entire untreated 
sewage was discharged into river Yamuna/Hindon defeating the 
purpose for which it was constructed. 
x Further, it was envisaged in the DPR that electricity would be 
generated from biogas from the STP. However, this was also not 
happening due to non-functioning of gas holder, gas scrubbing 
system and power generation units of the plant.
As such, the STP totally failed to meet its objectives.
Interception
and Diversion 
work at 
Ghaziabad
x The project was completed in January 2003 after a delay of one 
month.
x The total length of sewer lines laid under the project was 7.72 Km 
against the original planned 7.93 Kms.
x The project had been handed over to the local bodies but no 
evidence was found to indicate whether it was carrying out 
preventive maintenance and periodic cleaning of the sewer lines 
laid.
Low Cost 
Sanitation at 
Ghaziabad
x The project was completed in March 2002 on time. The final 
Utilization Certificate was submitted only in January 2004.
x The project envisaged construction of 48 units of LCS, however, 
only 39 were built. The project had been handed over to Nagar 
Nigam which was carrying out the O&M of all 39 units through 
NGOs and Sulabh International. However, no supporting 
documents were furnished. 
(c) Lucknow 
The average daily sewage generated in Lucknow town is 410 mld against which on an 
average 300 mld of sewage is treated.  As a result, 110 mld of untreated sewage daily flows 
into Gomti river. 26 drains from Lucknow town open into the Gomti river but only nine have 
been intercepted. The civil and electrical works of remaining drains had been completed but 
the interception and diversion work of these drains could not be put to use due to non- 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 231
commissioning of rising main of Kukrail Pumping Station. All of the four projects test 
checked under Lucknow which aim at improving the quality of water of Gomti River are 
discussed below:
Project name Findings 
STP Daulatganj x The project was completed in January 2002 on time. 
x  There was a cost overrun of ` 0.55 crore for which reasons 
could not be ascertained.  
x The STP was not being utilised at its full capacity and was 
treating only 34 mld of sewage against designed capacity of 
42 mld due to non-construction of two drains and resultant 
blockage of drains. UP Jal Nigam had not initiated any 
action to rectify the problem.  Further, the treated sewage 
did not meet the standards prescribed by NRCD. 
STP   USAB x The project has been completed in January 2011 after a 
delay of three years and ten months.
x There was a cost overrun of ` 34.59 crore. 
x The time and cost overrun of the project was attributable 
to delay in acquisition of land and the land was acquired in 
July 2008 after the expiry of completion date of the project. 
Interception and 
Development of GH 
Canal Drain 
x The project completed in January 2011 after a delay of 
three years and ten months.
x The project was delayed due to delay in acquisition of land 
for construction of pumping station and change in 
alignment of rising main.
MPS at Gwari Culvert x The project was completed in January 2011 after a delay of 
three years and ten months. 
x  There was a cost overrun of ` 9.88 crore.  
x The project was delayed due to problems in acquisition of 
land and delay in tendering process. 
x An advance payment of ` 50 lakh was paid to contractor in 
September 2006 which was not adjusted even after a lapse 
of four years.
As such, projects sanctioned under NRCP in Kanpur, Ghaziabad and Lucknow for control of 
pollution of Ganga, Yamuna and Gomti could not achieve the desired objectives.

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 232
 Incomplete Intermediate Pumping Station at Munsipurwa,  Kanpur
Incomplete STP 2.76 mld (WSP technique) at Mathura 
4.2 NLCP 
 (i) Physical and financial progress 
Only one lake conservation project relating to Mansi Ganga lake was included under NLCP. 
Name of the lake Sanctioned cost  
(` in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure ( ` in 
crore)
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion
Mansi Ganga 22.71 16.37 March 2009 On going 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 233
(ii) Performance of project: 
Project name Findings 
Mansi Ganga x The activities envisaged for restoration and conservation of Mansi 
Ganga lake involved construction of an STP, Low cost Sanitation, de-
weeding, de-silting, lake front development and afforestation.
x The project was scheduled for completion by March 2009 but it was 
still ongoing. 
x An expenditure of ` 16.37 crore was incurred on the project as of 
November 2010.
x The delay was due to non release of funds by NRCD, in obtaining 
permission from Forest Department, laying of rising main and land 
acquisition for STP.
x With respect to construction of STP 90 per cent  progress of the 
work has been reported till November 2010 by the implementing 
agency. With respect to LCS, only eight out of the planned ten LCS 
units/toilet blocks have been completed till November 2010 as land 
was not available for remaining two. With respect to lake front 
development, audit scrutiny showed that work under this 
component has not yet started. With respect to afforestation, only 
40 per cent of the work under this component has been completed 
till November 2010.
As such, the objective of restoration and conservation of Mansi Ganga 
lake had not yet been achieved.
Temple sewage & solid waste entering in Mansi Ganga Lake


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 234
Stored storm water mingled with sewage enters into Mansi Ganga Lake through inlet
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
0 out of 14 projects 0 out of 14 projects 0 out of 14 projects 0 out of 14 projects 
5.2   NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
Coordination 
Committee
By Steering 
Committee at the 
district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring 
Committee
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
0 out of 1 projects 0 out of 1 projects 0 out of 1 projects 0 out of 1 projects 
5.3  Ground water (in six blocks test checked) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
No No information 4 out of 6 No information  
Testing and monitoring agency (SPCB) of the state was unaware of arsenic content in 
ground water till the School of Environmental Studies Jadhavpur University Kolkata traced 
arsenic in water in Ballia district in it’s study, in 2003. Jal Nigam had identified 1225 
habitations effected from fluoride in 1994 in district Unnao.  Jal Nigam conducted test and 
survey of arsenic effected habitations in 2004 with help of UNICEF and identified 310 
habitations in district Ballia and 165 habitations in district Lakhimpur Kheri. 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 235
6.   Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP  
(a) Water quality in Ganga after Kanpur 
Status of Ganga on entering Kanpur and 
after leaving Kanpur in terms of DO, BOD 
and TC is shown in the chart alongside.  
Both the BOD and TC rise enormously after 
the Ganga leaves Kanpur, with TC rising by 
almost 1434 per cent . This highlights the 
inadequate sewage treatment facilities in 
Kanpur city. BOD was almost 1.4 times the 
criteria in Ganga river after Kanpur, 
indicating high levels of organic pollution. 
Further, the TC was 86 times the criteria, 
indicating that Ganga, after leaving Kanpur, was full of disease causing, fecal-related 
bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause 
illness.
(b) Water quality in Hindon after 
Ghaziabad
Status of Hindon entering and leaving 
Ghaziabad in terms of DO and BOD is shown 
in the chart opposite. It can be observed 
that the Dissolved Oxygen decreased 
whereas BOD was increased by 153 per 
cent. Further, TC increased from 120000 to 
210000, a rise of 75 per cent by the time 
Hindon left Ghaziabad. BOD was more than 10 times the criteria in Hindon river, indicating 
high levels of organic pollution. Further, the DO was less than the criteria indicating 
insufficient oxygen being available for survival of aquatic life. Further, the TC was 420 times 
the criteria, indicating that Hindon, after leaving Ghaziabad, was full of disease causing, 
fecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
(c) Water quality in Gomti after Lucknow 
Status of quality of water, in terms of DO 
and BOD, in Gomti while entering and 
leaving Lucknow are shown in the chart 
opposite. It can be observed that while 
leaving Lucknow, DO decreased significantly 
whereas BOD and TC increased by 233 per 
cent and  3155 per cent . BOD was more 
than 3.6 times the criteria in Gomti river, 
after Lucknow, indicating high levels of 
organic pollution. Further, the DO was less 
6.15
4.16
6.35
3.34
DO
BO
D
Status of Ganga entering Kanpur
Status of Ganga leaving Kanpur
1
31.2
2.7
12.3
DO
BOD
Status of Hindon entering Ghaziabad
Status of Hindon leaving Ghaziabad
1.6
11
6.5
3.3
DO
BOD
Status of Gomti entering Lucknow
Status of Gomti leaving Lucknow

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 236
than the criteria indicating insufficient oxygen being available for survival of aquatic life. 
Further, the TC was 280 times the criteria, indicating that Ganga, after leaving Lucknow, was 
full of disease causing, fecal-related bacteria, viruses and protozoa which cause illness. 
Projects sanctioned under NRCP in Kanpur, Ghaziabad and Lucknow for control of 
pollution of Ganga, Yamuna and Gomti could not achieve the desired objectives and 
 6.2  NLCP 
As the project on improving water quality of Mansi Ganga lake was still in progress, no 
conclusions could be drawn about impact of NLCP in restoring the lake. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 237
State: Uttarakhand  
1.  Background 
Some of the important rivers in Uttarakhand are Ganga, Yamuna, Bhagirathi, Kali, Gori, 
Alaknanda, Kosi, Saryu, Bhilangana etc. Some of the important lakes in Uttarakhand are 
Bhimtal Lake, Dodital, Kedartal, Nainital lake, Roopkund, Panna Tal, Satopanth Tal, Sattal 
etc. According to Central Ground Water Board, the annual replenishable ground water 
resources in 
Uttarakhand was 2.27 
Billion Cubic Meters 
(BCM) and the net 
annual ground water 
available was 2.10 BCM. 
Out of 95 blocks, only 
two blocks in 
Uttarakhand were over-
exploited and three 
blocks were semi-critical 
with respect to ground 
water. The only ground 
water contaminant was 
nitrate which affected 
ground water in parts of 
the districts of 
Dehradun, Haridwar and 
Udhamsinghnagar.
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, Uttaranchal 
Peyjal Nigam, Government of Uttrakhand is the nodal department for NRCP and the 
implementing agency was Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam. Nainital Lake Region Special Area 
Development Authority (NLRSADA) is the implementing agency for NLCP. 
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of Uttarakhand is discussed below: 
Rivers Lakes Ground 
water
1. Preparation of inventory of water 
resources 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) According to 
chemical Indicators 
Done Done Done 
b) According to 
Biodiversity indicators 
Not Done Done Not
applicable
Rivers and lakes test checked in Uttarakhand

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 238
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Partially (Nutrients: 
Not Done, 
Pathogenic
organism: Done,  
Human produced 
chemicals:Not Done) 
Partially (Nutrients: Not 
Done, Pathogenic 
organism: Done,  
Human produced 
chemicals: Not Done) 
Could not be 
verified
d) Assessment of 
impact of human 
activities
Partially (Industry: 
Done)
Not Done Not Done
3. Identification 
of risks to 
environment 
and health 
a) Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not
applicable
b) Risks to aquatic 
species 
Not Done Not Done Not
applicable
c) Risks to human 
health  
Not Done Not Done Not Done
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and control 
of water pollution 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Not Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of Uttarakhand
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of Uttarakhand is 186.04 mld, of 
which treatment capacity is available for only 24.33 mld.  
13% (24.33 mld)
87% (161.71 mld)
Capacity available for treatment of sewage in Class I and Class II cities 
of Uttarakhand (%)
% of sewage for which  treatment capacity is available
% of sewage for which no treatment capacity is available

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 239
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
River Ganga had been selected for pollution abatement projects under the National River 
Conservation Programme (NRCP) in Uttarakhand. Projects are being implemented in 10 
cities
36 viz. 44 projects in these 10 cities were sanctioned under NRCP out of which 37 were 
completed as of March 2010. The total sanctioned cost of all the projects was ` 70.62 
crores. Nine projects being implemented under NRCP at a cost of ` 48.34 crore were test 
checked for detailed examination.
 (i) Physical and financial progress
Name of the 
river/
location
Name of the Project Sanctioned 
cost (` in 
crore)
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore)
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Ganga/
Haridwar-
Rishikesh 
I&D & STP works at 
Lakhshman Jhula and 
Swarg Ashram 
4.53 3.47 October 2009 Not completed
STP at Bhopatwala 6.13 2.40 October 2009 Not completed
Enhancement of 
capacity & 
replacement Gravity 
Main
11.70 11.73 October 2009 January 2010
Enhancement of STP 
at Jagjeetpur at 
Haridwar 
15.99 13.36 October 2009 July 2010
Ganga/
Srinagar
I&D Part I 
(Alaknanda) 
2.65 2.65 December 2003 May 2004
STP 3.50 mld 
(Alaknanda) 
1.61 3.50 January 2006 January 2009
Ganga/
Uttarkashi 
STP Part I (Bhagirathi) 0.88 0.88 February 2004 March 2010
I&D Part I (Bhagirathi) 3.67 4.98 May 2004 September 2009
I&D Part II 
(Bhagirathi) 
1.18 1.85 December 2003 December 2009
(ii) Performance of the Projects
(a) Rishikesh 
The average estimated sewage generated in the city of Rishikesh was 2.6 mld. Though three 
mld sewage treatment capacity existed in the city, only 1.70 mld was being treated and the 
rest 0.90 mld was being discharged into the Ganga. Out of 24 drains falling into the river 
Ganga, 23 have been intercepted and one has yet to be intercepted which is responsible for 
the 0.90 mld of sewage being discharged into the river Ganga.  
(b) Haridwar
                                                           
36 Badrinath, Devprayag, Gopeshwar, Haridwar & Rishikesh, Joshimath, Karnaprayag, Ranipur, Rudraprayag, Srinagar and 
Uttar Kashi

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 240
The average estimated sewage generated in the city of Haridwar was 53.09 mld. Though 53 
mld sewage treatment capacity existed in the city, only 51 mld was being treated and the 
rest 2.09 mld was being discharged into the Ganga. Out of 21 drains falling into the river 
Ganga, 17 have been intercepted and four have yet to be intercepted . Details of the cities 
test checked under NRCP are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
I&D and STP 
works at 
Lakhshman Jhula 
and Swarg Ashram 
in Rishikesh on 
river Ganga
x The project scheduled for completion by October 2009 but 
was not yet complete.
x The project was delayed due to public hindrance. 
STP at Bhopatwala 
in Haridwar on 
river Ganga
x The project scheduled for completion by  October 2009 was not 
yet complete.
x The project was delayed due to non-transfer of land from UP 
Irrigation Department.
x Due to the project not taking off as yet, it was observed that 
the I&D work at Loknath Nala at Bhopatwala (Sanctioned cost 
Rs. 4.48 crore) was affected. 
Enhancement of 
capacity & 
replacement 
Gravity Main in 
Haridwar on river 
Ganga
x The project was completed in January 2010 after a delay of 
three months. The completion report of the project and the 
final UCs of the project have not yet been sent to MoEF.
x The project was delayed due to delay in permission for land 
from local residents.
x Under the project, 8.56 kms of pipe were laid as against the 
target of 8.06 kms. One pumping station was also replaced and 
the pumping station was being utilised fully. 
Enhancement of 
STP at Jagjeetpur 
at Harid at 
Haridwar on river 
Ganga
x The project was completed in July 2010 after adelay of nine 
months. The completion report and final UCs have not yet been 
submitted to MoEF.
x  The project was delayed due to late award of contract. 
x STP of capacity 27 mld was built and 27 mld of sewage was 
being treated. Further, monthly sampling was being done by 
State Pollution Control Board. 
(c) Srinagar 
The average estimated sewage generated in the city of Srinagar was 3.50 mld flowing out 
from eight tapped drains and for remaining 11 un-tapped drains, no data was available. 
Total sewage flowing through eight tapped drains was being treated and the rest sewage 
from the 11 untapped was being discharged into the Alaknanda As such, there would be 
untreated sewage being discharged from these drains which have not yet been intercepted. 
Details of two projects test checked in Srinagar which aim to improve the quality of 
Alaknanda water are discussed below: 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 241
Project name Findings 
I&D Part I at 
Srinagar on 
river
Alaknanda37
x The project was completed in May 2004 after a delay of five 
months. The completion report and final UCs have not yet been 
submitted to MoEF. 
x Though the project was completed within the allotted funds, it 
was observed that ` 7.61 lakh was incurred on un-approved items. 
x The project was delayed due to time extension sought by the 
contractor
x 8 drains were intercepted under this project and 5.76 kms of pipes 
laid, against targeted 4.49 kms.One pumping station was also built 
and its capacity was being fully utilised
STP 3.50 mld 
Srinagar on 
river
Alaknanda
x The project was completed in January 2009 after a delay of three 
years. The completion report and final UCs have not yet been 
submitted to MoEF. 
x The cost overrun on the project was ` 1.89 crore. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in release of funds and 
tender process.
x The STP capacity created was 3.50 mld and it was treating 3.50 
mld.However, it was observed that untreated sewage was still 
flowing into the river Alaknanda but its exact amount had not 
been measured.The treated sewage was meeting the prescribed 
standards in relation to pH, Total Suspended solids (TSS), BOD and 
COD.
(d) Uttarkashi
The average estimated sewage generated in the city of Uttarkashi was 2.25 mld and only 
0.25 mld capacity for treatment was available in Uttarkashi but no sewage was actually 
being treated due to the fact that none of the STPs constructed were operational. As a 
result, the entire 2.25 mld of sewage being generated in Uttarkahi was flowing untreated 
into the Bhagirati. As such, there would be untreated sewage being discharged from these 
drains which have not yet been intercepted. Details of three projects test checked in 
Uttarkashi which aim to improve the quality of Bhagirathi water are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
STP Part I in 
Uttarkashi on 
river Bhagirathi 
x The project was completed in March 2010 after a delay of six 
years and one month. Completion report and final UC had not yet 
been submitted by the implementing agency to MoEF.
x The project was delayed due to non availability of land.  
                                                           
37 At Devprayag, Alaknanda meets Bhagirathi and renamed Ganga 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 242
x The STP capacity created was 0.25 mld but actually no sewage was 
being treated because the sewer line was not connected to the 
STP.
I&D Part I x The project was completed in September 2009 after a delay of 
five years and four months. Completion report and final UC had 
not yet been submitted by the implementing agency to MoEF. 
x The cost overrun on the project was `1.31 crore due to change in 
design structure of the project by executing unapproved works. 
Further, ` 49.97 lakh was incurred on un-approved items. 
x The project was delayed due to resistance by local residents over 
use of their land for construction work.
x The performance of the project had not been assessed by the 
implementing agency due to non completion of STP-II. Even 
though under the project one pumping station was built, it was 
not being utilised. 
x As such, the entire project was lying unutilized at present. 
I&D Part II x The project was completed in December 2009 after a delay of six 
years. The completion reports and final UCs have not yet been 
submitted by the implementing agency to MoEF. 
x The cost overrun on the project was ` 0.67 crore due to change in 
design structure of the project by executing unapproved works. 
Further, ` 9.82 lakh was incurred on un-approved items. 
x The project was delayed due to resistance by local residents over 
use of their land for construction work.
x The performance of the project had not been assessed by the 
implementing agency due to non-completion of STP-II. Two 
pumping stations were constructed but these were not being 
utilised at present due to non-completion of STP II.
x As such, the entire project was lying unutilized at present.  
Thus, the projects sanctioned for prevention of pollution of Alaknanda/Ganga  river in 
cities of Srinagar and Rishikesh-Haridwar were working as envisaged. However, projects 
sanctioned for prevention of pollution of Bhagirathi in Uttarkashi had not met their 
objectives. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 243
Untreated sewage flowing into Ganga in Haridwar
4.2 NLCP  
5 lakes in Uttarakhand, Bhimtal, Naukuchiatal, Sattal, Khurpatal and Nainital had been 
included under NLCP for conservation and restoration. Out of these five lakes, works 
undertaken for conservation and restoration of Nainital lake were test checked for detailed 
audit scrutiny. It was observed that none of these lakes figured in the list of most polluted 
lakes prepared by NRCD.  
Untrapped drain in Srinagar

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 244
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the lake Sanctioned cost 
(` in crore) 
Actual 
Expenditure  
(` in crore) 
Scheduled date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion  
Nainital lake  47.97 47.97 August 2006 March 2007 (but 
not yet 
completed) 
(ii)  Performance of the Project: 
Project name Findings 
Nainital Lake x NRCD, MoEF in 2003 had sanctioned a project for conservation 
and management of Nainital Lake at a total cost of ` 47.96 crore 
on 70:30 basis between GOI and State government.  
x For effective implementation of project, the Project monitoring 
Committee (PMC) had been constituted by government Of 
Uttarakhand under the Chairmanship of Commissioner, Kumaon 
Division.
The Lake Development Authority (LDA) was assigned to be the 
nodal agency for coordinating various works under the project. 
The PMC entrusted different works to the different government 
departments/ agencies and private agencies.
The main works under the Naini Lake conservation project were as under: 
1. Sewage management
1.1 Sewer lines and Sewage treatment Plant: Branch lines , STPs 
1.2 Construction of community toilets in the catchment area: Community 
toilets (29)
1.3 Solid waste management: Mission Butterfly launched by Solid waste Management for 
mobilising the community. Manage waste in a sustainable way, optimising recycling and 
reuse.
2. Hydraulic Works 
2.1 Outlet works of lake at 
Tallital
2.2 Protection works at Balia Nala: Bed protection measures, 
Control measures for stabilisation of landslides, Repair and 
renovation of drains, Construction of toe walls, check walls 
etc, Vegetative turfing on the sliding slope 
3. Conservation and Development works 
3.1 Aeration 
works
3.2 Dredging 
of deltas: 
removal of silt 
3.3 Bio-manipulation 
works: Removal of 
Gambusi, Puntius, Big 
head carp, Mahseer and 
silver carp introduced 
3.4 Shore line development: 
jetty, paving of flat area, 
development of parks, 
renovation and beautification 
of Thandi Sadak, renovation of 
railing and wall and lighting and 
street furniture 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 245
4. Catchment Conservation Works 
4.1 Catchment Conservation Works: 
Vegetational remedial, Engineering remedial 
and eradication of Loranthus
4.2 Other conservation works: Renovation of 
lake retaining wall 
5. Water Conservation and infrastructure facilities 
5.1 Water Quality 
monitoring: checking of 
water quality parameters 
5.2 Parking 5.3 New bridge cum bypass 
6.  Public participation and awareness creation for lake conservation  
x Awareness through print media and electronic media, Launching of lake warden scheme, 
Talk show, Workshop under Solid Waste Management
Results and Benefits of the Project : After completion of the different works, the 
achievements were as under: 
x Transparency of the lake has increased 
x Decrease in concentrations of toxic gases like carbon dioxide, ammonia, hydrogen 
sulphide and methane 
x Decease in concentrations of nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus 
x No algae bloom observed after aeration 
x Suitable conditions for the growth and breeding of environment friendly fish species 
like mahseer 
x Concentrations of dissolved oxygen in the lake have increased from the bottom of the 
lake to the surface 
x No fish fatalities have occurred after the aeration work 
x BOD levels came down from 21mg/lt to 6.8 mg/lt and improvements in other 
parameters 
x Whole lake catchment area has been covered by sewer line. No sewage is entering the 
lake
x Open defecation has been controlled by constructing the community toilets 
x After launching mission butterfly, solid waste, garbage of the whole town is being 
managed in a more sustainable way 
x There is improvement in aesthetic view within periphery of lake. 
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP 
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
8 out of 9 projects 8 out of 9 projects 8 out of 9 projects 0 out of 9 projects 
5.2   NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
Coordination 
Committee
By Steering 
Committee at the 
district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring 
Committee
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
1 out of 1 projects 1 out of 1 projects 1 out of 1 projects 1 out of 1 projects 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 246
5.3 Ground water (in six blocks test checked) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes Yes Not Done, except in 
Dehradun and 
Nainital.
Yes (Partially) 
6.   Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
(a) Water quality in river Ganga after 
Rishikesh
Status of Ganga on entering Rishikesh and 
after leaving Rishikesh in terms of DO and 
BOD is shown in the chart alongside. TC of 
Ganga rises from 220 MPN/100 ml to 250 
MPN/100 ml after it leaves Rishikesh. 
(b) Water quality in river Ganga after 
Haridwar
Status of Ganga on entering Haridwar and 
after leaving Haridwar in terms of DO and 
BOD is shown in the chart alongside.  TC of 
Ganga rises from 280 MPN/100 ml to 500 
MPN/100 ml after it leaves Haridwar.  
(c) Water quality in river Alaknanda after 
Srinagar  
Status of Alaknanda on entering Srinagar and 
after leaving Srinagar in terms of DO and 
BOD is shown in the chart alongside.  TC of 
Alaknanda rises to 40 from 32 when it leaves 
Srinagar.
7.8
1.3
7.9
1.2
DO
BOD
Status of Ganga entering Rishikesh
Status of Ganga leaving Rishikesh
7.5
1.6
7.7
1.3
DO
BOD
Status of Ganga entering Haridwar
Status of Ganga leaving Haridwar
7.4
0.82
7.5
0.79
DO
BOD
Status of Alaknanda entering Srinagar
Status of Alaknanda leaving Srinagar

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 247
(d) Uttarkashi 
Status of Bhagirati on entering Uttarkashi 
and after leaving Uttarkashi in terms of DO 
and BOD is shown in the chart alongside.  
TC of Bhagirati rises to 36 MPN/100 ml
from 28 MPN/100 ml  when it leaves 
Uttarkashi.
6.2  NLCP 
Though the project for restoration and conservation of Nainital Lake was not yet complete 
as a whole, the water quality report of December 2010 revealed that criteria for designated 
best use classification for B class water for all parameters was achieved.
7.6
0.69
7.6
0.64
DO
BOD
Status of Alaknanda entering Uttarkashi
Status of Alaknanda leaving Uttarkashi

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 248
State: West Bengal  
1.  Background 
Ganga, Mahananda and Damodar are the important rivers of West Bengal. Some important 
lakes in West Bengal are Rabindra Sarobar, Rasikbil, Senchal lake, Sagar Dighi, Mirik lake, 
Mati jheel,   
Bhangzang
Salamander Lake, 
Talberia etc. Out of 
341 blocks in West 
Bengal, in one block 
the ground water is 
critical and in 37 
blocks, the ground 
water is semi-critical. 
According to Central 
Ground Water Board, 
the annual 
replenishable ground 
water resource in 
West Bengal is 30.36 
BCM and the net 
annual ground water 
availability is 27.46 
BCM.  Some of the 
contaminants present in ground water in West Bengal are salinity, fluoride, chloride, iron, 
nitrate and arsenic.
Insitutional arrangements in the State:  As per information provided by MoEF, the Urban 
Development and Commerce & Industries Department, Government of West Bengal, 
Kolkata is the nodal department for NRCP and the implementing agency is Kolkata 
Metropolitan Development Authority, Kolkata and Industries Department. Department of 
Urban Development, Government of West Bengal is the implementing agency for NLCP.  
2. Planning for water pollution
Action taken by the State in planning for programmes for the control of river, lake and 
ground water pollution in the State of West Bengal is discussed below: 
 Rivers Lakes  Ground water 
1. Inventory of water resources Done Done Done 
2. Assessment of 
water quality  
a) Chemical
Indicators 
Done Done Done  
b) Biodiversity 
indicators 
Done Not Done Not applicable
c) Quantification of 
contaminants 
Done Done  Could not be 
verified
d) Impact of human 
activities
Partially
(Agriculture-Done. 
Done Partially
(Mining-Not
Test checked rivers and lakes in West Bengal

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 249
Industry-Done.
Mining-Not Done. 
Dams-Not Done. 
Uncontrolled 
disposal of human 
waste-Done.)
Done) 
3. Identification of 
risks to 
environment and 
health 
a)Risks to wetlands Not Done Not Done Not applicable
b) Risks to aquatic species Not Done Not Done Not applicable
c)Risks to human health Not Done Not Done Could not be 
verified
4. Policy for water pollution  Not Done Not Done Not Done
5. Programmes for prevention and control of 
water pollution 
Not Done Not Done Not Done
6. Constitution of Water Quality Review 
Committee 
Done
[Note: Not applicable: Does not pertain to Ground Water; Could not be verified: Could not be verified on 
account of lack of evidence.]
3.    Sewage generation and its treatment as per CPCB 
Sewage generated/ treatment capacity in Class I and Class II cities of West Bengal 
[Source: CPCB data, 2005-06]
The total sewage generated in Class I and Class II cities of West Bengal is 2525.63 mld, of 
which treatment capacity is available for only 567.80 mld.  
4. Implementation of programmes for control of water pollution  
4.1 NRCP 
Ganga, Damodar and Mahananda rivers had been selected for pollution abatement projects 
under the National River Conservation Programme (NRCP). Projects are being implemented 
in 32 cities. 219 projects in these 32 cities were sanctioned with the cost of ` 377.39 crore. 
22% (567.80 mld)
78% (1957.83 mld)
Capacity for sewage treatment  in Class-I and Class-II cities of West 
Bengal (%)
% sewage for which  treatment capacity is available 
% sewage for which no treatment capacity is available 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 250
10 projects being implemented under NRCP at an estimated cost of ` 56.60 crore were test 
checked for detailed examination 
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
river/ location 
Name of the 
project 
Sanctioned 
cost 
(` in crore) 
Actual
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Schedule date 
of completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Ganaga/
Barrackpore
RFD at Kolkata 4.81 4.81 November 2008 November 2009
Crematoria at 
Shantipur 
0.83 1.15 July 2007 January 2010
MPS I 2.00 1.64 August  2003 August 2009
I&D 3.96 3.96 December 2004 
extended upto 
March 2011 
 Ongoing 
RFD at Kamarahati 2.86 2.46 March 2009 September 2009
Ganga/
Gayeshpur, 
Halilshar & 
Kancharapara
MPS II 3.41 3.12 Februar y 2004 June 2009 
I & D 
Sewer,Halishar, 
Kanchrapara,
Gayeshpur 
1.52 1.52 November 2002 March 2004
Lifting Station I 
Southern Part 
1.82 1.83 August 2003 April 2009 
Mahananda/ 
Siliguri 
I & D,MPS,STP and 
RFD 
32.37 22.06 September 
2007 
Not completed
RFD at Siliguri 3.02 3.00 May 2009 May 2009 
(ii) Performance of the projects 
(a) Barrackpore 
The average sewage generated in the city of Barrackpore in 2001 was 24.30 mld. One STP 
existed in the city but no sewage was being treated and the entire 24.30 mld untreated 
sewage was being discharged into the Ganga. 
Details of four projects test checked in Barrackpore which aim to improve the quality of 
Ganga’s water are discussed below
Project
name
Findings 
RFD at 
Kolkata
x The project was completed in November 2009.after a delay of one 
year . 
x The project was sanctioned at an estimated cost of ` 4.81 crore  
x Operation and maintenance of the created assets was yet to be 
started and the assets created at a cost of ` 4.81 crore remained 
without any maintenance for last two years. 
RFD at 
Kamarahati
x The project was completed in September 2009 after a delay of six 
months
x An expenditure of ` 2.46 crore was incurred on the project against 
the sanctioned cost of ` 2.86 crore.
x The project was delayed due to encroachment and Monsoon. 
x 250 meters of river front area was actually developed under the 
project. Assets created at a cost of ` 2.46 crore remained without 
any maintenance for last almost two years because Kolkata 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 251
Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA) did not receive the 
required funds.
Main
Pumping
Station I 
x The project was completed in August 2009 after a delay of six years 
The project completion report along with final utilization certificate 
was yet to be submitted to NRCD.
x An expenditure of `1.64 crore was incurred on the project. 
x The project was delayed due to non acquisition of land. 
x Two pumping stations having capacity of 6.9 mld were constructed 
under the project. However, these were not handed over to the 
Municipality for commissioning. Thus, the pumping station 
constructed at a total cost of ` 1.64 crore was lying idle.
Electric
Crematoria
x The project was completed in January 2010 after a delay of two years 
and six months.
x An expenditure of ` 1.15 crore was incurred on the project against 
the sanctioned cost of.  `  0.83 crore resulting in cost escalation of 
`0.32 crore.
x The project was delayed due to change of location of the original 
site.
I&D x The project was sanctioned in August 2002 with scheduled date of 
completion by December 2004. The duration of the project was 
extended upto March 2011. 
x  The project was delayed due to legal issues in acquisition of land. 
x Due to non-completion of the I&D work, the Main Pumping Station, 
constructed at a cost of ` 1.64 crore, could not be commissioned.   
(b) Siliguri 
The average daily estimated sewage generated in Siliguri is 59 mld and the entire untreated 
sewage is let into Mahananda river. There are 350 drains falling into Mahananda river and 
none of them has been intercepted. 
Two projects test checked in Siliguri are discussed below: 
Project name Findings 
I&D at Siliguri x The project scheduled for completion by March 2007 was not yet 
complete.
x The project was delayed due to non-availability of land.
STP at Siliguri x The project was scheduled for completion by September 2007, 
was not yet complete
x The project was delayed due to non-availability of land.
RFD x The project scheduled for completion by April 2007 was not yet 
complete. 
x The project was delayed due to non-availability of land. 
MPS x The project scheduled for completion by October 2006 was not 
yet complete.
River Front 
Development
x The project was completed in May 2009. 
x  An expenditure of ` three crore was incurred on the project 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 252
at Siliguri against a sanctioned cost of ` 3.02 crore.
x 8.7 kilometer river front area was developed under the project 
and the river front areas were being maintained properly.
(c) Gayespur/Halilshar
The average daily estimated sewage generated in Gayespur/Halilshar is 38 mld.  STP 
capacity of 12.5 mld is available in the city but no sewage is treated and the entire 
untreated sewage is let into River Hoogly. No Information was available regarding the 
quality of River Ganga before it enters Gayespur/Halilshar and after it leaves 
Gayespur/Halilshar.
Projects test checked under Gayespur/Halilshar which aim at improving the quality of 
water of Ganga River are discussed below: 
Project Name Findings 
MPS-II, Halilshar, 
Kanchrapara,
Gayespur
x The project was completed in June 2009 after a delay of five years 
and four months. 
x An expenditure of ` 3.12 crore was incurred on the project against a 
sanctioned cost of ` 3.41 crore.
x The project was delayed due to delay in acquisition of land.
x Pumping stations having capacity of 6.5 mld was constructed under 
the project. 
Lifting Station 
(I&D sewer) 
Halilshar/
Kanchrapara/
Gayespur
x The project was completed in March 2004 after a delay of one year 
and four months but the project has not yet been commissioned. 
x The project was delayed due to non-availability of site, poor sub soil 
condition for laying sewers and shifting of utility services and narrow 
width of the road. 
x The pumping stations having capacity of 6.5 mld was constructed 
under the project and against the total length of 3233 meters of 
sewer lines, only 1934 meters sewer line was laid under the project.
LS-I Halisahar, 
Kanchrapara,
Gayespur
x The project was completed in April 2009 after a delay of five years 
and eight months but the project has not yet been commissioned. 
x The project was delayed due to delay in acquisition of land. 
x Under the project, pumping stations having capacity of 6.5 mld was 
constructed and against the total length of  3233 mtrs sewer lines 
planned, only 1934 mtrs sewer lines were  actually laid.
x The project has not been handed over to the municipality and is 
lying unutilized. 
It was observed that all the three projects were completed. However, 
these projects could not be handed over to the concerned 
municipalities due to legal issues. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 253
Non functional STP at Halilshar
RFD at Kamarhati
4.2  NLCP 
(i) Physical and financial progress 
Name of the 
Lake
Sanctioned cost 
 (` in crore) 
Expenditure till 
date (` in crore) 
Sanctioned 
date of 
completion
Date of 
completion
Mirik lake 4.01 0.60 February 2006 Ongoing 
Ravindra 
Sarovar
6.96 3.86 March 2004 Ongoing


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 254
(ii)  Performance of the Project 
Project Name Findings 
Mirik Lake x The restoration and consevation of Mirk Lake included components 
like bank protection, fencing work, construction of silt & debris 
arrestor, afforestation, de-siltation and public participation, waste 
treatment, underground drainage etc.
x The project was to be completed by February 2006 but it was still 
ongoing. 
x NRCD released ` 1.00 crore as first installment but KMDA could 
spend only ` 60.26 lakh till March 2009. KMDA had entrusted the 
execution of waste treatment and allied works to Siliguri Jalpaiguri 
Development Authority (SJDA) which were nearing completion. 
Further, an amount of ` 50 lakhs had been released to Darjeeling 
Gorkha Hill Council (DGHC) in April 2005 for executing the 
remaining work like bank protection, de-siltation, jhora lining, 
fencing etc. However, DGHC had not submitted any report to KMDA 
regarding their progress of work.  
Thus, the project for restoration and conservation of Mirik Lake was yet to 
be completed even after a time overrun of more than five years. 
Ravindra
Sarovar 
x The restoration and consevation of Ravindra Sarovar included 
components like bio-remediation, upkeep, lake bank protection and 
fencing and lake beautification. 
x The project was scheduled for completion by March 2004 but it 
continued without any extension as of March 2011.
x The bio-remediation was originally proposed for improvement of 
water quality of Ravindra Sarovar as huge number of slum squatters 
were using the lake water for bathing and washing of clothes. 
However, bio-remediation work was not initiated.  
x Further, the, water quality reports of Sea Explorers’ Institute, 
Jadavpur University and West Bengal Pollution Control Board for 
the year of 2007, 2009 and 2010 revealed the presence of BOD, TC 
and FC in excess of permissible limits.
Thus, the project for restoration and conservation of Ravindra Sarovar was 
yet to be completed even after a time overrun of more than seven years. 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 255
 Littered shoreline of Rabindra Sarovar 
Weeds choking Rabindra Sarovar
5. Monitoring of programmes for control of water pollution
5.1 NRCP
By Chief Executive of 
implementing agency 
By Divisional 
Project Monitoring 
Cell
Steering Committee 
chaired by Chief Secretary 
of State 
High powered 
committee under 
CM
 8 out of 10 projects  0 out of 10 projects  0 out of 10 projects  0 out of 10 projects 


Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 256
Further, it was observed that regular monitoring of the water body and the environment 
done by West Bengal State Pollution Control Board (WBSPCB) for two locations-
Ganga/Barrackore and Mahananda/Siliguri.
5.2  NLCP 
By Inter-Departmental 
coordination committee 
By Steering Committee 
at the district level 
By Lake specific 
Monitoring Committee 
Water quality 
monitoring plan 
 2 out of 2 projects  0 out of 2 projects  1 out of 2 projects  0 out of 2 projects
5.3   Ground water (in six blocks test checked) 
Whether system exists for 
monitoring of groundwater 
Pollution 
Whether regular 
monitoring done 
Whether water 
quality laboratories 
established 
Whether Field Testing 
Kits issued to all the 
panchayats 
Yes No,in 5 out of 6 
blocks 
Yes, except in one 
block 
No
6. Outcomes 
6.1 NRCP 
(a) Water quality  of Mahananda after 
Siliguri
(a) Bio chemical Oxygen demand (BOD) 
and Dissolved Oxygen (DO) measured in 
Mahananda river at the time of its 
entering the town and leaving the town 
is shown in the graph alongside. It can be 
seen that BOD levels increase drastically 
after Mahananda river leaves Siliguri, 
pointing to inadequacy of pollution 
control measures. Further DO level in 
the river also falls. 
(b) Quality of water in Hoogly after Gayespur/Halilshar 
No Information was available regarding the quality of River Hoogly before it enters 
Gayespur/Halilshar and after it leaves Gayespur/Halilshar.  
(c) Quality of water in Ganga after Barrakpore
Status of Ganga on entering Barrakpore in terms of DO, BOD and TC is 5.6 mg/lts, 3.2 mg/lts 
and 210000/ 100ml respectively. However, the quality of Ganga after it leaves Barrakpore 
was not measured. Hence, it could not be ascertained if the quality of water in Ganga had 
been improved after its inclusion in NRCP. 
6.2 NLCP 
As the projects on improving water quality of Mirik lake, Darjeeling  and Ravindra sarovar 
lake, Kolkata were still in progress, no conclusions could be drawn about impact of NLCP in 
restoring the lake. 
3.2
45
4.2
10
DO
BOD
Status of Mahananda entering Siliguri
Status of Mahananda leaving Siliguri

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 257
                                                        
Chapter 9: Conclusions
Clean, safe and adequate fresh water as mentioned earlier is vital to the survival of all 
organisms and the smooth functioning of key systems, entities and economies.  Water 
based eco-systems provide a diversity of services vital for human well-being and poverty 
alleviation.  The delivery of fresh water is a particularly important service both directly and 
indirectly.  Water pollution and contamination weakens or destroys natural eco-system that 
supports human health, food production and bio-diversity.  Polluted water can lead to 
serious problems with diseases and death of humans, animals, plant and vegetation.   Water 
pollution in the 14 major and 55 minor and several hundreds more rivers of India is a serious 
problem.  Millions of litres of sewage, industrial and agricultural waste are discharged into 
these rivers.  At present only 10% of the waste water generated is treated.  Similarly lakes 
and ground water are under severe threat from the impact of pollution.  The cost of penalty 
is far cheaper than the cost of prevention of pollution.  There are no effective deterrents for 
the polluters.  Although the concerns relating to water pollution have been addressed in the 
National Water Policy and National Environment Policy in India both at the Centre and 
State, the resources available for prevention of pollution, treatment of polluted water and 
ecological restoration of polluted water-bodies are woefully inadequate.
The absence of a comprehensive inventory of rivers, lakes and keystone species associated 
with them adversely impact the quality of planning.  MoEF, CPCB and States failed to carry 
out the comprehensive identification and quantification of human activities which were a 
serious threat to the water quality and the different sources which affect the water quality 
in rivers, lakes and ground water.  No agency in the country has assessed the risk of polluted 
water to health and environment.  MoEF is yet to adopt the basin level approach for control 
of pollution of rivers and lakes except in the case of the Ganges  where a beginning has been 
made.   It is yet to also develop water quality guidelines and corresponding parameters for 
each river and lake. 
Inclusion of rivers and lakes into the National River Conservation Programme and the 
National Lake Conservation Programme was flawed and the States failed to take a 
comprehensive survey to measure  pollution level in rivers, lakes across the country on the 
basis of which the decision regarding inclusion should have been made.   Further neither 
MoEF nor the States have introduced any programme to prevent pollution of ground water.  
They have also not addressed the concerns of pollution from agricultural sources. 
The implementation of NRCP and NLCP both at the Centre and State left much to be 
desired.  DPRs were not adequately prepared. MoEF failed to get the DPR vetted by 
technical experts.  The monitoring of implementation of the projects by MoEF/CPCB and the 
States was ineffective.  The implementation of the projects at the level of the States also 
suffered from delays, cost escalations and poor quality work.   There was no maintenance of 
assets after creation.  The continuous monitoring of the quality of water after the planned 
intervention was also missing.  The poor monitoring and the failure to establish a network to 
track pollution of water in rivers, lakes and ground water, failure to update and define water 
quality parameters, absence of database, poor dissemination of data are all indicators of an 

Report No.21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 258
inadequate system to support such a vital activity.  In spite of these programmes being 
implemented for over two decades there has been no discernible effect on the quality of 
water both in rivers and lakes.  All the rivers test-checked continue to be plagued by the 
high levels of organic pollution, low level of oxygen available for aquatic organisms and 
bacteria, protozoa and viruses which have faecal origin and cause illness.  The lakes in India 
continue to be under threat from nutrient overloading which is causing their eutrophication 
and the eventual choking up by various weeds proliferating in the nutrient-rich water. 
The funds available for control and prevention of water pollution and restoration of polluted 
water are inadequate.  This situation is further aggravated by poor financial management in 
the implementation of projects.  MoEF and the States need to exercise greater oversight 
over utilization of funds to ensure that funds are spent timely and for the purpose it was 
sanctioned.
                                                                                                                                          (GEETALI TARE) 
New Delhi        Principal Director of Audit, 
Dated: 29 – 11-11          Scientific Departments 
Countersigned 
New Delhi                       (VINOD RAI) 
Dated: 29 -11 - 11         Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 261
Annexure 1 
Details of Sample 
Name of 
State
River Lake Ground
waterName of river/ town Name of the project
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Godavari/ Rajamundry 1. STP  Banjara Anantpur, 
Nalgonda,
Vishakhapat-
nam, Medak, 
Guntur and 
Khammam 
Godavari/
Ramagundam 
2. STP Zone 1  
3. I&D
4. STP, WSP, 14 mld  
5. STP Zone 2  
Musi/ Hyderabad        6.    STP+I&D  
2. Assam Sampled only for 
general issues in water 
pollution                       
Borkhola,
Dhemaji,
Jaleswar,
Chandrapur,
Mayang,
Diphu 
3. Bihar Ganga/ Barahaya 1. LCS
2. RFD
 Simri, Katoria, 
Barauni , 
Mushahari,
Maner, Biraul
Ganga/ Patna 3. RFD
4. Diesel Crematoria  
5. RFD
6. RFD
4. Chhattis-
garh
Sampled only for 
general issues in  
water
pollution
  Chowki, 
Korba,
Kartala,
Bagicha,
Baikunthpur, 
Bastar 
5. Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi  1. STP Sen Nursing 
Home
2. STP Delhi Gate 
Nala
3. EC
4. STP 3 mld FAB 
technology  
5. STP 3 mld SAFF 
technology  
6. STP 2 mld SAFF 
technology  
7. LCS
8.  2 mld disinfection 
plant at Sen 
Nursing Home 
9. Public
Participation and 
Gandhinagar, 
Model Town, 
Anand Parvat, 
Wazirpur,
Defence
Colony and 
Rajouri
Garden 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 262
Awareness
10. STP  135 mld  
6. Goa Mandovi/ Panaji 1. I&D
2. STP Plan 12.50 mld 
3. STP renovation 
and re-modeling  
4. LCS
 Ponda, Bardez 
and Salcette 
7. Gujarat Ahmedabad/ 
Sabarmati 
1. I&D De-silting of 
sewer
2. I&D WTS Zone V 
Part I  
3. I&D ETS Zone IV Pt 
I including of 
sewer cleaning 
equipment  
4. STP
5. Renovation of 3 
STP
6. Western Trunk 
Sewer Zone 5 Part 
II
7. LCS
8. STP at Pirana 106 
mld
9. STP at Vasna 126 
mld
Himatnagar,
Godhra,
Chotila,
Ankleshwar,
Sanand and 
Veraval
8. Haryana Yamuna/ Faridabad 1. Pilot Plant at 20 
mld STP Zone I  
2. LCS
3. I&D
4. Sewer Lines 
Phase—II/Stage II  
5. Public
Participation and 
Awareness for 6 
towns
 Meham, 
Karnal,
Kathura,
Faridabad,
Panipat and 
Nathusri-
chopta 
Yamuna/ Panipat 6. LCS
7. I&D
8. Drying Beds  
9. Sewer Lines Phase 
II/Stage II  
10. Additional 
Sewerage Works  
9.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Sampled only for general issues in water pollution and for monitoring of ground water 
resources in blocks of Jassur, Mandi, Baddi, Paonta Sahib, Una, and Shimla. 
10. Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Dal Lake 
11. Jharkhand Subarnarekha/ 
Jamshedpur 
1.  CRE (EC+IWB)  
2. LCS
3. RFD
 Chainpur, 
Chas,
Jamshedpur, 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 263
Subarnarekha/ Ranchi 4. RFD Lohardaga 
Sadar, Mandu, 
and Ormanjhi 
12. Karnataka Bhadra/ Bhadravati 1. I&D  Bellandur, 
Kotekere,
Sharanabasa
veshwara
lake
Kolar,
Gulbarga,
Mangalore,
Bhadravati,
Belgaum
block, and 
Davanagere
Tungabhadra/ 
Devanagare
2. STPs based on 
WSP
Pennar/ Bangalore 3. I&D Environment 
Action Plan  
13. Kerala Pamba/ Pamba 1. I&D
2. STP
3. RFD
4. LCS
5. SWM
6. Public
participation  
Veli Akkulam Alathur,
Attappady, 
Alangad,
Edappally,
Palakkad and 
Malampuzha  
14. Madhya 
Pradesh 
Khan/ Indore 1. MPS
2. I&D Part II  
3. STP
Shivpuri Lake Indore, 
Pithampur, 
Jabalpur,
Ratlam,
Khargone,
Jhabua 
Betwa/ Vidisha 4. I&D
5. STP
Kshipra/ Ujjain 6. I&D
7. STP
8. I&D Part II  
15. Maharash-
tra 
Krishna/ Karad 1. STP
2. I&D
Powai and 
Rankala lake 
Nanded,  
Jalna,
Dombivali,
Nashik,
Raigad, and 
Jalgaon   
Godavari/ Nashik 3. I&D
4. STP 78 mld at 
Tapovan
5. STP 22 mld at 
Chehdi
Krishna/ Sangli 6. I&D
7. STP
Godavari/Nanded 8. I&D
9. STP
16. Nagaland Twin lake None sampled 
17. Odisha Mahanadi/ Cuttack 1. I&D Part II  
2. STP
3. I&D
4. LCS
Bindusagar
lake
None sampled 
Coastal area/ Puri 5. I&D
6. MPS
7. STP
18. Punjab Satluj/ Jallandhar 1. STP
2. MPS at Garha  
 Kot kapura, 
Ludhiana,
Bhikhi, Maur, 
Abohar and 
Jallandhar 
Satluj/ Ludhiana 3. STP at Bhattian  
4. MPS
5. MPS Baloke  
6. MPS at Jamalpur  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 264
7. STP Baloke  
8. STP at Jamalpur  
19. Rajasthan Chambal/ Kota 1. STP 30 & 6 mld 
and I&D  
2. LCS
3. RFD
4. Improved Wood 
Crematoria
Mansagar
Pushkar
Pichola
Udaipur, 
Jalore, Jaipur, 
Pali and Tonk    
20. Sikkim Rani Chu/ Gangtok  1. Sewerage and STP 
2. Rehabilitation of 
Main Sewer Line  
None sampled 
21. Tamil Nadu Adyar & Cooum/ 
Chennai 
1. STP at Koymbedu 
60 mld  
2. STP at Koymbedu 
110 mld  
3. STP at Perungundi 
54 mld Package 13 
4. STP at 
Nesapakkam 40 
mld, Package 15  
5. I&D Package VII  
6. I&D Package VIII  
Kodaikanal Manali, 
Cuddalore,
Krishnagari,
Dharmapuri,
Perambalur
and Vellore 
Cauvery/ Tiruchirappalli 7. I&D and STP  
Vaigai/ Madurai 8.  I&D Part I  
9. I&D Part II  
10. I&D Phase IV  
11. STP Phase II  
22. Tripura Dimsagar,
Laxmina-
rayanbari
and
Durgabari
None sampled 
23. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Yamuna/ Ghaziabad 1. STP Cis Hindon 
Area 70 mld  
2. STP trans Hindon 
Area
3. I&D
4. LCS
Mansi  Ganga Isha Nagar,  
Reoti , 
Bisrakh,
Rajapur,
Hilauli, and 
Kannauj 
Ganga/ Kanpur 5. Intermediate
Pumping Station
Munsi Purwa PIII  
6. Intermediate
Pumping Station 
at Rakhi Mandi 
PIV
7. Relieving sewer 
for Bakermandi to 
Rakhimandi  
8. MPS and Campus 
development  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 265
9. SWM Part II  
10. Tapping of Ganda 
Nala and Halwa 
Khanda Nala and 
dive
Gomti/ Lucknow 11. STP of 42 mld at 
Daulatganj
12. I&D of GH Canal 
Drain
13. STP USAB  
14. MPS at Gwari 
Culvert
24.  Uttara-
khand 
Ganga/ Haridwar-
Rishikesh 
1. I&D and STP works 
at Lakhshman Jhula 
and Swarg Ashram  
2. STP at Bhopatwala  
3. Enhancement of 
capacity & 
replacement
Gravity Main
4. Enhancement of 
STP at Jagieetpur at 
Harid   
Nainital lake Bhagwanpur, 
Purola,
Bhimtal,
Sahaspur,
Rudrapur, and 
Syaldeh
Ganga/ Srinagar 5. I&D Part I  
6. STP 3.50 mld  
Ganga/ Uttarkashi 7. STP Part I  
8. I&D Part II  
9. I&D Part II  
25. West
Bengal
Ganga/ Barrakpore 1. RFD at Kolkata
2. Crematoria at 
Shantipur  
3. MPS I  
4. I&D
5. RFD at Kamarahati 
Ravindra
Sarovar, 
Mirik 
Manikchak, 
Siuri-II, Haldia, 
Syaldeh,
Falakata and 
Dantan-I
Ganga/ Gayeshpur, 
Halilshar & 
Kancharapara 
6. MPS
7. Lifting Station I 
Southern Side  
8. Lifting Station I 
Southern Part  
Mahananda/ Siliguri 9. I&D, MPS, STP, 
RFD and STP at 
Kolkata
10. RFD at Siliguri  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 266
Annexure 2 
Completed projects not utilised
Sl. No. Name of the 
Project
Date of 
completion
Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Remarks
1. STP Zone 1 on 
Godavari/
Ramagundam,
Andhra Pradesh
June 2008 0.16 Though the STP capacity was 4 mld, only 1 mld 
was being treated and th e rest 3 mld was flowing 
into Godavari. The pump sets were not working 
which hampered the operation of the STP.  
2. STP Zone 2 on 
Godavari/
Ramagundam,
Andhra Pradesh
January
2005
0.82 Though the STP was constructed to treat 14 mld 
of sewage, it was treating only 3.5 mld and the 
rest 10.5 mld was flowing untreated into the 
Godavari.  The pump sets were not working 
which hampered the operation of the STP.  
3. RFD, Barahiya on 
Ganga in Bihar
July 2002 0.28 The facility was handed over by the 
implementing agency to the local body for 
operation and maintenance. But, both the ghats 
(Vijaygharh ghat & Sojikipari) constructed, are 
not existing as the course of Ganga has shifted 
from the purported sites and both the ghats were 
completely destroyed and non existing due to 
erosion.
4. RFD, Patna on 
Ganga in Bihar
April 2003 0.65 The River Ganga has shifted from Kurjee Ghat, 
Rajendra Ghat and Indira Ghat and these ghats 
are defunct.  Collectorate Ghat and Narkat Ghat, 
where Ganga is flowing are not maintained by 
Patna Municipal Corporation and thus are in 
deplorable condition. Mahavir ghat, which was 
constructed under this project was also 
destroyed.
5. RFD, Danapur on 
Ganga in Bihar
May 2007 0.29 RFD is now completely defunct.  Electric poles 
have been uprooted and electric lamps are 
broken, stair cases have been buried under thick 
layer of sand/mud and change room was found in 
dire state, Also this project was not handed over 
to Danapur Cantonment Board (local body). 
6. STP, Delhi March 2003 1.28 The plant is shut down since 2007 and all the 
sewage is passing to Yamuna through 
drain/nallah without treatment. 
7. LCS at Delhi February
2003
1.65 Out of 1146 Nos. of Community Toilet Complexes 
(CTCs) to be constructed under the project, only 
959 CTCs were constructed. Of which, status of 
only 471 CTCs are functional as of February 2011. 
Reasons are:- some LCS Units were encroached, 
some were lying abandoned and some were 
completely demolished. 
8. Disinfection plant 
at Sen Nursing 
Home STP, Delhi
March 2002 0.45 The plant is non-functional.  

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 267
9. Pilot Plant of 20 
mld STP Zone 1, 
Yamuna/
Faridabad, 
Haryana
Commission
ed in March 
2002 and 
stabilized in
March 2003 
1.04 It was scheduled to be completed in March 2002 
and commissioned in March 2002. However, it 
could be stabilized only in March 2003. Even 
though the STP was to treat 20 mld of sewage, it 
was treating only 14 mld and the rest 6 mld was 
flowing into the river.  
10. STPs based on 
WSP, Devanagare, 
Karnataka
November
2005
1.86 STP of capacity  19.45 mld was constructed but it 
is not functioning at all du e to non-maintenance 
by CC, Devanagare. 
11. STP , Khan, Indore, 
Madhya Pradesh
April 2008 26.82 STP capacity created under the project was 90 
mld but it was observed that 50 mld of untreated 
sewage was flowing into the river Khan. 
12. STP, Nanded, 
Maharashtra
June 2006 2.44 STP was commissioned in June 2006.  However, it 
was not taken over by Municipal Corporation and 
made operational. Moreover, the STP including 
stabilisation pond, inlet outlet arrangement, 
canal work were demolishe d and dismantled by 
the Municipal Corporation for a new STP at the 
same site with the fund from JNNURM. 
13. I&D, Nanded, 
Maharashtra
June 2006 9.92 The STP at Nanded was dismantled and 
demolished and hence, the I&D work is not put to 
use for its intended purpose.  
14. LCS at Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat
September 
2001
0.73 34 LCS Units were constructed under NRCP.  
However, only 28 LCS Units are actually 
functioning now. 
15. 100 mld STP at 
Pholriwal
(Jalandhar), Punjab
March 2008 29.14 STP was treating only 82 mld of sewage against 
created capacity of 100 m ld despite the fact that 
the MPS received sewage 125 mld and the 
balance was discharged into the drain without 
any treatment. 
16. I&D Part I, 
Madurai, Tamil
Nadu
July 2005 46.65  The work of STP Phase III was dropped under 
NRCD due to non identification of huge land for 
STP and was taken up by  the Corporation under 
JNNURM. As a result, the infrastructure created 
for I&D projects (I&D Phase Part I and Part II) 
under NRCD at a cost of `116.89 crore were 
being kept idle for want  of completion and 
commissioning of STP. 
17. I&D Part II, 
Vagai/Madurai, 
Tamil Nadu
February
2010
70.24
18. STP part-I 
(Bhagirathi), 
Uttarkashi on 
Ganga in 
Uttarakhand
March 2010 0.88 STP of capacity 0.25 was constructed. However, it 
was not functional due to sewer line not being 
connected. 
19. I&D Part-I 
(Bhagirathi), 
Uttarkashi on 
Ganga in 
Uttarakhand
September 
2009
4.98 The asset (of capacity 4000 lpm) created is not 
being used due to non-completion of STP-II in the 
town for which tender process was completed 
only in December 2010. 
20. I&D Part-II 
(Bhagirathi), 
Uttarkashi on 
December
2009
1.85 The asset (of capacity 2400 lpm) created is not 
being used due to non-completion of STP-II in the 
town for which tender process was completed 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 268
Ganga in 
Uttarakhand
only in December 2010. 
21. STP Cis Hindon 
Area, Yamuna/ 
Ghaziabad, UP
November
2002
18.63 The STP was not functioning as per prescribed 
standards of SPCB as a result of which the entire 
untreated sewage was directly discharged into 
river Yamuna/Hindon. Further, it was envisaged 
in the DPR that electricity would be generated 
from biogas from the STP. However, this was also 
not happening due to non-functioning of gas 
holder, gas scrubbing system and power 
generation units of the plant. 
22. STP Trans Hindon 
Area, Yamuna/ 
Ghaziabad, UP
November
2002
15.12 The STP was not funct ioning as per prescribed 
standards of SPCB as a result of which the entire 
untreated sewage was directly discharged into 
river Yamuna/Hindon. Further, it was envisaged 
in the DPR that electricity would be generated 
from biogas from the STP. However, this was also 
not happening due to non-functioning of gas 
holder, gas scrubbing system and power 
generation units of the plant. 
23. MPS-I at 
Barrackpore, West
Bengal
August 2009 1.64 The MPS-I was completed August 2009 at a cost 
of ` 1.64 crore but could not be utilized due to 
non completion of the related interlinked works. 
24. MPS- II, Halisahar 
on Ganga in West
Bengal
June 2009 3.12 The construction of the project was completed in 
June 2009 but was yet to be commissioned and 
handed over to the concerned municipality. 
25. Lifting Station –I 
Southern part,  
Halisahar on Ganga 
in West Bengal
April 2009 1.83 The construction of the project was completed in 
April 2009 but was yet to be commissioned and 
handed over to the concerned municipality. 
26. Lifting Station –I 
(I&D sewer) 
Southern side,  
Halisahar on Ganga 
in West Bengal
March 2004 1.52 The construction of the project was completed in 
2009 but was yet to be commissioned and 
handed over to the concerned municipality. 
27. RFD at Kamarhati, 
West Bengal
September 
2009
2.46 The work was completed in September 2009. As 
per Administrative Approval, O&M was the 
responsibility of the implementing agency i.e., 
Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority 
(KMDA) and cost of annual O&M ( ` 4.33 lakh) 
was to be borne by Dakhineswar Kali Temple and 
Debottar Trust. The created asset has been 
handed over to the Dakshineswar Kali Temple 
Trust. However, the Trust did not release any 
fund for O&M and in absence of required fund, 
Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority did 
not maintained the created assets. 
28. RFD, Kolkata, West
Bengal
November
2009
4.81 Under Kolkata RFD project, 1 ladies and 1 gents 
toilet blocks were to be c onstructed in each of 
the 7 ghats. As per sanction letter of the project, 
annual O&M cost was estimated to `11.09 lakh. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 269
Of which, an amount of ` 7.56 lakh was to be 
generated from usage of toilets to be constructed 
under the project and rest was to be borne by 
State Government. Though the project was 
completed in November 2009, operation and 
maintenance of the created assets was not 
started on the plea (of KMDA) that the project 
was not commissioned yet. During joint 
inspection in February 2011, it was found that 
none of those toilets were being utilized as 
source of resource generation by way of making 
provision for “Pay and Use”,  though people were 
found to be using the same. 
Total actual 
expenditure 
251.27

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 270
Annexure 3 
List of projects where there was cost overrun 
Name of State Name of river/ town Name of project Sanctioned cost 
(in ` crore) 
Expenditure 
(in ` crore) 
Cost
overrun 
(in `
crore) 
1. Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi Electric Crematoria 1.45 revised to 
1.78 
1.78 0.33 
2. Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi STP 3 mld FAB technology  1.78 1.83 0.05 
3. Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi STP 3 mld SAFF technology   1.86 1.93 0.07 
4. Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi LCS 1.49 1.65 0.16 
5. Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi 2 mld disinfection plant at 
Sen Nursing Home
0.42 0.45 0.03 
6. Delhi Yamuna/ Delhi STP 135 mld 65.03  79.54 14.51 
7. Goa Mandovi/ Panaji I& D 14.10 14.47 0.37 
8. Goa Mandovi/ Panaji STP Plan 12.50 mld 
9. Goa Mandovi/ Panaji STP renovation & 
remodelling 
10. Goa Mandovi/ Panaji LCS 
11. Gujarat Sabarmati/
Ahmedabad 
I&D WTS Zone V Part I 1.68 1.85 0.17 
12. Gujarat Sabarmati/
Ahmedabad 
Western Trunk Sewer Zone 5 
Part II 
12.91 14.82 1.91 
13. Haryana Yamuna/
Faridabad
Sewer Lines Phase—II/ Stage 
II
8.33 9.29 0.96 
14. Haryana Yamuna at 
Panipat
I&D 1.43 1.44 0.01 
15. Karnataka Bhadra/
Bhadravati
I&D 1.30 revised to 
1.91 
2.29 0.99 
16. Karnataka Pennar/
Bangalore
I&D Environmental Action 
Plan
46.27 47.20 0.93 
17. Kerala Pamba / 
Sabarimala 
Public participation 0.25 0.27 0.02 
18. Kerala Pamba & 
Sabarimala 
RFD 0.43 1.39 0.96 
19. Madhya Pradesh Khan/ Indore MPS 4.33 4.69 0.36 
20. Madhya Pradesh Khan/ Indore I&D Part II 2.53 2.84 0.31 
21. Madhya Pradesh Kshipra/ Ujjain STP 2.78 2.87 0.09 
22. Madhya Pradesh Kshipra/ Ujjain I&D Part II 4.8 5.06 0.26 
23. Maharashtra Krishna/ Karad  STP  0.55 0.86 0.31 
24. Maharashtra Godavari/
Nashik
STP 78 mld at Tapovan 20.82 20.90 0.08 
25. Maharashtra Krishna/ Sangli STP 2.96 revised to 
4.49 
4.23 1.27 
26. Maharashtra Godavari/
Nanded
I&D 6.50 revised to 
9.95 
9.92 3.42 
27. Odisha Mahanadi/
Cuttack
I&D Part II 1.20 1.40 0.20 
28. Odisha Mahanadi/
Cuttack
STP 3.51 3.65  0.14 
29. Odisha Mahanadi/
Cuttack
LCS 0.13 0.18 0.05 
30. Punjab Sutlej/
Jallandhar 
100 mld STP at Pholriwal 
(Jalandhar) 
22.84 29.14 6.30 
31. Punjab Satluj/ Ludhiana 111 mld STP at Bhattian 34.85 37.59 2.74 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 271
32. Punjab Satluj/ Ludhiana MPS Baloke 14.92  15.27 0.35 
33. Punjab Satluj/ Ludhiana 152 mld STP at Balloke 
(Ludhiana) 
34.79 42.67 7.88 
34. Punjab Satluj/ Ludhiana 48 mld STP at Jamalpur 13.46 14.56 1.10 
35. Rajasthan Chambal/ Kota  RFD 0.07 0.13 0.06 
36. Sikkim Rani-Chu/
Gangtok 
Sewerage and STP 15.81 revised 
to 17.17  
17.12 1.31 
37. Tamil Nadu Adyar & Cooum/ 
Chennai
STP at Kodungaiyur 110 mld 41.56 45.96 4.40 
38. Tamil Nadu Vaigai/ Madurai I&D Part I 42.53 46.65 4.12 
39. Tamil Nadu Vaigai/ Madurai I&D Phase IV 7.32 9.66 2.34 
40. Uttarakhand Ganga/
Haridwar-
Rishikesh
Enhancement of capacity & 
replacement Gravity Main 
11.70 11.73 0.03 
41. Uttarakhand Ganga/ Srinagar STP 3.50 mld (Alaknanda) 1.61 3.5 1.89 
42. Uttarakhand Ganga/
Uttarkashi
I&D Part I (Bhagirathi) 3.67 4.98 1.31 
43. Uttarakhand Ganga/
Uttarkashi
I&D Part II (Bhagirathi) 1.18 1.85 0.67 
44. Uttar Pradesh Yamuna/
Ghaziabad
STP Cis Hindon Area 16.60 revised 
to 17.78 
18.63 2.03 
45. Uttar Pradesh Yamuna at 
Ghaziabad
STP trans Hindon Area 15.11 15.12 0.01 
46. Uttar Pradesh Ganga at Kanpur Intermediate Pumping 
Station Munsi Punwa P-III 
7.96 revised to 
12.71 
9.15 1.19 
47. Uttar Pradesh Ganga at Kanpur Intermediate Pumping 
Station at Rakhimandi  
9.38 revised to 
18.74 
15.19 5.81 
48. Uttar Pradesh Ganga/ Kanpur Relieving sewer for 
Bakermandi to Rakhimandi 
5.90 revised to 
10.81 
14.85 8.95 
49. Uttar Pradesh Ganga/ Kanpur I&D of Ganda Nala and 
Halwa Khanda at Pandu 
Ganga
10.50 revised 
to 15.21 
13.89 3.39 
50. Uttar Pradesh Gomti/ Lucknow  STP at Daulatgang 14.05 14.60 0.55 
51. Uttar Pradesh Gomti/ Lucknow STP USAB 104.22 revised 
to 169.71 
138.81 34.59 
52. Uttar Pradesh Gomti/ Lucknow MPS at Gwari Culvert 30.10 revised 
to 53.10 
39.98 9.88 
53. West Bengal Ganga/
Barrakpore 
Crematoria at Shantipur 0.83 1.15 0.32 
        54.  West Bengal Ganga/
Gayeshpur,
Halilshar & 
Kancharapara
Lifting Station I Southern 
Part, 
Halishar,Kanchrapara,Gayesh
pur 
1.82  1.83 0.01
Total 671.62 800.81 129.19 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 272
Annexure 4 
Project-wise break-up of monitoring of rivers and lakes by 
different agencies in test checked projects
State Numbe
r of 
river 
project
s test 
checke
d
Review of 
progress 
by Chief 
Executive 
of nodal 
agency
Review of 
progress 
by 
DPMC**
Review of 
progress 
by State 
Steering 
Committee
Review of 
progress 
by
High-
Powered 
Committee 
under 
Chairman-
ship of CM
Numbe
r of 
lake
project
s test 
checke
d
Review of 
progress by 
Inter-
Departmenta
l
Coordination 
Committee
Review of 
progress 
by 
Steering 
Committe
e at 
district 
level
Review of 
progress 
by Lake-
specific 
Monitorin
g
Committe
e
Water 
quality 
monitorin
g plan 
prepared 
by State 
Govt. 
Pesticides 
monitorin
g by Lake-
specific 
Monitorin
g
Committe
e
Conservatio
n plan by 
Lake-specific 
Monitoring 
Committee
Required for river projects under NRCP Required for lakes projects under NLCP
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
Andhra 
Pradesh 
6 1 out of 6 1 out of 6 0 out  of 6 0 out  of 6 1 0 out  of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 1 out of 1 
Bihar 6 5 out of 6 0 out of 6 0 out  of 6 0 out  of 6 Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Delhi 10 No
informatio
n for all 10 
projects 
No
informatio
n for all 10 
projects 
No
informatio
n for all 10 
projects 
No
informatio
n for all 10 
projects 
Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Goa 4 1 out of 4 0 out of 4 0 out of 4 0 out of 4 Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Gujarat 9 9 out of 9 0 out of 9 
Projects 
0 out of 9 
Projects 
0 out of 9 
Projects  
Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Haryana 10 No 
informatio
n for all 10 
projects 
No
informatio
n for all 10 
projects 
0 out of 10 0 out of 10 Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Jammu and 
Kashmir
Nil Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 
Jharkhand 4 0 out of 4  0 out  of 4  0 out  of 4  0 out  of 4  Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Karnataka 3 2 out of 3 0 out of 3  0 out of 3   0 out of 3   3 0 out of 3 0 out  of 3  0 out  of 3  0 out  of 3  0 out of 3 0 out of 3 
Kerala 6 0 out of 6 0  out of 6 0  out of 6 0  out of 6 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 
Madhya 
Pradesh
8 8 out of 8 8 out of 8 8 out of 8 8 out of 8 1 1 out of 1 1 out of 1 1 out of 1 1 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 
Maharashtr
a
9 0 out of 9 0 out of 9 0 out of 9 0 out of 9 2 0 out of 2 1 out of 2 2 out of 2 0 out of 2  0 out  of 2 0 out of 2 
Nagaland Nil Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
1 0 out of 1  0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 
Odisha 7 0 out of 7 0 out of 7 0 out of 7 3 out of 7 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 
Punjab 8 0 out of 8 0 out of 8 8 out of 8 8 out of 8 Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Rajasthan 4 1 out of 4 0 out of 4 1 out of 4 0 out of 4 3 3 out of 3 3 out of 3 3 out of 3 0 out of 3 0 out of 3 0 out of 3 
Sikkim 2 2 out of 2 0 out of 2 2 out of 2 0 out of 2 Nil Not 
Applicable* 
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable* 
Tamil Nadu 11 11 out of 
11 
1 out of 11 0 out of 11 0 out of 11 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 1 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 
Tripura Nil Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
Not 
Applicable
*
3 1 out of 3 0 out of 3 0 out of 3 0 out of 3 0 out of 3 0 out of 3 
Uttar 
Pradesh
14 0 out of 14 0 out of 14 0 out of 14 0 out of 14 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 0 out of 1 
Uttarakhan
d
9 8 out of 9 8 out of 9 8 out of 9 0 out of 9 1 1 out of 1 1 out of 1 1 out of 1 1 out of 1 0 out of 1 1 out of 1 
West Bengal 10 8 out of 10 0 out of 10 0 out of 10 0 out of 10 2 2 out of 2 0 out of 2 1 out of 2 0 out of 2 0 out of 2 0 out of 2 
* Not Applicable as no project were test checked in audit 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 273
Annexure 5 
Comparison of amount sanctioned, released and spent on
select NRCP projects 
` in crore
Sl.
No
Name of the 
State
Number of 
Project
Cost of Project 
Sanctioned
Total
funds
released
by NRCD 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
(including State 
share)
Total Project
test
checked 
Total Project
test
checked
Total Sampled 
1. Andhra Pradesh 25 638 367.51 351.54 259.80 342.48 294.91
2. Bihar 18 6 3.95 2.17 3.15 2.98* 1.47
3. Delhi 23 10 650.00 89.77 335.48 271.65* 101.42
4. Goa 5 4 14.10 14.10 9.26 13.50 14.47
5. Gujarat 13 9 101.96 96.15 89.66 95.08 88.89
6. Haryana 127 10 305.63 24.73 227.61 304.50 24.89
7. Jharkhand 15 44 . 3 8 2.20 4.45 1.59* 0.74
8. Karnataka 42 3 66.25 50.54 46.87 53.59 51.35
9. Kerala 6 6 18.45 18.45 2.78 1.47* 3.26
10. Madhya Pradesh 69 8 115.38 52.32 79.00 75.14* 52.32
11. Maharashtra 31 9 192.60 100.74 111.90 106.93* 96.22
12. Nagaland 6 0 31.75 0 4.50 0.00* 0
13. Odisha 22 7 92.74 81.01 56.41 51.23* 56.35
14. Punjab 60 8 215.68 141.52 183.05 295.91 158.75
15. Rajasthan 8 4 150.95 150.23 21.12 0.77* 25.94
16. Sikkim 6 2 114.31 25.16 33.32 28.38* 23.05
17. Tamil Nadu 83 11 915.93 408.01 623.65 867.86 389.51
18. Uttar Pradesh 257 14 914.66 404.08 679.11 854.81 331.56
19. Uttarakhand 44 9 70.62 48.34 31.38 50.66 44.82
20. West Bengal 219 10 377.39 56.60 239.41 249.02 45.55
Total 1079 140 4724.24 2117.66 3041.91 3667.55 1805.47
                                                           
38 5 projects on Godavari rivers and 1 project on Musi river which contain 30 indiavidual sub-projects. 

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India   274 
Annexure 6 
Comparison of amount sanctioned, released and spent on
select NLCP projects
(` in crore)
Sl.
No.
Name of State   Projects for 
number of lakes 
Cost of projects 
sanctioned
Total
Funds
released
under
NLCP
Expenditure 
incurred by 
State
(including 
State share) 
Total Test-
checked 
Total Test-
checked 
1. Andhra Pradesh 1 1 4.30 4.30 0.82 0.18
2. Jammu & Kashmir 1 1 298.76 298.76 143.55 154.18
3. Karnataka 16 3 69.14 16.07 33.09 11.85
4. Kerala 1 1 24.56 24.56 4.30 Not available
5. Madhya Pradesh 4 1 76.64 51.99 14.13 1.79
6. Maharashtra 14 2 28.57 15.27 15.02 6.71
7. Nagaland 1 1 25.83 25.83 5.81 6.46
8. Odisha 1 1 3.36 3.36 2.21 1.21
9. Rajasthan 5 3 214.97 157.83 46.60 55.70
10. Tamil Nadu 2 1 12.37 10.42 3.73 2.22
11. Tripura 3 3 2.02 2.02 0.50 0.43
12. Uttarakhand 5 1 64.82 47.97 39.62 47.97
13. Uttar Pradesh 1 1 22.71 22.71 9.22 16.37
14. West Bengal 3 2 35.91 10.97 9.11 4.46
Total 58 22 883.96 692.06 327.71 309.53

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 275
Glossary
Acronyms and technical 
terms
Expansion of acronyms and Definition of technical terms 
CGWB Central Ground Water Board
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board
Cr. Crematoria
DPR Detailed Project Report
FAB Fluidized Aerated Bed
I&D Interception and Diversion 
JNNURM Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewable Mission 
LCS Low Cost Sanitation
mld Million liters per day (a measure of water quantity).  
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development
MoWR Ministry of Water Resources
MPS Main Pumping Station
NGRBA National Ganga River Basin Authority
NLCP National Lake Conservation Plan
NRCD National River Conservation Directorate
NRCP National River Conservation Plan
O&M Operation and Maintenance
RFD River Front Development 
SPCB State Pollution Control Board
STP Sewage Treatment Plant
SWM Solid Waste Management
UIDSSMT Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for small and 
Medium Towns 
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 
WQAA Water quality Assessment Authority  
WQRC Water Quality Review Committee 
Baseline stations An essential part of water quality monitoring systems, baseline 
stations are established in areas away from human influence, 
these give data for comparison purposes.
Basin approach River and lake basins are dynamic over space and time and any 
single management intervention has implications for the system 
as a whole. Increasingly, human activities are impacting the 
ecological integrity of lakes. Basin approach is a way of thinking 
that assists Basin managers and stakeholders in achieving 
sustainable management of rivers and lakes and their basins. It 
takes into account that rivers and lakes have a great variety of 
resource values whose sustainable development and use require 
special management considerations for their static water 
properties.

Report No. 21 of 2011-12
 Water Pollution in India 276
BOD BOD is a chemical procedure for determining the uptake rate of 
dissolved oxygen by the biological organisms in a body of water 
and is widely used as an indication of the quality of water. 
Bio-indicators Biological monitoring goes beyond the conventional measures of 
water quality to address questions of ecosystem function and 
integrity. It involves the measurement of species or a group of 
species like invertebrates whose population is used to determine 
environmental integrity 
DDFU Domestic Deflouridation Unit 
DO DO is a relative measure of the amount of oxygen that is 
dissolved or carried in the water body. Adequate dissolved 
oxygen is needed and necessary for good water quality. 
Flux/Impact  stations An essential part of water quality monitoring systems , flux 
stations determine fluctuations of critical pollutants from river 
basin to ocean or regional sea. 
Keystone species A keystone species is a species so critical to an ecosystem that its 
removal could potentially destroy the entire system. The concept 
of keystone species has become an important issue in 
conservation today as the loss or decline of keystone species may 
have far-reaching consequences for the structure and functioning 
of the eco-systems in which they live 
MINARS Monitoring of Indian National Aquatic Resources (MINARs) 
programme established by CPCB 
Non-Point source 
pollution
It occurs when pollutants are delivered indirectly through 
transport or environmental change. Non-point sources are much 
more difficult to monitor and control. Today they account for the 
majority of contaminants in ground water, streams and lakes. 
Point source pollution It occurs when harmful substances are emitted directly into a 
body of water. Point source pollution is easier to monitor and 
regulate. 
TC Total Coliform which is an indicator of presence of fecal matter in 
water.
Trend stations An essential part of water quality monitoring systems, the 
purpose of trend stations is to test for long-term changes in 
water quality and identify trends of pollution. 
UASB Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket, a technology for treatment of 
effluents from sewage treatment plants.