(i)
Table of Contents
Reference to
Paragraph Page
Preface - v
Chapter I
Introduction
About this Report 1.1 1
Profile of the Audited Entity 1.2 1
Authority for Audit 1.3 2
Organisational Structure of the Office of the Principal
Accountant General (General and Social Sector Audit),
Rajasthan, Jaipur
1.4 2
Planning and conduct of audit 1.5 3
Significant audit observations 1.6 3
Response of the Departments to Performance Audits/
Draft Paragraphs
1.7 11
Follow-up on Audit Reports 1.8 12
Chapter II
Performance Audit
Department of Child Rights & Social Justice
and Empowerment
Working of Juvenile Homes 2.1 13
Technical Education Department
Working of Rajasthan Technical University 2.2 37
Chapter III
Compliance Audit
Non-compliance with rules and regulations
Disaster Management and Relief Department
Inadmissible and irregular extra expenditure of ` 21.29
crore on agriculture input subsidy to farmers
3.1 55

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
(ii)
Reference to
Paragraph Page
Medical Education Department
Unfruitful expenditure on construction of Nursing
College Building
3.2 57
Public Health Engineering Department
Irregular and unauthorised sanction
Unfruitful expenditure
3.3
3.4
58
60
Audit against propriety and cases of
expenditure without adequate justification
Medical Education Department
Non-utilisation of grant 3.5 63
Public Health Engineering Department
Creation of extra liability due to approving higher rates
Extra liability to Government exchequer
Unusual delay in execution of work
3.6
3.7
3.8
64
66
69
Urban Development and Housing Department
Unfruitful expenditure 3.9 72
Failure in implementation, monitoring and
governance
Agriculture Department
PPP project of Soil Testing Laboratories 3.10 74
Archaeology and Museums Department
Preservation, protection, maintenance, acquisition, and
control over ancient and historical monument,
archaeological sites and antiquities in the State
3.11 83
Medical Education Department
Procurement and Utilisation of Machinery, Equipment,
Tools and Plants in Medical Colleges and their attached
Hospitals
3.12 95

Table of Contents
(iii)
Reference to
Paragraph Page
Medical & Health and Medical Education
Departments
Implementation of Mukhyamantri Nishulk Dava Yojana 3.13 108
Medical & Health and Administrative
Reforms & Co-ordination Departments
Implementation of Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of
Public Services Act-2011
3.14 118
Public Health Engineering Department
Bisalpur-Dudu drinking water supply project
Follow-up action on recommendations of PAC/audit on
Performance Audit of ‘Drinking Water Supply in Jaipur
City’ incorporated in Audit Report (Civil) 2009-10
3.15
3.16
127
143
Secondary and Elementary Education
Department
Implementation of ‘ Rajiv Gandhi Vidhyarthi Digital
Yojana’
3.17 166
Disaster Management and Relief Department
and Public Health Engineering Department
Failure in exercising prescribed checks and balances led
to dubious payment on water transportation 3.18 171
Medical Education Department
Undue benefit to the licensee 3.19 173
Sports and Youth Affairs Department
Non-adjustment/ recovery of loans and advances
Non-recovery of due amount
3.20
3.21
175
176
Tribal Area Development Department
Hostel buildings not utlised for intended purpose 3.22 179
Urban Development and Housing Department
Avoidable extra expenditure on construction of sewerage
line due to change of alignment
3.23 180
Women and Child Development Department
Non-construction of Anganwadi Centres 3.24 183

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
(iv)
Appendices
Page
Appendix 2.1 Details of clothing material issued by
Government Observation and Children Homes
and NGO Homes of various districts
187
Appendix 2.2 Statement showing list of engineering colleges
selected for test check
191
Appendix 2.3 Statement showing details of faculty position in
selected colleges
192
Appendix 3.1 Statement showing the extra liability due to
approval of higher rates for identical items
194
Appendix 3.2 Statement showing position of SSTL and MSTL
established on PPP mode
196
Appendix 3.3 Statement showing the details of Machinery and
Equipments lying unutilised.
197
Appendix 3.4 Statement showing the details of METP lying idle
for want of repairing during the year 2012-15
198
Appendix 3.5 Statement showing the details of non-recovery of
revenue share from service provider during
2012-15
199
Appendix 3.6 Statement showing the details of machinery and
equipments shown installed before issue from
Poly Trauma Store of SP Medical College,
Bikaner
200
Appendix 3.7 Name of units selected for theme Audit 201
Appendix 3.8 List of range wise test checked Delayed cases in
Medical & Health Department
202
Appendix 3.9 Statement showing incomplete works treated as
completed
204

(v)
PREFACE
This Report for the year ended 31 March 2015 has been prepared for
submission to the Governor of the State of Rajasthan under Article 151 of the
Constitution of India. This report contains three Chapters
This Report relates to audit of the Social and General Sectors of the
Government departments conducted under provisions of the Comptroller and
Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 and
Regulations on Audit and Accounts 2007 issued thereunder by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. This report is required to be placed
before the State Legislatue under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India.
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the
course of test audit during the period 2014-15 as well as those, which came to
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports;
instances relating to the period subsequent to 2014-15 have also been
included, wherever necessary.
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards
(March 2002) issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

1
Chapter I
Introduction
1.1 About this Report
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates
to matters arising from Performance Audit of selected programmes and
activities and Compliance Audit of various Departments of State Government.
Compliance Audit refers to examination of the transactions relating to
expenditure of the audited entities to ascertain whether the provisions of the
Constitution of India, applicable laws, rules, regulations and various orders
and instructions issued by competent authorities are being complied with. On
the other hand, performance audit, besides conducting a compliance audit, also
examines whether the objectives of the programme/activity/department are
achieved economically and efficiently.
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State
Legislature, important results of Audit. Auditing Standards require that the
materiality level for reporting should be commensurate with the nature,
volume and magnitude of transactions. The findings of Audit are expected to
enable the Executive to take corrective actions so as also to frame policies and
directives that will lead to improved financial management of the
organisations, thus, contributing to better governance.
This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and extent of Audit,
provides a synopsis of the significant deficiencies in performance of selected
programme, significant audit observations made during the compliance audit
and follow-up on previous Audit Reports. Chapter-II of this report contains
findings arising out of performance audit of selected programme/
activity/departments. Chapter-III contains observations on the compliance
audit in Government Departments.
1.2 Profile of the Audited Entity
Under General and Social Sector of the Government of Rajasthan, there are 37
departments and 34 autonomous bodies, headed by Chief Secretary/Principal
Secretaries/Secretaries, assisted by Deputy Secretaries/Commissioners and
subordinate officers, which are audited by the Principal Accountant General
(General and Social Sector Audit), Rajasthan, Jaipur.
The comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government of
Rajasthan during 2012-13 to 2014-15 is given in Table 1.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
2
Table 1: Comparative position of expenditure
(` in crore)
Particulars 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Revenue expenditure
General services 20,496 23,339 27,868
Social services 25,293 31,486 37,754
Economic services 17,408 20,436 28,920
Grants-in-aid and
Contribution
265 249 -*
Total 63,462 75,510 94,542
Capital and other expenditure
Capital Outlay 10,684 13,665 16,103
Loans and Advances
disbursed
2,412 811 701
Payment of Public Debt 4,707 4,116 4,960
Contingency Fund - - 300
Public Accounts
disbursement
1,50,175 1,05,605 1,22,061
Total 1,67,978 1,24,197 1,44,125
Grand Total 2,31,440 1,99,707 2,38,667
Source: Audit Reports on State Finances of the respective years
*` 9 lakh only.
1.3 Authority for Audit
The authority for audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(CAG) is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the Constitution of India and
the CAG’s Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service (DPC) Act, 1971.
Principles and methodologies for various audits are prescribed in the
Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 and the Auditing standards, 2002
issued by the C&AG.
1.4 Organisational Structure of the Office of the Principal
Accountant General (General and Social Sector Audit),
Rajasthan, Jaipur
Under the directions of the CAG, the Office of the Principal Accountant
General (General and Social Sector Audit), Rajasthan conducts audit of
Government Departments/Offices/Autonomous Bodies/Institutions under the
General and Social Sector Departments and Autonomous Bodies, which are
spread all over the State. During 2014-15, financial, performance and
compliance audits of the selected units under various General and Social
Sector Departments, Autonomous Bodies (except Panchayati Raj Institutions
and Urban Local Bodies) and externally-aided projects of the State
Government were conducted by 48 audit parties, manned by Senior Audit
Officers/Audit Officers and Assistant Audit Officers who conduct the Audit in the
field.

Chapter 1 Introduction
3
1.5 Planning and conduct of audit
The audit process starts with the assessment of risk exposure of various
Government departments/organisations/autonomous bodies and schemes/
projects etc. Risk assessment is based on expenditure, criticality/complexity
of activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal
controls and the concerns of stakeholders. Audit findings during the previous
years are also considered in this exercise.
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports containing audit
findings are issued to the Heads of the units/departments with the request to
furnish replies on audit findings, within one month of receipt of the Inspection
Report. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled or
further compliance is advised. The important audit observations arising out of
these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports.
To carry out audit of 1,071 out of the 17,397 units of General and Social
Sector Departments, 6,832 audit party days were used during 2014-15. The
audit plan covered those units/entities, which were vulnerable to significant
risk, as per the risk assessment.
1.6 Significant audit observations
During the last few years, audit has reported several significant deficiencies in
implementation of various programmes/activities as well as the quality of
internal controls in selected departments through performance audits, which
had impacted the success of programmes and functioning of the departments.
Similarly, the deficiencies noticed during compliance audit of the government
departments/organisations were also reported.
1.6.1 Performance audit of programmes/activities of departments
Chapter II of this report contains the performance audits of ‘Working of
Juvenile Homes ’ and ‘Working of Rajasthan Technical University’. Brief
summaries of the performance audit are discussed in the following paragraphs:
1.6.1.1 Working of Juvenile Homes
State Government established Juvenile Homes (children homes and
observation homes) in every district, for children in need of care and
protection and juveniles in conflict with law.
State Government failed to identify children in need of care and protection.
Adults in the age group of 18 to 27 years were found admitted in Observation
(Juvenile) Homes. Separate Homes for children in need of care and protection
and children in conflict with law were not established, as required under JJ
Act. Except at Divisional Headquarters, separate Homes for Boys and Girls
were not established.
Adequate infrastructure facilities for stay and recreation were either not
provided or provided inadequately in both Government and NGO Homes.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
4
Nutritional diet viz. ghee, paneer, milk, dahi and fruits were either not
provided or provided inadequately in test checked Homes. Clothing items,
including school material, were also distributed in less quantity. Regular
health check-up of Juveniles and Children were not being conducted in eight
Government and two NGO Homes.
Status of providing school education in NGOs Homes was better than
Government Homes. School education was not being provided in two
Government Homes. No vocational training was provided in any of the test
checked Government Homes. ‘After Care Organisations’ to facilitate children
in their transition from institution-based life to mainstream society for social
re-integration, were not established.
Supervisory staff like Superintendents, Counsellor etc. posted in Government
Homes was generally not adequate. Post of Nurse, Housekeeper and Physical
Training Instructors were vacant in all test checked Homes.
For inspection of Homes, norms as per scheme guidelines were not fixed for
State, Division and District level authorities and only a few inspections were
conducted by these authorities.
(Paragraph 2.1)
1.6.1.2 Working of Rajasthan Technical University
Rajasthan Technical University (RTU) was established under ‘Rajasthan
Technical University Act 2006’. Presently there are 12 government and 123
private engineering colleges affiliated to RTU.
Though the onus of maintaining the quality of technical education lies on
RTU, its irregular, faulty and unstructured affiliation process proved to be
biggest hurdle in doing so. Affiliation rule have also not been framed.
Affiliation orders were not issued to 131 out of 135 engineering colleges for
the academic session 2014-15.
Consistent deficiencies existed in the test checked colleges and these
deficiencies were neither being rectified nor being communicated to All India
Council of Technical Education, the agency responsible for granting approval
to Engineering Colleges. Continuing enrolment of students, conducting of
examination and awarding of degrees to the student in these colleges without
granting affiliation, has rendered the process of affiliation meaningless. There
was a large shortage of qualified faculty in test checked Engineering colleges.
RTU failed to curb the increasing trends of vacant seats in its affiliated
colleges which can also be attributed to shortage of faculty, poor research
infrastructure and other deficiencies of its affiliated colleges. New branches of
Aeronautical, Petroleum and Petrochemical Engineering and Centre for Nano-
Technology were opened in its constituent college ‘University college of
Engineering (UCE)’ without developing proper infrastructure. None of the
under graduate courses and post graduate courses running in UCE were
Accredited with National Board of Accreditation.

Chapter 1 Introduction
5
RTU irrationally diverted its huge annual savings to fix deposits. Annual
accounts for the year 2013-14 and 2014-15 were neither prepared nor
submitted to State legislature till date. Annual Reports were not prepared and
submitted to State legislature, from 2010-11 to 2014-15 (except for 2013-14).
The internal control system of RTU is also not very effective. Only 10
Meetings (against 20) of Board of Management (BoM) were held during the
period 2010-15.
(Paragraph 2.2)
1.6.2 Significant audit observations during compliance audit
Audit observed significant deficiencies in critical areas, which impact the
effectiveness of the State Government. Some important findings of
compliance audit (eight thematic/long audit paragraphs and 16 draft
paragraphs) have been reported in Chapter III. The major observations relate
to the following categories:
1.6.2.1 Non-compliance with rules and regulations
For sound financial administration and control, it is essential that expenditure
conforms to financial rules, regulations and orders issued by the competent
authority. This helps in maintaining financial discipline and preventing
irregularities, misappropriation and frauds. This report contains instances of
non-compliance with rules and regulations involving ` 32.38 crore, as given
below:
Disaster Management and Relief Department incurred an avoidable and
irregular extra expenditure of ` 21.29 crore towards payment of agriculture
input subsidy to farmers for Kharif crop 2012, by adopting incorrect norms of
relief.
(Paragraph 3.1)
Sardar Patel Medical College and Associated Group of PBM Hospital
Bikaner, failed to submit to Government of India, the audited statement of
expenditure along with utilization certificate, resulting in non-receipt of
central assistance of ` 4.18 crore. This led to stoppage of construction work
and rendered the expenditure of ` 2.52 crore on construction of nursing
college building unfruitful.
(Paragraph 3.2)
Public Health Engineering Department approved irregular and unauthorised
expenditure of ` 7.24 crore on execution of additional works against annual
rate contracts, in contravention of financial rules.
(Paragraph 3.3)
Public Health Engineering Department rendered the expenditure of ` 1.33
crore unfruitful on construction of raw water reservoir and modernisation of

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
6
recycling tank at Pandusar, due to non-completion of works. The expenditure
was incurred irregularly without prior administrative and financial sanctions.
(Paragraph 3.4)
1.6.2.2 Audit against propriety and cases of expenditure without
adequate justification
Authorisation of expenditure from public funds has to be guided by the
principles of propriety and efficiency of public expenditure. Authorities
empowered to incur expenditure are expected to enforce the same vigilance as
a person of ordinary prudence would exercise in respect of his own money.
Audit scrutiny revealed instances of impropriety and extra expenditure
involving ` 329.39 crore. Audit findings are as under:
Grant-in-aid of ` 27.29 crore, received for strengthening and upgradation of
Medical Colleges Kota, for starting new Post Graduate (PG) disciplines and
increasing PG seats, was not utilized, resulting in non increase of 84 PG seats
even after lapse of 4 years of receiving funds.
(Paragraph 3.5)
Public Health Engineering Department, by not observing principles of
financial propriety, approved different rates for identical items of two works
on the same date, resulting in incurring of an extra liability of ` 1.56 crore.
(Paragraph 3.6)
Public Health Engineering Department created extra liability of ` 52.95 crore
on procurement, installation and commissioning of Reverse Osmosis plants in
the state, owing to approval of plants at higher cost.
(Paragraph 3.7)
Due to laxity of Public Health Engineering Department, the work of
‘Chambal-Sawai Madhopur-Nadoti Water Supply Project’ could not be
completed even after incurring expenditure of ` 246.86 crore and lapse of
more than 6 years, defeating the objective of providing safe and potable
drinking water to targeted population.
(Paragraph 3.8)
Imprudent decision under ‘Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development
Project’, to start the construction for a landfill site within 10 kilometres
radius from ‘Aerodrome Reference Point’ without obtaining no objection
certificate from Air Force Station and environment clearance from State
Environment Impact Assessment Authority, resulted in incurring of unfruitful
expenditure of ` 0.73 crore.
(Paragraph 3.9)

Chapter 1 Introduction
7
1.6.2.3 Failure in implementation, monitoring and governance
Government has an obligation to improve the quality of life of the people in
the areas of health, education, development and upgradation of infrastructure,
public services etc. Audit noticed instances where the funds released by the
government for creating public assets, remained unutilised/blocked or proved
unfruitful/unproductive due to indecisiveness, lack of administrative
supervision or concerted action at various levels. Test check of cases revealed
that failure in implementation, monitoring and governance involving
` 908.00 crore. Audit findings are as under :
`National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility’ a centrally
sponsored scheme was launched by the Government of India for strengthening
and revamping of soil testing facilities. The selection of Static Soil Testing
Laboratories was not appropriate and no criteria for selection of sites were
fixed by the Department. No survey for identifying areas, where maximum
farmers could be benefitted was conducted. No time line for establishing
laboratories was prescribed. Clear role and responsibility for executing
agencies were not outlined in the agreement and no penal provisions for any
shortcomings in executing the work were incorporated. Analysis of secondary,
minor and auxiliary nutrients was not conducted by any laboratories. There
was shortfall in achieving targets of soil testing and substantial delay in
sending recommendations to the farmers by executing agencies. Awareness
camps were not organised by any executing agency. The State Project
Sanctioning cum Monitoring Committee was not setup.
(Paragraph 3.10)
Preservation, protection and maintenance of historical monuments,
archaeological sites and antiquities and interpret the cultural legacy
embodied in various forms of art and architecture is the responsibility of
Archaeology and Museums Department in the State.
Rajasthan has a large number of ancient monuments and sites which need to
be protected/preserved. No comprehensive survey was carried out by the
Department for identifying important monuments. The department failed to
initiate even the first step for framing a plan for systematic conservation of its
heritage of 5,220 monuments identified (2007) as unprotected by National
Mission of Monuments and Antiquities. While only 335 monuments/sites were
declared as protected, large number of monuments/sites still remained to be
protected.
Inspection of monuments is a major activity but no annual/quarterly inspection
were being carried out. Conservation of monuments was undertaken in an ad-
hoc manner and expenditure incurred on some of the monuments was
unfruitful due to incomplete preservation work. Encroachment, damages and
dilapidated condition of protected monuments were also noticed in audit.
Department was running with deficient manpower and security arrangements
were not rationalised and were lopsided
(Paragraph 3.11)

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
8
Procurement and Utilisation of Machinery, Equipment, Tools and Plants is
one of the activity of ‘Rajasthan Medicare Relief Society’ formed in each
hospital attached with Medical Colleges, with the objective of providing
various diagnostic and treatment facilities at nominal cost, supply of
medicines free of cost and purchase/running of machineries, equipments, tools
and plants for the hospitals.
Though there is an increase of 32 per cent in patient load, long term planning
in procurement of equipments was lacking. A large number of
machineries/equipments purchased were not inspected at the time of delivery
resulting in accepting below specification equipments.
Instances of delay upto 22 months in installation of 196 medical equipments
were noticed while 811 equipments remained unutilised for a period ranging
between 2 to 76 months. Log books, history sheets, stock register, etc. were
not found maintained properly. Marking of make and model of machines were
also not found. 39 machineries were shown installed before receipt from
Central Stores.
(Paragraph 3.12)
Mukhyamantri Nishulk Dava Yojana is a novel scheme and large numbers of
patients in Rajasthan have received the benefit of free medicines under it. The
coverage of patients under the scheme increased over the period.
As per statistics available with the Department, 5.51 crore patients had
registered during the period January to December 2013 which increased to
7.57 crore during the period January to December 2014 but the increase was
not ascertainable as patient gets enrolled multiple times for treatment of a
single ailment or for different ailments during the year.
It was seen that there was variation between annual demand and consumption
of medicines. Demand was not assessed in a time bound manner and was
revised repeatedly which resulted in excess purchase of medicines. Proper and
timely supply of medicines was not ensured. ‘Not of Standard Quality’ drugs
were found distributed to patients. Drugs worth ` 40.23 lakh were not
transferred to other hospitals and allowed to expire in five test checked
hospitals. Rajasthan Medical Services Corporation Limited failed to utilise the
funds of ` 158.56 crore on procurement of medicines during 2011-12 to
2014-15. Online monitoring through implementation of “ e-Aushadhi”
software was not effective.
(Paragraph 3.13)
Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of Public Services Act, 2011 , was enacted by
the Government of Rajasthan with the objective of providing a responsible,
accountable, transparent and corruption free administration.
Audit examined the delivery of services in Medical and Health Department.
There was delay in delivery of specified services under Medical and Health
Department in 27 per cent of test checked cases. Substantial delay (more than

Chapter 1 Introduction
9
200 days) was noticed in some cases. Basic records, required to watch the
delivery of the services, were not being properly maintained. Besides,
awareness campaigns were not organized by the Department which was
evident from the fact that no applicant went into appeal for delayed/non
delivery of services.
(Paragraph 3.14)
Bisalpur-Dudu Water Supply Project was conceived and sanctioned (2002)
in view of insufficient quantity/availability of ground water and quality issues
due to presence of high fluoride contents and total dissolved solids and
salinity problem in Jaipur, Tonk and Nagaur districts.
Scrutiny revealed that detailed Project Report was not prepared and the
estimated cost was overestimated. The objective of providing adequate
drinking water to the population of the rural areas of Jaipur, Tonk and Nagaur
districts within the stipulated time, could not be achieved due to inefficiencies
at every stage of planning, execution and monitoring. Prior to commencement
of work, required permissions from various authorities like Railways, National
Highways Authority of India, Road Authorities and Forest Department etc.
was not obtained, which resulted in delay in execution of works. Works
amounting to ` 286.32 crore were awarded after lapse of administrative and
financial sanction. Transmission Mains I and II were not tested and
commissioned at full design discharge.
(Paragraph 3.15)
Follow-up action on recommendations of PAC/audit on Performance Audit
of ‘Drinking Water Supply in Jaipur City’ incorporated in Audit Report
(Civil) 2009-10 were examined to assess the compliance by Public Health
Engineering Department (PHED).
PHED was unable to supply sufficient piped drinking water to Jaipur city.
Supply of drinking water, 52 to 98 LPCD, was below the norms of 150 LPCD.
Dependency of Jaipur on tube wells (TWs) to supply drinking water
continued. New TWs were constructed during 2010-15, resulting in depletion
of underground water. PHED constructed water harvesting systems (WHS) in
its own buildings and construction of WHS in other government and school
buildings was not monitored by it.
Quality of water supplied from TWs remained problematic. Majority of
samples drawn from TWs failed on all parameters except Chloride. Water
from many TWs was being supplied directly to consumers instead of mixing it
with treated water. Lack of coordination between PHED and RUSDIP resulted
in construction of WTP of substantially lower capacity and incurring of
avoidable liability of more than ` 57.68 crore in enhancing its capacity.
Performance test of transmission line, required to be conducted before
commissioning of pipe line, to make it risk free, was not conducted, even
though two incidents of leakage have already occurred.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
10
PAC made 61 recommendations on the performance audit of which 54
recommendations were treated as executed. Compliance of seven
recommendations were still pending. 23 recommendations were either not
complied with or partially complied. Further compliance to the pending
recommendations was still awaited.
(Paragraph 3.16)
Rajiv Gandhi Vidhyarthi Digital Yojana was announced in 2012-13 by the
State Government to promote/encourage the students to acquire knowledge
through information technology.
The scheme of distribution of laptop was not well planned since its inception.
Because of this the department was able to distribute laptops only in 2013-14
(academic sessions 2011-12 and 2012-13). Even this distribution was not done
properly as 647 laptops were lying in stores since October 2013, though 1054
eligible students were not distributed laptops. Further, the students were left to
operate the equipment themselves without any practical knowledge of
operating the system.
In case of Tablet PCs, the scheme totally failed to serve the purpose as
purchase of Tablet PCs by a large number of students was not verified and
hence not ensured. Also in absence of e-learning material and proper training,
the students who purchased tablet PCs also did not receive the intended
benefit.
(Paragraph 3.17)
Due to failure of Disaster Management and Relief Department as well as
Public Health Engineering Department, in exercising required
checks/verifications of claims/bills, dubious payment of ` 0.50 crore was
made to the contractors for supply of drinking water through tankers.
(Paragraph 3.18)
Failure of the Medical Education Department to put in place a transparent
billing system to ensure the genuineness of the payments and extended undue
benefits to the licensee.
(Paragraph 3.19)
Due to lack of proper/effective monitoring and accounting system in Rajasthan
State Sports Council Jaipur, loans and advances amounting to ` 3.72 crore
along with interest, granted to Associations, Trainers, Sports officers and other
departments/officers, was not adjusted/ recovered.
(Paragraph 3.20)
Rajasthan State Sports Council, through an MoU, allowed Rajasthan Cricket
Association (RCA) to use south pavilion of SMS stadium upto 31 December
2009, under which RCA was to develop infrastructure facilities, incur all
recurring and non recurring expenditure on development, to pay to council a

Chapter 1 Introduction
11
match fee for domestic or international matches and to share revenue from
advertisements. RCA did not pay its dues amounting to ` 3.70 crore (upto
August 2007) on this account but the Council extended the MoU upto 21 July
2012, and allowed RCA to use the academy premises, upto 21 July 2023.
The outstanding amount (match fee and revenue generated from advertisement
and hoardings, rent, electricity charges etc.) accumulated to ` 29.09 crore by
the end of 2012. On demanding the same by the Council, RCA contested
certain items. Council neither rebutted the arguments of RCA, nor called on
RCA to arrive at a mutually agreed settlement of the claim. Council also not
initiated any legal action under Rajasthan Public Debt Recovery Act 1952.
Thus, partial and lenient approach of the Council towards RCA and non
pursuing of its legal dues accruing over the time, resulted in accumulation of
unrecovered amount of ` 29.71 crore (December 2015).
(Paragraph 3.21)
Non-utilisation of hostel buildings constructed for scheduled tribe boys/girls
by Tribal Area Development Department, resulted in unproductive
expenditure of ` 3.59 crore and deprived scheduled tribes boys/girls students
of hostel facilities.
(Paragraph 3.22)
Non conducting surveys and investigations for availability of dispute free land
before preparing detailed technical estimates by Jaipur Development
Authority, led to avoidable extra expenditure of ` 6.65 crore due to increase in
length of the pipe line by 6,000 metres, reduction of size of sewer pipe to 1000
mm dia (from 1600 mm dia), cost escalation due to cancellation/re-allotment
of works and shifting of site.
(Paragraph 3.23)
Failure of Women and Child Development Department in taking up of
construction work of 378 Aganwadi Centres (AWCs) and in monitoring the
ongoing construction work of 56 AWCs, led to incurring of unfruitful
expenditure of ` 22.61 crore on construction of AWCs and also in blocking of
funds of ` 14.27 crore for a period of more than three to five years. Non
utilization of 569 completed AWCs also resulted in running of AWCs in
rented buildings depriving the beneficiaries of the intended basic facilities.
(Paragraph 3.24)
1.7 Response of the Departments to Performance Audits/Draft
Paragraphs
The draft paragraphs are forwarded to the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of
the departments concerned, drawing their attention, for their response. It is
brought to their personal attention that in view of likely inclusion of such
paragraphs in the Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India, which are placed before State Legislature, it would be desirable to

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
12
include their comments. They are also advised to have meetings with the
Principal Accountant General to discuss the performance audits/thematic
audits/draft paragraphs, proposed for inclusion in the Audit Reports.
Accordingly all the performance audits/thematic audits/draft paragraphs
proposed for inclusion in this report, were forwarded to the Principal
Secretaries/ Secretaries concerned.
The concerned departments did not send replies to 4 paragraphs out of 26
performance audits/long draft paragraphs/thematic audit paragraphs/draft
paragraphs featured in Chapter II and Chapter III. The responses of the
concerned departments received in respect of 22 paragraphs have been
suitably incorporated in the Report.
1.8 Follow-up on Audit Reports
The Finance Department of the State Government decided (December 1996)
that Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on all paragraphs/reviews that have appeared
in Audit Reports be submitted to the Public Accounts Committee, duly vetted
by Audit, within three months from the date of laying of the Reports in the
State Legislature. A review of the outstanding ATNs on paragraphs/
performance reviews included in the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India pertaining to various Departments as of December 2015,
revealed that seven ATNs1 were pending from the concerned Departments.
1. Paragraphs 2.3.2.1 and 3.5 of the Audit Report (State Finances) 2012-13 and paragraphs
1.4.4, 2.3.3, 2.7, 3.2 and 3.5 of the Audit Report (State Finances) 2013-14.

13
Chapter-II
Performance Audit
This Chapter presents the performance audits of ‘Working of Juvenile Homes’
and ‘Working of Rajasthan Technical University’.
Department of Child Rights & Social Justice
and Empowerment
2.1 Working of Juvenile Homes 1’
Executive Summary
State Government established Juvenile Homes (children homes and
observation homes) in every district, for children in need of care and
protection and juveniles in conflict with law. These Homes are being
maintained either by the Government itself or in association with voluntary
nongovernmental organisations.
State Government failed to identify children in need of care and protection.
Further adults in the age group of 18 to 27 years were found admitted in
Observation (Juvenile) Homes. Separate Homes for children in need of care
and protection and children in conflict with law as required under JJ Act were
not established. Except at Divisional Headquarters, separate Homes for Boys
and Girls were also not established.
Adequate infrastructure facilities for stay and recreation (dormitories,
Bathrooms, dining hall, library rooms, first aid rooms and recreations room)
were either not provided or provided inadequately in both Government and
NGO Homes.
In test checked Homes nutritional diet viz. ghee, paneer, milk, dahi and fruits
were either not provided or provided inadequately. Clothing items, including
school material, were also distributed in less quantity. Regular health check-up
of Juveniles and Children were not being conducted in eight Government and
two NGO Homes.
Status of providing school education in NGOs Homes was better than
Government Homes. Eight Government Homes were providing education to
less than 64 per cent children and three NGO Homes were providing it to 87
to 94 per cent children. School education was not being provided in two
Government Homes. No vocational training was provided in any of the test
checked Government Homes. ‘After Care Organisations’ to facilitate children
1 Juvenile homes include Observation Homes, Children Homes and Shelter Homes.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
14
in their transition from institution-based life to mainstream society for social
re-integration, were not established.
Supervisory staff like Superintendents, Counsellor etc. posted in Government
Homes was generally not adequate which adversely affected the functioning of
Government Homes. Post of Nurse, Housekeeper and Physical Training
Instructors were vacant in all test checked Homes.
In 2010-11, State Government incurred ` 7.47 crore from its own budget, as
funds were not allotted under ‘Institutional Care of Integrated Child Protection
Scheme’ by Government of India (GoI). On the other hand, State Government
could not utilize GoI grant of ` 47.45 lakh under 'Care, Support and
Rehabilitation Services'. Government could not construct four new buildings
(Homes) due to non-availability of land/land dispute.
As per scheme guidelines, inspection of Homes needs to be conducted. For
this purpose, norms were not fixed for State, Division and District level
authorities and only a few inspections were conducted by these authorities.
District level inspection committees were either not constituted or constituted
but no inspections were conducted.
2.1.1 Introduction
Under the provisions of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2000 (JJ Act) and Rajasthan Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Rules 2011 (JJ Rules), State Government may establish and
maintain either by itself or in association with voluntary organisations,
children homes and observation homes in every district, for reception of
children in need of care and protection2, and juveniles3 in conflict with law.
Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) was launched in 2009 by
Government of India (GoI) with the objective of contributing to the
improvement in well being of children in difficult circumstances, as well as to
reduce their vulnerabilities to situations and actions that lead to abuse, neglect,
exploitation, abandonment and separation of children. The scheme provides
grants to new institutions (Observation Homes, Children Homes and Shelter
Homes) and maintenance of existing institutions.
2.1.2 Organisational Set up
The organisational structure for running homes for juveniles (Children Homes
and Observation Homes) is represented in the following organogram:
2 As per section 2(d) of JJ Act, child in need of care and protection means a child who is
found without any home or settled place; who is found begging or who is a street child;
who is mentally challenged, does not have a parent, victim of natural calamity or has a
reasonable threat to be killed/injured etc.
3 As per section 2(k) of JJ Act, Juvenile means a person who has not completed 18 years of
age.

Chapter II Performance Audit
15
2.1.3 Audit Objectives
Performance audit on working of Juvenile Homes was conducted to ascertain:
• whether there exist proper methods for identifying children in need of
care and protection and for their admission in Juvenile Homes;
• whether Juvenile Homes are being run with proper infrastructure and
provide proper physical care and adequate facilities for mental
development of children;
• whether any aftercare programme is in existence after releasing the
children from Juvenile Homes either by adoption or on attaining the
age of 18 years;
• whether funds were provided timely, adequately, and utilized properly
and
• whether proper supervision and monitoring system is in existence in
Juvenile Homes.
2.1.4 Sources of Audit criteria
Audit criteria was derived from:
• The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 as
amended;
• Rajasthan Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules,
2011;
State Child Protection Society
District Child
Welfare
Committee
District Child
Protection
Officer & staff
(District Child
Protection Unit)
District Juvenile
Justice Board
Special Adoption
Resource Agency
(District level)
State Adoption Resource
Agency
Superintendent of
Juvenile Homes run
by Govt./NGO
Principal Secretary
(Social Justice and Empowerment)
Director and Joint Secretary,
Child Rights Department
Deputy Director
(Children)
District Children
Officer (Divisional
Headquarter)
Assistant Director
(District level)

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
16
• Guidelines of Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) 2009 and
ICPS 2014 and
• Orders and circulars issued by the department.
2.1.5 Audit Scope and methodology
Nine districts4 (out of 33) with 13 Homes run by Government 5and 5 Children
Homes6, 3 Shelter Homes 7 and one Adoption Agency 8 run by NGOs, along
with District Child Protection Unit (DCPUs) were test checked on random
basis, covering 25 per cent of total expenditure incurred (` 74.98 crore). Field
study for performance audit was conducted covering the period from 2010-11
to 2014-15. An entry conference was held on 1 May 2015 with audited entity
wherein objectives, scope and coverage of performance audit were discussed.
The findings of audit were discussed with the Department in an exit
conference held on 8 January 2016.
Audit findings
Audit findings on performance of juvenile homes are discussed in following
paragraphs:
2.1.6 Identification and admission of children
Children in need of care and protection (Children) are referred to the Child
Welfare Committee (CWC) of the District by any individual/ society/NGO/
DCPU. CWC orders for admission of these children to Children Homes.
Similarly, children in conflict with law are presented to Juvenile Justice Board
(JJ Board) of the District by concerned designated officer of police department
and JJ Board orders for admission of such children to Observation Homes.
Street children and run away children, who are in need of urgent care and
protection are also admitted in Shelter Homes run by NGOs with financial
assistance from Government.
4 Baran; Bikaner; Jaipur; Jhunjhunu; Pali; Sawai Madhopur; Sikar; Tonk and Udaipur.
5 Govt. Observation and Children Home, Baran; Govt. Observation and Children Home
(Boys), Bikaner; Govt. Apchari Balika Home, Bikaner; Govt. Observation and Children
Home, Sethi Colony (Boys) Jaipur; Govt. Observation and Children Home (Girls) Jaipur;
Govt. Shishu Grah, Jaipur; Govt. Observation and Children Home, Jhunjhunu; Govt.
Observation and Children Home, Pali; Govt. Observation and Children Home, Sawai
Madhopur; Govt. Observation and Children Home, Sikar; Govt. Observation and
Children Home, Tonk; Govt. Observation and Children Home (Boys), Udaipur; Govt.
Observation and Children Home (Girls), Udaipur.
6 Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah Kanyadeh, Baran; RAISE Asha Ki Kiran, Children Home,
Jaipur; Kasturba Sewa Sansthan, Children Home, Sikar; Nirashrit Balgrah, Children
Home, Tonk; Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit Balgrah, Children Home, Udaipur.
7 I-India Shelter Home (Boys), Jaipur; I-India Shelter Home (Girls), Jaipur; AASRA Vikas
Sansthan, Shelter Home, Udaipur.
8 Mahesh Ashram, Shishu Grah, Adoption Agency, Udaipur.

Chapter II Performance Audit
17
Following points were noticed during Performance Audit:
2.1.6.1 Lack of identification of children in need of care and protection
Para IV.1.1 (iii) and (iv) of ICPS, 2009 guidelines and para III.2.1(iii) and (iv)
of ICPS, 2014 guidelines stipulate that DCPU have to identify families at risk
and children in need of care and protection through effective networking and
linkages with ICDS functionaries viz. Anganwadi Workers from Integrated
Child Development Schemes and other agencies (Auxiliary Nursing Midwife
(ANMs) from Medical Department and local bodies), assess the number of
children in difficult circumstances and create district specific data base to
monitor patterns of children in difficult circumstances.
Scrutiny of nine test checked districts revealed that identification of children
in need of care and protection through surveys was not done in six 9 districts.
Other three districts did not furnish any information. No data base was
available with all these nine district authorities.
2.1.6.2 Less admission of children in Government Homes
As per sanction, each Home has the capacity to accommodate 30/50 children.
However, it was noticed that most of the homes were housing less children.
The occupancy was less than 50 per cent in seven Homes run by Government
(Baran; Bikaner (Boys); Jhunjhunu; Pali; Sawai Madhopur; Sikar; and Tonk).
Had the identification of children in need of care and protection been done, the
optimum capacity of Government Homes could have been utilised. Two Girl
Homes (Jaipur and Udaipur) however were over crowded due to admission of
runaway girls.
State Government did not offer any comment on this issue (January 2016).
2.1.6.3 Excess admission of children in NGO Homes
Capacity of children is sanctioned at the time of registration of NGO Homes.
It was observed that out of eight test checked NGO Homes, in two Homes 10,
CWCs offered five to 20 children in excess of their sanctioned capacity. In
another case Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah Kanyadeh, Baran, capacity of the
Home was not mentioned in the sanction order but 49 to 56 children were
residing in the Home. This might adversely affect the standards of care and
protection provided to children.
Government did not offer any comment (January 2016) for variation between
sanctioned capacity and numbers of children residing in various homes.
However, on being pointed out by audit, Government amended (October
2015) registration certificate of Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah Kanyadeh,
Baran.
9 Baran, Bikaner, Jhunjhunu, Pali, Tonk and Udaipur.
10 I-India Shelter Home (Boys) Jaipur (5 to 20) and RAISE Asha ki Kiran Children Home,
Jaipur (14 to 20).

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
18
2.1.6.4 Admission of adults in children Homes
Section 2 (l) of JJ Act defines ‘a juvenile in conflict with law’ as a juvenile
who is alleged to have committed an offence and has not completed 18 year of
age as on the date of commission of such offence. Such juvenile is fit for
temporary reception in Observation Home established under section 8 of the
Act.
It was noticed that in test checked districts, 121 adults in the age group of 18
to 27 years and two adults of 35 (Jaipur Boys) and 40 years (Sikar), in
conflict with law, were admitted in 8 Observation Homes 11. Concerned
Superintendents replied (May to July 2015) that juveniles were admitted in
Observation Homes as per orders of the concerned JJ Board.
State Government replied (January 2016) that no report was received from JJ
Board under section 16(2) of the JJ Act. However, action taken by
Government for removal of irregularity was not intimated.
2.1.6.5 Reception units not working
Section 8(4) of JJ Act, stipulates that every juvenile who is not placed under
the charge of parent or guardian and is sent to an Observation Home shall be
initially kept in a reception unit of the Observation Home for preliminary
enquiries, care and classification for juveniles according to his age group. Test
check by audit revealed that no Reception Unit was found in six 12 test
checked Observation Homes. Six 13 test checked Observation Homes did not
provide the information.
Government accepted (January 2016) that reception units were not
functioning in Observation Homes but the work of these units was being done
by concerned superintendent at the time of admission. Reply is not acceptable
as requirement of the act was not being fulfilled.
2.1.6.6 Non-separating children by category, gender and age
Rule 29 of JJ Rules, 2011 prescribes separate Homes for children in need of
care and protection (Children Home) and for children in conflict of law
(Observation Home). Rule 16 of JJ Rules, 2011 stipulates that separate
Children Homes and Observation Homes shall be set up for boys and girls
also. They shall be further segregated into three age groups i.e. upto 12 years,
13 to 15 years and 16 to 18 years in Observation Homes. Segregation shall be
done upto 10 years, 10 to 15 years and 15 to 18 years in Children Homes.
Scrutiny revealed that there were no separate Children Homes and
Observation Homes in any of the districts in Rajasthan and both the Homes
11 Govt. Observation and Children Home , Baran: 9; Boys Bikaner: 12, Girls Bikaner: 2,
Boys Jaipur: 75, Jhunjhunu: 3, Pali: 8, Sawai Madhopur: 8, Sikar: 4.
12 Govt. Children and Observation Homes: Bikaner (Boys), Bikaner (Girls), Jaipur
(Boys), Tonk, Udaipur (Boys) and Udaipur (Girls).
13 Govt. Children and Observation Homes: Baran, Jaipur (Girls), Jhunjhunu, Pali, Sawai
Madhopur and Sikar.

Chapter II Performance Audit
19
were housed in the same premises. Out of nine selected districts, in six (Baran,
Sawai Madhopur, Pali, Sikar, Tonk and Jhunjhunu) districts, Children Homes
and Observation Homes were not set up separately for boys and girls and there
was no separate living facility for children as per their age group. In Bikaner,
Jaipur and Udaipur districts although separate Children Homes and
Observation Homes for boys and girls were established, there was no age wise
separation.
This indicated that Department has failed in keeping the children in need of
care and protection separately from children in conflict with law. Besides,
Department also did not provide separate living facility for children on the
basis of gender and age.
Government stated (January 2016) that both type of children are being kept in
one premise in such a manner that they cannot contact each other. However, a
State Level Home Upgradation Committee has been constituted (August 2015)
for improvement of conditions/separation in Government/NGO Homes, which
has decided (August 2015) that after getting proposals from DCPUs for
separate homes, the same would be submitted to GoI under ICPS.
Reply is not in conformity with the provisions of JJ Act as the children of both
types were required to be kept in separate premises. Moreover, concerned
Homes (except Boys Jaipur) intimated to audit that there was no separation of
children in need of care and protection and children in conflict with law. Reply
on issue of sex-wise and age-wise separation was not furnished.
This issue was also commented in para 2.2.7.1 of Audit Report 2008-09. PAC
in 167th Report of 2012-13 recommended (No. 12) for separate Children
Homes and Observation Homes but no progress has been made in this matter.
2.1.6.7 Keeping children in Shelter Homes for more than one year
As per rule 30 of JJ Rules for children in need of care and protection, such as
street children and run-away children, the State Government shall support
creation of requisite number of Shelter Homes through voluntary
organizations. Children can stay for a maximum period of one year in Shelter
Homes. It was observed that I-India Shelter Home, Jaipur were caring for 45
children (Boys: 22 and Girls: 23) for more than one year against the provisions
of the JJ Rules.
Government stated (January 2016) that as rehabilitation of children takes lot of
time therefore they overstayed. Reply is not acceptable as shelter homes are
created for temporary shelter for a maximum period of one year and not for
longer stay of more than one year.
2.1.6.8 Children escaping from Homes
Rule 18(2) of the JJ Rules 2011 stipulates that in the event of an escape of a
Juvenile or a child, the officer- in- charge of the Home shall immediately send
the guards to places where the juvenile is likely to go. The parents or
guardians of the juvenile are also to be informed immediately after such

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
20
escape along with a report to the area police station and a copy to the JJ Board
and the authorities concerned after holding an enquiry.
Scrutiny of records revealed that 134 14 children escaped during the period
2010-15 from 10 Government Homes in eight test checked districts. Of these,
only 75 children were brought back and the remaining 59 children from eight
Homes15 were still missing. It was also observed that in three NGO Homes 16,
6 children escaped during 2012-15 but only one was brought back. Report
regarding FIR and efforts made to trace missing children were not made
available to audit.
Government stated (January 2016) that concerned Observation Homes/JJ
Board intimate concerned police stations about escape of children and
thereafter the process of searching the children is started. However, action
taken to prevent children from escaping was not intimated.
This issue was also raised in paragraph 2.2.7.8 of Audit Report 2008-09 and
PAC in 167 th Report 2012-13 and 240 th Report 2013-14, recommended to
taking action against responsible officers. However, children continue to
escape both from Government Homes and NGO Homes and no action was
taken against responsible officers.
2.1.7 Standards of care for Institutions
The State Government has established Observation Homes and Children
Homes for providing facilities for their care and facilities for recreation and
rehabilitation of children. Deficiencies in standards of care are discussed
below:
2.1.7.1 Physical Infrastructure for Homes
As per rule 40(3) of JJ Rules 2011, the norms 17 for building of Homes were
fixed for a Home of 50 children.
(i) Scrutiny of 13 test checked Government Homes revealed that the space
for dormitories and bathrooms available was less than prescribed norms.
Further, space for dining hall, recreation room, workshop and library was
either not provided or were less than prescribed norms. Playground was
available only in six18 out of 13 Government Homes.
14 Baran-6, Boys Bikaner-4, Girls Jaipur-5, Boys Jaipur-78, Jhunjhunu-5, Pali-4, Sawai
Madhopur-19, Sikar-10, Girls Udaipur-2, Boys Udaipur-1.
15 Baran (3), Boys Bikaner (4), Girls Jaipur (1), Boys Jaipur (36), Jhunjhunu (2), Pali (2),
Sawai Madhopur (6), Sikar (5).
16 I-India Shelter Home (Boys) Jaipur-4, I-India Shelter Home (Girls) Jaipur-1, AASRA
Vikas Sansthan Shelter Home, Udaipur-1 (Brought back).
17 (i) 2 Dormitories (1000 sqft. Each= 2000 sqft. (40 sqft. for each child)) (ii) 5 Bathrooms
(25 sqft. each = 125 sqft.) (iii) 8 Toilets/latrines (25 sqft. each = 200 sqft.) (iv) 1 Dining
Hall (800 sqft.) (v) 1 Recreation Room (300 sqft.) (vi) 1 Workshop (1125 sqft.) (vii) 1
Library (500 sqft.) (viii) Play ground (Sufficient area according to total number).
18 (i) Boys Bikaner (ii) Girls Jaipur (iii) Boys Jaipur (iv) Shishu Grah Jaipur (v) Tonk (vi)
Boys Udaipur.

Chapter II Performance Audit
21
In Government Homes, Sikar and Jhunjhunu, though a new building was
constructed in 2014, the dining hall and recreation rooms were not as per
prescribed norms. Space for workshop and library was being utilised for office
work. No provision was made for playground.
(ii) Scrutiny of Homes run by NGOs revealed that except Kasturba Sewa
Sansthan, Sikar, in remaining 7 Homes, space for dormitories were less than
prescribed norms and except Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit Balgrah, Udaipur,
area of bathrooms was less than norms. In 4 Homes 19 workshops were not
available whereas in 3 Homes 20, space available for workshops was less than
the norms. In two Homes (RAISE Asha Ki Kiran Children Home, Jaipur and
Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit Balgrah Children Home, Udaipur) there was no
playground.
Thus, standards/norms prescribed under JJ Act for physical infrastructure were
not followed.
Government stated (January 2016) that efforts were being made for providing
adequate building facilities for homes by introducing 'Protsahan Yojana'.
However, no comments were offered on reasons for not following the
prescribed norms of physical infrastructure.
2.1.7.2 Physical Infrastructure for offices
As per Rule 40(3) of JJ Rules 2011, the norms for building 21 were fixed for
offices and other services for Homes. Further, as per Rule 40(4) the
Superintendent shall stay within the institution and shall be provided a quarter.
The position of availability of building in Homes is discussed below:-
(i) Out of 13 Homes test checked, first aid room was not available in 9
Homes and in other four Homes 22 the area was less than the prescribed norms.
The area of kitchen and stores was also less than the prescribed norms in
nine23 and five 24 Homes. Counseling Room was available only in one Home
(Jaipur (Boys) Home).
(ii) Residence of Superintendent was available only in 3 Homes (Girls
Bikaner, Jhunjhunu and Sikar). However, Superintendent was actually
residing only in one (Jhunjhunu) of these three Homes. In remaining two
Homes, residence was being used for office work. Area for office was
available as per norms only in 4 Homes (Boys Bikaner, Shishu Grah Jaipur,
19 (i) Baran (ii) RAISE Asha Ki Kiran, Jaipur (iii) Sikar (iv) AASRA Vikas Sansthan,
Udaipur.
20 (i) I-India Shelter Home, Girls, Jaipur (ii) Tonk (iii) Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit
Balgrah, Udaipur.
21 1. Kitchen (250 sqft.) 2. Store (250 sqft.) 3.(i) Office (300 sqft.) (ii) Superintendent Room
(200 sqft.) 4. Counselling and guidance room (120 sqft.) 5. First Aid Room (750 sqft.) 6.
JJ Board Room (300 sqft.) 7. CWC Room (300 sqft.) 8. Superintendent Residence (375
sqft.).
22 (i) Girls Jaipur (ii) Boys Jaipur (iii) Shishu Grah Jaipur (iv) Jhunjhunu.
23 Baran, Boys Bikaner, Girls Bikaner, Girls Jaipur, Boys Jaipur, Shishu Grah Jaipur, Pali,
Sawai Madhopur and Boys Udaipur.
24 Baran, Boys Bikaner, Shishu Grah Jaipur, Girls Udaipur and Boys Udaipur.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
22
Sawai Madhopur and Tonk) whereas office room for Superintendent was not
available in any of the 13 Homes.
The issue of non-residing/non-availability of residence of Superintendent was
commented in para no. 2.2.7.7 of Audit Report 2008-09. PAC in its 167 th
Report 2012-13 advised the department to make available residence facilities
in Homes. However, the department failed to comply with the advise.
(iii) First aid room was available only in four 25 Homes which was less than
prescribed norms. Counselling room were available only in three Homes
(Baran, I-India Shelter Home for Girls and Boys Jaipur). Rooms for office
were available in all Homes, but room for Superintendent was available only
in Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah, Kanyadeh, Baran. Space for kitchen and
store was less than the norms in four Homes (RAISE Asha Ki Kiran, Jaipur,
AASRA Vikas Sansthan, Udaipur, I-India Shelter Home Boys and Girls
Jaipur). Further, superintendent was not residing in any of the NGO Homes.
This indicated that the Department was indifferent towards meeting the needs
for overall/proper care of the children due to which they were being deprived
of proper facilities.
Government stated (January 2016) that all these facilities are available in
newly constructed Homes and necessary instructions for adhering to the norms
have been issued to NGO homes.
2.1.7.3 Nutritional diet
As per Rule 44 and Schedule 2 of JJ Rules, 2011, norms have been prescribed
for nutrition and food (diet), wherein ghee (20 gm), milk (250 ml),
dahi/chhachh (250 ml), sugar (40gm), fruits (125 gm) everyday and paneer
(100 gm) every week for each child have been prescribed.
Scrutiny of records of distribution of nutritional diet in test checked
Government Homes and NGO Homes for the selected months June 2013 and
December 2014, revealed following deficiencies:
(i) In three Government Homes (Bikaner Girls, Jhunjhunu and Sawai
Madhopur) ghee was never provided to children. In other nine Homes, except
Shishu Grah, Jaipur, ghee was provided in lesser quantity than prescribed
norms. Sugar was provided by all the Homes in the prescribed quantity. Six
Homes26 did not distribute fruits. Seven Homes 27 did not provide paneer.
Further, three Homes28 did not provide Dahi.
(ii) NGO Homes at Baran (Swami Shree Krishan Balgrah Kanyadeh) and
Sikar (Kasturba Sewa Sansthan) and Shelter Home at Udaipur (AASRA
Vikas Sansthan) did not provide ghee. Paneer which was to be provided
25 Girls Jaipur, Boys Jaipur, Shishu Grah Jaipur and Jhunjhunu.
26 (i) Girls Bikaner (ii) Boys Jaipur (iii) Jhunjhunu (iv) Pali (v) Sawai Madhopur (vi) Tonk.
27 (i) Baran (ii) Girls Jaipur (iii) Jhunjhunu (iv) Sawai Madhopur (v) Tonk (vi) Boys
Udaipur (vii) Girls Udaipur.
28 (i) Baran (ii) Jhunjhunu (6/2013) (iii) Sawai Madhopur (6/2013 & 12/2014).

Chapter II Performance Audit
23
weekly was not distributed by NGO Homes at Baran (Swami Shree Krishan
Balgrah Kanyadeh) and Tonk (Nirashrit Bal Grah) and by both the NGOs at
Udaipur. I-India (NGO shelter home) Jaipur provided Dahi and fruits in lesser
quantity then prescribed. NGO Home at Baran (Swami Shree Krishan Balgrah
Kanyadeh) and Shelter Home at Udaipur (AASRA Vikas Sansthan) did not
distribute dahi and fruits in both the months, whereas NGO Home at Sikar
(Kasturba Sewa Santhan) did not distribute dahi and fruits in June 2013.
Though normal diet was being provided regularly to children, however, the
necessary nutritional diet were not adequately being provided in some Homes.
Government stated (January 2016) that orders of ` 2000 per child per month
have already been issued for providing proper nutritional facilities in
Government/NGO Homes as per ICPS norms. Action for non-providing
facilities during period in question in Government Homes is being proposed.
In case of NGO Homes, respective District Officers are being directed to
remove deficiencies. However, reasons for not following prescribed norms
were not furnished to audit.
2.1.7.4 Clothing articles
Schedule-I under Rule 41 of JJ Rules, 2011 provides norms for clothing
material and other materials to be issued per child per year for girls: wearing
topper/lower (5 sets), banian/bra (6 ), panties (6), sanitary pads (12), dupatta
(2), slipper (1 pair) shoes (1 Pair), handkerchief (6) woollen shawl (1),
woollen sweater (1) and for boys: shirts and pants (5 sets), vests and
underwear (4 sets) jersey (1), scarf (1 pair), slipper (1 pair), shoes (1 Pair) and
handkerchief (6) and for school going boys and girls: school uniform, bags,
shoes, books and stationery etc.
(a) Scrutiny of records of material distributed in selected Homes for the
years 2013-14 and 2014-15 revealed that in most of the cases clothing items
were distributed in less quantity as detailed in Appendix 2.1 . Government
Home Baran and Jhunjhunu (except 4 numbers of shirts in 2014-15) did not
provide any clothing to any children during 2013-14 and 2014-15.
(b) Similarly, school material was also distributed in these Government
Homes/NGO Homes in lesser quantity against norms as detailed in
Appendix 2.1 . One Shelter Home AASRA Vikas Sansthan, Udaipur did not
distribute school material to its children during both the years 2013-14 and
2014-15. Thus, clothing material was not being distributed/provided as per
prescribed norms to the children by Government/NGO Homes.
Government stated (January 2016) that action for non-providing facilities
during period in question in Government Homes is being proposed. In case of
NGO Homes, respective District Officers are being directed to remove
deficiencies. However, reasons for not following prescribed norms were not
furnished to audit.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
24
2.1.7.5 Recreation facilities
As per Rule 49 of JJ Rules 2011, a provision of guided recreation shall be
made available to all juveniles or children which include indoor and outdoor
games, music, television, picnics and outings, cultural programmes and
library.
Scrutiny revealed that library room was available only in four Government
Homes29, whereas books were not available in one (Boys, Bikaner) Home.
Besides, library room was being utilized for office work in Jhunjhunu. Library
rooms were not available in four NGO Homes 30. Only newspapers and
magazines were available in remaining four Homes.
Earmarked recreation room was not available in five Government Homes 31
and one NGO Home (RAISE Asha Ki Kiran Children Home, Jaipur).
However, T.V. carom board etc. were available in these five Homes.
Playground was not available in seven Government Homes 32 and two NGO
Homes (RAISE Asha Ki Kiran Children Home, Jaipur and Bhagwan
Mahaveer Nirashrit Balgrah, Udaipur).
Government stated (January 2016) that from time to time necessary
instructions are being issued to NGO Homes to provide facilities to the
children as per norms. No comments were offered in case of Government
Homes.
Non-availability of playground was also commented in para no. 2.2.7.4 of
Audit Report 2008-09. PAC in its 167 th Report of 2012-13 enquired about the
entertainment facilities being provided in Homes. However, entertainment
facilities like playground etc. are still lacking in many Homes.
2.1.7.6 Medical care facilities
As per Rule 45 of JJ Rules 2011, every institution shall maintain a medical
record of each juvenile or child on the basis of monthly medical checkup and
provide necessary medical facilities, including a doctor on call available on all
working days for regular medical checkups and treatment of juveniles or
children and have sufficient medical equipment to handle minor health
problems including first aid kit with stock of emergency medicines and
consumables.
It was seen that facility of patient room was available only in four Government
Homes (Shishu Grah Jaipur, Boys Jaipur, Girls Jaipur and Jhunjhunu).
Regular health checkups of juvenile and children were not being conducted in
29 (i) Boys Bikaner (ii) Boys Jaipur (iii) Jhunjhunu (iv) Sikar.
30 (i) Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah, Baran (ii) I-India Shelter Home Girls, Jaipur (iii)
RAISE Asha Ki Kiran, Jaipur (iv) AASRA Vikas Sansthan Shelter Home, Udaipur.
31 (i) Baran (ii) Pali (iii) Sikar (iv) Tonk (v) Girls Udaipur.
32 (i) Baran (ii) Girls Bikaner (iii) Jhunjhunu (iv) Pali (v) Sawai Madhopur (vi) Sikar (vii)
Girls Udaipur.

Chapter II Performance Audit
25
eight Government Homes 33 except taking them to the nearest
hospital/dispensary when they fell ill. Similarly, facility of patient room was
not available in four NGO Homes 34. Regular health checkup of children was
also not being conducted in two NGO Homes 35, except taking them to nearest
hospital/dispensary whenever required.
Government stated (January 2016) that directions have been issued
(September 2015) for preparing a panel of doctors/nurses at district level to
utilize their part time/full time services.
The issue was commented in para no. 2.2.7.5 of Audit Report 2008-09. PAC
in its 167th Report of 2012-13 directed to keep the health record of children
after monthly medical check-up but no progress has been made in this
direction.
2.1.7.7 School education
As per Rule 47 of JJ Rules, 2011, every institution shall provide education to
all juveniles or children according to the age and ability, both inside or outside
their institution, as per requirement through mainstream schools, bridge
schools, open schools, non-formal education and learning and input from
special educators where needed.
It was seen that except for Shishu Grah, Jaipur, where the children are in the
age group of 0 to 6 years, in eight test checked Government Homes36, less than
64 per cent eligible children (age 6-18 years) were provided school education
during the period 2010-15. Government Homes at Baran and Jhunjhunu did
not provide education to any child whereas Government Homes at Sikar and
Boys Udaipur provided school education to all eligible school going children.
In case of NGO Homes, only Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah, Kanyadeh Baran
and Nirashrit Balgrah, Tonk provided school education to all children.
AASRA Vikas Sansthan, Udaipur, I-India Boys & Girls, Jaipur Shelter Homes
were also providing education to all enrolled children. In case of the remaining
three NGO Homes, education is being provided to only 87 to 94 per cent 37
children. Thus, Government Homes were lagging behind in providing school
education to children.
Government stated (January 2016) that action for non providing facilities
during period in question in Government Homes is being proposed. In case of
33 (i) Baran (ii) Bikaner Boys (iii) Shishu Grah Jaipur (iv) Boys Jaipur (v) Girls Jaipur
(vi) Jhunjhunu (vii) Pali (viii) Sawai Madhopur.
34 (i) RAISE Asha Ki Kiran, Children Home, Jaipur (ii) Kasturba Sewa Sansthan, Children
Home, Sikar (iii) Nirashrit Balgrah, Tonk (iv) AASRA Vikas Sansthan, Shelter Home,
Udaipur.
35 (i) Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah, Baran (ii) AASRA Vikas Sansthan Shelter Home,
Udaipur.
36 (i) Boys, Bikaner-20 (ii) Girls, Bikaner-10 (iii) Girls, Jaipur-2 (iv) Boys, Jaipur-49 (v)
Pali-1 (vi) Sawai Madhopur-5 (vii) Tonk-23 and (viii) Udaipur-64
37 (i) RAISE Asha ki Kiran, Jaipur-94 (ii) Kasturba Sewa Sansthan, Sikar-87 and
(iii) Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit Balgrah, Udaipur-92

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
26
NGO Homes, respective District Officers are being directed to remove
deficiencies. However, reasons for not following prescribed norms were not
furnished to audit.
2.1.7.8 Vocational training
As per Rule 48 of JJ Rules, 2011, every institution shall provide gainful
vocational training to Juvenile or children to get employment after release
from Homes.
It was observed in all test checked Government Homes that vocational training
was not provided to any Juvenile or Child. In NGO Homes, 3 NGOs (Swami
Shree Krishna Balgrah, Baran; RAISE Asha Ki Kiran, Jaipur and Nirashrit
Balgrah, Tonk) did not provide vocational training to children.
Government stated (January 2016) that 'Chief Minister Skill Development
Scheme' has been introduced for imparting vocational training for children
completing age of 18 years, to make them self dependent after release from
Homes. However, fact remains that no training was imparted to children in
any of the test checked Government Homes and three NGO Homes.
2.1.8 After Care of Children/Juveniles
Section 44 of the Act provides for establishment or recognition of ‘after care’
organisation Rule 38 of the JJ Rules provides that the State Government shall
set up an ‘After Care Programme’ for care of juveniles or children after they
leave special Homes and children Homes with the objective to facilitate their
transition from institution-based life to mainstream society for social re-
integration.
It was observed that there was no organisation registered under section 44 of
the Act and all the nine selected districts have informed (May to July 2015)
that they do not have any ‘after care’ organisation.
Government stated (January 2016) that under 'Chief Minister Skill
Development Scheme' children upto the age of 21 year will get
vocational/technical training for two years or for two programmes. However,
opening of ‘After Care Organizations’ under provisions of JJ Act was not
addressed. This issue was also commented in paragraph 2.2.8.3 of Audit
Report ending March 2009 but no progress was noticed.
2.1.9 Manpower Management and capacity building
2.1.9.1 Shortage of manpower in Government Homes
As per Annexure IV of ICPS 2009 and Annexure X of ICPS 2014, each Home
with a capacity of 50 children, should have 14 staff members38.
38 Superintendent-One, Counselor – One, Probationary officer- One, House Mother/Father –
Two, Para Medical staff (Nurse) – One, Storekeeper cum Accountant- One, Cook-One,
Helper – One, Housekeeper- One, Educator-One, MBBS Doctor- One, Art & Craft cum
Music Teacher – One, PT instructor – One.

Chapter II Performance Audit
27
Scrutiny of staff positions in 13 test checked Government Homes revealed
following shortcomings in posting of staff during 2010-15:
(i) It was seen that out of 13 test checked Government Homes,
Superintendents were not posted in eight homes in any of the years. During
2010-11, Superintendents were posted in five Government Homes (Boys
Bikaner, Boys Jaipur, Girls Jaipur, Boys Udaipur and Shishu Grah, Jaipur),
whereas the position deteriorated in 2014-15, where Superintendents were
posted in only two Government Homes (Boys Home Jaipur and Shishu Grah,
Jaipur).
(ii) Out of 13 tests checked Government Homes counsellors were not
posted in 12 Homes 39 during the period 2010-12. During 2012-15, counsellors
were not posted in ten Government Homes 40. In absence of counsellors, no
counselling services were provided to needy children.
(iii) Probation Officers (PO), required to assess the activities of juveniles,
were not posted in 11 Government Homes 41 during 2010-12, in 7 Homes 42
during 2012-13 and in 5 Homes43 during 2013-15.
(iv) The post of Educator was not filled in any of the Homes, except in
Sawai Madhopur during 2010-12, resultantly educational and moral education
classes which were to be a part of daily routine, were not conducted.
(v) The post of Nurse, housekeeper and PT instructors remained vacant in
all Homes during the period 2010-15.
(vi) Other posts viz. House Father/Mother, Storekeeper cum Accountant,
Cook, Helper and Art & Craft Teacher etc. remained vacant intermittently
(filled for 1 to 3 years) in selected Homes.
Thus, non-filling of key posts adversely affected functioning of Homes.
Government in its reply (January 2016) stated that directions have been issued
(September 2015) for preparing panel of doctors/nurses at district level to
utilize their services and action related to filling up of other posts is under
process.
The issue was also commented in paragraph 2.2.7.9 of Audit Report 2008-09
and PAC in Action Taken Report 2012-13 directed to take action but no action
was found taken.
39 (i) Baran (ii) Boys Bikaner (iii) Girls Bikaner (iv) Boys Jaipur (v) Girls Jaipur (vi)
Jhunjhunu (vii) Pali (viii) Sawai Madhopur (ix) Sikar (x) Tonk (xi) Girls Udaipur and
(xii) Boys Udaipur.
40 (i) Baran (ii) Boys Bikaner (iii) Girls Bikaner (iv) Boys Jaipur (v) Girls Jaipur (vi) Pali
(vii) Sawai Madhopur (viii) Tonk (ix) Girls Udaipur and (x) Boys Udaipur.
41 (i) Baran (ii) Boys Bikaner (iii) Girls Bikaner (iv) Girls Jaipur (v) Jhunjhunu (vi) Pali
(vii) Sawai Madhopur (viii) Sikar (ix) Tonk (x) Girls Udaipur and (xi) Boys Udaipur.
42 (i) Girls Bikaner (ii) Boys Jaipur (iii) Girls Jaipur (iv) Pali (v) Tonk (vi) Girls Udaipur
(vii) Boys Udaipur.
43 (i) Girls Bikaner (ii) Boys Jaipur (iii) Girls Jaipur (iv) Pali (v) Girls Udaipur.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
28
2.1.9.2 Training to staff members
As per rule 90 of JJ Rules, 2011, the State Government or the officer incharge
shall provide training to personnel of each category of staff in keeping with
their statutory responsibilities and specific job requirements.
Training was imparted to all staff members in two test checked NGO Homes
(I-India Open Shelter Boys and I-India Open Shelter Girls, Jaipur) and one
Government Home (Boys Udaipur). Further, two members (out of 8) were
imparted training in one NGO Home (AASRA Vikas Sansthan,Udaipur) while
154 members in 17 Homes (12 Government Homes except Boys Udaipur and
5 NGOs44) were not imparted any training.
Government stated (January 2016) that staff members of Homes were being
nominated for trainings, organized by National Institute of Public Cooperation
and Child Development or by regional centres. Fact remains that not all the
staff members of the test checked Homes were imparted training.
2.1.9.3 Training to members of JJ Board and CWC
As per Rule 5(5) and Rule 20(4) of JJ Rules, the State Government shall
provide for such training and orientation in child psychology, child welfare,
child rights, national and international standards for juvenile justice to all
members of the JJ Board and CWC as it considered necessary.
(i) In six test checked districts (Bikaner, Jhunjhunu, Pali, Sawai
Madhopur, Tonk and Udaipur), no training was provided to any member of JJ
Board while in Baran only one member was imparted training.
(ii) In four test checked districts (Bikaner, Jaipur, Jhunjhunu and Pali) no
training was provided to any member of CWC and in three districts (Sikar,
Tonk and Udaipur) only 20 to 80 per cent members were imparted training. In
remaining two districts (Baran and Sawai Madhopur) all members were
imparted training.
Thus, most of the staff of Homes and members of JJ Board and CWC were not
trained in child psychology and child welfare/rights for implementing Act and
Rules properly.
Government stated (January 2016) that training for members of CWC and JJ
Board was organized in four Divisional HQs (Ajmer and Udaipur: December
2014 and Jodhpur and Bharatpur: January 2015). However, reasons for
providing less trainings at district level was not furnished.
The issue was also raised in paragraph No. 2.2.9.3 of Audit Report ending
March 2009 but no progress was noticed.
44 (i) Swami Shree Ksishna Balgrah Kanyadeh, Baran (ii) RAISE Asha Ki Kiran, Children
Home, Jaipur (iii) Kasturba Sewa Sansthan, Sikar (iv) Nirashrit Balgrah, Tonk (v)
Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit Balgrah, Udaipur.

Chapter II Performance Audit
29
2.1.10 Pendency of cases in Juvenile Justice Boards (JJB)
As per Rule 9(3) of JJ Rules 2011, and section 6 (i) of JJ Act, Board will meet
on all working days of a week unless the cases pending are less in a particular
district and concerned authority (State Government) issues order in this
regard. JJ Board will deal with all proceedings under JJ Act relating to
Juvenile in conflict with law.
In test checked districts it was noticed that full bench of JJ Boards met only
once or twice in a week instead of on all working days of a week despite huge
pendency of criminal cases against the children in Observation Homes. Out of
3,741 pending cases (2010-15) of all nine test checked districts, 998 cases
were pending for more than one year in seven 45 districts. Information in
respect of other two districts was not made available. Thus, juveniles are
forced to stay in Observation Homes till pendency of their cases.
Government replied (January 2016) that meetings of JJB are being held as per
circular (December 2004) issued by Registrar High Court. Reply is not
acceptable as the said circular was issued under the provisions of JJ Rules
2002 where as under revised JJ Rules 2011, enacted w.e.f. May 2011. JJ Board
will meet on all working days of a week.
Paragraph No. 2.2.6.2 of Audit Report 2008-09 had also raised this issue.
Though the department intimated PAC that in compliance to recommendation
of PAC (167th Report 2012-13) necessary instructions have been issued in this
regard but no progress was found to have been made.
2.1.11 Advisory Boards not constituted
As per section 62(3) of the JJ Act read with Rule 93 of JJ Rules, the State
Government shall constitute Advisory Boards at State, District and City level
consisting of representatives of State Government, members of the competent
authority, academic institutions, locally respectable citizens and
representatives of NGOs, for inspection of various institutional or non-
institutional services in their respective jurisdiction and to make
recommendation to the State Government. These Boards shall also function as
inspection committees under section 35 of the Act.
Though State Level Advisory Board was constituted, no District or City Level
Advisory Boards were constituted in any of the nine test checked districts.
This has deprived the Homes from any inspection and recommendation for
development/improvement of Homes.
Government stated (January 2016) that as per order of 5 June 2015, District
Inspection Committee constituted in February 2012, will also work as
Advisory Board at District level. This confirms that Advisory Boards were
constituted only in June 2015.
45 Baran 275, Bikaner 59, Jhunjhunu 185, Pali 237, Sawai Madhopur 172, Sikar 38 and
Tonk 32.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
30
2.1.12 Financial Management
Grant allotted under ICPS and expenditure incurred during the period 2010-11
to 2014-15 for Government Homes, NGO Children Homes and Shelter Homes
was as under:
(` in crore)
S.No. Year Allotment Expenditure Saving Percentage
1 2010-11 10.74 7.47 3.27 30.44
2 2011-12* 9.92 6.70 3.22 32.46
3 2012-13* 13.59 12.62 0.97 7.12
4 2013-14 18.98 18.97 0.01 0.05
5 2014-15 36.16 29.22 6.94 19.19
Source: (i) 2010-11 State Budget Head 2035 (ii) 2011-12 to 2014-15 provided by Directorate
Child Rights, Jaipur
* During 2011-12 and 2012-13 expenditure on running of Homes was met from State Budget
and reimbursed through submitting Statement of Expenditure (SOE) to GoI under ICPS.
Observations on financial management are discussed below:
2.1.12.1 Non-allotment of funds under Institutional Care Head of ICPS
As per annexure IV of guidelines of ICPS 2009, recurring expenditure grant
for running of Homes was ` 20.29 lakh per Home per year, including ` 10.92
lakh for salary of staff under the head institutional care.
Scrutiny of sanction revealed that GoI commented on the proposal submitted
by State Government for 2010-11, that the State would need to rationalize the
Homes and revert to the Plan Approval Board for approval. It was noticed that
State Government did not submit rationalization of Homes and therefore GoI
did not sanction any grant under the head institutional care. As such the State
Government incurred expenditure of ` 7.47 crore from its own budget for
2010-11.
Government replied (January 2016) that although it had submitted revised
proposals (January and March 2011) but the same were not accepted by GoI.
The reply is not acceptable as the State Government did not submit
rationalization of Homes along with revised proposals as asked for by GoI.
2.1.12.2 Non-utilisation of grant for Shelter Homes
GoI sanctioned (February 2011) ` 47.45 lakh Central Assistance for running
of Shelter Homes under the Head ‘Care, Support and Rehabilitation Services’
for 2010-11. State Government could not utilize the grant and it was adjusted
by GoI from the next year’s (2011-12) grant. Thus, State Government was
deprived of the central assistance. Reasons for non-utilising the central share
were not intimated.
2.1.12.3 Funds to NGOs not disbursed
It was noticed that the DCPUs were not disbursing full amount to NGOs, as
sanctioned by State Child Protection Society (SCPS), resulting in
accumulation of huge balance at DCPUs. In eight out of nine test checked
districts the amount accumulated is ` 10.40 crore for 36 NGOs during
2012-15 as detailed in table below:

Chapter II Performance Audit
31
(` in crore)
S.
No.
Name of District No. of NGOs Allotment Disbursement Balance
1 Baran 2 1.30 0.41 0.89
2 Jaipur 14 4.84 1.15 3.69
3 Jhunjhunu 1 0.08 - 0.08
4 Pali 1 0.15 - 0.15
5 Sawai Madhopur 1 0.07 - 0.07
6 Sikar 2 0.90 0.28 0.62
7 Tonk 3 0.66 0.33 0.33
8 Udaipur 12 6.68 2.11 4.57
Total 36 14.68 4.28 10.40
Source: Provided by DCPUs
It was interesting to note that in Pali, Sawai Madhopur and Jhunjhunu districts
though NGOs were not functioning but concerned DCPU were getting funds
for them.
The amount so disbursed to DCPUs is shown as expenditure in SOE submitted
by SCPS to GoI without its actual utilisation.
Government did not offer any comment on accumulation of funds in DCPUs.
2.1.12.4 Non-utilisation of grant for construction
GoI approved construction of new buildings for 23 Government Homes. Of
these 20 Government Homes 46 were approved in 2012-13 at a cost of ` 10.49
crore ( ` 7.87 crore central share and ` 2.62 crore state share). GoI released its
share ( ` 5.51 crore: 17 October 2012 and ` 2.36 crore: 12 March 2013).
Remaining 3 Government Homes 47 were approved in 2013-14 at a cost of
` 1.25 crore ( ` 0.94 crore central share and ` 0.31 crore State share). GoI
released its share on 26 November 2013.
It was observed that construction of only 15 buildings were completed upto
July 2015 whereas construction of other four (Bharatpur, Sriganganagar,
Jalore and Nagaur) buildings was in progress (August 2015). The construction
of four buildings48 was not started due to non-availability of land/land dispute.
Thus, children of these eight districts were deprived from their own building.
Government did not offer any comment on this observation.
2.1.12.5 Utilisation of non-recurring grant
In 11 49 (out of 13) test checked Government Homes, non-recurring grant for
development (computer, furniture and upgradation of facilities/
46 Bhilwara, Churu, Jhunjhunu, Jaisalmer, Sirohi, Baran, Bundi, Jhalawar, Banswara,
Rajsamand, Dausa, Chittorgarh, Pratapgarh, Hanumangarh, Sikar, Bharatpur, Dungarpur,
Dholpur, Barmer and Karauli.
47 Sriganganagar, Jalore and Nagaur.
48 Baran, Dholpur, Barmer, Karauli.
49 Govt. Observation and Children Home (Boys), Bikaner; Govt. Apchari Balika Home,
Bikaner; Govt. Observation and Children Home, Sethi Colony, Jaipur; Govt. Observation
and Children Home (Girls) Jaipur; Govt. Observation and Children Home, Jhunjhunu;
Govt. Observation and Children Home, Pali; Govt. Observation and Children Home,
Sawai Madhopur; Govt. Observation and Children Home, Sikar; Govt. Observation and
Children Home, Tonk; Govt. Observation and Children Home (Boys), Udaipur; Govt.
Observation and Children Home (Girls), Udaipur.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
32
accommodation etc. in offices), amounting to ` 36.90 lakh received during
2012-13 to 2014-15 under ICPS could not be utilized fully. Of this only ` 5.87
lakh could be utilized (upto March 2015) and an amount of ` 31.03 lakh was
lying unspent in concerned DCPUs resulting in non-upgradation of facilities in
these Homes. This includes entire allotted amount of ` 28.70 lakh of 4 Homes
(Boys Jaipur: ` 21 lakh; Sikar: ` 0.45 lakh; Pali: ` 1 lakh and Tonk: ` 6.25
lakh). Non-recurring grant was not allotted to Shishu Grah, Jaipur while
information in respect of Government Observation and Children Home, Baran was
not provided to audit.
State Government replied (January 2016) that concerned DCPUs were being
instructed to utilize the amount.
2.1.12.6 Utilisation of maintenance grant
As per Annexure IV of ICPS, 2009 guidelines, recurring expenditure per
month for maintenance of children was ` 750/- per child per month (food,
clothing, medicine, soap, oil etc.) which was revised to ` 2000/- per child per
month from 2014-15 (annexure X of ICPS, 2014 guidelines).
(i) In Government Home, Jhunjhunu expenditure of ` 0.16 lakh only was
incurred against required expenditure of ` 0.92 lakh on 10 children (average)
during 2010-11 and 2011-12. During 2012-13 and 2013-14, no expenditure
was incurred against requirement of `1.17 lakh for 13 children. Similarly, only
` 0.48 lakh was incurred against required expenditure of ` 1.44 lakh for 6
(average) children during 2014-15. Scrutiny of stock register revealed that
food material was shown as issued on issue side of the register but no entry
was found on the receipt side. In view of this, it could not be ascertained that
children were being provided items as required from maintenance grant.
(ii) Expenditure was incurred less than required by 2 NGO Shelter Homes
(I-India Boys and Girls) ranging between ` 0.17 lakh and ` 5.41 lakh in
2013-14 and 2014-15 and by other four NGO Homes 50 between ` 0.68 lakh
and ` 2.41 lakh in 2014-15.
(iii) In seven Children/Shelter Homes run by NGOs, DCPU have disbursed
less amount against required norms ranging between ` 0.18 lakh and ` 7.31
lakh during 2013-14 and 2014-15, against which utilization certificates were
recived from NGOs. However, DCPU has disbursed ` 13.99 lakh (2013-14) in
excess of norms in case of three NGO Homes namely, Bhagwan Mahaveer
Nirashrit Balgrah, Udaipur ( ` 12.10 lakh) RAISE Asha Ki Kiran Balgrah,
Jaipur (` 0.99 lakh), AASRA Vikas Sansthan, Udaipur (` 0.9 lakh).
50 Kasturba Sewa Sansthan, Sikar( `0.68 lakh) (ii) Nirashrit Balgrah,Tonk ( ` 0.99 lakh
(iii) Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit Balgrah, Udaipur (0.85 lakh) (iv) AASRA Vikas
Sansthan, Shelter Home, Udaipur (` 2.41 lakh).

Chapter II Performance Audit
33
This indicated that maintenance grant was being disbursed by SCPS/DCPUs,
without considering average occupancy in Homes.
Government stated (January 2016) that necessary instructions for proper
accounting are being issued and information related to under/over utilisation is
being called for from units.
2.1.13 Monitoring and Supervision
2.1.13.1 Inspection by State level authorities
As per Para 2.1(ii) of ICPS, 2009 and Para 4.1.10 (ii) of ICPS, 2014 at State
level, SCPS has to implement, supervise and monitor ICPS and other child
protection scheme/programmes and agencies/institutions providing facilities to
children in State.
In 13 test checked Government Observation and Children Home, State level
inspections were conducted as under:
S.
No.
Name of District No. of Inspections conducted
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total
1 Baran 0 0 0 0 0 0
2 Bikaner (Boys) 0 1 0 0 1 2
3 Bikaner (Girls) 0 3 0 3 1 7
4 Jaipur (Shishu Grah) 0 0 0 0 1 1
5 Jaipur (Boys) 0 0 0 1 0 1
6 Jaipur (Girls) 0 0 0 0 0 0
7 Jhunjhunu 0 0 0 0 0 0
8 Pali 0 0 0 0 1 1
9 Sawai Madhopur 0 0 1 3 0 4
10 Sikar 0 0 0 0 0 0
11 Tonk 0 0 0 0 0 0
12 Udaipur (Boys) 0 0 0 0 1 1
13 Udaipur (Girls) 0 0 0 0 1 1
TOTAL 0 4 1 7 6 18
Source: Information from concerned Homes
The table shows that no inspection was carried out during 2010-11 and five
Homes have never been inspected. Remaining eight Homes were inspected
only one to seven times during the period 2011-15. No Inspection Reports
were issued to Homes. Out of eight children Homes and Shelter Homes run by
NGOs, only six Homes (3 shelter Homes and 3 children Homes) were
inspected once during the period 2010-15. No Inspection Reports were issued.
Thus, required numbers of inspections were not conducted by State authorities
as norms of inspection at State level were not fixed.
Government stated (January 2016) that state level authorities are carrying
inspections of Government/NGO Homes from time to time. Reply is not
acceptable as no supporting documents were furnished in this regard.
2.1.13.2 Inspection by District Child Officer (DCO)
There are six DCOs at all Divisions of the State (Bharatpur Division included
in Jaipur) who have to inspect all Government Homes and NGO Homes. It
was observed that in three test checked Divisions (Bikaner, Jaipur and

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
34
Udaipur), no regular DCO was posted and no inspection of Government
Homes was conducted during the period 2010-11 to 2014-15. Out of nine
NGOs, only two NGOs (I-India Jaipur (Boys) and Bhagwan Mahaveer
Nirashirt Balgrah Udaipur) were inspected in 2011-12 and other seven NGOs
were never inspected.
Government stated (January 2016) that district authorities i.e. DCPU, CWC
and District Legal authorities are carrying supervision/inspections of
Government/NGO Homes from time to time. Reply is not acceptable as no
supporting documents were furnished in this regard.
2.1.13.3 Inspection by District level authorities
As per Para 4.1.1(xv) of ICPS, 2009 and Para 3.2.1(xv) of ICPS, 2014,
DCPUs have to supervise and monitor all institution/agencies providing
residential facilities to children in district.
Out of 13 test checked Government Homes, seven Homes were never
inspected by DCPUs/District authorities during the period 2010-15. Other six
Homes51 where inspections were carried out, only Shishu Grah Jaipur was
inspected during all these years (14 inspections). In other five Homes only 1 to
5 inspections were conducted during 2010-15 which is far less than the target
fixed under Rule 63(5) of JJ Rules.
In Children Homes run by NGOs number of inspections conducted by
DCPU/District authorities was as under:
S.
No.
Name of Home Inspections conducted by district level authorities
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total
1 Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah
Kanyadeh, Baran
4 2 3 1 3 13
2 I-India (Boys) Jaipur 0 3 2 1 2 8
3 I-India (Girls) Jaipur 0 0 1 3 1 5
4 RAISE Asha ki Kiran, Jaipur 0 0 0 1 4 5
5 Kasturba Seva Sansthan, Sikar 0 0 0 3 5 8
6 Nirashrit Balgrah, Tonk 0 5 0 1 0 6
7 Bhagwan Mahaveer Nirashrit
Balgrah, Udaipur
0 0 0 0 1 1
8 AASRA Vikas Sansthan, Udaipur 0 0 1 0 3 4
9 Mahesh Ashram, Udaipur 0 0 1 0 0 1
It reveals that only Swami Shree Krishna Balgrah Kanyadeh, Baran was
inspected in all five years (13 inspections) and all other Homes were inspected
one to eight times during 2010-15 which were far less than that required.
Government did not offer any comment in the matter.
2.1.13.4 Inspection committees at district level
Rule 63 of JJ Rules, 2011 stipulates that the State Government shall constitute
State, District or City level Inspection Committee (minimum 5 members) on
51 (i) Boys, Bikaner: 2014-15=3 (ii) Girls, Bikaner: 2013-14 & 2014-15= 2 (iii) Shishu
Grah, Jaipur: 2010-11 to 2014-15 =14 (iv) Tonk: 2013-14= 1 (v) Boys, Udaipur:
2014-15=2 (vi) Girls, Udaipur: 2010-12, 2013-14 & 2014-15 = 5

Chapter II Performance Audit
35
the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted under rule 91 of
these rules. The Committee has to inspect each Home quarterly.
It was noticed that district level inspection committees were not constituted in
two test checked districts (Baran and Jhunjhunu). In Sikar, Tonk, Sawai
Madhopur, Bikaner, Pali and Udaipur although committees were constituted
but no inspection was carried out during 2010-15, except in Udaipur where 11
inspections were carried out.
Government intimated (January 2016) that Inspection Committees have been
constituted under the Government’s order of 14 February 2012, in all districts.
The reply is not factually correct as in two test checked districts (Jhunjhunu
and Baran), audit noticed that Inspection Committees were not constituted.
This indicates that there was no proper and sufficient control mechanism. The
issue was also raised in paragraph 2.2.9.1 of Audit Report 2009 but no
progress was noticed.
2.1.14 Conclusion and Recommendations
Large gaps were noticed in the care of children in need of care and protection
and for children in conflict with laws. Identification of children in need of care
and protection was not done.
State Government may prepare a data base of children in need of care and
protection by identifying children by conducting surveys through effective
networking with ICDs functionaries.
No separate Children Homes and Observation Homes were established in any
of the district to keep children in need of care and protection and children in
conflict with law separately. Cases of adults in the age group of 18 to 27 years
in conflict with law were found admitted in Observation Homes.
State Government should comply with the provisions of the JJ Act and Rules
Separate Homes for children in need of care and protection and children in
conflict with law should be established.
Physical infrastructure provided was less than the norms prescribed in Rules.
Cases of less space for dormitories, bathrooms, recreation room, workshop,
counselling rooms and library etc. were noticed. The area of kitchen, dining
hall and stores was also less than the prescribed norms.
It was also seen by audit that nutritional diet and clothing items were not
distributed or distributed in less quantity. Regular health checkups of juvenile
and children were not being conducted. Vocational training was not being
provided by any Government Home. NGO Homes provided school education
to a higher proportion of children than Government Homes. ‘After Care
Organisations’, to facilitate children in their transition from institution-based
life to mainstream society for social reintegration, were not established.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
36
State Government should maintain standards of care for children as per
Act/Rules to allow children to live a dignified life.
The DCPUs were not disbursing full amount to NGOs, resulting in
accumulation of huge balance.
Funds to the respective NGOs should be released as sanctioned by SCPS in
accordance with the ICPS guidelines.
Inspections by State Level and District Level Committees were either lacking
or not done according to the norms laid down in the Act, indicating that
proper and sufficient control mechanism was not in place.
Monitoring/inspection should be conducted as per ICPS norms and
deficiencies noticed in running of the Homes should be rectified on priority
basis.

Chapter II Performance Audit
37
Technical Education Department
2.2 Working of Rajasthan Technical University
Executive summary
Rajasthan Technical University (RTU) was established (December 2005)
under ‘Rajasthan Technical University Act 2006’ as an affiliating university
with jurisdiction spread over the entire State. Government of Rajasthan
notified (September 2006) the erstwhile Engineering College, Kota as
constituent college of RTU and named it as ‘University college of Engineering
(UCE)’, Kota. Presently there are 12 Government and 123 private engineering
college affiliated to RTU.
Though the onus of maintaining the quality of technical education in the state
lies on RTU, its irregular, faulty and unstructured affiliation process proved to
be biggest hurdle in doing so. Affiliation rule have also not been framed by
RTU. Affiliation orders were not issued to 131 out of 135 engineering colleges
for the academic session 2014-15. Consistent deficiencies were existing in the
test checked colleges and these deficiencies were neither being rectified nor
being communicated to All India Council of Technical Education, the agency
responsible for granting approval to Engineering Colleges.
Continuing enrolment of students, conducting of examination and distribution
of degrees to the student in these colleges without granting affiliation, has
rendered the process of affiliation meaningless. Provisional affiliation orders
were issued despite the consistent existence of deficiencies. There was a large
shortage of qualified faculty in test checked Engineering colleges.
RTU failed to curb the increasing trends of vacant seats in its affiliated
colleges which could be attributed to its negligent approach towards the
problem of shortage of faculty, poor research infrastructure and other
deficiencies of its affiliated colleges. In case of RTU’s constituent college i.e.
UCE, Kota, new branches of Aeronautical, Petroleum and Petrochemical
Engineering and Centre for Nano-Technology were opened without
developing proper infrastructure. None of the under graduate courses and post
graduate courses running in UCE were Accredited with National Board of
Accreditation (NBA).
RTU irrationally diverted its huge annual savings to fixed deposits. These
funds could have been used for developing proper infrastructure for quality
technical education in the State. Annual accounts for the year 2013-14 and
2014-15 were neither prepared nor submitted to State legislature till date.
Annual Reports were not prepared and submitted to State legislature, from
2010-11 to 2014-15 (except for 2013-14).
The internal control system of RTU is also not very effective. Only 10
Meetings (against 20) of Board of Management (BoM) were held during the
period 2010-15. Also, RTU failed to nominate its representative in 94 out of

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
38
127 affiliated colleges in the year 2013-14 and thereafter no representative
was nominated in any of the colleges.
2.2.1 Introduction
‘Rajasthan Technical University (RTU), Kota’ was established (December
2005) under ‘Rajasthan Technical University Act, 2006’ (Act) with the main
objective of improving quality of technical education in the State; to meet the
demand of technical education and research; to promote entrepreneurship
among students; to extend its frontiers to rural, desert, tribal, backward areas
and to weaker section of society by providing technical education at affordable
cost and to monitor the quality and standard of teaching and evaluation in
constituent and affiliated colleges. One of the main functions of RTU is to
grant affiliation to the colleges and institutions to run technical courses 52.
‘University College of Engineering (UCE)’, Kota is a constituent college of
RTU. Presently there are 12 Government engineering colleges (including
UCE, Kota) and 123 private engineering colleges, affiliated to RTU, having
intake capacity of 64,830 students annually in 29 branches.
2.2.2 Organisational set-up
The organisational set up is depicted in following organogram:
All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), an autonomous body
under Department of Human Resource Development, Government of India,
grants recognition to the technical institutions and approves number of seats in
every branch, subject to fulfilment of its norms. Department of Technical
52 Doctor of Philosophy (Ph. D), Master of Technology (M. Tech.), Bachelor of
Technology(B. Tech.), Master of Business Administration ( MBA), Master of Computer
Application (MCA), Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch.), Bachelor of Hotel Management
and Catering Techniques ( BHMCT).

Chapter II Performance Audit
39
Education, Government of Rajasthan, monitors the administrative, financial
and academic activities of RTU.
Colleges are related to RTU in mainly three ways:- (i) Affiliation to the
engineering colleges are granted by RTU. (ii) Examinations for the students of
affiliated engineering colleges are conducted and results thereof are declared
by RTU, and (iii) Monitoring over affiliated engineering colleges is done
through the nominee of RTU in Governing Body of these colleges.
2.2.3 Audit Objectives
Performance audit of RTU was conducted to assess:
• Whether a proper system of designing and maintaining academic standard
in its affiliated colleges-government as well as private, existed in RTU.
• Whether a proper academic management system and infrastructure exists
in RTU, its affiliated colleges and its constituent college i.e. UCE, Kota.
• Whether a prudent financial management and control system exists in
RTU.
2.2.4 Audit Coverage
RTU Kota, UCE Kota, three (out of 11) Government engineering colleges and
14 (out of 123) private engineering colleges, all spread in 10 districts
(Appendix-2.2), selected randomly were test checked. Field study was
conducted during April to August 2015 covering the period from 2010-11 to
2014-15 on the basis of planned audit criteria 53. An Entry conference was held
in the month of May 2015 in which scope and coverage of performance audit
was discussed. The findings of audit were discussed with Pro Vice Chancellor
of RTU in the exit conference held on 6 January 2016. Replies of the RTU
have suitably been incorporated at appropriate places.
Audit findings
2.2.5 Maintenance of Academic Standard
2.2.5.1 Non-preparation of Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations of RTU
Technical education was separated from non-technical education (University
of Rajasthan) vide Notification of December 2005, by forming ‘Rajasthan
Technical University (RTU)’ under RTU Act 2006. Section 23(K) of RTU
Act, empowered the Board of Management (BoM) to make statutes,
ordinances and regulations for smooth functioning of the University with the
approval of Chancellor.
53 All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE) Act, 1987; Rajasthan Technical
University Act, 2006; Minutes and Agenda of meeting of BoM; Academic Council;
Finance Committee and Board of Studies; Circular and order issued by GoI/GoR and
AICTE.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
40
During scrutiny of records, it was noticed (June 2015) that RTU adopted (June
2007) statutes, ordinances and regulations of University of Rajasthan without
approval of the Chancellor. RTU further failed to review/assess the suitability
of these statutes, ordinances and regulations for its functioning even after a
lapse of ten years. A committee was formed (July 2014) for this purpose but it
has not submitted its report (March 2015).
RTU while accepting the facts replied that ordinances incorporating the
provisions of the technical university have been framed and got approved
(July 2015) by Board of Management (BoM) and the same have been
forwarded to the Chancellor for assent, which is still awaited (December
2015).
2.2.5.2 Affiliation of Engineering Colleges
RTU has the powers and duties to lay down the conditions/rules of affiliation
of colleges with it. As per section 6 of RTU Act 2006, all technical institutions
shall be affiliated with the RTU in accordance with the Statutes, Ordinances
and Regulations made under the Act. RTU grants affiliation to new
institutions, after they are granted approval by AICTE for commencing new
technical courses. After granting affiliation to an institution its academic
activities are monitored by the RTU through periodical assessment/inspection.
It was noticed that RTU had failed to frame its own affiliation rules so far.
RTU is merely using adopted parameters of Rajasthan University for granting
affiliation without ascertaining their applicability to technical institutions
(Engineering colleges).Thus in the absence of specific norms/rules of
affiliation, an effective system of evaluation and monitoring of academic
standards of the affiliated colleges did not develop.
RTU while accepting the facts replied (December 2015) that the University
shall prepare the detailed affiliation rules in due course of time.
During test check of records of Director (Academics), RTU relating to
affiliation the following issues were noticed:
(a) Issuing degrees to students of non-affiliated technical colleges
RTU demands affiliation fees for issuance of affiliation orders in the month of
December every year, although inspection of the affiliated colleges is carried
out once in every two years. As per the system adopted by RTU, if
deficiencies54 of serious nature are found during inspection, these are required
to be intimated to AICTE well in time, with the recommendation of not
granting extension of approval till that college/institution rectifies deficiencies
pointed out by the inspection team of RTU.
54 Shortage of faculties; faculties cadre ratio not as per AICTE norms; appointing
unqualified Principals and Assistant Professors; non availability of hostel, canteen and
playground; non availability of software in computer labs; non availability of online
journals; lack of personality development classes; shortage of space in labs; lack of labs
equipment and non functional computers.

Chapter II Performance Audit
41
The position of issuance of affiliation in respect of all engineering colleges
under RTU is as under:
Year No. of colleges
applied for affiliation
Affiliation not issued till date
(December 2015)
2010-11 119 1
2011-12 123 27
2012-13 129 37
2013-14 127 82
2014-15 131 131
Source:- Information provided by Director, Academics (RTU)
It was noticed that 27 colleges, had been given provisional affiliation only for
2010-11. These colleges admitted 5,859 students for the academic session
2010-11 and 2011-12 and these students have completed their course duration
(four year). Though these colleges were granted provisional affiliation only
for one year, RTU enrolled their students for annual examinations, and as such
these students became eligible for getting a degree from RTU.
It was also noticed that consistent deficiencies 55 of serious nature were
observed in all test checked colleges during inspection. But these deficiencies
were neither communicated to AICTE for consideration of the extension/
cancellations of approval neither granted to these institutions nor were their
students declared ineligible for giving their annual examinations. Hence, these
institutions did not pay any attention to rectify these deficiencies.
RTU while accepting the facts replied (December 2015) the following:
S. No. Year No. of colleges to
whom affiliation
order not issued
Reasons for non-issuance of affiliation
1 2010-11 01 In the case of one 56 institute the extension of
approval for the session 2010-11 had not been
issued by AICTE. Hence, affiliation order could
not be issued. Recently AICTE has issued EOA for
2010-11 which is kept pending as institute is
having dues towards development fee more than
` One lakh.
2 2011-12 27 As per direction of BoI 57, for the institutes having
outstanding dues of more than ` one lakh,
affiliation is to be kept pending. Hence, affiliation
orders were not issued.
3 2012-13 37
4 2013-14 82 Out of 82 colleges, 41 colleges are having dues of
more than ` one lakh and inspection report of 41
colleges are yet to be put up in forthcoming
meeting of BoI. Hence, affiliation orders are
pending.
5 2014-15 131 Process of issuing provisional affiliation order is
under consideration as per the decision of 3 rd
Standing committee and subsequently approval in
BoI. The provisional affiliation orders will be
issued after reviewing the compliance of 2013-14.
55 Shortage of faculties, cadre ratio not maintained as per AICTE norms, Un-qualified
Principals, Assistant Professors having B.Tech degree, lack of labs equipment, shortage
of space in labs.
56 Laxmi Devi Memorial College of Engineering and Technology, Alwar.
57 Board of Inspection is chaired by VC, six other members and Dean Academic as member
Secretary.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
42
The above reply furnished by RTU points towards the fact that the affiliation
process is delayed for want of consideration of inspection reports or for
unimportant reasons like non -payment of development fee etc.
Thus, due to non-serious approach of colleges, RTU and AICTE towards the
core function of affiliation, the entire system of conducting inspection and
granting affiliation became ineffective. Continued enrolment of students,
conducting of examinations and issuing degrees without granting affiliation
has rendered the system of quality control meaningless. This resulted in
coming up of and continuing of ill-equipped Engineering Colleges and other
Technical Institutions in the State.
(b) Provisional affiliation without rectifying deficiencies
As per notification (November 2006), the BoI should make arrangements for
periodical inspection of affiliated colleges. In case of any deficiency,
conditional provisional affiliation was to be granted on the recommendation of
BoI for particular session subject to the removal of such deficiency within 15
days.
During scrutiny of 17 test checked colleges, we noticed that conditional
provisional affiliation orders for the year 2010-11, were issued to 1458 colleges
despite having deficiencies. Even though these deficiencies were not removed
by the concerned colleges within the prescribed period, even then inspections
were carried out for the next academic sessions and granting of provisional
affiliations to 11 colleges continued till the academic session 2012-13.
However, the affiliation to these colleges was not issued for the subsequent
sessions 2013-14 and 2014-15.This made the entire affiliation and inspection
process a mere formality.
RTU replied that to improve the affiliation process, due care will be taken in
future to ensure the compliance of the deficiencies before issuing the
provisional affiliations to the colleges.
Fact remains that a large number of students have been granted degrees
without their college being affiliated by RTU.
In one case of ‘Buddha Group of Institution (institution), Udaipur, RTU issued
(June 2011) provisional affiliation for session 2010-11 with the condition that
deficiencies pointed out in inspection should be removed within seven days.
These deficiencies were not removed and affiliation for 2011-12 to 2014-15
58 (i) Asians Institute of Technology, Tonk; (ii) Vedant College of Engineering &
Technology, Bundi; (iii) Aravali Institute of Technical Studies, Udaipur (iv) Baldev Ram
Mirdha Inst. of Tech., ITS-3, Jaipur (v) Modi Institute of Technology, Kota (vi)
Rajasthan Institute of Engineering & Technology, Jaipur (vii) Sidhi Vinayak College of
Science & Higher Education, Alwar (viii) Sine International Institute of Technology,
Jaipur (ix) St. Wilfreds Institute of Engineering & Technology, Ajmer (x) Vyas College
of Engineering and Technology, Jodhpur (xi) College of Engineering & Technology,
Bikaner; (xii) Government Engineering College, Jhalawar; (xiii) Government Engineering
College, Ajmer; (xiv) Poornima Group of Institutions, Jaipur.

Chapter II Performance Audit
43
was not granted, however the institution was allowed to function without
affiliation.
RTU conducted surprise inspection (August 2014) of Buddha Group of
Institution and found that the college was running in two classrooms only and
that also without any Department of engineering branches, Principal and
Laboratories etc. There were only two faculty members (Chemical and
Electronics branch) and no other facilities existed. These serious deficiencies
were not pointed out in previous inspection reports. Though these deficiencies
were forwarded to the institution concerned, action was neither initiated
against the college nor the matter reported to AICTE by RTU’s Board of
Inspection (BoI).
RTU, while accepting the facts, agreed that due to serious deficiencies,
affiliation was not granted and students of this college have been shifted to
other affiliated colleges.
Reply was not convincing as deficiencies were not rectified by the institution
even after numerous inspections by RTU and the students admitted in 2010-11
were deprived of quality education. Had timely action been taken by RTU
students could have benefitted.
Thus, due to negligence and irresponsible approach of members of inspection
teams, an institute with six branches was running only in two class rooms
since 2010, extracting money from the students as well as putting their future
in dark.
(c) Inspection of Engineering Colleges
Section 5(vii to x) of RTU Act empowered RTU to lay down the conditions of
affiliation of courses of institutions subject to verification of their academic
performance, through inspection. RTU, Kota issued notification (September
2006) that Inspectors in the inspection teams, constituted for affiliations,
should be faculties of the related subjects.
It was noticed that faculties of Chemistry Department, Physics Department
and Assistant Accounts Officers were nominated in the Inspection Teams for
carrying out inspection for affiliation of technical institutions having
specialised engineering branches like electrical, mechanical, electronics,
computer science etc. Putting these officers in the inspection team was in
contravention to the above provisions as inspection was to be carried out to
verify the technical standards, infrastructure, laboratories and workshop as per
AICTE norms. Assigning such important duties to persons not conversant with
these disciplines pose serious doubts about the process of affiliation.
RTU stated (December 2015) that the inspection teams are constituted as per
the direction of BoM with the approval of Hon’ble VC and University take
care that one of the members of the inspection team must be appointed from
concerned discipline/programme.
The reply is not convincing as the inspection carried out was not in accordance
with the instructions in force.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
44
2.2.5.3 Non-appointment of full time officers
As per section 14 of RTU Act, the Registrar should be a full time officer and
should be appointed by the State Government. Similarly, section 16 of RTU
Act, 2006 envisaged that the Controller of Examination (CoE) should be a full
time officer for discharging the functions of administrative control over
examination and staff dealing with the examination process.
We observed that no regular officer was appointed/deputed to the post of
Registrar for most of the period 59. Functions and duties of Registrar and CoE
were entrusted to Professors as an additional charge. Similarly the post of
Director, Academic was held by a Professor, as an additional charge.
RTU replied (December 2015) that registrar has been appointed in October
2015. The post of Director academic has been abolished and Dean academic is
looking after the affiliation work. University is trying to fill the vacant post of
CoE.
2.2.6 Academic Management
2.2.6.1 Shortage of faculty
As per AICTE norms, the ratio of Professors, Associate professors and
Assistant Professors in engineering colleges should be 1:2:6. Further AICTE
norms prescribe teacher-student ratio for UG courses as 1:15 and for PG
courses as 1:12. No norms for teaching hours have been prescribed by AICTE.
Scrutiny of records of RTU, Kota revealed that against the requirement of 184
faculties (Professors: 28; Associate Professors: 57; and Assistant Professors:
99) in the UCE, Kota only 111 faculties (Professors: 11; Associate Professors:
25; and Assistant Professors: 75) were posted. Thus 61 per cent posts of
professors, 56 per cent of associate professors and 24 per cent post of assistant
professors were lying vacant as on June, 2015.
Similarly in 17 test checked colleges, against the requirement of 1729 faculty
(Professors: 190; Associate Professors: 382; and Assistant Professors: 1157)
only 1141 faculties (Professors: 35; Associate Professors: 129; and Assistant
Professors: 977) were posted (July 2015) (Appendix 2.3) . Thus, 82 per cent
posts of Professors, 66 per cent of posts of Associate Professors and 15 per
cent posts of Assistant Professors were lying vacant as on August 2015.
This huge shortage of faculty deprived the students from valuable guidance in
their studies.
Further, as per norms fixed by AICTE, minimum qualification of the
Engineering faculty is M.Tech. Scrutiny of information uploaded by selected
17 engineering colleges for the session 2013-14 on the website of RTU,
revealed that out of 1162 teaching faculty, 686 (59 per cent ) were only
B.Tech instead of M.Tech.
RTU replied (December 2015) that State Government has sanctioned faculty
position in the year 2015 and vacancies shall be filled to meet the shortage.
59 December 2012 to February 2013 and February 2014 to till date (July 2015).

Chapter II Performance Audit
45
However, deficiencies in terms of faculty and their qualification in affiliated
colleges are communicated to them after each inspection. Reply is not tenable
as provisional affiliations have been given to the colleges without rectifying
the deficiencies.
2.2.6.2 Enrolment of students
The position of sanctioned seats, enrolment and vacant seats in the
Government and private Engineering Colleges (B.Tech courses) of the State
during 2010-11 to 2014-15 is as under:
Year Approved/
Sanctioned seats
Enrolment Vacant seats Percentage of
vacant seat
1 2 3 4(2-3) 5
2010-11 47,847 33,404 14,443 30
2011-12 53,060 32,932 20,128 38
2012-13 61,401 33,355 28,046 46
2013-14 61,746 29,463 32,283 52
2014-15 64,830 27,399 37,431 58
Source:-Information provided by RTU
Above table shows that number of approved/ sanctioned seats increased by35
per cent during the period 2010-15 but at the same time, enrolment of students
declined by 18 per cent. Thus, the number of vacant seats was increased by 58
per cent.
During the scrutiny of records it was noticed that in 35 colleges, second shift
was started between the years 2010-14 despite seats lying vacant in the first
shift. Further, 49 new engineering colleges were opened between the period
2010-15 but only 36 per cent of their seats were filled. Interestingly it was also
revealed that in 11 colleges in the academic session 2014-15, actual admission
was zero and in another 10 colleges, actual admission varied from 2 to 15 per
cent of their approved seats.
RTU while accepting the facts replied (December 2015) that steady increase in
the number of colleges in Rajasthan, increase in intake capacity of existing
colleges and AICTE’s approval of seats without taking into account the
demand existing in the market were the main cause of seats remaining vacant.
RTU further stated that decrease in enrolment is attributed to the fact that good
performing colleges got converted into universities, shortage of qualified
faculty, and capping on the number of sanctioned post of teaching faculty are
some of the other reasons for decrease in enrolment.
Justification of RTU is not convincing as the overall dismal condition of
technical education in the State because of failure of affiliation process of
RTU is responsible for decline in quality of technical education and interest of
the students due to which 30 to 58 per cent of seats were lying vacant during
2010-15. The facts like shortage of faculty and unqualified faculty also points

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
46
towards the poor quality of technical education being provided under the
overall supervision of RTU.
2.2.6.3 Establishment of Research Laboratories and Skill Development
Centers
BoM approved (September 2014) establishment of Research Laboratories, to
be financed from RTU resources at seven 60 Divisional headquarters for the
purpose of facilitating the colleges of these divisions, and two Skill
Development Centers (Kota and Jaipur) for developing the skills of students
for placement.
It was noticed that neither any research laboratory nor any skill development
center was established (July 2015).
RTU replied (December 2015) that skill development centre has been
established under the Department of civil, mechanical and electronics.
Computers and peripherals have been provided in the centre. However process
of supplying software and designing course module is still going on. RTU
further stated that setting of research labs shall be included in the perspective
plan of the university.
Fact remains that neither research labs nor skill development centres were
functioning due to lackadaisical attitude of RTU.
2.2.6.4 Training for faculties
RTU expressed concern about poor performance of students in university
examination; therefore, Finance Committee passed (March 2011) a resolution
to establish a training centre in Kota for faculty development to improve the
quality of teaching. These training programmes were to be financed partly by
funds collected from the participating candidates and partly from RTU.
Though the centre was established but no training programmes were
conducted for development of teaching skills and pedagogy during the period
2011-15.
RTU replied (December 2015) that due to lack of response from the faculty,
the scheme could not be implemented.
2.2.6.5 Credibility of RTU in evaluation of answer books
The Controller of Examination (CoE) conducts examinations of all
engineering colleges affiliated to the RTU and declares results. After
declaration of results, candidates not satisfied with their result are entitled to
apply for revaluation of the answer books. The details of total answer books,
answer books revaluated and number of answer books in which change
occurred, pertaining to B.Tech. examinations are given in the table below:
60 Ajmer, Bharatpur, Bikaner, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur .

Chapter II Performance Audit
47
Particulars Year
2010-11
(per cent)
2011-12
(per cent)
2012-13
(per cent)
2013-14
(per cent)
2014-15
(per cent)
1 2 3 4 5 6
Total number of Answer
Books evaluated
15,48,589 19,49,941 16,55,675 18,59,921 N.A.
Total No. of Students
involved in revaluation
56,175
(3.63)
62,567
(3.21)
91,328
(5.52)
1,22,686
(6.60)
N.A.
Total No. of students
whose results was
modified
3,731
(6.64)
7,333
(11.72)
18,162
(19.89)
26,472
(21.58)
N.A.
Source: Information provided by CoE, RTU for B. Tech exam only
The percentage of students who got answer books re-evaluated increased from
3.63 per cent in 2010-11 to 6.60 per cent in 2013-14. The increasing trend in
modification of results on account of revaluation also increased to 21.58 per
cent in 2013-14 as compared to 6.64 per cent in 2010-11. This indicated
increasing trend in the dissatisfaction level and poor quality of evaluation of
answer books.
RTU stated (December 2015) that it will provide model solution with marking
scheme at all the central evaluation centres. This will also increase the
accuracy level of the evaluation.
2.2.6.6 Slow progress in research work
One of the main objectives of RTU was to set up centres of advanced
technology in areas of high national relevance with a view to speeding up
innovation and to promote sponsored research and industrial consultancy.
Section 5(xiv) of RTU Act, 2006 also envisaged to explore the possibilities of
augmenting the resources of RTU by exploring innovative activities like
research and development works, providing consultancy and training to clients
from industries and trade. Research activities are monitored through office of
Dean (Research) at RTU. As per ordinance issued by RTU for Doctor of
Philosophy (PhD.), the time period for submission of the thesis for full time
scholars ranges from 5 to 12 semesters and for part time scholars it ranges
from 8 to 16 semesters.
Scrutiny of records of RTU revealed that during the period 2009-13, 68
students got admission in PhD. under various branches of Engineering. Out of
them only two students successfully completed their PhD. Rest of the 66
scholars did not complete their PhD. within the stipulated period. Further, only
one research project, sanctioned by Department of Science and Technology,
GoI in the year 2012-13, was undertaken by RTU.
RTU while accepting the facts replied (June 2015) that action is being taken
against those students who did not submit their thesis for PhD. and all efforts
shall be made to encourage the scholars for timely submission of their thesis.
This shows that RTU failed to create a research oriented environment to meet
the demand of quality technical education and research in the State.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
48
2.2.6.7 Management of University College of Engineering, Kota
Government notified (September 2006) and renamed the erstwhile
Engineering College, Kota (a constituent college of RTU) as ‘University
College of Engineering (UCE)’, to be administered through Director of the
College. Presently, UCE is offering eleven UG programmes and eleven PG
programmes.
(a) Starting new courses without proper planning
State Government announced commencement of Petroleum and Aeronautical
Engineering branches in UCE from the session 2011-12 with the intake of 30
students in each branch. Further, State Government announced (May 2012)
establishment of Centre of Nanotechnology in UCE for post graduate studies
and research in Nanotechnology from session 2012-13. State Government also
directed (June 2013) RTU, to ensure starting of new branch of Petrochemical
Engineering with intake of 30 students from the academic session 2013-14.All
these branches were of specific nature and required specialised class rooms,
laboratories, equipment and faculties.
It was noticed that RTU started all of the above branches in UCE, Kota
without acquiring such infrastructure. In absence of development of labs (fully
furnished with required equipment), practical training of the courses were
being arranged in Regional Geo Science Laboratory, Vadodara, Reservoir
Studies, ONGC Ahmedabad and school of Aeronautics, Neemrana, Alwar.
Lack of proper planning for opening new branches adversely affected
academic study and career of students, as in the absence of proper faculties,
equipment and infrastructure, students were deprived of the knowledge of
latest technology.
RTU replied (December 2015) that faculty has been appointed and labs have
been established but the reply was not supported by any documentary
evidence.
(b) Accreditation of courses
‘National Board of Accreditation (NBA)’, an agency of AICTE, gives
accreditation to various courses of technical education. The purpose of the
accreditation is to promote and recognize excellence in technical education in
colleges and universities, both at undergraduate and post graduate levels.
Accreditation by NBA also increases the rating of the university/colleges. It
also helps in enhancing industry-institute partnership for advancement of
technology which ultimately effect intake of the students and placement in
various service sectors.
Scrutiny of the records revealed that none of the eleven under-graduate
courses61 and eleven post-graduate courses 62 in UCE, Kota, was accredited by
61 1.Civil Engineering, 2. Electronic Inst. and Control Engineering, 3. Production and
Industrial Engineering, 4. Electrical Engineering, 5. Mechanical Engineering, 6.
Electronics and Communication Engineering, 7. Information Technology, 8. Computer
Engineering, 9. Aeronautical Engineering, 10. Petrochemical Engineering, 11. Petroleum
Engineering,

Chapter II Performance Audit
49
NBA (March 2015). RTU stated (June 2015) that it has now applied for
accreditation from NBA for 5 courses 63 of B. Tech. and 5 courses 64of M.
Tech.
Non-accreditation of courses resulted in non-receipt of funds from UGC and
private sector, for research as well as for expansion, support and advice to
enhance the quality of education. This also downgrades the rating of the
college resulting in decreasing trend of placement of students during the
period 2005-06 to 2014-15 as shown in the following table:
Year Total Strength
(as per
placement
record)
Eligible
students65
No. of
students got
placement
Percentage of placement
w.r.t.
eligible
students
w.r.t. total
students
2005-06 354 245 201 82 57
2006-07 363 282 209 74 58
2007-08 376 275 275 100 73
2008-09 376 275 209 76 56
2009-10 395 275 175 64 44
2010-11 413 280 159 57 38
2011-12 434 269 119 44 27
2012-13 429 274 96 35 22
2013-14 450 333 116 35 26
Source:- Information provided by RTU
Above table shows that percentage of students, who are getting jobs through
campus placement showed a steeply declining trend since 2007-08 onwards
which reflects a serious flaw in the functioning of UCE, Kota. UCE should
endeavour to train the student and improve their academic standards so that
maximum number of students could take part in the placement programme.
One of the prominent reasons of low placements was assigning non-
academic/administrative duties of RTU to teaching staff of UCE, Kota.
Apathy shown by State Government in filling the vacant posts and over-
burdening UCE by opening new branches (Petroleum, Petrochemical and
Aeronautical Engineering), was also a major cause of concern.
RTU stated (July 2015) that continuous efforts are being made to improve the
numbers of placement. Percentage of placement has been increasing during
2014-15 and 2015-16. Further accreditation of five PG and five UG courses is
under process. However information about promotion of industry-institute
partnership and absorption of its students in industries and promoting
entrepreneurship among the students was not furnished.
62 1. Structural Engineering, 2. Geotechnical Engineering, 3. Environmental Engineering, 4.
Computer Science and Engineering, 5. Power System, 6. Power Drives, 7. digital
Communication, 8. Control and Instrumentation, 9. Machine Design, 10. Industrial
Management and Engineering, 11. Renewable Energy Technology.
63 1. Civil Engineering, 2. Electrical Engineering, 3. Mechanical Engineering, 4.Electronics
and Communication Engineering, 5. Computer engineering.
64 1. Environmental Engineering, 2. Power System, 3. Digital Communication, 4.Control
and Instrumentation, 5. Industrial Management and Engineering.
65 Qualification/Standards of eligibility of students for campus placements are decided by
the respective placement companies.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
50
Thus, lackadaisical approach of academic management resulted not only in
loss of credibility among Multinational companies/Industries in placement of
RTU/UCE students but also failed in its mission to promote Industry-Institute
partnership to make technical education a valid means of job creation.
2.2.7 Financial Management and Control
2.2.7.1 Funding
RTU and its affiliated colleges together form a system of managing technical
education for nearly four lakh students in the State. Financial assistance in
terms of grants-in-aid was provided to RTU up to 2011-12, by the State
Government. Thereafter, RTU was to meet all its expenses from its own
resources with the approval of Finance Committee (FC) and BoM.
Major sources of income of RTU are affiliation fee, enrollment fee,
development fee, exam fee, inspection fee, admission fee and interest earned
on FDRs. The financial position of RTU, during the period 2010-15 was as
under:
(` in crore)
Year Budget allocation Capital
expen-
diture
Income
from own
sources
Total
expen-
diture
Savings
Capital Revenue Total
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
2010-11 10.31 27.55 37.86 2.37 54.55 41.76 12.79
2011-12 8.10 29.87 37.97 1.37 56.53 33.86 22.67
2012-13 4.72 41.92 46.64 11.21 107.24 50.71 56.53
2013-14* 24.60 48.54 73.14 1.13 88.77 46.15 42.62
2014-15* 30.73 61.43 92.16 NA 95.60 73.81 21.79
Source: Financial Statement and Budget of RTU
* Income and expenditure is based on ledgers as annual accounts were not finalized yet.
The surplus of income over expenditure is transferred to General fund of the
University and it is either invested in FDRs or utilised as capital expenditure.
As on April, 2010, RTU was having FDRs worth ` 52.47 crore, which went
up to ` 204.57 crore on 31 March, 2015 due to large savings that occurred
every year.
Finance Officer of the RTU is responsible for preparation of budget plan of
the RTU for each year. Budget allocation by the university under capital head
during the period 2010-14 was ` 47.73 crore. Against this allocation,
university utilised only ` 16.08 crore (34 per cent). This shows the non-serious
approach of RTU in preparing the budget estimates which resulted in parking
of funds in Bank FDRs.
Observations on financial management are discussed below:
(i) Funds and reserves are created for the purpose of fulfilling the future
requirements and incurring expenditure from it, for which no budget

Chapter II Performance Audit
51
provisions is made. It was observed that various funds 66 were created by RTU
for developmental and welfare activities, an amount of ` 12.97 crore, collected
under these funds was accumulated as on March 2013. However, these funds
were not utilized for any purpose since 2010-11, resulting in non-fulfillment of
the purposes of creation of these funds.
(ii) As per provisions of General and Financial Accounting Rule
(GF&AR), payment of advances to Government servants should be adjusted
as soon as possible. Temporary advances to employees of RTU and other
organisations and individuals were being paid to meet petty expenses related
to RTU. Advances were also paid to other departments for execution of
construction work, purchase of items or equipment etc. It was noticed that
advances of ` 2.39 crore were outstanding in the books of RTU as on 31
March 2015, of which ` 0.10 crore was pending for adjustment since more
than four years from 2011-12. Similarly, it was also noticed that an amount of
` 9.14 lakh given as TA advances to the faculty members of the UCE, Kota
under the Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme-II, was lying
unadjusted for a period ranging between 2 to 21 months.
RTU while accepting the facts stated (December 2015) that due to
decentralized system of RTU, allocated funds were not utilised and efforts will
be made to ensure full utilisation of funds in the ensuing financial year.
2.2.7.2 Preparation of Annual Accounts and their submission in assembly
As per section 45 of RTU Act, 2006, annual accounts and balance sheets of
RTU shall be prepared by Finance Officer and the audited accounts along with
audit report should be submitted to State Legislative Assembly.
Scrutiny of records revealed that annual accounts up to 2012-13 were prepared
and submitted to BoM, the preparation and submission of annual accounts for
the years 2013-14 and 2014-15 were still in process (June 2015). Detail
regarding submission of annual accounts before State Legislature was not
furnished (July 2015). This indicates lack of monitoring control of State
Government on financial status of RTU.
RTU while accepting the facts stated (December 2015) that preparation of
annual accounts is under process and would be submitted soon to the
administrative department.
2.2.7.3 Non-preparation of Annual Reports
Section 44 of RTU Act, 2006 envisaged that the annual report of the RTU
should be prepared and circulated among the members of BoM a month before
annual meeting of the board. The annual report approved by BoM is submitted
before State legislature.
66 University Development Fund: ` 9.57crore; RPET Fund: ` 1.00 crore; Staff Welfare
Fund: ` 0.71 crore; Other Funds: ` 1.67 crore.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
52
Audit observed that annual report for the year 2013-14 was got published.
Details of submission of this report to State Government and
publication/submission of reports for 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2014-15
were not furnished (July 2015).
RTU while accepting the facts replied (December 2015) that preparation of
annual reports for the year 2014-15 and 2015-16 was under process.
2.2.7.4 Absence of nomination of representative in affiliated colleges
(i) As per Rule 26(2) of Hand Book of Rajasthan University, as adopted
by RTU, it has to depute its Representative in the governing body of each
affiliated college. The Representative has to monitor the administrative,
academic and financial activities of the colleges and to ensure running of
college as per norms/regulations fixed by AICTE/RTU/ State Government.
Scrutiny of records revealed that RTU nominated its representative only in 33
(of 127) affiliated colleges for the academic session 2013-14. Thus, governing
bodies of 94 colleges remained without any representation from RTU and their
administrative, academic and financial activities remained unmonitored.
(ii) As per Rule 26(5)(B)(5) and 26 (6) ibid, BoM would nominate two
subject experts, approved by the Vice Chancellor in the selection committee of
affiliated colleges constituted for selection of faculties in the college. It was
observed that RTU nominated its subject experts only in 33 colleges for the
academic session 2013-14 since its formation. This indicated that RTU had no
monitoring over selection of faculties in any affiliated colleges up to
2012-13.
RTU while accepting the facts replied (December 2015) that guidelines have
been prepared for appointment of nominee of VC in the Committee
constituted for selection of Faculty in affiliated colleges.
2.2.7.5 Meeting of Board of Management
As per Para 23(j) of RTU Act, BoM shall meet at such times and as often as it
deem necessary, provided, however, that the regular meeting of the Board
shall be held at-least once in every three months.
Scrutiny of minutes of meetings revealed that only 10 meetings were held
against 20 meetings due during the period 2010-15. This reflects lack of
monitoring of RTU activities by BoM.
RTU stated (December 2015) that efforts were being made to convene the
meetings of BoM as per norms enumerated in RTU Act.
2.2.8 Conclusion and Recommendations
The RTU failed to frame its own statutes, ordinances and regulations for
effective administration. It completely neglected its core function of granting
affiliation to the colleges and monitoring its academic activities through

Chapter II Performance Audit
53
periodical assessment/inspection. Continued enrolment of students, conducting
of examinations and issuing degrees without granting affiliation has rendered
the system of quality control meaningless. This resulted in coming up of and
continuing of ill-equipped Engineering Colleges and other Technical
Institutions in the State.
The RTU should focus on its core activity of improving and maintaining
academic standards in its affiliated colleges. For this, it should immediately
frame the affiliation rules and devise a control mechanism to ensure
rectification of deficiencies in institutions getting provisional affiliation.
There was shortage of faculty in Government as well as private engineering
colleges. RTU’s own constituent colleges i.e. UCE was having many
deficiencies in terms of infrastructure, faculty etc. Further, faculties were not
having qualification as per AICTE norms. Deterioration in quality of teaching
was also felt as placement of students was on a declining trend. The RTU also
failed to create research oriented environment to attract research projects from
Government/Non-Government organisations.
RTU should initiate efforts to improve the quality of technical education and
to create a research oriented environment.

55
Chapter III
Compliance Audit
Audit of transactions of the Government Departments, their field formations
as well as audit of the autonomous bodies brought out lapses in management
of resources and failures in the observance of the norms of regularity,
propriety and economy, which have been presented in the succeeding
paragraphs under broad objective heads.
Non-compliance with rules and regulations
Disaster Management and Relief Department
3.1 Inadmissible and irregular extra expenditure of ` 21.29 crore on
agriculture input subsidy to farmers
By adopting incorrect norms, the Department incurred inadmissible and
irregular extra expenditure of ` 21.29 crore towards payment of
agriculture input subsidy to farmers.
Ministry of Home Affairs (Disaster Management Division), Government of
India (GoI) prescribes from time to time, the items and norms for various
categories of relief from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and the
National Disaster Relief Fund (NDRF). GoI revised these norms of assistance 1
on 28 September 2012 with prospective effect. These norms were further
revised2 on 21 June 2013 with retrospective effect from First March 2013.
As per para No. 2 of Chapter 4 of ‘Drought Management Manual’ of
Government of Rajasthan, in scarcity situations, the dates for announcement of
the first and the final ‘ Girdavari Reports’ for Kharif crop is 31 October and
30 November respectively. It follows from the above that the NDRF norms
dated 28 September 2012 were applicable for the Kharif crop 2012 (period
June to October 2012).
Test check (November 2014) of the records of Collector (Relief) Barmer
revealed that on the basis of ‘ Girdavari Reports Samvat 2069’, received from
respective District Collectors 3, Government of Rajasthan inter alia notified
(January 2013) 1821 villages of Barmer District as scarcity areas for Kharif
crop 2012 ( Samvat 2069) for sanction of agricultural input subsidy.
Accordingly, Collector (Relief) Barmer, deposited agriculture subsidy
amounting to ` 41.93 crore in Barmer Central Co-operative Bank Limited,
1 Agriculture crops: ` 3,000 per ha in rainfed areas; ` 6,000 per ha in assured irrigated areas and
perennial crops: ` 8,000 per ha.
2 Agriculture crops: ` 4500 per ha in rainfed areas; ` 9000 per ha in assured irrigated areas and
perennial crops: ` 12,000 per ha.
3 Ajmer, Banswara, Barmer, Bikaner, Churu, Jaisalmer, Jhunjhunu, Jodhpur, Nagaur, Pali,
Rajsamand and Sikar.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
56
Barmer for disbursement to the affected farmers. Of this, an amount of ` 41.83
crore was disbursed to the affected farmers by 31 March 2014, under NDRF
norms dated 28 September 2012 and remaining amount of ` 0.10 crore was
returned to the State Government.
State Government, however clarified (July 2013) that the departmental orders
for payment of subsidy for Kharif crop 2012 have been issued on 15 March
2013 and as the revised (21 June 2013) NDRF norms were effective from First
March 2013, therefore agricultural subsidy may be disbursed as per these
revised norms.
Accordingly, Collector, Barmer deposited the differential amount of ` 21.30
crore in Barmer Central Co-operative Bank Limited for disbursement to
affected farmers. Of this, an amount of ` 21.29 crore was disbursed to the
farmers and remaining amount of ` 0.01 crore was returned to the
Government.
Audit observed that as per provisions of Draught Manual, date prescribed for
final Girdavari Report of Kharif crop is 30 November every year. Accordingly
subsidy for Kharif crop 2012 was required to be paid under the norms fixed by
NDRF in September 2012 and not under the norms effective from March
2013. Therefore payment of differential subsidy of ` 21.29 crore for Kharif
crop 2012 was irregular.
State Government stated (March & June 2015) that the revised norms issued
(June 2013) by GoI, were effective from first March 2013, whereas the
Department issued order for payment of agriculture subsidy on 15 March
2013, therefore, the payment of assistance under the revised norms was
judicious towards relief to affected farmers and there was no contravention of
Rules.
The reply was not acceptable as norms of assistance from the SDRF and
NDRF were revised (June 2013) by GoI with effect from 01 March 2013 i.e.
from kharif 2013 (Samvat 2070). Payment of agriculture input subsidy under
revised norms (March 2013) for mitigating the draught situation of kharif crop
2012 was therefore irregular and in contravention of the decision of GoI. This
is further confirmed by the fact that District Collector Rajsamand, did not
disburse any differential amount on the ground that the crop loss pertains to
the period prior to March 2013, though he had sought further clarification
from State Government. Similarly, DC, Barmer also did not pay any
differential amount of subsidy to the farmers for the crop damaged in February
2013 due to hailstorm.
Thus, by adopting incorrect norms, the Department has allowed inadmissible
agriculture input subsidy of ` 21.29 crore to farmers.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
57
Medical Education Department
3.2 Unfruitful expenditure on construction of Nursing College
Building
Sardar Patel Medical College and Associated Group of PBM Hospital
Bikaner, failed to submit to Government of India, the audited statement
of expenditure along with utilization certificate, resulting in non-receipt of
central assistance of ` 4.18 crore. This led to stoppage of construction
work and rendered the expenditure of ` 2.52 crore on construction of
nursing college building unfruitful.
Under the plan scheme ‘Development of Nursing Services’, Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare (MHFW), Nursing Division, Government of India,
issued (February 2010) guidelines for expenditure of ` six crore 4 on
upgradation of General Nursing Training Center, Sardar Patel Medical College
and Associated Group of PBM Hospital (Medical College), Bikaner, into
College of Nursing during the year 2009-10 (Plan). Of this, ` 5.20 crore was
to be provided by GoI as non-recurring expenditure and ` 0.80 crore was to be
borne by State Government as recurring expenditure. MHFW released ` 1.02
crore to Secretary, Rajasthan Medicare Relief Society (RMRS), PBM
Hospital, Bikaner, in two installments (March 2010: ` 0.62 crore and
September 2010: ` 0.40 crore). As per condition No. 4 (d) of sanction letter
(February 2010), utilisation certificates (UCs) and audited expenditure
statement, along with quarterly progress report were to be submitted to
MHFW within 12 months of release of funds.
Test check (February-March 2015) of records of Principal, Sardar Patel
Medical College and Associated Group of PBM Hospital, revealed that after a
lapse of about one and half year of receipt of funds, District Collector Bikaner,
who was also the Vice President of RMRS as well as the Chairman of Urban
Improvement Trust (UIT) Bikaner, decided (September 2011) to get the work
of construction of nursing college building executed through Rajasthan State
Road Development & Construction Corporation Limited (RSRDCC), Bikaner.
The amount received from GoI, was deposited with UIT Bikaner, as UIT had
already (August 2011) signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with
RSRDCC for construction of Janana Hospital in PBM Hospital Campus and
therefore, construction work of Nursing College at a cost of ` 3.20 crore was
incorporated (November 2011) in that MoU.
Secretary, RMRS, transferred ` 1.02 crore ( ` 0.63 crore on 21 September
2011 and ` 0.39 crore 16 March 2012) towards construction of Nursing
College to UIT, Bikaner and submitted (19 March 2012) UC of this amount to
4 Non-recurring grant-in-aid of ` 5.20 crore (Furniture: ` 1 crore; Additions &
Alterations of the School & Hostel Building: ` 3.20 crore; Laboratory equipments etc.:
` 0.65 crore and Teaching Aid & Books: ` 0.35 crore).
Recurring grant-in-aid of ` 0.80 crore (Salary of teaching staff: ` 0.68 crore and
contingency: ` 0.12 crore).

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
58
MHFW. While acknowledging the receipt of the UC, MHFW observed (April
2012) that the statement of expenditure was not furnished by the Secretary
RMRS for settling the UC. The said statement of expenditure was, however,
not submitted to MHFW till date (May 2015), due to which the balance grant
of ` 4.18 crore was not released even after a lapse of more than three years.
RSRDCC, the executing agency, after incurring an expenditure of ` 2.52 crore
(` 1.02 crore from GoI and ` 1.50 crore from UIT funds), stopped construction
work (March 2013) and repeatedly requested (April 2013, September 2013,
May 2014, June 2014) Principal, Medical College, Bikaner for releasing the
balance amount, but no funds were released. Since then, the college building is
lying incomplete for want of funds, rendering the expenditure of ` 2.52 crore,
already incurred, unfruitful.
State Government stated (September 2015) that UCs/SoE and bank details of
` 1.02 crore were sent (August 2012 and August 2013) to MHFW by Medical
College, after which there was no need to send any UC/SoE/audited SoE. It
was further stated that provision for sanction/allotment of funds with fresh
proposals for Nursing College Bikaner have been made (December 2014)
under 12th Plan, by GoI, which implies that no more formality requires to be
completed on this account.
Reply is not acceptable as the Medical College had sent only UC and not the
audited SoE to GoI. Copy of SoE was also not made available to Audit. GoI
sanction of December 2014 simply conveys the allotment of funds and it does
not exempt the State Government from fulfilling the conditions of earlier
sanctions that is the reason that GoI has not released any amount under this
sanction.
Thus, failure of Medical College to submit the audited statement of
expenditure along with utilization certificate, resulted in unfruitful expenditure
of ` 2.52 crore and non-receipt of central assistance of ` 4.18 crore.
Public Health Engineering Department
3.3 Irregular and unauthorised sanction
Approving of irregular and unauthorised expenditure of ` 7.24 crore on
execution of additional works in contravention of financial rules.
Serial No. 24 of Appendix XIII of Rajasthan Public Works Financial and
Accounts Rules (PWF&ARs) confers the power of sanction, execution and
payment of additional quantities of items existing in Schedule ‘G’ or Bills of
Quantities (BOQ) of a particular work to:
(i) Administrative Department- up to 50 per cent of original quantity of
each item subject to 50 per cent of the tendered amount of work sanctioned.
(ii) Chief Engineer (CE)/Additional Chief Engineer (ACE)/ Superintending
Engineer (SE)/Executive Engineer (EE)- up to 5 per cent of the original

Chapter III Compliance Audit
59
quantity of each item subject to 5 per cent of tendered amount of work
sanctioned by the authority concerned. In case, the above limits are exceeded,
the powers shall be exercised by the next higher authority assessing the
prevalent tender premium, site and market conditions by more than 5 per cent
and up to 25 per cent of the original quantity and also more than 5 per cent and
upto 25 per cent of the tendered amount of work sanctioned.
During test check (December 2014 and March 2015) of records of EEs, Public
Health Engineering Department (PHED), Pali and Barmer (North), it was
noticed that the Department entered into annual rate contracts with M/s Jain
Jal (contractor) for three works5 costing between ` 0.40 crore and ` 0.80 crore,
during the period 2009-12. The contracts were valid for one year.
Test check of the records revealed that after exhausting the tendered/work
order value of these works, executing authorities, without inviting fresh
tenders, continued to release more works under these contracts, for which
approval of the higher authorities for sanctioning additional works was
obtained. The approving authorities approved execution of extra/additional
work costing between ` 1.20 crore and ` 4.34 crore as shown below:
(` in crore)
S.
No
Work
sanctioning
authority
Date
of work
order
NIT
amount
Approving
Authority
(additional
work)
Total
approval
Financial
limit of additional
works
(25 percent of
NIT)
Excess
approval
(per
centage )
Total
expen-
diture
incurred
Date
upto which
work
carried out
1 SE, Pali 14.04.2009 0.65/
0.40*
CE
(HQs)
4.99 0.16 4.34
(668)
4.98 May 2013
2 SE, Barmer 08.04.2011 0.80 ACE,
Jodhpur
2.00 0.20 1.20
(150)
1.78 Feb. 2012
3 ACE, Jodhpur 27.01.2012 0.80 ACE,
Jodhpur
2.50 0.20 1.70
(213)
2.12 March 2013
Total 2.25 9.49 0.56 7.24
(322)
8.88
*Work order of ` 0.40 crore issued against NIT amount of ` 0.65 crore.
The table shows that against the total NIT value of ` 2.25 crore for three
contracts, approving authorities issued approval of excess expenditure of
` 7.24 crore (150 to 668 per cent ) against the permissible financial limit of
` 0.56 crore (25 per cent of the tendered amount) as delegated to them under
PWF&ARs ibid. Moreover, the works under two rate contracts (S. No. 1 and 3)
were carried out for more than one year against the validity period of the
contract for one year. The work at S. No. 3 was executed without extending the
validity period of contract.
EE, PHED, North Division, Barmer stated (March 2015) that expenditure was
incurred as per the sanctions and financial limits of the works, issued by SE,
Barmer and ACE, Jodhpur.
5 (i) Drilling of Boreholes for hand pumps by combination and DTH rig machine in various
cities, villages and dhanies in Pali circle (NIT No. 120/2008-09); (ii) construction and
commissioning of Boreholes for hand pumps under Panchayat Samitti, Baitu (NIT No.
2011-12/11) and (iii) construction and commissioning of Boreholes for hand pumps under
Panchayat Samitti, Baitu (NIT No. 2010-11/07).

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
60
State Government, in respect of PHED Division Pali, stated (November 2015)
that SE, PHED Circle, Pali, extended the monetary limit first to ` 1.20 crore
and then to ` 2 crore due to urgency of work of Contingency Phase-II.
Thereafter, for execution of emergent augmentation of work and with the
consent of the contractor, the monetary limit was extended (July 2012) upto
` 4.99 crore and time limit was extended upto May 2013 by CE HQ Jaipur as
per recommendation of SE Pali. It was further stated that the Department
invited tenders for new rate contract for subsequent years but due to non
finalisation of the tenders, and need for immediate execution of Contingency
Phase-II, to provide immediate relief to public, monetary limit was extended
and the Department did not fail in assessing the quantities.
The reply is not tenable as by keeping the tender value as low as ` 0.65 crore
and ` 0.80 crore, the executing authorities not only failed to estimate the work
requirements of their respective Divisions during the year but also deprived the
Department from receiving competitive rates for high value works. This
resulted in approving of irregular and unauthorised expenditure of ` 7.24 crore.
3.4 Unfruitful expenditure
Non-completion of works rendered expenditure of ` 1.33 crore unfruitful
which was irregularly incurred without prior A&F sanctions.
As per Rule 286 (1) of the Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules, it is
necessary to obtain the concurrence of competent authority of the
Administrative Department. This involves preparation of technical estimate for
the work in advance and sending it to the Administrative Department along
with the proposal of Administrative and Financial (A&F) sanction for
approval.
Test check (August 2014) of records of Executive Engineer, PHED, Taranagar
(Churu) and further information obtained (April 2015) revealed that
Superintending Engineer (SE), Operation and Maintenance (O&M), Project
Management Cell (PMC), PHED, Circle Churu approved and awarded
following two works:
(` in crore)
S.
No.
Name of the work Name of
contractor
Date of
award
Stipulated
date of
completion
Contract
value
Payment
made (till
date)
Current
status
(May 2015)
1. Construction of Raw
Water Reservoir at
Pandusar Head Works
M/s Gaur
Enterprises,
Sriganga-
nagar
February
2011
August
2011
1.00 1.00
(February
2012)
Incomplete
2. Modernisation of
recycling tank at
Pandusar Head Works
M/s
Chauhan
Construction
Company
Jhunjhunu
March
2011
June 2011 0.32 0.33
(June 2011)
Completed
Total 1.33
The work of construction of Raw Water Reservoir (RWR) at Pandusar was
lying incomplete for more than three years. Though the work of Modernisation

Chapter III Compliance Audit
61
of recycling tank has been completed, it cannot be utilised, until the work of
construction of RWR is completed as recycling tank would get water from
RWR for onward transmission to pump house.
Scrutiny by audit revealed that both these works were awarded without
obtaining A&F sanction from State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee
(SLSSC) in contravention of the provisions ibid. Further, the expenditure was
met from National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) funds
unauthorisedly i.e. without getting approval of detailed project report from
SLSSC.
On submission of (August 2013) proposal to SLSSC for ex post facto sanction,
it set up a committee headed by Additional Chief Engineer, Bikaner, to
examine the reasons for execution of works without A&F approval and their
essentiality. The committee in its report stated that the scheme was necessary
and it was functional partially, through a small raw water sump cum recycling
tank. It advised completion of the main work of RWR which would add to
storage capacity. After completion of remaining works, 34 habitations of
Pandusar, Dhansiya and Ratusar clusters would be benefitted. SLSSC accorded
(September 2014) ex-post facto A&F sanction of ` 1.65 crore 6 with the
condition that defaulting officers, who executed the works without competent
sanction, should be charge sheeted under Classification, Control & Appeal
Rules.
From the A&F sanction accorded ibid, it was evident that the balance work of
construction of RWR, were essential for the above two works to become
complete and operational for which a provision of ` 0.19 crore and ` 0.09 crore
respectively was made in A&F sanction.
On being directed from time to time (June 2013, June, August, September
2014) by the Department for completion of the work, the contractor replied
(January 2014) that he had already executed the work allotted to him and
refused to execute balance work due to undue delay in obtaining sanction for
extra work done by the him (` 1.18 crore against ` one crore). The department
neither took any action against the contractor under clause 3 7 of Public Works
Financial and Accounts Rules, nor withdrew the work so as to award the same
to another contractor.
Thus, the Department irregularly executed works without prior A&F sanctions.
In addition, the expenditure of ` 1.33 crore incurred on RWR and
Modernisation of recycling tank proved unfruitful as the works executed have
no utility unless the balance/supporting works are completed. The work
6 Construction of Raw Water Reservoir (RWR): ` 0.96 crore; balance work of RWR:
` 0.19 crore; Mordernisation of Recycling tank: ` 0.33 crore; providing, installation of
pump sets: ` 0.05 crore; construction of pump house: ` 0.04 crore and contingency
charges (5 per cent): ` 0.08 crore.
7 The clause inter alia empowers the Engineer-in-charge, in respect of any delay or inferior
workmanship or otherwise, forfeit the earnest money/security deposit, employ labour and
supply material by debiting the contractor with the cost of labour/material and give the
unexecuted work to another contractor in which case the excess amount will have to be
borne by the original contractor.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
62
already executed runs the risk of getting damaged due to non-maintenance.
Besides, the residents of 34 villages of Pandusar, Dhansiya and Ratusar
clusters remained deprived of piped drinking water. Action taken against
defaulting officers has also not been intimated to audit.
State Government while accepting the facts, stated (August 2015) that the
agenda note for approval of SLSSC was submitted (January 2011) to CE
(Rural) Jaipur, by ACE, PHED Bikaner. An advance Technical Sanction of the
work was issued (January 2011) by ACE, PHED Bikaner. In anticipation of
A&F sanction and in response to directions of Principal Secretary (PS), SE
(O&M) PMC, PHED invited tenders on 15 December 2010. Due to slow
progress on the above matter, tenders were re-invited on 24 February 2011. As
the rates received were 25.77 per cent below the tendered (G schedule) rates,
work order was issued, considering the delay occurring in issue of A&F
sanction by SLSSC and possible backing out of the contractor in absence of
non issue of work order. Hence audit observation that the work was undertaken
without sanction of SLSSC was not correct as PS of the Department is the
chairman of the SLSSC, under whose direction the work was started. The
proposal was approved by SLSSC in its thirteenth meeting (September 2014)
and A&F was issued.
It was further stated that the work of modernisation of recycling tank at
Pandusar Head Works was completed and the same is being utilised, hence the
amount incurred ( ` 0.33 crore) cannot be held as unfruitful. The work of
construction of RWR at Pandusar Head Works, though complete from
financial angle, some works were not completed by the contractor due to which
RWR was not being used. Notices have been issued to the contractor for not
completing the work. SE, PHED, Churu has invited NIT for completion of
remaining work.
The reply was not acceptable as the concurrence of competent authority
(SLSSC) was not obtained and the work was started in contravention of codal
provisions. The Department should have made efforts to get early approval of
SLSSC in the meeting subsequent to award of work (February-March 2011).
The SLSSC itself noticed the delay and proposed action against defaulting
officers, who executed the works without competent A&F sanction. Moreover,
the work of construction of RWR etc., was required to be executed for the
above two works to become operational which have not been allotted till date
(December 2015). Hence, mere completion of the work of modernisation of
recycling tank was not sufficient.
Thus, due to non-completion/partial completion of the two works, drinking
water could not be provided to the beneficiaries till date (October 2015) even
after incurring an expenditure of ` 1.33 crore, thereby rendering the
expenditure unfruitful.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
63
Audit against propriety and cases of expenditure without
adequate justification
Medical Education Department
3.5 Non-utilisation of grant
Non-utilisation of grants-in-aid of ` 27.29 crore resulting in non increase
of 84 post graduate seats even after lapse of 4 years of receiving funds.
Under a centrally sponsored scheme “Strengthening and upgradation of State
Government Medical Colleges for starting new Post Graduate (PG) disciplines
and increasing PG seats”, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW),
Government of India (GoI) sanctioned (March 2009) grant-in-aid of ` 87.05
crore with 75 per cent central share (` 65.30 crore) and 25 per cent state share
(` 21.75 crore) for starting new PG courses and increasing 234 PG seats in
four Government Medical Colleges (Bikaner: 35 seats; Jaipur: 109 seats;
Kota: 61 seats and Udaipur: 29 seats). MoHFW released its share of ` 65.05
crore in two instalments 8. As per terms and conditions of the sanction issued
by GoI, the State Government/Institute was to furnish utilization certificate to
GoI and in case of non-creation of stipulated number of PG seats, return
unutilized/mis-utilized funds along with interest. State Government allotted its
share of ` 21.81 crore.
Test check (January 2015) of records of Principal and Controller (P&C),
Medical College, Kota, and information collected from other three Medical
Colleges revealed the position of the grants received and expenditure incurred
for strengthening and upgradation of these four Medical Colleges upto March
2015, as follows:
(` in crore)
S.
No.
Name of the
Medical College
Medical Seats (in
numbers)
Grant
received
Interest
earned
Total
funds
available
Expen-
diture
incurred
Total
unutilised
amountDemanded Approved
by MCI
From
GoI
From
GoR
1 Medical College,
Kota
61 23 17.26 5.76 1.27 24.29 11.68 12.61
2 Medical College,
Bikaner
35 16 17.11 5.71 1.25 24.07 16.41 7.66
3 SMS Medical
College, Jaipur
109 94 20.64 6.95 0.83 28.42 23.88 4.54
4 RNT Medical
College, Udaipur
29 17 10.04 3.39 0.70 14.13 11.65 2.48
Total 234 150 65.05 21.81 4.05 90.91 63.62 27.29
Medical Council of India (MCI) observed inadequacies in teaching faculty,
infrastructure, lab, instruments/ equipments, books/journals etc., and therefore
recognized 150 PG seats (against 234) only. On the other hand, four medical
colleges could spent ` 63.62 crore against available funds of ` 90.91 crore till
8 ` 32.66 crore: August 2010 and ` 32.39 crore: September/October 2012.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
64
March 2015. Thus, due to non-developing of infrastructure facilities by the
Medical Colleges and non appointment of teaching faculties by the State
Government, the objective of strengthening and upgradation of Medical
Colleges could not be achieved.
It is worthwhile to mention that the Central Government relaxed 9 the norms of
teacher-student ratio and advised (May 2012) the State Government to take
advantage of the liberalised MCI regulations by applying for increase of PG
seats from the academic year 2013-14. Medical colleges, however, did not
avail these regulations for recognition of remaining PG seats. This resulted in
non utilization of the available funds of ` 27.29 crore (including accrued
interest of ` 4.05 crore). Medical Colleges, Kota and Bikaner did not draw the
state share of ` 11.47 crore, while Medical Colleges, Jaipur and Udaipur drew
state share of ` 4.85 crore only against available of ` 10.34 crore. Medical
colleges, Kota and Bikaner did not return the unutilized central funds of
` 8.80 crore (` 6.85 crore plus ` 1.95 crore) to MHFW, as required under the
terms and conditions of the sanction.
State Government stated (September 2015) that the tendering process for
purchase of equipments has been completed. Approval of increase in PG seats
was not granted by MCI due to shortage of staff and shortcomings in other
norms of MCI which are being complied with. Government further stated that
efforts are being made for obtaining of essential infrastructure, equipment and
purchase of equipments as per norms of MCI. However, reasons for shortage
of staff were not intimated.
Fact remains that medical colleges failed to utilise grant-in-aid of ` 27.29
crore resulting in non increase of 84 PG seats even after lapse of 4 years of
receiving funds due to lack of infrastructure and non appointment of teaching
facilities.
Public Health Engineering Department
3.6 Creation of extra liability due to approving higher rates
Non-observance of principles of financial propriety by the department in
approving rates for identical items of two works on the same date,
resulted in incurring of an extra liability of ` 1.56 crore.
Rule 10 of General Financial and Accounts Rules (GF&ARs) stipulates that
every Government servant incurring or authorising expenditure from public
funds should be guided by high standards of financial propriety and should
also enforce financial order and strict economy at every step.
9 Maximum limit of admitting PG students in broad and super-specialty courses was
increased from 04 to 05 PG students in each unit per year and in certain disciplines of
postgraduate and super-specialty courses, the teacher-student ratio was increased to 1:3
for Professor and 1:1 for other cadres subject to a maximum of 06 students in each unit
per year.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
65
Policy Planning Committee (PPC) of Rajasthan Water Supply and Sewerage
Management Board (RWSSMB), Public Health Engineering Department
(PHED) issued (April 2007) administrative and financial (A&F) sanction of
` 183.97 crore (revised to ` 221.34 crore in October 2008) for water supply
project of Ajmer-Peesangan tehsil. The work of the project was distributed
(October 2008) in eight packages10.
Additional Chief Engineer (ACE), PHED Ajmer, invited Tenders (17 October
2012) for execution of work ‘providing, laying, jointing of DI trunk main/
rising main, cluster distribution and village distribution networks and its
dhanis etc.’ amounting to ` 39.87 crore and ` 12.95 crore for Jethana (15
villages) and Lamana (nine villages) clusters respectively, in Ajmer-Peesagan
Tehsil. Finance Committee (FC) RWSSMB, in its meeting (1 February 2013),
approved the lowest tenders of M/s Dara Construction Co., Jodhpur
(contractor ‘A’) for the work of Jethana cluster (` 35.74 crore) and of M/s S.B.
Enterprises, Jodhpur (contractor ‘B’) for Lamana cluster ( ` 10.99 crore).
Accordingly, ACE, PHED Ajmer, issued (11 February 2013) work orders to
contractor ‘A’ and ‘B’ with stipulated date of completion as 20 August 2014
and 20 February 2014 respectively.
Test check (October 2014) of records of Executive Engineer (EE), PHED,
District Rural Division Ajmer, and further information collected (January
2015) revealed that though the FC approved both the contracts on the same
date (01 February 2013), rates of a number of common items (supply and
laying and jointing of pipes, sluice valves, RCC valve chambers etc.) were
approved at higher rates for Jethana cluster (Appendix 3.1). The difference
ranged between ` 15 and ` 26,000 per item. As these items under the two
works were common and to be executed in the same period, accepting higher
rates for Jethana cluster without any negotiation with L-1, was not financially
prudent. This resulted in incurring of an extra liability of ` 1.56 crore
(Appendix 3.1) for this work. Had a negotiation been conducted with
contractor ‘A’ to lower his rates, the extra expenditure of ` 1.56 crore could
have been avoided.
State Government stated (September 2015) that the rate quoted by the tenderer
was already below the estimated amount, hence considered reasonable and not
called for negotiation. It was also stated that the work relating to the Jethana
Cluster is planned for 15 villages while the work relating to Lamana Cluster is
planed only for 9 villages and were having different periods of completion and
different quantities of items, common as well as uncommon to be executed.
The reply is not acceptable as both the works were similar in nature having
common items, except the volume of work. This was evident from the fact that
a single estimate was prepared for rising main pipeline for Peesagan Tehsil
(including Jethana and Lamana Clusturs). A comparison of rates of such
similar items under both the contracts was therefore desirable. As the FC
approved both the contracts in the same meeting, observance of the principles
10 Peesangan Rural Sector: Lamana, Jethana, Peesagan, Bhanwta and Ganhera ;
Ajmer Rural Sector: Gangwana, Hatoondi and Sederiya.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
66
of financial prudence by making such a comparison would have had resulted
in lowering down of rates by contractor ‘A’, if negotiated.
Thus, non-observance of principles of financial propriety by the department
and approving higher rates for common items without negotiation with L-1,
resulted in incurring of an extra liability of ` 1.56 crore.
3.7 Extra liability to Government exchequer
Extra liability of ` 52.95 crore on procurement, installation and
commissioning of Reverse Osmosis plants in the state owing to approval
of plants at higher cost.
Chief Engineer (CE), Rural, PHED, Jaipur invited (16 January 2013) tenders
for providing, installation and commissioning of 35 Reverse Osmosis (RO)
plants (output capacity of 1000 litre per hour) in 3 regions 11 on rate contract
basis. The contract involved seven years operation and maintenance (O&M)
after installation and a payment schedule of 65 per cent on providing,
installation/commissioning of the plant and the remaining 35 per cent during
the O&M period @ five per cent per year. The work was awarded (April-
May 2013) to contractors, M/s Doshion Veolia Water Solution Private
Limited, Ahmedabad (15 plants) and M/s Water Life India Private Limited
Secunderabad (20 plants) at ` 13.39 lakh 12 (total dissolved solid upto 5000
ppm) and ` 13.73 lakh13 (total dissolved solid more than 5000 ppm) per plant.
Test check (July 2014) of records of the Executive Engineer (EE), PHED
District Division, Phalodi and further information collected (October 2014 and
January 2015) from the Department, revealed that while the above work was
in progress, the State Government decided (6 March 2013) to install 1000 RO
plants in rural areas of Rajasthan, for providing safe drinking water in quality
affected habitations. Accordingly, CE (Rural), invited (26 April 2013) tenders
for providing, installation and commissioning of 1000 RO plants for five
regions14 on similar terms and conditions as ibid.
However, rate received by CE were high and after considering the approved
base rates for similar work and after adding the impact of appreciation in US
Dollar for imported parts, payment terms (65/35 per cent), additional scope of
IEC, logistic cost etc. and submitted the same to Standing Negotiation
Committee (SNC) for consideration/negotiation.
The SNC observed (July 2013) that the lowest quoted rates under all five
regions were much higher. It was also observed by SNC that work orders for
similar works were awarded in recent past to the M/s Doshion Veolia Water
Solution Pvt. Ltd., Ahmedabad and M/s Water Life India Pvt. Ltd.,
Secunderabad at around ` 13.50 lakh per RO. However, these firms had also
quoted very high rates this time. The representatives of these contractors
11 Bharatpur, Jaipur and Jodhpur
12 Providing of RO plant: `9.05 lakh; installation and commissioning etc.: ` 4.34 lakh.
13 Providing of RO plant: ` 9.05 lakh; installation and commissioning etc.: ` 4.68 lakh.
14 Jodhpur : 370 ( NIT 1,2 and 3); Bharatpur : 330 (NIT 4 and 5); Ajmer : 140 (NIT 6);
Jaipur : 120 (NIT 7) and Udaipur : 40 (NIT 8).

Chapter III Compliance Audit
67
clarified that the referred work was a small pilot work and first of its kind in
Rajasthan (based on Punjab model) and at that time they could not make a
realistic assessment of prevailing conditions, terms and conditions and they
quoted a lower price for entry into the State. During actual working on the
project, the situation in the state was found to be quite different than that in
Punjab in terms of distances involved, scattered population, availability of
skilled labour, means of transport, logistics and lesser public interest. They
requested that the rates quoted by them earlier should not form a basis for
justification of the cost quoted by them now.
During negotiation, all the bidders initially expressed their inability to reduce
the rates as about 80 per cent of parts of RO plant are imported and the price
of these parts was on a rising trend due to devaluation of the rupee. Further,
terrain where the work was to be executed was very difficult, technically
skilled labour was not available locally and payment conditions provided for
65 per cent payment on installation and the rest @ 5 per cent in seven years
O&M period. They finally agreed to slightly reduce their rates/prices. SNC
compared the negotiated rates with the justified rates proposed by CE (Rural),
and finding them a little higher than the justified rates, recommended to the
FC for approval. On receipt of final approval (August 2013) from FC, work
orders were issued (24 August to 11 September 2013) to six successful
bidders15.
A comparison of the approved rate (April 2013) under existing contract and
rates approved in August 2013 for 1000 plants is as under:
(` in lakh)
NIT
S. No
Name of
District/
Region
Name of Bidder TDS level
(PPM)
Rate
approved
in April
2013
Rate
approved in
August 2013
Diffe-
rence
No. of
RO
ordered
Extra
Liability
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (6-5) 8 9 (7*8)
1 Barmer
(Jodhpur)
M/s Doshion
Veolia Water
Solution Pvt.
Ltd., Ahmedabad
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.53
19.07
19.58
5.14
5.68
5.85
55
101
04
282.70
573.68
23.40
2 Jalore,
Jaisalmer
(Jodhpur)
M/s Water Life
India Pvt. Ltd.,
Secunderabad
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.60
19.08
19.60
5.21
5.69
5.87
67
11
02
349.07
62.59
11.74
3 Jodhpur
(Jodhpur)
M/s GA Infra
Pvt. Ltd.,Sirohi
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.54
19.07
19.58
5.15
5.68
5.85
113
14
03
581.95
79.52
17.55
15 ACE Jodhpr: M/s Doshion Veolia Water Solution Pvt. Ltd., Ahmedabad (160 plants);
M/s Water Life India Pvt. Ltd., Secunderabad (80 plants) and M/s GA Infra Pvt. Ltd.,
Sirohi (130 plants); ACE Bharatpur: M/s LVJ Project Pvt. Ltd. Ahmedabad (150 plants)
and M/s Hi-Tech Water Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Surat (180 plants); ACE Ajmer: M/s SR
Paryavaran Engineers Pvt. Ltd., Panchkula (140 plants); ACE Jaipur: M/s Hi-Tech Water
Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Surat (120 plants) and ACE Udaipur : M/s Doshion Veolia Water
Solution Pvt. Ltd., Ahmedabad (40 plants).

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
68
NIT
S. No
Name of
District/
Region
Name of Bidder TDS level
(PPM)
Rate
approved
in April
2013
Rate
approved in
August 2013
Diffe-
rence
No. of
RO
ordered
Extra
Liability
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (6-5) 8 9 (7*8)
4 Bharatpur
(Bharatpur)
M/s LVJ Project
Pvt. Ltd.
Ahmedabad.
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.58
19.09
19.58
5.19
5.70
5.85
140
05
05
726.60
28.50
29.25
5 Bharatpur,
Karauli
(Bharat
pur)
M/s Hi-Tech
Water Solutions
Pvt. Ltd.,
Surat
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.57
19.09
19.58
5.18
5.70
5.85
172
07
01
890.96
39.90
5.85
6 Nagaur
(Ajmer)
M/s SR
Paryavaran
Engineers Pvt.
Ltd.,
Panchkula
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.56
19.09
19.59
5.17
5.70
5.86
85
40
15
439.45
228.00
87.90
7 Jaipur,
Sikar,
Churu
Jhunjhunu
(Jaipur)
M/s Hi-Tech
Water Solutions
Pvt. Ltd.,
Surat
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.56
19.09
19.59
5.17
5.70
5.86
116
02
02
599.72
11.40
11.72
8 Chittor-
garh
(Udaipur)
M/s Doshion
Veolia Water
Solution Pvt. Ltd.
Ahmedabad
< 3000
3000-
5000
5000-
8000
13.39
13.73
18.53
19.07
19.58
5.14
5.68
5.85
26
11
03
133.64
62.48
17.55
Total 1000 5295.12
It may be seen from the above that the rates approved for each RO plant, were
higher by ` 5.14 lakh to ` 5.87 lakh than the rates approved previously.
Hence, the action of the Department was not justified. It was also noticed that
the rates quoted by all the bidders and reasons explained by them for quoting
higher rates were almost similar, indicating some cartelisation among the
bidders.
State Government stated (November 2015) that the tenders were invited online
for fair, reasonable and competitive rates. As audit has not commented
adversely on tendering process, the rates arrived at after negotiation should be
accepted as fair and reasonable. The whole process was completed by
respective ACEs and justified rates were also submitted to CE (Rural). After
considering the analysis, the justified rates were submitted to Secretary
RWSSMB before opening financial bids. The rates received were higher than
the justified rates and the matter was submitted before Finance Committee
(FC) of RWSSMB. As per decision of FC, negotiations were conducted with
the lowest bidder in each tender by SNC and the rates were lowered down to
near the justified rates, which were approved by FC.
It was further clarified that the estimated cost of ` 14.80 lakh was based on
average of maximum and minimum cost received in pilot project tender of 35
RO plants and the effect of depreciation in exchange rates of US dollar,
resulting in increase in cost of imported parts, logistic cost, provision of IEC
etc. was not taken into account while estimating this cost. Reasons for rate

Chapter III Compliance Audit
69
quoted by bidders were almost identical because they quoted for RO plants of
prescribed specification. Explanation given by bidders for quoting higher rates
was almost similar because nature of work was same and almost similar
difficulties were likely to be faced by bidders in the field. Therefore, it could
not be considered a ground for indication of cartelisation.
The reply was not acceptable as justified rates for comparison were prepared
after considering the approved base rates for similar work and after adding the
impact of appreciation in the US Dollar for imported parts. Parts used in RO
plants are mostly manufactured in India and the RO plants are manufactured
either by the contractor himself or manufactured by a consortium of service
providers. The rate of RO plants that were approved by FC were 38 to 43 per
cent higher, whereas the rupee devalued by only 11 per cent during the period
January 2013 to July 2013.
Moreover, the argument that bidders have quoted identical rates/explanations
because of similar nature of work and similar difficulties likely to be faced by
them was not acceptable as Rajasthan, being a big state, have different
ground conditions in each region, as such similarity in their rates and
explanations given by them, indicate a possible cartelisation among the
bidders.
Thus, accepting very high rates for the same work within a period of three
months, was irregular and resulted in extra liability of ` 52.95 crore to
Government exchequer.
3.8 Unusual delay in execution of work
Due to laxity of the department, the work could not be completed even
after incurring an expenditure of ` 246.86 crore and a lapse of more than
6 years defeating the objective of providing safe and potable drinking
water to targeted population.
The area of Rajasthan, comprising Sawai Modhopur and Karauli districts is
mostly dependent on ground water for providing safe and potable drinking
water. The ground water has high nitrates, chlorides and total dissolved solid
(TDS) contents and is not fit for human consumption. To solve this problem,
an integrated project ‘Chambal-Sawai Madhopur-Nadoti Water Supply
Project’ for 926 villages and four towns of these districts, was conceived in
June 2002. The infrastructure such as main transmission pipe line, intake
pumping station and pump houses were designed for estimated population of
2031.
Policy Planning Committee (PPC), Rajasthan Water Supply and Sewerage
Management Board of Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)
accorded (June 2002) administrative and financial sanction (A&F) of ` 240.88
crore for the Project. The cost of the project was revised (September 2004) to
` 478.91 crore, with a rider that all necessary statutory sanctions from Central
Government/State Government and other departments should be obtained
prior to starting the work. The technical committee (TC) of PHED decided

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
70
(October 2004) to split the Project into four packages and accorded technical
sanction of ` 289.31 crore for package-I (main transmission system).
Test check of the records (July 2014 and April 2015) of Executive, Engineer
(EE), PHED, Project Division-I Sawai Madhopur, revealed the following:
• Additional Chief Engineer, (Bisalpur and Special Project) PHED, Jaipur
invited tenders for package–I 16 in March 2005. The Finance Committee
(FC) approved (September 2005) the lowest tender ( ` 269.30 crore) of
M/s Subhash Projects and Marketing Limited, New Delhi (contractor).
Work order was issued on 23 September 2005 with stipulated date of
commencement and completion of work as 3 October 2005 and 2 October
2008 respectively and with five year’s operation and maintenance after
completion of the work.
• As intake well was to be constructed in forest land of Chambal Sanctuary,
proposal for obtaining permission for diversion of forest land was sent to
Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) New Delhi, on 10 May 2006
and permission was granted by MoEF on 05 April 2010. This permission
was conveyed to EE by the Additional Principal Chief Conservator of
Forest Jaipur, on 12 April 2010.
• As per condition no. 9 of ‘Special Conditions of Contract’, the contractor
was responsible for obtaining necessary clearances of drawings and design
of the work, which were to be approved by competent authority within 15
days. The department directed the contractor on 30 May 2011 to prepare
drawings and design for intake well and approach bridge and forwarded
the same to Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi, on 16 January
2012, which were approved by IIT New Delhi on 11 December 2012.
• Due to paucity of funds, re-phasing of the work was approved by FC and
the contractor was granted time extension upto 31 March 2013. FC
granted (February 2014) further time extension upto 31 March 2015 on
grounds of delay in handing over of site for intake well and approach
bridge, non availability of environmental and forest clearance and
approval of design and drawing by IIT, Delhi.
• As of March 2015 the contractor was paid ` 194.87 crore (72.4 per cent of
tendered value of ` 269.30 crore), for the work executed by him. Of this,
` 192.46 crore was paid (during June 2006 to March 2015) for the works
for which there were no hindrances (laying and jointing of pipes, water
treatment plant, raw water reservoir, clear water reservoir, pumping
station, head works etc.) and ` 2.41 crore only was paid for the works for
which there was hindrances/delay on the part of the department in
obtaining approval/permission of the competent authorities (intake well,
approach bridge, intake head works and switch yard).
16 Construction of intake structure, pumping stations, MS/PSCC pipelines, water treatment
plant, GSS/switchyard etc.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
71
• In addition, ` 23.37 crore was paid to the contractor on account of price
escalation (up to the period of December 2011) due to delay at various
stages of execution of work.
• The work has still not been completed.
It was further revealed that the department did not take necessary measures for
speedy completion of the work. The tenders for work were invited without
obtaining prior permission/environmental clearances from respective
authorities in contravention to the directions of PPC. Proposal for
environmental clearance was sent on 10 May 2006 after a delay of 18 months
from technical sanction. It took 65 months in obtaining environmental
clearance from MoEF from the date of technical sanction (October 2004).
Efforts made by the department for obtaining clearance of MoEF were not
provided though, called for in October 2014 and May 2015. Had the
department sent the proposal to MoEF immediately after receipt of technical
sanction and pursued it vigorously, the delay could have been reduced.
Moreover, the progress of the work, not falling under hindrances, was not
monitored, which resulted in non completion of that part of the work within
stipulated time.
State Government stated (September 2015) that parallel activities of seeking
permission from CEC Delhi, as area falls under Ghariyal Sanctuary on
Chambal river and issuing work order was carried out in anticipation of the
permission. But due to consideration of the matter by Supreme Court and
CEC, it got extra ordinarily delayed which was beyond the control of the
department. The department directed the contractor to submit drawings and
design on 16 April 2010, just after getting permission from Supreme Court on
12 April 2010 and these were sent to Central Water Commission (CWC) for
approval. The CWC raised so many observations before starting vetting of
drawings of Intake Well. Finally, to expedite the issue it was decided to get
approval of drawing and design from IIT Delhi, instead of CWC. The drawing
and design was approved on 11 December 2011. The work of Transmission
Main is almost complete and Intake well, RWR, WTP, PH, etc. is in progress.
The firm has assured the department to complete the work by June 2016.
The reply was not acceptable as revised A&F, issued on September 2004
clearly mentioned that all necessary statutory sanctions from Central
Government/State Government and other departments should be obtained
prior to starting the work, whereas the department sent the proposals to GoI
only in May 2006 i.e. after a lapse of 18 months. Further, Ministry of
Environment and Forest, issued in principle sanction on 10 December 2009,
but the department directed the contractor for preparing drawing and design
on 30 May 2011 (a delay of 17 months) and not on 16 April 2010 as
contended by State Government in their reply. Moreover, as per work order,
the work was to be completed within three years (October 2008) while the
drawing and design of the work was approved on December 2012 (and not in
December 2011 as stated by State Government) and after a lapse of 4 years
the work is still incomplete.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
72
Thus, due to laxity of the department, the work could not be completed even
after incurring an expenditure of ` 246.86 crore 17 and after a lapse of more
than six years from the stipulated date of completion. The PPC has further
revised (September 2013) the cost of package-I to ` 303.82 crore and the final
cost may go up, considering the pace of work and cost escalation. This
defeated the purpose of providing safe and potable drinking water to target
population of Sawai Madhopur and Karauli district even after lapse of eleven
years.
Urban Development and Housing Department
3.9 Unfruitful expenditure
Imprudent decision of the Department to start the construction for a
landfill site within 10 kms radius from Aerodrome Reference Point
without obtaining NOC from Air Force Station and environment
clearance from State Environment Impact Assessment Authority, resulted
in incurring of unfruitful expenditure of ` 0.73 crore.
For Solid Waste Management (SWM) of the Jaisalmer city, the District
Collector, Jaisalmer allotted (October 2004) 300 bighas land 18 to Municipal
Board (MB) Jaisalmer, at village Bada Bag. As per order of the Collector, the
land was to be used for collection, segregation, storage, transportation,
processing, treatment and disposal of solid waste as per the Municipal Solid
Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2000, after obtaining no objection
certificates (NOCs) from line Departments 19, Air Force Station (AFS)
Jaisalmer and Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB).
Test-check (February and October 2014) of the records of Project Director
(PD), Rajasthan Urban Infrastructure Development Project (RUIDP), Jaipur
and further information collected (March 2015) revealed that MB Jaisalmer
did not obtain environment clearance (EC) from State Environment Impact
Assessment Authority (SEIAA) and NOCs from AFS. The AFS intimated (20
November 2004) that construction of refuse dumps would not be permitted
within a radius of 10 kilo metres (kms) from Aerodrome Reference Point
(ARP) due to the bird hazard. Further, during the physical visit of the site,
Flying Officer, AFS, found that the earmarked area did not adhere to the
policies laid down by the Indian Air Force for safe conduct of flying and
requested (25 November 2004) the Commissioner, MB Jaisalmer, that the
earmarked area may be shifted by at least five kms for obtaining NOC. In a
subsequent discussion (17 December 2004), the Wing Commander reiterated
(20 December 2004) that the site should not be within a radius of 10 km
17 ` 194.87 crore: Execution of work; ` 23.37 crore: Price escalation; ` 28.62 crore:
payments to Forest Department (diversion of forest land), National Highways Authority
of India, Indian Railways (for crossing railway line), Electricity Board (electric
connection) etc.
18 Khasara nos. 69/465, 70/464, 71 and 72
19 Forest Department, Ground Water Department, Public Health & Engineering Department,
Irrigation Department and Village Panchayat.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
73
around the ARP and issued a conditional NOC. A fresh NOC was to be
obtained by MB Jaisalmer before commencement of any construction work at
the designated site.
The Work Finalisation Committee of RUIDP approved (June 2007) a work
plan for ‘Development of sanitary landfill site including installation of weigh
bridge and construction of transfer station and procurement of equipments’
with an estimated cost of ` 1.50 crore for Jaisalmer town under Asian
Development Bank (ADB) funded project ‘Rajasthan Urban Sector
Development Investment Programme (RUSDIP)’. The bids for the work
‘Development of sanitary landfill site at Jaisalmer 20’ were invited (December
2008) and the Tender Approval Committee of RUSDIP accepted (July 2009)
the sole bid of M/s Durgaa Impex, Udaipur. Accordingly, Executive Engineer
(EE), RUSDIP, Jaisalmer awarded (August 2009) the work to the firm at
` 0.90 crore with stipulated date of commencement and completion of work as
24 August 2009 and 23 August 2010 respectively.
As RUSDIP could not obtain NOC from AFS Jaisalmer, necessary EC from
SEIAA could not be obtained by RUSDIP. In view of this, after completion of
around 90 per cent work and incurring an expenditure of ` 0.73 crore 21,
RUSDIP instructed (November 2010) the firm to stop the work for want of EC
as instructed by ADB. Since then the work is lying incomplete.
Subsequently, on the request (11 June 2014) of the MB Jaisalmer for
providing clearance on the ground that allotment of additional land was under
progress, the Wing Commander again advised (July 2014) the Commissioner,
MB Jaisalmer that the present earmarked site is within 10 kms of the air field
and also requested to shift the entire site beyond 10 kms from the air field and
submit a fresh request for NOC along with the layout plan of the new site. It
was evident from the facts of the case that the work of development of sanitary
landfill site was carried out at a wrong site which was within a radius of 10
kms from ARP inspite of clear instructions (December 2004) from AFS and
therefore the expenditure of ` 0.73 crore incurred on this work was rendered
unfruitful.
State Government stated (March 2015) that the matter for allotment of
additional land is under process and construction work on land fill site would
be utilised after allotment of additional land for dumping the solid waste. As
of now (March 2015), the District Collector, Jaisalmer had allotted (January
2015) 250 bighas land at Ramgarh road, village Bada Bag for SWM in
Jaisalmer area.
The reply was not acceptable as the additional allotted land was also adjacent
to existing site and the Air Force Authority had advised the MB Jaisalmer to
shift the entire site beyond 10 kms radius of the air field. Since, the NOC had
not been issued by AFS, Jaisalmer (July 2015) as such the collected solid
20 Construction of trenches, office building, watch man building, installation of
weighbridge, digging of tube wells etc.
21 Work of office building, excavation of trenches, tube well, plantation was completed.
Weigh bridge work was incomplete and HDPE Geomemberance and clayliner procured at
site.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
74
waste was presently being dumped at previously allotted site which is
hazardous to AFS as well to the environment. Moreover, no norms for
disposal of collected solid waste were available at MB, Jaisalmer.
Thus, imprudent decision of the Department to start construction for a landfill
site within 10 kms radius from ARP without obtaining NOC from AFS and
environment clearance from State Environment Impact Assessment Authority,
resulted in incurring of unfruitful expenditure of ` 0.73 crore. Besides, the
norms for disposal of solid waste as per the Municipal Solid Waste
(Management & Handling) Rules 2000 were not fulfilled.
Failure in implementation, monitoring and governance
Agriculture Department
3.10 PPP project of Soil Testing Laboratories
3.10.1 Introduction
The Government of India (GoI) launched (2008-09) a centrally sponsored
scheme `National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility
(NPMSF)’ for strengthening and revamping of soil testing facilities. The main
components of the project were to strengthen soil testing facilities by setting
up of new Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs) and promoting integrated nutrient
management through judicious use of chemical fertilizer, including secondary
and micro nutrients, in conjunction with organic manures and bio-fertilizers,
for improving soil health and its productivity. The project aimed to provide
soil testing facilities at the door step of farmers to achieve improved crop
productivity to augment agriculture production on sustainable basis and reduce
per unit cost of production. In order to promote balanced and judicious use of
chemical fertilizer, establishment of new soil testing laboratories
(static/mobile) were proposed under the project.
In Rajasthan, the implementation of the project of running the laboratories was
assigned on Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode, under which operation
and maintenance of laboratories was entrusted to private partners. Three
private partners for 14 Static Soil Testing Laboratories (SSTLs) and 10 private
partners for 12 Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories (MSTLs) as per details given
in Appendix 3.2, were selected and an agreement for each SSTL and MSTL
was signed between the public (Commissioner of Agriculture) and private
partner. In case of SSTLs, the public entity handed over fully developed
SSTLs, (buildings, equipment and accessories) to selected agencies for
operation for three years. As per agreement, the public entity was to provide
fixed operation cost per annum towards operation of SSTL as per rate
approved after inviting tenders/expression of interests. The testing fee (user
charges) collected by the private partner shall be deposited in Government
account. In case of MSTLs, the public entity handed over fully equipped
Mobile Soil Testing Vans to selected agencies for operation for three years
and private partner was to provide soil testing facilities to farmers at testing

Chapter III Compliance Audit
75
fee decided by the public entity. The private partner was kept free to deposit
testing fee into Government account. The operating and maintenance cost of
mobile soil testing van and testing expenses were to be borne by the private
partner. In addition to this, consumable articles like chemicals, filter papers,
etc. were also to be provided by the public entity to the private partners on the
basis of number of samples analysed in both cases of SSTLs and MSTLs.
Under the project, GoI provides 50 per cent of the project cost as subsidy
subject to a limit of ` 30 lakh for purchase of machinery and equipment,
chemicals and glass wares, miscellaneous laboratory articles and
contingencies in case of SSTLs while 75 per cent of the project cost subject to
a limit of ` 30 lakh is provided as financial assistance in case of MSTLs. The
remaining amount needs to be arranged by the State Government from its
resources. The year wise position of allotment of budget and expenditure is as
given in table below:
(` in crore)
Year Static Mobile
Amount received Expenditure
incurred
Amount received Expenditure
incurredGoI GoR Total GoI GoR Total
2009-10 3.39 - 3.39 - 2.18 - 2.18 0.84
2010-11 2.10 22 2.38 4.48 0.01 1.80 0.61 2.41 2.20
2011-12 - - - 0.08 - - - 0.04
2012-13 - - - 0.67 - - - -
2013-14 - - - 0.33 - - - 0.01
2014-15 - - - 0.08 - - - -
Total 5.49 2.38 7.87 1.17 3.98 0.61 4.59 3.09
Audit of records for the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15 of 14 units (nine
SSTLs23 and five MSTLs 24) out of 26 laboratories was taken up (March-May
2015) by adopting simple random sampling method. Besides, records of the
Commissioner of Agriculture and State Institute of Agriculture Management
(SIAM) were also examined to see whether the terms and conditions
incorporated in the agreements executed with the private partners for operation
and maintenance of the laboratories were adhered to, services of soil testing
facilities were provided to the farmers in an efficient and effective manner and
objectives for setting up the soil testing laboratories were achieved.
Audit Findings
Audit findings noticed during the test check of selected SSTLs/ MSTLs, office
of the Commissioner of Agriculture and SIAM are discussed in succeeding
paragraphs.
3.10.2 Planning and Implementation
Scrutiny of records of Commissioner of Agriculture and 14 selected
laboratories along with records of offices of the Deputy/Assistant Directors
(Extension) revealed the following:
22 ` 6.38 lakh towards bank interest had been considered against installment.
23 Duni, Gudhamalani, Kekri, Kuchaman city, Ladnu, Sandawa, Sri Dungargarh,
Srimadhopur and Pratapgarh.
24 Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota, Pali and Suratgarh.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
76
3.10.2.1 Criteria for selection of site for establishment of laboratories not
fixed
The criteria for selection of sites for establishment of laboratories were not
established. No survey or assessment was conducted for identifying the areas
where maximum farmers could be benefitted by these laboratories. It was
noticed that a Government Soil Testing Laboratory was in existence in Churu
district but was not operational for the last three years in the absence of
manpower. It was further observed that instead of providing the manpower in
Government Laboratory, a new SSTL in Sandwa (Churu district) was
established about 140 kilometres away from the district headquarter. The
establishment of SSTL far away from the district headquarter led to delay of
about 30-45 days in collection of samples from the farmers, analysis of
samples and sending of reports back to the farmers, whereas the guidelines
prescribed maximum 10 days period for conducting tests and reporting of
results. Similarly, SSTL at Gudhamalani (Barmer district) was established at a
secluded place, not connected with road, due to which, the operation of the
laboratory could not be started (May 2015) though an agreement was
executed with a firm to run the laboratory in April 2013.
Further, it was also noticed that eight SSTLs 25 and eight MSTLs 26 were
established on sites other than the sites proposed (December 2008) by
Commissioner of Agriculture to GoI.
The State Government stated (September 2015) that selection of sites for
establishment of laboratories was done keeping in view the geographic,
irrigation and extension conditions in agriculture sector. It was further stated
that objective of establishment and operation of laboratories was to provide
facilities to farmers at the nearest point as well as extend facilities in remote
and deprived areas. The reply may be viewed in the light of the fact that
laboratory in Churu district was established at 140 kms away from the district
headquarter and no other laboratory was working which deprived the farmers
from soil testing facilities at their nearest point. State Government did not
furnish specific reasons on establishment of MSTLs at the sites other than
proposed. However, no survey or assessment was also conducted for
identifying the areas where maximum farmers could be benefitted by these
laboratories.
3.10.2.2 Non-establishment/Delay in establishment of laboratories
The GoI accorded (August 2008) administrative approval and released (March
2009 and March 2011) funds of ` 7.80 crore for setting up of 14 SSTLs and
12 MSTLs. Further, for establishment of new additional laboratories,
proposals were sought (April 2009) by the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, GoI. In compliance of this, the
Commissioner of Agriculture submitted (May 2009) proposals for 10 SSTLs
and four MSTLs. The GoI released (January 2010) ` 1.67 crore under NPMSF
25 Each in Laxamangarh, Kekri, Sangod, Sri Dungargarh, Ladnu, Jaitaran, Sandwa and
Gudhamalani.
26 Three in Udaipur, two in Jaipur, one each in Kota, Bikaner and Pali.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
77
as first installment. As per guidelines, laboratories were to be established
during 11th Five year plan i.e. upto March 2012. The status of SSTLs/MSTLs
sanctioned by GoI, established by GoR and functioning as on 31 March 2015
is given in table below:
Number of laboratories
sanctioned by GoI
Number of laboratories
established by GoR
Number of laboratories
functioning as on 31 March 2015
SSTLs MSTLs SSTLs MSTLs SSTLs MSTLs
24 16 14 12 13 8
(i) Scrutiny of the records revealed that no timeline for setting up of
laboratories was fixed by the Department. Only 10 MSTLs and one SSTL
were set up during the 11th Five year plan while 15 laboratories 27 were set up
with delay from one to three years. It was also noticed that after entering into
an agreement in April 2013, the buildings of two SSTLs 28 were handed over to
the executing agency for operation in September 2014 with a delay of 17
months. In SSTL Gudhamalani, equipment was handed over to private partner
in March 2015 with a delay of 23 months from the date of agreement.
The State Government stated (September 2015) that the delay was due to
many factors involving availability and allotment of land, construction of
building, procurement and supply of equipment, installation, selection of
agency, etc. The State Government also attributed the delay to repeated
tendering process in selection of private partner. The reply is not acceptable as
all these reasons were not beyond the control of executing authority and,
therefore, action should have been taken by the authority for timely
establishment of laboratories. The delay in setting up of laboratories led to
deprival of benefit of soil testing facilities to the farmers.
(ii) Audit observed that more than five years had elapsed from the date of
sanction of additional laboratories, but no laboratories had been established till
March 2015. In absence of this, GoR failed to get second installment of ` 1.66
crore from GoI. The State Government accepted the facts and attributed the
reasons of non-establishment of 10 SSTLs and four MSTLs sanctioned during
2009-10 due to non-commencement of operation of 14 SSTLs sanctioned in
first phase in 2008-09.
The proposals for establishment of additional laboratories were, therefore,
prepared without any strategy and action plan which severely crippled the
successful implementation of the project.
3.10.2.3 Risk area for private partner not clearly defined
The key to success of PPP Project is fair and balanced sharing of risks and
benefits between the partners. Also, transparency and accountability in all
transactions relating to the award and management of the contract are critical.
In order to provide facilities of soil testing laboratories, the implementation of
the project through PPP framework was adopted under which operation and
27 10 SSTLs and two MSTLs in 2012 -13, one SSTL in 2013-14 and two SSTLs in 2014-15.
28 Sanchore and Gudhamalani.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
78
maintenance of SSTLs and MSTLs was entrusted to private partners by
inviting Open Tenders/Expression of Interest (EoI).
Audit observed that no clear role and responsibility were outlined in the
agreement. One of the critical elements for the success of the project was
collection of samples from farmers. It was however, observed that Agriculture
Supervisor/Assistant Agriculture Officers were to collect and send the samples
to the SSTL/MSTL but no targets in this respect were assigned to the private
partners. Consequently, there was huge shortfall in achievement of targets for
testing soil samples as discussed in succeeding paragraph. In the Expression of
Interest document for MSTLs, it was mentioned that the private partner would
be responsible for collection of soil samples, but this condition was not
included in the agreement. Further, no clause for deduction of payment or
termination of agreement for non-satisfactory performance was included in the
agreement. Similarly, there was no penal provision for delay in testing and
sending recommendations. As fully equipped laboratories were handed over to
the private partners, fixed operating cost 29 and recurring expenses30 were borne
by the Department and no investment had to be made by the private partner in
case of SSTL, then absence of clear cut role and responsibility of the private
partner was an impediment in successful implementation of the project and
diluted the accountability of the private partner.
Similarly, no yardstick was fixed for per sample operating cost. Resultantly, in
test checked laboratories, per sample operating cost was different ranging
between ` 70 and ` 267 during the project period.
The State Government did not furnish any specific reply to the observations
made (December 2015).
3.10.2.4 Required tests not done
One of the main objectives of NPMSF was to facilitate and promote Integrated
Nutrient Management (INM) through judicious use of chemical fertilizer
including secondary and micro nutrients in conjunction with organic manures
and bio-fertilizer for improving soil health and its productivity.
In order to promote balanced and judicious use of chemical fertilizer, new
SSTLs and MSTLs were established, in which complete analysis of soil like
NPK (major nutrients), Ca, Mg, S (Secondary nutrients), Zn, Fe, Cu, Mn, B,
Mo, CI (micro nutrients) and C, H, O (auxiliary nutrients) was to be conducted
in one out of every three samples.
In all test checked laboratories, it was observed that only major nutrients
(NPK) were analysed and no secondary, micro and auxiliary nutrients were
analysed due to non-procurement of required equipment i.e. Atomic
Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS).
29 Cost of staff, cost of maintenance of laboratory equipment, accessories plus stationery,
postage, light and water, miscellaneous charges and agency margin.
30 Recurring expenses like chemicals, filter papers etc.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
79
The State Government stated (September 2015) that AAS is not appropriate
for MSTLs. However, tenders were invited for procuring the AAS for SSTLs
but not finalised. Hence, amount of ` 10 lakh for each AAS received from GoI
remained unutilised. The reply is not acceptable as the Commissioner of
Agriculture had submitted proposals to GoI in December 2008 for purchase of
AAS for both SSTLs and MSTLs, but it had not been procured (March 2015)
despite revalidating the unspent amount by GoI in February 2015.The farmers
therefore, could not avail the facility for complete analysis of soil and water
samples from these newly established laboratories. One of the main objectives
of the project stood defeated.
3.10.2.5 Huge shortfall in achieving targets
In the proposal document (December 2008), The Commissioner of Agriculture
mentioned that the analysing capacity of Government sector laboratories was
3.50 lakh soil samples per annum, which would be increased upto 6.70 lakh
samples per annum by establishing new SSTLs and MSTLs. In order to
achieve this target, new SSTLs and MSTLs were designed to have capacity of
analysing minimum 8000 (SSTL) and 5000 (MSTL) samples per annum. In
both the cases, the private partner was to utilise full capacity or more than this
as per prevailing conditions.
Scrutiny of the records disclosed that in 14 SSTLs, shortfall of achievement
ranged between five and100 per cent while in ten MSTLs, the shortfall was
between 14 and 94 per cent. Thirteen SSTLs and five MSTLs never achieved
targets in any year since their operation. It was noticed that total number of
Soil Health Cards (SHCs) distributed by operated laboratories on PPP mode
and Government Laboratories was always less in comparison to 2007-08
(except in 2011-12).
The State Government accepted the facts and stated (September 2015) that
progress of analysing samples was improving. The fact is that there was a
decreasing trend31 of SHC’s distribution even though new SSTLs and MSTLs
were established.
3.10.2.6 Inordinate delay in conducting soil tests and sending
recommendations
The guidelines issued by Government of Rajasthan envisaged that the private
partner should not take more than 10 days in conducting tests and reporting of
results during peak season.
During scrutiny of records of selected laboratories and the offices of the
Deputy/Assistant Director, Agriculture (Extension), it was noticed that records
regarding date of receipt of samples from farmers, date of analysis and date of
handing over of SHCs to farmers were not maintained properly. The date of
analysis was not recorded by any laboratory except SSTL, Kekri due to which
delay in analysis could not be ascertained. There were inordinate delays in
sending SHCs to concerned Assistant Agriculture Officer (AAO)/Agriculture
Supervisor (AS) and farmers by laboratories. Out of 42,108 cases test checked
31 3.12 lakh in 2010-11,3.68 lakh in 2011-12, 3.10 lakh in 2012-13, 3.22 lakh in 2013-14 and
3.21 lakh in 2014-15.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
80
in nine laboratories, there were delays ranging between two and 185 days in
15,987 cases.
In review of records of SSTL, Duni (Tonk) and Kuchaman City (Nagaur), it
was observed that 50 SHCs (February 2013) in Duni (Tonk) and 277 SHCs
(December 2013 to March 2014) in Kuchaman City (Nagaur) were lying
undelivered in original sheets till May 2015.
The State Government accepted the facts and stated (September 2015) that as
this was the first effort in soil testing work with the participation of private
partner, hundred per cent usefulness was not achieved as expected from the
private partner. It further stated that proper arrangement would be ensured in
future.
Inordinate delay as mentioned above indicated that the farmers were not
getting SHCs before sowing their crops. Hence, balanced use of fertilizer
through recommendations could not be ensured. Absence of any proper
monitoring mechanism as discussed in succeeding paragraphs facilitated such
shortcomings to exist.
3.10.2.7 Analysis results prepared without conducting soil tests
Scrutiny of records of SSTL, Duni (Tonk) disclosed that two lists of analysis
results of 50 farmers bearing the same name and villages were prepared on the
same date but the analysis results were different. This implied that analysis
results were filled in without conducting tests. Further, in some cases, the
recommendations were mentioned in the SHCs without showing test results.
These instances indicated that analysis results were being prepared without
conducting tests and there was absence of effective monitoring or inspection
of the records of the SSTL.
The State Government accepted (September 2015) the facts and intimated that
online software had been evolved to prepare SHCs through National
Informatics Centre (NIC) so that this type of error could be evaded in future.
3.10.2.8 No follow up of soil test recommendations
According to the guidelines prepared by the Joint Director (Quality Control),
Agriculture, Rajasthan, one of the objectives of soil testing programme was to
supply SHCs to farmers with recommendations and do a follow up. In order to
achieve the project objective, there was a need to do the follow up of soil test
recommendations.
During scrutiny of records of selected units, it was noticed that no such
records regarding follow-up/feedback were maintained in the district level
extension offices. In absence of such records, it could not be ensured that there
was adequate follow up of the recommendations and that the recommended
fertilisers were used by the farmers to augment soil productivity.
The State Government stated (September 2015) that SHCs had been
distributed to the farmers on the basis of analysed samples and knowledge was
provided for use of tests and recommendations in various trainings/fairs and

Chapter III Compliance Audit
81
meetings, etc. The fact remains that no follow up/feedback records were
maintained at the district level extension offices.
3.10.2.9 Non-acquiring of equipped Mobile Van after completion of
project
The guidelines issued by the Commissioner of Agriculture for MSTLs
envisaged that after completion of the agreement period, the organisation
would hand over all equipment, buildings and accessories to the Department in
a manner as they were taken from the Department.
During review of records, it was observed that four MSTLs 32 had completed
their project period (November 2013 and February 2014).However, no action
for acquiring all equipment, van, etc. was taken (May 2015) by the
Department.
The State Government stated (September 2015) that executing agencies
expressed their unwillingness to run these four MSTLs. However, an
Expression of Interest was invited (September 2013) but no agency had
applied for running these MSTLs. The reply is not acceptable as no further
action for re-tendering was taken by the Commissioner of Agriculture for
providing uninterrupted services of MSTLs.
3.10.2.10 Awareness camps were not organised
According to the agreement document, publicity was to be done by the private
partner in advance for camps/ visits so that the farmers could take benefit from
the services. The programme for organising camps/fairs was to be intimated to
the Deputy Director, Agriculture (Extension).
Scrutiny of records of test checked SSTLs and MSTLs, disclosed that no
camps/ fairs were organised by the executing agencies. Thus, private partners
did not fulfil the condition of the agreement and the desired awareness for soil
testing for the benefit of farmers could not be generated.
The State Government stated (September 2015) that camps/fairs were
organised by MSTLs. The reply is not acceptable as no such records were
produced in any of the test-checked MSTLs and SSTLs.
3.10.2.11 Lack of required staff
As per agreement, six posts 33 in each SSTL and three posts 34 in each MSTL
were to be filled in by the concerned executing agency.
Audit observed that as on 31 March 2015, there was shortfall of one post each
in three SSTLs 35and three MSTLs 36 while two posts were lying vacant in
32 Kota and Udaipur (Liberty Phosphate Limited), Udaipur (Maharana Pratap University of
Agriculture and Technology) and Jaipur (Jubiliant Organosys Limited).
33 One each for each Laboratory (Incharge/Sr. Chemist, Analyst, Assistant, Computer Data
Entry Operator cum Office Assistant) and two Attendants cum Chowkidar.
34 Analyst cum Chemist, Assistant and Driver cum Attendant.
35 Ladnu, Sandwa and Sri Madhopur.
36 Jaipur, Jodhpur and Suratgarh.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
82
SSTL, Sri Dungargarh. The position was worse in four laboratories 37 where
only three employees were enrolled in each laboratory against required six
posts. Thus, the implementing agencies were not adhering to the conditions
laid down in the agreement which also reflected deficient monitoring
mechanism of the Department.
The State Government stated (September 2015) that executing agencies had
been directed to execute the work by deploying staff as required but no
specific reply regarding non-adhering to the conditions of agreement was
furnished.
3.10.3 Financial Management
3.10.3.1 Amount lying unutilized
Audit observed that GoI released ` 9.47 crore during 2009-10 to 2010-11 and
State Government released ` 2.99 crore during 2010-11 for establishment of
SSTLs and MSTLs. Out of ` 12.46 crore released, only ` 4.26 crore were
spent upto March 2015. Thus, ` 8.20 crore was lying unutilised.
The GoI released ` 4.20 crore38 for 14 SSTLs and ` 3.60 crore for 12 MSTLs
in 2009-11. However, State Government released only ` 2.38 crore for SSTLs
and ` 60.50 lakh for MSTLs. Thus, the State’s matching share was released
less by ` 1.82 crore in case of SSTLs and ` 59.50 lakh in case of MSTLs.
Further, GoI released first installment of ` 1.29 crore for additional 10 SSTLs
and ` 37.55 lakh for additional four MSTLs in 2009-10. However, State
Government did not release its matching share. Thus, ` 3.83 crore were less
released by State Government.
The State Government stated (September 2015) that savings were mainly due
to failure of tenders for procuring AAS equipment, receiving lowest tender
rates and non-utilisation of funds provisioned for requirement of generators,
etc.
This shows that financial proposals sent (December 2008) to GoI were on
higher side and without assessing the actual requirement.
3.10.4 Monitoring
3.10.4.1 State level
As per GoI guidelines, at the State level, a State Project Sanctioning cum
Monitoring Committee (PSMC) was to be constituted under the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Agriculture) with members from line Department and
representatives from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), State
Agricultural Universities and Fertilizer Industries.
Audit observed that PSMC was not constituted (May 2015) at the state level.
However, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Director,
Agriculture (Research) was constituted (October 2010).The meetings of this
Committee were to be convened on quarterly basis to review the progress and
37 Duni, Kekri, Kuchaman city and Pratapgarh.
38 ` 6.38 lakh towards bank interest had been considered.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
83
implementation of the laboratories. However, it was observed that only eight
meetings were held against required 18 meetings during October 2010 to
March 2015. No half yearly meetings were organised under the Chairmanship
of the Commissioner of Agriculture as required under the agreement. Thus,
the State level monitoring mechanism did not exist.
The State Government accepted the facts and stated (September 2015) that
NPMSF was merged in the mission ‘National Mission for Sustainable
Agriculture’ in 2014-15 and was being operated as Soil Health Management.
A State Level Committee (SLC) under this mission had been constituted (May
2014). However, the reply was silent on shortfall of meetings.
3.10.4.2 District level
At the district level, Deputy Director (Extension) was to monitor all the
operational work of the laboratories regularly.
No district level monitoring mechanism was in place in case of MSTL. In
review of selected MSTLs, it was observed that Deputy/Assistant Director,
Agriculture (Extension) of the concerned district was unaware of his role and
responsibilities about MSTLs, as no direction or guideline was received from
the Commissioner of Agriculture, Jaipur. Thus, there was absence of any
effective monitoring mechanism at the district level.
3.10.5 Conclusion
The selection of SSTLs was not appropriate and no criteria for selection of
sites were fixed by the Department. No survey for identifying areas where
maximum farmers could be benefitted was conducted. No time line for
establishing laboratories was prescribed due to which delay occurred in
establishing laboratories. Clear role and responsibility for executing agencies
were not outlined in the agreement and no penal provisions for any
shortcomings in executing the work were incorporated. Analysis of secondary,
minor and auxiliary nutrients was not conducted by any laboratories. There
was shortfall in achieving targets of soil testing and substantial delay in
sending recommendations to the farmers by executing agencies. Awareness
camps were not organised by any executing agency. The State Project
Sanctioning cum Monitoring Committee was not setup.
Archaeology and Museums Department
3.11 Preservation, protection and maintenance of historical
monuments, archaeological sites and antiquities in the State
3.11.1 Introduction
Archaeology and Museums Department (A&M Department), established in
the year 1950, is responsible to preserve, protect, upkeep, exhibit and interpret
the cultural legacy embodied in various forms of art and architecture.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
84
‘Rajasthan Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Antiquities Act 1961 (Act)
was enacted for preservation, protection, and maintenance of ancient and
historical monuments, archaeological sites and antiquities in the State.
As on date (March 2015), A&M Department has 335 protected monuments 43
protected sites, 18 museums and 2 art galleries under its control. Audit
conducted test check (March–July 2015) of 25 monuments, 2 archaeological
sites, 2 museums and 2 art galleries selected on simple random basis to assess
the effectiveness of the Department in maintaining them. In addition five
monuments situated in Jaipur city were also selected in view of their tourist
importance.
Audit findings are discussed in following paragraphs:
3.11.2 Planning
For preserving, protecting and maintaining historical and ancient monuments
or sites, the department needs to prepare a comprehensive plan so that
periodical preservation/conservation work can be carried out and no
monument or site is left unattended. Audit scrutiny revealed that no such plan
was prepared by the department.
State Government stated (October 2015) that work of conservation had been
done on the priority fixed in view of report of departmental officers,
availability of budget, their dilapidated conditions, local demand of area and
importance of monuments. The reply confirmed that no such plan was
prepared.
3.11.2.1 Identification of monuments/sites for protection
Under sub section 3 (1) of the Act, the State Government may declare any
ancient or historical monument, or any archaeological site, or any antiquity to
be a protected monument/area/antiquity if not protected by Archaeological
Survey of India (ASI). Such historical monument, archaeological site, or
antiquity needs to be identified.
A survey conducted (2007) by the ‘National Mission of Monuments and
Antiquities (NMMA)’, established by ASI, revealed that there were 5,220
unprotected monuments in the State. This was the highest number in India.
Audit scrutiny revealed that 228 monuments were being protected by A&M
Department up to March 2008 and this number had increased to 335 by
2014-15. Thus, only 107 monuments were declared protected by the
department in the past seven years and 5,113 (94 per cent ) monuments still
remain unprotected (March 2015).
State Government stated (October 2015) that a survey of 9,045 monuments
was conducted in 2007 by the Department through Jawahar Kala Kendra
(JKK), of which important monuments had been protected as per parameters
(ancient, historical monuments or archeological sites).

Chapter III Compliance Audit
85
Reply was not convincing as the survey conducted through JKK was not
proper as it did not contain the detailed descriptions and importance of the
monuments/sites. Further, only additional 107 monuments were declared
protected up to 2014-15 whereas a large number of important monuments/sites
remained to be identified and protected.
3.11.2.2 Protection of antiquities
(i) Under section 3(1) (iii) of the Act, the Government may declare any
antiquity39 to be protected by notifying the same under section
3 (4)(iii) of the Act.
Details of antiquities, declared protected under the Act, were not available in
A&M Department. Information collected revealed that there were 2,36,163
numbers of antiquities in 17 museums 40. Department intimated (June 2015)
that only three antiquities (Sikar District) were declared protected in 1978.
This indicated that almost all antiquities in the state are unprotected. In
absence of declaring antiquities protected, these may be prone to theft,
smuggling, defacement etc. and situation needs urgent attention.
State Government stated (October 2015) that earlier under section 3(1)(iii) of
the Act antiquities under private ownership were being declared protected.
Thereafter under Registration Scheme of GoI such antiquities were got
registered and relevant record was transferred to GoI on 13 May 2011 and
presently this work was being carried out by ASI.
Reply was not tenable as Section 2 (ii) of the Act excluded those antiquities
which had been declared protected under Central Act. Therefore, provisions of
the Act were not adhered to in respect of antiquities available at museums
pertaining to A&M Department.
(ii) As per sub section 3 (4A) of the Act, where the State Government is
satisfied with respect to any monument, archaeological site or antiquity that
there is immediate danger for its removal/ destruction, it may forthwith make a
declaration under sub section 3 (4) in respect of any such monument,
archaeological site, or antiquity without following procedure under the Act.
As per a report of Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage
(INTACH)41 published (13 March 2015) in a news paper (Hindustan Times),
out of total 362 unprotected stone inscriptions of 117 A.D. to 1800 A.D. in
various villages of Western Rajasthan 42, around 80 have been lost, defaced or
washed away due to lack of protection. This indicated the casual approach of
39 Under Section 2 (ii) of the Act, antiquity means any coin, sculpture, epigraph, manuscript,
record, document, picture, painting, printed matter or other work of art or craftsmanship.
It includes any article, object or thing which the State Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette declare, by reason of its historical or archaeological association, to be
an antiquity for the purpose of this Act.
40 Information from museum at Bhilwara was not made available.
41 A non-government organization founded in 1984 with the objective of preservation,
restoration of art, culture and architecture heritage.
42 Bilara, Merta, Nagaur, Jetaran, Pali, Sojat, Pachpadra and Barmer.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
86
the Department in protecting such valuable inscriptions. State Government
needs to take immediate action to declare/notify all such inscriptions and
protect them from further loss/defacement/damage.
State Government stated (October 2015) that it was protecting a number of
stone inscriptions, however, regarding inscriptions referenced in the above
paragraph no specific reply was furnished.
3.11.3 Inspection of protected monuments
As per norms prescribed (25 April 2000) by State Government, Senior
Monument Inspector/Monument Inspector was required to inspect at least 10
protected monuments yearly and 18 monuments quarterly. As the post of
Monument Inspector was lying vacant, no annual/quarterly inspection of
protected monuments was carried out. The Superintendents were required to
inspect five monuments and one museum in a year. It was noticed that during
the period 2010-15, inspections were completed only by two Circle
Superintendents (Bikaner and Kota).
No norms for technical supervision by the Executive/Assistant Engineer for
supervising preservation work have been fixed.
State Government while accepting the facts stated (October 2015) that the
main reasons for less inspection by Archaeological superintendents were lack
of manpower. Superintendents had been directed for conducting inspection as
per norms.
3.11.4 Irregular de-protection of monuments
As per Section 3 (5) of the Act a notification issued under section 3 for
protection of a monument shall, unless it is withdrawn, will remain conclusive
evidence of the fact that the ancient and historical monument is a protected
monuments. This implies that the Government can de-protect any monument
by withdrawing notification under which it was protected. Moreover, section
17 of the Act prescribes penalties for whoever destroys, defaces, alters,
disperses, misuse, or allows a protected monument to fall into decay, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to ` one lakh or with both.
(i) Devgarh Palace (Pratapgarh district), an 18 AD century monument,
popularly known as Devalia Pratapgarh, was built by Maharaja Pratap Singh, a
scion of Mewar family. In view of its historical, artistic importance and
immediate danger to its existence, State Government declared it as a protected
monument (9 August 1982).
The Superintendent, A&M Department Udaipur Circle noticed (26 February
2002) unauthorised conversion of protected palace into a hotel by the
occupants without seeking any approval of the State Government under
section 22 43 of the Act. On 3 May 2007, the then Superintendent, A&M
43 No person including the owner or occupier of a protected area, shall construct any
building within the protected area without permission of State Government.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
87
Department suggested the Government to acquire the title of monument just
like in case of Sunehari Kothi, Tonk and Patwon ki Haveli, Jaisalmer. No
action was taken by the Government.
On 15 April 2010, again the then Superintendent, reported further changes in
the structure and removal of signboard (declaring monument as protected with
warnings and prohibitions) by the occupants, and also lodged (13 April 2010)
an FIR. Superintendent noticed that Palace was sold out to two residents of
Jodhpur and therefore he proposed to acquire the monument after cancellation
of sale deed. Instead of taking any action against the occupants under section
17, State Government decided (28 June 2010) to de-protect the monument as it
was a private property and ignored the opinion of the Superintendent and de-
notified (23 August 2010) the monument.
State Government stated (October 2015) that as per recommendation of Ex-
Archaeological Superintendent, due to dilapidated condition and change in
original shape, the monument was de-protected in compliance of directions
received from competent authority. Reply was not acceptable as instead of
taking action under section 17 and section 22 of the Act, State Government de-
notified the monument.
(ii) Shergarh Fort, Atru (Baran) was declared a protected monument in
October 2008. It was de-protected in September 2014 on the ground that it was
already declared protected by ASI. Audit observed that only some parts of
this Fort (old temple, statues and inscriptions) were being protected by ASI
(S.No.32 of list of protected monuments). Thus, de-protection of the entire fort
was irregular. State Government admitted (October 2015) that the monument
was de-protected by mistake and issued revised notification (5 October 2015)
treating the monument as re-protected. The change was at the instance of
audit.
3.11.5 Preservation/restoration of protected monuments
3.11.5.1 Status of preservation/restoration works of protected monuments
undertaken during 2010-15 was as under:
Year Protected monuments Preservation/restoration works undertaken
Monuments Sites Monuments Sites
2010-11 318 47 22 -
2011-12 323 47 8 -
2012-13 328 47 18 -
2013-14 331 44 13 1
2014-15 335 43 4 -
Source: Information furnished by department
Joint inspection of 30 monuments by audit team along with officials of the
Department, revealed that eight monuments were in dilapidated condition.
This was despite having sufficient funds of ` 26.51 crore. There is thus a
substantial scope for improvement in restoration work of monuments
especially in a historically rich state like Rajasthan.
State Government stated (October 2015) that work of preservation/restoration
was being done on the basis of priority fixed according to the conditions of

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
88
monuments, local demand of area and importance of monuments and
confirmed that there was a saving on account of non-transfer of funds to
Amber Development and Management Authority 44 (ADMA) due to non-
utilisation of funds for establishing International museum in Town Hall Jaipur.
3.11.5.2 Non-completion/failure of restoration works
(i) ‘Shiv Temple, Ramgarh (Baran), built in Nagar style in 10 th century is
of great historical importance and is famous as ‘Mini Khajuraho’. Renovation
work of this temple was awarded (8 September 2008) to M/s R.R. Furnishers
and Interior Decorators, Jaipur (contractor) for ` 3.25 crore with stipulated
date of completion as 17 September 2010. The renovation work was stopped
in March 2009, after incurring an expenditure of ` 0.09 crore due to reduction
in budget.
Subsequently, GoI sanctioned (20 December 2010) ` 4.90 crore for this work,
to be completed within 18 months. Work order was again issued (29
December 2010) to the above contractor to restart and complete the work by
19 June 2012. For providing technical advice to execute the work, Department
invited proposals from architects listed with it but no proposal was found fit
by the Permanent Technical Advisory Committee (PTAC) (November 2011).
Conservation/restoration work of the Temple was a special type of work and
needed supervisory consultancy for adopting relevant technology of ‘salvaging
archaeology’45. The Superintendent, A&M Department, Kota visited (16 June
2011) the site after five months of allotment of work and found the work not
being attended to. Thereafter, PTAC of the Department inspected (25
November 2011) the site and instructed the contractor to make necessary
arrangements like crane, shuttering, electricity, water, security and skilled
masons. This was also not complied with by the contractor. PTAC advised (28
November 2011) the department to frame a high level technical committee for
providing supervisory consultancy to the contractor. The committee was
constituted in December 2011 but never held any meeting. Finally, State
Government dropped (18 February 2013) the work due to non-completion
within the validity period. Thus, due to selection of a technically incompetent
contractor and non-monitoring of work, the Department failed to execute
conservation/restoration work of historically important site.
State Government stated (October 2015) that the contractor was selected
through tender process and after technical evaluation. However, State
Government admitted that for want of technical advice/direction the
sanctioned amount by GoI, could not be utilized. In State Budget of 2015-16 a
declaration had been made to execute the work and in this regard suggestions
of Rajasthan Heritage Conservation and Development Authority were under
consideration.
44 ‘Amber Development and Management Authority (ADMA)’ was created with the
objective of maintenance of Amber Mahal complex and other monuments.
45 In technology of salvaging archaeology the original form and alignment including
detailed drawings and photographic documentation is prepared in respect of each stone of
the monument. By adopting this technology hundreds of temples were successfully
dismantled and reconstructed in Nagarjuna Konda, Andhra Pradesh.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
89
The fact remains that the Department failed to provide technical advice to the
contractor which was necessary to execute the work and also resulting non-
utilization of ` 4.90 crore sanctioned by GoI.
(ii) GoI sanctioned (30 December 2010) ` 2.99 crore for conservation and
development work of Kishori Palace, Bharatpur, under ‘Dang Tourist Circuit
Scheme’, to be completed within 36 months (December 2013). The validity of
the project was subsequently reduced to March 2013 by GoI. Due to reduction
in validity, the Department stopped the work (March 2013) after incurring an
expenditure of ` 2.28 crore. During joint inspection, it was noticed that
chhajjas, chhatris and some parts of roof were in dilapidated condition, which
indicated that the restoration work was not completed.
Picture showing dilapidated Chhatri of Kishori Mahal,
Bharatpur
State Government stated
(October 2015) that due to
reduction in validity
period, only the very
essential work was
completed on priority basis
in view of available budget
and requirement of the
site. Reply was not
acceptable as some
essential works were not
completed as stated above.
(iii) GoI sanctioned (30 December 2010) an amount of ` 0.48 crore for
conservation work of Chauburja Fort (Gadi Khemkaran), Bharatpur, to be
completed within 36 months which was revised to 31 March 2013. The work
was awarded (22 July 2011) to M/s Shubh Enterprises, Jaipur with stipulated
date of completion as March 2012. However, the contractor was asked (17
May 2012) to stop the work after incurring an expenditure of ` 0.34 crore.
State Government stated (October 2015) that the work was stopped as ASI
objected to the specifications of the work. In view of site requirement, the
essential work was finalised and completed on 31 May 2013. The contention
of the Department that work was completed on 31 May 2013 was not
acceptable in view of the fact that during inspection of the site on 18 June
2013 the Archeological Superintendent Bharatpur, pointed out various
shortcomings in the work like south eastern part of the burj was in dilapidated
condition, western part required boundary wall and northern part required
repair work. He stressed for immediate repair work as some parts of the
monument might fall in rainy season. This indicated that the work was not
completed as per the site requirements.
(iv) Chandrawati Art Gallery, Abu Road is one of the art galleries for
display of old excavated antiquities. Audit Report 2008-09 (para 2.1.6.1) had
reported unfruitful expenditure of ` 0.36 crore (upto March 2006) on
construction of building for Art Gallery. Public Accounts Committee (PAC)
was apprised by the State Government that due to non availability of staff, the
gallery could not be opened for visitors and efforts were being made to fill up

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
90
the vacant posts. It was also apprised to PAC that idols have been installed on
available pedestals and rest of the idols have been systematically placed on the
platform in a hall.
Audit scrutiny (April 2015) revealed that a further expenditure of ` 0.18 crore
had been incurred on this work during 2010-15. Only 58 idols were installed
on pedestals and 232 idols were still lying scattered in a hall. The gallery was
not open for visitors. Toilets were constructed without ensuring availability of
water and gallery had no electricity and water connections.
State Government stated (October 2015) that the Art Gallery was open for
visitors since June 2012 but as tourists rarely visit the art gallery, it is kept
closed on security grounds and is opened only when visitors comes to visit it.
It was further stated that electricity connection was in existence for which
payment was being made to Jodhpur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited (JVVNL).
Moreover, action was being taken to get water connection.
Reply was not acceptable as during a joint inspection conducted by audit (24
April 2015) of the gallery with departmental officers, the building work was
found still incomplete, and the gallery was not open for visitors and idols were
found lying scattered. Moreover, electricity connection was catering to the
residential quarters only and not the art gallery.
3.11.6 Up-keeping of monuments/museums/antiquities
3.11.6.1 Encroachments of protected monuments
Joint inspection (April-May 2015) of monuments/museums by audit along
with departmental officers revealed that:
(i) Chhatris, situated near Central Bus Stand Jaipur, declared as protected
monument were being encroached by neighbouring residents and owners of
hotels46. Though the matter was reported by Superintendent to Directorate
A&M Department on 18 June 2008, no corrective/penal action was taken/
initiated against encroachers so far.
Pictures showing encroachment in Chhatris at Station Road, Jaipur
State Government stated (October 2015) that encroachers had fully
encroached the monument and destroyed its original shape, therefore a
46 One Chhatri by Hotel Jaimangal Palace, one by Hotel Kanta Palace and rest by other
residents.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
91
proposal was under consideration to remove the monument from list of
protected monuments. Reply was not tenable as instead of taking appropriate
action under the Act to remove encroachment and restore the monument, it
was considering to de-protect the monument which tantamount to rewarding
the encroachers for their illegal act.
(ii) A room at first floor of Bala Fort, Alwar was being utilized for cooking
food by the personnel of the office of Police Telecommunication. Due to this,
wall paintings of the room were completely defaced. Roof of the top floor was
also in dilapidated condition and required immediate repair to protect it from
collapse.
Pictures showing (1) room being used for cooking food and (2) dilapidated condition of roof
of the top floor in Bala Fort, Alwar
State Government stated (October 2015) that a letter was written on 1 October
2015 by Curator to Superintendent of Police, Alwar to stop burning earthen
stove in the fort so that paintings of historical heritage would not be destroyed.
(iii) Parts of ‘Jodhpur City Wall’, collapsed (28-29 September 2013) due to
which four persons died and ten were injured. Factual report by the Executive
Engineer, stated (29 September 2013) that the city wall was encroached by as
many as 166 families. Construction of houses and cutting rocks made its base
very weak and part of it collapsed during rain.
State Government stated (October 2015) that it had directed the District
Collector and Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Jodhpur to remove
encroachments. Notices have been issued to the encroachers and action was
being taken with assistance of police. Jodhpur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited,
Jodhpur had also been requested to immediately disconnect illegal electric
connection of encroachers and illegal occupants. Further, concerned
Archaeological Superintendent proposed to de-protect the City Wall in view of
loss of original shape of the city wall, establishment of police posts on the
gates, encroachment and damage caused to the wall.
Reply was not acceptable as the Government failed to take timely action to
remove the encroachments and maintain monument in its original shape.
3.11.7 Financial Management
For conservation, restoration, maintenance and development of monuments
and museums, funds are allocated by the State Government under State Plan

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
92
and by Government of India (GoI) under centrally sponsored schemes (CSSs).
Issues regarding financial management are discussed below:
3.11.7.1 Financial irregularity/embezzlement in issue of tickets
The system of manual tickets to visitors was changed w.e.f. 15 July 2014 to
tickets generated through electronic machine in Jaipur. During inspections of
the Department (Curator, Hawa Mahal), audit pointed out (January 2013)
irregularities in maintenance of stock of admission tickets and issuance of
tickets without holograms. Audit had also pointed out (August 2013) belated
deposits of revenue receipts of tickets in treasury (Dungarpur) and non-
reconcilliation of remittances with Government tresury in respect of various
offices of the A&M Department. No action was taken on audit observations.
Department, however, initiated (July 2015) an enquiry on irregularities in
issue of tickets at Jantar Mantar and Central Museum (Albert Hall) in Jaipur.
Enquiry Committee revealed a revenue leakage of ` 0.99 crore during the
period July 2014 to May 2015 through tampering of programming of the ticket
machines. In case of manual tickets, Enquiry Committee noticed that
counterfoils of manual admission tickets were not maintained systematically
and some of them were damaged by termites. Entry in stock registers were not
attested by the competent authority. Serial number of admission tickets were
not certified and date of issuance was also not recorded on counterfoils. Many
of the counterfoils, having two to three sets of same serial numbers or without
serial number, were recovered from the store.
In compliance to the findings of the enquiry committee, the Department
suspended three officials, issued orders for recovery and lodged FIRs (25
August 2015). Department intimated (August 2015) that considering this a
serious irregularity, the Finance Department was requested for conducting a
special audit.
State Government accepted the facts and stated (October 2015) that the
embezzlement was carried out by technical tempering of ticket machines for
which investigation was being done by the Police Department. The Directorate
also issued (September 2015) a Circular containing detailed instructions to its
subordinate offices to prevent loss/embezzlement in revenue received from
tickets at museums and monuments.
Had the Department taken timely action, financial irregularity/embezzlement
could have been avoided. Similar irregualrities happening in other monuments
can also not be ruled out.
3.11.7.2 Unfruitful expenditure on International Museum and Art Square
` 9.62 crore
A&M Department accorded (6 June 2011) administrative approval of
` 45 crore (State share: 70 per cent and Central share: 30 per cent), to develop
an International Museum and Art Square at Sawai Man Singh Town Hall,
Jaipur. The department transferred (31 March 2012) ` 5 crore in PD account
of the ADMA (implementing agency). GoI released its share of ` 13.50 crore
(7 February 2012) as additional central assistance (ACA) with the condition
that the amount be released to implementing agency without any delay.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
93
Department, however, transferred ` 10 crore of ACA to PD account on 31
March 2013 with a delay of 13 months.
Test check of the records revealed that ADMA issued (21 September 2011)
work order ( ` 16.19 crore) to M/s Rajputana Construction Private Limited,
Jaipur with stipulated date of completion of work as 30 September 2013.
ADMA stopped (9 January 2014) the work after incurring an expenditure of
` 9.62 crore. Reasons for stopping the work were not available on record. As
such, the very purpose of developing an International Museum and Art Square
remained unachieved and expenditure of ` 9.62 crore was rendered unfruitful.
Moreover, ACA funds of ` 8.88 crore 47, were lying unutilized for more than
three years. State Government stated (October 2015) that procedure of taking
decision to restart the work was under process at State Government level,
though reasons for stopping the work were not intimated.
3.11.8 Manpower management
(i) In response to para 2.1.6.5 of AR 2008-09, regarding inadequate
security arrangements of the monuments etc. and shortage of manpower, the
Department apprised the PAC that security arrangements of unattended
monuments would be done by engaging locals from schools, panchayats and
police personnel.
The position of sanctioned strength and men in position during the period of
audit coverage (2010-15) is shown in the following table:
Year Technical Staff Class IV and Security persons
Sanctioned Working Vacant Sanctioned Working Vacant
2010-11 36 20 16 288 277 11
2011-12 36 18 18 288 256 32
2012-13 36 22 14 288 277 11
2013-14 37 19 18 388 282 106
2014-15 37 19
(51%)
18 388 271
(70%)
117
Source: Information provided by A&M department
No technical staff was posted in any circle except at Bharatpur for proper and
regular technical supervision of conservation works.
State Government accepting the shortage stated (October 2015) that efforts
were being made to fill the posts.
(ii) Audit scrutiny revealed that 641 security personnel/monument
attendants, including police guards, home guards, outsourced security guards
and own staff, engaged by A&M Department for protecting 88 48 monuments
(26 districts). Out of these, 389 (61 per cent) were deployed (May 2015) for
13 protected monuments of Jaipur District only and remaining 252 security
personnel/monument attendants (39 per cent) were deployed for the rest of 75
monuments in 25 districts. Thus, 270 49 protected monuments and 40 50
47 ` 3.50 crore with GoR and ` 5.38 crore with ADMA
48 65 monuments, 3 sites, 18 museums and two art galleries.
49 335 monuments minus 65 monuments under security cover.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
94
protected sites were without any security arrangement. This was also noticed
(May 2015) that 19 51 (out of 36) test checked monuments/ museums were
having no security arrangement. This indicated that the security personnel
have not been deployed in a rationale manner to cover maximum numbers of
monuments/sites.
State Government stated (October 2015) that deployment of security staff was
made keeping in view the number of tourists visiting the monuments and
where posts were lying vacant efforts were being made to fill up the posts.
Fact remains that most of the monuments where tourists do not visit remain
unsecured.
3.11.9 Miscellaneous points
3.11.9.1 Non-digitisation of Department’s assets (monument/sites etc.)
The Department had prepared digitized profiles of coins (2.21 lakh
approximately) and uploaded them on their website. However, Department has
not devised any plan to digitize profiles of protected monuments/
archaeological sites. State Government admitted (October 2015) that
digitization of protected monuments was not done.
3.11.9.2 Non-formation of Advisory Board
Under section 30 of Act, the State Government had to constitute an Advisory
Board for giving advice in matters of conservation, maintenance, acquisition,
and control of ancient or historical monuments. No advisory board was
constituted by Government (April 2015) even after a lapse of 54 years. State
Government stated (October 2015) that the matter of constituting an Advisory
Board was under process.
3.11.10 Conclusion
Rajasthan has a large number of ancient monuments and sites which need to
be protected/preserved. It was however seen that no comprehensive survey
was carried out by the Department for identifying important monuments. The
department failed to initiate even the first step for framing a plan for
systematic conservation of its heritage of 5,220 monuments identified (2007)
as unprotected by National Mission of Monuments and Antiquities. While
only 335 monuments were declared as protected, large number of monuments
still remained to be declared as protected.
In one case, the monument (Devgarh Palace, Pratapgarh) was irregularly de-
protected by the Government, ignoring the recommendation of the concerned
Superintendent.
50 43 sites minus three sites under security cover.
51 1. Ramgarh Fort (Baran), 2. Rao Maldeo ki Chhatri, Mandore, Jodhpur 3. Minaret well,
Butia (Churu) 4. Akbari Masjid, Nagaur 5. Kotwali Gate, Ajmer 6. Bala Fort, Alwar 7.
Varah Temple, Shukergarh (Ajmer) 8. Dadhimathi Mata Temple, Goth Manglod, Nagaur
9. Barha Khambo ki Chhatri, Bayana, (Bharatpur) 10. Lal Darwaja, Kaman, 11. Ancient
Palace, Kaman (Bharatpur) 12. Chauburja Gadhi Khemkaran, Bharatpur 13. Haveli
Shikhar Chand Ram Puria, Bikaner 14. Haveli Ratan Lal Ram Puria, Bikaner 15.
Chhatriyan Devi Kund, Sagar, Bikaner 16. Kirti Stambh, Bikaner. 17. Ancient site Agar,
Baran 18. Patwon ki Haveli 3127 B, Jaisalmer 19. Chhatriyan, Station Road, Jaipur.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
95
Inspection of monuments is a major activity but no annual/quarterly inspection
was being carried out as per norms. Conservation of monuments was
undertaken in an ad hoc manner and expenditure incurred on some of the
monuments was unfruitful due to incomplete preservation work.
Encroachment, damages and dilapidated condition of protected monuments
were also noticed in audit.
Department was running with deficient manpower and security arrangements
were not rationalised and were lopsided.
Medical Education Department
3.12 Procurement and Utilisation of Machinery, Equipment, Tools and
Plants in two Medical Colleges and attached Hospitals
3.12.1 Introduction
High quality machinery and equipment play an important role in smooth
functioning of hospitals. Their procurement at competitive rates in a
transparent manner is essential for minimizing the cost of treatment of patient.
‘Rajasthan Medicare Relief Society (RMRS)’ registered under Rajasthan
Societies Registration Act, 1958, was formed (October 1995) in each hospital
attached with Medical Colleges, to provide to all patients various diagnostic
and treatment facilities at nominal cost, supply of medicines free of cost and
purchase/running of machineries, equipments, tools and plants for the
hospitals.
There are six Medical Colleges with 27 attached hospitals to provide medical
and diagnostic facilities to indoor/outdoor patients in Rajasthan. With the
objectives of assessing the effectiveness of the system for requirement and
purchase of machineries, equipments, tools and plants (METP) at competitive
rates and adequacy of infrastructure facilities and technical resources for the
same, audit examined the procurement and utilization of METP of two
Medical Colleges (Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Medical College, Jaipur and
Sardar Patel (SP) Medical College, Bikaner) and 10 attached hospitals 52
covering the period 2012-15.
Expenditure of ` 166.37 crore, incurred by the two Medical Colleges (Jaipur
and Bikaner) and their attached Hospitals, was covered during audit.
Audit findings in procurement and utilisation of machinery and equipments
are discussed below:
52 Jaipur: SMS Hospital, Sir Padam Path Mother and Child Health Institute (J. K. Lone),
New Zanana Hospital (Mahila Chikitsalaya), Mental Hospital, T.B. Hospital, and
Isolation Diseases Hospital. Bikaner: PBM Men's Hospital, PBM Zanana Hospital, GGJ
TB Hospital and Mental Hospital.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
96
3.12.2 Planning
Principal and Controllers (P&Cs) of respective Medical Colleges sends annual
proposals for purchase of METP along with requirement of attached hospitals,
to the Budget Finalisation Committee (BFC) through Medical Education
Department. BFC, after detailed discussion with P&Cs of the respective
Medical Colleges, decides the final budget requirements and funds are allotted
for each medical college/attached hospital. Thereafter, priority of procurement
of METP is decided by the P&C of each Medical College as per availability of
funds.
Scrutiny of records of two medical colleges and attached hospitals revealed
that annual patient load was 47.26 lakh in December 2012 which increased (32
per cent) to 62.31 lakh in December 2014. In view of the increasing patient
load a long term plan for procurement of METP was required to be framed
taking into account the existing conditions of the medical equipments and
future requirement. However, it was seen that except sending yearly budget
proposals, no long term planning of requirement for METP was prepared.
Though, every year requirement of new METP are assessed and budget
proposals are sent to Government. Both Medical Colleges did not furnish any
reply regarding preparation of long term plan.
3.12.3 Procurement
Medical Colleges follow the General Financial and Accounts Rules (GF&AR)
in the purchase process. After invitation of tenders for procurement of METPs,
bids (technical and financial) are finalised by a Technical Committee of
respective Medical Colleges. Purchase Committee, finalises the supplier and
the rates for purchases. Purchase orders are thereafter issued for procurement
of METP. After receiving the equipments/machineries by the medical college,
specifications are technically checked by technical committee.
Rule 68 of General Financial and Accounts Rules (Part II) provides that while
inviting tenders, specifications of the items/goods be assessed in view of their
need and utility. Variation in specification may lead to non utilization or under
performance of machinery. Further, Rule 4 of Part-II of General Financial &
Accounts Rules, all material received should be inspected when delivery is
taken and record a certificate to the effect that their quality is as per
specification. As per rule 5, 100 per cent quantity should be checked and
material be inspected for quality assurance by the committee or technical
officer. Irregularities noticed and non-adherence to these provisions are
discussed below:
3.12.3.1 Non-carrying out inspections
Scrutiny of records revealed that SMS Medical College, Jaipur purchased 997
items of METP worth ` 105.79 crore during 2012-15. However, no records of
inspection of METP, before taking them in stock register, by any inspecting
officer/inspection committee/technical committee were available.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
97
P&C, Medical College replied (June 2015) that concerned Technical
Committee was responsible to receive the equipment as per approval/supply
order and to hand them over to concerned department.
However, no reply was furnished regarding inspection carried out by
Inspection/Technical Committee.
3.12.3.2 Delayed delivery and supply
In SMS Medical College, Jaipur, SP Medical College, Bikaner and selected
hospitals, 1513 53 number of METP ( ` 39.65 crore) received during 2011-15
were issued to respective units with a delay of one to twenty-four months.
Medical College, Bikaner while admitting the facts stated (December 2015)
that machines were issued only after obtaining indent and receipt from stores
of concerned unit. As this process takes time, necessary instructions have been
issued to send the machines immediately to units just after issue. The reply did
not justify the non utilisation of machines for prolonged period. Reply of SMS
Medical College was awaited (December 2015).
METP (167 numbers costing ` 3.67 crore) were shown as issued in time from
Central Store of Medical College whereas these were received with a delay of
upto 15 months by SMS Hospital, Jaipur. This shows that equipments were
not supplied within the prescribed period but Central Store showed them as
issued on the basis of invoices.
3.12.3.3 Acceptance of OT tables without ensuring specifications
P&C, SMS, Medical College, Jaipur issued (March 2013) purchase order for
Operation Theatre (OT) tables for Neuro Surgery Department. Three OT
tables were supplied (October 2013) by the firm and department accepted
delivery without checking the technical specification required and payment of
` 57.89 lakh (70 per cent of approved price) was made. Subsequently, Head of
Neuro Surgery Department found certain deficiencies 54 in the tables and asked
(May 2014) the firm either to replace the tables or to return the amount paid
along with 18 per cent interest.
The firm proposed to replace the tables with electro motorised tables model
Mars-2.02. Technical Committee approved the model offered by the firm.
Accordingly a revised purchase order was placed (May 2015). The firm
replaced the OT Tables but not installed them as intimated (December 2015)
by P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur.
53 SMS Medical College, Jaipur: 1005 Nos., ` 3.16 crore, 1-24 Months; SMS Hospital,
Jaipur: 251 Nos, ` 21.84 crore, 1-19 Months; Sir Padam Path Mother & Child Health
Institute (J.K. Lone), Jaipur: 39 Nos., ` 3.38 crore, 1-20 months SP Medical College,
Bikaner: 101 Nos., ` 7.18 crore, 1-12 Months and PBM (Men’s) Hospital (Poly Trauma)
Bikaner: 117 Nos., ` 4.09 crore, 4-16 Months.
54 The Table do not have all functions and position with remote and manuals. Leg position
do not go upto 80 degree as asked in work order. Kidney position is not available. Leg
portion is not single. Head section is not adjustable. Accessories No.9 to 16 were not
available. Voltage stabilizer is not available with the table.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
98
Thus, non-inspection of technical specification at the time of delivery resulted
in receipt of below specification OT Tables. Though the below specification
tables have been replaced, they remain un-installed. Thus, procurement of OT
Tables has not completed since two years and neuro surgery patients remained
deprived of the benefits.
3.12.3.4 Faulty technical clearance in purchase of Hemo-Dialysis Machine
P&C, Medical College, Bikaner invited (15 January 2014) online tenders for
purchase of 10 Nos. Hemo-Dialysis Machines for Paediatric Department.
Technical evaluation of machines was made by Technical Committee and
supply order (26 February 2014) issued to lowest bidder M/s. B. Braun
Medical (India) Private Limited, New Delhi. The firm supplied 10 Hemo-
Dialysis Machines (28 March 2014) and full payment of ` 0.82 crore was
released (14 January 2015) to the firm.
One of the participants in the tendering process ‘M/s Shree Medical Projects,
Bikaner’ complained (29 March 2014) that Hemo-Dialysis Machines having
certain deficiencies 55, were approved by Technical Committee (TC) without
demonstration. Brochure and other papers concerned with machine were also
not submitted online by the successful bidder, therefore, tender should have
been cancelled. A Committee investigated (31 March 2014) the complaint and
found two major deficiencies viz machine did not have B powder online dry
module and Inbuilt Pyrogen and Endotoxin Filters were not present.
Scrutiny revealed that deficiencies were not intimated to the successful firm
for rectification and full payment of ` 0.82 crore was released on 14 January
2015 ignoring the complaint and major deficiencies noticed by Investigation
Committee. Further, the utilization of machine could not be ascertained in
audit as logbook of machine is not being maintained by Paediatric
Department.
P&C Medical College, Bikaner replied (December 2015) that payment was
made to the firm after submitting the installation report of machine by TC, but
did not inform audit about the removal of deficiencies pointed out by
investigating committee and utilization of machine. Fact remains that TC
cleared the payment for the machine despite its deficiencies. Date of tests
conducted on machine was also not available with the department
3.12.3.5 Purchase of Sonography Colour Doppler Machine ignoring
specifications desired by user department.
For successful implementation of ‘Chief Minister Nishulk Janch Yojana ’,
immediate requirement of three ‘3D/4D Sonography Colour Doppler
Machines’ with cardiac software was assessed by Head of Department (HoD),
Radio Diagnosis Department for three hospitals 56. A purchase proposal (23
55 Inbuilt NIBP module (Point no. 17of ‘G’ Schedule); Inbuilt B powder online dry
bicarbonate mixing module with pack of B powder (Point no. 06); Inbuilt Pyrogen and
Endotoxin Filter behind of machine (Point No. 15) and Inbuilt kit/V module with dialysis
dose and online clearance monitoring and online working in each step (Point No. 18).
56 Men’s Hospital, Zanana Hospital and Cancer Department of P.B.M Hospital at Bikaner.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
99
February 2013) and technical specifications (11 March 2013) were sent to
Superintendent, PBM (Men’s) Hospital, Bikaner for procurement of the
equipment.
Scrutiny of records of PBM (Men’s) Hospital, Bikaner revealed that technical
specifications mentioned (Sonography Colour Doppler) in tender document
(05 February 2014) were different from the technical specifications required
(3D/4D Sonography Colour Doppler) by user department. Supply orders were
issued (4 and 5 March 2014) to M/s Surgimed Solution, Jodhpur for ` 0.65
crore. All three machines were supplied (22 March 2014) and payment was
released (25 March 2014). P&C, SP Medical College, Bikaner replied
(December 2015) that Colour Doppler Machines purchased were fulfilling
the educational requirements of students.
Fact remains that ordinary Sonography Colour Doppler machines, in place of
3D/4D Sonography Colour Doppler Machines, were purchased which were
not as per technical specifications required by Head of Radiodiagnosis
Department. Moreover, the Machines was required for providing better
services to the patients and not for fulfilling educational requirements only.
Thus, METPs were purchased ignoring specifications recommended by user
departments.
This indicates that machinery purchased were below specifications and were
not as per norms.
3.12.3.6 Undue benefit to the firm
(i) SMS Medical College, Jaipur issued (22 March 2013) purchase orders
for 30 ICU ventilators to M/s. Surbhi Meditech, Jaipur at a cost of ` 249.47
lakh. As per the Comprehensive Annual Maintenance Contract (CAMC), firm
was to maintain the machines for 5 years at 3 per cent of approved cost in first
year with an increase of 5 per cent per annum thereafter. However, Medical
College executed (30 March 2013) agreement with the firm in which CAMC
rate included was 4 per cent of approved cost in first year with increase of 5
per cent per annum thereafter. Ventilators were installed on 14 May 2015.
Thus, due to executing CAMC at higher rate by one per cent, Medical College
incurred avoidable liability of ` 13.78 lakh57.
P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur replied (July 2015) that amendment to this
effect has now been issued in condition No.3 of both original approval orders
(13 July 2015). Reply not acceptable as conditions of the agreement are
binding on Medical College and the firm has not given its acceptance for the
amendments so far.
(ii) P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur, after approval by the technical
committee, accepted (22 March 2013) the sole tender of ‘M/s. Imperial Life
Sciences, (P) Ltd., Gurgaon’, for supply of one number Micro Array System at
a cost of ` 1.62 crore FOR destination, for Genetic Laboratory, SMS
Hospital, Jaipur. The firm agreed during negotiations (May and August 2013)
57 10 ICU ventilators: ` 4.28 lakh and 20 ventilators: ` 9.50 lakh.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
100
to supply the equipment at a cost of ` 1.42 crore and supply order was issued
to firm on 15 October 2013. The firm supplied the equipment (24 June 2014).
Based on the USD price (instead of INR price) on the date of supply, a total
payment of ` 1.60 crore58 (instead of ` 1.42 crore) was released to the supplier
firm. Thus, while accepting the final cost in negotiation, the committee had
not considered the price fluctuation of USD and also not negotiated with the
contractor that any hike in price due to price fluctuation would be borne by the
supplier. This resulted in excess payment of ` 0.18 crore.
P&C replied (July 2015) that at the time of negotiations , concurrence of firm
was taken to supply the equipment at USD 2,59,825, instead of USD
295,620.44, after reducing USD 35,795.44 which saved ` 19.62 lakh. Reply
was not acceptable as the rates were quoted FOR destination in INR.
3.12.4 Utilisation of METP
Timely installation of the METPs procured is necessary for immediate
utilisation. Test check of records of receipt, stock and issue registers of both
medical colleges revealed the following:
3.12.4.1 Non/delayed installation of equipments
(i) Scrutiny of records of P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur, revealed
that 196 equipments ( ` 18.31 crore) were installed with a delay of upto 22
months. Installation report of five equipment ( ` 0.30 crore) were not made
available to audit. Further, it was observed that in the supply orders of METP,
no provision was made for penalty against delayed installation. Due to absence
of such a condition, local firms did not take interest in immediate installation
of METP procured.
P&C stated (June 2015) that it is not possible to ascertain the period of
installation from the date of shipment and therefore, provision of penalty was
not made. Reply was not acceptable as time taken in installation from the date
of shipment can always be ascertained. Non- installation of METP resulted not
only in blocking of funds but also deprived the patients from the benefit of
these equipments.
(ii) Scrutiny of records of Mahila Chikitshalya (New Zanana), Jaipur
revealed that one Mammography Machine costing ` 0.31 crore received (16
July 2014) by the Mahila Chikitshalya, Jaipur from SMS Medical College,
Jaipur was installed after eight months on 03 March 2015 as
infrastructure/site was not ready for its installation. Thus, patients were
deprived from its benefit for eight months.
3.12.4.2 Non/delayed utilization of equipments
(i) Test check of 15 units/sub-units of both Medical Colleges/attached
hospitals revealed that 811 Nos. METP ( ` 8.44 crore) were lying unutilized
58 ` 1,13,12,781 (70 per cent ): 29 January 2014 and ` 46,92,440 (30 per cent ): 15 July
2014.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
101
(2 to 76 Months) at departments of Medical colleges and units of hospitals
since their purchase due to non-installation, lack of space, non-availability of
technician, non-issue from store and non-availability of source etc. Detailed
position is shown in Appendix.3.3.
(ii) Test check of six units/sub-units revealed that 16 Nos. METP
(` 1.04 crore) were lying idle for a period ranging from 5 to 28 months for
want of repair (Appendix 3.4).
Thus, both the Medical Colleges failed to plan timely installation and
utilization of METPs.
3.12.4.3 Purchase of ECG Machines without requirement
P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur issued purchase order (28 February 2014)
to M/s Medical Care System, Adarsh Nagar, Jaipur for 41 Nos of ECG
machines @ of ` 84,500 per machine. The firm supplied the machines on 20
March 2014 and payment of ` 0.36 crore was released to the supplier (30
March 2014). Of these, eight ECG machines, purchased for Medicine
Department of SMS Hospital Jaipur, were shifted (29 March 2014) to
Cardiology Department without obtaining any requirement from them.
P&C, SMS Medical College replied (July 2015) that eight ECG machines of
Medicine Department were relocated to Cardiology Department.
Joint physical verification (9 December 2015) conducted by audit with the
Cardiology Department of SMS Hospital, further revealed that out of these
eight machines, four were still kept packed in the store.
3.12.4.4 Replacement of Brachytherapy Machine
New Brachytherapy Machine was purchased ( `1.03 crore) with a delay of 31
months (June 2015) by Medical College, Jaipur though Radio Therapy,
Department had requested (November 2012) to replace the old machine
(installed in 1999) due its obsolete technology and software. Moreover, new
machine could not be installed due to non procurement of ‘source (cobalt 60)’
which was necessary for its utilisation. For import of ‘source’, sanction from
Atomic Energy and Research Board (AERB) of India was compulsory which
was not obtained (August 2015) before purchase of machine. Due to planning
failure on the part of Medical College machine could not be replaced and
cancer patients were deprived from treatment for last 33 months (December
2012 to August 2015).
Thus, there was substantial delay in installation/utilisation of equipment
costing ` 1.03 crore. This indicates poor planning and lack of prioritisation.
3.12.4.5 Non-utilisation of Gamma Camera Machine
One Dual Head Variable Angle Gamma Camera costing ` 1.93 crore, was
installed (August 2002) in the Acharya Tulsi Regional Cancer Treatment and
Research Institute (ATRCTRI), Bikaner facilitating nuclear medicine

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
102
treatment to cancer patients. Sr. Demonstrator (Biophysics), who was the only
qualified doctor in nuclear medicine and held license issued by Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), Mumbai to operate the said equipment,
was transferred (September 2013) to Medical College, Jodhpur without
making any alternative arrangement. In absence of a qualified/license holder
doctor, AERB withdrew ‘no objection certificate’ issued for this equipment
and prohibited its use in nuclear medicine treatment. Simultaneously, the
supply of nuclear medicines from Bhabha Research Institute of Technology,
Mumbai, was also stalled. Resultantly, cancer patients were not treated for the
disease since then. In absence of above facility, the patients were being
advised to take treatment, as an alternative, in hospitals situated at Jodhpur or
Jaipur.
State Government Stated (September 2015) that the doctor was posted in
Medical College, Jodhpur for starting Nuclear Medicine facilities. He was
reposted (February 2015) in Medical College Bikaner but he did not join and
sought voluntary retirement w.e.f 31 July 2015.
Fact remains that in absence of specialized doctor, the patients at ATRCTRI
Bikaner are now being diverted to other places for undertaking treatment
which involves long journeys to Jodhpur or Jaipur and high cost of treatment.
Therefore State Government should make efforts to utilize the machine by
posting of a specialised doctor.
3.12.5 Financial Management
The position of budget allotment (including funds under centrally sponsored
schemes) and expenditure in two test checked Medical Colleges (Jaipur and
Bikaner) and 10 attached hospitals is shown below:
(` in crore)
S.
No.
Name of Medical
College
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total Saving
(%)Budget
Allotment
Expen-
diture
Budget
Allotment
Expen-
diture
Budget
Allotment
Expen
-diture
Budget
Allotment
Expen
-diture
1 SMS Medical
College and
Attached
Hospitals, Jaipur
51.03 36.03 62.97 50.88 33.88 29.28 147.88 116.19 31.69
(21.42)
2 SP Medical
college and
Attached
Hospitals, Bikaner
29.57 20.01 12.82 5.01 33.86 25.16 76.25 50.18 26.07
(34.19)
Total 80.60 56.04 75.79 55.89 67.74 54.44 224.13 166.37 57.76
(25.77)
Source: Information furnished by department
This shows that an amount of ` 57.76 crore (25.77 per cent ) could not be
utilised by the two test checked medical colleges and their attached hospitals
during the period 2012-15. P&C, SP Medical College, Bikaner and SMS
Medical College, Jaipur while accepting the facts replied (December 2015)
that due to delay in tender process and supply of equipments by the firms at
the end of March, payments could not be made during the financial year and
budget could not be utilised.
3.12.5.1 Non receipt of GoI funds
(i) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare approved (5 July 2012)
` 12.16 crore under CSS ‘Supporting State Government Medical College for

Chapter III Compliance Audit
103
conducting Paramedical Courses through one time grant to SMS Medical
College, Jaipur’. Cost was to be shared between GoI and State in the ratio of
85:15 respectively. Out of the sanctioned amount, ` 6.18 crore was to be
incurred on infrastructure, ` 5.43 crore on equipment and ` 0.55 crore on
faculties. GoI, while approving the project, released ` 5.17 crore as first
installment on 5 July 2012. As per GoI condition under CSS, the
second/subsequent installment would be released only when the UCs with
regard to first installment are furnished by State Government Medical College
in time. State Government also released first installment of its 15 per cent
share to the Medical College.
Scrutiny of records revealed that of the earmarked amount of ` 5.43 crore for
equipment, an amount of ` 2.11 crore was spent (May 2015) on procurement
of equipment and UC sent (23 May 2015) to GoI. Submission of UC late by
three years, resulted in non-receipt of second installment amounting ` 3.32
crore for METP from GoI. Reply of P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur was
awaited (December 2015).
(ii) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, GoI, New Delhi issued
financial sanction (September 2013) of ` 5.25 crore (equipment ` 5 crore and
minor construction works ` 0.25 crore) for establishment of Multidisciplinary
Research Unit- (MRU) at Medical College, Bikaner. First installment of
` 1.25 crore ( ` one crore: equipment and ` 0.25 crore: construction) was
released (27 September 2013) and second and third installment of ` 2 crore
each for equipment was to be released after utilisation of the first installment.
It was noticed that UC of ` 0.49 crore (civil work: ` 0.25 crore and equipment:
` 0.24 crore) was sent (15 May 2015) with a delay of more than two years,
despite reminders from GoI (03 April, 14 November 2014 and 18 February
2015). Still expenditure statement and list of equipment was not enclosed with
UC. Thus, due to non-utilisation of ` 0.76 crore from first installment, second
installment of ` 2 crore was not released by GoI. Due to non receipt of funds,
Medical College was deprived from the benefit of developing infrastructure
for promotion of Health Research.
P&C Medical College, Bikaner stated (December 2015) that now total UCs of
` 0.97 crore have been sent to GoI and the second installment has been
demanded from GoI.
3.12.5.2 Diversion of funds
Rule 11 of part-I of General Financial and Accounts Rules provide that funds
allotted should be expended by spending only on those items for which money
has been provided.
Scrutiny of records of SMS Medical College, Jaipur revealed that of the funds
allotted (` 149.60 crore) for procurement of METP, ` one crore were spent
(2012-13 to 2014-15) on purchase of items like Hostel Furniture, Office
Furniture, Multi-functional Photocopier Machine, CCTV Cameras, RO
Systems etc., not covered under METP. P&C replied (May-June 2015) that
items like RO and furniture for newly constructed laboratory were purchased

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
104
from RMRS share and information regarding remaining equipments/items will
be provided later on. Fact remains that METP funds of ` one crore were
diverted for purchasing of other items.
3.12.5.3 Earnest money not deposited in Government Accounts
Rule 5 of GF&AR (Part-I) provides that all money received by or on behalf of
government either as dues of Government or for deposit, remittances or
otherwise shall be brought into Government Account without delay.
Scrutiny of record of SMS Medical College, Jaipur and SP Medical College,
Bikaner revealed that earnest money amounting to ` 2.79 crore, received from
unsuccessful bidders, in the form of bank draft/bankers cheques (2012-15),
was not taken in government account/cash book. These drafts/cheques were
returned to the unsuccessful bidders with a delay of one to ten months. P&C,
Medical College, Bikaner admitted (December 2015) that earnest money
cheques of unsuccessful bidder were not deposited in government account and
refunded/returned in original. Thus, ` 2.79 crore remained outside
Government Account.
3.12.5.4 Security not received against Comprehensive Annual Maintenance
Contract
Scrutiny of records of SMS Medical College, Jaipur, revealed that METP
worth ` 16.59 crore were purchased during 2012-15. Security deposit of
` 2.92 lakh was found deposited by supplier firms only in respect of 16
equipment ( ` 2.25 crore 59), to be refunded after satisfactory completion of
Comprehensive Annual Maintenance Contract (CAMC) period. In respect of
rest of the equipment valuing ` 14.34 crore, no security deposit was obtained
from concerned suppliers for facilitating recovery against penalty in case of
violation of terms and conditions of CAMC.
P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur replied (June 2015) that security was
deposited for 16 machines only. In these cases, the rates for AMC quoted by
firms were too less, therefore department considered to take security to ensure
performance of CAMC satisfactorily. Reply was not acceptable because
security deposit against CAMC should have been obtained from the concerned
firm in all cases as per terms and conditions agreed in CAMC.
3.12.6 Other cases
3.12.6.1 Non-recovery of revenue share from service provider
Member Secretary, RMRS, SMS Hospital, Jaipur entered into an agreement
(April 2012) with M/s Soni Hospitals Pvt. Ltd, Jaipur (Service Provider) for
installation of two 128 slice CT Scan Machines and two 3.0 Tesla MRI
Machines at BMRC/Emergency Wing of SMS Hospital on PPP mode. As per
clause 5 of the agreement, service provider was to pay 41.11 per cent of
59 Anesthesia work station - 5 Nos of ` 0.87 crore, Mannequin and Simulator – 4 Nos of
` 0.16 Crore and Anesthesia work station – 7 Nos of ` 1.22 crore.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
105
revenue collection for MRI scan and 31.11 per cent for CT scan investigations
to RMRS. Clause 4 ibid, enjoined upon the service provider to perform 30 per
cent free cases of total cases done in each category during the month, referred
by authorised hospital authorities. If number of free cases were less than 30
per cent during the month the amount due for tests not so conducted was to be
deposited in RMRS by the service provider. Further, in case the number of
free tests exceeded 30 per cent during the month, then the amount so exceeded
would be paid by the hospital administration to the service provider.
Test-check (March-June 2015) of records of SMS Hospital, Jaipur revealed
that the service provider carried out 77,582 tests on MRI machine between
2012-13 and 2014-15. The number of free cases carried out against the
stipulated 30 per cent was 35,914 which was 12,639 more than the stipulated
number and therefore RMRS made a payment of ` 5.04 crore to the service
provider against these cases. Similarly, a total of 2,96,101 tests were carried
out on the CT Scan machine during the period from 2012-13 to 2014-15. The
number of free cases carried out was 60,465 which were 28,365 cases less
than the stipulated 30 per cent (88,830) cases. RMRS received ` 2.31 crore on
account of less cases. Thus, the service provider earned an additional revenue
of ` 2.73 crore on account of excess free cases. As per Clause 5 of the
agreement, the service provider was to pay 41.11 per cent (` 1.12 crore) of
this revenue amount (` 2.73 crore) to RMRS (Appendix 3.5). It was, however,
observed that neither the service provider paid the said revenue share nor did
the hospital administration make any effort to recover the government dues.
Even no penalty clause was incorporated in the agreement. Reply of
Superintendent, SMS Hospital, Jaipur was awaited (December 2015).
3.12.7 Inventory Control
Rule 73-74 of Part-II of General Financial & Accounts Rules, proper
inventory control affects the efficiency and effectiveness of the government
departments activities and also their productivity as huge amount is invested in
inventories. Scrutiny in audit revealed the following:
3.12.7.1 History sheet/logbook not maintained
History sheet/logbook required to be maintained in each unit of the hospital to
ascertain the period of utilisation and smooth running of machinery and
equipment. However, it was observed that these records were not maintained
in 46 test checked units of both medical colleges and attached hospitals. In
absence of these records, proper utilisation of METP and their benefit to the
patients could not be ascertained in audit. Medical College, Bikaner stated
(December 2015) that necessary instructions have been issued in this regard.
Reply of P&C, SMS Medical Colleges, Jaipur was awaited (December 2015).
3.12.7.2 Stock register not maintained properly
Scrutiny of stock registers of both test checked Colleges with their attached
hospitals revealed that entries of various kinds of METP ( ` 153.05 crore)
purchased between 2012-13 to 2014-15 were not properly maintained.
Indexing of stock registers, receipt and issue date in chronological order, value

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
106
of METP, signature of receiver/ stock verifier (Medical Officer/In-charge) was
not entered in stock register. Due to non-maintenance of proper stock register,
fraud, theft and pilferage of METP also cannot be ruled out. P&C Medical
College, Bikaner informed (December 2015) that necessary instructions have
been issued to rectify the deficiencies. Reply of P&C, SMS Medical Colleges,
Jaipur was awaited (December2015).
3.12.7.3 Non-marking of make and model of Machines
Scrutiny of records of both test checked Colleges revealed that to ascertain
the utilisation and proper record of METP purchased during the period 2012-
15, make of machine, model, purchase year and equipment issued to which
department/unit was to be entered in stock register. Further, as soon as
equipment is supplied to Central Store, marking should be done immediately
so that availability/utilisation of machinery of equipment could be ascertained
during physical verification. It was noticed during physical inspection in test
checked hospitals that marking of make of machine, model and purchase year,
equipment issued were not made on any of the machine. Due to absence of
marking on machinery and corresponding registers, possibility of under
utilisation of costly machines could not be over ruled.
P&C Medical College, Bikaner stated (December 2015) that necessary
instructions have been issued to concerned to mark the year of purchase and
make & model of machines. Reply of P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur is
awaited (December 2015).
3.12.7.4 Machines and equipment shown installed before issue from stores
During stocking i.e. receipt, issue and installation of machinery, procedural
deficiencies noticed was indicative of inadequate internal control. Shortfalls
noticed are discussed below:
(i) Equipments (39 Nos.) worth ` 4.22 crore purchased by the SP Medical
College, Bikaner during 2013-15 for Poly Trauma Department and issued to
concerned units of Poly Trauma Department for installation. Scrutiny of
records revealed that the equipments were shown installed irregularly before
issue from Poly Trauma Store (Appendix 3.6).
P&C, SP Medical College, Bikaner stated (December 2015) that in practice
equipments are received and shown issued from Poly Trauma store only after
receipt of installation report from concerned unit. Fact remains that proper
procedure of stocking was not followed.
(ii) SMS Medical College, Jaipur issued supply order (25 February 2012)
of EURO 1,12,000 ( ` 0.89 crore) to M/s Toshbro Medical Pvt. Ltd., New
Delhi for an operating microscope in Neuro Surgery Department. As per terms
and conditions of the order, 70 per cent amount after shipment and 30 per cent
amount after installation was to be paid. Equipment was received on 15 June
2012 at SMS Medical College, Jaipur and issued on 21 July 2012 to the
Superintendent, SMS Hospital, Jaipur. The equipment was received by the
Superintendent, SMS Hospital, Jaipur on 30 July 2012 at its store. The

Chapter III Compliance Audit
107
equipment was further issued (20 September 2012) to Neuro Surgery
Operation Theater (NSOT).
Scrutiny of records revealed that the equipment was shown installed in NSOT
on 19 July 2012 and balance (30 per cent) was also released to the firm on 21
August 2012, contrary to the fact that it was received in NSOT on 20
September 2012. Thus, full payment of ` 0.89 crore was made before receipt
and installation of equipment thereby providing undue benefit to supplying
firm. P&C, SMS Medical College, Jaipur replied (June 2015) that equipment
was installed on 19 July 2012 in NSOT Department. Reply is contrary to the
fact that equipment was received on 20 September 2012 in NSOT.
(iii) SMS Medical College, Jaipur purchased a Neuro Endoscope Machine
(` 1.53 crore -EURO 1,70,000 + Custom Duty) during 2014-15 from M/s Karl
Storz India Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi. The firm supplied (30 August 2014) it to
Central Store, SMS Medical College, Jaipur. Machine was shown issued to
SMS Hospital, Jaipur on same date, while it was shown received by the
hospital on 5 September 2014. SMS Hospital issued (13 October, 2014) it to
Neuro Surgery Operation Theater (NSOT). Installation report, not in proper
format, was issued on 6 September 2014. This indicates that the equipment
was shown installed and balance amount of ` 0.40 crore (30 per cent ) was
released (19 September 2014) even before reaching in Neuro Surgery
Operation Theater.
Further, this Neuro Endoscope machine remained unutilised up to 3 May 2015
(eight months). Only 11 patients were operated in all five units between 4 May
2015 and 1 June 2015. Incharge, NSOT replied (15 July 2015) that machine
was installed on 6 September 2014 in NSOT and 88 patients in all were
operated. Reply is not acceptable as only 11 patients were operated as per
NSOT records and it remained unutilised for at least eight months. Further
current status of machine was not provided (December 2015) by SMS Medical
College/NSOT Jaipur.
(iv) Scrutiny of records of SMS Medical College Jaipur, revealed that
purchase order (PO) of ` 0.14 crore, for 20 beds mattresses, inter venous rods,
adjustable bed side tables and lockers, was issued (25 February 2012) to M/s
Vijay Laxmi Sales Corporation, Jaipur. As per condition No. 3 of PO, supply
was to be made within 30 days. Goods were supplied (12 March 2012) to
central store of SMS Medical College by the firm. These goods were shown
issued to central store of SMS Hospital on the same date, while these were
shown received in stock register of SMS Hospital on 12 June 2012 i.e. after
three months of issue. Installation report of these goods was issued on 19 June
2012 by Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) Department of the hospital.
The fact that central store showed the goods received on 12 March 2012, while
the same took three months time to reach the adjacent building of SMS
Hospital, indicates that only the bill was received by Medical College (12
March 2012) without physical delivery of goods. P&C, SMS Medical College,
Jaipur replied (July 2015) that goods were supplied to Central Store of SMS
Hospital, Jaipur on the same date by the Medical College. Reply of P&C is not

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
108
acceptable, because these goods were shown received in stock register of SMS
Hospital, Jaipur on 12 June 2012 after three months.
3.12.8 Conclusion and Recommendation
Though there is an increase of 32 per cent in patient load, long term planning
in procurement of equipments was lacking.
Department should frame a long term plan for procurement of equipments
A large numbers of machineries/equipments purchased were not inspected at
the time of delivery though required for confirming technical specifications.
Faulty technical clearances of OT Tables led to their replacement nearly after
two years and non utilisation.
All METPs should be inspected by a committee or technical officer at the
time of delivery and record a certificate to that effect to avoid accepting
lower specification equipments.
Instances of delay upto 22 months in installation of 196 medical equipments
were noticed while 811 equipments remained unutilised for a period ranging
between 2 to 76 months.
Department should keep a watch on timely installation for optimum
utilisation of METP.
Log books, history sheets, stock register, etc. were not found maintained
properly. Marking of make and model of machines were also not found. 39
machineries were shown installed before receipt from Central Stores.
To control proper utilisation and smooth running of machineries, logbooks,
history sheets and stock registers should be maintained properly. Make and
model should be marked on machineries for their identification.
Medical & Health and Medical Education Departments
3.13 Implementation of Mukhyamantri Nishulk Dava Yojana
3.13.1 Introduction
The scheme ‘Mukhyamantri Nishulk Dava Yojana’ (MNDY), a novel venture
for improving the health of State’s population, was announced in Budget
2011-12 and launched on 2 October 2011 by State Government. Under this
scheme more than 400 commonly used essential medicines, surgical and
suture items were to be made available to all patients visiting Outdoor Patients
Department and Indoor Patients Department at all Government Health Care
Institutions (HCIs) in the State. Initially, about 200 medicines were made
available for free distribution which has now been increased to 607 medicines
and 150 surgical and suture items.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
109
‘Rajasthan Medical Services Corporation Limited (RMSCL)’, established
under Companies Act, 1956 in May 2011, is the nodal agency for
implementation of the Scheme. Need based procurement of drugs, surgical and
suture items, is made at state level by RMSCL. Thereafter, the drugs are
delivered and stored at District Drug Warehouses (DDWs) located in each
district. The quality of drug, surgical and sutures is ensured through
empanelled drug testing laboratories60and after quality testing, these are issued
to sub stores of various HCIs of the district as per their requirement. The drugs
are finally distributed to the patients from Drug Distribution Centres (DDCs)
of HCIs. A total number of 17,439 DDCs have been established across all
government HCIs, to make medicines available on presentation of prescription
of Medical Officers (MOs).
Audit conducted a test check of records at RMSCL, 8 DDWs 61, 9 Hospitals 62
and 7 Community Health Centres (CHCs)/Satellite Hospitals 63 along with two
DDCs of each selected Hospital/CHC/Satellite Hospital during January to
August 2015 to assess effective implementation of the scheme through proper
assessment of demand, economic procurement, supply and distribution of
medicines to patients during the period 2011-15. Audit findings are discussed
below:
3.13.2 Implementation
3.13.2.1 Coverage of patients
As per figures provided by the department, the coverage of patients by the
scheme increased substantially over the period. As per calendar year wise
statistics available with the Department, 5.51 crore patients had registered
during the period January to December 2013 in the State which increased to
7.57 crore during the period January to December 2014. Thus, there was an
increase of 37 per cent of patients registered in one year.
Examination of registration procedure by audit however revealed that the
patient is required to register afresh every time he visits an HCI for treatment.
Accordingly, a patient gets enrolled multiple times for treatment of a single
ailment or for different ailments during the year. As such it is not possible to
ascertain the actual number of patients covered under the scheme. Thus, the
increase in coverage of patients under the scheme is inflated.
60 6 in 2011-12, 7 in 2012-13, 6 in 2013-14 and 7 in 2014-15.
61 Alwar, Bhilwara, Churu, Jhalawar, Jodhpur, Pali, Rajsamand and Swaimadhopur.
62 Mahatma Gandhi Hospital (MGH), Bhilwara, Mathura Das Mathur Hospital (MDMH),
Jodhpur, MGH, Jodhpur, Shri Rajendra Government Hospital (SRGH), Jhalawar, RK
Hospital (RKH), Rajsamand, Government General Hospital (GGH), Sawaimadhopur,
Government Bangur Hospital (GBH), Pali, Dedraj Bhartiya General Hospital (DBGH),
Churu and Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital (RGGGH), Alwar.
63 Satellite Hospital Sahapura (Bhilwara), CHC, Bhawani Mandi (Jhalawar), CHC, Amet
(Rajsamand), CHC, Choth Ka Barwara (Sawaimadhopur), CHC, Jaitaran (Pali), CHC,
Sardar Sahar (Churu) and CHC, Tijara (Alwar).

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
110
Audit test checked the total number of enrollments and benefit extended to the
patients during the period 2011-15, in 16 test checked HCIs. The results are
tabulated below:
(in lakh)
Year No. of patients enrolled
during the year
No. of patients
benefitted
Per centage of beneficiaries
2011-12 24.86 16.50 66
2012-13 48.80 36.01 74
2013-14 54.56 45.26 83
2014-15 54.42 45.53 84
Source: Information made available by HCIs
Above data reveals that there was a gradual increase in number of patients
enrolled during 2011-12 to 2013-14 in the test checked districts and remained
stagnate during the year 2014-15. However, the actual number of beneficiaries
also stagnated at approximately 45 lakh during 2013-15. Thus about 16 per
cent of the registered patients failed to receive the requisite treatment/drugs
prescribed.
3.13.2.2 Assessment of demands
As per instructions issued (16 March 2012 and 20 June 2013) by RMSCL,
assessment of annual demand of drugs, surgical and sutures is made at HCI’s
level, which is duly analysed by CMHOs and DMHS and then submitted to
RMSCL for procurement. In respect of Medical Colleges and Associated
Group of Hospitals, analysis and compilation of demands is carried out by Dy.
Secretary, Medical Education, and the same is forwarded to RMSCL for
procurement.
(i) Examination of records of HCIs consumption of medicines by audit
revealed that HCIs did not properly assess the demand of drugs, surgical and
sutures that would be required by them during the initial years 2011-12 to
2013-14. The same was assessed, analysed and consolidated only from
2014-15 onwards.
(ii) Scrutiny of records at District Drug Warehouses 64 of test checked
districts revealed that in 7 test checked DDWs, drugs, surgical and sutures
costing ` 48.78 lakh 65 purchased by RMSCL during the year 2012-13,
remained unutilized as the HCIs had not sent any requirement of surgical and
sutures. This indicates that the same were purchased without any demand being
raised by the HCIs. Demand for these drugs, surgical and sutures was also not
made in 2013-14 and 2014-15 by HCIs and these still remained unutilised.
(iii) Scrutiny of annual demand and actual consumption of 100 medicines,
each in 16 test checked HCIs revealed that:
64 District Drug Warehouses (DDW), located in each district, are the places where drugs are
delivered and stored after procurement by RMSCL. From DDWs, the drugs are issued to
sub stores of various HCIs of the district as per their requirement and for distribution
through DDCs.
65 Alwar: ` 1.75 lakh, Bhilwara: ` 1.19 lakh, Jhalawar: ` 7.05 lakh, Jodhpur: ` 18.63 lakh,
Pali: ` 6.56 lakh, Rajsamand: ` 9.15 lakh and Sawaimadhopur: ` 4.45 lakh.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
111
• During 2014-15, medicines were found consumed by HCIs in excess of
their annual demand in 388 instances, which exceeded by thirty times in
one case (Cefotaxime injection IP 1 gm) indicating instances of short
assessment of demand.
• Consumption of medicines by HCIs was less than their annual demand in
412 instances, indicating that these were demanded in excess of
requirement.
• Demanded medicines were not supplied to HCIs by DDWs in 178
instances, indicating that RMSCL/DDWs were not monitoring supply of
medicines as per demand of HCIs.
Thus, out of 1600 instances test checked, there was variation between actual
demand and final consumption of medicines by HCIs, in 978 (61 per cent )
instances. The fact remains that variation in 61 per cent of cases between
demand and consumption is substantial and indicated that demand for drugs is
not being estimated correctly.
RMSCL, while accepting the facts stated (November 2015) that medicines
(drugs, surgical and sutures) might not have been utilised as the scheme was
new. Further medicines purchased were in generic names and generic names
were not co-related with commonly used names of medicines. Change in
posting of medical officers/specialists was also one of the reasons of non
utilisation of medicines.
The reply is not convincing as all these issues should have been factored in
while assessing the demand. Thus, the fact remains that even after 4 years of
launching of scheme, remedial measures were not taken.
3.13.2.3 Procurement
Procurement of drugs, surgical and sutures is made by RMSCL through
competitive bidding. It is also ensured that drugs, surgical and sutures are of
good quality and have a long life. Each batch of drugs/medicines supplied by
the suppliers is subjected to quality test by empanelled laboratories. On the
basis of annual demand, RMSCL invited 50 tenders during the period 2011-15
for purchase of drugs, surgical and sutures and issued 5,436 purchase orders
as per details given below:
(` in crore)
Year No. of tenders No. of supply
orders issued
Amount of supply
orders issued
Amount of supply
received
2011-12 7 829 273.40 245.43
2012-13 7 1028 248.58 211.57
2013-14 16 1771 321.72 309.09
2014-15 20 1808 330.74 310.13
Total 50 5436 1174.44 1076.22
Source- Information supplied by RMSCL
Extension was granted in seven tenders due to revision of tender condition/
specification as per decision taken in pre bid meetings. Details of total amount

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
112
involved in these tenders and delayed/defective supply was not furnished
(December 2015) to audit. Audit findings on procurement process are
discussed below:
(i) Excess purchase
Scrutiny of records of annual procurement for the year 2014-15 revealed that
demand was forwarded to RMSCL by DMHS on 13 December 2013. The
demand was revised on 13 March 2014 in view of comments made by
RMSCL. Demand was again revised on 08 September 2014, reasons of which
were not made available to audit. In the mean time RMSCL issued purchase
orders on the basis of earlier demand (December 2013 and March 2014).
Audit observed that by the time the demand was last revised (September
2014), procurement of 16 items had already exceeded the revised demand of
September 2014 by 25 to 3000 per cent . In addition to this, in one item
‘Artesunate injection’ (an anti-malarial drug), against the demand of one unit,
purchase orders were issued for 76,400 units.
RMSCL intimated (November 2015) that 75470 units of Artesunate injection
have since been consumed up to October 2015 and in remaining cases of
excess procurement, up to 99 per cent medicines have been consumed during
2015-16.
Fact remained that demand was not assessed in a time bound manner and was
revised repeatedly which resulted in excess purchase of medicines and
resultant risk of their expiry.
(ii) Short supply/ non-supply of medicines by the firms
As per tender condition No. 13 (2), the supplier shall supply the entire ordered
quantity before the end of 60 days from the date of issue of purchase order at
the destinations mentioned in the purchase order. Tender condition No 10(3)
provides that bid inviting authority, or his authorized representative has the
right to inspect the factories of bidders, before accepting the rate quoted by
them or before releasing any purchase order(s) or at any point of time during
the continuance of bid and also has the right to reject the bid or terminate/
cancel the purchase orders issued and or not to issue purchase orders based on
the reports brought out during such inspections regarding capacity of bidder.
It was noticed that out of 5,436 purchase orders issued during 2011-12 to
November 2014, in 225 purchase orders ( ` 33.05 crore) no supply was made,
while in 16 purchase orders ( ` 5.73 crore), there was short supply. RMSCL
stated (March 2015) that in case of non-supply of medicines by supplier,
ordered quantity is included in next purchase order. Even if supply is not
received, action is being taken to purchase at the risk and cost of supplier.
Further, in case of non-supply, medicines are procured from local markets.
RMSCL further informed (November 2015) that in 75 cases action has been
initiated to purchase medicines from other suppliers at the risk and cost of
supplier. In 12 cases action is under process. In remaining 154 cases, no action
could be taken in absence of availability of rates. Thus non/short supply of
medicines in large quantity indicated that RMSCL did not properly assess the
capacity of the bidders before releasing supply orders.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
113
(iii) Purchase of medicines not as per specification
RMSCL issued (August 2011) purchase order to M/s Bharat Biotech
International Ltd; Hyderabad for supply of 3,56,909 units of rabies vaccine
human (cc) IP (intramuscular) 2.5 IU/dose at the rate of ` 177.35 per unit. As
per purchase order each pack of medicine was required to contain 1.0 ml vial
with 0.5/1.0 ml diluents and syringe with needle. Scrutiny of invoices
revealed that firm supplied packs of 1.0 ml vial, without diluents, syringe and
needle. However, full payment of ` 6.32 crore was released (November 2012)
to the firm. Releasing full payment was not in order as supply of medicines
without required accessories was not in accordance with the supply order.
RMSCL stated (November 2015) that the supplier had supplied the product as
per specification demanded in tender and purchase orders. In compliance of
purchase order, supplier had supplied the product with diluents and syringe.
Commercial invoices matched with product description given in purchase
order but details of other items (diluents and syringe with needle) were not
mentioned. The syringes in question were purchased from M/s Oyester
Medisafe Ltd., Secunderabad. Reply was not acceptable as no excise or
commercial invoices were issued for clearance of these items in the said
supply from the factory of the supplier. Further, stock entry and quality test
reports of the diluents, syringe and needle were also not available on record.
(iv) Procurement of ‘Not Of Standard Quality’ drugs
MNDY guidelines provide for quality test by empanelled laboratories, of
each batch of drugs/medicines supplied by the supplier. Drugs received at
DDW are entered in stock register and kept in quarantine till their testing and
receipt of test reports. Further, in order to ensure their quality during the
storage period (more than six months), RMSCL may also draw and analyse
the drug samples to counter check the stability and quality of the drugs.
As per clause 19 (3) of the tender document the supplier of the drugs will not
be entitled to any payment whatsoever for items of drugs found to be ‘Not Of
Standard Quality (NOSQ)’ whether consumed or not consumed.
Scrutiny of records revealed that 86 batches of drugs, costing ` 3.24 crore
supplied by 19 supplier firms, passed by empanelled laboratories were later on
declared NOSQ in retesting of samples during storage period. An amount
` 2.15 crore of NOSQ drugs was recovered from four supplier firms while
recovery ` 1.09 crore was still pending from 15 supplier firms (December
2015). Distribution of NOSQ drugs to patients is likely to have an adverse
effect on their health.
3.13.2.4 Supply and Distribution
(i) Non-maintenance of Supply chain
Chapter-6 of guidelines and instructions (March 2012) of RMSCL provides for
maintaining buffer stock and supply chain in each DDW. Accordingly,
medicines are to be procured in such a manner that supply chain is maintained
regularly. Schematic representation of the supply chain of medicines is
depicted below:

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
114
In eight test checked DDWs, as per the stock position (May 2015), 218
medicines were not available in stock for a period ranging between one month
and four years. Of these, 58 medicines including the medicines used as
antihypertensive, anti-allergic, antibacterial, antibiotic, female hormonal
preparations and gastro intestinal etc. were not available in stock for
distribution for a period of more than six months. This indicated that buffer
stock of these important medicines in DDWs was not made which deprived the
patients of essential drugs.
(ii) Availability of Drugs
As per scheme guidelines DDWs are to ensure continuous supply of drugs to
HCI sub-stores for stocking. On the basis of annual demand, each HCI is
allocated a financial limit of medicines. From HCI sub-stores, the drugs are
issued to DDCs for distribution to patients on presentation of the prescription
of Medical Officers.
Audit test checked records in eight DDWs and 16 HCIs. Observations on
utilisation of financial limits under the scheme are discussed in following
paragraphs:
• During the period 2011-15 in eight test checked districts, a comparison
of total financial limit and actual consumption, revealed that against a
total allocated financial limit of ` 313.08 crore, medicines valuing only
` 210.36 crore were received/stocked and financial limit of
` 102.72 crore (33 per cent ) remained unutilized. The unutilized
financial limit ranged between 24 and 45 percent during this period66.
• HCIs periodically requisites medicines from DDWs and DDW supplies
the medicines as per the requisition and their availability. Test check of
records of selected HCIs for the period 2011-15 revealed that against
the requisition of 16,572 number of medicines, only 7,395 number of
medicines were supplied by DDWs for distribution to patients. Thus,
66 2011-12: ` 14.22 crore (39 per cent); 2012-13: ` 37.60 crore (45 per cent); 2013-14:
` 22.66 crore (24 per cent) and 2014-15: ` 28.24 crore (29 per cent).
Procurement of Medicine by RMSCL
Delivery of Medicines at DDWs
Indented by Sub-stores of HCIs
Issue to Drug Distribution Centres
Distribution to patients
as per prescription slips

Chapter III Compliance Audit
115
there was short/non supply of 9,177 (55 per cent ) medicines. This
resulted in deprival of patients from proper medical care.
RMSCL in reply (November 2015) accepted the facts and stated that
the scheme was new and variation in demand occurred due to various
reasons like spread of a particular disease and transfer/posting of
medical officers etc. Further, sometimes rate contract for purchase of
medicines takes time as such supply of some medicine was
interrupted. However the concerned CMOs/MOICs did not give any
example of large scale spread of any particular disease.
• Further in 16 test checked HCIs, scrutiny of prescription slips with
reference to issue of medicines, revealed that 18 to 88 per cent 67
medicines prescribed by MOs were not available with HCIs for issue
to patients. HCIs stated (April to July 2015) that where stock of
medicines is not available in sub-store and DDC, patients are advised
to purchase medicines from Life line68 stores.
This indicated that in spite of allocation of financial limit, medicines were not
made available and undue financial burden was put on the patients which were
against the spirit of the scheme. Shortage of Medical officers, long queues of
enrolled patients and short supply of medicines to sub-stores were some of the
reasons attributable to short consumption of medicines as stated (April to July
2015) by concerned DDWs.
3.13.2.5 Expiry of medicines
As per Government Order dated 26 August 2011, expiry of drugs would be
treated as negligence and the Store keeper/officer in charge of store/head of
the institute would be responsible for such expiry. Action would also be taken
to recover the cost of drugs.
(i) During test check of sub stores of five Hospitals, it was noticed that
during the period 2012-13 to 2014-15 drugs valuing ` 40.23 lakh expired 69
(2012-13: ` 0.98 lakh; 2013-14: ` 30.43 lakh and 2014-15: ` 8.82 lakh).
Although expiry of medicines during the year 2014-15 declined substantially as
compared to 2013-14, it still needs to be monitored.
67 MGH Bhilwara 51 and 53, Satellite Hospital Shahpura Bhilwara 72 and 88, MDMH
Jodhpur 58 and 68, MGH Jodhpur 47 and 51, SRGH Jhalawar 28 and 32, CHC Bhawani
mandi 33 and 33, RKH Rajsamond 34 and 34, CHC Amet 24 and 18, GBH Pali 51 and
43, CHC Jaitaran (Pali) 41 and 39, CHC Sardar sahar 39 and 45, CHC Tijara 37 and 28
and RGGGH Alwar 35 and 31 per cent on 24 December 2014 and 10 February 2015
respectively. GGH Sawaimadhopur 51 and 39 per cent on 23/24 December 2014 and 10
February 2015 respectively. CHC Choth ka Barwara (Sawaimadhopur) 21 per cent on 10
February 2015. DBGH Churu 31 and 28 per cent on 23 December 2014 and 10 February
2015 respectively.
68 Life line drug stores have been opened by Rajasthan Medicare Relief Society in all
government hospitals in order to provide good quality medicines and surgical at
affordable rates.
69 MGH Jodhpur: ` 24.38 lakh, MDMH Jodhpur: ` 7.09 lakh, RGGGH Alwar: ` 0.52 lakh,
SRGH Jhalawar: ` 6.88 lakh and DBH Churu: ` 1.36 lakh.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
116
RMSCL (November 2015) stated that medicines at HCIs expire due to
unavoidable conditions like change in prescription pattern, transfer of
specialists, availability of substitute of medicines etc. RMSCL also stated that
in spite of effective management, expiry of some medicines is natural.
Fact remains that substantial amount of drugs are still expiring every year as
pointed out above and the position needs to be continuously monitored.
(ii) Test check of records of DDW/RGGG Hospital, Alwar, revealed that
1660 Injections ‘Dopamine Hydrochloride’, (used in treatment of heart)
demanded by the Hospital, were issued by DDW on 01 June 2013, but the
same were not received. However, these injections were found as expired
(August 2013) on the basis of issue vouchers and therefore declared as
expired by the Hospital. Thus, near expiry medicines were shown as issued by
DDW and were declared expired without physical transfer.
3.13.3 Financial management
Funds are allotted for MNDY by Government of Rajasthan to DMHS. Out of
funds so allotted, a major portion is transferred to non interest bearing PD
account of RMSCL for purchase of drugs, surgical/sutures, and remaining
portion is utilized for running the establishment of MNDY and purchase of
medicines not supplied by RMSCL (up to a limit of 10 per cent of annual
demand). RMSCL also receives funds under National Health Mission (NHM)
for purchases of medicines for the scheme.
Year wise budget allocation to DMHS and expenditure during 2011-12 to
2014-15 was as under:
(` in crore)
Year Funds allotted Expenditure incurred Savings
2011-12 194.90 194.90 00.00
2012-13 346.30 326.00 20.30
2013-14 254.98 204.58 50.40
2014-15 258.89 245.04 13.85
Source- Information furnished by DMHS
Details of funds transferred to RMSCL by DMHS/National Health Mission
and utilization there against were as under:
(` in crore)
Year Grant received from Available
funds
Grant
Utilised
Closing
Balance
Opening
Balance
DMHS National Health
Mission ( GOI)
2011-12 0 194.90 0 194.90 118.67 76.23
2012-13 76.23 292.31 0 368.54 179.01 189.53
2013-14 189.53 140.00 61.00 390.53 255.21 135.32
2014-15 135.32 185.00 110.00 430.32 271.76 158.56
Total 812.21 171.00 824.65
Source: Sanctions issued by Rajasthan Government Medical & Health (Group-2) Department
and information furnished by RMSCL
The above table shows that RMSCL was having huge balances in PD account
ranging between ` 76.23 crore and ` 189.53 crore indicating that during the
period 2011-15, DMHS transferred more funds to RMSCL than actually

Chapter III Compliance Audit
117
required and without considering the balances with it. Unspent amount at the
end of 2014-15 was ` 158.56 crore which was 86 per cent of the grant (` 185
crore) received during the year.
RMSCL accepted the facts and stated (November 2015) that balance was on
account of a grant of ` 110 crore, received from NRHM on 28 and 31 March
2015, against which supply of medicines worth ` 32.47 crore were pending up
to 31 March 2015. Fact remains that huge funds were lying with RMSCL.
3.13.4 Monitoring
3.13.4.1 Off line monitoring
District Level Committees (DLCs) were constituted (June 2011) by RMSCL,
having one Chairman (CMHO); three members (Executive Engineer, District
Project Coordinator and Health Manager) and one optional member (Manager
DDW), to monitor the progress of availability of drugs at DDW/DDCs on
regular basis. The DLCs were required to monitor the progress and submit a
report fortnightly to MD/RMSCL. RMSCL intimated (December 2015) audit
that no such record is being maintained in RMSCL.
3.13.4.2 Online monitoring through “e-Aushadhi” software
For online monitoring, RMSCL adopted ‘e-Aushadi’ software, a drug
inventory management system, which is a comprehensive online system for
detailed information about availability of medicines, right from procurement
point to consumption point. This application has features like inventory
management at DDC, facility to receive drugs offline, issue drugs to patients
and generate statements.
(i) In test checked HCIs, various shortcomings were noticed in
functioning of software as under:
(a) Internet connectivity problem arising due to remote locations of HCIs.
Server usually remains down for long period.
(b) Indent reports generated are incomplete and not showing actual
position of issue of medicines with reference to indents.
(ii) During scrutiny of records of test checked DDC’s, audit noticed that
maintaining of on line ledger accounts of issue of medicines was incomplete at
six HCIs 70 for a period of 6 to 12 month. In absence of data entries, the
correctness of consumption and availability of drugs distributed by DDCs
could not be ascertained. It was stated (April, May and June 2015) that
Information Assistants posted for this work, were deputed to other
offices/works of “Bhamashaha Yojna” and Election Department. Fact remains
that in absence of proper and timely data feeding, factual position of
consumption and availability of medicines was not available for proper
monitoring.
70 CHC Amet (District Rajsamand), MDMH, Jodhpur, CHC Choth ka Barwara, GGH
Sawaimadhopur, CHC Bhawani Mandi, and CHC, Jaitaran.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
118
3.13.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
MNDY is a novel scheme and large numbers of patients in Rajasthan have
received the benefit of free medicines under it. The coverage of patients under
the scheme increased over the period. As per statistics available with the
Department, 5.51 crore patients had registered during the period January to
December 2013 which increased to 7.57 crore during the period January to
December 2014. However, as the patient is required to register afresh every
time he visits an HCI for treatment, and gets enrolled multiple times for
treatment of a single ailment, it was not possible to ascertain the increasing
trend.
It was seen that there was variation between annual demand and consumption
of medicines. Demand was not assessed in a time bound manner and was
revised repeatedly which resulted in excess purchase of medicines. Proper and
timely supply of medicines was not ensured. Not of Standard Quality drugs
were also found distributed to patients at the risk of their health. Drugs worth
` 40.23 lakh were not transferred to other hospitals and allowed to expire in
five test checked hospitals. RMSCL failed to utilise the funds of ` 158.56
crore on procurement of medicines during 2011-12 to 2014-15.
State Government should ensure effective system of assessment of
requirement of medicines through proper planning for procurement and
maintenance of supply chain. Monitoring system may be strengthen to
ensure timely availability of medicines to the targeted population.
Online monitoring through implementation of “ e-Aushadhi” software was not
effective.
Updation of “e-Aushadhi” software and proper internet facility to HCIs
should be ensured for effective monitoring of the scheme.
Medical & Health Department and Administrative Reforms &
Co-ordination Department
3.14 Implementation of Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of Public
Services Act-2011
3.14.1 Introduction
Timely delivery of services to the people by different departments of
Government determines the level of efficiency, transparency and
accountability of the Government. The Government of Rajasthan enacted the
‘Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of Public Services (RGDPS) Act, 2011’ with
the objective of providing a responsible, accountable, transparent and
corruption free administration. The Act came into force w.e.f. 14 November
2011. ‘Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of Public Service (RGDPS) Rules
2011’ were framed under section 10 of the Act, which lay down the procedure
to be followed for providing desired services to the applicant. The

Chapter III Compliance Audit
119
Administrative Reforms and Co-ordination Department, under Government of
Rajasthan, issues instructions/guidelines/ circulars from time to time, to all the
Government departments responsible for implementation of provisions of the
Act/Rules. As on date, 153 services under 18 departments have been covered
under the Act.
For assessing the implementation of the Act, audit test checked (April-August
and November 2015) records of Medical & Health Department, providing
twelve notified services 71. For this purpose, four Chief Medical & Health
Offices of districts: Alwar; Barmer; Jaipur and Udaipur, covering rural,
border, urban and tribal areas of Rajasthan, were selected based on highest
population. Under each district 20 per cent units (offices/centers) under the
Department were test checked for the period November 2011 to March 2015.
Details of units test checked is indicated in Appendix 3.7.
Audit findings
3.14.2 Implementation of the Act
Section 4(1) of the Act enjoins upon the designated officer to provide services,
notified under section 3, to the persons eligible to obtain the service within the
stipulated time.
Information regarding status of all 12 services provided, detailed in following
paragraph, by Medical and Health Department in the State was sought for
(September 2015) from the Department and also from Administrative Reforms
and Co-ordination Department but the same was not furnished (December
2015). Audit examined the Implementation of notified services under the
Department in test checked units and deficiencies noticed are given below:
3.14.2.1 As per the information collected from test checked units for the
period from November 2011 to March 2015, the position of providing notified
services in Medical and Health Department, is depicted below:
S.
No.
Notified Services Stipulated
period
No. of cases in test
checked unit
No. of cases test checked
by audit
Number
of
applicants
Service
provided
with delay
(per cent)
No. of
cases test
checked
Service
provided with
delay
(per cent
against test
checked cases )
1. Payments under Janani
Shishu Suraksha Yojana
At the time of
discharge
2,61,075 21,089
(8.07)
1614 633
(39)
2. Compensation for
Undergoing Sterilization
Operation
-do- 67,590 99
(0.15)
375 Nil
3. Sterilization Operation
Certificate (Male)
Three months 97,522 301
(0.30)
394 241
(61)
71 1. Payments under JSSY 2. Food License 3 Food Manufacturing License 4.
Compensation for Undergoing Sterilization Operation 5. Sterilization Operation
Certificate (Female) 6. Sterilization Operation Certificate (Male) 7. Visible Disability
Certificate 8. Complicated Disability Certificate 9. Drug License 10. Drug Manufacturing
License 11. Medico Legal Case (MLC) Report 12. Post Mortem Report.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
120
S.
No.
Notified Services Stipulated
period
No. of cases in test
checked unit
No. of cases test checked
by audit
Number
of
applicants
Service
provided
with delay
(per cent)
No. of
cases test
checked
Service
provided with
delay
(per cent
against test
checked cases )
4. Sterilization Operation
Certificate (Female)
One month
5. Visible Disability
Certificate
Same day 3,605 Nil 154 Nil
6. Complicated Disability
Certificate
Three weeks 173 Nil 150 65
(43)
7. Medico Legal Case Report 24 hours 35, 244 65
(0.18)
584 10
(2)
8. Post Mortem Report -do- 4,717 116
(2.46)
263 Nil
9. Food License 60 days 9,647 175
(1.81)
250 40
(16)
10. *Food Manufacturing
License
-do- 751 Nil Nil Nil
11. Drug License 20 days 4,299 652
(15.16)
302 105
(35)
12. Drug Manufacturing
License
Three months 21 5
(23.81)
21 5
(24)
Total( Percent) 4,84,644 22,502
(4.64)
4,107 1,099
( 27)
Source: Information provided by test checked units of Medical & Health Department.
*Test checked cases of Food Manufacturing Licenses are included in the service of Food
License (S.No. 9)
A comparison of the delay as given by the department and as in test checked
cases indicated that department showed delay in about 5 per cent cases
whereas audit found delay in 27 per cent of cases test checked. Besides, it was
also observed that the percentage of delay was high in services like
Sterilization Operation Certificate (61 per cent ); complicated disability
certificate (43 per cent); Payments under Janani Shishu Surksha Yojana (39
per cent) and issue of drug licenses (35 per cent). Delay ranged between 11 to
30 days in substantial number of cases (512) constituting 46 per cent of total
delayed cases noticed by us under all services. Audit noticed excessive delay
of more than 200 days in 24 cases. Of these 21 cases pertained to obtaining
sterilization certificates, in PMO Alwar alone (Appendix 3.8).
Scrutiny of delayed cases revealed that though the powers of first appeal
officer and second appellate authority were notified (October 2011) to various
officers of the department but none of the applicants went in appeal for
redressal of their grievances. This indicates lack of awareness in public about
the mechanism available under this Act for redressal.
3.14.2.2 Discrepancies in Data
Cumulative fortnightly information of disposal of applications filed for
requisitioning various notified services was to be submitted by the designated
officers of departments to Administrative Reforms and Co-ordination

Chapter III Compliance Audit
121
Department through District Collector/Nodal Officer. Audit observed that
there was delay in sending the information and similar formats were not
completed. For instance, CMHO-II Jaipur sent cumulative information
fortnightly while CMHO Barmer & Udaipur sent information of belated
services only for concerned fortnight. However, CMHO Alwar did not send
the information to Nodal Officer regularly.
Scrutiny of data reported by designated officers do not match with the actual
delayed cases as observed by audit in test checked cases in following services:
(i) Eight test checked units72 reported no case of delay in payment under
JSSY. However, in scrutiny audit observed that delayed payments were made
in 236 cases by these units.
(ii) CHC Tijara (Alwar) reported eight cases of delayed payment under
JSSY during 2013-14 whereas audit noticed delayed payment occurred in 78
cases (May 2015) during corresponding period.
(iii) In PMO Alwar and PHC Taratara (Barmer), no case of delayed issue
of sterilization certificate was reported. However, audit found that sterilization
certificates issued were delayed in 173 and 43 cases respectively .
(iv) CHC Ramgarh (Alwar) informed no case of delayed issue of MLC
Report while audit noticed delay in ten cases.
(v) CMHO Alwar and Udaipur intimated no case of delayed issue of food
licenses while audit found delayed issue of food licenses in 18 and 2 cases
respectively.
(vi) The fortnightly report of March 2015 submitted by CMHO-II, Jaipur to
District Collector (DC) revealed that 1,36,464 applications were filed which
were shown as disposed within prescribed time. However, CMHO-II, Jaipur
informed the audit that there were 17,361 cases of delayed payment under
JSSY during the period November 2011 to March 2015. Thus, factual position
of delayed cases was not reported to Administrative Reforms and Co-
ordination Department.
The above indicates that records required to show actual time taken in
delivery of services were not being maintained properly and the actual number
of cases of delay in providing of services was higher than reported.
State Government, Department of Medical & Health (DoMH) stated (February
2016) that clarifications for discrepancy in data have been sought from
concerned medical units and instructions have been issued to furnish correct
data in future.
72 PMO, Sethi Colony, Jaipur, PHC-Beelwa (Jaipur), PMO, Rajiv Gandhi Hospital, Alwar,
PHC- Mubarikpur(Alwar), CHC-Sarada (Udaipur), PHC - Chitrawas (Udaipur), PHC-
Adel, Taratara (Barmer).

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
122
3.14.3 Payments under Janani Shishu Surksha Yojana (JSSY)
Under ‘JSSY’, a payment of ` 1000 or ` 1400 depending upon urban or rural
area, is required to be made at the time of discharge of a mother from
hospital/health care facility, after birth of a child. Audit test checked 1614
cases in selected units to assess the effective implementation of the Act under
this scheme. Following irregularities were noticed in payment of incentives:
3.14.3.1 Delayed payment of incentive
Of 1614 cases test checked, audit noticed delayed payment of incentives in
633 cases (39 per cent). The delay was more than three months in 58 cases.
State Government (DoMH) stated (February 2016) that delay was mainly
attributable to delayed receipt of budget from districts/block level officers
(CHC Sarada and CHC Ramgarh); shortage of staff (PHC Taratara) and
delayed submission of documents by beneficiaries (PHC Bhankrota and PHC
Beelwa). Keeping in view the deficiencies, online payment of incentives is
now being made directly to beneficiaries accounts.
The facts remained that implementation of the scheme was not effective.
3.14.3.2 Systemic deficiencies
The payments to beneficiaries under JSSY were made through account payee
cheques at the time of discharge from hospital/health care centre. Review of
records revealed non encashment of cheques amounting to ` 16.50 lakh
pertaining to 1214 beneficiaries. Of these cheques amounting to ` 1.23 lakh
were issued by Principal Medical Officer (PMO) Satellite hospital Sethi
Colony, Jaipur and Satellite Hospital, Hiranmagari and CHC Sanwad
(Udaipur) (urban area) to 123 urban beneficiaries and cheques amounting to
` 10.79 lakh were issued by CHC Bassi Jaipur, Satellite Hospital Hiranmagari
and CHC Sanwad (Udaipur) (rural area) to 771 rural beneficiaries. Instances
of non encashment of cheques amounting to ` 4.48 lakh by 320 beneficiaries,
were also noticed during audit of three units (CHC Dungla (Chittorgarh); CHC
Delwara and Kelwara (Rajsamand).
State Government (DoMH) stated (February 2016) that cheques were issued
to beneficiaries well in time but due to non presentation of cheques by some of
the beneficiaries, the same could not be encashed. The department is not
responsible for this. Reply was not convincing as intended benefit did not
reach to the beneficiaries due to system deficiencies.
Thus, non-encashment of cheques and non receipt of intended benefits of
service under the scheme reflects deficiencies in the payment procedure.
In PMO Barmer and Alwar, total amount of cheques issued to beneficiaries
was not reconciled with the bank, therefore actual drawal of incentive by
beneficiaries and those who did not draw incentive could not be ascertained.
PMO Barmer and Alwar accepted (November 2015) the fact of non
reconciliation.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
123
State Government (DoMH) stated (February 2016) that the CM&HO, Barmer
and Alwar have been asked to submit report after reconciliation of payment
with the bank.
3.14.3.3 Non-payment of incentive to residents of other states
Under JSSY, there is no restriction of making payment under the scheme to
the residents of other states. It was noticed that 23 beneficiaries belonging to
other states, were not paid the incentive by PMO, Hiranmagari, Udaipur on the
plea that they were not residents of Rajasthan. Thus, non-payment of incentive
to these beneficiaries was not in conformity with the provisions of the Act.
State Government (DoMH) stated (February 2016) that the clarification for not
making payment to beneficiaries of other states have been sought from the
concerned officers and instructions have been issued to ensure payment as per
rule.
3.14.4 Issue of Food Licenses and Food Manufacturing Licenses
(i) As per provisions of the Act, food licenses are issued by Chief Medical
and Health Officer (CMHO) within 60 days of filing of application. Out of
total 250 cases test checked in three districts (Alwar, Jaipur and Udaipur),
audit observed delay in issuing food licenses in 40 cases. In respect of CMHO
Udaipur, State Government stated (December 2015) that challans of requisite
fees were not received along with applications, therefore, the licenses were
issued after receipt of challans. Reply was not correct, as applications in
absence of challans were liable to be rejected as provided in the Act. In case of
CMHO Jaipur and Alwar the Government stated (December 2015) that though
the applications were submitted on line, but the hard copies were submitted
later. However, audit has calculated delay from the date of application of
forms received online. Reply was not convincing as delay should be computed
from the date of receipt of application irrespective of mode of filing the same.
(ii) As per section 5(2) of the Act read with rule 5 of RGDPS Rules, the
designated officer, on receipt of an application, within the stipulated time
limit, either provide the service or reject the application and in case of
rejection of the application, shall record the reasons in writing and inform the
applicant.
In test check of CMHOs, 939 online applications were received during
November 2011 to March 2015, for issue of food licenses. These were kept
pending for 2 to 17 months over the prescribed time limit. The CMHO
Udaipur and Barmer replied (July 2015) that online applications were not
disposed off due to non-receipt of required documents. Reply was not
acceptable as in absence of documents, rejection of applications along with
reasons, was required to be intimated to the applicants. This indicated that the
applications were not attended to which was violative of the provisions of the
Act/rules.
3.14.5 Issue of Drug Licenses/ Drug Manufacturing Licenses
As per provisions of the Act, drug licenses are required to be issued by the
Assistant Drug Controller within 20 days of filing of application while drug

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
124
manufacturing licenses are issued by the Drug Controller within three months
of filing of application.
Out of 302 cases test checked, delay in 105 cases of drug licenses were
noticed in four districts (Alwar; Jaipur, Barmer and Udaipur). The delay was
attributable to late site inspection by Drug Control Officer and excessive time
consumed in procedure of issuing drug licenses after inspection. The Assistant
Drug Controller, Alwar replied (June 2015) that the post of licensing
authority remained vacant from 01 November 2013 to 27 October 2014, due
to which some delay occurred in issuing licenses. The reply was not
convincing as instances of delay were noticed during the entire period of audit
(November 2011 to March 2015).
3.14.6 Issue of sterilization certificates
As per provisions of the Act, sterilization certificates are required to be issued
within one month in case of female sterilization operations and 3 months in
the case of male sterilization operations.
Audit noticed that out of test checked 394 sterilization certificate cases, there
were 241 cases (234 female sterilization and 7 male sterilization) of delayed
issue of sterilization certificates. In 44 cases there was delay of more than 100
days. PHC Taratara (Barmer) admitted that the certificates were not issued
within time due to shortage of staff. Reply of other units is awaited (November
2015).
PHC Bhankrota; CHC Bassi; CHC Banskho and PMO Satellite Hospital Sethi
Colony, Jaipur issued 1738 sterilization certificates but no detailed record was
found maintained, in absence of which delay in delivery of service could not
be ascertained.
3.14.7 Issue of Complicated Disability Certificate
Act provides for issue of complicated disability certificates by the Incharge of
Medical Board, constituted in health centres, within 3 weeks from the filing of
application. In PMO Alwar, audit noticed delay in issue of complicated
disability certificates in 65 cases out of 150 cases test checked. In 14 cases
delay of more than three months was noticed. No case of delay in issue of
complicated disability certificates were found in other test checked units.
3.14.8 Issue of Visible Disability Certificate
As per rule 4 of RGDPS Rules, the person authorised under rule 3 shall give
acknowledgement in form 1 for receipt of an application for delivery of
service.
It was noticed that out of 54 cases test checked, Government Satellite
Hospital, Sethi Colony Jaipur did not issue acknowledgements in 43 cases for
visible disability certificates. It was also noticed that applications were being
received and certificates issued only on Tuesday instead of on all working

Chapter III Compliance Audit
125
days. Receipt registers were also not maintained, in absence of which, delay
in issue of visible disability certificate could not be ascertained.
3.14.9 Medico Legal Case (MLC) Report
Act provides for issue of MLC Report within 24 hours from receipt of
application. Out of 50 cases test checked, audit noticed delay in 10 cases
ranged between two to four days in CHC, Ramgarh (Alwar). CHC replied
(July 2015) that delay was attributable to heavy work load. Instructions have
now been issued to issue MLC Reports within stipulated time.
Scrutiny of records of CHC, Govindgarh (Alwar) revealed 13 blank MLC
Reports, pertaining to the period from December 2014 to March 2015,
contained signature of recipients/applicants. This shows that signatures of the
recipients were taken in advance on MLC Reports raising doubts about the
authenticity of these reports. Apart from this, the MLC Reports issued by
CHC, Govindgarh (Alwar) and CHC, Sarada (Udaipur) did not contain date of
dispatch. In its absence, audit could not ascertain whether the notified services
were delivered in time. Accepting the facts, CHC Sarada stated (June 2015)
that the required records of services will be maintained in future. Reply from
CHC, Govindgarh is awaited (December 2015).
3.14.10 Monitoring
Rule 18 of RGDPS Rules provides that State Government may introduce a
system for centralised monitoring of timely delivery of notified services
including service delivery through use of Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) and for monitoring of various provisions of this Act.
(i) Department of Information Technology & Communication (DoIT)
developed (June 2012) a Management Information System (MIS) portal for
obtaining online status for monitoring of notified public services. However
DoIT stated (August 2015) that the scope of work of MIS portal was merged
with e-Mitra and Raj Sampark portal w.e.f. 1 April 2014 across the State and
MIS portal was made non-operational from June 2014.
During test check, audit noticed that e-Mitra was catering to only one service
(issue of food licenses) of the Department while Raj sampark was meant only
for lodging general grievances of public and was not related with delivery of
services under the RGDPS Act. Thus, neither e-Mitra nor Raj sampark were
monitoring delivery of notified services. Audit also sought (November 2015)
details of random inspection of delivery of notified services manually or on
software conducted by Administrative Reforms And Co-ordination
Department but the same were not made available (December 2015)
(ii) As mentioned in para 3.14.2.2 ibid, cumulative information of disposal
within time and beyond time limit and pending applications for notified
services were being submitted by the designated officers of respective
department fortnightly through District Collectors/Nodal Officers to
Administrative Reforms and Co-ordination Department. Audit observed that
the said information submitted by designated officers was not being checked
either by District Collector/Nodal Officers or by the Administrative Reforms

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
126
& Co-ordination Department which led into several discrepancies mentioned
in para 3.14.2.2
3.14.11 Non-maintenance of essential records/Registers
Rule 4 of RGDPS Rules provides for issuing acknowledgement to the
applicant in Form-1 containing details of time limit for providing the services
which help applicants to know the time limit of particular service, and rule 17
provides that the designated officer shall maintain records of the cases in
Form-3 which consists of all information of services provided along with
details of order passed. Out of 50 units test checked by us, 17 units 73 were not
maintaining registers in Form-3, containing information of services provided
and details of order passed.
These registers are the key tools for monitoring the implementation of the Act,
in absence of the same, timely delivery of services could not be ensured.
3.14.12 Non-organising awareness campaigns
Rule 20 of RGDPS Rules stipulates that the State Government may develop
and organize campaigns and programmes to advance the understandings of the
public for obtaining services under the Act.
Audit observed that awareness programmes like advertisement, distribution of
pamphlets and public meetings were not organized to improve the awareness
of the Act among the public. One of the popular measures for educating
citizens about the provision of the act, is by displaying information of notified
services and time limit for providing such services on notice boards. This was
also not found in CMHO Alwar. Lack of awareness deprived the beneficiaries
from redressal of their grievances by respective authorities. This was evident
from the fact that out of 22,502 cases of delayed delivery of services, none of
the applicants preferred any appeal for redressal of their grievances.
3.14.13 Non-imparting training to designated officers/Appeal officers
Rule 20(4) of RGDPS Rules 2011, stipulates that the State Government may
to the extent of availability of financial and other resources, train the
designated officer, first appeal officer, second appellate authority and revising
officer, as the case may be, of their duties under the Act.
Scrutiny of records of test checked units revealed that training programmes for
Designated Officers and Appeal Officers were not organised in compliance
with the instructions contained in Rule20(4) of RGDPS Rules.
State Government (Administrative Reforms & Co-ordination Department) in
its reply (September 2015) stated that the contention of audit of non achieving
the objectives of the Act was not acceptable as, after enactment of the Act,
general public has largely been benefitted in obtaining desired services and the
73 PMO, Rajiv Gandhi Government Hospital, Alwar, CHC- Ramgarh, Tijara, Govindgarh
and Shahjahanpur (Alwar), ADC Alwar, CHC- Bassi, Tunga (Jaipur), PMO, Satalite
Hospital, Hiranmagri, Udaipur, CHC-Sarada, Kurabar, Sanwad (Udaipur), PHC-
Chitrawas, Barwara (Udaipur) , CMHO Barmer, PMO Barmer, CHC, Dhorimanna
(Barmer).

Chapter III Compliance Audit
127
notified services are being delivered timely. Approximately four crore
applications (all services under 18 departments) were disposed of under the
Act.
The reply is not corroborated by findings of audit wherein substantial delay
was noticed in delivery of all 12 notified services of the Medical and Health
Department.
3.14.14 Conclusion and Recommendations
The government of Rajasthan has made efforts to provide timely delivery of
specified services to the public. However, efforts in delivery of services need
to be improved. We observed delay in delivery of specified services in 27 per
cent of test checked cases. Substantial delay was of more than 200 days was
also noticed in 24 cases.
Basic records, required to watch the delivery of the services, were not being
properly maintained. Audit noticed discrepancies in reporting data of cases of
service deliveries. Actual numbers of delayed cases are not reported to
Administrative Reforms and Co-ordination Department. No follow up action
is in practice as delayed cases are not being checked/monitored by the
Administrative Reforms and Co-ordination Department.
State Government should improve its monitoring mechanism to watch the
proper maintenance of required record and, disposal of cases under the Act
within the prescribed time limit.
Awareness campaigns are not being organized by the Department which was
evident from the fact that no applicant went into appeal for delayed/non
delivery of services.
State Government should make efforts towards increasing awareness among
public.
While a time limit for disposal of first appeal has been notified by the
Government, no such time limit has been notified for second appeal.
No time limit for disposal of second appeal has been notified. State
Government should fix a time limit for the same.
Public Health Engineering Department
3.15 Bisalpur-Dudu drinking water supply project
3.15.1 Introduction
Bisalpur-Dudu Water Supply Project (BDWSP) was conceived and sanctioned
(2002) in view of insufficient quantity/availability of ground water and quality
issues due to presence of high fluoride, total dissolved solids (TDS) and
salinity issues in Jaipur, Tonk and Nagaur districts. The project comprises

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
128
laying of two main pipe lines namely transmissions main (TM) -I (Surajpura-
Malpura-Dudu-Sambhar) and TM-II (Surajpura-Jhirana-Niwai-Chaksu),
originating from water treatment plant at Surajpura. The distribution of water
to the rural areas has been done through distributaries of 11 Regional Water
Supply Schemes (RWSSs)74 by connecting these to TM I and II. The supply to
urban areas has been done by connecting existing/newly constructed Service
Reservoirs to TM I and II.
Phase-I of the project comprised of two parts. Part-I covered the transmission
mains (TM-I and TM-II) for the demand of 1522 villages and 7 urban towns 75
and regional water supply schemes of 718 villages of Jaipur and Tonk
districts while Part-II covered Regional Water Supply Schemes of remaining
804 villages of Jaipur, Tonk and Nagaur districts and 7 urban towns.
Subsequently, 113 villages and two towns 76 were added. Phase-I was designed
for design year 2021. Though the demand for Phase-II (design year 2036) was
also calculated, the project for phase-II is yet to be prepared.
Work orders for TM –I and II were issued in January 2006 with stipulated date
of completion as January 2008. The works were actually completed in July
2010 and April 2011 respectively. Works of RWSSs were allotted between
December 2007 and September 2013 with stipulated date of completion as
June 2009 and March 2016. Works of three RWSSs have been completed as of
March 2015.
Audit examined records 77 of Public Health Engineering Department (PHED)
and the records of BDWSP covering the period from 2011-12 to 2014-15 to
assess the efforts made by PHED in ensuring adequate drinking water supply
in the state. In addition 10 per cent villages, where water supply has been
commissioned, were also test checked for beneficiaries survey.
3.15.2 Funding
BDWSP is being financed by Ministry of Rural Development, Government of
India (GoI) under ‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)’ 78
and by State Government under ‘Minimum Needs Programme (MNP)’.
The details of funds allotted for the project and utilization thereagainst are as
under:
74 RWSS Mor-Malpura-Pachewar; RWSS Dudu; RWSS Naraina; RWSS Sambhar; RWSS
Bawri-Nathri-Jhirana; RWSS Todaraisingh; RWSS Phagi; RWSS Chaksu; RWSS
Bassi; RWSS Niwai and Tonk and RWSS Nawa (Nagaur).
75 Chaksu, Malpura, Naraina, Niwai, Phulera, Sambhar, and Todaraisingh.
76 Jobner and Kishangarh-Renwal.
77 Chief Engineer (Special Project), Jaipur, Additional Chief Engineers, Project, Jaipur;
Superintending Engineers, Project Circle, Jaipur, Executive Engineers, (Project) Dudu,
Niwai, Phagi, Bassi, Sambhar.
78 Renamed as ‘National Rural Drinking Water Programme’ (NRDWP) in February 2010.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
129
(` in crore)
Year Allotment Expenditure
ARWSP/
NRDWP
State Plan ARWSP/
NRDWP
State Plan
Upto 2010-11 149.38 108.84 149.05 109.09
2011-12 6.00 19.19 5.76 19.19
2012-13 7.88 52.32 6.67 52.18
2013-14 10.36 201.39 10.32 191.51
2014-15 13.00 191.00 13.00 189.82
Total 186.62 572.74 184.80 561.79
Source: Departmental information
For Phase I (part I) of the BDWSP, initial administrative and financial
sanction (A&F) of ` 216.55 crore was accorded (04 June 2002) by Policy
Planning Committee (PPC). The A&F was revised (02 November 2004) by
PPC to ` 283.77 crore. Due to increase in cost of RWSS, A&F was further
revised (11 October 2007) to ` 678.87 crores. Further, in the phase-1 (Part-II),
5 A&F sanctions for RWSSs amounting to ` 1012.84 crore were issued. Thus
there was a cost overrun of ` 462.32 crore in Phase I (part I) of the Project.
The position of A&F sanctions and expenditure incurred thereagainst depicted
in following table:
(` in crore)
S.
No.
Name of Project A&F sanction Expenditure incurred
1 BDWSP (Transmission Main (TM)-I and TM-II) and
packages #
(i) Regional Drinking Water Supply Scheme (RWSS) Mor-
Malpura-Pachewar;
(ii) RWSS Dudu;
(iii) RWSS Naraina;
(iv) RWSS Sambhar;
(v) RWSS Bawri-Nathri-Jhirana and
(vi) RWSS Todaraisingh
678.87 457.41
2 (vii) RWSS Phagi 217.24 59.03
3 (viii) RWSS Chaksu 254.45 50.61
4 (ix) RWSS Bassi 299.55 55.37
5 (x) RWSS Niwai and Tonk 112.88 38.65
6 (xi) RWSS Nawa (Nagaur) 128.72 85.52
Grand Total 1691.71 746.59
# BDWSP and its packages (i) to (vi) were approved under one A&F sanction while
packages (vii) to (xi) were approved under separate A&F sanctions.
Source: Departmental information
Audit findings
Audit findings on performance of the project are discussed in following
paragraphs:
3.15.3 Project planning
Planning is the basic frame work of a scheme/project on which the success of
the project depends. Scrutiny of records of PHED revealed following
deficiencies in the planning process:

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
130
3.15.3.1 Preparation of Detailed Project Report
Chapter 3 of Manual of Water Supply and Treatment issued by Central Public
Health and Environment Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO), provides for
preparation of a detailed project report (DPR) before taking up any project.
Para 3.2.2 of Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)
guidelines also envisages that the State Governments were required to prepare
DPR as per its operational guidelines.
Scrutiny in audit revealed that no DPR was prepared for the entire BDWSP.
The Department merely issued separate administrative and financial (A&F)
sanctions for each sub project under the BDWSP and the project was
conceived through these A&F sanctions. State Government stated (January
2016) that A&F proposal were prepared as per norms and guidelines of the
department and all the required parameters were taken into consideration, so
separate DPR was not required. CPHEEO guidelines are not binding on the
department like PWF&AR.
The reply of the State Government is not acceptable as the DPR is a base
document for planning and execution of a project. DPR was to be prepared as
per CPHEEO manual as well as ARWSP guidelines. Moreover, State
Government has issued (October 2015) directions for preparation of DPR
before preparation of A&F sanction. Non-preparation of DPR as per the site
requirements led to delays and deviations, resulting in time and cost overrun
as discussed in succeeding paragraphs.
3.15.3.2 Reservation of water
As per State Water Policy (SWP), issued by State Water Resources Planning
Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur, top priority was given to drinking water for
human consumption. Technical Committee (TC) in its meetings 79 issued
directions that before taking up execution of the work, reservation of water in
Bisalpur Dam may be ensured for requirement of the project for entire design
period.
Water Resource Department (WRD) made reservation of 16.2 thousand
million cubic feet (TMC) of drinking water from Bisalpur Dam, against which
water supply projects (including BDWSP) having a total demand of 18.44
TMC were sanctioned by the department for the design year 2021.
Scrutiny by audit revealed that demand of 21.918 MLD in respect of 113
villages (Bassi Tehsil: 16.8 MLD) and two towns (Jobner and Kishangarh-
Renwal: 5.118 MLD) were not included in the estimated demand of BDWSP
but were added subsequently. This indicated that reservation of designed
demand of water was not ensured before taking up the projects and water
reserved for BDWSP was less to the extent of 21.918 MLD. State Government
stated (January 2016) that during preparation of project of Bassi it was decided
by the State Government that the water from Chambal river will be supplied to
Bisalpur dam to fulfill the water requirement. This confirms that reservation of
designed demand of water was not ensured before taking up the projects.
79 TC 399 dated 13 April 2005, TC 568 dated 03 January 2013, TC 576 dated 17April 2013.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
131
3.15.3.3 Calculation of demand of drinking water
As per para 2.2.6 of CPHEEO Manual, water supply projects may be designed
normally to meet the requirements over a period of thirty years, after their
completion. The time lag between design and completion of the project should
also be taken into account which should not exceed two to five years
depending on the size of the project.
Design period of TM–I and TM–II of BDWSP were designed for demand of
the year 2021 while RWSSs, connecting villages/ dhanies (other habitations)
through distribution system, were designed for 2031/2045, as such the design
demand of TM–I and II and the distribution system do not match. Works of
TM–I and II were completed in August 2010 and April 2011 respectively.
Thus TM–I and II would not meet additional demand after design year 2021.
Thus, intended benefits would not be available to public.
State Government stated (January 2016) that it has executed the project as per
availability of funds and additional pipelines will be laid for the designed
demand of 2045 or 2050 in phase II.
The reply is not acceptable as the department did not take time lag between
design and completion of the project into account and put additional financial
burden of additional pipe line due to improper planning.
3.15.3.4 Preparation of Estimates
Rule 289 of Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules (PWF&AR) provides
that for every proposed work for which lump sum provision were sanctioned,
properly detailed estimates must be prepared and these proposals should be
structurally sound, accurately calculated and based on the adequate data.
(i) Basic rates of various items adopted by Region Offices for preparing
estimates for various projects/packages were not uniform, as such cost of some
of the projects were over estimated while others were under estimated. For
instance, in the estimates of RWSS Nawa (July 2012), Naraina (January 2013)
and Sambhar (April 2013) items like 10 per cent contractor’s profit, taxes
(income tax, sale tax, labour cess), price variation etc. were also included. To
maintain uniformity of rates in all Regions, CE (Special Project) prepared
(5 April 2013) 80 typical rates/estimates for various items useful in the major
projects on the basis of current market rates.
A&F and Technical Estimates of RWSS Bassi, RWSS Chaksu and RWSS
Phagi were approved in the same period (May-June 2013). The Department
adopted typical rates (5 April 2013) for preparing estimates in case of RWSS
Phagi but the rates adopted for RWSS Bassi and RWSS Chaksu were higher
than typical rates. Due to different rates of these items in rate analysis, the
estimation of cost of pipes were overestimated by ` 16.37 crore and ` 12.76
crore respectively. It was also observed that the Department entered into rate
contracts for supply of pipes during this period, which were comparatively
lesser than BSR rates, but the same were not adopted. This indicated that
80 Superseded vide letter dated 10 July 2013.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
132
estimates were prepared on higher side by inflating the estimated costs which
affected bid prices as well as contract prices.
State Government stated (January 2016) that estimation of a project was based
upon the various aspects and similar concept cannot be adopted in each and
every project and further stated that typical rates were prepared in the month
March 2013 and at that time the preparation of estimates were going on.
The reply is not acceptable as the cost added for items like contractor’s profit,
taxes (income tax, sale tax, labour cess), price variation etc. had no effect on
topography of the area, availability of labour and other essential commodities
and thus the estimates were prepared on higher side by inflating the estimated
costs.
(ii) Scrutiny of records of TM-I, revealed that after awarding (16 January
2006) work on the basis of technical sanction (TS), revised A&F was issued
(October 2007) wherein the quantity of pipes of various ratings was changed
by (-) 80 to 598 per cent as compared to schedule of quantity in work order.
However the actual deviation in quantity of pipes of various ratings, used in
the work from TS, ranged between (-) 59 per cent and 100 per cent with a cost
overrun of ` 15.79 crore. As compared to revised A&F, this deviation ranged
between (-) 73 and 328 per cent.
Further, it was noticed that in the revised A&F (2007), 8,480 meter (900 mm)
and 8,380 meter (700mm) MS pipes were estimated whereas 5,564 meter (900
mm) and 3,478 meter (700mm) MS pipes were actually laid. For remaining
quantity of 2,916 meter (900 mm) and 4,902 meter (700 mm), PSCC pipe in
place of MS pipe was used. This change in type of pipes, resulted in
overestimation of cost by ` 8.01 crore.
In TM-I, as there was overall excess in MS pipe over the Technical Sanction,
permission of laying of MS pipe in place of PSCC pipe was granted by TC (3
November 2007) subject to approval of Finance Committee. As the overall
increase in quantity of MS pipe was 127 per cent, Finance Committee
approved (2 May 2014) the deviation statement, subject to approval of Finance
Department (FD) for additional quantities more than 50 per cent. FD approved
(22 may 2015) deviation with the directions that action may be taken against
defaulting Engineers/Authority for preparing incorrect estimates. Action on
this account is yet to be taken. State Government accepted (January 2016) the
facts.
(iii) Contractor completed the work amounting to ` 66.46 crore against the
work order of ` 59.74 crore (execution part only). Besides ` 2.31 crore was
also paid on account of price escalation. Accordingly the final cost worked out
to ` 68.77 crore. This was 15.11 per cent higher than the work order amount
and required regularization from FC. However, it was noticed that while
submitting proposal of deviation for approval of FC, this item of price
escalation (` 2.31 crore) was not included and was yet to be regularized.
Thus there were a huge deviation in quantity of pipes between technical
sanction, revised A&F and actual consumption. This indicates that technical

Chapter III Compliance Audit
133
sanction issued in 2004 and revised A&F sanction issued in 2007 were not
prepared on realistic data.
3.15.3.5 Excess quantity of pipes
In RWSS Bassi, it was observed that technical sanction, was approved (4 June
2013) and work order was awarded (18 September 2013), requiring 4,03,100
metre DI pipes. Against this, the contractor submitted (30 December 2014)
requirement of 2,77,073 meter of DI pipes, on the basis of site survey, which
resulted in overall savings of ` 18.73 crore. This indicated that TS was
prepared without actual site survey.
State Government stated (January 2016) that survey was done by the
contractor in respect of rising mains only and DI pipes to be used in
distribution system were not surveyed.
The reply is not acceptable as the contractor has surrendered ` 18.73 crore for
excess quantity of DI pipes as they were not required in distribution system.
Thus technical estimates prepared were not realistic.
3.15.4 Delay in execution of Project
As per CPHEEO Manual, time lag between design and completion of the
project should be taken into account which should not exceed two to five years
depending on the size of the project. Besides ARWSP guidelines provided that
during project preparation, a detailed project implementation schedule would
be developed for entire three-year project implementation period consisting of
four distinct phases and a post project completion phase.
Work of BDWSP was initiated in the year 2002. However, Transmission
Mains (TM-I and TM-II) were designed for the requirement of year 2021.
However, the work orders for these works were awarded in 2006 and the lines
were laid in July 2010 and April 2011 respectively. For distribution of
drinking water from these lines (TM-I and TM-II), only three (out of 11)
RWSSs were completed till March 2015. Thus, the Department did not take
time lag between design and completion of the project into account.
Few illustrative cases where packages were delayed for more than one year are
summarized below:
Name of Package/Project A&F date Work order
date
Stipulated
date of
completion
Completion date
Transmission Main-I 11-10-2007 16-01-2006 25-01-2008 31-07-2010
Transmission Main-II 11-10-2007 16-01-2006 25-01-2008 03-04-2011
RWSS Mor, Malpura and Pachewar 11-10-2007 12-08-2011 21-08-2013 Work in progress
RWSS Dudu (main distribution) 11-10-2007 07-12-2007 16-06-2009 31-07-2012
RWSS Naraina 11-10-2007 03-05-2013 12-11-2014 Work in progress
RWSS Todaraisingh 11-10-2007 12-08-2011 21-11-2012 25-03-2014
RWSS Bawari, Nathary Jhirana, 11-10-2007 07-12-2007 16-06-2009 03-02-2012
RWSS Nawa 24-08-2012 22-11-2012 30-11-2014 Work in progress
Source: Departmental information

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
134
3.15.5 Delay due to obtaining permission from different authorities
The Policy Planning Committee (PPC) issued (22 September 2004) directions
that required statutory permissions are obtained before commencement of
work. Technical Committee 81, while approving technical sanctions issue
riders of getting permission from agencies like Railway, Public Work
Department (PWD) etc. before commencement of work to avoid delays. In
following cases, project works were delayed due to delay in obtaining
permissions from different authorities:
S.
No.
Packages Name of
Agency/
Authority
Name of work Date/Month of Delay
(in
days)
Start and
stipulated date
of completion
Request Permission
1 TM-I Railways Railway crossing at
Naraina and Sambhar
26-1-2006 and
25-1-2008
August 2006 April 2008 264
and
553
2 TM-II Railways Railway crossing at reach
KM62/2-3
26-1-2006 and
25-1-2008
March 2006 August 2008 909
3 TM_I NHAI/Road
Authorities
Road cutting permission 26-1-2006 and
25-1-2008
July 2008 March 2009 240
4 RWSS
Naraina
Railways Laying of pipe line
through railway crossing
3-5-2013 and
12-11-2014
June 2013 December
2014
540
5 RWSS
Naraina
Road
Authorities
Road cutting permission 3-5-2013 and
12-11-2014
September
2014
awaited -
6 RWSS
Nawa
Road
Authorities
Road cutting permission 01-12-2012 and
30-11-2014
April 2014 awaited -
7 TM-I HPCL, IOCL
and GAIL
Laying pipeline through
gas pipeline at Dudu and
Pachewar
26-1-2006 and
25-1-2008
August 2007 May 2008
August 2008
222
8 RWSS
Mor-
Malpura-
Pachewar
HPCL, IOCL
and GAIL
Laying pipeline through
gas pipeline at points
22-08-2011
and 21-8-2013
December
2014
November
2013
and February
2015
60
9 RWSS
Phagi
Forest Laying pipeline through
forest area near kherapati
Bheechi village
03-08-2013and
02-02-2016
June 2014 awaited -
Source: Departmental information
State Government accepted (January 2016) the facts and stated that delay were
not on account part of PHED. The reply is not acceptable as the required
statutory permissions were to be obtained before commencement of work.
3.15.6 Execution of excess work without revised sanction
Rule 286 (2) and Rule 287 read with Rule 288 of PWF&AR Vol-I provides
that when expenditure on a work exceeds or is likely to exceed the amount
administratively approved for it by more than 10 per cent, or where there are
material deviations from the original proposals, even though the cost of the
same may possibly be covered by savings on other items, revised A&F
approval must be obtained from the authority competent to approve the cost,
so enhanced.
Revised A&F sanction ( ` 678.87 crore) of BDWSP was accorded on 11
October 2007 including O&M ( ` 9.32 crore) of RWSSs for five years.
81 TC 399 dated 13.04.2005, TC 568 dated 13-01 2013.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
135
Following cases of excess expenditure/sanctions were noticed where revised
A&F approval was not obtained from the competent authority:
(i) The work orders for RWSSs Naraina and Sambhar were issued at
` 48.53 crore and ` 206.58 crore against the A&F sanctions of ` 38 crore and
` 133.02 crore respectively. The stipulated dates of commencement were 3
May 2013 and 15 July 2013 and stipulated dates of completion were 12
November 2014 and 24 January 2016. As the amount of work orders exceeded
the A&F sanction by more than 10 per cent in each case, there was a need for
approval of revised A&F sanction in respect of these works.
(ii) Against A&F sanction of ` 9.32 crore for O&M, work orders of
` 35.17 crore were awarded to contractor as under:
(` in crore)
Name of Package/Project A&F Amount Work order Amount
RWSS Mor-Malpura-Pachewar
Consolidated O&M amount
` 9.32 crore for RWSS
5.93
RWSS Dudu 1.68
RWSS Naraina 3.93
RWSS Sambhar 20.37
RWSS Todaraisingh 1.33
RWSS Bawari-Nathari-Jhirana 1.93
Total 9.32 35.17
Source: Departmental information
Accordingly, revised A&F sanction was necessary from competent authority
for execution of aforesaid O&M works.
State Government accepted (January 2016) the facts and stated that revised
A&F sanction will be got approved from competent authority.
3.15.7 Lapse of administrative and financial sanction
Scrutiny of records revealed that following works were awarded after lapse 82
of more than five years from the date of revised A&F sanctions:
Name of Package Date of
Original
A&F
Date of Ist
revised
A&F
Date of IInd
revised
A&F
Date of
work
order
Work order
amount
(` in
crore)
RWSS Naraina 4-6-2002 2-11-2004 11-10-2007 03-05-2013 52.46
RWSS Sambhar 4-6-2002 2-11-2004 11-10-2007 15-07-2013 226.95
RWSS Dudu
(Internal Distribution
of Dhanis)
4-6-2002 2-11-2004 11-10-2007 11-02-2013 6.91
Total 286.32
Source: Department information
Thus due to delay in inviting tenders and awarding works, work orders
amounting to ` 286.32 crore were issued irregularly after lapse of revised
A&F sanctions. State Government stated (January 2016) that these
components were part of the same ongoing sanction and taken in hand late.
82 As per rule 353 of PWF&ARs, approval of sanction to an estimate for any public work
other than annual repairs would unless work has commenced, cease to operate after a
period of five years from the date on which it was accorded.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
136
The reply is not acceptable as the works were awarded after lapse of more than
five years from the date of revised A&F sanctions in 2007.
3.15.8 Supply of defective uPVC pipes
As per agreement, supply of material and manufacture of uPVC pipes should
conform to the relevant Indian standard specification No. 4985 -2000 or its
latest revision and all the material should be new and of high quality. All pipes
or joints which are proved to be in any way defective shall be replaced or
remade and re-tested as often as may be necessary until a satisfactory test shall
have been obtained. Any work which fails or is proved by test to be
unsatisfactory in any way shall be redone by the Contractor.
(i) In RWSS Naraina, it was noticed that department approved (11
November 2013) Quality Assurance Programme (QAP) of uPVC pipes.
Thereafter, representatives of PHED and third party inspection/consultant
approved83 uPVC pipes at factory of manufacturer. However Vigilance Team
of Department, in a post delivery inspection of uPVC pipes, found samples
defective from following batches:
S
No.
Dia meter
of Pipe
Length Rate
(per
meter)
Cost
(` in
crore)
Batch nos.
1 90 mm 35000 meter 126 0.44 B-14266,B-14267, B-14268,B-14269
2 110 mm 13350 meter 227 0.30 A-14022, A-14023, A-14024
3 160 mm 13404 meter 455 0.61 B-14021, B14022,B-14023,B-14024
Total 1.35
Source: Department information
As per terms of agreement, such pipes which are proved to be in any way
defective shall be replaced by the contractor. EE, project Division, PHED,
Dudu directed (15 December 2014) the contractor to replace above pipes.
State Government accepted (January 2016) the facts and stated that contractor
had replaced defective pipes now and supplier firm was black listed for future
supply.
(ii) In RWSS Niwai, it was noticed that the Department approved QAP of
uPVC pipes at factory of manufacturer and received 61,680 meters 84 uPVC
pipes of the various sizes for which payments of ` 1.56 crore was released to
the contractor. However these pipes failed post delivery test conducted (10
February 2015) by specified laboratory M/s Sriram Institute for Industrial
Research, Delhi. By this time, the contractor had laid 14,562 meters 85 uPVC
pipes and an amount of ` 9.26 lakh was also released for laying work.
As these pipes failed post delivery test, the same were required to be replaced
by the contractor. EE, project Division, PHED, Niwai directed (4 March 2015)
83 22 to 24 November 2013, 1 January 2014, 18 February 2014, 4 May 2014 and 5 October
2014.
84 75 mm-11,700 meters; 90 mm-11,700 meters; 110 mm-11,070 meters; 140 mm-11,070
meters; 160 mm-11,070 meters and 225 mm-5,070 meters.
85 90 mm-1,896 meters; 110 mm-9,132 meters; 140 mm 1,122 meters; 160 mm-2,412
meters.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
137
the contractor to replace above pipes. No records were made available to
showing that pipes were replaced, including the pipes already laid, by the
contractor. State Government accepted (January 2016) the facts and stated that
pipes have been removed from site. However the same have not been replaced
yet.
The aforesaid supply of pipes was also subject to inspection at site of
manufacturer by the Departmental officers/Third Party Inspection (TPI).
Failure of pipes in post delivery inspection indicated lack of compliance of
QAP as well as inspection by the departmental officers/ TPI.
3.15.9 Non-testing and commissioning of Transmission Main-I and II
As per clause 12.3 of Special Condition to Contract, immediately after the
physical completion, the work of testing and commissioning the entire system
on design conditions should be taken up as per the procedure given in ‘Scope
of Work and Technical Specifications’. Once the entire system has been
successfully tested and commissioned, trial run period of one month should
commence. The work was to be treated as ‘completed’ only thereafter. After
issue of certificate of “Completion of Work” by Engineer in-charge, O&M
period would commence from the date of certificate.
(i) TM-I work was treated as complete on 31 July 2010 without
commissioning of pipeline at design discharge and provisional certificate of
completion of work was issued by the Department on 23 May 2011.
Accordingly the O&M period commenced from 1 August 2010. The
contractor submitted an undertaking to carryout commissioning of pipeline at
design discharge, whenever department asks during O&M period (5 years).
Thus the work was treated as complete without final testing and
commissioning at design discharge. State Government accepted (January
2016) the facts and stated that full load commissioning is now been done.
(ii) Similarly in TM-II, the work was treated as complete on 3 April 2011
and provisional certificate of completion of work was issued on 10 October
2011. Though the firm submitted an undertaking to carryout commissioning of
pipeline at design discharge whenever department asks during O&M period (5
years), a completion certificate was issued on 10 July 2013 without getting the
work of commissioning of pipeline done at design discharge. State
Government accepted (January 2016) the facts and stated that transmission
system is being operated through gravity and operation of pipe line at designed
flow would be done in the year 2016.
It is evident from above mentioned cases that the work of testing and
commissioning the entire system was not taken up at full design discharge and
trial run period of one month has also not commenced. As the stipulated
period of O&M is ending in August 2015 (TM-I) and March 2016 (TM-II),
there is little chance of conducting any testing on TM-I. As such efficiency of
entire system of pipe line could not be ascertained.
3.15.10 Inadmissible price escalation
Rule 378 of PWF&ARs provides that in lump sum contracts, the contractor
agrees to execute a complete work with all its contingencies in accordance

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
138
with drawings and specifications for a fixed sum. Therefore, inclusion of a
clause on price variation in the lump sum contract agreement is not justifiable.
(i) In BDWSP, revised A&F sanction of ` 678.87 crore was accorded (11
October 2007) which included ` 57.58 crore on account of price escalation.
Thus, inclusion of price escalation in lump sum contract was in contravention
of Rule 378 of PWF&ARs.
(ii) Inadmissibility of payment of price escalation in lump sum contracts
was commented in Paragraph No.3.1.7 of Audit Report 2008-09 and
Paragraph No. 3.4.3 of Audit Report 2009-10. Public Accounts Committee
(PAC) in its 26 th Report 2014-15 directed the Department to take appropriate
action in the matter.
The Department made further payment of price escalation in these two cases:
(` in crore)
S.
No.
Project
Divisions
Package
Name
Name of contractor Amount of
work order
Final
amount paid
Price
escalation
Remarks
1. Dudu TM-I M/s Bhooratnam
Construction
Company (P)
Limited,
Secunderabad
61.17 68.44 2.31 ` 1.99 crore
commented in
Audit Report
2008-09 and
` 0.32 crore
paid thereafter
2. Niwai TM-II M/s IVRCL,
Infrastructure Project
Limited, Hyderabad
54.00 54.89 2.05 ` 1.87 crore
commented in
Audit Report
2008-09 and
` 0.18 crore
paid thereafter
Total 4.36
Source: Departmental information
Thus, payments of price escalation in lump sum contract was made by the
Department in contravention of the Rule 378 ibid and recommendation of
PAC. State Government accepted (January 2016) the facts and stated that
matter is pending with PAC for decision.
(iii) Clause 45 (10) of General Conditions of Contract (GCC) provides that
in case the contractor does not make pro rata progress as per clause 2 of the
agreement in the first or another time span and the short fall in progress is
covered up by him during subsequent time span within original stipulated
period then the price escalation of such work expected to be done in the
previous time span shall be notionally given based upon the price index of that
quarter in which such work was required to be done.
In RWSS Chaksu and RWSS Sambhar the contractor was paid price escalation
of ` 0.71 crore and ` 0.86 crore respectively inspite of the fact that the
contractors had not maintained pro rata progress of the work. Hence payment
of price escalation ` 1.57 crore was irregular. State Government stated
(January 2016) that price escalation would be payable for the period where
delay was not attributable to the contractor. The reply is not acceptable as
department had not decided whether the delay was attributable to the
contractor or not.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
139
3.15.11 Achievements of Project
The status of commissioning of drinking water supply in the villages (as of 31
March 2015) was as under:
Phase I Name of Package Number of
villages to be
covered
Number of
villages
commissioned
Per cent
achievement
Part-I RWSS Mor-Malpura-Pachewar 153 153 100
RWSS Dudu 105 105 100
RWSS Naraina 71 23 32
RWSS Sambhar 174 NC -
RWSS Todaraisingh 55 55 100
RWSS Bawari-Nathary-Jhirana 160 160 100
Total 718 496 69
Part-II RWSS Chaksu 275 NC -
RWSS Niwai 199 NC -
RWSS Bassi 210 NC -
RWSS Phagi 161 NC -
RWSS Nawa 72 28 39
Total 917 28 3
Grand Total 1635 524 32
NC – Not commissioned
Source: Department information
It is evident from above that although the project was initiated in 2002 but out
of total 1,635 villages, drinking water was provided only in 524 villages (32
per cent) upto March 2015. Drinking water supply has not been commissioned
in five packages. Moreover water supply in 91 villages 86 has been
disconnected as of 1 June 2015 due to non payments of water bills by the
village level committees (VLCs). Of nine towns, water supply has been
commissioned only in seven towns87.
The project was initiated in 2002 and the works of TM-I/II were completed in
2010/2011. Works on 9 RWSSs started thereafter. This resulted in non
completion of the project packages simultaneously with TM-I/TM-II. The
objective of providing adequate drinking water to the population of the rural
areas could not be achieved due to inefficiencies at every stage of planning,
execution and monitoring.
State Government stated (January 2016) that remaining villages are likely to
be benefitted in the year 2016.
The fact remain that conceived objectives of the project were partly achieved
even after a lapse of 13 years after incurring an expenditure of ` 746.59 crore
(Part-I- ` 457.41 crore and Part II ` 289.18 crore).
3.15.12 Public perception
To ascertain the level of public satisfaction on the quality of service provided
by BDWSP through Public Stand Posts (PSPs) in the villages, audit obtained a
list of 524 villages commissioned up to 30 June 2015 under the BDWSP.
86 RWSS Bawri-Nathri-Jhirana-25; RWSS Dudu-40; RWSS Mor-Malpura-Pachewar-2;
RWSS Todaraisingh-24.
87 Chaksu, Malpura, Naraina, Niwai, Phulera, Sambhar, and Todaraisingh.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
140
(i) A detailed questionnaire was prepared and beneficiary survey was
conducted during June-July 2015 by the audit parties along with the official of
PHED and VLC member in 54 selected commissioned villages. The response
received from the villagers is tabulated below:
Audit
Questions
Beneficiaries response in selected commissioned village
Availability of
water
11.12 per cent stated that they received water supply for 1 hour in a day.
53.70 per cent stated that they received water supply for 2 hours in a day.
18.51 per cent stated that they received water supply for 3 hours in a day.
09.26 per cent stated that they received water supply for 4 hours in a day.
07.41 per cent villages in which water supply stopped.
Sufficiency of
water
64.82 per cent respondents stated that they received sufficient water.
35.18 per cent did not have sufficient water.
Quality of water 90.74 per cent respondents found the water worthy for drinking.
07.40 per cent respondents not found it for drinking from the appearance.
01.86 per cent village in which water supply stopped.
Testing of water 48.14 per cent respondents stated that they have arranged to check quality of water
51.86 per cent respondents stated that they have not arranged to check quality of water
Complaints 90.74 per cent respondents were satisfied with the complaint redressal mechanism
09.26 per cent were not satisfied with the redressal of complaints.
Training
imparted to
beneficiary
77.77 per cent respondents stated that they have capacity to repair independently.
18.53 percent respondents stated that they have not capacity to repair independently.
03.70 per cent villages connected with piped scheme.
Suggestions
given by the
member of
VLC
59.25 per cent respondents were of view that house to house connection should be
provided in the scheme in place of PSPs
40.75 per cent have no suggestion for house to house connection.
Source: Survey questionnaire
The responses received from commissioned villages suggested lack of
satisfaction both in terms of sufficiency and duration of water supply. Nearly
60 per cent respondents were of view that in place of PSPs, house to house
connection should be provided for need based distribution and to mitigate the
stress of villagers caused due to coverage of longer distances, timings of
supply of water and mutual conflicts.
(ii) As per para 1.4 (X) of Scope of work and Technical Specifications of
agreement (Volume- II), for branched Network System from cluster ESRs to
individual villages, a minimum residual pressure of 7 meters (on the outlet of
the tap) is to be maintained at the village’s highest point, which is to be
ascertained by contractor as per survey and which is required to be approved
by department.
During physical verification (16 June 2015) of village Sirsi (RWSS Nawa), it
was noticed that in four PSPs88 there was no water supply due to installation of
the PSPs at height. This indicated that a minimum residual pressure was not
maintained at the village’s highest point. Thus villagers were deprived from
potable drinking water due to defective design.
(iii) In RWSSs, Dudu, Bawri-Nathri-Jhirana, Mor-Malpura-Pachewar and
Todaraisingh, agreements between Project Division and concerned VLCs,
88 Bagachi ki dhani, Jakhad Kharwaso ki dhani, Netwalon ki dhani and Thakkarwalo ki
dhani.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
141
were executed for supply of 20 lpcd water for drinking and washing purpose,
whereas packages/schemes were designed with the objective of providing 70
lpcd in DDP blocks and 40 lpcd water in other blocks. Thus the agreements
with VLCs have been made on lower side, resulting in supply of insufficient
water. State Government accepted (January 2016) the facts and stated that due
to uncertainty of availability of sufficient water agreement was executed on
the lower side.
3.15.13 Monitoring and quality control
3.15.13.1 Maintenance of records
To perform effective monitoring of contractor’s work, Department must
maintain records/ Registers 89 in proper and complete manner. Additional CE
also issued (18 October 2011), instructions for maintaining necessary records.
Required records/ registers were either not being maintained or not in the
proper format. State Government stated (January 2016) that necessary records
are being maintained. Reply was not acceptable as the same were not found
maintained in test checked packages.
3.15.13.2 Operation and Maintenance
In TM-I at Pump houses Dudu and Malpura, no record of cleaning of Clear
Water Reservoir (CWR) was available at pump houses. The date of last
cleaning was 12 January 2015. There are two tanks in each CWR, to be
cleaned one by one, as such cleaning of both tanks on a single day appears to
be incorrect. Moreover compliance of CPHEEO manual on O&M for cleaning
of reservoirs 90 could not be verified in absence of proper records. State
Government stated (January 2016) that cleaning of reservoir was being done
properly. The reply is not acceptable as in the absence of proper records to the
effect, audit could not ensure the claim of the department.
3.15.13.3 Quality control System
(i) Quality control wing was established on 6 September 2013 under the
Chief Engineer (Headquarter). The wing started functioning from 4 October
2013. No budget/facilities have been provided to the wing and no material
testing laboratory has been established for functioning of quality control wing.
However in complaint cases, wing obtained samples at sites and examine the
89 Register of QAP Approved for machinery and equipment, Register of testing of water
retaining structure (OHSR, CWR etc), Register of testing of materials, Register of batch
wise testing of pipes and valves at works of manufacturer, Register of sectional testing,
Quality control register, Register of pumps and pumping machinery at works of
manufacturer, Register/record of testing of complete system during final commission, Site
book and hindrance register, Record of IEC activities.
90 Making alternate arrangement for water supply, collection of sample of water and
silt/mud accumulated for biological analysis and for presence of snails and worms,
washing the interior walls and floor with water hose and brushes and applying
disinfectant (Supernatant of Bleaching powder) to the walls and floors before filling the
reservoirs again.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
142
samples through approved laboratories of National Accreditation Board for
Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL). Thus Quality Control wing was
defunct due to lack of funds/infrastructure.
(ii) Policy Planning Committee directed (27 September 2011) to prepare a
Quality Control Manual for ensuring quality of works in respect of Water
Supply Schemes/Projects. However the manual has not been prepared so far
(July 2015) and there was no specific guidelines for ensuring quality of work.
3.15.14 Conclusion
Bisalpur-Dudu Drinking Water Supply Project was conceived and sanctioned
(2002) in view of insufficient availability of ground water and quality issues
due to high level of fluoride, total dissolved solids and salinity problem in
Jaipur, Tonk and Nagaur districts.
The objective of providing adequate drinking water to the population within
the stipulated time, could not be achieved due to inefficiencies in every stage
of planning, execution and monitoring and led to cost/time overrun. DPR, the
base document for planning and execution of a project was not prepared by the
Department. Reservation of designed demand of water was not ensured before
taking up the project.
Estimates were prepared on the higher side by inflating the estimated costs
which affected bid prices as well as contract prices. Works amounting to
` 286.32 crore were awarded after lapse of A&F sanction. TM- I and II were
not tested and commissioned at full design discharge even after five years of
their completion.
Quality Control wing was defunct due to lack of funds/infrastructure. and
there was no specific guidelines for ensuring quality of work.
Out of total 1,635 villages, drinking water was provided only in 524 villages
(32 per cent ) upto March 2015. The responses received from villagers of
commissioned villages, suggested lack of satisfaction both in terms of
sufficiency and duration of water supply.
Thus, the conceived objectives of the project were partly achieved even after a
lapse of 13 years and after incurring an expenditure of ` 746.59 crore
Effective steps may be taken to achieve the intended objectives of the project
to provide adequate and quality drinking water to the rural population duly
addressing the deficiencies as pointed out.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
143
Public Health Engineering Department
3.16 Follow-up action on recommendations of Public Accounts
Committee/audit on Performance Audit of ‘Drinking Water
Supply in Jaipur City’ incorporated in Audit Report (Civil) 2009-
10
3.16.1 Introduction
Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), under Government of
Rajasthan, is responsible for supply of drinking water in the state.
Performance Audit on ‘Drinking Water Supply in Jaipur City’, was conducted
to examine implementation of the State Government's Plan to provide
adequate and safe drinking water to the population of Jaipur city and to reduce
dependency on ground water, through completing ‘Bisalpur Jaipur Water
Supply Project’ 91 (BJWSP). Audit reviewed implementation of the BJWSP
and various water supply schemes providing drinking water to Jaipur city for
the period 2005-10. Implementation of BJWSP (2005-2010) and the
augmentation/summer schemes for 2007-10 were reviewed (January to July
2010) through test-check of records in the concerned offices of PHED 92 and
Rajasthan Urban Sector Development Investment Programme (RUSDIP).
The Audit revealed deficiencies in planning, execution, monitoring and
vigilance. Findings of PA were incorporated in Para 2.1 of Audit Report
(Report No. 2) for the year 2009-10.
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) took-up the Performance Audit for
detailed examination in July, November 2012 and June 2013, considered the
recommendations made by Audit in its Audit Report, the views of PHED, and
submitted (August 2013) 61 recommendations 93 for remedial action. The PAC
examined the progress submitted by PHED on these recommendations and
submitted (February 2015) its report to legislature in which fifty-four
recommendations were treated as executed and seven were left for final
compliance.
A follow-up audit to review the status of implementation of recommendations
of PAC/audit were examined to assess the compliance by PHED to
recommendations made by PAC and recommendations made by audit. Field
study covered offices of the Chief Engineer, Headquarter (CE-HQ), the Chief
Engineer, Project (CE-Project), the Additional Chief Engineer, Region-II
91 A project to meet the increasing and anticipated demand of Jaipur City of horizon year
2021, funded by Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Japan Bank for International
Cooperation (JBIC) through construction of water treatment plant and pipelines to carry
water of Bisalpur Dam to Jaipur city.
92 SE City Circle Office North and South, EE Division North-I, II, III; Division South-I, II,
III; Division Project I & II
93 PAC Report No. 248 of 2013-14.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
144
Jaipur (ACE), Chief Chemist, including all Superintending Engineers (SE) 94,
all Executive Engineers (EE)95 and RUSDIP of Jaipur city.
Audit findings
The follow-up audit was conducted from April 2015 to July 2015 to assess the
present status of action taken and context submitted by PHED with reference
to issues raised in Audit Report and recommendations of PAC. Audit issued
94 letters to CE (HQ), CE (Special project) and ACE besides various letters to
divisional officers of PHED for providing information for follow-up audit.
However, inspite of repeated requests to Principal Secretary PHED and
Ground Water Department (GWD), reply of large number of letters were not
provided to audit. Apart from this, replies of the letters issued to divisions of
PHED were also not provided to audit. Supporting records/files relating to
replies of some letters were also not provided to audit. This lack of
cooperation to audit hindered the follow-up audit work. The major findings
that emerged based on information that audit could collect and examinations
made are, narrated below:
3.16.2 Adequacy of drinking water
BJWSP was scheduled to supply 400 MLD (360 for Jaipur and 40 for en-route
villages) water from January 2008 but supply of 67.5 MLD began from March
2009. The supply of water was gradually increased from 2010 onwards. The
quantum of water proposed to be transmitted to Jaipur City from Bisalpur
Dam was based on the allocation of 869 MLD by the year 2021.
Audit scrutiny (May 2015) revealed that the projected demand of water for the
year 2015 assessed by the consultant 96 and PHED was 719 MLD including 20
per cent estimated leakages/unaccounted for water (UFW). The projected
requirement for year 2015 comes to 822 MLD if actual prevailing UFW of 30
per cent is taken, as intimated (May 2015) by PHED. Thus, supply of water
being made (November 2015) for Jaipur city (490 MLD) is far below its
assessed requirement (822 MLD).
Details provided (June–July 2015) by all test checked divisions of Jaipur city,
revealed that present demand and supply of water was 540 MLD and 450
MLD respectively and per person water supply ranged between 74 and 140
litre per person per day (LPCD). Accordingly actual supply works out to 52 to
98 LPCD after reducing UFW (30 per cent) which is far below Central Public
Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO) norms of 150
LPCD.
Government admitted (November 2015) that presently, actual supply of
drinking water is 490 MLD and average service level is 163 LPCD. However,
total population of Jaipur city and division-month wise break-up of supply was
not provided, in absence of which details of 163 LPCD could not be
94 City Circle Office North and South.
95 Division North-I, II, III; Division South-I, II, III; Division Project I&II.
96 M/s Tata Consultancy and Engineering, an agency approved by State Government.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
145
examined. Reply confirms that supply of drinking water in Jaipur city is below
the norms. After deducting 30 per cent UFW, the actual supply comes to 343
MLD and average service level comes to 114 LPCD only.
This indicates that supply of drinking water was substantially less than the
CPHEEO norms (150 LPCD) as well as the projected requirement (822
MLD). Thus, the objective of BJWSP to provide adequate drinking water to
Jaipur city has still not been achieved (November 2015).
3.16.3 Over extraction of ground water
To overcome the problem of over extraction of ground water, the State
Government was required to pass a legislation and to establish a mechanism to
obtain prior clearance of GWD before boring of TWs.
3.16.3.1 Paragraph 2.1.7.1 of Audit Report highlighted construction of
TWs in non feasible zones 97, due to lack of co ordination between PHED
and GWD, resulting in over extraction of ground water. Audit recommended
establishment of a mechanism to regulate tapping of ground water. The
PAC directed the Department to make efforts to establish mutual
coordination with GWD and to control construction of TWs.
As per reports from Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), the ground water
in all blocks except Phagi and Dudu of Jaipur district has been over extracted
since 2004. All the three blocks of Jaipur city were declared notified areas i.e.
dark zones (Jhotwara-1999, Amer and Sanganer-August 2011), in which
ground water extraction was prohibited and restricted. However, information
provided (July 2015) to audit by four divisions (North-I & II and South I &
III), revealed that 259 new TWs were constructed during the period 2010-11
to 2014-15, even though sufficient water in Bisalpur Dam was available for
supply. This indicates that the Department is not serious in stopping further
depletion of ground water.
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015)
however, the Government did not furnish any reply (December 2015).
3.16.3.2 Planning
Drinking water problem in Jaipur City is chronic and acute. Water supply of
city was based on surface and ground water. Government of India had
circulated (January 2005) a Model Bill to all states which suggested
establishment of “Ground Water Authority” to regulate and control ground
water extraction and rain water harvesting. To overcome the problem of over
extraction of ground water, the State Government prepared ‘Ground Water
Management Bill 2006’ for regulation and management of ground water
extraction but this bill was not passed.
Paragraph 2.1.7.1 of Audit Report pointed out that in absence of a
legislation, there was no mechanism to obtain prior clearance of Ground
97 Zones having limited alluvial thickness and high density of existing TWs.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
146
Water Department (GWD) before boring of Tubewells (TWs) and to check
boring in over exploited area i.e. dark zone. In response to PAC query about
progress of passing the bill, PHED apprised (August 2014) that necessary
action regarding this bill is to be taken by GWD.
Examination of records revealed that no action has been taken to restrict the
extraction of ground water in Jaipur city and to pass the bill, as evidenced
from the fact that 259 TWs were established by four divisions (North-I & II
and South I & III) for extraction of ground water since 2010 onwards though
sufficient water in Bisalpur Dam was available for supply.
In response to audit observation Government replied (November 2015) that
this is related to GWD. The reply is not acceptable to audit as the Principal
Secretary (PHED and GWD) is the administrative head of both the
departments.
3.16.3.3 PAC recommended (July 2012) that extraction of ground water by
PHED and other private bodies may be controlled and monitored by all
relevant departments in a coordinated manner. PAC further recommended
to carry out survey to find total numbers of TWs established and working in
Jaipur city during last ten years for seize and seal of illegal TWs. It also
suggested to obtain details of TWs from Jaipur Vidyut Vitaran Nigam
Limited (JVVNL) for this purpose. Department intimated (June 2014) to the
PAC that office order has been issued (December 2013) to take necessary
action at the earliest.
Scrutiny by Audit revealed that no action was taken (August 2015) by field
offices. The office order of December 2013 was either not received or not
available in any divisional offices.
State Government intimated (November 2015) that Engineers of Jaipur City,
PHED are very much engaged in the day to day maintenance of water supply.
So it is very difficult to carry out door to door survey of private Tube wells.
JVVNL was requested (23 October 2015) to provide list of all such
connections released for tube wells.
Reply is not convincing as door to door survey was to be conducted by
collecting data from JVVNL and to verify them. Reply confirms that no such
survey was conducted so far by PHED to monitor ground water depletion as
per recommendation (July 2012) of PAC.
3.16.3.4 The guidelines issued by the CGWB prescribed that permission for
ground water extraction in notified area was to be obtained from competent
authority (District Collector). It further prescribed construction of water
harvesting system (WHS) in the premises within 45 days of issuance of NOC
for ground water extraction in notified area.
PAC directed (June 2012) PHED to take steps to construct WHS in all
Government and School buildings to recharge the ground water. PHED
apprised (June 2012) PAC that efforts in this direction are being made.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
147
Scrutiny of record of two Divisions (North-I and II) revealed (June –July
2015) that against 57 TWs, only 12 WHS were constructed from December
2011 to March 2015.
Government accepted (November 2015) that WHSs are being constructed over
PHED buildings and for other buildings the nodal agency is PWD.
Reply was not satisfactory because as per discussions held with PAC, the
monitoring for construction of WHS on all government buildings was to be
done by PHED. Further, reasons for shortfall and construction of 12 WHS,
against new 57 TWs along with details of total TWs and WHS constructed by
PHED were not provided to audit.
Thus, provisions of CGWB were not complied with. However, PHED
constructed WHS in its own buildings but construction of WHS in other
government and school buildings was not monitored by the Department (June-
July 2015).
3.16.3.5 Paragraph 2.1.1 of Audit Report pointed out that the ground water
extraction was 345 MLD (March 2010) and sufficient water was available
for supply from Bisalpur Dam (October 2010). There was allocation of 869
MLD of water to Jaipur city from Bisalpur Dam by 2021.PHED apprised
(June 2012) PAC that present extraction of ground water of 100 MLD would
be reduced and stopped.
Audit scrutiny (June-July 2015) revealed that 90 MLD ground water was still
being extracted from TWs as on May 2015.
Government confirmed (November 2015) the same. Thus, assurance given to
PAC was not fulfilled, resulting in to further depletion of ground water level.
3.16.3.6 PAC expressed (July 2012) its concern on sources and supply of
water in multistoried buildings and directed PHED to clarify the position.
In response to a starred question (No. 5878), PHED informed (February 2015)
the State Assembly that water connections in multi storied building is a policy
matter which is yet to be decided. This indicated that large numbers of
consumers in multi storied building are left with no option but to extract
ground water resulting in further depletion of ground water level.
Government intimated (November 2015) that PHED is supplying water to
multistoried buildings, which comes under approved plan of Jaipur
Development Authority (JDA) and are constructing WHS on plots having
size of more than 300 sqm. This indicates that other buildings left with no
option but to extract the ground water. Besides, a policy has also not been
framed in this regard.
3.16.3.7 The department was supplying drinking water through tankers. It
was reported in meeting held (December -2014) with the Collector, Jaipur that
water supply through 1000 tanker trips per day as a routine and 1400 tanker
trips per day during summer was being made. This indicates that there is

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
148
shortage in supply of piped water and that the same might be resulting in
depletion of ground water level. Details of the source of water for supply of
water through tankers were not intimated to audit.
State Government intimated (November 2015) that in most of the cases,
Bisalpur water is supplied through tankers which is not resulting in depletion
of ground water. However, details of quantity of water supplied from Bisalpur
and tube wells through tankers were not provided to audit.
Above facts indicated that though water at Bisalpur Dam was available from
October 2010 onwards but supply to Jaipur city remained low. No action was
taken to control extraction of ground water resulting in further depletion of
Ground water level ranging between 10.73 metres and 23.18 metres, as per
reports of CGWB, in Jaipur city during 2004 to 2014.
3.16.4 Reduction of losses in distribution of water
Difference between the quantity of water supplied to a city's network and the
metered quantity of water used by the customers, termed as ‘Unaccounted-for
Water (UFW)’ which has two components: (a) physical losses due to leakage
from pipes, and (b) administrative losses due to poor meter management.
Package VIII of BJWSP envisaged reduction in UFW from 37 per cent to 20
per cent by the year 2011. Test check of all Divisions (Jaipur) by Audit
revealed the following:
3.16.4.1 Damages /leakages of pipe line
Occasionally pipelines are damaged by departments/agencies like JDA,
JVVNL, BSNL etc., while executing their works. This results in leakages,
wastages and frequent interruption in water supply. PHED established a
system (May 2009) under which the work executing departments are required
to obtain no objection certificate (NOC) before undertaking such works. There
was however, no provision to enforce execution of these orders and impose
penal action on defaulters even though the distribution network of PHED
water supply in Jaipur city was about 22,000 km (April 2010).
Paragraph 2.1.13.5 of Audit Report highlighted that JDA, JVVNL and other
agencies did not obtain the required NOCs from PHED and damaged the
pipelines while executing their construction work. PHED intimated
(January 2012) PAC that the matter was being discussed in inter
departmental meetings and favourable results have been achieved
(i) Audit however noticed that none of the departments/agencies obtained
NOC from PHED before executing their work during 2010-11 to 2014-15.
Jaipur Metro damaged the pipeline while executing its works. Though Jaipur
Metro repaired damages and also deposited the amount for loss of water, but
neither did it obtain NOC nor did PHED insist for the same.
(ii) Audit observed that the information on the occurrence of
leakages/damages and their repair is reported in a channelised manner (from

Chapter III Compliance Audit
149
Junior Engineer to Executive Engineer) periodically i.e. on daily and weekly
basis. However, the information provided (June and July 2015) by four
divisions (North-I, III, South-II and III) revealed that though repair work of
leakages/damages amounting to ` 5.07 crore were executed during 2010-11 to
2014-15, but neither any department/agency applied for NOC nor the same
was monitored by PHED. Further reasons attributable to such leakages/
damages were not analysed by PHED.
State Government intimated (November 2015) that expenditure of ` 5.07 crore
was due to repair of regular maintenance/leakages and not due to damages by
other department. However, details of cases of leakages caused by damages or
otherwise, were not provided to audit.
3.16.4.2 Non reduction of unaccounted for water
The importance of reduction in unaccounted for water (UFW) was emphasized
in State Water Policy 2010. CPHEEO norms prescribe reduction of UFW up
to 15 per cent. In case of 24 hours water supply, UFW is admissible 98 up to
10 per cent only. A pilot project to provide 24 hours water supply in selected
areas and to reduce UFW up to 20 per cent was taken up (October 2013) by
PHED with the assistance of Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA).
Examination of records revealed that the UFW could be reduced to 30 per cent
only. Moreover, target of 20 per cent fixed for reduction of UFW was higher
than CPHEEO norms.
In absence of lack of assessment of production and distribution as mentioned
in para 3.16.4.4(i) and (ii) below and improper monitoring of leakages/
damages of pipeline as pointed out in para 3.16.4.1 above, the reduction of
UFW from 37 per cent to 30 per cent as claimed by PHED (May 2015)
cannot be said to be reliable. Moreover, as per MIS of PHED, actual
consumption of water was 270 MLD during 2014-15 against water supply of
450 MLD. Thus, actual UFW comes to 40 per cent.
Government admitted (November 2015) that actual reduction of UFW can be
done after implementation of action plan for entire city. Thus, there was no
effective progress in reduction of UFW.
3.16.4.3 Audit pointed out (paragraph 6.2.9.3) in Audit Report (Revenue
Receipts) 2008-09 that excessive UFW had resulted into loss of ` 88.78 crore
in Jaipur city and ` 234.43 crore in five cities (Ajmer; Jaipur; Jodhpur;
Kota and Sriganganagar) of Rajasthan during 2003-04 to 2007-08. PAC
asked for the action taken for checking water leakages by PHED. Reply
furnished (March 2014) by PHED was not considered (June 2014) complete
by PAC.
Audit noticed (June-July 2015) that proper attention was not focused towards
reduction of UFW. Water received from Bisalpur and TWs during 2014-15
was 450 MLD. The prevailing loss on account of UFW was 30 per cent (135
MLD) against admissible norms of 15 per cent. Thus loss beyond norms was
98 Para 10.10.2 (a) of the PHED Manual on Water and Treatment.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
150
67.5 MLD amounting to ` 26 crore 99 during 2014-15 and ` 130 crore for the
period 2010-15.
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015). The
Government did not furnish any reply (December 2015).
3.16.4.4 Meter management
Earlier Audit Reports 100 had pointed out various deficiencies on meter
management in PHED. PAC recommended that effective action for
replacing the remaining non functional meters should be taken up.
Department apprised (June 2014) PAC that senior officers have visited and
studied the system of major cities and a policy would be prepared on the
basis of the study report and action taken at the earliest.
Test check by audit revealed the following:
(i) Total connections in all test checked divisions as on March 2015 were
4,19,217. Of these 4,00,591 (96 per cent) connections were metered but in
2,45,618 connections only, meters were functional. Thus 39 per cent
(1,54,973) meters were non-functional while 18,626 (4 per cent) connections
were meterless. In absence of proper metered connections, accuracy of volume
of water distributed could not be assessed.
Government intimated (November 2015) that replacement of non-functional
consumer meters requires a heavy expenditure and PHED is billing such
consumers on the basis of average billing as per rules. This implies that
Department did not ensure proper and accurate measurement of water actually
distributed.
(ii) Bulk flow meters (BMs) were to be installed on all TWs. PAC was
apprised (June 2012) that BMs have been installed on all TWs.
Total number of BMs installed against 1359 TWs in Jaipur City was not made
available to audit. As per the details provided (June and July 2015) by four
Divisions101, only 144 BMs, of the 807 TWs, were functioning. In absence of
complete details of BMs, the accuracy of production and distribution of 90
MLD water of TWs, could not be ascertained.
Government intimated (November 2015) that keeping BMs on all TWs always
functioning will result in heavy O&M expenditure. Looking to the cost/benefit
of BM and as major chunk of water is coming from Bisalpur, the system
seems appropriate.
Thus assurance given to PAC that BMs have been installed on all TWs was
not found implemented, indicating the fact that proper mechanism for
assessment of production of water had not been established.
99 67.5 MLD=67500 KL*Rs. 10.55 per KL*365 days
100 (i) Para no. 6.2.7.4of Audit Report- 2008-09 (Revenue Receipt) Rajasthan.
(ii) Para no. 2.1.13.3 of Audit Report 2009-10 (G&SSA) Rajasthan.
101 North-I, II, III and South-III.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
151
3.16.5 Uneconomic production of water
As per State Government norms, production below 9000 litre per hour (LPH)
of a TW should be considered unsuccessful due to high consumption of
electricity by pumping machinery.
Paragraph 2.1.7.3 of Audit Report pointed out that the average production
of 1857 TWs was 7736 LPH. Out of 1857 TWs, production of water in 111
TWs ranged between 1800 LPH to 3600 LPH. PHED apprised (June-2014)
PAC that keeping the current ground water level of 30 to 80 meters, average
production of 7547 LPH water may be considered as sufficient. Further
1456 uneconomical machineries had been replaced.
Department intimated (May-2015) audit that 1050 TWs were being used to
supply drinking water in Jaipur. Test check (June-July 2015) of all units of
Jaipur City by audit revealed that there were 1359 TWs. Information provided
by only four units revealed that they were using pumping machinery on 778
TWs out of which 415 were uneconomical as detailed below:
S.
no.
Name of
Division
Total TWs
in use
No. of TWs producing LPH
Up to
3000
Above 3000 to
5000
Above 5000
to 7500
Above
7500
1. North-I 243 08 20 52 163
2. North-II 228 44 08 103 73
3. North-III 210 09 92 20 89
4. South-III 97 18 31 10 38
Total 778 79 151 185 363
Source: Divisions of PHED
Considering TWs producing more than 7500 LPH as economical, there were
only 363 (47 per cent ) TWs that were economical while 230 TWs (30 per
cent) were very uneconomical producing lower than 5000 LPH.
Government intimated (November 2015) that PHED has to maintain water
supply through such TWs till the capacity of Bisalpur system is enhanced. As
there is no cheaper alternative available as of now, TWs of less discharge are
being operated.
The reply was not acceptable, as only the uneconomical pumping machinery,
requires to be replaced.
3.16.6 Quality of water
3.16.6.1 Paragraph 2.1.10.1 of Audit Report highlighted that the number
of samples drawn for quality testing were short against norms. The results
of sample drawn were also not satisfactory. PAC recommended drawing
samples as per norms and carrying out tests of ground water as specified in
the Rule Book of CPHEEO. PAC was apprised (June 2014) that the water of
TWs was being supplied to consumers after mixing it with treated surface
water of Bisalpur in clear water reservoirs (CWR) and therefore, it need not
be tested at TWs as per CPHEEO norms.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
152
(i) Scrutiny by audit in test checked Divisions revealed direct supply from
TWs during 2011-15 as detailed below:
S. No Position as on
date
Name of Divisions Total No.
of TWs
TWs connected
with direct supply
1. 31 March 2012 North I, II and South I 782 587
2. 31 March 2013 North I, II and South I, II 1,096 878
3. 31 March 2014 North I, II and South I, II 1,077 840
4. 31 March 2015 North I, II and South I, II, III 1,050 844
Source: Record of PHED
Thus water from many TWs was being supplied directly to consumers without
its quality being tested.
(ii) The CPHEEO manual stipulates that samples for quality testing are to
be drawn once in a year for chemical tests and twice a year for biological tests
from each TW. The position of number of TWs, number of samples required
to be drawn and samples tested during 2014-15 is given below:
Year No. of TW
in
operation
Samples for chemical tests Samples for biological tests
To be
tested
Tested
actually
Shortfall To be
tested
Tested
actually
shortfall
2014-
15
1,050 1,050 244 806 2,100 614 1,486
Source: Chief Chemist, PHED & CPHEEO manual
Above facts indicates that required periodical tests were not being done and
supply of good quality water was not being ensured.
Government assured (November 2015) that PHED will try to get the samples
tested for each TW as per CPHEEO manual in future.
(iii) The parameters of safe drinking water prescribed in CPHEEO manual
were to be maintained. Chief Chemist PHED, conducted chemical tests of 244
samples drawn from TWs during 2014-15. Their test results are indicated in
the table below:
S. No. Subject Acceptable
limits
Test results found beyond acceptable
limits
Mg/litre No. of results
(out of 244 samples)
Per centage
1 Total Hardness 200 150 61
2 Magnesium
Hardness
<=30 235 96
3 Chloride 200 13 5
4 Nitrate 45 190 78
5 Total dissolved
solid
500 183 75
6 Calcium Hardness 75 168 69
Source: Chief chemist, PHED & CPHEEO norms.
The above table indicated that water samples (61 per cent to 96 per cent )
failed on all parameters except chloride (5 per cent).

Chapter III Compliance Audit
153
Government intimated (November 2015) that samples of representative tube
wells have been checked during the year 2010-2015.These were found to be
within permissible limits except for nitrate contents in few cases. PHED
assured that they will try to get a sample tested for each tube well as per
CPHEEO manual in future.
The reply was not convincing as maximum permissible limits of rejection, as
per CPHEEO norms, were applicable only where alternative source of
drinking water is absent. As water from Bisalpur is available for supply and
Water Treatment Plant (WTP) has been constructed, therefore, acceptable
limit of minimum level should have been applied.
3.16.6.2 The authenticity of water analysis greatly depends on sampling
procedure. Chief Chemist apprised (July 2010) Audit that it was not possible
for laboratory staff to collect samples from each TW.
It was noticed that guidelines regarding procedure for drawing, packing and
sending samples to laboratory and duties and responsibilities for drawing
samples for bacteriological, chemical and residual chlorine tests, have still not
been prescribed.
The Government did not furnish any reason for not establishing and
prescribing a system to draw samples from every source of water, though
matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015). In
absence of which, samples for quality test could not be drawn as per norms of
CPHEEO.
3.16.6.3 Paragraph 2.1.10.1 pointed out that repetition of same source for
drawing sample was to be avoided so that samples drawn may represent
optimum sources. PHED reported (May 2013) to the PAC that a rotation
register were being maintained to avoid repetition.
Rotation register was not provided to audit. In absence of the same, facts
reported to PAC could not be verified.
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015)
however, the Government did not furnish any reply (December 2015).
3.16.6.4 Replacement of polluted pipelines
In compliance to directions of the Hon’ble High Court Rajasthan, Jaipur,
Principal Secretary and Chief Engineer, PHED, surveyed the water supply
system of Jaipur City and noticed that sewer and water distribution network
are running parallel at some places.
Paragraph 2.1.10.2 of AR highlighted non completion of work of
replacement of polluted pipelines (March 2010). Department apprised (June
2013) PAC that 71 km polluted pipeline had been replaced and complaints
of pollution were not being received. PHED informed the PAC (June 2013)
that the said work has been completed.
Status of separation of drinking water and sewer network in Jaipur city was
not provided (November 2015) by Additional Chief Engineer (ACE) II to

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
154
audit. However, Division offices (North-I, II and South I) replied (June 2015)
that some lines were still to be replaced for which efforts were being made.
Plans for replacement of polluted pipelines amounting to ` 34.12 crore
(` 10.70 crore: North I and ` 23.42 crore: North II ) were under progress. This
indicated that the work of replacing pipelines and service connections was not
completed.
Government admitted (November 2015) that there are old and damaged
pipelines which need replacement and it is being done every year on priority
basis depending upon availability of budget. This indicates that the report
submitted to the PAC was not factually correct.
3.16.6.5 Cleaning of reservoirs
Paragraph 2.1.10.4. pointed out that reservoirs were to be cleaned annually
as per manual of CPHEEO but they were not being cleaned as per norms
and proper record of cleaning them was not maintained. Audit
recommended cleaning of reservoirs as per prescribed periodicity. PAC was
apprised (January 2012 and May 2013) that periodical cleaning as per
norms were being conducted and officers responsible for the same were
counter signing the records of cleaning of reservoirs.
(i) Scrutiny (June -July 2015) of records of four divisions (North I,II and
South II,III) by audit revealed that periodical cleaning of CWRs during the
period 2012-15, was not being done. Against 60 CWRs in four Divisions, 35
CWRs (58 per cent) were not cleaned during the period 2012-15. Further, 18
CWRs were not cleaned for more than 2 years. Scrutiny of cleaning record of
all divisions revealed that dates of cleaning of reservoirs with signature of
JENs and counter signatures of AENs were recorded in one division North-I
only; signature of JEN and Counter signature of AENs were not recorded in
one division (South III); two divisions (North-III and South II) did not
maintain the cleaning record and two divisions (North-II and South I) did not
provided the relevant record.
Government admitted (November 2015) that instructions have been issued to
all JENs to get the cleaning register counter signed. But copy of instructions
issued has not been provided to audit.
However, fact remains that the procedure reported (May 2013) to the PAC,
was not based on facts and is still not being followed.
(ii) In addition to above, for supply of safe drinking water, ventilation
spaces/windows on top of the reservoirs and covers are to be kept intact in
such a way that any animals, birds, reptiles etc. may not enter in to the
reservoir and contaminate the water. Three divisions (Project I, North I and
South III) intimated audit that ventilation spaces of all CWRs and SRs have
been covered completely and are intact. However, physical verification by
audit (June-July 2015) revealed that ventilation spaces in reservoirs in
premises of PHED at Panipech, Mansarovar and Pratap Nagar, Jaipur were
not found covered or the covers were broken. Water was also found
accumulated on the roof tops near the broken covers causing contamination of

Chapter III Compliance Audit
155
water in the reservoir, as shown in following sample photographs. This
indicates that remedial action to ensure supply of safe drinking water was not
taken as reported to the PAC:
CWR at Panipech, Jaipur CWR at Mansarovar, Jaipur
Government replied (November 2015) that work of repairing of ventilators at
Panipech and Mansarovar is expected to be completed in 15 days as reported
by ACE (October 2015).
The reply was not convincing as completion report of the work was not
provided (December 2015) to audit. Further, details of action taken in respect
of ventilators at other CWRs were also not intimated to audit.
3.16.7 Store and stock accounts
Paragraph 2.1.13.4 of Audit Report pointed out that stock balances shown
in the stock ledger were not in conformity with the quantities physically
available in store.
Stock worth ` 2.68 crore were charged to work but actually it was lying in
the store. PAC was apprised (June 2014) that monitoring over storage is
being carried out as per provisions of the GF&AR and PWF&AR. Online
controlling over store is also being followed.
3.16.7.1 Scrutiny of records during audit revealed that the irregularities were
still persisting (June-July 2015). Online monitoring system over store and
stock was also not established. Joint inspection (June 2015) by Audit team and
departmental officers of store of Division South-I revealed that material worth
` 4.90 lakh was issued on 31 March 2015 and of ` 11.55 lakh during 07 April
2015 to 09 June 2015 but gate passes were not issued. Similarly in Division
North II, Jaipur material worth ` 8.78 lakh was exited from store with a delay
ranging between 47 and 150 days from date of issue. This indicated that stock
balances shown in the stock ledger were not reflecting the correct picture and
provisions of GF&AR and PWF&AR were not being followed.
Government intimated (November 2015) that material was issued with proper
issue note and entries of issue notes were verified from stock ledgers. But
reply on audit observation on physical exit of material delayed, as per gate
passes mentioned above, was not intimated to audit.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
156
The reply was not in conformity with the assurance given to audit and PAC in
November 2010 and January 2012. Besides the irregularity was still persisting.
3.16.7.2 It was also observed that indent book, issue note book and gate
passes were being bought or got printed by divisions. It was seen that book
number and page number on each set of copies in all books were not printed;
total pages used in issue note books and gate pass books were different due to
which, it could not be examined that how many sets of pages were there in
books and how many were utilised or misutilised. It was seen that two copies
of issue note were not being issued except in one division and
acknowledgement of material in office of indenter was not being received; one
copy of gate pass was either not being provided to gate keeper to ensure that
quantities were exited from premises of store as per issue note or the gate
keeper was not verifying the physical exit of material as per gate pass. Thus,
there was no uniformity in working and monitoring over this procedure in
PHED.
The Government did not furnish any reply (December 2015)
3.16.8 Monitoring of implementation of programmes and internal control
3.16.8.1 Paragraph 2.1.13.1 of Audit Report highlighted that preparation
and maintenance of prescribed records and registers facilitates monitoring
physical and financial progress and implementation of programmes. Works
abstract, contractor ledger, agreement register, detailed technical estimate
were not maintained or were incomplete. Audit was intimated (November
2010) that officers have been directed to maintain proper records.
It was however, noticed that works abstract, major and minor works register,
agreement register, contractor ledger, land and building register and assets
register were still (June-July 2015) not being maintained or were incomplete.
These irregularities were pointed out regularly through Inspection Reports
also, but no improvement was found in the system.
Government intimated (November 2015) that officers are being directed to
maintain proper records.
The contention of government was not convincing because direction are being
issued repeatedly but there was no compliance as irregularities are still
persisting.
3.16.8.2 Paragraph 2.1.13.2 of Audit Report pointed out that AEN
(Vigilance) was posted in Divisional offices for detection of pipeline
leakages, damages and unauthorised drawls of water. No technical and
ministerial staff and vehicle was provided to AEN (Vigilance). Audit was
apprised (November 2010) that all efforts are being made to utilise the
services of vigilance.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
157
It was observed that technical and ministerial staff and vehicle has still not
been provided to AENs (Vigilance). AENs (Vigilance) were doing regular
duties and not the vigilance duties for which they were posted in the Division.
The details of cases of leakages, damages and unauthorized drawal of water
detected by AENs (Vigilance) during last five years was called for during
audit. The ACE intimated (May 2015) that factual details are not available.
Divisional offices did not furnish any reply.
Further, detailed duties and responsibilities of vigilance wing, comprising of
ACE, SE, EE and AEN have also not been prescribed and targets were not
fixed for its proper use and performance.
Government admitted (November 2015) that AEN vigilance is engaged in
monitoring work.
Thus, no efforts were found (November 2015) have been made to utilise the
services of AEN (vigilance).
3.16.9 Construction of WTP of lower capacity
3.16.9.1 (a) Paragraph 2.1.7.6 of Audit Report pointed out that WTP of
400 MLD was got constructed (March 2009) through RUSDIP against
administrative and financial sanction (October 1999) of 600 MLD. This
resulted in under utilization of clear water main pipeline, constructed with a
carrying capacity of 540 MLD. The PAC recommended to find out the
reasons of lack of cooperation between both the departments and extra cost
for enhancing the capacity of WTP upto 600 MLD. PAC was intimated
(August 2014) that estimated extra expenditure on enhancement of capacity
from 400 to 600 MLD would be ` 21 crore.
Scrutiny of records by audit, revealed that RUSDIP started tendering process
in May 2003, opened financial bid in February 2006 and issued work order for
WTP of 400 MLD in June 2006. Meanwhile, it was decided in meeting (May
2006) between PHED and RUISDP officers to construct WTP of 600 MLD,
but PHED gave its nod for WTP of 600 MLD in November 2006. PHED
intimated (June 2014) PAC that request made by PHED to construct WTP of
600 MLD could not be entertained by RUSDIP because work order to
contractor had already been issued in June 2006. However, audit observed that
RUSDIP continued to correspond with PHED and contractor as regards to the
cost of WTP of 600 MLD till March 2007. RUSDIP intimated (June 2006)
that as per estimate submitted by contractor, additional cost for WTP of 600
MLD would be ` 42 crore (` 40 Basic cost + ` 2 contingency) and requested
PHED to provide the funds. But in absence of a mutual consent between both
the departments, layout was finally given (March 2007) to contractor for WTP
of 400 MLD. This indicated lack of co-ordination between PHED and
RUISDP.
It was further observed that PHED issued (March 2013) work order of
` 122.50 crore without any contingency charges for increasing capacity from
400 MLD to 600 MLD by constructing a new WTP of 200 MLD. The work

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
158
was under progress as on date and expenditure of ` 103.34 crore has been
incurred (July 2015). This implies that increase in capacity by 200 MLD
would require expenditure of more than ` 122 crore.
State Government stated (November 2015) that the work order of ` 122.50
crore included construction of 2 Nos. of CWR, installation of pumping
machinery at Surajpura, transfer system, interconnection of pipeline,
strengthening of sourcing arrangements, boundary wall etc. If we compare this
cost in relation to indices of 2006-07, there will be no significant difference.
Reply was not convincing as the total cost of these extra works amount to
` 24.82 crore in the work order of ` 122.50 crore. Therefore, avoidable extra
expenditure works out (July 2015) to ` 57.68 crore102, which was incurred due
to construction of new WTP of 200 MLD.
(b) PAC also recommended to make a perfect arrangement so that cases of
lack of co-operation are not repeated. It was intimated (August-2014) to the
PAC that detailed directions have been issued (August-2014) to all
subordinate officers to avoid repetition of such instances.
Audit observed that subordinate officers are not concerned with such matters
as these are dealt with officers at apex level and hence issue of such
instructions to subordinate officers does not make any difference. Further
copy of instruction issued, was also not provided to audit
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015)
however, the Government did not furnish any reply (December 2015).
3.16.9.2 Back filling of trenches with unsuitable soil
Clause 4.3.9.8 of section 4 of contract agreement (BJWSP) for main pipeline
work provided that back filling of trenches of the whole transmission pipeline
was to be done by sand or gravel, free from rock or stone103.
Paragraph 2.1.9.2 of Audit Report highlighted that the excavated material of
trenches was ordinary rock, not fit for filling, for which payment had been
made at a higher rate. The contractor was allowed to use excavated material
for back filling in the trenches. The PAC recommended to take action
against officers for using different criteria for considering the strata, as
ordinary rock for excavation and as sand (free from rock or stone) for back
filling, which was unjustified and led to undue benefit to the contractor.
PAC was apprised (June 2014) that material used in back filling was
suitable for it as per provisions of agreement and it would not be proper to
take action against any officer. PAC concluded (March 2015) that it is
expected to take action as per recommendation and intimate to PAC and
Audit.
102 ` 122.5 crore - ` 24.82 crore (extra work) - ` 40 crore (initial estimate excluding
contingency charges)
103 Gravel or any other nodular material having dimensions not exceeding 75 mm occurring
in such strata shall be deemed to have covered under this category.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
159
Scrutiny (June-July 2015) of records in audit revealed that classification of
excavated material was got tested/examined from other agencies i.e. Malviya
National Institute of Technology (MNIT) and Geological Survey of India
(GSI). MNIT used the criteria of N-value and GSI used the criteria of quantity
of kankar in samples of excavated material. These criteria were not prescribed
in the contract agreement. The size of kankar was one of criteria prescribed in
agreement but this criteria was ignored by GSI though it mentioned the size of
kankar in test result of excavated material. Both MNIT and GSI classified the
excavated material under ordinary rock.
The contractor himself with the representative of Department, conducted
(October 2006) joint soil testing prior to excavation for pipeline under
provisions of agreement and ordinary soil was found up to a depth of 3-4
meters in more than 50 per cent of sample tests. The total depth of trench for
pipeline was also 3.5 to 4.00 meter. This indicated that there was contradiction
in results of tests carried out jointly by Department with contractor and by
MNIT/GSI but results of joint tests were ignored and results of MNIT and GSI
were accepted, resulting in higher payment for excavation.
Excavated material could be used for back filling only after prior approval of
representative of employer as per clause 4.3.9.8.4 and 4.3.9.8.6 of the
agreement. It was observed during audit that no such permission/approval was
obtained. Therefore, back filling of trenches by excavated material was not
covered by provision of agreement and was thus irregular.
Government intimated (November 2015) that it pertains to RUSDIP. The
RUSDIP also did not provide details of action taken or reason of no action in
compliance of recommendation of PAC.
The reply of Government was not acceptable as action was to be taken in
compliance of recommendation of PAC and since the BJWSP has been
handed over to PHED, the compliance was to be ensured by PHED.
3.16.9.3 Avoidable expenditure due to non-reduction of electricity load
Paragraph 2.1.11.5 of Audit Report pointed out the power load taken
(December 2008) by PHED from Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited
(JVVNL) for pumping station Surajpura was much higher (5000 KVA) than
actual utilisation (1512 KVA). It resulted in avoidable expenditure of
` 48.50 lakh, for the period December 2009 to October 2010. PAC was
intimated (May 2013) that load could not be changed before one year from
date of connection/last revision as per provisions of JVVNL, however, the
load has been reduced subsequently.
Audit scrutiny revealed (July 2015) that connected load was 10,000 KVA,
while actual maximum utilisation was 4,088 KVA, and the payment was being
made on 7,500 KVA (75 per cent of 10,000) @ ` 170 per KVA per month.
This indicated that the load was not reduced which resulted in incurring of

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
160
further avoidable expenditure of ` 1.72 crore 104 (approximately) from
November 2010 to June 2015.
Government intimated (November 2015) that now electric load has been
reduced.
The Department, however, failed to supply the details of sanctioned load and
actual load during 2010 to date and rate of load charges to examine the actual
position of extra expenditure.
3.16.10 Completion and performance of BJWSP system
3.16.10.1 Paragraph 2.1.7.5 of Audit Report pointed out delay in completion
of work of BJWSP transmission pipeline. PAC was apprised (June 2014)
that completion of work was delayed due to late issuance of permission for
work from Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL) and Forest department.PAC
was apprised (August 2014) that delay occurred due to late sanction of loan
by Asian Development Bank, change in place of pumping station,
permission of work from Hon’ble High court and permission on the part of
railways. The PAC did not accept the reply and recommended that action be
taken against responsible officers for the delay.
Scrutiny (May- June 2015) of records by audit of RUSDIP revealed that
permission for work was issued by IOCL and Forest Department after
completing the required formalities by RUSDIP. There was delay of 544 days
in completing the requirements of IOCL. It was also noticed that while
granting time extension to contractor, a list of reasons of delay and their
attribution to contractor/Department was finalized. The list did not include late
issuance of permission by Forest Department.
Relevant records of justification for delay in work were not provided to audit
for examination. Moreover recommendation of PAC has not been complied
with so far (December 2015).
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015)
however, the Government intimated (November 2015) that it pertains to
RUSDIP.
The reply was not convincing because BJWSP was handed over to PHED who
is parent office of project. Therefore reply was to be obtained by PHED and
provided to audit with its own comments.
3.16.10.2 Paragraph 2.1.9.4 of Audit report pointed out that heavy leakage
of water occurred during testing on 3 October 2009 on central transfer
pipeline of BJWSP. PAC was apprised (January 2012 and May 2013) that
the leakage occurred under test run which was conducted prior to actual
operation to find out any left over defect.
104 7500 KVA (-) 4088 KVA = 3412 KVA * 56 months * ` 90.00 (rate of 2010 taken for
calculation).

Chapter III Compliance Audit
161
(i) During audit scrutiny, it was noticed (July 2015) that contractor
repaired the leakage portion only in transfer pipeline whereas deficiencies
pointed out by technical inquiry committee were not rectified through out the
whole length of pipeline to make it risk-free. Moreover, the technical
committee had held all three agencies (consultant, department and contractor)
responsible for the leakage but penalty was imposed only on consultant and
no action was taken against departmental officer and the contractor.
Further, three more incidences of leakages (One in December 2011 and two in
January 2014) occurred after above repair by the contractor. Non-rectification
of deficiencies in complete pipeline might have resulted in these leakages.
However, technical enquiry reports showing reasons of these three leakages
were not provided to audit.
Government intimated (November 2015) that these three leakages of minor
nature probably occurred due to unequal settlement of soil and due to heavy
traffic load.
The fact remains that the actual reason of leakages and technical enquiry
reports showing reasons of these three leakages were not provided to audit
(ii) Performance test (P-test) of transmission pipeline was to be conducted
and remedial action was to be taken on the basis of test results as per
agreement. The contractor had given (April 2010) an undertaking at the time
of handing over of the pipeline to the PHED that P-test would be conducted
during O&M period of five years (20.04.2010 to 19.04.2015). However, it was
observed during audit that P-test had not been conducted so far (August-2015).
In absence of P-test, pipeline cannot be said to be risk-free. It was also
observed that two incidents of leakages occurred in transmission line during
O&M period which were repaired (January 2012 and January 2015) by the
contractor, though the pipe line was catering to 360 MLD only against rated
capacity of 540 MLD.
Government intimated (November 2015) that the matter pertains to RUSDIP.
The reply was not convincing as the project, after completion was handed over
to PHED and contractor had given (April 2010) an undertaking to conduct
performance test during O&M period. This test has still not been conducted
despite completion of O&M period.
3.16.10.3 Execution of work without issuing work order
Paragraph 2.1.10.3 of Audit Report pointed out replacement of 33,446 meter
pipe line only against the work orders for replacing 40,710 meter pipeline.
The PAC pointed out that work order of 9,945 meter was not issued under
sanction of 2007 hence correct position may be intimated. PAC was apprised
(June 2014) that work order of August 2006 was under progress at that time
and the work of 9,945 meter line was got completed against that work order.
Payment was made on approved rates and no additional expenditure was
incurred.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
162
It was observed that work of 9945 meter line was got executed from M/s
Ramgopal Panwar without issuing any work order under Rate Contract and
payment of ` 2.23 crore was made. The details of rate of payment was not
provided to audit (December 2015).
Government intimated (November 2015) that audit team has inspected the
work order of laying distribution pipeline of 3406 meters only. The reply was
not acceptable because the said files were pertaining to different work as
commented in para 3.16.12.4 below.
3.16.11 Non-revision of water tariff
Paragraph 2.1.11.6 of Audit Report highlighted non revision of water
tariff. Audit recommended to ensure realization of operational cost through
water charges. PAC was intimated (August 2014) that the work of revision
of water tariff is under progress.
Audit observed that requirement for revision of tariff was pointed out earlier105
in 2008-09 and importance of revision of tariff was emphasized in State Water
Policy 2010 also. However, it has not been revised so far (November 2015).
Government intimated (November 2015) that revision of water tariff is under
consideration of department.
However, reasons of non-revision of tariff for a long period have not been
intimated to audit. There was no justification for non-recovery of water
charges when 39 per cent consumer meters were lying non-functional for
replacement and recovery of operational cost was recommended at several
levels.
3.16.12 Delayed/incomplete implementation of schemes
3.16.12.1 Paragraph 2.1.8.3 to 2.1.8.6 of Audit Report pointed out that five
summer schemes (except Summer 2009) could not be completed till March
2010. In Summer-2007, the work of pipeline was pending. PAC was
intimated (June and August-2014) that works have been completed, put in to
use and drinking water was being supplied through these schemes.
Scrutiny of records by audit revealed that in a number of eight incomplete
major works pointed out earlier (2009-10), the quantum of works as provided
in five work order/sanction were not completed but those works were stated
to be completed and the completion certificates had been issued. The details
of such cases are shown in Appendix 3.9 . The detailed justification was
inquired on the basis of which completion of these works and achievement of
objectives of schemes/works through these works were declared and how
these works were being utilised, but required information and relevant record
were not provided to audit.
Government intimated (November 2015) that completion certificates have
been issued after commissioning of said works and benefiting the target
105 Para no 6.2.7.5 of audit report 2008-09 (Revenue receipt) Rajasthan.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
163
population. The saving in quantity of work order was due to reorientation of
pipeline due to receiving water from Bisalpur system. The urgent work only
was executed.
The reply was not convincing because relevant record were not provided to
audit for detailed examination of justification of deviation in quantity of work,
sanction of urgent work and benefits being provided against target/sanction.
3.16.12.2 Paragraph 2.1.8.5 of Audit Report pointed out that distribution
pipeline of 20 kilometer (km) at six locations under North wing was to be
constructed, but work of 2.6 km only was completed (March 2010). PAC was
apprised (June 2014) that 3.5 km line at two locations has been completed
with an expenditure of ` 34.47 lakh and it was being used for supply of
water.
(i) Audit observed (June-July 2015) that the works of these two locations,
2.5 Km line from Transport Nagar to Khaniya and 1 Km at Topkhanadesh was
completed in November 2009 and December 2010 respectively at a cost of
` 75.70 lakh and not at ` 34.47 lakh as intimated to PAC.
Government admitted (November 2015) that actual expenditure on total length
of 3.5 KM was ` 75.70 lakh only. But reasons of intimating expenditure of
` 34.47 lakh to PAC were not provided to audit.
Moreover, the Department intimated (June 2014) to PAC that works of
distribution pipeline for remaining 16.5 km were not taken up in compliance
of departmental order issued in May 2009, vide which it was decided to keep
such works in abeyance, for which tenders have been finalized but works have
not been started. However, copy of said order was not provided to audit.
Contrary to this, audit observed that the work of Topkhanadesh commenced
(25 November 2009) after issuance of the said order for which no reasons
were intimated to audit.
(ii) PHED incurred an expenditure of ` 49.09 crore during 2007-10 on urban
water supply scheme-summer-2007 phase II but execution could not be
examined due to required information and record of division South wing were
not provided (2009-10) to audit.
The PAC recommended to take action against officers who were responsible
for not providing the record to audit. It was apprised (August-2014) to the
PAC that the ACE, region-II, Jaipur has been appointed (August-2014) as
Inquiry Officer and action would be taken on receipt of inquiry report. The
final action taken in the matter was not intimated to audit. Thus compliance to
recommendation of PAC was still pending.
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015)
however, the Government did not furnish any reply (December 2015).
3.16.12.3 Paragraph 2.1.8.4 of Audit Report pointed out that the work of
pipeline from Fateh Ram Ka Tibba to Shastri Nagar (3300 meters) and
Brahampuri to Truck stand (4000 meters) were awarded in September 2007

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
164
and October 2007 respectively with completion period of four months for
each work, were not completed (August 2010). PAC recommended to take
action against defaulting officers for delay. Department apprised (August-
2014) PAC that work completion was delayed due to non-supply of pipe by
the supplier, for which recovery of ` 4.17 lakh has been made and late
issuance of permission for road cut. Therefore, it would not be reasonable to
make any officer responsible for the delay.
Scrutiny of records audit revealed (June-July 2015) that works of pipeline
from Fateh Ram Ka Tibba to Shastri Nagar and Brahampuri to Truck stand
were completed with a delay by 38 and 36 months respectively. The work
order for work of Fateh Ram Ka Tibba was issued in September-2007, but lay
out was given in January-2009 and required pipes were available in store
during that period. Further, details of recovery of ` 4.17 lakh was not made
available to audit.
Government intimated (November 2015) that delay in execution was due to
delay in supply in pipe and amount of ` 4.17 lakh has been kept in deposit and
case has been submitted to CE (HQ) for final decision.
The reply was contrary to the facts that required pipes were available in store
as intimated by Division North-I. Further, the reasons of delay in finalization
of case of recovery of ` 4.17 lakh submitted to CE(HQ) were not intimated to
audit by CE(HQ) besides relevant record of permission for road cut was also
not provided to audit by Division North I&II.
The facts remained that recommendations of PAC regarding recovery of
` 4.17 lakh and action against defaulters are still pending for compliance.
3.16.12.4 Paragraph 2.1.8.6 of Audit Report pointed out that works of
pipelines in Baiji ki Kothi, Jhalana, were incomplete (March 2010). PAC
recommended that the details of completion of work may be intimated. PAC
was apprised (June 2014) that total work of 7,229 meter with an expenditure
of ` 1.37 crore, had been completed.
Scrutiny of records revealed that the work of laying of 7,229 metre as reported
to PAC, was not completed, but actually 3,406.5 metre pipe line only was
completed against ordered quantity of 9,908 metre.
Government stated (November 2015) that as per record available the rising
pipeline for TWs were earlier laid vide order of May 2007 in making of total
7229 meter.
The reply was not convincing as the work order for 9908 metre pipeline was
issued in April 2008 to M/s Vinayal Enterprises and therefore it could not be
supposed to carry over the quantity of work order of May 2007 issued to M/s
Jugal Constructions.
3.16.12.5 The work completion report after completing the work of ‘Baiji Ki
Kothi’ was issued but quantity of work ordered, executed actually and date of
issuance was not recorded in work completion report issued by the PHED.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
165
Furthermore, it was also observed that “work completion and commissioned
certificate”106 issued in favour of contractor was containing details contrary to
the actual facts in record as detailed below:
S.
No.
Subject Actual Position as
per records
Position mentioned in
certificate
1 Work of 250 mm dia pipeline 240 mtrs. 2240 mtrs.
2 Total quantum of work 3406.5 mtrs. 5406.5 mtrs.
3 Total amount of work
completed
` 91.22 lakh ` 97.35 lakh
4 Date of completion of work Not intimated to
audit
15-07-2009
5 Non-completion of work against
work order
13.98 per cent of
amount of work
order
8.20 per cent of amount of
work order
Source: Division of PHED
This indicated that facts mentioned in work completion and commissioned
certificate were misleading.
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (September 2015)
however, the Government did not furnish any reply (December 2015).
3.16.13 Conclusion
PHED was unable to supply sufficient piped drinking water to Jaipur city.
Supply of drinking water, 52 to 98 LPCD, was below the norms of 150 LPCD.
Dependency of Jaipur on TWs to supply drinking water continued. New TWs
were constructed during 2010-15, though sufficient water was available in
Bisalpur Dam resulting in depletion of underground water. PHED constructed
water harvesting systems (WHS) in its own buildings only and construction of
WHS in other government and school buildings was not monitored by it.
Quality of water supplied from TWs remained problematic. Majority of
samples drawn from TWs failed on all parameters except Chloride. Water
from many TWs was being supplied directly to consumers instead of mixing it
with treated water. Guidelines for duties and responsibilities for drawing
samples for tests and manner of drawing, packing and sending samples for
bacteriological, chemical and residual chlorine tests have so far not been
prescribed.
Lack of coordination between PHED and RUSDIP resulted in construction of
WTP of substantially lower capacity. This resulted in incurring of avoidable
liability of more than ` 57.68 crore in subsequently enhancing its capacity
by 200 MLD. Performance test of transmission line, required to be conducted
before commissioning of pipe line, to make it risk free, was not conducted,
even though two incidents of leakage have already occurred.
PAC made 61 recommendations on the performance audit of which 54
recommendations were treated as executed as per report submitted by PAC to
legislature. Compliance of seven recommendations were still pending. From
the records provided to audit, it was noticed that 23 recommendations were
106 Performance cum Experience Certificate issued by PHED in favour of contractor.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
166
either not complied with or partially complied. In few cases the facts presented
to PAC were misleading. Further compliance to the pending recommendations
was still awaited.
One of the recommendations of PAC was to take action against the concerned
officers for non providing records/information to audit. However, no action
was found taken. Moreover, records/information on a number of issues were
also not made available to audit during follow-up audit.
Secondary and Elementary Education Department
3.17 ‘Implementation of Rajiv Gandhi Vidhyarthi Digital Yojana’
3.17.1 Introduction
‘Rajiv Gandhi Vidhyarthi Digital Yojana (Scheme)’107 was announced in
Budget 2012-13 by the State Government to promote/encourage the students
to acquire knowledge through information technology. Under this scheme,
laptops were to be distributed to students of Government Schools who have
passed out from class VIII with first rank, and also to students from class X
and class XII, holding ranks up to 10,000, in merit list of Rajasthan Board of
Secondary Education, Ajmer. The scheme also envisaged imparting ‘free of
cost’ training for operation of laptops and for providing e-learning audio video
CDs to the students to whom laptops have been provided. State Government
entrusted (June 2013) this work to ‘Rajasthan Knowledge Corporation Limited
(RKCL)108’.
The Scheme was again announced in Budget 2013-14 with additional
provision of distribution of tablet-Personal Computers (tablet PCs) valuing
around ` 6,000, for those students who have passed out from class VIII with
second to eleventh rank in their schools.
Year wise budget allocation for laptops was ` 0.50 crore (2012-13), ` 232.07
crore (2013-14) and ` 51.63 crore (2014-15). However, the budget for
2014-15 lapsed due to non purchase of laptops. For tablet PCs ` 178.53 crore
was allotted during 2013-14, out of which ` 177.92 crore was utilised.
Audit examined the implementation of the Scheme by conducting test check
(March-June 2015) of the records of Principal Secretary, School Education,
Rajasthan; Rajcomp Info Service Limited (RISL); (RKCL); Director,
Secondary and Elementary Education, Bikaner; District Education Officers
(DEOs) (Secondary); DEOs (Elementary); Block Elementary Education
Officer (BEEO) of selected district headquarters with two Government Senior
Secondary and two Government Upper Primary Schools (GUPS) from each
107 The scheme was initially introduced as Rajiv Gandhi Digital Vidhyarthi Yojana
(RGDVY) was renamed (May 2013) as Rajiv Gandhi Vidhyarthi Digital Yojana
(RGVDY).
108 An undertaking of Government of Rajasthan

Chapter III Compliance Audit
167
district, in eight (out of 33) districts 109, covering at least one district from each
of the seven divisions.
Audit findings are discussed in the following paragraphs:
3.17.2 Planning
• The scheme was announced in Budget 2012-13 but due to inadequate
budgetary provisions and absence of any action plan, the scheme could not
be implemented in 2012-13.
• The scheme provided distribution of laptop/tablet PCs to the students of a
school with first to eleventh rank of class VIII without fixing any criteria
of percentage of marks. This resulted in discrimination among meritorious
students as students in one school having lower percentage were extended
benefit of the scheme but students in another school having higher
percentage were deprived of the benefit.
• There was no monitoring of the prescribed trainings required under the
scheme for the students who have been provided laptops. Moreover, the
scheme did not provide for any training on Tablets PCs. The scheme also
did not address the practical aspects like availability of internet/ wi-fi
facilities for connecting students of rural and remote areas, with
information technology.
3.17.3 Implementation of the scheme
3.17.3.1 Distribution of Laptops
(i) The scheme of distribution of Laptops was started during 2012-13 but
due to inadequate budget allocation only 99 laptops were distributed against
53,642 eligible students.
(ii) During 2013-14, a total number of 1,08,184 beneficiaries (students)
were identified for two academic years i.e. 2011-12 and 2012-13 by the
Department against which 1,07,654 laptops were purchased and only 1,06,868
were distributed. Thus a total number of 1316 students were deprived of
laptops.
During a joint inspection (May 2015) by the audit team with Additional DEO,
Secondary I, Jaipur, and as per information provided by the Deputy Director,
Secondary Education, Jaipur and DEO-I, Secondary Education, Nagaur, it was
noticed that 647 laptops worth ` 1.29 crore, were lying in stores of these
offices since October 2013 and their warranty period of one year had expired.
These laptops could have been distributed to 1054 110 eligible students who
were not distributed laptops earlier because of their absence in distribution
ceremony or late submission of their names by school authorities or they
became eligible after re-evaluation of marks.
109 Barmer, Bikaner, Bundi, Dholpur, Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Nagaur and Udaipur.
110 Out of 1316 eligible students for the years 2011-12 and 2012-13, 262 received the laptops
later issued by Deputy Director, Secondary Education, Jaipur.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
168
Director, Secondary Education stated (October. 2015) that 647 Laptops
remained undistributed in the stock as the students did not apply for Laptops.
The fact remains that scheme was not successful or properly implemented.
Further, test check of records of DEO-I (Secondary) Jaipur (May 2015),
revealed that 100 laptops were issued to Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) Jaipur, and one each to Principal Secretary, Education
Department and Deputy Director, Secondary Education, Jaipur. As the laptops
were meant for distribution to eligible students, issuing them to other
offices/officers was against the scheme guidelines.
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government but no reply has been
furnished.
(iii) In 2014-15, for making the scheme of distribution of quality
laptops/tablet-PCs to meritorious students more practicable, the responsibility
of submitting appropriate proposals was entrusted (October 2014) to Director,
Secondary Education. But before getting any proposal from the Director,
Government decided (22 January 2015) to purchase 25000 laptops through
RISL for distribution to the students in February 2015, but RISL expressed
(January 2015) its inability to purchase laptops within such a short time. Later
the Director finalised and submitted the report in February 2015, mentioning
number of eligible students (16,346) under each category for the scheme.
A purchase committee was constituted and e-Tenders were invited in February
2015. In response, only one tender was received. Department decided (March
2015) to bring transparency in the tendering process and cancelled (March
2015) the sole tender. No further action was taken.
Thus, due to lackadaisical approach of Government in deciding the scope of
the scheme and completing tendering process, the purchase of laptops could
not be finalized which resulted in lapse of budget provision of ` 51.63 crore
and deprived the students from the benefits of scheme during 2014-15.
Director, Secondary Education stated (October 2015) that sanctions have been
issued for purchase of 40,000 laptops for Academic years 2013-14 and 2014-
15 and the distribution of laptops is in final stage. The reply accepts the fact
that the scheme was not implemented in the year 2014-15 resulting in delay in
extending the benefit to the students.
3.17.3.2 Purchase of tablet PCs by students
In 2013-14, Government decided to distribute tablet-Personal Computers
(tablet PCs) valuing around ` 6,000 to those students who have passed out
from class VIII with second to eleventh rank in their schools. State
Government issued instructions (April 2013) that instead of purchasing and
distributing tablet PCs, the eligible students may be issued account payee
cheques of ` 6000 each, to purchase tablet PCs on their own. The instructions
envisaged that a self declaration be submitted by the students to Principal of
concerned school, in support of purchase of tablet PCs. The cheques for Tablet
PCs were distributed to the students of academic year 2012-13.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
169
Information collected from Director, Elementary Education, revealed that of
the 2,93,664 eligible students, cheques to 2,93,423 students were issued and
out of this, only 1,52,253 students submitted self declaration. Hence, purchase
of tablet PCs by 1,41,170 students (48 per cent ) involving an amount of
` 84.70 crore, could not be ensured. The matter was brought to the notice of
Government but reply has not been furnished.
The distribution of tablet PCs under the scheme was discontinued from 2014-
15 as no further budget provision was made for Tablet PCs.
The scheme did not envisage verification of the tablet PCs purchased by the
students on their own. A joint inspection (April-June 2015) by audit with
Headmasters/Principals of concerned schools (Secondary/Senior Secondary/
Upper Primary schools) in each of selected district was carried out and 274
students to whom cheques were issued, were called by respective schools for
showing the tablet PCs purchased by them. It was revealed that:
• Only 43 students brought their Tablet-PCs for physical verification, of
which 28 Tablet-PCs were out of order.
• 13 students admitted that they had not purchased Tablet PCs.
The matter was brought to the notice of Government but reply has not been
furnished.
3.17.3.3 Wasteful expenditure on advertisement of cheque distribution
ceremony.
State Government decided (17 April 2013) to hold on 14 May 2013 a ‘cheque
distribution ceremony’ for Tablet PCs. The Department requested (13 May
2013) the Director, Information and Public Relation Department to arrange
publication of advertisements for this event in various State and National level
news papers.
Test check of the records of Secretary, Elementary Education and Director,
Elementary Education, Rajasthan, Bikaner revealed that the advertisements
were published in various State and National level news papers and magazines
late on 14 May 2013 and expenditure of ` 2.42 crore was incurred. Of this, an
amount of ` 0.89 crore was incurred on advertisements published in news
papers of Delhi and other states. Besides, advertisements costing ` 0.23 crore
were published in weekly, fortnightly and monthly issues of some magazines
after the date of ceremony (14 May 2013).
As the function was scheduled in district headquarters of the State, publishing
of the advertisement in news papers of Delhi and other states had no relevance
for the event. Moreover, it was improper to get the advertisement published in
subsequent issues of weekly/fortnightly/ monthly magazines, once the event
was over on 14 May 2013. Thus, the expenditure of ` 1.12 crore incurred, was
wasteful. The matter was brought to the notice of Government but reply has
not been furnished.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
170
3.17.4 Training programmes
(i) The scheme envisaged free of cost training to the students who have
been provided with laptops. The training was to focus on practical knowledge
to operate the laptops and acquaintance with internet usages. An e-learning
audio CD was also to be provided to each beneficiary.
Details of training programmes conducted in the State, were not made
available by Rajasthan Knowledge Corporation Limited (RKCL) who was
entrusted to impart trainings. However, all 194 111 students, who appeared for
physical verification of laptops/tablet-PCs informed (April-June 2015) to audit
that they had not been given any training. This casts doubt on the conducting
of training programmes by RKCL. Reasons for not imparting training were
called for from, Secretary, Secondary Education (July 2015) but reply has not
been furnished. (October 2015)
In absence of any training, the students were deprived of practical knowledge
of handling Laptops/tablet PCs and use of information technology effectively
in their studies. The e-learning material, Audio video CDs were also not
provided to students. The department also failed to pursue RKCL for
imparting training after distribution of laptop and ensure proper monitoring of
such trainings.
Moreover, the scheme did not provide for any training on tablet PCs. Thus, the
very purpose of the scheme to promote/encourage the students in technical
areas through knowledge of information technology, was defeated. The matter
was brought to the notice of Government but reply has not been furnished.
(ii) Hon’ble Chief Minister approved distribution of laptops under the
scheme to maximum 100 blind students. Specific training and software 112 was
to be provided to enable them to access the system without distraction from
outside noises and to follow talking software.
The Department distributed laptops to 72 such blind students. Rajasthan
Prarambhik Shiksha Parishad, with technical assistance of 'Site Savers'
(NGO), imparted training to 60 blind students in two stages 113. Remaining 12
blind students were not provided with any practical training, depriving them
from access of the system without distraction and follow talking software. The
matter was brought to the notice of Government but reply has not been
furnished.
3.17.5 Monitoring
Scheme lacks any provision of monitoring in case of purchase of tablet PCs by
the students on their own except submission of self declaration by them. It also
does not have any monitoring system for ensuring further usage of
laptops/tablet PCs. There was no monitoring of the prescribed trainings
111 152 students provided Tablet PC and 42 students provide Laptops.
112 Data card usable with sim card, Head phones with mike and Non-visibility Display
Access Software.
113 From 8-20th September 2014 and 3-14th November 2014.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
171
required under the scheme for the students who have been provided with
laptops. There was no provision for submission of any progress report on
implementation of the scheme. Directorate, Secondary Education, who was the
nodal agency for implementation of the scheme and responsible for
monitoring the scheme, did not monitor various aspects of implementation. In
absence of these mechanism, the objectives of the scheme remained
unachieved and the scheme proved to be ineffective.
Director, Secondary Education stated (October 2015) that orders were issued
from time to time for proper implementation and monitoring of the scheme.
The reply is not tenable as merely issuing of orders was not enough for proper
implementation/execution of the scheme unless there exists a robust system
for watching the compliance of orders issued.
3.17.6 Conclusion
The scheme of distribution of laptop was not well planned since its inception.
Because of this the department was able to distribute laptops only in one year
i.e. 2013-14 ( for academic sessions 2011-12 and 2012-13) out of test checked
three academic sessions. Even this distribution was not done properly as is
supported by the fact that 647 laptops ( ` 1.29 crore) were lying in stores since
October 2013, though 1054 eligible students were not distributed laptops.
Further, the students were left to operate the equipment themselves without
any practical knowledge of operating the system. Hence objectives of this
scheme were achieved only marginally.
In the absence of e-learning material and proper training, the students who
purchased tablet PCs also did not receive the intended benefit. The
distribution of Tablet PC has now been discontinued under the scheme.
Disaster Management and Relief Department and
Public Health Engineering Department
3.18 Failure in exercising prescribed checks and balances led to
dubious payment on water transportation
Due to failure of both, Disaster Management and Relief Department as
well as Public Health Engineering Department in exercising required
checks/verifications of claims/bills, dubious payment of ` 0.50 crore was
made to the contractors.
Disaster Management and Relief Department (DMRD), Government of
Rajasthan, issued Disaster Management and Relief Guidelines (September
2005) for handling various types of disasters/scarcities and providing assistance
to public. Para 9 of these guidelines pertains to providing drinking water in
notified water scarce areas. It envisaged providing drinking water in water

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
172
scarce villages through tankers/tractor trolleys/camel carts/oxen carts etc. Also
Para 9.9 envisaged the norms114 for correct distribution of water by contractor.
(A) Test check (July 2013) of the records of District Collector, DMRD,
Alwar and Nagaur and further information collected revealed that DMRD
notified (August 2009) 32833 villages of 26 districts as drought affected areas,
which included Alwar and Nagaur districts. District Collectors of these two
districts entered into contract with five contractors for supply of water in
affected villages and paid ` 0.26 crore (Nagaur: ` 0.12 crore and Alwar: ` 0.14
crore) during the period February 2009 to July 2010. During scrutiny of
payment vouchers, it was noticed that in most of the cases, the departmental
authorities did not verify and co-relate the entries of coupons with registration
certificates (RCs) of tankers. Copies of registration certificates (RCs) of the
tankers were also not attached with the claims. On cross verification of the
registration numbers shown in the bills, with the records of Regional Transport
Offices, audit found that either no tankers/vehicles were registered on such
numbers or the number pertained to scooter/motor cycle/car/jeep etc.
Thus, the Department did not follow the instructions of DMRD and payments
were made without verifying related records like RCs to ensure actual supply of
water through the tankers.
District Collector (Relief), Nagaur stated (March 2015) that an enquiry
committee examined the issue and in its report (March 2015) did not accept the
arguments made by the contractors and recommended recovery of ` 10.83 lakh
from the contractors. Details of such recovery are awaited (November 2015)
In respect of DMRD Alwar, State Government clarified (August 2014 and
September 2015) that no suspicious payment was made in transportation of
water. An enquiry committee in its report (July 2014) stated that the water was
actually transported during the period in question. In support of its findings,
Enquiry Committee collected RCs/ vehicle particulars of concerned tankers.
Reply was not tenable as in 40 cases (15 vehicles) out of 51 cases (21 vehicles),
the enquiry committee collected particulars of tractors and not the RCs.
However, repeated irregularities in respect of registration numbers etc. cannot
be accepted time and again. Moreover appropriate action needs to be taken
against the officers/official dealing in vouching and making the payment.
(B) Executive Engineer (EE), Public Health Engineering Department
(PHED) District Rural Division-II, Jaipur issued eight work orders (May 2013)
for supply of water in scarcity affected areas 115. Test check (April-May 2014)
114 The guidelines set a procedure of issuing three coupons from the place of water supply to
the tanker owner, by the temporary check post. The coupons would carry details of
quantity of water, departure time, date, tanker’s registration number and name of the
driver. One coupon would be retained as office copy and the remaining two copies would
be handed over to the tanker driver. He would obtain signature on the said coupon, of two
men and one woman residing in the village where the water was supplied. The tanker
owner would submit the receipted coupon along with bills and the payment would be
made after verifying entries/details with the office copy of coupon
115 Bassi (Rural), Jaipur (Rural), Jaipur (Municipal Corporation), Manoharpur (Urban), Virat
Nagar (Rural), Amber (Urban), Shahpura (Rural) and Jamuwa Ramgarh (Rural).

Chapter III Compliance Audit
173
of the records revealed following irregularities in implementation of these work
orders:
• In four cases, it was noticed that Special Condition No. 1 116 & 13117 of
tender document were not complied with. Consequently, the Department
failed to verify authenticity of the claims and made dubious payments of
` 0.22 crore. On cross verification of the registration numbers shown in the
bills, with the records of Regional Transport Offices, audit found that either no
tractors were registered on such numbers or the numbers pertained to
scooter/motor cycle/car/jeep etc or registered numbers pertained to other states
and were not verifiable in absence of RCs.
• Scrutiny of payment vouchers revealed that the same tractors supplied
water to two different villages on the same day and time which was not
practically possible. It also indicated that payments were made without
verification of documents as required under condition No. 4 and 5 118 of the
work order. The payment of ` 0.02 crore made to the contractor for 1910 trips
through five tankers was dubious.
State Government intimated (November 2015) that out of ` 0.24 crore,
recovery of a sum of ` 0.19 crore has been made and action for recovery of
balance amount of ` 0.05 crore was being taken.
Thus, due to a system failure of Disaster Management and Relief Department
as well as Public Health Engineering Department, in exercising required
checks/verifications of claims/bills, dubious payment of ` 0.50 crore was made
to the contractors. Audit has test checked a few cases only and possibility of
such irregularity in a wider area cannot be ruled out.
Medical Education Department
3.19 Undue benefit to the licensee
Failure of the department to put in place a transparent billing system to
ensure the genuineness of the payments and extended undue benefits to
the licensee.
Rajasthan Medicare Relief Society (RMRS), P.B.M Hospital, Bikaner
(licensor) entered into an agreement (July 2009) with Emkay Medicare
116 Special Condition No. 1 provided that the contractor would submit Registration number
of tractor and certificate of capacity of Tankers issued by Transport Department.
117 Condition No. 13 provided that the Assistant Engineer (A.E.)/Junior Engineer (J.E.)
would verify the coupons received from contractors with the office copy before
forwarding it the bill to the EE
118 Condition No. 4 provided that Junior Engineer would maintain a log book showing the
date-wise/tanker-wise/ trip details along with source of water and distance from source to
place of distribution. Condition no. 5 provided that AE concerned would ensure required
distribution of water and intimate the divisional office on daily basis. He was also
required to give report of tankers transported after verifying it from the log book of
tractors.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
174
Services (Licensee), Jaipur, for installing and running of 1.5 Tesla MRI & 64
slices CT scan machine in PBM Hospital, Bikaner on PPP basis. Clause 7 of
the agreement provided that 20 per cent of the total MRIs done in the MRI
centre and 20 per cent of CT scans done in CT Centre should be done free of
cost for the patients below poverty line (BPL) and other free categories as
referred to Licensee by Superintendent/Principal Medical College or their
authorised signatory. As per Clause 8 of the agreement, if the number of free
cases is less than 20 per cent, the licensee would not be liable to pay back to
RMRS, the differential amount and in case the number of tests exceed the 20
per cent limit, the difference in amount should be borne by licensor and should
be paid to licensee on monthly basis. Further, as per Clause 29, it was enjoined
upon the licensee to issue the receipts for the tests done, through computer as
per format approved by the hospital administration.
Records of Superintendent, PBM Hospital, Bikaner revealed that the licensor
was issuing tickets/prescriptions of free cases to patients below poverty line
(BPL) and other free categories. The licensee was submitting quarterly claims
of free cases exceeding 20 per cent to the licensor, along with monthly details
of free cases and total number of tests done on both the machines. Based on
these informations, the licensor was making payments of the cases exceeding
20 per cent, to the licensee.
Scrutiny of records (March 2015) of Superintendent, PBM Hospital, Bikaner
revealed that there was no mechanism with the licensor to know the actual
number of tests 119 done on both the machines. The licensor was completely
dependent on the information provided by the licensee for deciding the
entitlement of the licensee to receive claims of free cases, exceeding 20 per
cent of the total cases done. In absence of any monitoring system, there was
always a possibility of understating total number of cases to keep the number
of free cases less and number of chargeable cases more.
This was supported by the fact that Member Secretary, RMRS also observed
(March 2013) that since installation of the machines, the licensee had regularly
been submitting claims for free cases (exceeding 20 per cent). He, therefore,
directed the licensee to put in place a billing software programme, which
should be accessible to the Superintendent’s office for monitoring on daily
basis and which should have facility of non deletion/changes once the receipt
is generated. A firm ‘Pelagian Software Limited’ was awarded (August 2013)
the work of preparation and installation of billing software in four computers
at a cost of ` 38,115. However, RMRS made a payment of ` 4.46 crore
without ensuring the genuineness of the claims upto November 2014 on
account of free cases (exceeding 20 per cent).
State Government replied (September 2015) that the licensee was submitting
monthly category-wise information (paid-up; BPL; senior citizens; widows
and others as prescribed by Government) and quarterly claims for free cases
exceeding 20 per cent. Payment for excess free cases and recovery of lesser
cases was being made after verification. State Government argued that Audit
has not produced a single example where the patient was checked but his
119 Referred as well as other than referred.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
175
name did not appear in the list. It was further stated that the authorised doctor
verified not only the free cases referred by the hospital but also the total
number of cases and the payment made on the basis of rate of each test was
correct and justifiable. Though there was no provision of billing software in
the tender as well as agreement, but RMRS itself wrote to licensee to install it
and the same has been installed on 22 May 2015.
The reply was not acceptable as the licensee was submitting only category-
wise information as stated (November 2012) by the authorised doctor that he
was verifying only the unaudited list of patients undergoing tests free of cost.
This implied that he verified only the free cases referred to by the hospitals,
and not the total tests done by the licensee on both the machines. In absence of
a verifiable record of the total number of tests conducted on both the machines
and the correctness of the claims could not be ascertained. This might be the
plausible reason, the authorised doctor requested (November 2012) for
formation of a committee which would suggest an internal foolproof system,
to avoid untoward problems. In addition, in his report dated 9 April 2013, the
Programmer also listed shortcomings in data maintenance of licensee and
suggested for installation of a software for retrieving online data of the tests
done. But RMRS did not act upon the suggestions and continued to accept and
pass the claims submitted by licensee. In absence of a robust control
mechanism and an authentic billing software programme, it was not possible
to ascertain the genuineness of the claims. As the records of RMRS only (and
not that of licensee) were examined, audit could not identify cases where test
were conducted but not included in the list of patients. Moreover, the impact
of functioning of the software has not been intimated by the Department.
Thus, failure of the department to put in place a transparent billing system to
ensure the genuineness of the payments and extended undue benefits to the
licensee.
Sports and Youth Affairs Department
3.20 Non-adjustment/ recovery of loans and advances
Due to lack of proper/effective monitoring and accounting system, loans
and advances amounting to ` 3.72 crore along with interest, was not
adjusted/ recovered.
Rule 221 of General Financial and Accounts Rules (Volume-I), inter alia
provides that temporary advances may be given to the government servants
out of permanent advance for petty office expenses, purchase of stores etc.
The government servant shall render the accounts of such advances soon after
the purpose of the advance is accomplished and in no case later than four
weeks120 of such advances. In case where the account is not rendered within
120 The account of advances given out of amount drawn in Advance Contingent Bill, shall be
rendered ordinarily after four weeks except in cases where different period is prescribed
by the Government under Rule 220(5) of these rules.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
176
the maximum period of four weeks or the unspent balance is retained for more
than the period mentioned above, the cashier shall be competent to make
recovery directly from the salary of such government servants along with
interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum thereon.
Test check (December 2014) of records of the Rajasthan State Sports Council,
Jaipur (Council) for the period April 2007 to March 2014 and information
collected (April, June and August 2015), revealed that advances amounting to
` 7.26 crore were granted to Associations, Trainers, Sports officers and other
departments/officers, for organising sports activities, training camps etc., were
pending adjustment/recovery since 2011-12. It was also noticed that the
register for watching adjustment and recoveries of such advances/loans, as
required under Rule 219 (iv) ibid, was not being maintained by the Council.
Adjustment bills were not submitted in all these cases within the maximum
period of four weeks. As such the Council was required to make recoveries
directly from the salary of the officers concerned, or ask the associations/other
persons to submit their adjustment bills without further delay but no action
was found to have been taken.
The State Government intimated (August and October 2015) that under a
special drive for adjustment/recovery of outstanding advances, conducted
during the period 05 July to 31 July 2015, and from 1 August 2015 to 31
August 2015, an amount of ` 2.04 crore and ` 1.99 crore respectively has been
adjusted and efforts are being made for adjustment/recovery of remaining
outstanding advances of ` 3.72 crore.
Thus, due to lack of proper/effective monitoring and accounting system, loans
and advances amounting to ` 3.72 crore could not be adjusted/recovered.
Interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum, imposable under rule ibid on
these advances also needs to be ascertained and recovered.
3.21 Non-recovery of due amount
Non-initiation of any concrete action by the Rajasthan State Sports
Council/State Government against Rajasthan Cricket Association led to
non-recovery of outstanding dues of ` 29.71 crore.
‘Sawai Man Singh (SMS) Stadium’, a property of the Government of
Rajasthan, was entrusted to the ‘Rajasthan State Sports Council (Council)
Jaipur’, registered under the Rajasthan Societies Registration Act 1958, with
the condition that the council would maintain a ledger for transactions related
to the stadium which would be used on a commercial basis. In the eventuality
of any surplus, this should be paid to the State Government to compensate it
for meeting the cost of maintenance and repair.
Test check (December 2014) of the records of the Council for the period April
2007 to March 2014 and information collected (March 2015) revealed that the
Council had been letting out the stadium to sports bodies at rates fixed by the

Chapter III Compliance Audit
177
Council from time to time. ‘Rajasthan Cricket Association (RCA)’, registered
under Rajasthan Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of
Association) Act 2005, submitted (August and October 2005) to the Council, a
proposal to develop a cricket academy at Jaipur and executed (30 December
2005) a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with RCA, wherein the
Council allowed RCA to use south pavilion and the play field situated in the
north-east of SMS stadium upto 31 December 2009. According to MoU, RCA,
inter alia , was to develop infrastructure facilities, for imparting training,
develop and maintain facilities in the south pavilion at inter-national standard,
incur all recurring and non recurring expenditure on development, renovation
and refurbishment and to pay electricity charges for electricity consumed by it,
on the basis of a separate meter/sub meter that the council shall install.
Further, it was to pay to council a match fee, to be mutually determined, when
a domestic or international match is played on the ground, keeping in mind the
income of the RCA from the match Council and RCA were jointly to ensure
that if the area (south pavilion and the play field situated in the north-east of
SMS stadium) or any part thereof is used for advertising, other than during
match time, then this was to be only with the prior permission of the Council
and the revenue from such advertisement was to be shared between the council
and RCA in the ratio of 1:3. The MoU was to expire on 31 December 2009.
RCA requested (May-July 2007) State Government for extending MoU for use
of north and east blocks of the stadium, which were constructed by them, as
the same were required for keeping ground maintenance machines like rollers,
super sopper and grass cutting machines. RCA further requested (July 2007)
that Cricket Control Board of India, to which RCA was affiliated, had laid
down the condition of extending financial assistance to only those associations
which have their own land or permission to use land for minimum period of 15
years and therefore, MoU may be extended for a period of 15 years.
Accordingly, State Government directed the Council (August 2007) to extend
the MoU on same terms and conditions of earlier MoU (December 2005).
Accordingly, Council entered into two MoUs on 3 August 2007, one for
extending the earlier MoU (December 2005) upto 21 July 2012, and another
for allowing RCA to use the academy premises developed by them, upto 21
July 2023, notwithstanding the fact that RCA had not paid its dues amounting
to ` 3.70 crore (August 2007).
Scrutiny of records revealed that the outstanding amount on account of match
fee and revenue generated from advertisement and hoardings, rent for use of
space and flood lights, electricity charges etc. accumulated to ` 29.09 crore121
by the end of 2012. The Council kept writing to RCA (September 2005 to
June 2012) for payment of these dues. RCA contested certain items 122, shown
121 ` 3.44 crore : prior to execution of MoU in December 2005 and ` 25.65 crore : after said
MoU
122 ` 8.81 lakh: cases were very old and pertain to old regime (1993-2004); ` 1210.21 lakh:
revenue not earned by RCA on these matches; ` 100 lakh: spent in renovation of south
block of the stadium; ` 3.56 lakh calculations of dues were arbitrary and ( ` 1360 lakh:
construction and maintenance undertaken by RCA.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
178
in the statement of dues furnished by the Council. Due to these underlying
differences between the Council and RCA, there was a serious dispute which
affected conduct of cricket matches in the State. Consequently a Public
Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed before Hon’ble High Court (HC), wherein
the HC disposed off the PIL (February 2013) with the direction that a fresh
MoU would be signed between State of Rajasthan and RCA within three days,
in respect of holding ‘Indian Premier League (IPL) Matches 2013’ in SMS,
without imposing any condition. RCA would pay ` 20 lakh for each match
through post dated cheques for IPL matches. As regards to any inter se dispute
about arrears between the Council and RCA, the same would be settled by
parties in accordance with the law.
On the direction of HC, a fresh MoU between State Government and RCA
was executed (February 2013) for a period of five years valid upto 28
February 2018. Para 2.10(B) of the MoU provided that a fixed amount for the
use of stadium for matches and other international sports events (excluding
IPL series 2013 for which RCA paid eight post dated cheques of ` 20 lakh
each for eight matches), was to be recovered on the basis of decision to be
taken by the State Government by 30 June 2013. These charges were to be
reviewed by 30 June every year. Regarding the other disputes relating to dues
against RCA and to prevent such disputes in the future, the State Government
appointed (5 February 2013) Justice Shri N. M. Kasliwal, as Arbitrator
between the Council and RCA so as to determine the dues and give award
within 30 days. There was no progress in arbitration case.
After execution of the fresh MoU (2013), a further sum of ` 0.62 crore
became due on account of renting of premises (September- October 2013) for
Champions League T-20 match and one day cricket matches (India v/s
Australia). But no payments were made by RCA inspite of further reminders
(October 2013 to May 2015).Thus a total sum of ` 29.71 crore, was
outstanding against RCA from January 1993 to October 2013, chargeable
from time to time, as on date (May 2015).
It was observed that the Council neither rebutted the arguments of RCA as
stated above, nor called on RCA to arrive at a mutually agreed settlement of
the claim. Council had also not initiated any legal action under Rajasthan
Public Debt Recovery Act 1952. Further, the Council was not reflecting this
amount in its Final Accounts as the Auditor has held the amount as ‘not
ascertainable’.
Thus, a very partial and lenient approach of the Council towards RCA in
entering into MoU after MoU and not pursuing its legal dues accruing over
the time, resulted in accumulation of unrecovered amount of ` 29.71 crore.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
179
State Government while accepting the facts stated (August 2015) that
outstanding amount is still to be recovered and efforts are being made for
recovering the same.
Fact remains that non-initiation of any concrete action by the Council /State
Government against Rajasthan Cricket Association led to non-recovery of
outstanding dues of ` 29.71 crore (December 2015). There was a further loss
of interest on this amount as no provision for charging interest on the
outstanding amount was made in the MoU.
Tribal Area Development Department
3.22 Hostel buildings not utlised for intended purpose
Non-utilisation of hostel buildings resulted in unproductive expenditure of
` 3.59 crore and deprived scheduled tribes boys/girls students of hostel
facilities.
Tribal Area Development Department (TAD), Government of Rajasthan
accorded administrative sanctions for construction of boys/girls hostels in
Government Colleges of tribal areas, out of the residual funds received from
Government of India under Section 275 (1) 123 of Constitution of India.
Test-check (January 2015) of records of Additional Commissioner, TAD,
Udaipur, and further information collected (May 2015) from TAD, revealed
that ten hostels (Banswara: 5; Dungarpur: 1; Pratapgarh: 2; Sirohi: 1; and
Udaipur: 1) for scheduled tribe boys/girls were constructed (1996 to 2007) by
TAD, after incurring an expenditure of ` 4.83 crore and handed over (1997 to
2009) to the respective college administration.
Of these only two hostel buildings (Udaipur and Sirohi) were being utilised for
intended purpose. 5 hostels in 5 districts were occupied by other
departments/agencies. Remaining three hostel buildings were lying unutilized.
Thus eight hostel buildings were either lying non operative or not being
utilised for intended purpose. The department incurred an expenditure of
` 3.59 crore on construction of these eight hostel buildings. Respective Project
Officers of TAD intimated (May-June 2015) that these hostels could not be
made functional due to non-allotment of funds and non-availability of hostel
staff/other facilities.
State Government accepted (October 2015) the facts that three buildings were
not being utilised and remaining five being utilised for other purposes. Efforts
for utilization of these hostels for intended purpose was not intimated.
123 Under Article 275(1), 100 per cent grants are provided to the states by the GoI from the
consolidated fund of India on the basis of scheduled tribe population of the state.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
180
Thus, eight hostel buildings were not being utilized for the purpose of
providing hostel facilities to tribal students. This indicated that either the
hostels for tribals were constructed without any requirement or the
authorities/department could not ensure occupancy by providing staff and
other facilities. This has resulted in non utilisation of hostel buildings and
unproductive expenditure of ` 3.59 crore and also deprivation of tribal
students of hostel facilities.
Urban Development and Housing Department
3.23 Avoidable extra expenditure on construction of sewerage line due
to change of alignment
Non-preparation of detailed technical estimates and detailed surveys/
investigations and not ensuring availability of dispute free land/sites led to
increase in length of the pipe line, cost escalation and reduction in size of
sewer pipe line, resulting in avoidable extra expenditure of ` 6.65 crore.
Rules 289 of Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules (Vol.-1) provide that
before preparation of detailed technical estimates, detailed surveys and
investigations must be carried out and working designs/drawings should be
prepared. Further, Rule 351 ibid provided that no work should be commenced
on land which has not been duly made over by the responsible civil officers.
Test check (September 2014-May 2015) of records of Jaipur Development
Authority (JDA) for the period 2005-10, revealed that the project report of
‘Providing Sewerage network of Jaipur city under Jawahar Lal Nehru National
Urban Renewal Mission’, included the work of providing, laying and jointing
of 16,600 meter124 pipe line for main sewerage trunk line for area between 200
feet bypass, Sikar Road/railway line and Ajmer Railway line at a cost of ` 8.53
crore. The project was to cater the demand of next 30 years (upto 2039), souls
of 8.32 lakh. This work was divided into two parts viz main trunk line in sector
31and 33 from Lohamandi to Kalwar road and main trunk line in sector 32 and
54 of Niwaru/Kalwar road area. Both these works were awarded (September
2007) to M/s Vindravan Construction Company, Jaipur (contractor) at ` 3.89
crore and ` 3.92 crore respectively with stipulated dates of commencement and
completion as 15.09.2007 and 14.09.2008. The work of main trunk line in
sector 31 and 33 (Lohamandi to Kalwar road) was completed (October 2009) at
a cost of ` 3.93 crore.
While the work of main trunk line of sector 32 and 54 was in progress, the
Department approved (June 2008) new route for the pipe line via Hathoj (sector
54) due to shifting of Sewerage Treatment Plant (STP) from Champapura to
124 500 mm dia pipe: 3950 metre; 1000 mm dia pipe: 2600 metre; 1200mm dia pipe : 4960
metre and 1600 mm dia pipe: 5090 metre.

Chapter III Compliance Audit
181
village Gajadharpura (on bank of Bandi River), on account of non-
availability125 of land for proposed STP at village Champapura and to cover
a wider area. This led to redesigning of outfall sewer line and change in length
and size of pipe line. This diversion resulted in increase in the length of
proposed sewerage line by 6,000 metre. The incomplete work (sector 54) 126
was further divided into two parts viz (i) main outfall sewer line of 1,200 mm
dia (Kardhani- Hathoj to Champapura) and (ii) main outfall sewer line of 1,600
mm dia (Champapura-Gajadharpura to Bandi river). Both the works were
awarded (October 2008) afresh to the same contractor (M/s Vindravan
Construction Company) at ` 4.20 crore and ` 4 crore with stipulated date of
completion as 21.10.2009 and 22.10.2009 respectively.
First part of the work from Kardhani-Hathoj to Champapura was completed
(June 2009) at a cost of ` 3.58 crore. In case of second part of the work
(Champapura-Gajadharpura to Bandi River), during execution, JDA noticed
(21 March 2009) that the available site was only 16 feet wide and not fit for a
sewer line of 1,600 mm, as invert level of the sewer line was emerging above
the ground level which may cause closure of the parallel road along the
alignment and from Kalwar to Gajadharpura. Therefore, after laying 1672.50
metre long pipe line of 1,600 mm, it was decided (April 2009) to reduce the
size of pipeline from 1600 mm to 1000 mm which would cater the need for
next 15 years i.e. upto year 2024.
However, the work was held up for more than 21 months due to land dispute in
main outfall sewer line (from STP to Bandi river), after laying of 2366.85
metre sewer line (1672.50 metre: 1600 mm dia and 694.35 metre: 1000 mm
dia) and incurring an expenditure of ` 2.50 crore (March 2010). Consequently
the work was stopped (January 2012).
The left over work of downstream portion was finally allotted (July 2012) to
another contractor M/s Shashi Construction, Jaipur at ` 0.64 crore with a
provision of double line of 1000 mm dia pipe line and got executed at a cost of
` 0.75 crore. Laying of double line of 1000 mm dia in the downstream portion
was not justified, especially when sludge itself was fed in the STP through
single line of 1000 mm dia on upper stream as merely treated water remained
to be released in the downstream and led to incurring an unfruitful expenditure
of ` 0.38 crore (half of ` 0.75 crore).
The position of execution of the whole work of main trunk line of sector 32 and
54 is depicted in following table:
125 As per office note (19.04.2008), the Sector plans of Sector 32 and 54 were approved
many years ago but Sector road was not yet constructed and action for acquisition of land
for Sector road had also not yet started.
126 The existing work of sector 32 was finalised (July 2010) after incurring an expenditure of
` 3.74 crore.

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
182
(` in lakh)
S.
No.
Name of the work Name of the
firm
Date of
allotment of
work
Amount
of work
order
Actual
expen-
diture
Remark
1 Main sewer lines in
sector 32 and 54
(Niwaru/Kalwar
road area)
M/s
Vindravan
Construction
Co.
07.09.2007 391.78
(Original
cost of
work)
374.38 Route of pipe line
changed due to non-
acquisition of land for
proposed STP,
increasing length of
pipe line by 6,000 mts.
Not completed
2 Main outfall sewer
line (Kardhani
Hathoj to Chakbad
Champapura) Jaipur
(1200 mm dia)
M/s
Vindravan
Construction
Co.
13.10.2008 419.72 357.58 First part of remaining
work due to change in
route/alignment.
Completed
3 Main outfall sewer
line (Champapura,
Gajadharpura to
Bandi river)
(1600 mm dia)
M/s
Vindravan
Construction
Co.
14.10.2008 399.56 250.27 Change of dia from
1600 mm to 1000 mm
in second part of
remaining work.
Work held up due to
land dispute.
Not completed
4 Remaining work of
main sewer line of
Gajadharpura to
Bandi river
M/s Shashi
Construction
24.07.2012 63.70 74.83 Work allotted after
settlement of land
dispute.
Completed
Final cost of
the work
1057.06
This indicated that before preparation of detailed technical estimates and
allotment of work, surveys and investigations for availability of dispute free
land were not carried out and working designs/drawings were not prepared.
This led to increase in length of the pipe line by 36 per cent (6,000 meteres),
reduction of size of sewer pipe from 1600 mm to 1000 mm and cost escalation
due to cancellation/re-allotment of works, resulting in avoidable extra
expenditure of ` 6.65 crore127.
State Government, while accepting the facts, stated (September and November
2015) that the site of STP was finalised at village Gajadharpura instead of
village Champapura (considered provisionally), on sound technical grounds,
on account of more coverage area and availability of government land. It was
further, stated that additional cost was incurred due to extended length of
outfall sewer at village Gajadharpura and tender premiums. State Government
also stated that the works of sewerage network and STP for the North-West
area of Jaipur city have been made operational since September 2013 and
entire sewerage system is fully functional and working efficiently.
The reply was not acceptable as in original DPR, STP was proposed to be
constructed at Champapura after ensuring availability of land by the
Department. There was no indication on record that land was not available at
127 Final cost of work: ` 10.57 crore (-) original cost of work: ` 3.92 crore

Chapter III Compliance Audit
183
the proposed site. This implies that shifting of location to village Gajadharpura
was not on technical ground or availability of land. The coverage of wider
area, as claimed by the Department, was mainly the colonies developed by
private developers (Shushant City, Manglam City, Global City etc.).
Moreover, the project was designed to cater the demand of next 30 years but
due to laying of the pipe line of 1000 mm dia (against 1600 mm dia approved),
this will cater the need of 15 years only and presently the population in the
nearby area is sparse. Hence the argument of the Government that sewerage
system is fully functional and working efficiently was not correct.
Thus, due to non-following the provisions of Rule 289 and 351 ibid, shifting
of location of STP, redesigning of outfall sewer line and change in length and
size of pipe line had resulted in an avoidable extra expenditure of ` 6.65 crore.
Women and Child Development Department
3.24 Non-construction of Anganwadi Centres
Failure of the department in monitoring construction work of Anganwadi
Centres (AWCs) led to incurring of unfruitful expenditure of ` 22.61
crore on construction of AWCs and also in blocking of funds of ` 14.27
crore depriving the beneficiaries of the intended basic facilities.
Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Rajasthan, Jaipur, submitted
(July 2008) a proposal to Government of Rajasthan for construction of 1140
Anganwadi Centres (AWCs) with financial assistance from Rural
Infrastructure Development Fund-XV (RIDF-XV) through ‘National Bank of
Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)’. As per the proposal, the
construction work was to be executed in three phases at a total cost of ` 35.91
crore during 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 (380 AWCs at a cost of ` 11.97
crore in each phase). Of this, 85 per cent of construction cost was to be met
from RIDF loan and remaining 15 per cent was to be contributed by the State
Government. The work was to be executed by respective Zila Parishads
(ZPs).
NABARD sanctioned interest bearing loan of ` 9.73 crore (December 2009)
and ` 20.39 crore (January 2012) (@ 6.50 per cent) for 2009-10 (380 AWCs)
and 2011-12 (659 AWCs) respectively. No funds were released for 2010-11.
ICDS transferred in P.D. accounts of ZPs, ` 12.89 crore for 2009-10 in March
2010 and ` 23.99 crore for 2011-12 in March 2012 for construction of 354 and
656 AWCs respectively. The amount so transferred also included the State
Government’s contribution. In addition, ICDS also transferred ` 2.90 crore for
142 AWCs (amongst 354 AWCs) in January 2012, due to increase in unit cost.
Funds were transferred to ZPs with specific condition that keeping in view the

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
184
trend of increase in unit cost, ZPs should ensure completion of construction
work of AWC building within sanctioned unit cost and within three months of
commencement of work.
Test-check of records (July-August 2013) of Director, ICDS, Jaipur and
further information collected (October 2015) revealed the position of the funds
released and construction of AWCs, as of March 2015, as under:
(` in crore)
Year of
sanction
Sanctioned by
NABARD
Transferred by
ICDS to ZPs
(along with State
share)
Work taken up
by ZPs
Present status of AWCs (No.) Total
Expen
diture
incurred
Amount
returned
by the
ZPs to
ICDS
Funds
lying
unutilised
with ZPs
(5-(11+12))
Comp
-leted
Work in
progress
Cancelled
/not
started
No.
(AWCs)
Amount No. Amount No. Amount
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
2009-10 354 12.89 354 12.89 354 12.89 260 NP 69 NP NP NP
2010-11 - - - - - - - - - - - -
2011-12 656 23.99 656 23.99 656 23.99 309 NP 316 NP NP NP
Total 1010 36.88 1010 36.88 1010 36.88 569 56 385 22.61 9.26 5.01
NP- Not provided
The above table shows that ZPs took up the work of construction of 1010
AWCs (` 36.88 crore) during the period 2009-12. Of this, 569 AWCs only
were completed while 56 AWCs were still under construction after incurring
an expenditure of ` 22.61 crore and after a lapse of more than three to five
years. Construction work of 385 AWCs was cancelled/not started by ZPs.
` 9.26 crore was returned to ICDS and a balance of ` 5.01 crore remained
unutilized in PD accounts of ZPs.
Further, it was intimated (October 2014) by Joint Director, ICDS that all 1,039
AWCs were running in rented buildings. This implies that 569 AWCs
completed were also not being utilized by the Department. However, updated
position and the amount being paid as rent for these AWCs was not intimated
(December 2015).
Thus, the department has not only failed to take up the construction work of
385 AWCs but also failed to monitor the ongoing construction work of 56
AWCs. It also failed to ensure utilization of 569 completed AWCs. This had
resulted in incurring of unfruitful expenditure of ` 22.61 crore on construction
of AWCs and also in blocking of funds of ` 14.27 crore (` 9.26 crore + ` 5.01
crore).
State Government while admitting the facts stated (October 2015) that work of
569 AWCs have since been completed and 56 AWCs were under progress for
which respective Chief Executing Officers of ZPs are being requested from
time to time to complete the work. Work of 385 AWCs has been cancelled and

Chapter III Compliance Audit
185
` 9.26 crore in respect of these works have been refunded by ZPs to
government account. Action for handing over of completed AWCs to ZPs was
in progress.
The reply establishes that there was absence of effective monitoring due to
which, construction work of 56 AWCs could not be completed within the
stipulated time. Work of 378 AWCS was cancelled while it could not be
started for 7 AWCs. Further, the Department failed to utilise completed
AWCs.
JAIPUR, (DIVYA MALHOTRA)
The 1 April 2016 Principal Accountant General
(General and Social Sector Audit), Rajasthan
Countersigned
NEW DELHI, (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
The 4 April 2016 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

187
Appendix 2.1
(Refer paragraph: 2.1.7.4; page: 23)
Details of clothing material issued by Government Observation and Children Homes and NGO Homes of various
districts
S.
No.
Name of Home Year Clothing material for boys Clothing material for girls Material for school going
children
Material not issued Material short
issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
1. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Baran
2013-14 None of the material
issued
- - - None of the
material issued
-
2014-15 None of the material
issued
- - - None of the
material issued
-
2. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Jhunjhunu
2013-14 None of the material
issued
- None of the
material issued
- None of the
material issued
-
2014-15 None of the material
issued
Only 4 shirts issued None of the
material issued
- None of the
material issued
-
3. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Pali
2013-14 None of the material
issued
- - - None of the
material issued
-
2014-15 Pants, woolen jersey,
scarf, shoes and
handkerchief not issued
Shirts, vests, underwear
and slippers
- - None of the
material issued
-
4. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Sawai Madhopur
2013-14 Pant, underwear,
woolen jersey, scarf,
slipper, shoes,
handkerchief
Shirts - - School shoes School uniform
2014-15 None of the material
issued
- - - School
uniform, school
shoes and bag
-

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
188
S.
No.
Name of Home Year Clothing material for boys Clothing material for girls Material for school going
children
Material not issued Material short
issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
5. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Sikar
2013-14 Shoes and handkerchief Shirts, pant, vests,
underwear, woolen
jersey, scarf
- - - School uniform,
shoes and bag
2014-15 Scarf , shoes and
handkerchief
Shirts, pant, vests,
underwear, woolen
jersey
- - School uniform -
6. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Tonk
2013-14 Scarf and handkerchief Shirts, pant, vests,
underwear, woolen
jersey, slippers and
shoes
None of the
material issued
- - School uniform,
shoes and bag
2014-15 Scarf and handkerchief Shirts, pant and vests None of the
material issued
- - -
7. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Bikaner (Boys)
2013-14 Woolen jersey and scarf Shirts, pants, vests,
underwear, slipper,
shoes and handkerchief
- - School shoes -
2014-15 Woolen jersey and scarf Shirts, pants, vests,
underwear and
handkerchief
- - School shoes -
8. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Bikaner (Girls)
2013-14 - - Woolen
sweater, shawl,
dupatta, slipper
and
handkerchief
Topper/ lower,
baniyan/bra,
panties and
sanitary pad
School uniform
and shoes
-
2014-15 - - Baniyan/Bra,
Woolen
sweater, shawl,
dupatta, slipper,
shoes and
handkerchief
Sanitary pad School uniform
and shoes
-

Appendices
189
S.
No.
Name of Home Year Clothing material for boys Clothing material for girls Material for school going
children
Material not issued Material short
issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
9. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Jaipur (Boys)
2013-14 Scarf, slipper, shoes and
handkerchief
Shirt, pants and
underwear
- - School shoes -
2014-15 Scarf, slipper, shoes and
handkerchief
Shirt, pants and
underwear
- - School shoes -
10. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Jaipur (Girls)
2013-14 - - Woolen shawl,
shoes and
handkerchief
Topper/lower,
baniyan/bra,
panties and
sanitary pad
Record not
maintained
Record not
maintained
2014-15 - - Woolen shawl,
shoes and
handkerchief
Topper/lower,
baniyan/bra,
panties and
sanitary pad
None of the
material issued
-
11. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Udaipur (Boys)
2013-14 None of the material
issued
- - - School uniform
and shoes
-
2014-15 Scarf, shoes and
handkerchief
Shirt, pant, vests,
underwear and slippers
- - School uniform -
12. Govt. Observation
and Children Home,
Udaipur (Girls)
2013-14 - - Woolen shawl,
dupatta, shoes
and
handkerchief
Topper/lower,
baniyan/bra,
panties and
sanitary pad
- School uniform
2014-15 - - Woolen shawl,
dupatta, shoes,
slippers and
handkerchief
Topper/lower,
baniyan/bra,
panties and
sanitary pad
- -
13. Swami Shree Krishna
Balgrah Kanyadeh,
Baran
2013-14 Scarf and handkerchief Shirt, pant, vests and
underwear
- - School bag -
2014-15 Scarf and handkerchief Shirt, pant, vests and
underwear
- - School uniform
and bag
-

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
190
S.
No.
Name of Home Year Clothing material for boys Clothing material for girls Material for school going
children
Material not issued Material short
issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
Material not
issued
Material
short issued
14. I-India (Boys), Shelter
Home, Jaipur
2013-14 - - - - School uniform -
2014-15 - Underwear - - - -
15. I-India (Girls), Shelter
Home, Jaipur
2013-14 - - Dupatta Sanitary pad School uniform School shoes
and bag
2014-15 - - Dupatta Sanitary pad - School shoes
16. RAISE Asha ki Kiran
Children Home, Jaipur
2013-14 Bra, dupatta,
slippers, shoes
and
handkerchief
Sanitary pad
and woolen
shawl
- -
2014-15 Bra, dupatta,
slippers, shoes
and
handkerchief
Sanitary pad
and woolen
shawl
- School uniform,
shoes and bag
17. Kasturba Seva
Sansthan, Sikar
2013-14 Handkerchief Shirt and pant Sanitary pad Topper/lower,
panties and
woolen shawl
- School uniform
2014-15 Handkerchief Shirt, pant and shoes Sanitary pad Topper/lower,
panties and
woolen shawl
- -
18. Nirashrit Balgrah,
Tonk
2013-14 Scarf, shoes and
handkerchief
Shirt, pant, vests and
underwear
- - School bag School uniform
2014-15 Scarf and handkerchief - - - School bag School uniform
and shoes
19. Bhagwan Mahaveer
Nirashrit Balgrah,
Udaipur
2013-14 Scarf and handkerchief - - - School shoes -
2014-15 Scarf and handkerchief - - - School shoes -
20. AASRA Vikas
Sansthan, Shelter
Home, Udaipur
2013-14 None of the material
issued
- - - None of the
material issued
-
2014-15 None of the material
issued
- - - None of the
material issued
-

Appendices
191
Appendix 2.2
(Refer paragraph: 2.2.4; page: 39)
Statement showing list of engineering colleges selected for test check
S. No. Name of Colleges Remarks
1 College of Engineering & Technology, Bikaner Govt. Engineering College
2 Government Engineering College, Jhalawar Govt. Engineering College
3 Engineering College, Ajmer Govt. Engineering College
4 Asians Institute of Technology, Bhuria, tonk PPP Engineering college
5 Vedant College of Engineering & Technology, Bundi PPP Engineering college
6 Advait Vedanta Institute of Technology, Kanota-Sambhariya Road, Village
Gangarampura, Tehsil Bassi
Private Engineering College
7 Aravali Institute of Technical Studies, Udaipur Private Engineering College
8 Baldev Ram Mirdha Institute of Technology, ITS-3, Jaipur Private Engineering College
9 Chankya Technical Campus, Jaipur Private Engineering College
10 Modi Institute of Technology, Kota Private Engineering College
11 Poornima Group of Institutions, Jaipur Private Engineering College
12 Rajasthan Institute of Engineering & Technology, Jaipur Private Engineering College
13 School of Aeronautics (Neemrana), I-04, RIICO Industrial Area, Neemrana, Alwar Private Engineering College
14 Sidhi Vinayak College of Science & Higher Education, Alwar Private Engineering College
15 Sine International Institute of Technology, Jaipur Private Engineering College
16 St. Wilfreds Institute of Engineering & Technology, Ajmer Private Engineering College
17 Vyas College of Engineering and Technology, Jodhpur Private Engineering College

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
192
Appendix 2.3
(Refer paragraph: 2.2.6.1; page: 44)
Statement showing details of faculty position in selected colleges
S.
No.
Name of Institute Approved
intake
Total
strength
Required
No. of teaching staff
required
Actual No. of teaching staff Shortage
Prof. Associate.
Prof.
Asstt.
Prof.
Prof. Associate
Prof.
Asstt.
Prof.
Prof. Associate
Prof.
Asstt.
Prof.
UCE, Kota 2652 184 28 57 99 11 25 75 17 32 24
Selected colleges
1 Government College
of Engineering and
Technology, Bikaner
1680 112 12 25 75 - 5 47 12 20 28
2 Government
Engineering College,
Jhalawar
1440 96 10 21 65 0 1 27 10 20 38
3 Government
Engineering College,
Ajmer.
1920 128 14 28 86 0 16 49 14 12 37
4 Asians Institute of
Technology, Tonk
1560 104 12 23 69 1 3 101 11 20 -
5 Vedant college of
Engineering &
Technology, Bundi
1860 124 14 28 82 1 6 48 13 22 34
6 Advait Vedanta
Institute of
Technology, Jaipur
1140 76 8 17 51 1 0 75 7 17 -
7 Aravali Institute of
Technology Studies,
Udaipur
1560 104 11 23 70 1 7 78 10 16 -

Appendices
193
S.
No.
Name of Institute Approved
intake
Total
strength
Required
No. of teaching staff
required
Actual No. of teaching staff Shortage
Prof. Associate.
Prof.
Asstt.
Prof.
Prof. Associate
Prof.
Asstt.
Prof.
Prof. Associate
Prof.
Asstt.
Prof.
8 BRMIT, Jaipur 1500 100 11 22 67 1 0 55 10 22 12
9 Chankya Technology
Campus, Jaipur
1200 80 9 18 53 1 3 51 8 15 2
10 Modi Institute of
Technology, Kota
1890 126 14 28 84 1 11 82 13 17 2
11 Poornima Group of
Institutions, Jaipur
1680 112 12 25 75 9 19 80 3 6 -
12 RIET, Jaipur 1980 132 15 29 88 3 18 110 12 11 -
13 School of
Aeronautics. Alwar
360 24 2 5 17 1 4 11 1 1 6
14 Siddhi Vinayak
College of Science &
Higher Education,
Alwar
1365 91 10 20 61 2 13 21 8 7 40
15 Sine Institute of
Technology, Jaipur
1440 96 11 21 64 4 9 64 7 12 -
16 St. Wilfred college of
Engineering &
Technology, Ajmer
1500 100 11 22 67 3 3 56 8 19 11
17 Vyas College of
Engineering &
Technology, Jodhpur
1860 124 14 27 83 6 10 22 8 17 61
Total 190 382 1157 35 129 977 155 254 271

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
194
Appendix 3.1
(Refer paragraph: 3.6; page: 65)
Statement showing the extra liability due to approval of higher rates for identical items
(Amount in `)
S.No. Identical Items Rate of Dara
Construction
Company, Jodhpur
Rate of SB
Enterprises,
Jodhpur
Difference in
Rates (3-4)
Quantity Extra expenditure
(5x6)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 Providing, laying, jointing testing and commissioning of DI Pipes
(i) DI K-9 100 mm 1,111 1,070 41 18,330 7,51,530
(ii) DI K-9 150 mm 1,585 1,450 135 27,980 37,77,300
(iii) DI K-7 80 mm 1,097 1,025 72 43,891 31,60,152
(iv) DI K-7 100 mm 1,050 950 100 22,722 22,72,200
(v) DI K-7 150 mm 1,491 1,350 141 13,275 18,71,775
(vi) DI K-7 200 mm 1,815 1,800 15 3,040 45,600
2 Supply and installation of Sluice Valves
(i) 80 mm PN-1.0 15,000 6,000 9,000 33 2,97,000
(ii) 100 mm PN-1.0 20,000 7,000 13,000 24 3,12,000
(iii) 150 mm PN-1.0 25,000 9,000 16,000 35 5,60,000
(iv) 200 mm PN-1.0 30,000 12,000 18,000 2 36,000
3 Construction RCC valve chamber
(for 200-300 mm dia. pipeline, Size
1.2m x 1.5m)
25,000 15,000 10,000 66 6,60,000
4 Supply & Installation of double ball
air relief valves 40 mm PN 1.0
19,000 15,000 4,000 43 1,72,000
5 Supply & Installation of scour
valves with cost of specials
construction of valves chamber 80
mm
PN 1.0
30,000 18,000 12,000 6 72,000

Appendices
195
S.No. Identical Items Rate of Dara
Construction
Company, Jodhpur
Rate of SB
Enterprises,
Jodhpur
Difference in
Rates (3-4)
Quantity Extra expenditure
(5x6)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
6 Supply & Installation of in line woltman type turbine
(i) 80 mm 40,000 25,000 15,000 16 2,40,000
(ii) 100 mm 50,000 35,000 15,000 13 1,95,000
(iii) 150 mm 55,000 40,000 15,000 9 1,35,000
(iv) 200 mm 66,000 40,000 26,000 1 26,000
7 Construction of Village transfer
chambers
75,000 50,000 25,000 39 9,75,000
Total 1,55,58,557
i.e. ` 1.56 crore

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
196
Appendix 3.2
(Refer paragraph: 3.10.1; page: 74)
Statement showing position of SSTL and MSTL established on PPP mode
Sl. No. Place of Laboratories Name of executing agency Date of establishment
SSTL
1 Lakshmangarh M/s Chitransh Education and Welfare Society Jaipur 28.12.2012
2 Sri Madhopur 25.10.2012
3 Duni 11.11.2011
4 Kekri 31.10.2012
5 Kuchaman City 19.10.2012
6 Sangod 10.05.2013
7 Sanchore 19.09.2014
8 Gudhamalani 24.09.2014
9 Sri Dungargarh Agristar Warehousing and Coletaral Management Limited, Jaipur 19.11.2012
10 Ladnu 06.11.2012
11 Hindaun 05.12.2012
12 Jaitaran 02.01.2013
13 Sandwa 23.11.2012
14 Pratapgarh Liberty Phosphate Limited, Udaipur 02.01.2013
MSTL
1 Udaipur Liberty Phosphate Limited, Udaipur 04.08.2010
2 Kota Liberty Phosphate Limited, Udaipur 04.08.2010
3 Sri Ganganagar Chambal Fertiliser and Chemical Limited 04.08.2010
4 Jaipur Jubiliant Organosys Limited 04.08.2010
5 Kota Chambal Fertiliser and Chemical Limited 04.08.2010
6 Jaipur Indian Potash Limited 04.08.2010
7 Bikaner Marubhumi Seva and Anusandhan Sansthan 04.08.2010
8 Suratgarh FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited 11.11.2010
9 Jodhpur Dhanuka Agritech Limited 11.11.2010
10 Udaipur Maharana Pratap Agriculture and Technical University 23.12.2010
11 Pali Ambuja Cement Foundation Jaitaran /Gramin Avsanranchna Vikas Sansthan 06.06.2012
12 Udaipur Director, Swachh Pariyojana 03.07.2012

Appendices
197
Appendix 3.3
(Refer paragraph: 3.12.4.2; page: 101)
Statement showing the details of Machinery and Equipments lying unutilised
S.No. Name of Unit No. of Equipments Total Amount
(` in lakh)
1. Pharmacology Department SMS Medical College, Jaipur 50 3.50
2. Zanana Hospital, SMS Medical College, Jaipur 1 31.00
3. Cancer Department, SMS Hospital, Jaipur 1 103.00
4. Radio Dignostic Department, SMS Hospital, Jaipur 4 112.00
5. Central Store, SMS Hospital, Jaipur 287 154.91
6. Urology Department, SMS Hospital, Jaipur 1 0.89
7. Gestroentrology Department, SMS Hospital, Jaipur 92 101.58
8. Sir Padam Path Mother & Child Health Institute (J.K.Lone), Jaipur 113 51.34
9. Isolation Disease Hospital, Jaipur 4 7.35
10. Psychiartry Department, Mental Hospital, Bikaner 2 51.35
11. Central Store, S.P. Medical College, Bikaner 44 41.15
12. Anatomy Department, S.P. Medical College Bikaner 2 9.05
13. Gireatric Department, PBM (Men’s) Hospital Bikaner 176 28.76.
14. Poly Trauma Center PBM (Men’s) Hospital, Bikaner 23 99.62
15. Multi-disciplinary Research Unit (MRU) S.P. Medical College, Bikaner 11 48.04
Total 811 843.54

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
198
Appendix 3.4
(Refer paragraph: 3.12.4.2 (ii); page: 101)
Statement showing the details of METP lying idle for want of repairing during the year 2012-15
(` in lakh)
Name of
Medical College
S. No Name of
Hospital/Department
Name of
equipment/Make
Qty. (in Nos.) Date of purchase/
receipt
Period of out of
order
Period of lying
Idle
in months (Up
to August 2015)
Reasons for
lying idle
Cost
SMS Medical
College, Jaipur
1 SMS Hospital
Jaipur (Radio Diagnostic
Department)
Ortho Pentagram 1 08.06.07 Since 14.05.13 27 Due to want of
repairing
16.61
2 -do- Mammography Machine 1 16.09.03 Since 28.07.14 13 -do- 38.71
3 SMS Hospital
Jaipur (Eye Department)
B-Scan Machine 1 31.03.12 Since March 2013 28 -do- 11.98
4 Mahila Chikitshalaya,
Jaipur
Infusion Pumps Symtek
(Nursery)
1 24.07.11 For six months 6 -do- 2.60
5 -do- Multi Para Monitor (OT) 2 2011 For six months 6 -do- 1.20
6 -do- Blood Bank Refrigerator
Alfa
1 17.06.10 For two years 24 -do- 1.60
7 -do- Neonatal Ventilator
Newport
1 19.03.10 For six months 6 -do- 11.47
8 Chest & T.B. Hospital,
Jaipur
Five Parts Hemology
Analyzer Sysmek
1 23.03.14 23.03.2014 16 Due to short
circuit of
wiring from
starting
9.90
S.P. Medical
College, Bikaner
9 SP Medical College,
(Micro-Biology)
Department, Bikaner
Incubator (MAC & Yarko) 2 02.07.14 For six months 6 Due to want of
repairing
0.50
10 -do- Water Bath 1 02.07.14 02.07.14 13 -do- 0.20
11 PBM Hospital Bikaner
Pediatric Department
Multi Para Monitor(3+1)
(VBMI60)
4 10.03.13 04/2014 – 2
06/2014 – 1
03/2015 – 1
05-16 -do- 9.41
Total 16 5-28 104.18
Source: Information furnished by the department

Appendices
199
Appendix 3.5
(Refer paragraph: 3.12.6.1; page: 105)
Statement showing the details of non-recovery of revenue share from service provider during 2012-15
(Amount in `)
Year Name
of Test
Place of MRI/CT
Scan Machine
Total
No. of
cases
Amount
(in `)
Total
free
cases
Amount Amount of
free cases
(Max. 30% of
total)
Amount
payable by
RMRS against
above of 30%
of free cases in
MRI
Amount
received by
RMRS against
less of 30% of
free cases in
CT scan
Net
difference
Payable to
RMRS
41.11%
share to be
deposit with
RMRS
2012-13 MRI EMRC(w.e.f.30.6.12) 12679 39573550 4696 16307400 11872065 4435335
BMRC(w.e.f.1.10.12) 6584 21520300 3129 10975150 6456090 4519060
TOTAL 19263 61093850 7825 27282550 18328155 8954395
CT
SCAN
EMRC(w.e.f.07.6.12) 42720 40989550 8698 8360550 12296865 3936315
BMRC(w.e.f. 27.7.12) 28534 26488100 7818 7370050 7946430 576380
TOTAL 71254 67477650 16516 15730600 20243295 4512695 4441700 1825983
2013-14 MRI EMRC 13549 40578950 5677 18917950 12173685 6744265
BMRC 14234 43845100 6683 22809900 13153530 9656370
TOTAL 27783 84404050 12360 41727850 25327215 16400635
CT
SCAN
EMRC 59314 54686950 9260 8593400 16406085 7812685
BMRC 51181 46377000 11483 11272450 13913100 2640650
TOTAL 110495 101063950 20743 19865850 30319185 10453335 5947300 2444935
2014-15 MRI EMRC 15503 46740850 7487 24978400 14022255 10956145
BMRC 15033 47417650 8242 28279600 14225295 14054305
TOTAL 30536 94158500 15729 53258000 28247550 25010450
CT
SCAN
EMRC 50917 45654950 8903 8160700 13696485 5535785
BMRC 63435 58375900 14303 14956550 17512770 2556220
TOTAL 114352 104030850 23206 23117250 31209255 8092005 16918445 6955173
TOTAL
2012-13 to 2014-15
MRI 77582 239676400 35914 122268400 71902920 50365480
CT SCAN 296101 272572450 60465 58713700 81771735 23058035 27307445
GRAND TOTAL (MRI & CT SCAN) 373683 512248850 96379 180982100 153674655 50365480 23058035 27307445 11226091
BMRC: Birla Memorial Research Center
EMRC: Emergency Research Centre

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
200
Appendix 3.6
(Refer paragraph: 3.12.7.4(i); page: 106)
Statement showing the details of machinery and equipments shown installed before issue from Poly Trauma Store
of SP Medical College, Bikaner
(` in crore)
S. No Name of Machinery/ Equipment Quantity Cost Date of receipt in
Poly Trauma
Store
Date of issue from Poly
Trauma Store to concerned
Unit
Date of Installation shown
1 Modular OT Unit 2 1.72 31.03.2014 30.07.2015 15.03.2014
2 High Frequency C-Arm Unit 1 0.30 24.02.2015 22.07.2015 21.02.2015
3 Pneumatic Tourniquet 2 0.01 18.03.2015 21.07.2015 14.03.2015
4 Drill for Orthopedic Surgery 1 0.02 18.03.2015 21.07.2015 17.03.2015
5 Fully Digital Colour Doppler System-
Alpha-6
1 0.28 18.03.2015 31.07.2015 17.03.2015
6 Molecular Resonance Generator 1 0.44 04.03.2015 Not issued from store 03.03.2015
7 Pedestal Side Light 10 0.05 27.03.2015 16.07.2015 to 30.07.2015 (6
Nos.) and remaining (4 Nos.)
not issued from store
26.03.2015
8 Rapid Autoclave 2 0.29 27.03.2015 16.07.2015 to 21.07.2015 26.03.2015
9 OT Table for MOT 4 0.02 27.03.2015 16.07.2015 27.03.2015
10 OT Ceiling Light shadow less two
dome (LED)
3 0.25 29.03.2015 (3 Nos.) 16.07.2015 to 21.07.2015 (3
Nos.)
29.03.2015
11 Large Fregement 4 0.05 29.03.2015 Not issued from store 29.03.2015
12 Basic Instruments Sets for fractural-
Small Fregements
4 0.07 29.03.2015 Not issued from store 29.03.2015
13 Farius Plus XL Vista 120
Invas/ETCo2
4 0.72 30.03.2015 17.07.2015 30.03.2015
Total 39 4.22
Source: Information furnished by the department

Appendices
201
Appendix 3.7
(Refer paragraph: 3.14.1; page: 119)
Name of units selected for theme Audit
Name of District Name of Units
Jaipur 1. CMHO-II Jaipur 2. BCMO- Bassi 3. BCMO-Sanganer 4. PMO Sethi Colony, Jaipur 5. PHC Bilwa
6. PHC-Bhankrota 7. PHC-Banskho 8. PHC-Benada 9. CHC- Bassi 10. CHC-Banskho, 11. CHC-
Tunga 12. ADC Jaipur 13. Drug Controller (DC) Jaipur
Alwar 14. CMHO Alwar, 15. BCMO Ramgarh 16. BCMO Laxmangarh, 17. BCMO Rajgarh, 18. PMO Alwar
19. ADC Alwar, 20. PHC- Dhigawada, 21. PHC Surai, 22. PHC Pahadawati 23. PHC Mubarkpur 24.
CHC- Ramgarh, 25. CHC Tijara, 26. CHC Govindgarh, 27. CHC Shahjahapur
Udaipur 28. CMHO Udaipur, 29. BCMO Kotra, 30. BCMO Gogunda 31. PMO Hiranmagari, Udaipur 32.
ADC- Udaipur, 33. PHC- Barwada, 34. PHC Chitrawas, 35. PHC Kukawas 36. CHC Sanwad, 37.
CHC Kurabad, 38. CHC Sarada
Barmer 39. CMHO- Barmer, 40. BCMO Sindhri, 41 BCMO Barmer 42. PMO Barmer, 43. ADC Barmer, 44.
PHC Khara Mahechan, 45. PHC Adel, 46. PHC Gardia, 47. PHC Bhadresh, 48. PHC Taratara 49. CHC-
Dhorimanna, 50. CHC Siwana

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
202
Appendix 3.8
(Refer paragraph: 3.14.2.1; page: 120)
List of range wise test checked Delayed cases in Medical & Health Department
S.No Service wise Name of Unit Total Delayed cases 4-10
Days
11-30
Days
31-50 Days 51-200
Days
Above 200
Days
A Payments under JSSY
1. PMO, Jaipur 16 6 6 2 2 -
2. PMO, Alwar 10 10 - - - -
3. CHC, Sarada 95 - 56 39 - -
4. CHC, Sanwar 38 23 14 - - 1 (230)
5. CHC, Kurabad 74 12 49 13 - -
6. CHC, Govindgarh 43 10 14 8 11 -
7. CHC, Tijara 78 1 8 2 67 -
8. CHC, Ramgarh 121 4 117 - - -
9. CHC, Shahjahanpur 33 18 9 3 3 -
10. PHC, Chiterwas 52 10 18 12 12 -
11. PHC, Mubarikpur 16 3 5 3 5 -
12. PHC, Adel 30 10 20 - - -
13. PHC, Taratara 15 8 6 1 - -
14. PHC, Beelwa 2 2 - - - -
15. PHC, Bhankrota 10 4 6 - - -
Total 633 121 328 83 100 1
B Complicated disability Certificate
1. PMO, Alwar 65 5 25 8 26 1(204)
Total 65 5 25 8 26 1
C Issue of Food License
1. CMHO, Alwar 18 - 4 13 1 -
2. CMHO, Udaipur 2 1 1 - - -
3. CMHO, Jaipur 20 16 3 - 1 -
Total 40 17 8 13 2 -

Appendices
203
S.No Service wise Name of Unit Total Delayed cases 4-10
Days
11-30
Days
31-50 Days 51-200
Days
Above 200
Days
D Issue of Drug License
1. ADC, Jaipur 30 7 9 9 4 1(220)
2. ADC, Alwar 44 7 31 2 4 -
3. ADC, Udaipur 31 3 23 - 5 -
Total 105 17 63 11 13 1
E Issue of Drug Manufacturing License
1. DC, Jaipur 5 - - 2 3 -
Total 5 - - 2 3 -
F MLC Report
1. CHC, Ramgarh 10 10 - - - -
Total 10 10 - - - -
G Sterilization Certificate
1. PMO, Alwar 173 15 41 28 68 21(Max. 660)
2. PMO, Barmer 25 4 11 4 6 -
3. PHC, Tara tara 43 7 36 - - -
Total 241 26 88 32 74 21
Grand Total 1099 196 512 149 218 24

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended 31 March 2015
204
Appendix 3.9
(Refer paragraph: 3.16.12.1; page: 162)
Statement showing incomplete works treated as completed
S.
No.
Details of activities required to be done Name of Division Details of activities required to be
done
Status of work
completed
Short fall
1 Replacement of 4,000 metre of 425 mm dia pipeline
between Intermediate Pumping Station(IPS) and
Bundhgate
North – II Pipeline 4000 mtr 3329 mtr 671 mtr
2 Laying of pipeline from Shastri Nagar to Fateh Ram Ka
Tibba
North – II Pipeline 3300 mtr 2458 mtr 842 mtr
3 Development of source and distribution system in
Malviya Nagar (Eight Tws, rising pipeline in 5,200 mtr,
pumping pipeline 200 mtr, Distribution pipeline 15732
mtr and construction of clear water reservoir)
South II
& III
Tube well 8 No. Nil 8
Rising pipelines 5200 mtr Nil 5200 mtr
Distribution
pipelines
15732 mtr 4694 mtr 11038 mtr
Pumping pipeline 200 mtr Nil 200 mtr
SR 1 No. constructed Nil
4 Sindhi Colony South II
& III
Tube well 7 No. 7 Nil
Rising pipelines and
Distribution
pipelines
10375 mtr 2459 mtr 7916 mtr
OHSR 1400 KL
(1 no.)
Constructed Nil
5 Baiji Ki Kothi South II & III Tube well 5 No. 5 Nil
Rising pipe line 4500 mtr 1457.5 mtr 3042.5 mtr
Distribution pipeline 4608 mtr 1672mtr 2936 mtr
Pumping pipeline 800 mtr 277 mtr 523 mtr
S R 1 No.
(900 KL)
Constructed Nil