PREFACE

The Report for the year ended March 2010 containing the results of the
performance audit of Taxation of payments to non residents has been prepared
for submission to the President under Article 151(1) of the Constitution of India.

The audit of Revenue Receipts - Direct Taxes of the Union Government is
conducted under Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.

Our findings are based on mainly test audit conducted during the period 2009-10.

Some findings of audit conducted in earlier years, but could not be covered in
previous Reports, have also been included.


Executive
SUMMA ry



Executive Summary

Growing integration within the global economy has led to increased flow of capital,
services and technology into the country. As an impetus to economic growth, the
government has eased the restrictions on flow of foreign exchange transactions. The
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) was repealed and replaced by the Foreign
Exchange Management Act (FEMA) in June 2000 with a view to facilitate external trade
and payment and for promoting the orderly development and maintenance of foreign
exchange markets in India. The shift has also necessitated delegation of authority to the
remitting banks ie., the authorized dealers to vouchsafe the legality of the forex
transactions as also collection of applicable income tax.

Tax is deducted at source (TDS) on passive income i.e., income which accrues to a non-
resident without a physical existence in the country (in the form of a branch office or a
local subsidiary etc). The remittances that form the taxable base are captured in the
“‘Snvisibles” account of the Balance of Payments (BoP) computed by the Reserve Bank of
India.

The country has witnessed a robust growth in outward remittances. The global
economic downturn has prompted countries to close loopholes in tax especially
through tax havens. We felt that it would be topical to conduct a study on the
effectiveness of institutional mechanisms in the tax department to maintain oversight
on outflows and bridge the tax gap.

The objectives of our study were to seek an assurance that: the Income Tax Department
(ITD) has established integration with the banking sector to provide an overarching
oversight on foreign exchange remittances; the risks of illicit flows are identified,
prioritized and communicated to the risk managers; the systems and control measures
are effective to ensure that all taxable remittances are taxed accurately; ITD is geared
to meet the new challenges in international taxation owing to globalization and the
attendant complexity in transactions.

We drew our primary audit sample from assessment records in the ITD. This was
correlated with the sample of top forex remitters culled out from database of Centre for
Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE). We cross-checked records of select ADs with that
of ITD. The study also involved analysis of data on remittances collected from Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) for macro-level correlation with tax collections.

We observed that oversight on remittances envisages a close coordination between the
banking sector and tax administration. However, currently there is a lack of adequate
coordination.


Balance of Payments is an accounting record of all monetary transactions between a
country and the rest of the world. BoP comprises the Capital Account detailing the
movement of assets and the Current Account capturing the corresponding flow of
funds. Completion of a transaction should balance out these two accounts. Therefore,
un-reconciled balances in these accounts indicate towards unaccounted transactions.

The taxable base increased 2.5 -fold during 2004-08 but the Tax Deducted at Source
(TDS) collections have substantially dipped in 2005-08. This indicates towards an
increasing tax gap. Our computation of the tax gap shows that the tax actually deducted
is a miniscule fraction of the collectible tax.

In the absence of specific provisions towards regulating taxation, foreign companies are
benefiting from Thin Capitalisation whereby they are investing more in terms of
bringing in loans rather than investing through equity. Liaison Offices of foreign
companies are not being monitored towards their taxable activities.

A remitter is required to submit an undertaking that he has abided by the FEMA
requirements. He is also required to submit a certificate by a chartered accountant
certifying the undertaking. The certificate and undertaking (C&U) form the basic
documents that the AD must examine before the remittance. The rigours of checks
expected from the ADs on each individual remittance are rendered unviable with the
increase in the volume of remittances.

A copy of the C&U on every remittance is sent by the ADs to the assessing officers (AOs)
in the ITD. The manual receipt and collation of C&Us in ITD are in disarray especially in
heavy assessment charges. Stacks of C&Us lay dumped in rooms making their
retrievability for use in assessment, a near impossibility. No reconciliation of C&Us is
possible between ADs and ITD in this scenario. We could not draw an assurance that
the ADs are collecting C&Us on each transaction; some C&Us examined by us were
found incomplete with vital data missing from them; and the incidence of ADs not
transferring C&Us to ITD were high. Our assessment of the tax gap on the remittances
in the audit sample was severely constricted given the state of record management of
C&Us in ITD. Even so, we found that हैं 98.7 crore was not deducted during the period
2005-09.

We found that errors in assessments and failure to collect the applicable taxes involved
a tax effect of ¥ 852.8 crore.

The huge tax gap adds grist to the conclusion drawn in 2007 by the Committee on

Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services (CPPAPS) of the Ministry of

Finance that the provisions for TDS are “very onerous and are met only in the breach’.

ITD introduced e-filing of undertakings but it meets the purpose only partially as it is

yet to be harmonized with the returns to RBI or even integrated with the e-filed
vi


vii


SUMMA ry

of

Recommendations



Summary of recommendations

We recommend:

© a periodic reconciliation of aggregate data maintained by various government
agencies that together should provide an oversight on forex transactions. Ministry of
Finance could co-ordinate to institute a mechanism for such reconciliation;

«© that a significant step towards transparency will be the submission of tax gap
analysis to the Parliament. This will also provide an estimate on revenue leakages in
forex remittances;

« that the ITD conduct a macro-analysis of remittances. This analysis can form the
basis for a risk-based tracking of high risk transactions by ITD in co-ordination with the
banking sector. The data can also be used to further fine tune selection of tax returns
for scrutiny- for eg: remitters with high volume of forex transactions with OFCs can be
selected;

© — thata flat and lower tax rate applied to all payments regardless of their purpose or
destination will be a more viable alternative to administer- for the ITD as well as the
banking sector;

© an automated solution that sifts out error reports from e-filed undertakings. This
would require that the purpose codes of RBI are adopted by the ITD and integrated into
the automation. We are of the opinion that this will also facilitate reconciliation of data
with RBI;

« that the e-TDS returns must also provide data on all remittances, even those with
null value for TDS and must also capture the purpose codes;

« that adequate safeguards may be built into the system to protect revenue on
account of thin capitalization. ITD needs to strengthen monitoring of non-filers among
liaison offices;

© that sectoral studies may be conducted by ITD to identify the avenues of revenue
leakage as well as flag ambiguities in emerging areas.


CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION

Why we chose the topic

Objectives of the study

Legal Provisions and procedures

Scope of audit and methodology

Acknowledgement


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Introduction

1.1 Tax administration recognizes a taxpayer as non-resident depending on the
duration of his/her residence? in India in the relevant period of assessment.

1.2 Growing integration with the global economy has led to increased flow of
capital, services and technology into the country. As an impetus to economic
growth, the government has considerably eased the restrictions on flow of foreign
exchange transactions. The policy intent is to “eschew micro-management and
control of forex transactions and shift to monitoring the flows, the endeavor being to
provide seamless, hassle-free services’. The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act
(FERA) which formed the statutory basis for exchange control in India was repealed
and replaced by the new Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) with effect
from June 2000. Shifting from the need for “regulating foreign exchange for
conservation of foreign exchange resources of the country” in the FERA regime, the
stated object of FEMA was for “facilitating external trade and payment and for
promoting the orderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange markets

in India.” This shift has
necessitated delegation of
Chartl: Investment and Returns authority to the remitting banks
| (called authorized dealers of
Dividend foreign exchange) to vouchsafe the
a गण legality of the forex transactions.

Fauity

Capital Gains
Purchase with ubsequn

1.3 The Banking Sector
including the RBI and Authorised

बसा [ance Dealers as well as the Central
Debt aifslrseilS8) Board of Direct Taxes with their
field formations are responsible

ता for managing the risks associated

ae with foreign remittances and

taxation on them.

1.4 Foreign investment can be in the form of business/ productive capital being
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI); or money/ financial capital ie, Foreign

1 An individual is a resident in India if he has been in India during the previous year for 182 days or more; has been in India during
the previous year for less than 182 days but has been in India for an aggregate of 365 days or more in the four years preceding and
his stay in India during the previous year is 60 days ar more. A company is a non-resident if itis neither an Indian company nar the
control and management of whose afiairs during the previous year, is situated wholly in India, Every other person is a non-resident
if, during a previous year the control and management of its affairs are situated wholly outside India.

2 Report of the Committee (2004) on Procedures and Perfarmance Audit on Public Services (CPPAPS) of Ministry of Finance

1


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Institutional Investment (FII). The returns from foreign investments can be broadly
classified as active or passive income.

1.5 Active income includes profits from business and demands 3 physical
presence of the taxpayer in the country. Subsumed in the concept of business
connection is the one of a Permanent Establishment (PE). It essentially means a
physical existence: fixed place of business or relationship through a branch office, an
agent or a local subsidiary company. Thus a PE involves the concept of control,
supervision or an activity of continuous nature. The ‘active’ business income of a PE
will be subject to taxation in India as per the Income Tax Act read with provisions of
Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAA)?. The multiplicity of players
involved and the labyrinthine relationships between the parent and its affiliates
smudge clarity on ownership and contro]* and make taxation of such business
income very complex.

1.6 On the other hand, passive income’ can be said to have deemed to arise or
accrue in the country, even without such physical presence. Tax is deducted at
source (TDS) on all such income before it is remitted abroad. The taxability of
passive income is established on the principle that it was generated from a business
connection in India, even if such a connection is a ‘virtual’ one, i.e., without a physical
presence.

Why we chose the topic

1.7. The country has witnesse
a robust growth in outward
remittances® fuelled by private
transfers and software exports.
Services. m'Transfers Income Year 2009 witnessed a consensus
particularly among the G20
countries to use the global
economic downturn to close
loopholes that are costing them
hundreds of billions in lost
revenues. This was followed by
crack down on tax havens to press for greater information sharing and co-operation
in tracking tax evasion. We felt that it would be topical to conduct a study on the

Chart 2: Invisible payments by category of
transactions
रहें जी crore

2007-08

2004-05

2001-02

3 Through the DTAAs, respective jurisdiction is so identified that a particular income is taxed in one country only or, in case it is
taxed in both the countries, suitable relief is provided in one country ta mitigate the hardship caused by taxation in anather
jurisdiction, DTAAs in addition to avoidance of double taxation of the same income in the two Contracting States, cover other areas
of co-operation in p ion of fiscal evasion, exchange of information, recovery of tax and promotion of mutual economic
relations, trade and investment.

4 : ; हि

In some cases the remitter may be a branch or a subsidiary of the service provider non-resident. In other cases the remitter may
simply be an agent with no direct relation with the non-resident, Quantification and valuation of the profit is also complicated owing
to the level of relations between the remitter and the non -resident as also some third party which may be the final recipient of the
remittance.

5 In addition to the income from foreign investment, the taxable base of non-residents includes passive income from services (such
as customer service or shipping); intellectual property; and patents.
© Source: RBI


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

effectiveness of institutional mechanisms in the tax department to maintain
oversight on outflows and bridge the tax gap.

Objectives of the study

1.8 ४४९ sought an assurance through our study that:

© Income Tax Department (ITD) has established integration with the banking sector,
to provide an overarching oversight on foreign exchange remittances;

© The risks of illicit flows are identified, prioritized and communicated to the risk
managers. The effectiveness of the risk mitigation measures are monitored;

© The systems and control measures are effective to ensure that all taxable
remittances are taxed accurately;

© The Department is geared to meet the new challenges in international taxation
owing to globalization and the attendant complexity in transactions.

Legal provisions and procedures

1.9 Section 5 of the Income Tax Act, 1961(Act) provides for taxation of income in
India. Section 9 provides the circumstances under which an income accrues or arises
in India.

1.10 Sections 190 to 206 of the Act deal with TDS. Any person making deduction
of tax from payments made to non-residents is required to electronically file
quarterly returns to the Department. Sections 201, 221, 271(C) and 272(A) deal
with default, interest and penalty provisions in respect of TDS. Section 40a (i)
provides that if TDS is not deducted on a remittance which warranted such
deduction, then such expenditure shall not be tax deductible to the remitter.

1.11 Authorized dealers (ADs) remit money abroad on submission of an
undertaking by the remitter’, along with a certificate from a Chartered Accountant
(CA) in duplicate. One copy is sent to the assessing officer (AO) in the ITD; the other
copy is kept on record for verification during audit by the Reserve Bank of India.

1.12 Taxation of non-residents is centralised under the Directors of International
Taxation (DIT) at Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai and Bangalore. In other places,
the designated Chief Commissioners of Income Tax (CCsIT) exercise jurisdiction
over non-residents within their region.

7 CBDT Circular no, 10 of 2002 dated 9 October, 2002



Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Scope of audit and methodology

1.13 The payments made to non-residents during the financial years 2005-06 to
2008-09, formed the basis of our study. We also covered income tax assessments of
resident assesses’ who had claimed expenditure towards payments to non-residents to
verify whether the applicable taxes had been deducted in respect of these payments.

1.14 Selection of the actual assessment units was made based on the risk analysis of
each unit'. Scrutiny assessments and summarily processed cases of non- residents for
the financial years 2005-06 to 2007-08 were selected by us. 25 per cent of the total
certificates and undertakings (C&U) filed by the remitters and forwarded by the ADs to
the ITD during this period were requisitioned; these remittances were correlated with
the assessment records. We stood hampered in selection of cases due to the absence of
any centralized database regarding assessment of non residents in the Income Tax
Department. Details of records produced to us are given in table 1.

[ Table 1: Details of records checked in 21 offices I
Assessments C&U Concessions? eTDS? Returns
12000 19993 355 2013

1.15 We also drew a sample of 1240 specific high remitters extracted from the
database of Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE). Data on remittances was
also collected from Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for macro-level correlation with tax
collections.

Acknowledgement

1.16 Indian Audit and Accounts Department acknowledges the cooperation provided
by the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and the field formations of the ITD in
providing the necessary records and information for audit. An entry conference was
held with the CBDT in March 2009 to discuss the objectives, modalities and scope of the
audit study.

1.17 The exit conference was held (October 2010) with the Ministry/Board wherein
the report was discussed. The views expressed by the Ministry/Board in the exit
conference have been suitably incorporated in this report.

1.18 We also acknowledge the cooperation rendered by the RBI and by the ADs
including public, private and foreign banks in providing us with valuable inputs.

8 Several factors such as materiality of assessments in a unit, assessment profile of a unit and previous audit observations in respect
ofa unit etc., form the risk matrix for evaluation of a unit.

9 The Act allows lower rate of TDS or for complete exemption of certain categories of remittances/ remitters from TDS.

10 Returns furnished by the deductors of tax to the Income Tax Department using electronic filing.

4


CHAPTER 2

OVERSIGHT ON FOREX

The process

Oversight and Reconciliation
Reconciliation of imports

Net Errors and Omissions in BoP

Tax gap
Oversight: Risk analysis
Oversight: Risk mitigation

Thin Capitalisation

Liaison Offices

Recommendations


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

CHAPTER 2
Oversight on forex flows

re

Chapter Overview

An oversight on remittances envisages a close coordination between the banking
sector and tax administration, which is obtuse currently. Un-reconciled figures in
BoP are pointers to forex flows, the purpose behind which are unknown or
unaccounted. Our computation of the tax gap shows that the tax actually deducted is
a miniscule fraction of the collectible tax. The taxable base increased 2.5 times
during 2004-08 but the TDS collections have substantially dipped in 2005-08. There
is a need for a non-intrusive framework through automation which does not
constrict business but at the same time sifts out potentially high risk transactions for
scrutiny.

2.1. The RBI is the nodal agency for channelizing remittances to non- residents
through ADs. ADs mainly comprise private, public and foreign banks. There are
about 4300 branches of ADs across the country listed under A and 8 category". The
RBI collects data from the ADs under 99 purpose codes. Payments under 34
purpose codes have been identified as liable for TDS.

A The process

2.2 Resident individuals are permitted to remit upto US $ 25,000 for certain
purposes? on the basis of a self declaration. For remittances higher than this limit,
additional documentation towards establishing the remittance as bonafide is
insisted upon. The Exchange Control Manual" states that “the Reserve Bank trusts
that ADs will ensure that the Exchange Control regulations are observed by themselves
and their constituents both in letter and in spirit’. Thus ADs have the primary
responsibility to ensure the legality of the remittance and conformity to FEMA
Rules15 as well as with the various Acts that govern the business of the remitter (the
person who pays) and the receiver (the person receiving the money).

+ Depending on the quantum and nature of business, banks categorise their branches under category A, B and C based on the

guidelines issued by RBL.

BE Category A: Offices and Branches maintaining independent foreign currency accounts in their own names.

EE Category B: Do not maintain independent foreign currency accounts but have powers of operating on the accounts
maintained abroad by their Head/ Principal Office ar any other link office.

BE Category ९: All other offices excluding branches of Categories A & B

77 For easy compilation and to enable comparison between countries, the IMF has prescribed a set of purpose codes under which

remittances - payments and receipts in foreign exchange have to he classified. Accordingly the RBI has adopted the same set of

lassification which the remitters have to indicate to the authorized dealer and the same is compiled by them and reported to the

RBI for Balance of Payments purposes. For eg.: $0403 captures payments under telecommunication services and P0205 reflects

purchases on account of operational leasing by Shipping Companies.

+ The purposes being (i) employment abroad (ii) emigration (iii) maintenance of close relatives abroad (iv) education abroad and

(v) medical treatment.

* paragraph 1.19 of the Exchange Control Manual

* AP (DIR Series) Circular No 56 dated 26.11.2002 and Circular No 3 dated 19.07.2007.



Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

B Oversight & Reconciliation

2.3. Reconciliation of aggregate level data across different sources would be an

indicator on the controls on illicit flows. Two sets of reconciliation conducted by RBI

for this purpose include:

¢ Imports data on Balance of Payments (BoP) with that on foreign trade reported by
Director General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS).

* Net Errors and Omissions in BoP.

Reconciliation of imports

2.4 BoP is compiled by the RBI from the data collected by ADs while the foreign
trade data of DGCIS relate to merchandise trade through all the recognized seaports,
airports, land customs stations and inland container depots. The two figures differ
widely. RBI in its Reconciliation of Import Data’® had attributed the difference to the
fact that the DGCIS data does not capture defence imports. However, even after
factoring defence imports, the un-reconciled balance averaged annually around
र 23000 crore in 2005-07. The difference stands for remittances that are not
backed by corresponding imports and which the reconciliation process is yet to
account for.

Table 2: Reconciliation between DGCIS and RBI

( in crore)
Year Imports as Defence Total Payments as Difference of
per DGCIS imports* per RBI Column (4) & (5)
(0) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
2005-06 660409 7511 667920 695412 27492
2006-07 838048 5541 843589 862833 19244

‘Source: 297 Report of Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) Demand for Grants 2007-08, April 2008

Net Errors and Omissions in BoP

2.5 BoP has two components:

Chart 3 .
Net Errors and Omissions Capital Account that captures the
Zin Crore movement of assets and Current
Account which captures the
4344 4830 corresponding flow of funds. The two
5000 2775 accounts should balance out once the
transaction is completed and when
0 added under the ‘Net Errors and
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Omissions (NEO)’ should ideally

yield a sum of zero. In practice,
however, the resulting balance inevitably shows a net credit or a net debit which
would mean unaccounted inflow or outflow of forex respectively. On an average, the
annual ‘unaccounted’ forex flow as captured in NEO in three years 2006-09 was
₹ 3983 crore; the accumulating credit balance (flowing from transactions in the three
years) being है 11949 crore as of 2009. The gaps in reconciliation are pointers to

16 India's BoP Developments during July-September 2007 released on 31.12.2007:RBL

6


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

forex flows, the purpose behind which are unknown or unaccounted. Thus the NEO
balances require analysis towards arresting the unaccounted transactions for
deriving a greater assurance on forex flows.

Tax Gap

2.6 The tax gap captures the gap between the collectible tax and the tax collected
by the government. We sought to correlate the invisibles account in the BoP data
(remittances which are broadly classifiable as taxable) with the tax collected.

2.7. The following bases were used in the calculation of the tax gap:

* Investment income under the BoP includes interest, dividend and _ profits.
Dividends are arrived at after payment of taxes and dividend income is exempt
from tax under the Income Tax Act. Profits accruing to Permanent Establishments
are a post tax entity. Therefore, we considered only interest payments as the
taxable base;

© Almost 31 per cent?’ of the total debt raised is in the form of concessional debts ;
we factored this amount while working out the tax base as the interest payments
in this regard are subject to various levels of tax concessions;

Table 3: Details of payments made to non-residents
@ in crore)

2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08

Payments on Miscellaneous Account* 37894 62396 71962 108793 105674
Payments on Transportation Account* 459 389 369 383 595
Payments on Insurance Account* 397 346 1237 674 994
Payments of Investment Income * 20928 18538 26971 37522 39745
Total 59678 81669 100539 147372 147008
Tax deductible @ 10% 5967 8166 10054 14737 14700
TDS from remittances * NA 10 54 41 16
Tax gap 5967 8156 10000 14696 14684

* The Principal Chief Controller of Accounts, Ministry of Finance
# Balance of Payments, RBI

¢ Charter hire charges for ships (captured under the transportation account of BoP)
are to be treated as payment of royalties or payment for use of equipment’? liable
for TDS. Commission paid on insurance business, captured under the insurance
account of BoP would be liable for TDS. Almost all the remittances under
miscellaneous account of the BoP are liable for TDS as fees for technical services or
royalties;

17 India's External Debt-A Status Report, Ministry of Finance, August 2006

15 Loans from multilateral institutions such as International Development Agency (IDA), International Fund for Agriculture
Development (IFAD) and Organisation of Petroleum Exporting countries (OPEC) which have long maturity and relatively low
service/interest charges are treated as concessional. Loans from certain multilateral sources such as IBRD, ADB ete whose terms are
close to market rates are classified under non concessional.

29 Hire charges paid by Indian charterers for hiring ships on bare ~boat charter- cum- demise basis to a non resident are taxable in
India as ‘royalty’ and hence liable for TDS - West Asia Maritime Ltd v. IT0(2008) 297 ITR(AT) 202 Chennai

7


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

© We applied a flat rate of 10 per cent for TDS which is the lowest rate as applicable
under the DTAAs. The calculations are thus essentially conservative estimates of
the tax gap.

2.8 The remittances have steadily

increased by 2.5 times during the period chart 4Taxideducted at source tin Crore
2004-08 but the TDS collections have

shown a substantial dip during 2005-08. 60 ar

In all the years, the tax collected was 50 I

only a miniscule fraction of the
collectible tax. In absence of further
details, we could not make an 16.26
assessment on whether the increasing zo, oe

gap has been due to better tax 0) a

management by assessees or was 0

simply, leakage of revenue. 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08

Cc Oversight: Risk Analysis

2.9 A study by the Global Financial Integrity?® published in 2008 estimates illicit
financial flows?! out of developing countries in the range of US $850 billion to US $1
trillion a year. India was ranked 5‘ in the list with an estimated annual illicit flow of
US $ 22.7 billion.

2.10 OECD22 reports speak of the weak regulatory mechanisms for information-
sharing between countries, even within the OECD. Information can be shared under
tax treaties (DTAAs) based on specific queries relevant to the tax proceedings and
engender prolonged consultations. The framework for such co-operation in sharing
information on money laundering is even weaker. The risk is heightened as novel
ways of money laundering emerge. Tax needs to be deducted at the first instance as
more than 90 countries are not covered under DTAAs with India; 50 out of the 7423
DTAAs do not provide for assistance for recovery of tax undercharge after the
remittance is made; even though the provision for such assistance is incorporated in
24 DTAAs, the procedure is long drawn and often unfruitful4.

20 }jlicit Financial Flows from Developing Countries, 2002-2006
21 [llicit financial flows involve the transfer of money earned through activities such as corruption, transactions involving
contraband goods, criminal activities, and efforts to shelter wealth from a country’s tax authorities. It does not include major forms
of value drainages not represented by money, viz, trade mispricing that is handled by collusion between importers and exporters
within the same invoice, not picked up in mispricing models based on IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, a technique utilized
extensively by multinational corporations; proceeds of criminal and commercial smuggling such as drugs, minerals, and contraband
goods; and mispriced asset swaps, where ownership of commodities, shares, and properties are traded without a cash flow.
22 Access for Tax Authorities to information gathered by Anti Money Laundering Activities - Centre for Tax Policy and
Administration: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)

Comprehensive Agreements as listed on the ITD website
24 Source: Para 3.14 CAG Audit Report No 13 of 2005 Direct Taxes (Systems Appraisals)

8


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

2.11 We conducted a destination-wise analysis of the pattern of remittances
relating to invisibles in two years 2007-09. The aggregate data puts the spot light on
high risk remittances (illustrative):

© The destination of remittances

we . Table 4 Analysis of remittances made towards
(towards invisibles) aggregating to

royalties, fees for technical services and

₹ 8762.5 crore and representing | interest  inGaane
5.4 per cent of the total, was Countries 2007-08 2008-09
“unspecified” in the RBI’s data. 8. DTAA countries 77460.2. 73613.5
360 degree check of the Non-DTAA countries 754.1 1393.2

. . . Unspecified countries 3099.3 5663.2
remittances with the purpose i.e., Total 81313.6  80669.9

services received in India is
difficult without data on destination of the remittances. % 2147.3 crore was
remitted to non-DTAA countries.

© Of particular concern were remittances made to under developed
jurisdictions, for services which these countries appear ill-equipped to
deliver. For instance, ~ 1.5 crore to Guernsey for architectural, engineering
and other technical services in 2008-09; ₹ 7.5 lakh was remitted to Ecuador
for research and development expenses in 2008-09. There is also the risk of
treaty shopping?® by residents of third countries.

© % 56676 crore was remitted during 2007-08 to Offshore Financial Centers
(OFCs) which are recognized by the World Bank as jurisdictions that are
opaque to regulations and are not conducive for information sharing?®. This
constitutes about 19 per cent of the amounts being remitted out of India
under the invisibles account. Once again, remittances to OFCs are not put
under the scanner-at the time of the remittance or thereafter.

D Oversight: Risk mitigation
Thin capitalization

2.12 Foreign companies generally tend to bring in capital in the form of loans to
the affiliates, rather than as equity. This is known as thin capitalization. Thin
capitalization is frowned by host countries not only because it belies the
commitment of the foreign investor to the domestic economy, but also because it
allows the principal to receive regular interest regardless of the profits earned by

25 Treaty shopping is a process by which entities resident of third countries seek to avail the benefits of DTAAs between two
Contracting States.

26 The major source of information on banking activities of OFCs is reporting to the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) which is
incomplete. The reporting is confined to the major OFCs. The smaller OFCs (for instance, Bermuda, Liberia, Panama, etc) do not
report for BIS purposes. Claims on the non-reporting OFCs are growing, whereas claims on the reporting OFCs are declining.
Secondly, the BIS does not collect from the reporting OFCs data on the nationality of the borrowers from or depositors with banks,
or by the nationality of the intermediating bank. Thirdly, for both offshore and onshore centers, there is no reporting of business
managed off the balance sheet, which can be several times larger than on-balance sheet activity. In addition, data on the significant
quantity of assets held by non-bank financial institutions, such as insurance companies, is not collected at all. Nor is there any
information on assets held by mutual funds as well as private trusts and companies whose beneficial owners are normally not under
any obligation to report. Source: IMF Background Paper on Offshore Financial Centers Prepared by the Monetary and Exchange Affairs
Department (June 2000)



Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

the affiliate. On the other hand, dividend from equity is distributed on the profits
earned by the affiliate. TDS is withheld on interest at the rate of 10 per cent, while
business profits (worked out after allowing interest payments as deductions from
the incomes) are taxed at the rate of 30 per cent, thus providing a tax arbitrage.

2.13 Tax laws of several countries provide that if the company’s debt equity ratio
exceeds a certain threshold level, then some or all of the interest above that level are
to be disallowed. However, neither the Companies Act nor the Income Tax Act
addresses the problem of thin capitalization of foreign affiliates in India.

Canadian rules disallow interest where debt equity ratio exceeds three times the
equity at any time during the year. In Japan thin capitalization rules apply only to
related party debt; interest is excluded when amount borrowed is three times the
amount of capital from lending shareholders. In UK, where interest paid to the
related party is excessive, the interest is re-classified as deemed dividend. The
acceptable debt-equity ratio is industry-specific under application of arm’s length
principle2’.

2.14 We analysed the capital structure and interest payments of 566 foreign
companies for the assessment years 2005-06 to 2008-09. Using the benchmark of
debt-equity 70028 in excess of 3:1 to categorise the affiliate as thinly capitalized, we
found that 130 companies assessed in Delhi, Mumbai, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh
and Karnataka were thinly capitalized. In the absence of specific provisions in the
Act, the companies were entitled to claim deduction for the payment of interest on
their borrowings without any restriction. The proportionate claim of deduction
towards interest in excess of the debt equity ratio of 3:1 worked out to % 8430.3
crore involving a tax impact of € 3134.8 crore.

CBDT constituted (2009) a committee to examine the ‘Investigation issues in abuse

of tax treaties and tax havens’2? which recommended the following:

* Separate investigation units to handle cases relating to tax havens, round tripping
and electronic transfers.

¢ Need to initiate negotiations for tax information exchange agreement with all tax
havens that have substantial international transactions with India.

¢ Introduce legal and anti-tax evasion measures such as thin capitalization rules,
general tax avoidance rules etc.

Liaison Offices

2.15 Foreign companies can operate in India through a liaison office (LO) with the
approval of RBI. It is allowed to undertake only liaison activities, ie. it can act asa
channel of communication between the foreign head office and parties in India. LOs

27 Section 92 of the Act provides tax authorities to make adjustments to the assessee’s income on arm’s length basis in case of
transactions between residents and nonresidents having ‘close connection’

28 Debt equity ratio =Debt/Equity where Debt equals secured loans plus unsecured loans and Equity has been taken as paid up
capital

29 Background Paper - 25% Annual Conference of Chief Commissioners and Directors General of Income Tax, New Delhi

10


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

are not allowed to undertake any business activity in India; cannot earn any income
in India; and their expenses are to be met through inward forex remittances from
their foreign principals. Thus a LO should not constitute a taxable entity in India. It
is in this context that the RBI endorses a copy of the approval letter of setting up a
LO in India to the CBDT. This is necessary to ensure that the LOs are not indulging in

activities which would have a tax impact.

2.16 We sought an assurance on the

Table 5: Tax returns filed by LOs

thin IT न State No of LOs No filing returns
controls within ITD to monitor the Karnataka 125 1
activities of LO. We found that only ३31. Andhra Pradesh 23 3
LOs out of 844 spread across select eeu Nadu eH rat
हे हैं F erala i
States, had filed their ens of income Mumbai 273 4
during the period 2006-09. There isno — yaryana 37 Nil
system for review of non-filers in the Delhi 282 18
department; this applies to the LOs as Rajasthan 3 1
well. The LOs who do not file returns Su/arat 6 Ni
हु West Bengal 18 Nil
are currently out of the radar of the Total 844 31
ITD. After we raised the issue, few ITD
charges informed us that notices had been issued to select LOs in their jurisdiction.

Recommendations

© We recommend periodic reconciliation of aggregate data maintained by

various government agencies that together should provide an oversight on forex
transactions. Ministry of Finance could co-ordinate to institute a mechanism
for such reconciliation;

The CBDT (October 2010) stated that the electronic submission of
certificates, since July 2009 has made the process of reconciliation easier. The
electronic filing of returns would address the issue of reconciliation. CBDT is
in active correspondence with the RBI based on which the procedures are
being revised, the procedure of electronic reporting of undertakings and
certificates being one such. As RBI is the nodal authority for movement of
forex, CBDT felt that the control mechanisms would need to be addressed by
RBI if they found the same to be inadequate. It was claimed that the
reconciliation is restricted to the extent of withholding taxes and the systems
are in place.

We are of the opinion that the reconciliation between CBDT and RBI needs to
be strengthened.

A significant step towards transparency will be submission of tax gap analysis
to the Parliament under the Fiscal Responsibility & Budgetary Management Act
(FRBM), that will also provide an estimate on revenue leakages in forex
remittances;

11


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

The CBDT(October 2010) stated that gap is bound to exist between the total
amount of remittances and remittances subject to withholding tax as the
Income Tax Act and the DTAAs provide very little scope for source based
taxation. It has been stated that the tax gap analysis done by them is not
throwing up any broad conclusion. Submission of tax gap analysis to
Parliament is a policy issue which entails detailed deliberation.

We agree with CBDT that the tax gap is bound to exist. Yet the tax gap needs
to be objectively analysed with respect to the specific items that are taxable
and may be suitably followed up.

« We recommend that the ITD conduct a macro-analysis of remittances. This
analysis can form the basis for a risk-based tracking of high risk transactions by
ITD in co-ordination with the banking sector. The data can also be used to
further fine tune selection of tax returns for scrutiny- for eg: remitters with high
volume of forex transactions with OFCs can be selected;

The CBDT while noting the recommendation stated that they are conducting
checks on the C&Us on the basis of due risk assessment. The electronic filing
of U/Cs has helped in better management of records and their analysis.
Exception lists are being prepared based on identified risk criteria like zero
TDS which are acted upon by the jurisdictional assessing officers.

We are of the opinion that the risk assessment parameters may be
institutionalised and be made applicable uniformly through centralized
monitoring.

© We recommend that adequate safeguards may be inbuilt to protect revenue on
account of thin capitalization. ITD needs to strengthen monitoring of non-filers
among liaison offices;

The CBDT stated that these issues are under examination and will be taken
care of in the Direct Tax Code Bill, 2010. With regard to liaison offices, the ITD
receive information from RBI which is examined. Presently there is no
mandatory requirement of filing of return of income by every liaison office.
However, in our opinion, revising the statute to this effect would facilitate
better oversight and monitoring.

12


CHAPTER 3
CONTROLS ON REMITTANCES
Collection and transfer of documents

Controls in tax administration
Correlation with authorized dealers
Use of C & Us in regular assessments

Electronic filing of undertakings

Processing of TDS returns

Streamlining the process

Recommendations


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Chapter Overview

A remitter is required to submit an undertaking that he has abided by the FEMA
requirements. He is also required to submit a certificate by a chartered accountant
certifying the undertaking. The certificate and undertaking (C&U) form the basic
documents that the AD must examine before the remittance. The rigours of checks
expected from the ADs on each individual remittance are rendered unviable with the
increase in the volume of remittances.

A copy of the C&U on every remittance is sent by the ADs to the assessing officers
(AOs) in the ITD. The manual receipt and collation of C&Us in ITD are in a disarray
especially in heavy assessment charges. Stacks of C&Us lay dumped in rooms making
their retrievability, a near impossibility. No reconciliation of C&Us is possible
between ADs and ITD in this scenario. Our assessment of the tax gap on the
remittances in the audit sample was severely constricted given the state of record
management of C&Us in ITD. Even so, we found that हैं 98.7 crore was not deducted
during the period 2005-09.

ITD introduced e-filing of undertakings but it meets the purpose only partially as it
is yet to be harmonized with the returns to RBI or even integrated with the e-filed
quarterly TDS returns. The TDS returns are also not being processed in ITD. The
weak controls across the government leave wide gaps for tax evasion.

3.1. The ADs play a pivotal role in providing an assurance on the conformity of
forex remittances to sovereign Acts. We examined the ability of the ADs to discharge
their functions with reference to the volume of transactions and the nature of the
responsibilities placed on them.

3.2 Data on the total volume of forex transactions handled by ADs was not
available. On an average, each AD remits around हैं 700 crore every year. The
number of checks and the nature of checks make the process cumbersome. With the
introduction of FEMA, RBI decided not to prescribe the documents which should be
verified by the ADs. Instead it was left to the ADs to satisfy themselves on the nature
and purpose of the remittance. However, the guidelines prescribing onerous checks
by the ADs continue and a viable alternative is yet to emerge.

The checks prescribed by RBI in respect of remittances relating to foreign shipping
companies or their agents in India, illustrate the rigours expected of ADs. The ADs
are required to check that collection of freight is duly supported by details
(contained in the ‘freight manifest’) of the cargo carried, the port of embarking and
of discharge. They are also required to check in detail the entries in respect of 10 to

13


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

15 per cent of the freight manifest and to cross reference the same with the export
tally sheet certified by the surveyors of the shipping companies towards actual
loading. The bills of lading (document given by the carrier to the shipper
acknowledging that specified goods have been received on board) in respect of
imports are to be verified. In respect of receipts other than freight, suitable
documentary evidence is to be verified in detail. ADs are required to watch the
voyage-wise details from foreign shipping companies/agents for crediting freight/
passage collections.

Similarly, remittances towards refunds of Income tax are required to be preceded by
cumbersome checks by the ADs: they are required not only to verify the original
assessment order, the source of funds of investments, profits arising thereof, income
tax returns etc. हैं 544 crore3? was remitted towards refunds during 2007-08 to 66
countries; in 2008-09, the figure was 1988 crore?! remitted to 73 countries.

3.3. Innovative solutions are required that meet the need for control without
making the controls cumbersome and ineffective. We are of the opinion that the
rigours of checks at the level of the AD impinge on the effectiveness of such controls,
which makes the need for co-ordination with the ITD even greater. We also feel that
ITD is a key partner in the framework of governmental oversight and its
performance would need to be assessed not only in its ability to collect tax but also
its role as a deterrent in money laundering.

Collection and transfer of documents

3.4 A remitter is required to submit an undertaking that he has abided by the
FEMA requirements. He is also required to submit a certificate by a chartered
accountant certifying the undertaking. The ADs send a copy of the certificate and
undertaking (C&U) on each individual remittance to the assessing officer (AO) in ITD.
We approached about 16882 ADs in order to correlate the receipt and transfer of
C&Us to the ITD. 253 responded to our queries, of which 129 ADs reported nil
remittances during the period under review. Our findings on the remaining 124 ADs
are illustrated below:

A Collection of C&Us

The process does not provide an assurance that C&Us with respect to each
remittance are collected by the ADs from the remitter. For instance, we found that
during 2004-06, there has been import of merchandise to the extent of हैं 40445
crore. However, the ADs did not collect C&Us for remittances made for the above
import of merchandise?3.

3 Includes remittances of € 32.03 crare to unspecified countries and remittances of 1.62 crore to 15 countries with whom India
does not have DTAA

31 Includes remittances of रे 1258.84 crore to unspecified countries and remittances of 2 20.76 crore to 21 countries with whom
India does not have DTAA

32 115 under category A and 1573 under category B

33 RBI/A. P. (DIR Series) Circular No, 03 dated 19.07.2007 specifies that C & Us are to he submitted even in respect of impart of
goods

14


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

B Completeness of C&Us

We found instances where the C&Us did not mention vital data on remittances. For
instance in Karnataka, C&Us supporting seven remittances aggregating to हैं 13.5
crore made through three ADs during 2005-08, did not mention the purpose and no
tax was deducted from the remittances.

Capital gains tax is not deductible on a remittance relating to sale of shares if
Securities Transactions Tax (STT) has already been levied. We found that tax was
not deducted from 13 remittances worth & 9.8 crore in 2006-08 in Andhra Pradesh,
CIT Hyderabad although the C&Us were not supported with the details of
transaction such as date of acquisition of share, sale and demat account. These
details were required towards verifying the admissibility of the exemption of capital
gains tax.

Cc Transfer of C&U to ITD

Our study across 16 branches of ADs showed that they had not forwarded C&Us in
respect of 16305 transactions involving a remittance of ¥ 5613 crore to the ITD. We
correlated the receipt of C&Us in ITD in detail in two States. We found that the 1770
was not receiving C&Us from 73 per cent of the ADs in Tamil Nadu; the figure was 75
per cent in Karnataka. In Madhya Pradesh, the assessment records of 31 assessees
showed foreign remittances, but the ITD could not produce the C&Us supporting the
remittances. The liaison of ITD with ADs was clearly deficient and the gap remains
to be effectively bridged even after we raised the issue with ITD.

Calyon Bank, Tamil Nadu, made 22 remittances of ~ 3.5 crore relating to Saint
Gobain Glass and Air Liquid Engineering Pvt Ltd during 2004-06 towards ‘fees for
technical services’, on which tax amounting to हैं 44.2 lakh was leviable. However,
the AD did not transfer the C&Us and did not deduct the TDS either.

D Transfer of C&Us to unrelated AOs

We found 72 C&Us relating to remittance of हैं 18.2 crore in 3 States34 which were
forwarded to officers other than the AO where the remitters were assessed.

Ei Deduction of tax on remittances

We attempted to cross-check a sample of C&Us received in ITD for the tax
deductibility of remittances. This was no mean task given the state of record
management of C&Us in ITD (refer paragraph 3.10). In all, we found that TDS of
% 44.7 crore was not deducted from remittances made during the period 2005-09 in
4 States35, In addition, ~ 2.9 crore was deducted less than the TDS leviable in 3
States3¢, Income Tax Act disallows deduction of those items of expenditure on which

* Delhi, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal
* Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu
26 Karnataka, Mumbai, Tamil Nadu

15


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

tax had not been deducted. We found 8 cases where remittances amounting to
= 114.4 crore were disallowed by the AOs; the TDS that was not collected on these
remittances amounted to ~ 42.4 crore. The process is unable to provide an
assurance that the ADs collect the TDS at the time of remittance.

Charge: DIT (IT), Chennai, Tamilnadu; AY: 2003-04 to 2005-06

Assessee: Cairn Energy India Pvt Ltd

The assessee made remittances towards acquiring and processing of seismic
data/geological data and charter hire charges. As these payments partake the
character of royalty and fees for technical services, tax ought to have been deducted.
Failure resulted in short levy of tax of = 21.1 crore. The proportionate disallowance
under Section 40(a)(i) worked out to be % 90.4 crore involving a short levy of = 37.7
crore.

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2005-06

Assessee: Citi Bank NA.

TDS was not collected on interest of ¥ 47.2 crore paid by the assessee to the head
office/foreign branches. The payment was therefore disallowed by ITD and was
brought to tax. However, it was taxed at the rate of 10 per cent instead of normal
rate of tax at the rate of 40 per cent with surcharge and education cess. This resulted
in short levy of tax of % 26.9 crore including interest. The department accepted
(February 2009) our findings and rectified the assessment in May 2009.

F Misclassification of remittances

We found that = 78.74 crore and हैं 71.35 crore remitted through one 0037 during the
years 2007-08 and 2008-09 had been incorrectly classified under the purpose code
for Miscellaneous Remittances(S1019) as against the correct head relating to
payment for shipping freight for import and export.

3.5 Weare also concerned about forex transactions which are not covered under
the requirement of C&U. For instance Income Tax Act38 exempts income from export
of goods or computer software subject to certain conditions, one of which is
repatriation of sale proceeds into India in convertible foreign exchange. The sale
proceeds shall be deemed to be received in India if they are credited to a separate
account maintained for the purpose with any bank outside India with the approval
of RBI. Whenever payments are made from this account, there would be no
undertaking or certificate as applicable to remittances from India. Thus the veracity
and taxability of the transaction would not be available for verification in India.

Controls in tax administration

3.6 The C&Us are received by the AO in charge of the tax assessment of the
remitter (deductor who deducts the tax from the payments made to the non-
resident) or with the DIT (IT), wherever located. The AO is required to check from

# State Bank of India, SP Commercial Branch Indore
38 section 10A/10B

16


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

the C&U that TDS was deducted as required; if not, the payment (remittance) may be
disallowed as deduction during assessment. The remitter is also required to file a
quarterly tax return (Form No 27Q) with the jurisdictional TDS Officer. The AO
(TDS) is required to co-relate the TDS return (reporting the transactions on which
TDS was deducted) with the actual TDS deposited and the interest payable, if any,
for delay in such tax deposit.

३.7. The remittances under the invisible
account have increased three-fold during
2002-2008. As every remittance is to be
backed by a C&U, the quantum of C&Us
being received by the Department is
gargantuan. The volume has rendered
micro check of individual remittances in
ITD very difficult. The manual receipt and
collation of C&Us was in disarray and we
found that stacks of C&Us lay dumped in
rooms, with their retrievability a near
impossible task, especially in heavy
assessment charges. In such a scenario, a
system of periodic reconciliation of receipt of C&Us in ITD with those sent by ADs
was rendered difficult.

3.8 The tax administration is currently stretched, ill-equipped to handle the flow
of records (C&Us) manual or automated. The risks are neither identified nor are
they placed on a hierarchy to enable the authorities to be able to either sift risky
transactions or mitigate the risks that flow from them.

Correlation with authorized dealers

3.9. We approached the ADs to cross-link the C&Us collected by them with the
remittances reflected in assessment records of the remitters. Our findings illustrate
the risks that crept into the system in absence of co-ordination between ADs and
ITD, as well as due to inadequate monitoring of the C&Us in ITD. Such correlation
will not only throw up inadmissible deductions but also put the spotlight on “hidden”
remittances.

Charge: CIT, Kochi, AY 2005-06; Assessee: Kochi Shipyard Ltd

The assessee reported an expenditure of ~ 57.1 crore, which was remitted abroad.
The C&Us collected by the AD also showed that the money had been remitted
abroad.

We found that the assessee had paid the sum as fees for technical services, on which
tax was not deducted at source. When queried, the Department stated that of the
total, हैं 12.5 crore was accounted twice and actual payment was हैं 44.57 crore only.
The balance of € 12.5 crore actually remitted by the assessee through the AD was

17


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

unexplained? and would have remained undetected but for the correlation
attempted by us. This unexplained income involved a short levy of ¥ 4.6 crore.

We found three other instances (of private companies) where the assessees declared
(in the tax returns) remittances short of the actual remittance as reflected in the
C&Us collected by the ADs. This unexplained income involved a short levy of % 2.7
crore.

Use of C&Us in regular assessment: Analysis of top remitters

3.10 As mentioned in previous paragraphs, even though the AOs fail to get all the
C&Us, they need to correlate the C&Us at the time of assessment because
remittances (i.e., expenditure) on which TDS has not been deducted is disallowable
as deduction and should be brought to tax. The data contained in an undertaking is
largely the same as in the certificate and need for two documents is not clear. Given
the large volume of certificates, the ITD is currently unable to link the certificates to
each remittance, leave alone identify those CAs who have erred or initiate concerted
action against them.

3.11 We collected data from CMIE*°, which lends itself to segregation of forex
remittances across four categories viz., interest, royalties, fees for technical services
and others to identify top remitters whose remittances were liable for taxation. The
assessment records of these remitters were used as a base to determine whether the
remittances reflected in their tax returns, were supported by C&Us received in the
ITD. Given the poor record management of C&Us, this exercise could be conducted
only in select charges.

3.12 The assessment charges in Karnataka and Mumbai reported a high level of
processing the C&Us received from ADs. But when we asked for C&Us in support of
expenditure claimed by the remitters and allowed by the AOs in regular assessment,
we were told that the C&Us were not available with either the AO or the DIT (IT).
We could not link the C&Us with the assessments in other charges also because they
could not be retrieved. Clearly, the ITD is not equipped to cross-link the TDS
deductions on remittances with the C&Us; the processing of e-TDS returns is in
difficulty (paragraph 3.16-3.18); the AOs are permitting expenditure incurred in
forex without assuring themselves that the tax obligations have indeed been
discharged.

Charge: DIT (IT), Chennai AY: 2003-04 & 2005-06

Assessee: Shri Narain Karthikeyan

The assessee, a sports person remitted training fees of हैं 2.8 crore and हैं 10.1 crore
to non-residents without making TDS. But the remittance was not disallowed as
expenditure.

39 ;
Section 69 of the Act provides that where any expenditure is not explained by the assessee, such amounts may be brought to tax
© Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy

18


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

३.13 The documentation sought by ITD is two fold: an undertaking from remitter
and a certificate from a CA for every transaction. The certificate from a CA is
essentially a substitute to the earlier requirement of a no-objection certificate!. The
requirement adds to the cost of compliance of the remitter as also to the bulk of
documents without seeming to serve any effective purpose.

Electronic filing of undertakings

3.14 The process of submission of C&Us has been partly automated since July
200942, The new process (summarized in Chart 5) provides for electronic uploading
of the undertaking by the remitter
on the ITD’s server. The ADs will
remit the moneys only on

Chart 5: Flow chart of filing undertaking
form u/s 195 of IT Act 1961

Gin submission of the system generated
undertaking. However, the ADs will

a ee certificate of Accountant (Form 15 CB). -
Form available at wwwitin-nsdl.com continue to manually send a copy of

है the C&Us to the ITD. In our opinion,

seen dhs os this step towards automation can
+ elp in tracing a_ particular
remittance as also in correlation of
remittances with TDS returns.
However, a few gaps in the process
eo imit the correlation. Exception

[Printout ofform (15CA) is signed reports on the tax rates or quantum
| कई = of tax that was to be deducted can

[Hteetronically uploads the remittance details in Form 150A, | Electronically uploads the remittance details in Form 15CA. ]

¥

‘Takes Printout of filled undertaking form (15CA) with
stem generated acknowledgment numl

ubmits the signed undertaking (Form 15CA) alongwith certificat
of Accountant (Forin 15CB) in duplicate to the AD. be generated from a database of

t undertakings only if the undertaking
AD remits the amount captures the purpose of remittance
y each purpose attracting different

rates of taxation) and on whether
the remittance is covered under
DTAAs. The purpose (of remittance) is not captured under alphanumeric codes in
the undertaking. Synchronizing this field with the RBI allotted purpose codes could
facilitate such correlation. In addition, the linkages designed to integrate the
electronically filed undertaking with the e- filed TDS returns, currently not defined,
must be established.

A copy of undertaking (form 1508] & certificate of Accountant
(Form 1509) forwarded by AD to Assessing Officer.

3.15 We found that the departmental formations in Assam, Punjab, UT Chandigarh
and Chennai were unable to access the undertakings which had been electronically
filed by the remitters and there was no mechanism for the department to process
the same. In Gujarat there were no access issues but they were not being used.

a1 है हि “ ला cert ‘
Previously, the remitter was required to obtain the ITCC (Income Tax Clearance Certificate) for each and every forex remittance,
Which was even more cumbersome. The requirement of C&U was a step towards voluntary compliance by the remitters.
2
Circular Na. 4 of 2009, dated 29.06.2009,

19


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Processing of TDS returns

3.16 Though there is no specific time period for processing and assessment of the
TDS returns filed, it has been judicially held*s that action is to be initiated by the
competent authority under the Act within a period of four years.

3.17 We found that several field formations* in ITD are unable to process the e-
filed TDS returns mainly because of problems in online matching of the tax deposit
(after the TDS deduction) with the PAN of the remitter. There were also problems of
access to 805 in newly created posts. For instance in Kerala access to the TDS
returns was given only to officers under regular assessment charges whereas
jurisdiction of non-residents had been transferred to the newly created DIT (IT)
office.

3.18 e-TDS application is designed to verify the fulfillment of conditions
prescribed in the direct tax laws, and throw up mismatch reports where the data
filed by the deductors is incomplete or incorrect to enable department to initiate
further action. We found that all the parameters necessary for processing of e-
returns involving application of DTAA provisions, are yet to be made functional. The
Department replied (June 2009) that owing to the complexities of DTAA provisions,
it has not been possible to build in all the parameters in the existing e-TDS software.

Streamlining the process: Issues and solutions

3.19 Our assessment on the controls on taxation of forex remittances is that it is
currently weak. The burden placed on the ADs would become more difficult with
the increasing volume of transactions. It is evident from Chart 2 that the
transactions are increasing at a substantial rate. The controls in ITD are unviable
too as the C&Us are too voluminous to be correlated to detect tax evasion. The huge
tax gap (discussed in paragraph 2.6) further vindicates this assessment. The
Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services (CPPAPS)
constituted by the Ministry of Finance*® also concluded (2007) that the provisions
for TDS are “very onerous and are met only in the breach”. Add to this the issues
thrown up in the DTAAs and judicial decisions; taxability of an international
transaction is a virtual conundrum to be solved.

3.20 The amount of tax gap is too huge to be ignored and calls for an assessment of
the contributing factors. The IT Act and the DTAAs together provide for various
exemptions to incomes arising to non-residents which are currently, un-quantified
in terms of revenue foregone. In an earlier study, we had pointed out the need for a
re-look on the exemptions. The Working Group for ‘Study of Non-Resident Taxation’
had in its report*® also recommended deletion of various exemptions being extended to
non- residents. As incomes exempt arising to non-residents in India would be liable for

© CIT Vs NHK Japan Broadcasting Corporation [2008] 305 ITR 137 (Delhi)

“ Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chandigarh, Delhi, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu
Report No 1 for Examining Exchange Control relating to individuals

* Submitted in 2003

20


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

tax in the host country/country of residence of the recipient, these exemptions would
not affect the recipient but mainly benefit the host country. And India has DTAAs with
all the major investing countries.

३.21 We compared the tax rates in different countries to assess whether the tax
differential is leading to greater tendency among foreign investors to escape
taxation in India and opt for it in their resident country. The corporate tax rates in
countries range from 20 to 30 per cent (of their net business income). The TDS rates
in India of 10-20 per cent (on gross receipts) would be much higher than the tax
rates in resident countries.

3.22 We feel that a lower flat rate of tax applicable across streams of incomes
irrespective of destinations would be workable alternative. This would be easier to
implement on the part of ADs as well as the ITD. It would facilitate greater taxpayer
compliance, reduce cost of doing business in India and also reduce disputes. This
lower rate if incorporated in the Direct Tax Code (DTC), would thus override all
other rates provided in the DTAA and would not require re-negotiations with other
countries.

Recommendations

© We are of the opinion that a flat and lower tax rate applied to all payments
regardless of their purpose or destination, will be a more viable alternative to
administer- for the ITD as well as the banking sector;

The CBDT stated that under the existing provisions of domestic law and
DTAAs the income liable to tax and the rate of tax varies from case to case.
The decision of withholding flat and lower rate of tax to all the payments
cannot be taken up unilaterally as most of withholding tax is governed by
DTAAs. It was further emphasized that there is a limit to simplification of the
statutes and oversimplification in the direction of taxation on gross basis
would not be feasible in the domestic context and would not be appreciated
in the international context.

We are of the opinion that CBDT may simplify and rationalize the procedures
to the extent possible so that they are easily understandable and
implementable. As non residents can opt for the domestic law (Income Tax
Act, 1961 or DTC, 2010) or DTAA which ever is beneficial, a clause in DTC
would in no way need renegotiation of DTAAs with other countries.

© Since processing each C&U is not feasible, an automated solution that sifts out
error reports from e-filed undertakings is recommended. This would require
that the purpose codes of RBI are adopted by the ITD and integrated into the
automation. We are of the opinion that this will also facilitate reconciliation of
data with RBI;

21


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

The CBDT stated that the suggestion requires further analysis considering the
practicability of harmonizing purpose codes of RBI with DTAAs and tax rates
contained therein. Electronic filing of C&Us has been introduced only during
the last year. Feedback from all stakeholders would be obtained before
streamlining the process.

We are of the opinion that the automated system may be made more robust
so as to enable field based exception reporting instead of limiting itself to
being a view based database of C&Us.

© The e-TDS returns must also provide data on all remittances, even those with
null value for TDS and must also capture the purpose codes;

The CBDT stated that the integration process would require change in rules
and agreed to consider the suggestion while framing rules under the DTC.

22


CHAPTER 4

SECTORAL ANALYSIS

Foreign Institutional Investors

Telecom Payments

Shipping Sector

Recommendations


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Ambiguity in the classification of incomes in respect of Foreign Institutional
Investors and Telecom Companies are leading to inconsistent assessments. Our
earlier study on the shipping sector had also shown that inadequate co-ordination
across various governmental bodies and weak controls within ITD plague the
taxation in this sector and, which provide an unintended advantage to non-resident
shipping industry over the domestic industry. Each sector deals with revenue
streams that challenge the application of Income Tax Act. The ITD is yet to evolve an
effective mechanism to provide clarity in these “green field areas” of taxation to
mitigate the risk to revenue.

4.1 The taxation of payments to non-residents involves monitoring the tax
liability of assesses operating in different sectors of the economy. We selected three
sectors to seek an assurance that the ITD is alive to the new challenges in these
sectors.

Foreign Institutional Investors

4.2 As on 31.12.2009, there are 1651 Foreign Institutional Investors (FIls)47
registered in India. FIIs can participate in the primary and secondary capital
markets and acquire shares/debentures of Indian companies through the stock
exchanges in India.

4.3 Classification of income earned by FIls as capital gains or business income has
been a contentious issue. The preferred option of the tax payer FII would depend on
the tax residency of the FI] and the applicable DTAA. FIIs operating through
Mauritius, Singapore, UAE and Cyprus would prefer their incomes to be treated as
capital gains as against business income. This is because these countries exempt
capital gains from tax while the DTAAs with these countries provide that the capital
gains will be taxed only in the country where the assessee is resident. On the other
hand, a FII resident in other countries would prefer to have its income treated as
business income since it will be liable for taxation only if it has a PE, i.e., a physical
existence, in India. When operating without a PE, it can escape taxation.

4.4 The departmental instructions do not provide clarity on this issue. The ITD
circular of 2007 had directed that while ordinarily trading in shares would yield
capital gains and not business profits, the AO must use his judgment to segregate the
stock holding of the FIIs into those for ‘investment’ and those as ‘stock-in-trade’. But

47Source Securities & Exchange Board of India (SEBI)

23


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

a FII operates in India within the ambit of permission granted by SEBI, which is for
investment activities and not for business. We are therefore of the opinion that
income of FIIs must be treated as capital gains regardless of whether the FII
categorizes its stock holding as investment or stock-in-trade. Simultaneously, the
Department needs to safeguard the loss of revenue in respect of the FIIs operating
from Mauritius, Singapore, UAE and Cyprus who are going out of the tax net on
account of the DTAA provisions.

Charge: DIT (IT), Delhi, AY: 2005-06, Assessee: ITF Mauritius

The assessee made 27 remittances of € 190 crore to Mauritius. Since the remittance
was treated as capital gains, no tax was deducted at source. We found that the
assessee was a sub-account*® of a foreign institutional investor-Venus Capital
Management Inc*%, a tax resident of USA. If the beneficial owner was from USA and
capital gains is taxable in India under the Indo-US DTAA, the grounds for exempting
the remittance from TDS by treating the company as a resident of Mauritius, is not
clear.

4.5 ४९ found that FIIs use this ambiguity to get advance rulings®® for treating
gains from capital markets as business income. ITD had argued for their treatment
as capital gains in AAR but had not appealed against these rulings. The department
went further and applied the AAR ruling to other assessments (although AAR was
for a particular transaction), resulting in under-charge of tax of = 87.8 crore in 5
cases51, ITD accepted our opinion and levied हैं 40.3 lakh in one case®? ; replies on the
other cases were awaited.

4.6 In respect of those assessments of FIIs where the income was treated as
capital gains, we found errors in 7 cases®? in Mumbai charge that led to under-
charge of tax of हैं 23.6 crore. ITD accepted our opinion and rectified two
assessments. One case is illustrated:

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2006-07

Assessee: Platinum Asset Management LTD. (A/C Platinum Asia Fund)

The loss of हैं 93.3 crore arising from speculative activity to the assessee was
incorrectly set-off against taxable short term capital gains resulting in short levy of
tax of t 10.6 crore including interest.

48 sub-account includes those foreign corporates, foreign individuals, and institutions, funds or portfolios established or
incorporated outside India on whose behalf investments are proposed to be made in India by a FIL

# Registration No 2006514. The Company is registered with the Securities & Exchange Commission in the United States as a
Registered Investment Advisory Company in 2000.

३० In order to provide the facility of ascertaining the Income-tax liability of a non-resident, to plan their Income-tax affairs well in
advance and to avoid long drawn and expensive litigation, a scheme of Advance Rulings has been introduced under the Income-tax
Act, 1961. The Authority for Advance Rulings (AAR) consists of a Chairman who is a retired Judge of the Supreme Court and two
members of the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, one each from the Indian Revenue Service and the Indian
Legal Service.

51 Name of Assessee and nature of assessment: Prudential Assurance Co Ltd(Scrutiny), Indivest Pvt Ltd,18 sub accounts of Fidelity
Group(Annexure)Summary, BNL Global Emerging Markets(Summary), Prudential Pension Ltd(Summary)

® Prudential Pension Ltd

53 Platinum Asset Management Ltd A/c Platinum Asia Fund; A/c Platinum International Brands Fund; A/c The Platinum Master
Portfolio; Carlson Fund Equity; Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System; Bank of America Singapore Ltd; Citicorp Investment
Bank (Singapore) Ltd.

24


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Telecom Payments

4.7. Increased trans-

Table 6: Forex payments towards telecom usage
country travel has Zi
. di d lex In crore
introduce comp! Year 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08
revenue sharing 3547 3298 1285 3589 3459
arrangements between — Source: RBI Monthly Bulletin March 2009

telecom companies. A phone call between subscribers to two different networks

usually means that both networks require a payment for carrying the call. The

charges include:

¢ Roaming charges: Charge paid by the local telecom company for extending the
connectivity service to its customer in the foreign country

e Termination charges: Since the originator of the call pays the full cost, the
network from which the call originates pays the termination charge to the
network on which the call terminates

e Connectivity charges: Charges payable by the local telecom company to the
foreign service provider for usage of the network elements for origin, transit and
termination of calls

e¢ Bandwidth charges: The charge for signal transmission through satellite
transponders for uplinking and downlinking™ of signal and data.

4.8 The disputes have arisen on whether these payments to foreign telecom
companies are liable to TDS in India. This has led to conflicting approaches within
ITD. The Department has not issued clarificatory orders to remove ambiguities or
approached the higher courts to overrule prejudicial AAR rulings.

4.9 In the recent past, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunals (ITAT) have provided
greater clarity on the taxability of telecom payments. ITAT, Hyderabad held
(October 2008) that connectivity charge was paid for use of equipment and not a
‘rendition of service’; hence, it falls within the ambit of royalty. A special Bench of
ITAT constituted to resolve (५४०55 conflicting decisions of the Delhi ITAT also held
(October 2009) that bandwidth charges also fall within the ambit of ‘royalties’. It is
interesting to note that the Department before the AAR (in the case of Dell
International Services Pvt Ltd%* and in the case of Cable & Wireless India Private
Limited 7) had also contended that services provided by telecom companies were in
the nature of technical services liable for taxation in India as fees for technical
services. Nevertheless, conflicting approaches continue within ITD.

54 Uplinking is the portion of the communication link used for transmission of signals from an earth terminal to a satellite. A
downlink is the inverse of an uplink

55 Asia Satellite Telecommunications Co. Ltd. v DCIT(2003)85 ITD 478(Delhi ITAT) and DCIT v Pan Am Sat International Systems
Inc,(2006) 9 SOT 100(Delhi ITAT)

56 Authority for Advance Ruling vide a ruling dated 18th July 2008 AIT-2008-236-AAR has held that amount of fixed monthly
recurring charges payable under Agreement, for the circuit between America and Ireland and for the circuit between Ireland and
India is not liable to be treated as fee for included services or royalty under DTAA between India and USA.

9 AAR No 786 of 2008.The AAR has held that in carrying telecom signals, Cable & Wireless Networks India Private Ltd UK had not
provided any managerial, technical or consultancy service, nor is it providing the services of its technical or other personnel to the
applicant and hence the same is not taxable as fees for technical services. The arrangement between Cable & Wireless Networks
India Private Ltd and Cable & Wireless Networks India Private Ltd, UK was for rendition of services and telecom services were
standard services,

25


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Charge: CIT I Chennai, Tamilnadu, AY: 2004-05 to 2006-07

Assessee: Aircel Cellular Ltd

The assessee was exempted by ITD from TDS on remittances towards roaming
charges. The tax along with interest amounting to % 4.7 crore was not deducted at
source. The AO justified the exemption on the ground that payments made were for
services rendered abroad and would not fall under the ambit of ‘royalty’ or ‘fees for
technical services’.

Similarly, TDS of ¥ 12.8 crore was not deducted (by Dishnet DSL Limited for three
AYs 2003-06) though the certificate issued to the assessee clearly stated that
bandwidth charges were classifiable under ‘fees for technical services’ and hence,
tax was deductible

4.10 Our checks on C&Us threw up 5 other cases where remittances aggregating to
% 172.5 crore were made without deducting TDS of % 19.8 crore.

Shipping sector

4.11 Anon-resident shipping company is taxed on a presumptive basis (whereby
7.5 per cent of the charges received by the company will be taxed). The master of
the ship is required to submit tax returns before setting sail from the Indian port.
Alternatively, he could undertake to submit tax returns within 30 days and collect a
no-objection certificate (NOC) from ITD before the journey. हैं 20879 crore and
₹ 30103 crore were remitted to non-residents engaged in shipping during 2007-08
and 2008-09 respectively.

4.12 Our earlier study on taxation of the shipping sector®* had raised concerns on

tax evasion in the absence of effective co-ordination between various government

authorities. We referred our findings to the Departments of Revenue and Shipping in

the Government of India; an assurance that the risks have been addressed is yet to

be received. Our main findings were:

¢ The 1775 records on the number of ships leaving Indian ports were substantially
lower than that in the records of the Port Trusts. There was wide variation between
1775 data and of the Customs authorities on the tonnage carried in these ships. Such
reconciliation was also important to segregate domestic cargo (cargo that will be
offloaded within India) from those that embark in foreign seas, DTAA relief can be
claimed only for international cargo;

© We found instances where ships were cleared for voyage without having applied for
NOC or filed tax returns; and where NOCs were issued without proper documentation
or proof of payment of TDS;

© Relief under DTAAs should be based on the provisions of the specific DTAA and after
clearly establishing the nationality of the freight beneficiary. The labyrinthine trails
of ownership and of transactions make this process difficult. Foreign ships obtain
NOCs by invoking nationality of the flag or the shipper or the charterer or the sub-

58 Review on exemptions, deductions and allowances to shipping and related sectors : Performance Audit Report No.25 af 2009

26


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

charterer or the owner of the ship- whichever is most beneficial. We found several
instances of incorrect relief leading to tax evasion;

© It is logical that a taxpayer can claim relief under DTAA if he is liable for taxation in
the country of residence’*. We found that there was no consistency in the taxation of
shipping profits arising to residents of countries where there is no tax on shipping
income.

4.13 In 3 cases in Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai charge, there was an
undercharge of ~ 14.5 crore owing to incorrect treatment of shipping income. One
case is illustrated below:

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra: AY 2006-07

Assessee Delmas France

The assessee carried out operation through a PE in India and therefore its income
from shipping activities was brought to tax in AY 2001-02. However, the same was
not done in AY 2006-07 resulting in escapement of income of ¥ 4.1 crore and short
levy of tax of हैं 2.3 crore. Department accepted the observation and initiated
remedial action (February 2009).

Recommendation

© We recommend that sectoral studies may be conducted hy ITD to identify the
avenues of revenue leakage as well as flag ambiguities in emerging areas;

The CBDT stated that sectoral studies are an ongoing process and suggestions
in the report have been noted.

59 AAR ruling in the case of Cyril Eugene Periera also held that “a taxpayer cannot claim relief from a non-existent burden of double
taxation (which would be the case, if he is not liable to pay tax in the country). DTAA is meant only for the benefit of taxpayers who
are liable to pay tax twice on the same income”.

© Delmas France(Mumbai DIT (IT) charge), Diamond Shipping Company Limited(CIT Kolkata charge) and Bengal Tiger Line India
(Pvt) Ltd. (BTL India) (CIT-1, Chennai)

27


CHAPTER 5

MISTAKES IN ASSESSMENTS

Relief under DTAA

Other mistakes in assessments

Recommendations


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

HAPTER 5

Mistakes in assessment

The provisions of DTAA were not being properly invoked or interpreted while
assessing non-residents. There were also errors in assessments involving other
provisions of the Act.

I Relief under DTAA

Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements entail tax benefits to assesses of other
countries. This needs to be weighed against the principle of reciprocity. Several
instances of incorrect allowance of the benefits under DTAA by the Department have
come to light during audit.

5.1 Relief to entities that are not taxed in the resident country

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2006-07

Assessee: Chiron Behring Gmbh & Company KG

The assessee was a limited partnership firm which was not
liable to tax in Germany. In AY 2005-06, the AO denied the
benefit of Indo-German DTAA relief to the assessee on this
ground and taxed royalty income. However this principle was
not followed in AY 2006-07 resulting in short levy of tax of 48
lakh.

DTAA is meant
only for the
benefit of
taxpayers who are
liable to pay tax
twice on the same
income. A
taxpayer cannot
claim relief under
DTAA if he is not
liable for taxation
in the country of
residence

Charge: CIT I, Chennai, Tamilnadu; AY: 2005-06

Assessee: West Asia Maritime Ltd.

The assessee paid ~ 193.3 crore to Emirates Trading LLC UAE,
for chartering vessels on which tax was not deducted at source.
Payments towards charter hire charges partake the character of
royalty under Section 9. Further, Emirates Trading Agency LLC,
UAE is a company incorporated in UAE. There is effectively no
tax on shipping income derived from shipping business in UAE. Tax deductible at
source along with interest worked out to % 59.8 crore.

5.2 Treatment of companies with a PE

Charge: DIT (IT), Chennai, Tamilnadu; AY: 2003-04

Assessee: Qualcom India Inc

The assessee did not offer any
business income, but debited
expenditure relating to
engineering गाव technical
services in the accounts.
presumptive basis on its gross receipts. Instead of being taxed on a

Article 7 of the Indo-US DTAA provides that profits
attributable to a PE in India will be taxed in accordance
with the Indian tax laws. Under the Income Tax Act, a
foreign company with a PE in India will be taxed on a

29


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

presumptive basis on the gross receipts, the assessment was completed by invoking
the normal provisions of the Income Tax Act and the assessee was allowed to carry
forward business loss of 3.1 crore. This led to potential undercharge of ¥ 1.3 crore.

Charge: CIT I, Chennai, Tamilnadu; AY: 2003-04 to 2006-07

Assessee: CEX ONYX India Pvt. Ltd

The assessee had remitted fees for technical
services to Onyx Asia Services Ltd Singapore, a
foreign company on which tax was deducted
(@20/10%). But as this income arose from a
PE, the income should have been assessed as
business income under Section 44DA and taxed (@ 40%). Short levy worked out to

Section 44DA of the Act provides for
assessing income being fees for
technical services as
Income.

Business

% 1.7 crore.

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2005-06
Assessee: J. Mcdermott Eastern Hemisphere Ltd

Article 5 of Indo Mauritius DTAA provides
that PE includes a mine or gas well and a
site of assembly or supervisory activities.
Section 44BB of the Income Tax Act
provides that where a non-resident is
engaged in the business of providing
services or facilities used in the business of
extraction or production of mineral oils
then 10 per cent of the amounts received
by it shall be liable for tax.

5.3. Computation of capital gains

The assessee was in exploration business
and its income was brought to tax in
earlier AYs on the ground that it had a PE
in the country. In AY 2005-06, its income
was exempted from tax on the ground that
income earned from execution of
contracts was exempt from tax under
Indo-Mauritius DTAA. This resulted in
short levy of tax of हैं 5.7 crore.
Department initiated remedial action after
we raised the issue.

Charge: DIT (IT), Kolkata, West Bengal; AY: 2005-06

Assessee: Century Enka Ltd

Article 13 of Indo Netherlands DTAA
provides for taxation on capital gains of a
Dutch Company in India if the gains were
made from transfer of shares in India.
While computing the capital gains arising
to a non-resident from transfer such
shares, the benefit of indexation is not
allowable.

Accordis Overseas Investment BV,
Netherlands derived long term capital gains
of हैं 57.9 crore on buyback of shares by
Century Enka Ltd. Assessee had made the
remittance to the non resident after
deducting tax of ¥ 12.1 crore at source. We
found that the capital gains had been worked
out by allowing cost of indexation which was
against the provisions of section 48. The
mistake resulted in short levy of tax of
% 8 crore.

30


5.4 Exemption from tax

Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Charge: DIT (IT), Chennai, Tamilnadu; AY: 2005-06

Assessee: Caterpillar India Pvt Ltd

Income Tax Act provides that the ‘fees for
technical services’ received by foreign
companies shall be taxed at 10 per cent.
Reimbursement of payments to technical
staff also forms fees for technical
services. Article 23 of DTAA with USA &
UK provides that incomes not covered
under the articles of DTAA, will be
charged under the head ‘other income’

I Other Mistakes in Assessment

The assessee made payments to technical

and non-resident staff belonging to Hong
Kong, China, USA and UK without
deduction of tax at source. Though these
ayments partake the nature of technical
services®!, no tax was withheld on the
basis of an exemption certificate from the
ITD. The tax deductible was % 1 crore.
The department held that it is not
ossible to revoke an exemption order;
ence no remedial action was possible.
We are of the opinion that exemption
certificate is only an interim measure and
is subject to final assessment.

We found mistakes in 87 cases involving short levy/non levy of tax amounting to
% 250.8 crore. A few are illustrated below:

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2004-05
Assessee: Unilever HPC Finance Services Inc. USA

The assessee purchased shares of an Indian company,
Hindustan Lever Ltd from Conopco Inc. USA % 1018.5

The case of Vodafone,
established the principle
that even if the financial
transactions occur abroad,
if they relate to assets in
India, they will be taxed in
India.

crore. The consideration was paid directly in USA by
Unilever Finance Services Inc. USA to Conopco Inc. USA
without deducting tax at source. This has resulted in
non compliance of TDS provisions. Failure of the
department to take cognizance of this fact resulted in
non levy of tax recoverable of ¥ 181.6 crore including
interest under section 201(IA) of हैं 76.9 crore. On this

being pointed out by audit, department issued notice to
the assessee (March 2009).

61 AAR in the case of AT & 5 India Pvt. Ltd.(2006) 157 Taxmann 198

31


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2003-04

Assessee: Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL)

The assessee had, in the capacity
of an agent of Deutsche Bank
made interest payments to
foreign financial institutions. An
earlier exemption from income

tax on such interest payments,
outside India and (c) under a loan agreement was withdrawn (2002) by ITD

approved by the Central Government owing to non fulfillment of

conditions of section 10(15). Yet,
the TDS deducted from the interest payments was quantified as refundable to RIL.
When we raised the issue, ITD expressed its inability to rectify the assessment of RIL
on the ground that it was only an agent. It instead reopened the assessment of the
branch office of Deutsche Bank. Instead of taxing the payments afresh, ITD gave the
credit for the TDS deducted by RIL without taking into account the fact that the TDS
credit of ¥ 10.9 crore was allowed as credit to RIL. This has resulted in undercharge
of tax of 10.9 crore.

Section 10(15) of the Income Tax Act provides that
interest payment is exempt from tax if (a)the loan is
taken by an industrial undertaking in India, (b) the
money is borrowed in foreign currency from sources

Similarly in two other instances, the assessee (in the capacity of an agent of D.B
Services and Credit Lyonnais) claimed the interest payments to foreign financial
institutions as exempt under section 10(15) and claimed refund of % 29.3 crore. The
claim was accepted in the summary assessments. On being pointed out ITD
reopened the assessments of the branch offices of D.B Services Tennesse Inc and
Credit Lyonnais.

Charge: DIT (IT), Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2003-04 to 2004-05
Assessee: B4U International Holdings Ltd
हि The assessee was allowed carry forward of रैं 42.5 crore as
sn 72 allows  \nabsorbed loss of AYs 2001-02 and 2002-03. We found that
carry forward and there were no losses to be carried forward for these AYs. Of
set off of business the total carried forward loss, हैं 17.7 crore was set-off against
losses pertaining (© profits of AYs 2003-04 and 2004-05 and the unadjusted loss of
an assessment year = 24.9 crore was allowed to be carried forward. This led to
eee short levy of tax of % 20.0 crore including potential under-
CEBEEEIMTELG 7९8५. charge of = 10.2 crore. Department rectified the assessment in
July 2008.

Charge: DIT (IT); Mumbai, Maharashtra; AY: 2004-05 to 2005-06

Assessee: M. Fabrikant and Sons INC, Mumbai

The business expenses incurred in earning income that is
exempt from income tax, is not deductible. However, the
expenses were not disallowed resulting in excess carry

Section 14A of the
Act seeks to tax

expenditure हि forward of loss 0रिं 5.4 crore involving potential short levy of
incurred on earning tax of ¥ 2.3 crore. Department accepted and rectified both the
exempted income assessments in March 2009.

32


Report No.18 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit)

Recommendation

© We recommend that responsibility for material errors in assessments should be
clearly fixed to reduce their incidence;

The CBDT stated that the ITD has been making sincere efforts for proper
training and skill development of its personnel to reduce incidence of

mistakes.

New Delhi (MEENAKSHI GUPTA)
Dated Director General (Direct Taxes)
Countersigned
New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated Comptroller and Auditor General of India

33