 iii
 
PREFACE 
 
The Report for the year ended 31 March 2009 has been prepared in two 
volumes (No.8 - Performance Audit and No.11 - Compliance Audit) for 
submission to the President under Article 151 (1) of the Constitution of India. 
This volume (No.8 - Performance Audit) contains results of the following 
reviews: 
(i) Freight Services in Indian Railways (Chapter 1)
(ii) Freight Operations Information System in Indian 
Railways
 
(Chapter 2)
(iii) Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in 
Indian Railways  
(Chapter 3)
The observations included in this Report have been based on the findings of 
the test-audit conducted during 2008-09 as well as the results of audit 
conducted in earlier years, which could not be included in the previous 
Reports. 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 1
Chapter 1 
Freight services in Indian Railways 
Executive summary 
Freight is a profit making business segment of Indian Railways and is the 
backbone of railway revenues. Over the years the market share of Indian 
Railways has been consistently shrinking and railways was losing out to road.  
Indian Railways laid down detailed freight operational and marketing 
strategies for the X Five-year plan to regain the lost market share. 
Achievement of projected freight target s largely depended on the manner in 
which the Indian Railways reshaped its policies and strategies not only to 
regain the lost share in freight traffic but also to provide value for money to 
customers in terms of better facilities and improved services. 
This Performance Audit was aimed at assessing the adequacy of infrastructure 
commensurate with freight traffic growth envisaged in the operational and 
marketing strategy of Indian Railways.  It is also intended to asses the 
effectiveness of initiatives taken to improve market share of Indian Railways 
besides efficient maintenance and optimum utilization of available assets. 
The recent growth in freight loading due to more intensive asset utilisation 
and adoption of market responsive strategies has brought into focus its long 
term sustainability. Subsequent reviews of the impact of enhanced loading in 
the zones have amply demonstrated t hat the current infrastructure was 
overstretched and capacity enhancement was essential to sustain the enhanced 
loading strategy in the long run. 
Study conducted across the zones indicated that Indian Railways has thus far 
continued with the strategy of augmenting locomotives largely from its 
existing manufacturing facilities- Diesel Locomotive Works, Varanasi and 
Chittranjan Locomotive Works, Chittaranjan- whose manufacturing capacities 
were not sufficient to meet the planned annual augmentation of locomotives. 
Neither was the capacity of these manufacturing facilities enhanced nor was 
external procurement of locomotives adequately pursued. Augmentation of 
locomotives, therefore, did not keep pace with growth of traffic. Augmentation 
of wagons is primarily from wagon manufacturers in public and private 
sector. There is a case for improved contract management with effective 
deterrence on defaulting public and pr ivate wagon manufacturers, who were 
persistently supplying only 33 to 51 per cent of the contracted quantity every 
year, adversely affecting availability of wagons in the zones. As a corollary, 
the scarcely available funds, ranging from Rs.387 crore to Rs.1,864 crore 
remained unutilised during 2006-09.  
The various initiatives envisaged for capacity augmentation, throughput 
enhancement, port connectivity works and upgradation of permanent way, 
were plagued by procedural delays and were behind schedule. Infrastructure 
augmentation was, therefore, not commensurate with the projected growth in 
freight traffic and Indian Railways had a huge throw forward of 408 projects 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 2
costing Rs.1,41,015 crore (including the Dedicated Freight Corridor) as at the 
end of March 2009.  
The initiatives for harnessing private investment for infrastructure 
augmentation through Public Private Partnership arrangements have not 
materialized as envisaged. Setting up of locomotive manufacturing facilities, 
and initiatives to recapture the road traffic such as development of multi 
modal parks and Roll –On-Roll-Off facility  to provide door to door multi 
modal service were all in preliminary stages. 
Major freight terminals that handl e more than 30 rakes every month, 
including those identified for modernization were also deficient in basic 
facilities leading to heavy terminal detentions of rolling stock, which needs to 
be urgently addressed. Majority of the respondents to the survey of 
terminal/siding owners also echoed sim ilar sentiments. Customer perception 
also indicated that the mechanism of supplying rakes as per the demands of 
customers required improvement. This coupled with enroute detentions to 
rakes on account of stabling and ineffi cient interchange commitments between 
zones were bottlenecks in efficient delivery of freight services.  
A test check in loco sheds disclosed that several locomotives were increasingly 
failing within a short span of six months of their periodic overhaul  indicating 
poor workmanship in the sheds. The quality of maintenance of locomotives, 
therefore, warranted improvement.  
The various freight schemes introduced to capture piece meal traffic were only 
operating sporadically in some zones. Performance of the individual incentive 
schemes in terms of incremental freight loading achieved was not evaluated. 
Considering that the average annual growth of 8.1 per cent in freight loading 
more or less corresponded to the average annual growth of 8-9 per cent in 
Gross Domestic Product during the last five years, the incentive schemes at 
best contributed to retention of the market share. The marketing strategy 
needs to be restructured for improving the market share of Indian Railways.   
1.1 Highlights 
• Capacity and manufacturing constraints in the two locomotive 
manufacturing units at Varanasi and Chittaranjan hampered 
locomotive augmentation vis-à-vis the growth in traffic. Only 11 per 
cent of the envisaged external pr ocurement was provided in the 
Rolling Stock programmes, leading to shortage of locomotives. 
Procurement was not sychronised with requirements in the zones 
affecting the availability of locomotives in zones. 
(Para 1.9.1.1) 
• Remedial measures were not in place even though the public and 
private wagon manufacturers continuously supplied only 33 to 51 per 
cent of the contracted quantity, adversely affecting availability of 
wagons in the zones. Funds ranging from Rs.387 crore to Rs.1,864 
crore, comprising 12 to 31 per cent of the funds allocated for 
augmentation of rolling stock, remained unutilised during 2006-2009.  
(Para 1.9.1.1) 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 3
• The augmentation of specialised w agons envisaged in the Integrated 
Railway Modernisation Plan was being augmented at a very low scale 
even though four of the five year period of the plan had lapsed.  
(Para 1.9.1.1) 
• Major freight terminals handling more than 30 rakes every month 
also suffered from inadequate in frastructure and were not receiving 
adequate importance. The envis aged modernisation of freight 
terminals with enhanced facilities w ere not fully implemented in most 
of the terminals resulting in heavy terminal detentions to rolling stock.  
(Para 1.9.1.2) 
• Progress of capacity augmentati on and throughput enhancement 
works was characterised by procedural delays and the pace of 
progress of these works rendered them unlikely to be completed 
within the envisaged period. Port connectivity works and upgradation 
of permanent way were similarly be hind schedule. Dedicated Freight 
Corridor was at a primitive stage and even land acquisitions were not 
completed since setting up of the special purpose vehicle in 2006. 
(Para 1.9.1.3) 
• Customer perception indicated that the mechanism of supply of rakes 
to customers was inefficient. Furth er frequent stabling of rakes and 
inefficient interchange commitments between zones impeded efficient 
delivery of freight services.  
(Para 1.9.2.1) 
• Quality of periodic maintenance in locomotive sheds was poor as a 
substantial 25 per cent of locomotives failed on account of poor 
workmanship. The time involved in train examination in wagon 
maintenance depots continued to be beyond the envisaged norm due to 
operational and manpower constraints apart from deficient 
infrastructure.  
(Para 1.9.2.2) 
• The freight incentive schemes introduced to improve the market share 
of piece-meal traffic were not successful in improving the market 
share as envisaged. The commodity wise loading under the incentive 
schemes contributed to only 10 per cent of the traffic for all 
commodities except cement. Scheme wise data was not maintained and 
the performance of the individual schemes was not evaluated.   
(Para 1.9.3.1) 
• The envisaged Public Private Partnership projects for setting up of 
locomotive manufacturing facili ties were at a nascent stage. 
Development of multi modal parks and Roll on Roll off schemes for 
capturing road traffic have not ye t materialised though four years 
have lapsed since it was envisaged.  
(Para  1.9.3.2) 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 4
1.2 Gist of recommendations 
• Indian Railways need to expedite augmentation of rolling stock, including 
those envisaged in the Integrated Railway Modernisation Plan, to ensure 
that the rolling stock infrastructure adequately caters to the projected 
growth in traffic. Indian Railways also need to address, on priority, the 
zonal imbalances in the availability of rolling stock.  
• Contract management practices need to be strengthened and effective 
deterrence needs to be instituted on defaulting public and private wagon 
manufacturers to ensure timely supply of wagons.  
• Indian Railways need to expeditiously provide the basic facilities in all 
freight terminals. Indian Railways should ensure that its initiative of 
modernisation of freight terminals is effectively implemented in the zones 
to minimise rolling stock detentions at freight terminals.  
• Indian Railways need to expedite the capacity augmentation, throughput 
enhancement and port connectivity works to ensure that the infrastructure 
is commensurate with the projected traffic volume. Indian Railways needs 
to effectively monitor and curtail procedural delays in works contracts. 
• IR needs to ensure adequate availability of power to haul the freight train, 
besides curtailing stabling of rakes enroute and improve the interchange 
commitments between zones to minimise enroute detentions and to 
enhance the efficiency of freight services. 
• Indian Railways need to enhance the quality of locomotive maintenance 
and address the infrastructural and operational constraints to strengthen the 
mechanism of train examination at wagon maintenance depots. Indian 
Railways should provide train examination facility at all freight terminals 
to prevent avoidable empty haulage of rakes.   
• Indian Railways should evaluate the incremental loading derived from 
incentive schemes and modify the schemes suitably to enhance the freight 
market share. 
• Indian Railways need to expedite all the Public Private Partnership 
projects to effectively harness privat e investment. The initiatives aimed at 
capturing the road traffic also needs to be quickened. Alternatively, Indian 
Railways should explore other means of capturing such traffic in the short 
and medium term.  
1.3 Introduction 
Indian Railways (IR) is one of the largest and busiest rail networks in the 
world spread over a network of 64,015  route kilometers and is a chief carrier 
of the bulk freight traffic. Revenue from freight services (Rs.46,425 crore) 
account for about two thirds of the gross railway revenues (Rs.71,720 crore) 
and therefore management of freight services assumes greater importance. 
However, railway transportation is a derived demand and is directly dependent 
on the growth of six major infrastructure industries in the country viz. 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 5
electricity, coal, steel, crude petroleum, petroleum refinery products and 
cement, to which majority of railway customers belong. During the X Five 
year plan, IR recorded a phenomenal growth in freight loading, which was 
attributed to market focused strategy aimed at capturing large volume of 
traffic along with the efficient utilisa tions of assets. The enhanced freight 
loading strategies, however, impact the rolling stock consisting of locomotives 
and wagons, track and signals apart from affecting other service departments. 
Further the rapid economic growth accompanied by growing market 
competition in recent years presents a challenge to IR to reorient its operations 
through cost cutting and volume maximizing strategies. 
1.4 Organisational structure 
At the Railway Board, Traffic Commercial directorate formulates policies on 
tariff and marketing strate gies while the Traffic Transportation directorate 
monitors the movement of traffic of different commodities. The two 
directorates function under the overall control of Member Traffic. In the 
zones, the freight business operations are vested with the Chief Commercial 
Manager, Chief Commercial Manager (Freight Marketing), Chief Operations 
Manager and Chief Freight Transport Manager. In divisions the Sr. Divisional 
Commercial Manager is responsible for implementation of policies and Senior 
Divisional Operations Manager is responsible for freight operations.  
1.5 Audit objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit of Freight Services in IR are to 
assess whether: 
• Infrastructure was adequate and comm ensurate with growth in freight 
traffic as envisaged in the operational and marketing strategy of IR;  
• Available assets were utilised and maintained efficiently; and 
• Initiatives for improving IR’s market share were adequate and effective. 
1.6 Audit scope, criteria and methodology 
The performance audit covered the five  year period from 2004-05 to 2008-09. 
The scope of audit included study and evaluation of the major aspects that 
impact freight services such as infrastructure augmentation, utilisation of 
assets and initiatives for improving the market share of IR.  
The various policy initiatives, guidelines and instructions issued by the 
Railway Board from time to time on the aforementioned facets of freight 
services were used as criteria for assessing the performance of IR. The audit 
methodology included examination of records at the Railway Board, Zonal 
Railway Headquarters and field locations and analysis of relevant quantitative 
data. A survey of owners /users of fre ight terminals was also conducted to 
harness their perception of freight services provided by IR. The survey 
questionnaire is given in Annexure I 
1.7 Sample selection 
The Performance Audit for evaluating freight services was conducted across 
all the 16 zones. Data was collected for the entire zone for trend analysis and 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 6
Growth in Freight Traffic-Rail vs Road
(As per study of Asian Development Bank)
54.6
62.361.567.1
48.6
48.7 48
29.534.5
38.5
37.7
45.4 51.4
51.3 52
70.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Year
Per cent
Rail Freight
Road Freight
other macro level analysis.  Micro analysis to evaluate the position obtaining 
in field locations was conducted on a judg mental selection of a representative 
sample of the various activity centres as indicated below: A representative 
sample of 173 major terminal/siding owners was surveyed in the zones. 
Sl No Activity centre Sample selected 
1 Division 39 Divisions  
2 Terminals (Sidings /Goods 
Sheds) 
110 terminals (loading /unloading terminals) 
handling more than 30 rakes per month  
3 Inter-change poin ts  53 points  
4 Carriage and Wagon depot 47 depots 
Detail of Sample size is given in Annexure II. 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
The audit objectives, scope of study and methodology were discussed with 
Member (Traffic) at Railway Board as  well as with General Managers 
/concerned departmental heads in the zones by the Principal Directors of Audit 
during entry conferences. The inputs provided on various aspects including the 
suggestions on sample selection and the cooperation extended by railways is 
acknowledged with thanks.  The audit findings and recommendations were 
discussed with Member Traffic, Member Mechanical and Member 
Engineering in an exit conference held in February 2010. Similar exit 
conferences were also held by the Principal Directors of Audit in the zones, 
with concerned zonal authorities. 
1.9 Audit findings 
The results of the Performance Audit of Fr eight services in IR are given in the 
following three sections. 
• Augmentation of assets and infrastructure 
• Utilisation and maintenance of available assets 
• Improvement of freight market share  
1.9.1 Augmentation of assets and infrastructure  
Over the years, the 
railways’ share of the total 
transport sector has come 
down from 53 per cent in 
the IV Five-year plan 
(1972-1977) to 37 per cent 
in the IX Five-year plan 
(1997-2002) due to 
inadequate investment in 
infrastructure and 
competitive weakness vis-
à-vis other modes of 
transport. A study by Asian Development Bank also indicated a declining 
market share of IR as shown in the chart alongside. 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 7
The X Five-year plan (2002-2007), therefore, envisaged a target of 624 
million tonnes of originating freight traffic by the terminal year of the plan (an 
average annual growth of four per cent from the terminal year of the IX plan 
period) and laid down detailed freight op erational and marketing strategies to 
regain the lost market share, to strengthen the high density network and to 
improve efficiency, throughput and average speed of freight trains. The 
strategy also comprised operating freight trains by enhanced loading of 
wagons beyond their carrying capacity after complying with certain pre 
conditions to protect the permanent wa y (track) and rolling stock (wagons and 
locomotives). As a result during the X Five-year plan, IR recorded a 
phenomenal growth in freight loading and carried around 727 million tonnes 
of freight during the year 2006-07 at an average annual growth rate of 8.1 per 
cent. The XI Five year plan (2007 to 2012) emphasises on capacity 
enhancement to handle the projected growth in the medium and the long term 
through quick yielding investments.  
A review of the augmentation of assets and infrastructure over the five year 
period from 2004-05 to 2008-09 revealed inadequacies in augmentation of 
rolling stock, modernisation of freight terminals and strengthening of 
permanent way and the capacity augmentation works were progressing slowly 
as brought out below: 
1.9.1.1 Rolling stock 
Rolling stock comprising of  locomotives and wagons is the backbone on 
which freight movement depends. The augmentation of locomotives and 
wagons is planned centrally at Railway Board every year by means of a 
Rolling Stock Programme (RSP) and allotted to zones.  
Locomotives 
The augmentation of diesel and electric locomotives is primarily through the 
manufacturing facilities of Indian Railways – Diesel Locomotive Works, 
Varanasi (diesel locomotives) and Chittaranjan Locomotive Works, 
Chittaranjan (electric locomotives). Zones draw up power plans to assess and 
project their respective requirement of locomotives for passenger and freight 
services. As at the end of 2007-08, the overall holding of electric and diesel 
locomotives across IR was 3,443 and 3,933 respectively. A review of 
augmentation of locomotives vis-à-vis the requirement disclosed as under. 
Augmentation of locomotives 
Railway Board reckons the manufacturing lead time of locomotives as three 
years and accordingly plans augmentation considering the traffic projections, 
replacement of overaging fleet and funding constraints. However, the 
planning, was predominantly based on projected traffic requirements and was 
flawed since the planned annual augmentation of locomotives always far 
exceeded the manufacturing capacities of both Diesel Locomotive Works, 
Varanasi and Chittranjan Locomotive Works, Chittaranjan.  IR primarily 
relied on its manufacturing facilities for augmentation of locomotives. The 
persistent gap between the annual requirements and manufacturing resulted in 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 8
heavy carry over of requirements (termed as throw forward) to subsequent 
years as tabulated below.  
Types of locos Year Carry over 
balance 
RSP 
Provision 
Manufactured 
during the year 
Throw 
forward 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW) 
Main line locos 94 208 121 181 
4000 HP Locos 
2004-05 
48 27 15 60 
Main line locos 181 126 148 159 
4000 HP Locos 
2005-06 
60 55 22 93 
Main line locos 159 0 186 (-) 27 
4000 HP Locos 
2006-07 
93 0 39 54 
Main line locos -27 146 163 (-) 44 
4000 HP Locos 
2007-08 
54 161 59 156 
Chittaranjan Locomotive Works (CLW) 
Main line locos 114 124 90 148 
6000 HP Locos 
2004-05 
98 0 22 76 
Main line locos 148 107 129 126 
6000 HP Locos 
2005-06 
76 42 25 93 
Main line locos 126 209 150 185 
6000 HP Locos 
2006-07 
93 28 36 85 
Main line locos 185 286 * 145 326 
6000 HP Locos 
2007-08 
85 205 55 234 
* Includes 100 locos planned to be procured from BHEL 
IR estimated a shortfall of 700 diesel and 700 electric locomotives by the end 
of the XI plan period and considered acquisition of locomotives to meet the 
shortfall apart from contemplating (August 2006) setting up of new 
manufacturing facilities for manufactu re of High Horse Powered electric 
(12000 HP) and diesel (6000 HP) locomotives through Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) to cater to growing tr affic requirements in the long term. In 
spite of heavy annual throw forward of requirements, IR continued with the 
strategy of augmenting locomotives la rgely from its existing manufacturing 
facilities at Varanasi and Chittaranjan rather than expeditiously exploring 
procurement options or alternatively en hancing the capacities of these units. 
Therefore, by October 2009, only 11 per cent (150 out of 1,400 locomotives) 
of the contemplated acquisition was provided for in the Rolling Stock 
Programmes (100 in 2007-08 and 50 in 2008-09). The first order on M/s 
BHEL was placed only in December 2007 and 11 locomotives have been 
received up to November 2009 from M/s BHEL 
Further, the setting up of two green field locomotive manufacturing plants in 
Madhepura and Saran districts in Bihar th rough joint venture were still in the 
nascent stage three years after they were envisaged, though IR estimated the 
contracts to be in place by 2008-09. Owing to non receipt of bids from the 
short listed bidders, the projects were  approved as production units by the 
Government (February 2009) but further processes were not yet initiated.  
IR in its response (March 2010) conceded that it primarily relied on the 
production capacity of its Production Units for augmenting locomotives and 
accepted that there was a persistent gap in requirement and acquisition of both 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 9
electric and diesel locomotives. IR further mentioned that keeping in view the 
budgetary requirement for various projects the locomotive plants were again 
proposed to be taken up as joint venture projects. This highlighted that the 
planning process was flawed as the funding mechanism was not firmed up 
before obtaining Cabinet approval for setting up of these plants as railways’ 
own production units.   
Linkage with zonal power plans 
The annual Rolling Stock Programmes had no linkage to the zonal power 
plans and was, therefore, not synchronised with requirements affecting the 
availability of locomotives vis-à-vis requirements in the zones. Shortage of 
electric locomotives was observed in fi ve (SER, ECoR, SECR, ER and ECR) 
out of the eleven zones, which had electric traction (data was not available in 
two zones- WR and WCR); two zones (SCR and NCR) had assessed that 
locomotives were surplus to its requirement, while locomotives were 
commensurate with requirements in the other four zones (SR, NR, CR and 
SWR). Similarly, shortage of diesel locomotives was observed in three zones 
(SECR, NER and ECR) while in three zones (SER, NWR and SCR) the 
locomotives were in excess of requirements.  
Owing to shortage of electric locomotives, zones were deploying diesel 
locomotives on electrified traction. In SER, which had 85 per cent of its route 
kilometers on electrified traction, the excess holding of diesel locomotives 
ranged from 126 (in 2006-07) to 152 (in 2004-05) locomotives during the 
period from 2004-05 to 2008-09 under review. Apart from lending diesel 
locomotives to two contiguous zones, SER was deploying diesel locomotives, 
which had a comparatively higher cost of operation, on routes with electrified 
traction. To have a perspective of the cost implication, deployment of diesel 
locomotives in 12 electrified sections, in SER, during the period 2004-05 to 
2008-09 resulted in an additional expe nditure of Rs.435.71 crore on fuel 
consumption alone. The zone stated that moving freight was the main 
objective and both diesel and electric locomotives had to be used to manage 
the growth of traffic. The fact, howeve r, remained that due to shortage of 
electric locomotives, the zone carried traffic by deploying diesel locomotives, 
which had a higher cost of operation.  
Further, in SCR even with introduction of improvised versions of diesel 
locomotives having lesser maintenance schedules, the zone while assessing its 
requirements of locomotives continued to provide a cushion of 10 per cent 
towards unforeseen repairs, while analysis revealed that locomotives receiving 
unforeseen repairs never exceeded seven and a half per cent. 
IR in its reply (March 2010) mentioned that growth of traffic in most of the 
zones facing shortage of locomotives was above the IR’s average growth and 
accepted that the increased overall growth in freight loading resulted in 
increased requirement of locomotives. As such the Rolling Stock Programmes 
of locomotives could not match the bare requirement of locomotives for 
efficient movement of freight traffic. IR also stated that diesel locomotives 
were deployed in electrified territories due to operational requirements (i.e. the 
locomotives were required to move from one non-electrified territory to 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 10
another with the load through an electrified territory) and that modern state-of-
the-art diesel locomotives will work to a higher availability and will offset any 
disadvantage due to higher operational cost.   
However, even in the scenario of overall shortage of locomotives in the 
system, availability of locomotives was surplus to requirements in some zones 
and therefore the deficiency in the system was non synchronization of the 
procurement plan with the zonal power plans. Further, presently the modern 
diesel locomotives comprised a negligible per cent of the overall diesel 
locomotive holding and therefore operating diesel locomotives under 
electrified traction invariably involved a higher cost of operation.  
Management of locomotives 
Inadequacies in the management of locomotives were seen in the zones. Rakes 
were persistently detained at freight terminals (goods sheds and sidings) for 
want of power (locomotives) even in zones that had adequate or surplus 
locomotives (SR, NWR). Out of 1,300 loaded rakes transported from 
Jaisalmer in NWR, during April 2006 to September 2008, 356 rakes 
comprising 27.38 per cent suffered detention due to delay in arranging power 
for double headed movement, involving a loss of earning capacity of Rs.4.63 
crore. Similarly, in SR failure to arrange a high powered locomotive or 
alternatively a banker (additional locomotive) invariably detained rakes 
moving into Tamilnadu Electricity Board siding, Mettur Dam and Southern 
Iron Steel Company Limited sidings, Mecheri Road at Karuppur and Omalur 
stations involving a loss of earning capacity of Rs.8.89 crore. In J.K.Cement 
Siding of WR, which offered an average of 16 rakes of cement traffic per 
month, loaded wagons were constantly detained in the yard for a duration 
ranging from two to 59 hours due to non-availability of locomotives. From 
April 2006 to March 2009, 585 rakes comprising 58,078 wagons were 
detained for 4,99,805 hours causing loss of 20,826 wagon days. 
IR while accepting (March 2010) shortages of locomotives vis-à-vis 
requirements added that in a system which had shortage of locomotives, 
detentions to rakes in certain pockets was unavoidable. However, detentions to 
rolling stock were constantly occurring even in zones with surplus 
locomotives and the management of locomotives was therefore inadequate.  
Wagons 
Augmentation of wagons is primarily from wagon manufacturers in public and 
private sector and a small fraction of the requirement is met from in house 
manufacturing in designated railway workshops. As at the end of 2007-08, the 
overall Broad Gauge wagon holding across IR was 41,532 wagons (in four 
wheeler units). A review of the position of wagon holding vis-à-vis 
requirements in the zones disclosed as under:- 
• Performance Audit on Freight and Wagon Management contained in 
C&AG’s Report on Railways (Report No. 6 of 2007) disclosed that 
wagon manufacturers in the public sector were persistently defaulting on 
supplying the contracted wagons and IR was continuously repeating 
orders on these manufacturers. Effective remedial measures were still 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 11
not in place and the public sector wagon manufacturers were only 
supplying 1,739 to 2,713 wagons every year comprising 33 to 51 per 
cent of the contracted wagons. Similarly, analysis of data for period 
2006-09 disclosed that private manufacturers were also supplying only 
5,445 to 7,170 wagons comprising 43 to 51 per cent of the contracted 
wagons leading to a heavy carry over of requirements adversely 
affecting availability of wagons in the zones. 
Further, the persistent carry ove r of requirements of wagons and 
locomotives contributed to continuous non-utilisation of funds, ranging 
from Rs.387 crore to Rs.1,864 crore comprising 12 to 31 per cent of the 
total grant (both from budgetary support and IR’s internal generation) for 
augmentation of rolling stock during 2006-09.  
• IR formulated an Integrated Railw ay Modernisation Plan (IRMP) for 
implementation over a five year period (2005-2010) to address, among 
others, the growing demands of traffic and to modernise the freight 
business segment. This included induction of corrosion resistant stainless 
steel body wagons and light weight aluminium wagons to minimise the 
adverse effect of corrosion and high abrasions due to mechanised 
loading/unloading. IR also envisaged introduction of self steering bogies 
to reduce stress on track and rolling st ock. IR while finalising its annual 
Rolling Stock Programmes for augmentation of various types of wagons 
was only considering a very low scale of augmentation of these 
improvised wagons. The pace of augmentation at the end of four out of 
the five year plan period indicated that the objective of the plan was not 
achievable by the envisaged period as  shown below. Some zones (NWR, 
SWR, NR and ECR) did not receive any of these specialised wagons.  
Sl 
No. 
Type of wagons/ bogies No. envisaged 
in IRMP 
No. provided at the 
end of March 2009 
1 Corrosion resistant stainless steel 
wagons 
10,000 278 
2 Light weight aluminium wagons 2,000 922 
3 Self steering bogies Not mentioned Nil 
• IR introduced (2006-07) Wagon Investment Scheme (WIS) to cater to 
the increased demand for wagons by inviting private investment in 
acquisition of wagons. The benefits e nvisaged in terms of rebate in 
freight and an assured supply of a guaranteed number of rakes to 
investors did not serve as an incentive as in 13 out of the 16 zones, no 
investor came forward to invest in the scheme. Out of the other three 
zones (SER, ECoR and SWR), while 91 customers opted for the scheme 
in two zones (SER-60, ECoR-31) only 15 customers opted in SWR. IR 
replied that the induction of rakes under the scheme was confined to a 
single commodity and was restricted to a few iron ore loading points 
with an assured supply of rakes, which created enormous pressure to 
fulfill other commitments of moving programmed traffic .  The scheme, 
therefore, was not effective in harnessing customers for various other 
commodities and was  withdrawn from April 2008 and a new scheme 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 12
namely Liberalised Wagon Investment Scheme (LWIS) was launched 
which is yet to fully materialize in the zone.  
Thus augmentation of locomotives did not keep pace with growth of traffic in 
the zones owing to persistent manufa cturing constraints and setting up of 
manufacturing facilities under PPP initiativ e were still in nascent stages. The 
initiatives envisaged in the IRMP fo r augmentation of specialised wagons 
were only partially achieved. Imbalances in availability of rolling stock vis-à-
vis the requirements existed in the zones, warranting improved management.  
Recommendations 
IR needs to expedite augmentation of rolling stock to ensure that the rolling 
stock infrastructure adequately caters to the projected growth in traffic. IR 
also needs to address, on priority, the imbalances in the availability of rolling 
stock vis-à-vis the requirements in the zones.  
1.9.1.2 Freight terminals 
Freight terminals comprise goods sheds owned by railways and sidings owned 
by private parties. Efficient movement of rolling stock is dependant on various 
facilities provided at these terminals to enable faster loading and unloading of 
rakes without much detention to ensure that available scarce resources are 
optimally utilised. Modernisation of freight terminals, leveraging Information 
Technology and augmentation of privat e participation are some of the 
initiatives taken up by IR for improvin g freight services. A review of the 
adequacy of facilities provided at 110 fr eight terminals handling more than 30 
rakes a month on an average, modernisation and Information Technology 
initiatives disclosed the following:- 
 
Broken concrete basement at Jagdalpur goods shed 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 13
Facilities in freight terminals 
Facilities in freight terminals comprise direct reception and dispatch facility; 
all weather cemented/ tarred approach roads etc to enable quicker placement 
and removal of rakes and facilities such as a covered shed, mechanical 
equipment and weighment to enhance the quality and pace of loading/ 
unloading operations. IR also envisaged that terminals handling more than 30 
rakes per month should have at least three lines for goods operations.  
While planning the annual works programmes IR accorded priority to capacity 
enhancement works such as provision of new lines, gauge conversion and 
doubling works etc and terminal improvement works were planned to the 
extent of the remaining resources available. Allotment of funds towards 
Traffic facilities in the annual Budget Es timates also constituted barely 10 per 
cent of the allotment towards capital augmentation works, though the 
allotment increased from Rs.413.58 crore in 2005-06 to Rs.914.48 crore in 
2007-08. Further, IR regularly surrendere d about seven to nine percent of the 
allotment under Traffic facilities (ranging from Rs.41 crore to Rs.88 crore) 
during the three years 2005-08. As such, these basic amenities were not 
provided in a substantial number of terminals as shown below thereby 
adversely affecting placement, removal, loading/ unloading operations causing 
detention to rakes. 
 
 
 
Partly covered shed at Pune goods shed 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 14
Sl No Description of facility Number of 
deficient terminals
Zones with deficiency in 
five or more terminals 
1 2 3 4 
Reception and placement facilities 
1 Separate engine escape line 47 CR , ECR 
2 Direct reception /dispatch 
facility 
48 CR, SER, SECR 
3 Interlocking facility 62 SCR, CR, SER, WR, WCR 
4 Track circuiting facility 80 CR, SER, WR, SECR, 
WCR, SCR, ER, NWR, 
ECoR,  
5 Tarred approach road  39 CR, ECoR 
6 Three lines for goods 
operations  
23 ECoR 
Loading and unloading facilities 
7 Fully covered shed 53 CR, SER, ECR, ECoR 
8 Pucca circulating /handling 
area 
44 CR, SER, ECoR, ECR 
9 Lighting arrangement 23 CR  
10 Loading and unloading 
equipment 
41 CR, ECR 
11 Weighment facility 56 CR, SR, ECR  
In the absence of interlocking facility, the average time taken for manual 
operations for placement of rakes was one hour or more in 16 out of 59 
terminals, of which in three terminals (Rourkela Steel Plant siding, OCL 
siding, Rajgangpur and JCP siding, Tatanagar) over SER, the average time 
taken was 18 hours, eight and a half hours and five hours respectively. In 
National Aluminium Company siding, Damanjodi in ECoR, though the siding 
authorities had deposited Rs.4.58 crore in phases with IR for undertaking 
interlocking and track circuiting works, IR did not commence any work till 
2008-09 and insisted on an additional deposit of Rs.0.23 crore to commence 
work.. Similarly it was seen in ECR that due to non availability of direct 
reception lines in Raxaul and NarayanpurAnant goods sheds the rakes were 
first taken to the yard and then brought on to the goods shed for 
loading/unloading . In Raxaul, the rake s were being placed in the goods shed 
for loading only after 23 hours of its arrival in the yard.  
Further, absence of weighing facility at freight terminals exposed the system 
to the risk of overloading. It was seen in WR that goods trains were being 
detained for around two hours for weighment at the enroute electrical in 
motion Weigh Bridge at Viramgam alone. Though the number of trains 
detained at this facility has reduced from 3,000 trains in 2005-06, around 400 
trains continue to get detained every year at Viramgam. The zone accepted 
that steps would be taken to further minimise this detention. 
IR stated (March 2010) that 141 works costing Rs.831.60 crore were in 
progress for improvement/ upgradation/ provision of goods sheds and that 
upgradation of infrastructure was a continuous process. IR also stated that 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 15
development of reliable electronic in-motion weighbridge of the desired 
technical specification and the costs of 120 tonne weighbridges were the main 
reasons for slow proliferation.  IR fu rther added that instructions have now 
issued to all the zones for commissioning all planned/ proposed weighbridges 
quickly and as close to the loading points as possible. 
However, a substantial number of terminals were not provided with even the 
basic facilities and IR needs to scale up its investment in traffic facilities. The 
management of resources also required improvement since the limited 
resources allocated for Traffic facilities was being persistently surrendered.  
Modernisation of freight terminals 
Recognising that most of 
the terminals on IR, 
other than the industrial 
sidings, suffered from 
inadequate infrastructure 
IR in its IRMP 
envisaged modernisation 
of freight terminals to 
provide quicker loading 
and unloading of rakes, 
improved turn around 
and customer 
satisfaction. Forty 
terminals were initially 
selected for modernisation and the list  was later revised to 55 terminals. A 
review of facilities provided in 22 such  terminals identified for modernisation 
disclosed that even modernisation works at freight terminals were not being 
planned by the zones and mechanisation of freight operations received low 
priority and were not taken up. Therefore, the facilities envisaged were not 
provided in many terminals as shown below even though four out of the five 
year period for implementation had lapsed. 
The poor condition of some terminals and the pace of progress of works in 
terminals identified for modernisation, it is unlikely that the objectives of the 
IRMP would be met by the envisaged period as shown below: 
• Sanctioned works on nine terminals in seven zones
1 were either not 
taken up or were in the preliminary stages such as finalising cost 
estimates, evaluation and placement of tenders. In two zones, works 
taken up in six other terminals2 were progressing very slowly.  
• Though full rake loading facility was available in Cuttack goods shed in 
ECoR, which on an average handled 33 rakes every month, the shed was 
lacking in basic facilities. The shed only had two lines as against the 
stipulated three. Even in these two lines, only partly covered sheds were 
                                                 
1 Ghaziabad and Chandigarh –NR, Korukkupet and Tiruchchirapalli –SR, Salvordam –SWR, Sanathnagar- SCR,  
Navlakhi Port- WR , Solapur –CR and Kalumna-SECR.. 
2 Laxmibainagar, Dewas, Mangliagaon , Chirai, and Gandhidham –WR and New Mulund goods terminal –CR 
Deficient terminals
20
3
12
14
0
5
10
15
20
25
Full Rake
handling
facility
Engine on
Load
Shunting
Neck
Ware
Housing
Facility
Facilities
Number of terminals

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 16
provided and therefore each time about half a rake (15 to 19 wagons) 
was placed in the open. Further, the platform shed on one line was 
chipped to raise the traction wire and as a sequel the platform was 
exposed to rain water making it un suitable for stacking food grains and 
sugar consignments during rainy season.   
IR mentioned (March 2010) that modernization of freight terminals was a 
continuous process and that a number of works were in progress for 
upgradation of facilities in freight terminals. However, Audit observed that the 
pace of progress of these works wa s slow and thereby the objectives 
envisaged in the IRMP were not likely to be achieved within the envisaged 
period.  
Private participation 
In order to encourage the terminal or siding owners to invest in modernisation 
of terminals so as to reduce terminal detention of wagons by using modern 
methods of loading/unloading, the Terminal Incentive cum Engine On Load 
Scheme was launched with suitable financial incentive to siding or terminal 
owners. IR also offered a financial incentive by way of rebate in freight. The 
engine on load facility was applicable only in terminals where mechanical 
loading takes place and it was observed that mechanical loading facilities were 
not provided in many major terminals as shown in para 7.2.1 above. 
Therefore, there were no takers for the scheme in 10 out of the 16 zones. In the 
remaining six zones, only 66 parties opted for the scheme of which 51 
customers were from one zone (SWR ). The scheme was subsequently 
withdrawn in January 2009 and the initiative of augmenting private investment 
Chipped platform shed - Cuttack goods shed 


Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 17
for modernising terminals remained unsuccessful. A majority 54 per cent of 
respondents also opined that existing policies of IR were not providing 
adequate incentive to attract investments for improving facilities in terminals.  
IR mentioned (March 2010) that a draft policy was under consideration to 
throw open development of private freight terminals for handling all types of 
rail-borne traffic (except outward iron ore and coal) to third parties.   
Thus even major freight terminals across  IR that handle more than 30 rakes 
every month were deficient in basic fac ilities. Modernisation of terminals by 
enhancement of facilities has not been fully implemented by the zones in most 
of the terminals leading to heavy terminal detentions of rolling stock. The 
objective of reducing detentions due to loading and unloading operations 
below 16 hours has not been achieved. Freight Operations Information System 
in its present state was not serving as a decision making tool. 
Detention to wagons 
Detention to rolling stock in freight term inals occur from the arrival of rake to 
its placement for loading/unloading (arrival to placement time), during 
loading/unloading operations (placement to release time) and till its actual 
departure (release to dispatch time) from the terminal. Analysis of detention 
details of terminals handling more than  30 rakes per month across IR for the 
period 2007-09 indicated that 54 per cent of the detentions occurred from 
placement of rakes to their release,  when the basic loading/unloading 
operations take place.  
Though Railway Board had advised the zo nes to restrict detentions from 
placement of the rake to its release to less than 16 hours, analysis in four zones 
(CR, ER, SCR and SWR) disclosed that in 60 out of the 87 terminals the 
average detention from placement of the rake to its release continued to be 
beyond the stipulated 16 hours due to deficient facilities in the freight 
terminals. Consequently, demurrage leviable from private parties for detention 
of rolling stock in terminals beyond the allowed free time for 
loading/unloading operations, were routinely waived across zones. SWR, 
however, mentioned that detentions had come down to nine hours between 
November 2008 and March 2009. Rake wi se detention test checked for a 
period of ten days in the selected 110 terminals across IR during April to June 
2009 indicated that the trend of detentions continued in the zones. Some of the 
major detentions observed and their financial impact are enumerated below: 
• Kanakpura goods shed of NWR handling 45 rakes per month was opened 
for traffic in August 1995 without basic facilities. As a result, 86.87 per 
cent (483 out of 556 rakes) and 93.18 per cent (328 out of 352 rakes) of 
rakes suffered detention during 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively causing 
a loss of earning capacity of Rs.18.99 crore.  IR mentioned that the goods 
shed was provided with a siding, loading/unloading area and circulating 
space. However, it was seen that the other reception, placement facilities 
and loading/unloading facilities were not provided leading to persistent 
detentions to rolling stock.  

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 18
• The unloading line at Ennore Port Limited siding in SR was partially wired 
to suit unloading by poclain cranes, which necessitated shunt moves for 
placement and removal of wagons. The consequential loss of Rs.9.19 crore 
due to detentions to wagons was not getting compensated as the siding was 
declared as an independent booking point.  
IR accepted (March 2010) that the sudden jump in loading in the period under 
review resulted in shortages of locomotives and rolling stock and that 
currently the number of driving units in the system was substantially less than 
the number of rakes and thus detentions to rakes were unavoidable. Though 
IR claimed that by prioritizing facilities at terminals, detentions were reduced, 
Audit observed that the average detention from the placement of rake to their 
release continued to be beyond the envisaged time of 16 hours in a substantial 
number of terminals, indicating that the loading/unloading facilities were 
deficient in the freight terminals. 
Leveraging Information Technology 
Freight Operations Information System (FOIS) was developed by IR with a 
view to computerise freight operations and to provide a wide range of 
information to enable planning, directi on and control of freight operations as 
well as to provide a real time view of transactions. IT Audit of FOIS was 
conducted across IR to assess the system design, reliability and timely 
availability of basic operating data, Information Systems controls and security 
environment. The detailed findings are reported separately in Chapter 2.  
Broadly, it was seen that the system was largely being utilised to generate 
Railway Receipts. The system design was not comprehensive, the master data 
bases contained numerous errors and the system was not serving as a tool for 
decision making. Even though exhaustive details of demands of customers 
were captured to assess the load and to facilitate decisions on allotment of 
rakes using FOIS, decisions were taken manually defeating the very objective 
of capturing such exhaustive details.  
Further, comparative analysis of manual  data on detentions vis-à-vis the data 
reported through FOIS pertaining to nine terminals in SCR (whose details 
were only made available) indicated that the detentions details reported by 
FOIS were mostly understated and the extent of understatement ranged from 
15 minutes to 32 hours, which indicated that the information was unreliable.  
Similarly, in ER, detention details were understated by FOIS ranging from 38 
minutes to 57 hours in 21 out of 23 terminals.  
IR in its reply (March 2010) stated that the discrepancies in reporting of 
detentions would be eliminated with full implementation of TMS along with 
control charting. IR also mentioned that zones were being advised to take 
appropriate measures to strengthen the internal checks.  
Free time allowance 
IR reduced the free time for loading/unloading from nine to seven hours at 
thermal sidings. The Committee constituted by Ministry of Power (June 2008) 
reviewed the infrastructure at 38 thermal power house sidings across IR and 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 19
concluded that the infrastructure was designed reckoning the free time as nine 
hours and therefore the reduction to seven hours was impracticable due to 
space and funding constraints. Unless IR initiates concerted action with the 
Ministries of Coal and Power, detent ions of rolling stock beyond seven hours 
would continue to occur. 
IR in its reply (March 2010) stated that the lower free time was prescribed to 
ensure faster release of wagons, whic h would correspondingly lead to greater 
availability of wagons for loading.  However, since the Ministries of Coal and 
Power consider it impracticable with the current infrastructure, IR needs to 
initiate concerted action with these Ministries on priority for ensuring 
adherence to the prescribed free time allowance. 
Feedback of terminal/siding owners 
A majority of the 173 respondents to the survey of siding owners echoed 
similar sentiments as 52 per cent of them felt that mechanised 
loading/unloading facility was not available in terminals and that the free time 
allowed for loading was inadequate. 50 per cent of the respondents however 
expressed satisfaction over the approach roads, lighting, stacking area and the 
working hours at terminals. However, a significant 42 to 47 per cent of them 
felt that these facilities were inadequate. 
Thus even major freight terminals across  IR that handle more than 30 rakes 
every month were deficient in basic fac ilities. Modernisation of terminals by 
enhancement of facilities has not been fully implemented by the zones in most 
of the terminals leading to heavy terminal detentions of rolling stock. The 
objective of reducing detentions due to  loading and unloading operations 
below 16 hours has not been achieved. Freight Operations Information System 
in its present state was not serving as a decision making tool. 
Recommendations 
IR needs to expeditiously provide the basic facilities in all freight terminals. IR 
should ensure that its initiative of m odernisation of freight terminals is 
effectively implemented in the zones to minimise rolling stock detentions at 
freight terminals.  
The system design and reliability of the Freight Operations Information 
System needs to be enhanced so that the IT application serves as a decision 
making tool as envisaged.   
1.9.1.3 Capacity enhancement 
IR projected freight traffic of 1,100 milli on tonnes by the terminal year of the 
XI plan (2011-2012). To handle the projected traffic volume, IR assessed that 
capacity augmentation and throughput en hancement works were essential and 
identified capacity augmentation and throughput enhancement works. IR also 
identified works for improving the rail connectivity with ports. Upgradation of 
the permanent way was planned to cater to the enhanced loading strategy. 
These works were over and above the works required to develop the Dedicated 
Freight Corridor. The overall annual outlay on capacity enhancement works 
ranged from Rs.4,365 crore in 2005-06 to Rs.8,650 crore in 2007-08.  

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 20
The traffic density over IR indicated that the passenger trains outnumbered the 
freight trains. The increased number of passenger trains introduced every 
successive year contributed to congesting the available network and off-setting 
the capacity enhancement initiatives taken up annually. Notwithstanding the 
above, a review of these initiatives disclosed the following:- 
Capacity augmentation works 
IR identified the high density network routes across the railway network that 
included all the six Golden Quadrilateral routes (New Delhi- Mumbai-
Chennai-Howrah) its diagonals and other feeder routes. IR evaluated that these 
routes comprise 28 per cent of the total route kilometers but accounted for 76 
per cent of the total freight tonnage carried by IR. A total of 124 works were 
identified along these routes, which included gauge conversion, doubling, new 
lines, electrification on identified sections and automatic signaling works. A 
review of the progress of 38 works taken up in seven zones
3 indicated that: 
• Twelve works 4 whose envisaged target date of completion ranged 
between November 2008 and December 2009 were delayed due to 
procedural delays in the pre tender finalisation stage and the physical 
progress of works taken up ranged from five to 70 per cent only. 
• Another 16 works5 whose target date of completion ranged from August 
2009 to June 2011 have not yet been taken up. Most of these works were 
still in the preliminary stages of the tendering process such as drawing 
up of estimates, finance vetting and opening of tenders. The pace at 
which these works were progressing makes it unlikely that they would 
be completed by the envisaged period. 
IR replied (March 2010) that during the first two years of the XI five year plan 
513 kilometers of new lines, 2,112 kilometers of gauge conversion and 789 
kilometers of doubling have been completed. However, Audit observed that 
procedural delays in the preliminary stages of tendering were delaying the 
progress of a substantial number of works, which needs to be addressed. 
Throughput enhancement and other works 
A review of the works taken up for throughput enhancement and port 
connectivity and progress of the Dedicated Freight Corridor disclosed that: 
• During the entire X plan period (2002-2007) IR could only add 945 
kilometers of New Lines and 1,363 Track Doubling kilometers as against 
the envisaged 1,310 and 1,575 kilometers respectively. This translated 
into an average annual addition of 462 kilometers of which only 189 
kilometers comprised New Lines, which was inadequate considering 
IR’s scale of operations in terms of its network of route kilometers, 
freight tonnage and passengers carried. 
                                                 
3 SCR-8, NR-3, SER-3, ECoR-5, SECR-5, NFR-7, ECR-7. 
4 SCR-1, ECoR-4, SECR-1, NFR-6. 
5 SCR-2, NR-2, SER-3, SECR-1, NFR-1, ECR-7 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 21
• Out of the 86 throughput enhancement works identified by IR, the 
physical progress of 30 works which were planned for completion during 
2009-10 and 2011-12 were less than 50 per cent. Of these, 10 works 
taken up during 1990-91 to 2003-04 were still in the land acquisition and 
earthwork stages and were progressing slowly. Seven other works were 
neither taken up nor their target dates determined.  
IR replied (March 2010) that overall 30 out of the 86 works would be 
completed by the end of 2009-10. However,  as pointed out by Audit 
above, physical progress of works planned for completion during 2009-
10 and 2010-11 were progressing slowly and were behind schedule and 
therefore the pace of progress of these works needs to be quickened. 
• The port connectivity works taken up in three zones (SCR, ECoR and 
SER) were progressing slowly as shown below. 
o Haridaspur-Paradeep new line in ECoR was sanctioned in 1996-97 
and was due for completion in June 2010. However, after more 
than 12 years, physical progress of the work was only 14 per cent 
as land acquisitions were still in progress. Further, out of the 
estimated 136 minor and 27 major bridges, only construction of 
major bridges was in progress and others were not yet taken up.  
o In SCR, laying of new line between Obulavaripalli to 
Krishnapatnam port sanctioned in 2007-08 with targeted 
completion in 2014 under phase I and the doubling work Samalkot 
and Kakinada port has been comple ted. The electrification work 
was still incomplete due to the zone’s failure to include the work of 
a small patch of four kilometers from Kakinada port to New Block 
cabin in the original estimate. The material modification in the 
scope of work was pending sanc tion in Railway Board March 
2010.   
o Similarly, in the 69.60 kilometer Panskura – Haldia port section in 
SER, the doubling work from Panskura to Rajgoda has been 
completed but the portion between Rajgoda to Tumluk remains to 
be completed and thus the planned port connectivity could not be 
achieved.   
• The Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India - a Special Purpose 
Vehicle - was set up in October 2006 to undertake planning and 
development, mobilisation of financial resources and construction, 
maintenance and operation of the proposed western and eastern corridors 
from Jawaharlal Nehru Port to Dadri (1483 kilometers) and Ludhiana to 
Dankuni (1806 kilometers) respectively. The project was at a very 
primitive stage. IR replied (March 2010) that the process of land 
acquisition was being closely monitored and funding tie ups with 
bilateral/multilateral funding agencies were at advanced stage and the 
loan agreement for the western corridor phase–I was expected to be 
signed in March 2010 . The project cost initially estimated at 28,000 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 22
crore (January 2007) has almost doubled and is estimated at Rs.48,000 
crore at present costs. 
Permanent way 
After enhanced loading was permitted on several routes, the permanent way 
(railway track) required strengthening to bear the heavier loads. The sections 
with 90R rails and/or steel trough sleepers  were being identified in the zones 
and upgraded every year with 60 kilogram rails and PSC sleepers with a 
density of 1,660 sleepers per kilometer. However it was seen that even on 
routes identified for enhanced loading, in some zones (NCR and SWR) 
upgradation works on 115.54 6 kilometers were not taken up and in some 
others (NR, ER and NWR) the works taken up on 505.09 out of the planned 
950.10 kilometers
7 were progressing slowly due to operational constraints 
such as non-availability of the sections and locomotives for testing the track. 
Similarly, while works of upgrading th e sleeper density were not taken up in 
one zone (NCR) in some others (NR, NWR and SWR) works taken up on 
558.20 out of 1,110 kilometers were progressing slowly.   
Thus the progress of capacity augmentation, throughput enhancement, port 
connectivity works and upgradation of permanent way was behind schedule. 
Infrastructure augmentation was not commensurate with the projected growth 
in freight traffic and IR had a huge throw forward of 408 projects costing  
Rs.1,41,015 crore (including the Dedicated Freight Corridor) as at the end of 
March 2009. 
Recommendation 
IR needs to expedite the capacity augmentation, throughput enhancement and 
port connectivity works to ensure that the infrastructure is commensurate with 
the projected traffic volume. IR need s to effectively monitor and curtail 
procedural delays in works contracts. 
1.9.2 Utilisation and maintenance of available assets 
IR’s phenomenal growth in freight loading in the recent past was due to 
efficient asset utilisation apart from adopt ion of market responsive strategies. 
The earlier performance audit on Freight and Wagon Management 8 and the 
multi disciplinary core committees constituted in the zones to oversee the 
impact of enhanced loading of wagons on some vital components of rolling 
stock and permanent way (railway track) provided ample evidence that the 
existing infrastructure was in fact over stretched. A test check of the current 
quarterly statistics continued to indicate that the wear and tear on rolling stock 
had increased manifolds as shown below: 
 
 
 
                                                
 
6 NCR-99.49, SWR(Bangalore Division) 16.05 
7 NR-232.90, ER- 95.87 and NWR-176.32 out of planned 541.92, 109.50 and 298.68 kms respectively.  
8 Chapter I of Report No 6 of 2007 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Union Government Railways).  

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 23
 
Parameter Pre enhanced loading 
period Quarterly average 
of 2004-05  
Post enhanced loading period 
Quarterly average of 2008-09 
1 2 3 
CBC and Draft Gears 158 760 
Spring Defects 128 334 
Stalling cases 15 37 
Wagon Body defects 901 3547 
Arisings in unloadables* 
A Category Repairs 
B category Repairs 
C Category Repairs
 
 
602 
460 
64 
 
1735 
1406 
312 
   * Wagons forming part of rake damaged during loading /unloading & are unfit for loading 
The wear and tear on permanent way in terms of defects in track structure viz., 
rail fractures and weld failures had also increased significantly. The initiative 
of enhanced loading is, therefore, not sustainable in the long term unless it is 
accompanied by augmentation of assets and infrastructure. 
IR in reply (March 2010) stated that due to heavy inputs given to track 
maintenance, rail fractures and weld failures have not increased significantly 
and that wear and tear on rakes was on the higher side, which was being 
controlled by providing additional springs to enable the rolling stock to carry 
heavy loads. However, current statistics continued to indicate that wear and 
tear on rolling stock continued to be perceptibly higher and there was no 
improvement in the defects to the track structure.  
Further, viewed from the customer’s perspe ctive, efficient utilisation of assets 
should ultimately translate into efficien t and effective delivery of freight 
services, which implies provision of a reliable and timely service. In the 
endeavour, it is also imperative that assets are efficiently maintained to enable 
optimum utilisation. A review coupled with the customer perception obtained 
by Audit through a survey of siding owners indicated inadequacy in supply of 
rakes to customers, inefficiencies in enroute stabling of rakes, interchange 
commitments and maintenance of rolling stock that affected the efficiency of 
freight services as brought out below. 
1.9.2.1 Utilisation of assets 
Effective utilisation of assets calls fo r supply of rakes to customers as per 
demand and delivery of consignments at the destination minimising the 
enroute detentions to rolling stock. En route detention to rolling stock occurs 
either when the rakes are stabled or when the interchange commitments 
between zones and other operational agreements are not efficiently regulated. 
A review disclosed the following:-  
Supply of rakes 
Effectiveness of supply of rakes to customers assessed by the feedback 
received from terminal/siding owners indicated that:-  
 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 24
• Though a substantial 66 per cent of the respondents to the survey felt that 
information on availability of rakes were provided by IR, 52 per cent felt 
that on most occasions the rakes were not placed in the terminals for 
loading at the time preferred by customers. The respondents also felt that 
rakes were placed belatedly as shown below.  
Response on delays in placement of rakes
No Delays,  
(34%)
Delay from 5 to 
12 hours, (32%)
Delay up to 5 
hours, (34%)
 
Forty eight per cent of the respond ents, however, expressed satisfaction 
on the quality of rakes supplied, while another 55 per cent felt that rakes 
were moved by IR within a reasonable time after completion of loading. 
IR in its reply (March 2010) conceded that IR would have to maintain extra 
cushion in rolling stock to ensure timely supply of rakes to customers and that 
at present there was a shortage of rolling stock. IR, however, added that 
maintenance practices were rationalised to reduce the ineffective time of the 
wagon fleet.  
Some of the zonal initiatives for managing the supply of rakes to customers 
indicated that: 
• Due to improper planning, WR continuously supplied 10,423 wagons in 
excess of demand to Mundra Port and Special Economic Zone Limited 
during the period September 2007 to March 2009, which were detained 
for 4,651.52 wagon days. As per the terms of the agreement, wagon 
hiring charges for such detention of wagons supplied in excess of 
demand was also not recoverable from Mundra Port and Special 
Economic Zone Limited and WR was losing out. 
• Conversely, SCR carried bagged consignments of cement from five 
cement sidings in open wagons instead of in the normal covered wagons 
during 2006-07 to 2008-09 by offering concession in freight, which 
enabled the zone to earn revenue of Rs.88.06 crore. 
Stabling of rakes 
Rakes get stabled at various locations due to inadequate powering, non 
availability of path and inefficient management of crew adversely affecting 
freight operations. A test check of the extent of stabling of rakes in 32 out of 
the 68 divisions over IR revealed that: 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 25
• A substantial 15 percent of 4,32,634 rakes and 2,79,110 rakes booked 
during 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively had to be stabled enroute on 
account of inadequate powering a nd non-availability of path. The 
average detention to rakes on acco unt of in-adequate powering ranged 
from 2.19 to 17 hours during 2007-08 in six zones (CR, ECoR, NCR, 
SECR, SER and SWR), which marginally improved and ranged from 
2.62  to 15 hours in 2008-09. 
• Enroute stabling of rakes occurred even in zones which had adequate 
locomotives, due to inefficient management of locomotives. Out of 
21,023 rakes that were stabled in 2008-09 due to inadequate powering, 
WCR alone accounted for 12,214 rakes, while three zones (NR, NCR 
and NWR) accounted for 6,116 rakes.  
• Though the overall stabling of rakes for want of crew was not 
significant, NCR alone accounted for 68 and 72 per cent of the stabling 
cases during 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively, indicating that the crew 
management in the zone was not efficient.  
Interchange commitments and other agreements 
Interchange commitments are commitments entered into on a day to day basis 
between contiguous zones for provision of a specified number of 
wagons/rakes at interchange points (where one zone hands over the rakes to 
the other zone). The interchange commitments between zones are vital for 
smooth and efficient operation of freight services, since freight trains 
transverse across zones to different destinations. The interchange 
commitments between the zones at selected interchange points were reviewed 
and disclosed that:- 
• Shortfall in provision of the required number of rakes vis-à-vis the 
commitments was noticed in six (ECoR-21.09, NFR-16.34, NWR-8.32, 
SR-13.07, SER-1.53 and SECR-7.72 per cent) out of the 10 zones. 
Details of commitments made by the other six zones (ER, NR, SCR, 
WR, CR and NER) were not made available. Average detention to rakes 
at the selected interchange points ranged from three to 276 hours. Out of 
these, in three zones (ECoR, NCR and SWR) detentions to rakes were 
regularly in the range of 32 to 41 hours, which was substantial and 
required attention. Failure to meet the interchange commitments was 
mainly due to non-availability of path and precedence accorded to 
coaching trains, which warranted enhancement and/or decongestion of 
the route network. 
IR stated (March 2010) that passenge r trains have substantially higher 
speeds than freight trains. In the existing operating system, it was 
inevitable to detain freight trains to give precedence to passenger trains 
due to their importance and speed differe ntials of the rolling stock. This 
reinforces the need to accord priority to enhance and/or decongest the 
route network.  
• The agreement between WR and Kutch Railway Company Limited was 
not being efficiently managed. Periodic traffic plans estimating freight 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 26
traffic to be moved by rail on Kutch Rail project, though envisaged in 
the agreement, were not being prepared. As such, in Mundra Port Trust 
siding alone, WR lost 33,216 wagon days between July 2008 and March 
2009, due to detention of rakes for want of power. The zone maintained 
that consolidated power plan was only prepared and that a separate 
power plan for Kutch Rail was not prepared. 
IR in its reply (March 2010) has stated that 
power allotments are made on 
a day-to-day basis prioritizing areas that give maximum returns.  The fact, 
however, remained that in the absence of traffic plans estimating freight traffic 
movement as envisaged in the agreement, detention of rakes for want of power 
could not be contained.
 
Thus inefficient supply of rakes to customers, frequent stabling of rakes and 
inefficient interchange commitments between zones mainly due to congestion 
of path were leading to heavy enroute detention of rakes, which was adversely 
affecting efficient delivery of freight services.  
Recommendations 
IR needs to ensure adequate availability of power to haul the freight train, 
besides curtailing stabling of rakes enroute and improve the interchange 
commitments between zones to minimise enroute detentions and to enhance 
the efficiency of freight services. 
1.9.2.2 Maintenance of assets 
To ensure regular availability, enhance reliability and productivity of 
locomotives and wagons, efficient maintenance is essential in sheds and 
workshops respectively. Preventive maintenance is carried out in IR through 
periodic overhauls. Efficient periodical maintenance of locomotives and 
wagons reduces the incidence of unscheduled maintenance. Under the existing 
scenario where the assets are already strained, scheduled maintenance was 
imperative. The quality of maintenance was reviewed and findings are brought 
out below. 
Locomotive maintenance 
Railway Board had advised zones to keep the movement of dead locomotives 
(locos that have failed) to the minimum. A review of the maintenance of 
locomotives in the selected divisions indicated that:   
• Under the existing mechanism locomotives failing enroute in a run are 
brought to its home shed for repairs irrespective of the nature of repairs.  
Such movement of dead locomotives from the location of failure to the 
home shed, even for minor repairs, instead of to the nearest available 
shed results in extra expenditure on haulage apart from the loco being 
out of service for a longer period. During the period 2007-09, 463 
electric locomotives and 876 diesel locomotives, which failed enroute in 
27 divisions, were hauled back as dead to home sheds involving 
avoidable haulage of 6,81,098 kilometers. Of these, only 124 diesel 
locomotives pertaining to eight zones
9 had come for major repairs.  
                                                 
9  ECoR-38, WR-42, NFR-2, NER-1, SER-11, SCR-11, SWR-6 and CR-13 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 27
• A test check of the quality of maintenance of locomotives in 42 diesel 
and electric locomotive sheds in 28 divisions for the years 2007-09, 
disclosed that several locomotives failed on account of poor 
workmanship in the sheds as tabulated below. Locomotives were also 
increasingly failing within a short span of six months of the periodic 
overhaul (POH), aggravating the shortage of locomotives in the zones.  
Number of locos failing 
due to 
Year Traction Locos 
on line 
(Nos) 
Bad 
workmanship 
System 
failure 
Nos. of 
locos given 
premature 
POH 
Locos 
failing with 
in short 
span of 
POH 
1 2 3 5 6 7 8 
2007-08 Diesel 3156 803 148 15 264 
2007-08 Electric 2716 618 59 26 137 
2008-09 Diesel 2927 683 71 7 136 
2008-09 Electric 2606 699 46 26 122 
Further locomotives were detained in workshops for want of spares. 
Nine locomotives were detained for periods ranging from 53 to 233 days 
in Krishnarajpuram Diesel Shed in SWR for want of power pack. The 
total detention, after allowing for seven days towards each replacement 
of power pack worked out to 1,386 days resulting in potential 
productivity loss of Rs.13.77 crore.  
IR in its reply (March 2010) accepted failures of locomotives on account 
of poor workmanship in sheds/workshops and mentioned that the 
shortcomings in maintenance due to these failures were taken care of. 
The fact, however, remained that the quality of maintenance of 
locomotives in sheds required improvement especially in a scenario 
where locomotives are already in short supply and failures due to bad 
workmanship and equipment failures would aggravate the shortage 
further.   
Maintenance of wagons  
Primary maintenance of wagons is carried out in the wagon maintenance 
depots. Train examination (TXR examination) in wagon maintenance depots is 
periodically carried out to assess th e condition of wagons and the TXR 
examination in freight terminals certifies the fitness of wagons for the next 
run. Analysis of records maintained in 53 wagon maintenance depots in 38 
divisions and in 80 freight terminals across IR disclosed that: 
• Out of the 9,632 wagons that were found defective with in a short span 
of their periodical overhaul during 2007-08 and 2008-09, 6,341 belonged 
to three zones (ECoR-2,818, SCR-2,312 and SR-1,211), indicating that 
the quality of maintenance in these zones required improvement. 
• Railway Board advised (June 2008) the zones to bring down the total 
detention of freight trains for ex amination (from its arrival to its 
departure after TXR examination) from the IR’s average of 14 hours (of 
which placement of trains for examination, the TXR examination and 
departure after examination accounted for 23 per cent, 32 per cent and 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 28
45 per cent of detention time respectively) to 11 hours. A test check of 
53 wagon maintenance depots disclosed that in many depots the 
detention continued to be beyond the envisaged norm as shown below.  
Year No of depots where 
average arrival to 
placement time was 
beyond 2 ½ hours (23 
per cent of 11 hours) 
No of depots where 
average TXR 
examination time was 
beyond 3½ hours (32 
per cent of 11 hours) 
No of depots where 
average departure time 
after TXR check was 
beyond 5 hours (45 per 
cent of 11 hours) 
2007-08 16 24 25 
2008-09 34 23 23 
While the delays in placement of trains for examination was mainly on 
account of lack of information on arrival of trains, inadequate 
infrastructure and operational delays, the TXR examination was 
primarily delayed in the depots due to inadequate manpower and 
deficient infrastructure leading to undue detention of rolling stock.  
• TXR facilities were not available in 58 out of the 80 terminals selected.  
In the absence of TXR facility at the terminals /sidings, the rakes had to 
be hauled to the nominated depots located at the distance ranging from 1 
to 400 kms. On CR and SECR alone, TXR facility was not available on 
21 out of the 30 terminals booking traffic. Consequently, several rakes 
had to be hauled to a distance of 70 to 400 kms for TXR examination 
leading to detention of rakes for which incidentally no record was 
available with the Railway Administration. 
• Further in SWR, due to deficient supervision the private agencies 
engaged by the consignors of iron ore for loading /unloading operations 
were extensively damaging the railway wagons due to reckless 
operations. Consequently, the damaged wagons (one to 30 wagons in a 
rake) were hauled in empty condition often for three to four trips before 
the rake returned to depot for primary maintenance and no deterrence 
mechanism was in place in the zone. 
The supervisory mechanism in freight terminals warranted review across 
zones since the defective wagon arising was showing an increasing 
trend. While 16,345 wagons out of 61,009 rakes were found defective in 
TXR examination in 2007-08, 18,375 wagons were found defective in 
51,598 rakes booked during 2008-09 from the selected terminals.  
Thus the quality of periodic maintenance in locomotive sheds was poor and 
warranted improvement. TXR examination in wagon maintenance depots 
continued to be beyond the envisage norm due to manpower and operational 
constraints apart from deficient infrastructure. Further non availability of TXR 
examination in all freight terminals was leading to avoidable haulage of rakes. 
Supervision of loading and unloading operations by private parties in freight 
terminals was also deficient in the zones.   
IR in its reply (March 2010) contended that wagon ineffective percentage was 
around 2.7 per cent for the current year, which was below the laid down target 
of four per cent.  IR’s contention is not tenable as in 59 wagon maintenance 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 29
depots test checked by Audit in 38 divisions, IR failed to bring down the 
detention of freight trains for examin ation (from its arrival to its departure 
after TXR examination) to the stipulated 11 hours. 
Recommendations 
IR needs to enhance the quality of locomotive maintenance and address the 
infrastructural and operational constraints to strengthen the TXR examination 
at wagon maintenance depots. IR should provide TXR facility at all freight 
terminals to prevent avoidable empty haul age of rakes.  IR should strengthen 
its supervisory mechanism over loadi ng /unloading operations by private 
parties and institute effective deterrence on defaulting parties. 
1.9.2.3 Performance parameters 
Various performance parameters are a vital index to judge the performance of 
IR in the various facets of freight operations. Indices such as Net Tonne 
Kilometerage per engine hour and per wagon day, wagon kilometers per 
wagon day and wagon turn round have improved in most of the zones, 
indicating better asset utilisation. Th e reported wagon turn round statistics 
were, however, unreliable.  Even though most of the zones reported wagon 
turn round ranging from 1.37 to 3.6 days in 2007-08, the All India Average 
stood at 5.23 days. Further the following indices registered a decline in some 
zones as shown below. 
• The hours worked per day per engine in use is an index that indicates the 
per day utilisation of a locomotive in use. While the per day utilisation of 
locomotives was in excess of 20 hours in some zones, in many others 
(diesel-SR, ECoR, SER and WR, Electric- ECR, ECoR, SR, SCR, SWR,  
WR and SECR ) the utilisation ranged from 13 to 17 hours only, 
indicating that locomotive utilisation in these zones required 
improvement. 
• Similarly, the engine kilometers per day per engine in use on diesel 
traction declined in 2008-09 in five zones (SR, NWR, SWR, WCR and 
CR) when compared to 2004-05. On SECR, SWR and SR the decline 
was 19, 27 and 39 per cent respective ly. A similar trend was seen on 
electric traction in three zones (SR, CR and SECR). 
• Inspite of various capacity augmentation works under over IR, the 
average speed of freight trains did not show any perceptible increase. 
The average speed rose from 23.8 kilometers per hour in 2004-05 to 25.4 
kilometers per hour in 2008-09 as against the maximum permissible 
speed of 60 kilometers per hour, which hampered efficient delivery and 
adversely affected their turn around. 
IR accepted (March 2010) that traffic increased substantially in the zones 
without substantial commissioning of major throughput works and resultantly 
inefficiencies crept into running of trai ns due to which utilisation declined and 
speed did not substantially improve. 
 

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 30
Recommendation 
IR needs to review and improve main tenance and utilisation of locomotives 
and wagons, which would reflect on the performance parameters.  
1.9.3 Improvement of freight market share  
The freight market share of IR is driven by seasonality of demand. During the 
traditional busy season, the demand for movement of traffic peaks sharply 
putting considerable stress on the existing infrastructure. On the other hand, 
during the lean season, the demand falls sharply resulting in under utilisation 
of transport capacity. IR recognised that for some commodities such as iron 
ore and other minerals where it provides door to door service, IR had a 
competitive edge over other modes of transport. However, for other 
commodities, especially that of fini shed goods, which are transported either 
from siding to stations or from station to station, IR was losing out to road. IR 
had launched various freight incentive schemes to improve the market share 
and planned development of multi modal parks and other schemes to capture 
the road traffic. A review of these initiatives disclosed that these initiatives 
were either not evaluated or not implemented at all. This apart, zones were 
unable to achieve the loading potential as shown below. 
1.9.3.1 Freight incentive schemes 
The overall objective of the schemes was to enhance IR’s revenue though they 
were also intended to project a customer sensitive image make over of IR. The 
schemes introduced in 2006 were broadly divided into three categories:- 
S. No. Freight Incentive Schemes Brief description 
1 Volume Growth Incentive 
Schemes 
Aimed at promoting higher rail share of the 
existing users traffic 
2 Cargo Aggregation Schemes Aimed at capturing traffic not amenable to bulk 
movement in block rake. IR offers aggregation 
of cargo through warehousing facility  
3 Consignment volume based 
schemes 
Transportation options differentiated by volume 
of consignment booked to a single destination 
or two or multiple destinations 
A review of performance of the schemes introduced revealed the following:- 
• The freight schemes were operating sporadically in some zones and 
some schemes such as incentive sc heme for rail co-efficient (a volume 
growth incentive scheme) was not operational in any of the 16 zones. 
Amongst the cargo aggregation schemes, the ‘Freight Forwarder’ 
scheme was in operation in NR only, while the ‘Two Leg’ scheme was 
in operation on NR and NFR only. The marketing strategy of IR aimed 
at capturing piece meal traffic was, therefore, only partially achieved.  
• Neither was the scheme wise data maintained nor was the incremental 
loading on account of the various freight incentive schemes monitored 
by the zones. IR has maintained that its marketing efforts translated into 
freight incentive schemes and contributed to the average annual increase 
in freight loading. However, in the absence of scheme wise data the 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 31
extent of patronage and the effectiveness of the individual schemes were 
not verifiable. 
• The overall freight traffic booked under the various freight incentive 
schemes was 22.79, 38.41 and 46.34 million tonnes, which constituted 
only 3.02, 4.59 and 6.55 per cent respectively of the total traffic carried 
during 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09. The commodity wise loading 
under freight incentive schemes vis-à-vis the total loading achieved for 
the commodity during 2007-08 and 2008-09 indicated that loading under 
the freight incentive schemes contributed to less than 10 per cent for all 
commodities except cement where the freight incentive schemes 
contributed to 23 to 33 per cent. Further, the overall annual growth of 8.1 
per cent in physical loading was more or less corresponding to the 
average annual Gross Domestic Product growth of eight to nine per cent 
during the aforesaid period. Thus the incentive schemes at best 
contributed to retention of IR’s market share and were not successful in 
improving the market share. 
• Instances have also come to notice (NWR) where the customers misused 
the schemes by changing their names in the agreement with railways and 
misinterpreting the Board’s orders. Further, the ‘Two Leg’ scheme 
allows 15 days’ time for loading of goods in the second leg which was 
on the higher side considering that average wagon turnaround of IR was 
about six days. 
IR mentioned (March 2010) that zones were directed to give wide publicity of 
the freight incentive schemes and to provide regular feedback so that the 
schemes could be modified periodically and that comprehensive guidelines 
were again issued in January 2010. IR also contended that its marketing 
strategy was not aimed at capturing piecemeal traffic since that role could be 
discharged more effectively and efficiently by container train operators.  
  
IR’s contention was not tenable as recapturing of piecemeal traffic, through 
aggregation of container and wagon load traffic to be moved in rake loads was 
one of its stated marketing strategy of the 10th Five Year Plan of IR.  
1.9.3.2 Other marketing initiatives 
To attract road traffic 
IR planned to develop 
multi modal parks 
under a Public Private 
Partnership initiative 
for aggregation of 
freight for onward 
transport by road. IR 
also envisaged 
development of Roll –
On-Roll-Off (RoRo) 
door to door service to 
provide the facility of 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Loading in million tonnes
Loading under
schemes in
2007-08
Total loading in
2007-08
Loading under
schemes in
2008-09
Total loading in
2008-09
Commodities
Performance of incentive schemes
Cement Coal Fertilizer Iro n o re POL

Report No .8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 32
transporting trucks loaded on a train to provide door to door multi modal 
service with greater customer satisfact ion. These initiatives envisaged in 2005 
have still not materialised. Respondents to the survey felt that apart from 
providing door to door service, transporting by road provided greater 
operational flexibility, lesser intermittent handling and consequential damages. 
Majority of the respondents, however, e xpressed concern over the pilferage of 
cargo enroute and IR’s efficiency in settling their claims, implying that IR 
would have to address these issues as well to effectively capture road traffic. 
IR mentioned (March 2010) that the initiatives such as Special Freight Train 
Scheme, Automobile Hub, Kisan Vision Project for attracting investments in 
PPP mode for logistics parks and in  wagons were still in the policy 
formulation stage. 
1.9.3.3 Loading targets and loading potential  
A review of the freight loading achieved by zones vis-à-vis the targets fixed 
by Railway Board and the loading potential available disclosed shortfalls in 
achievement of targets and loading potential in some zones as shown below. 
• Shortfall in achieving the loading targets was observed in eight out of the 
16 zones in one or more commodities as tabulated below. 
Commodity Year Per cent shortfall 
w..r.t. targets 
(average) 
Zones in which the 
loadings fell short of 
the targets 
1 2 3 4 
Coal 2006-07, 2007-08 9.03 SER, ER 
Cement 2006-07 to 2008-09 8.06 SCR, WCR, ER 
Fertiliser 2007-08, 2008-09 6.57 SR, SWR, WCR, NFR 
Food Grains 2005-06 to 2007-08 20.52 NR, NFR, ER 
Iron Ore 2005-06 and 2008-09 14.96 SCR, SWR, ECoR 
Pig Iron & Steel 2008-09 9.65 SER, SWR, ER 
• An analysis of the freight loading ac hieved by the zones during the years 
2006-07 to 2008-09 vis-à-vis the loading potential available based on the 
number of wagons available and wagon turn round revealed that the 
loading potential was not fully utilised in some zones (CR, NR, SCR, 
SER, SR and WCR). The under utilisation ranged from 18 per cent in SR 
to 44 per cent in CR. 
Thus the performance of freight incentive schemes was not assessed and the 
marketing strategy to improve the market share of piece-meal traffic was not 
fully achieved considering that the overall growth in freight loading 
corresponded with the growth in GDP. IR’s initiatives of capturing the road 
traffic through development of multi modal parks, Roll on Roll off schemes 
have not yet materialised though four years have lapsed since it was 
envisaged. Zones were not able to achi eve loading targets and were not fully 
utilising the loading potential available. 
 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
 33
Recommendations 
IR should evaluate the incremental loading derived from incentive schemes 
and modify the schemes suitably to enhance the freight market share. 
IR needs to expedite all the Public Private Partnership projects to effectively 
harness private investment. The other initiatives aimed at capturing the road 
traffic also needs to be quickened. Alternatively, IR should explore other 
means of capturing such traffic in the short and medium term.  
IR needs to monitor the loading potential available in the zones and ensure 
that they are optimally utilised. 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
34 
 
Chapter 2  
Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
 
Executive summary 
Freight Operations Information System (FOIS) was implemented in Indian 
Railways as an initiative to leverage the use of Information Technology in the 
freight segment as an aid to decision making and to ultimately improve the 
freight services. After successful completion of trials and its implementation in 
Northern Railway, the system comprising two modules- Rake Management 
System and Terminal Management System- was rolled out to all the zones over 
Indian Railways. This was an ambitious project introduced, inter alia, to 
enhance the accuracy and reliability of operating data to provide a real time 
view of transactions and to serve as a decision making tool in allotment of 
rakes to customers and improved asset turnaround.  
The Information Technology Audit conducted to assess the comprehensiveness 
of system design, accuracy and timely av ailability of reliable data apart from 
the adequacy and effectiveness of IT s ecurity disclosed several deficiencies. 
Indian Railways has since incorporated several features and developed 
additional software to strengthen the system and has addressed some of the 
issues pointed out by Audit. Indian Railways was of the view that the initial 
difficulties of field staff had considerably reduced and railway management 
responsible for planning and operation of trains was now maintaining checks 
at various activity points to ensure timely and sequential input of data.  
However, much more needs to be done as system design still did not 
incorporate all the business rules relating to freight operations and interface 
mechanisms were not fully established. The input validation controls were 
inadequate and deficient leading to numerous errors in the master databases. 
FOIS required extensive manual inte rference and accounting of freight 
revenues also continued to be done manually in the field locations. The 
system, in its present state, was un able to provide an updated and reliable 
‘real time’ information to assist th e operating/ commercial management and 
field supervisors in short term planning as envisaged.  
 
2.1 Highlights 
The system was not comprehensively designed to incorporate all the 
relevant business rules relating to freight and posed operational 
constraints. Consequently, the perceiv ed objectives of Freight Operations 
Information System were not fully achieved even after more than seven 
years of its implementation. 
(Para 2.9.1.1) 
 
 

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
35 
 
Interface mechanisms with weighbridges and other applications were yet 
to be established limiting the utility of the application. Some processes 
were performed manually exposing th e system to the risk of input and 
processing errors. 
(Para 2.9.1.2) 
The master data bases contained numerous errors and validations were 
either absent or deficient which adversely affected reliability of data.  The 
operating data was also being input in the system belatedly due to weak 
monitoring mechanism in the zones.  The system was, therefore, not 
geared to provide a real time view of the freight operations. 
(Paras 2.9.2.1 to 2.9.2.3) 
Decisions on rake allotment were being taken manually in the zones, 
defeating the objective of capturing elaborate details on registration of 
demands of customers in the system. 
(Para 2.9.2.3) 
Both physical and logical access controls were weak and maintenance of 
back up data was defective. Network security was inadequate exposing 
the system to increased Information Security risk. 
(Paras 2.9.3) 
2.2 Gist of recommendations 
Indian Railways should rectify the syst em to incorporate all the relevant 
business rules relating to levy of freight.  
Integration of the system with weighbridges and other applications needs to be 
expedited to eliminate manual interventions and attendant risk of data entry 
errors.  
Inaccuracies in master data need to be rectified on priority. Indian Railways 
should institute appropriate checks for i nput and process validation as also for 
updating master data to enhance reliability.  
The monitoring mechanism needs to be strengthened to ensure that field 
locations input the transaction details promptly so as to provide a real time 
view of operations and to facilitate decision making as envisaged. 
Indian Railways should strengthen the physi cal and logical access controls to 
monitor and prevent unauthorised access . Effective off-site storage of back-up 
data needs to be maintained and network security needs to be strengthened. 
 2.3 Introduction   
Indian Railways (IR) depends on freight traffic for the bulk of its revenues. 
Freight is subject to frequent changes based on the freight marketing policies 
and initiatives launched from time to time. The sheer size and complexity of 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
36 
 
operations, lack of continuous cargo visibility and end-to-end commitment to 
freight customers necessitated developmen t of a system for availability of 
information on freight operations as an aid to decision making. Freight 
Operations Information System (FOIS) was initially sanctioned in 1983-84. 
The application software -Traffic Re porting and Control System- procured 
from Canada, customised as centralised application for FOIS at a cost of 
Rs.74.38 crore (up to March 1996) failed at the trial stage as an interface could 
not be established with the subsystems indigenously developed by the Centre 
for Railway Information System (CRIS) and was abandoned in 1996.. 
Subsequently, IR developed and implemented FOIS with the help of M/s 
Computer Maintenance Corporation (CMC) Limited and CRIS. 
A prototype of FOIS application software comprising Rake Management 
System (RMS) and Terminal Management System (TMS) was developed and 
implemented in Northern Railway in 2000. RMS covered various operational 
functions relating to routing, tracking  and yard activities and had seven sub-
modules while TMS covered the commercial activities pertaining to goods’ 
sheds such as generation and accounting of Railway Receipts etc and had 11 
sub-modules. Subsequently, M/s CMC developed an upgraded production 
version of RMS and TMS to make it apposite for IR.  
2.4 System architecture   
The design conforms to the state of the art client server technology using 
middleware and a Relational Data Base Management System (RDBMS). 
Application servers at the CRIS are networked and linked to a central database 
for global level transactions. The central database acts as the repository of all 
current and historical data. The applic ation is interface-re ady for web-based 
services like connectivity to customers and e-payment gateway interface. 
The hardware includes two Compaq/HP Alpha server ES-45, two Compaq/HP 
Alpha server DS-20 having RA-8000 storage system (3.2 TB storage space) 
with DAT drives, 16 ports SAN switch, personal computers (Client/Console 
machines), printers, UPS, Routers, Dial up modems, Switches, VSAT etc.  
System software includes Oracle 9.2.0 RBDMS as backend on TRU-64 UNIX 
5.1B PK4 cluster platform with BEA Tuxedo 8.1 as middleware and Visual 
Basic as presentation layer, Pro-C as front end, PL-SQL for business logics 
and XML for MIS reports. The FOIS network plan utilises a mix of the 
available terrestrial network of IR, leased BSNL lines and a satellite network 
(V-SAT) to ensure reliability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
37 
 
System architecture of FOIS 
 
2.5 Objectives of computerisation  
The objectives of computerisation of freight operations included: 
• enhancing the accuracy, reliability and timely availability of basic 
operating data pertaining to events in the field locations;  
• providing a wide range of information updated in ‘real time’ facilitating 
operating management for better planni ng, direction and control of freight 
operations and revenue accounting;  
• efficient scheduling and quick turnaround of rakes to enable effective and 
optimum utilization of the assets and resources;  
• facilitating acceptance of customers’ orders, billing and cash accounting of 
freight traffic from identified nodal customer centers, which might not be 
the handling terminals; and 
• global tracking of consignments in real time and seamless availability of 
pipeline of consignments for timely planning and just in time inventory 
management 
2.6 Organisation structure  
The organisation of Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), FOIS was created in 
1994 for implementation of FOIS on Indian Railways. CAO (FOIS) works 
under administrative control of the General Manager, Northern Railway. The 
accounts and finance work is dealt with by Financial Advisor and Chief 
IR Router 
Varun
Surya
Tara Ganga
 
Brahma Vishnu 
Switch  
 Switch 
Laxmi Uma 
Switch
  Switch
Web Server
E-Payment 
Production 
Server 
E-Payment 
Development 
NR Router 
Router-3
Internet 
Blue Zone 
Switch-1 
Blue Zone 
Switch-2 
Checkpoint 
Firewall 
Red Zone 
Switch 
E-Payment 
Web Server 
Green Zone 
Switch 
WAN 
Development Environment
E-Payment 
Development 
Web Server 
LAN 
PRS 
Internet 
Gateway 
Router 
Production Environment 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
38 
 
Accounts Officer (Construction), Northern Railway. Field units for 
implementation of FOIS exist in all zones under Chief Operating Managers.  
The RMS terminals in the divisions are managed by operating staff – train 
clerks and guards at yards, by controllers in divisional control office and are 
monitored by Senior Divisional Oper ating Manager. Similarly, the TMS 
terminals are managed by commercial st aff- goods clerks/supervisors in goods 
sheds and by assistant officers in commercial branch in divisions and are 
monitored by Senior Divisional Commercial Manager. 
2.7 Audit objectives 
The IT Audit on Freight Operations Information System was conducted with a 
view to assessing whether the: 
• System design was comprehensive and effective in providing information 
on freight operations and revenue a ccounting for review, coordination and 
monitoring;  
• Mechanism to enhance accuracy, reliability and timely availability of basic 
operating data at locations was adequate and effective; and 
• IT security was adequate and effective  
2.8 Audit scope, criteria and methodology 
The scope of audit covered audit of project management covering IT Plan, 
system analysis, design, development, implementation and post 
implementation review. Apart from the general controls covering change 
management mechanism, system and network security, disaster management 
and business continuity plan, the application controls covering input, 
processing and output controls were evaluated.  
The rules and provisions contained in Indian Railway Conference 
Association’s Goods Tariffs, Indian Railway Stores codes, decisions, 
guidelines and orders issued by Railway Board from time to time, procedures 
defined by FOIS administration and best practices prevalent in IT environment 
were used as audit criteria.  
Audit methodology included scrutiny of records at CAO (FOIS) office, CRIS 
office at New Delhi and at different field units of various zones, online 
queries, discussions with concerned offi cials. Simulation tests were also 
conducted and FOIS data was analysed using Computer Assisted Audit 
Techniques (CAATs). The audit fi ndings and recommendations were 
discussed in an exit conference held in February 2010 with Member (Traffic) 
in Railway Board, who stated that FOIS had been of great help to IR and the 
deficiencies pointed out in the system by Audit are being taken care of.  
2.9 Audit findings 
The audit findings are given in the following three sections: 
• System design 
• Data reliability  
• Information System security 

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
39 
 
 
2.9.1 System design 
The system was developed to computerise freight operations and to provide a 
wide range of information to enable planning, direction and control of freight 
operation. Additional features such as identifying nodal customer centers to 
facilitate acceptance of customers’ orders, billing and cash accounting of 
freight traffic from other than handling terminals were also planned. For 
effective utilisation, it is essential that the system is comprehensively designed 
encompassing all the relevant rules and providing interface mechanisms to 
eliminate or alternatively minimise manual intervention. Audit observed 
deficiencies in the system design due to improper mapping and updation of 
rules and inadequacies in interface mechanism as brought out below: 
2.9.1.1  Improper mapping of business rules  
Business rules governing levy of freight were not fully incorporated while 
designing the system requiring frequent manual interventions. The system also 
imposed operational constraints as brought out below: 
• Generation of Railway Receipts : The system did not have a provision to 
generate all types of RRs and to cancel a prepared RR as shown below: 
o Multiple RRs could not be generated in cases where customers were 
entitled for a number of RRs for booking multiple commodities under 
the Freight Forwarding scheme requiring manual intervention (SR).  
o In colliery sidings, destinations are changed even after issue of RRs 
due to operational reasons. There wa s, however, no provision to cancel 
the prepared RR and issue a fresh one. Despite repeated requests of the 
TMS locations at Asansol and Andal, Durgapur Steel Exchange Yard 
of ER to CRIS, the system was yet to be rectified (ER). 
o In sidings with inadequate capacity to accommodate an entire rake 
formation, loading was done in piecemeal and the system could not 
generate RRs until the entire work of loading or unloading was 
completed. Consequently, the system was not recognising the 
placement or withdrawal timings of wagons in such sidings and 
various charges leviable towards inad equate capacity of sidings could 
not be charged through TMS, requiring manual interference (New 
Jalpaiguri CS siding and Food Corporation of India/ NGC siding in 
NFR).  
o As a corollary, in most of the zones (NR, NER, WR, NFR, SECR, CR, 
SER, ER, SR, SCR, SWR, NWR and ECoR) manual corrections had to 
be carried out by the operators on the printed RRs due to generation of 
erroneous RRs.  
IR in its response (January 2010) stated  that the manual interference in RR 
preparation has progressively come down and accepted that the system 
does not cancel RRs once issued. IR further stated that the locations where 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
40 
 
complete consignment cannot be loaded at one time, rules exist for 
recording their times of placement and withdrawal. 
The mechanism built in for generation of multiple RRs and RRs for 
consignments loaded in piecemeal was defective as observed in the zones 
mentioned above, which required rectification.  
• Computation of chargeable weight: IR decided (Rate circular 76 of 
20 July 2007) that all Broad Gauge routes would be treated as CC+6 
routes (CC+6 tonnes over the carrying capacity allowed on such 
routes) with the exception of certain routes on which the chargeable 
weight of commodities was different  from those on CC+6 routes. The 
logic was improperly built into th e system and consequently freight 
charges were improperly levied as per CC+6 routes even on exempted 
routes resulting in refund claims from customers
10.  
IR mentioned (January 2010) that the business logic was built into the 
system and the process of updating the referential data was being 
followed. However the fact that cases of improper levy were detected 
in three zones indicated that the logic was improperly built in the 
system. 
• Levy of terminal charges:  As per extant provisions (Rate circular 58 
of 29 May 2007), a terminal charge at the rate of Rs.10 per tonne 
(revised to Rs.20 per tonne for a ll traffic other than iron ore and 
container traffic with effect from 1 February 2008) was leviable for 
loading/unloading of loose or bulk commodities at both railway owned 
originating and destination terminals. The rule was not properly 
incorporated in the system and terminal charges were incorrectly 
levied on terminals/sidings owned by private parties and the RRs were 
manually modified to ensure correct levy of charges
11. Conversely, 
terminal charges were not levied in some locations where both the 
originating and destination terminal were owned by Railways (e.g. 
Kalamboli in CR).  
IR mentioned (January 2010) that there was a provision in the system 
to periodically monitor the correct status of terminals and that the cases 
pointed out could pertain to sidings whose status were not corrected in 
the system.  Though regular exercises have been done to update the 
data base in case of omission, users in the field have instructions to 
correct RR’s before and after printing. 
• Levy of Busy Season surcharge: Busy Season surcharge was imposed 
on the applicable base freight rates from 1 November 2006 to 31 
March 2007 for certain classes of commodities.  Due to an improper 
                                                
 
10 (Ambala to Simogha on NR, Fertilizer Siding, Rashtriya Chemical Factory, Trombay to Kadur via Miraj, Hubli 
and Kalamboli goods shed to Kalmeshwar on CR, BCSW/Satna to Raxaul via Manikpur Junction, Allahabad City, 
Varanasi and Chapra Kacheri, Jaypee Rewa Cement siding, Satna to Warshliganj, National Fertilizer siding, Vijaipur 
to Sharsa and Khageria on WCR) 
11 (Rajbandh of ER, Chambal Fertiliser Chemical Limited,  Bhanora and BCSW/Satna of WCR, Bharat Petroleum 
siding Trombay, Associated Cements Company siding Wadi and Godhani locations of CR, BRPN siding of NFR, 
PGFC, Bargarh Road, Indian Oil Corporation siding Barauni  of ECR, Food Corporation of India sidings in SEWR-
ECoR, NR, and Hubli- SWR, GRPB/Bajva of WR, LIPL of SECR and Rudrapur City of NER) 

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
41 
 
logic built in, system computed the surcharge on total freight, instead 
of the base freight rate (SWR).  
IR mentioned (January 2010) that application of the business logic was 
monitored. However, the monitoring mechanism was inadequate as the 
logic continued to be defectively implemented and the busy season 
surcharge levied by the system was incorrect.  
• Adjustment of Wagon Demand Registration fee:  There was no-
provision for adjustment of the refundable portion of the Wagon Demand 
Registration Fee against the freight charges on the freight paid 
consignments (SCR, ER, ECR and WCR) . Similarly, though some 
customers were exempted from payment of this fee, the system did not 
have the provision to process the exemption. As such, the fee was shown 
as collected while booking the consignment and after loading of wagons it 
was shown as refunded though no real transaction had taken place (JVSL 
siding of SWR).  
Accepting the deficiency, IR mentioned (January 2010) that the business 
logic was being developed in consultation with CRIS. 
• Availing Train load benefit: Though a minimum of 10 wagons should be 
loaded for each destination for availing Train load benefit, the system 
allowed this benefit to loads with less than 10 wagons (SR, ER and NWR). 
System also could not calculate freight on train load rates in case of mixed 
composition of rakes resulting in overcharges (SECR).  
IR stated (January 2010) that the provision of giving train load benefit 
had been incorporated in the system. However, it was seen in Audit that 
the system allowed the benefit to loads less than 10 wagons, which was 
contrary to extant rules.  
• Levy of demurrage charges: Demurrage charges are levied when goods 
are not loaded into or unloaded from the wagons.  At FOIS locations 
across all zones, the facility to compute demurrage charges were not 
provided in the system and were being manually calculated .  IR replied 
(January 2010) that the feature would be incorporated in the system.  
• Availability of data for mining: At present, FOIS data of the last 15 days 
could only be retrieved by the zones.  In the absence of mining of data, the 
zones were unable to compile data for analysis.  Further, accounts 
department in the zones was capturing the data again from RRs to prepare 
Machine Prepared Abstract and for other accounting purposes resulting in 
duplication of work.   
IR mentioned (January 2010) that the module for data warehouse and  
e-working was sanctioned, which would also address the provision for data 
mining.  
• Inbuilt help:  For providing a mechanism of error handling, error  
messages are displayed by the system. A review of the error message file 
revealed that multiple error codes were allotted to same error message. 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
42 
 
Eleven error messages had multiple error codes. Thus, error handling 
procedure was not effective.  
IR mentioned (January 2010) that al l application based errors had a 
different code but accepted  that for errors pertaini ng to database several 
error messages could have the same code. 
2.9.1.2  Lack of an interface mechanism 
The system did not have the planned interface mechanisms and was not 
integrated with other applications lead ing to manual calculations as shown 
below: 
• Interface with weighbridges:  As per Railway Board instructions, all 
wagons/rakes should be weighed before preparation of RRs and the system 
was to capture details of weighment of wagons from the weighbridges at 
the time of calculation of freight an d generation of RRs. No interface was, 
however, developed between the TMS terminals and weighbridges. 
Consequently, the operators at TMS terminals were required to input the 
wagon details into the system manually exposing the system to the risk of 
data entry errors IR while accepting audit contention (January 2010) 
stated that such interface mechanism was being developed. 
• Integration of FOIS with other applications:  Integration of FOIS with 
other applications like Crew Management System, Integrated Coach 
Management System, Control Charting Operations and Web enabled 
Claim Application was not done in the zones . Similarly, despite specific 
instructions of Railway Board (June 2006), accounting freight earnings 
and its apportionment to the zones could not be achieved due to non–
integration of FOIS with Advanced Financial and Railway Earnings and 
Expenditure System (AFRES) and as su ch the exercise was being carried 
out manually and input into AFRES . 
IR in its response (January 2010) accepted the audit contention and added 
that the Control Office application was proposed to be integrated with 
FOIS and the e-working module envisaging freight accountal using data 
generated by FOIS was under implementation.   
Thus, the system was not comprehensively designed to incorporate all the 
relevant business rules and posed operational constraints. The system also did 
not have a mechanism to interface with weighbridges and other applications, 
which limited its utility. Consequently, the perceived objectives of FOIS were 
not fully achieved even though more than seven years have lapsed since FOIS 
became operational. Some processes are still being performed manually 
exposing the system to the risk of input and processing errors. 
Recommendations 
IR should rectify the system to incor porate all the relevant business rules 
relating to levy of freight.  

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
43 
 
IR needs to expedite integration of the system with weighbridges and other 
applications to eliminate manual interventions and attendant risk of data entry 
errors.  
2.9.2 Data reliability  
In order to achieve the perceived objectives of enhancing the accuracy and 
reliability of basic operating data pertaining to events in the locations, 
availability of a wide range of ‘real time’ information for better planning and 
monitoring of freight operations and global tracking of consignments in real 
time, the database needs to be complete with a high level of integrity and the 
events in the field need to be captured immediately on their occurrence. 
Further the successful functioning of FOIS - an input intensive system-largely 
depends on the effectiveness of the input control system. Audit observed that 
the master data contained errors, inputs were delayed and incomplete 
preventing real time view and input contro ls/validations were either absent or 
deficient as brought out below: 
2.9.2.1 Deficiencies in the master data bases 
Generation and updation of master data (i.e. geographical data/station booking 
profile, siding data etc.) suffered from weak validation controls, which led to 
discrepancies in the data maintained in the system as brought out below.  
Wagon master 
The wagon master contained master data of the total availability of wagons in 
the railway network. Deficiencies observed in the master wagon database were 
as follows: 
• Even though Railway Board had adopted (2003) a system of allotting 
numbers to new wagons consisting of 11 numerical digits, which was 
subsequently revised to 10 numerical di gits (first two digits indicating the 
type of wagon, the next two the ow ning railway, the subsequent two the 
year of manufacture, the next three the individual wagon number and the 
last digit indicating the check digit for validation), incorrect wagon 
numbers consisting of less than the prescribed 10 digits or inadmissible 
characters were present in the Wagon master (SCR, ER, WR, SR and 
SER) due to deficient validation control in the wagon number field. 
Instances of wagon numbers with the pre revised 11 digits were also seen 
in the computerised database at WCR (Jaypee Rewa siding).   
A review further revealed that wh en the wagon number was not found in 
the master, the TMS locations were allowed to prefix/suffix characters 
‘A’/’D” before/after the wagon numbers while generating RRs and 
releasing wagons with consignments. While this was solving the 
operational issue of clearing consignments, such cases were not validated/ 
reviewed before updating the master. As a result, the master data was 
inflated and did not reflect the actual wagon holding. A test check in four 
zones (ER, NR, CR and SR) alone disclosed that the database indicated an 
inventory of 65,630, 39,408, 54,907 and 25,125 active wagons against an 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
44 
 
actual holding of 37,615, 17,563, 48,219 and 11,155 active wagons owned 
by these zones respectively. 
• Details of tare weight and carrying capacity of wagons were incorrectly 
shown for 15,644 and 848 wagons respectively. In some cases these details 
were kept blank in the master file (NR, ER, CR, SR, SER, SCR, NFR and 
NWR).  
• New types of wagon like BRNHE, BTAL and TORXC introduced in 
Railways was not updated in the Wagon master and the master file was 
therefore incomplete (ER, CR, NFR and ECoR).  
IR in response (January 2010) mentioned that a pilot project on fitting RFID 
tags to the referential data base of wagons was being carried out in ECoR to 
facilitate automatic input of wagon details through reading of RFID tags by 
strategically placed readers.  
Distance tables 
Commercial Inspector and Traffic Inspector of Accounts are jointly 
responsible for entering the chargeable distances at a TMS terminal both for 
inward and outward traffic. The fo llowing irregularities were noticed 
regarding the authenticity and completeness of distances entered in the system:  
• Users at TMS locations had the facility to directly feed routes/distances in 
the master tables which was not authenticated at supervisory levels leading 
to discrepancies in database.  
• For several entries in the station index master table, the actual distances 
were not entered. Though freight cal culations are generally based on 
chargeable distance, for routes falling in the ghat section freight is based 
on the actual distance. In the absence of actual distance figures, freight 
charges for such routes could not be calculated by the system requiring 
manual intervention. (SCR). 
• A test check of a sample of ten pairs of stations indicated that the distances 
available in the database varied from two to 1,149 kilometers from their 
actual distance (SR). Similar discrepancies were noticed in other zones 
also (SCR, NWR, NR, SER and NFR). Further, discrepancies were noticed 
in the distance between pairs of stations in the ‘Up’ and ‘Down’ directions 
(NWR). The chargeable distance was also shown as zero against various 
cases (SCR and NWR). 
IR in response (January 2010) stated that with the introduction of Rates 
Branch Software and its integration with FOIS, the chargeable distance was 
now calculated by the system and that timely updation of data was ensured. 
However, due to weak monitoring mechanism discrepancies with reference to 
the actual distance continued to exist in the system. 
2.9.2.2 Inadequate input validation controls 
Deficiencies in the input validation controls were observed as brought out 
below: 

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
45 
 
• Instances of inconsistencies in placement and release time of rakes were 
noticed in the zones (ER, CR, NR, SR, WR, SER, NWR, WCR and NFR) 
indicating that the information was eith er incorrect or deficient. In 24,005 
cases it was observed that the commercial placement time (the time at 
which the operating department has placed the train for 
loading/unloading)and release time(the time at which the rake has been 
dispatched) of wagons were the same Further, in 294 rakes it was seen that 
the commercial placement and release times had a difference of one hour 
or less while in 30 rakes the difference was of five minutes, indicating that 
the entire train was loaded/unloaded in less than one hour /five minutes, 
which was impossible. 
IR in reply (January 2010) mentioned that with the proposed integration of 
Control Office application with FOIS  the discrepancies between reporting 
of time would be eliminated. 
• ‘To-Pay’ surcharge as applicable from time to time is to be levied in all 
cases where the freight exceeds the Credit Note Cum Cheque limit (CNCC 
limit- the monthly limit fixed for freight acceptance based on lumpsum 
deposits made with IR). Due to lack of input of basic data like “Lump Sum 
account of Customer” the system failed to levy ‘To-Pay’ surcharge 
amounting to Rs.0.16 crore (OCL Siding at Rajgangpur of SER). Similar 
cases were also noticed in ER, ECR and NER (Rudrapur City).  
IR mentioned (January 2010) that the CAO FOIS and the zones were 
responsible for feeding data in the data base. The reply only reiterated the 
defined responsibility without indicating the quality of implementation. 
Audit observed that the responsibility was not effectively discharged in the 
zones and the monitoring mechanism was weak. 
• Instances of incorrect input were also noticed. Out of 42 BOST empty 
wagons placed at DSEY location of ER, only 17 were shown as loaded 
from DSEY and the rest were shown as loaded at some other location(s).  
Similarly, in NWR it was seen that out of 599 wagons loaded on 22 July 
2008 for STPB, 238 were incorrectly shown in the system as diverted to 
some other station (Birdhwal), while the wagons were physically delivered 
at STPB.   
IR mentioned (January 2010) that regu lar update of referential data base 
and scrutiny of MIS reports served as internal checks for timely detection 
and correction of such mistakes. The fact, however, remained that 
incorrect input could be entered into the system due to inadequate input 
validation controls. 
• Invalid transaction data were noticed in the zones. It was observed in NR 
that, in respect of 3,591 transactions, the delivery date was prior to RR 
date. The system even accepted future date for forwarding note such as 
dates for the years 2019 and 2021  (NR). Further, fields to capture details 
of forwarding note, invoice id, commodity code, RR notes etc contained 
either ‘zeros’ or were left blank in many records (SR, ER and NR). 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
46 
 
IR mentioned (January 2010) that the system was built on the concept of 
sequential reporting and therefore deliv ery of goods could take place only 
after it was booked on the system against  a particular RR. The response 
was partial . Inadequate validation controls  were evident as the system 
accepted invalid values in date and other fields.  
• All cash transactions done at FOIS locations/stations should be accounted 
for at locations and be reflected in monthly station balance sheets.  A 
review of station balance sheets revealed that the opening and closing 
balances of different stations in the zones (NR- Patiala, Ambala, 
Chandigarh and SCPD, SCR-Ranajitpura, SR- Chettinad Cement siding, 
SER-Muri, ER-Dankuni) varied from the actual balances. In some Balance 
Sheets the balances were incorrectly shown as zero or as minus figures 
(SR and NR). Therefore manual cash records and balance sheets were 
being maintained at FOIS locations/stations. As such, financial data 
produced by FOIS system was not used for financial accounting. 
IR mentioned (January 2010) that the functionality was being developed as 
a part of e-working module and Chandigarh goods shed of NR was 
identified for conducting the pilot project. 
2.9.2.3 Delayed and incomplete inputs  
To enable the system to provide a real time view it is also essential for the 
field locations to update the system as and when the transactions take place. 
Deficiencies were observed in the pro cess of updating data. These are brought 
out below:  
• Various transactions were being input in the system after considerable 
delay. The system in fact accepts back reporting up to five hours (at 
present reduced to four hours). As such data pertaining to rake formation, 
wagon details, loco particulars etc. are not always entered in the system on 
real time basis. Therefore, one of the main objectives of FOIS- Global 
tracking of consignments in real time was not effective. Additionally 
instances of missing or unconnected wagons and payment of compensation 
continued to persist in the zones (SCR, SR and NER), which bear further 
evidence that the global tracking of consignments in real time was not 
fully achieved. IR mentioned (January 2010) that with integration of 
Control Office application, details of running of trains would be available 
on real time basis. 
• Moreover, Railway Board’s master policy circular of 14 January 2005 
envisaged registration of demands received from customers in the system 
by capturing details such as load (rake/piecemeal), single or multi party 
consignor(s), rake commodity, traffic type, priority class, rake type, stock 
type etc to enable assessment of requirement and to facilitate a decision on 
allotment of rakes with the aid of FOIS. The demands were, however, 
initially recorded in a manual register and were input into the system only 
after a decision on allotment of rakes was taken manually, defeating the 
very objective of capturing such exhaustive details in the system.  

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
47 
 
IR mentioned (January 2010) that instructions already existed for 
registration of demands as soon as forwarding note is received at TMS 
locations. This, however, was not being ensured in the zones.  
Thus, the master data bases contained numerous errors and validations were 
either absent or deficient which adversely affected reliability of data and 
reports generated by the system. The op erating data was also input in the 
system belatedly due to weak monitoring mechanism in the zones. Further, 
decisions on rake allotment were being taken manually in the zones, defeating 
the objective of capturing elaborate de tails on registration of demands of 
customers in the system. The system was, therefore, not geared to provide a 
real time view of freight operations.  
Recommendations 
IR should initiate necessary action on priority to rectify the inaccuracies in 
master data and institute appropriate validation checks while updating master 
data to enhance reliability. Necessary ch ecks and validation controls need to 
be incorporated to ensure that only correct data is entered and processed.  
The monitoring mechanism needs to be strengthened to ensure that field 
locations input the transaction details promptly so as to provide a real time 
view of operations and to facilitate decision making as envisaged. 
2.9.3 Information System security  
The system which manages the railways’ core activity of freight operations 
should have an efficient and time te sted security in place to ensure 
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability of information and communication 
system that store, process and transmit data. Though the system was equipped 
with a security module encompassing password and backup policies, Audit 
observed that the system suffered from security deficiencies posing 
unacceptable risks as shown below: 
• Physical access:  Access of unauthorised persons to the FOIS locations 
was not restricted. There was no mechanism for preventing any 
unauthorised physical movement of customers and for continuous 
surveillance, indicating that the physical access controls were weak (ER, 
SER and SR). 
IR mentioned (January 2010) that instructions would be reiterated to zones 
to ensure segregation of areas and to prevent unauthorised access in both 
TMS and RMS locations. 
• Logical access:  Logical access controls protect the application and 
underlying data files from unauthorised access, amendment or deletion. 
The logical access controls were weak as shown below: 
o As per the defined procedure, usernames were to be created in the 
system only after assigning a specific role to the user depending upon 
the functions performed while Audit observed that the role of the users 
were not defined as per actual requ irements and users had no logical 

Report No.8 of 2010-11(Railways) 
48 
 
linkage with the actual functions entrusted. A common single user was 
defined in the system for various locations.  
o Further, common User ID and pass word with all privileges were 
allotted to/shared by all level of users at various locations.  
o The passwords were stored as plain text instead of in hash values in 
system tables. The User IDs and passwords were sent as open text 
through messages, which was not in consonance with good security 
practice. Further even though the system provided for changes of 
password periodically, the system accepted the same password 
repeatedly (SR). 
• Offsite back up: There was no procedure for back-up of data in the zones. 
Off site back ups were not being maintained out of CRIS headquarters.  
Security of DAT tapes containing daily/ weekly/ monthly onsite backups 
was not ensured as it was not kept in a fire protected environment and the 
tapes were not properly labeled. Backups were never tested for restoration. 
IR mentioned (January 2010) that FOIS keeps off site back up of the 
application. The reply does not address the issue of back up of data. Audit 
had observed that off site back up of data was not ensured. Further, on site 
back ups were not secure and were never tested. 
• Disabling proxy location:  The system was designed to operate from a 
proxy location in case of a disruption to  the original designated location. It 
was, however, seen that the proxy location had to be manually disabled 
when the original location was restored, which had an inherent risk of the 
proxy location remaining active for an indefinite period of time (NR and 
ER).  
• Network security:  Network security management encompasses 
deployment, maintenance and monitoring of the effectiveness of network 
security controls to safeguard information and information systems and 
protect supporting network infrastructure.  Effective network security 
management practices also require established and documented procedures 
that provide instructions for system to restart and recover in the event of 
system failure in a short time. Network security was inadequate in the 
zones as shown below: 
o Anti-virus software was either not in stalled in terminals or not updated 
regularly at various locations of NR (Shakurbasti, Patiala, Ambala, 
Jallandhar City, Firozepur, Chandigarh, BPHT and Thuglakabad 
mineral siding) NER and SECR. 
o FOIS terminals were found infected with virus/Trojans at locations 
(TMS Chandigarh and Patiala) and were frequently shutting down at 
very short intervals due to virus, thus interrupting the smooth 
functioning at locations (NR). 
o The computers used at CRIS for database administration and software 
development for FOIS application had internet facility, in violation of 

Chapter 2 Freight Operations Information System in Indian Railways 
49 
 
the Railway Board’s orders (October 2004), exposing the  system to 
the risk of external threats (NR). 
IR mentioned (January 2010) that FOIS  intranet was secure and there was 
no direct connection to the internet and that CRIS intranet was totally 
segregated from FOIS intranet. IR also mentioned that it was the 
responsibility of the zones to maintain the antivirus software through AMC 
contracts. However, FOIS terminals were found infected by virus and 
antivirus software were either not installed or not updated in locations, 
which required effective monitoring. 
Thus, both physical and logical access controls were weak and maintenance of 
back up data was defective. Network security was inadequate exposing the 
system to increased Information Security risk. 
Recommendations 
IR should strengthen the physical and logical access controls to monitor and 
prevent unauthorised access. Effective off-site storage of back-up data needs 
to be maintained and network security needs to be strengthened.  
 
 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 50
Chapter 3 
Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 
Executive Summary 
The primary requirement of train transportation is to ensure safe, speedy, 
reliable and punctual movement of passengers and goods to various 
destinations in the country. Over the years, various safety review committees 
have recommended the formulation of a Corporate Safety Plan indicating  the 
policy/objectives and strategies for achieving the objectives and to set bench 
marks for safety achievements. 
Accordingly the Indian Railways formulated the Corporate Safety Plan for the 
period 2003 to 2013, with a fund outlay of Rs.31,835 crore. This  envisaged a 
safety action plan directed towards c ontinuous reduction in risk level to its 
customers. The Corporate Safety Plan was divided into two phases, the first 
phase to be completed by 2008 and the second phase by 2013. 
The progress in achieving the objectives  of Phase I of the Corporate Safety 
Plan and the action plan laid down for implementing Phase II, other than 
Signalling & Telecommunication and Disaster Management, which were 
covered earlier, were reviewed in the Performance Audit. 
The study revealed that the Indian Railways could not fully achieve the target 
of Phase I in providing ballast, improvement works at level crossings for road 
users’ safety etc. Target for replacement of overaged locomotives 
technological improvement on maintenance of track and bridges, upgradation 
of freight train examination facilities etc. also could not be achieved. 
The development of various new technologies for improvement in rolling 
stock, permanent way etc., that reduce th e risk level to Rail users, which was 
entrusted to the Research, Design and Standards Organisation (RDSO), was 
behind schedule.  
The targets fixed for conducting safety audits and drives by multi disciplinary 
teams at zonal and Railway Board level co uld not be achieved in many zones 
and records of such audits and drives conducted were also not maintained 
properly in many zones. 
Targets fixed for reduction in various defects on track, rolling stock, overhead 
equipments were also not achieved by many of the zones. 
While the overall accident figures have come down over the years, a few types 
of accidents like level crossing accident s, collisions etc. increased in some 
zones.  
Though human error proved to be the major cause of many accidents and 
resultant loss of life, the Indian Railways  failed to provide improved facilities 
for the running staff, modernization and upgradation of training facilities. 
Indian Railways were also not able to  fill all the safety category staff 
vacancies. 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 51
3.1 Highlights 
• Execution of track renewal work on MG line identified for gauge 
conversion resulted in infructuous expenditure of Rs.48.26 crore in 
SCR.  
(Para 3.9.1.1) 
• There were 223 overaged BG diesel locomotives on line over Indian 
Railways. 
(Para 3.9.1.2) 
• Utilisation of funds allocated for undertaking road safety works under 
Railway Safety Fund was less than 65 percent during the period from 
2003 to 2009. The progress in replac ement of level crossings with 
ROB/RUB was very slow. Only 12.62  percent of the identified level 
crossings have been replaced so far. Progress of other improvement 
works at level crossings as proposed in CSP was also very slow.   
(Para 3.9.1.3) 
• Preventive rail grinding works to tackle the problem of gauge corner 
cracking of rails could not be carried out due to non availability of 
Rail Grinding Machines. These machines are yet to be procured.  
(Para 3.9.1.4) 
• 20 percent of the wagons weighed at way side weigh bridges were 
found overloaded and such wagons were allowed to proceed 
endangering the condition of the track.  Further, targets for reduction 
in defects on track, rolling stock and overhead equipments could not 
be achieved in most of the zones. 
(Para 3.9.1.5) 
• Progress of modernization and upgradation of training centres was 
very slow. There were vacancies in safety category posts in all the 
zones.  
(Para 3.9.1.6) 
• No mid term review has been con ducted in the zones except in ECR 
and NER. 
(Para 3.9.2) 
• No specific action plan has been drawn in eight zones and Metro 
Railway, Kolkata for implementation of Phase II of CSP. 
(Para 3.9.3) 
3.2  Gist of Recommendations   
• Better planning needs to be done before undertaking the track renewal 
works of MG/NG sections so that no expenditure becomes infructuous 
while taking up the gauge conversion works later on. Adequate ballast 
hoppers should be provided to the zones so as to clear the deficiency of 
ballast on the track which is vital for safety of train operations. Overaged 
locomotives need to be replaced on priority basis. 
• Since most of the accidents with maximum casualties are taking place at 
level crossings, Indian Railways s hould strictly implement all the 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 52
improved safety features at the LCs as recommended in the CSP. Indian 
Railways needs to take proper action to curtail the undue delay in adoption 
of improved technology to strengthen track safety as proposed in the CSP. 
• Indian Railways and RDSO need to accelerate the research work so as to 
implement the new technology for speedy and safe train operations. 
• Indian Railways needs to focus on implementation of the 
recommendations of CSP for inspection and management of bridges. 
Necessary data regarding the defects detected on various items of track, 
rolling stock, OHE etc. should be maintained for making comprehensive 
evaluation of the safety risks.  Defects should be brought down to the 
minimum. Overloaded wagons should not be allowed to run on track. 
• Indian Railways should take necessary action to complete the periodic 
safety drives and audits of safety in stallations and take corrective actions. 
The monitoring mechanism of Indian Ra ilways should be geared up so as 
to achieve reduction in accidents and casualties on all zones and also to 
achieve the overall objectives of Corporate Safety Plan. 
• Indian Railways should fill up all sa fety category posts and also take 
necessary steps to reassess the requirement of staff, in view of introduction 
of modern technology, to bring down the requirement to a realistic level. 
 3.3 Introduction   
The primary requirement of train transportation is to ensure safe, speedy, 
reliable and punctual movement of passengers and goods to various 
destinations in the country. During the last four decades, four Safety Review 
Committees have investigated the deficiencies and suggested reforms for 
improving safety of the Railway system. The Railway Safety Review 
Committee (RSRC - 1998), which was the last one in the series, in Part-I of its 
report recommended that Indian Railways (IR)  should immediately formulate 
a comprehensive Corporate Safety Plan which will, interalia:- i) clearly state 
the safety policy/objectives and strategies for achieving them; ii) 
unambiguously enunciate the basic tenets and requirements of safety; iii) 
prioritise the safety related works and indicate the timeframe as also 
investments proposed; and iv) set bench marks for safety achievements. 
Accordingly the IR formulated the Corporate Safety Plan (2003-2013) in 
August 2003 which envisaged a safety action plan directed towards continuous 
reduction in risk level to its customers, implementation of suggested system 
reforms, imbibing better safety culture,  enhancement of asset reliability etc. 
Though the Corporate Safety Plan (CSP) was made for 10 years, most of its 
achievable targets were divided into two phases. Phase-I covered the period 
between 2003-08 and Phase-II the remain ing period up to 2012-13. This was 
done to have a mid-term assessment with changed circumstances, 
advancement of technology and assimilation of devices.  The funds required 
for safety enhancement works, incl uding SRSF, outlined in the CSP were 
Rs.31,835 crore. 
 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 53
 3.4 Organisation Structure  
Though the Railway Board retains the ultimate responsibility for ensuring 
safety, various departments like Civil Engineering, Mechanical, Electrical, 
Signalling and Telecommunication were responsible for implementing the 
CSP with the Safety Department being the nodal department to monitor the 
implementation. At the Zonal Railway level, the General Managers were 
ultimately responsible for achieving the safety objectives and all the above 
departments at Zonal Railways were responsible for implementation of the 
CSP with safety department being the nodal department for monitoring the 
implementation. 
3.5 Audit objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess:- 
• Whether the targets of the CSP (Phase-I) up to the period 2008 have been     
achieved? 
o Whether the replacement / renewal of assets have progressed as 
planned? 
o Whether the introduction of new technology / improved design has 
taken place as planned? 
o What has been the progress in the areas identified for research for 
safety improvement? 
o Whether the steps identified, for improving maintenance practices/ 
improving asset reliability and thereby inculcating a safety culture, 
have been taken? 
o Whether the planned investment in human resources has taken place? 
• Whether the progress of the CSP has been reviewed through a mid term 
review at the zones / Railway Board?  
• Whether any action plan has been laid down for the items to be 
implemented in the latter half of the CSP? 
3.6 Audit criteria, methodology and scope 
Scope: Phase-I of CSP was to be implemented from 2003 to 2008. Hence the 
Performance Audit covered the five year period 2003-08. However the aspects 
in respect of Signalling and Telecommunication and Disaster Management in 
the CSP have been excluded from the scope as they have already been covered 
in Report No. 26 of 2008-09 and Report No. 8 of 2008 respectively. 
Criteria: The criteria adopted was the benc hmarks indicated in the Corporate 
Safety Plan (2003-13), RSRC (1998) Report, guidelines and instructions 
issued by the Railway Board and relevant codes and manuals of the IR. 
Methodology: The audit methodology followed was examination of records at 
the Railway Board, Zonal/Divisional Headquarters and field offices. Data 
collected from Zonal/Divisional Headquarte rs was verified wi th that of basic 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 54
records available in field offices.  Physical Inspection, surveys and interviews 
were also used wherever found necessary. Entry and exit conferences were 
held in zones and Railway Board to obtain the views of the Railway 
executives. 
3.7 Sample Selection    
At the macro level data was collected from all Divisions, Workshops and 
Zonal Headquarters. For micro analysis of specific issues the sample selection 
was made as detailed in Annexure III. 
3.8 Acknowledgement  
The audit objectives, scope, methodology and findings were discussed by the 
Principal Directors of Audit in the zones with the respective General 
Managers/concerned departmental heads in entry and exit conferences. The 
input provided on various aspects including suggestions and support provided 
by railway officials while conducting the audit is acknowledged with thanks. 
The co-operation extended by Railway Board during the course of audit is also 
appreciated. The findings presented in this review were discussed with the 
Railway Board in an exit conferen ce held in February 2010 and their 
suggestions/remarks are included in the report. 
3.9 Audit Findings  
The results of audit are given in the following sections: 
3.9.1 Achievement of Targets of Phase I of Corporate Safety Plan for 
the period up to 2008 
3.9.1.1 Track related works  
A. Track Renewals 
Periodic renewal of the railway track is necessary to ensure its continued 
ability to withstand the expected traffic. IR assessed the total track renewal at 
the beginning of April 2003 as 10705 km and provided an amount of Rs. 4894 
crore (net) for the purpose under SRSF. The work was to be completed by 
March 2007 as envisaged in the CSP. A review of track renewal works under 
SRSF revealed that by March 2008 two zones (NWR and ECR) could not 
achieve the target in spite of exceeding the final grant of expenditure. This was 
mainly due to increase in cost of mate rial, delay on the part of contractors in 
execution of work etc. It was also noticed that in eleven out of sixteen zones 
(CR, ER, NR, NWR, SCR, SER, NER, ECR, SECR, SWR and WCR) the 
expenditure exceeded the final grant under SRSF, whereas remaining five 
zones could not fully spend the funds allotted to them.  At the end of March 
2008 an amount of Rs.597.73 crore remained unutilized in SRSF which was 
later transferred to DRF. It was furt her noticed that in CR, funds worth 
Rs.19.75 lakh were diverted for other than track renewal works.   
IR in February 2010 stated that as the ground reality differs on each Railway 
the progress cannot be uniform and there has been a complete track renewal 
on almost 100 percent of the identified track, because of which there has been 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 55
a vast reduction in number of dera ilments. The track renewal works under 
SRSF were almost completed and the funds allocated under SRSF were fully 
utilized. However the fact remains that IR almost completed the track renewal 
only by March 2008, i.e. after a delay of more than one year, and still a small 
portion of track is yet to be completed.  
B. Track renewals/maintenance of MG/NG sections 
CSP identified 9000 kms of Metre Gauge/Narrow Gauge (MG/NG) track for 
conversion to Broad Gauge (BG) which would take up to the year 2013.  It 
was further proposed that track renewal works on these tracks would be done 
using mixed gauge PRC sleepers so that at the time of gauge conversion, no 
part of expenditure becomes infructuous. During the review it was noticed that 
in WR three works of track renewal on the section identified for gauge 
conversion were taken up. In NER, fourteen works on the identified sections 
were taken up. Similarly in ECR three works were taken up and in NFR ten 
works were taken up, where gauge conversion was proposed. However mixed 
gauge PRC sleepers were being used only on two sections of NFR. This would 
render the expenditure on sleepers used  on other sections infructuous when 
gauge conversion is carried out by the year 2013.  
Railway Board directed (June 2003) that where gauge conversion work is 
sanctioned and is likely to be completed by March 2007, keeping in mind the 
economy measures and financial interest of the Railway along with the safety 
parameters, heavy investment should not be made on the lines which have 
already been included in the Gauge Conversion Plan. In SCR it was noticed 
that gauge conversion was sanction ed on Guntakal-Dharmavaram-Pakala 
section in April 2003. Despite the above orders, track renewal work was taken 
up and completed in 2006-07. The stretches of track between Kalluru-
Dharmavaram was abandoned within three months after completion of work 
rendering an expenditure of Rs.6.05 crore infructuous. This has already been 
commented in the Railway Audit Report No.CA 19 of 2008-09.  Later the 
entire section of Guntakal-Dharmavaram-Pakala was also closed within seven 
months after completion of track renewal works, for taking up gauge 
conversion work rendering an expenditure of Rs.48.26 crore infructuous. 
C.   Provision of Ballast 
Provision of adequate ballast is very essential for proper up-keep of track.  To 
wipe out huge arrears of ballast de ficiency it was proposed under CSP to 
procure 3800 Hopper wagons by 2008 through Rolling Stock Programme. 
Though most of the zones placed indents with the Railway Board for ballast 
hoppers, the combined total of hoppers received by the zones was only 3036 
as of March 2008. The deficiency in provision of ballast as of March 2008 was 
1148839 CUM over IR and the deficiency over zones ranged from 4000 CUM 
(0.50 percent) in SER during 2005-06 to 614867 CUM (58.06 percent) in SR 
during 2004-05. 
IR in February 2010 stated that recently in view of higher axle load running 
and universalisation of CC+6+2 tonne load running, track standards have been 
upgraded. Large deficiency of ballast was mainly due to this upgradation. 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 56
Every year more than 100 lakh CUM ballast sufficient for 10,000 track KM is 
being taken and progress of deep screening and ballast supply has been 
consistently good and targets were almost achieved in procurement. However 
the fact remains that despite achieving the target of procurement the 
deficiency of ballast over IR was 11.49 lakh CUM as of March 2008 mainly 
due to non availability of adequate ballast hoppers, which affects the safety of 
track. 
Recommendation 
Better planning needs to be made before undertaking the track renewal works 
of MG/NG sections so that no expend iture becomes infructuous while taking 
up the gauge conversion works later on. Adequate ballast hoppers need to be 
provided to the zones so as to clear the deficiency of ballast on track which is 
vital for safety of train operations.  
3.9.1.2 Rolling Stock – Replacement of overaged locomotives   
CSP proposed the replacement of overaged locomotives by new locomotives 
with enhanced safety features. Year-wise replacement plan was also drawn up 
by the CSP. The replacement of overaged diesel locomotives, which were 213 
as on March 2003 and estimated to go up to 819  by the year 2013, was 
planned to be 90 locos per year from 2003 to 2008 and 74 locos per annum 
from 2008 to 2013.  
During the review of records at zonal Railways it was noticed that after 
replacing 382 locomotives, IR was holding 223 overaged BG diesel 
locomotives as against a total stock of 4163 locomotives as of March 2008.  In 
case of MG Diesel locomotives, after replacing 31 locomotives during the 
review period, IR was holding 82 overaged locomotives as against a total of 
444 locomotives on line as of March 2008. Though many of the overaged 
locomotives were reported to be used fo r inferior services such as shunting 
operation etc., IR was compromising the safety of Railway users by engaging 
the overaged locomotives for Railway operations as possibility of 
derailments/accidents remain.  
IR in February 2010 stated that locomotives are expensive assets which are the 
backbone of train running. It is therefore a policy that the locomotives are 
replaced on age-cum-condition basis, instead of only on age basis. Production 
capacity is being increased in the locomotive production units to replace the 
over-aged rolling stock and to meet the future condemnation requirements. 
However the fact is that IR will have overaged locomotives on line, 
compromising the safety aspects, till the above steps materialize. 
Recommendation 
As the stock of overaged diesel locomotives was very high and its replacement 
was very minimal, IR needs to look into this area to replace the entire 
overaged rolling stock. 
 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 57
Trespassers after closing the level crossing at Diva Station (CR) endangering their lives 
3.9.1.3 Improvement works and introduction of new technology/improved 
design as per plan 
A. Improvement works at Level Crossings for Road Users’ safety 
In order to curb accident s at Level Crossings (LCs), CSP envisaged a multi-
pronged strategy of widening of roads in Railway land at high density 
locations, modified design of stop boa rds in retro-reflective sheets at 
unmanned LCs, provision of manned LCs in the next five years at unmanned 
LCs as per revised criteria for manni ng etc. As per the revised criteria, 
wherever the Train Vehicle Units (TVUs) are more than one lakh per day, the 
LCs are to be replaced with Road Over Bridges/Road Under Bridges 
(ROBs/RUBs) on the basis of cost sharing with State Governments.  
The table below shows the target and actual work of ROB/RUB done as of  
March 2008 at LCs with more than one lakh TVUs. 
Particulars Target Actual as of March 2009 
Physical (Nos.) 1252 158 
Financial (in Crore) 8000 1050.87 
From the above table it is seen that out  of the 1252 ROBs/RUBs targeted to be 
completed by 2013 only 158 (12.62 percent) have been constructed as of 
March 2009, indicating very slow progress. It was noticed that work of 
ROB/RUBs has been planned/undertaken only at 438 LCs over 11 zones (SR-
74, CR-71, ER-33, WR-5, SCR-126, SER-10, NCR-39, ECR-26, ECoR-31, 
and SWR-23). The reason for the slow progress of construction work was 
attributed to unwillingness of the State Governments to share the cost of 
construction, public agitation in acquiring the land, delay in acquisition of land 
etc. It was further noticed in ER that replacement of LCs was being planned 
only when proposals were initiated by the concerned State Government 
agreeing to share the cost and accepting the Railway’s stipulations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 58
Out of the 171 LCs test checked (92 manned and 79 unmanned) by Audit on 
the zones, it was noticed that many of the safety features were not provided at 
the LCs. Reflectors on stop disc on both sides of gate for the road users were 
provided only at 80 LCs and interlocking was done only at 62 LCs. Wicket 
gates or stiles for pedestrians have be en provided only at 47, lamps were 
provided only at 83 and locking arrangements were provided for both gates 
only at 90 LCs. It was further noticed that the distance of lifting barriers from 
centre of track was less than five metres in respect of 65 manned LCs. In 
NWR and SER the distance of lifting barriers was less than five metres at all 
the LCs test checked. It was also found that in ER four manned LCs were not 
provided with telephones (Annexure IV). 
The table below shows the year-wise funds allocation and utilization under 
Railway Safety Fund for undertaking road safety works for the period 2003-04 
to 2008-09. 
(Figures in crores) 
Year Total Grant Actual 
Expenditure 
Saving Percentage 
of saving 
2003-04 433.00 166.19 266.81 61.62 
2004-05 401.03 201.58 199.45 49.73 
2005-06 711.39 262.87 448.52 63.05 
2006-07 710.94 360.28 350.66 49.32 
2007-08 1050.69 533.55 517.14 49.22 
2008-09 1300.28 565.57 734.71 56.50 
It is seen that in all the years the Railway Administration was surrendering 
about 50 percent or more of the funds allotted for road safety works. This was 
mainly due to slow progress of wo rks, delay in land acquisition, non 
completion of detailed estimates and formalities before making payment to 
State Governments towards the cost of road approaches in respect of various 
ROBs/RUBs etc. Surrender of funds shows that the Railways are not carrying 
out all the works planned at level crossi ngs where most of the accidents take 
place with maximum casualties. The fatality numbers on level crossing 
accidents were 454 out of the total 71 4 fatalities for the period from 2005-06 
to 2007-08. 
IR stated in February 2010 that most of the unmanned LC accidents, which 
constitute 45 per cent of the total number of consequential train accidents, are 
caused due to negligence of road users. IR have therefore started 
comprehensive social awareness programmes and publicity campaigns 
through electronic and print media to educate the road users about the 
precautions to be observed while negotiating the unmanned LCs.  They further 
stated that the criteria for manning have been reviewed and in order to wipe 
out all arrears, IR has taken steps to increase the pace of manning and the 
target for manning has been substantially raised, sanctioning process for 
manning has been simplified to increase the pace. State Governments are 
being interacted at a higher level for expeditious decisions regarding sharing 
of cost of construction of ROB/RUB, timely acquisition of land etc. Limited 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 59
height and normal height subways are being constructed in lieu of level 
crossing gates, traffic being diverted to adjacent level crossings to reduce the 
number of level crossings. For the purpose of manning the unmanned level 
crossings, efforts such as recruitment of new gateman, re- engaging retired 
employees etc. are being taken. While admitting the points raised by Audit, IR 
stated that instructions are also being issued to provide basic infrastructure at 
the level crossings and adequate measures would be taken to overcome 
shortcomings.   
B. Improved Thermit Welding  
Thermit welding, carried out in open line, generally suffers from poor quality. 
It was proposed in the CSP to acquire  the latest technology of Thermit 
welding and the most modern equipment for testing each weld. As early as in 
April 2000 Railway Board asked RDSO to study the quality of rail welding 
and the technology of Ultrasonic flaw  detection (USFD) and accordingly a 
Technology Development Group (TDG) was formed. They submitted the 
report in October 2001 in which it was stated that the specification of AT 
welding on IR was of international standards and no changes in the present 
specification were warranted. They furt her stated that emphasis should be 
given for training of welders and availa bility of adequate equipments. Despite 
this Railway Board insisted for adoption of improved technology and allocated 
Rs.30 crore under SRSF for the project. Accordingly RDSO in February 2003 
identified two international firms and trial kits were obtained in May 2004 and 
February 2005 from them. A team of officers also visited the firms’ works in 
France and Germany to study the aspects of new AT welding technology.  
Based on the study and various tests with the trial kits, RDSO framed 
specification for acquiring the new AT welding technology. Though the 
Railway Administration called for international bids with the new 
specification, the same was not successf ul as the technology offered by the 
international firms were not conforming to the bench mark set by RDSO. Thus 
the Railways are still continuing with the existing thermit welding technology 
and even after nine years since April 2000 and spending an amount of Rs.12 
lakh for the trials etc. the improved technology could not be adopted in IR so 
far. 
While accepting the delays, IR in February 2010 stated that keeping in view 
the sensitivity of welds in safety scenario, long drawn trials, lab evaluation, 
tests, analysis, extended trials, time consumption in the process are 
unavoidable before introduction of the same into field.  
C. Reduction in thermit welds by mobile flash butt welding  
It was planned in CSP that as the Alumino-Thermit welds are weak links in 
track, its population was to be gradually reduced and replaced by Flash Butt 
welds to be executed with the help of mobile flash butt welding plants. As a 
first step this was to be introduced in construction projects by the year 2004 
and gradually extended to other areas in the next five years. However it was 
noticed during the review that the use of alumino thermit welds, due to which 
tracks are prone to frequent weld failures, is still widespread and the use of 
mobile flash butt welding is yet to be introduced in open line in eleven out of 
sixteen zones (SR, ER, WR, NWR, SER, NER, NCR, ECR, SECR, SWR and 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 60
WCR) and in Metro Railway Kolkata. In three zones (CR, NR and SCR) 
where the mobile flash butt welding was introduced, the use of the same is 
negligible. Reason for slow progress in introduction of mobile flash butt 
welding was stated to be that mobile flash butt welding plants are bulky and 
consume more space and require traffic blocks of long spells. 
IR while furnishing figures of weld joints using alumino thermit welding and 
weld joints at departmental flash butt welding plants stated in February 2010 
that the figures furnished by Audit appear to be incorrect. However the 
comparison made by IR is incorrect as IR has adopted the details of weld 
joints done through stationary departmental welding plants and not the weld 
joints done on open line with the mobile flash butt welding plants. The 
comparison should have been made betw een the alumino thermit weld details 
and mobile flash butt weld details of open line. The number of weld joints 
executed by mobile flash butt welding plants in four zones (SR,SWR, SCR 
and NWR) for the period from January 2006 to March 2008 against the 
Railway Board’s contract was only 49696 joints as stated by IR which is 
negligible as compared to the figures of alumino thermit weld joints during the 
two years 2006-08 which was 838748.  
Recommendation 
Since most of the accidents with maximum casualties are taking place at level 
crossings, IR should strictly implement al l the improved safety features at the 
LCs as recommended in the CSP. Further, IR should put greater efforts to 
bring in the State Governments’ co-operation in construction of ROB/RUBs 
wherever necessary. IR needs to take proper action to curtail the undue delay 
in adoption of improved technology so as to strengthen track safety.  
3.9.1.4 Progress in the areas identified for research for safety 
improvement   
A. Preventive Rail Grinding 
Because of the heavier loads and also to minimize  wear from the harder steel 
used for the cast wheels especially for the new BOXN wagons, 90 UTS 
(Ultimate Tensile Strength) rails were being used on IR. Though these rails 
have greater hardness, they have a tendency of gauge corner cracking due to 
rolling contact fatigue. Gauge corner cracking can result in accidents due to 
rail fractures. Gauge corner cracking can be prevented by rail grinding to 
remove the fatigued top layer of rail metal. Out of the four Rail Grinding 
Machines proposed for procurement, contracts have been awarded by the 
Railway Board in February 2009 for procurement of two machines which are 
expected to be received by July 2010. Thus IR was not able to tackle the 
problem of gauge corner cracking which can lead to rail fracture accidents. 
IR stated in February 2010 that they are making all the efforts after careful 
consideration of suitable technology to tackle the problem of gauge corner 
cracking. 
B. Role of RDSO in adopting new technology 
For testing and conducting applied research for development of railway rolling 
stock, permanent way etc., Research Designs and Standards Organisation 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 61
(RDSO) was established in Lucknow in 1957 by integrating the then Central 
Standards Office and Railway Testing and Research Centre. The primary 
quality policy of RDSO is to develop safe, modern and cost effective Railway 
technology complying with statutory and regulatory requirements, through 
excellence in research, designs and standards and continual improvements in 
quality management system to cater to growing demand of passenger and 
freight traffic on the railways. The CSP envisaged development and 
implementation of certain new technologies in improving the safety in train 
operations, which were entrusted with RDSO to develop them within a time 
bound programme. However it was noticed in audit that the following 
technologies could not be made operational even after one year of completion 
of phase I of CSP. 
(i) Lubrication of gauge face and friction modifier on top of rails  – 
though these were to be completed by 2005-06, only the rail mounted 
lubricators were commissioned in April 2008, whereas no action was 
initiated for friction modifier by RDSO stating that the technology has 
not matured globally so far. 
(ii) Development of trackside bogie monitoring system  – A pilot project 
with an estimated cost of Rs.4.36 crore was sanctioned in September 
2005 and the system was procured from abroad at a cost of Rs.3.47 
crore in March 2009.  However, the commissioning work has been 
completed (August 2009) after delayed arrangement of power supply 
at nominated site and extensive trials are being conducted. 
(iii) Development of test track facility  – Though the project was 
sanctioned way back in 1985, the same was abandoned after spending 
Rs.3.16 crore but again proposed in September 2001. The project could 
not be started due to non finalisation of proper site for the testing 
facility. 
(iv) Vibration signature analysis and development of rail vehicle based 
testing car – the project for assessing th e bridge condition quickly by 
using vibration signature technique was sanctioned in March 2005 and 
was to be carried out through IIT Mumbai. However due to delay in 
finalizing contract the work could not be completed so far. 
IR stated in February 2010 that IR and RDSO are continuously working 
towards identifying new projects and adopting the advanced technology to 
match with those of other countries, as and when required, to suit the 
Railways’ requirement. However the pace of adoption of new technology does 
not match with the safety requirements. 
Recommendation 
Since innovation in technology is necessary under the changing conditions of 
train operations where speedy operation and maintenance would be 
inevitable, IR and RDSO should accelerate the research work so as to 
implement the new technology for speedy and safe train operations. 
 
 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 62
3.9.1.5 Steps identified for improving maintenance practices/improving 
asset reliability and thereby inculcating safety culture 
A. Modern Bridge Inspection and Management System 
Modernization of bridge inspection and assessment system was contemplated 
in the CSP by implementing a modern bridge management system with the 
following focused areas: 
a) Underwater Inspection of bridges 
b) Mapping of unknown foundations and integrity testing of foundations. 
c) Non-destructive testing techniques like Ultra Sonics, Acoustic Emission, 
Strain Gauging and Radar etc. 
d) Fatigue life and residual life assessment techniques 
e) Bridge management system. 
Only Projects from (a) to (d) above we re approved by IR (2003). After their 
completion, the technologies were to be adopted over the entire system in a 
period of three to four years thereafter. Mobile Bridge testing laboratories with 
some Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) were also approved (2003) for 16 zonal 
Railways and these laboratories were to be implemented on the zonal 
Railways in the next five years with the balance complement of essential NDT 
equipment like Impact Echo testers etc.  
It was however noticed in Audit that while two mobile bridge inspection units 
manufactured at RCF, Kapurthala are under commissioning, mapping of 
unknown foundations was not being done in any of the zones except Northern 
Railway where it was carried out through an outside agency as a pilot project. 
In other zones this is yet to be arranged as training is still to be provided to the 
staff for this job.  Similarly fatigue life and residual life assessment technique 
was also not being adopted in 10 out of 16 zones (SR, NWR, SCR, SER, NER, 
Mobile Bridge Inspection Unit manufactured at RCF, Kapurthala 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 63
NCR, ECR, SECR, WCR and NFR). Computerisation of information about 
bridges was not done in 11 zones (CR, NWR, SCR, SER, NCR, ECR, SECR, 
ECoR, SWR, WCR and NFR); while in Southern Railway it was 
computerized. Delay in provision of the modern system was on the part of 
COFMOW, who were to arrange the mobi le bridge testing laboratories to 
zones. Various items of testing for nine initial zones for which contracts have 
been placed are still under procurement (October 2009). 
It was further noticed in Audit that there was a huge shortfall in under water 
inspection of bridges. Out of the 209 bridges on which under water inspection 
was required to be done over Indian Railways, the inspection was done only 
on 128 bridges leaving a shortfall of 81 bridges (38.76 percent). NDT 
technique was not adopted in six zones (ER, NR, SCR, SWR, WCR and NFR) 
on 61 of the 128 bridges inspected. In WR though one mobile bridge-testing 
laboratory with NDT technique was commissioned in 2003 with one set of 
structural scanning equipment, staff was not trained to operate the equipment, 
leading to non-functioning of the laboratory costing Rs.0.98 crore. 
While accepting delay in modernization of bridge management system, IR in 
February 2010 stated that the two mobile bridge inspection units have been 
commissioned in NR and CR. Under water inspection of bridges has been 
carried out in 269 bridges out of 327 bridges identified as of March 2009. This 
shows that still there is a shortfall of 58 bridges (17.74 percent). 
B. Upgradation of freight train examination 
Upgradation of freight stock maintenance infrastructure at some major 
Routine Overhauling (ROH) depots, freight train examination points and sick 
lines was proposed in the CSP to be completed during the plan period for 
which funds were to be arranged through the normal plan outlay. However it 
was seen that out of the 137 freight train examination points in IR, 86 were 
identified for upgradation, of which only 27 (19.71 percent) were upgraded as 
of 2007-08. Out of the 45 ROH depots, 34 were identified for upgradation, of 
which only 12 (26.67 percent) were upgrade d so far. Similarly, out of the 120 
sick lines, 59 were identified for upgradation, out of which 18 sick lines (15 
percent) were only upgraded as of 2007-08. Slow progress in upgradation 
work was resulting in taking more time for attending to sick wagons and 
rectification of defects. Reasons for de lay in upgradation were reported to be 
delay in completing the ancillary works such as electrical connection etc. 
IR stated in February 2010 that there have been several reasons for delay 
including funding and award of contracts. They further stated that the 
upgradation of infrastructure is being expedited. 
C. Way side detection of overloaded rolling stock by in-motion weigh 
bridges 
A number of rail/weld failures are caused by over-loaded wagons. In motion-
weigh bridges help detection of over-l oaded wagons. CSP therefore proposed 
to install in-motion weigh bridges se lectively on identified routes at 
originating points and ensure the functioning of these weigh bridges. It was 
noticed in Audit that while 93 weigh bridges were installed at various 
locations over IR, the proper functioning of these weigh bridges was not being 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 64
ensured. None of the weigh bridges was working on all the days of the year 
during 2005 to 2008. Further, 50 percent of the weigh bridges were not 
installed at originating points (46 locati ons out of 93) defeating the purpose of 
detection of over-loaded wagons. It was fu rther noticed that out of 92.60 lakh 
wagons weighed on these weigh bridges during the three year period from 
2005 to 2008, 18.57 lakh wagons (20.05 percent) were detected as overloaded. 
Even after detection of overloaded wagons, they were allowed to proceed 
without adjustment of the load as noticed in SR, which has  serious 
repercussions for the track. In SER, overloading was detected in 30.62 percent 
of wagons weighed at the in-motion weigh bridges during 2005 to 2008. The 
rail fracture and weld failure cases reported in 2007-08 were also on the higher 
side in SER as compared to the previous year. The impact of enhanced loading 
on infrastructure is being covered separately in the Performance Audit on 
Freight services. 
IR stated in February 2010 that the weighbridges do remain under repair and 
calibration and due to some operating constraints unloading of overloaded 
wagons cannot always be carried out en route. They further stated that the 20 
percent overloaded wagons calculated by Audit do not seem to be correct and 
no scientific study has related weld fa ilures to overloading of wagons. The 
remarks of IR are not tenable. The figures of 20 percent arrived at by Audit 
shows the percentage of overloaded wagons to the total number of wagons 
weighed on way side weigh bridges and not the percentage of the entire fleet 
of loaded wagons carried by IR.  Further the fact remains that overloaded 
wagons could be detrimental to track life.  
D. Integrated maintenance blocks  
For implementing the concept of preventive maintenance, granting of adequate 
time for maintenance of assets – both fixed and movable – is absolutely 
essential. To over-utilise an asset and temporarily neglect its maintenance is 
bound to be counter-productive in the long run. It was therefore proposed in 
the CSP that efforts be made to make optimum use of all maintenance blocks 
(suspension of traffic in a specified period for maintenance purposes). 
Following actions are proposed in the CSP: 
Computerised database to be maintained at divisional level for keeping 
accurate record of all aspects of working connected with maintenance blocks. 
Each maintenance block granted to be simultaneously utilized by all 
departments as granting of maintenance blocks is an expensive proposition. 
Integrated maintenance vehicles on the pattern of accident relief train (ART), 
have to be procured so that staff a nd materials of all departments can move 
together. Working of maintenance staff is to be geared up to ensure that they 
are in a position to avail of night main tenance blocks also, especially on over-
saturated sections. 
During the review of records it was noticed that the concept of integrated 
maintenance block was not in vogue in eleven out of sixteen zones (ER, NR, 
NWR, NER, NCR, ECR, SECR, ECoR, SWR, WCR & NFR). Computerized 
data was being maintained in CR and maintenance blocks were being used by 
all departments simultaneously in Mumbai Division. However in Nagpur 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 65
Division the allotment of blocks was always less than the demand. In SR 
computerized database on maintenance blocks was not being maintained. 
Though corridor blocks are stipulated in the working time table which are to 
be used by all departments simultaneously as per zonal arrangements, blocks 
are also granted separately to each department outside these corridor blocks 
during exigencies and night maintenanc e blocks are also granted on over 
saturated sections. However no integrated maintenance vehicle on the pattern 
of ART has been procured in SR and SCR. In Ahmedabad Division of WR, 
the allotment of maintenance blocks were less than demanded and in SER out 
of the two divisions test checked the integrated maintenance blocks was being 
availed in one division only. 
While accepting the above IR stated in February 2010 that the shortcomings 
are identified and measures are being taken for the full utilization of integrated 
maintenance blocks. 
E. Safety Audit and safety drives  
Inspections generally single out individual failures. Safety audits are expected 
to identify system failures and generic shortcomings. CSP proposed that 
periodic safety audits be undertaken at various levels for making an in-depth 
assessment of safety systems. These safety audits were to be done by multi-
disciplinary team from Railway Boar d, inter-Railway, multi-disciplinary 
headquarters team, inter-divisional etc. During the review of records of zonal 
Railway it was noticed that no records indicating the safety audit conducted by 
the multidisciplinary team from Railway Board were available in any of the 
zones other than NWR, where only once it was done during the period from 
2005-06 to 2007-08. On a specific query the Safety Directorate of Railway 
Board stated that the multi disciplinary team from Railway Board conducted 
the safety audit and the shortcomings identified have been pointed out to the 
zones for rectification. However no records were provided by the Directorate 
to Audit in this regard stating that the issue was very elaborate and Safety 
Directorate does not get all the correspondence.  The safety audit by inter 
divisional team has also not been conduc ted in the zones except in SER and 
SECR. 
IR in February 2010 stated that Railway Board directed zonal railways to 
constitute a team of five Senior Administrative Grade officers from various 
departments along with similar number of inspectors to audit/inspect at least 
one unit of their Railway for at least two consecutive days bi-monthly. They 
further stated that they have evolved the concept of inter-railway safety 
inspections to have better security, objectivity and comprehensive enrichment 
of field practices. 
F.  Defects on Track and Rolling Stock  
CSP had proposed a reduction in track defects from the level of 10.58 defects 
per billion GTKM as of August 2003 to 6.35 defects as of 2007-08. It was 
noticed that:- 
(i) while eight zones (NWR, SCR, SER, NCR, SECR, ECoR, SWR and 
WCR) have achieved the reduction proposed in CSP, in three zones, SR, 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 66
NER & NFR, the defects were above 12 and  showed an  upward trend. 
In other zones (CR, ER, NR, WR, ECR and Metro/Kolkata) the figures 
were not made available. 
(ii) Targets were also included in the CSP for reduction in various Rolling 
Stock defects such as Coach defects, Wagon detachments, Poor Brake 
power (Goods), incidence of train parting (Goods), Diesel loco defects, 
Electric loco defects, OHE defects etc. It was noticed that the actual 
coach defects/failures were more than the target in NER, NCR, SECR 
and NFR, whereas data was not made available in four zones (CR, NR, 
WR and ECR) and Metro Railway, Kolkata. 
(iii) The targets for wagon detachments/fa ilures were achieved by twelve  
zones (SR, ER, SCR, SER, NER, NCR, ECR, SECR, ECoR, SWR, 
WCR and NFR), whereas the data was not made available in other 
zones. 
(iv) The incidences of Poor Brake Power were significantly higher than the 
target in ECR, data was not made available in four zones (CR, NR, WR 
and NWR) and Metro Kolkata while in remaining zones the target was 
achieved. 
(v) Incidences of Train Parting were hi gher than the targets in SR, NER, 
ECR and SECR, while data was not made available in four zones (CR, 
NR, WR and NWR) and Metro Kolkata while other zones achieved the 
target. 
(vi) Motive Power defects (Diesel locos) were higher than the target in seven 
zones (SR, NWR, SCR, NER, SECR, ECoR and NFR) whereas data was 
not made available in three zones (CR, NR and WR). Motive Power 
defects (Electric locos) were more than the target in SCR and SECR, 
while data was not made available in CR. 
(vii) It was noticed that in six zones (SR, ER, NR, SER, ECR and SECR) the 
incidents of Overhead Equipment (OHE) defects as of 2007-08 were 
more than the level of August 2003. In two zones (NCR and SWR) the 
incidents of OHE defects were slightly higher than the proposed level, 
while the figures were not made available in CR, WR and Metro 
Kolkata. Only three zones (SCR, ECoR and WCR) could achieve the 
proposed target of reduction in OHE defects.  
IR stated in February 2010 that the data for coach failures is maintained and 
available for individual zonal Railways as well as consolidated position for IR, 
adequate measures are being initiated  to overcome the various equipment 
failures and there has been a consistent improvement in the reliability of the 
equipments. However the fact remains that there were cases in many zonal 
Railways where the target could not be achieved in various equipment failures, 
which affect the safety performance. 
 
 
 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 67
G. Accidents 
The table below shows the number of accidents during the period 2003-08. 
Accidents during the year Type of 
Conseq-
uential 
accidents 
(Average of 3 
years from 
2000 to 2003) 
Extent of 
reduction 
proposed 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 Average of 
five years
Collisions 22 -- 9 13 9 8 7 9 
Derailments 282 60% 197 136 130 95 100 132 
LC accidents 90 No change 95 70 75 79 77 79 
Fire accidents 14 80% 14 10 15 4 5 10 
Misc. 5 -- 5 3 4 8 4 5 
Total 413  320 232 233 194 193 235 
While the overall accident figures of IR have come down considerably, figures 
of accidents in a few zones increased during 2007-08 as compared to the 
figures of 2002-03. Level crossing accidents increased in WR and NWR and 
collisions increased in SER.  
 
IR stated in February 2010 that accidents are caused due to failure of a 
combination of factors. All these accidents are analyzed and various remedial 
measures taken to stop recurrences. They further stated that the level crossing 
accidents in WR remained at the same level of 9 accidents in 2008-09 as in 
2002-03. However it was noticed from the data maintained in Chief Safety 
Officer’s office in WR that the number of level crossing accidents was 21 
(consequential – 10 and non consequential – 11) in 2008-09 and 14 (8 + 6) in 
2002-03. 
 
Collision accident near Mathura Station (NCR) on 21.10.2009 in which 22 persons were killed

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 68
Recommendation 
Necessary data regarding the defects detected on various items of track, 
rolling stock, OHE etc. should be maintained for making comprehensive 
evaluation of the safety risks.  Defects in track and rolling stock should be 
brought down to the minimum so as to improve safety. IR should also ensure 
that whenever overloading of wagons is detected, the load in such wagons is 
adjusted so as to avoid adverse impact on the track. 
Further, since safety audit and safety drives are important features of the CSP, 
IR should take necessary action to complete the periodic safety drives and 
audits and take corrective actions on the safety installations, wherever 
necessary. The monitoring mechanism of IR therefore needs to be geared up 
so as to achieve reduction in accidents and casualties in all zones and also to 
achieve the overall objectives of Corporate Safety Plan. 
3.9.1.6 Investment in human resources as planned  
A. Constitution of Human Resource Cell 
To promote devotion, dedication and sincerity towards duties, it was proposed 
in the CSP to constitute Human Resource Development (HRD) cells at zonal 
and Divisional headquarters involving dynamic and knowledgeable 
supervisors to study – working habits of  ground level staff, factors leading to 
short cuts and to reduce fatigue, minimize monotony and improve safety 
consciousness. It was noticed in Audit that no HRD cell was formed in any of 
the zones except in WR, where it was formed in zonal headquarters and in 
Mumbai Divisional headquarters which has not yet started functioning.  Non 
creation of   HRD cell in other zones implies that human resource 
development was not getting proper attention as envisaged in CSP. 
B. Modernisation and upgradation of training centres 
Main training centres over IR have  been granted Rs.73.50 crore under SRSF 
for upgradation. Remaining centres incl uding Basic Training Centres spread 
over IR under various departments were also proposed in the CSP to be 
modernized with provision of necessary infrastructure at an overall outlay of 
Rs.220 crore (inclusive of allotment already made under SRSF). 
It was noticed in audit that out of the 96 training centres identified for 
upgradation/ modernization, work on 20 training centres only has been 
completed so far. While work was in progress on 59 centres, no work was 
sanctioned on four training centres. 
C. Strength of staff and vacancies  
It was proposed in the CSP that staff requirement would be worked out afresh 
for zero based assessment of manpower.  Based on such exercise, sanctioned 
strength of staff is to be revised and made uniform. It was further envisaged 
that all safety category vacancies woul d be filled up on urgency basis. A 
review of staff position in zonal Railways revealed that vacancies existed in all 
departments under safety category in all zones. The vacancy ranged from 3.68 
percent (in Mechanical Dept. of NWR) to 37.10 percent (in Civil Engineering 
Dept. of SWR) (Annexure V). 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 69
IR stated in February 2010 that the number of vacancies remained static over 
the past several years, with constant upgradation on technology the efficiency 
of the man-power is increasing, the assets renewed under SRSF require 
miniscule maintenance in the initial years and the vacancies have not resulted 
in any decline in the safety performance of the IR. This is not tenable, if the 
vacant posts are not required to increase  efficiency of the performance of 
machinery assets, there is need to reassess the requirement of manpower to 
bring it to a realistic level and to surrender excess posts. 
D. Crew friendly cab in locomotives 
It was stated in the CSP that an ergonomic design of loco cab has been 
developed to provide easy approach to various control handles/buttons. 
Providing new features would ensure fatigue-free driving for long hours. 
However, it was noticed that while Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW), 
Varanasi turned out almost all the locos with crew friendly cab during the 
period from 2003 to 2008, Chittaranjan Locomotive Works (CLW) lagged 
behind. The locos turned out with crew friendly cab ranged from 18.6 to 51 
percent in CLW during the above five years. No reasons were found on record 
for the slow progress in providing crew friendly cab in all locomotives. 
IR stated in February 2010 that the slow progress was due to the fact that 
modification of crew cab required re-loc ation of various equipments, reducing 
size of silicon rectifier, redesign of equipment panels etc. 
E. Upgradation of running rooms and crew lobbies 
It was stated in the CSP that the existing running rooms are being upgraded on 
an urgent basis and the new running rooms would be built with improved lay 
out and proper amenities. It was also pr oposed that crew lobbies also need to 
be upgraded by providing basic amenities, facility for proper display of 
various instructions, computer and software package for proper booking of 
crew and ensuring adequate rest for running staff. In a test check it was 
noticed in audit that out of the 187 running rooms available in selected 
divisions on all zones 70 have been upgraded and 44 are under upgradation. 
While 27 are proposed for upgradation, no action has been taken for remaining 
46 running rooms. Similarly out of 165 crew lobbies test checked 95 have 
been upgraded. While 32 are under upgradation and 15 are proposed for 
upgradation, no action has been taken on remaining 23 crew lobbies 
(Annexure VI). 
IR stated in February 2010 that adequate measures are being taken to expedite 
the upgradation of balance running rooms and lobbies. 
F. Crew Management 
It was proposed in the CSP that to assess the actual problems faced by the 
running crews, proper record would be maintained at crew lobbies and follow 
up action taken within 24 hours of observations made by drivers. The 
deficiencies noted during crew runs  would be identified and corrected 
expeditiously. A test check of record s maintained in selected divisions 
revealed that though registers to record  the defects noticed by drivers were 
being maintained in crew control offices and defects were communicated to 
the respective department through control office for corrective actions, feed 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways) 
 70
back was not available on record in crew control office, hence the corrective 
action taken could not be monitored. 
IR stated in February 2010 that the delays on this process are being plugged.  
G. Coaching Maintenance Terminals 
The CSP envisaged zero based review of  sanctioned strength of staff at all 
existing coaching maintenance depots, specification of time in terms of man-
hours per coach for primary and secondary maintenance, provision of 
adequate pit lines for proper maintenan ce of all rakes and computerization of 
coach history. However during the test check in Audit on few coaching 
terminals in each zone it was noticed that zero based review of sanctioned 
strength was not being done in four zones (ER, SER, SECR and ECoR) and 
Metro Railway Kolkata. In some other zones (NR, NER and NFR) the review 
was not done at all the depots. Similarly computerized database of coach 
history was not available in any of the depots in NER, NCR, SECR, ECoR and 
SWR. In few other zones (ER, NR, NWR, SCR, ECR, NFR and Metro 
Kolkata) the computerized data base was not available in some of the depots. 
Time for primary maintenance was not laid down in three zones (ER, NR and 
ECR) in some depots and for secondary maintenance it was not laid down in 
six zones (ER, NR, NER, NCR, ECR and ECoR). 
IR stated in February 2010 that instructions for carrying out a zero based 
review of sanctioned strength of staff at all coaching maintenance depots have 
been reiterated to the Railways for compliance. 
Recommendation 
Since human error contributes to a major part of accidents, IR should strictly 
ensure that the modernization and upgrada tion of training facility to the staff  
is completed on time. Further IR should take immediate action to fill up all the 
vacancies in safety category posts and al so take necessary steps to reassess 
the requirement of staff, in view of introduction of modern technology, to bring 
down the requirement to realistic level. 
3.9.2 Review of Progress of Corporate Safety Plan through Mid Term 
Review 
Though the Corporate Safety Plan was formulated for the period up to the year 
2013, most of its achievable targets were divided into two phases. Phase I was 
to cover the period 2003-08 and Phase II would span its safety activities up to 
the year 2012-13. This was done to have a mid-term assessment with changed 
circumstances, advancement of technology and assimilation of devices. 
However it was noticed in audit that even though periodical progress of the 
implementation of CSP was being monitored and action plan was being drawn 
every year, no specific suggestion for modification of the already chalked out 
programme has been made by the Railway Administration. No mid term 
review has been conducted in the zones except in ECR and NER where no mid 
course correction has been suggested in the mid term review. 
IR stated (February 2010) that the Ministry of Railways is monitoring works 
with the zonal Railways. Safety directorate is the nodal directorate for 

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways 
 71
consolidating progress and Chief Safety Officers of zonal Railways have been 
advised to monitor the works of CSP concerning their Railway. 
3.9.3 Action Plan for the items to be implemented in Phase II   
The CSP had envisaged a broad action plan  for all the works to be carried out 
for the entire plan period (2003 to 2013). While in eight zones (SR, CR, ER, 
WR, NER, NCR, ECR and NFR) specific action plan has been drawn for 
undertaking the proposed work in the phase II, in other zones and Metro 
Railway Kolkata no such action plan has been drawn up so far.  
IR stated in February 2010 that by 2008 there has been overall 62.2 per cent of 
financial progress, which is more than pro-rata and considered satisfactory and 
therefore 100 per cent achievement in stipulated works under CSP can be 
assumed. They further stated that there may not be a need to prepare emergent 
plans to give focus on certain lacking items in view of substantial overall 
progress. However, zonal Railways have been advised to prepare an action 
plan with revised targets for all those works where the progress is not 
satisfactory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(NARENDRA SINGH)   
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated:  
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (VINOD RAI)   
New Delhi                              Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Dated:  
 

Report No .8  of 2010-11 (Railways) 
72 
 
Annexure I 
(Para 1.6) 
Survey Questionnaire on Freight services in Indian Railways 
 
 
Date:                         Time:                    Location:    
GENERAL 
1 Name of the siding :___________________                                                                   Contact number: 
 (i) Outward traffic (commodity):                                      From:                 To: 
(ii) Inward Traffic (commodity)           From:    To: 
(iii) Rail Customer Since (month /year) 
(iv) Average Annual Production /Total quantity Handled (MTs): 
(v) Average Annual Quantity handled through Railways (MTs): 
(Vi) Average Lead (Kms.): 
 ATTITUDE OF OFFICERS /STAFF 
2 Does interaction with officers at Divisional /Zonal Headquarter  meet with adequate response? 
 Always Mostly Some Times Never 
3 Are Railway Staff at field level friendly and responsive? 
 Always Mostly Some Times Never 
 RELIABILITY/ TIMELINESS OF FREIGHT SERVICES 
4 Is timely information made available in respect of availability of rake?  
 Always Mostly Some Times Never 
5 Are the rakes placed at the time preferred by you? 
 Always Mostly Some Times Never 
6 Are rakes supplied to you on time? 
 Always Mostly Some Times Never 
7 If you have been experiencing delays in placement of rakes,  the average delay ranges 
 Up to 5 hours  More than 5 hours  but less than 12 
hours 
More than 12 hours but less 
than 24 hours 
Beyond 24 hours 
8 Are the wagons supplied clean, fit for loading and without damage? 
 Always Mostly Some Times Never 
9 Whether your rakes are moved with in reasonable time after the completion of loading?  
 Always Mostly Some Times Never 
10 Do the rakes booked by you reach destination timely? 
 Always Mostly Sometimes Never 
11 What would make you offer more traffic to Railways? 
 Scheduled running of trains Door to door service Timely placement of rakes Can’t say 
12 What other changes would you suggest in freight operation of Railways that will make you offer major share of product to 
Railways? 
 (i) 
 (ii) 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
73 
 
13 Do you have access to FOIS for tracking the freight trains and ascertain its expected time of arrival? 
 Always Mostly Sometimes Never 
14 If yes, is the information reliable? 
 Always  Mostly  sometimes Never  
 TERMINALS AND SIDING OPERATIONS 
15 Are adequate facilities such as approach roads, lighting and stacking area available? 
 YES NO 
16 If not, the suggestions to improve the service 
17 Are you satisfied with the working hours at terminals? 
 YES NO 
18 Any suggestions regarding the working hours at terminals 
19 Are the mechanized loading /unloading facility available at the terminal? 
 YES NO 
20 Do you feel that that the free time allowed for loading /unloading adequate? 
 YES NO 
21 Do the existing policies of Railways on investments  for improving the facilities at sidings offer adequate incentive? 
 YES NO 
22 If not,  what is your suggestion 
 SECURITY OF CARGO AND COMPENSATION 
23 Is adequate security arrangement against pilferage and theft provided for your cargo at terminal as well as enroute? 
 Always Mostly Sometimes Never 
24 Are the claims processing against the damage /pilferage prompt and efficient? 
 Always  Mostly  Sometimes Never 
 GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 
25 Are you aware of the existing mechanism for redressal of your grievances? 
 YES NO 
26 Are your complaints with respect to freight operations handled promptly and effectively? 
 Always  Mostly  Sometimes Never 
 

Report No 8  of 2010-11 (Railways) 
74 
 
Annexure II 
(Para 1.7) 
SAMPLE SELECTION ON FREIGHT SERVICES 
Zone Division Terminals selected Interchange point 
selected 
C&W depot selected 
NEFR Katihar 
Lumding 
New Guwahati 
Jogighopa 
Bongaigaon refinery 
Numaligarh Oil Refinery 
Katihar 
Malda Town 
- 
ER Howrah 
Asansol 
Durgapur Goods Shed 
Ultratech Cement Siding 
Asansol Goods Shed 
Barkeshwar Thermal Power Plant Siding 
Pakur Stone Quarry siding 
Bhattanagar 
Asansol 
Pakur 
Sitarampur 
NR Delhi 
Ambala 
GNTP Bhatinda 
Ghaziabad 
Shakurbasti 
Jammu Tawi 
IFFCO, Aonla 
Palwal 
Bhatinda 
Rewari 
Sriganganagar 
Tuglakabad 
Ghaziabad 
Ambala 
Khanalampur 
SR Chennai 
Palghat 
Dalmia Cement Siding 
Kudal Nagar Good shed 
Salem Market Goods Shed 
Panambur Goods Shed 
Kochi Refinery Siding 
Kurukkupet Goods Shed 
Tiruchirapalli Goods Shed 
Renigunta 
Jollarpettai 
Kankanadi 
Thokkur 
Tondiarpet 
Jollarpettai 
Kankanadi 
SWR Hubli 
Mysore 
Ranjitpura 
JVSL, Tornagalu 
Tinaighat 
Sasalu 
New Mysore Good Terminal 
Miraj 
Bellary 
Kankanadi 
Hospet 
NWR Ajmer 
Jodhpur 
Bikaner 
Jaisalmer 
Laxmi Cement Siding, Banas 
Kanakpura 
STPB-Birdhwal 
BNGS 
Chittorgarh 
Palanpur 
Rewari 
Bandikuin 
Madar 
Abu Road 
Jaisalmer 
Jodhpur 
Jaipur 
Lalgarh 
ECR Dhanbad 
 
Mughalsarai 
Karpurigram 
Narayanpur Anant 
Raxaul 
Fatuha 
Patherdih 
Katrasgarh 
Jarangdish 
MGS Up & Down yard 
Pradhankhunta 
Mahadiya 
MGS 
Gaya 
Patherdih 
Barwadih 
NER Lucknow 
 
Izatnagar 
Gonda 
Nakaha Jungle 
Rudrapur City 
 
Persendi 
Katra 
Chamrua 
Farukkabad 
Gonda 
Gorakhpur 
 
 
SCR Secunderabad 
 
Vijayawada 
Rudram siding , Bhadrachalam 
Nagarjuna Fertiliser Corporation, 
Kakinada Port 
Rajsri Cement Siding, Malkheid Road 
Ultratech Cement Juturu 
KTPS, Kondapalli 
Sanat Nagar 
Balharshah 
Wadi 
Duvvada 
Vijayawada 
Ramagundam 
Sanat Nagar 
Kakinada 
Vijayawada 
SECR Bilaspur 
 
Raipur 
 
Raigarh 
JSLK siding, Kirodimal Nagar 
Lafarge India Pvt.Ltd. 
Bijuri colliery 
MPSEB Siding Khaparkheda 
Century Cement, Tilda 
Ambuja Cement, Bhatapara 
Jharsugda 
IB 
RVH 
BCN Depot 
AKT 
P P Yard Bhilai 
Bhilai Marshalling yard 

Chapter 1 Freight Services in Indian Railways 
75 
 
 
SER Chakradharpur 
Kharagpur 
 
Adra 
Barajamada 
Noamundi Roapway Sdg. 
TISCO Sdg., TATA 
Bokaro Steel Plant siding (inward) 
Bokaro Steel Plant siding (outward) 
Orissa Cement siding, Rajgangpur 
Bhaga Goods Shed 
JCP siding TATA 
RSP Siding, Raurkela 
Kolaghat TPP siding  
Jharsugda 
Joruli 
Andal 
Asansol 
Bondamunda 
TATA 
Bokaro 
Adra 
WCR Jabalpur  
 
Kota 
Kota TP Station 
Chambal Chemical & Fertilizer 
Maiher Cement 
JQSG 
Prism Cement 
Singrauli 
Manikpur 
Swaimadhopur 
Chanderiya 
New Katni Jn. 
Satna 
KTT-Kota 
Sakatpura 
WR Ahmedabad 
 
Vadodara 
Ratlam 
Mundra Port Siding 
Kandla Port Good Shed 
IFFCO Siding, Kandla 
Wanakbori TPS Sdg. 
Vikram Cement Siding 
Palanpur Sabarmati 
Vatva  
Karachiya 
Vadodara Yard 
ECOR Khurda 
 
Waltair 
 
Sambalpur 
Cuttak, 
 Jagdalpur 
Nayagarh,  
Nergundi, 
NTPC exchange yard TLHR 
PPL/PRDP  
VSKP siding  
NALCO Siding, Damanjodi  
Bhusan Power &Steel, Lapange 
Duvvada 
Bhadrak 
Joruli 
Ore Exchange 
yard/VSKP  
VSKP Steel Plant 
Khurda Road, Paradeep 
NCR Allahabad 
 
Jhansi 
 
Agra Cantt. 
Diamond Cement Siding, Parichha  
IOC, Baad  
NTPC, Dadri 
U.P Rajya Vidyut Nigam, Parichha, 
Yamuna Bridge 
Mughalsarai 
Harduaganj 
Alwar 
Palwal 
Juhi 
Baad 
CR Bhusawal 
Solapur 
Mumbai 
Nagpur 
Nasik Thermal Power Station Siding 
Orient Cement Siding 
MSEB Siding 
Solapur Goods Shed 
Ghugas Coal Siding 
Wani Goods Shed 
NTPG siding 
BRSG siding 
Rajur Goods Shed I 
Rajur Goods Shed II 
Nasik Road terminal 
BPCL siding, Trombay 
Jalgaon Goods Shed 
Cement siding, Wadi 
Pune Goods Shed 
BSC, Hotgi 
Turbhe APM Complex 
RCF siding, Thal-vaishet 
MPBG siding, Sarni 
New Mulund Goods shed 
Umrer Coal siding 
WCCL, Wani 
 
Jalgaon 
Manmad 
Hotgi 
Wadi 
Vasai Road 
Roha 
Balharshah 
Nagpur 
Bhusawal 
Daund 
Wadi 
Trombay 
Igatpuri 
Ajni 
Amla 
 

Report No.8 of 2010-11 (Railways)
Category Issues Extent of sample selection
Zonal Hqrs Safety related records of all concerned
departments
100%
Divisional Hqrs Safety related records of all concerned
departments
Total 28 divisions on IR
Workshop Safety related works (including POH, upgradation
works etc.)
18 workshops on IR
Carriage sheds Safety related works 17 sheds on IR
Loco sheds Safety related technological upgradation works 20 loco sheds on IR
RDSO Research projects & evaluation of new technology 100% of Safety related items
ROH depots Safety related technological upgradation works 15 Depots on IR
Training Centres Review of training modules and facilities provided
in respect of safety related training
15 Training centres on IR
Works Track Renewals etc. A total of 271 works were
reviewed
Production Units Safety related technological upgradation works 100%
Annexure III
(Para No. 3.7)
Statement showing the sample selection made for micro analysis of specific Issues in Corporate 
Safety Plan
76

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways
Sl.No. Details of items to be provided SR CR ER NR WR NWR SCR SER NER NCR ECR SECR ECoR SWR WCR NFR Total
1 No. of LCs test checked 10 20 10 10 11 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 171
2 No. of LCs Manned 5 10 5 5 9 5 5 6 5 5 5 5 5 7 5 5 92
3 No. of LCs Provided with telephone 5 10 1 5 9 5 5 6 5 5 5 5 5 7 5 5 88
4 No. of LCs Interlocked 5 9 2 5 6 1 3 5 5 3 4 4 3 1 3 3 62
5 No. of LCs where wicket gates or 
stiles have been provided for 
pedestrians.
563 0 4 0 3 2 5 1 2 33 6 1 3 47
6 No. of LCs with reflectors provided 
on the stop disc on both sides of the 
gate.
495 5 6 5 4 6 5 5 4 25 7 4 4 80
7 No. of LCs with lamps provided on 
the gate on both sides for the road 
users
51 04585 4 4 5 4 55 57 2 5 83
8 No. of LCs with speed 
breaker/bumps provided on either 
approach (unmanned level crossing 
onl
y)
7 13 6 5 1 5 5 4 9 10 8 4 5 8 10 8 108
9 No. of LCs with warning boards for 
road users  provided on both the 
approaches at the gate in the case of 
unmanned level crossings.
    
6 12 3 5 2 10 5 4 5 10 5 4 7 10 7 8 103
10 No. of LCs with locking 
arrangements  provided for both 
gates. 
51 05595 5 6 5 5 53 57 5 5 90
11 No. of LCs with lifting barrier is 
less than 5 mtrs from centre of track
365 1 4 5 2 6 5 5 0 35 7 3 5 65
(Para 3.9.1.3)
Annexure-IV
Availability of Safety requirements at Manned/Unmanned Level Crossing Gates
 77

Report No. 8 of 2010-11 (Railways)
Sanctioned 
strength Vacancies Percentage 
of vacancy
Sanctioned 
strength Vacancies Percentage 
of vacancy
Sanctioned 
strength Vacancies Percentage 
of vacancy
Sanctioned 
strength Vacancies Percentage 
of vacancy
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3
SR 12059 992 8.23 17824 3967 22.26 4096 362 8.84 610 92 15.08
CR 17355 1226 7.06 19445 2869 14.75 5380 396 7.36 613 161 26.26
ER 14459 690 4.77 17190 5983 34.80 5725 614 10.72 777 154 19.82
NR 21259 3532 16.61 26364 3441 13.05 7835 841 10.73 538 152 28.25
WR 14547 1611 11.07 21543 1856 8.62 2018 419 20.76 636 105 16.51
NWR 9276 917 9.88 12787 2885 22.56 1549 57 3.68 125 27 21.60
SCR 14989 2278 15.20 21086 4296 20.37 2339 444 18.98 30 4 13.33
SER 12832 1457 11.35 16773 4805 28.65 4616 728 15.77 227 49 21.59
NER 7728 620 8.02 10495 1870 17.82 1205 69 5.73 82 17 20.73
NCR 12183 1837 15.08 15401 1873 12.16 2776 169 6.09 1226 150 12.23
ECR 14359 1944 13.54 19525 5596 28.66 4801 571 11.89 428 101 23.60
SECR 9456 2021 21.37 11993 3403 28.37 1464 231 15.78 98 24 24.49
ECoR 7231 1092 15.10 12081 4456 36.88 2339 519 22.19 239 52 21.76
SWR 5886 1157 19.66 8399 3116 37.10 1893 376 19.86 116 43 37.07
WCR 10086 806 7.99 15611 3139 20.11 2090 190 9.09 557 67 12.03
NFR 8117 657 8.09 15882 2023 12.74 2681 338 12.61 208 66 31.73
RPU/  
Metro
343 46 13.41 17 1 5.88 0 0 0.00 805 52 6.46
Source: Safety CDO
(Para 7.9 of CSP)
Annexure-V
Vacancy position of Safety category staff as on 31.3.2008.
Operating Dept. Civil Engg. Dept. Mechanical Dept. Electrical Dept.
(Para 3.9.1.6 -C) 
Zone
 78

Chapter 3 Implementation of Corporate Safety Plan in Indian Railways
Zone Division No. 
available
No.upgraded 
(out of Col.3)
No. under upgradation 
(Out of Col.3)
No. proposed for 
upgradation (Out of 
Col.3)
1 23 4 5 6
SR Chennai 10 2 2 0
TVM 8 2 1 3
CR Pune 4 4 0 0
Bhusawal 6 6 0 0
Nagpur 5 2 2 1
Solapur 3 3 0 0
ER SDAH 1 0 1 0
HWH 1 1 0 0
ASN 2 2 0 0
NR LKO 10 0 1 9
DLI 13 3 3 1
WR Ratlam 4 3 0 1
Ahmedabad 12 4 1 2
NWR BKN 5 5 0 0
JU 3 2 1 0
SCR SC 10 5 2 0
GTL 8 3 1 0
SER Chakradharpur 10 14 0
Kharagpur 5 1 0 1
NER 70 4 7
NCR JHANSI 6 0 1 1
ECR DHN 13 0 13 0
MGS 4 3 1 0
SECR Bilaspur 87 1 0
ECoR 42 1 1
SWR Bangalore 8 4 2 0
WCR Bhopal 8 5 1 0
NFR 90 1 0
RPU/Metro 00 0 0
Total 187 70 44 27
SR Chennai 7 0 4 0
TVM 4 1 1 2
CR Mumbai 9 1 1 2
Pune 5 3 0 0
Bhusawal 7 7 0 0
Nagpur 3 2 0 1
Solapur 5 4 1 0
ER SDAH 9 3 2 2
ASN 6 4 0 2
HWH 2 2 0 0
NR LKO 9 5 2 2
DLI 12 9 1 1
WR Ratlam 4 3 0 0
Ahmedabad 9 8 1 0
NWR BKN 6 1 4 1
JU 3 2 1 0
SCR SC 9 8 1 0
GTL 6 5 0 0
SER Chakradharpur 6 11 0
Kharagpur 3 1 0 0
NER 40 3 1
NCR JHANSI 3 1 1 1
ECR DHN 10 4 6 0
MGS 4 3 0 0
SECR Bilaspur 6 5 1 0
ECoR 11 0 0
SWR Bangalore 2 2 0 0
WCR Bhopal 7 6 0 0
NFR 43 1 0
RPU/      
Metro 00 0 0
Total 165 95 32 15
Annexure VI
(Para 3.9.1.6-E)
(Para 7.20, 7.21 of CSP)
Crew Lobbies
Running Rooms
Upgradation of  Running Rooms & Crew Lobbies
 79

 iv
Abbreviations used in the Report 
 
IR Indian Railways 
CR Central Railway 
ER Eastern Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
ECoR East Coast Railway 
NR Northern Railway 
NCR North Central Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NFR Northeast Frontier Railway 
NWR North Western Railway 
SR Southern Railway 
SCR South Central Railway 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SECR South East Central Railway 
SWR South Western Railway 
WR Western Railway 
WCR West Central Railway 
RPU Railway Production Units 
 