 

 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
on  
 
 
 
Restructured Accelerated 
Power Development and 
Reforms Programme  
 
 
 
Union Government  
Ministry of Power  
Report No. 30 
(Performance Audit) 

 

 
  
i  
  
               CONTENTS 
 
 
Chapter/Title      Page No. 
 
Preface iii 
 
Executive Summary v to ix         
Chapter 1 -      Introduction  
1.1          Background  1 
1.2          Major features of R-APDRP  3 
1.3          Funding of R-APDRP  6 
1.4           Integrated Power Development Scheme 6 
 
Chapter 2 -     Audit Methodology  
2.1          Audit Objectives 7 
2.2          Audit Scope and Sample 7 
2.3      Sources of Audit Criteria 7 
2.4          Audit Methodology 8 
 
Chapter 3 -     Financial Management  
3.1         Release and Utilization of Funds 9 
3.2         Expenditure incurred under Part C of the Scheme 10 
3.3         Lapses in release and utilization of funds in the States 11 
3.4         Transfer / abandonment of works by Utility 15 
3.5         Diversion of funds 15 
3.6         Overlapping of Schemes 16 
3.7         Release of funds not in consonance with conditions of agreement 17 
3.8         Utilisation Certificates 18 
3.9         Non-inspection of the books of accounts of State Utilities 19 
3.10       Conversion of loan into grant 20 
 
Chapter 4 -      Programme Implementation  
4.1         Preparatory activities 21 
4.2         Appraisal of DPRs 23 
4.3         Delay in calling of tenders and award of work 25 
4.4         Non – prioritisation of projects 26 
4.5         Non-adherence to the approved DPR (Change in project area) 26 
4.6          Delay in start of projects due to non – provision of infrastructure to the 
contractors 
27 
4.7        Revision of costs without the approval of the Steering Committee 27 
4.8 Data Centre and Disaster Recovery Centre 28 
4.9 Non – adoption of turnkey contracting 29 
4.10 Additional expenditure due to re-tendering 29 

 
  
ii  
  
4.11 Different rates for same items 30 
4.12 Shortcomings in contract entered into by Utili ties 31 
4.13 Quality Control 32 
4.14 Non-obtaining of suitable guarantees 34 
4.15 Inadequate Training to Employees of State Util ities as Capacity Building 
measures 
36 
4.16 ‘Go Live’ projects 37 
 
Chapter 5 -     Aggregate Technical & Commercial Losses  
5.1  Aggregate Technical & Commercial Losses 41 
5.2 Verification of baseline data by the TPIEAs 43 
5.3 Unreliable data of AT & C losses 43 
5.4 Discrepancies in computation of AT&C losses 45 
5.5 Energy Accounting and Audit 46 
5.6 Power sector reforms  50 
 
Chapter 6 -    Consumer satisfaction  
6.1 Computerisation of Commercial Activities (billi ng, collection etc.) 53 
6.2 Establishment of Customer Service System  53 
6.3 Non-fixation of service connections /replacemen t with high accuracy/tamper 
proof meters 
54 
6.4 Non-supply of proper tail end voltage 54 
 
Chapter 7 -      Monitoring and Evaluation  
7.1        Overview of monitoring          57 
7.2        Non-monitoring of milestones and targets etc. by DRC          58 
7.3        Other issues observed at the state level    58 
 
Chapter 8 -     Conclusions and Recommendations  
8.1 Conclusion    61 
8.2 Recommendations   62 
 
Annexures  
Annexure I to XVII A-1 to A-37 
List of Abbreviations  Ab-1 to Ab-5 
 

 
  
iii  
  
 
 
 
 
 
his Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India has been prepared for submission to the 
President of India under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the Parliament. 
The Report contains the results of audit examination of the 
implementation of the Restructured Accelerated Powe r 
Development and Reforms Programme by the Ministry o f 
Power and State power utilities.   
  
T 
Preface 

Executive Summary 
   v  
   
 
The Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (R-APDRP) 
was launched in December 2008 as a continua tion of the Accelerated Power Development 
and Reforms Programme (APDRP) in the XI  Plan period. The programme envisaged 
sustainable reduction of Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) losses, establishment 
of reliable and automated system for collection of  accurate base line data and the adoption of 
Information Technology in the area of energy accounting as necessary preconditions for 
sanctioning distribution strength ening projects. The scheme al so aimed to map all power 
distribution assets, index and me ter all consumers to ensure th at electricity supplied can be 
traced to the ultimate consumer thereby resulting in better billing efficiency.   
This was sought to be achieved thr ough implementation of projects under Part A  
(preparation of baseline data for projec t areas covering consumer indexing, metering, 
automatic data logging etc., a sset mapping of the entire dist ribution network, Information 
Technology applications for meter reading, billing & collection, energy accounting and 
auditing, implementation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition pr ojects in selected 
towns with a population of more than 4 lakh,  etc.) and Part B  (regular distribution 
strengthening projects). The sc heme also envisaged capacity building of power distribution 
utility personnel through Part C  and provided for incentive scheme for personnel under  
Part D. The projects were to be implemented by the Utilities on turnkey basis.  
The scheme provided for 100 per cent funding of Part A projects by way of Government of 
India loans while in respect of Part B projects, 25 per cent of the project cost (90 per cent in 
case of special category states) was provided by Government of India loan and the balance 
funds were to be raised as  counterpart fund from othe r sources like Power Finance 
Corporation / Rural Electrificat ion Corporation / Banks etc. The scheme also provided for 
conversion of the Government of India loan into  grant subject to fulfilment of prescribed 
conditions.  
  
                  
 
 
                  Executive Summary 

Executive Summary 
   vi  
   
The projects were to be sanctioned on the basis of Detailed Project Reports submitted by the 
Utilities to the Steering Committee through the state level Distribution Reforms Committees. 
The scheme stipulated that the details of funds released and actual utilisation should be 
submitted to the Ministry of Power at the end of the year.  
The major findings of the performance audit are: 
Financial Management 
• Gross Budgetary Support of `28,424 crore was envisaged for the Scheme in the XI and 
XII plan periods (2008–17). Against this, Ministry of Power had actually budgeted  
`12,415.04 crore during 2008-09 to 2014-15 which was only 43.68 per cent  of the 
envisaged amount. R–APDRP scheme has b een subsumed in Integrated Power 
Development Scheme since December 2014 and no separate budget for R–APDRP has 
been allocated after 2014–15. The actual releases during 2008–15 on R–APDRP scheme 
were only `8,175.45 crore implying slow pace of scheme implementation. 
(Para 3.1)  
• Counterpart funding was not tied up by many State Utilities implementing the scheme 
within the prescribed peri od. Audit noticed that Power Finance Corporation did not 
maintain records of counterpart funding raised by the Utilities from Financial Institutions.  
(Para 3.3.3) 
• Instances of diversion of R-APDRP funds a nd overlapping of schemes were noticed in 
some States.  
(Paras 3.5 & 3.6) 
• Power Finance Corporation submitted two sets of Utilisation Certificates to the Ministry 
of Power; one indicating the total disburseme nt of Government of  India funds made by 
Power Finance Corporation to Utilities and the other indicating the utilisation of funds by 
the Utilities as received from them periodi cally. There was a considerable mismatch 
between both sets of Utilisation Certificates; Utilisation Certificates furnished by Power 
Finance Corporation indicated disbursement of `8,606.62 crore while Utilisation 
Certificates from Utilities indi cated utilisation of a meagre ` 4,155.88 Crore (49.29 per 
cent of the total funds released) as on March 2016. 
(Para 3.8) 
   

Executive Summary 
   vii  
   
• It was noticed that only the fi rst instalment had been releas ed in 198 Part A, 317 Part B 
and 47 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisitio n projects of the selected sample raising 
doubts regarding completion of the projects.  
(Para 3.3.1)  
• The provision of conversion of loan into grant has not been utilized by any of the Utilities 
as none of the Part A and Part B projects had been completed in any of the states.  
(Para 3.10) 
Programme Implementation 
• There were delays ranging up to 13 months in finalization of preparatory activities for 
implementation of the programme. 
(Para 4.1 ) 
• Detailed Project Reports were not prepared in line with the Model Detailed Project 
Report, resulting in inclusion of inadmissibl e items of work and exclusion of required 
items of work in the scope of the project.  Assumptions made during project formulation 
were not independently verified  during appraisal. Instances of  r e v i s i o n  i n  c o s t  o f  t h e  
projects without approval of the Steering Committee were noticed. In some cases, the 
Detailed Project Reports were appraised and approved by the Steering Committee without 
recommendation of State Distribution Reform s Committees in contravention of the 
prescribed procedure. 
(Paras 4.2 & 4.7) 
• Additional expenditure due to re-tendering and award of wo rks to contractors at different 
rates for similar items of work being executed in a State were observed. 
 (Paras 4.10 & 4.11) 
• Deficiencies in quality controls like pr ocurement of material  in deviation of 
specifications, failure of the items/systems leading to delay in completion of the projects 
and not obtaining suitable guarantees were noticed.   
(Paras 4.13.1, 4.13.2 & 4.14) 
• The efforts made to impart training to the staff of the Utilities were inadequate and the 
purpose of training of staff was not achieved. 
(Para 4.15) 
• Audit noticed that State Util ities had declared a number of  Part A projects ‘Go Live’ 
though as per the project details available with  Ministry of Power, none of them had yet 
been verified by Third Party Independent Ev aluation Agency which was a pre-requisite 

Executive Summary 
   viii  
   
for project completion. Though, nearly 80 per cent of the towns where Part A projects 
were implemented had been declared ‘Go Live’, only around 50 per cent  of the 
sanctioned cost had been disbursed to the U tilities. Many projects  were declared ‘Go 
Live’ where release of funds was less than 30 per cent of the approved project cost. Audit 
noticed that the ‘Go Live’ was declared by the States themse lves without verification by 
or approval of Ministry of Power.  
(Para 4.16) 
Aggregate Technical & Commercial Losses  
• In the sample cases test checked in Audit,  the Aggregate Technical & Commercial losses 
had increased relative to the baseline or could not be gene rated in more than 100 towns 
which had been declared ‘Go Live’. It was noticed that the baseline data itself has not 
been collected in many States before the projects were taken up. 
(Paras 5.1 & 5.2) 
• Variations were noticed in the Aggregate Technical & Commercial losses presented in 
various documents by the Ministry of Power to the Parliament. The methodology used for 
calculating the Aggregate Technical & Comm ercial losses, though laid down, was not 
followed uniformly leading to varying es timates of the Aggregate Technical & 
Commercial losses.  
(Paras 5.3 & 5.4) 
 
• Energy accounting and audit was not being done in 12 States while in another 13 states, 
the data for energy accounting and audit was being collected manually raising concerns 
about their reliability and accuracy. The main reason for not conducting energy 
accounting and audit was non–completion of Part A projects and non–integration of 
different modules for data collection. 
(Para 5.5) 
• 100 per cent metering of feeders, Distribution Tr ansformers and consumers was not done 
in many states. 
(Para 5.5.1) 
• The measures for preventing theft of electric ity like special courts and vigilance squads 
were not adequate and effective.  
 (Para 5.6.1) 
 

Executive Summary 
   ix  
   
Consumer satisfaction 
• Computerisation of Commercial Activities like billing, collection etc. remained 
incomplete. The Customer Service System co mprising of computer ised logging, tracking 
and redressal of customer requests were not fully established by the Utilities in many 
states.  
(Paras 6.1 & 6.2) 
• In some States, all service connections we re not fixed/ replaced with high accuracy/ 
tamper proof meters, as envisaged under the scheme. Proper tail end voltage was also not 
supplied in some States. 
(Paras 6.3 & 6.4) 
Monitoring and evaluation 
• Shortcomings were noticed in the monitori ng of the Scheme by State Distribution 
Reforms Committees. 
(Para 7.2) 
Recommendations 
1. Ministry should ensure that Utilities tie-up Counterpart funding before release of funds.  
2. Ministry may ensure that Utilisation Certif icates are submitted by the concerned Utilities 
as per timelines prescribed in the General Financial Rules. 
3. Ministry should consider e volving a mechanism of reporting of achievement of 
milestones vis-à-vis targets by state utilities along with re asons for non-achievement and 
action taken. 
4. Ministry may ensure 100 per cent completion of metering so th at verification of baseline 
data of Aggregate Technical & Commercial lo sses is completed, a nnual verification of 
Aggregate Technical & Commercial losses is done and to enable effective energy 
accounting and audit.  
5. Ministry may encourage States to set up the special courts and vigilance squads, based on 
population of project area, so th at speedy trials of offences act as deterrent to theft of 
electricity thereby reducing the commercial losses. 
6. Monitoring and evaluation process, at the level of the Distribution Reforms Committee 
and Steering/Review Committee, needs to be st rengthened to ensure that projects are 
completed in time. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
         1     
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1  Background 
Power sector reforms in India are more than two dec ades old and had initially focused 
on bringing about structural changes like unbundlin g of State Electricity Boards 
(SEBs), creation of independent generation, transmi ssion and distribution companies. 
Subsequently, the focus shifted to power generation  and to power distribution. During 
the last two decades, the Government of India (GOI) introduced various programmes to 
support the power sector, the significant initiativ es being Accelerated Power 
Development Programme (APDP), Accelerated Power Dev elopment and Reforms 
Programme (APDRP) and Restructured Accelerated Powe r Development and Reforms 
Programme (R-APDRP). 
1.1.1  Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP) 
APDP was launched in February 2001 to finance speci fic projects related to renovation 
and modernization (R&M) / life extension / up-ratin g of old power plants (thermal and 
hydel); upgrading and strengthening of sub-transmis sion and distribution network 
(below 33 KV or 66 KV) including energy accounting and metering in the distribution 
circles in a phased manner. 
1.1.2  Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP) 
In order to enable a quick turnaround of the power sector, APDP was restructured from 
being merely an investment window to a driver for r eforms and renamed ‘Accelerated 
Power Development and Reforms Programme’ (APDRP) during 2002-03.  
A performance audit of the APDRP was conducted by t he Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India (CAG) and the Report (Report no. 1 6 of 2007) was considered by the 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC). The PAC gave its r ecommendations regarding the 
scheme in its 77 th  report (of the 14 th  Lok Sabha). The scheme had also been evaluated 
by independent agencies (such as Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Administrative 
 
1 
Chapter Introduction 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
         2     
        
Staff College of India  (ASCI),  Tata Consultancy S ervices (TCS), The Energy and 
Resources Institute (TERI) and SBI Capital Markets Limited) which while 
recommending the continuance of APDRP beyond the X Plan, suggested restructuring 
of the scheme and recommended direct release of fun ds to utilities, adoption of 
Information Technology (IT), adherence to specific reform milestones, better project 
management, third party quality checks, continued training of utility staff. 
1.1.3  Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Refo rms Programme  
(R-APDRP) 
R-APDRP was launched in December 2008 as a continua tion of APDRP in the XI Plan 
period. The programme envisaged sustainable loss re duction, establishment of reliable 
and automated systems for collection of accurate ba se line data and the adoption of 
Information Technology in the areas of energy accou nting as necessary pre-conditions 
for sanctioning distribution strengthening projects . It was hoped that these  
pre-conditions would enable objective evaluation of  the performance of utilities before 
and after implementation of the programme, and enforce internal accountability leading 
to better performance. The scheme also aimed to map  all power distribution assets, 
index and meter all consumers to ensure that electr icity supplied can be traced to the 
ultimate consumer thereby resulting in better billing efficiency. 
This was sought to be achieved through implementati on of projects under Part A, Part 
B and other activities under Part C and Part D. The  scheme provided for release of 
funds for the projects by way of loans and their co nversion into grants subject to 
fulfilment of prescribed conditions.  
1.1.4  Part – A 
These projects were for preparation of baseline dat a for project areas covering 
consumer indexing, Geographical Information System (GIS) mapping, metering of 
distribution transformers and feeders, automatic da ta logging. It was to include asset 
mapping of the entire distribution network at and b elow 11 KV transformer level and 
shall include the distribution transformers and fee ders, low tension lines, poles and 
other distribution network equipment. They also include adoption of IT applications for 
meter reading, billing & collection; energy account ing and auditing; Management 
Information System (MIS) etc. They also envisaged i mplementation of Supervisory 
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) projects in se lected towns with a population of 
more than 4 lakh. Part A projects were to be completed in three years. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
         3     
        
1.1.5  Part – B  
Part B projects were regular distribution strengthe ning projects. They included 
renovation, modernization and strengthening of 11KV  substations, transformers/ 
transformer centres, re-conductoring of lines at11K V level and below. In exceptional 
cases, where the sub-transmission system is weak, s trengthening at 33KV or 66KV 
levels may also be considered under Part B  projects. 
1.1.6  Part C 
The task of capacity building of power distribution  utility personnel was mandated to 
Power Finance Corporation (PFC) under this part. Pa rt C included the enabling 
components for the implementation of R-APDRP and fo r facilitating the process of 
reforms in the Power Sector.  
1.1.7  Part D  
This part dealt with the incentive schemes for the personnel of the Utilities. The funds 
under the incentive schemes were to be released aft er the conversion of the loan into 
grant under Part B.  
1.2  Major Features of R-APDRP 
The major features of the R-APDRP were as below:  
a.  R-APDRP covered urban areas (towns and cities with a population of more than 
10,000 in the case of Special Category States 
1 and 30,000 in other cases). It 
envisaged separation of agricultural feeders from d omestic and industrial ones and 
of High Voltage Distribution System (11KV) in high- load density rural areas. 
Towns and areas for which projects had been sanctio ned in the X Plan under 
APDRP were eligible for consideration under the XI Plan either after completion or 
short closure of the earlier sanctioned projects. 
b.  PFC was the nodal agency for the operationalisation  and implementation of  
R-APRDP scheme, under the overall guidance of the M inistry of Power (MOP). 
PFC was expected to take the initiative for speedy and timely completion of 
projects and assist the Utilities in achieving loss  reduction targets and other 
parameters of the scheme. 
c.  The Steering Committee of R-APDRP under the Chairma nship of Secretary 
(Power) comprising of representatives of Ministry o f Finance (MOF), Planning 
                                                 
1 All  North-  Eastern  States,  Sikkim,  Uttarakhan d, Himachal Pradesh and J&K  

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
         4     
        
Commission, Central Electricity Authority (CEA), PF C, Rural Electrification 
Corporation (REC), selected State Governments (on o ne year rotation basis) was to 
oversee the scheme. The Steering Committee was to s anction projects, monitor and 
review the implementation of the scheme, approve pa nels of consultants, 
implementing agencies, independent evaluation agencies and approve conversion of 
loan into grants on fulfilment of necessary conditions.  
d.  Under the R-APDRP scheme, the Utilities were to pre pare Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) in two parts (i.e., Part-A & Part-B) for eac h of the project areas indicating 
the priority of the projects while forwarding them to PFC. For Part-A projects, 
Utilities were to either prepare DPRs on their own or through IT Consultants (ITC) 
appointed through open bidding process from the pan el of IT Consultants prepared 
by the PFC. For Part-B projects, the DPRs were to b e prepared in-house. The DPRs 
were then to be validated and appraised techno-comm ercially by PFC and 
submitted to the R-APDRP Steering Committee for app roval. SEBs / Utilities were 
to implement projects sanctioned under Part-A through an IT Implementing Agency 
(ITIA) and Part-B projects by themselves on turnkey basis. 
e.  For approved Part-A projects, 100 per cent  of the funds were to be provided by 
GOI as loan. Once the Part-A project was completed within three years and the 
developed system verified by an independent agency,  the loan was to be converted 
into grant. For Part-B projects, 25 per cent  of the funds (90 per cent for Special 
Category States) were to be provided as loan from G OI with the balance funds 
raised from financial institutions (including PFC, REC) and or own resources. If the 
target of 15 per cent Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) loss was 
achieved on a sustained basis for five years in the project area, up to 50 per cent (up 
to 90 per cent for Special Category States) of the loan against Pa rt-B projects was 
to be converted into grant. 
f.  A Quadripartite Agreement (QA) was to be entered in to amongst SEBs/Utilities, 
GOI, PFC and the State Governments to implement the  R-APDRP. The signing of 
the QA was a prerequisite for release of funds. The  MOP/ PFC was to monitor 
implementation of the precedent conditions agreed t o in the QA before releasing 
funds. If considered necessary, MOP could impose su ch conditions as it deemed fit 
for the implementation of R-APDRP from time to time. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
         5     
        
g.  R-APDRP provided for third party independent evalua tion agencies (TPIEA) to be 
appointed by the MOP through PFC for verification of 
(i) base (starting) figure of AT&C loss of the proj ect area. Part-B projects were 
to be taken up after verification of initial AT&C loss by MOP through nodal 
agency; and  
(ii) the yearly AT & C loss figures of project area s after the completion of the 
Part-A projects.  
h.  The scheme also envisaged incentives for utility st aff in towns where AT&C loss 
levels were brought below 15 per cent . A maximum of 2 per cent  of the grant for 
Part-B projects was allocated for this purpose. The  Utility was expected to match 
these funds and disburse the total amount among its  employees according to 
suitably devised incentive scheme.  
The implementation of the R-APDRP is graphically indicated below.  
 
 
 
Part A Part A 
Source: Power Finance  Corporation 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
         6     
        
1.3  Funding of R-APDRP 
As per the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (C CEA) approval for R-APDRP 
scheme dated 30 July 2008, an outlay of ` 51,577 crore had been provided during the 
XI Plan period for the Scheme. 
The subsequent CCEA Note of May 2013 projected an o utlay of 
` 44,011 crore  
incorporating GOI grant of ` 28,424 crore (for both XI and XII Plan periods;  
2008 – 17).  Till March 2015, MOP had released only ` 8,175.45 crore on the project. 
1.4  Integrated Power Development Scheme 
Government of India had launched a new Scheme ‘Inte grated Power Development 
Scheme’ (IPDS) in December 2014 and the scheme of R -APDRP was subsumed in this 
scheme as a separate component relating to IT enabl ement of distribution sector and 
strengthening of distribution network. In addition to this, IPDS had two other 
components, namely, strengthening of sub-transmissi on and distribution network in the 
urban areas; and metering of distribution transform ers/ feeders/ consumers in the  
urban areas. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     7     
        
 
 
 
Chapter 1 -   
 
2.1  Audit Objectives 
The performance audit was undertaken to assess whether: 
• The planning required for implementation of the pro gramme was appropriate and 
adequate; 
• The funds were released in accordance with the guid elines and were commensurate 
with the progress of the work; 
• The projects were implemented in an efficient and effective manner; and  
• The mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of the projects was adequate  and 
adherence to quality and timelines was ensured.  
2.2  Audit Scope and Sample 
The performance audit covered the period from the s tart of the R-APDRP scheme 
(December 2008) to 2014-15. The performance audit c overed 29 States. In respect of 
Part A and Part B projects, a sample of 25 per cent  of the sanctioned projects, subject to 
a minimum of 25 projects in each State was selected . In States where the number of 
sanctioned projects were less than 25, all the proj ects were selected for examination. In 
all, 596 Part A projects, 570 Part B projects and a ll 72 SCADA projects were examined 
in audit. State-wise number of projects sanctioned for implementation and selected for 
audit are presented at Annexure - I and II . 
2.3  Sources of Audit Criteria 
The main sources of audit criteria for the performance audit were: 
• R-APDRP Guidelines; 
• Detailed Project Reports (DPR), Quadripartite Agreements (QA) and Memorandum 
of Agreements (MoA) with State Electricity Boards (SEB); 
• Electricity Act, 2003; 
• General Financial Rules, 2005 (GFR); 
 
2 
Chapter Audit Methodology 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     8     
        
• Methodology for establishing baseline AT&C losses; and 
• Records and correspondence relating to the Scheme in MOP, PFC and Utilities. 
2.4  Audit Methodology 
The performance audit was taken up in May 2015. The  performance audit commenced 
with an entry conference with MOP in May 2015 which  was also attended by officers 
of PFC, the nodal agency. In the entry conference, audit methodology, scope, 
objectives and criteria were discussed.  
Audit was conducted at MOP/PFC and SEBs/ State Elec tricity Departments (SEDs)/ 
Distribution Companies (Utilities / DISCOMS) in States. 
The draft audit report was issued to the MOP in Feb ruary 2016 and replies were 
received from MOP in April 2016. An exit conference  was held in May 2016 with the 
MOP, where the audit findings and recommendations w ere discussed. Representatives 
of PFC were also present in the exit conference. Th e State Audit offices also conducted 
entry/exit conferences with the respective Utilities/SEBs (Utilities). 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the officers of the MOP, PFC, 
Utilities and/or the State Governments in the conduct of this audit. 
 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     9     
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1  Release and Utilization of Funds 
The projected requirement of Gross Budgetary Suppor t (GBS) for the R-APDRP 
scheme over the XI Plan period (2008 - 12) was ` 31,577 crores.  The CCEA Note of 
May 2013 for continuation of the R-APDRP scheme projected that the estimated outlay 
required for the scheme (2008 - 17) would be ` 44,011 crore with GOI grant of  
` 28,424 crore.  The budgeted estimates and actual r eleases over 2008-15 (the scheme 
was subsumed in IPDS w.e.f. December 2014) were, ho wever, much lower as 
presented in the following table:  
Table 1 :  Details of budgeted funds and release of funds under R-APDRP  
(`` `` in crore)  
Financial year Budget Estimate  Released 
Loan Grant Loan Grant 
  2008-09 2 0 1.00 325.00  25.00  
2009-10 1,650.00 80.00 1,321.09  1.26  
2010-11 3,600.00 100.00 2,256.79  100.00  
2011-12 1,959.00 75.00 1,600.00  67.87  
2012-13 2,997.00 117.00 1,217.45  17.04  
2103-14 500.00 75.00 640.00  8.70 
2014-15 1,116.54  144.50 578.47  16.78  
TOTAL 11,822.54 592.50 7,938.80 236.65 
 12,415.04 8,175.45 
The budgetary estimates for 2008-15 were ` 12,415.04 crore (43.68 per cent  of the 
revised GBS - `28,424 crore projected for the period 2008 - 17). T he actual releases 
during 2008-15 were only ` 8,175.45 crores which was only 65.85 per cent  of 
budgetary allocation. The reasons for the lower bud get allocation as against the outlay 
                                                 
2  Supplementary of ` 325.00 crore and ` 25.00 crore was obtained towards loan and grant respectively. 
 
3 
Chapter Financial Management  

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     10     
        
and even lower release of funds for the scheme were  not available in the records 
produced to Audit.   
The poor utilisation of the earmarked funds in APDR P scheme resulting in non-
achievement of the targets was also commented upon by the PAC while considering the 
CAG’s Report no. 16 of 2007.  From the above, it ap pears that the situation with regard 
to the utilisation of the earmarked funds had not improved even under R-APDRP. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that as against the revised programme size of 
` 44,011 crore, 
total sanctioned cost of Part A and B projects was ` 39,244 crore as on 31 March 2015 
of which the GOI loan component sanctioned was ` 17,855 crore (45.49 per cent  of 
total sanctioned cost). The balance amount for Part -B was to be arranged by the 
Utilities from Banks/ financial institutions (FIs) /own resources. MOP further added 
that against the GOI loan sanction of `17,855 crore, MOP had budgeted for  
` 11,822.54 crore (BE) and the revised budget estimat e was `8,346.57 crore which 
works out to about 47 per cent  of GOI loan component sanctioned. Further, actual GOI 
loan releases were ` 7,938.79 crore as against revised budget estimate o f ` 8,346.57 
crore which works out to 95 per cent  of RE budget and about 44.46 per cent  of total 
GOI loan sanctioned.  
The fact was that MOP failed to fully utilise the f unds allocated under the scheme even 
in a span of six years and implementation of the scheme was slow.  
3.2  Expenditure incurred under Part C of the Scheme 
The allocation for enabling activities under Part C was  ` 1,177 crore as under: 
• ` 850 crore for the services rendered by PFC for oper ationalisation of the Scheme, 
validation of baseline data system and yearly verif ication of AT&C loss figures of 
project areas, appointment of advisors and project management consultants to vet 
the project proposals, monitor implementation of the projects and MIS etc.; 
• ` 200 crore for Capacity Building and Franchisee Deve lopment and exposure to 
latest developments in electricity distribution within India and abroad; 
• ` 50 crore (increased to `250 crore vide MOP Order dated 8 July 2013) for few  
Pilot Projects for adopting new innovations; and 
• ` 77 crore for miscellaneous activities such as ‘Best  Practices’ workshops and 
conferences, Consumer attitude survey, Project spec ific evaluation and 
Standardisation of specification of equipment and contractual documents. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     11      
        
Against the allocation of ` 1,177 crore, MOP released only ` 236.65 crore up to March 
2015.  
3.3  Lapses in release and utilization of funds in the States 
Clause 2 of the ‘Terms and Conditions’ of the QA re garding release/ disbursement of 
loans inter-alia  provided that 30 per cent  of the project cost can be released as GOI 
loan up front on approval of the project in case of  Part A projects. Similarly, 30  
per cent  of the project cost can be released as GOI loan up  front on approval of the 
project in case of Part B projects in Special Categ ory States and 15 per cent in other 
States. Audit noticed the following issues: 
3.3.1  Release of only the first installment 
Scrutiny of records revealed that in 198 Part A pro jects, 317 Part B projects and 47 
SCADA projects of the selected sample, only the fir st instalment amounting to 
`3,808.71  crore was released as upfront advance as detailed below: 
Table 2 :  Projects in which only first instalment was released 
(( ((`` `` in crore) 
 
Year 
Release of First Installment by GOI 
Part A - 100% Funded by 
GOI 
Part B - 25% Funded by GOI SCADA - 100% Funded by  
GOI 
 No. of 
Projects  
Cumulative 
no. of 
projects 
Amount 
Released  
No. of 
Projects  
Cumulative 
no. of 
projects 
 Amount 
Released  
No. of 
Projects  
Cumulative 
no. of 
projects 
Amount 
Released 
2009  60  60  169.34  - - --  5 5 45.27  
2010  104  164  168.26  51  51  186.61  --  5 --  
2011  18  182  20.58  159  210  1,402.11  18  23  144.43  
2012  4 186  4.51  30  240  478.74  18  41  113.92  
2013  --  186  --  37  277  170.53  --  41  --  
2014  12  198  31.69  27  304  122.66  3 44  12.14  
2015  --  198  - 13  317  316.20  3 47  421.72  
TOTAL  198   394.38  317   2,676.85  47   737.48  
Part A projects had to be completed within three years of sanction. As can be seen from 
the table, for 186 Part A and 41 SCADA projects, on ly the first instalment was released 
even though three or more years have lapsed since t he first release. No further funds 
have since been released. It is also noticed that a  number of Part B projects have been 
pending for up to six years. 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     12     
        
MOP stated (March 2016) that in respect of Part B p rojects, implementation period is  
5 years and up to 25 per cent  of project cost (90 per cent  in case of Special Category 
States) is provided as GOI loan and the balance fun ds were to be raised by the Utilities 
as counterpart fund from other sources, viz., PFC/R EC/Banks/own resources. As such, 
in case of Part B projects after release of initial  advance of GOI loan (15 per cent ), 
major funding (75 per cent ) was from counterpart funds and Utilities were ava iling the 
same for project implementation. Hence, last 10 per cent  GOI loan was not yet due in 
most of the Part B projects. 
The reply of MOP may be seen in light of the fact that: 
• The test checked cases include Part A and SCADA pro jects, with 100 per cent  
funding by GOI, which had a completion period of th ree years and where second 
instalment has not been released even after lapse o f four to seven years from the 
date of sanction of the projects raising doubts on completion of these projects. 
• The table also indicates Part B projects where the 1 
st  installment has been released 
more than five years ago and hence these projects o ught to have been completed 
as per plan.  
3.3.2  Separate Bank Account 
As per clause no.13.0 (b) of R-APDRP guidelines, Utilities had to open a separate bank 
account (Escrow account) for receipt and utilisatio n of funds. It was, however, 
observed that:  
• Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited (MSEDCL) operated a 
separate “current” account with the bank only for t he purpose of receiving funds 
from the PFC. The funds received from PFC, after ma intaining a minimum balance 
of ` 5,000, were automatically transferred through stan ding instruction to another 
operative account of MSEDCL, which was common for a ll other schemes, 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) and other expenses of MSEDCL. Pooling of 
funds in the common operative account was in violation of the scheme guidelines. 
MSEDCL replied that the funds were transferred to t he cash credit account as the 
interest rates were around 10 to 11.50 per cent  as against the interest rate of  
4 to 5 per cent  in respect of savings account. It was added that there was no delay in 
project implementation due to diversion of funds an d stated that scheme guidelines 
would be followed for future schemes.  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     13      
        
• In Chhattisgarh, ` 304.67 crore received as R-APDRP funds from Februa ry 2013 to 
March 2015 were initially put into the overdraft ac count of the Utility. Out of the  
` 304.67 crore R-APDRP funds, ` 233.19 crore was transferred to the R-APDRP 
scheme account and balance fund of ` 71.48 crore was lying in the overdraft 
account as on August 2015. Evidently, the Utility u sed the scheme fund to reduce 
its own overdraft. By depositing  the scheme funds in the overdraft account of the 
Utility instead of the Separate Account opened for scheme funds, the Utility 
benefitted at the cost of the scheme. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that the Utility has been a dvised to comply with the scheme 
guidelines in view of the audit observation. 
Audit is of the opinion that in cases where higher interest has been earned due to 
parking of R-APDRP funds in a different account, su ch interest needs to be credited 
into the R-APDRP account. 
3.3.3  Counterpart Funding 
As per the terms of the scheme, a Quadripartite Agr eement (QA) had to be entered 
amongst SEBs/Utilities, GOI, PFC and the State Gove rnment before implementation of 
projects. Signing of QA was a prerequisite for rele ase of funds under the R-APDRP. 
The Ministry of Power/ PFC had to monitor complianc e of the conditions precedent 
agreed to in the QA before releasing funds. 
Clause 5.3 of the QA stipulated that the Utility sh all ensure that the balance funds of 
Part B projects (to be raised from PFC/ REC / multi -lateral institutions and/ or own 
resources) will be fully tied up within two months of the sanction of a project and that 
agreement with Financial Institutions (FIs) for cou nterpart funding will be appended to 
the Loan Agreement with Nodal Agency. 
It was noticed that in eight States, though the 1 
st  installment of the Part B projects had 
been released during 2010 to 2014 ( Annexure III ), neither the PFC nor the MOP  
had any information as to whether the requisite cou nterpart funding had actually been 
tied up.  
PFC replied (October and November 2015) that it took an undertaking from the utilities 
to the effect that the counterpart funding would be  tied up within two months of 
sanction of the project. Details of counterpart loa n extended by PFC only were 
maintained by them. They reviewed the tie up of bal ance funds for Part B projects on a 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     14     
        
continuous basis in various fora, review meetings and through e-mails. The requirement 
of appending the counterpart loan agreement with GO I loan agreement does not serve 
any purpose as the Part-B counterpart loans from th e FIs are to be governed by the 
respective terms of the FIs. The details of counter part funding, as required shall be 
obtained at the time of conversion of loan into grant. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that:  
• The onus of tying up of counterpart fund is on the Utilities, being owners of 
projects and not on the PFC. PFC is maintaining information to the extent furnished 
by the Utilities in respect of tying-up of counterpart fund. 
• The QA required the Utilities to ensure tie up of c ounterpart funds within two 
months from sanction of Part B projects. The same w as amended in the 28 
th  
meeting of the Steering Committee held on 6 August 2013 when Utilities were 
allowed to ensure tie up of counterpart funds withi n two months from award of Part 
B projects by the utilities.  
• The Utilities are required to submit the details of  counterpart funding while 
submitting claims for further release of GOI loan o r conversion of loan into grant. 
PFC, while processing release of further tranche of  GOI loan for Part B projects, 
ensures that Utility has tied-up and utilised count erpart funds as per R-APDRP 
guidelines. 
The above reply should be seen in light of the fact that:  
• Non-tying up of counterpart funding can lead to fin ancial crunch for the Utility in  
implementation of the projects and should have been  ensured by the MOP/ PFC 
before release of funds as envisaged in the scheme to ensure  projects 
implementation in a time bound manner. 
• Para 4.0 (c) of R-APDRP Guidelines entrusted the responsibility of monitoring the 
implementation of the precedent conditions agreed t o in the Quadripartite 
Agreement to PFC, before funds of MOP and PFC were released. Hence, it was 
incumbent upon PFC to monitor whether counterpart f unding were tied up by the 
Utilities in cases where funds have been released under Part B Projects. 
• The contention of PFC that ‘ the requirement of appending the counterpart loan 
agreement with GOI loan agreement does not serve any purpose ’ is not acceptable 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     15      
        
as such agreement assures MOP/ PFC that adequate fi nances were available for 
implementing the project. 
• The contention of PFC that counterpart loans from t he FIs were to be governed by 
the respective terms of the FIs also needs to be se en in the light of the fact that the 
counterpart loan was also eligible for conversion o f loan into grant, subject to 
fulfillment of stipulated conditions.  
3.4  Transfer / abandonment of works by Utility  
Clause 16.0 of the QA, inter alia , stipulates that the Utility shall not transfer or  
abandon the project at any stage without written co nsent of the PFC. Further, when 
projects were transferred or abandoned, the entire outstanding dues from the Utility 
were to be repaid to the PFC.  
It was observed that projects of 24 towns in Tamil Nadu had been cancelled by the 
Steering Committee as the AT & C losses verified by  the TPIEA were less than 15  
per cent  in these towns. However, the funds released for th ese towns, amounting to  
` 163.95 crore, were yet to be recovered/ adjusted by PFC. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that PFC is pursuing with T amil Nadu Generation and 
Distribution Corporation Limited (TANGEDCO) regular ly for recovery of loan 
proceeds  along with interest accrued.  
3.5  Diversion of funds 
Para 12 (g) of the QA envisaged that funds provided  to the Utility under R-APDRP 
shall not be diverted for any other scheme or purpose.  
Audit scrutiny in 29 States  indicated cases of div ersion of funds of ` 535.39 crore in 8 
States ( Annexure - IV ) out of which, recovery only in respect of ` 368.54 crore has 
been made till March 2015. 
It was also  noticed from the Internal Audit Report  of MOP for the year 2011-12 that in 
five cases there were diversion of funds amounting to 
` 1,365.52 crore in different 
States as detailed below:  
  

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     16     
        
Table 3 :  Cases of diversion of R-APDRP Funds 
(`` `` in crore ) 
Sl. No. State (Utility) Amount Diverted  
1. Tamil Nadu (TANGEDCO) 572.91 
2. Maharashtra (MSEDCL) 540.38 
3. Andhra Pradesh (Now Telangana) (APCPDCL) 124.14 
4. Rajasthan (JVVNL) 104.94 
5. Karnataka (BESCOM) 23.15 
Total 1,365.52 
 
MOP, while stating (March 2016) that PFC had sought  clarifications from the Utilities 
of Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu  added that PFC had suggested 
that as long as the Utility met its payment obligat ions in a timely manner, fund 
management by the Utility as per its own policy may  be acceptable as the Utility was 
taking interest risk on the GOI loan. It was furthe r stated that PFC/MOP cannot 
exercise any direct operational control on the bank accounts as they are managed by the 
concerned Utilities.  
MOP’s reply did not address the issue of specific c ases of diversion of funds pointed 
out by Audit. Further, while the responsibility of fund management rests with the 
concerned Utility, MOP/PFC cannot absolve themselve s of supervisory responsibility 
to ensure that the funds were utilized in accordance with the scheme guidelines.  
3.6  Overlapping of Schemes 
It was noticed that in Assam , projects taken up under R-APDRP were also taken up 
under other schemes as indicated below:  
Table 4 :  Cases indicating overlapping of Projects 
Project/ Part of the 
Project 
Value of the 
Project / Part of 
the Project 
Other Scheme under which 
included 
Part B project in Dhing - 
supply and installation of 
Vacuum Circuit Breaker 
(VCB) 9 unit for 33/11 
KV sub-station 
` 30.05 lakh Scheme under Asian Development 
Bank (ADB). Material procured 
under ADB project kept on 
standby. 
 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     17      
        
Part B project in 
Dibrugarh –  supply and 
installation of one 5 MVA 
PTR 
` 57.96 lakh Scheme under Asian Development 
Bank.  Material procured under R-
APDRP  installed outside ring 
fence of respective projects. 
Bongaigaon Project area – 
supply and installation of 
33KV VCB and 11 KV 
Outdoor VCB 
` 6.82 lakh 
MOP stated (March 2016) that PFC appraised projects  on the basis of DPRs submitted 
by the Utilities, adding that the Utilities submit claims in the prescribed formats 
including a certificate that the same items were no t being claimed from any other 
sources. It was further added that the concerned Ut ilities need to reply to the specific 
issues raised by Audit.  
While it is true that the responsibility for prepar ing DPRs rests with the Utility, MOP 
and PFC need to monitor the implementation of the s cheme effectively to avoid such 
overlapping of schemes to ensure optimal utilisation of the scheme funds.  
3.7  Release of funds not in consonance with conditions of agreement 
Release of funds were noticed in some States which were not in consonance with the 
identified milestones/conditions of agreement as given below: 
Andhra Pradesh 
• An advance of 
`2.83 crore was released to the SCADA / Distribution  Management 
System (DMS) implementing agency – M/s Chemtrols In dustries Ltd.  without the 
implementing agency setting up site office as required in the agreement.  
Chhattisgarh 
• Though an amount of 
` 27.98 crore was recoverable from the utilities due  to 
cancellation of projects/ other reasons in 32 towns /cases, a further ` 545.48 crore 
was released without adjusting the previous releases. 
• A penalty of ` 1.31 crore was imposed in six towns/cases of Part B  and penalty of  
` 1.55 crore was imposed on the ITIA of Part A which  were not adjusted in funds 
released subsequently by PFC. 
• Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) forfeited from the cont ractor was not accounted for 
in the scheme account. 
  

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     18     
        
The Ministry did not offer any comments on the audit observation (March 2016). 
3.8  Utilisation Certificates (UCs) 
The terms & conditions of the sanction of loans to the Utilities under the scheme 
provided inter alia , that each layer of funding should keep a strict m onitoring on the 
funds parked in the accounts of the next lower leve l. It also stipulated that the details of 
funds released, actual utilization and physical tar gets achieved vis-à-vis funds released 
etc. were required to be furnished to MOP at the en d of the year. Moreover, as per Rule 
226 of GFR, a UC (in Form 19-B) should be furnished  within a reasonable time, not 
later than 18 months from the expiry of financial year in which loan is disbursed. 
It was noticed that PFC submitted two sets of UCs t o the MOP; one indicating the total 
disbursement of GOI funds made by PFC to Utilities and the other indicating the 
utilisation of funds by the Utilities as received from them periodically by PFC. 
Audit observed that : 
• As per the UCs furnished by PFC in respect of the G OI loan funds, PFC had fully 
disbursed the funds released by GOI amounting to ` 8,606.62 crore as of March 
2016. However, in respect of the funds released to the Utilities by PFC, UCs for 
an amount of ` 4,155.88 crore ( 48.29  per cent  of the total funds released) were 
forwarded by the PFC to MOP. It is pertinent to not e here that the loans disbursed 
during 2013-15 were only ` 1,218.47 crore indicating that the UCs in respect o f 
the balance amount of loan disbursed were overdue. 
• Instances where UCs had not been received from Util ities up to a period of six 
years from the release of funds (` 706.57 crore) are presented in Annexure - V. 
• PFC did not maintain the stipulated monthly/ annual  project-wise report in respect 
of funds released, actual utilization and physical targets achieved vis-à-vis funds 
released.  
PFC informed (February 2016) that town-wise expendi ture was not separately 
maintained in their Enterprise Resource Planning (E RP) system. It also stated (March 
2016) that progress/ status /issues of project impl ementation are discussed/ reviewed in 
various forums /meetings/ regional review meetings etc. and it provided fortnightly 
MIS reports to MOP. Further, PFC indicated that all  India sanctions/ disbursement 
details are informed to MOP from time to time while requesting further release of funds 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     19      
        
and that the utilisation details are submitted for those claims of utilities for which 
further fund release is sought. 
MOP in their reply (March 2016) referred to the fac t that the Pay & Accounts office 
was provided with the UCs of the previous tranche b efore releasing the next tranche of 
installment and stated that a system of checks and balances exists at MOP as well as the 
Pay & Accounts office.  
The replies of the PFC and MOP need to be seen in light of the following facts:  
• PFC did not provide specific returns as envisaged i n the sanction letters issued by 
MOP. 
• The fortnightly MIS reports referred to in the reply did not indicate anything about 
the release of funds and expenditure incurred. 
• In the sample scrutinized by Audit, it was seen tha t Utilities have not submitted 
even a single UC for 198 Part A (33.22 per cent  of sample), 47 SCADA (61.11 
per cent  of sample) and 317 Part B (55.61 per cent  of sample) projects. 
• The reply of MOP is not in accordance with the prov isions of Rule 226 of GFR 
which stipulates that UCs are required to be furnis hed within a reasonable time 
not later than 18 months from the expiry of financi al year in which loan is 
disbursed. 
3.9  Non-inspection of the books of accounts of State Utilities 
Para 14.0 of the QA inter-alia stipulated that the State Utility (SU) shall make available 
for the inspection of the Central Government / PFC or its nominated agency all its 
books of account and other documents maintained by it.  
It was noticed in Audit that no such inspection was  carried out by PFC or its nominated 
agency to ensure optimum utilization of the funds released under the scheme. 
PFC replied (February 2016) that they did not inspe ct the annual accounts of the 
Utilities related to R-APDRP scheme implementation due to manpower shortage and 
being engrossed with activities like operationaliza tion of scheme, resolution of issues, 
disbursement process etc. 
The fact remains that inspection as envisaged under the scheme has not been done. 
 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     20     
        
3.10  Conversion of loan into grant 
Responding to the observation of the PAC on the Report of the CAG regarding APDRP 
Scheme (Report no. 16 of 2007), MOP had stated that  conversion of loan into grant has 
been linked to their timely completion and the Comm ittee expressed hope that this 
provision shall have salutary effect on the various projects and their timely completion. 
Accordingly, the R-APDRP guidelines provided for co nversion of loan for Part A 
projects into grant once the projects were complete d within three years of sanction. As 
per the R-APDRP guidelines, Part A Projects would b e considered as completed on  
establishment of the required system duly verified by an independent agency appointed 
by the MOP through the nodal agency. From the scrut iny of the records, it was seen 
that none of the Part-A projects were certified as completed by the independent agency. 
Consequently, there were no instances of conversion of loans into grants and hence, the 
provision for conversion of loan into grants could not incentivise timely completion.  
MOP stated (March 2016) that conversion of Part-A l oan into Grant is to be initiated 
after verification of Part-A completion by Third Pa rty Independent Evaluation Agency- 
Information Technology (TPIEA-IT) which is going on  in most States where 100 per 
cent  towns have been declared Go-Live. It further state d that the CCEA, while 
considering continuation of R-APDRP in XII Plan, ex tended Part A completion from 
three to five years and also delegated powers to th e Steering /Monitoring Committee to 
consider giving further extension of time for compl etion of projects under R-APDRP 
on case to case basis. 
The extension of completion time from three to five  years defeated the purpose of 
conversion of loan into grant as a motivating facto r to get projects completed in time. 
Further, it is seen that 182 projects sanctioned be fore 2011 (that is more than five years 
ago) have not yet been certified as complete (March 2016).  
Recommendations 
1.  Ministry should ensure that Utilities tie-up Counterpart funding before release of 
funds.  
2.  Ministry may ensure that Utilisation Certificates a re submitted by the concerned 
Utilities as per timelines prescribed in the General Financial Rules. 
 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     21      
        
 
 
 
 
Programme Implementation 
 
The R-APDRP scheme was to be implemented through th e execution of Part A and 
Part B projects as brought out in the preceding Cha pters. The Utilities were required to 
formulate DPRs, on their own or through empanelled consultants, for each of these 
projects and forward the same to the PFC through Di stribution Reforms Committee 
(DRC). PFC was to present the DPRs to the Steering Committee and get the projects 
executed through turnkey contracting. Power Finance  Corporation (PFC) was required 
to empanel IT consultants and IT implementing agenc ies for Part A projects for 
selection by the  Utilities through competitive bid ding. The findings of Audit with 
respect to the implementation of the projects (Part  A and B projects) are presented in 
the following paragraphs.  
4.1  Preparatory activities 
In the first meeting of the Steering Committee held on 20 October 2008, a schedule was 
drawn up for carrying out basic activities relating to formulation and implementation of 
the projects under the Scheme. The completion of th ese activities as per the decided 
timelines was important for the timely implementati on of the project and the success of 
the R-APDRP scheme. Delay in the completion of thes e activities would lead to a 
cascading delay in the completion of the projects a nd the realization of the envisaged 
benefits of the projects.  
The schedule for the activities and achievement of targets against the projected 
schedule are given as under: 
Table 5 :  Projected schedule of basic activities and achievement thereagainst for 
formulation and implementation of the projects 
Activity Scheduled date Actual date of 
completion 
Empanelment of IT Consultants for Part 
A projects 
28 November 2008 9 January 2009 
Empanelment of implementing agencies 
(ITIA)  
15 January 2009 20 March 2009 
 
4 
Chapter 
Programme  
Implementation 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     22     
        
Preparation of Model DPRs for Part A 
projects  
30 November 2008 9 January 2009 
Preparation of Model DPRs for Part B 
projects 
30 January 2009 29 June 2009 
Empanelment of SCADA consultant  31 March 2009 22 D ecember 
2009 
Preparation of Model DPRs for SCADA  
projects 
30 September 2009 14 July 2010 
Empanelment of Third Party Independent 
Evaluation Agencies  
15 January 2009 30 November 
2009 
Appointment of consultant for 
preparation of capacity building 
programme of distribution personnel  
15 April 2009 9 September 2009  
Empanelment of Partner Training 
Institutes  
30 September 2010 18 October 2011 
 
There were delays ranging up to 13 months in finali zation of preparatory activities for 
implementation of the programme. The delays in prep aratory activities had a cascading 
effect on the actual implementation of the scheme.  
MOP stated (March 2016) that most of the preparator y activities were carried out by 
PFC with the help of a Process Consultant as R-APDR P was first of its kind of IT 
enablement initiative by GOI in the urban distribut ion sector and detailed deliberations 
and due diligence were required in empanelment of c onsultants/agencies and 
preparation of bid documents/ model DPR formats etc . As the IT intervention in 
distribution was being taken up on a large scale fo r the first time in the country, delays 
in implementation of the programme could mainly be attributed to delay in finalization 
of tenders by utilities; disputes and court cases; difficulty faced in various activities due 
to complex technical problems as well as skilled ma npower constraints etc. and not the 
preparatory activities for the implementation.  
The reply of MOP needs to be viewed in light of the  fact that the delays pointed out by 
Audit were with reference to the target dates fixed  by the Steering Committee for 
various activities to be carried out under the Sche me taking into consideration the 
nature, scope and quantum of work involved in these activities.  
 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     23      
        
4.2  Appraisal of DPRs  
As per clauses 4.0, 10.0 and 10.2 of the R-APDRP Sc heme, the Utilities were to 
prepare the DPRs for the projects either by themsel ves or through IT consultants 
appointed for the purpose. The DPRs were then to be  presented to the Distribution 
Reforms Committee (DRC), under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary/Principal 
Secretary/Secretary Power/ Energy, of the respectiv e states for approval. The approved 
DPRs were to be forwarded to PFC, which was to  app raise the DPRs techno-
economically before presenting them to the Steering  Committee for approval. The 
Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of the Se cretary (Power) would sanction 
the projects, including modifications or revision o f estimates, monitor and review the 
implementation of the Scheme.  
In the CAG’s Report No. 16 of 2007, it was observed  that an average of 71 projects 
were sanctioned per meeting of the Steering Committ ee and it was recommended that 
the Ministry take steps to ensure critical examinat ion of all the DPRs by the Steering 
Committee for technical and financial feasibility before approval. Audit noticed that the 
average number of projects sanctioned per Steering Committee meeting for R-APDRP 
scheme, had, in-fact, increased to 121 with 2,774 p rojects costing 
` 37,427.08 crores 
being sanctioned in 23 meetings of the Steering Com mittee held during February 2009 
to February 2014 as detailed in Annexure - VI .  
The observations of Audit with regard to the apprai sal of DPRs are presented in the 
following paragraphs. 
4.2.1  Sanctioning of projects not recommended by State DRCs 
Audit observed that 553 projects under the Scheme w ere sanctioned without prior 
scrutiny/ approval by the State DRCs, as required. The details of the projects so 
approved are presented as Annexure - VI .  
MOP stated (March 2016) that the projects were sanc tioned by the Steering Committee 
even when there was no prior scrutiny by DRCs to expedite project implementation and 
added that the project sanction letters were issued  only after submission of DRC 
recommendations. It was further added in the exit c onference (May 2016) that no funds 
were released for any of the projects without receiving the formal approval of the DRC.  
The reply of the Ministry needs to be considered in  light of the fact that once the 
projects were approved by the Steering Committee, a pproval of DRCs became a mere 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     24     
        
formality. Audit could not draw an assurance that p roject proposals were critically 
examined at DRC/Steering Committee level. 
4.2.2  Non – preparation of DPRs as per the Model DPR 
Clause 3.4 of the QA stipulated that PFC would prep are model DPR formats for Part-A 
and Part-B projects. The model DPRs indicated, inter alia,  items of work which could 
be included in the individual projects.  
It was, however, noticed  that: 
• In five 
3 out of 29 States, DPRs had included inadmissible i tems of work and 
excluded required items of work from the scope of t he project as indicated in 
Annexure - VII . 
• DPRs in respect of three 4 states did not indicate implementation schedule re quired 
as per the Model DPR.  
Audit also noticed in the test checked projects tha t instead of vetting the facts and 
figures independently before recommending the proje cts for approval of Steering 
Committee, PFC had made certain assumptions such as  Utility had followed the DPR 
Guidelines while preparing the DPRs, Utility had co nsidered approved benchmark 
prices/scheduled rates in DPR, benchmark cost had b een derived (in the absence of 
awarded cost) based on market data, feedback from Utilities etc. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that all Utilities are foll owing R-APDRP guidelines for 
implementation of Part A projects and that detailed  appraisal procedure was followed 
by PFC and formats/DPRs were standardised. PFC in i ts reply (November 2015 and 
February 2016) stated that these were not assumptions but declarations. 
The reply of Ministry does not address the anomalie s noticed in Audit. Further, the 
‘Executive Summary’ in respect of the DPRs, submitt ed to the Ministry of Power by 
the PFC specifically mentioned that PFC had made these assumptions.  
4.2.3  Projects under APDRP continued under R-APDRP withou t being 
completed / short  closed 
Clause 2.3 of the R-APDRP guidelines provided for s anction of projects only after 
completion or short closure of ongoing APDRP projec ts. The Utilities were required to 
                                                 
3 Assam, Gujarat,  Rajasthan, Tripura and Uttar Prade sh 
4  Meghalaya, Rajasthan and Sikkim  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     25      
        
submit completion certificates for the works execut ed under X Plan APDRP projects 
which were under implementation.  
It was observed that in Jharkhand, Part A  projects in 30 towns were sanctioned 
(September 2009) by MOP after Jharkhand State Elect ricity Board (JSEB) intimated 
(February 2009) that all the packages of previous A PDRP scheme in respect of the R-
APDRP towns have already been completed / short clo sed. It was, however, observed 
in Audit that 14 projects undertaken under APDRP we re under various stages of 
completion. Moreover, DPRs for the Part B projects in respect of these towns were 
approved by MOP in September 2013 although closure plan of the ongoing APDRP 
projects were not submitted . 
MOP stated (March 2016) that R-APDRP projects have been sanctioned based on the 
certificate given by the Utility that X Plan projec ts in the concerned project area have 
been completed/ short closed.  
Thus, it is clear that MOP had no independent mecha nism to ensure that X Plan 
APDRP projects were completed/short closed before t aking them under R-APDRP 
although APDRP projects were also sanctioned and implemented under their guidance. 
4.3  Delay in calling of tenders and award of work 
Audit noticed cases where Part A project DPRs were submitted for approval three years 
after inception of the scheme, even as the schedule  of completion of Part A projects 
was three years. Delays up to 52 months in calling of tenders and award of work by the 
Utilities have been noticed in 16 States in Part A and Part B projects. Even DPRs were 
formulated late. The delay in these activities resu lted in delayed completion of projects 
under the Scheme. The cases of delays noticed in va rious States are presented as 
Annexure - VIII . 
MOP stated (March 2016) that there is no timeline f or DPR formulation and that delay 
in calling of tenders and award of work by the util ities etc. were brought to the 
Utilities’ notice regularly through correspondence/ meetings/workshops etc. for 
expeditious implementation of the programme. PFC co nducts monthly review meetings 
with the representatives of utilities for speedy implementation of the programme. It was 
further stated that keeping in view the delays face d by the Utilities due to size and 
complexities involved in the implementation of the programme, an extension in 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     26     
        
completion period from 3 to 5 years was accorded by  CCEA, which also authorised 
Steering Committee for grant of further extensions on case to case basis.  
While MOP may have taken steps to ensure prompt app raisal of DPRs and the timely 
completion of project, the fact remains that there were delays of up to 52 months in the 
formulation of DPRs, calling of tenders and award o f work by the Utilities and the 
projects were not complete even after six years of implementation of the Scheme. 
4.4  Non – prioritisation of projects 
Para 4 of the scheme guidelines required that the o rder of priority of the projects was to 
be indicated by the Utilities while forwarding the DPRs to PFC. However, the basis on 
which the projects were to be prioritised was not stipulated in the guidelines. 
It was observed in audit that in 11 States 5, priority of the projects was not indicated. 
Further Audit noticed that in Jharkhand , though priority was decided, it was not 
followed in the execution of the works.  
MOP stated (March 2016) that DPRs, as and when rece ived by PFC from the Utilities, 
were appraised and submitted to the Steering Commit tee for sanction. Prioritisation 
was done at the Utilities’ end.  
While it may be true that the prioritisation of pro jects is the responsibility of the 
Utilities, the fact remains that PFC being the Noda l Agency should have ensured the 
prioritisation of projects as stipulated in the sch eme guidelines to ensure optimal 
utilisation of the scheme funds. 
4.5  Non-adherence to the approved DPR (Change in project area) 
Audit noticed that one project in Tripura and two p rojects in Uttar Pradesh were not 
executed in line with the approved DPR as detailed below: 
Table 6 :  Projects not executed as per approved DPR 
S.No.  State Proposed Project in DPR Executed Project 
1 Tripura Augmentation of transformer 
capacity at Rampur Sub-Station 
Augmentation of transformer 
capacity at Khayerpur sub-station 
2 Uttar 
Pradesh 
Construction of Sub-Station at 
Vikram Colony, Aligarh 
Construction of Sub-Station at 
Lal Diggi, Aligarh 
Augmentation of transformer 
capacity at Town hall, Hapur 
town 
Augmentation of transformer 
capacity at Delhi Road, Hapur 
town 
                                                 
5 Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,  Gujarat, Himachal Prad esh, J&K, Madhya Pradesh (Eastern DISCOM), 
Maharashtra, Manipur, Kerala and West Bengal  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     27      
        
MOP stated (May 2016) that the change in location o f a project should not be objected 
to so long as the project area is the same.  
While the project area may be the same, the fact re mains that the projects were not 
executed in line with the approved DPR.  
4.6  Delay in start of projects due to non – provision o f infrastructure to the 
contractors 
In 116 out of 29 States, works were not started in time a s the Utilities did not provide 
basic infrastructure like land / building required for execution of the projects to the 
contractor. This had contributed to delay in completion of the projects.  
MOP stated (March 2016) that for this reason, the C CEA/Steering Committee granted 
further extension for completion of these projects. 
In view of the significant delays in scheme impleme ntation, MOP should take 
appropriate steps to ensure minimisation of the delays.  
4.7  Revision of costs without the approval of the Steering Committee 
The maximum limits for variations in the pre – awar d stage and the post – award stage 
under different circumstances and the procedure to be followed in each of the cases 
were prescribed vide guidelines approved by the Ste ering Committee in its 14 th  
Meeting held on 26 November 2009. The same are presented as Annexure - IX .   
However, it was observed in Audit that in seven Sta tes 7, there was variation in excess 
of prescribed limits in the DPR costs approved by t he PFC. The details of these works 
are given in Annexure - X.  
MOP stated (March 2016) that they were restricting the release of funds to the 
sanctioned cost or revised awarded cost whichever i s lower and that the Integrated 
Power Development Scheme 8 (IPDS) guidelines allowed no further cost 
escalation/enhancement. As regards the additional q uantities approved for 
implementation, MOP stated that distribution system  being dynamic in nature, the 
                                                 
6  Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jammu & Ka shmir, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan,  Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. 
7 Assam, Bihar, Gujarat,  Jharkhand, Kerala, Manipur and Uttar Pradesh. 
8  Government of India had launched a new Scheme ‘In tegrated Power Development Scheme’ (IPDS) in December 
2014 and R-APDRP scheme, as approved by CCEA for continuation in XII and XIII Plans, was subsumed in this 
scheme as a separate component relating to IT enablement of distribution sector and strengthening of distribution 
network. 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     28     
        
requirement of meters / modems etc. varies, dependi ng upon the expansion of the 
system. 
The assurance of MOP regarding correction in IPDS g uidelines is noted. While 
requirements of distribution systems could indeed b e dynamic, the limits of such 
variations had been laid down in the R-APDRP guidel ines which ought to have been 
adhered to. 
4.8  Data Centre and Disaster Recovery Centre 
In the eighth meeting of Steering Committee held on  13 February 2009, it was decided 
that each state will have one data centre (DC) for all the Utilities in the state and also 
one Disaster Recovery Centre (DRC). The DC and DRC were required to be located in 
different seismic zones to ensure safety of the dat a in at least one place in case of 
natural disasters like earthquakes etc. In the 14 th  meeting of the Steering Committee 
held on 26 November 2009, it was decided that State s falling entirely in one seismic 
zone may be allowed to have both the DC and the DRC  in the same seismic zone 
provided DRC is hosted in an earthquake resistant b uilding. It was seen that these 
guidelines were not followed in some states as indicated below:  
• The initial proposal was for setting up DRC for Assam at Kolkata in a different 
seismic zone. However, during actual execution, the  location of DRC was shifted 
from Kolkata to Agartala which was in the same seis mic zone as the DC 
(Guwahati). The reason for shifting the location of  DRC from Zone-III to Zone-V 
was not available on record. Further, the capabilit y of the DRC building to 
withstand the earthquakes was not verified/ certified. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that common DC and DRC for NER region are located 
at Guwahati and Agartala respectively. It was added that the Utility has confirmed 
to the PFC that the DRC building is structurally sound and  would assess the earth 
quake resistance parameter of the DRC building in c onsultation with the State 
Public Works Department (PWD) and take remedial mea sures as per their 
suggestions.  
• In Jharkhand,  the DC  and DRC were in the same seismic zone. Fur ther, the 
absence of proper maintenance and deficiency in the  infrastructure may impede 
continuous operation of the DC and DRC. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     29      
        
MOP accepted the facts and stated (March 2016) that  the issue may be taken up 
with the Utility. 
4.9  Non – adoption of turnkey contracting 
Para 4.3 of the QA envisaged that the Utility shall  implement Part A projects 
sanctioned under this programme on turnkey basis by  appointing the IT implementing 
agency (ITIA). Para 4.4 of the QA envisaged that Pa rt B projects would also be 
implemented on turnkey basis.  
It was, however, observed that in seven States 
9, the Utilities did not award contracts on 
turnkey basis or got the works executed on partial turnkey basis, thereby negating the 
purpose of turnkey contracting, viz., identificatio n of single point responsibility. The 
State wise deficiencies noticed during audit examin ation are given in Annexure - XI . It 
is pertinent to mention here that non- adoption of turnkey contracting was highlighted 
in the CAG’s Report no. 16 of 2007 on APDRP scheme and the Public Accounts 
Committee in its 77 th  Report (14 th  Lok Sabha) had also recommended that during XI 
Plan period, the projects should be awarded only on turnkey basis.   
 
MOP, while accepting the observation, stated (March  2016) that under R-APDRP 
guidelines, Part B projects were to be implemented preferably on turnkey basis. It was 
added that Utilities decide the mode of implementat ion of projects based on their 
experiences/expertise/field conditions/ packaging.  
The reply of MOP is not acceptable as Para 4.4 of t he Model Quadripartite Agreement 
clearly stipulated that ‘Utility shall prepare DPRs  of Part B projects in-house or by 
appointing the Consultant from the panel prepared by the Nodal Agency and implement 
the same on turnkey basis’. 
4.10  Additional expenditure due to re-tendering 
Additional expenditure had to be incurred in three States to the tune of ` 61.31 crores 
due to re-tendering as detailed below: 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
9 Assam, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharash tra, Telangana and Sikkim 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     30     
        
Table 7 :  Cases of extra expenditure due to re-tendering 
                (` (` (` (`    in crore) 
State Excess 
expenditure  
Reason for re – tendering 
Haryana 55.59  Non – finalisation of tender within the bid validity 
period due to seeking of  clarification on negotiat ion 
with L-1 from PFC by  DISCOM .  
Karnataka 4.70  Earlier tender cancelled by Board of Directors with out 
documenting any reason and same work was awarded 
on single tender basis. 
Tripura 1.02 Utility had erroneously invited restri cted tenders which 
were cancelled on the instructions of Board of 
Directors. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that PFC is restricting rel ease of funds to sanctioned cost or 
awarded cost, whichever is lower. 
While the assurance of MOP is noted, it does not ad dress situations where inefficiency 
on part of the contracting Utilities has resulted in additional costs though the sanctioned 
cost for the project has not been breached. 
 
4.11  Different rates for same items 
It was seen during Audit that the works were awarde d to contractors at different rates 
for same items of work being executed in the same S tate at the same time as detailed 
below: 
Table 8 :  Extra Expenditure due to different rates for same items 
(( ((`` ``    in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
State Work Extra 
Expenditure 
1 Assam Dibrugarh and Mangaldoi Electrical Circles  
(4 project areas each) 
3.94 
2 Bihar Part B works of Patna town (Package B & C) 7.07 
3 Punjab Cost of transformers in Ludhiana East and 
Ludhiana West 
4.83 
4 Tamil 
Nadu 
Distribution strengthening works for Chennai 
(North) and Chennai (South) 
1.52 
MOP stated (March 2016) that PFC had not prescribed  any Standard Bidding 
Documents for Part B works. Utilities are adopting their own Bidding Documents for 
award of Part B Projects.  
The reply needs to be considered in the context of lack of due diligence on part of the 
Utility before tendering of work. This aspect needs  to be adequately identified through 
the mechanisms laid down by MOP.   

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     31      
        
4.12    Shortcomings in contract entered into by Utilities 
In following cases, the conditions of the contract were not adhered to:  
Assam 
In Nagaon Electrical Circle, the Utility awarded th e work on the basis of lump sum 
prices. However, during actual execution, material worth 
` 0.63 crore was not supplied 
by the Contractor and had to be arranged by the Uti lity at its own cost. Since, the 
tenders were evaluated based on the lump sum prices  for the entire scope, the decision 
of the Utility to supply material at its own cost w as not justified and resulted in 
extension of undue benefit to the contractor. 
Sikkim 
• Energy and Power Department (EPD) had appointed Nat ional Power Training 
Institute (NPTI)  for preparation of DPRs for Part B project. The agreement 
prohibited the transfer or assignment of work either wholly or in part, by any party 
without the written consent of the other party. How ever, NPTI assigned the 
contract to M/s. Feedback Ventures Private Limited. 
• EPD awarded the installation of feeder panels at 66 /11 KV Switch Yard at 5 
th  
Mile and 11/11 KV Switch Yard at Deorali to Sinhal Infrastructure. However, 
physical verification at Upper Tadong indicated tha t the work had been done by a 
contractor, M/s Pema Thutem Sherpa  instead of Sinh al Infrastructure in violation 
of the Agreement. 
Tamil Nadu 
The strengthening of distribution works at Dindigul , Pudukottai and Aranthangi was 
awarded to IVRCL Limited for a gross value of 
` 38.71 crore to be completed by 27 
June 2013. As the contractor failed to show any pro gress even after nine months from 
the scheduled date of completion, the contract was terminated in November 2014. 
Subsequently the work was awarded to M/s. Herodex P ower System Private Limited, 
Nasik for ` 42.98 crore. However the contract with IVRCL Limit ed did not provide for 
recovery of the differential cost from the defaulti ng contractor and as such, the extra 
cost incurred by the Utility could not be recovered.   
 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     32     
        
Tripura 
The work pertaining to implementation of Part B pro ject under Indranagar Project Area 
was awarded (14 October 2014) to M/s Horizon Hi-tec h Engicon Limited at a cost of  
` 1.62 crore. The agreement provided that the contra ctor could not assign or sub-let the 
contract without obtaining written approval of the Engineer in charge. A scrutiny of the 
records revealed that some materials were issued to  M/s JMP technical services who 
was the sub-contractor of M/s Horizon Hi-tech Engic on Limited. However, the Utility 
was unable to produce any document where approval w as given to the contractor to 
sub-let the contract. 
MOP (March 2016) did not offer any comments on thes e observations and stated that 
they are issues between the Utilities and the Contractor.  
The reply of MOP needs to be seen in light of the f act that the breach of contract 
conditions may lead to cost escalations which would  adversely impact the R-APDRP 
programme. This needs to be monitored by the MOP to  ensure effective 
implementation of the scheme.  
4.13  Quality Control 
The observations of Audit with respect to the quali ty of material used in the projects 
executed under the R-APDRP are presented below:  
4.13.1 Concerns regarding procurement of material b y Utilities 
In the following instances, Audit noticed procureme nt of material by Utilities which 
were not as per approved DPR specifications: 
• In Andhra Pradesh , against the  requirement of  92 Category B meters  (Boundary 
Meters) 7,350  Category B meters were procured (Jul y & September 2011). 
Subsequently it was decided (December 2012) to conv ert them into Category C 
meters (HT consumer meters) resulting in avoidable additional cost of 
` 0.40 crore.  
•  In Meghalaya ,  Meghalaya Energy Corporation Limited (MeECL) pro cured 
Category B meters instead of Category C meters resu lting in unfruitful expenditure 
of ` 0.50 crore. 
• In Bihar , the Utility awarded a contract for supply of 10 M VA power transformers 
at a cost of ` 8.05 crore on the basis of test report of  Central  Power Research 
Institute (CPRI) which was found to have been manipulated by the contractor.  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     33      
        
• In Punjab , for execution of Part B project on turnkey basis,  Punjab State Power 
Corporation Limited (PSPCL) had, inter alia, issued  (May 2013) four work orders 
to M/s L&T Limited which required radiators in the transformers to be Electric 
Resistance Welded (ERW) elliptical “tube type”. How ever, at the request of the 
contractor, the type of radiators of  the 500 KVA a nd 200 KVA transformers were 
changed from ERW elliptical “tube type” to “fin typ e” despite the fact that PSPCL 
had itself stopped purchase of distribution transfo rmers with “fin type” radiators 
due to oil leakage problems.  
MOP did not offer any comments on the audit observations.  
 
4.13.2  Failure of the items/systems leading to delay in completion of the projects 
Instances of failure of items/systems leading to de lay in completion of projects were 
noticed in following States as indicated below.  
• In Karnataka , as per Request For Proposal (RFP), a total of 59,520 GPRS modems 
had to be supplied by the ITIA for all  Electricity  Supply Companies (ESCOMs), 
which increased to 84,640 during survey. After inst allation of modems, problems 
were noticed in communication of information through the modems and there was a 
high failure rate. The matter was referred to Centr al Power Research Institute by 
Bangalore Electricity Supply Company (BESCOM) to id entify the reasons for 
failure of modems. Though the Utility followed up t he issue of poor quality of 
modems, the entire process took one year and nine m onths for new modems to be 
installed, thereby delaying the Scheme and delaying  analysis of the results of meter 
readings including analyzing AT&C losses.  
• In Meghalaya , out of 1,467 modems installed, 745 modems were no t functioning. 
Five out of 19 Data Collection Units (DCUs) install ed were not sending data to the 
Data Centre. This has resulted in delay in completion of the project. 
• In Madhya Pradesh , at selected towns, materials such as distribution  transformers 
(DT), cables, meters, polymer pin insulators etc., valuing 
` 1.87 crore, installed 
under Part B works were found to be defective but were not replaced.  
• In Tripura , in  Part B Schemes for three project areas, the d istribution transformers 
(DTs) were guaranteed for a period of 18 months fro m the date of receipt of 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     34     
        
materials in stores or 12 months from the date of i nstallation. Out of the 80 DTs 
supplied under the agreement, six DTs were found da maged within the guarantee 
period. However, DTs were not repaired by the supplier (October 2015). 
• In Uttar Pradesh , several incidents of poor performance of CCB Serv er had been 
reported in October 2014, January 2015 and February  2015. By March 2015, the 
problem had escalated but no Root Cause Analysis (R CA) 10  was done despite 
recommendation of IT Consultant (ITC).  
MOP did not offer any comments on the audit observations.  
4.14  Non-obtaining of suitable guarantees   
It was seen that suitable guarantees were not obtai ned from the contractor for 
satisfactory functioning of the system after completion of the work in three States 11 .  
Manipur 
• Letters of Awards (LOAs) for implementation of Part -B projects were issued 
(September 2013) to nine Turn Key Firms (TKFs) at t otal contract value of  
` 357.16 crore, which, inter alia ,  stipulated that 15 per cent  Contract Performance 
Guarantee (CPG) were required 12  to be furnished by the executing firms before 
commencement of work. However, the TKFs were allowe d to execute the works 
without furnishing the required performance guarant ee in violation of the terms of 
LOAs.  
• Para 11 of LOA issued to M/s TCS for implementation  of Part A projects stipulated 
that the firm should furnish bank guarantee from an y Scheduled Commercial Bank 
towards performance guarantee at the rate of 10 per cent  of the contract price. 
However, M/s TCS did not submit the required bank guarantee.  
Utility stated that the TKFs were asked to submit the performance guarantee, failing 
which an amount equivalent to 15 per cent  of the contract price will be retained up 
                                                 
10   Root cause analysis (RCA) is a method of problem solv ing used for identifying the root causes of faults or 
problems. 
11  Manipur, Rajasthan and Tripura. 
12  Para 7.4 of LOAs for implementation of R-APDRP (Par t-B projects) also provides that Contract Performance  
Guarantee (CPG) at the rate of 15 per cent  of the contract price shall be furnished by the Turn Key Firms (TKFs) 
and the guarantee shall be valid up to 90 days afte r the end of Warranty period as specified in the bi dding 
document.  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     35      
        
to 90 days after the end of the warranty period. Th e reply is not acceptable as the 
company was required to collect the performance gua rantee before commencement 
of work.  
Rajasthan 
Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited (JVVNL) in four turnkey contracts and Ajmer 
Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited (AVVNL) in two turnkey contracts, accepted a lower 
composite bank guarantee than the 10 per cent  performance bank guarantee mandated 
in the model DPR.  JVVNL and the Jodhpur Vidyut Vit ran Nigam Limited (JdVVNL) 
also awarded  Part B projects on turnkey/ Central L abour Rate Contract (CLRC) basis 
with work order value of 
` 78.67 crore where performance guarantee at the rat e of five 
per cent  of the value of work order was obtained instead of 10 per cent .  
Tripura 
• The Utility did not obtain suitable guarantee from the contractors, for satisfactory 
functioning of the system after completion of the work, as detailed below: 
 Contracts for supply of 6 sq. mm Polyvinyl chloride  (PVC) Cable for 
implementation of Part-B works were awarded (June 2 014) to two contractors. 
Though the Utility allowed its contractors to submi t 50 per cent  of the 
performance guarantee in the form of Bank Guarantee  and the balance 50 per 
cent  as deductions from running bills; the same were no t adhered to and these 
contractors were permitted to remit the entire amou nt of Contract Performance 
Guarantee (CPG) by way of pro-rata deductions from their running bills. As 
the contractors did not supply any material, the Ut ility did not have any scope 
for taking action on the contractors.  
 Further, the LOA issued to the contractors for impl ementation of various 
works under R-APDRP scheme stipulated, inter alia , that the successful bidder 
has to furnish CPG which was to be kept valid for 1 2 calendar months 
commencing immediately upon the satisfactory commis sioning. It was 
observed that in nine out of the 16 project areas, the Bank Guarantees (BG) of 
` 0.48 crore provided by the contractors expired befo re completion of the 
commissioning work.  

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     36     
        
MOP did not offer (March 2016) any comments on the observations but stated that 
implementation of Part A projects shall be treated as complete after verification by 
TPIEA-IT as per guidelines and accordingly conversi on of loan into grant will depend 
upon satisfactory completion as verified by TPIEA-I T. Hence, all the issues related 
with Part A shall have to be addressed by Utilities  before/during verification by 
TPIEA-IT so as to enable them to avail the benefit of conversion of loan into grant. In 
respect of Part B projects, it was stated that the conversion of loan into grant will 
depend upon Utilities achieving the AT&C loss reduc tion as per guidelines which will 
be duly verified by the Third Party Independent Eva luation Agency -Energy 
Accounting (TPIEA-EA) one year after completion of Part A IT and completion of Part 
B. Therefore, all the issues related with Part B shall have to be addressed by Utilities so 
as to enable them to avail the benefit of conversion of loan into grant. 
The reply of MOP should be seen in light of the fac t that bank guarantee was required 
to be obtained to ensure satisfactory completion of  work by the contractors which is 
necessary for the achievement of the objectives of the scheme. 
4.15  Inadequate Training to Employees of State Utilities  as Capacity Building 
measures 
As a part of Capacity Building measures, PFC empane lled 10 Partner Training 
Institutes (PTI) for imparting training to Level A& B employees of State Utilities (SUs) 
and 24 PTIs for imparting training to Level C&D emp loyees of various SUs on 
different training themes. Specific themes of train ing were earmarked for each level of 
employees. 
PFC incurred 
`4.56 crore on training of Level A & B employees and  ` 17.47 crore on 
imparting training to Level C & D employees till March 2015. Audit observed that:  
• No training was imparted to any Level A & B employe e on the theme ‘Disaster 
Management, Electrical Safety Procedures and Accident Prevention’.  
• Similarly, training on ‘Metering technology & Autom atic Meter Reading (AMR) 
Application’ was not imparted to any Level C&D grade employees; and  
• In Gujarat  and Uttar Pradesh  no Level C&D employees were imparted any 
training and no training was provided to any of the  employees of Level A&B in 
Manipur  and Sikkim .  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     37      
        
Lack of trained employees would affect smooth imple mentation of the Scheme in the 
States. 
PFC stated (October 2015) that no training was impa rted as two PTIs empanelled for 
the above themes had not shown interest in conducti ng the programme and also for  
want of nominations from Utilities. PFC further sta ted (February 2016) that PFC 
identified various themes in a holistic manner that  would be useful for the personnel of 
the SU engaged in implementation of scheme. It shou ld be appreciated that themes 
were identified without taking into account IT capa bilities of Utilities which varied 
from State to State depending upon their existing I T preparedness. It was added that 
within these identified themes, Utilities decided a bout their training needs based on 
their IT preparedness and sought training of their personnel accordingly from PFC. 
That these programmes helped in implementation of t he scheme is visible by the fact 
that 1,121 towns (in 25 States) out of 1,409 across  States have been declared ‘Go-Live’ 
under Part-A and 19 out of 21 data centres and 297 out of 1,258 towns have been 
declared completed under Part-B. Moreover, 14 States (including Andhra Pradesh  and 
Maharashtra ) have since declared ‘Go Live’ for all their towns  which are 
communicating with Data Centres. 
This does not address the concern that trainings wh ich were identified were not 
imparted. Further, 1,121 towns were declared ‘Go-Li ve’ by state Utilities without any 
TPIEA verification which is still pending and thus the accuracy of the claims cannot be 
assured.  
4.16  ‘Go Live’ projects 
Audit noticed that State Utilities had declared a n umber of Part A projects ‘Go Live’ 
though as per the project details available with MO P, none of them had yet been 
verified by TPIEA which was a pre-requisite for pro ject completion.  Of 1,412 towns  
where Part A projects were implemented, 1,121 towns  (79 per cent ), had been declared 
‘Go Live’ as on November 2015.  
Audit noticed the following in the context of decla ration of ‘Go Live’ in these projects 
on the basis of a test check:  

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     38     
        
• MOP/ PFC had not set any benchmarks for declaration  of ‘Go Live’ for the 
towns. In the absence of such benchmarks or verific ation by TPIEAs, the basis 
for declaration of ‘Go Live’ remained unclear. 
• Audit noticed that even projects where expenditure incurred has been lower 
than 30 per cent have been declared ‘Go Live’. The accuracy of the d eclaration 
needs to be viewed against the meagre expenditure on the projects.  
• The installation of meters was not complete (as ela borated in Para 5.5.1 of the 
report) in the towns declared ‘Go Live’. 
• The percentage of communication of data by meters w as found to be less than 
85 per cent  in eight States 13 .  
• As per the letter sent by Telangana  and Andhra Pradesh  Utilities to PFC 
intimating the declaration of towns as ‘Go Live’, i t was mentioned that they 
were fine tuning the consumer indexing and handling , rectifying the meter side 
issues and that the energy audit reports were gradually being streamlined. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that as per guidelines, com pletion of Part A project will be 
verified by Third Party Independent Evaluation Agen cy (TPIEA-IT) for declaring 
completion of Part A projects. The completion of Pa rt A project declaration will have 
to be done for the whole State by the TPIEA-IT afte r completion of all towns within a 
State. Currently, verification process by TPIEA-IT is going-on in various States 
wherever 100 per cent  towns have been declared Go-Live. Go-Live declarat ion made 
by the Utilities is an intermediate stage towards p roject completion. Utility being the 
owner of the project are declaring Go-live to their  satisfaction. Payment schedule of 
ITIAs implementing Part A projects in various State s is back loaded to the extent of 
about 40 per cent  of contract value, due to which there is a mismatc h between physical 
completion of projects and payments made to ITIA in many States. 
The reply of MOP only confirms that neither MOP nor PFC have verified the ‘Go Live’ 
status in the part A projects but have depended ent irely on the statement furnished by 
the Utility, which does not appear to be reliable a s brought out above. Further, though 
                                                 
13   Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,  Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and 
Telangana. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     39      
        
nearly 79 per cent  of the projects have been declared as ‘Go Live’, i t was seen that in a 
number of projects, the AT&C losses have not been g enerated or have increased as 
brought out in the subsequent chapters. Even consid ering that payments to ITIAs were 
back loaded up to 40 per cent , the actual expenditure in some of the projects de clared 
‘Go Live’ were as low as 3-19 per cent  (in 6 projects) and 20-30  per cent (183 projects) 
as detailed in Annexure – XII . 
Recommendation 
3.  Ministry should consider evolving a mechanism of re porting of achievement of 
milestones vis-à-vis targets by state utilities alo ng with reasons for non-
achievement and action taken. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     41     
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.1 AT&C Losses 
The Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT&C) Losses comprise of two elements:-  
• Technical Losses: Technical losses primarily take p lace due to (a) transformation 
losses (at various transformation levels) and (b) h igh losses on distribution lines 
due to inherent resistance and poor power factor in the electrical network.  
• Commercial Losses: Any illegal consumption of elect rical energy, which is not 
correctly metered, billed and revenue collected, ca uses commercial losses to the 
utilities. Commercial losses occur due to (i)  disc repancy in meter (ii) theft by 
direct hooking  and (iii) collection inefficiency. 
The reduction of the AT&C losses was one of the imp ortant objectives of the APDRP 
scheme. However, the same could not be achieved as brought out in CAG’s Report no. 
16 of 2007. R-APDRP scheme also aimed at reducing t he AT&C losses to below 
15 per cent on a sustainable basis.  
Out of 1,121 towns which had declared ‘Go Live’, 97 6 towns had submitted reports on 
AT & C losses. 749 of these towns (77 per cent) had reported a reduction in AT & C 
losses with reference to base line data. Audit, how ever, noticed that this information 
was provided by the Utilities without having been v erified by any third party. Even 
PFC did not have any mechanism to verify the correc tness of AT&C losses being 
reported by state utilities. 
In the Audit sample of 596 towns, ‘Go-live’ had bee n declared in 444 towns.  Audit 
noticed the following status of AT&C losses in these towns: 
• Though baseline data was established in all the 444  towns, AT&C losses were 
not available/were not generated in 43 towns. 
 
5 
Chapter 
Aggregate Technical & 
Commercial Losses 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     42     
        
• In the balance 401 towns, the AT&C losses had decre ased only in 298 towns.  
AT&C losses actually increased in 102 towns while i t remained unchanged in 
one town. 
In the other 152 towns where ‘Go-live’ had not been  declared, AT&C losses were not 
available/were not generated in 143 towns (for 43 o f which, baseline data was also not 
established). In the balance nine towns, AT&C losse s decreased in three while it 
increased in the other six towns.   
Thus, in the Audit sample, it can be seen that AT&C losses have increased in more than 
100 towns (23 per cent) relative to the baseline. AT&C losses could not be generated at 
all in another 43 which rendered the process of declaration of ‘Go Live’ doubtful. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that the high AT&C loss sho wn in these towns may be due 
to correct energy data not being captured due to fa ulty meter, modem and 
communication failure issues, error in billing and collection data and increase in 
commercial losses due to pilferage. PFC, however, o n its part is monitoring town-wise 
AT&C losses based on system generated data uploaded  by the Utilities on IPDS 
website and Utilities are informed for sanitization  of data as well as taking 
administrative and other measures for reduction of losses. These reports are also 
discussed in monthly Review Planning and Monitoring  (RPM) meeting of the MOP. 
Further, regarding non-reliability of Go-Live repor ts submitted by Utilities, it is stated 
that after declaration of Go-Live, Utilities are su bmitting system generated Go-Live 
reports without any manual interventions thereby gi ving enough assurance about their 
reliability. 
The reply of MOP suggested that the towns were decl ared as ‘Go Live’ without 
ensuring stability of the systems and verifying tha t the systems are communicating 
accurate information. The objective of R-APDRP was to reduce AT&C Losses as well 
as to have reliable data of AT&C Losses which does not appear to have been achieved. 
Further, it was noted in many cases that the data i s not being communicated 
automatically.  
 
 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     43     
        
5.2 Verification of baseline data by the TPIEAs 
It was seen from the records furnished by the Utili ties that the AT&C losses were not 
completely verified by the TPIEAs in five States14. The verification of the base AT & C 
losses and the yearly losses was required, to ascer tain status before the scheme and the 
progress under the scheme. The failure to do so wou ld make it difficult to verify the 
progress of the scheme to ascertain whether any mid -course corrective measures were 
required. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that at present baseline data has been established in all States 
except Goa (4 Towns), J&K (17 Towns), Puducherry (4  Towns), Bihar (24 Towns), 
Jharkhand (11 Towns), Arunachal Pradesh (2 Towns), Mizoram (1 Town), Odisha (12 
Towns) which are also expected to be completed soon . It was stated that the process is 
being monitored regularly by PFC/MOP and added that  the validation of yearly AT&C 
loss figures was to be done one year after completi on of Part A (IT) as well as 
completion of Part B for the purpose of conversion of Part B loan into Grant as per  
R-APDRP guidelines which is not due yet.  
In this regard, it is to be noted that the evaluati on of the AT&C figures was to be done 
every year, which was to commence  one year after t he Part B projects were taken up 
and not after the completion of the Part B projects  as stated by the MOP. Hence, the 
evaluation of AT&C losses is due but has not yet be en done and the baseline data itself 
has not been collected before the project was taken up. Further, it is seen that the details 
of the verification of baseline data furnished by t he Utilities and by the MOP are not 
tallying, raising questions about the validity of the data. 
5.3 Unreliable data of AT & C losses 
The PAC, in their 77 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha), had expressed displeasure over 
significant deficiencies in the maintenance of reco rds relating to AT&C losses 
including absence of proper guidelines and supporti ng records resulting in the data 
reported by MOP not being regarded as authentic, ac curate and acceptable. Further, the 
Standing Committee on Energy 2012-13 (15 th Lok Sabha), while noting that PFC has 
been mandated to maintain AT&C losses data, stated that it was unable to comprehend 
as to whether the data can vary on year to year bas is. The Committee directed the 
                                                 
14  Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya and Pudu cherry. 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     44     
        
Ministry to monitor this vital aspect and also incl ude a statement of State-wise AT&C 
losses in the Annual Report of the Ministry on annu al basis as it was the basis for 
approval of projects under national programmes like  R-APDRP, National Electricity 
Fund Scheme and a new scheme for financial assistance to DISCOMs. 
It was, however, observed that despite the observat ions of the PAC and the Standing 
Committee on authenticity of AT&C loss data, there were differences in the figures of 
AT&C losses for the same years reflected in various documents, namely: 
• (i) Report of 14 th Standing Committee on Energy (2010-11) submitted t o 
Parliament in March 201115  
(ii) XII Five Year Plan document,  
(iii) Annex referred to in reply to parts (c) & (d)  of unstarred question no. 5892 
answered in the Lok Sabha on 02 May 2013 and  
(iv) Report of the 5 th Standing Committee on Energy 2014-15 Sixteenth Lok  
Sabha submitted to Parliament in April 2015 
 (v) Report on "The Performance of State Power Util ities for the years 2011-12 to 
2013-14" (July 2015) 
The data on  AT&C losses for the years 2008 – 09, 2 009 – 10 and 2010 – 11 is 
presented as Annexure - XIII  while the data for the years 2011 – 12 and 2012 – 13 is 
presented as Annexure XIV. Further, the Standing Committee’s direction to in clude a 
statement of State-wise AT&C losses in the Annual R eport of the Ministry on annual 
basis was not complied with. 
It can be concluded from the above that PFC and MOP  did not comply with the 
directions of the PAC and the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Energy and do not 
yet have authenticated figures of AT&C losses for various states. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that though the  methodolog y for calculation of AT&C 
losses is uniform, the AT&C losses for previous year may undergo changes when:  
• The utility sends revised information with respect to parameters not available in 
the annual accounts. 
                                                 
15  For 2008-09 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     45     
        
• The audited accounts have been received subsequentl y and the information 
contained therein is not the same as in the provisional accounts.  
• Resource Plans contain information for three years.  If there is a change in 
information for previous two years, the entire data  is updated and all parameters 
including AT&C losses are recalculated. 
Since, the information was submitted to Standing Co mmittee/ Ministry of Power/ CEA 
as per the latest updated information as on date, t he AT&C losses vary in different 
documents. 
The reply of MOP needs to be seen in light of the f act that there were differences in the 
data obtained from different sources pertaining to older periods which was not 
expected. For instance, the data for the year 2008 – 09 presented in April 2015 (after 
seven years) was different from the data presented in May 2013 (after four years). 
Authentic figures of AT&C losses, thus, do not appe ar to be available with MOP 
though it was to be the basis for achieving the basic objectives of R-APDRP. 
5.4 Discrepancies in computation of AT&C losses   
During 22nd Steering Committee Meeting held on 22 February 2011, it was decided that 
CEA will carry out the sample check of base AT&C lo ss of towns verified by TPIEA-
EA, particularly where the variations are found to be large. CEA had conducted test 
check of AT&C losses of 243 projects in four states  and found variations ranging up to 
5 per cent in 116 projects and more than 10 per cent in 52 projects. The variations were 
stated to be on account of change in area of comput ation of AT&C losses, non-
completion of ring fencing, variation in computatio n methods, consideration of 
different period spells for computation of AT&C los ses and time lag between 
preparation of DPRs and computation of AT&C losses.  
Audit observed that the methodology for calculation  of AT&C losses was prepared by 
PFC during September 2009 and circulated to all the  State utilities. As such, all utilities 
should assess AT&C losses in a uniform manner. It w as seen that PFC did not verify 
the adherence to prescribed method for computation of AT&C losses. Audit noticed 
that the methodology is not being uniformly followed  as brought out below: 
 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     46     
        
Andhra Pradesh 
In Andhra Pradesh, meters and modems were fixed at 11 KV feeders emerging 
from 33/11 KV sub-stations instead of at the input points of 33/11 KV sub-stations 
which was in contravention of clause 3.1.1 of ‘Base  Line Methodology for 
calculation of AT&C losses’. Further, this system d id not calculate the losses 
arising due to stepping down the power from 33 KV to 11 KV.  
Meghalaya 
o In respect of all the towns where base line AT&C lo sses were fixed by Water 
and Power Consultancy Services (WAPCOS), it was obs erved that the 
collection efficiency was calculated without consid ering the previous months’ 
arrears which resulted in higher collection efficiency and less AT&C losses than 
the actual. 
o In respect of Jowai, Resubelpara, Williamnagar and Mairang towns, AT&C 
losses were fixed based on erroneous energy input a nd output figure as the 
33KV & 11 KV CT PT sets were defective. 
o In respect of Shillong and Mairang towns, the AT&C losses were fixed based 
on energy input and output as measured by old meter s installed in 11KV and 
33KV feeders and export and import points which wer e not as per the 
specification approved for R-APDRP projects. 
MOP stated (March 2016) that the methodology for es tablishment of baseline data has 
been applied uniformly across various States. The b aseline of town areas has been 
established through TPIEA using the same methodology uniformly.  
The contention of the Ministry is not acceptable in  light of the audit findings listed 
above. 
5.5 Energy Accounting and Audit 
Energy accounting involves preparation of accounts of the energy flow to various 
segments and various categories of consumers and how it has been consumed out of the 
total available quantum over a specified time perio d. Energy audit involves analysis of 
energy accounting data in a meaningful manner to ev olve measures to introduce checks 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     47     
        
and balances in the system to reduce leakages and l osses and also to improve technical 
performance. In order to achieve effective energy a ccounting and audit, it is imperative 
that meters are installed at all levels, i.e., feed er, distribution transformers and 
consumers, meter readings are taken regularly and r econciled, and proper consumer 
indexing is done through GIS mapping and linked to the billing system so that loss 
pockets are identified and corrective measures take n. Energy accounting is not a 
onetime exercise but is to be done on a continuous basis. 
As per the recommendations in CAG’s Report no. 16 o f 2007, a system of energy 
accounting and audit was to be developed to ensure that the AT & C losses were 
estimated correctly and the impact of the correctiv e measures was measured accurately. 
The PAC had also, in their 77 th Report (14th Lok Sabha), observed that one of the most 
important pre-requisites for ensuring reduction of commercial losses, with relatively 
lower capital investment, is comprehensive energy a ccounting and audit, which would 
enable quantification of losses in different segments of the system and their segregation 
into commercial and technical losses. The Committee  also observed that effective 
energy accounting and auditing was not being carrie d out in most States due to lack of 
100 per cent system metering, lack of accountability at the cir cle and feeder level and 
low progress in respect of IT enabling activities s uch as consumer indexing, digital 
mapping, Automated Meter Reading instruments, Data Loggers etc. The metering of all 
the electricity connections and the subsequent bill ing on the basis of the units metered 
rather than lump sum billing on assessment basis wo uld improve the billing efficiency 
and help in reducing the AT&C losses.  
R-APDRP envisaged establishment of authenticated ba seline data. All assets and 
consumers were to be mapped and indexed, Feeder and  Distribution Transformer 
(FDT) meters and bulk consumer meters were to be re ad remotely and the base-line 
data was to be validated through independent audito rs to be appointed by MOP. 
Mapping of assets and consumers would enable Utilit ies identify specific areas where 
electricity was being pilfered which would, in turn , enable them to take targeted 
corrective measures for reduction of AT&C losses. 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     48     
        
Audit noticed that energy accounting and audit was not being done in 12 States 16 while 
in another 13 States 17, the data for energy accounting and audit was bein g collected 
manually raising concerns about its reliability and  accuracy. It was observed that the 
main reason for not conducting energy accounting an d audit was the non – completion 
of Part A projects and the non – integration of different modules for collection of data.  
MOP stated (March 2016) that as of January 2016, Ut ilities have uploaded IT system 
generated (without manual intervention) energy audi t reports of 1,069 towns out of 
1,164 Go-Live towns in 25 States and hence considered as reliable. 
The reply of MOP is not tenable in light of audit findings indicated below: 
• Andhra Pradesh and Telangana : Communication of meters was far less than 
100 per cent required for transmission of data without human intervention. 
• Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand : Communication of DT Meters and Feeder 
Meters in many cases was zero per cent. 
• Chhattisgarh: Out of 8,165 General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) modems 
installed under Part A, only 5,733 were communicati ng energy data compelling 
the Utility to fill the gaps in the energy data through manual entries.  
• Himachal Pradesh: 628 PTR/ feeder/ DTR meters were not connected to  online 
communication. 
• Tamil Nadu: No Energy Audit Reports could be generated throug h Auto Mode 
even in February 2016. 
The fact is that energy accounting and audit is eit her not being done or being done with 
manual intervention raising concern about their authenticity. 
The status of the various components required for e nergy accounting and audit is 
presented in the following paragraphs: 
 
 
                                                 
16  Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,   Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, 
Puducherry, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh 
17 Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Ja mmu & Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Manipur, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura and West Bengal 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     49     
        
5.5.1 Metering 
Implementation of 100 per cent metering of feeders, Distribution Transformers (DT ) 
and consumers is a pre – requisite to ensure proper  energy accounting and auditing. 
Metering would ensure that energy supplied is prope rly accounted for and accurately 
billed. It is essential that metering is at all the  levels, namely, the feeder level, the 
distribution transformer level and the consumer lev el to ensure a proper trail of the 
supply of energy which would help in better energy accounting and audit.  
The State wise status of feeder, DT and consumer me tering is given in Annexure XV 
and Annexure XVI respectively. Audit observed that in the 29 States  where sample 
check was carried out, the metering remained incomplete as seen from the table below: 
Table 9 : Status of feeder, DT and consumer metering 
Sl. 
No. 
Percentage of 
metering 
Number of States 
11KV feeders metering DT metering Consumer 
metering 
1.  0-60 2 8 2 
2.  60-80 2 8 2 
3.  80-100 24 12 22 
4.  Data not available 1 1 3 
As can be seen from the table, the metering in some States were below 60 per cent.   
MOP in their reply (March 2016) stated that under R -APDRP, Part A (IT) projects, 
online energy accounting up to DT level (feeder met ering / boundary metering / DT 
metering) was envisaged which is monitored by PFC i n respect of Part-A (IT) towns of 
the programme. The details provided by MOP as part of their reply (March 2016) 
indicated that feeder metering was less than 60 per cent  in four 18 States while DT 
metering were less than 60 per cent in five 19 States. Further, MOP could not furnish 
data of feeder metering in respect of four20 States. As regards consumer metering, MOP 
stated that funding towards consumer metering was o nly for replacement of electro – 
mechanical meters/ defective meters and added that Utilities are making every effort to 
achieve 100 per cent consumer metering.  
                                                 
18  0 per cent in Jharkhand, Puducherry, Rajasthan (two utilities) and 40 per cent in Jammu and Kashmir. 
19 Jammu and Kashmir -14 per cent,  Odisha-40 per cent , One utility in Rajasthan -55 per cent , One 
utility in Haryana-56 per cent and Chhattisgarh-57 per cent. 
20  Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Sikkim. 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     50     
        
The reply of MOP only strengthens the audit content ion that 100 per cent  metering is 
yet to be achieved in all States even after eight years of implementation of the scheme.  
5.6 Power sector reforms 
The recommendations in the CAG’s Report No. 16 of 2 007 and the report of the PAC 
thereon dealt mainly with the restructuring of the Power sector, measures for reducing 
AT&C losses like formation of vigilance squads, set ting up of special courts etc. Since 
the R-APDRP was also aimed at achieving similar obj ectives, these measures, though 
not specifically covered in R-APDRP guidelines, wer e equally important for ensuring 
effective implementation of the scheme. The status of achievement of various states in 
respect of these measures is presented in the following paragraphs.  
5.6.1 Special Courts and Vigilance Squads 
Unauthorised connections from the electricity suppl y system, tampering, by-passing of 
meters by the consumers etc., are different modes o f theft of electricity leading to 
AT&C losses. The theft of electricity can be checke d by forming vigilance squads to 
conduct inspection of connections. The speedy trial  of offences relating to theft of 
power would act as a deterrent to repeated acts of theft of electricity. This can be 
achieved through the setting up of special courts a s the existing judicial system is 
already burdened with large number of cases leading to delays. The National Electricity 
Act has also envisaged the setting up of special co urts in each state for speedy trial of 
offences relating to theft of power etc. The format ion of vigilance squads and the 
creation of special courts would help to check thef t of electricity and thereby enable 
reduction of AT&C losses.  
5.6.1.1 Special Courts 
In the course of audit, it was seen that special co urts were not established in Goa, 
Haryana, and Jammu & Kashmir . In Goa, the special courts were not set up as the  
theft cases were stated to be fractional. The reaso ns for not setting up of the special 
courts were not available on record in case of Hary ana and Jammu & Kashmir. The 
state – wise details of setting up of courts, cases of power thefts and other such offences 
noticed and punished is given in Annexure XVII. The status of the cases as observed 
by Audit in the States were as below:  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     51     
        
• In Chhattisgarh, 9,460 cases were pending in the special courts wh ile 1,43,678 
cases were pending with the special courts in Madhya Pradesh and 1,838 cases 
were pending with the special courts in Uttar Pradesh. 
• In Odisha and Tamil Nadu , 2,623 cases and 19 cases were pending in special 
courts respectively, with some cases pending for fi ve years or more. Instances of 
pendency of cases for five years or more in special  courts were also noticed in 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Telangana. 
5.6.1.2 Vigilance Squads 
Audit noticed the following discrepancies in functioning of Vigilance Squads in the 
States: 
• Vigilance Squads had not been set up in Mizoram. The reasons for not constituting 
vigilance squads were not available from the records furnished to Audit.  
• No targets were fixed for the Vigilance Squads in 1 0 States 21.  The details of the 
inspections conducted by the vigilance squads in these States were not furnished.  
• In four States 22, the number of connections checked by the vigilanc e squads were 
less than 2 per cent of the total connections.  
• Theft cases had increased in Chhattisgarh. The trend of theft cases in respect of 
the other states were not provided to Audit. 
 
Recommendations 
4. Ministry may ensure 100 per cent completion of metering so that verification of 
Baseline Data of Aggregate Technical & Commercial l osses is completed, annual 
verification of Aggregate Technical & Commercial lo sses is done and to enable 
effective energy accounting and audit.  
5. Ministry may encourage States to set up the special  courts and vigilance squads, 
based on population of project area, so that speedy  trials of offences act as 
deterrent to theft of electricity thereby reducing the commercial losses. 
  
                                                 
21  Assam, Bihar, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Man ipur, Puducherry, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttarakhand. 
22  Ch hattisgarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala and Uttarakhand. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     53      
        
 
 
 
 
 
One of the objectives of R-APDRP scheme was to impr ove consumer satisfaction. This 
was sought to be achieved through the setting up of  IT – enabled consumer service 
centres, establishment of Customer Service System a nd also by ensuring the quality of 
the electricity supply to the consumers. The observ ations of audit in this regard are 
presented below. 
6.1  Computerisation of Commercial Activities (billing, collection etc.) 
Computerization of commercial activities like billi ng, collection etc. have not been 
completed in two 23  States while in four 24  States, it was implemented only partially. 
Shortcomings in the system were also noticed in Andhra Pradesh . 
6.2  Establishment of Customer Service System (CSS) 
The Customer Service System comprising of computeri sed logging, tracking and 
redressal of customer requests was to be establishe d by the Utilities. However, it was 
seen that the system was not fully established in n ine 25  States. Audit noticed the 
following in the CSS established in the States:  
• Requests for temporary connections, electric addres s maintenance, special 
connection/ disconnection/termination, interface wi th spot metering and billing 
systems, interface with other systems, etc. at Cust omer Service Centres, has not 
been done in six States 
26  while in  Mizoram ,  it had been done partially. 
• It was not possible to make payment of energy bille d through multiple channels in 
six States 27 . 
• The system did not support expeditious disconnectio ns and dismantling to plug 
revenue leakage in 11 States.28  
                                                 
23  Goa and Nagaland. 
24  Jammu & Kashmir, Manipur, Rajasthan and Telangana.  
25  Assam, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir, Meghalaya, Mizoram,  Nagaland, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Tamil 
Nadu. 
26   Goa, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, N agaland  and Rajasthan.  
27  Jammu and Kashmir, Puducherry, Uttar Pradesh, Goa,   Madhya Pradesh and Nagaland. 
28  Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Jammu and Kas hmir, Kerala, Odisha, Puducherry, Rajasthan, 
Sikkim and Tamil Nadu. 
 
6 
Chapter Consumer Satisfaction 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     54     
        
• Metering system did not support functionalities per taining to meter reading and 
generation of exception lists in  five States 29 . 
MOP stated (March 2016) that the issues flagged by Audit with regard to consumer 
satisfaction shall have to be addressed by Utilities before/during verification by TPIEA-
IT so as to enable them to avail the benefit of conversion of loan into grant.  
The reply of MOP indicates that  the establishment of customer service system is not 
being regularly monitored by Ministry/nodal agency.  
6.3  Non-fixation of service connections/replacement wit h high accuracy/tamper 
proof meters  
High accuracy tamper proof meters were required to be provided for all connections as 
they would enable more accurate billing without man ual intervention. This would also 
help in plugging leakages of revenue and in improvi ng the commercial viability of the 
Utilities. It was seen that all the service connect ions were not fixed /replaced with high 
accuracy/tamper proof meters, as contemplated in three States 30 . 
MOP stated (March 2016) that all the issues related  with Part A and Part B shall have 
to be addressed by Utilities before/during verifica tion by TPIEA-IT so as to enable 
them to avail the benefit of conversion of loan into grant.  
The reply of MOP suggested lack of constant monitor ing, the stress being on corrective 
action expected to be taken by the utilities for co nversion of loan to grant at the end of 
project.  
6.4  Non-supply of proper tail end voltage  
The supply of tail end voltage is a measure of the quality of electrical supply. It was 
seen that proper tail end voltage was not supplied in two States 31  while in 15 States, 32  
the projects were yet to start or were in progress. 
MOP reiterated (March 2016) that implementation of Part A projects shall be treated as 
complete after verification by TPIEA-IT as per guid elines and accordingly conversion 
of loan into grant will depend upon satisfactory co mpletion as verified by TPIEA-IT. 
Hence, all the issues related with Part A shall hav e to be addressed by Utilities 
                                                 
29  Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Puducherry, Rajasthan a nd Tamil Nadu. 
30    Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Sikkim . 
31    Meghalaya, and Uttar Pradesh. 
32   Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu & Kash mir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, 
Mizoram Nagaland,  Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     55      
        
before/during verification by TPIEA-IT so as to ena ble them to avail the benefit of 
conversion of loan into grant. In case of Part B pr ojects, conversion of loan into grant 
will depend upon Utilities achieving the AT&C loss reduction as per guidelines which 
will be duly verified by the TPIEA-EA one year afte r completion of Part A IT and 
completion of Part B. Hence, all the issues related  with Part B shall have to be 
addressed by Utilities so as to enable them to avai l the benefit of conversion of loan 
into grant. 
The reply of MOP suggested dependence upon correcti ve action at the end of the 
project implementation rather than constant monitor ing and ensuring that the projects 
are implemented properly.  
  

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     57      
        
 
 
Chapter 1 -   
 
 
7.1  Overview of monitoring 
As per the scheme guidelines, a Steering Committee under Secretary (Power) was to 
sanction projects including modification or revisio n of estimates, monitor and review 
the implementation of the scheme. At the State leve l, a Distribution Reforms 
Committee (DRC) under the Chairmanship of the Chief  Secretary/Principal 
Secretary/Secretary (Power/Energy) constituted by t he State was to monitor the 
Scheme.  
Para 14 of the QA, inter-alia , stipulated that the State Utility shall make avai lable for 
the inspection of the Central Government / Nodal Ag ency or its nominated Agency, all 
the books of accounts and other documents maintaine d by it. Further, the sanction 
letters issued by PFC also required the borrowers t o maintain proper accounts, furnish 
unaudited annual accounts within  three  months and  audited accounts within seven 
months of the close of the year of accounts. Furthe r, Para 12 (h) of the QA, inter-alia, 
stipulated that the Utility would be required to su bmit monthly progress report to the 
PFC / MOP through its web portal in respect of progress of execution of the project and 
fund utilisation. As per Para 3.8 of the QA, PFC  w as to design monitoring formats for 
Part A and Part B projects, analyse the reports, mo nitor the implementation against 
identified milestones and deliverables in Part A and Part B projects for consideration of 
the MOP.  
From the records examined in Audit, it appears that  details of project – wise 
expenditure were not collected and / or verified. Despite monthly review meetings, UCs 
were received for only around 50 per cent  of the disbursement, only the first instalment 
had been released in a significant number of cases,  there were variation in quantities 
during execution, overlapping of schemes, diversion of funds, increase in AT&C losses 
as  highlighted in the preceding chapters of this report. 
 
 
7 
Chapter 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     58     
        
The observations of Audit in this regard are presented in the following paragraphs: 
7.2  Non-monitoring of milestones and targets etc. by DRC 
According to Para 10.2 of the R-APDRP Guidelines, D istribution Reforms Committee 
(DRC) at the State level under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary/Principal 
Secretary/Secretary (Power/Energy) would monitor th e Scheme at the State level. 
These DRCs had been setup under the Memorandum of Agreement signed by the States 
for implementation of the X Plan APDRP. DRC was to recommend the project 
proposals of the distribution companies to the MOP after ensuring that all the required 
formalities had been complied with, monitor complia nce to the conditionalities and 
monitor the achievement of milestones and targets u nder the R-APDRP scheme. States 
were to decide on the periodicity of the meetings o f the DRC to ensure the effective 
discharge of the above functions.  
Audit observed that: 
• The periodicity of meetings of the DRC varied from once in a fortnight to once in a 
year across States.  
• DRC did not monitor milestones and targets under th e scheme or compliance to 
conditionalities in seven 
33  States.  
• DRC met twice in Puducherry  and Jammu & Kashmir ; three times in Assam , 
Tripura  and Manipur ; seven times in Bihar ; and ten times in Tamil Nadu since 
inception.  
MOP (March 2016) did not offer any comments on these observations.  
7.3  Other issues observed at the state level  
Audit analysed the effectiveness of monitoring of p rojects at the state level apart from 
the procedures prescribed in the guidelines. The findings are discussed below: 
• There was no system for monitoring the implementation of projects in Sikkim. 
• In Assam , though the projects were being monitored by the o fficials of the 
Utility as per requirement, no procedure / system f or monitoring had been 
prescribed.  
• In Manipur , the Utility created a Project Monitoring Unit (Ju ne 2014) to 
streamline project monitoring with the requirement of fortnightly meetings to be 
                                                 
33  Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pr adesh, Meghalaya, Sikkim and Telangana. 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     59      
        
mandatorily taken up at the level of Deputy General Managers (DGMs) with the 
Turn Key Firms (TKFs). The DGMs were to send copies  of the minutes of 
Fortnightly Meetings to the General Managers, Execu tive Director (Tech) and 
Managing Director. Further, the TKFs were to increase their manpower and also 
induct staff with managerial capabilities and furni sh the list of manpower 
deployed along with the work execution schedule to the DGMs. Test check of 
records of Divisional offices did not indicate any documentary evidence that 
fortnightly meetings were conducted or manpower dep loyed by the TKFs and 
work execution schedule were collected from the TKFs.  
• In West Bengal , West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Compan y Limited 
(WBSEDCL) constituted (August 2007) Project Apprais al and Monitoring 
Committee (PAMC) to control the different types of projects executed by 
WBSEDCL including R-APDRP scheme. Between January 2 009 and March 
2015, PAMC met on 23 occasions. From a scrutiny of the minutes of PAMC 
meetings, it was observed that R-APDRP was discussed only perfunctorily.   
• The performance parameters of the projects had not been identified in five 
States 34 . 
• In Uttar Pradesh , the minutes of the meetings conducted at Chief Ex ecutive 
Officer (CEO) level had not been maintained due to which remedial action 
suggested in CEO level monitoring meeting and action taken there against could 
not be vouchsafed in audit. 
• No comparison with benchmarks of performance parame ters was carried out 
and remedial/ corrective action taken in four States 35 . 
• In Punjab , as per reply of PSPCL, review meetings with contr actors were 
regularly conducted. No record was, however, produc ed in respect of 
comparison sheets of progress vis–à–vis  benchmark parameters. 
• In Jammu & Kashmir, representative of PFC did not attend the DRC meeting / 
review meeting held by the department for monitorin g the progress of the 
implementation of the programme. Though the nodal o fficer from PFC had 
been visiting the State, there were no documented o bservations/ instructions on 
record. 
                                                 
34  Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Rajasthan and Sikkim  . 
35  Maharashtra, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim. 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     60     
        
• In Jharkhand , it was seen that commitments made by the utilitie s in review 
meeting remained unfulfilled (September 2015).  
MOP did not offer any comments on the observation (March 2016). 
Recommendation 
 
6.  Monitoring and evaluation process, at the level of the Distribution Reforms 
Committee and Steering / Review Committee, needs to  be strengthened to ensure 
that projects are completed in time. 
 

Report No. 30 of 2016 
 
     61      
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.1  Conclusion 
R-APDRP aimed at establishing reliable and automate d systems for collection of 
accurate data through greater adoption of Informati on Technology. The programme 
aimed at achieving sustained loss reduction and enf orcing internal accountability for 
better performance through preparation of baseline data for project areas covering 
consumer indexing, GIS mapping, metering of distrib ution transformers and feeders, 
automatic data logging and regular distribution strengthening projects. 
The pace of implementation of the scheme was slow w ith the actual budgeted amount 
being only 39.32 per cent  of the amount originally envisaged while the relea ses were 
even lower. In a number of projects examined in the  selected sample, only the first 
instalment had been released. The counterpart fundi ng was also not tied up by many 
Utilities within the prescribed period.  
There were shortcomings in appraisal of project DPR s. It was noticed that DPRs were 
not being prepared in line with the Model DPR. Inst ances of revision in cost of the 
projects without approval of the Steering Committee  were also noticed. In some cases, 
the DPRs were appraised and approved by the Steerin g Committee without 
recommendation of State DRCs in contravention of th e prescribed procedure. Instances 
of additional expenditure due to re-tendering, defi ciencies in quality controls were also 
noticed.   
Though only 50 per cent of the sanctioned costs had been disbursed to Utili ties, nearly 
80 per cent  of the towns had been declared ‘Go Live’. It was n oticed that ‘Go Live’ 
was declared by the States themselves without verif ication by or approval of MOP. 
Further,  the AT & C losses had increased relative to the baseline or could not be 
generated in more than 100 towns which had been dec lared ‘Go Live’. Besides, the 
methodology used for calculating the AT & C losses,  though laid down, was not 
followed uniformly leading to varying estimates of the AT & C losses. Energy 
accounting and audit was not being conducted in 12 states as Part A projects were yet 
to be completed and different modules for data collection were yet to be integrated. 
 
8 
Chapter 
Conclusion and  
Recommendation 

Restructured Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
     62     
        
8.2 Recommendations 
The recommendations were discussed in the exit conf erence and most of the 
recommendations were accepted by the MOP. The audit  recommendations are 
presented below:  
1. Ministry should ensure that Utilities tie-up Counte rpart funding before release of 
funds.  
2. Ministry may ensure that Utilisation Certificates a re submitted by the concerned 
Utilities as per timelines prescribed in the General Financial Rules. 
3. Ministry should consider evolving a mechanism of re porting of achievement of 
milestones vis-à-vis targets by state utilities alo ng with reasons for non-
achievement and action taken. 
4. Ministry may ensure 100 per cent completion of metering so that verification of 
Baseline Data of Aggregate Technical and Commercial  losses is completed, annual 
verification of Aggregate Technical and Commercial losses is done and to enable 
effective energy accounting and audit.  
5. Ministry may encourage States to set up the special  courts and vigilance squads, 
based on population of project area, so that speedy trials of offences act as deterrent 
to theft of electricity thereby reducing the commercial losses. 
6. Monitoring and evaluation  process, at the level of  the Distribution Reforms 
Committee and Steering / Review Committee, needs to  be strengthened to ensure 
that projects are completed in time. 
 
 

  A1  
  
Annexure-I 
(Refer to Para 2.2) 
 
 
 
State-wise List of Number of Projects Sanctioned by MOP/PFC 
 
Sl. No. State Part 'A' 
projects 
sanctioned 
Part 'B' 
projects 
sanctioned 
SCADA 
projects 
sanctioned  
1.  Andhra Pradesh 75 46   4  
2.  Assam 67 67 1 
3.  Bihar 71 64 1 
4.  Chhattisgarh 20 19 2 
5.  Goa 4 0 0 
6.  Gujarat 84 62 6 
7.  Haryana 36 34 1 
8.  Himachal Pradesh 14 14 0 
9.  Jammu & Kashmir 30 30 2 
10.  Jharkhand 30 30 3 
11.  Karnataka 98 81 0 
12.  Kerala 43 43 3 
13.  Madhya Pradesh 83 81 5 
14.  Maharashtra 128 123 8 
15.  Manipur 13 13 0 
16.  Meghalaya 9 9 0 
17.  Mizoram 9 9 0 
18.  Nagaland 9 0 0 
19.  Odisha 12 12 2 
20.  Puducherry 4 1 1 

  A2  
  
21.  Punjab 47 46 3 
22.  Rajasthan 87 82 5 
23.  Sikkim 2 2 0 
24.  Tamil Nadu 110 80 7 
25.  Telangana 40 38 2 
26.  Tripura 16 16 0 
27.  Uttar Pradesh 168 167 12 
28.  Uttarrakhand 31 31 1 
29.  West Bengal  61 59 3 
Total 1,4011 1,259 72 
 
  
                                                           
1  Arunachal Pradesh  and Chandigarh were not covere d in Performance Audit where 10 and 1 projects resp ectively 
under Part 'A' and nil project in Part 'B' and 'SCADA' were sanctioned.  

  A3  
  
Annexure-II 
(Refer to Para 2.2) 
 
 
State wise list of number of projects selected for audit in States and at MOP/PFC 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State Part 'A' projects Part 'B' projects SCADA 
projects 
sampled 
for 
scrutiny in 
states and 
PFC/MOP 
Total No 
of Projects 
Sampled 
for 
scrutiny in 
states 
No. of 
Projects 
Sampled 
for 
scrutiny in 
PFC/MOP 
Total No 
of Projects 
Sampled 
for 
scrutiny in 
states 
No. of 
Projects 
Sampled 
for 
scrutiny in 
PFC/MOP 
1. Andhra Pradesh 25 7 25 7 4 
2. Assam 25 7 25 7 1 
3. Bihar 25 7 25 7 1 
4. Chhattisgarh 20 5 19 5 2 
5. Goa 4 1 0 0 0 
6. Gujarat 25 8  25 4 6 
7. Haryana 25 7 25 7 1 
8. Himachal 
Pradesh 
14 4 14 4 0 
9. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
25 7 25 7 2 
10. Jharkhand 25 7 25 7 3 
11. Karnataka 30 8 26 7 0 
12. Kerala 25 7 25 7 3 
13. Madhya Pradesh 25 7 25 7 5 
14. Maharashtra 32 8 31 8 8 
15. Manipur 13 4 13 4 0 
16. Meghalaya 9 2  9 2 0 
17. Mizoram 9 3 9 3 0 
18. Nagaland 9 3 0 0 0 

  A4  
  
19. Odisha 12 3 12 3 2 
20. Puducherry 4 1 1 1 1 
21. Punjab 25 7 25 7 3 
22. Rajasthan 26 7 26 7 5 
23. Sikkim 2 1 2 1 0 
24. Tamil Nadu 28 7 25 7 7 
25. Telangana 25 7 25 7 2 
26. Tripura 16 5 16 4 0 
27. Uttar Pradesh 43 11 42 11 12 
28. Uttarrakhand 25 7 25 7 1 
29. West Bengal  25 7 25 7 3 
Total 596 165 570 155 72 
  

  A5  
  
Annexure III 
(Refer to Para 3.3.3) 
 
 
Instances of release of first installment for Part B funding without tying up of 
counterpart funding by the Utility with Financial Institutions 
 
 
(` in crores) 
Sl. No. State Number of cases/ 
towns 
Amount of 1st 
Instalment of Part B 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 18  13.88  
2.  Bihar  25  126.79  
3.  Chhattisgarh  19 106.53 
4.  J&K 30  499.58  
5.  Maharashtra 121 466.71 
6.  Manipur 13 119.66  
7.  Rajasthan   70 210.62 
8.  Uttar Pradesh 42 561.47 

  A6  
  
Annexure IV 
(Refer to Para 3.5) 
 
 
Cases of diversion of funds noticed during audit 
 
State Name of 
Utility 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Purpose for 
which funds 
(materials) 
diverted 
Steps taken to 
get back the 
funds diverted. 
Present 
Status. 
 Andhra 
Pradesh 
APEPDCL 35.85  Working capital 
of company 
CLTDR Account  
opened  
Now funds 
spent are more 
than funds 
received from 
PFC 
 Assam Assam Power 
Distribution 
Company 
Limited. 
1.90  
(The value 
of materials 
such as DTR 
meters, VCB 
panels & 
APFC) 
Areas not 
covered by the 
Ring-fenced 
area under 
RAPDRP 
Projects. 
Not available on 
record. 
Not available 
on record 
 Haryana DHBVN 27.14 Other than R-
APDRP  
(for making 
payments to 
parties and 
contractors not 
connected with 
implementation 
of R-APDRP.) 
Funds now utilized 
(3/2015) in 
RAPDRP 
Funds now 
utilized 
(3/2015) in 
RAPDRP 
 Karnataka BESCOM & 
CESC 
34.25 
(Amount of 
interest) 
Treated as own 
income and not 
adjusted against 
the project cost. 
    
 Manipur 
 
MSPDCL 10.52 Payment of 
NPV & 
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
charge of 2  
(two) power 
projects. 
Fund returned to 
project account 
Fund returned 
and utilized for 
project. 

  A7  
  
State Name of 
Utility 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Purpose for 
which funds 
(materials) 
diverted 
Steps taken to 
get back the 
funds diverted. 
Present 
Status. 
MSPDCL 119.66 Diverted to State 
Govt. Account 
on 3.4.13 
` 59.00 cr. Released 
on 12.7.13 and ` 
60.66 cr released on 
7.11.13 
Fund returned 
and utilized for 
Projects. 
 Meghalaya MeECL 29.20 Working Capital The unauthorised 
diversion of funds 
was noticed by 
audit. No action has 
been taken to pay 
back the funds  
Diversion of 
funds yet to be 
transferred back 
Tripura Utility as a 
whole 
2.11 Diverted to non-
RAPDRP works 
Not available on 
record. 
Amount of 
`1.02 crore 
returned to 
Project account.  
Uttar 
Pradesh 
DVVNL 80.37  
 
To meet the 
power 
purchase 
liability of 
UPPCL 
 
 
DISCOMs had 
been writing to 
UPPCL to return 
the amount 
 
 
` 100.41 crore 
still not 
recovered 
from UPPCL 
MVVNL 70.64 
PVVNL 71.12 
PuVVNL 52.63 
  

  A8  
  
Annexure V 
(Refer to Para 3.8) 
 
 
Cases of non- submission of UCs by Utilities as of March 2015 
 
 
 (` in crore) 
State 
  
Name of  Project 
  
Date of signing 
of Quadripartite 
Agreement/ 
MoA  
Approved 
Project 
Cost 
  
Release of 1st Instalment of 
funds by PFC 
Date Amt. 
Assam  
  
  
 Part B 
 
  
Tinsukia 25-Feb-2010 13.63 30-Dec-2011 4.09 
Guwahati 25-Feb-2010 227.85 19-Jun-2012 68.35 
Diphu 25-Feb-2010 10.52 30-Dec-2011 3.16 
Nalbari 25-Feb-2010 8.95 30-Dec-2011 2.69 
Himachal Pradesh  
Part B Sundarnagar 16-Mar-2009 6.55 18-Feb-2011 1.97 
Kerala  
 
 
 
Part A 
 
Cherthala 17-Aug-2009 2.32 04-Jan-2010 0.70 
Alappuzha 17-Aug-2009 4.02 04-Jan-2010 1.21 
Ottapalam 17-Aug-2009 0.73 04-Jan-2010 0.22 
Kannur 17-Aug-2009 5.55 04-Jan-2010 1.67 
Kollam 17-Aug-2009 6.67 04-Jan-2010 2.00 
Kozhikode 17-Aug-2009 13.69 04-Jan-2010 4.11 
Thrissur 17-Aug-2009 4.84 04-Jan-2010 1.45 
 
 
 
 
 
Part B 
   
Shoranur 17-Aug-2009 3.79 15-Mar-2011 0.57 
Kunnamkulam 17-Aug-2009 5.53 01-Sep-2010 0.83 
Kannur 17-Aug-2009 80.20 29-Oct-2010 2.61 
      20-Dec-2010 8.61 
      29-Dec-2012 0.82 
Attingal 17-Aug-2009 10.02 29-Oct-2010 0.29 
      20-Dec-2010 0.97 
      29-Dec-2012 0.24 
Ernakulam-Kochi 17-Aug-2009 207.96 28-Jun-2011 31.19 
Malappuram 17-Aug-2009 7.26 01-Sep-2010 1.09 
Thodupuzha 17-Aug-2009 13.97 29-Oct-2010 0.49 
      20-Dec-2010 1.61 
 
 
Uttarakhand 
  Sitarganj 26-Mar-2009 4.24 16-May-2012 0.23 

  A9  
  
  
  
  
  
 Part B 
 
  
  
  
      17-May-2012 1.04 
Landhora 26-Mar-2009 4.30 16-May-2012 0.23 
      17-May-2012 1.06 
Kathima 26-Mar-2009 10.00 16-May-2012 0.54 
      17-May-2012 2.46 
Ramnagar 26-Mar-2009 11.65 16-May-2012 0.62 
      17-May-2012 2.87 
       0.85 
Madhya Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part B 
  
 
Indore 30-Mar-2009 276.24 31-Mar-2010 36.13 
      09-Jul-2012 5.32 
Katni 30-Mar-2008 52.45 24-Sep-2010 7.87 
Narsinghpur 30-Mar-2008 15.46 24-Sep-2010 2.32 
Bhind 30-Mar-2008 31.82 22-Sep-2010 4.78 
Ujjain 30-Mar-2009 91.10 31-Mar-2010 10.16 
      09-Jul-2012 3.50 
Hoshangabad 30-Mar-2008 15.00 30-Jun-2010 2.25 
Dewas 30-Mar-2009 54.01 24-Sep-2010 8.10 
      16-May-2012 0.11 
      17-May-2012 0.58 
Mizoram 
 
Part A 
  
  
Aizawl 14-Sep-2009 25.10 01-Feb-2011 7.53 
Lunglei 14-Sep-2009 3.05 01-Feb-2011 0.92 
Lawngtlai 14-Sep-2009 0.86 01-Feb-2011 0.26 
 
 
Part B 
  
 
Champhai 14-Sep-2009 11.93 18-Feb-2014 2.86 
      06-Sept-2014 0.72 
Serchhip 14-Sep-2009 8.87 18-Feb-2014 2.12 
      06-Sept-2014 0.54 
Aizawl 14-Sep-2009 156.84 18-Feb-2014 37.51 
      06-Sep-2014 9.55 
Goa 
Part-A Marmagoa 24-Mar-2009 3.65 09-Nov-2009 1.09 
Gujarat 
Part B 
  
  
  
Wadhwan 3-Sep-2009 31.35 23-Sep-2010 4.70 
Gondal 3-Sep-2009 8.22 23-Sep-2010 1.24 
Vadodara 2-Mar-2009 58.48 01-Jan-2015 8.77 
Godhra 2-Mar-2009 37.60 23-Sep-2010 5.64 
 
Maharashtra 
 
 
Beed 20-Feb-2009 56.23 15-July-2011 3.39 
      28-Sept-2011 5.04 

  A10  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Part B 
  
 
Wardha 20-Feb-2009 25.67 18-Feb-2011 3.85 
Ahmednagar 20-Feb-2009 55.90 15t-JULY-2011 3.37 
      28- Sept -2011 5.01 
Nalasopara 20-Feb-2009 27 18-Feb-2011 4.05 
Vasai 20-Feb-2009 32.88 29-Sep-2011 4.93 
Virar 20-Feb-2009 59.15 18-Feb-2011 8.87 
Solapur 20-Feb-2009 128.47 18-Feb-2011 15.98 
      29-Dec-2012 3.29 
GR. Mumbai 20-Feb-2009 1193.91 28-Sept-2011 86.16 
      29-Sept-2011 81.00 
      29-Dec-2012 11.92 
Nagaland 
Part A 
  
  
Zunheboto 12-Apr-2010 0.82 16-Mar-2011 0.25 
Mokokchung 12-Apr-2010 1.31 16-Mar-2011 0.39 
Tuensang 12-Apr-2010 1.5 16-Mar-2011 0.45 
Puducherry 
Part A 
  
Puducherry 14-Jan-2011 20.17 31-Mar-2012 3.45 
      08-May-2014 0.72 
SCADA  14- Jan-2011 
 
13.89 08- May -2014 
 
4.17 
Part B  14- Jan-2011 
 
84.78 08- May -2014 
 
12.72 
Rajasthan 
  
 
 
 
Part A 
   
Pali 13-Feb-2009 3.21 26-Mar-2009 0.54 
      31-Mar-2009 0.38 
   06-Jul-2009 0.05 
Jhunjhunu 13-Feb-2009 1.77 26-Mar-2009 0.30 
      31-Mar-2009 0.21 
   06-Jul-2009 0.03 
Sojat city 13-Feb-2009 0.86 26-Mar-2009 0.14 
      31-Mar-2009 0.10 
   06-Jul-2009 0.01 
Part B Makrana 13-Feb-2009 29.70 09-Mar-2011 4.46 
Jhalawar 12-Feb-2009 7.92 12-Oct-2010 1.19 
Jalore 13-Feb-2009 10.10 29-Sep-2010 1.52 
Bharatpur 12-Feb-2009 35.06 12-Oct-2010 5.26 
Kota 12-Feb-2009 249.70 12-Oct-2010 37.46 
Bhilwara 13-Feb-2009 35.08 31-Mar-2010 4.70 
      20-Dec-2010 0.56 
West Bengal 
 Haldia 22-Jul-2009 28.88 1-Jan-2015 4.33 

  A11  
  
 
 
Part B 
English Bazaar 22-Jul-2009 25.54 01-Mar-2011 3.83 
Darjeeling 22-Jul-2009 10.23 01-Jan-2015 1.54 
Bankura 22-Jul-2009 17.79 01-Mar-2011 2.67 
Raiganj 22-Jul-2009 10.95 01-Mar-2011 1.64 
Bangaon 22-Jul-2009 15.83 01-Mar-2011 2.37 
Diamond Harbour 22-Jul-2009 12.09 01-Mar-2011 1.81 
Meghalaya 
Part A Cherrapunjee 12-Apr-10 0.7 04-Feb-2011 0.21 
Shillong 12-Apr-10 25.02 04-Feb-2011 7.50 
Part B Nongpoh 12-Apr-10 2.49 06-Sep-2014 0.75 
Shillong 12-Apr-10 72.8 06-Sep-2014 21.84 
Punjab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part B 
Faridkot 30-Jul-2009  11.37 31-Mar-2010 1.52 
   12-Sep-2012 0.13 
   28- Sep -2012 0.05 
Hoshiarpur 30-Jul-2009 38.01 29- Sep -2011 5.70 
Kapurthala 30-Jul-2009 20.35 29- Sep -2011 3.05 
Sunam 30-Jul-2009 12.75 29- Sep -2011 1.91 
Firozpur 30-Jul-2009 20.87 31- Mar -2010 2.79 
Bhatinda. 30-Jul-2009 47.5 31- Mar -2010 6.36 
   12-Sep -2012 0.54 
   28- Sep -2012 0.22 
Jalandhar Cantt 30-Jul-2009 29.86 19-Jun -2015 4.48 
Total 706.57 

  A12  
  
Annexure VI 
(Refer to Paras 4.2 & 4.2.1) 
 
Details of the projects sanctioned during various S teering Committee meetings 
 
 
Sl. No Date and no. of the meeting No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Total cost of the 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
(` in crore) 
No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
without 
approval of 
SDRC 
1.        8th Meeting held on 13th  February 2009 256 894.10 127 
2. 9th   Meeting  held  on  20th  February 2009 284 861.44 61 
3.                 10th Meeting held on 26th  February 2009 64 196.39 29 
4.                 11th  Meeting held on 30th June2009 423 1,614.23   
5.                 12th Meeting held on 4th September 2009  109 598.56 53 
6.                14th Meeting held on 26th November 2009 155 546.43   
7.                15th Meeting held on 9th December 2009 61 74.92   
8.                16th Meeting held  on  2nd March  2010 22 65.52   
9.                 17th  Meeting  held on  19th March  2010   251 3,042.67 229 
10.             18th  Meeting  held on 29th  March 2010   3 65.81   
11.             19th Meeting held  on  2nd June   2010 152 2,061.12 54 
12.             20th Meeting held  on  16th August  2010   269 5,748.00   
13.             21st  Meeting held  on  8th December  2010 145 4,195.96     
14.             22nd Meeting  held  on  22nd February  2011 58 1,317.68   
15.             23rd Meeting held  on  15th June,  2011 98 3,706.19   
16.             24th Meeting held  on  18th October 2011 151 4,694.73   
17.             25th Meeting held on 20th January 2012 49 1,083.47   
18.             26th Meeting  held on  3rd August 2012 48 726.84   
19.              27th Meeting held  on  18th February  2013 41 2,316.84   
20.             28th Meeting held  on  6th August  2013 33 1,152.17   
21.             29th Meeting held  on  27th September  2013 68 1,841.29   
22.             30th Meeting held  on  28th February  2014 32 571.49   
23.             31st Meeting held  on  9th July 2014 2 51.16   
Total  2,774 37,427.01 553 

  A13  
  
Annexure VII 
(Refer to Para 4.2.2) 
 
 
Non-preparation of DPRs in the prescribed formats b y the State Utilities resulting in 
inclusion of inadmissible items of work and exclusion of required items of work 
 
 
Name of 
the State 
Instances of cases of incorrect preparation of DPRs 
Assam  15 per cent Supervision charges amounting to `10.47 crore included in the estimates 
of Project Cost.  
 Overloading of 15 per cent additional cost on SOR 2010-11, in contravention t o the 
stated facts in the DPR resulted in overestimation of the Project by `62.39 crore on 
SOR rates of 2010-11. 
Gujarat  Inclusion of Departmental overhead charges in DPR cost estimates  
 Two SCADA projects (one SCADA Part A and other SCAD A Part B) were sanctioned  for 
Ahmedabad peripheral area. The population of the project area (3,49,298) was below 
the prescribed limit of 4,00,000. 
Rajasthan Five Works under progress in two towns involving ex penditure of ` 3.60 crore were 
included in proposed DPR of the concerned town. 
Tripura Value of dismantled material was  not reduced from the approved Project Cost resulting in 
undue advantage to the Utility.   
Uttar 
Pradesh 
 Inclusion of meter cost of new/unmetered connection.  
 Inclusion of cost of installation of meters. 
 Non-consideration of cost of receipt back items. 
 Non provision and recovery of Labour Cess. 
  
 
  

  A14  
  
Annexure VIII 
(Refer to Para 4.3) 
 
 
 
Delay in formulation of DPRs, calling of tenders and award of work 
 
 
State Delay in submission/approval of 
DPRs 
Delay in tender/award of works. 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
 Part B DPRs of APSPDCL : from 205 
days (7 months) to 1,266 days (42 
months). 
 Part B DPRs of APEPDCL : from 190 
days (more than 6 months) to 1,265 
days (42 months)  
 Supervisor Control and Data 
Acquisition system/ Distribution 
Management System (SCADA/ DMS) 
of APSPDCL and APEPDCL : 333 
days (11 months) to 1,258 days (42 
months). In 4 cases relating to 
APSPDCL and APEPDCL, there was 
delay of 359 days (12 months) in 
submission of DPRs of Part B SCADA 
enabling components and works are yet 
to be awarded (September 2015). 
 Part B – APSPDCL: 74 days (more than 
2 months) to 617 days (more than 20 
months) in respect of 10 towns.  
 Part B – APEPDCL :  From 78 days 
(more than 2 months) to 1,180 days (more 
than 39 months) 
 (SCADA/DMS) of APSPDCL and 
APEPDCL: 102 (more than 3 months) to 
635 days (21 months) 
Assam 
 
 Part A  DPRs (67Projects) : 100 days 
(3 months) 
 Part B DPRs (67 Projects) : 7 to 15 
months. 
Bihar  In all 25 cases 
 Part A: 155 days (5 months)  
 Part B: 360 days. (12 months) 
 
In all 25 Cases 
 Part A: 266 days (9 months).  
 Part B: 235 (more than 7  months) to 539 
days (more than 17 months) 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
 Part A 14 Projects: 427 (14 months) to 
505 days (17 months) 
 Part B 14 Projects:  596 days (20 
months) to 638 days (21 months) 
 Part A 14 Projects: 61 days(2 months) 
 Part B 14 Projects (Tendering)  :119 (4 
months) to 1569 days (52 months)  
Award of Works 
 Part A:  299 days (10 months) 
 Part B:  140 (5 months) to 450 days (15 
months)  
Haryana  850 days (28 months) to 1,049 days (35 
months) 
 431 (more than14 months)  to 990 days (33 
months) 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
-  More than 10 months in finalization of 
tenders for selection of SCADA 
Consultant.  
 28 months in issue of LOA in favour of the 
selected vendor 
 15 months in issue of letter of award to the 
ITIA vendor 

  A15  
  
Jharkhand - Part A (30 Projects): 
  IT Consultant (4 months) 
 ITIA (12 months);  
 Metering of Distribution Transformers (27 
months),  
 Boundary and Feeder Meters (24 months) 
  Network Bandwidth Service Provider (30 
months)  
 21 to33 months in civil works and non IT 
Infrastructure for DC and DRC. 
Kerala  Part B DPRs (43 cases) : 150 days (5 
months) to 840 days (28 months) 
 In 3 cases from 608 days (20 months) to 
996 days (33 months). 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
 27 projects in Eastern DISCOM : 
From 12 to 16 months. 
 31 projects (Part B) in Central 
DISCOM: From 12 to 18 months  
 23 (Part B) projects in Western 
DISCOM:  From 11 to 12 months. 
 26 projects in Eastern DISCOM : From 
19 months to 25 months  
 Central DISCOM: 19 to 31 months. 
 Western DISCOM: 21 to 30 months. 
Maharashtra -  Part B One case: More than one year 
Mizoram -  Part B:9 months 
Rajasthan  81 cases: Up to 162 days (more than 5 
months) 
 29 cases: 420 days (14 months)  to 1291 
days (43months ) 
Tamil Nadu -  IT  Implementing Agency: 378 days (12 
months) 
Tripura -  Part B projects: 8 to 40 months  
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Part A. (43 cases):  51 days (2 months)  Part B  (34 cases ): 9 to 46 months in 
initiating tendering process and 18 to 48 
months in awards of work. 
Uttarakhand Part B ( 31 cases):  
 258 (more than 8 months)to 313 (more 
than 10 months) 
Part B  (31 cases ) 
 309 (10 months)to 576 days (19 months) 
in calling of tenders 
 491(more than 16 months) to 870 days (29 
months) in awards of work. 
  

  A16  
  
Annexure IX 
(Refer to Para 4.7) 
 
 
Guidelines for sanction of Cost variation in appoin tment of ITIA by Utilities 
approved by the Steering Committee in its 14th Meeting held on 26h November 
2009  
 
 
Pre-award stage:  
a) If the lowest quoted / awarded cost is higher th an the sanctioned DPR values up to a 
maximum of 10 per cent , the Utility may issue Letter of Intent (LOI) and intimate such 
variation to PFC/ MOP along with proper justificati on and take approval of their DRC. Such 
variation in cost was to be put up in the next steering committee for sanction of additional project 
cost to the Utility.  
b) If the lowest quoted/awarded cost is higher with  respect to sanctioned DPR values by more 
than 10 per cent, the Utility was required to provide proper justif ication of such cost variation/ 
changes in scope, BOQ, etc. to PFC / MOP along with  due approval of State DRC. The cost 
escalation would be appraised by the PFC and shall be put up to the Steering Committee for their 
consideration.  
Post-award stage:  
Quantity variation of individual items may be accep ted to the extent of +/- 20 per cent  of the 
awarded Bill of quantity subject to 10 per cent of the value of the awarded project cost. In such 
cases, the Utility was required to provide to PFC/ MOP, proper justification of such cost 
variation for any changes in scope, BOQ, price etc. along with approval of their DRC (within one 
year from the LOI). In case, the cost increase is found justified, the recommendation of PFC shall 
be put up to Steering Committee for their consideration and sanction of additional project cost. 
  

  A17  
  
Annexure X 
(Refer to Para 4.7) 
 
Variations in excess/short of prescribed limits 
 
State Remarks 
Assam During invitation of bids the Utility excluded many  jobs which were originally 
included in the DPRs of Part-B. Against the total project cost of ` 589.91 crore 
(excluding consumer metering cost), the Utility has  tendered for an amount of           
` 476.53 crore with an overall reduction of scope of  ` 113.38 crore. As regards 
individual projects (Electrical circle-wise) the re duction was in the range between ` 
2.69 crore and ` 18.69 crore. In all the towns the work relating to  ‘LT Clean-up’ as 
proposed in the DPRs valuing ` 15.98 crore was excluded during actual execution. 
Bihar In all 24 cases there were variations ranging from 100 per cent to below 397 per 
cent in the approved DPRs and works actually executed, without approval from the 
PFC.  
Gujarat 
 
The details of the expenditure of Part B submitted to Audit revealed that the work 
executed by the DISCOMs in 14 towns (7 towns in DGV CL, 6 towns in MGVCL 
and 1 town in UGVCL) exceeded the quantity mentione d in the approved DPR. 
Even after allowing the increase in quantity by 20 per cent as allowed by PFC, the 
extra quantity executed by the DISCOMs of these tow ns worked out to ` 26.25 
crore. In Jambusar town (in DGVCL) the work execute d by the Company was less 
than 50 per cent value of DPR work. 
Jharkhand 
 
In all the 30 projects of Part A :  
The quantity of Boundary and Feeder meters to be ex ecuted increased by 93 per 
cent over the DPRs quantity with an additional cost of ` 8.44 crore (i.e. 170 per cent 
higher than the DPR cost) due to incorrect assessme nt of quantity in the DPRs. The 
quantity of Distribution Transformers installed inc reased by 158 per cent  with an 
increase of ` 15.08 crore i.e. 147 per cent over the DPR cost.  
Kerala Part A work was awarded at quoted price of ` 189.94 crore which was lower by 11 
per cent of the approved project cost of ` 214.38 crores. 
Difference between sanctioned project cost ( ` 547.51 crores) and awarded project 
cost (` 643.60 crores) in respect of distribution componen t of three Part B projects 
of Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi and Kozhikode, awarded  on turnkey was higher by 
18 per cent. 
Manipur The decision to install prepaid energy meters inste ad of tamper proof electronics 
meters as per the DPRs resulted in extra expenditure/liability of ` 5726.56 lakh. 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
It was noticed that quantity awarded in final BOQ v aried by more than 20 per cent 
in certain components of BOQ of Baghpat Town and ra nged between -100 per cent 
and 683 per cent . We also noticed that certain works had been award ed for which 
zero quantity was approved in the DPR. This resulte d into variation in overall 
project cost by (-) 16 per cent  against the allowable limit of (+/-) 10 per cent  in 
contravention of the guidelines. 

  A18  
  
Annexure XI 
(Refer to Para 4.9) 
 
 
Cases of projects not executed on turnkey basis 
 
 
State Cases noted in Audit 
Assam The Utility while submitting the DPRs for Part B of R-APDRP included the 
scope of consumer metering along with the work of System Improvement (SI). 
However, during actual execution, the company segre gated the scope of 
consumer metering from the works relating to SI. 
Karnataka  The DISCOM (CESC) split the Part B  works into two parts viz., (a) 
Electrical works and (b) Metering. Further, Meterin g was again split into 
single phase metering and three phase metering. Whi le calling for the 
tender for electrical works, 12 projects were group ed into six packages 
based on districts and works were awarded accordingly. 
 GESCOM, for the purpose of execution, grouped the 2 1 projects based on 
the Division and made them into nine packages and tenders were called for 
on partial turnkey basis. Purchase orders were plac ed separately for 
transformers and meters. 
Kerala 40 Projects under Part B of the scheme were executed departmentally and not  
awarded on turnkey basis. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Works in 23 Part B projects (Central: 2, Eastern: 1 and Western: 20) were not 
awarded on turnkey basis.   
Maharashtra In procurement of meters, the work was not awarded on the turn key basis, as 
the Company had procured meters centrally. 
Telangana In 38 (Part A 1 & Part B 37) cases, the work was not awarded on the turn key 
basis. 
Sikkim The works under Part B were not awarded on turnkey basis as E&PD took up 
the metering works departmentally. 
 
  
  

  A19  
  
Annexure XII 
(Refer to Para 4.16) 
 
 
Cases where projects have been declared as ‘Go Live’ despite low expenditure 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State Utility Town Name Go-Live 
Date 
Sanction 
Cost 
Disbursement Percentage 
1. Uttar 
Pradesh 
DVVNL Tundla Nov-13 9.73 0.35 3.60 
2. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Aonla Feb-14 0.87 0.16 18.39 
3. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Baheri Feb-14 0.68 0.13 19.12 
4. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Budaun Feb-14 2.95 0.53 17.97 
5. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Ujhani Feb-14 0.81 0.15 18.52 
6. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Barabanki Apr-14 4.91 0.94 19.14 
7. Assam Assam Dergaon Jun-15 0.6 0.18 30.00 
8. Bihar SBPDCL Fatuha Jun-15 0.95 0.28 29.47 
9. Bihar NBPDCL Hajipur Jun-15 2.58 0.77 29.84 
10. Bihar NBPDCL Barauli Jul-15 0.64 0.19 29.69 
11. Bihar NBPDCL Sugauli Jul-15 0.46 0.14 30.43 
12. Bihar SBPDCL Makhdumpur Jul-15 0.48 0.14 29.17 
13. Bihar NBPDCL Gopalganj Jul-15 0.84 0.25 29.76 
14. Bihar NBPDCL Raxaul Bazar Jul-15 0.94 0.28 29.79 
15. Bihar NBPDCL Samastipur Jul-15 1.4 0.42 30.00 
16. Bihar SBPDCL Jehanabad Jul-15 1.51 0.45 29.80 
17. Bihar SBPDCL Maner Jul-15 0.67 0.2 29.85 
18. Bihar NBPDCL Darbhanga Jul-15 3.52 1.06 30.11 
19. Bihar NBPDCL Gogri Jamalpur Jul-15 0.56 0.17 30.36 
20. Bihar NBPDCL Khagaria Jul-15 1.07 0.32 29.91 
21. Bihar NBPDCL Kishanganj Jul-15 1.08 0.32 29.63 
22. Bihar NBPDCL Madhepura Jul-15 0.89 0.27 30.34 
23. Bihar NBPDCL Mahnar Bazar Jul-15 0.47 0.14 29.79 

  A20  
  
24. Bihar NBPDCL Purnia Jul-15 2.61 0.78 29.89 
25. Bihar NBPDCL Ramnagar Jul-15 0.78 0.23 29.49 
26. Bihar NBPDCL Saharsa Jul-15 1.12 0.34 30.36 
27. Bihar SBPDCL Barahiya Aug-15 0.46 0.14 30.43 
28. Bihar SBPDCL Jamui Aug-15 0.84 0.25 29.76 
29. Bihar SBPDCL Masaurhi Aug-15 0.92 0.28 30.43 
30. Bihar SBPDCL Bakhtiarpur Sep-15 0.61 0.18 29.51 
31. Bihar SBPDCL Lakhisarai Sep-15 1.2 0.36 30.00 
32. Bihar SBPDCL Sheikhpura Sep-15 0.91 0.27 29.67 
33. Bihar NBPDCL Begusarai Sep-15 1.63 0.49 30.06 
34. Bihar NBPDCL Chapra Sep-15 2.08 0.62 29.81 
35. Bihar NBPDCL Katihar Oct-15 1.99 0.6 30.15 
36. Bihar NBPDCL Narkatiaganj Oct-15 0.77 0.23 29.87 
37. Bihar NBPDCL Siwan Oct-15 1.65 0.49 29.70 
38. Bihar SBPDCL Barbigha Oct-15 0.47 0.14 29.79 
39. Bihar SBPDCL Hilsa Oct-15 0.7 0.21 30.00 
40. Bihar SBPDCL Naugachhia Oct-15 0.83 0.25 30.12 
41. Bihar SBPDCL Rajgir Oct-15 0.88 0.26 29.55 
42. Bihar SBPDCL Sultanganj Nov-15 0.71 0.21 29.58 
43. Bihar SBPDCL Barh Dec-15 0.93 0.28 30.11 
44. Bihar SBPDCL Bhabua Dec-15 0.9 0.27 30.00 
45. Bihar SBPDCL Mokama Dec-15 0.68 0.2 29.41 
46. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
J & K Bandipore Oct-15 0.5 0.15 30.00 
47. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
J & K Ranbirsinghpora Oct-15 0.76 0.23 30.26 
48. Kerala Kerala Shoranur May-14 0.87 0.26 29.89 
49. Kerala Kerala Chalakudy Feb-15 1.37 0.41 29.93 
50. Kerala Kerala Changanassery Feb-15 1.19 0.36 30.25 
51. Kerala Kerala Chockli Feb-15 1.37 0.41 29.93 
52. Kerala Kerala Neyyattinkara Feb-15 1.21 0.36 29.75 
53. Kerala Kerala Ottappalam Feb-15 0.73 0.22 30.14 
54. Kerala Kerala Palakkad Feb-15 4.78 1.43 29.92 
55. Kerala Kerala Payyannur Feb-15 1.78 0.53 29.78 
56. Kerala Kerala Ponnani Feb-15 1.37 0.41 29.93 
57. Kerala Kerala Thiruvalla Feb-15 2.52 0.76 30.16 
58. Kerala Kerala Thodupuzha Feb-15 1.68 0.5 29.76 

  A21  
  
59. Kerala Kerala Guruvayoor Apr-15 2.55 0.77 30.20 
60. Kerala Kerala Mattannur Apr-15 1.25 0.38 30.40 
61. Kerala Kerala Nedumangad Apr-15 1.32 0.4 30.30 
62. Kerala Kerala Punalur Apr-15 1.11 0.33 29.73 
63. Kerala Kerala Pathanamthitta May-15 1.12 0.34 30.36 
64. Kerala Kerala Attingal Jun-15 1.4 0.42 30.00 
65. Kerala Kerala Chittur-
Thathamangalam 
Jun-15 1.81 0.54 29.83 
66. Kerala Kerala Kodungallur Jun-15 1.81 0.54 29.83 
67. Kerala Kerala Malappuram Jun-15 1.74 0.52 29.89 
68. Kerala Kerala Perinthalmanna Jun-15 1.71 0.51 29.82 
69. Kerala Kerala Taliparamba Jun-15 1.43 0.43 30.07 
70. Kerala Kerala Kasaragod Jul-15 1.89 0.57 30.16 
71. Kerala Kerala Kunnamkulam Jul-15 1.78 0.53 29.78 
72. Kerala Kerala Pappinisseri Jul-15 1.03 0.31 30.10 
73. Kerala Kerala Varkala Jul-15 1.19 0.36 30.25 
74. Kerala Kerala Aroor Aug-15 1.22 0.37 30.33 
75. Kerala Kerala Kayamkulam Aug-15 2.54 0.76 29.92 
76. Kerala Kerala Kothamangalam Aug-15 1.11 0.33 29.73 
77. Kerala Kerala Paravoor Aug-15 0.76 0.23 30.26 
78. Kerala Kerala Kollam Sep-15 6.67 2 29.99 
79. Kerala Kerala Kanhangad Sep-15 2.75 0.83 30.18 
80. Kerala Kerala Kottayam Sep-15 5.62 1.69 30.07 
81. Kerala Kerala Thrissur Sep-15 4.84 1.45 29.96 
82. Kerala Kerala Tirur Sep-15 2.65 0.8 30.19 
83. Kerala Kerala Kannur Oct-15 5.55 1.67 30.09 
84. Kerala Kerala Koyilandy Oct-15 1.78 0.53 29.78 
85. Kerala Kerala Vadakara Oct-15 2.74 0.82 29.93 
86. Kerala Kerala Alappuzha Nov-15 4.02 1.21 30.10 
87. Kerala Kerala Cherthala Nov-15 2.32 0.7 30.17 
88. Kerala Kerala Kochi Nov-15 52.49 15.75 30.01 
89. Kerala Kerala Kozhikode Nov-15 13.69 4.11 30.02 

  A22  
  
90. Kerala Kerala Thiruvananthapuram Nov-15 61.03 18.31 30.00 
91. Madhya 
Pradesh 
MPPKVVCL - 
E 
Nowgaon Oct-13 1.03 0.24 23.30 
92. Manipur Manipur Ningthoukhong Nov-14 0.38 0.11 28.95 
93. Manipur Manipur Thoubal Nov-14 0.91 0.27 29.67 
94. Manipur Manipur Bishnupur Feb-15 0.68 0.2 29.41 
95. Manipur Manipur Moirang Feb-15 0.63 0.19 30.16 
96. Manipur Manipur Kakching Dec-15 0.9 0.27 30.00 
97. Meghalay
a 
Meghalaya Jowai Jul-15 1.67 0.5 29.94 
98. Meghalay
a 
Meghalaya Cherrapunjee Dec-15 0.7 0.21 30.00 
99. Mizoram Mizoram Kolasib Jul-15 1.19 0.36 30.25 
100. Rajasthan JoVVNL Pipar City Sep-13 0.74 0.22 29.73 
101. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Gobichettipalayam Jan-14 1.17 0.35 29.91 
102. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Sathyamangalam 17-Feb-14 1.08 0.32 29.63 
103. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Namakkal 28-Mar-14 1.32 0.4 30.30 
104. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Rasipuram 28-Mar-14 0.88 0.26 29.55 
105. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Ambur 07-Apr-14 1.51 0.45 29.80 
106. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Gudiyatham 07-Apr-14 1.42 0.43 30.28 
107. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Melvisharam 07-Apr-14 0.66 0.2 30.30 
108. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Pernampattu 07-Apr-14 0.81 0.24 29.63 
109. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Arcot 05-May-14 0.9 0.27 30.00 
110. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tiruttani 05-May-14 1.03 0.3 29.13 
111. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Karur 29-May-14 3.74 1.12 29.95 
112. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Chengalpattu 16-Jun-14 1.16 0.35 30.17 
113. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Maraimalainagar 16-Jun-14 1.48 0.44 29.73 
114. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tirupathur 27-Oct-14 0.94 0.28 29.79 
115. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Vaniyambadi 27-Oct-14 1.36 0.41 30.15 
116. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Mallasamudram 05-Nov-14 0.64 0.19 29.69 

  A23  
  
117. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tiruchengode 05-Nov-14 2.15 0.65 30.23 
118. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Chidambaram 10-Nov-14 0.95 0.28 29.47 
119. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Cuddalore 10-Nov-14 3.34 1.01 30.24 
120. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Viluppuram 10-Nov-14 1.69 0.5 29.59 
121. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Chinnamanur 17-Nov-14 0.78 0.23 29.49 
122. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Gudalur 17-Nov-14 1.08 0.32 29.63 
123. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Kambam 17-Nov-14 0.85 0.25 29.41 
124. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Periyakulam 17-Nov-14 0.77 0.23 29.87 
125. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Sivaganga 17-Nov-14 1.07 0.32 29.91 
126. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Theni Allinagaram 17-Nov-14 1.62 0.48 29.63 
127. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Aranthangi 24-Nov-14 0.86 0.26 30.23 
128. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Manapparai 24-Nov-14 0.87 0.26 29.89 
129. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Pattukkottai 24-Nov-14 1.3 0.39 30.00 
130. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Perambalur 24-Nov-14 1.04 0.31 29.81 
131. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Dharapuram 15-Dec-14 1.01 0.3 29.70 
132. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Palladam 15-Dec-14 1.75 0.53 30.29 
133. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Udumalaipettai 15-Dec-14 1.41 0.42 29.79 
134. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Vellakoil 15-Dec-14 1.35 0.41 30.37 
135. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Attur 23-Feb-15 1.48 0.44 29.73 
136. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Edappadi 23-Feb-15 1.06 0.31 29.25 
137. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Mettur 23-Feb-15 1.25 0.38 30.40 
138. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Ambasamudram 27-Apr-15 0.82 0.25 30.49 
139. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Kadayanallur 27-Apr-15 1.39 0.42 30.22 
140. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Puliyankudi 27-Apr-15 0.99 0.3 30.30 

  A24  
  
141. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Sankarankoil 27-Apr-15 1.22 0.37 30.33 
142. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tenkasi 27-Apr-15 1.38 0.41 29.71 
143. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Vikramasingapuram 27-Apr-15 0.84 0.25 29.76 
144. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Arani 04-May-15 1.16 0.35 30.17 
145. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Erode 04-May-15 6.35 1.89 29.76 
146. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Periyasemur 04-May-15 0.87 0.26 29.89 
147. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tindivanam 11-May-15 1.35 0.41 30.37 
148. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tiruvannamalai 11-May-15 2.43 0.73 30.04 
149. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tiruvethipuram 11-May-15 0.8 0.24 30.00 
150. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Virudhachalam 11-May-15 1.48 0.44 29.73 
151. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Kallakkurichi 18-May-15 1.16 0.35 30.17 
152. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Aruppukkottai 09-Jul-15 1.6 0.48 30.00 
153. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Sattur 09-Jul-15 0.81 0.24 29.63 
154. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Srivilliputhur 09-Jul-15 1.42 0.43 30.28 
155. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Rajapalayam 13-Jul-15 7.08 2.12 29.94 
156. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Sivakasi 13-Jul-15 1.96 0.59 30.10 
157. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Virudhunagar 13-Jul-15 1.79 0.54 30.17 
158. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Tirunelveli 20-Jul-15 8.27 2.48 29.99 
159. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Bodinayakanur 10-Aug-15 1.06 0.31 29.25 
160. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Melur 10-Aug-15 0.74 0.22 29.73 
161. Tamil 
Nadu 
TANGEDCO Thirumangalam 10-Aug-15 1.16 0.35 30.17 
162. Tripura Tripura Indranagar (Part) Nov-13 0.57 0.17 29.82 
163. Tripura Tripura Ranirbazar May-14 0.56 0.17 30.36 
164. Tripura Tripura Belonia Sep-14 0.64 0.19 29.69 
165. Tripura Tripura Jogendranagar Sep-14 0.78 0.23 29.49 
166. Tripura Tripura Sonamura Sep-14 0.69 0.21 30.43 

  A25  
  
167. Tripura Tripura Agartala Nov-14 20.71 6.21 29.99 
168. Tripura Tripura Pratapgarh Nov-14 0.48 0.14 29.17 
169. Tripura Tripura Teliamura Nov-14 0.81 0.24 29.63 
170. Tripura Tripura Khowai Mar-15 0.72 0.21 29.17 
171. Tripura Tripura Kailasahar Mar-15 0.83 0.25 30.12 
172. Tripura Tripura Gandhigram Mar-15 0.3 0.09 30.00 
173. Tripura Tripura Badharghat Mar-15 1.67 0.5 29.94 
174. Tripura Tripura Dharmanagar Mar-15 1.06 0.32 30.19 
175. Tripura Tripura Kumarghat Mar-15 3.68 1.1 29.89 
176. Tripura Tripura Udai Pur Mar-15 1.05 0.32 30.48 
177. Uttar 
Pradesh 
PoVVNL Obra Jun-13 0.77 0.17 22.08 
178. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Kakrala Oct-13 0.33 0.09 27.27 
179. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Mahmudabad Oct-13 0.73 0.21 28.77 
180. Uttar 
Pradesh 
PoVVNL Kopaganj Jan-14 1.13 0.3 26.55 
181. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Laharpur Feb-14 0.67 0.17 25.37 
182. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Palia Kalan Feb-14 0.93 0.28 30.11 
183. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Bahraich Apr-14 3.57 1.04 29.13 
184. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Bangarmau Apr-14 0.78 0.22 28.21 
185. Uttar 
Pradesh 
PaVVNL Tanda. Apr-14 0.79 0.23 29.11 
186. Uttar 
Pradesh 
MVVNL Akbarpur Jul-14 1.91 0.54 28.27 
187. Uttar 
Pradesh 
PoVVNL Mughalsarai May-15 3.06 0.61 19.93 
188. Uttar 
Pradesh 
PaVVNL Loni Jun-15 9.59 2.32 24.19 
189. Uttar 
Pradesh 
DVVNL Mathura Jul-15 12.48 2.63 21.07 

  A26    
 
Annexure XIII 
(Refer to Para 5.3) 
 
 
A T&C Losses for the year 2008-09 to 2010-11 (in per cent) 
 
 
S. No State 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
  14th 
Standing 
Committee 
on Energy 
(2010-11)  
March 2011 
12th 
Five 
Year 
Plan 
(May 
2013) 
Annex 
referred 
to in reply 
to parts 
(c) & (d) 
of un-
starred 
question 
no. 5892 
to be 
answered 
in the Lok 
Sabha on 
02.05.2013 
5th 
Standing 
Committ
ee on 
Energy 
2014-15 
16th  
Lok 
Sabha 
 
April 
2015 
12th Five 
Year 
Plan 
(May 
2013) 
Annex 
referred to 
in reply to 
parts (c) & 
(d) 
of un-
starred 
question 
No. 5892 to 
be 
answered 
in the Lok 
Sabha on 
02.05.2013 
5th 
Standin
g 
Commit
tee on 
Energy 
2014-15 
Sixteent
h Lok 
Sabha 
April 
2015 
12th Five 
Year 
Plan 
(May 
2013) 
Provisio
nal 
Figures 
Annex 
referred to 
in reply to 
parts (c) & 
(d) 
of un-
starred 
question 
no. 5892 to 
be 
answered 
in the Lok 
Sabha on 
02.05.2013 
5th 
Standing 
Committee 
on Energy 
2014-15 
Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha 
April 2015 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
12.99 19.39 12.99 12.99 18.32 16.43 16.43 16.78 17.50 17.50 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
60.15 74.27 60.15 60.15 63.14 58.82 58.82 65.48 61.45 61.45 
3. Assam 20.32 35.37 32.68 32.68 38.24 29.31 56.19 45.13 29.19 28.71 
4. Bihar 34.37 41.66 34.37 34.37 42.39 43.92 43.92 49.99 47.44 47.44 
5. Chhattisgarh 32.45 37.78 32.73 32.73 46.62 36.28 40.04 36.41 28.64 28.84 
6. Delhi 17.97 17.92 17.92 17.92 20.78 20.78 20.78 15.76 15.76 15.76 
7. Goa 17.17 17.81 21.69 21.69 16.18 6.12 6.12 15.57 14.08 14.08 
8. Gujarat 22.05 25.46 22.04 22.04 26.87 22.81 22.81 18.25 16.89 16.89 

  A27    
9. Haryana 33.29 28.43 33.29 33.29 29.50 29.32 29.32 26.72 28.02 28.02 
10. Himachal 
Pradesh 
12.85 16.20 12.85 12.85 17.39 18.46 18.46 13.53 15.72 14.70 
11. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
69.05 70.69 69.05 69.05 72.03 70.44 70.44 74.30 72.86 72.86 
12. Jharkhand 59.00 54.23 54.16 62.80 49.07 10.21 10.43 45.11 46.79 46.79 
13. Karnataka 25.68 24.79 24.94 24.94 23.69 25.34 25.34 23.64 23.71 23.71 
14. Kerala 21.61 34.98 21.61 21.61 28.81 14.90 14.90 29.72 14.09 14.09 
15. Madhya 
Pradesh 
61.05 45.78 46.61 46.61 42.93 41.03 41.03 41.10 37.28 37.28 
16. Maharashtra 31.19 28.75 31.19 31.19 27.44 25.02 25.02 23.47 23.30 23.30 
17. Manipur 81.01 83.55 81.32 81.32 69.23 47.55 47.55 67.74 40.17 40.17 
18. Meghalaya 43.37 35.27 43.37 43.37 43.19 48.77 48.77 37.93 51.63 51.63 
19. Mizoram 41.01 46.43 41.08 41.08 42.89 38.95 38.95 42.08 41.00 43.09 
20. Nagaland 48.69 55.85 44.12 44.12 58.02 46.16 65.36 55.98 50.07 49.73 
21. Odisha 39.43 42.20 42.20 42.20 39.71 39.70 39.70 44.35 44.35 45.60 
22. Puducherry 18.47 Not 
available 
18.47 18.47 Not 
available 
19.35 19.35 Not 
availabl
e 
14.43 14.43 
23. Punjab 18.96 19.76 18.51 18.51 19.97 17.73 17.73 18.35 17.47 19.64 
24. Rajasthan 29.52 32.99 29.83 29.83 33.06 30.07 30.07 25.60 24.19 24.66 
25. Sikkim 56.86 46.81 46.81 46.81 51.37 55.36 59.31 46.81 51.96 65.46 
26. Tamil Nadu 15.33 20.19 14.39 14.39 19.11 18.87 18.87 18.27 19.90 19.49 
27. Tripura 31.98 40.08 31.91 31.91 37.52 29.16 29.16 41.19 34.48 34.48 
28. Uttar Pradesh 40.32 35.29 35.04 34.90 36.69 35.73 34.45 37.86 40.29 42.94 
29. Uttarakhand 35.37 29.35 39.89 39.89 28.61 28.35 28.35 29.17 28.48 28.48 
30. West Bengal 22.73 28.81 25.81 25.81 26.13 33.24 33.24 28.87 27.40 27.40 
 
  

 
  A 28  
  
Annexure – XIV 
(Refer to Para 5.3) 
 
                       
 AT&C Losses for the year 2011-12 and 2012-13 (in per cent) 
 
 
Sl No. States 2011-12 2012-13 
Fifth Report of 
Standing 
Committee on 
Energy (2014-15) 
16th Lok Sabha- 
Ministry of 
Power -Demands 
for grants  
2015-16 
(April 2015) 
Report on "The 
Performance of 
State Power 
Utilities for the 
years 2011-12 to 
2013-14" 
(July 2015) 
Fifth Report of 
Standing 
Committee on 
Energy (2014-15) 
16th Lok Sabha- 
Ministry of 
Power -Demands 
for grants  
2015-16 
(April 2015) 
Report on "The 
Performance of 
State Power 
Utilities for the 
years 2011-12 to 
2013-14" 
(July 2015) 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
15.27 15.27 13.63 13.70 
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
65.55 65.55 60.26 60.26 
3.  Assam 29.47 29.47 31.85 31.85 
4.  Bihar 59.24 59.24 54.63 47.44 
5.  Chhattisgarh 29.05 29.05 25.12 25.12 
6.  Delhi 18.56 18.56 15.22 15.22 
7.  Goa 15.12 15.12 14.14 14.14 
8.  Gujarat 19.26 19.26 19.87 19.87 
9.  Haryana 28.27 28.27 32.55 32.55 
10.  H.P. 18.04 18.04 9.53 11.90 
11.  J&K 71.16 71.16 60.87 60.87 
12.  Jharkhand 42.77 42.76 47.49 47.49 
13.  Karnataka 23.29 23.29 20.78 20.78 

 
  A 29  
  
14.  Kerala 12.17 12.17 10.53 12.32 
15.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
38.26 38.26 31.15 31.15 
16.  Maharashtra 21.63 21.63 21.95 21.95 
17.  Manipur 44.80 44.80 85.49 85.49 
18.  Meghalaya 44.85 45.33 26.60 36.25 
19.  Mizoram 36.59 36.59 27.55 27.55 
20.  Nagaland 22.85 22.85 75.30 75.30 
21.  Odisha 44.66 44.66 42.94 42.88 
22.  Puducherry 18.91 18.91 9.13 9.13 
23.  Punjab 18.96 18.96 17.66 17.52 
24.  Rajasthan 24.81 24.81 20.00 20.00 
25.  Sikkim 58.32 58.32 53.51 53.51 
26.  Tamil Nadu 21.70 21.70 20.72 20.71 
27.  Tripura 33.76 33.76 33.85 24.86 
28.  Uttar Pradesh 41.95 41.95 42.85 42.85 
29.  Uttarakhand 25.84 25.84 23.18 23.18 
30.  West Bengal 32.90 32.90 34.43 34.43 

 
  A 30  
  
Annexure – XV 
(Refer to Para 5.5.1)   
 
Status of DT Metering and Feeder Metering 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
States 
11kV Feeders Distribution Transformer 
2008-09 2014-15 2008-09 2014-15 
Numbers  Metered %age Numbers  Metered %age Numbers  Metered %age Numbers  Metered %age 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
985 932 94.62 1,484 1,484 100 28,709 5,988 20.86 47,921 49,586 103.47 
2. Assam R-APDRP works not started 539 539 100 R-APDRP works not started 5,624 5,624 100 
3. Bihar2 182 102 56.04 755 715 94.70 4,065 1,395 34 15,127 12,473 82.45 
4. Chhattisgarh 500 391 78.20 700 688 98.29 9,201 2,761 30.01 11,214 10,127 90.31 
5. Goa 227 227 100 275 275 100 4,081 0 0 5,900 4,709 79.81 
6. Gujarat 5,895 5,895 100 7,984 7,984 100 2,24,086 1,53,712 68.60 4,31,303 3,43,437 79.63 
7. Haryana 1,452 1,452 100 1,575 1,575 100 18,569 2,828 15.23 35,109 27,076 77.12 
8. Himachal 
Pradesh 
135 135 100 165 165 100 2,015 1,960 97.27 2,906 2,887 99.34 
9. J&K 621 282 45.41 1,371 269 19.62 9,588 0 0 9,588  685 7.31 
10. Jharkhand 342 229 66.96 413 413 100 10,195 6,261 61.41 10,040 10,040 100 
11. Karnataka 1,227 299 24.37 488 1,858 380.74 23,852 8,699 36.47 58,483 53,066 90.74 
12. Kerala 1,752 1,752 100 2,021 2,021 100 46,955 15,943 34 71,199 38,698 54 
13. Madhya 
Pradesh 
26,945 24,467 90.80 42,083 41,640 98.94 1,02,482 25,435 24.82 1,92,317 70,849 36.84 
                                                           
2  Information for 2008-09 is only for one utility 

 
  A 31  
  
14. Maharashtra3 9,380 6,851 73.04 17,093 16,156 94.52 3,59,543 2,33,754 65.01 4,50,492 2,31,275 51.34 
15.  Manipur No data 
available 
No data 
available 
No data 
available 
71 71 100 Nil Nil ------ 1,168 1,081 92.55 
16.  Meghalaya 113 75 66.37 122 122 100 928 455 49.03 1,682 1,682 100 
17.  Mizoram 147 145 98.64 215 170 79.07 1,273 0 0 1,752 850 49.00 
18.  Nagaland 198 80 40 260 158 
(including 
78 under 
R-
APDRP) 
61 1,694 453 27 3,604 1,638 
(including 
1,185 
under R-
APDRP) 
45 
19.  Odisha Base year is 2012-13.  Tenders are in the final stage of award  NA 
20. Puducherry 40 0 0 60 0 0 960 0 0 1,416 950 67.09 
21.  Punjab 1,032 1,032 100 1,568 1,568 100 24,301 N.A. N.A. 39,591 31,358 79.2 
22.  Rajasthan  2,064 1,768 85.66 3,058 2,652 86.72 35,204 8,697 24.70 54,398 15,143 27.84 
23.  Sikkim 56 23 41.07 65 65 100 237 57 24.05 328 258 78.66 
24.  Tamil Nadu  704 704 100 2,285 2,285 100 29,994 NIL 0 48,244 48,244 100 
25. Telangana 1,337 1,337 100 1,787 1,787 100 39,176 7,024 17.92 50,870 50,870 100 
26.  Tripura 72 72 100 86 86 100 1,409 1,110 78.77 1,280 1,059 82.73 
27.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
4,224 2,322 54.97 3,331 3,065 92.01 1,40,833 1,14,804 81.52 43,441 28,463 65.52 
28. Uttarakhand 519 516 99.42 662 662 100 3,618 1,724 47.65 5,680 4,360 76.76 
29.  West Bengal NA NA NA 3,337 3,170 95 85,145 15,000 17.62 1,99,289 38,124 19.13 
 
 
                                                           
3  The figures or 2008-09 and 2014-15 pertains to Maharashtra state as a whole. 

 
  A 32  
  
 
Annexure XVI 
(Refer to Para 5.5.1) 
 
 
Status of consumer metering 
 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
States 
2008-09 2014-15 
Numbers  Metered Percentage Numbers  Metered Percentage 
1. Andhra  
Pradesh 
12,34,159 12,34,159 100 14,25,368 14,25,368 100 
2. Assam Consumer metering not started 7,62,101 7,62,101 100 
3. Bihar 3,80,9194 3,44,902 90.54 24,95,249 23,52,966 94.30 
4. Chhattisgarh 6,76,050 6,76,050 100 8,78,129 8,78,129 100 
5. Goa 5,29,773 5,27,336 99.54 5,83,694 5,81,441 99.61 
6. Gujarat 79,82,367 77,53,964 97.14 1,04,38,509 1,02,13,107 97.84 
7. Haryana 14,92,595 14,92,595 100 17,40,286 17,40,286 100 
8. Himachal 
Pradesh 
2,73,875 2,73,875 100 3,19,538 3,19,538 100 
9. J&K 11,82,548 4,17,077 35.26 15,85,149 8,14,345 51.37 
10. Jharkhand 6,16,322 5,37,252 87.17 N A N A N A 
11. Kerala 93,63,461 93,63,461 100 1,14,58,301 1,14,58,301 100 
12. Karnataka 10,13,426 10,13,426 100 20,55,697 20,55,697 100 
13. Madhya 
Pradesh 
23,02,740 22,70,488 98.64 51,01,914 30,33,066 59.45 
                                                           
4  Information in respect of one Utility. 

 
  A 33  
  
14. Maharashtra5 1,68,09,590 1,53,68,271 91.42 2,30,35,775 2,14,33,928 93.05 
15. Manipur 1,83,686 1,65,270 
(i/c 
defective) 
89.97 2,58,484 1,94,867 75.39 
16. Meghalaya 86,683 79,646 91.88 1,28,688 1,26,582 98.36 
17.  Mizoram 1,58,289 1,49,186 94.25 2,03,220 1,95,581 96.24 
18. Nagaland 1,80,000 1,75,000 97 2,40,626 2,32,171 96 
19. Odisha -  - - - - - 
20. Puducherry 165 66 40 197 125 63.45 
21. Punjab 20,56,262 20,56,262 100 21,97,838 21,97,838 100 
22. Rajasthan  24,19,606 24,19,597 99.99 36,53,583 36,53,154 99.99 
23. Sikkim 12,527 10,131 80.87 15,771 14,459 91.68 
24. Tamil Nadu 63,26,000  63,26,000 100 85,26,000  85,26,000  100 
25. Telangana 34,33,225 34,33,225 100 38,64,941 38,64,941 100 
26. Tripura 1,34,089  1,34,089   100 2,73,247  2,73,247  100 
27. Uttar 
Pradesh 
28,15,611 27,77,384 98.63 37,56,833 37,56,833 100 
28. Uttarakhand 4,41,542 4,41,484 99.99 5,85,247 5,85,247 100 
29.  West 
Bengal 
68,35,269 58,09,979 85 1,50,99,540 1,50,91,440 99.94 
 
  
  
                                                           
5  The figures or 2008-09 and 2014-15 pertains to Maharashtra state as a whole 

 
  A 34  
  
Annexure- XVII 
(Refer to Para 5.6.1.1) 
  
 
Setting up of Special Court 
 
 
Name of State Date of Setting up of 
Special Court 
Nos. of offences 
recorded since 
April 2008 to 
March 2015 
Nos. of cases 
in which 
trial 
conducted 
Nos. of 
cases in 
which 
penalties 
imposed 
Nos. of 
cases 
pending 
for 
decisions 
Duration of 
pendency of 
each case. 
 Andhra Pradesh 
(APEPDCL) 
18.10.2003 26,660 47 22,613 39 7 months to 4 years 
10 months 
 Andhra Pradesh 
(APSPDCL) 
18.10.2003 87,291 0 87,291 2 More than 2 years 
 Assam 15-10-2005 1,862 154 1,708 Nil NA 
Bihar 20-11-2009    8906 NA 468 NA NA 
 Chhattisgarh 16  and 5 special courts 
were set up on 5/1/2007 
and 22/6/2013 respectively 
48,113 9,981 521 9,460 NA 
                                                           
6  Special courts have been set up at Gaya, Muzzaferpur and Patna. Inform ation in respect of Gaya and Patna are not available. 

 
  A 35  
  
 Goa Not  Established Information  furnished 
as ‘NIL’ 
Not Applicable Not 
Applicable 
Not 
Applicable 
Not Applicable 
Gujarat 
 
 
 
 
21-06-04 DGVCL -65,818 1,333 65,818 1,077 1 to 6 years 
21-06-04 MGVCL -35,763 753 34,037 265 1 to 6 years 
21-06-04 PGVCL -143270 17,595 1,43,270 4,256 1 to 6 years 
21-06-04 UGVCL- 11017 135 1,279 126 1 to 6 years 
 Haryana Special court not set up in 
Haryana 
N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. 
 Himachal Pradesh 21-10-2005 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
 J&K No court established Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 
 Jharkhand 23.7.20107  N.A N.A 
 
N.A N.A N.A 
 Karnataka8 10.11.2003 13,523 13,523 13,523 460 1 year to 6 years 
 Kerala 11.7.2007 22,646 53 3,263 53 From 6 months to 4 
years 
                                                           
7 23-07-2010   Special courts have been set up at Ranchi,  Jamshedpur, D hanbad, Hazaribagh, Dumka, Medininagar Districts 
8 Information pertaining to only one utility BESCOM,      

 
  A 36  
  
 Madhya Pradesh9 Not furnished (MPMKVVCL, 
Bhopal)- 3,35,28010  
Not furnished 3,35,28011  67,999 Not furnished 
40 numbers of special 
courts were opened under 
Eastern Discom during the 
period from 2004 to 2014-
15 as furnished by 
management 
Eastern DISCOM- 
84,403 
64,466 16,426 67,977 Case wise pendency 
was not furnished by 
the management. 
However it was 
stated that duration 
of pendency varies 
from case to case and 
generally the cases 
were decided in three 
years period  
16-09-2010 (MPPKVVCL, Indore)12 
35,118 
18,067 8 7,702  
 Maharashtra 29-12-05 Kalyan – 28,338 397 0 397   
Nasik – 12,330 299 0 299   
Pune – 3,334 355 173 182   
Latur – 12,363 170 8 162   
Nagpur – 13,747 479 0 479   
Jalna – 30,529 597 0 597   
 Manipur Jun-04 489 461 461 28 6-8 months 
 Meghalaya 03-Aug-06 4 4 4 Nil -- 
 Mizoram 08 .02.2012 NIL NIL  NIL NIL 
                                                           
9  Information in respect of establishing the case pending in  court  in resp ect of MPMKVVCL was not furnished 
10  From 2009 to 2015 
11  From 2009 to 2015 by company 
12  Information in respect of establishing the case pending in  court  in resp ect of MPMKVVCL was not furnished 

 
  A 37  
  
 Nagaland 14.08.2006 NIL NIL  NIL NIL 
 Odisha 2007 2881 258 82 2,623 April 2008 to March 
2015 
Puducherry 08.09.2010 1 --- --- 1 48 months 
 Punjab  3-12-2008 11,987 819 179 434 -- 
 Rajasthan       
May 2004 Jodhpur-13879 753 12,489 637 NA 
NA Ajmer-1238 557 132 681 6-7 years 
 Sikkim 03.05.2006  Nil  Nil  Nil Nil  Nil 
 Tamil Nadu 05.10.2006 22 10 3 19 1-6 years    
Telangana 18.10.2003 TSSPDCL -2,24,051 228 70 77 1month to 7 years 
2000-03 TSNPDCL -57 56 27 2 0 to 2 years 
 Tripura 02.08.2004  Not furnished  Not furnished  Not 
furnished  
Not 
furnished  
Not furnished 
Uttar Pradesh 
 
 
 
 
31.08.2004 MVVNL -7,213 7,213 5,375 1,838 Establishment of 
duration of pendency 
of each cases is not 
feasible. 
31.08.2004 PVNNL- NA NA NA NA   
31.08.2004 PuVVNL- NA NA NA NA   
31.08.2004 DVVNL -NA NA NA NA   
Uttarakhand 24-09-04 4,697 2,542 2,230 419 08 to 36 months 
 West Bengal NA  17,410 10,230  90  NA NA  
 

 
 
 Ab 1  
  
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
ABBREVIATION  FULL FORM 
ADB  Asian Development Bank 
AMR  Automatic Meter Reading 
APCPDCL  Andhra Pradesh Central Power Distribution Company Limited 
APDP  Accelerated Power Development Programme  
APDRP  Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
APEPDCL  Eastern Power Distribution Company of Andhra Pradesh Limited 
APFC Automatic Power Factor Controller 
APSPDCL Andhra Pradesh Southern Power Distribution Company 
ASCI  Administrative Staff College of India 
AT & C  Aggregate Technical and Commercial  
AVVNL  Ajmer Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited  
BE  Budget Estimates 
BG Bank Guarantee 
BESCOM  Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Ltd. 
BOQ Bill of Quantities 
CAG  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CEA  Central Electricity Authority  
CEO  Chief Executive Officer 
CESC Chamundeshwari Electricity Supply Corporation Limited 
CLTDR  Corporate Liquid Term Deposit Receipt 
CLRC  Central Labour Rate Contract  
CPG  Contract Performance Guarantee  
CPRI  Central Power Research Institute 
CSS  Customer Service System  
DC  Data Centre  

 
 
 Ab 2  
  
DCU Data Collection Unit 
DGM  Deputy General Manager 
DGVCL Dakshin Gujarat Vij Company Limited 
DHBVN Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam 
DISCOMS  Distribution Companies  
DMS  Distribution Management System 
DPR  Detailed Project Report 
DRC  Disaster Recovery Centre  
DRC  Distribution Reforms Committee  
DT  Distribution Transformer 
DVVNL  Dakshinanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd. 
EMD  Earnest Money Deposit 
EPD  Electricity and Power Department  
ERP  Enterprise Resource Planning 
ERW  Electric Resistance Welded 
ESCOM  Electricity Supply Company 
FDT  Feeder and Distribution Transformer  
FI  Financial Institution 
GBS  Gross Budgetary Support 
GESCOM Gulbarga Electricity Supply Company  Limited 
GFR  General Financial Rules 
GIS  Geographical Information System 
GOI  Government of India 
GPRS  General Packet Radio Service 
IIM   Indian Institutes of Management  
IPDS  Integrated Power Development Scheme 
IT  Information Technology 
ITC  IT Consultant 
ITIA  IT Implementing Agency 
JVVNL  Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited. 
JdVVNL  Jodhpur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited  

 
 
 Ab 3  
  
JSEB  Jharkhand State Electricity Board  
KV  Kilo Volt 
KVA  Kilo Volt Ampere 
LOA  Letters of Award 
LOI  Letter of Intent  
LT  Low Tension 
MDAS  Meter Data Acquisition System   
MeECL  Meghalaya Energy Corporation Limited 
MGVCL  Madhya Gujarat Vij Company Limited 
MIS  Management Information System 
MoA  Memorandum of Agreement  
MOF  Ministry of Finance 
MOP  Ministry of Power  
MPMKVVCL  Madhya Pradesh Madhya Kshetra Vidyut Vitaran Company Limited 
MPPKVVCL  Madhya Pradesh Paschim Kshetra Vidyut Vitaran Company Ltd. 
MSEDCL  Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited 
MSPDCL  Manipur State Power Distribution Company Limited 
MVA  Mega Volt Ampere 
MVVNL  Madhyanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd. 
NEF National Electricity Fund 
NER  North Eastern Region 
NPTI  National Power Training Institute  
NPV  Net Present Value 
O&M  Operation and Maintenance 
PAC  Public Accounts Committee  
PAMC  Project Appraisal and Monitoring Committee 
PFC  Power Finance Corporation  
PGVCL  Paschim Gujarat Vij Company Limited 
PSPCL  Punjab State Power Corporation Limited 
PTR  Power Transformer 
PTI  Partner Training Institute 

 
 
 Ab 4  
  
PVC  Polyvinyl chloride 
PVVNL   Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Limited 
PuVVNL  Purvanchal Vidyut Vitaran Nigam Limited 
PWD   Public Works Department 
QA  Quadripartite Agreement  
R-APDRP  Restructured – Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme  
R&M  Renovation and Modernization  
RE  Revised Estimates 
RCA  Root Cause Analysis  
REC  Rural Electrification Corporation Limited 
RFP  Request For Proposal 
Rl  Resource Institute 
RPM  Review Planning and Monitoring  
SBI  State Bank of India 
SCADA  Supervisory  Control and Data Acquisition System 
SDC  SCADA/DMS Consultant 
SEB  State Electricity Board 
SED  State Electricity Department 
SI  System Improvement 
SIA  SCADA/DMS Implementing Agency 
SOR  Schedule of Rates 
SU  State Utility 
TANGEDCO  Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited 
TCS  Tata Consultancy Services 
TERI  The Energy and Resources Institute 
TKF  Turn Key Firm 
TPIEA  Third Party Independent Evaluation Agency  
TPIEA-EA  Third Party Independent Evaluation Agency -Energy Accounting 
TPIEA-IT  Third Party Independent Evaluation Agency - Information Technology 
TSNPDCL  Telangana State Northern Power Distribution Company Limited 
TSSPDCL  Telangana State Southern Power Distribution Company Limited 

 
 
 Ab 5  
  
UC  Utilisation Certificate 
UGVCL  Uttar Gujarat Vij Company Ltd. 
UPPCL Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited 
VCB  Vacuum Circuit Breaker 
WAPCOS Water and Power Consultancy Services 
WBSEDCL  West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Company Limited 
 
 
 
  