 
 
 


 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
on  
 
 
Land Management in  
Delhi Development Authority 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government  
Ministry of Urban Development  
Report No. 31 of 2016 
(Performance Audit) 

 
 
 

 
 
    i     
        
               CONTENTS 
 
  
           
Chapter/Title Page No. 
 
Preface v 
 
Executive Summary vii-xv 
 
Chapter 1 -     Overview of Land Management in DDA  
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Nature of Land under jurisdiction of DDA  1 
1.3 Land Management Process in DDA 2 
1.4 Organisational Set up in DDA for Land Management 2 
1.5 Budget, Receipt and Expenditure 3 
 
Chapter 2 -     Audit Framework  
2.1  Audit Mandate 5 
2.2 Audit Objectives 5 
2.3 Scope of Audit  5 
2.4 Sources of Audit Criteria 5 
2.5 Audit Methodology and Sampling 6 
2.6 Acknowledgment 7 
 
Chapter  3 - Land Acquisition   
3.1 Planning 9 
3.2 Land Acquisition 13 
 
Chapter 4 - Development of Land  
4.1 Introduction 27 
4.2 Planning  27 
4.3 Delay in Commencement and Execution of Work 29 
4.4 Delay in handing over of the Completed Projects  31 
4.5 Non-Utilization of the land handed over to user departments  31 

 
 
    ii     
        
 
Chapter 5 -      Land Disposal  
5.1 Introduction 33 
5.2 Rules governing Disposal of Land 33 
5.3 Planning 33 
5.4 Institutional Allotments 36 
5.5 Allotment of Commercial Land  44 
5.6 Allotment of Industrial Land  48 
5.7 ROHINI Residential Scheme 49 
5.8 Allotment of Alternate Residential Land 50 
5.9 Allotment of land to Government Departments 51 
5.10 Post Allotment Monitoring Mechanism 52 
 
Chapter 6 -    Land Protection  
6.1 Introduction 55 
6.2 Protection of DDA Land 55 
6.3 Recovery of Encroached Land 55 
 
Chapter 7 -      Management of Nazul-I Lands  
7.1 Introduction         61 
7.2 Database/records of Nazul-I Lands    61 
7.3 Lease Administration of Nazul-I Lands 61 
7.4 Nazul-I Receipts  64 
7.5 Improper use of DDA Lands 66 
 
Chapter 8 -     Record Management  
8.1 Non Maintenance of Records 69 
8.2 Preservation and Protection of Records 73 
8.3 Safe Custody of Lease Deeds 73 
8.4 Digitalisation of Records by DDA 73 
 

 
 
    iii     
        
Chapter 9 -     Internal Audit and Accounts  
9.1 Effectiveness and Efficiency of Internal Audit in DDA 75 
9.2 Reporting and Reconciliation in DDA 76 
 
Chapter 10 -     Conclusion and Recommendations  
10.1 Conclusion 81 
10.2 Recommendations 82 
 
 
Abbreviations Ab1 – Ab2 
Glossary G1 – G2 
 
  
Annexures  
Annexure I to XIII A1 - A27 

 
 
 
 
    v     
        
 
 
 
his Report has been prepared for submission to the President 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
contains results of Performance Audit on Land Manag ement in 
Delhi Development Authority for the period 2010-11 to 2014-15. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, w hich came to 
notice in the course of test audit for the period 2 010-11 to 2014-15. 
The matters relating to the period subsequent to 20 14-15 have also 
been included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation receiv ed from DDA 
at each stage of the audit process. 
 
 
 
T
Preface 

 
 
    vii     
        
 
Introduction 
Delhi, being a city state and also the capital of the Country with an area of 1483 sq. km. and a 
population of 1.67 crore (as per census 2011), has a great need for planned development to 
make it a world class city. Further, with the explo sive growth of population, the importance of 
providing necessary infrastructure in a reasonable time and effective manner cannot be 
overstated.  
The Delhi Development Act, 1957 (DD Act) enacted by  the Central Government in 1957 
provides that the objective of the Delhi Developmen t Authority (DDA) shall be to promote 
and secure the development of Delhi according to th e Master Plan. Thus, DDA is responsible 
for acquisition and development of land for various developmental schemes as per the Master 
Plan approved by the Central Government. The land i s acquired through Delhi Government 
and placed at the disposal of DDA for development p urposes as approved under the various 
development schemes. 
Audit Objectives and Scope 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess: 
• Whether land management activities were executed wi th efficiency, economy and 
effectiveness and whether these were undertaken in accordance with the applicable 
legal and regulatory framework; 
• Whether an efficient planning mechanism for carryin g out the land management 
activities was in place and was functional; 
• Whether an effective system of record management an d documentation existed and was 
functional; 
• Whether an effective and efficient internal control  and monitoring system was in place 
for planned implementation of the land management activities. 
The land management activities in DDA commence with  the planning for acquisition of land. 
Requests for acquisition of land are sent to Delhi Government. Land acquired by Delhi 
Government as per the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (r eplaced by ‘The Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 
2013’) is handed over to the Land Management (LM) W ing of DDA. The land taken over by 
LM Wing is to be transferred to the user department /Engineering Wing of DDA for 
developing the same as per the relevant development  schemes and the Master Plan 
requirements. The developed land should be disposed  off for various purposes including 
institutional, residential, commercial and industri al use, by DDA in accordance with the 
provisions of Nazul Rules by the Land Disposal (LD)  wing. Protection of the land with DDA 
                  
 
 
                  Executive Summary 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    viii     
        
is an indispensable function of land management and  planned development. Land Protection 
activities are carried out by the LM and Engineerin g wings of DDA. Activities relating to 
land acquisition, development, protection and dispo sal were examined by Audit at DDA 
Headquarters as well as various field offices.  
Significant Audit Findings 
 
Budget, Receipt  and Expenditure 
Budget estimates of land acquisition, development a nd disposal were not prepared on a 
realistic basis keeping in view actual receipt/ expenditure.  
(Para 1.5) 
Land Acquisition 
The Master Plan of Delhi provides the vision for planned development of Delhi. The National 
Capital Territory of Delhi has been divided into 17  Zones as per the Master Plan.  The Zonal 
Development Plan (ZDP) contains, inter alia, site plan and use plan indicating approximate 
location and extent of land uses proposed in the Zo ne as well as detailed information 
regarding provision of social infrastructure, parks  and open spaces, circulation system, etc. 
Audit noticed that the ZDPs of 16 Zones were submit ted by DDA between February 2009 
and September 2009 i.e. after two years from notification (February 2007) of MPD-2021, and 
were approved by MoUD between March 2010 and June 2 010. Thus, finalization of ZDPs 
was delayed by more than two years. Further, the Pl an for one Zone i.e. Zone ‘D’, was yet to 
be notified by DDA (June /October 2016). 
 (Para 3.1.1) 
Monitoring and periodical review of Master Plan of Delhi (MPD)-2021 was not conducted as 
prescribed in the Master Plan. The Monitoring Unit set up in August, 2007 was not provided 
with modern data processing facilities and other necessary resources required for carrying out 
the task.  
(Para 3.1.2) 
MPD-2021 had envisaged alternative options for deve lopment of areas identified for 
urbanization in MPD-2021 through involvement of the  private sector in land assembly and 
development. For this purpose, a land pooling polic y was approved by the Central 
Government in September, 2013, but due to lack of c oordination between DDA and Delhi 
Government, on pre requisite formalities such as declaration of development areas, the policy 
has not been operationalised yet (October 2016). 
 (Para 3.1.3) 
DDA had no consolidated information/database in res pect of land acquired and utilized for 
various schemes as well as vacant land in hand. The  information relating to vacant land lying 
with DDA and acquired land during 2010-11 to 2014-15 provided by different wings of DDA 
was at variance. Further, joint inspection carried out by audit revealed shortages in land vis-à-
vis the area reported by DDA in its records. 
(Para 3.2.1) 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    ix     
        
There was lack of coordination between DDA and Delhi Government in acquisition proceedings, 
release of compensation/ enhanced compensation, rec eipt of land from Delhi Government, 
reconciliation of accounts and proper utilisation of funds by Delhi Government, which resulted in: 
• Non-reconciliation of compensation amount between DDA and Delhi Government. 
• Non-receipt of utilisation certificate from Delhi Government. 
• Non receipt of land even after release of full payment. 
• Double payment of enhanced compensation. 
 (Para 3.2.2) 
There was delay in completion of land acquisition p rocess. Time taken for release of 
compensation to Delhi Government, after receipt of demand from Delhi Government, ranged 
from seven month to more than eight years. Further, the time taken for transfer of land to user 
departments (or non transfer of land upto October 2 016), after taking possession of land from 
Delhi Government, ranged from one month to more than nine years.  
(Para 3.2.3) 
 
In respect of seven cases of acquisition, although the awards were announced before 01 
January 2009 for acquisition of 2052 acres of land,  physical possession of only 486 acres of 
land was received up to October 2016.  As such, lan d measuring 1566 acres has not been 
received (June/October 2016) which may lapse, in view of the  Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. 
 (Para 3.2.4) 
Recommendations 
/head2right The MPD should be monitored regularly as per the pr escribed periodicity and the 
monitoring unit should be equipped with all the nec essary resources to carry out its 
duties effectively. DDA should take necessary actio n to finalise the Zonal 
Development Plan of Zone ‘D’ at the earliest. 
/head2right DDA should develop a proper database of total land and appropriate records 
maintained in all wings should be properly reconciled. 
/head2right DDA should develop systems to ensure timely process ing of all the payment requests 
for compensations and enhanced compensations. DDA s hould also ensure that the 
acquired land is transferred to the user department/wing within a reasonable time after 
the possession of land is received in the Land Management wing. 
Land Development 
Proper and effective planning was important for tim ely and cost effective implementation of 
the development activities. It was important that p lans for development were prepared after 
carrying out proper site surveys, necessary technic al studies and in accordance with the 
identified requirements. Audit noticed various defi ciencies in planning for land development 
activities, which included: 
• Non availability of clear site before award of work. 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    x     
        
• Delay in submission of structural drawings. 
• Failure to take required approvals from various bodies before start of work. 
• Non approval of revised administrative approvals & expenditure sanctions and non-
revision of technical sanctions.  
• Foreclosure of work due to encroachments, agitations and court orders.  
(Para 4.2) 
Audit noticed delay ranging from six months to more  than 17 years in start of work, after the 
approval of  layout plan/ administrative approval a nd expenditure sanction by the competent 
authority. Further, delay in completion of works wa s noticed in the range of three to 43 
months. Delays ranging from 15 months to 55 months were also noticed in handing over of 
completed works to the concerned authorities.  
(Para 4.3 and 4.4) 
Joint Inspection with DDA representatives’ revealed  non-utilisation of land handed over to 
user departments. 
(Para 4.5) 
Recommendations 
/head2right DDA should strengthen its planning mechanism for la nd development activities. The 
estimates should be prepared after proper site veri fications, technical study and 
according to the requirements of the development plan.  
/head2right DDA should ensure that implementation of the develo pment works is taken up in a 
time bound manner and as per the prescribed technic al estimates. Revised approval of 
the estimates should also be taken in time and as per the prescribed norms.   
/head2right DDA should ensure proper coordination with other lo cal bodies, agencies and public 
utilities so that the development works are carried  out smoothly, all the clearances are 
received in time and completed works are handed ove r to the ultimate user at the 
earliest. 
Land Disposal 
Audit noted that there was neither a documented pol icy/timeframe to prioritize, schedule and 
plan the land disposal activities nor a centralized record/database of number of plots available 
and disposed off by DDA.  
(Para 5.3.1 and 5.3.3) 
No records relating to valuation of land and fixati on of reserve price was provided to Audit, 
in the absence of which audit could not draw an ass urance that any guideline in this regard 
existed and valuation was carried out properly and with necessary due diligence.  
 (Para 5.3.4) 
DDA allots Nazul land either through tender/auction  or by the process of allotment after 
consideration by Institutional Allotment Committee (IAC). For the process of allotment, the 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    xi     
        
application was to be processed within a period of three months from the date of application. 
Audit noticed that: 
• IAC meetings to process the cases for allotment of institutional land were not held 
regularly. Only seven IAC meetings were held during  the period 2010-11 to 2014-15 
as against the requirement of 30 meetings. 
• 13 out of 36 cases put up to IAC did not fulfil the  requirements of Nazul Rules and 
allotment was made in four of these cases.  
• DDA did not have clear guidelines or policy to deci de whether a society was running 
for charitable purpose. Different standards and criteria were used in different cases. 
• In all the five cases of concessional allotment und er socio-culture category, the 
applicants did not fulfil all the requirements of t he Nazul rules. There was also delay 
between seven months to more than 11 years in processing of these cases. 
• Deficiencies were noticed in processing of cases wi th respect to requirements/ criteria 
framed for allotment of land to religious societies 
 
 (Para 5.4.1, 5.4.2, 5.4.3 and 5.4.4) 
As per Guidelines on Land Management, three per cent to four per cent of land acquired by 
DDA is to be utilized for commercial use such as fo r hotels, banquet hall, multilevel parking, 
office space etc. Audit noticed that there has been  a declining trend in the allotment of 
commercial plots. The percentage of plots disposed during 2010-11 to 2014-15 ranged 
between three per cent  and 15 per cent  of the number of plots put to disposal. Further 
scrutiny of the records of allotment of commercial land revealed the following deficiencies: 
• There were delays ranging from 26 to 481 days in in timation to successful bidders as 
against the stipulated period of 15 days. 
• Instances of Floor Area Ratio (FAR) and ground coverage being allowed to the bidder 
in variance either with the norms of the MPD-2021 o r with the Government orders 
were noticed. 
• Instance of reserve price of a commercial plot bein g successively reduced over the 
years were noticed, whereas all other commercial pl ots auctioned during the period in 
the same area had higher reserve prices. 
• Other issues including omission to sign rectificati on deed, intimation of granting 
extension of time communicated at the fag end, encr oachment of land by the 
successful bidder prior to making payment of land were also noticed. 
(Para 5.5.1 to 5.5.5) 
The Nazul rules prescribe tender or auction as the mode of allotment of land. However, Audit 
observed that a plot of land was allotted at the cu rrent market rate, without tender or auction, 
treating it as a strip of land. The correctness of the current market price arrived at could not 
be verified in audit due to absence of any record in this regard. The case was also not referred 
to the Land Allotment Advisory Committee, which rec ommends the cases of allotments for 
commercial purposes and industrial uses. 
(Para 5.6) 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    xii     
        
DDA announced ‘ROHINI’ residential scheme in the ye ar 1981. While announcing the 
scheme, it was envisaged that the allotment would b e made through draw of lots periodically. 
16 draws were held between 1982 and 2014. During th e period covered in audit, DDA had 
issued possession letters to 125 applicants. Audit/  test check of records of 24 cases provided 
to audit revealed certain deficiencies such as delay in holding draw for allotment, deficiencies 
in submission of required documents; loss of revenue in respect of unearned increase etc.                              
  (Para 5.7) 
Alternative allotment of residential plot is given on the recommendation of Delhi 
Government to the persons whose land was acquired f or planned development of Delhi under 
the scheme of Large Scale Acquisition, Development and Disposal of land in Delhi. Once 
recommended, DDA was to prepare a seniority list an d make allotment of alternative plots 
through periodic draw of lots. During test check of  17 alternative allotment cases, issues like- 
delay in making alternative allotment; delay in handing over the plot to allottees; allotment of 
land in excess of the prescribed norms etc. were noticed. 
(Para 5.8) 
DDA allots land to a Government Department as per r equest of the concerned department for 
construction of school, hospital, police station, b us depot etc. In the test checked cases of 
allotment of land to Government Departments, Audit noticed the following deficiencies:  
• Delay in processing of cases ranging from five to 93 months 
• Failure to hand over plots. 
• Allotment of land in excess/short of the norms prescribed in the Master Plan of Delhi. 
(Para 5.9 and 5.9.1) 
Joint Inspection with DDA representatives revealed instances of land not being used or being 
used unauthorisedly and land lying vacant as no con struction had been carried out by the 
allottees at the site.  
(Para 5.10) 
Recommendations 
/head2right DDA should prepare and adopt a comprehensive Land D isposal policy which should 
prescribe the principles and parameters for identif ication, prioritization and 
scheduling for land disposal programmes. Further, M oUD should take necessary 
action to resolve dispute of DDA & DSIIDC in consul tation with Delhi Government 
to enable industrial development of Delhi. 
/head2right DDA should ensure that the land disposal activities  are carried out in a timely manner 
as per the applicable regulatory framework and the norms should be uniformly and 
consistently applied in all the cases. Further, norms for identifying charitable nature of 
the institutions for allotment of lands on concessional terms should be laid down. 
/head2right DDA should implement an effective post allotment mo nitoring framework to ensure 
that all the conditions of allotment of land and po st allotment obligations are being 
complied with by the allottees. 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    xiii     
        
Land Protection 
In the scenario of growing population with increasi ng demand of land for various purposes, 
land being a premium and finite asset with resultan t existence of various vested interests, it 
was very important to have a robust and effective l and protection system. With regard to the 
land protection activities, Audit observed that: 
• Information pertaining to vacant land, land under e ncroachment and land being 
protected was incomplete and not updated.  
• There were encroachments and cases of failure to construct boundary wall. 
• There was an overall shortfall of 31.77 per cent  in carrying out demolition 
programmes during 2010-11 to 2014-15. 
• There was inadequate field staff for protection of land. 
• There were deficiencies in execution of demolition programme including late 
reporting of encroachment, non-handing over of land  to the Engineering Wing, 
ambiguities noticed in area under jurisdiction of e ngineering divisions and resultant 
lack of proper land protection activities. 
(Para 6.2, 6.3.1 to 6.3.4) 
Recommendations 
/head2right DDA should lay down and implement a land protection  system where construction of 
boundary wall/fencing/similar protection structure and setting up of sign boards 
declaring these to be DDA lands, is carried out immediately after the land is received. 
/head2right Regular inspections of the vacant land should be ca rried out and all the 
encroachments should be immediately reported and re medial action taken at the 
earliest. 
/head2right DDA should initiate action to ensure utilisation of  land for intended purposes in a 
time bound manner.  
Nazul-I Land 
No consolidated information/database in respect of Nazul-I lands transferred from erstwhile 
Delhi Improvement Trust, Land & Development Office,  Gaon-Sabha Lands of urbanised 
villages  as well as the details of individual Nazu l Properties, leases and their status was 
maintained. There were also deficiencies noticed in  lease administration and conversion of 
leases from leasehold to freehold. 
(Para 7.2) 
Perpetual lease of 90 years was required to be rene wed after specific intervals. At the end of 
90 years, land would lapse to DDA or could be made freehold by the lessee. However, there 
was no mechanism in DDA to watch and monitor the re newal of leases, as some leases were 
renewed up to second renewal, while others were not  renewed at all. The third renewal was 
not done in any of the test checked cases. 
(Para 7.3) 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    xiv     
        
As per terms and conditions stipulated in lease dee ds the ground rent, at the rate of two per 
cent to 2.5 per cent per annum of the premium determined by Government,   was payable in 
advance, either in two half yearly installments or annually. However, the demand of ground 
rent was not raised regularly as per the terms of l ease and recovery of ground rent was in 
arrears, which was not monitored.  Further, if any person was in unauthorised occupation of 
DDA’s property, the Estate Officer of DDA would ass ess the damages at the rates fixed by 
DDA from time to time. Damages were also to be levi ed on the ex-lessees/ occupants, in the 
case of expired/ cancelled leases. For collection o f damage charges, Show Cause Notices 
were to be issued regularly. Audit, however, notice d that there were delays up to 32 years in 
raising the demand of damage charges on the unauthorized occupants. 
(Para 7.4) 
There were commercial activities being undertaken o n the vacant land of the L&DO, 
transferred to DDA for care and maintenance/ land l eased out by DDA for residential 
purposes.  
(Para 7.5) 
Recommendations 
/head2right DDA should ensure that a comprehensive database and  record of all types of leases 
administered by it is prepared. This should also be  regularly updated to reflect the 
current changes viz. titles, periodic renewals. Add itionally, these records should also 
be integrated with land database.  
/head2right DDA should develop a comprehensive policy for effec tively dealing with the expired 
leases in Nazul -I land. This policy should aim at balancing all the interests like those 
of planned development of these areas, revenue inte rests of DDA and interests of the 
existing lessees.   
Record Management 
The Guidelines on Land Management of DDA prescribed  various types of records to be 
maintained relating to Land Management in various w ings of DDA. Audit reviewed the 
records maintained in DDA and noticed that: 
• Various important records and registers, which were  prescribed, were not maintained/ 
updated in various wings. 
• Records relating to land acquisition cases, ledgers , lease files etc were not being 
maintained properly and some of the records were mutilated. 
 (Para 8.1 and 8.2) 
Internal Audit and Accounts  
• Internal Audit was not able to complete audit of va rious units at the required 
periodicity of audit. Settlement of pending internal audit paragraphs was also slow.  
• DDA was not preparing Income and Expenditure Accoun ts and Balance Sheet in 
respect of its Nazul-II lands. 

Executive Summary 
 
 
 
    xv     
        
• There were differences in the amounts reported in d ifferent branches for expenditure 
incurred on acquisition of land.  
(Para 9.1 and 9.2) 
DDA, in its reply (June/October 2016) as well as in  the Exit Conference, stated that Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) relating to Land Management and Mobile Applications for land 
protection and e-Measurement Books have been develo ped (2015-16) and are being 
implemented. 
 
 
General Recommendations 
/head2right DDA should prepare an Office Manual laying down the  organization structure and 
defining roles and responsibilities across levels o f the organization along with 
Standard Operating Procedures for various activitie s and processes with defined 
timelines. The recently introduced SOPs and other i nitiatives should be 
institutionalized and monitored to ensure that thes e are integrated into the work 
processes of DDA.   
/head2right As DDA deals with varied activities in Land Managem ent and multiple wings of 
DDA participate in this process, DDA may consider i mplementation of an Enterprises 
Resource Planning (ERP) system, integrating all aspects of its functioning.  
/head2right DDA should maintain all the prescribed records and ensure their completeness, 
accuracy, timely updation and proper upkeep. A comp rehensive database of land 
stock with all details and present status must also  be maintained. Further, considering 
the importance, age and quantum of records, DDA sho uld complete the digitalization 
of its records at the earliest.  
/head2right It is important to have an effective coordination a nd cooperation mechanism between 
DDA and Delhi Government. An effective mechanism sh ould be evolved where all 
the pending issues between DDA and Delhi Government are settled. 
/head2right DDA needs to implement a strong system for effectiv e internal monitoring of land 
management activities.  
 
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        1     
        
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Introduction 
Delhi, being a city state and also the capital of t he country with an area of 1483 sq. km. and a 
population of 1.67 crore (as per census 2011), has a great need for planned development to 
make it a world class city. Moreover, with the expl osive growth of population, the importance 
of providing necessary infrastructure in a reasonab le time and effective manner cannot be 
overstated.  
Delhi Development Act, 1957 (DD Act) was enacted by  Parliament to provide for planned 
development of Delhi. As per the DD Act, the object ive of Delhi Development Authority 
(DDA) is to promote and secure the development of D elhi, as per the Master Plan for Delhi 
prepared by DDA and approved by the Government of I ndia (GoI). The land is acquired by 
Delhi Government (Land and Building Department) and  placed at the disposal of DDA for 
development as approved under various development schemes.  
1.2 Nature of Land under jurisdiction of DDA 
The Guidelines on Land Management prescribed by DDA  (January 1992) categorise land as 
under: 
1.2.1  Nazul-I Land 
 
(a) Old Nazul land transferred to DDA as successor of Delhi Improvement Trust 
The Government of India placed 24 Nazul Estates 1 at the disposal of the erstwhile Delhi 
Improvement Trust with effect from 1 April 1937 thr ough the “Nazul Agreement" of  
March, 1937 signed between the then Secretary of St ate for India in Council and Delhi 
Improvement Trust. After constitution of DDA, the a foresaid 24 Nazul Estates were 
transferred from Delhi Improvement Trust to DDA.  
 
(b) Land transferred to DDA under Section 22(1)2 of the DD Act 
This category included approximately 4021.33 acres 3 of land transferred to DDA in July 
1974, August 1974, August 1975 and July 1991, under  Section 22(1) of the DD Act, by the 
GoI. Transfer of the above land was subject to the condition that DDA would not make or 
                                                 
1 ( 1) Naiwala, (2) Basti Reghar (3) Karol Bagh (4) Bag h Raoji (5) Shidipura (6) Jhandewalan (7) Qadam Sha rif (8) Paharganj (9) Burn 
Bastion Road (10) Gestin Bastion Road (11) Darya Ganj South (12) Chirag North (13) Chirag South (14) Jhilmil Tahirpur (15) Inderpat 
(16) Arakpur Bagh Mochi (17) Aliganj (18) Southern Ridge (19) Sadar Bazar North (20) Sadar Bazar South  (21) Inside City Wall (22) 
Daryaganj North (23) The Bela and (24) Jangpura. 
2  As per Section 22 (1) of the DD Act, 1957, the Ce ntral Government may, by notification in the Offici al Gazette and upon such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed upon between that g overnment and DDA, place at the disposal of the Aut hority all or any developed 
and undeveloped lands in Delhi vested in the Union for the purpose of development. 
3  As worked out by Audit on the basis of records ma de available by DDA. 
 
1 
Chapter 
Overview of Land 
Management in DDA 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        2     
        
cause or permit to make any construction on the sai d land and was to re-place the said land at 
the disposal of the Central Government, when so required. 
The receipts and expenditure on account of these la nds are booked under a section, called 
"Nazul Account-I", of Accounts of DDA. 
1.2.2 Nazul-II Land 
These lands are acquired by Delhi Government as per  the provisions of Land Acquisition Act 
(LA Act)4, 1894 under the scheme of Large Scale Acquisition,  Development and Disposal of 
Land in Delhi framed by Government of India in 1961  and placed at the disposal of DDA for 
development and disposal. These lands are managed a s per provisions of the  
DD Act and Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of  Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 
(Nazul Rules).  
The receipts and expenditure on account of these la nds are booked under a section, called 
"Nazul Account-II", of Accounts of DDA. 
1.2.3 General Development Land 
These lands are acquired by DDA out of General Deve lopment Accounts Funds as its own 
property. These lands also include the unutilised l ands within the urban limits of Delhi, 
purchased by DDA in 1982 from erstwhile Ministry of  Supply and Rehabilitation, 
Government of India on as-is-where-is basis.  
The receipts and expenditure on account of these la nds are booked under a section, called 
"General Development Account", of Accounts of DDA. 
1.3 Land Management Process in DDA 
 
As per Section 6 (Chapter II) of the DD Act, DDA ha s the power to acquire, develop and 
dispose off land for planned development of Delhi. The various stages involved in the 
process of land management are shown below:  
Chart 1: Process of Land Management in DDA 
 
1.4 Organisational Set up in DDA for Land Management 
Land Management comprises the activities of land ac quisition, development, protection and 
disposal. Land acquisition matters are handled by t he Principal Commissioner (Land 
Management) who is assisted by Commissioner (Land M anagement) and two Directors. 
                                                 
4  The LA Act, 1894 has been replaced by ‘The Right t o Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisi tion, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013’ (The New Land Acquisition Act, 2013) applicable from 01/01/2014. 
Land Acquisition
Request for acquisition of
land is sent to Delhi
Government which carries
out the acquisition.
Land Development
Development of the
acquired land is to be
carried out according to
the Master Plan and
purpose for which land
was acquired.
Land Disposal
The developed land is
disposed off for
various developmental
purposes.

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        3     
        
Execution of the schemes is done by Chief Engineers  who function under the administrative 
control of the Engineer Member. Land disposal matte rs are handled by the Principal 
Commissioner (Land Disposal) who is assisted by Com missioner (Land Disposal) and three 
Directors. The Principal Commissioner (Land Management), Engineer Member and Principal 
Commissioner (Land Disposal) work under the overall  supervision of Vice Chairman, DDA, 
as shown in Chart 2: 
Chart 2: Organisation Chart for Land Management in DDA 
 
1.5 Budget, Receipt and Expenditure  
Budgetary allocation and actual expenditure on acqu isition and development of land and 
receipts from its disposal during the period 2010-11 to 2014-15 were as follows: 
Table 1 : Year-wise Budget and Actual Expenditure/Receipt 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Land Acquisition Land Development Land Disposal 
 Budgeted 
Expenditure 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Budgeted 
Expenditure 
Actual 
Expenditure 
Budgeted 
Receipt 
Actual 
Receipt 
2010-11 246.00 175.75 1,272.59 854.94 1,046.92 1,343.23 
2011-12 400.00 447.71 1,376.29 1,026.62 1,133.79 95 5.75 
2012-13 459.00 124.75 2,156.37 1,493.47 715.06 895.83 
2013-14 297.00 163.50 1,801.48 1,343.40 858.09 1,08 2.58 
2014-15 234.30 300.57 2,039.77 1,303.14 707.97 1,151.71 
 
From the above table, it is observed that the actua l expenditure varied significantly from 
budgeted expenditure pointing towards inadequacies in budget preparation. DDA stated  
(June/October 2016) that the Budget Estimate for pa yment of compensation and enhanced 
compensation entirely depended upon the demand bein g raised by Land Acquisition 
Collectors (LACs) /Land & Building Department of De lhi Government and is prepared on 
realistic basis based on data available with DDA on the estimated demand. Regarding receipt, 
Vice Chairman
Principal 
Commissioner (LM)
Commissioner 
(LM)
Director 
(LM)-I
Director 
(LM)-HQ
Engineer Member
Chief Engineer
(Zone/Project)
Superintending 
Engineer 
(Circle level)
Chief 
Engineer 
(HQ)
Superintending 
Engineer (HQ)
Principal 
Commissioner (LD)
Commissioner 
(LD)
Director (Land)
Director 
(Residential 
Land)
Director 
(Commercial 
Land)

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        4     
        
DDA stated that the actual receipt depends on the p revailing market trends which were down 
during past years resulting in variations. However,  observation of the Audit had been noted 
for future compliance. 
No specific reasons for variation in figures relate d to Land Development were furnished 
(October 2016) by DDA.  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        5     
        
Chapter 2 -  Audit Framework  
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 Audit Mandate 
The Performance Audit on Land Management in DDA was  conducted under Section  
19(2) of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Dut ies, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971, read with Section 25 (2) of the Delhi De velopment Act, 1957. The functioning of 
DDA relating to Development of Land was reviewed an d reported in Chapter-II of Audit 
Report No. 2 of 2006 of the C&AG of India. The Perf ormance Audit on Acquisition and 
Development of Land was reported in Chapter -V of A udit Report No. 17 of 2011-12 of the 
C&AG of India. Compliance with the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee 
on Report No. 2 of 2006 has been suitably incorporated in this report.    
2.2 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess: 
• Whether land management activities were executed wi th efficiency, economy and 
effectiveness and whether these were undertaken in accordance with the applicable 
legal and regulatory framework; 
• Whether an efficient planning mechanism for carryin g out the land management 
activities was in place and was functional; 
• Whether an effective system of records management a nd documentation existed and 
was functional; 
• Whether an effective internal control and monitorin g system was in place for planned 
implementation of the land management activities. 
2.3 Scope of Audit 
Activities relating to Land Acquisition, Land Devel opment, Land Disposal and Protection of 
land for the period of five years i.e. from 1 April  2010 to 31 March 2015 were examined at 
DDA Headquarters as well as at its various field offices.    
2.4  Sources of Audit Criteria 
Audit criteria for the Performance Audit have been drawn from the following sources: 
• Delhi Development Act, 1957; 
• Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and the Right to Fair Co mpensation and Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013; 
• Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981; 
• Policies/guidelines/instructions issued by competent authorities; 
 
2 
Chapter Audit Framework 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        6     
        
• Central Public Works Department Manual; 
• Master Plan of Delhi, 2021; 
• Contract Agreements and other relevant documents. 
2.5 Audit Methodology and Sampling 
 
2.5.1 Audit Methodology 
This Performance Audit was conducted in conformity with provision of Performance Audit 
Guidelines 2014. A Pilot Study was carried out duri ng January-May 2015 and an Entry 
Conference with DDA and representatives of the Mini stry of Urban Development (MoUD) 
was held on 26 June 2015 wherein the objective and scope of audit, audit methodology, audit 
criteria to be applied, detailed audit programme et c. were discussed. Joint Inspection was 
carried out with the officials of DDA. 
After completion of audit, a Draft Performance Audi t Report on Land Management in DDA 
was issued to MoUD and DDA on 22 April 2016 with a time of four weeks to respond.  
Responses of DDA were received in June 2016. An Exi t Conference was held on 16 June 
2016 with representatives of the MoUD and DDA, wher ein major audit findings and 
recommendations were discussed. Thereafter, the mod ified Draft Performance Audit Report 
was again issued to MoUD and DDA on 14 October 2016, wherein their final comments were 
sought within two weeks. DDA in its reply dated 28 October 2016 intimated that they had no 
additional comments to offer and the reply submitte d earlier may be treated as final. The 
replies received from DDA, as well as their respons e during the Exit Conference, have been 
duly considered and incorporated in the Report. Reply of Ministry was not received. 
2.5.2 Audit Sample 
DDA did not make available complete information sou ght by Audit on Land Acquisition, 
Land Development, Disposal of Land and Nazul-I prop erties relating to the audit period. 
Details of cases selected for Audit and records provided by DDA there against are as follows: 
Table 2 :  Details of cases selected for Audit and status of records provided by DDA 
Particulars Type Total No. of Cases 
(as provided by 
DDA) 
No. of 
Cases 
Selected 
No. of Cases 
in which 
Records 
Provided 
Land Acquisition Acquisition  39 19 18 
Enhanced Compensation 935 50 46 
Land 
Development 
Major schemes/works 57 11 11 
Land Disposal Institutional  141 50 40 
Industrial  2 2 2 
Alternate Allotment 175 17 17 
Commercial 24 24 18 
Land Sales Branch, Rohini 125 25 24 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        7     
        
Particulars Type Total No. of Cases 
(as provided by 
DDA) 
No. of 
Cases 
Selected 
No. of Cases 
in which 
Records 
Provided 
Land Protection Demolition Cases 734 37 14 
Nazul I 
Properties 
Lease Cases Full details not 
provided 
60 13 
Conversion from leasehold 
to freehold 
Full details not 
provided 
58 44 
Recovery of damage 
charges 
Full details not 
provided 
21 12 
2.6 Acknowledgment 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation received from t he officers/ officials of MoUD, DDA 
and its field offices during the audit process. 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        8     
        
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        9     
        
 
 
Chapter 3 -  Land Acquisition  
 
 
DDA is responsible for acquisition and development of land for various developmental 
schemes as per Master Plan approved by the Central Government. Land Management Wing 
of DDA carries out the work of Land acquisition on the basis of request from user 
departments. It forwards the request to Delhi Gover nment for acquisition of land. The land is 
acquired by Delhi Government and placed at the disp osal of DDA. After taking over the 
possession of land from the Delhi Government, the s ame is to be transferred to the user 
departments for development purposes approved under various development schemes and the 
purpose of acquisition of land.  
3.1 Planning 
Master Plan of Delhi (MPD) 1962 sets out the broad vision for planned development of 
Delhi. With a view to realizing the development pla n underlying this vision, a scheme of 
large scale acquisition and development of land was  formulated in 1961. The aim of the 
scheme was to ensure that spatial pattern of develo pment and use of land would conform to 
the development plan and the infrastructure and services would be laid out to match the same.  
Later, MPD-2001 also reiterated the planning proces s, which had been outlined in  
MPD-1962. Keeping in view the above goal, the MPD-2 021 also emphasized upon 
development perspective up to the year 2021. The vi sion of MPD-2021 is to make Delhi a 
global metropolis and a world-class city, where all  the people would be engaged in 
productive work, living in a sustainable environment with a better quality of life.  
The hierarchy of plans for development of Delhi is given in the chart at next page: 
  
 
3 
Chapter Land Acquisition 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        10     
        
Chart 3: Planning Hierarchy 
 
In order to ensure whether proper and efficient pla nning mechanism was in place and was 
functional for carrying out the land acquisition ac tivities, Audit reviewed the Planning 
mechanism of DDA. The Audit findings are given in succeeding paragraphs: 
3.1.1 Failure to prepare Zonal Development Plan   
Section-8 of the DD Act, 1957 provides for preparat ion of ZDP simultaneously with the 
preparation of Master Plan or very soon thereafter.  Further, Section-16.1 of MPD-2021 
prescribed that ZDPs were to be prepared within 12 months of the approval of the  
MPD-2021. As the MPD-2021 was approved on 07 Februa ry 2007, ZDPs were to be 
prepared by February 2008.  
It was noticed in Audit that: 
• ZDPs of 16 Zones were submitted between February 20 09 and September 2009 
i.e. after two years from notification (February 2007) of MPD-2021, and were approved 
by the MoUD only in March 2010 to June 2010. Thus, at the planning stage itself, 
finalization of ZDPs was delayed by at least two years. 
• ZDPs for the remaining zone i.e. Zone ‘D’, is yet to be notified by DDA. 
DDA in its reply (February 2016 and June/October 20 16) stated that Zone-D is being dealt 
differently from other planning zones of Delhi as t he major portion of the zone is under 
Lutyens Bungalow Zone, which is being monitored at the level of the MoUD and DDA had 
not delayed the matter of processing the ZDP of Zone ‘D’. 
3.1.2 Monitoring Framework  
MPD-2021 provided that monitoring of the plan was e ssential to evaluate the changes 
required for improving the quality of life in the c ity. MPD-2021 had envisaged that a 
dedicated Monitoring Unit with modern data processi ng facilities would be set up which 
Master Plan
•Master Plan provides the vision and policy guideli nes for perspective period.
•MPD-2021 was notified on 7 February 2007 by the Ce ntral Government.
Zonal 
Development 
Plan (ZDP)
•ZDP for a Zone (National Capital Territory of Delhi has been divided into 17 Zones) contains
site plan and use plan indicating approximate locations and extent of land uses proposed in
the Zone. ZDP also contains detailed information regarding provision of social infrastructure,
parks and open spaces, circulation system, etc.
•ZDP acts as link between the Layout Plan and Maste r Plan. 
Lay out Plan
•These are detailed plans/schemes indicating config uration and sizes of all Use Premises.
• These are prepared after acquisition of land in de velopment area. 
•Layout plans indicate various Use Premises required to con form to the Master Plan / Zonal
Development Plans.

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        11     
        
would be responsible for collection and analysis of  primary and secondary data and bringing 
important changes to the notice of the Authority co mprehensively. This unit was to be in-
charge of overall monitoring of implementation of t he approved development plans and 
layout plans. Further, MPD-2021 also mentioned that  the plan period was to be divided into 
three phases (2006-11, 2011-16 & 2016-21) and the p lan was to be reviewed at five yearly 
intervals to keep pace with the fast changing requi rements of society. However, Audit 
observed the following: 
3.1.2.1 Non-functioning of Monitoring Unit 
A Monitoring Unit was set up in August 2007 but was  not provided with any modern data 
processing facilities and other necessary resources  required for carrying out the task. The 
issue of non-functioning of Monitoring Unit was als o commented upon in C&AG’s 
Performance Audit Report No. 17 of 2011-12, Union Government (Civil), however, DDA did 
not take any corrective action. 
DDA accepted the audit observation (October 2015 an d January 2016) and stated that in the 
absence of modern data processing facilities and fu ll-fledged manpower, the Monitoring Unit 
was unable to coordinate with concerned agencies in volved in implementation of MPD-2021 
and it also did not prepare any reports. 
3.1.2.2 Failure to conduct Periodic Review of MPD-2021 
No review of MPD-2021 was conducted for the first p hase i.e. 2006-2011. A mid-term 
review was, however, conducted for the period 2011- 14. Thus, monitoring and periodical 
review of the MPD-2021 was not conducted as prescri bed in the Master Plan, in the absence 
of which, the changes required for achieving the de sired objectives of MPD- 2021 could not 
be incorporated therein, defeating the objective of review of MPD-2021. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that for regular mon itoring and review of MPD-2021, 
frequent meetings with all the agencies concerned are held periodically in the MoUD and also 
at Raj Niwas by the Hon’ble Lieutenant Governor (LG ), wherein specific inter-agencies 
issues relating to planning and land requirement ar e addressed as part of the Master Plan 
implementation, monitoring, review and inter-agency  coordination. In addition, DDA has 
been carrying out changes in the system of monitori ng and implementation through Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) for processing modificati on in MPD-2021, Guidelines for 
processing of change of land use cases for land own ed by the Government agencies and local 
bodies and through development of Mobile Applicatio n for recording/reporting of various 
development activities and arrangements for its implementation.  
While any step taken by DDA for effective monitorin g is welcome, the above steps do not 
negate the necessity of setting up of dedicated Mon itoring Unit equipped with modern data 
processing facilities as well as conducting of peri odic review for overall monitoring and 
review of implementation of MPD-2021 as envisaged in MPD-2021 itself. 
The mid-term review report (2011-14) sought by Audi t was not made available by DDA. 
Hence, the adequacy of the review could not be assessed in Audit. 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        12     
        
3.1.3 Adverse impact of delay in approval of Land Policy and Regulations on 
operationalisation and finalization of Land Policy 
As per MPD-2021, an important aspect of planned dev elopment was the provision of 
adequate well planned shelter and housing for the d ifferent categories of inhabitants of Delhi. 
MPD-2021 envisaged that about 48 lakh population ha d to be accommodated in the future 
urban extension area of approximately 20,000-22,000  hectares of land within development 
time frame of 15-16 years. For this purpose, altern ative options for development of areas 
identified for urbanization in MPD-2021 through inv olvement of the private sector in land 
assembly and development were planned. Land policy was to be based on the optimum 
utilization of available resources, both public and private for land assembly, development and 
housing.  
Audit noticed that a draft Land Policy was approved  (July 2013) by DDA and after approval 
of Government, a new chapter i.e. Chapter 19 ‘Land Policy’ was added to MPD- 2021 in 
September 2013. The new land policy was applicable for areas proposed for urbanisation of 
the Urban Extensions (Zone J-one village, K-I, L, N  and P-II) for which Zonal Plans were 
approved. Thereafter, based on the policy, DDA prepared (January 2014) draft regulations for 
operationalisation of the policy and forwarded (Nov ember 2014) to the MoUD for approval. 
The draft regulations for operationalisation of the  Land Policy were approved (May 2015) by 
the MoUD with some modifications/additions, but the  same is yet to be notified by DDA 
(June 2016). 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that there were some other modifications already in process in 
the Land Policy under Section-11A of the DD Act, 1957 and pre-requisites such as declaration 
of development areas etc., which were under conside ration of Delhi Government. Once these 
modifications in Land Policy were issued, the regulations would be notified by DDA. 
DDA’s reply may be viewed in light of the fact that  though more than nine years have passed 
since notification of MPD-2021, the new land policy  has not been operationalised.  Keeping 
in view that only 1823 acres of land were acquired by DDA in the last eight years (i.e. since 
notification of MPD-2021 in February 2007 to 2014-1 5) and further, considering the delay in 
finalization of land policy as well as delay in ope rationalisation of regulations, it may be 
difficult to achieve the goal of development as envisaged in MPD-2021. 
Conclusion : 
Zonal Development Plan of Zone ‘D’ could not be fin alised even after a lapse of eight years 
of notification of MPD-2021.  Further, the Monitori ng Unit established for monitoring of 
MPD was non functional and periodical review was no t being conducted. In the absence of 
these, the improvements/changes required for achiev ing the desired objectives of MPD-
2021 could not be incorporated therein. 
Recommendation: 
The MPD should be monitored regularly as per the pr escribed periodicity and the 
monitoring unit should be equipped with all the nec essary resources to carry out its duties 
effectively. DDA should take necessary action to fi nalise the ZDP of Zone ‘D’ at the 
earliest. 
 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        13     
        
3.2 Land Acquisition  
Land acquisition process in DDA starts with receipt  of request from the user department in 
Land Management (LM) Wing of DDA. The request is fo rwarded to Delhi Government for 
acquisition of land. Thereafter, Delhi Government s ends the request to its concerned Land 
Acquisition Collectors (LACs) for acquisition of la nd. Once the land is acquired, Delhi 
Government sends the demand of compensation to DDA.  It is necessary that the amount of 
compensation is released to land owners on time for  timely completion of land acquisition 
process. A timeframe was arrived at (May 2006) whic h stipulated that DDA will release 
payment to Delhi Government within 30 days of recei pt of the communication. After 
payment by DDA, possession of land is to be taken b y the LM Wing of DDA. The LM Wing 
then transfers the same to the user departments.  
During course of land acquisition, the land owners may go to Court for enhanced 
compensation. The Hon’ble Court may revise the comp ensation rates on which the land was 
acquired and issue directions to pay the revised ra tes to the land owners alongwith applicable 
interest on the additional amount. Thereafter, Delh i Government calculates the difference of 
compensation payable as well as interest thereon as  Enhanced Naksha Muntjamin (ENM) 5 
and communicates the same to DDA for payment. After  receipt of demand, the enhanced 
amount of compensation is released by DDA to Delhi Government for further disbursement 
to land owners. 
The audit findings on the basis of examination of r ecords relating to acquisition process in 
DDA are given below: 
3.2.1 Non-maintenance of consolidated database/records of Land Stock 
DDA had no consolidated information/database in res pect of land acquired and utilized for 
various schemes as well as vacant land in possession. During audit, requisite records/registers 
having details of land requests received from user department, requests sent to Delhi 
Government, land awarded by Delhi Government, land actually received from Delhi 
Government etc. were called for, but no records/registers were provided to Audit.  
DDA furnished monthly statements, indicating (i) ar eas of land for which notification has 
been issued under Section-4 and 6 of the LA Act, (i i) physical possession taken up to the end 
of previous month and during the month, (iii) total area of land in possession up to the month, 
(iv) land transferred to user departments and (v) b alance of land in possession at the end of 
the month. Audit scrutiny of the aforesaid statements revealed the following discrepancies: 
• As per the Monthly Statements, the total land acqui red by DDA during the period from 
2010-11 to 2014-15 was 556.64 acres. However, as pe r the information furnished by 
DDA in September 2015 to Audit, the land acquired b y DDA during the same period 
was 1184.93 acres. 
                                                 
5  ENM means calculation sheet for working out enhan ced compensation. 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        14     
        
• Land measuring 1083.80 acres was lying vacant as on  31 March 2015 as per statement 
of April 2015. However, as per information furnishe d by four zones 6 (out of total six 
zones), vacant land lying with DDA was approximately 1214.43 acres.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the figures rep orted by various zones seems to have 
included some vacant land which were already handed  over to the engineering department or 
some Gram-Sabha land 7, hence, the figures reported as 1083.80 acres were  final. Thus, the 
information provided by different wings of DDA was at variance. As a result, Audit could not 
draw an assurance regarding the correctness of info rmation relating to total land available 
with DDA (land acquired, actually utilized and vacant land). 
Audit also conducted joint inspections with officials of DDA in respect of vacant land8 in two 
cases (Azadpur and Wazirpur) to verify the correctn ess of information available with DDA. 
During joint inspection, the land area was found to be short vis-à-vis that reported by DDA in 
its records in both cases. In Azadpur village, land  (Khasra No: 403/90/2/1) measuring  
2 Bigha 09 Biswa was lying vacant as per records, b ut as per joint inspection only 3 Biswa 
land was vacant with boundary wall, while the remai ning was encroached by jhuggies and 
Public Works Department.  
Further, in Wazirpur village, the land (Khasra No: 678 & 679) measuring 3 Bigha 16 Biswa 
was lying vacant as per records, but as per joint i nspection only 1 Bigha 13 Biswa land was 
lying vacant and the remaining land was unauthorisedly used in streets/ roads. 
 
 Picture in case of land at Azadpur   Picture in case of land at Wazirpur 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that most of the lan d pockets of village Azadpur and 
Wazirpur are part of the old schemes of DDA wherein  the issue is regarding the land 
protection/ enforcement related matters.  These issues pertain to the Enforcement Department 
of Lands and Engineering Wing of DDA.  
DDA did not furnish reply on land found short with reference to actual vacant land reported 
in DDA records. The reply of DDA needs to be seen i n light of the fact that in Azadpur, 
physical possession of the land was taken in May 19 63, but the same was not transferred to 
the user department (October 2016). 
 
 
                                                 
6  North, Rohini, South East and West Zones. 
7  Certain land vested in central government on urban isation of specified villages for the purpose of development. 
8  Vacant land, as reported by DDA in its records. 


  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        15     
        
3.2.2 Lack of co-ordination between DDA and Delhi Governm ent on Acquisition of 
land 
Acquisition of land is carried out by Delhi Governm ent whereas management and 
development of land after acquisition is the respon sibility of DDA, necessitating close  
co-ordination and proper follow up for timely compl etion of acquisition proceedings and 
other development activities.  
Scrutiny of records revealed many instances of lack of co-ordination between DDA and Delhi 
Government in acquisition proceedings, release of c ompensation & enhanced compensation, 
receipt of land from Delhi Government, reconciliati on of accounts and utilisation of funds by 
Delhi Government, as detailed below: 
3.2.2.1 Non-Reconciliation of compensation/enhanced compens ation amount between 
DDA and Delhi Government  
There was no system of reconciliation between DDA a nd Delhi Government of records 
regarding payment for land acquisition released by DDA towards the demands received from 
Delhi Government and the amount of land compensatio n actually released to the land owners 
and actual land received from Delhi Government. Audit noticed that: 
• DDA attempted to reconcile some records between September 2013 and May 2015. 
• On receipt of initial reconciliation reports, DDA n oticed a difference of more than  
` 375.14 crore. As against an amount of ` 1790.78 crore released by DDA to Delhi 
Government, only ` 1415.64 crore was released (March 2014) as compensa tion to land 
owners. 
• Based on the reconciliation of 481 awards, DDA foun d that an amount of ` 508.82 
crore remained undisbursed with various LACs. DDA r equested (March 2015-  
May 2015) Delhi Government to refund the same. But,  the amount reconciled as above 
by DDA was not authenticated by concerned LACs.  
Thus, due to lack of co-ordination between DDA and Delhi Government, the issue of  
un-reconciled amount of at least ` 508.82 crore lying unutilised with Delhi Governmen t, 
remained unresolved. 
DDA accepted (June/October 2016) the audit observat ion and stated that out of ` 508.82 
crore, an amount of ` 159.04 crore has been authenticated by LAC (South) South-East & 
North for which letter to refund the said amount ha s already been sent to Delhi Government, 
but nothing has been refunded by the Delhi Government so far.  
Non-recovery of excess amount from land owners 
As pointed out by Audit in Para 5.3.3.4 of Audit Re port No. 17 of 2011-12, DDA did not 
recover the amount of ` 25.69 crore from land owners in Village Pooth Kalan  as directed 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order dated 28 November 2002. Audit noticed that 
DDA and Delhi Government have still not been able t o file the complete list of those cases 
in the Court, where amount is yet to be recovered. In view of above, it appears that neither 
the Delhi Government nor DDA has complied/prepared full details of persons from whom 
the amount of excess recovery is to be made even af ter expiry of more than 13 years of 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        16     
        
Judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Thus, cumula tive outstanding amount of ` 47.01 
crore (excess payment of ` 16.79 crore plus interest @ 15 per cent w.e.f. 1 April 2003 to  
 31 March 2015 amounting to ` 30.22 crore) remained recoverable from land owners. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the matter has been taken up with concerned 
authorities number of times. 
 
3.2.2.2 Non-receipt of Utilization Certificates from Delhi Government 
Utilization Certificates (UCs) are a means to ensure that funds released to an agency have 
been actually utilised for the purpose for which these were sanctioned. DDA releases funds to 
Delhi Government with the request to furnish UCs in respect of funds released.  
Audit noticed that  
• Amount of ` 1001.84 crore was released by DDA to Delhi Governme nt for the land 
acquired between 2010-11 to 2014-15, for which UCs were awaited (October 2016) at 
DDA from Delhi Government. 
• No UCs were available with DDA, in all 64 cases of land acquisition test checked in 
Audit. Further, Audit did not find any communicatio ns exchanged between DDA and 
Delhi Government to obtain UCs.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that no UCs had been  received from the Delhi Government 
in respect of any funds released by DDA. 
Thus, in the absence of UCs, it could not be ascert ained in Audit whether payment has 
actually been disbursed to land owners on time. 
Case study of “Village Bamnoli- Irregular payment of ` 24.39 crore by DDA” 
In August 2007, an award of `111.76 crore was announced by Land Acquisition Coll ector 
(LAC) for land in village Bamnoli. DDA released ` 77.67 crore (August 2007) to Delhi 
Government, on actual availability of land. But the  same was not released by concerned 
LAC to land owners on time and was released only in  February 2010. Meanwhile some of 
the landowners of the village Bamnoli, whose land h ad been acquired, approached the 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi for release of compensa tion. Court directed (February 2010) 
LAC to release the compensation along with interest . LAC forwarded (March 2011) the 
demand of interest amounting to ` 24.39 crore to DDA. DDA denied (February 2012) the 
above payment of interest stating that they had alr eady paid the amount of award to LAC in 
August 2007; as such they are not liable to make th e payment of interest and sought reasons 
of non-payment of compensation to land owners. Delh i Government stated (February 2012) 
that delay occurred due to procedural and technical  reasons in disbursing the compensation 
to the interested persons. Finally, DDA had to rele ase (March 2012) the amount of interest 
of ` 24.39 crore. Thus, lack of coordination between DDA  and Delhi Government and not 
obtaining UCs by DDA led to an avoidable payment of ` 24.39 crore.  
DDA’s reply was awaited (October 2016). 
 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        17     
        
3.2.2.3 Non-receipt of Land even after release of full payment  
LA Act, 1894 and instructions of Delhi Government p rescribe that as soon as Delhi 
Government receives the amount of compensation from  DDA, it has to take over possession 
of land and hand over the same to DDA.  
Audit noticed that in seven cases (out of 18 test c hecked), DDA did not obtain physical 
possession of complete land (October 2016), despite  release of full amount of compensation 
to Delhi Government. Details are given in Table below: 
Table 3 : Status of land not received 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
Purpose of 
acquisition 
Date of 
award 
Total 
land to be 
acquired 
as per 
award  
Land not 
received as 
on (October 
2016) 
Date of last 
payment 
released 
against 
award 
Period from 
date of last 
payment 
released to 
October, 
2016 
 
Bigha 
Biswa-
Biswani  
Bigha 
Biswa-
Biswani 
1 Bakkarwala Construction of 20 
mtr. Road. 
18/04/07 182-06 59-13 27/11/13 2 years 11 
months 
2 Pooth Khurd Construction of 
100 mtr. Road 
05/09/12 79-16 29-09 22/11/13 2 years 11 
months 
3 Maidangarhi For SAARC 
University under 
Planned 
development of 
Delhi 
10/07/13 49-14 9-11 21/11/13 2 years 11 
months 
4 Tikri Kalan For Delhi State 
Industrial & 
Development 
Corporation 
Limited. 
01/05/08 438-01 67-01 25/06/10 6 years 4 
months 
5 Mehrauli Planned 
development of 
Delhi 
27/12/13 44-10 0-10 04/09/14 2 years 2 
months 
6 Nasirpur 
  
Dwarka Phase-I 
under Planned 
Development of 
Delhi 
30/06/08 15-08 4-08 11/11/13 3 years 
7 Barwala Rohini 
Residential 
Scheme Ph. IV & 
V. 
01/07/11 
 
177-15-10 1-6-0 23/02/12 4 years 8 
months  
Total   987-10-10 
(205.73 
acres9) 
171-18-00 
(35.81 
acres) 
  
 
                                                 
9  1 Acre – 4.80 Bigha, 1 Bigha – 20 Biswa and 1 Biswa –  20 Biswani 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        18     
        
Audit Analysis of the above cases revealed that: 
• 35.81 acres (17 per cent) of the total land acquired (205.73 acres) had not been received 
from the Delhi Government even after release of ful l payment of compensation by 
DDA. 
• The non receipt of land ranged between 2 years 2 mo nths (Mehrauli) to more than six 
years (Tikri Kalan) during the period from date of last payment released to October, 
2016. 
• In case of four villages10, land was acquired under emergency clause, hence, non receipt 
of land defeated the purpose of acquisition. 
Non receipt of land had an adverse impact on the ob jective of land acquisition, thereby 
delaying the benefit of development to citizens of Delhi. DDA stated (June/October 2016) 
that the area, which were part of unauthorized colo ny, was heavily built up. This resulted in 
non- handing over of complete land by Delhi Government.  
The reply of DDA needs to be seen in the light of f act that in joint survey conducted by the 
officials of DDA and Delhi Government before acquis ition proceedings, the survey team was 
required to prepare complete details about the status of the land clearly indicating the built up 
areas, Kabristan, Temples, Evacuee Property etc. wh ich was not furnished to audit. Thus, it 
was apparent that there was lack of due diligence a t the time of planning and implementing 
the land acquisition proceedings.  
Announcement of award without ascertaining the actual site condition 
In village Kirari Suleman Nagar, the land measuring  5278 Bigha 02 Biswa costing  
` 286.41 crore was acquired for Rohini Residential S cheme in March 2006. DDA 
considering the fact that approximately 150 Bigha l and was vacant and the balance land 
was built up, released only ` 8.14 crore in September 2006.  Audit noticed that no land had 
been received from Delhi Government (up to October 2016) even after lapse of more than 
ten years of award delaying the purpose of acquisit ion as well as blockade of funds 
amounting to ` 8.14 crore.  
3.2.2.4 Double payment of Enhanced Compensation  
Audit noticed that in 96 cases, DDA released the pa yment of enhanced compensation to 
Delhi Government during the period 2010-11 to 2014- 15, but the same was not disbursed to 
the land owners. Consequently, the Hon’ble Courts i ssued attachment warrants to the 
concerned banks having bank accounts of DDA and dir ected the banks to deposit the desired 
amount in the court, resulting in double payment of  enhanced compensation. The year-wise 
status of amount of double payments made by DDA is given at next page: 
 
 
 
                                                 
10  Bakkarwala, Pooth Khurd, Maidan Garhi and Barwala 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        19     
        
Table 4 : Year-wise details of double payments 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. No.  Year Number 
of cases 
Total amount 
attached as per 
court orders     
Amount refunded 
by Delhi 
Government            
Amount yet to be 
refunded by the Delhi 
Government 
1 2010-11 11 1.31 1.00 0.31 
2 2011-12 11 13.68 0.04 13.64 
3 2012-13 13 2.18 0.07 2.11 
4 2013-14 24 4.32 0.47 3.85 
5 2014-15 37 18.42 1.81 16.61 
 Total 96 39.91 3.39 36.52 
It is seen from the above that DDA made double paym ents to the extent of ` 39.91 crore 
during 2010-11 to 2014-15 based on court orders, ou t of which it had recovered only an 
amount of ` 3.39 crore and balance amount of ` 36.52 crore was yet to be realised from 
Delhi Government (October 2016). 
Audit test checked 11 cases of double payment and noticed that:  
• In three 11 cases, court attachments were made two to five mon ths before receipt of 
demand of enhanced compensation. However, on receip t of demand from Delhi 
Government for the same amount, the concerned offic ers and officials of DDA certified 
that this was a fresh demand and they had no object ion to release the amount. 
Resultantly, the payments were released twice.  
• In eight 12 cases, DDA had already released the payment of enh anced compensation to 
Delhi Government on receipt of demand. However, thi s amount was presumably not 
released by Delhi Government to land owners on time  resulting in court attachments. 
Efforts made, if any, by DDA to bring the fact to t he notice of the concerned court, that 
DDA had already paid the amount of enhanced compens ation to the concerned LACs, 
Delhi Government, for releasing the same to land ow ners, were not available in the 
records.  
Thus, lack of coordination with Delhi Government an d not updating the records of payments 
released by DDA resulted in double payment to the extent of ` 39.91 crore, out of which only 
` 3.39 crore has been refunded.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that time and again Delhi Government was requested to 
refund the excess amount to DDA but this has not been done so far. 
3.2.3 Delay in land acquisition process in DDA 
Processing of land acquisition requests and forwarding the same to Delhi Government was an 
important part of Land Acquisition process in DDA. Audit did not find any records to verify 
that all the requisition received from user departm ents were processed timely with due 
                                                 
11 LAC No. 128/09, 130/09 and 70/11 
12 LAC No. 437A/05, 417/05, 214A/06, 223A/06, 194A/06,  275A/06, 281A/06 and 96A/06 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        20     
        
diligence. In the absence of this, Audit was unable  to draw an assurance that land acquisition 
process was carried out with due diligence. 
Audit test checked 18 cases of land acquisition (de tails in Annexure I-A ) to analyse time 
taken to complete important stages in the land acqu isition process and observed that time 
taken from: 
• Date of issue of award to date of demand by Delhi G overnment ranged from one day 
(Tikri Kalan and Madanpur Dabas) to more than 11 months (Nasirpur) in 13 cases13.   
• Date of receipt of demand from Delhi Government to release of compensation by DDA 
ranged from one month (Humayunpur/Hauz Khas/Madanpu r Dabas) to more than eight 
years (Basai Darapur) in 17 cases14.  
• Date of issue of award to date of receipt of physic al possession of land by DDA ranged 
from one month (Basai Darapur) to more than 14 years (Malikpur Kohi) in nine cases15.  
• Date of receipt of physical possession of land by L M Wing to transfer of land to 
user/engineering department or non transfer of land upto October 2016 ranged from one 
month (Bakkarwala) to more than nine years (Madanpur Dabas) in 12 cases16.   
Details of cases showing all the delays mentioned i n above observation are given in 
Annexure I-B. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that no delay takes place intentionally. Audit noticed that 
delays in land acquisition proceedings were mainly due to irregularities in land acquisition 
process discussed as under: 
3.2.3.1 Delay in release of compensation/enhanced compensation by DDA 
Scrutiny of records in Audit revealed that in 13 ca ses out of 18 test checked cases, DDA did 
not release the compensation within one month. Details are given in Annexure II-A. 
It is apparent from the Annexure II-A that there were delays, ranging between seven mont hs 
(Barwala/Pansali/Pehladpur) and more than eight yea rs (Basai Darapur), in release of 
compensation amount to Delhi Government. The main r eason noticed in Audit was delay in 
processing the files in different Sections of LM Wi ng itself as no timeframe had been fixed 
for processing of files at DDA as well as delay in response by Delhi Government to 
clarifications sought by DDA. Resultantly, payment to land owner invariably got delayed, 
which delayed the acquisition process with conseque nt delays in achievement of intended 
objectives.  
                                                 
13 (i) Basai Darapur (ii) Tikri Kalan (iii) Bakkarwala (iv) Nasirpur (v) Malikpur Kohi/Rangpuri (vi) Singho la (vii) 
Masoodabad/Najafgarh (viii) Khichripur (ix) Maidan Garhi (x) Humayunpur (xi) Hauz Khas (xii) Kirari Su leman Nagar 
and (xiii) Madanpur Dabas. 
14 (i) Basai Darapur (ii) Tikri Kalan (iii) Bakkarwala (iv) Nasirpur (v) Malikpur Kohi/Rangpuri (vi) Singhola (vii) Mehrauli 
(viii) Masoodabad/Najafgarh (ix) Khichripur (x) Okh la (xi) Bamnoli (xii) Barwala / Pansali/ Pehladpur Ba ngar (xiii) 
Maidan Garhi (xiv) Humayunpur (xv) Hauz Khas (xvi) Kirari Suleman Nagar and (xvii) Madanpur Dabas. 
15 (i) Basai Darapur (ii) Tikri Kalan (iii) Nasirpur ( iv) Malikpur Kohi/Rangpuri (v) Singhola(vi) Khichrip ur (vii) Okhla 
(viii) Bamnoli  and (ix) Madanpur Dabas. 
16 (i) Basai Darapur (ii) Tikri Kalan (iii) Bakkarwala (iv) Nasirpur (v) Malikpur Kohi/Rangpuri (vi) Pooth Khurd (vii) 
Mehrauli (viii) Khichripur (ix) Bamnoli (x) Barwala /  Pansali/ Pehladpur Bangar (xi) Humayunpur and (xii)  Madanpur 
Dabas. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        21     
        
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the delay in re lease was due to reasons like presence of 
built up structure at sites, files getting mixed up  in Legal department, prolonged 
correspondence with Delhi Government etc. DDA also stated that due care shall be taken so 
that such instances do not occur in future. 
Hence, it is evident that there was lack of coordin ation among different Wings/Sections of 
DDA and between DDA and Delhi Government relating to release of compensation. 
As per Section 34 of LA Act 1894, interest from the  date of taking over the possession of 
land till actual date of payment of compensation/en hanced compensation to the land owner is 
payable as per applicable rate (9 percent for first  year and 15 percent thereafter). Further, the 
payments were to be released to Delhi Government wi thin 30 days of receipt of the 
communication from them. In test checked cases of c ompensation and enhanced 
compensation, the following issues were noticed: 
• Due to delay in release of compensation by DDA in n ine cases (out of 18 test checked), 
it had to bear an avoidable interest liability of ` 8.55 crore . Details of these cases are 
shown in Annexure II-B. 
• Delhi Government had sent the demand of enhanced co mpensation to DDA with delay 
(from date of judgment to date of interest) from 14  days to 11 years in 42 cases (out of 
46 cases test checked) for payment.  Due to delayed  action by Delhi Government, DDA 
had to pay ` 9.77 crore as additional interest.  
• Due to delay in release of payment of enhanced comp ensation by DDA to Delhi 
Government, ranging from 9 days to more than three years in 42 cases (out of 46 cases 
test checked), DDA had to bear an additional interest liability of ` 10.78 crore.  
Further, it was also noticed that there was a gap b etween the date of release of cheque by 
DDA and the date upto which the interest was calcul ated and paid in respect of enhanced 
compensation mentioned in the ENM. Thus, the interest for the period i.e. after the date up to 
which it was calculated and actual date of payment to Delhi Government or land owners, 
remained unpaid. Audit was unable to ascertain such  additional interest liability  
paid as well as outstanding, as the concerned records were not furnished by DDA. 
 In two cases DDA had to make extra payment of  ` 5.11 crore towards interest: 
(i)   Chilla Saroda Bangar 
Delhi Government raised a demand in July 2010 for ` 67.98 crore for 264 Bigha 11 Biswa 
land as per direction of the Court. Instead of rele asing the payment, DDA in January 2012 
requested Delhi Government to send a revised demand  as DDA was in possession of only 
253 Bigha of land. Delhi Government sent the revise d demand for ` 69.72 crore in March 
2012 for 253 Bigha, which was released by DDA on 30 March 2012.    
Audit scrutiny, revealed that in the revised demand , interest for delay under Section 34 of 
the LA Act was calculated up to the period 31 March  2012, which was exceeding ` 4.71 
crore from the earlier demand considering interest calculation up to 30 October 2009.  

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        22     
        
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the delay was d ue to wrong ENM/demand sent by 
Delhi Government and further delay occurred due to non submission of revised 
ENM/demand in time as required by DDA. The fact rem ained that due to delay, DDA had 
to make extra payment of ` 4.71 crore. Had DDA made corresponding reduced payment for 
land possessed by it, extra payment towards interest could have been avoided. 
(ii) Mehrauli 
Delhi Government raised (14 January 2013) demand fo r enhanced compensation 
amounting to ` 17.71 crore (including interest up to 15 January 20 13) to DDA.  DDA 
released (28 June 2013) the payment to Delhi Govern ment. The Delhi Government sent 
further demand of ` 0.40 crore on 24 July 2013 for balance interest (up to 18 July 2013) 
with reference to the High Court order dated 22 Jul y 2013 and the same was also released 
(02 August 2013) by DDA. Thus, DDA made extra payme nt of interest amounting to 
` 0.40 crore which could have been avoided, if timely  payments were made to the Delhi 
Government as per order of Court.  
DDA while accepting audit observation stated (June/ October 2016) that the file was put up 
in time by the concerned officials/officers but due  to queries raised by the officers, the 
amount of enhanced compensation could be released a fter gap of four and half months. 
Hence, the excess interest of ` 0.40 crore was released. 
3.2.3.2 Excess payment of awards 
Scrutiny of awards (July 2011) for village Pansali and Pehladpur Bangar revealed that the 
interest was calculated on the total cost of land w ithout deducting the amount of advance 
compensation already paid.  As such, the total cost of award for village Pansali and Pehladpur 
Bangar was incorrect, but the same was released (February 2012) by DDA. The same worked 
out to ` 8.44 crore and ` 1.53 lakh instead of ` 9.20 crore and ` 1.67 lakh respectively. This 
resulted in excess payment of ` 0.76 crore in respect of village Pansali and ` 0.14 lakh in 
respect of village Pehladpur Bangar. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the matter pert ains to Delhi Government. However, 
Audit noticed that no correspondence was made by th e DDA with Delhi Government to 
recover the excess amount of awards. 
3.2.3.3 Non-transfer of Land to the User Departments by LM Wing  
In 11 cases (out of 18 cases test checked), Audit noticed that the land had not been transferred 
by LM Wing of DDA to the executing agencies/user de partment in eight cases 17, even after a 
period of more than two years to more than nine years (October 2016) from the date of taking 
the physical possession from Delhi Government. Furt her, in remaining three cases 18, the land 
was transferred to the executing agencies/user depa rtments by the LM Wing of DDA after a 
                                                 
17 (i) Mehrauli, (ii) Humaunpur, (iii) Khichripur, (i v) Barwal/ Pansali/ Pehladpur, (v) Bamnoli, (vi) Mali kpur Kohi, (vii) 
Nasirpur and (viii) Madanpur Dabas 
18 (i) Pooth Khurd, (ii) Tikri Kalan and (iii) Basai D arapur. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        23     
        
lapse of one year to more than six years from the d ate of taking physical possession from 
Delhi Government. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the land is tra nsferred to Engineering Department 
within a couple of days after taking over the land from LAC. However in certain cases due to 
litigation or built up area, the land could not be transferred to user department. The reasons 
are beyond administrative control. These are part and parcel of acquisition process. 
DDA’s reply needs to be seen in light of the fact t hat to achieve the objective of land 
acquisition, it is necessary that the land should b e transferred to user department in a time 
bound manner so that other necessary development activities can be taken up. 
Non-transfer of land to user department by DDA even after 33 years   
In village Chilla Saroda Banger, 264 Bigha 11 Biswa  land was acquired out of which 
physical possession of land measuring 253 Bigha was  received by DDA from Delhi 
Government on 1 October 1982 but there was no recor d in Land Record register of DDA 
about the transfer of 253 Bigha land to the user de partment even after more than three 
decades since possession of land.  Audit requested (January 2016) DDA to provide present 
status of the 253 Bigha land indicating the purpose  for which it was acquired and status of 
project, name of Zone/Division etc. to which it was  transferred for development/watch & 
ward.  The same was not furnished to Audit, in the absence of the information audit could 
not draw an assurance that the said land had actual ly been transferred to the user 
department and the same had been utilised for the p urpose for which it was acquired. No 
reply was received from DDA (October 2016). 
Non-transfer and/or delay in transfer of land to th e executing agencies/user departments 
resulted not only in blocking of funds but also in the objective of acquiring the land including 
development/construction of roads, residential sche mes, community centres etc. under 
planned development of Delhi remaining incomplete. In addition, there was always risk of 
encroachment on the land lying vacant. 
3.2.4 Possibility of Lapse of Acquisition in view of The New Land Acquisition  
Act, 2013 
Section 24 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Tr ansparency in Land Acquisition, 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (The New Land Acquisition Act, 2013) applicable 
from 01 January 2014 stipulates that in case of lan d acquisition proceedings initiated under 
the LA Act 1894, where an award under Section 11 of  the LA Act has been made five years 
or more prior to the commencement of the New Land A cquisition Act, 2013 but the physical 
possession of the land has not been taken or compen sation has not been paid, such 
proceedings shall be deemed to have lapsed.  
 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        24     
        
It was noticed that in respect of seven cases 19 of acquisitions, although the awards were 
announced before 01 January 2009 for acquisition of  2052 acres of land, physical possession 
of only 486 acres of land was received up to Octobe r 2016. As such, land measuring 1566 
acres had not been received upto October 2016 which  may lapse. Thus, the purpose of 
acquisition of land would get defeated, delaying th e benefit of development to the citizens of 
Delhi.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that it has been wri ting to the Delhi Government to ensure 
handing over the physical possession of land. There  is no delay or lapse on the part of DDA. 
The law empowers the LAC to take over the possessio n from land owners. Further, DDA 
admitted that 1613.53 acre of land has already laps ed due to application of the above 
provision. 
Thus, at planning and implementation stage, there were deficiencies noticed by Audit as there 
were delays in completion of acquisition process. I n some cases, the delay was more than  
14 years and even thereafter the land had not been received by DDA. There was lack of  
co-ordination between DDA and Delhi Government, whi ch further delayed the process, 
resulting in encroachment of land, court cases and delay in transfer of land. The overall result 
was that purpose of acquisition suffered and develo pment work for benefiting the people, 
could not be completed in time. 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that as and when th e demand is received, the payment is 
released by the department after verification.   
The reply of DDA needs to be seen in light of the o bservations made on delay in release of 
compensation and avoidable interest liability thereon. 
Conclusion: 
• DDA had no authentic and reliable database in respect of land acquired and utilised as 
well as vacant land in its possession. 
• There was lack of coordination between DDA and Delh i Government resulting in 
delay in land acquisition, delayed payment to land owners of compensation and 
enhanced compensation and delay in transfer of acquired land to user departments. 
• Audit could neither find existence of a well planne d system and codified procedures 
for carrying out acquisition activities nor draw an  assurance that the processes were 
carried out with economy, efficiency and effectiven ess. This adversely impacted 
achievement of the overall objective of DDA which w as development of Delhi and 
providing the necessary infrastructure to its citizens. 
 
 
                                                 
19  (i) Bakkarwala, (ii) Tikri Kalan, (iii) Malikpur Kohi/Ran gpuri, (iv) Bamnoli,  (v) Nasirpur, (vi) Kirari Sule man Nagar 
and (vii) Madanpur Dabas 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        25     
        
Recommendations:  
• DDA should develop a proper database of the total l and in its possession and 
appropriate records maintained in all the wings should be properly reconciled.  
• DDA should develop systems to ensure timely process ing of all the payment requests 
for compensations and enhanced compensations. DDA s hould also ensure that the 
acquired land is transferred to the user department/wing within a reasonable time after 
the possession of land is received in the Land Management wing. 
• There should be effective co-ordination and co-oper ation between DDA and Delhi 
Government. An effective mechanism should be evolve d and institutionalized where 
all the pending issues between DDA and Delhi Govern ment could be settled 
expeditiously.  
 
 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        26     
        
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        27     
        
Chapter 4 -  Development of Land 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1  Introduction 
Afterr acquisition, the land is handed over to the Engine ering Wing for developing and 
creating the physical infrastructure through activi ties involving site survey, demarcation, 
levelling and dressing, construction of roads, drai nage, sewerage system, water supply, 
boundary walls, beautification of parks, construction of power lines and recreational activities 
etc. as stipulated in MPD-2021. Apart from the Mast er Plan, Planning Wing of DDA 
formulates Zonal Plans and Lay out Plans (LoP) of p articular area. After approval of LoP by 
the Planning Wing of DDA and local bodies, the conc erned Engineering wing prepares the 
architectural/structural drawings, Preliminary Esti mates (PEs), Detailed Estimates (DEs), 
Notice Inviting Tenders (NITs) and invites of tende rs for award of development works. DDA 
follows provisions of Central Public Works Departme nt (CPWD) Manual, terms and 
conditions mentioned in the concerned contract Agre ement, directions of Works Advisory 
Council20 in carrying out the land development activities. 
4.2  Planning 
For proper planning of land development activities,  it is necessary that plan for development 
should be prepared in advance. These activities inc lude proper site survey, confirmation of 
clearance of sites, preparation of lay out plan and  their approval from planning authority and 
local bodies.  
DDA follows the CPWD Works Manual in its day to day activities. Section 2.7 of the Manual 
envisages that the pre-construction activities like  assessments of feasibility of services and 
preparation of site data, preparation and approval of preliminary estimates, approval of 
preliminary plans from local bodies, preparation of  architectural drawings, preparation of 
detailed estimates, services drawings, preparation of NIT and invitation of pre-qualification 
applications should be fulfilled or completed befor e execution of work or at the planning 
stage.  
Section 2.3.5 of the Manual stipulates that excess upto 10 per cent  of the amount of the 
administrative approval may be authorized by the Of ficers of the CPWD, upto their 
respective powers of technical sanction.  In case i t exceeds this limit, a revised administrative 
approval must be obtained from the authority compet ent to approve the enhanced cost.  
                                                 
20  This is a body constituted under Section 5 of Del hi Development Act, 1957, comprising representative s nominated by 
Central Government, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, D elhi Electric Supply Committee, Delhi Water Supply a nd 
Sewage Disposal Committee of MCD, Delhi Transport Corp oration etc. The Council advises the DDA on preparat ion of 
Master Plan and matters relating to planning and development. 
 
4 
Chapter Development of Land 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        28     
        
Further, Section 2.5.2 of the Manual specifies that  the technical sanction can be exceeded 
upto 10 per cent, beyond which revised technical sanction shall be necessary. 
Scrutiny of 26 works under 11 schemes selected for review in audit under three Zones viz. 
Rohini, Dwarka and North Zone, revealed the followi ng deficiencies in planning and 
implementation of the works undertaken: 
4.2.1 Non availability of clear site  
Audit observed that in three works the Technical Sanction (TS) of the work stated that site for 
the said work was available. However, the work coul d not commence due to encroachment, 
dispute of villagers at the work site, presence of materials/items of work of another civic 
agency, etc. Non-availability of clear site resulte d in delays in commencement of work, 
which ranged between 17 months to more than 26 mont hs (Annexure III-A ). The Public 
Accounts Committee (PAC) in their 55 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on C&AG’s Report No.  
2 of 2006 (Performance Audit) relating to ‘Developm ent of Land by DDA’ had also 
recommended that DDA should strictly adhere to the codal provisions for ensuring 
availability of clear and unhindered site before award of work.    
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the sites were available at the time of Technical 
sanction (TS) but work could not be started due to various reasons viz. order of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court to maintain status-quo, non-availability of a small part of the site of w ork, 
non-removal of materials/ items of work from the ro ute by Delhi Jal Board which was earlier 
working in that area, etc.  
The fact, however, remains that these issues were i n the knowledge of DDA before 
finalization and award of tenders for the works. 
4.2.2 Delay in submission of structural drawings by the c onsultants and Central 
Design Organisation 
The CPWD manual stipulates that the structural draw ings were to be provided to the 
executing agencies before commencement of the work.  It was, however, noticed that 
structural drawings were provided after a period ra nging between three months and seven 
months of the start of work in four test checked wo rks ( Annexure III-B ). DDA replied 
(June/October 2016) that delays were due to modific ation of the structural drawings and non-
availability of the drawings of a part of the site.  
The fact, however, remains that not providing the s tructural drawing before commencement 
of work would delay the commencement, with consequent delays in completion of the work.  
4.2.3 Failure to obtain requisite approvals from local bo dies before start of work by 
DDA 
For efficient execution of woks it was necessary th at all clearances and approvals from the 
concerned authorities/civic bodies were taken befor e commencement of the work. Audit, 
however, noticed that in two test checked works ( Annexure III-C ), DDA did not take the 
requisite approvals from the concerned authorities prior to taking up the works which resulted 
in hindrances and consequent delay in completion of  the works. DDA stated (June/October 
2016) that the approvals were taken during the execution of the work.  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        29     
        
These cases highlight the fact that the planning an d management of the execution of works 
were deficient in DDA.  
4.2.4 Non approval of revised Administrative Approval and  Expenditure Sanction 
(AA&ES)   
In terms of the CPWD Works Manual, in cases where t he expenditure on execution of works 
exceeds 10 per cent  of the AA&ES, a revised administrative approval is  required to be 
obtained from the competent authority. Audit, howev er, observed that in three test-checked 
works (Annexure III-D) though the tendered amount was higher than the AA &ES by 40 per 
cent to 572 per cent , DDA did not seek revised AA&ES for these works. T he actual 
expenditure exceeded the AA&ES by 79 per cent to 682 per cent. DDA stated (June/October 
2016) that it was under the process of seeking the revised AA&ES.  
Taking up of work without proper expenditure sanction violates the codal provision as well as 
canons of financial prudence. 
4.2.5 Non-revision of Technical Sanction 
The CPWD Works Manual provides that if the actual e xpenditure exceeded 10 per cent of 
Technical Sanction (TS), revised TS had to be obtai ned. Audit observed that in five test-
checked works (Annexure III-E) the expenditure incurred was higher than the TS b y 33 per 
cent to 655 per cent. However, DDA, in contravention of the codal provi sion, did not obtain 
revised TSs in respect of these works. DDA stated ( June/October 2016) that they were in the 
process of issuing revised TS.  
4.2.6 Work not completed/ foreclosed 
Audit noticed that in eight test-checked cases ( Annexure III-F) Technical Sanctions (TS) of 
the works indicated that the site was available for  execution of work. However, after 
commencement of the works, these works were partial ly completed or had to be foreclosed 
due to various reasons such as agitation of village rs/ encroachments and stay order of 
Hon’ble Courts, etc. The total expenditure incurred  on these foreclosed/ partially completed 
works was ` 73.70 crore which remained unfruitful due to non-completion/partial completion 
of the works. Further, if these works are awarded a fresh, chances of additional expenditure 
due to higher rates being demanded cannot be ruled out.  DDA stated (June/October 2016) 
that Works were partly completed or foreclosed due to various reasons i.e. litigation/ 
agitation by Barwala villagers, legal hindrances, non-availability of police force etc. 
Non-completion of works undertaken is indicative of  the deficient planning and delay/failure 
to take remedial measures. 
4.3  Delay in Commencement and Execution of Work 
For completion of any project in time, it is essent ial that detailed estimates should be 
prepared on realistic basis and Notice Inviting Ten ders should be framed on the basis of 
proper site verification and requirements of sites.  Before preparation of design/drawings, 
preliminary and detailed estimates, the site should  be properly  inspected by various officers 
viz. Chief Engineer, Superintendent  Engineer with their assisting staff, consultants and staff 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        30     
        
of local bodies etc. so that work is executed as pe r the estimates and  execution of 
deviated/extra/substitute items is minimized.  
Audit noticed that: 
• In 24 works (Annexure IV-A) there were significant delays in commencement of work 
after issue of Administrative Approval and Expendit ure Sanction by the competent 
authority. These delays ranged between six months t o more than seventeen years 
defeating the very purpose of providing external infrastructure (viz. utility services such 
as drainage and sewerage, roads, culverts etc.) to the allottees/ beneficiaries in a timely 
manner. Reasons for delay in start of work could no t be found in the records provided 
by DDA. 
• In 17 works test checked in audit ( Annexure IV-B ), there was excess expenditure 
ranging between ` 0.02 crore and ` 84.00 crore incurred against the tendered amount 
• In 22 test checked works ( Annexure IV-C ) there were delays, ranging between 
3 months and 43 months, in completion of the works.  
Audit conducted a joint verification of selected eight works in three zones (North, Rohini and 
Dwarka) alongwith the officers/officials DDA during  December 2015 and January 2016. 
Audit noticed that in the following four works of R ohini and North Zone, works were not 
completed according to original agreement due to no n-availability of clear site i.e. land was 
under litigation, encroachment by Jhuggi Jhopari Cluster and construction of road work etc.   
i. Construction of Main carriageway (two line of 30 mt r. Road (CC pavement) in Sector 
34-35, RPD-4, Rohini Zone ) 
ii. Providing and laying of peripheral sewerage scheme in Sector 29, 30, 34, 35 in RPD-2, 
Rohini Zone. 
iii. Construction of Peripheral S.W. Drains in Sector 30  and on 80 M R/W road along Sector 
30 up to outfall points RPD-2 (Rohini Zone) 
iv. Construction of  Peripheral SW Drain & culverts in Sector G-7 & G-8 at Narela sub city 
ND-12, (North Zone) 
Rohini Zone: Construction of Main carriageway  
 
North Zone : Construction of Peripheral S.W. Drain &      
culverts in Sector G-7 & G-8 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that commencement of  works was delayed due to delay in 
pursuance with local authorities, revision of lay o ut plan, change in structural 


  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        31     
        
designs/drawings etc. Excess expenditure incurred a gainst tendered amount was due to 
change in scope, drawings/designs, site conditions, inclusion of extra/deviated items/payment 
against 10 CC21 etc., and works were delayed in execution/completion due to non-availability 
of clear sites, agitation by Barwala villagers, Status quo orders of Supreme Court. 
4.4  Delay in handing over of the Completed Projects 
Audit noticed that in 12 test-checked works ( Annexure V ) the infrastructure, such as 
sewerage lines, storm water drains, internal roads,  60 meter carriageway etc., was completed 
but had not been handed over to the concerned autho rities i.e. Public Works Department, 
Delhi Jal Board and Municipal Corporation of Delhi till October 2016 despite a lapse of 
fifteen months to 55 months from completion of proj ects. Inordinate delays in handing over 
the completed projects to the concerned authorities would not only result in blocking of funds 
but also in DDA having to incur expenditure on main tenance till such time the completed 
project was in their possession. DDA replied (June/October 2016) that (i) the whole area shall 
be handed over after completion of complete develop ment works in the sectors and it is 
generally done when the occupancy is more than 50 per cent as seen in the past (ii) whenever 
development of any sub-city is taken up, the develo pment area is handed over to the local 
bodies for further maintenance and operation when development is nearing completion. 
The fact that DDA is not able to hand over the poss ession of the work to the concerned 
authorities even after lapse of a considerable peri od of time due to non-habitation of the area 
is indicative of inadequate planning before taking up of the work. 
4.5 Non-Utilization of the land handed over to user departments 
Audit conducted joint inspection of acquired land w ith officials of DDA and noticed that in 
four cases 22, though the land was transferred by DDA to user de partment for development, 
the same was lying vacant and no development work h ad been initiated thereby defeating the 
purpose of acquisition. 
Maidangarhi: Land transferred to SAARC University, lying 
Vacant 
 Humayunpur: Unauthorized jhuggies on land 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that utilization of land at Maidangarhi to construct the 
building was the responsibility of the concerned ag ency (i.e. South Asian University) as the 
                                                 
21  Payment against 10CC is meant for variation in co ntract amount due to variation in price of material s and is 
applicable for contracts where stipulated period of completion is more than 18 months 
22  (i) Humanyunpur, (ii) Maidangarhi, (iii) Singhola and (iv) Basai Darapur 


 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        32     
        
land has already been handed over to SAARC University. DDA’s view that utilization of land 
at village Maidangarhi was the responsibility of th e concerned agency is correct, however, 
DDA needs to ensure that the land allotted is utili zed for the purpose for which it was 
acquired, at the earliest.  Further, the response o f DDA in respect of utilisation of three other 
lands was awaited (October 2016). 
Conclusion: 
• Non-adherence to codal provisions in award of work i.e. without ensuring availability 
of land, availability of structural drawings and cl ear sites and lack of co-ordination with 
other concerned civic and public utility agencies r esulted in delayed start and 
completion of projects.  
• DDA did not conduct proper physical verification of  site before preparation of detailed 
estimates which resulted in preparation of unrealis tic estimates. DDA awarded work at 
rates beyond the amount of Expenditure and Technica l sanction. Even after exceeding 
the permissible limit of expenditure, revised AA&ES  and technical sanction were not 
obtained by concerned division of DDA in contravent ion of the provisions of CPWD 
Manual. 
• No timelines were framed by DDA for approval of est imates/ lay out plans/drawings, 
award of work as well for handing over the completed projects to civic authorities. 
Recommendations: 
• DDA should strengthen its planning mechanism for la nd development activities. The 
estimates should be prepared after proper site veri fications, technical study and 
according to the requirements of the development plan.  
• DDA should ensure that implementation of the develo pment work is taken up in a time 
bound manner and as per the prescribed technical es timates. Revised approvals of the 
estimates should also be taken in time as per the prescribed norms.   
• DDA should ensure proper co-ordination with other l ocal bodies, agencies and public 
utilities so that the development works are carried  out smoothly, all the clearances are 
received in time and completed works are handed ove r to the ultimate user at the 
earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        33     
        
Chapter 5 -  Land Disposal 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Introduction 
The Guidelines on Land Management of DDA provide th at the acquired land is to be 
developed by the Engineering Wing and disposed off by the Land Disposal Wing of DDA 
through allotment for different purposes. As per DD A (Disposal of Developed Nazul  land) 
Rules 1981, Nazul land may be allotted for institut ional, residential, industrial & commercial 
use to individuals, firms, companies, public or pri vate institutions, co-operative societies and 
departments of Government. 
5.2  Rules governing Disposal of Land 
Allotment of land is made on payment of premium which is decided either through auction or 
through tender. Land is also allotted at pre-determ ined rates 23 in cases of institutions that 
directly serve the interest of population of Delhi such as schools, colleges, hospitals, other 
social or charitable institutions, religious, political organisations etc. after recommendation of 
the Institutional Allotment Committee (IAC) 24. All cases of allotment for industrial and 
commercial purposes are referred to the DDA Land Al lotment Advisory Committee 
(LAAC)25.  The findings of Audit pertaining to disposal of land are given in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
5.3 Planning 
For planned development of Delhi, it is necessary t hat land is utilised as per MPD-2021 for 
institutional, residential, industrial & commercial  purposes. Audit, however, observed as 
under:  
5.3.1 Discrepancies in details of land  
For proper utilisation of land, it is necessary to have proper stock of available land so that 
DDA can dispose off the land in a planned manner.  
                                                 
23 Pre-determined rates means the rates of premium ch argeable from different categories of persons and d etermined, by 
notification, from time to time, by the Central Gove rnment, having regard to cost of acquisition, devel opment charges 
and concessional charges for use and occupation. 
24 IAC constituted on 03/06/1991 by LG Delhi comprises  of (1) Commissioner (Lands) DDA (as Chairman), (2) 
Commissioner (Planning)/Director (DC&P)/Director (Bui lding), (3) L&DO, Government or his representative,  (4) 
Additional Dy. Commissioner (Land & Estate), MCD or h is representative, (5) Representative of Secretary ( L&B), (6) 
Dy. Commissioner, Delhi, (Director) 
25 LAAC was constituted in 1964 and then reconstituted  in 1985. LAAC comprises of Chief Secretary, Delhi 
Administration as Chairman, and others members from MCD, DSIIDC, Delhi Administration and DDA. 
 
5 
Chapter Land Disposal 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        34     
        
DDA provided the following details regarding plots available for disposal and disposed off 
during the period from April 2010 to March 2015: 
Table 5 : Plots available for disposal and disposed off during 2010-11 to 2014-15 
Type of land  Total number of vacant plots  Number of plots disposed of during the 
period from 2010-11 to 2014-15 
Institutional plots  166  (as on June 2015) 14126 
Industrial plots 603/1229/610* 2 
Commercial plots Not provided by DDA 24 
Residential plots --do-- 125 
Alternative Allotment 27 --do-- 175 
*(May 2015, February 2016 and June 2016) 
From the above table it is evident that: 
• DDA could not produce details of all the vacant plots; and  
• DDA also could not confirm completeness of the list s of vacant institutional and 
industrial plots of land. 
Audit scrutiny of the list of 166 vacant institutio nal plots revealed that entries were made 
against individual plots, as given below: 
• In 17 out of 166 cases certain entries were made un der the column ‘Name of the 
Institute’ which suggested that the plots of lands had been earmarked/allotted to the 
individuals/societies.  
• The ‘Remarks’ column depicted entries like ‘To be v erified’, ‘Built up area’ in 19 out 
of 166 cases.   
• The unit of area of land was also not depicted in 7 cases28 out of 166 cases. 
As regards the vacant industrial plots, DDA furnish ed three different (May 2015, February 
2016 and June 2016) sets of figures. DDA furnished (June 2016) a list of 610 vacant 
industrial plots. However audit examination of rela ted papers showed that number of vacant 
plots worked out to 612. 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that different numb ers of vacant industrial plots reported 
by it was an inadvertent mistake and the whole of i ndustrial estates had not been surveyed till 
date.  
Evidently, DDA did not have the actual number of th e vacant plots that were available for 
disposal. In the absence of detailed documents /rec ords in this regard, Audit could not draw 
an assurance as to the actual number of vacant plots available with DDA.
 
                                                 
26 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation-32, Delhi Police-17, H ospitals and Dispensaries-28, Schools-10, Delhi Tra nsport 
Corporation-11, Power utilities-22, Socio/Religious/ Higher Education-21. 
27  Alternative residential plot is allotted to the p ersons whose land was acquired for planned development of Delhi based on 
the recommendation of Delhi Government. 
28  Three plots in Dwarka, two plots in Rohini and one plot each in Karkardooma and Tughlakabad. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        35     
        
5.3.2  Non disposal of Industrial plots 
The master plan envisages planned industrial develo pment of Delhi. Audit observed that 
DDA had not allotted any industrial land for the la st 16 years (except two cases 29 which were 
also not allotted through tender/auction) and that survey of the whole industrial plots had not 
been carried out till February 2016. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the reason for non disposal of Industrial plots was the 
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the year 2000 consequent upon which it was decided 
to place all the vacant Industrial plots with Delhi  State Industrial & Infrastructure 
Development Corporation (DSIIDC) for relocation of industries in conforming areas under 
the Master Plan. Thereafter, DDA offered 610 plots to DSIIDC in 2005 on payment of  
` 106.75 crore. Since the said demand was not paid b y DSIIDC a revised demand to the tune 
of ` 558.64 crore was raised in 2010, which was also not  paid by DSIIDC. Subsequently, 
after enactment of Delhi Industrial Development Ope rational & Maintenance (DIDOM) Act, 
2010, the DSIIDC had been claiming transfer of Indu strial Estates managed by DDA to 
DSIIDC. DDA had opposed the claim and the matter was under consideration of MoUD.  
The fact remains that Industrial plots have neither  been transferred to DSIIDC nor allotted by 
DDA so far. 
5.3.3 Absence of Policy for Land Disposal 
A documented policy/guidelines to prioritize, sched ule, plan and carry out land disposal 
activities in DDA is necessary to implement the fra mework envisaged in the Master Plan of 
Delhi. No such policy/ guidelines were made available to Audit. Further, DDA did not have a 
documented policy for deciding whether a plot of land was to be disposed off through auction 
or tender. During the period from 2010-11 to 2014-1 5, DDA conducted tender/auction 
programme for commercial and institutional lands on ly on four and two occasions, 
respectively, which was inadequate.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that auction of land  depends on various factors viz. market 
trend, need etc. However, the audit observation for  framing of a documented land disposal 
policy had been noted. 
5.3.4 Non availability of records relating to fixation of Reserve Price 
The Guidelines on Land Management of DDA require th at the reserve price of plot should 
reflect the cost incurred on acquisition and develo pment of the plot. Audit requisitioned 
records considered by DDA for fixation of reserve p rice, determination of full market value, 
details of rules, regulations and office orders fol lowed in fixation of reserve price. However, 
no records relating to fixation of reserve price for disposal of various types of land were made 
available to Audit. In the absence of such records,  Audit could not ascertain whether the 
reserve price fixation process was in line with the  guidelines formulated by DDA and was 
being done in a transparent and fair manner. 
 
                                                 
29  Allotment to Davinder Ajmani/Yogyata Ajmani in Kirti Nagar and L&DO in Mangolpuri 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        36     
        
Further, Audit noticed that in the tender programme  for commercial plots conducted in 
October 2010, the fixation of reserve price was not  supported by verified data collected from 
agencies other than DDA so as to understand the pro per valuation of land (detailed analysis 
in one case is given in Para 5.5.3).  
5.4 Institutional Allotments 
DDA allots Nazul land to institutions as per the Na zul Rules, 1981. The institutional land is 
disposed off either through tender/auction or at a pre-determined rate after consideration by 
Institutional Allotment Committee. The process of a llotment of institutional land as per 
Guidelines on Land Management is as follows: 
Chart 4 :Process of allotment of Institutional land 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
The conditions prescribed for cases to be put up before IAC are the following: 
• The institution seeking allotment of land should be  a society of non-profit making 
character, sponsored by Government and registered u nder the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860, for at least five years.  
• Its aims and objects should sub serve the interest of Delhi by being conducive to its 
planned development, and the nature of work carried  out by the institution should be 
such that the same cannot, with equal efficiency be carried out elsewhere than in Delhi. 
• The Society should possess sufficient funds to meet  the cost of land and the 
construction of building for its use and should hav e persons of professional and 
representative character on its Management Committee. 
Besides above, submission of audited accounts of pr evious three years, Bank Pass Book,  
80 G Certificate under Income Tax Act, Permanent Ac count Number of the Society, 
Applicants are given 30 
days to remove the 
deficiencies.  
Cases cleared by 
IAC are sent to 
planning department 
for preparation of 
handing over 
possession plan 
(within 15 days). 
A note stating that all 
applicants satisfy the 
Nazul Rules is prepared 
for comments of IAC 
members by specified 
date (within 15 days). 
Entire procedure 
for allotment to 
be completed 
within a period of 
three months 
from the date of 
application
. 
 
All applications for allotment of 
land are to be entered serially in 
Master Register.  
Within a fortnight after 
the specified date, cases 
are prepared along with 
comments of concerned 
departments for 
consideration by IAC. 
Deficiency letter stating the 
deficiency in application is issued to 
applicants where applications do not  
satisfy Nazul Rules. 
Applications received are to be 
taken up for examination within 15 
days of receipt of the same. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        37     
        
verification of character and antecedents of its Ex ecutive Body and suitability 30 report from 
the Delhi Police are other requirements for processing of the land allotment cases. 
Audit selected 50 cases of institutional allotment for detailed examination, out of which DDA 
furnished records of only 40 cases. Audit findings are as follows: 
5.4.1 Meetings of Institutional Allotment Committee not held regularly  
In terms of the Guidelines on Land Management of DD A, the Institutional Allotment 
Committee was required to meet once in two months o r whenever the pending allotment 
exceeded 15 cases. 
During 2010-11 to 2014-15 only seven IAC meetings w ere held, as against the requirement 
of at least thirty meetings. The Master Register, c ontaining the details of applications 
received for allotment of land, was not provided to Audit. 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that after changes were made in the Nazul Rules in 2006, 
applications received from various Government/Semi- Government agencies and Socio 
Culture category only were being considered by IAC. 
However, in the absence of the Master Register, Audit could not draw an assurance regarding 
adequacy of the IAC Meetings. 
5.4.2 Cases not fulfilling the requirements of Nazul Rules put up before IAC  
The Guidelines on Land Management stipulate that, f or institutional allotment of land, a note 
is prepared in respect of the applications which satisfy the requirements of Nazul Rules and is 
circulated to all the members of IAC inviting their  comments within 15 days.   The IAC had 
also reiterated, in its meeting held on 29 Septembe r 2006 that only cases which were 
complete in all aspects should be placed before the IAC. Audit, however, observed that out of 
36 cases recommended by IAC for allotment for the p eriod 2010-11 to 2014-15, 13 cases 31 
did not fulfil requirements of Nazul Rules and the norms framed by DDA. Subsequently,   in 
4 cases32 out of these 13 cases, allotment of land was made by DDA. 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that all the reques ts received are to be disposed of and are 
to be placed before the IAC for consideration. Afte r consideration, the IAC rejected the cases 
which did not fulfill the codal formalities and requirements of Nazul Rules.  
Reply of DDA is not acceptable because as per rules  only cases which fulfilled all 
requirements of Nazul Rules were to be put up to th e IAC and due to non-following of these 
rules, even allotment was made in 4 cases despite non-fulfillment of all the conditions.  
                                                 
30 In case of allotment of land for religious purpose s 
31 IAC approved five cases, in its meeting held on 27 September 2013 , subject to furnishing of required funds by the 
society: (1) Delhites Syro Malabar Mission, (2) Jai n Samaj Dwarka, (3)S.S. Jain Sabha Rohini, (4) Cham Cham Welfare 
Society, (5) Akhil Bhartiya Gramin Sewa Sangh. Appro val of IAC to six cases, in its meeting held on 14/10/2014 , was 
subject to furnishing of Audit Report / Balance Shee t and proof of having sufficient funds: (1) Delhi Ra dha Soami 
Satsang Association, (2) Oswal Seva Mandal, (3) Shr i Sanatan Dharm Sabha, (4) Lala Gopiram Charitable T rust,  
(5) Shree Jagdish Ramesh DivyaYog Bhawan and (6) Agra sain Charitable Society Rohini. IAC had approved two cases 
in meeting held on 14 July 2011 - Science of the Soul Research Centre and Learning Matt ers Educational Society 
subject to fulfillment of all codal formalities. 
32 Delhites Syro Malabar Mission, Jain Samaj Dwarka, Science of the Soul Research Centre and Learning Matt ers 
Educational Society 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        38     
        
5.4.3 Allotment of land under Socio-Culture category 
Five cases of land allotment made under socio-cultu re category during the period 2010-11 to 
2014-15 were examined in audit. Though it was requi red that the applicants fulfil the 
requirements specified under the Nazul Rules as wel l as meet the criteria framed by DDA 
before the actual allotment of land, Audit noticed that in none of the cases all the 
requirements under the Nazul Rules/criteria framed by DDA were fulfilled ( Annexure VI). 
Examination of the said cases of allotments made un der the Socio-Culture category revealed 
the following: 
5.4.3.1 Delay in processing of cases 
As per Guidelines on Land Management, the entire pr ocedure for allotment should be 
completed within a period of three months from the date of application. Audit, however, 
noticed significant delays, ranging between seven months and more than 11 years (in cases of 
Learning Matters Educational Society and Internatio nal Medical Science Academy 
respectively), in completion of approval process and issue of allotment letters.  
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that the delay in p rocessing of cases is due to lengthy 
procedure of collecting reports from various depart ments of the organization and agencies 
outside DDA. However, corrective action to reduce t he time for processing and finalizing the 
requests had already been initiated and revised SOP had been circulated.   
Reply is not acceptable as the delay (discussed in Para 5.4.3.2) in allotment of land made to   
the charitable society was mainly attributable to l ack of clarity in deciding the eligibility and 
charitable nature of the society at the level of DD A itself. Moreover the SOPs, as mentioned 
in DDA’s reply, did not relate to allotment of land  to societies as they pertained to allotment 
of land for various services for projects taken up by DDA. 
5.4.3.2 Absence of uniform policy for deciding eligibility of cases under charitable 
category 
Rule 5 of the Nazul Rules, inter alia, stipulates that allotment of land to various inst itutions 
including other social or charitable institutions , is to be made at rates fixed by the Central 
Government from time to time. Rule 20 of Nazul Rule s stipulates various conditions that are 
to be fulfilled by the institution seeking allotmen t under Rule 5 of Nazul Rules. However, 
both the rules are silent on the definition of “charitable institution”.   
In one of the judgments 33, the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi interpreted that Rule 5 would 
include schools, colleges, universities, hospitals or other social institutions provided they are 
also run for charitable purposes . It was, however, observed that DDA did not have c lear 
guidelines or policy for deciding whether a society  was a charitable institution or not. The 
Legal Wing of the DDA had also opined that mere possession of 80 G Income Tax exemption 
certificate was not a concrete evidence to decide c haritable nature of a society. In the absence 
of guidelines for categorizing an institution as ch aritable, DDA processed allotment cases 
                                                 
33 In the matter between Bhagwan Mahavir Education So ciety versus Union of India and others (WPC No. 
2549-60/2005); Order dated 25 March 2011  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        39     
        
without following any fixed norms which is evident in the cases of allotments of institutional 
land as detailed in subsequent paragraphs.  
As regards the submission of documents of charitabl e activities being undertaken by 
societies, Audit noticed that while one society was  asked to submit various documents by 
DDA such as balance sheets, documentary evidences s howing the charitable activities 
undertaken and the utilization of profit; the other s were merely asked to submit basic 
documents viz. annual accounts, 80 G tax exemption certificate etc. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that there was no fi xed mechanism to conclude that the 
activities of a particular Society/Trust were chari table. Submission of 80 G Income tax 
exemption certificate and documents of activities b eing undertaken for charitable purposes 
was sufficient proof to the effect that charitable activities are being performed by the 
Society/Trust. However, the observations of the Aud it had been noted for taking every 
precaution before finalizing the case under charitable category. 
The fact, however, remains that DDA did not have a uniform policy for allotment of plots to 
charitable institutions. 
Scrutiny of the following cases of allotments made under the Socio-Cultural category 
revealed other deficiencies, in addition to the fac t that they did not fulfil all the requirements 
under the Nazul Rules/ criteria framed by DDA, as given below: 
• Allotment of land to International Medical Sciences Academy  
International Medical Sciences Academy (IMSA) appli ed (November 2000) for allotment 
of a plot measuring 500-1000 sqm for the purpose of  construction of office building. The 
request was rejected by DDA as ‘office space’ did not come under the category eligible for 
institutional allotment and the society was a non- government organization. On IMSA’s 
representation before the LG office, the LG ordered allotment of land as IMSA was a body 
which arranged seminars, research exchanges etc amo ngst international medical experts 
and hence allotment of land to IMSA was a fit case for institutional allotment. The society 
was allotted 873 sqm.of land in Narela at a cost of  ` 91 lakh in June 2010. However, 
IMSA deposited (December 2010) ` 45.70 lakh only and stated that half of the allotte d 
area may be provided to them as they did not have f unds. Evidently, the body did not have 
the requisite financial capability which was one of  the requirement/ criteria for allotment 
of Nazul lands. As per Demand cum Allotment Letter (DAL), in case of part payment, the 
society needs to re-apply for the allotment of land . However in the present case, the 
society did not re-apply for allotment and was stil l allotted (27 September 2012) land 
measuring 500 sqm for construction of office building. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that allotment was made as per the orders of Hon’ble LG 
being the competent authority. Further, VC/ Hon’ble  LG were empowered to allot small 
plots, if the cost of small plots had already been deposited within the stipulated period. 
• Allotment of land to Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Education  
DDA allotted 400 sqm of land in Rohini on 10 Februa ry 2012 to an organization named 
Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer Educ ation (VOICE) for consumer 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        40     
        
education, training and comparative testing. From t he documents submitted by the society 
it was noticed that it required the land for reloca ting its office. However, ‘Office Space’ 
did not come under eligible categories of land allo tment. According to the project 
proposal, the society planned to establish a small in-house lab for general tests with some 
basic instruments. However, as per the annual repor ts of the society, the comparative 
testing had to be conducted in the National Accredi tation Board for Testing and 
Calibration of Laboratories (NABL) accredited labs to ensure that test results were 
accurate, authentic and credible. DDA had rejected the request of the society thrice 
(October 2008, June 2010 and August 2010) stating t hat the policy for disposal of 
institutional land had been changed from allotment to auction mode and that the case did 
not fall under the ‘socio-cultural’ category. On re presentations (on 08 July 2010, 19 July 
2010, 02 August 2010 and 30 September 2011) by the society to LG Office requesting the 
Hon’ble LG to issue suitable instructions to DDA to  reconsider the matter afresh and allot 
land to the society at the earliest, the LG office asked (November 2011) DDA to submit 
the status of the case relating to allotment of ins titutional land applied by the organization 
VOICE, a leading NGO in the field of consumer educa tion. DDA subsequently reversed 
its earlier decisions to reject the case and made t he allotment (February 2012) of land to 
the society. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the allotment w as made under rules by Hon’ble LG, 
with the opinion of chief legal advisor. 
• Allotment of land to Learning Matters Educational Society 
DDA allotted a plot of land measuring 3000 sqm. to ‘Learning Matters Educational 
Society’  in September 2011 for construction of spe cial education and teaching college & 
laboratory school under the socio-cultural category  at a price of ` 8.02 crore, in response 
to the application submitted by the society. Audit noticed that: 
/head2right As per the society’s documents the school was to be established for children with and 
without learning difficulties and would have classe s from Kindergarten to 12th 
standard. The project report did not highlight the admission procedure including the 
planned ratio of children with learning differences /disabilities to that of children 
without disabilities. As per the Financial Projecti ons and Business Plan submitted by 
the society, the organization would start generatin g profit from the very year of its 
operations. 
/head2right Initially, the legal and administrative wings of DD A were not in favour of allotting 
the land to the society as the eligibility conditio ns were not fulfilled by the society. 
Vice Chairman, DDA, had rejected the case of the so ciety citing the existence of 
identical institutions in Delhi.  
/head2right The case was forwarded to Principal Secretary to LG . Hon’ble LG desired that 
representatives of the society may meet the Chief L egal Advisor, DDA and explain 
the position. Subsequent to the meeting of the repr esentative of the society with 
DDA officials, the representative submitted an opinion by Ex Chief Justice of Punjab 
and Haryana High Court and also a copy of order dat ed 25 March 2011 passed by 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        41     
        
division bench of Hon’ble Delhi High Court which co ncluded that Rule 5 of Nazul 
Rules (dealing with allotment of land at predetermi ned rates) would include schools, 
colleges, universities, hospitals or other social institutions provided that they are also 
run for charitable purposes. 
/head2right Based on legal opinions/ judgment submitted by the society, DDA decided that Rule 
5 of Nazul Rules can be interpreted to include Scho ol/College which is charitable 
and run for blind, under privileged or children wit h special needs and considered 
allotment of land to the society, subject to submis sion of documents establishing the 
fact that society was a charitable institution. In response, the society stated that it had 
already submitted all the required documents along with application form. DDA 
allotted (September 2011) the land in favour of the society. 
/head2right It was noticed that DDA did not seek additional inf ormation/ documents to ascertain 
that the society was entirely charitable such as do cuments showing the utilisation of 
profit, utilisation of income entirely for charitab le work, last income tax assessment 
orders etc. as were sought from another society viz . Chandra Bhushan Singh 
Memorial Mahila, Bal Evam Shravan Viklang Siksha Ev am Purnarvas Sansthan for 
assessing the fact that the society was entirely charitable.  
/head2right Further, the society was not able to deposit the mo ney as raised in the Demand cum 
Allotment Letter issued by DDA within a period of 1 80 days. Evidently, the society 
did not have the requisite financial capability, wh ich was one of the requirement/ 
criteria for allotment of Nazul lands. On the reque st of the society, DDA granted 
extension of time for three months to the society t o deposit the balance amount. It 
was, however, noticed that though the extension of time was for three months, the 
society had paid the balance amount after more than four months.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that Hon’ble LG, bei ng the competent authority, has 
approved the allotment and grant of Extension of Time (EOT) to the society. 
• Delay in allotment of land to Chandra Bhushan Singh  Memorial Mahila, Bal Evam 
Shravan Viklang Siksha Evam Purnarvas Sansthan 
The above society had applied (October 2003) to DDA  for allotment of 10,000 sqm. of 
institutional land, for construction of school and clinical services for hearing impaired.  
DDA issued deficiency letter in August 2006 asking the society to submit various 
documents for processing the case further, which we re submitted on 31 August 2006. 
DDA intimated the society on 13 March 2007 that the  case of the society was placed 
before the IAC meeting held on 29 September 2006. A udit, however, noticed that the 
matter was placed before the IAC only on 6 August 2 008. Subsequently, the IAC meeting 
held on 04 September 2009 recommended allotment of land to the society. However, later 
the society was asked (July 2010) to furnish docume nts regarding Balance Sheet for last 
five years, documentary evidence establishing that the society is charitable and details of 
grants received from Government, which were furnished in September 2010. 
Later, on the advice of the Legal Wing of DDA, copi es of Annual list of managing body 
filed before the Registrar of Societies, last incom e tax assessment order and latest income 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        42     
        
tax return filed, explanation of the loan amount an d other income of the society and 
documents relating to utilisation of entire income in charitable work and utilisation of 
profit etc. were also sought, which were furnished in March, 2011. Further, the society was 
also asked (June 2011) to submit the additional inf ormation such as the details of activities 
undertaken by it along with photographs, purposes o f fee charged by the society, brief of 
all activities carried by society in Delhi and othe r states etc, which were furnished in 
September 2011. 
Due to delay in allotment process, the applicant ap proached the Hon’ble High court for 
relief. Subsequently, with reference to the Hon’ble High Court direction, DDA asked (July 
2012) the society to submit documents relating to s ocial and charitable works carried out 
by the society for the last five years. 
Accordingly, based on the directions of the Hon’ble  High Court and submission of 
requisite documents by the society, the case was ap proved for allotment by the competent 
authority on 15 January 2013 and allotment was finally made to the society on 19 February 
2013.  
Evidently, DDA took more than 10 years in finalizin g the allotment of land to the society 
by writing letters on various occasions for furnishing of records/documents, some of which 
had already been submitted by the society. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that land was allott ed on the approval of Hon’ble LG 
after fulfilment of all the codal formalities by the society.  
It is evident from the above illustrated cases that  despite the orders of the Hon'ble Court, 
DDA did not frame any guidelines to ascertain wheth er an entity applying for allotment of 
land, under socio-cultural category, was being run for charitable purposes.  
Further, the verification of character and antecede nts of the Executive Body of the society 
from Divisional Commissioner had not been carried out in most of the cases illustrated above 
(as detailed in Annexure VI). In this regard, Audit observed that in one case i.e. allotment of 
land to "Popular Institute Society for Blind", the Hon’ble Court had directed (March 2011) 
DDA to satisfy itself about the genuineness and existence of the society and its objects before 
allotment of land. However, from  documents  made  available, audit  could  not  draw  any  
assurance  that  DDA  had  taken steps to verify the genuineness of the society. Moreover, the  
sponsorship  certificate  from  the  concerned  Min istry/Department  was  not  sought  by  
DDA  from  the  society. 
5.4.4 Allotment of land for religious purposes 
Land for religious purposes is allotted by DDA in a ccordance with Nazul Rules. The 
allotment of land is to be made on the recommendati on of IAC . Allotment of land for 
religious purpose follows the institutional allotments process indicated at Para 5.4. In addition 
the guidelines also stipulate requirement of suitab ility report from the Special Branch of 
Delhi Police. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        43     
        
Audit sought records related to 15 cases of allotment of land for religious purposes during the 
period 2010-11 to 2014-15 against which DDA produce d records of only 12 cases to Audit.  
Audit noticed the following: 
5.4.4.1 Non-compliance with allotment criteria  
Despite non-fulfilment of allotment criteria (framed by DDA in May 2005 and May 2010) by 
the societies seeking allotment of land for religio us purposes, land was allotted by DDA to 
such societies. The details are given in table below: 
Table 6 : Cases of non-compliance with allotment criteria 
Sl. 
No. 
Allotment Criteria  prescribed  Cases where the criteria was not found 
fulfilled 
1.  The Society should be registered for at least 5 
years. 
(i) Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti  
      (registered for 15 days) 
(ii) Delhites Syro Malabar Mission 
     (registered for 46 months) 
2.  The Society should submit affidavit that its 
Management Committee comprises persons of 
professional and representative character and 
does not consist of family members. 
(i) Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti  
(ii) Science of the Soul Research Center 
(iii)  Delhi Wakf Board 
3.  The Society should submit proof of having 
fixed deposits/equivalent liquid investment 
covering the cost of land plus 10% to ensure 
payment of land cost without seeking any 
special dispensation. 
(i) Delhites Syro Malabar Mission 
(ii) Jain Samaj Dwarka 
(iii) Jenendra Charitable Society Dwarka 
(iv) Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti  
(v) Science of the Soul Research Center 
(vi) 
Shri Shwetamber Sthanak Vasi Jain Mahila     
Mandal 
(vii) Delhi Wakf Board 
(viii) Bengal Welfare and Cultural Association 
Delhi Wakf Board did not make any payment and 
payment for Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti was 
made by GoI as mentioned in para 5.4.4.2. Shortage 
of funds in other institutes ranged from 38 to 84 per 
cent. 
4.  The Society should furnish an affidavit to the 
effect that they have not been earlier allotted 
or sought allotment of land under any name 
and style, or, that if they have been allotted 
institutional land earlier, they have not 
violated any of the conditions of the said 
allotment. 
(i)  Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti 
(ii) Science of the Soul Research Center 
(iii) Delhi Wakf Board 
5.  The Society should submit the Audited 
Accounts of the previous three years, Bank 
Pass Book, 80-G Certificate and Permanent 
Account Number 
(i)  Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti 
(ii) Science of the Soul Research Center 
(iii) Delhi Wakf Board 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        44     
        
Sl. 
No. 
Allotment Criteria  prescribed  Cases where the criteria was not found 
fulfilled 
6.  Suitability Report from special branch of 
Delhi police. 
(i) Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti 
(ii) Arya Samaj 
(iii) Delhi Wakf Board 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that allotment to r eligious category had been made by the 
Hon’ble LG, as per the laid down policy and procedure. 
The reply of DDA does not address the specific case s of non-compliance pointed out in 
Audit. 
5.4.4.2 Other deficiencies in allotment of land under religious category   
Audit noticed that: 
• In four cases 34 though the Suitability Report from special branch of Delhi Police stated 
existence of similar religious places for the exist ing population and/or meagre 
population of the concerned religious community, al lotment of land under religious 
category was done. 
• In the case of allotment made to Radha Krishna Mand ir Sewa Samiti, K.G. Marg, the 
payment of premium of ` 1.06 crore for allotment of land was made by Minis try of 
Finance, Department of Revenue, Government of India  and forwarded by Government 
of Delhi, Office of Commissioner (New Delhi District) to DDA35. 
• International Society for Krishna Consciousness, (I SKCON), East of Kailash was 
allotted 8000 sqm. of land in Sector-13, Dwarka aga inst the norms of 400 sqm. Further, 
no construction had been done on land measuring 401 2 sqm. allotted to society earlier 
in Rohini in November 2009. 
• In one case of allotment of land to Delhi Wakf Boar d, Daryaganj, the cost of land 
amounting to ` 94.19 Lakh was not deposited by the Board. 
• Land having Semi Public land use was allotted for r eligious purpose to Bengal Welfare 
and Cultural Association, Vasundhara Enclave, without changing its land use. 
5.5 Allotment of Commercial Land  
As per Guidelines on Land Management, three per cent  to four per cent  of land acquired 
under the scheme of Large Scale Acquisition, Develo pment & Disposal of land in Delhi or 
otherwise placed at the disposal of DDA is to be utilized for commercial use. 
DDA disposes commercial land, through tenders or au ctions as per Nazul Rules, for various 
types of commercial activities such as for Hotels, Banquet Halls, Multilevel parkings, Office 
space etc. 
                                                 
34 Delhites Syro Malabar Mission, Karol Bagh; Jinendr a Charitable Society, Surajmal Vihar; Shri Shwetamb er 
Sthanak Vasi Jain Mahila Mandal, Paschim Vihar;  Gurudwara Shri Guru Singh Sahab, Sheikh Sarai 
35 Vide letter no. 10(180)/SDM/Ch. Puri/2011/11084 da ted 27/03/2012. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        45     
        
During the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15, DDA allo tted 24 commercial plots through 
tenders and out of these 24 cases, records pertaini ng to only 18 cases were provided to audit. 
Audit scrutiny revealed: 
5.5.1 Non Disposal of Commercial plots 
Tenders for disposal of commercial land were called  for between 2010-11 and 2014-15 by 
DDA– two during 2010-11; one each during the year 2 011-12 and 2013-14. Audit observed 
that there had been a declining trend in the allotm ent of commercial plots as shown in graph 
below. The percentage of plots disposed ranged from three per cent to 15 per cent only of the 
total plots put to tender. 
Chart 5: Comparison of total number of plots put to tender and total number of  
plots sold 
 
The number of un-disposed commercial plots lying wi th DDA after the last tender 
programme held on 10 January 2014 was 59, which had  a reserve price of approximately 
` 2,457.18 crore. 
Audit observed that DDA had not analysed the reason s for poor response to disposal of 
commercial plots and had not taken corrective actio n to improve the allotment of commercial 
land.  
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that during the per iod 2010-11 to 2014-15, four tender 
programmes were conducted and all the available dis posable commercial plots were put to 
tender. Although there was slightly low response, a s the disposal of commercial plots 
depends on various factors determining market trend s including reserve price. Hence, less 
response cannot be attributed to the organization, as the department has made sincere efforts 
for disposing of the commercial plots by putting th e available disposable commercial 
properties to tender. Further, DDA stated that keep ing in view the market trend, the reserve 
price has been reduced by 10 per cent in order to facilitate disposal of all available p roperties 
within the current year. 
The fact, however, remains that DDA had neither con ducted any assessment/review to 
identify the causes of non disposal of commercial p roperties nor taken any corrective steps 
thereagainst. As per contention of DDA, merely decr easing the reserve price periodically 
does not serve the purpose as non disposal can also  be attributed to other factors such as 
inadequate infrastructure, poor basic facilities in the area etc. 
92
78
65
57
14
5 2 3
0
20
40
60
80
100
20/10/2010 8/3/2011 21/03/2012 10/1/2014
Total number of plots put to
tender
Total number of plots sold

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        46     
        
5.5.2 Delay in intimation to successful bidder 
Rule 40 of the Nazul Rules provides that the Vice C hairman or an officer nominated by him 
shall, within 15 days of opening of tenders, commun icate acceptance to the tenderer whose 
tender has been accepted. Audit observed that in 16  cases, intimation of acceptances was sent 
to successful tenderer with a delay ranging between  26 and 481 days and accordingly the 
issue of demand letters was also delayed.  
No reply was received from DDA (October 2016).  
5.5.3 Successive reduction in reserve price of a commercial plot 
Plot no. 6, Sector-14 (North), City Center, Dwarka measuring 28,260 sqm was put to tender 
by DDA at a reserve price of ` 329.47 crore at the rate of ` 64,754/sqm for the tender  
programme held on 08 March 2011 and awarded to the highest bidder M/s Pratham Infratech 
Pvt. Ltd at its quoted price of ` 363.63 crore. Examination of the case revealed the following: 
• The plot was first put to tender in September 2006 at a reserve price of ` 723.10 crore. 
This price was however, successively brought down to ` 329.47 crore in March 2011 on 
the ground that the plot could not be sold over the years.  
• On a complaint received by Central Vigilance Commis sion (CVC), the case was 
examined by it and the CVC advised (November 2011) DDA to take appropriate 
decision by keeping in mind legal issues and presen t/future real estate scenario in this 
regard. 
• Later Vice Chairman, DDA opined that the process of  reduction in reserve price should 
be supported by some verified data collected from a gencies other than DDA, so as to 
understand proper valuation of land. However, no re cords indicating that such an 
analysis was actually done were available in DDA. 
• Further, it was also noticed that during the tender  programme of October 2010, three 
commercial plots were disposed off by DDA in Dwarka  in which the average auction 
rate fetched by DDA worked out to ` 1,26,729/sqm. Similarly, during the tender 
program held in March 2012, one commercial plot was  disposed off in Dwarka for 
which the reserve price was fixed at ` 1,19,000/ sqm. and the final bid price fetched was 
` 1,33,000/sqm. However, the reserve price for the pl ot in the instant case (tender 
programme conducted in March 2011) was fixed at onl y ` 64,754/sqm, which 
ultimately fetched DDA a price of ` 71,000/sqm (bid price).  
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that due to adverse  market conditions and non-receipt of 
bids during the past years, the reduction in reserv e price was resorted to, for disposal of the 
commercial plots. 
The reply of DDA is not tenable as it did not furni sh the basis of assumption that there were 
adverse market conditions. Further, DDA did not giv e any records to show that any analysis 
was done regarding valuation of land. DDA also did not give any specific reply to the fact of 
non consideration of trend of the market price of t he plots disposed in October 2010 and 
March 2012 as observed in Audit. In the absence of these, the statement of adverse market 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        47     
        
conditions could not be verified in audit. The basi s of reduction of reserve price could not be 
verified in audit as no document for fixation of price and its reduction was produced to audit. 
5.5.4  Disposal of commercial plots at Floor Area Ratio in variance with MPD norms  
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 36 and Ground Coverage, as prescribed in the MPD-2021 , were some 
of the conditions that were to be taken into consid eration at the time of disposal of 
commercial plots. Audit, however, noticed that FAR and Ground Coverage allowed to the 
bidder varied from the norms of the MPD-2021 and/or  those prescribed in the Government 
orders in four cases. Details of such cases are given in the table below: 
Table 7 : Cases of variance/deviation in FAR and ground coverage 
Sl. 
No 
Details of Commercial plots Norms 
for FAR 
as per 
MPD37 
FAR as 
per 
Allotment 
made 
Norms for 
ground 
coverage as 
per MPD (%) 
Ground 
coverage as 
per Allotment 
made (%) 
1 Plot No. 3, CC, Road No. 44, 
Pitampura 
125 369 25 54 
2 Plot No. 4, City Centre, 
Sector 10, Dwarka 
150 180 25 45 
3 Plot No. A 3a District Centre, 
Nehru Place, phase II 
225 150 40 30 
4 Plot No. A 3b District Centre, 
Nehru Place, phase II 
225 150 40 30 
It can be seen from the above table that in two cas es the FAR allowed to the bidders was 
more than the MPD norms. Depiction of incorrect FAR /Ground Coverage at the time of 
tendering/ bidding would affect the behaviour of th e bidders and consequently, the bidding 
pattern. Moreover, excess FAR/ground coverage would  result in deviation from planned 
development.   
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that while fixing d isposal programme, the latest MPD 
norms and FAR norms are taken into consideration. H owever, as per the latest MPD 
notifications enhanced FAR was to be given to the e xisting commercial plot owners, as per 
the building control and Building Bye Laws.   
The reply is not acceptable because DDA did not all ow correct FAR and ground coverage as 
per the prevailing MPD notifications.  
5.5.5 Other deficiencies in allotment of land under commercial land category  
In addition to the shortcomings stated above, other  deficiencies in allotment of land under 
commercial land category are given at next page: 
 
 
 
                                                 
36  FAR is the ratio of a building's total floor area to the size of the piece of land upon which it is built. 
37 FAR and ground coverage norms given in MPD-2021 wer e modified in respect of Hotels vide Gazette Notifi cation No. 
K-20013/10/2007-DDIB dated 26/02/2009. Allotment of land in cases mentioned at S. No. 3 & 4 above was for hotels. 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        48     
        
Table 8 : Other deficiencies in allotment of land under commercial land category 
Nature of 
deficiency  
Cases Deficiency noticed  
Non signing of 
rectification deed38 
Multilevel 
parking, block –
B, CC, Road no. 
44, Pitampura 
In the Conveyance Deed executed, DDA had erroneousl y 
mentioned the use of plot as parking with commercia l component 
as per MPD-2021. Therefore, a rectification deed wa s to be 
signed which had not been done. 
Intimation of 
granting extension 
of time 
communicated at 
the fag end 
Hotel Plot, 
Dheerpur 
/head2right As per Demand-cum-Allotment Letter, the tenderer wa s 
required to deposit the premium of ` 74.32 crore on or before 
04 December 2012. The tenderer applied for extensio n of 
time for 180 days on 26 November 2012, citing slugg ish 
market conditions.  
/head2right The approval of the extension of time was intimated  to the 
tenderer only on 30 May 2013 stipulating last date of 
payment as, on or before 02 June 2013.  
Encroachment of 
land by successful 
bidder prior to 
making payment of 
land 
Plot no. P1 at 
District centre, 
Wazirpur 
/head2right Demand cum Allotment Letter for making payment of 75 per 
cent of the premium was issued to the bidder on 02/03 
December 2010. However, before making the final pay ment, 
the tenderer encroached the land and erected bookin g office/ 
temporary structures on the plot.  
Thus, the absence of a well defined policy for deci ding the mode (tender/auction) of disposal 
of commercial plot and fixing its reserve price ind icated lack of transparency in disposal of 
commercial plots. 
5.6 Allotment of Industrial Land  
The Master Plan 1962 envisaged setting up of Indust rial Areas in Delhi where the industrial 
units were to be relocated. Keeping in view the pro visions made in the Master Plan 1962, 
twenty Industrial Areas were set up by DDA. Master Plan 2021 stipulates industrial area 
redevelopment schemes which consist of Modernizatio n and Up-gradation of existing 
planned industrial areas and redevelopment of areas  which have become industrialized over 
the period of the two Master Plans, even though not designated as such. 
During the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15, DDA allo tted only two industrial plots.  Out of 
these two plots, one plot was allotted to L&DO for further allotment to Shri A. R. Gandhi/his 
heirs in Mangolpuri due to cancellation of an earli er allotment to him and the other was 
allotted to Shri Davinder Ajmani/Yogyata Ajmani in Kirti Nagar (a plot measuring 125.41 
sqm for ` 69.75 lakh) 
Following was noticed by audit in case of Davinder Ajmani/Yogyata Ajmani:  
• The applicant requested for allotment of the plot a nd agreed to pay at current market 
value. As DDA had not auctioned industrial plots si nce many years (last auction held in 
the year 2000), the old auction rates were updated to arrive at the current market rates. 
However, as no records relating to price fixation w ere furnished to Audit, it could not 
                                                 
38 A rectification deed is a supplementary document e xecuted between the buyer and seller to rectify the  mistakes made in 
the original/principal deed with respect to factual and typographical errors. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        49     
        
be ascertained whether the method adopted and cost calculated by DDA reflected the 
correct market value of land, in compliance with norms of price fixation. 
• The plot of land was required to be disposed of thr ough tender or auction mode as 
stipulated in Nazul Rules. 
• The matter was not referred to the Land Allotment A dvisory Committee in accordance 
with the Nazul Rules. 
DDA replied (February 2016) to the audit observatio n that the piece of land cannot be 
auctioned as it was without any number and had to b e treated as strips. At the same time it 
could not be kept idle, which would result in encro achments or misuse by the adjacent 
allottees or anti-social elements and disposal of s uch piece of land was done as per policy for 
this purpose 
The reply of DDA is not acceptable, as the Nazul Ru les, framed by the Central Government, 
clearly stipulate tender or auction as the mode of disposal of Nazul land and do not 
differentiate on the type of land whether it is a strip or a piece of land.  
5.7 ROHINI Residential Scheme 
DDA announced ‘ROHINI’ Residential Scheme in the ye ar 1981. While announcing the 
scheme, it was envisaged that the allotment would b e made through draw of lots periodically. 
Draw for the scheme was held 16 times from 1982 to 2014 as per the information furnished 
to audit by DDA. During the period under audit, the  Possession letters were issued to 125 
applicants upto March 2015. Out of these, Audit req uisitioned records relating to 25 cases of 
land allotment, against which DDA provided records in 24 cases39.  
Audit noticed the following: 
5.7.1 Delay of 30 years in holding of draw 
DDA had launched the scheme in 1981, however, it wa s noticed from the cases test checked 
in audit that the draw of the aforesaid 24 cases wa s held in June 2012 and Demand Letters 
were issued during November-December 2014.   
DDA stated that without developmental work, the all otment of plots to applicants was not 
possible. The reasons for delay have been attribute d to slow execution of works of 
development relating to Civil & Electrical on accou nt of agitation from residents of Barwala 
village and also the time taken in land litigation during acquisition of land. 
The fact remains that there was a delay of 30 years  in holding of the draw and a further delay 
of over two years in issue of demand letter. 
 
 
                                                 
39 (i) Case file No. (i) F16(10834)/12/RHN,  (ii) F16(7 663)/12/RHN,  (iii) F16(7881)/12/RHN, (iv) F16(8117)/ 12/RHN,  
(v) F16(2449)/12/RHN (vi) F16(1628)/12/RHN (vii) F16( 8756)/12/RHN, (viii) F16(11742)/12/RHN, (ix) 
F16(4179)/12/RHN, (x) F16(9687)/12/RHN , (xi) F16(103 82)/12/RHN, (xii)  F16(10305)/12/RHN, (xiii) F16 (706 6) 
/12/ RHN, (xiv) F16(11689)/12 /RHN , (xv) F16 (11656)  /12/ RHN , (xvi) F16(3403)/12/RHN, (xvii) F16(2644)/  
12/RHN, (xviii) F16(6456)/12/RHN (xix) F16(4278)/12/ RHN, (xx) F16(456)/12/RHN, (xxi)F16(6333)/12/RHN , (xx ii) 
F16 (3830)/12/RHN, (xxiii) F16(4702)/12/RHN , (xxiv) J(647)/647/ LSB/ RHN  

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        50     
        
5.7.2 Deficiencies in submission of required documents 
Notwithstanding the fact that in 11 cases40 the requisite documents had not been submitted by 
the allottees and in five cases 41 there were discrepancies in various documents subm itted by 
the allottees, DDA issued possession letters to them. 
DDA did not furnish any specific reply in respect o f the cases pointed out in Audit 
(June/October 2016). 
5.7.3 Loss of revenue to DDA in respect of Unearned Increase 
Clause 5 (b) of Perpetual lease deed provided that,  in the event of the sale or fore-closure of 
the mortgaged or charged property, the Lessor shall  be entitled to claim and recover fifty 
percent of the unearned increase 42 in the value of the residential plot as aforesaid and the 
amount of the said unearned increase shall be a fir st charge, having priority over the said 
mortgage or charge.  
Audit noticed that in one case, the allottee had sold (July 2015) the plot (No. 1653, measuring 
32 sqm. in block ‘A’ & pocket 1, sector 34 Rohini) allotted (November 2014) to him by DDA 
at a cost of ` 4.52 lakh to another person for a total considerat ion of ` 22.45 lakh. However, 
there was no document in the records to establish w hether unearned increase on account of 
such sale was deposited by the allottee in DDA. 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that the sale/mortgaging of plot at this stage is not allowed. 
Action can be taken in cases where such transaction  is reported and allotment of plot is liable 
to be cancelled. 
DDA had not taken any corrective action (October 2016). 
5.8 Allotment of Alternative Residential Land 
The scheme of Large Scale Acquisition, Development and Disposal of land in Delhi, 
envisaged the allotment of alternative residential plot to persons whose land was acquired for 
planned development of Delhi. As per policy, the al lotment of an alternative plot is made on 
the recommendation of Delhi Government. Once recomm ended, DDA prepares a seniority 
list which is based on the date of possession of the acquired land. The allotment of alternative 
plot is made through periodic draw of lots. 
5.8.1 Deficiencies noticed in Alternative allotment 
Audit examined records relating to 17 cases of alte rnative allotment. The details of the test 
checked cases are given in Annexure VII. In all cases (except at Sl.no.14 in the Annexure)  
the land was acquired by Government during the peri od 1980-86, and recommendation for 
alternate allotment was given during 1986-1992 (all  cases except at Sl. no. 10 & 14 in the 
Annexure); however, alternate allotment was made on ly in March 2012 i.e. after a delay of  
around 20 years. The deficiencies noticed in alternate allotment are given at next page.  
                                                 
40 Sl. No. (i), (ii), (iv) to (viii) , (x) to (xii) a nd (xx) in Footnote No. 39.  
41 Sl. No. (vi), (ix), (xiii), (xv) and (xx) in Footn ote No. 39. 
42 Unearned increase refers to difference between the sale price and the lease value of the property (rat e at which land was 
acquired from DDA) 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        51     
        
• In six cases (Sl. no. 2, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 13 in the Annexure VII) though the allottees did not 
make full payment of land, the same had not been cancelled.  
• In two cases (Sl. no. 3 and 5 in the Annexure VII) it was noticed that though the 
concerned branch had issued letter for handing over  the land, the Engineering Wing 
intimated that the handing over of the plots cannot  be carried out because services had 
not been provided/laid down in the area. 
• In nine cases (Sl. no 1, 3, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14 an d 17 in the Annexure VII) the allottees 
had made full payment of land, yet the land was not handed over to them. 
• In one case (Sl. no. 12 in the Annexure VII), allotment of land was done in excess of the 
prescribed norms. 
DDA attributed (June/October 2016) the reasons for delay in holding the draw and inability 
to hand over the plots of land to non-execution of development works due to interference of 
Barwala villagers.  
However, the efforts made by DDA to sort out the issues were not intimated to Audit. 
5.9 Allotment of land to Government Departments 
DDA allots land to Government Departments as per re quest of the concerned department for 
construction of school, hospital, police station, b us depot etc. Allotment of land to 
Government Departments is made at rates fixed by th e MoUD. During test check of these 
cases certain deficiencies as detailed below were noticed in Audit.  
5.9.1 Deficiencies noticed in allotment of land to Government Departments 
The following deficiencies were noticed in allotment of land to Government Departments: 
Table 9 : Deficiencies in allotment of land to Government Departments 
Allotment to 
Government 
Departments 
Total Cases 
provided to 
Audit/Total 
allotment 
cases 
Delay in 
processing of 
cases 
(Annexure-VIII) 
Status of 
handing 
over of 
plots 
Excess/shortfall in 
allotment  vis-à-vis 
MPD norms 
Whether 
lease 
deed 
signed 
Allotment of land 
to Delhi Metro 
Rail Corporation 
6/32 12 to 41 months Done   Not applicable No 
Allotment of land 
to Delhi Transport 
Corporation 
3/11 
 
51 to 93 months Not  
done   
Not applicable No 
Allotment of land 
to Power 
department, 
GNCTD 
3/22 
 
19 to 40 months  Done   Excess in 2 cases 
 
(Sl. No. 11 & 12 in 
Annexure VIII) 
No 
Allotment of land 
to Delhi Police 
4/17 5 to 51 months Done   Excess  in one case  
(Sl. No. 9 in Annexure 
VIII) & Short  in two 
cases (Sl. No. 7 & 10 in 
Annexure VIII) 
No 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        52     
        
Allotment of land 
for Dispensaries/ 
Hospitals 
5/20 7 to 21 months  Not done   
(in four  
cases). 
Not applicable No 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that in very few ca ses the dimension at site may be 
different, depending on the site condition. DDA, ho wever, did not give any reply to the issue 
of delay in processing of cases, non-handing over of the plots cited by Audit. 
5.9.2 Other Deficiencies 
During Audit following instances were noticed which  underline the lack of co-ordination 
among various wings of DDA: 
• The Directorate of Health Services, Delhi Governmen t requested (December 2012) for 
allotment of land for construction of polyclinic in  Phase-III, Sector 22, Rohini. The 
Engineering wing of DDA marked the vacant land on t he Lay out Plan and stated on 2 
April 2013 that the land was available at site, whi le it was noticed that the plot was 
already allotted by DDA to a society Bankey Behari Social Welfare Society, Rohini on 
26 March 2012.  
• In another case, the plot of land in Pocket Q, Pasc him Puri, on which a Government 
school was already running, was allotted to Delhi Police in March 2011 for constructing 
a police post. Consequently, DDA allotted (Septembe r 2013) alternative site to Delhi 
police in Nangloi Sayyad Village. 
5.10 Post Allotment Monitoring Mechanism 
It is necessary that there should be vigorous post allotment monitoring mechanism to monitor 
the use of leased out land so as to ensure that the re were no violations of the conditions 
attached with lease such as timely recovery of grou nd rent, composition fee, unearned 
increase etc. Audit found that:- 
A.   (i)  There was no system in DDA to watch the conditions of lease deed executed 
between DDA and allottees and to monitor recovery of various dues viz. ground rent, 
composition fees, unearned increase etc. from the a llottee, as a result of which Audit 
could not draw an assurance of the existence and ef fectiveness of monitoring system 
in the Land Disposal Wing. 
(ii) No Property Registers containing records of all imm ovable properties (Award 
number, Khasra Plot number, Date of taking over possession, Term of Lease, Annual 
Rent, Total amount of rent demand, Total amount of outstanding rent etc.) were 
maintained in DDA.  
B. As per terms of lease agreement and conditions of allotment, ground rent @ 2.5 per cent 
of land premium is payable annually failing which i nterest @ 10 per cent per annum is to be 
levied. Audit scrutiny of records made available  b y DDA in respect of institutional allotment 
made in 20 cases revealed that an amount of ` 5.49 crore (Details are given in  
Annexure IX ) and interest thereon was outstanding as on 31 Mar ch 2015 on account of 
ground rent from the allottees. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        53     
        
DDA, while accepting the audit observation stated (June/October 2016) that it had launched a 
special drive to recover outstanding ground rent fr om the defaulters who are holding 
properties on leasehold basis. Under this drive, du es have been worked out in 1897 cases of 
institutional properties and action to raise the demands from the allottees is under process. 
C. Audit conducted field visits jointly with the offi cers/officials of DDA in respect of the 
sites mentioned in the land bank maintained by Inst itutional Land branch. It was noticed in 
audit that land was not being used for the purpose allotted and land had also been encroached. 
This only confirmed that DDA did not have a monitor ing mechanism to ensure that land was 
used for the given purpose and that condition of the lease agreement was being fulfilled.  
Out of the 16 sites selected, DDA facilitated joint  inspection visits to 14 sites only. Findings 
in respect of joint field visits are as follows: 
Table 10 : Issues noticed in Joint Inspection 
Sl. 
No. 
Land/ plot Joint Inspection remarks 
1.  Land allotted to Popular 
Institute Society for the Blind 
(801 sqm.; Sec. 24, Rohini) in 
February 2012 
• Visited the site on 17 December 2015 and found that  
the land was lying vacant as no construction had 
been carried out by the allottee at the site. 
• Some portion of the adjacent plot earmarked for 
Community hall, was found encroached by the 
society constructing Jagannath Temple at the back of 
the site allotted to Popular Institute Society for the 
Blind.  
2.  Land allotted to Voice Society 
(400 sqm.; Sec. 22, Rohini) in 
February 2012 
• Visited the site on 17 December 2015 and found that  
the dimensions could not be verified as there was n o 
demarcation.  
• No construction had been carried out by the allotte e  
at the site. 
3.  Land allotted to Learning 
Matters Educational Society 
(3000 sqm; Sec. 13, Dwarka) in 
September 2011 
• Visited the site on 30 December 2015 and found the 
site lying vacant as no construction had been carri ed 
out by the allottee at the site. 
4.  Vacant Land measuring 5.00 
hectares in Sec. 22, Phase –III, 
Rohini 
• Visited the site on 17 December 2015 and found that  
on some portion of the site, farming was being 
carried out.  
 
 
Photograph relating to site at S. No. 3 Photograph relating to sites at S. No 4 
 


 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        54     
        
Conclusion: 
• DDA did not prepare comprehensive details/inventory  of developed  land. DDA did 
not have a timeframe to prioritize, schedule, plan and carry out land disposal activities. 
• No auction of any industrial plot could be held sin ce 2000 due to dispute between 
DDA and DSIIDC. 
• Cases for allotment of institutional land were put up before IAC for consideration 
without fulfilling the Nazul Rules and the same wer e recommended by IAC and even 
allotment was made in few cases. Further, DDA did n ot have a uniform policy for 
deciding eligibility of cases of allotment under charitable institution category. 
• DDA had a large number of commercial plots for disp osal, however, very few plots 
could be disposed during the period 2010-15.  
• There were delays in allotment of land to Government Departments which led to direct 
impact on timely achievement of objectives for public good. 
• There was lack of effective monitoring mechanism in  DDA to  ensure  that  land  
allotted  was  utilized  effectively.  
Recommendations: 
• DDA should prepare and adopt a comprehensive Land D isposal policy which should 
prescribe the principles and parameters for identif ication, prioritization and scheduling 
for land disposal programmes. Further, MoUD should take necessary action to resolve 
dispute of DDA and DSIIDC in consultation with Delh i Government to enable 
industrial development in Delhi. 
• DDA should ensure that the land disposal activities  are carried out in a timely manner 
as per the applicable regulatory framework and the norms should be uniformly and 
consistently applied in all the cases. Further, nor ms for identifying charitable nature of 
the institutions for allotment of lands on concessional terms should be laid down. 
• DDA should implement an effective post allotment mo nitoring framework to ensure 
that all the conditions of allotment of land and po st allotment obligations are being 
complied with by the allottees. 
 
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        55     
        
Chapter 6 -  Land Protection 
 
 
 
 
 
6.1 Introduction 
Protection of land from unauthorized encroachment i s one of the most important activities 
performed by DDA. The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, 
empowers DDA in protecting its land from encroachments.  
6.2  Protection of DDA Land 
The land protection activities are carried out by L and Management Wing as well as the user 
departments in accordance with the Guidelines on La nd Management. DDA land is divided 
into six zones for the purpose of protection of lan d with each zone headed by a Deputy 
Director, who is assisted by the revenue staff i.e.  Patwaries, Kanungos, Naib Tehsildars/ 
Tehsildars, Field Investigators, Security guards and Security supervisors. Each security guard 
is provided with a Beat Diary indicating the land e armarked for patrolling/protection. The 
zonal Deputy Directors work under the supervision of Director (LM)-I, who in turn reports to 
Commissioner/Principal Commissioner (LM). Further, the user departments are assigned the 
task of protecting the land by erecting a fence, bo undary wall and sign boards indicating 
ownership of DDA and by maintaining round the clock  watch and ward for the land. The 
security guards and supervisors also assist in demo lition programmes carried out by DDA to 
remove encroachments from land. In the development areas, Assistant Engineers/Junior 
Engineers are entrusted with the task of patrolling  and detecting unauthorised construction 
and taking action there-against. The cases of unaut horised construction are to be entered in 
the Vigilance Register maintained by the concerned Junior Engineers for the purpose. 
Scrutiny of records as well as field visits to selected land revealed that:  
• Due to lack of complete information on stock of lan d with DDA, protection of land was 
weak and inadequate. 
• In two cases of village Bamnoli (2) and Basai Darap ur (1) out of nine field visits, 
boundary wall was not constructed around the DDA land. 
6.3  Recovery of Encroached Land 
It is the responsibility of DDA to maintain round t he clock watch and ward for protection of 
land so as to ensure that no unauthorized structure  comes on the land and to remove the same 
at the earliest, if any. 
 
 
 
6 
Chapter Land Protection 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        56     
        
6.3.1 Information regarding vacant land and land under encroachment 
Against the audit requisition for the information r egarding vacant land and land under 
encroachment for all the six zones, DDA furnished i ncomplete information in respect of four 
zones only (except East and West Zones).   
The information furnished (August 2015) by DDA show ed 13155 Bigha of land under 
unauthorized cultivation in Yamuna Khadar area. How ever, it could not be ascertained as to 
which zone /zones this area pertained to and what s teps were taken by DDA to recover this 
land.  
6.3.2 Inadequate field staff for protection of land 
DDA intimated (March 2016), that the sanctioned strength of security guards was 250 against 
which 148 guards were employed.  
Non-deployment of adequate field staff and lack of complete information regarding land to 
be protected would seriously affect the watch and w ard functions undertaken at the ground 
level, thereby putting DDA land at risk of being encroached. 
Further, beat dairies of field staff in 2 out of 3 (west zone and south east zone) test checked 
zones were not provided to audit. In case of the No rth Zone, audit enquired about the action 
taken by DDA on the reports of encroachments report ed in the beat diaries. However, no 
records/information with regard to these was provid ed to audit. Besides, it was also observed 
that the beat diaries did not depict the details of  land being protected such as Khasra number, 
demarcation of the area etc. 
  
Unauthorized encroachment on land in Humayunpur Farming done on the vacant land in Bamnoli 
6.3.3 Shortfall in conducting Demolition Programmes 
It was noticed from the records furnished to Audit that during 2010-11 to 2014-15, 1596 
demolition programmes were fixed out by DDA of whic h 1089 demolition programmes were 
carried out resulting in overall shortfall of 31.77  per cent. DDA reclaimed 318.74 acres of 
land through these demolition programmes. The zone- wise demolition programmes fixed and 
carried out by DDA are given in Annexure X.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the demolition programs are executed as planned 
except in the circumstances when police force is no t made available or stay orders of the 
court exist or due to extreme weather conditions etc. 


  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        57     
        
DDA fixes yearly targets for conducting demolition programmes in each zone to remove 
encroachment from DDA land. However, as only partia l details of the vacant land, 
unauthorized encroachment were furnished, Audit cou ld not ascertain whether the targets 
fixed were commensurate with the actual ground posi tion of encroachment on land. Further, 
Audit also could not draw conclusion on the basis b y which encroachments were identified 
and shortlisted for carrying out demolition programmes. 
6.3.4 Other shortcomings relating to protection of land 
From test check of cases of demolition provided to audit, the following shortcomings were 
noticed:  
6.3.4.1 Deficiencies relating to Demolition Programmes 
During examination of files relating to demolition programmes various deficiencies like Non-
construction of boundary wall/fencing, late reporti ng of encroachment etc. were noticed. 
These deficiencies have been summarised below in the table: 
Table 11 : Deficiencies noticed in Demolition Programmes 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of Deficiency  Number  of  Cases  
1. Late reporting of encroachment43 7 cases  
(Bhorgarh, Saidulajaib, Kirti Nagar, Sayoorpur-I,  
Sayoorpur-II,  Paschim Vihar & Satbari) 
2. Records did not reflect whether all the 
unauthorized structures present were 
demolished 
4 cases  
(Bhorgarh,  Saidulajaib, Malikpur Chhawani & Satbari ) 
3. Records did not reflect whether 
boundary wall was constructed after 
demolition. 
7 cases  
(Dhakka,  Bhalaswa-Jahangirpuri,  Bhalaswa, Pul 
Pehladpur,  Sayoorpur-I,  Sayoorpur-II & PaschimVihar) 
4. Non-handing over the land to 
Engineering Wing 
2 cases 
 (Bhalaswa-Jahangirpuri and  Sayoorpur-II) 
5. Fresh encroachment after demolition 
programme 
2 cases  
(Paschim Vihar & Malikpur Chhawani) 
No reply was furnished by DDA (October 2016). 
6.3.4.2 Protection of Land in Bhorgarh 
Land measuring around 17.42 Bigha in village Bhorga rh, Narela was acquired in 1986-87 
and transferred to the Engineering Wing in 1986 and  1991 for development. However, in 
April 2008, unauthorised construction was noticed b y field staff of DDA in the area, which 
was reported to the Engineering Wing for taking act ion. Consequently, some unauthorised 
structures were removed (April 2010) through a demo lition programme. Scrutiny of the file 
revealed that:  
                                                 
43 The documents as well as photograph relating to th e unauthorised structures attached in the individual files indicated that 
the field staff deputed for protection of land did not report the matters of encroachment promptly to the Zonal Offices. 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        58     
        
• The reports about encroachment were sent to two Eng ineering Divisions ND-12 (June 
2008) & ND-4 (August 2008) for taking action. Howev er, both the Engineering 
Divisions kept shifting responsibility to each other. 
• A demolition programme, initially fixed on 27 May 2 009, was not executed as the 
Housing Welfare Association of the area had represe nted before Hon'ble LG that the 
colony had obtained a certificate for regularisatio n from Delhi Government on 17 
September 2008. However, DDA processed the case wit h Delhi Government against 
regularization of the colony only in May 2010, even  though the information about 
encroachment had been reported much earlier in April 2008.  
DDA did not furnish any reply (October 2016). 
6.3.4.3 Protection of Land in village Saidulajaib 
The revenue staff of DDA reported unauthorized cons truction of a three storied pucca 
structure on vacant land of DDA in village Saidulaj aib in October 2013.  Consequently, a 
demolition programme was carried out in March 2014.   During scrutiny of the file, following 
was observed: 
• DDA failed to notice the unauthorized construction on time, leading to construction of a 
three storied pucca structure. 
• Unauthorised structure could not be demolished fully by DDA.  
• Another demolition program, fixed on 1 July 2014, c ould not be executed as a case was 
filed against demolition in the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, which restrained DDA 
from carrying out demolition.  
DDA while accepting the audit findings stated (June /October 2016) that this matter has 
already been referred to the Vigilance Department f or investigation and fixing responsibility. 
However, the demolition of unauthorized construction could not be done due to stay orders of 
the Hon’ble High Court in February 2016. 
6.3.4.4 Protection of Land in Bhalswa Village, Jahangirpuri 
Representatives of the jhuggi cluster; adjacent to DDA Flats, K block Jahangirpuri had 
informed DDA about encroachment of DDA land adjoini ng their jhuggies in July 2012. 
Consequently, a demolition programme was carried ou t on 21 September 2012 at Khasra No. 
1158 and 1159 of Village Bhalswa, Jahangirpuri. The  following issues were noticed from the 
scrutiny of file: 
• After the execution of first demolition programme, the land was encroached upon four 
times from October 2013 to December 2014, since bou ndary wall was not constructed 
around the reclaimed land. 
• The land was not transferred to the Engineering Win g for proper utilization and 
development.  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        59     
        
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that as per report o f Deputy Director (Land Management), 
North Zone, the encroachment on the land has been r emoved a number of times, but 
engineering department refused to take possession. 
It was, thus, seen from the above referred encroach ment cases that DDA could not identify 
unauthorized construction in time nor take prompt a nd appropriate action for its full removal 
and protect it from fresh encroachment. It also sho ws non-coordination among different 
departments of DDA. 
DDA informed that it had introduced Standard Operat ing Procedure (SOP) for land 
protection in October and December 2015 to improve the functioning of Land Management 
Department of DDA. A mobile based application has a lso been developed by DDA for 
uploading photographs of the vacant land on DDA web site. All Deputy Directors of Land 
Management (LM) Zones and revenue officials working  under their control have been 
directed to upload the photographs of DDA vacant la nd under their charge. They have also 
been directed to inspect each property under their jurisdiction at least once a week and their 
reporting officer should visit the sites once a mon th. All Heads of Departments are required 
to submit monthly report to the VC, DDA, on work done by each officer/official. 
While the steps taken by DDA to improve protection of land are welcome, it should be 
ensured that the new system is properly institutionalized and implemented. 
Conclusion: 
• DDA did not have complete details of vacant land and land under encroachment.  
• There were shortfalls in demolition programme during the period 2010 to 2015.  
• Cases of late reporting of encroachment, failure to  hand over the land to the 
engineering department and delayed construction of boundary wall were also noticed 
in audit. 
• There was deficit in the number of field staff depl oyed for protection of land which 
adversely affected the watch and ward function for protection of land. 
Recommendations: 
• DDA should lay down and implement a land protection system where construction of 
boundary wall/fencing/similar protection structure and setting up of sign boards 
declaring these to be DDA lands, is carried out immediately after the land is received. 
• Regular inspections of the vacant land should be ca rried out and all the 
encroachments should be immediately reported and re medial action taken at the 
earliest. 
• DDA should initiate action to ensure utilisation of  land for intended purposes in a 
time bound manner. 
 
 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        60     
        
 
 
 
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        61     
        
Chapter 7 -  Management of Nazul-I Land 
 
 
 
 
 
7.1  Introduction 
Management of Nazul-I land is the responsibility of  Land Management and Land Disposal 
Wings of DDA. Land Management (LM) Wing looks after  issues relating to eviction of 
squatters from Government land, recovery of damages , maintenance of land records and 
mutation of properties. Land Disposal Wing looks af ter issues related to conversion of 
specified categories44 of leases from leasehold to freehold, recovery of lease charges, ground 
rent etc.  
Audit examined the records maintained in DDA relati ng to management of Nazul-I lands. 
Audit findings are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
7.2  Database/records of Nazul-I Land 
Audit observed that DDA had no consolidated informa tion/database in respect of Nazul-I 
land transferred from erstwhile Delhi Improvement Trust (DIT), Land & Development Office 
as well as Gaon Sabha Land of urbanised villages. D DA informed that there were around 
17000 (approximately) leases administered by DDA, o ut of which 5970 had been converted 
into freehold till 31 January 2016 since 1992.   
Scrutiny of 57 lease files (out of 118 45 files requisitioned by Audit) as well as ground re nt 
ledgers of Karol Bagh, Naiwala and Paharganj estates revealed the following: 
7.3 Lease Administration of Nazul-I Land 
There are two types of leases as per Guidelines on Land Management, namely Durated (20 
years) and Perpetual (90 years) lease.  Nazul-I lea se was to be renewed on the specified 
period mentioned in the lease as first renewal, sec ond renewal and third renewal for 
maximum period of 90 years, before it lapsed.  At t he end of 90 years, land would lapse to 
DDA or could be made freehold by the lessee.  It wa s observed from the records that Old 
Scheme Branch (OSB) administers the leases and proc esses the cases for conversion from 
leasehold to freehold in two categories i.e. Reside ntial Leases and Mixed Land Use 46 leases 
in respect of Nazul-I properties. As per the existi ng leases, the lessee cannot sub-divide or 
sell the property without prior consent of DDA (lessor).   
 
 
                                                 
44 Residential Leases and Mixed Land Use 
45 60 Lease files and 58 cases of conversion from Lea sehold to Freehold 
46 Mixed Land Use refers to Shop-cum-Residential Lease  
 
7 
Chapter 
Management of  
Nazul-I Lands 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        62     
        
7.3.1 Renewal of Leases 
A. Perpetual lease of 90 years was required to be rene wed after specific intervals.  
However, it was noticed that there was no mechanism  in DDA to watch and monitor the 
renewal of leases, as some leases were renewed up t o second renewal, while others were not 
renewed at all. The third renewal was not done in any of the test checked cases.  
DDA in its reply stated (June/October 2016) that th e term lease executed by the erstwhile 
DIT, is renewed after second, third spell i.e. afte r expiry of 20 years, 30 years, 40 years or 90 
years. As per policy of allowing conversion in case s of expired lease, no renewal is 
mandatory provided the applicant has applied on or before 31 December 2015. Hence, the 
conversion has been allowed as per policy.  There i s no deviation from the policy and the 
same is governed as per the policy stated above.  
Reply of DDA is not acceptable as the renewal of le ases i.e. second/third renewal was the 
condition of lease deed in order to validate the le ase. The fact remains that the third renewal 
as per lease terms was not done in any case. 
B. As per the existing rules/instructions of DDA, prop erty registers showing complete 
details of plots/ lands estate wise, full name and complete address of the persons who have 
been allotted land, details of taking over and hand ing over of possessions etc. are required to 
be maintained. Further, ground rent due and receipt  thereof is being watched through the 
ledgers. Examination of records revealed that: 
• Property registers were not maintained, in the abse nce of which total number of leases 
and their details could not be verified in audit. 
• In case of ledger of Karol Bagh II, 112 leases out of 144 leases had expired upto 2013. 
Further, 53 leases could not be examined due to badly mutilated condition of records. 
• In case of ledger of Naiwala, 22 leases out of tota l 178 leases were not readable and 
remaining 156 leases had expired during the period from 2004 to 2009.   
• In case of ledger of Paharganj, 26 leases out of to tal 190 leases were not readable and 
out of the remaining 164 leases, 149 leases had expired upto 2010.    
Audit also noticed that DDA had neither levied nor recovered damage charges from the 
allottees who had become unauthorised occupants after expiry of leases.  
7.3.2 Sale of Property 
As already stated in Para 7.3, Nazul-I land cannot be sold/sub-divided by the lessee without 
prior consent of DDA.  Further, unearned increase o n sale was to be given to DDA.  
Examination of records at DDA, however, revealed that: 
• In 16 cases of sale of property (Annexure XI) , the prior consent of DDA was not 
obtained by the lessees. 
• In two cases47, unearned increase in case of sale was not charged  on the basis of market 
rates fixed by Government from time to time.  
                                                 
47 (i) File No.S-6(17)1956/OSB/Pt.1, No.S/6(17)56/OSB,  S/4(12)/48, S/2(153)59Pt. (ii) S-6(10)67/OSB, S/6(11)67 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        63     
        
7.3.3  Conversion from Leasehold to Freehold 
Policy of conversion from leasehold to freehold was  formulated by MoUD in 1992 on the 
basis of which DDA introduced the scheme of convers ion from lease hold to freehold, which 
was modified from time to time. Audit noticed defic iencies in processing of cases with 
respect to requirement/criteria stipulated in the scheme as given in the next page: 
Table 12 : Cases of non compliance noticed in respect of residential properties 
Sl. 
No.  
Criteria prescribed for conversion  Deficiencies noticed in Audit 
1. Conversion would be allowed only when the completio n 
certificate form ‘D’ for the residential building h as been 
obtained.   
In absence of form ‘D', the lessee was required to furnish 
either the affidavit that the sanctioned building p lan was 
not available or a copy of the building plan from a  
registered architect in conformity with the buildin g bye-
laws.  
In nine cases ( Annexure XII-A ), copy 
of neither the completion certificate 
form 'D' nor alternate documents were 
submitted.  
2. Proof of possession of the property i.e. house tax 
assessment order or grant of permanent connection f rom 
the concerned electricity authority as collateral e vidence 
of construction of building. 
In nine cases (Annexure XII-B) , the 
proof of possession of the property for 
which conversion was sought was 
either not given or was inadequate. 
3. In case, original lease deed was lost, the lessee/a pplicant 
must issue notice in a prominent newspaper having 
circulation in the area where the property is situa ted and 
also execute an affidavit before the first class Ma gistrate 
indicating therein how the original lease deed was lost.  A 
copy of the public notice published in the newspape r and 
the original affidavit must be submitted at least 1 0 days 
before the date of execution of the conveyance deed.  
In five cases 48 an affidavit executed 
before the first class Magistrate 
indicating how the original lease deed 
was lost, was not submitted.  
4. Where there was successive power of attorneys, 
conversion to be allowed after verifying the factum  of 
possession provided that the linkage of original 
lessee/sub-lessee/ allottee with the last power of attorney 
is established and attested copies of power of atto rneys 
are submitted. 
 In such cases, a surcharge of 33.33 per cent  on the 
conversion fee would be payable over and above the 
normal conversion charges applicable for a regular lessee 
(No unearned increase would be recoverable). 
In six cases 49 factum of possession 
from original lessee/sub-lessee/allottee 
to the last power of attorney was not 
ascertained by DDA.  
In these cases, instead of charging 
surcharge of 33.33 per cent  on the 
conversion charges, 40 per cent  rebate 
on conversion charges was allowed. 
                                                 
48 File numbers: (1) S/1(04)2015/OSB/NSK (ii) 17(271)40 (iii) S-5(16) 76/Pt (iv) S-11(41)87-OSB (v) S&S file No. 20(55) 
2014/ASO-I Property No. 56/6, WEA, Desh Bandhu Gupta Road, Karol Bagh (2) File No.  S-6 (17) 1956/OSB/ Pt.I, No. 
S/6(17)56/OSB, S/4(12)/48, S/2(153)59 Pt. (3) (i)S/1  (191) 2012/ OSB (ii) S / 19 (238)44, 2622 s q. yards Christian, 
Karol Bagh, Delhi (4) (i) S/1(175)2014/OSB (ii) S/20  (573) 62 / OSB/ KBH  Khasra No. 29, Block P, Naiwala, Karol 
Bagh (5) File No. S/1 (149) 2010 / OSB and 8/5(482)/51 pertai ning to Plot No. 34, Block P, Naiwala, Karol Bagh.  A rea 
222 square yards. 
49 File Nos. (1) File No. S/1(149)2010/OSB Plot No 34 Block P, Naiwa la, Karol Bagh (2) File No. S/1(140)2010/OSB and 
lease file No S/5(433)51 pertaining to the Plot No.  62/15 Khasra No. 687/19 WEA Karol Bagh1302.3 sq yar ds (3) File 
no. S/1(64)2011/OSB and File no. S/2(176)/62 Plot No . 87 of Dariyaganj Janoobi) plot measuring 142 Sq y ards 118.71  
sq. metres (Khata No. 40, Khasra No. 176/110 (4) File No. S/1(99)2014/OS/DDA, S/12(09)46 and S&S-I N o. 20(46) 
/2014/ASOI , Khasra No. 348 Block M, Naiwala Estate (5) File No.S1(244) /OSB, Plot No. 3, Kadam Sharif, Paha rganj 
(6) File No. S/1(212)2012/OSB,  S/7(20)46/OSB and TN 4(1 87)08  pertaining to Khasra No. 1185/67 plot No. 67 /8720, 
D.B. Gupta Road, Pahar Ganj, New Delhi.   

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        64     
        
5. Conversion was to be applicable only for the proper ties 
for which the land use prescribed in the lease deed /sub 
lease deed/allotment letter is commercial/ resident ial or 
mixed as the case may be. 
In one case 50 the land use in the lease 
deed was mentioned as ‘residential’ but 
conversion was allowed for the mix 
land use.  
6. In case of any legal dispute relating to the title of the 
property, conversion shall not be allowed until the  legal 
dispute is settled. 
Though the property viz. Plot No. 56/6 
WEA, Desh Bandhu Gupta Road, 
Karol Bagh was under legal dispute and 
case was pending at High Court Delhi, 
the conversion was allowed.  
In one case (Jhandewalan Estate), conversion of pro perty with Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 
300 was allowed violating the prescribed FAR of 150. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the conversions  from leasehold to freehold has been 
allowed as per the policy on the subject.   
Reply of DDA is not acceptable as violation of proc edure had taken in all the cases cited 
above.  
7.4 Nazul-I Receipts 
The receipts from Nazul-I land comprise of ground r ent for leased properties, lease 
conversion charges, damage/misuse charges and other  miscellaneous receipts. Results of 
audit scrutiny of these receipts are as under: 
7.4.1 Failure to raise and recover Ground Rent 
As per terms and conditions stipulated in lease dee ds, the ground rent was payable in 
advance, either in two half yearly installments or annually. As per lease terms, ground rent 
was recoverable at the rate of 2 per cent  to 2.5 per cent  per annum of the premium 
determined by Government, in respect of Nazul-I pro perties. Scrutiny of Demand and 
Collection ledgers of Paharganj, Naiwala, Karol Bagh and Daryaganj (South) revealed that: 
• In 633 test checked cases, yearly/half yearly demands were not raised.  
• In 633 cases, cumulative demand from 1980 to 2007 was raised, against which recovery 
of ground rent was effected upto 1987 only.    
Thus, demand of ground rent was not raised regularly and was also not monitored effectively. 
7.4.2 Drawbacks in raising and collection of Damage Charges 
Where any person was, or had at any time been, in u nauthorised occupation of DDA’s 
property (public premises), the Estate Officer, hav ing regard to principles of assessment of 
damages as prescribed in The Public Premises (Evict ion of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 
1971, would have to assess the damages at the Zonal  rates fixed by DDA from time to time 
separately for residential and commercial use of th e public premises. Damages were also to 
be levied on the ex-lessees or the occupants, as th e case may be, in the case of expired and 
cancelled leases in accordance with the procedure p rescribed for assessment and recovery of 
damages for unauthorized occupation of public premi ses. For collection of damage charges, 
Show Cause Notices were to be issued regularly on t he basis of suggested rates and the work 
                                                 
50 File No. S(186)2014/OBS/NSK, S-16(21)41 and /3(7)76 -OSB pertaining to property No. 63, Block ‘L’, Darya ganj.   
Area:  590.1 Sq. yards. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        65     
        
relating to issue of notices for the period up to 3 1 March last ended was required to be 
completed up to 30 th September in case of all encroachers. Examination of relevant records 
revealed the following:- 
• No survey regarding unauthorised occupation of DDA’ s properties has been conducted 
since 1959. There were approximately 20,000 cases o f unauthorised occupation on the 
Nazul Estates based on a survey carried out by DDA in 1959 including 6000 cases 
assessed later. 
• There was discrepancy between the figures of damage s demanded, recovered and 
outstanding as provided by Damages Section and that  shown in the annual accounts of 
DDA for the period 2010-11 to 2014-15. It was furth er noticed that as per Damages 
Section, damage charges amounting to  `  69.84 crore were outstanding as on March 
2015 whereas as per annual accounts only ` 18.49 crore were shown as outstanding. No 
efforts were made by DDA to reconcile the discrepan cy in the figures of outstanding 
damages charges.  
• Scrutiny of 12 cases of damage charges demanded by DDA from unauthorized 
occupants (out of 21 cases requisitioned by Audit) revealed delay up to 32 years in 
raising the demand of damage charges on the unautho rized occupants.  
(Annexure XIII). 
• For collection of damage charges, Show Cause Notice s are to be issued for the period 
up to 31 March last ended and the issue was require d to be completed up to 30 th 
September in the case of all encroachers. However, only 79 notices demanding the 
damage charges were issued by DDA instead of 477 notices to be issued in these twelve 
cases (Annexure XIII). 
Interest amount accrued on the outstanding damage c harges could not be quantified because 
in none of the 12 cases, all details were available. 
It was also noticed in audit that:  
• Notices were served only when the unauthorised occu pants requested DDA to get their 
unauthorised occupancy transferred/mutated in their  name or for No Objection 
Certificates. 
• DDA also allowed the substitution of unauthorized o ccupants other than legal heirs on 
the basis of Affidavit/General Power of Attorney/Agreement to Sale etc.   
Thus, there was no system either for regular identi fication of unauthorised occupants, or for 
raising and collection of demands.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that a conscious dec ision was taken to stop door to door 
collection of damage charges and to stop issuing no tice for demand, and it was left for 
unauthorised occupant to make payments on their own.  
The reply of DDA needs to be seen against the fact that though the decision for not sending 
the notices was taken in July 2008, it was revoked in March 2012. Further, the basis for the 
above decision of 2008 was the direction of LG that  policy paper for giving ownership rights 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        66     
        
to the unauthorised occupants of old Nazul Properti es should be immediately brought before 
DDA which has not been done (October 2016).  
Further, the delay in sending the notices had been occurring since 1952 whereas the decision 
for not sending the notices was operative only duri ng the period from July 2008 to March 
2012.  
Case study: Non eviction of unauthorized occupants from properties required for 
planned development of Delhi 
Two properties measuring 500 Sq. Yard and 1000 Sq. Yard falling in Khasra No. 407 of 
village Malikpur Chhawani Revenue Estate situated a t G.T. Karnal Road, Delhi were 
acquired by DDA under Section 22(1) of DDA Act in 1 963 but were occupied by the 
unauthorized occupants. In this connection, Audit noticed that:  
As per the Master Plan of Delhi-2001, the said land  was earmarked for development of 
Facility Center No. 2 in the Zonal Development plan of Zone-C. Accordingly, eviction orders 
were passed by Estate Officer and served in June 20 06.  On 17 July, 2006, the Estate Officer, 
DDA issued letter to Deputy Director North Zone/Lan d to take over the physical possession 
of the said land by use of such force as may be nec essary. However, Audit did not find any 
records relating to the efforts made for eviction. The unauthorized occupants filed a petition 
in the Hon’ble District Court, Delhi against the orders of the Estate Officer. 
The Hon’ble District Court in December 2006 remande d both the cases to the Estate Officer 
with the directions to pass the order within two months after duly hearing both the parties and 
also considering the appellants’ submissions with r espect to their claims that their case was 
covered by Government’s Regularization scheme. The Estate Officer heard both the parties 
on 18 March 2013 and passed the order for assessment of damages.   
Audit further noticed that the damage charges again st the unauthorized occupant of property 
measuring 1000 Sq. Yard and 500 Sq. Yard were ` 1.35 crore (31 December 2012) and  
` 0.38 crore (30 November 2011) respectively. No evi dence of payment was available in  
the file. 
DDA replied (June/October 2016) that after hearing the parties in pursuance of the directions 
of the court, the Estate Officer has passed the order on 18 March 2013.  
The reply of DDA was not acceptable as the order of  the Estate Officer, referred to by DDA, 
did not deliberate on the fact whether the cases we re covered under Government’s 
Regularization Scheme, as directed by the Hon’ble D istrict Court, Delhi and passed order for 
assessment of damage charges only. 
7.5  Improper use of DDA Lands  
It was noticed that there was variation in the purp ose of use of land in lease records vis-a-vis 
physical verification report by the field officers/ officials of DDA. To ascertain factual 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        67     
        
position joint inspection of 14 properties 51 was conducted (January/February 2016) by Audit 
alongwith officials of DDA. It was noticed that com mercial activities were undertaken in the 
vacant land of the L&DO, which was transferred to D DA for care and maintenance.  Further, 
commercial activities were also being carried on, o n the vacant land of DDA and land leased 
out by DDA for residential purposes. 
I .  Status of land lying with the L&DO  
Karol Bagh, Khasra No. 437/31 
(796 Sq yards)  
(As per DDA records, the vacant land 
was shown in possession of Land & 
Development Office (L&DO)   
 
II  Status of vacant land lying with DDA  
Paharganj 
Khasra No. 895/865( Plot Area 333 
sq yards) 
(As per records of DDA, the property 
was in possession of DDA) 
 
 
III Status of land allotted to individuals  
Paharganj 
 Khasra No. 911/714-715 (333 sq 
yards) 
(As per records of DDA, the land was 
leased out for residential purposes.) 
 
DDA in its reply stated (June/October 2016) that Mi xed Land Use (Special Zone) is 
permitted on the land under reference transferred to DDA. 
                                                 
51 Mauja Karol Bagh  (6):  Khasra No.s (i) 133/33-36-37 (ii) 437/31 (ii i) 725/508 (iv) 266/35-36-39 (v) 687/19 
 (vi) 730/508;  Naiwala (3): Khasra No.s (i) 845 (ii) 5 & 6 (iii) 2020/125 8 ; Paharganj (5): (i) 759/218 (ii)  895/865 (iii)  
863/73 (iv)  718/214-16 (v)  911/714-715 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        68     
        
The reply is not acceptable since as per land recor ds, status of these lands was vacant/leased 
for residential purpose, whereas in actual the land  was being used for commercial purposes 
for which permission was not taken from DDA.  
Conclusion: 
• DDA did not have complete information on total area  of Nazul-I land in possession 
of DDA, number of leases it had entered into, numbe r of leases which had lapsed, 
leases where land use had been changed and whether land was in the control of 
original lessees or it had changed hands.  
• There was no proper system of raising demand for gr ound rent and ascertaining the 
amount realisable towards ground rent, transfer of lease, change of land use, 
unearned income etc. at any point of time. 
Recommendations: 
• DDA should ensure that a comprehensive database and  record of all types of leases 
administered by it is prepared. This should also be  regularly updated to reflect the 
current changes viz. titles, periodic renewals etc.  Additionally, these records should 
also be integrated with land database.  
• DDA should develop a comprehensive policy for effec tively dealing with the expired 
leases in Nazul-I land. This policy should aim at b alancing all the interests like those 
of planned development of these areas, revenue inte rests of the DDA and interests of 
the existing lessees.   
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        69     
        
Chapter 8 -  Record Management  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintenance of proper records of ownership and mana gement of land is essential for 
effective land management. The Guidelines on Land Management of DDA prescribed various 
types of records to be maintained relating to Land Management in various wings of DDA. 
Audit reviewed the records maintained in DDA to ver ify whether a proper and effective 
system of records management and documentation for land was in existence. The findings of 
Audit are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
8.1  Non Maintenance of Records  
 
8.1.1 Land Related Records 
Para 2.9 of Chapter 2 of guidelines on Land Managem ent (Land Department) Volume I of 
DDA lists various records that were required to be maintained. Audit, however, did not find 
any evidence that these records were maintained by DDA as detailed in the Table below: 
Table 13 : Records not maintained by DDA 
Name of land 
record 
Format in which records 
were required to be 
maintained 
Nature  of information  
Field Book Form N-2 Records of all field numbers in a Patwari Circle 
incorporating description and areas of fields for e ach 
patwari circle. 
Khasra Register Form N-7 (to be re-written 
after every four years) 
Details of individual khasra numbers of village, aw ard 
number, number of notification under Section 22(1) of 
the DD Act and date of taking over physical 
possession. 
Nazul Land 
Scheme Register 
Form N-6 Permanent record of land utilization under  different 
development schemes or different purposes. 
Encroachment 
Register 
Form N-10 Details of nature of encroachment, name and address  
of person who made the encroachment, date of 
encroachment and date of encroachment report. 
Diary of Patwari Form N-9 Daily diary of work of a Patwari to be mai ntained and 
submitted to Tehsildar concerned by close of the 
month. 
Annual 
Inspection 
Register 
Form N-11 Annual inspection registers giving details of 
infringement of terms and conditions of lease by 
lessee/sub-lessee. 
Records of lease Form N-3 Names and particulars of lessees/sub-lesse es of 
Nazul-I land, details of premium/yearly rent payabl e 
by lessee/sub-lessee and data of renewal of lease/s ub-
lease. 
 
 
8 
Chapter Record Management 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        70     
        
It is evident from the above table that these were important basic records for recording 
significant details of the land and its status with  DDA. It was also noticed that the issue of 
non-maintenance of various land records was also ra ised (March 2014) by the Internal Audit 
Wing of DDA, but apparently, DDA did not take any a ction in the matter. In the absence of 
these records audit could not draw an assurance tha t these details were available with DDA 
for all its land.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that land records ha ve been maintained since 1960 on 
standard format of Revenue Department. The record i s voluminous and was not possible to 
convert the same as per 1981 Regulations. Further, it has introduced (2015-16) and put in 
place new SOP and has developed Mobile application for uploading photographs of vacant 
land. 
The fact is that DDA was not maintaining land recor ds as per regulations. While the 
introduction of mobile application for monitoring o f DDA vacant land is a welcome step, 
DDA needs to ensure that these new initiatives are properly implemented and incorporated in 
their system. 
8.1.2   Property Registers 
The following important property registers were req uired to be maintained for Nazul-I and 
Nazul-II properties. Audit, however, noticed that t hese records were not being maintained by 
DDA: 
Table 14 : Property Registers not maintained by DDA 
Property Source of Rule / 
Requirement 
Details to be included in the Registers 
Nazul-I Internal Audit 
Manual 
(Chapter 16) 
Complete details of plots/lands estate-wise, full n ames and complete 
address of the persons who had been allotted these lands, details of 
taking over and handing over possession etc. 
Nazul-II Guidelines on Land 
Management 
(Para 2.10) 
Estate award number, khasra/plot number, owner with  description, 
resolution of the authority sanctioning purchase, a ward number with 
date, amount paid, date of taking over possession etc.  
Master 
Register for 
Institutional 
allotments 
Guidelines on Land 
Management 
{Para 7.13(17)} 
Key record containing processing of the cases of al lotment under 
institutional category. All applications received o n the prescribed 
application form were to be entered in a Master Register etc. 
In the absence of maintenance of the aforesaid impo rtant records, Audit was unable to draw 
an assurance that DDA was properly managing its pro perty in accordance with its 
guidelines/manuals.   
 
 
 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        71     
        
8.1.3 Vigilance Register 
The cases of unauthorised construction noticed by t he officials (Junior/Assistant Engineers) 
in the development areas are to be reported to the Police Department and entered in the 
Vigilance Register. Audit did not find any evidence  that DDA had been maintaining the 
Vigilance Registers. Audit was, therefore, unable t o draw an assurance that DDA was taking 
appropriate steps for protecting the land property from encroachments / unauthorised 
constructions in an efficient and effective manner.   
DDA in its reply (June/October 2016) stated that th e vigilance registers were maintained for 
development areas. Since all the areas have been de -notified, there is no development area as 
of now. It further stated that a Mobile Application  has been developed for real time tracking 
of encroachment. 
The reply of DDA is not acceptable as in response t o audit observation on Rohini Residential 
Scheme, DDA had stated that development works are b eing executed in Sectors 34, 35, 36 & 
37, which are still under the ambit of development area, hence vigilance register in respect of 
these areas are required to be maintained. Further,  Mobile Application initiative by DDA 
needs to be implemented promptly and incorporated into their system.  
8.1.4 Monitoring of Court cases- Suit Register and Master Register of court cases 
 
It was noticed that detailed instructions/guideline s were issued by DDA for dealing with 
court cases in September 1990. As per guidelines/ci rculars, "Suit Register" was to be 
maintained by each branch indicating details  of  c ases, e.g. Suit No./Writ Petition No., Name 
of the Court, Name of the Party, Particulars of the  land involved, etc. In addition, a "Master 
Register" was also to be maintained. These were not produced to audit.  
However, as per information provided by DDA, 9680 c ases were pending in various Courts 
as on 31 March 2015 (an increase of 2350 since 31 M arch 2011 when 7330 cases were 
pending). 
8.1.5 Incomplete and non-updated Land Records 
(A) Audit noticed that the following records maintaine d by DDA were not being updated: 
Table 15 : Incomplete and not updated Land Records  
Nature of 
Record 
Rule/ 
Requirement 
Details required to be included and  
Audit observation 
Ownership 
record 
Guidelines on 
Land 
Management  
The ownership record was to be kept in the proforma  prescribed in the 
Guidelines (known as ‘Sakni Jamabandi’).  The Jamab andis were to be 
prepared and renewed after every four years. It was , however, noticed that 
most of the Jamabandis were updated only up to 1973-74 or even earlier.  
Revenue 
Ledger 
 
Guidelines on 
Land 
Management  
Out of 20 cases (as mentioned in the table given in  Annexure IX), only 10 
cases (Sl. No. 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 18, 19 & 20)  were entered in the 
Revenue Ledger.   

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        72     
        
Nature of 
Record 
Rule/ 
Requirement 
Details required to be included and  
Audit observation 
Beat Diary Guidelines on 
Land 
Management  
Beat Diaries furnished to Audit revealed that vario us details viz. Khasra 
numbers, jurisdiction, demarcation of area, counter -sign by supervisory 
staff etc. were not found in the Beat Diaries.  
Records of 
land 
acquired by 
the Delhi 
Government 
and placed at 
the disposal 
of DDA  
Form N-1 
prescribed 
under Para 2.8 
of Guidelines 
on Land 
Management 
The records were required to be kept in form N-1 ha ving particulars viz. 
award no., date of taking over of possession, descr iption of scheme, 
certificate of Land Record Officer etc.   
Audit noticed that village wise registers were maintained by DDA in place 
of Form N-1 which did not contain complete informat ion as required. 
Further, entries made in the register were neither authenticated nor cross 
referenced. The registers were also not updated. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the Land Record  Registers have been 
maintained/prepared since beginning and are duly authenticated by the Tehsildar.  
The reply of DDA is not tenable, as only the first page of the register was authenticated by a 
DDA official without date while register/land recor ds were not maintained in prescribed 
forms as per Land Management Guidelines.  
B. Audit scrutiny of 18 cases pertaining to land acqu isition compensation provided by 
DDA revealed that the files did not contain following information/documents: 
Table 16 : Cases having incomplete documents/records and its implications 
Detail of documents/ records not 
found in the files 
No. of 
cases 
Implication  
Copy of requisition/indent received 
from user department  
1352 Since the purpose of acquisition and approval of 
competent authority was not available on records, 
assurance on actual land requirement, could not be 
drawn in Audit.  
Joint Survey Report 
Joint Verification Report gives the 
actual status of land (i.e. vacant 
land/built up area, encroachment 
etc.), before its acquisition 
1153 DDA did not furnish Joint Survey Reports in 11 case s 
in absence of which Audit was unable to draw an 
assurance that it had done proper analysis and plan ning 
before acquisition.  
Copy of Award  0254 Assurance on details of actual land included in aw ard 
and correctness of amount of award could not be dra wn 
in Audit. 
 
 
 
  
                                                 
52 Bakkarwala, Singhola, Mehtrauli, Humayun pur,Maidan  Gari, Basai Darapur, Tikri Kalan, Khhichripur, Kira ri Suleman 
Nagar, Bamnoli, Madanpur Dabas, Masoodabad/Najafgarh and Nasirpur. 
53 Singhola, Mehralui, Maidan Garhi, Basai Darapur, Ti kri Kalan, Khhichripur, Kirari Suleman Nagar, 
Barwala/Pansali/Pehladpur Bangar,  Maidanpur Dabas,  Masoodabad/Najafgarh and Nasirpur 
54 Bakkarwala and  Pooth Khurd 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        73     
        
8.2  Preservation and Protection of Records 
Audit noticed that records relating to land acquisi tion cases /enhanced compensation/ledgers/ 
lease files, were not being maintained properly. Au dit noticed that some of the records were 
in badly mutilated condition, as shown in the pictures given below:  
  
Condition of ledger of Karol Bagh Estate Condition of lease files of OSB Branch in DDA 
Lease files and ledgers are primary and important r ecords showing details of lease and the 
original lease deed. However, in most of the cases of land acquisition, land has not been fully 
received/transferred and land acquisition not compl eted, hence it is essential to keep the 
records in safe and proper condition. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the record room s have been cleaned and have been 
organized in a catalogue and indexed. Digital Scann ing of the documents for more than one 
lakh pages have been completed in File Index.  
The steps taken by DDA regarding preservation and u pkeep of records are constructive. 
However, DDA has not stated the way out to reconstruct the records which have already been 
badly damaged and are unreadable. 
8.3   Safe Custody of Lease Deeds 
As per Internal Audit Manual, 2008 of DDA, the leas e deeds are required to be kept in safe 
custody of the Superintendent/Assistant Director of  the Branch duly arranged according to 
estates, block and plots with a proper index of all  such lessees both by names of lessees and 
by estates, blocks and plots.  The lease deeds are required to be verified and agreed with the 
index annually by the Branch officer or an officer nominated by the Vice-Chairman and a 
report of the results of verification is being main tained by the Vice-Chairman in April each 
year.  Audit, however, noticed that the above proce dure was not being followed as only 13 
files out of 60 files were provided to Audit and in  respect of remaining files, DDA stated 
(February 2016) that these files were not traceable.  
DDA while accepting audit view stated (June/October 2016) that the observation of the Audit 
has been noted for future compliance. 
8.4  Digitalisation of Records by DDA 
 
8.4.1   Functioning of Land Management Information System 
DDA awarded the work of development and implementat ion of Land Management 
Information System (LMIS), a land record automation  system, to Electronic Research & 


 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        74     
        
Development Centre of India (ER&DCI) in July 2001. ER&DCI was required to make the 
software package and install it within 18 months from the date of award. To verify that LMIS 
was implemented and was functioning in the manner e nvisaged, files/records relating to 
agencies involved in implementation of LMIS, time f rame/targets fixed by DDA for 
implementation of LMIS and year-wise progress made there against etc. were called for by 
Audit.  However, despite several reminders, the req uisite information was not furnished to 
Audit. In March 2016, DDA provided data of 240 vill ages along with a copy of agreement 
between DDA and M/s ER&DCI entered on 6 August 2001 . Analysis of data in audit 
revealed that: 
• Some of the fields’ in LMIS i.e. land use, land tra nsfer to user department were left 
blank due to which actual status of land could not be ascertained.    
• In the Digital map, location of land (Khasra no.) a cquired by DDA in village was also 
not marked. As such, identification of land acquire d by DDA could not be ascertained 
from the digitalized map of village concerned.  
In the absence of relevant records, Audit could not  draw any assurance whether the works 
relating to LMIS were completed as per time frame/t argets fixed and were delivering desired 
results even after a lapse of more than 14 years from its scheduled completion.  
8.4.2 Module for creating the database of institutional properties 
As per annual report of DDA for the year 2013-14, a  module for creating the database of 
institutional properties of DDA was developed and d etails of 3,808 institutional properties 
were reported to have been fed by institutional bra nch in this system. However, details of 
module and its current status as on 31 March 2015 a long with login access/database dumps 
sought by Audit were not provided by DDA.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the process of creating database is in progress.  
Conclusion:  
• Systems did not exist for proper record maintenance  in DDA, as a result of which 
Audit was unable to analyse the effectiveness of land management, land development 
and land disposal activities in DDA in a holistic manner. 
Recommendations:  
• DDA should maintain all the prescribed records and ensure their proper maintenance 
ensuring completeness, accuracy, timely updation an d proper upkeep. A 
comprehensive database of the land stock available with all the details and present 
status must also be maintained.  
• DDA should carry on and complete the digitalization of records process at the earliest 
considering the importance, age and quantum of the records, especially of those 
related to land ownership. 
 
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        75     
        
 
Chapter 9 -  Internal Audit and Accounts 
 
 
 
 
 
9.1 Effectiveness and Efficiency of Internal Audit in DDA  
The internal audit cell in DDA is headed by Member (Finance) who is assisted by the Chief 
Accounts Officer along with the other staff.  DDA h ad 213 auditable units, out of which 140 
units were to be audited annually. Year-wise audita ble units planned for audit and actually 
audited by internal audit during the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15 were as under: 
Table 17 : Year-wise details of audited unit by Internal Audit 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Total No. of 
auditable 
units 
No. of units to be 
audited annually  
as per schedule 
Total No. of units 
planned for audit in 
the year 
No. of units 
actually 
audited 
1 2010-11 213 140 80 80 
2 2011-12 213 140 95 95 
3 2012-13 213 140 80 88 
4 2013-14 213 140              100        104 
5 2014-15 213 140              101 98 
From the above, it is apparent that total units pla nned for annual audit were low as compared 
to number of units to be audited annually.  
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that the reasons for  low coverage of auditable units were 
due to shortage of man power and entrustment of spe cial audit to the Audit Parties. Efforts 
were being made to fill the vacant posts. 
Some specific deficiencies observed in internal aud it of three wings of DDA i.e. Land 
Management Wing, Land Development/Engineering Wing and Land disposal Wing are given 
below: 
In three Sections of Land Management Wing namely Da mage Section, Damage Accounts 
Section and Land Management Section audit was to be  conducted annually. However, it was 
noticed that during the period from 2010-11 to 2014 -15 Internal Audit of Land Management 
Section, Damage Section and Damage Accounts Section  was conducted twice, thrice and 
once only respectively.  
Audit also reviewed the settlement of outstanding p aras in these three sections, the status of 
which is as follows: 
 
 
 
9 
Chapter 
Internal Audit and 
Accounts 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        76     
        
Table 18 : Details of audit paras raised by Internal Audit and settled 
Name of Section Opening balance of 
Para Outstanding 
Para 
New Para raised 
during 2010-11 to 
2014-15  
Para settled 
during 2010-11 
to 2014-15 
Para 
Outstanding  
Land Management 15 56 Nil 71 
Damage Section 16 38 Nil 54 
Damage Accounts 
Section 
Nil 17 Nil 17 
It was also noticed that significant issues like tr acking of court cases, non-digitalisation of 
complete land records, non-transfer of land to user  department, non-reconciliation of 
accounts of land compensation/enhanced compensation , non-maintenance of important land 
records etc. were noticed by Internal Audit Wing of  DDA. However, no para was settled 
during the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15 which is indicative of fact that DDA did not take 
any corrective action on the issues pointed out by internal audit.  
In Land Development and Land Disposal wings, inform ation relating to units planned, 
audited and copies of internal audit reports for th e audit period were called for. These were, 
however, not provided to audit in absence of which audit could not draw an assurance as to 
whether internal audit was being conducted in these wings. 
DDA while accepting the audit view stated (June/Oct ober 2016) that the main reason for not 
conducting audit as per prescribed schedule and set tlement of the old outstanding paras was 
due to shortage of staff and assignment of special audits. It further stated that letters were 
written to the concerned branch followed by reminde rs to concerned officers, however, no 
reply was received. 
9.2  Reporting and Reconciliation in DDA  
 
9.2.1 Income & Expenditure Account and Balance Sheet of Nazul-II. 
DDA had been preparing final accounts relating to  land in different formats as per the details 
indicated below: 
• Nazul-I- Receipt and Payment Account, Income and Expenditu re Account and Balance 
Sheet. 
• Nazul-II- Receipt and Payment Account. 
• General Development Account - Receipt and Payment Account, Income and 
Expenditure Account and Balance Sheet. 
Due to non-preparation of Income and Expenditure Ac count and Balance Sheet as part of 
Annual Accounts, actual state of affairs and financ ial position of Nazul-II Accounts was not 
reflected in the Annual Accounts of DDA. The issue was raised by the C&AG of India 
through its Separate Audit Reports on the Annual Ac counts of DDA for the year 2012-13, 
2013-14 and 2014-15. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        77     
        
DDA, while accepting the audit observation, assured  (June/October 2016) that they would 
prepare Balance Sheet of Nazul-II Account in time b ound manner and be able to prepare 
Balance Sheet and Income & Expenditure Account of Nazul-II by 31 March 2020. 
9.2.2 Expenditure incurred on Land Acquisition  
DDA incurred expenditure towards acquisition of lan d by way of compensation, enhanced 
compensation, supplementary award and amount direct ly attached by the Court. Audit 
noticed that: 
• The expenditure incurred towards land compensation,  enhanced compensation and 
amount directly attached by the Hon’ble Court towar ds compensation was clubbed 
together and booked in one account under the head ‘ Payment to Delhi Administration’. 
Therefore, the system of accounting and reporting d id not facilitate the proper 
presentation and ready availability of expenditure incurred under the three different 
heads.  
• Total expenditure incurred on acquisition depicted in Annual Accounts (Receipt & 
Payment Accounts of Nazul-II) published by DDA during the period from 2010 to 2015 
was `1304.56 crore, whereas the same was `1001.85 crore as per information furnished 
by Land Management Account Section (LMA) of DDA for the same period. Thus, there 
was difference of `302.71 crore between expenditure reported in the fi nal Annual 
Accounts and LMA Section. 
• The LMA Section and Cash Main Section reported the expenditure on land acquisition 
on monthly basis to Accounts Main Section but recon ciliation of expenditure was not 
done regularly and certificate of reconciliation wa s not authenticated by both the 
Sections.   
DDA stated (January 2016) that the difference was d ue to non inclusion of amount attached 
by the Hon'ble Courts while reporting of expenditur e by the LMA Section. It further stated 
(June/October 2016) that Audit observations have been noted for compliance and instructions 
were being issued in this regard.  
9.2.3 Land received by DDA  
Audit noticed that DDA prepared monthly statement/MIS in respect of physical possession of 
land taken from Delhi Government on the basis of Ka bja Karyavahi 55 reports. Scrutiny of 
monthly statements and kabja karyavahi reports for the period 2010-11 to 2014-15 revealed 
that:  
• There were differences between actual physical poss ession of land received from Delhi 
Government vis-à-vis physical possession of land reported by DDA throug h MIS, 
details of which are as follows: 
 
                                                 
55 Proceedings for physical possession 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        78     
        
Table 19 : Year-wise difference in actual receipt of land as per MIS and Kabja  
    Karyavahi Report of DDA  
(Land in Acres) 
Year 
Physical possession of 
land reported as 
received in MIS  
Physical possession of land 
received in actual as per 
‘Kabja karyavahi’ report   
Difference in actual receipt of 
land as per MIS  and as per 
‘Kabja karyavahi’ 
2010-11 359.69 359.15 0.54 
2011-12 329.08 339.54 (-) 10.46 
2012-13 844.96 226.52 618.44 
2013-14 253.14 252.38 0.76  
2014-15 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total  1786.87 1177.59 609.28 
Audit also noticed that there was no system in plac e for regular cross checking and 
reconciliation of land actually received by DDA and that reported through MIS.  
Audit further noticed that  
• Cumulative closing balance of land 76,922.93 acres shown in May 2011 was changed to 
75,692.70 acres as opening balance of June 2011 whi ch was not evidenced by any 
document.  
• There were instances 56 of arithmetical mistakes while converting and repo rting of the 
land from Bigha, Biswa, Biswani to Acres. Thus, the  system of reporting of receipt of 
land as well as the actual quantity of land bank av ailable with DDA as on 31 March 
2015 was not reliable. 
DDA stated (June/October 2016) that discrepancies i n receipt of land for the year 2010-11, 
2011-12 and 2013-14 have been adjusted in the MIS f or the month of January 2016 and 
March 2016. DDA assured that in future efforts will  be made to report the receipt and 
disposal of land on monthly basis. DDA further stat ed that cumulative receipt of land was 
reduced by 1230.23 acres in June 2011 (year 2011-12) and 618.44 acres was increased during 
the year 2012-13 to file an affidavit in the Hon’bl e Court after reconciliation of land with the 
respective Land Acquisition Collectors.  
DDA, however, did not furnish any documentary evide nce regarding reconciling of land 
balances with Delhi Government to audit. Therefore,  reasonable assurance could not be 
drawn on the actual receipt of land by DDA as well as balance of land available with DDA as 
on date (October 2016). 
 
                                                 
56 In November 2013, 11.87 acre of land acquired in v illages Malikpur Kohi which was reported as 11.74 a cre. Similarly, 
in December 2013, land measuring 0.87 acre (i.e. 18 5.81 acre-184.94 acre) was reported in excess due t o arithmetical/ 
conversion mistakes. 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        79     
        
Conclusion: 
• There was lack of efficient internal audit as total  units planned for annual audit by 
Internal Audit Wing of DDA were low as compared to number of units to be audited 
annually. 
• Timely reconciliation of expenditure incurred vis-a -vis stock of land was not being 
done resulting in difference in the figures. 
Recommendations: 
• DDA needs to evolve and implement a system for inte rnal audit and effective internal 
monitoring of the activities of DDA in land management.  

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        80     
        
  

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        81     
        
Chapter 10 -  Conclusion and Recommendations 
 
 
 
 
10.1 Conclusion  
DDA has a crucial role in the governance of the cit y as it has been entrusted with the 
responsibility of promoting and securing the develo pment of Delhi as per the Master Plan of 
Delhi.  
DDA has a major role in acquisition, development as  well disposal of land in Delhi. Efficient 
planning and execution of land management activitie s require proper co-ordination with 
various agencies including the Ministry of Urban Development and Delhi Government. Audit 
observed lack of coordination among these agencies as a result of which development and 
implementation of a land pooling policy in land ass embly and development, disposal of 
industrial land etc. were pending since long.  
A critical issue noticed in audit was non-availability of consolidated information in respect of 
land stock with DDA. The information relating to la nd acquisition, utilization, development, 
disposal as well as land lying vacant was inadequate, incomplete and outdated. 
In respect of land acquisition processes, long dela ys in payment of compensation/enhanced 
compensation to land owners, excess payment of comp ensation, non-receipt of utilization 
certificates for the expenditure incurred on paymen t of such compensations, non-receipt of 
land even after full payment, possibility of lapse of acquisition due to enactment of a new 
statute in cases of considerable delays over five y ears since announcement of award etc were 
observed in audit.  
Land development works suffered from weaknesses in planning of the projects and lack of 
compliance with codal requirements and delays in st art and completion of various 
development works. 
Developed lands are to be disposed for various inte nded purposes such as industrial, 
institutional, residential and commercial. Disposal  activities are required to be carried out in 
accordance with Nazul Rules. Disposal activities we re adversely affected due to lack of clear 
policy in the areas of valuation, prioritizing, sch eduling and planning. Land was allotted to 
various institutions on concessional rates but ther e was no uniform policy for deciding 
eligibility of cases for this category. Progress in  auction of commercial plots was slow. There 
were cases of considerable delays in allotment of l and to even Government department and 
agencies.  
In the area of land protection, there were shortfal ls in execution of planned demolition 
programmes and instances of late reporting of encro achment, non handing over of land to 
engineering department after carrying out demolitio n programme and non construction of 
 
10 
Chapter 
Conclusion and 
Recommendations 

 Performance Audit Report on Land Management in Delhi Development Authority  
 
 
 
 
        82     
        
boundary wall in time after regaining the land were  noticed. In this scenario, a large number 
of vacant tracts of land lay unutilized for years a nd DDA could not guard against the risk of 
encroachment and haphazard development of those areas. 
Majority of leases under Nazul-I category i.e. land  transferred from erstwhile Delhi 
Improvement Trust, Land & Development Office, Gaon Sabha lands of urbanized villages 
etc., had expired and there was no mechanism to reg ularly watch and monitor the status of 
these lands. Various deficiencies were noticed in p rocessing of cases of conversion from 
lease hold to freehold and there was no mechanism f or regular monitoring and collection of 
outstanding ground rent and damage charges. 
DDA neither had a proper record management system nor did it have a robust internal control 
system which was evident from the fact that coverage of units in internal audit was quite low. 
There was lack of a regular and effective reconcili ation mechanism among different set of 
records. 
Joint Inspections carried out by audit alongwith DD A representatives revealed instances of 
shortage of land vis-à-vis DDA records, encroachment/unauthorised use of vaca nt land, land 
lying undeveloped even after transfer to user depar tment etc., signifying poor state of affairs 
of the functioning of the land management activities in DDA.  
DDA in its reply (June/October 2016) as well as in the Exit Conference held in June 2016 
stated that many Standard Operating Procedures (SOP s) relating to Land Management and 
Mobile Applications for land protection and e-Measu rement Books have been developed 
(2015-16) and are being implemented. These are welc ome steps but the systemic issues still 
remain to be resolved. 
10.2 Recommendations 
In the light of weaknesses in planning, implementat ion, monitoring of the land management 
activities at DDA, some general and specific recomm endations have been made. Specific 
recommendations relating to individual land managem ent processes have been included in 
the concerned chapters of this Report. General reco mmendations meant to address systemic 
deficiencies, are given below:  
•• •• DDA should prepare an Office Manual laying down the  organization structure and 
defining roles and responsibilities across levels o f the organization along with Standard 
Operating Procedures for various activities and pro cesses with defined timelines for land 
management. The recently introduced SOPs and initiatives should be institutionalized and 
monitored to ensure that these are integrated into the work processes of DDA.    
•• •• As DDA is dealing with varied activities in Land Ma nagement, where multiple wings are 
dealing with different aspects with a high level of  public interface, it may consider 
implementation of an Enterprises Resource Planning (ERP) system, integrating all aspects 
of its functioning.  
 

  Report No. 31 of 2016 
 
 
 
        83     
        
•• •• DDA should maintain all the prescribed records and ensure their completeness, accuracy, 
timely updation and proper upkeep. A comprehensive database of land stock with all 
details and present status must also be maintained.  Further, considering the importance, 
age and quantum of records, DDA should complete the  digitalization of its records at the 
earliest. 
•• •• It is important to have an effective co-ordination and co-operation mechanism between 
DDA and Delhi Government. An effective mechanism sh ould be evolved where all the 
pending issues between DDA and Delhi Government are settled. 
•• •• DDA needs to implement a strong system for effectiv e internal monitoring of land 
management activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
     A 1     
        
Annexure-I-A 
(Referred to in Para 3.2.3) 
Summary of examined land acquisition cases  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
 
 
Date of 
notification 
issued 
under 
Section 4 of 
LA Act, 
1894  
Date of 
notification 
issued 
under 
Section 6 of 
LA Act, 
1894 
Details of Award Date of 
demand of 
compensat
ion by 
Delhi 
Govt. 
Payment released against award by DDA Purpose of Acquisition 
 
 
 
(Emergency clause-
Yes/No) 
Date of 
transfer of 
land to the 
user deptt.  
Award No. 
and  
(Date)  
Area  
(Bigha –
Biswa-
Biswani ) 
Cost 
of 
award  
( `` `` in 
crore) 
Payment 
released with 
date 
 (` ` ` ` in crore) 
Land 
received 
from Delhi 
Govt. with 
date 
(Bigha   -
Biswa – 
Biswani ) 
Land not 
received  
( Bigha-   
Biswa- 
Biswani) 
1. Bakkarwala  13/12/04 20/04/05 10/DC(W)/ 
2006-07 
(18/04/07) 
182-06 9.29 20/04/07 6.21 
(24/03/05) 
3.08 
(27/11/13) 
122-13 
(01/11/06 
& 
23/02/07) 
59-13 C/o 20 mtr. Wide road 
(Yes)  
13/12/06 & 
23/02/07 
2. Pooth Khurd 09/09/09 08/09/10 2/2012-13/ 
DC(NW) 
(05/09/12) 
79-16 14.26 Not 
available 
9.19 
(07/09/10) 
5.07 
(22/11/13) 
50-07 
(04/10/12) 
29-09 C/o 100 mtr road (Yes) 22/09/15 
3. Singhola 15/05/06 14/05/07 02/2008-09/ 
DC(NW) 
(15/05/08) 
34-08 1.79 03/07/08 1.79 
(18/02/13) 
34-08 
(18/09/12) 
-Nil- C/o Sewerage Treatment 
Plant (No) 
18/09/12 
4. Mehrauli 21/07/11 19/07/12 05/2013-14 
(27/12/13) 
44-10 7.83 27/12/13 0.11 
(18/12/82) 
7.72 
(04/09/14) 
44-00 
(30/12/13) 
0-10 Planned development of 
Delhi (PDD)  
(No) 
Not 
transferred 
5. Humayunpur 20/05/10 
 
 
19/05/11 01/2013-14 
(30/04/13) 
1620  
sqm. 
4.43 
 
28/10/13 0.22 
(05/05/11) 
4.12* 
(27/11/13) 
1620sqm 
(20/01/12) 
 
-Nil- Approach road to 
community center (Yes) 
Not 
transferred 
6. Maidan Garhi 13/07/11 15/07/11 02/2013-04 
 (10/07/13) 
49-14 8.82 12/07/13 5.71 
(14/09/10) 
1.18* 
(21/11/13) 
40-03 
(11/08/11) 
 
9-11 For SAARC University 
under PDD. (Yes) 
26/08/11 
 
7. Basai Darapur 01/04/04 10/11/04 16/DC(W)/ 
2004-05  
(07/04/05) 
557.61 
sqm. 
1.07 13/04/05 1.07 
(11/11/13) 
557.61 sqm 
(16/05/05) 
-Nil- C/o Community centre 
(No)  
05/08/11 
 
 

 
     A 2     
        
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
 
 
Date of 
notification 
issued 
under 
Section 4 of 
LA Act, 
1894  
Date of 
notification 
issued 
under 
Section 6 of 
LA Act, 
1894 
Details of Award Date of 
demand of 
compensat
ion by 
Delhi 
Govt. 
Payment released against award by DDA Purpose of Acquisition 
 
 
 
(Emergency clause-
Yes/No) 
Date of 
transfer of 
land to the 
user deptt.  
Award No. 
and  
(Date)  
Area  
(Bigha –
Biswa-
Biswani ) 
Cost 
of 
award  
( `` `` in 
crore) 
Payment 
released with 
date 
 (` ` ` ` in crore) 
Land 
received 
from Delhi 
Govt. with 
date 
(Bigha   -
Biswa – 
Biswani ) 
Land not 
received  
( Bigha-   
Biswa- 
Biswani) 
8. Masoodabad 
And  
Najafgarh 
29/08/06 12/10/06 02/2007-08 
 (20/08/07) 
351-18- 
05  
17.29 14/12/07 13.41 
(03/10/06), 
  &  
3.88 
(16/11/11); 
 
2.00 (03/10/06) 
&  
0.59 
( 07/11/13) 
351-18-05 
02/11/06 
-Nil- For water treatment plant 
Delhi Jal Board  
(Yes) 
26/12/06 
29/08/06 12/10/06  3/2007-08   
(20/08/07) 
52-13 2.59 52-13 
Nov.-
Dec.06 
-Nil- 26/12/06 
9. Tikri kalan 15/06/06 14/06/07 06/DC(W)/ 
2007-08 
(01/05/08) 
438-01 24.50 02/05/08 18.60 
(12/05/09) 
5.90 
(25/06/10) 
371-00 
(27/09/10 
& 
05/12/12) 
67-01 Residential space for the 
workers of PVC market 
further transfer to Delhi 
State Industrial & 
Development Cor. Ltd.  
(No) 
21/10/11 
10. Hauz Khas 27/08/64 30/01/65 08/2011-12 
 (10/10/11) 
1-18 1.37 30/12/11 1.37 
(14/02/12) 
1-18  
(27/11/81) 
-Nil- Award was issued w.r.t 
revision of rate by the 
court. Physically position of 
land was taken on 27/11/81.  
(No) 
01/12/81 
11. Khhichripur 22/11/06 12/06/07 02/2009-10 
(East) 
(11/06/09) 
3-00 1.12 18/06/09 1.12 
(27/11/12) 
3-00 
(14/09/12) 
-Nil- Planned Development of 
Delhi (No) 
Not 
transferred 
12. Malikpur 
Kohi/  
Rangpuri 
27/06/96 10/01/97 02/98-99  
(06/01/99) 
1333-10 45.18 11/02/99 13.47 
(10/10/96) 
& 
3.56 
(07/10/14) 
(Part released) 
122-19 
(31/12/13) 
1210-11 Planned Development of 
Delhi  
(No) 
Not 
transferred 
27/06/96 24/06/97 7/98-99  
(22/06/99) 
366-10 14.26 14/10/13 362-00 
(31/12/13) 
4-10 Planned Development of 
Delhi 
 (No) 
Not 
transferred 
13. Okhla 13/07/2000 27/06/01 7/1/2003-04 
 (25/06/03) 
17-14 1.13 13/08/09 0.14 
(14/12/00) 
0.99 
(11/11/13) 
17-14 
14/06/07 
-Nil- Planned Development of 
Delhi (No) 
18/06/07 

 
     A 3     
        
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
 
 
Date of 
notification 
issued 
under 
Section 4 of 
LA Act, 
1894  
Date of 
notification 
issued 
under 
Section 6 of 
LA Act, 
1894 
Details of Award Date of 
demand of 
compensat
ion by 
Delhi 
Govt. 
Payment released against award by DDA Purpose of Acquisition 
 
 
 
(Emergency clause-
Yes/No) 
Date of 
transfer of 
land to the 
user deptt.  
Award No. 
and  
(Date)  
Area  
(Bigha –
Biswa-
Biswani ) 
Cost 
of 
award  
( `` `` in 
crore) 
Payment 
released with 
date 
 (` ` ` ` in crore) 
Land 
received 
from Delhi 
Govt. with 
date 
(Bigha   -
Biswa – 
Biswani ) 
Land not 
received  
( Bigha-   
Biswa- 
Biswani) 
14. Bamnoli 04/11/04 31/10/05 01/2007-08/ 
SW 
(06/08/07) 
2100-06 111.76 06/08/07 77.67 
(23/08/07) 
9.27 
(02/03/12) 
(Part released) 
1337-09 
(six times 
between 
2007- 
2011)  
762-17 Dwarka Phase-II under 
PDD (No) 
03/01/08 
15. Nasirpur 02/05/06 05/02/07 1/2008-09/ 
SW 
(30/06/08) 
15-08 0.88 09/06/09 0.88 
(11/11/13) 
11-00 
(13/04/09) 
4-08 Dwarka Phase-I under PDD 
(No) 
Not 
transferred 
16. Barwala 
 
Pansali  
 
Pehladpur 
Bangar 
25/11/09 19/02/10 03/2011-12  
(01/07/11); 
04/2011-12   
(01/07/11); 
05/2011-12 
(01/07/11) 
177-15-10 
 
55-04-10 
 
0-02-0 
27.20 
 
9.20 
 
0.02 
01/07/11 26.81 
(07/01/10) 
& 
9.61 
(23/02/12) 
176-9-10 
(20/04/10) 
55-04-10 
(20/04/10) 
0-02-0 
(20/04/10) 
1-6-0 
 
-Nil-  
 
-Nil-  
Rohini Residential Scheme 
Ph. IV & V. 
(Yes) 
20/04/10 
 
20/04/10 
 
Not 
transferred 
17. Kirari 
suleman 
Nagar 
21/03/03 19/03/04 29/DC/ 
NW/05-06 
(17/03/06) 
5278-02 286.41 
 
14/06/06 8.14 
(14/09/06)  
(Part released) 
-nil- 5278-02 Rohini Residential Scheme 
for PDD (No) 
 Not 
received  
18. Madanpur 
Dabas 
21/03/03 18/03/04 09/2005-06/ 
DC(NW) 
12/07/05 
135-04 6.97 13/07/05 5.58 
(11/08/05) 
(Part released) 
4-03 
30/11/06 
131-01 Rohini Residential Scheme 
for PDD (No) 
Not 
transferred 
*Released after adjusting the earlier payments released by DDA alongwith interest thereon. 
 
 

 
     A 4     
        
Annexure-I-B 
(Referred to in Para 3.2.3) 
Statement showing time taken in various activities of land acquisition process in DDA 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
Date of 
Award 
Date of 
demand of 
compensatio
n from Delhi 
Govt. 
Time taken 
from date 
of award to 
date of 
demand  
Date of 
release of 
compensation 
by DDA 
Time taken 
from date of 
demand to last 
date of release 
Date of 
physical 
possession 
of land 
taken from 
Delhi govt.  
Time taken from 
date of award to 
date of  physical  
possession of 
land by DDA 
Date of 
transfer of 
land to user 
departments  
Time taken from 
date of physical 
possession to 
date of transfer 
of land to user 
deptt./non-
transferred upto 
October 2016. 
1 2 3 4 5= 4 –3 6 7 =  6- 4 8 9= 8 -  3 10 11= 10 -  8 
1. Basai 
Darapur 
07/04/05 13/04/05 6 days 11/11/13 8 years 7 months 16/05/05 1 month 05/08/11 6  years 2 months 
2. Tikri Kalan 01/05/08 02/05/08 1 day 25/06/10 2 years 2 months 27/09/10 2  years 5 months 21/10/11 1 year  
3. Bakkarwala 18/04/07 20/04/07 2 days 27/11/13 6 years 7 months 01/11/06 & 
23/02/07 
emergency 13/12/06 & 
23/02/07 
1 month 
 
4. Nasirpur 30/06/08 09/06/09 11 months 
21 days 
11/11/13 4 years 5 months 13/04/09 9 months Not 
transferred 
7 years 6 months 
5. Malikpur 
Kohi/ 
Rangpuri 
06/01/99 & 
22/06/99 
11/02/99 & 
14/10/13 
1 month 5 
days 
07/10/14 1 year 31/12/13 14 years 6 months Not 
transferred 
2 years 10 months 
 
6. Pooth Khurd 05/09/12  Not available NA 22/11/13  NA 04/10/12 emergency 22/09/15 3 years  
7. Singhola 15/05/08 03/.07/08 1 month 18 
days 
18/02/13 4 years 7 months 18/09/12 4 years 4 months 18/09/12 Nil 
8. Mehrauli 27/12/13 27/12/13 Nil 04/09/14 9 months 30/12/13 NIL (3 days)  Not 
transferred 
2 years 10 months 
9. Masoodabad/ 
Nazafgarh 
20/08/07 14/12/07 3 months 17 
days 
16/11/11 
 
07/11/13 
3 years 11 
months 
Nov-Dec 
2006 
 emergency 26/12/06  Nil 
10. Khhichripur 11/06/09 18/06/09 7 days 27/11/12 3 years 5 months 14/09/12 3years 3 months Not 
transferred 
4 years 1 month  
11. Okhla 25/06/03 13/08/09 Nil 
(court case) 
11/11/13 4 years 3 months 14/06/07 4 years 18/06/07 Nil (4 days) 

 
     A 5     
        
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
Date of 
Award 
Date of 
demand of 
compensatio
n from Delhi 
Govt. 
Time taken 
from date 
of award to 
date of 
demand  
Date of 
release of 
compensation 
by DDA 
Time taken 
from date of 
demand to last 
date of release 
Date of 
physical 
possession 
of land 
taken from 
Delhi govt.  
Time taken from 
date of award to 
date of  physical  
possession of 
land by DDA 
Date of 
transfer of 
land to user 
departments  
Time taken from 
date of physical 
possession to 
date of transfer 
of land to user 
deptt./non-
transferred upto 
October 2016. 
1 2 3 4 5= 4 –3 6 7 =  6- 4 8 9= 8 -  3 10 11= 10 -  8 
12. Bamnoli 06/08/07 06/08/07 Nil 02/03/12 4 years 7 months 14/09/07 to 
20/01/11  
(5 times) 
3 years 5months 03/01/08   
(Part 
transferred)  
More than 5 years 
13. Barwala, 
Pansali & 
Pehladpur 
Bangar 
01/07/11 01/07/11 Nil 23/02/12 8 months 20/04/10 
20/04/10 
20/04/10 
 
 NA  
(acquired under 
emergency clause) 
20/04/10 
20/04/10 
Not 
transferred 
Nil 
Nil 
6 years 6 months 
14. Maidangarhi 10/07/13 12/07/13 2 days 21/11/13 4 months 11/08/11  NA  
(acquired under 
emergency clause) 
26/08/11 Nil (15 days) 
15. Humayunpur 30/04/13 28/10/13 5 months  
28 days 
27/11/13 1 month 20/01/12  NA  
(acquired under 
emergency clause) 
Not 
transferred 
4 years 10 months 
16. Hauz Khas 10/10/11 30/12/11 2 months  
20 days 
14/02/12 1 month 27/11/81 
(revised 
award) 
NA  
(revised award) 
01/12/81 Nil (4 days)  
17. Kirari 
Suleman 
Nagar 
17/03/06 14/06/06 2 months  
28 days 
14/09/06 3 months Nil  NA  
(no land received) 
Not 
transferred 
 
N.A. 
18. Madanpur 
Dabas 
12/07/05 13/07/05 1 day 11/08/05 1 month 30/11/06 1 year 5 months Not 
transferred 
9 years 11 months  
 

 
     A 6     
        
                               Annexure-II-A  
(Referred to in Para 3.2.3.1) 
Delay in release of compensation for land acquisition by DDA 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Village Award No. and date Date of demand 
of Compensation 
by Delhi 
Government 
Date of 
release by 
DDA 
Delay (more than 
six month) in 
release of 
compensation by 
DDA 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (=5-4) 
1. Basai Darapur 16/DC(W)/2004-05  
(07/04/2005) 
13/04/2005 11/11/2013 8 years 6 Months 
2. Tikri Kalan 06/DC(W)/2007-08 
(01/05/2008) 
02/05/2008 25/06/2010 1 year 11 Months 
3. Bakkarwala 10/DC(W)/2006-07 
(18/04/2007) 
20/04/2007 27/11/2013 6 Years 6 Months 
4. Nasirpur 1/2008-09/SW 
(30/06/2008) 
09/06/2009 11/11/2013 4 Years 4 Months 
5. Malikpur 
Kohi/Rangpuri 
02/98-99 (06/01/1999)  
& 7/98-99 (22/06/1999) 
11/02/1999 & 
14/10/2013 
07/10/2014 11 Months 
6. Pooth Khurd 2/2012-13/ DC(NW) 
(5/09/2012) 
Not available* 22/11/2013 12 Months  
7. Singhola 02/2008-09/ DC(NW) 
(15/05/2008) 
03/07/2008 18/02/2013 4 Years 6 Months 
8. Mehrauli 05/2013-14 
(27/12/2013) 
27/12/2013 04/09/2014 8 Months 
9. Masoodabad/ 
Najafgarh 
02/2007-08 & 3/2007-
08  (20/08/2007) 
14/12/2007 16/11/2011 
07/11/2013 
3 Years 10 Months 
10. Khichripur 02/2009-10 (East) 
(11/06/2009) 
18/06/2009 27/11/2012 3 Years 4 Months 
11. Okhla 7/1/2003-04 
(25/06/2003) 
13/08/2009 11/11/2013 4 Years 2 Months 
12. Bamnoli 01/2007-08/ SW 
(06/08/2007) 
06/08/2007 02/03/2012 4 Years 6 Months 
13. Barwala, Pansali 
& Pehladpur  
Bangar 
03/2011-12, 04/2011-
12 & 05/2011-12 
(01/07/2011) 
01/07/2011 23/02/2012 7 Months 
*excluding permissible two months from date of award. 
  

 
     A 7     
        
Annexure II-B 
(Referred to in Para 3.2.3.1) 
Additional interest liability under Section 34 of LA Act due to delay in payment 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Village 
Award No. Date of 
Award 
Physical 
possession 
of land 
taken 
(date) 
Date of 
release of 
compensati
on by DDA 
Delay period  
(after the date 
of physical 
possession 
taken to date 
of cheque)  
Interest 
liability 
calculated 
on cost of 
land taken 
over. ( `` ``    in 
lakh) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7= 6- 5 8 
1. Basai 
Darapur 
16/DC(W)/ 
2004-05 
07/04/2005 16/05/2005 11/11/2013 8 years 178 
days 
130.07 
2. Nasirpur 1/2008-
09/SW 
30/06/2008 13/04/2009 11/11/2013 4 years 210 
days 
39.40 
3. Singhola 02/2008-09/ 
DC(NW) 
15/05/2008 18/09/ 2012 18/02/13 151 days 6.67 
4. Mehrauli 05/2013-14 27/12/2013 30/12/2013 04/09/2014 246 days 46.82 
5. Masoodabad 
& Nazafgarh 
02/2007-08 
& 3/2007-
08 
20/08/2007 Nov-Dec 
2006 
16/11/2011 
07/11/2013 
4 years 319 
days 
6 years 310 
days 
260.36 
56.88 
6. Okhla 7/1/2003-04 25/06/2003 14/06/2007 11/11/2013 6 years 149 
days 
89.10 
7. Barwala, 
Pansali & 
Pehladpur 
Bangar 
03/2011-12, 
04/2011-12 
& 05/11-12 
01/07/2011 20/04/2010 23/02/2012 1 year 308 
days 
198.90 
8. Khichripur 02/2009-10 11/06/2009 14/09/2012 27/11/2012 72 days 1.99 
9. Malikpur 
Kohi/ 
Rangpuri 
02/98-99 & 
7/98-99 
06/01/1999 
& 
22/06/1999 
31/12/2013 07/10/2014 278 days 24.43 
Total 854.62  
 
  

 
     A 8     
        
Annexure-III A 
(Referred to in Para 4.2.1) 
Non-availability of clear site 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
Name of Work Scheduled date 
of Start of Work 
Actual Date of 
Start of Work 
1. WD-3 C/o RCC S.W. drain & culvert in Sec.26 Dwarka 
Ph. II. 
10/06/2012 9/12/2013 
 
2. RPD-6 C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  Internal Road 1st phase 
treatment  in Pocket A-1 & C-2 Sector-37 (Part) 
Phase.V Rohini 
Sept. 2013 Work could not 
be started till 
Dec. 2015. 
3. WD-6 C/o Peripheral SW Drain on 12M & 20M in Sector-
3, Dwarka, (Remaining Portion) 
21/05/2010 15/03/2012 
 
Annexure-III B 
(Referred to in Para 4.2.2) 
 Delay in submission of structural drawings 
 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
Name of work Date of start 
of work 
Date of submission/ 
approval of 
structural drawings 
1. WD-9 SH:- Covering of Palam Drain Sitapuri from 
Railway line near Delhi Cantt. To Dabri Bridge and 
constn. Of road over it 
08/08/2010 April 2011 to 
15/04/2014   
2. RPD-7 C/o Peripheral S.W. Drain & Culverts in Sector 29 
(Pt.II) & Internal road (Ph-I treatment) of 9M, 12 M  
and 24M R/W in Pocket D-1, D-2 &D-3 Sec.29( 
Part II) and Pocket C-1 and C-2 Sec.30 (Part-II) 
Rohini Ph. IV & V. 
28/06/2012 12/11/2012 
3. RPD-2 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain and Culverts in Sector-30 
& on 80 M R/W  road along Sec.30 upto out fall 
point Rohini 
29/10/2013 11/03/2014 
4. WD-3 C/o RCC S.W. drain & culvert in Sector 26 Dwarka 
Ph.II 
10/06/2012 14/09/2012 

 
     A 9     
        
Annexure-III C 
(Referred to in Para 4.2.3) 
Failure to obtain requisite approval from local bodies before start of work 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
Name of work Date of 
start of 
work 
Local bodies from 
which NOC required 
1. WD-3 Widening of existing carriage way & 60M MP 
road No. 226 with Foot Path & SW Drain from 
IOC culvert to crossing of Road No. 226 & 211 
Dwarka Ph.II 
05/05/2014 Indian Oil Corporation 
Ltd.(IOCL) 
2. ND-9 External Development (Land scaping and 
plumbing work) C/o  Interpretation Centre and 
Restaurant Building including their plumbing & 
Internal electrification work 
08/07/2011 Department of Forest and 
Wild Life 
 
 
Annexure-III D 
(Referred to in Para 4.2.4) 
Non approval of revised Administrative Approval and Expenditure sanction  
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
Name of work Date of 
accorded 
of AA&ES  
AA&ES  
+ 10 % 
Tendered 
amount 
Actual 
Expenditure  
1. WD-3 C/o RCC S.W. drain & culvert in sec. 
26 Dwarka Ph.II 
March 2005 1.70 
1.87 
11.43 13.29 
2. RPD-4 (i) SH:C/o main carriageway (two 
lanes) of 30M R/W Roads (Cement 
concrets Pavement) in Sector 34-35 
Rohini 
(ii) C/o  Internal Road  in plotted 
Pockets A-1,A-2,A-4 C-1 to C-6 of 
Sector 34 and Pockets A-1,A-2 and 
C-1 of Sector 35 Rohini Ph.V   
Feb. 2010 18.40 
20.24 
9.27 
 
 
 
16.44 
 
(9.27+16.44 
= 25.71) 
 15.23 
 
 
 
17.70 
 
(15.23+17.70=
32.93) 
3. ND-12 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & Culverts 
in Sector G-7 & G-8 at Narela Sub-
city. 
Oct. 2007 8.85 
9.74 
33.71 35.40 
 
  

 
     A 10     
        
Annexure-III E 
(Referred to in Para 4.2.5) 
Non- revision of Technical sanction 
(`` ``    in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Division 
Name of work Date of 
accord of 
Technical 
Sanction  
Technical 
sanction  
+ 10 % 
Actual Expenditure  
Amount Bill No. 
1. WD-9 SH:- Covering of Palam Drain 
Sitapurin from Railway line 
near Delhi Cantt. To Dabri 
Bridge and constn. of road 
over it 
February 2009 64.93 
71.42 
96.36 
 
Final 
2. WD-3 Widening of existing carriage 
way & 60M MP road No. 226 
with Foot Path & SW Drain 
from IOC culvert to crossing 
of Road No. 226 & 211 
Dwarka Ph.II 
 
September 
2013 
5.10 
5.51 
7.61 Final  
3. RPD-4 (SH:C/o main carriageway 
(two lanes) of 30M R/W 
Roads (Cement concrets 
Pavement) in Sector 34-35 
Rohini 
March 2012 11.41 
12.55 
15.23 11th RA 
4. RPD-6 SH : C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  
Internal Road in Pocket B-3 & 
C-I, Sector-37 (part) Rohini, 
Phase V.  
March 2012 2.39 
2.62 
3.34 Final 
5. ND-9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ED-4 
SH: External Development 
(Land scaping and plumbing 
work) C/o  Interpretation 
Centre and Restaurant 
Building including their 
plumbing & Internal 
electrification work 
 
March 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 2011 
12.95 
14.24 
 
 
 
 
 
0.27 
0.29 
 
26.99 
(Budget 
Code-
24503027) 
Actual: 
97.77 
 
0.30 
 
34th RA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd RA 
 
  

 
     A 11     
        
Annexure-III F 
(Referred to in Para 4.2.6) 
Work not completed /foreclosed 
(`` ``    in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of the 
Division  
Name of work Percentage 
of 
executed 
work done 
Date of fore-   
closure/ 
completion 
Tendered 
amount 
Total 
payment 
made 
1. RPD-8 C/o  Internal  Roads (12 m R/W 
and 9 m R/W) of Pkt.A-1,A-2,A-
3,B-1 and C-3, Sector 36, Rohini 
Phase-V 
65 08/10/2014 3.13 1.89 
2. RPD-8 C/o 24 M R/W Road in Sector-36, 
Rohini, Phase-V (Ist Phase 
treatment) 
15 08/10/2014 0.69 0.31 
3. RPD-8 C/o  Walls of Internal Parks and tot 
lots of plotted Pocket  A-1,A-2,A-
3,B-1 and C-3, Sector 36, Rohini, 
Phase V 
45 19/05/2014 0.49 0.40 
4. RPD-8 C/o   Boundary Wall of Green Belt 
at Sector-36, Rohini, Phase-V  
38 15/05/2014 0.93 0.58 
5. RPD-2 SH:Providing and laying Sewerage 
in Sector 29 (Part), 30 (Part), 34 
and 35 Rohini 
 67 May 2013 26.33 16.55 
6. RPD-4 C/o main carriageway (two lanes) 
of 30M R/W Roads (Cement 
concrets Pavement) in Sector 34-
35 Rohni 
100 per cent 
on available 
land 
May 2015 (as 
per progress 
report) 
9.27 15.23 
7. RPD-6 C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  Internal 
Road in Pocket B-3 & C-I, Sector-
37 (part) Rohini, Phase V.  
85 July 2014 1.78 3.34 
8. ND-12 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector G-7 & G-8 at 
Narela Sub-city. 
85 to 90 per 
cent on 
available 
land 
Nov.2015 33.71 35.40 
Total payment made (`)  73.70 
  

 
     A 12     
        
Annexure-IV A 
(Referred to in Para 4.3) 
Delay in commencement and execution of work  
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Divisi
on 
Name of work Month/ 
Year of 
approval 
of Lay 
out Plan 
Month/year 
in which  
AA&ES 
accorded 
Date of 
start 
Delayed 
period 
between 
AA&ES and 
date of start 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 = 6 -5 
1. WD-3 C/o RCC S.W. drain & culvert in 
Sector 26 Dwarka Ph.ii 
Not 
provided 
March 2005 10/06/2012  86 months 
2. WD-3 Widening of existing carriage way 
& 60M MP road No. 226 with 
Foot Path & SW Drain from IOC 
culvert to crossing of Road No. 
226 & 211 Dwarka Ph.II 
- March 2005 05/05/2014 110 months 
3. RPD-7 C/o Peripheral S.W. Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 29 (Pt.II) & 
Internal road (PH-I treatment )of 
9M, 12 M  and 24M R/W in 
Pocket D-1, D-2 &D-3 Sec.29 
(Part II) and Pocket C-1 and C-2 
Sec.30 (Part-II) Rohini Ph.IV & V. 
July 2002 April 2008 28/06/2012 50 months 
4. RPD-7 SH. : C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 30 (Part), 
Rohini 
July 2002 April 2008 31/01/2013 57 months 
5. RPD-8  SH: C/o  Internal  Roads (12 m 
R/W and 9 m R/W) of Pkt.A-1,A-
2,A-3,B-1 and C-3, Sector 36, 
Rohini 
December 
2010 
February 2012 23/08/2012 6 months 
6. RPD-8 SH: C/o 24 M R/W Road in 
Sector-36, Rohini, Phase-V  
(1st  Phase treatment) 
August 
2007 
March  2012 01/12/2012 9 months 
7. RPD-8 SH: C/o  Walls of Internal Parks 
and tot lots of plotted Pocket  A-
1,A-2,A-3,B-1 and C-3, Sector 36, 
Rohini, Phase V 
May 2012 March 2012 08/10/2012 6 months 
8. RPD-8 SH: C/o   Boundary Wall of Green 
Belt at Sector-36, Rohini, Phase-V  
August 
2002 
March 2012 08/11/2012 7 months 
9. RPD-2 SH: C/o Peripheral S.W Drain and 
Culverts in Sector-30 & on 80 M 
R/W  road along Sec.30 upto out 
fall point Rohini 
July 2002 March 2005 29/10/2013 103 months 
10. RPD-2 SH: C/o 30M ROW peripheral 
roads in Sector 29 & 30 (Pt.) 
Rohini. Ph. IV & V) 
July 2002 March 2005 29/06/2012 87 months 
11. RPD-2 SH: Providing and laying 
Sewerage in Sector 29 (Part), 30 
(Part), 34 and 35 Rohini 
March 
2006 
April 2008 & 
February 2010 
25/04/2013 60 months 
12. RPD-4 SH: C/o main carriageway (two 
lanes) of 30M R/W Roads 
(Cement concrets Pavement) in 
Sector 34-35 Rohini 
February 
2012 
February 2010 06/09/2012 30 months 
13. RPD-4 SH: C/o  Internal Road  in plotted 
Pockets A-1,A-2,A-4 C-1 to C-6 
of Sector 34 and Pockets A-1,A-2 
and C-1 of Sector 35 Rohini Ph.V   
February 
2012 
February 2010 26/03/2012 25 months 

 
     A 13     
        
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Divisi
on 
Name of work Month/ 
Year of 
approval 
of Lay 
out Plan 
Month/year 
in which  
AA&ES 
accorded 
Date of 
start 
Delayed 
period 
between 
AA&ES and 
date of start 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 = 6 -5 
14. 
RPD-6 SH: C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  Internal 
Road in Pocket B-3 & C-I, Sector-
37 (part) Rohini, Phase V.  
December  
2010  
March 2012 31/08/2012 6 months 
15. RPD-6 SH.: C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  
Internal Road  1St Phase treatment 
in Pocket A-I & C-2, Sector-37 
(part) Rohini, Phase V.  
December 
2010  
March 2012 09/08/2015* 
 
41 months 
16. WD-6 SH:  C/o Peripheral SW drain on 
12M & 20 M R/W in Sector-3 
Dwarka(Remaining Portion) 
Oct. 1996  Oct. 2009 21/05/2010 8 months 
17. SWD-9 SH: C/o S.W.Drain and footpath 
along 12M & 20 M R/W Road line 
Sector-11, Dwarka. 
April 2005 Oct. 2009 18/12/2010 14 months 
18. ED-4 SH:  Landscape and flood lighting 
including LT Panel & feeder pillar 
Not 
provided 
March 2011  30/10/2011 8 months 
19. ND-12 C/o Boundary wall of Green belt 
in Sec. G-2&G-6 adjoining 
housing pocket 
December 
2012 
 
March 2011 12/02/2013 
 
23 months 
 
20. ND-12  Refurbishing of existing stone 
masonary boundary wall in sec. G-
2 & G-6 in Narela subcity 
-do- -do- 18/01/2014 34 months 
21. ND-12 P/L Peripheral sewer line at Sector 
G-7 & G-8 at Narela subcity. 
April 2007 
 
October 2007 
 
13/06/2011 
 
 
43 months 
 
 
22. ND-12 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector G-7 & G-8 at 
Narela Sub-city. 
April 2007 
 
October 2007 
 
 
16/05/2014 78 months 
23. ND-5 SH: C/o S.W. Drain (Left out 
portion) in residential area at 
Model Town Balance work) 
September 
1995 
October 1996 & 
March 2012 
 
15/07/2014 
 
 
210 months 
 
 
24. ND-5 Improvement of Internal Roads in 
residential area of model Town 
Not 
provided 
-do- 06/11/2014 215 months 
*Work could not be started, but awarded twice in Sept. 2013 and July 2015 
 
  

 
     A 14     
        
Annexure - IV B 
(Referred to in Para 4.3) 
 Excess expenditure incurred against tendered amount                               
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Division 
Name of work Tendered 
amount 
(`` `` in 
crore) 
Paymen
t made 
(`` `` in 
crore) 
Final 
bill/ 
RA bill 
Excess expenditure 
incurred 
Amount 
(`` `` in 
crore) 
Percentage 
of excess 
amount 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 =5-4 8 
1. WD-9 Covering of Palam (Sita Puri) 
drain from Railway line near 
Delhi Cantt. to Dabri bridge & 
construction of road over it” 
73.05 96.36 Final  23.31 31.91 
2. WD-3 C/o RCC S.W. drain & culvert 
in sec. 26 Dwarka Ph.ii 
11.42 13.28 20th RA 1.87 16.37 
3. WD-3 Widening of existing carriage 
way & 60M MP road No. 226 
with Foot Path & SW Drain 
from IOC culvert to crossing 
of Road No. 226 & 211 
Dwarka Ph.II 
3.94 7.61 Final  3.67 93.14 
4. RPD-7 C/o Peripheral S.W. Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 29 (Pt.II) & 
Internal road (PH-I treatment ) 
of 9M, 12 M  and 24M R/W in 
Pocket D-1, D-2 &D-3 
Sec.29( Part II) and Pocket C-
1 and C-2 Sec.30 (Part-II) 
Rohini Ph.IV & V 
 13.60 15.11 Final 1.51 11.10 
5. RPD-7  C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 30 (Part), 
Rohini 
10.83 12.20 Final 1.38 12.74 
6. RPD-4 C/o main carriageway (two 
lanes) of 30M R/W Roads 
(Cement concretes Pavement) 
in Sector 34-35 Rohni 
9.27 15.23 11th RA 5.96 64.29 
7. RPD-4 C/o  Internal Road  in plotted 
Pockets A-1, A-2, A-4 C-1 to 
C-6 of Sector 34 and Pockets 
A-1, A-2 and C-1 of Sector 35 
Rohini Ph.V   
16.44 17.70 15th RA 1.26 7.63 
8. RPD-6 C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  Internal 
Road in Pocket B-3 & C-I, 
Sector-37 (part) Rohini,  
Phase V. 
1.78 3.34 Final 1.56 87.64 
9. SWD-9 C/o S.W. Drain and footpath 
along 12M & 20 M R/W Road 
lin Sector-11, Dwarka. 
1.65 2.39 Final 0.74 44.84 
10. ND-9 
ED-4 
External Development (Land 
scaping and plumbing work) 
C/o Interpretation Centre and 
Restaurant Building including 
their plumbing & Internal 
electrification work. 
14.24 
 
 
97.77 34th RA 
 
83.53 
 
586.59 
11. ED-4 Landscape and flood lighting 
including LT Panel & feeder 
pillar 
1.48 1.65 Final 0.17 14.48 
        

 
     A 15     
        
12. ND-12 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector G-7 & G-8 
at Narela Sub-city. 
33.71 35.39 18th RA 1.68 4.98 
13. ND-12 P/L Peripheral sewer line at 
Sector G-7 & G-8 at Narela 
subcity. 
5.69 6.24 Final 0.55 9.67 
14. ND-12 Refurbishing of existing stone 
masonary boundary wall in 
sec. G-2 & G-6 in Narela 
subcity 
0.08 0.11 Final      0.03 37.50 
15. ND-12 C/o Boundary wall of Green 
belt in Sec. G-2  & G-6 
adjoining housing pocke 
0.10 0.12 Final 0.02 20.00 
16. ND-5 Improvement of internal roads 
in residential area of Model 
Town. 
0.56 0.80 5th RA 0.24 42.86 
17. ND-5 C/o S.W. Drain (Left out 
portion) in residential area at 
Model Town Balance work) 
0.46 0.85 Final 0.39 84.78 
 
 
 
  

 
     A 16     
        
Annexure - IV C 
(Referred to in Para 4.3) 
                       Delay in completion of work   
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Division 
Name of work Stipulated 
Date of 
start  
Stipulated 
date of 
completion 
Actual date 
of 
completion 
Delayed 
period 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7=6-5 
1. WD-9 Covering of Palam (Sita Puri) 
drain from Railway line near Delhi 
Cantt. to Dabri Bridge & 
construction of road over it” 
08/08/2010 07/08/2013 28/08/2015 24 months 
2. WD-3 C/o RCC S.W. drain & culvert in 
sec. 26 Dwarka Ph.II 
10/06/2012  09/12/2013 06/07/2015 18 months 
3. RPD-7 C/o Peripheral S.W. Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 29 (Pt.II) & 
Internal road (PH-I treatment )of 
9M, 12 M  and 24M R/W in 
Pocket D-1, D-2 & D-3 Sec.29 
(Part II) and Pocket C-1 and C-2 
Sec.30 (Part-II) Rohini Ph.IV & V. 
28/06/2012 27/03/2013 30/04/2014 13 months 
4. RPD-7 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 30 (Part), 
Rohini 
31/01/2013 30/09/2013 31/03/2014 6 months 
5. RPD-8 C/o  Internal  Roads (12 m R/W 
and 9 m R/W) of Pkt.A-1,A-2,A-
3,B-1 and C-3, Sector 36, Rohini 
23/08/2012 22/12/2012 08/10/2014 
(foreclosed) 
22 months 
6. RPD-8 C/o 24 M R/W Road in Sector-36, 
Rohini, Phase-V (Ist Phase 
treatment) 
01/12/2012 28/02/2013 08/10/2014 
(foreclosed) 
19 months 
7. RPD-8 C/o  Walls of Internal Parks and 
tot lots of plotted Pocket  A-1,A-2, 
A-3,B-1 and C-3, Sector 36, 
Rohini, Phase V 
08/10/2012 07/02/2013 19/05/2014 
(foreclosed) 
15 months 
8. RPD-8  C/o   Boundary Wall of Green 
Belt at Sector-36, Rohini, Phase-V  
08/11/2012 07/03/2013 15/05/2014 
(foreclosed) 
14 months 
9. RPD-2 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain and 
Culverts in Sector-30 & on 80 M 
R/W  road along Sec.30 upto out 
fall point Rohini 
29/10/2013 28/06/2014 Ongoing 
(Till October 
2016) 
28 months 
10. RPD-2 C/o 30M ROW peripheral roads in 
Sector 29 & 30 (Pt.) Rohini. Ph. 
IV & V) 
29/06/2012 28/12/2012 11/10/2013 10 months 
11. RPD-2 Providing and laying Sewerage in 
Sector 29 (Part), 30 (Part), 34 and 
35 Rohini 
25/04/2013 24/04/2014   Ongoing 
(Till October 
2016) 
30 months 
12. RPD-4 C/o main carriageway (two lanes) 
of 30M R/W Roads (Cement 
concretes Pavement) in Sector 34-
35 Rohini 
06/09/2012 05/03/2013  Ongoing 
(Till October 
2016) 
43 months 
13. RPD-4 C/o  Internal Road  in plotted 
Pockets A-1, A-2,A-4 C-1 to C-6 
of Sector 34 and Pockets A-1,A-2 
and C-1 of Sector 35 Rohini Ph.V   
26/03/2012 25/09/2012 15/04/2015 30 months 
14. RPD-6 C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  Internal 
Road in Pocket B-3 & C-I, Sector-
37 (part) Rohini, Phase V.  
31/08/2012 30/12/2012 04/08/2014 19 months 

 
     A 17     
        
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Division 
Name of work Stipulated 
Date of 
start  
Stipulated 
date of 
completion 
Actual date 
of 
completion 
Delayed 
period 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7=6-5 
15. RPD-6 C/o 9.0 M &  12.0 M  Internal 
Road  1St Phase treatment in 
Pocket A-I & C-2, Sector-37 (part) 
Rohini, Phase V.  
09/08/2015* 31/12/2015 Work in 
progress 
 
16. WD-6 C/o Peripheral SW drain on 12M 
& 20 M R/W in Sector -3 Dwarka 
(Remaining Portion) 
21/05/2010 20/02/2011 31/12/2012 22 months 
17. SWD-9  C/o S.W.Drain and footpath along 
12M & 20 M R/W Road lin 
Sector-11, Dwarka. 
18/12/2010 17/12/2011 29/03/2012 4 months 
18. ND-9 & 
ED-4 
 External Development (Land 
scaping and plumbing work) C/o 
Interpretation Centre and 
Restaurant Building including 
their plumbing & Internal 
electrification work. 
08/07/2011 07/04/2012 30/10/2015 43 months 
19. ED-4 Landscape and flood lighting 
including LT Panel & feeder pillar 
30/10/2011 29/01/2012 25/09/2014 32 months 
20. ND-12 C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector G-7 & G-8 at 
Narela Sub-city. 
16/05/2014 15/05/2015 November 
2015 on 
available land 
i.e. 85% 
5 months 
21. ND-12 P/L Peripheral sewer line at Sector 
G-7 & G-8 at Narela subcity. 
13/06/2011 12/06/2012 08/02/2013 7 months 
22. ND-5  Improvement of Internal Roads in 
residential area of model Town 
06/11/2014 05/03/2015 29/05/2015 3 months 
*1st call in March 2013, awarded to M/s Amardeep Builders but due to Barwala villager’s agitation, work could not be started.  Again 
tenders were recalled for the same work in March 2015 and awarded to M/s Bansal Associates on 30/07/2015 but due to Barwala 
villager’s agitation, work could not be started till December 2015. 
  

 
     A 18     
        
Annexure - V 
(Referred to in Para 4.4) 
Delay in handing over the completed projects  
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Division 
Name of Work Payment 
made (`` `` 
in  crore) 
Actual 
Date of 
completion 
Delayed 
period till 
October 2016 
Agency  
whom to be 
handed over 
1. WD-3 C/o RCC S.W. drain & culvert in 
Sec. 26 Dwarka Ph.II 
13.28 06/07/2015 16 months Delhi Jal 
Board (DJB) 
2. RPD-7 C/o Peripheral S.W. Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 29 (Pt.II) & 
Internal road (PH-I treatment) of 
9M, 12 M  and 24M R/W in 
Pocket D-1, D-2 &D-3 Sec.29( 
Part II) and Pocket C-1 and C-2 
Sec.30 (Part-II) Rohini Ph.IV & 
V 
15.11  30/04/2014 30 months DJB & 
Municipal 
Corporation 
of Delhi 
(MCD) 
3. RPD-7  C/o Peripheral S.W Drain & 
Culverts in Sector 30 (Part), 
Rohini 
12.21  31/03/2014 31 months DJB 
4. RPD-2  C/o 30M ROW peripheral roads 
in Sector 29 & 30 (Pt.) Rohini. 
Ph. IV & V) 
7.90       11/10/2013 37 months MCD 
5. RPD-4 C/o  Internal Road  in plotted 
Pockets A-1,A-2,A-4 C-1 to C-6 
of Sector 34 and Pockets A-1,A-2 
and C-1 of Sector 35 Rohini Ph.V   
17.70   15/04/2015 18 months MCD 
6. WD-6 C/o Peripheral SW drain on 12M 
& 20 M R/W in Sector -3 Dwarka 
(Remaining Portion) 
1.35 31/12/2012 46 months DJB 
7. SWD-9 C/o S.W.Drain and footpath along 
12M & 20 M R/W Road lin 
Sector-11, Dwarka. 
2.39 
 
29/03/2012 55 months DJB 
8. ND-12 Pdg. and laying Peripheral sewer 
line at Sector G-7 & G-8 at 
Narela, sub.city 
6.24 08/02/2013 44 months MCD 
9. WD-9 Covering of Palam (Sita Puri) 
drain from Railway line near 
Delhi Cantt. to Dabri bridge & 
construction of road over it” 
96.36 28/08/2015 15 months MCD 
10. WD-3 Widening of existing carriage 
way & 60M MP road No. 226 
with Foot Path & SW Drain from 
IOC culvert to crossing of Road 
No. 226 & 211 Dwarka Ph.II 
7.61 12/03/2015 19 months Public Works 
Department 
(PWD) 
11. ND-5 Improvement of internal roads in 
residential area of Model Town 
0.80 29/05/2015 17 months MCD 
12. ND-5 S.W.Drain(left out protion) in 
residential area at Model 
Town(Balance work) 
0.85 05/12/2014 22 months DJB 
  Total 181.80    

 
     A 19     
        
Annexure - VI 
(Referred to in Para 5.4.3) 
Non compliance with requirements/criteria 
Requirements/Criteria for land 
allotment 
Name of the society  
IMSA, 
Narela 
Learning 
Matters 
Education-
al Society, 
Dwarka 
Popular 
Institute 
Society 
for the 
Blind, 
Rohini 
Voice 
Society, 
Rohini 
 
Chandra Bhushan 
Singh Memorial 
Mahila, Bal Evam 
Shravan Viklang 
Siksha Evam 
Punarvas 
Sansthan, Dwarka 
The Society should be registered for at 
least 5 years. Yes No Yes Yes Yes 
The Society should submit affidavit that 
its Management Committee comprises of 
persons of professional and representative 
character and does not consist of family 
members. 
Yes Yes Yes  Yes Yes 
The Society should submit proof of 
having fixed deposits/equivalent liquid 
investment covering the cost of land plus 
10% to ensure payment of land cost. 
No No No No Yes 
The Society should submit the Audited 
Accounts of the previous three years, 
Bank Pass Book, 80-G Certificate and 
Permanent Account Number. 
Yes No No No Yes 
Verification of character and antecedents 
of Executive Body of the Society from 
Divisional Commissioner. 
No No No No Yes 
Sponsorship from concerned Ministry of 
Central Government or Department of 
Government of National Capital Territory 
of Delhi. 
Yes No No Yes Yes 
The aims and objectives of the public 
institution be such that– (i) it directly 
subserves the interests of the population 
of the Union territory of Delhi; (ii) it is 
conducive to the planned development of 
Delhi; and (iii) the nature of work to be 
carried out by that public institution 
should be such, that the same cannot, with 
equal efficiency, be carried out elsewhere 
than in Delhi. 
No No No No No 

 
     A 20     
        
Annexure - VII 
(Referred to in Para 5.8.1) 
Details of test-checked cases of Alternate Allotment of Land 
 
SI. No. Land acquisition details/Award No.   Acquired land   
( in Bigha-Biswa) 
1. 16/85-86 dt. 10/09/1985 of village Rithala  11-02 
2. 20/85-86 dt. 11/11/1985 of village Pooth Kalan 12-08 
3. 20/85-86 dt. 11/11/1985 of village Pooth Kalan 18-13 
4. 20/85-86 dt. 11/11/1985 of village Pooth Kalan 14-07 
5. 16/85-86 dt. 10/09/1985 of village Rithala  11-02 
6. 20/85-86 dt. 11/11/1985 of village Pooth Kalan 10-13 
7. 20/85-86 dt. 11/11/1985 of village Pooth Kalan 29-01 
8. 20/85-86 dt. 11/11/1985 of village Pooth Kalan 18-11 
9. 16/85-86 dt. 10/09/1985 of village Rithala  11-04 
10 35/81-82 dt. 10/11/1981 of village Badli 31-09 
11. 16/85-86 dt. 10/09/1985 of village Rithala  11-02 
12. 16/85-86 dt. 10/09/1986 of village Rithala  29-01 
13. 42/84-85 dt. 27/03/1985 of village Samepur 30-15 
14. 8/96-97 dt. 12/12/1996 of village Safipur Ranholla 42-10 
15. 16/85-86 dt. 10/09/1985 of village Rithala  28-02 
16. 16/85-86 dt. 10/09/1985 of village Rithala  11-10 
17. 27/80-81 dt. 23/05/1980 of village Mangolpur Kalan  12-12 

 
     A 21     
        
Annexure- VIII 
(Referred to in Para 5.9.1) 
Details of cases of delay in issuing allotment letter to Government Departments  
Sl. 
No 
Type of allotment category Receipt of  
application from 
allottee 
 Issue of 
Allotment 
Letter 
Delay  
1 2 3 4 5= 4 - 3 
Hospitals and Dispensaries 
1. 100 Bedded Hospital, Bindapur July, 2012 February, 2013 7 months 
2. Dental University, Rohini  September, 2012 June, 2014 1 year 9 months 
3. Mother and Child Hospital, 
Rohini 
December, 2012 July, 2013 7 months 
Transport Department, GNCTD 
4.  Bus Terminal, Vikaspuri September, 2005 June, 2013 7 year 9  months 
5.  Bus Terminal Sector-37, Rohini December, 2007 March, 2012 4 years 3 months 
6.  Bus Terminal Sector-26, Rohini December, 2007 March, 2012 4 year 3 months 
Delhi Police 
7. Police Station, Palam April, 2009 June, 2013 4 year 2 months 
8. Police Station, Nangloi Saiyyad October, 2009 March, 2011 1 year 5 months 
9. Police Post PSP, Rohini February, 2013 July, 2013 5 months 
10. Police Station, Shahbad Dairy April, 2009 July, 2013 4 year 3 months 
Power Department, GNCTD 
11. ESS, Rohini December, 2012(*) July, 2014 1 year 7 months 
12. 53 ESS, Rohini October, 2011(*) July, 2014 2 years 9 months 
13. ESS, Molar Band July, 2009(*) November, 
2012 
3 year 4 months 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) 
14.  DMRC, Kalindi Kunj August, 2011 May, 2014 2 year 9 months 
15.  DMRC, Dhaula Kuan May 2012 May, 2013 1 year  
16. DMRC, Dwarka Sector-1 July, 2011 December, 2014 3 year 5 months 
17. DMRC, Dabri Mor February, 2012 September, 2013 1 year 7 months 
18. DMRC, Mukandpur December, 
2011 
January, 2015 3 year 1 month 
19. DMRC, IIT June, 2011 January, 2014 2 year 7 months 
(*)  represents the month in which the proposal was initiated in DDA

 
     A 22     
        
Annexure - IX 
(Referred to in Para 5.10 & Para 8.1.5) 
Details of Outstanding Ground Rent (as on 31 March 15) in test-checked cases 
Sl. 
 No. 
Name of Society/Institution Premium of 
land (Amount 
in `` ``) 
Area in 
sqm. 
Ground Rent @ 2.5 
per cent per annum 
(Amount in `` ``) 
Date of 
allotment 
Duration in 
months 
Ground Rent  due 
as on 31 March 2015 
(Amount in `` ``)  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8=(5x7)/12 months 
1. Arya Samaj, Sainik Vihar, Pitampura 30,63,116 200 76,578 06/05/2009  58 3,70,127 
2. International Medical Sciences Academy 
Sector-7A, Narela 
51,05,198 500 1,27,630 27/09/2012  18 1,91,445 
3. Bengal Welfare and Cultural Association, 
Vasundhara 
55,75,789 346.06 1,39,395 11/05/2010  46 5,34,348 
4. Shri Balaji Babosa Dharmik Society, Rohini 61,26,400 400 1,53,160 11/01/2011  38 4,85,007 
5. Sri Jagannath Rohini Sewa Sangh, Rohini 65,94,888 430.6 1,64,872 10/01/2011  38 5,22,095 
6. Gurdwara Baba Sahab Singh Ji (Regd.) 
Pitampura 
69,58,877 227 1,73,972 01/03/2012  24 3,47,944 
7. Voice Society, Plot No. 6 PSP Area,  
Sector-22, Rohini  
69,58,877 400 1,73,972 10/02/2012  25 3,62,442 
8. Shri Swetamber Sthanak Vasi Jain Mahila 
Mandal P.V. A Block, Paschim Vihar 
90,46,026 520 2,26,151 23/01/2012  26 4,89,994 
9. Delhi Wakf Board, Jangpura 91,89,347 400 2,29,734 29/03/2011  36 6,89,202 
10. Science of the Soul Research Centre, Vasant 
Kunj 
1,04,38,216 400 2,60,955 29/03/2012  24 5,21,910 
11. Radha Krishna Mandir Sewa Samiti ,  
Sector -19 Ph-II, Dwarka 
1,04,38,217 400 2,60,955 14/02/2012  25 5,43,656 

 
     A 23     
        
Sl. 
 No. 
Name of Society/Institution Premium of 
land (Amount 
in `` ``) 
Area in 
sqm. 
Ground Rent @ 2.5 
per cent per annum 
(Amount in `` ``) 
Date of 
allotment 
Duration in 
months 
Ground Rent  due 
as on 31 March 2015 
(Amount in `` ``)  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8=(5x7)/12 months 
12. Shri Guru Singh Sabha, Sheikh Sarai Ph-I 1,11,81,939 428.5 2,79,548 29/08/2012  19 4,42,618 
13. Shri Paramhans Advait Math Publication 
Society, Sector-23, PH-I Dwarka 
1,13,34,238 418.68 2,83,356 11/04/2012  23 5,43,099 
14. Delhities Syro-Malabar Mission, OCF Pkt-C, 
Dilshad Garden 
1,23,61,286 402.41 3,09,032 20/05/2014  0 0 
15. Popular Institute Society for the Blind, Plot 
No. CS/OCF-7, Sector-24, Rohini 
1,39,00,375 799 3,47,509 14/02/2012  25 7,23,977 
16. Jain Samaj Dwarka, Sector-12 1,90,41,405 413.25 4,76,035 11/12/2014  0 0 
17. Chandra Bhushan Singh Memorial Mahila 
Bal Evam Sharvan Viklang Shiksha Evam 
Punarvash Sansthan, Sector-13, Dwarka 
2,04,78,593 2,000 5,11,965 19/02/2013  13 5,54,629 
18. Learning Matters Educational Society, 
Sector-13, Dwarka 
7,82,86,622 3,000 19,57,166 21/09/2011  30 48,92,915 
19. International Society for Krishna 
Consciousness (ISKCON), Sector-3, Dwarka 
20,87,54,452 8,000 52,18,861 07/02/2012  25 1,08,72,627 
20. Dte. of Higher Education for setting up of 
B.R. Ambedkar University 
1,08,91,29,312 1,71,956 2,72,28,233 28/01/2013  14 3,17,66,272 
      Total 5,48,54,307 
 
 
 
 

 
     A 24     
        
Annexure -X 
(Referred to in Para 6.3.3) 
Details of encroachment demolition programmes during 2010-11 to 2014-15  
Zone 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total 
Zone & area 
under 
encroachment 
Demolition Demolition Demolition Demolition Demolition Demolition 
Fixed Carried 
out 
Area 
reclaimed 
(land in 
acre)   
Fixed Carried 
out 
Area 
reclaimed 
(land in 
acre)   
Fixed Carried 
out 
Area 
reclaimed 
(land in 
acre)   
Fixed Carried 
out 
Area 
reclaimed 
(land in 
acre)   
FixedCarried 
out 
Area 
reclaimed 
(land in 
acre)   
Fixed Carried 
out 
Area 
reclaimed 
(land in 
acre)   
East Zone 
(not furnished ) 
53 41 21.04 54 43 3.47 33 30 2.28 38 24 3.18 46 27 6.56 224 165 36.53 
West  Zone 
(not furnished ) 
88 68 10.75 80 59  11.98 134 110 23.06 108 75 06.96 78 52 02.74 488 364 55.49 
North Zone 
(106.71 ) 
96 65 08.10 69 50 07.90 78 57 13.63 36 28 01.30 23 13 02.07 302 213 33.00 
Rohini  Zone 
(27.89 ) 
43 29 10.62 30 20 5.36 38 20 6.25 19 9 1.26 50 38 10.84 180 116 34.33 
South West 
Zone 
(27.17 ) 
34 23 4.63 21 15 8.68 24 14 17.55 13 7 1.00 26 15 02.44 118 74 34.30 
South East Zone 
(1569.52 ) 
54 32 4.00 67 35 26.27 35 19 33.64 68 41 17.87 60 30 43.29 284 157 125.07 
Total 368 258 59.14 321 222 63.66 342 250 96.41 282 184 31.57 283 175 67.98 1596 1089 318.74 
 
  

 
     A 25     
        
Annexure - XI 
(Referred to in Para 7.3.2)  
Details of cases where the lessee had not obtained prior written consent to sub divide the land or to 
part with the possession or transfer or sub lease a part only of the land  
Sl. No.  File No.  
1. File No. S/1(140)2010/OSB and lease file No S/5(433 )51 pertaining to the Plot No. 62/15 Khasra No. 
687/19 WEA Karol Bagh1302.3 sq yards  
2. File No. S/1(241)14/OSB + S/20(278)57/OSB+16(47)40 pertaining to the Plot No. 62/15 Khasra No. 
687/19 WEA Karol Bagh1302.3 sq yards 
3. File No. S/1(38)2013/OSB and lease agreement file No. S/16(12)50 Plot No. 17-A Khasra No. 828/718 
4. File No. S/1(99)2014/OS/DDA, S/12(09)46 and S&S-I No. 20(46) /2014/ASOI  
5. File No. S-6(17)1956/OSB/Pt.I, No. S/6(17)56/OSB, S/4(12)/48, S/2(153)59 Pt.  
6. File No.  S-6(10)67/OSB, File No. S/6(10)67/OSB/Pt and File No. S/6(11) 67   
7. File No. S/1(191)2012/OSB and S/19(238)44, 2622 sq. yards, 
Plot No. 876/Khasra No. 205/31, East Park Road, Karol Bagh  
8. File No. S/1(175)2014/OSB  and S/20(573)62/OSB/KBH  Khasra No. 29, Block P, Naiwala, Karol 
Bagh 
9. File No. S/1(169)2010/OSB, S/20(861)62 and S/5(321) 84/OSB pertaining to Plot No. 35, Block No. 
34, Southern Ridge, Pusa Road Area : 1333.3 sq. yards 
10. File No. S/1(148)2010/OSB, 17(1132)42 and S/5(127)5 3 pertaining to property No. 29, Block 2 C, 
New Rohtak Road, WEA, Karol Bagh plot area 300  Sq. yards 
11. File No.S1(123)2013/OSB, file No. 17(592)42 and lea se file No. 17(592)42 pertaining to Plot No. 60, 
Block No. 53, WEA, Ramjas Road, Karol Bagh plot size 271.5 sq. yards 
12. File No. S/1(141)2012/OSB,  Plot No. 575, Block K, Khata No. 642, Plot measuring 183 sq. yards, 
Naiwala 
13. File No. S/1(185)2013/OSB and S/5(92)48 (Khasra No. 348 Block M, Naiwala Estate. 
14. File No. S/1(244)2011/OSB, Plot No. 5, Block No. 3, Qadam Sharif, Paharganj 
15. File No. S/1(64)2011/OSB, S/2(176)/62 and lease fil e, Plot No. 87 of Dariyaganj Janoobi) plot 
measuring 142 Sq yards  118.71  sq. metres (Khata No. 40, Khasra No. 176/110  
16. File No. S/1(175)2010/OSB, S/20(673)62/OSB, Plot No . 29 & 30, Block A, Khasra No. 809/529/530 
Paharganj 
  

 
     A 26     
        
Annexure – XII 
(Referred to in Para 7.3.3)  
(A) Details of cases where neither completion certificate/D form nor alternate documents were 
submitted  
Sl. No.  File No.  
1.  File No. S/1(140)2010/OSB and lease file No S/5(433 )51 pertaining to the Plot No. 62/15 Kh No. 
687/19 WEA Karol Bagh1302.3 sq yards 
2.  File No. S/1(38)2013/OSB and lease agreement file No. S/16(12)50 Plot No. 17-A Kh No. 828/718 
3.  File No. S/1(99)2014/OS/DDA, S/12(09)46 and S&S-I No. 20(46) /2014/ASOI  
4.  File no.S/1(191)2012/OSB and File no S/19(238)44, 2622 sq.yards, 
Plot No. 876/Khasra No. 205/31, East Park Road, Karol Bagh, Delhi.  
5.  File No. S/1(193)2010/OSB  for Plot No. 7, Block 2 E, Jhandewalan, New Delhi 
6.  File No. S (186)2014/OBS/NSK, S-16(21)41 and /3(7)7 6-OSB pertaining to property No. 63, Block 
‘L’, Daryaganj.   Area:  590.1 Sq.yards 
7.  File No. S/1(148)2010/OSB, 17(1132)42 and S/5(127)5 3 pertaining to property No. 29, Block 2 C, 
New Rohtak Road, WEA, Karol Bagh plot area 300  Sq. yards 
8.  File No. S/1(169)2010/OSB, S/20(861)62 and S/5(321) 84/OSB pertaining to Plot No. 35, Block No. 
34, Sourthern Ridge, Pusa Road Area : 1333.3 sq.yards 
9.  File No. S/1(212)2012/OSB,  S/7(20)46/OSB and TN 4( 187)08  pertaining to Khasra No. 1185/67 plot 
No. 67/8720, D.B. Gupta Road, Pahar Ganj, New Delhi.   
(B) Details of cases where documentary proof of physical possession of the property not furnished 
by the applicant  
Sl. No.  File No.  
1. File No. S/1(140)2010/OSB and lease file No S/5(433 )51 pertaining to the Plot No. 62/15 Kh No. 
687/19 WEA Karol Bagh1302.3 sq yards  
2. File No. S/1(38)2013/OSB and lease agreement file No. S/16(12)50 Plot No. 17-A Kh No. 828/718 
3. S/1(64)2011/OSB, S/2(176)/62, Lease agreement file  
Plot No. 87 of Dariyaganj Janoobi) plot measuring 1 42 Sq yards  118.71  sq metres (Khata No. 40, 
Khasra No. 176/110  
4. File No.s  S-6(17)1956/OSB/Pt.I, No. S/6(17)56/OSB, S/4(12)/48, S/2(153)59 Pt.  
5. File No.s  S-6(10)67/OSB, File No. S/6(10)67/OSB/Pt and File No. S/6(11) 67   
6. (i) S/1(175)2014/OSB  
(ii)S/20(573)62/OSB/KBH  Khasra No. 29, Block P, Naiwala, Karol Bagh 
7. File No.S/1(149)2010/OSB and 8/5(482)/51 pertaining  to Plot No. 34, Block P, Naiwala , Karol Bagh.  
Area 222 square yards. 
8. File No.S/1(185)2013/OSB and S/5(92)48 (Khasra No. 348 Block M, Naiwala Estate. 
9. File No. S/1(244)2011/OSB, Plot No. 5, Block No. 3, Qadam Sharif, Paharganj 
 
 

 
     A 27     
        
Annexure - XIII 
(Refer to Para 7.4.2) 
Delay in raising of demands on unauthorized occupants 
Sl. No File number 
 
 
 
 
Period of 
Assessment of 
damages 
Total 
Amount 
assessed 
 (```` in  
Thousands) 
Total No of 
Financial 
years  till 31 
March 15 
from the 
first FY of 
assessment 
Number 
of 
demands 
raised by 
DDA 
during 
the period 
Minimum to 
maximum 
Delay (in years)  
in raising the 
demands on the 
unauthorized 
occupants 
1. D/BGR/187-A 
 
01/04/1971 to 
31/03/2012 
1781.68 44 06 01-17 
2. D/BGR/187-B 27/08/2008 to 
31/03/2013 
1289.63 07 02 0-4 
3. EV/Malikpurchhawani/
10/80 Plus 05 
connected files 
01/09/1963 to 
30/11/2011 
4232.59 52 05 0-30 
4. EV/Malikpurchhawani/
05/80 Plus 06 
connected files 
01/04/1980 to 
31/12/2012 
13304.22 35 05 0-21 
5. D/NW/Bl-J/128 28/09/1953 to 
31/12/2012 
3443.58 62 07 0-32 
6. D/BRH/42 PT II/A 28/05/1996 to 
31/03/2013 
468.99 19 04 0-14 
7. D/Ch(8)/127/pt/II 01/04/1965 to 
31/12/2012 
2519.76 50 13 0-22 
8. D/Najafgarh/12/Pt 
(Shop demolished on 
23/09/2002) 
01/04/1979 to 
23/09/2002 
15.91 22 03 0-30 
9. D57(2)/Munirka/97 01/04/1977 to 
31/03/2010 
956.07 38 03 0-19 
10. D/SB-N/509-A 01/04/1966 to 
31/10/2014 
5179.97 49 11 0-24 
11. D/SB-N/509-B 01/01/1952 to 
31/10/2014 
5222.73 64 15 0-23 
12. D/R.K.Puram/9/80 01/04/1980 to 
31/03/2013 
4893.13 35 05 0-13 
Total 477 79  
 
  

 
     
    
 

 
 
    Ab 1     
        
ABBREVIATIONS 
AA&ES   Administrative Approval and Expenditure San ction 
CPWD    Central Public Works Department 
CVC    Central Vigilance Commission 
DAL    Demand cum Allotment Letter 
DD Act    Delhi Development Act, 1957 
DDA    Delhi Development Authority 
DEs    Detailed Estimates 
DIPP    Department of Industrial Policy and Promoti on 
DIT    Delhi Improvement Trust 
DSIIDC   Delhi State Industrial & Infrastructure De velopment Corporation 
DIDOM Act   Delhi Industrial Development Operationa l & Maintenance Act 
ENM    Enhanced Naksha Muntjamin 
EOT    Extension of Time 
ER&DCI    Electronic Research & Development Centre of India 
FAR    Floor Area Ratio 
GNCTD   Government of National Capital Territory of  Delhi 
GOI    Government of India 
IAC    Institutional Allotment Committee 
IMSA    International Medical Science Academy 
ISKCON   International Society for Krishna Consciou sness 
LA Act   Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
LAC    Land Acquisition Collector 
LAAC    Land Allotment Advisory Committee 
L&B    Land and Building Department, Delhi Governme nt 
L&DO    Land & Development Office, MoUD 
LD    Land Disposal 
LM     Land Management 
LMA Section   Land Management Account Section, DDA 
LM Wing   Land Management Wing of DDA 
LMIS    Land Management Information System 
LG, Delhi   Lieutenant Governor of Delhi 
LoP    Lay out Plan 
MCD    Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
MIS    Monthly Information Statement of Land 
MPD    Master Plan of Delhi 
MoUD    Ministry of Urban Development 

 
 
    Ab 2     
        
Nazul Rules   DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land ) Rules, 1981 
NABL    National Accreditation Board for Testing an d Calibration of Laboratories 
NGO    Non-Governmental Organization 
NIT    Notice Inviting Tender 
OSB Branch   Old Scheme Branch, DDA 
O & M  Study   Organization and Methods Study 
PAC    Public Accounts Committee 
PEs    Preliminary Estimates 
RPD    Rohini Project Division 
SAARC University  South Asian Association for Regio nal Cooperation University 
SOP    Standard Operating Procedure 
TS    Technical Sanction 
The New LA Act, 2013 The Right to Fair Compensation  and Transparency in Land Acquisition, 
    Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 
UC    Utilization Certificate 
VC    Vice-Chairman, DDA 
VOICE    Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Cons umer Education 
ZDP    Zonal Development Plan  
 
Conversion 
1 Hectare      -          2.5 Acres 
 1 Acre            -         4.80 Bigha 
1 Bigha          -         20 Biswa 
   1 Biswa          -         20  Biswani 
 

 
 
    G 1     
        
Glossary 
 
DD Act   Delhi Development Act 1957, as amended from time to time 
Development Areas Any area declared to be a development area under su b-section 
(1) of  section 12 of DD Act 
F.A.R  Floor Area Ratio i.e. the ratio that the total cove red space in 
the building bears to the area of plot on which it is constructed. 
Land Allotment Advisory 
Committee  
The committee constituted by the Delhi Development 
Authority for carrying out the purposes of Delhi De velopment 
Authority (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 
Lay out Plan Lay out plan prepared for planned utilisation of an y parcel of 
land for the implementation of a scheme or any othe r 
development activities 
Lease  Lease of immovable property is a transfer of a righ t to enjoy 
such property, made for a certain time, expressed or implied, or 
in perpetuity, in consideration of a price paid or promised to be 
rendered periodically or on specified occasions to the 
transferor by the transferee, who accepts the such transfer of 
such terms 
Lessee  The transferee is called lessee 
Master Plan Long term perspective plan for guiding the sustaina ble planned 
development of the city. This document lays down pl anning 
guidelines, policies, development codes and space r equirement 
for various socio-economic activities supporting th e city 
population during the plan period. It is also the b asis for all 
infrastructure requirements 
Nazul Land The land vested in Central Government and placed at  the 
disposal of the Authority under sub-section (1) of Section 22 of 
the DD Act or otherwise 
Nazul Rules DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 
Nazul-I Land 
 
The 24 Nazul Estates transferred from erstwhile Del hi 
Improvement Trust to DDA which were placed by GOI a t the 
disposal of the Delhi Improvement Trust with effect  from 1 
April 1937 through the “Nazul Agreement" of March, 1937  
Nazul-II Land 
 
Lands acquired by Delhi Government as per the provi sions of 
Land Acquisition Act (LA Act), 1894 
Pre-determined rates  The rates of premium as defined in rule 2(1) of Nazul Rules 
Premises Any land or any building including garden, ground, any fitting 
affixed etc. 
Site Plan A Detailed Plan showing the proposed placement of s tructures, 
parking areas, open space, landscaping, and other d evelopment 
features, on a parcel of land, as required by speci fic sections of 
the development code 

 
 
    G 2     
        
Unauthorised Occupation The occupation made by any person of the public pre mises 
without authority for such occupation and includes the 
continuance by any person of public premises after the 
authority under which he was allowed to occupy the premises 
has expired or has been determined for any reason w hat-so-
ever 
Zonal Development Plan A plan for one of the zones (divisions) of the Nati onal Capital 
Territory of Delhi containing detailed information regarding 
provision of social infrastructure, parks and open spaces, 
circulation system, etc. 
Zone  
 
Anyone of the divisions in which Delhi may be divid ed for the 
purposes of development under DD Act 
 
 
 