 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
 
on 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrated Coaching Management System in Indian Railways 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
Report No.32 of 2016 

 PREFACE 
 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President of India 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the 
results of the ITAudit of Integrated Coaching Management System in 
Indian Railways. The instances mentioned in this Report are those which 
came to the notice during course of test audit during the year 2015-16. 
Matters to the period prior to April 2015 and after March 2016 have also 
been included wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation received from Ministry of 
Railways at each stage of the audit process. 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 Paragraph Pages 
Abbreviations used in the Report  i 
Executive Summary  iii to vi 
Chapter1 Introduction 
Modules of ICMS 1.1 1 
Objectives of the ICMS 1.2 2 
System Architecture 1.3 2
Organization 1.4 2
Audit Objectives 1.5 3
Audit Criteria 1.6 3
Audit Methodology and Scope 1.7 3
Sample size 1.8 4
Acknowledgement 1.9 4
Chapter 2 Achievement of objectives of ICMS 
Monitoring punctuality of trains through ICMS 2.1 5 
Monitoring status of coaching stock through ICMS 2.2 10 
Managing coach maintenance through ICMS 2.3 18 
Chapter 3 A pplication Controls
Deficiencies in integration between ICMS and other 
applications viz. PRS/COA/CGS etc. 
3.1 22 
Mismatch in data between ICMS and PRS 3.2 23 
Deficiencies in Master Data 3.3 23 
Discrepancies in Coach/Train/Loco Attributes 3.4 24 
Non-validation of train/loco data 3.5 26 
Discrepancies in data of Stations, Division, Yard, Base 
depot, Interchange Station and sick coaches
3.6 27 
Other areas where data was found to be illogical/invalid 3.7 28
Non-updation of Repair, Maintenance and Depreciation 
Charges 
3.8 28 
Helpdesk Services 3.9 29 
Chapter 4IT Security 
Physical Access Control 4.1 30 
Logical Access Control - User and Password 
Management 
4.2 30 
Change Procedure/Management 4.3 33 
ICMS Documentation 4.4 33 
Business Continuity Plan 4.5 33 
Chapter 5Conclusion and Recommendations 
Conclusion and Recommendations  36 
Annexures  39-74 
 
  

i 
 
Abbreviations used in the Report 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
BG Broad Gauge 
CDS Coach Display System 
CGS Coach Guidance System 
CMS Crew Management System 
COA Control Office Application  
COIS Coaching Operation Information System 
CPRC Chief Parcel Reservation Clerk 
CR Central Railway 
CRIS Centre for Railway Information System 
CTLC Chief Train Loco Controller 
CTNC Chief Train Clerk 
ECoR East Coast Railway 
ER Eastern Railway 
FOIS Freight Operations Information System 
IOH Intermediate Over haul 
MEMU Mainline Electric Multiple Unit  
MG Metre Gauge 
MIS Management Information System 
NCR North Central Railway 
NEFR North East Frontier Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NG Narrow Gauge 
NR Northern Railway 
NTES National Train Enquiry System 
NWR North Western Railway 
OCV Other Coaching Vehicle 
PAM Punctuality Analysis and Management 
PCV Passenger Coaching Vehicle 
POH Periodic Over Haul 
PRS Passenger Reservation System 
PTT Public Time Table 
RBS Rates Branch System 
RDBMS Relational Data Base Management System 
SCR South Central Railway 
SECR South East Central Railway 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SR Southern Railway 
SWR South Western Railway 
TMS Train Management System 
UTS Unreserved Ticketing System 
VG Vehicle Guidance 
WCR West Central Railway 
WR Western Railway 
WTT Working Time Table 
 

 iii
iii 
 
Executive Summary 
Integrated Coaching Management System  
The Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS) application was 
developed by Indian Railways with the obj ective of monitoring punctuality of 
Mail Express/Passenger trains, monitoring st atus of coaching stock in real time 
and online, facilitating augmentation of train composition and planning and 
running of special trains on the basis of traffic demand to maximise revenue, 
managing asset maintenance, minimize manual intervention and to provide fool 
proof service to enhance the image of Railways.  
ICMS was sanctionedin 2003. The project cost of `18.76 crore was approved in 
2006. As on 31 March 2016, an amount of ` 16.28 crore has been incurred on 
project implementation and ` 34.6 crore on maintenance of the project. Initially 
ICMS was implemented at 257 locations (445 terminals) over various Zonal 
Railways (up to 2008). During 2015-16, due to increase in volume of passenger 
traffic and coaching trains, ICMS was proposed for expansion at 249 more 
locations (510 terminals) with a project cost of ` 21.34 crore.  
The extent of achievement of objectives of ICMS was evaluated in Audit and the 
aspects related to Application controls, IT  security and Business Continuity Plan 
were reviewed. The study was conducted over 128 locations of all Zonal 
Railways.  
The major audit findings are as follows: 
I. Complete data of all the trains was not available in ICMS as movement of 
some of the trains including Exceptional trains, Extended/Special Trains, 
Pilot and Unscheduled Trains was not  reported/available in ICMS for 
monitoring punctuality. There were delays in capturing train movement 
details which resulted in non-availability of train movement information 
inreal time to the users of the information. 
[Paras 2.1.1, 2.1.2, 2.1.4 and 2.1.5] 
II. Data related to train/coach movement, their arrival/departure, etc. was 
captured in ICMS manually. Where data was captured/updated from other 
applications, the same was captured in other applications (like Control 
Office Application etc.) through manual processes/means.This data is 
finally reflected in National Trai n Enquiry System (NTES) where 
passengers can see arrival and departure timings of the trains in real time. 
Audit noticed differences between train arrival/departure data maintained in 
ICMS and manual records/data maintained over nine Zonal Railways. 
Delay in reporting and lack of accurate dataof arrival and departure timings 
of trains led to inconvenience to passengers. This also led to generation of 
wrong Management Information System (MIS) reports for Railways which 
affects monitoring of train punctuality.     
[Paras 2.1.6 and 2.1.9] 
III. Comparison of the trains/coaches placed  at platform/station lines with the 
actual position of trains/coaches over five Zonal Railways showed that 
actual placement of the trains/coaches at different lines of a station was not 

iv 
 
reflected in ICMS.Test check showed that rake composition position 
available in the ICMS was not accurate and reliable as data pertaining to 
attached/detached coaches was not found updated in ICMS. ICMS details 
captured in respect of condemned coaches were neither complete nor 
accurate and the data did not match the manual records maintained by the 
Zonal Railways. 
 
[Para 2.2.1] 
IV. There was no provision to capture traffic demand in ICMS.  The system is 
not integrated with Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS). Though ICMS has 
been integrated with Passenger Reservation System (PRS), it does not get 
details of traffic demand (in the form of wait list passengers etc.) from PRS. 
The integration of system with PRS/UTS could assist Railways in 
augmenting train composition as per the requirement of traffic demand. 
[Para 2.2.4] 
V. Vehicle Guidance (VG) summary is the record of composition of train and 
is carried by the Guard during the journey. Deficiencies in preparation of 
VG Summary were noticed over various Zonal Railways. In some cases the 
details in the VG summary reports did not match the details in the manual 
records. During test check it was noticed that at 13 ICMS locations, VG 
summary was being prepared manually mainly due to non-availability of 
functional printers.      [Para 2.2.5] 
VI. Test check of the loco position at various stations of five Zonal Railways 
showed that ICMS did not depict actual physical position of the locos. As 
per ICMS, there were 3165 Electric Locos and 5088 Diesel Locos in these 
Railways, but manual records indicated that there were 3408 Electric and 
3743 Diesel Locos in these Zonal Railways during the same period.  
[Para 2.2.6] 
VII. Wide variations were observed betw een ICMS data and manual records 
maintained by Zonal Railways in respect of coach master and other types of 
coach data. These included coach master data, coaches transferred from one 
Zonal Railway to another, induction of new coaches, coach yard stock data 
and gauge wise coach position.     [Para 2.2.7] 
VIII. Audit check at selected locations showed that railways themselves did not 
rely on ICMS data and various Departments viz. Operating (Coaching) 
Department, Mechanical Control Section and Mechanical Loco Control 
Section at Zonal Headquarters, Train Branch/Control Offices/Yards and 
Statistical Department continued to use manual data for the purpose of their 
operations.        [Para 2.2.8] 
IX. There was no provision to capture Interm ediate Overhaul (IOH) details of 
coaches in the system as seen in NR, SCR, SWR, ER and WR. As regards 
Periodic Overhaul (POH), discrepancie s in ICMS data were noticed due to 
lack of validation controls. Data analysis over ten Zonal Railways revealed 
that difference between POH done and POH due dates was neither as per 
extant orders nor uniform in respect of same type of coaches.  The data of 
coaches due for POH as seen during a test check at various stations of six 
 iv

 vv 
 
Zonal Railways did not match with th e ICMS data. Despite having facility 
to identify the POH overdue coaches, it was noticed over 11Zonal Railways 
that 7706 coaches which were overdue for POH were part of the train 
composition/consists. Data on sick/fit status of coaches was not maintained 
in ICMS over ECR, SWR and NR.   
[Paras 2.3.1 and 2.3.4] 
X. Integration between ICMS and other applications related to passengers and 
train services was not achieved completely, as a result of which output from 
the ICMS were not used in the field operations. Train consists which 
contain details like coach type, coach number, coach count etc., were not 
reported to PRS timely to help for use in train charting. Manual system of 
communicating Train consists to PRS was still in operation. Non-
implementation of integration with Coach Guidance System (CGS) led to 
manual feeding of data in CGS, over NR, NER and CR.  
[Paras 3.1.1 and 3.1.2] 
XI. In all Zonal Railways, 2445 coaches did not have coach built year in ICMS 
database. In respect of 315 coaches, co ach factory turnout date was prior to 
coach built date. In 697 coaches, the dates of induction into service were 
shown 01 to 33 years before the date of built of coaches. Lack of validation 
checks to identify status of coaches resulted in inaccurate MIS reports. 
Railway Board prescribed five digit coach numbering system. However, 
coach number was less than five digits in 3325 cases and the coach number 
exceeded five digits in 13069 cases.   
[Paras 3.4.1 and 3.4.2] 
XII. Discrepancies in data of Stations, Division, Yard, Base depot, Interchange 
Station and sick coaches indicated inadequate application controls. 
[Para 3.6] 
XIII. At the ICMS locations visited by Audit, access of unauthorised persons was 
not found restricted in SR, SWR, NR, NCR, NER and ECoR. Passwords 
and user IDs of the users created by Centre for Railway Information System 
(CRIS) were not communicated to Chief Administrative Officer/Freight 
Operations Information System (CAO/FOIS) office confidentially, but by 
writing them on the request letter itself, thereby compromising the 
password security. The login page of the ICMS did not restrict the number 
of attempts of login by users. Password standards being followed by CRIS 
ICMS group at Centralized Data Centre did not conform to the laid down IT 
Security Policy. Records relating to authorisation for creation of user IDs 
and passwords were not available at Zonal Railway Headquarters in NR. 
Privilege assigned to users were not commensurate with job specifications. 
[Paras 4.1 and 4.2] 
XIV. As per the test check of CRIS records relating to changes made in the 
ICMS, no system/procedure for getting appropriate approvals before 
releasing the changes made in the ICMS application software in the online 
environment was found in place. 
 [Para 4.3] 

 vivi 
 
XV. At the CRIS Centralized Data Centre, the process for Disaster Recovery 
Setup was still going on. Though daily back up was being taken up by 
ICMS team, no off line/remote site backup of ICMS was being maintained 
by CRIS ICMS group. No documented Business Continuity Plan was 
available in SWR, NCR, SCR, ECR, ECoR, ER, WR, NER, SER, NWR 
and SR. Personal computers/desktops were used in ICMS locations of WR, 
SR, NR and NER instead of thin clients. ICMS systems were not covered 
under Annual Maintenance Contract over SCR, SR, NR. Smoke detectors 
and/or fire extinguishers were not found at ICMS locations in NCR, SR, 
ER, SCR, NR and NER.             
[Paras 4.5.1 and 4.5.2] 
Recommendations 
1. Punctuality reporting of movement of trains which are not covered under 
ICMS may also be brought in the scope of ICMS.  
2. Accuracy and real time updation of arriva l/departure timings of trains may be 
ensured to provide accurate and reliable information to the passengers.  
3. Inconsistencies in arrival/departure timings in different modules of ICMS may 
be rectified to have accurate position of coaches. Accuracy, completeness and 
timely updation of all coach data and their movement details may be ensured 
and dependence on manual records may be gradually reduced.  
4. Availability of the traffic demand (such as position of waitlisted passengers) 
may be facilitated in real time environment through ICMS so as to help 
Railways in augmentation of train composition on the basis of traffic demand, 
facilitate planning and running of special trains. 
5. Provision to capture IOH details of coaches in the system may be created. 
Timely and accurate updation of coach POH data, sick and fit coach data and 
effective usage of POH/Sick/Fit operations through ICMS may be ensured. 
6. Integration of ICMS and Crew Management System (CMS) may be ensured 
for generation of complete Vehicle Guidance reports so as to avoid manual 
intervention in the ICMS output. 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may be 
introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy,  completeness and validity of various 
types of data input and output.  
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes may be 
laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented so 
as to ensure that business critical information and assets are protected from 
loss, damage and abuse.
 

Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)1
1 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
Indian Railways run more than 12000 passenger carrying trains on average (like 
Duronto, Rajdhani, Shatabdi, Mail Express, Passenger, Suburban etc.) and carry 
about 23 million1 passengers on originating basis every day over its vast network. 
Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS) is a critical IT application 
which computerises 
x the whole coaching operations of Indian  Railways and has different modules 
to cater to railway requirements for day to day operational activities, 
maintaining computerised records of various events & functionalities,  
x monitoring & management of passenger carrying vehicles, other coaching 
vehicles and passenger locomotives; and  
x generation of MIS reports for decision making and to ensure optimum 
utilisation of resources.  
ICMS was sanctioned in 2003. The project cost of ` 18.76 crore was approved in 
2006. As on 31 March 2016, an amount of ` 16.28 crore has been incurred on 
project implementation and ` 34.6 crore on maintenance of the project.   
1.1  Modules of ICMS   
ICMS comprises of the following modules: 
a) Punctuality Analysis and Monitoring (PAM): This module provides 
various functionalities for monitoring the running and punctuality of 
passenger carrying trains. PAM automatically picks up the train running 
timings from the Control Office Application 2 (COA) & Train Management 
System3 (TMS). Train timings for non-COA sections are directly fed by users 
into PAM through utility provided for the purpose.  
b) Coaching Operation Information System (COIS): This module captures all 
operational activities of coaches, rakes and passenger locos. Data on rakes 
and coaches related operations is entered into the system at station level and 
for locos at divisional level. Zonal and divisional users of COIS can also 
proxy to station level, if required to do reporting for the station. COIS is 
integrated with PAM/COA, Freight Operations Information System (FOIS) 
and other applications.  
c) Data Module: This module facilitates feeding of all master data used in 
ICMS pertaining to trains, coaches, in frastructure etc. including information 
such as train definition, train schedule, master/standard consist
4, train links, 
                                                            
1 Source: Indian Railways White Paper of February 2015 (indianrailways.gov.in) 
2 Control Office Application (COA) - Train operations on the Indian Railways are controlled and monitored by the Control 
Rooms in all the divisional/ area control offices. The Control office, by its very nature never shuts down and works all 
hours of the day and every day of the week. The Control Office Application facilitates monitoring of train movements in 
real time and provides movement of scheduled and unscheduled trains planned and controlled through the computer aided 
interface. It is this application that feeds the National Train Enquiry System (NTES) that provides passengers up to date 
information on train running. 
3 Train Management System (TMS) - This is an application implemented in WR and CR for integrated management and 
monitoring of suburban train movements and signalling, as well as planning train routes, diversions and introduction or 
withdrawal of rakes in service. 
4 Consist of train contains details like coach type, coach number, coach count etc. which are part of the train/rake 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)2
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
2 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
station/yard lines, capacity etc. 
d) Report Module: This module provides various reports related to all other 
modules including reports on master data, monitoring, user performance, 
historical reports, analytical reports, utility reports, etc. for different levels of 
ICMS users. These reports can be used as tools for monitoring, analysis and 
decision making.  
e) Utility Module: This module provides facility for user management and user 
feedback. 
1.2 Objectives of the ICMS 
The Integrated Coaching Management System application was developed with 
the following objectives: 
a) Monitor punctuality of Mail Express/Passenger trains 
b) Monitor status of coaching stock in real time and online 
c) Facilitate augmentation of train composition on the basis of traffic demand 
to maximise revenue 
d) Facilitate planning and running of special trains 
e) Set Bench mark for Asset Maintenance 
f) Plan timely maintenance schedule including IOH/POH to minimize idling 
of coaches outside shop 
g) Prompt planning for idle coaches and their timely booking and usage to 
generate more revenue to the Railways 
h) To avoid manual manipulation and to provide fool proof service to enhance 
the image of Railways 
i) To provide MIS for coaching operations 
1.3 System Architecture 
The design is modelled on three tier client server technology using middle ware 
and Relational Database Management  System (RDBMS). Data from ICMS 
locations (stations) and Control Offices is captured through thin clients/PCs and 
sent to servers installed at Computer Data Centre at the Centre for Railway 
Information System (CRIS) through communication links for transactions 
processing.  Application servers at the CRIS are networked and linked to a 
central database for transactions processing. The central database provides 
management reports to the users at Railway Board, Zonal, Divisional and Station 
level.   
1.4 Organization 
The organization of Chief Administra tive Officer (CAO), FOIS which was 
created in 1994 for implementation of FOIS project over Indian Railways, 
functions as a coordinating office between Railway Board, Zonal Railways and 
CRIS for implementation of ICMS. The officials responsible for implementation 
of ICMS at Zonal, Divisional and Station levels of the Operating, Mechanical and 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)3
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
3 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Electrical departments are as follows: 
Level Operating Mechanical Electrical 
Zonal  x Chief Operations Manager x Chief Mechanical 
Engineer 
x Chief Electrical 
Engineer 
 x Chief Passenger Transportation 
Manager 
x Chief Rolling 
Stock/Workshop 
Engineer 
x Chief Electrical Loco 
Engineer 
 x Dy. Chief Operating Managers x Dy. Chief Mechanical 
Engineer/Coaching 
x Dy. Chief Electrical 
Engineer/Operations
 x Senior/Assistant Traffic Manager, 
Chief Controller and other 
supporting staff 
x Chief Office 
Superintendent and 
other supporting staff 
x Chief Traction Loco 
Engineer and other 
supporting staff 
Divisional  x Sr. Divisional Operations 
Manager
x Sr. Divisional 
Mechanical Engineer 
x Sr. Divisional Electrical 
Engineer
Station  x Chief Station Manager/Station 
Manager/Station Superintendent 
x Chief Power 
Controller 
x Chief Power Controller 
 x Chief Yard Master/Chief Train 
Clerk/Head Train Clerk/Train 
Clerk 
  
At CRIS, activities relating to development, maintenance and implementation of 
ICMS are looked after by an ICMS group headed by a General Manager who 
works under the overall control of Managing Director and is supported by a 
technical team comprising Principal/ Senior Project Engineer, Project Engineer, 
Sr. Software/Network Engineer, Consultants etc.  
1.5 Audit Objectives 
The audit of ICMS was conducted with a view to: 
I. Evaluate the extent to which the objectives of implementing ICMS were 
being met, 
II. Review the Application Controls to assess the extent to which they ensure 
proper authorisation, completeness, accuracy and validity of input data and 
transactions, and 
III. Review the IT Security to check the extent to which it is capable of 
reasonably protecting business critical information and assets from loss, 
damage or abuse. 
1.6 Audit Criteria 
IT Audit of ICMS was conducted keeping in view of the rules and regulations 
contained in Railway Codes/Manuals, inst ructions/guidelines/procedures issued 
by the Railway Administration from time to time and best practices prevalent in 
IT environment.  
1.7 Audit Methodology and Scope  
Audit methodology included scrutiny of records related to development, 
implementation and maintenance of ICMS project at CAO (FOIS) office, CRIS 
office, Zonal/Divisional Headquarters and selected ICMS locations. Online 
ICMS reports were reviewed, information pertaining to different aspects of ICMS 
was gathered from Zonal/Divisional Headquarters and from various ICMS 
locations using questionnaires. Discu ssions were held with officials at 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)4
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
4 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
zonal/divisional/station levels. ICMS data was analysed using computer assisted 
audit techniques. Entry and Exit Confer ences were held at Zonal level. Exit 
conference was also held at Railway Board with Additional Member (Budget), 
Additional Member (Computerization & Information System), Director 
(Coaching) and other officials from CRIS. 
1.8 Sample size 
As of 31 March 2008, ICMS was implemented over 257 locations (445 terminals) 
over various Zonal Railways. This included Zonal headquarters, Divisional 
headquarters, stations, etc. During 2015-16, due to increase in volume of 
passenger traffic and coaching trains, a new work 'Expansion of ICMS System' 
for provision of ICMS terminals at Proxy locations (i.e. at locations where ICMS 
was not installed and their activities were captured through 
Divisional/Headquarters control offices) was sanctioned by Railway Board at a 
cost of ` 21.34 crore for 249 locations (510 terminals) over various Zonal 
Railways. It was observed that as on 30 April 2016, ICMS was not installed/not 
made operational on 11
5 locations out of 257 locations planned earlier over five 
Zonal Railways (ER, CR, SECR, SCR and NR). 
The sample selected for the review was as follows: 
a. For Audit review, Zonal headquarters offices, one divisional control office 
(minimum) and four locations up to ten locations with addition of one 
location for every five locations (beyond ten locations) or part thereof were 
selected over each Zonal Railway. Overall, 128 locations of all Zonal 
Railways were selected for review. Details of these locations are given in 
Annexure 1.  
b. The transaction data of ICMS for three months’ period pertaining to July to 
October 2015, collected from CRIS, was analysed.   
c. Online ICMS reports during October 2015 to July 2016 were reviewed. 
Contents of ICMS data/reports were compared with manual/physical records 
on test check basis to verify their completeness and accuracy.  
d. IT Security evaluation was primarily focussed on application level security.  
e. The field audit work was conducted during October 2015 to April 2016. 
1.9 Acknowledgement 
The report includes the responses of Zonal Railways and Railway Board gathered 
during various discussions/Exit Conferences held at Zonal/Railway Board level. 
The Audit team wishes to acknowledge the cooperation extended during this 
audit by the management and staff of the Railway Administration at 
Zonal/Divisional Headquarters and station level as well as CAO (FOIS) office 
and by the CRIS ICMS team. 
                                                            
5 Chief Yard Master, Howrah, Azimganj, Katwa stations in ER; Dadar yard in CR; RRI Bilaspur in SECR,; C&W depot 
Secunderabad, Lallaguda workshop in SCR; New Delhi yard, Delhi yard, Sr. Station Manager, New Delhi, Amritsar  
station in NR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)5
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
5 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
 
Chapter 2 Achievement of objectives of ICMS 
 
Audit Objective I - To evaluate the extent to which the objectives of 
implementing ICMS were being met 
 
ICMS Objective - Monitoring punctu ality of trains, to avoid manual 
manipulation, to provide foolproof service to enhance the image of railways 
and to provide MIS for coaching operations. 
2.1 Monitoring punctuality of trains through ICMS 
ICMS facilitates capturing of data pertaining to various functionalities of train 
movement like train running timings, reasons for delayed running/detention of 
trains, various exceptional activities of trains. It provides various MIS Reports to 
enable Railway Administration at different level to monitor train movements in 
real time environment for ensuring their punctuality.  Functionalities provided for 
capturing train movement related data and related reports generated by ICMS 
were reviewed in Audit and observations in this regard are discussed below: 
2.1.1 Non-monitoring of movement of some of the trains in ICMS 
A test check of trains scheduled for reporting in ICMS and trains actually 
reported in ICMS revealed that during February 2016 over seven 6 Zonal 
Railways, 27112 trains out of 154724 trains were not reported in ICMS. It was 
further observed that: 
a. Over NR, monitoring movement of trains running in Kashmir was not done 
through ICMS.  
b. Complete details (profile and movement ) of all the Herita ge (e.g. Maharaja, 
Buddhist, Deccan Odyssey etc.)/FTR Trains (run in collaboration with 
IRCTC) were not available in ICMS.  
c. Movement of ten passenger trains operating between Vrindavan-Mathura 
Cantt. with daily/six days’ frequency was not covered under ICMS. 
d. Over SR arrival/departure of MEMU trains was not covered in ICMS. 
e. Over ER, punctuality performance of suburban trains was not being 
monitored through the system in Asansol and Howrah Divisions. It was being 
done manually. 
f. As per ICMS7 of different dates, there were 23 trains of six Zonal Railways  8 
under operations in PRS, but their details were not available in ICMS. 
As such, on-line monitoring of punctuality and other operational and 
management activities of the above mentioned trains were not done through 
I C M S .            
(Annexure 2 and 3) 
                                                            
6 NR, WCR, ER, SWR, CR, NER, NFR 
7 Report No. 982 
8 NR-6, WCR-1, SCR-3, NER-1, NFR-7,  SWR-5 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)6
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
6 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
 
2.1.2   Inadequate provision for monitoring diverted trains 
One of the options under Exception Train marking is ‘Diversion’. In case, a train 
is diverted from its scheduled path, then the user can define its diverted 
path/route in ICMS and the system provides information about the scheduled 
path/route and diverted path/route of the diverted train. In 11 9 Zonal Railways, it 
was seen that ICMS did not provide movement details of train over the diverted 
route. 
Further, analysis of ICMS database pertaining to August/September 2015 showed 
instances over ECoR and NR wherein, the reason for diversion of trains was 
captured as only ‘C’ in the relevant ‘Remarks’ column. Thus, live running 
position/movement of diverted trains could not be monitored through ICMS. 
2.1.3   Discrepancies between COA and ICMS in respect of Exceptional 
Trains 
Provision is available in the ICMS to mark train services as cancelled, 
rescheduled, short-termination, change of origination, etc. under exceptional 
activities. Marking of trains under exceptional activities impact other applications 
integrated with ICMS like COA, NTES, etc. In ten 10 Zonal Railways during 
October 2015 to June 2016, it was noticed that exceptional trains displayed by 
Punctuality Performance Report of ICMS were 305, whereas those displayed by 
COA Exceptional Trains Report were 288. As such, two different reports of 
ICMS provided inconsistent information about the same activity and impacted 
the quality of monitoring movement of trains. 
Further review of Punctuality Performance Reports of February/March 2016 
revealed that in three
11 Zonal Railways out of 1516 Mail/Express trains, 1468 
trains were reported and 38 trains were  marked as exceptional and details of 
remaining 10 trains could not be found from the report. Thus, the Punctuality 
Report did not reflect complete status of punctuality of the trains.  
(Annexure 4a and 4b) 
2.1.4   Delayed Reporting of train movement in ICMS 
A Report titled ‘COA to ICMS Updation Performance Report’ 12 was reviewed in 
audit on 14 June 2016. This report gives the data regarding reporting of train 
movement within five minutes to 30 minutes in ICMS, in respect of all trains 
which have passed during the past 10 minutes to one hour.  It was observed that 
in the five divisions of NR the reporting on time (within five minutes) was done 
only in respect of 42.34 per cent  to 71.46 per cent of the trains. In Howrah 
division of ER, on time reporting was done only in respect of 73.11 per cent 
cases.  Delay in capturing train movement details results in non-availability of 
train movement information on time to the passengers and can impact timely 
decision making. 
                                                            
9 NR, NCR, ER, NFR, WCR, SCR, ECoR, CR, NER, NFR, WR 
10 NR, NCR, ER, WCR, SCR, CR, NER, SER, SECR, NFR 
11 NR, ER, NFR 
12 Report No. 408D 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)7
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
7 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Further, a review of the data related to movement of exceptional trains for July to 
October 2015 revealed that in 8032 cases over eight Zonal Railways 13, there was 
a delay of one day to 234 days from the train start date, in reporting movement of 
exceptional trains in ICMS (i.e. from COA to ICMS) by the divisions of different 
Zonal Railways. 
(Annexure 5) 
2.1.5   Non-availability of movement of various types of trains 
Extended/Special Trains - A random check of new/existing trains 
operated/extended over Indian Railway during 2015-16 revealed that movement 
details of 11 trains running over four 14 Zonal Railways were not available in 
ICMS for the complete period for which they were extended/operated. 
Pilot and Unscheduled Trains - During review of ICMS 15, movement/running 
position of Pilot and unscheduled trains could not be ascertained in eight 16 and 
nine17 Zonal Railways respectively as train numbers of these trains were 
alphanumeric, which were not accepted in train number input field of ICMS. 
2.1.6    Differences in arrival/departure time of trains 
2.1.6.1 Differences in timings recorded in ICMS and the manual records 
maintained at Stations 
Train arrival/departure timings details at different stations are either manually fed 
in Control Office Application (COA) and then updated in ICMS or the 
arrival/departure timings from originating/terminating stations are directly 
entered in ICMS manually. This data is  finally reflected in National Train 
Enquiry System (NTES) where passengers can see arrival and departure timings 
of the trains in real time. 
Test check for the period January-February 2015 and October-November 2015 
showed that railways received numerous public complaints due to wrong 
reporting of train arrival/departure timings. Highlighting the inconvenience 
caused to the passengers, these complaints pointed out instances like the train was 
yet to reach a particular station, but Railway Train Enquiry System reported that 
the train had reached the station or while a particular train had not departed from 
a particular station, but it was reported that the train had already departed from a 
particular station.                   
(Annexure 6) 
Train arrival/departure data pertaining different periods between July 2015 and 
April 2016, maintained in ICMS was compared with manual records/data 
maintained over selected railway stations and differences between the two sets of 
records were noticed over nine
18 Zonal Railways. Over SER, a review of COA-
ICMS Schedule Mismatch Report revealed a 63 minutes time gap between ICMS 
                                                            
13 NR, WCR, SCR, SWR, ER, NER, CR & SECR 
14 SR - 6, NCR - 2, WCR - 2, SECR - 1 
15 ICMS Report No.508D for period April 2013 to March 2016 
16 NR, SR, WCR, ER, SCR, CR, NER, NFR 
17 NR, SER, ER, WCR, NCR, SECR, SWR, SCR, NER 
18 NR, ER, NFR, SER, SR, NWR CR, WCR, SWR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)8
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
8 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
and COA in respect of time of arrival of train number 38319 (local train between 
Howrah and Mecheda having a total running time of 1 hr and 12 minutes) having 
start date 1 October 2015, raising a doubt on the correctness of the data being 
captured in ICMS.  
Lack of accurate data of train move ment leads to inconvenience to public, 
projects a bad public image of Indian Railways, generates wrong MIS reports for 
Railway Administration and affects monitoring of train punctuality by the 
Railway Administration. 
Railway Board during Exit Conference (October 2016) stated that the matter is 
given utmost importance and is regularly monitored at Railway Board level. They 
further stated that action is also taken against officials who are responsible for 
wrong reporting and entering incorrect data in the system.  
2.1.6.2   Abnormalities/differences in arrival/departure time in ICMS 
Analysis of trains arrival and departure timings data recorded in ICMS was done 
in ten Zonal Railways 19 for the period July to October 2015.  In eight Zonal 
Railways20, the recorded actual departure time of trains, in respect of 322819 
stoppages (transactions), was prior to trains’ scheduled departure time and the 
difference in respect of 266 stoppages (transactions) pertaining to six Zonal 
Railways was in the range of one hour to one day. In eight Zonal Railways 21, the 
recorded actual train arrival time of trains, in respect of 284009 stoppages 
(transactions), was prior to trains’ schedul ed arrival time and the difference in 
respect of 9666 stoppages (transactions) was in the range of 30 minutes to 96 
hours. 
The abnormal/inordinate differences indicated that correct data was not captured 
in ICMS and the system lacked adequate controls to validate arrival/departure 
time of trains. Incorrect information affects monitoring of punctuality of train 
movement by the Railway Administration.  
2.1.6.3 Discrepancies in Working Time Table and Public Time Table/Train 
Arrival-Departure Time  
Review of working time table (WTT) and public time table (PTT) data for 
October 2015 over eight Zonal Railways revealed inconsistent arrival/departure 
timings. It was noticed that  
x In respect of 29481 stoppages of eight 22 Zonal Railways, the arrival time as 
per Public Time Table was earlier than Working Time Table and difference 
was in the range of 1 minute to 1440 minutes.   
x In respect of 12885 stoppages of five23 Zonal Railways, the arrival time as per 
Public Time Table was later than that of Working Time Table and difference 
was in the range of 1 minute to 675 minutes.  
                                                            
19 NR, NCR, NWR, WCR, SCR, SWR, CR, ER, SECR, NER 
20 NR, NCR,SCR, SWR, CR, ER, SECR, NER 
21 NR, NCR, NWR, WCR, SCR, SWR, CR, NER 
22 NR, WCR, SWR, SECR, CR, SCR, NER, NFR 
23 NR, SWR, SECR, SCR, NFR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)9
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
9 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
x In respect of 11775 stoppages of seven 24 Zonal Railways, the Working Time 
Table departure time was prior to Public Time Table departure time and 
difference was of 1 minute to 501 minutes. 
x In respect of 28893 stoppages of six 25 Zonal Railways, the Working Time 
Table departure time was after the Public Time Table departure time and the 
difference was in the range of 1 minute to 1440 minutes. All these were 
intermediate stations.  
The large differences in WTT and PTT timings did not appear to be plausible and 
were practically not possible. 
2.1.7   Incomplete data on train stoppages, train name in comparison to PRS 
2.1.7.1    Train stoppages 
As per ICMS Report No. 983 of different dates and ICMS database, there were 
187 stations/stoppages pertaining to 1226 Zonal Railways which were available in 
various train schedules of Passenger Re servation System (PRS), but were not 
available in ICMS trains schedules.   
These discrepancies in the stations/stoppages are required to be addressed by the 
Zonal Railways for facilitating effective monitoring of train movement and to 
provide complete information to users about movement of trains. 
(Annexure 7) 
2.1.7.2   Train name mismatch 
Review of ICMS 27 revealed that there was mismatch in respect of train names 28 
between ICMS and PRS and the mismatch was due to a number of reasons 
including use of station code instead of station name, non-usage of station code 
of originating and/or terminating station, incomplete name of the train etc.  
Mismatch in train name creates confusion among passengers.  
2.1.8   Non-usage of ICMS Reports related to Punctuality/Monitoring of 
Trains 
While reviewing the working of Punctuality Section it was noticed that in four 29 
Zonal Headquarters offices ICMS reports were not directly used for monitoring, 
but the data from ICMS was used for manually preparing reports and these 
reports were used by the Railway Administrations during discussions/meetings. 
This was due to the fact that data/information available through ICMS reports 
was not as per the user requirements.      (Annexure 8)  
Further, it was observed that data relating to punctuality performance of trains 
was available in ICMS for one-month period only. In the manual environment 
data was available for previous three to five years, which facilitated Divisions to 
compare performance over the years.  
                                                            
24 NR, WCR, SWR, SECR, CR, SCR, NFR 
25 NR, SWR, SECR, SCR, NER, NFR 
26 NR, NCR, SR, NWR, CR, WCR, SCR, ECR, NER, SECR, SWR, NFR 
27 Report No. 986 
28 NR - 254 trains, ER - 143 trains 
29 NR, SR, WCR, ER 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)10
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
10 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
2.1.9  Option for Generation of Consolidated Reports not functional 
In the following two reports, the option to generate collective report for all types 
of trains was not functional (NR and ER): 
(a) Month-wise Trains Performance Re port-Not Losing Time (NLT) basis and 
Month wise Trains Performance Report-RT terminating basis30.  
(b) Punctuality Performance Report (Report No. 29 – Good/Bad Runner) 
2.1.10  Wrong/Inconsistent Output - Train Movement and Loco Position 
During the review of ICMS 31, it was noticed over NR, ER, SECR and SCR that 
these reports provided inconsistent details about train movement, when Report 
No. 1002 was viewed under Full Running type option and under Textual Running 
type option.  
 (Annexure 9) 
The above findings indicates that complete data of all the trains was not 
available in ICMS and movement of some  of trains including exceptional train 
was not reported/available in ICMS for monitoring and ensuring punctuality. 
Delay in reporting of arrival/ departure timings of trains and lack of accurate 
data of train movement led to inconvenience to passengers and generation of 
wrong MIS reports for Railway Administra tion which affected monitoring of 
train punctuality by the Railway Administration.  The punctuality percentage 
during 2015-16 (up to February) reviewed in seven Zonal Railways
32 was 
between 70.33 per cent and 94.72 per cent against the target of 90 per cent to 
96.42 per cent33. As such, the objective of monitoring running of the trains and 
ensuring punctuality of trains was not fully achieved. 
Railway Board during the discussion in the Exit Conference (October 2016) 
agreed with the audit observations. As re gard coverage all types of trains in 
ICMS, it was stated that some routes which have been added to the network 
recently or route with insignificant traffic may not be part of the ICMS and would 
be added now. They further stated that post audit a lot of changes/rectification 
have been incorporated in the ICMS. They were requested to furnish a list of such 
changes made. As regard manual intervention, it was stated that though these 
cannot be done away completely, these are being reduced gradually. 
ICMS Objective - Monitoring status of coaching stock in real time and online, 
facilitate augmentation of train composition on the basis of traffic demand to 
maximize revenue, facilitate planning and running of special trains.  
2.2 Monitoring status of coaching stock through ICMS 
ICMS enables Railway Administration to capture details like coach holding 
(including transferred/new coaches) , train/rake consists and links, 
attachment/detachment of coaches, coach/rake movement/utilization in different 
services, loco holding, loco status, loco movement, station details, distances etc. 
                                                            
30 Report No.201 and 202 
31 Report No. 504 and 1002 
32 NR,WCR, ER, SWR, CR, NER, NFR 
33 Target For NR - 90, SWR  - 96.42, CR - 96, NER - 90 (Annexure 1) 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)11
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
11 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
The system is intended to provide the data of each coach on Indian Railways 
readily available through various online MIS reports so that the Railway 
Administration can ensure better coach management, their optimum usage and 
traffic management at all levels.   
The review of the ICMS coach data and information provided by ICMS through 
various MIS reports was conducted in the light of the ICMS objectives. The audit 
findings in this regard are discussed below: 
2.2.1 Incomplete information of coaches in ICMS 
2.2.1.1 Non-updation of attached/detached Coaches - Non-depiction of actual 
coach position  
In nine34 Zonal Railways, scrutiny of records for the period March 2015 to June 
2016 revealed that rake composition pos ition available in the ICMS was not 
accurate and reliable as data pertaining to attached/detached coaches was not 
found updated. Instances were also noticed where actual physical position of 
coaches was not depicted correctly in ICMS. As such, the data was not reliable 
for monitoring status of coach real time and online
. 
(Annexure 10) 
2.2.1.2 Incomplete Depiction of Current Status of Coaches 
One of the main objectives of ICMS was to monitor status of coaching stock in 
real time and online. A review of the ICMS data pertaining to current details of 
coaches over 12 35 Zonal Railways for October 2015 revealed that the database 
was providing incomplete/ inconsistent/inco rrect current status of coaches.  Out 
of 40094 coaches, current details of 30044 coaches were available in ICMS.  
Current status of 1570 coaches was disputed
36. In respect of 472 coaches the 
disputed status was more than 8 to 80 months old which indicated that these 
coaches were not in use for such a long time.  As per database, current location of 
3325 coaches was on platform, but database did not indicate their line number.  
Line number of 174 coaches was zero a nd position of 742 coaches was also not 
available. Thus, incomplete information was not helpful for effective 
management of coaches. Further, disputed status of so many coaches for such a 
long period of time vis-à-vis manual reco rds indicate that either the ICMS data 
was not in use or Railway Administration was not relying on ICMS data due to 
its factual inaccuracy.                (Annexure 11) 
2.2.1.3 Non-capturing of loading/unloading details Parcel Coaches/Vans  
ICMS has provision to capture loading/unloading details of VPH/VPU 37 coaches. 
A test check of the coach loading/unloading data revealed that loading details of 
VPH coaches over five38 Zonal Railways were not captured in ICMS. Only 182 39 
records of loading of VPH/VPU coaches were available during 2006 to 2015 
                                                            
34 NR, SER, NFR, SR, NWR, CR, WCR,  ECoR, SWR 
35 NR, NCR, ER, NFR, NWR, WCR, SCR, SWR, SECR, ECR, NER, CR 
36 A coach is called disputed when a user marks the coach as ‘Physically not arrived’ while recording the arrival of a train. 
37 High Capacity Parcel Vans and Parcel Vans 
38 NR, ER, SWR, WCR, CR 
39 NR-98, CR-84 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)12
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
12 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
(October) in ICMS whereas as per manual records, 339 VP coaches were loaded 
at old Delhi station (NR) and Wadi Bunder (CR) during July 2015 to September 
2015. Thus, loading/unloading details of VPH coaches available in ICMS were 
incomplete.                        
  (Annexure 12) 
2.2.1.4 Incorrect population of train placement data 
A comparison of the trains/coaches placed at platform/station lines was 
performed with the actual position of trains/coaches at a platform/station over 
five Zonal Railways 40 and it was found that actual placement of the 
trains/coaches at different lines of a st ation was not reflected in ICMS.  Thus, 
information about coach/train position provided by ICMS was not reliable. 
(Annexure 13) 
2.2.1.5 Train profile without having Train Consist details 
Analysis of ICMS data revealed that 2063 trains of NR, ER, SWR and CR (most 
of them special trains) did not have their train consist in the database. Further, six 
trains of NR had validity from 22 September 2015 to 31 December 2099 and six 
trains of SWR had validity from 2 February 2012 to 31 December 2099.  
It was further observed that in NR, NCR, SECR and WR, ICMS allowed 
movement of narrow gauge trains without having train consist and the 
information provided by ICMS about train movement, train consist and coach 
utilization of NG trains was not correct. As such, complete coach details were not 
captured in ICMS leading to generation of incomplete information. 
2.2.1.6 Data on condemned coaches 
Analysis of ICMS data regarding condemned coaches for October 2015 over 
eight Zonal Railways 41 showed that the details captured were neither complete 
nor accurate and the data did not match the manual records maintained by the 
Zonal Railways.  
(Annexure 14) 
Scrutiny of the ICMS database/Reports over ten Zonal Railways
42 revealed that 
majority of the coaches having null/online status were in operations/use even 
after the expiry of their condemnation date. Further, POH of coaches, having 
expired condemnation dates and majority of them recommended for 
condemnation, was performed after the expiry of their condemnation date which 
indicated that ICMS did not have adequate controls to validate  data input 
pertaining to POH and the information available in the ICMS was not correct and 
reliable.                  
(Annexure 15) 
2.2.2 Verification of Rake Consist without actual arrival of train  
As per the provision available in ICMS, when a train arrives at a station, the 
ICMS operator enters arrival time (in cas e auto arrival has not been done) and 
                                                            
40 NR, NWR, CR, SWR, SR 
41 NR, ER, NFR, WCR, SCR, SWR, SECR, NER 
42 NR, SR, NFR, SWR, SECR, ECR, ER, NER, CR, WR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)13
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
13 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
verify train/rake consist for its linked  trains.  During the scrutiny of ICMS 
operations, it was noted in NR that dummy train arrival time was captured in 
ICMS (COIS) and train consist was confirmed without actual arrival of the train. 
In SER, the reporting window of COIS was available for one hour from the 
schedule arrival of train and users were compelled to make entry within one hour 
even if the train had not actually arrived. As such, verification of rake consist 
after actual arrival of train was not being performed through ICMS. 
2.2.3 COIS and PAM - Differences in Train Arrival/Departure Timings  
A comparison of train arrival/departure time recorded in COIS module and PAM 
module revealed differences/inconsistencies in arrival and departure timings of 
trains over NR, SECR, ER and CR. As such, the actual data of train movement 
was not captured and the position of coaches/rakes was not depicted correctly in 
ICMS.                         
(Annexure 16) 
2.2.4  Integration between PRS/UTS and ICMS – Non-capturing of Traffic 
Demand 
It was observed that there was no provision to capture traffic demand in ICMS.  
The system is not integrated with Unreserved Ticketing System. Traffic demand 
for coaches can be ascertained after assessing the position of passenger traffic and 
number of reserved/unreserved tickets sold through PRS/UTS. Though ICMS has 
been integrated with Passenger Reservation System (PRS) of Indian Railways, it 
does not get details of traffic demand (such as position of waitlist passengers etc.) 
from PRS which could assist the Railway Administration in augmenting train 
composition as per the requirement of traffic demand. (NR, ER, SCR, WR). 
2.2.5 Deficiencies in preparation of Vehicle Guidance Summary 
Vehicle Guidance (VG) summary is the record of composition of train and is 
carried by the Guard during the journey. 
2.2.5.1 Discrepancies in generation of Vehicle Guidance Summary  
Review of ICMS data pertaining to VG revealed the following discrepancies 
across different Zonal Railways: 
a. In respect of 730 cases, multiple VGs (ranging from 2 to 6) were generated by 
the ICMS at the same generation time in respect of same train having same 
train start date and instances were noticed where status of the rake was 
recorded as XXXXXX, but description of this code was not available in table 
containing rake status codes.  
b. Data analysis also revealed that in respect of 11196 coaches, 23745 VGs were 
generated in which generation of more than one VG was involved and 
generation/updation time was same (SER). 
c. VG generated after change in the composition of train did not reflect the 
changes made. 
d. Coaches physically attached with the rakes could not be included in the 
composition of the trains in the ICMS as either the coaches were already 
attached in ICMS with other train which necessitated entering coach details in 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)14
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
14 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
the ‘Remarks’ column or coach were not available in ICMS database, and 
their details had to be entered in the VG manually. 
e. Instances were noticed where details of coaches and loco available in system 
generated VGs were not matching with physical records. 
f. Manual VGs were being prepared due to different reasons. Operations 
pertaining to attachment/detachment of slip coaches were not performed, as 
VGs generated through the system were not reliable to that extent. 
(Annexure 17) 
2.2.5.2   Incomplete VG Report - Lack of Integration between ICMS and 
CMS 
Review of Vehicle Guidance Summary (VGs) generated through ICMS over 12 
Zonal Railways43 for the period 1 July 2015 to 15 October 2015 showed that  
a. 41176 VGs of 11 Zonal Railways did not have loco details.  
b. 197573 VGs of 12 Zonal Railways did not have Guard details and  
c. 204509 VGS of 12 Zonal Railways did not have Driver details.   
d. During test check of field visits over SER, NER, SR and NR, VGs were 
found without Driver and Guard details. 
This shows that ICMS did not have interface with Crew Management System 
(CMS) which captures data of Loco Driver /Guard. It is pertinent to state that 
though a decision was taken in Chief Freight  Transport Managers’ Conference at 
Goa during 16/17 July 2015 to integrate ICMS and CMS, it was yet to be done.   
(Annexure 18) 
2.2.5.3    Manual Preparation of VG Summary 
During the review of ICMS over nine 44 Zonal Railways, it was noticed that at 
1345 ICMS locations VG summary was being prepared manually mainly due to 
non-availability of functional printers. Thus, inadequate infrastructure compelled 
users to prepare VGs manually.               
 (Annexure 19) 
2.2.6    Incorrect data on passenger locos 
2.2.6.1   Incorrect Loco Master Data 
Comparison  of the Loco Master de tails available in ICMS over 12 Zonal 
Railways46 with manual records/loco availability targets fixed by Railway Board 
showed differences between the two sets of records over all the Zonal Railways. 
As per ICMS, there were 3165 Electric Locos and 5088 Diesel Locos in these 
Railways, but manual records indicated that there were 3408 Electric and 3743 
Diesel Locos in these Zonal Railways during the same period. Differences were 
                                                            
43NR, NCR, ER, ECoR, NWR, WCR, SCR, SWR, SECR, ECR, CR, NFR 
44 NR, ECR, NER, SCR, CR, SWR, SR, NFR, WR 
45 NR – Amtritsar, Jammu, ECR- Rajendra Nagar Patna terminal, Darbhanga, NER- Gorakhpur, SCR- Nanded, CR- 
Mumbai CST, Dadar, and LokmanyaTilak Terminus, NFR – Katihar, New Jalpaiguri, WR – New Bhuj and Bharuch 
46 NR, NCR, WR, ER, NFR, WCR, SCR, SWR, SECR, ECR, NER, CR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)15
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
15 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
also noticed in respect of type of locos which indicated wrong data entry and 
raises doubt about the reliability of the data.              (Annexure 20) 
2.2.6.2    Incomplete/wrong details of movement/position of locos 
a)   Wrong loco position - During test check of the loco position at various 
stations of five Zonal Railways47, it was observed that ICMS did not depict actual 
physical position of the locos and even dummy loco numbers were in use to 
operate trains. Thus, actual loco attached to the rakes were not reflected in the 
system and loco position reflected by ICMS was not reliable. 
b)   Incomplete capturing of loco movement -  In order to facilitate reporting of 
actual light engine movement, a new light engine movement facility was 
provided in ICMS and it was expected that all necessary coaching loco events 
would be covered from movement perspective and Railways would be able to run 
the trains with correct loco number.  A review of the light engine movement over 
11
48 Zonal Railways showed 1614 instances of loco cut-in 49 in these railways 
over different dates which indicated that despite having loco engine movement 
facility, loco cut-in facility was still in use which leads to wrong generation of 
MIS reports pertaining to loco movements.   
As per ICMS Passenger Loco Running Info Report, during 1 March 2016 to 23 
March 2016, no Narrow Gauge (NG) loco was running over NR, though NG 
trains were running over NR during the above period. Similarly, in SECR, the 
report depicted information of NG trains but composition of train report depicted 
Nil record. Thus, the information about loco operations depicted by ICMS was 
incomplete. 
c)   Electric Loco Running over Diesel Traction- Review of ICMS Report 
number 1509 over nine Zonal Railways 50 revealed that electric locos were 
running over diesel track which is practically not possible. The report was 
reviewed over a different period of time in four Zonal Railways 51 and it was 
noticed that despite having information about operations of locos over wrong 
track, no remedial action was taken to rectify the data.            
(Annexure 21, 22 and 23) 
2.2.7 Mismatch between ICMS and manual data 
Wide variations were observed between ICMS data and manual records 
maintained by Zonal Railways in respect of coach master and other types of 
coach data as given below: 
x A comparison of the coach master data and manual records maintained over 
15 Zonal Railways
52 revealed wide variations 53 in the number of coaches 
being held by these Zonal Railways. 
x A comparison of data regarding coaches transferred from one Zonal Railway 
                                                            
47 NR, NFR, SER, CR, WCR 
48 NR, NCR, WCR, SCR, ER, SECR, SWR, CR, NER, NFR, ER 
49
 A facility available in ICMS to make a loco available at a particular location from other location without  
reporting/capturing actual  movement details of a loco in ICMS 
50 NR, NCR, SCR, ECR, WCR, SWR, CR,NER, ER 
51 NR, SCR, ECR, WCR 
52 NR, NCR,WR, SR, ER, NFR, CR, SCR, SWR, ECoR, WCR, SECR, ECR, NER, NWR 
53
 Manual data showed 2474 coaches less than ICMS (ER) and manual data showed 159 coaches more than ICMS (NWR)  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)16
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
16 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
to another with manual records/information made available by 11 54 Zonal 
Railways revealed discrepancies55 between the two sets of records.  
x ICMS data regarding induction of new coaches did not match with the 
manual records in seven 56 Zonal Railways. While the ICMS depicted 3790 
coaches added to the Zonal Railways during 2013-16, the manual records of 
Operating/Mechanical department of the same railways, indicated only 2637 
coaches.    
x Coach yard stock data in ICMS was f ound in variation to the manual records 
over six
57 Zonal Railways. The main cause of variation was non updation of 
data related to coach position/movement in ICMS. There were also 
differences in the number of passenger coaches and other coaches ranging 
between -1(SECR) and 35 (NR) in nine
58 Zonal Railways.  
x As per ICMS, gauge wise coach position showed 41013 BG (Broad gauge), 
973 MG (Metre gauge) and 350 NG (Narrow gauge) coaches on 11 59 Zonal 
Railways, however, as per manual records of Operating Department of these 
Zonal Railways, they had 33289 BG, 445 MG and 611 NG coaches 
respectively. 
The difference between two records raised doubts about the accuracy and 
completeness of ICMS data. Inaccurate coach data affected monitoring of 
coaching stock on real time basis through ICMS. 
(Annexure 24a, 24b, 24c, 24d, 24e, 24f)  
2.2.8 Use of manual records/processes instead of ICMS data 
Audit check at selected locations showed that railways themselves did not rely on 
ICMS data and various Departments continued to use manual data for use in their 
operations as discussed below: 
2.2.8.1 Operating (Coaching) Department  
Coaching section of Operating Department at Zonal Headquarters maintains 
records of all the coaches pertaining to the respective zone and manages 
assignment of coaches for various trains on a daily basis.  It was observed that  
x In NR, in order to manage coaching stock and their assignment for various 
trains, Coaching Section in Headquarters was using an in-house application 
software COSMOS 60, in which coach data and their position was being 
collected over phone from units for manu ally preparing reports instead of 
generating through ICMS. Delhi and Ambala divisions were also maintaining 
and relying on manual records of coaches. 
x Similarly, over SWR and WCR, Coaching sections were relying on manual 
records/register for management of coaches. In CR & WR (Dadar, Lok 
Manya Tilak Terminus and Mazgaon yard), the information was being 
collected telephonically. 
                                                            
54 NR, NCR, WCR, SCR, SWR, SECR, ECR, CR,NER,ER,  NFR 
55 -21 coaches in CR to 39 coaches in NFR in 2013-14 
56 NR, NCR, WCR, SWR, SECR, NER, NFR 
57 NR, WCR, SWR, NWR,NFR,WR 
58 CR, ER, NCR, NER, NR, SCR, SECR, SWR, WCR. 
59 CR, NR, NCR, NEFR, WCR, SECR, ER, NWR, SCR, ECR and WR 
60 developed through in-house efforts in MS Access and Visual Basic 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)17
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
17 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
2.2.8.2 Mechanical Control Section at Zonal Headquarters offices 
Mechanical Control Section keeps control over running/ maintenance/repair of 
coaches over respective Zonal Railways.  Review revealed that at seven 61 Zonal 
Railway Headquarters the section manually prepared various reports 62, after 
getting feedback about coaches from various divisions/units over phone, for 
submission of the same to higher officials.  ICMS terminals provided in 
Mechanical Control section were primarily used only for monitoring movement 
of trains. 
2.2.8.3 Mechanical Loco Control Section at Zonal Headquarters offices 
Mechanical (Diesel) Loco Control section controls/monitors the movement and 
status of all Diesel locos (goods/passengers) and their crews, on round the clock 
basis.  Review over six 63 Zonal Railways, showed that this section was not 
relying upon the information related to diesel loco provided by the ICMS and 
instead collected the information manually on a daily basis to update the same in 
ICMS. The section was also maintaining loco related all their records manually64.  
2.2.8.4 Train Branch/Control Offices/Yards 
During the scrutiny of records at various locations of ICMS including Train 
Branch, Yard, Station Manager/Station Superintendent office, Control office of 
eight
65 Zonal Railways, it was noticed that all the locations were maintaining 
almost all the records/registers 66 manually which were being maintained before 
introduction of ICMS.  
2.2.8.5 Statistical Department 
During the examination of records of Statistical Branch of ten 67 Zonal Railways, 
it was observed that various reports such as Punctuality Performance, Passenger 
train performance, Mail Link outage statement, Traffic density statement, Rolling 
Stock (carriage and wagon) performance etc. were being prepared manually for 
submission to Railway Board. To prepare the reports, the data was compiled/ 
collected telephonically or through input received from other subordinate offices.   
Maintenance of digital as well as manual records not only involve avoidable 
deployment of manpower in maintaining two sets of records, it also defeats the 
very purpose of computerisation of the activity. 
 
                                                            
61 NR,  WCR, SCR, SECR, ECoR, SWR, WR 
62 Coaches Ineffective (AC & Non AC) Position, Railway Board Position, Damaged vehicle stock (Mechanical) & 
(Electrical), Coaching Performance, AC Coach Division Ineffective, NAC Coach Division Ineffective, Overdue Coaches 
and Balance Due POH Coaches, Over Due and Balance Due IOH Coaches of Mail Exp 
63 NR, ECoR, WCR, SWR, SECR, WR 
64 Engine Failure Record Register, Accident Report Register, Loco Schedule: Outage, Incoming Message Register, 
Outgoing Message Register, Division wise Loco Schedule Register (showing deviation in loco schedule), Different Loco 
position 
65 NR, ER, ECoR, SCR, WCR, SWR, NER (Gorakhpur), WR 
66 Coaching Position Register, IOH and Trolley Register, Booking Register, Detention Register, Inward Control Book, 
Station Master Diary, Coach Register (POH), Outward and Inward Train Register, Coaching Stock Report Register, 
Attaching Register, Detaching Register, Shortage Register, Composition Charting, Coaching Cabinet Register, Sick and 
Fit Coach Register, Rake Link Register, etc. 
67 NR, SR, ER, ECoR, WCR, SCR, SECR, CR, SWR, NER 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)18
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
18 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
2.2.9 Wrong Generation of Loco Change Summary/Loco Position Report 
During the review of Loco Change Summary Report 68, it was noted that the 
report depicted same information irrespective of the option about BG, MG or NG 
type of locos selected by the user (NR, NCR, WCR, SCR, SECR, SWR). Over 
NER, Report No. 1511 did not depict any details about MG loco. Thus, date 
provided by ICMS was incorrect and not fit for decision making. Review of 
ICMS operations at Ambala station (NR) revealed that ICMS depicted one loco 
attached with two different trains which was not possible and information 
provided by ICMS was not reliable. Review of loco movement/position on SER 
revealed that ICMS depicted inconsistent and inaccurate position of locos. 
(Annexure 9) 
2.2.10   Lack of facility to view ICMS reports in different Internet Browser  
During examination of Report Module of ICMS, it was noticed that the facility 
provided in ICMS to copy contents of the reports as well as to export the contents 
of the reports in Excel format was operational only when the reports were viewed 
in Internet Explorer browser and not in other browser like Google Chrome etc. 
The restriction to copy/export ICMS contents to a single browser is not 
conducive to the usage of ICMS, particularly when a number of browsers are 
being used now-a-days. 
Above findings indicated that due to lack of availability of complete, accurate 
and real time details of coaches/loco and non-capture of traffic demand details, 
despite having integration with PRS, ICMS has not been able to effectively 
assist Railway Administration in monitoring coaches and locos in real time and 
in online environment. Railway Administration was not effectively using ICMS 
for managing coach/loco operations and continued to rely on manual 
procedures and records. 
ICMS Objective - Set benchmark for assets maintenance, plan timely 
maintenance schedule including IOH/POH to minimize idling of coaches 
outside shop, prompt planning for idle coaches and their timely bookings and 
usage to generate more revenue to the Railways. 
2.3 Managing coach maintenance through ICMS 
ICMS has a provision to capture maintenance and other related details of coaches 
like their maintenance periodicity, their sick/fit status etc. which can assist 
railway administration for undertaking timely remedial action for better 
management/ utilization of coaches.  Aud it findings from the review of the coach 
maintenance and status related data/ records are discussed below: 
2.3.1 Lack of provision to capture IOH schedule of coaches 
One of the objectives of ICMS was to plan maintenance schedule including 
Intermediate Overhauling (IOH) of coache s. However, it was observed that there 
was no provision to capture IOH details of coaches in the system as seen in NR, 
SCR, SWR, ER and WR. 
                                                            
68 Report No. 1511 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)19
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
19 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
2.3.2 Lack of adequate details of primary maintenance 
As per ICMS Report 69 on ‘Rake Link with no PM (Primary Maintenance)’ of 
different dates in six Zonal Railways, 36 70 rake links did not have Primary 
Maintenance details. There were 63048 records 71 where the movement details in 
terms of coach kms. after the Primary Maintenance had been captured as null. 
Incomplete information about primary maintenance of coaches affect timely 
maintenance of coaches.  
2.3.3 Missing/Invalid Train Link - Lack of Action 
Rake linking 72 is the term used for the decision of assigning physical rakes to 
train services on a regular basis. As per ICMS73 pertaining to March to June 2016 
of nine74 Zonal Railways, 85 trains had broken rake links, 44 trains had invalid 
rake links, 34 trains did not have any rake links and 36 trains had multiple rake 
links. Lack of proper train links results in disruption in smooth capturing of data 
pertaining to trains operations/movement in ICMS. It was noted from the ICMS 
reports that despite having information about defective links, Railway 
Administration did not take remedial action to correct the data. If proper and 
valid rake links are not available, the in complete information cannot be used for 
effective rake utilization.                 (Annexure 25)  
2.3.4 Discrepancies/Inconsistencies in ICMS data due to lack of validation 
controls 
2.3.4.1 Inconsistencies in Coach POH Data 
As per extant orders, Periodical Overhaul (POH) of AC/Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Mail 
Exp/Jan Shatabdi coaches becomes due after a period of 18/24 months. Data 
analysis over ten 75 Zonal Railways revealed that difference between POH done 
and POH due dates was neither as per exta nt orders nor uniform in respect of 
same type of coaches.  It contained cases where POH due dates, which were 
either before POH done dates or after P OH done dates. This indicated that ICMS 
did not have adequate controls to validate POH data when the same is entered, 
which rendered the data unreliable and unusable for any decision making process. 
(Annexure 26) 
2.3.4.2   Large Number of Coaches due for POH- Mismatch in Manual and 
ICMS Records of POH 
As per ICMS Report No. 651 as well as ICMS data, 15782 coaches were due for 
POH over ten 76 Zonal Railways as checked on different days between January 
2016 and July 2016. The data of coaches due for POH as seen during a test check 
                                                            
69 Report No. 962 
70 NR-5, CR-2, SCR-7,ER-4, SWR-15, NER-03 
71 Out of total 63074 records in Coach Current Table 
72 The rake links are a means to provide effective rake utilization by maximising reliability of services, increasing 
operational flexibility keeping in view availability of maintenance facilities, safety considerations and norms of operation. 
73 Report No. 962 
74 NR, NCR, CR, WCR, SCR, NER, SWR, ER, NFR 
75 NR, NCR, SER, ER, SCR, SECR, NFR,CR, NER, WR 
76 NR, SCR, ECoR, CR, ER, WCR, SECR, NER, SWR, NFR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)20
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
20 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
at various stations of six 77 Zonal Railways however, did not match with the 
ICMS data. This indicated incorrect data entry of information regarding coach 
maintenance.         (Annexure 27 a and 27 b) 
2.3.4.3   POH overdue coaches shown as part of Train Consist 
During the examination of train consist data, it was noticed that train consist also 
included coaches which as per ICMS database were due for POH. Though ICMS 
allowed attachment of POH due coaches in the train consist but indicated them in 
red while displaying train consist, to enable a user to identify POH overdue 
coaches in the composition/consist of a train for remedial action. Despite having 
facility to identify the POH overdue caches, it was noticed over eleven
78 Zonal 
Railways that 7706 coaches which were overdue for POH were part of the train 
composition/consists.  As the POH details  captured in ICMS were not accurate, 
the information in ICMS was not fit for decision making.            
(Annexure 28) 
2.3.4.4    Sick and Fit Coach data 
It was observed that data on sick/fit stat us of coaches was not maintained in 
ICMS over ECR, SWR and NR79. Further,  
x A total of 2888 coaches were declared sick long back (between 2008 and 
2014), but not declared fit as yet over all Zonal Railways 80, which meant that 
these coaches were not put to normal use since their sick marking dates. In 
nine
81 Zonal Railways, fit marking dates of 12157 coaches were not recorded 
in the database though their fit reporting dates were recorded in ICMS. Thus, 
it could not be ascertained from the data as to when these coaches were 
declared fit. The data was thus not correct and reliable. 
x Over 12
82 Zonal Railways, 44762 coaches were reported sick in ICMS after a 
gap of 30 minutes to 53437 minutes during 1 October 2013 to 7 October 
2015, which indicated that data was not reported on a real time basis. 
x Analysis of 79641 coaches reported fit over seven Zonal Railways 83 during 1 
October 2013 till October 2015 revealed that out of these, 55187 coaches 
were reported as fit after a period of 30 minutes to 719 minutes except one 
coach which was reported fit after a delay of 525610 minutes. Analysis of 
ICMS data revealed that placement time and placement reporting time of sick 
coaches reported fit was generally not captured in ICMS. 
x A comparison between manual and ICMS records on test check basis also 
showed differences in the timings of declaration of a coach sick or fit in 
Ambala and Jabalpur locations.          (Annexure 29a, 29b, 29c, 29d) 
Thus, incomplete data of sick and fit coaches was not helpful in taking decisions 
                                                            
77 NR, NWR, NFR, CR, SWR, NER 
78 NR, NCR, ER, NFR, NWR, WCR, SCR, SWR, SECR, ECR, WR 
79 Amritsar, New Delhi, Anand Vihar, Sarai Rohilla in NR and Jabalpur in WCR 
80 Till 7 October 2015 
81 NR, ER, WCR, SCR, SWR, SECR, ECR, CR, NFR 
82 NR, NCR, ER, NWR, WCR, SCR, SWR, ECR, SECR, CR, NER, WR 
83 NR, ER, SWR, NER, SECR, WR, NFR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)21
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
21 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
for effective coach utilization and forced the Railways to rely on manual 
procedures and records.  
Above findings indicated that valid rake links were not maintained for all the 
trains, thereby making the data unusable for effective utilization of 
coaches/rakes. ICMS data on coach st atus and maintenance was not accurate, 
reliable and complete and, thus, not usable for monitoring timely maintenance 
of coaches and for prompt planning of idle coaches. 
During Exit Conference (October 2016), Railway Board agreed that the facility to 
monitor coach utilization and maintenance were not being used by the Railways. 
It was further stated a facility has been  provided to capture coach inventory data 
from the coach manufacturing unit which would ensure accuracy and correctness 
of data.  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)22
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
22 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
 
Chapter 3 Application Controls 
Audit Objective II – Review the Application Controls to assess the extent to 
which they ensure proper authorisation, completeness, accuracy and validity of 
input data and transactions 
3. Application controls are specific to a particular IT application and provide 
assurance to the Administration that transactions are properly authorised, 
complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their maintenance and other 
types of data input controls are in place. During the course of scrutiny/analysis of 
ICMS database/records, the following defi ciencies in application controls were 
noticed: 
3.1 Deficiencies in integration between ICMS and other applications viz. 
PRS/COA/CGS etc. 
It was seen that integration between ICMS and other passenger and train service 
related applications were not implemented completely, as a result of which output 
from the ICMS were not used in the field operations. 
3.1.1 Non-utilization of ICMS for communicating Train Consists to PRS 
As per ICMS documentation, data of train/ rake consist is to be sent to PRS for 
PRS charting and it should be sent to PRS at least four hours before scheduled 
departure time of the train. Test check of records revealed that: 
x Consists of all trains were not repo rted to PRS through ICMS. These were 
also not communicated four hours before the scheduled departure of the train.  
x Manual system of communicating train consist to PRS was still in operation.  
Delay in communicating train consists to PRS did not serve the intended purpose 
of utilising the train consists for correct train charting. 
(Annexure 30a and 30b) 
3.1.2 Non-Integration between ICMS and Coach Guidance System  
Coach Guidance System (CGS) indicates the position of each coach from engine 
along with train number to help passengers to board the train. Even though coach 
position was available in ICMS, non-implementation of integration with CGS led 
to manual feeding of data in CGS, over NR, NER and CR. 
3.1.3 Manual Data Feeding/Duplicity of Efforts- ICMS and COA 
As per ICMS manual, COA and ICMS applications are interfaced with each other 
for exchange of information. However, despite having an interface the train 
detention reasons were being fed in both applications manually as seen in NR, 
SCR and SECR. 
Thus, the integration between ICMS and other applications was not complete and 
effective which led to populating same type of data in different applications 
involving usage of additional manpower as well as chances of discrepancies. 
Moreover, despite having MIS highlighting discrepancies, remedial action was 
not taken by Railways and MIS were not being used. 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)23
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
23 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
3.2 Mismatch in data between ICMS and PRS 
3.2.1    Differences in Public Time Table 
Though ICMS has integration with PRS, while creating train profile in ICMS, 
time table details were fed in ICMS. Time Table details were also populated in 
PRS and ICMS. Review of ICMS-PRS Public Time Table (PTT) Mismatch 
Summary84 of 18 February 2016 revealed 421 instances of mismatch between 
Public Time Table of ICMS and PRS over all Zonal Railways.  This mismatch 
was again noticed in respect of 368 trains on 23 March 2016 over all Zonal 
Railways, which indicated that Railway Administration did not take remedial 
action to rectify the mismatch in timings in the two applications. 
3.2.2 Differences in distances recorded in ICMS and other Databases 
Differences in distances recorded in ICMS and PRS were noticed as follows: 
x In ER, for 92 trains there was mismatch in distance in ICMS and PRS 
Database. The difference ranged between 1.01 kms to 31.94 kms. 
x Report No. 987 of ICMS pertaining to NWR, NFR and NR was showing 
mismatch of distance in ICMS and Block section of Rates Branch System 
(RBS)
85. 
x During comparison of distance between various stations, recorded in ICMS 
with Working Time Table distances, differences in the range of 2 kms to 
81.59 kms were noticed between two sets of records on NR.  A comparison of 
distances of three pair of trains, having same route details, revealed that there 
was a difference of 38 to 9.95 kms on NR.  
3.3 Deficiencies in Master Data 
3.3.1 Missing details in Coach Master Data 
Effective control over master files is essential to ensure integrity of the data as 
the reliability of the system depends heavily on the correctness and completeness 
of the Master Data. During the evaluation of the master files of ICMS for the 
month of October 2015, it was observed that 
x ICMS provided an online Report ‘Missing Coach Master’ for all Zonal 
Railways Gauge-wise, Vehicle type-wise (All, PCVs and OCVs) giving latest 
status of records of coaches for which important details like Base Depot, Base 
Workshop, Commissioning Data, Maximum Speed, Owning Division, POH 
due month, etc. During the check of the report dated 8 March 2016, it was 
noticed that, these basic details were missing in respect of 6845 records of all 
Zonal Railways ranging between 0 (NWR) and 720 (NR). 
x ICMS data did not contain details of defence owned coaches of two 86 types 
even though the same were communicated by Defence department to Railway 
Board in 2014. The data was therefore incomplete. 
                                                            
84 Report No. 981 
85 A database of routes and distances in IR 
86 MLACCW and MGSCNY 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)24
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
24 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
3.3.2  Non-capturing of capacity of PCV type of coaches 
Analysis of ICMS table containing details of Coach Type Master pertaining to all 
Zonal Railways revealed that Coach Ca pacity of 93 types of PCV (Passenger 
Carrying Vehicle) coaches was not defined in the Coach Type Master table. The 
coach capacity of 48 types of coaches was marked/defined in the database, but 
their seat/berth capacity was not defined. Coaches of ten types were 
defined/marked as composite class of coaches in the master database (viz. they 
had two type of classes) but number of seat/berth for both the classes in respect of 
six types of coaches were not defined/marked in the master data.  
If the basic information about the coach viz. its seat/berth capacity is not captured 
correctly, the coach data cannot be used for its optimal utilization. 
3.3.3   Non-availability of details of loco number in Master Data 
As discussed with CRIS during the course of audit, Master data of locos is 
populated in ICMS from FOIS. It was seen that there were 1101 records 
containing 11 different loco numbers which did not appear in Loco Master Table. 
Further analysis of these 11 locos with reference to the Loco Status Report in 
ICMS revealed that only one loco (No. 40241) belong to Passenger Service and 
remaining locos either belonged to Go ods Service or the details were not 
available in the ICMS report. Data an alysis of COA-ICMS-Loco table further 
revealed that out of 83396 records, 203 locos pertaining to 2916 records, were not 
available in loco master. Test check of these locos in ICMS loco status report on 
SER revealed that many of the locos were not available in the ICMS report or 
other locos pertained to Goods Service. Loco Master Data was, thus, incomplete. 
3.4 Discrepancies in Coach/Train/Loco Attributes 
The following application controls were found to be deficient resulting in 
incomplete and wrong data. 
3.4.1 Non-validation of Coach data 
As per Railway Board order (May 2006) , Codal life of IRS and Steel Body 
Coaches has been fixed as 30 and 25 years respectively. As the date of built is 
basic data for calculation of age of a coach as on a given date, it should be 
available with every coach in Master Table. Condemnation of a coach depends 
upon the built date of the coach. Data Analysis of Coach Master revealed that  
x In all Zonal Railways, 2445 coaches did not have coach built year in ICMS 
database which resulted in inaccurate MIS report relating to age-wise details 
of coaches. There were 1205
87 over-aged coaches on IR with age between 30 
and 50 years. 
x In respect of 315 88 coaches, coach factory turnout date was prior to coach 
built date. 
                                                            
87 Total 1205: CR-373, ECOR-34, ECR-36, ER-54, IR-16, KR-7, NCR-44, NER-28, NFR-28, NR-187, NWR-33, SCR-
36, SECR-30, SER-116, SR-5, SWR-27, WCR-42, WR-109 
88 Total 315: WCR-1, NFR-2, NWR-3, SECR-3, NER-4, ECR-5, ECOR-6, CR-14, NCR-17, SWR-20, SCR-23, SR-23, 
SER-24, WR-24, NR-36 and ER-110 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)25
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
25 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
x Out of 71447 coaches of all Zonal Railways, in 697 89 coaches, the dates of 
induction into service were shown 01 to 33 years before the date of built of 
coaches. Three coaches of NCR had induction dates between the year 2019 
and 2020.Test check revealed that 12 90 coaches had invalid induction dates 
like "01/01/0200", "31/12/2114" etc.  
x In 11 Zonal Railways, the dates of induction of 43 91 coaches in master data 
were prior to coach factory turnout dates and difference was in the range of 
one day to 109267 days, which was illogical.  
x Out of 71447 coaches in Coach Master Table, in 68673 coaches division 
particular was captured and in remaining 2774 coaches division particular 
were not available. In ER, the system was showing location Howrah (HWH) 
under Kharagpur (KGP) division whereas KGP division pertains to SER. 
The above indicated lack of validation checks to identify status of coaches which 
could enable the Railway Administration to take well-informed decision for 
optimum usage of coaches.                
(Annexure 31) 
3.4.2 Invalid Coach Numbers 
In April 1996, Railway Board prescribed five digit coach numbering system. The 
first two digits would indicate the year in which the coach was built and the next 
three digits would indicate the type and the individual number of the coach.  
Analysis of coach numbers of all Zonal Railways revealed that coach number 
was less than five digits in 3325 92 cases and the coach number exceeded five 
digits in 13069 93 cases. Test check also revealed that first two digits did not 
indicate year of built of coach. Thus, the coach numbering system was not as per 
extant orders. 
3.4.3   Discrepancy in Coach Condemnation Details 
Analysis of the table containing details of condemnation of 4629 coaches 
revealed that the table contained two records each for 328 94 coaches having two 
different dates of condemnation. However, the status of coach in one of the 
records was ‘recommendation for condemnation’ (Code – RECDMN) and in the 
second record, it was for condemnation. Thus, table contained invalid data for 
condemnation of coaches.  
In 231
95 instances on 15 Zonal Railways it was noticed that year of condemnation 
of coach was mentioned as “2099” which was not realistic and reflected 
deficiencies in input controls. It was also seen that, name of the Zonal Railway 
                                                            
89 Total 697: ECOR-2, KR-2, ECR-5, NER-5, SER-6, NWR-7, WCR-10, NCR-11, SR-13, ER-15, SECR-17, NFR-22, 
WR-62, SWR-83, CR-94, SCR-144 and NR-199 
90 Total 12: NER-3, ER-5, NR-2, SCR-1 and SWR-1 
91 Total 43: .CR-1, ECR-1, NWR-1, SECR-2, WR-2, ECOR-4, SER-4, SR-5, NR-6, SCR-8, NER-9 
92 Total 3325: KR-13, NCR-34, IR-38, WCR-42, SR-45, SWR-47, SCR-51, ER-83, ECOR-84, NER-91, ECR-108, SER-
124, NWR-192, SECR-219, WR-319, CR-372, NR-524, NFR-939 
93 Total 13069: KR-3, NFR-4, WCR-4, NWR-11, ECR-16, NCR-24, IR-41, CR-50, SWR-51, SECR-176, NER-241, ER-
415, SCR-444, ECOR-939, NR-1126, SR-1469, SER-3214, WR-4841 
94 NR-72, SER-90, ECR-68, ER-34, SR-31, WR-17, SECR-5, NWR-5, SCR-2, NFR-2, ECOR-2 
95 Total 231: SCR-1, SECR-1, WCR-1, NER-2, NCR-3, NFR-3, NWR-3, ER-4, NR-5, WR-5, ECOR-17, SWR-35, SER-
40, CR-42, KR-69 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)26
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
26 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
was captured in place of name of the workshop which condemned the coaches 
which indicated lack of controls to validate the data input. (WR, NR). 
3.4.4    Mismatch/Discrepancies in POH Due Years 
Analysis of POH history data and coach master data revealed instances where 
data of POH due years captured in Coach Master table and POH History table 
were not matching (WR, NR). Test check revealed that in 55 instances, coach 
built year and Coach POH due year were same.  
3.5 Non-validation of train/loco data 
3.5.1 Lack of controls to validate Train Pipelines Confirmation Data 
In respect of 666 trains owned by nine 96 Zonal Railways, the train pipeline (viz. 
route details of train) was confirmed but confirmation time was not captured and 
in 3325 trains of all Zonal Railways, Pipelines conformation time was captured 
but status was not confirmed as confirmation status flag was N. Thus, the system 
was capturing incomplete and inconsistent information and lacked adequate 
validation controls for capturing information. 
3.5.2   Non-capturing of complete details for detention of trains  
In case of detention of trains, ICMS pr ovides facility to capture reasons for 
detention to enable Railway administration to take remedial action.  Analysis of 
train detention data revealed that out of 364738 transactions, in 296 transactions 
of all Zonal Railways, detention codes (reasons) for detention/train loss were 
recorded but detention sub-codes/sub-reasons were not recorded. For example, 
there were four sub-reasons (Detention sub-code) for detention on account of 
weather (Detention Code – WEA
97) but system did not enforce capturing of sub-
reasons for weather. It was further no ticed that in 590 cases of all Zonal 
Railways, remarks were not recorded.             
(Annexure 32) 
3.5.3 Wrong Description of Locos 
In loco type table, the description of WDM3D type of loco was recorded as 
’XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX’. There were 484 98 locos of WDM3D type, over 
14 Zonal Railways for which description could not be ascertained. 
3.5.4 Movement of sick coaches by wrongly marking them as fit coaches 
It was noticed at Katihar station of NFR that coach No. ECR WGSCN 02244 (of 
ECR) was made sick on 30 January 2016 at 15:36 hours. Train examination 
revealed that the coach required major repair and was needed to be sent to its 
owning railway. In order to move the coach, the sick coach was marked as fit and 
released for attachment with rake. Thus, the sick coach was wrongly marked as 
fit for movement purpose and during the movement period, ICMS depicted 
wrong status of coach. Similar instances were noticed at WR and SCR also. This 
                                                            
96 NER-5, SR-30, NR-31, SCR-34, SECR-73, NFR-92, CR-107, NWR-120, WR-174 
97 WEA(Weather) – FOG (Fog), FL(Flood), CY(Cyclone), LD(Landslide) 
98 Total 484: SWR-7, ECOR-14, SER-15, ER-21, NCR-23, NFR-26, NER-31, WR-43, ECR-45, NR-50, SR-50, SCR-51, 
WCR-51, CR-57 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)27
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
27 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
showed that the user was not aware of the procedure to be followed for managing 
sick coaches in ICMS. 
3.6 Discrepancies in data of Stations, Division, Yard, Base depot, 
Interchange Station and sick coaches  
3.6.1      Station Details  
Out of 12310 stations defined over all Zonal Railways, 4685 stations were not 
marked as valid as the value of their flag was zero and it also included stations 
having valid codes, such as JUC (Jalandhar City), PWL (Palwal), DR (Dadar), 
PNVL (Panvel) stations etc. Out of 7625 valid stations of all Zonal Railways, 143 
stations in 47 divisions of IR had two to four station names.  Due to inadequate 
data validation, 585 instances of duplicat e station names with different station 
codes containing 289 station names were noticed on 67 divisions over IR. 
Both ends of 7525 stations were defined as "End1"/"END1" and "End2"/"END2" 
which did not convey proper directions/ends of the station.  Traction of 3668 
stations of 73 divisions of IR was not marked. 
In SR, the station name PONDICHERRY displayed under the profile of Train 
No.12898 still remains, though its name has been changed as PUDUCHERRY 
during 2006 itself.  
Over NWR, analysis of 345 records revealed that base depot codes for 08 and 63 
Locos were shown as GIM and PUEJ respectively but no base depots with such 
codes were available over NWR jurisdiction. 
3.6.2    Discrepancies in Yard Data 
Yards of NR, SCR were mapped wrongly to other Zonal Railways. Two yards of 
WR were wrongly mapped to station code of CR. Similarly, in WR, wrong 
mapping of stations with division/yard were noticed. Surat Yard was shown in 
Vadodara Division instead of Mumbai Central and Vadodara Station yard was 
incorrectly shown under Mumbai Central instead of Vadodara. In ECR, many 
instances of wrong mapping of yards were noticed. Yard code YD under 
Mugalsarai (MGS) division has been mapped to six different station codes though 
such yard code was available in MGS division. 
3.6.3 Discrepancies in Interchange (IC) Station Data 
In five 99 Zonal Railways, it was observed that 11 interchange stations were 
defined incorrectly between Divisions. Some of them did not even belong to the 
Zone. In SWR, data/information in respect of 28 out of 34 interchange stations 
was incorrect.  
3.6.4     Multiple/Duplicate records of sick coaches 
Analysis of data pertaining to the ye ar 2015 containing sick operations details 
revealed that records having same coach ID, same coach event, same coach event 
date, same coach sick ID, same station were recorded multiple times ranging 
                                                            
99 NR - Okhla and Panipat, SCR – Nellore and Tenali Jn., ECR – Simariya and Patna, SER – Kharagpur and Ahmadnagar 
and ER – Barrackpore and Kalyanpur 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)28
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
28 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
from 2 to 33. The system, thus, failed to restrict duplicate entries.   
3.7 Other areas where data was found to be illogical/invalid 
3.7.1 Negative Lie Over Period 
Lie over period is the period during which a rake is kept unused at a station or 
yard in between its use for scheduled trains. As per ICMS 100, 21101 rake links had 
negative Lie Over Period which was not logical. 
3.7.2 Non-capturing of movement details and showing invalid reasons for 
movement of Light Engine 
During analysis of ICMS tables containing light engine movement related data, 
pertaining to SER and NR, it was observed that all the movements of Light 
Engine were not captured in ICMS. Data pertaining to ER, NCR and ECR 
showed invalid reasons such as 0, 1, 11,111, LE etc. in 66, 79 and 1228 records 
respectively. 
3.7.3   Absence of validation in field “Validity To date” and “Validity From 
date” 
Analysis of data pertaining to train validity details sent to COA (viz. data that 
was stored in pipeline table) revealed that there were 252 records where train 
“Validity To date” was prior to “Validity From date” and the difference was in 
the range of 1 day to 184 days. This shows absence of input control on these two 
dates. 
3.7.4 Capturing of invalid data in ICMS 
x In table containing data on train detention 102 instance were noticed where 
‘section_code’ indicated same section codes e.g. BXN-BXN, SHM-SHM, 
ASR-ASR, ANVT-ANVT against different train numbers though the station 
codes should be different. (SER, NR) 
x Data pertaining to loco enroute failure showed instances where Train Number 
contained alpha-numeric characters instead of numeric values. 
x The Train Number
103  field had invalid data (such as /, 00000,00, A, P, B, S, 
D. /WL etc.). 
3.8 Non-updation of Repair, Maintenance and Depreciation Charges 
As per Para 869 of Indian Railway Finance Code Vol. I, inter railway adjustment 
is required to be done for the working expenses i.e. repair, workshop 
maintenance, depreciation and interest charges on provision of engines, on the 
basis of engine hour outage and on provision of passenger coaches on the basis of 
total kilometers earned though rakes/passenger coaches running on more than one 
railway system.  
Review of the ICMS Report 104 as well as records of accounts department over 
                                                            
100 Report No. 962 (dated 20.06 2016) 
101 NR-1, CR-1, ECR-2, ER-4, NCR-1, NFR-2, SER-1, SR-6, SWR-3 
102 Dy_Train_Detention 
103 Table Name LOCO.COA_MU_LOCO_TRG_ON_DEP 
104 Report No. 808 and 1521 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)29
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
29 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
four105 Zonal Railways revealed that the ICMS reports were not in use in their 
existing forms as the charges for the above mentioned elements were not found 
updated in ICMS as per extant orders 106 and the charges were being computed 
manually.  
In respect of Report No. 1521, it was noticed that the rates for Repair & 
Maintenance and Depreciation charges were not dynamic viz. ICMS Report 
number 1521 depicted same rates when the report was viewed for different period 
of time/years, though the rates were different. Thus, the report gave incorrect 
information for different period of time/years.             
(Annexure 33) 
3.9    Helpdesk Services 
There were 505 ICMS related complaints/grievances of different railways 
pertaining to October 2014 to October 2015 which were not resolved and pending 
for disposal on 7 October 2015. Out of 505 complaints/grievances, 256 
complaints/grievances were registered between 7 October 2014 to 1 April 2015 
viz. they were more than six months to 12 months old and remedial action was 
not taken. These complaints pertain to all the Zonal Railways
107.  
(Annexure 34) 
The above findings indicated that ICMS lacked adequate application controls 
to ensure data accuracy, consistency and completeness. The integration 
between ICMS and other applications was also not very effective to avoid 
manual intervention in the operations/data input. 
During Exit Conference (October 2016), Railway Board agreed with the audit 
observations. As regards, mismatches in Time Table data in PRS and ICMS, it is 
stated that remedial action is being taken to rectify the mismatch.  
                                                            
105 NCR, ECR, NR, ER 
106 RB circulated rate of charges for adjustment of these elements for the year 2015 and 2016 vide letter No.F(C) 
/2003/27/1 dated 30.04.2015 and 21.04.2016. 
107 Including Konkan Railway, Integrated Coach Factory and Railway Board 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)30
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
30 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
 
Chapter 4 IT Security 
Audit Objective III– Review the IT Security to check the extent to which it is 
capable of reasonably protecting business critical information and assets from 
loss, damage or abuse 
4. Railway Board formulated its Baseline IT Security Policy in April/May 
2008 according to which subsidiary procedures and instructions were to be drawn 
by CRIS/Zonal Railways/individual units. The Baseline IT Security policy 
addresses various aspects of IT Security including Contingent Management 
Planning, use of licensed software and its updation, back-up policy, password 
management, version control mechanism, protection against virus/malware, 
setting up of IT Security Monitoring Teams and Incident Response Teams, 
environment and location security, equipm ent security, physical access control, 
data access right, user identification and privileges management, application 
development and maintenance security, internet security etc.  
Audit of ICMS application security and related issues was conducted broadly 
keeping in view the IR Baseline Security Policy/CRIS IS Security Policy and best 
practices in IT environment. Audit visited 128 locations over various Zonal 
Railways and observed that: 
4.1 Physical Access Control 
Access of unauthorised persons at the ICMS locations visited by Audit was not 
restricted in SR108, SWR109, NR110, NCR111, NER112 and ECoR113. 
4.2 Logical Access Control - User and Password Management 
4.2.1  Though passwords of the users were recorded in encrypted form, answers 
to the security questions for reactivation of user accounts were captured in legible 
form as observed in four 114 Zonal Railways. Even registration passwords of the 
users were in legible form115. 
4.2.2 Password and user ID of the users created by CRIS were not 
communicated to CAO/FOIS office confidentially, but by writing them on the 
request letter itself, thereby compromising the password security. 
4.2.3 The login page of the ICMS did not restrict the number of attempts of 
login by users. In the absence of strong password controls, unlimited login 
attempts make it easier to break-in into the system using random password 
generator software.  
4.2.4 As per IT Security Policy of IR, the system administration password 
                                                            
108 At all selected locations visited during Audit 
109 At three ICMS locations at Hubli, Mysore and Vasco 
110 At all the selected ICMS locations of Delhi, Ambala and Firozepur divisions visited during audit. At Delhi Divisional 
Control Office CCTV camera were installed but bio-metric system was not found in use. 
111 At all selected locations visited by Audit 
112 At all the selected locations visited by Audit 
113 At two locations visited by audit [Waltair Control and Bhubaneswar  (FOIS) Cell] 
114 NFR, SCR, CR, NR, NER 
115 NR, SCR, CR, SECR 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)31
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
31 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
should be a minimum of 10 characters and should be a combination of alpha 
numeric and special character.  It was however, noticed that password standards 
being followed by CRIS ICMS group at Centralized Data Centre did not conform 
to the laid down IT Security Policy. 
4.2.5 Creation dates of 22 users preceded their start date by 1 to 30 days and 
Start date of 245 users preceded their creation date which did not appear logical 
and indicated lack of adequate controls. 
4.2.6 Requests for creation of user ID were entertained by NR Headquarters 
office over telephone. Records relating to authorisation for creation of user IDs 
and password were not available at Zonal Railway Headquarters in NR.  
4.2.7 Over NR, at six ICMS locations, ICMS users were created in excess of 
requirement when compared to the number of ICMS terminals and the 
operational shifts of the users. There were five users at New Delhi location and 
ten users at Delhi Main location, but 26 and 71 active users were created in 
ICMS. 
4.2.8 Over NR and SCR, 47 active users having same mobile number and date 
of birth had two to four user IDs.  Rest of the particulars like Secret Question, 
Name, Address etc. were either almost  same or had minor variations which 
indicated that the different user IDs pertain to the same person.  Thus, the system 
lacked controls to ensure creation of unique ID for each user. 
4.2.9 Users were created with vague names like Mr.lko, Mr.umb, Mr.dlli, 
Mr.CCM Database
, Mr.PRC, Mr.KCG, Mr.CRSE, Mr.HYB, Mr. DRM_NAG, 
Mr. CTE, Mr.secrcme, Mr. CEGE, Mr. CSTE-SECR etc.(location/designation 
names) in the user master table (NR, SCR, SECR). 
4.2.10      A number of incorrect/irrelevant user types such as ‘DC’ and ‘SC’ 
were found in the master table 116 containing user details without any description 
of such types of user in the database. 
4.2.11 Users who had crossed superannuation age were found active in the 
system. Users below the age of 18 years (viz. born after 1 November 1997 and 
were between nine to 15 years) were also active. This indicated that the users’ 
date of birth was not validated at the time of data capturing. 
Over NR, test check at ICMS locations also revealed that at Zonal Headquarters 
office, Ambala, Ambala Control o ffice and New Delhi, User IDs of 
retired/transferred officials were still active. Superannuated active users in NR 
were application users and also had privilege to modify application data. 
4.2.12 Details of users were incomplete and details such as state, mobile number, 
railway phone number, ICMS email ID, designation, secondary email ID, address 
fields were left blank. The data was,  thus, incomplete and not usable when 
required. (NR, SCR, NER, SECR)     
4.2.13 One user ID/password was shared by three train clerks posted at Jodhpur 
(NWR). User IDs and associated passwords authorized for specific personnel at 
ICMS locations at Chennai, Chennai Egmore and Basin Bridge Jn. of SR were 
                                                            
116
 MT_Users table 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)32
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
32 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
shared by more than one person. Four train clerks working at ICMS control office 
of Allahabad (NCR) had no individual user IDs/passwords and were using a 
common login ID/password. Over NR, WCR and SCER, each of the 13 
locations
117 had just one User ID and each of the seven locations 118 had just 2 
active User Ids.  During location visits, it was noticed that all the users did not 
have exclusive user ID in NR 119.At Anand Vihar, on 18 April 2016, ICMS ID of 
a user120 was in use even though she was not on duty during the morning shift. 
Over NER, user ID of a transferred official was in use at Kathgodam ICMS 
location. 
4.2.14 Out of 26 active ICMS users created on CRIS accounts, having 
administrative privileges, 25 were active super users121. These users also included 
those who were transferred from CRIS ICMS group to other CRIS group(s), but 
were still active ICMS users with super user privileges. The super users with 
administrative privileges also included two dummy users created in the name of 
ICMSIRCA and PRSCHART. This indicate d that no control was exercised to 
restrict access to ICMS in sync with the laid down functions/responsibilities/ 
duties of the users. This was in contravention to the IT Security Policy. 
4.2.15 Analysis of ICMS Users’ Registration Data revealed that 335 users were 
allotted registered code without user IDs to access the system. Out of these, 330 
users were granted application level/report level access and 253 users had 
privilege to modify data of one or more modules of ICMS.  Review of User 
Master Data revealed that nine users did not have registration code which 
included active users and superannuated users.  
4.2.16 In 147 cases,
122 users log-in time to various ICMS modules was 3 days to 
523 days old and users had not logged out from ICMS. It was further noticed that 
data in ICMS was being populated by users who had logged in but had not logged 
out from ICMS for a long period of time and their password had also expired. 
Though it was observed that ICMS forced a user to automatically log-out after a 
specific period of inactivity, as per ICMS database, these users were not 
automatically logged out even after logged-into ICMS for a period of 3 to 523 
days. 
Analysis of data123 pertaining to users’ session details  as well as last login details 
revealed instances where user logout time preceded user login time. (NR, NER, 
WCR, SCR) 
4.2.17 There was no record of login/logout of 407 active users
124 in the table 
containing user's Last Login details. 
4.2.18 In response to audit query, CRIS pr ovided designation wise duties and 
responsibilities of CRIS ICMS team rather than details of duties and 
                                                            
117 Meerut, Panipat, Patiala, Alambagh  (NR) and six locations of SECR, three locations of WCR 
118 Jagadhari Workshop, Jammu Tawi, Hussainpur  (NR), three locations of SECR, one location of WCR 
119 Anand Vihar, Ambala (CPRC and CTLC), Delhi Control (Coaching stock and CTLC), Jagadhari Workhops, Jammu 
Tawi, Delhi Sarai Rohilla 
120 Ms.Sushma 
121 A user having special privileges including privilege to create/manage new/existing users 
122 NR-84, WCR-15, SCR-48 
123 DT_Session and DT_Last_Login_Info 
124 SCR-80, SECR-5, NR-207, NER-115 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)33
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
33 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
responsibilities of individual official.  Thus, it could not be ascertained whether 
duties and responsibilities of each official was segregated/separately defined. 
4.3 Change Procedure/Management  
As per IT Security Policy, all the IT Groups were required to develop procedures 
for effecting changes in the application software. However, ICMS group had not 
developed/formulated procedures for eff ecting changes in the ICMS software.  
As per the test check of CRIS records re lating to changes made in the ICMS, no 
system/procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes 
made in the ICMS in the online environment was found in place. 
4.4 ICMS Documentation 
As per the information made available by CRIS, CRIS has a User Manual on 
ICMS, Software Requirements Specifications (SRS) on COIS and System Design 
and Development (SDD) on COIS.  CRIS did not provide any documentation on 
User Requirement Specification for PAM and COIS.  CRIS also did not provide 
SRS for PAM.  Even the SDD on COIS did not contain complete details of all the 
tables in use in COIS module including their table structure, linkage between 
various tables, description of various fields of ICMS tables, description of values 
used for various fields.  User Manu al was updated till December 2014 and was 
not found complete as it did not have details of the various reports generated by 
ICMS including their format, details of codes used in various reports, period for 
which various reports make ICMS data available to users etc. (NR, ECR) 
4.5 Business Continuity Plan 
4.5.1 Business Continuity Plan at CRIS Centralized Data Centre  
ICMS is a Centralized Application and all the servers (Database server, 
Application Server, Web servers etc.) were  installed at CRIS Headquarters office 
at Chanakyapuri, New Delhi.  In order to ensure continuity of ICMS operations, 
CRIS started the process of implementing the Business Continuity Plan during 
2011-12.  In November 2015, CRIS submitte d an Abstract Estimate for Disaster 
Recovery (DR) setup of ICMS application at a cost of ` 12.04 crore to Railway 
Board. As on 31 March 2016, the process for DR Setup was still going on. 
In response to Audit query, CRIS stated (February 2016) that ICMS Data Backup 
Security Policy for new system, installed in October 2015 was under progress and 
review. It was further noticed that though daily back up was being taken up by 
ICMS team but no off line/remote site backup of ICMS was being maintained by 
CRIS ICMS group. 
4.5.2 Business Continuity Plan at Zonal Level 
No documented Business Continuity Plan was available in SWR, NCR, SCR, 
ECR, ECOR, ER, WR, NER, SER, NWR & SR. CRIS had procured new ICMS 
servers in February 2015. Though the server was made online in October 2015 
the installation process was yet to be completed (March 2016). The following 
deficiencies were observed in the ICMS locations checked in audit: 
(i) Personal computers/desktops were used in ICMS locations of WR, SR, 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)34
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
34 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
NR and NER instead of thin clients. At NCR and ECR, thin clients were 
provided initially but these were subsequently replaced by desktop 
computers, making the system vulnerable to security risks and virus 
attacks, in the absence of anti-virus. 
(ii) Antivirus software was not in use over NER and NR 125at most of the 
ICMS locations visited by Audit team and antivirus software was not 
found updated in CR.  
(iii) ICMS systems were not covered under Annual Maintenance Contract 
over SCR, SR, NR
126. At ECR, warranty period of six PCs (out of 17) had 
already expired on 31st March 2016 and AMC for these six PCs with any 
of the agency was not found to be executed till date of audit. Codal life of 
three Thin Clients had expired on 31 March 2016 and process for 
replacement of these thin clients was yet to be started.  
(iv) Smoke detectors, fire extinguishers were not found at ICMS locations in 
NCR (5)
127, SR128, ER129, SCR130, NR131and NER132.  
(v) Dust/waste bins (fire hazards) were found to be placed inside the premises 
housing systems on which ICMS was installed and running.  In the event 
of fire breaking out due to short circui t, sharp energy variations etc. there 
were no extinguishers available to douse the fire so as to save the 
information system assets (SR). 
(vi) As per Railway Board orders/instructi ons, media and route diversity is to 
be provided in all the FOIS projects to ensure continuous and smooth 
operations.  Over NR, at almost all the locations visited by Audit, ICMS 
connectivity was provided by FOIS network but at none of the locations, 
standby/redundancy lines were made available. Users reported
133 
connectivity problems. Records for Link/Connectivity Failure/Problems 
was not maintained over NR 134 and CR 135. In SR though failure report 
register was being maintained in the ICMS locations test checked and the 
register contained information about network failure, system failure etc. 
details regarding rectification of fail ures, actual down time of the system 
were not available in the register.  
(vii) No UPS were provided at six ICMS terminals
136. UPS provided137 at five 
locations were not in working condition/had no power backup 138. 
                                                            
125 Except at Ambala (CTLC) where an free version of anti-virus was in use. 
126 Ambala (CPRC), Delhi(CTLC), Jagadhari Workshops, Jammu Tawi and Amritsar 
127 While Smoke Detectors were not available on all the locations, fire extinguishers were found at all the locations 
128 Smoke Detector and Fire Extinguisher not available at all locations visited. 
129 Smoke Detector was not available at all locations visited and fire extinguisher was not available at HWH/TNC 
130 Fire Alarm/Smoke Detector was available at 2 locations and fire extinguisher were available at all locations 
131 Except UMB Control office 
132 Smoke Detector were not found at all locations visited by Audit 
133 At New Delhi, Delhi Control office (CPRC), Anand Vihar, Ambala Control office (CPRC), Delhi Sarai Rohilla, Jammu 
Tawi 
134 At Mumbai CST and Mazgaon of CR and at locations visited by NR Audit team except at Train Branch at Delhi and 
Anand Vihar 
135 Mumbai CST and Mazgaon 
136 At Delhi Control office, Train Branch of Anand Vihar, Jammu Tawi, Amritsar 
137 At Train Branch of Delhi Sarai Rohilla, New Delhi, Delhi and Ambala 
138 Mazgaon 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)35
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
35 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Adequate and proper furniture was not provided139.   
(viii) Over NR, SCR and CR, dust free environment was not available at 12 
locations140 and air conditioners were not available at 11141 locations. 
(ix) Water seepage problem was noticed at Train Branch at New Delhi, Delhi 
Main and Amritsar locations of NR  and Guntakal of SCR which could 
adversely affect smooth ICMS operations. 
Thus, the IT Security was deficient an d physical and logical access controls 
needed strengthening. Change Management was not documented as per IT best 
practices and Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully implemented. 
During Exit Conference (October 2016), Railways agreed that access control is a 
weak area and they needed to work on strengthening the same. Railway Board 
also agreed to the audit observations. As regards audit recommendations, 
Railway Board stated that audit recommendations are useful and Railways would 
act upon them to improve the system.  
                                                            
139 At Control office of Ambala, Delhi (Coaching section), Train Branch of Anand Vihar, Ambala, Jammu Tawi, Delhi, 
Delhi Sarai Rohilla, Amritsar, Mazgaon Yard 
140 At Train Branch of Anand Vihar, Delhi Sarai Rohilla, Delhi, Ambala, Jagadhari Workshop, Secunderabad, 
Vijayawada, Guntakal, Guntur, Mumbai CST, Dadar Terminus, Mazgaon 
141 Anand Vihar, Delhi Sarai Rohilla, Delhi, Ambala, Jagadhari Workshop, Jammu Tawi, Amritsar, Mumbai CST, Dadar 
Terminus, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Mazgaon 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)36 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)36
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
36 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
 
Chapter 5 Conclusion and Recommendations 
While punctuality monitoring is being done through ICMS, manual interventions 
still remain which have an impact on the quality and timeliness of data being fed. 
Complete data of all the trains was not available in ICMS and movement of some 
types of trains such as diverted trains , EMU trains in some  Zonal Railways was 
not reported through ICMS for monitoring punctuality of all trains.  
Train arrival/departure timings details at different stations are manually fed in 
Control Office Application (COA) and then updated in ICMS. This data is finally 
reflected in National Train Enquiry System (NTES) where passengers can see 
arrival and departure timings of the trains in real time. Delay in reporting of 
arrival and departure timings of trains and lack of accurate data of train 
movement led to inconvenience to passengers and generation of wrong MIS 
reports for Railway Administration which affected monitoring of train 
punctuality by the Railway Administration.  It is recommended that 
1. Punctuality reporting of movement of  trains which are not covered under 
ICMS may also be brought in the scope of ICMS.  
2. Accuracy and real time updation of arrival/departure timings of trains may 
be ensured to provide accurate and reliable information to the passengers.   
Monitoring status of coaching stock in real time and online as well as planning 
and management of asset maintenance was continued to be done manually as the 
data in ICMS was not found to be reliable and complete. Data in respect of Coach 
POH and their sick/fit status was not updated timely and was, thus, inaccurate. 
Instead of using Management Informat ion System (MIS) reports from ICMS a 
large number of reports were being prepared manually. Integration with other 
railway applications such as PRS, COA, CDS and CMS was not effective, as a 
result of which data updation was done through manual intervention and was not 
on real time basis. Important reports such as Vehicle Guidance Reports were also 
being prepared manually.  As such, the objectives of implementation of ICMS 
were not fully achieved. It is recommended that 
3. Inconsistencies in arrival/departure timings in different modules of ICMS 
may be rectified to have accurate position of coaches. Accuracy, 
completeness and timely updation of all coach data and their movement 
details may be ensured and dependence on manual records may be 
gradually reduced.  
4. Availability of the traffic demand (such as position of waitlisted passengers) 
may be facilitated in real time environment through ICMS so as to help 
Railways in augmentation of train composition on the basis of traffic 
demand, facilitate planning and running of special trains. 
5. Provision to capture IOH details of coaches in the system may be created. 
Timely and accurate updation of coach POH data, sick and fit coach data 
and effective usage of POH/Sick/Fit operations through ICMS may be 
ensured. 
6. Integration of ICMS and Crew Management System (CMS) may be ensured 
for generation of complete Vehicle Guidance reports so as to avoid manual 
intervention in the ICMS output. 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)37
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
       
 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
Application controls provide assurance to the Administration that transactions are 
properly authorised, complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their 
maintenance and other types of data input controls are in place. As seen from the 
data and live operations checked during field audit ICMS lacked adequate input 
controls during data entry into the syst em which led to incorrect/invalid data 
being entered and also had deficient manual supervisory controls. Due to 
deficiencies in such controls data accuracy, consistency and completeness could 
not be ensured. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may 
be introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy, completeness and validity of 
various types of data input and output.   
The IT Security was deficient and physical and logical access controls needed 
strengthening. Change Management was not documented and no system/ 
procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes made in 
the ICMS was found in place. Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully 
implemented. 
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes 
may be laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented 
so as to ensure that business critical  information and assets are protected 
from loss, damage and abuse. 
 
 
 
         (Nand Kishore) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Date:1RYHPEHU 
 
    Countersigned 
      
 
 
     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
New Delhi            Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Date: 1RYHPEHU


Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)39
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
39 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 1[Para 1.8(a)] 
Sample Size – List of selected ICMS locations of different Zonal Railways 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Number of 
Locations  
Names of ICMS Sites/Locations 
NWR 9 
i)  CTNC-Ajmer 
ii)  Carriage Workshop – Ajmer 
iii) CTNC-Lalgarh 
iv)  CTNC-Jaipur 
v)   Carriage Workshop - Jodhpur              
vi)  TNC-Rewari 
vii)  CTNC-Jodhpur    
viii) Divisional Control-Bikaner                                        
ix)  Zonal Headquarters Control Office, Jaipur                 
ECoR 6 
(i)   FOIS Cell/Zonal Headquarters, Bhubaneswar 
(ii)  Divisional Control Office, Khurda Road 
(iii) Divisional Control Office, Waltair 
(iv)  Bhubaneswar Station 
(v)  PuriStation and 
 (vi) Visakhapatnam Station 
ER 8 
(i)   Zonal Headquarters Control Office, Kolkata   
(ii)  Howrah Division/control 
(iii) Tikiapara Yard 
(iv)  Sealdah/Howrah Yard 
(v) Howrah Station 
 (vi) Azimganj Station 
(vii)  Katwa Station 
(viii) Asansol Station 
NER 6 
i)  Kathgodam Station         
ii) Gorakhpur Jn. Station     
iii) Lucknow Jn. Station       
iv) Chhapra Jn. Station           
v) Divisional Control Office, Lucknow 
vi) Zonal Headquarters Control Office, Gorakhpur 
NFR 7 
i) Zonal Headquarters Control Office, Maligaon 
ii)Lumding Division (Control Office) 
iii) Katihar (Station) 
iv)New Jalpaiguri (Station) 
v)New Bongaigaon (Station) 
vi) Guwahati (Station) 
vii)Dibrugarh Town (Station) 
SER 8 
i)  EMR/Control/Garden Reach 
ii)  Coaching Control 
iii) DY.SMR/Adra 
iv) CTNC/Tata       
v)  CYM/Kharagpur 
vi)  CTNC/Shalimar 
vii) CTNC/Santragachi 
viii) DY.SS/Howrah 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)40
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
40 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Number of 
Locations  
Names of ICMS Sites/Locations 
SR 10 
i) CHC/CC (Punctuality) 
ii) ICMS/COIS/SEC 
iii) DY.SMR/Chennai 
iv) PERW & ICF/FUR 
v)  Control/O/LTM/Chennai 
vi) BBQ/TNC/O/ Chennai 
vii) SA (Salem) 
viii) SMR/Trivandrum Central 
ix) Control/O/LTM/Madurai 
x) Sr.DOM/Tiruchchirappalli Jn 
WCR 6 
i)  Zonal Headquarters Control Office, Jabalpur  
ii)  Divisional Control Office Jabalpur 
iii)  Jabalpur Jn. station  
iv)  Kota Jn. Station 
v)  Bhopal Jn. Station 
vi)  Habibgaj Station 
CR 7 
i) Zonal Headquarters Control Office, Mumbai                 
ii) Divisional Control, Mumbai                                          
iii) Mumbai CST Yard                                                       
iv) Dadar Terminus                                                            
v) Dadar Yard                                                                     
vi) LokmanyaTilakTerminus Yard                                   
vii) Mazgaon Yard 
NCR 5 
i) Emergency Control, NCR/ HQ, Allahabad 
ii) Agra Railway Station, Agra division 
iii) Emergency Control, Agra division 
iv)Tundla Railway Station, Allahabad division 
v) Emergency Control, Allahabad division 
SCR 10 
i)  Zonal Headquarters Control Office , Secunderabad 
ii)  Hyderabad Control Office   
iii)   SSE/Lallaguda Workshop     
iv)  ZRTI/Moula Ali  
v)  Nanded station 
vi)  Dy.SS Office, Guntakal 
vii) Dy.SS Office, Secunderabad 
viii) CDO/C&W Depot, Secunderabad 
ix)  Dy.SS Office/Vijayawada  
x)  Dy.SS Office/Guntur 
SWR 6 
i) Zonal Headquarters Control Office (Hubli) 
ii) Control Office - Hubli 
iii)  Dy.SS - Hubli 
iv) Dy.SS - Vasco 
v) Control Office - Mysore 
vi) Dy.SS – Mysore 
WR 13 
Operating Department                                           
i)   Zonal Headquarters Control Office Churchgate, 
Mumbai  
ii)  Divisional Control Office, Rajkot 
iii) Stations -BRC,  
iv) VRL & 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)41
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
41 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Number of 
Locations  
Names of ICMS Sites/Locations 
v) NBVJ = 3 
vi) Ahmedabad Yard, Surat  
vii) TNC Yard  
viii) IND Yard  
ix) W&S, Parel 
x) Coaching Depot, Mumbai Central 
xi) Coaching Depot GIM 
xii) Coaching Depot VRL  
xiii) Coaching Depot IND   
ECR 9 
i)   Danapur Control 
ii) Dhanbad Control 
iii) SamastipurControl 
iv) Patna RRI 
v)  Dibrugarh station 
vi) Samastipur station 
vii) Zonal Headquarters Control Office Hajipur(4 
terminals), 
viii) Dhanbad station 
ix)   Samastipurstation 
SECR 7 
i) Bilaspur Coaching Complex 
ii) RRI Bilaspur 
iii) Sr.DOM Office, Nagpur 
iv)CTNC/Gondia 
v) Durg Coaching Complex 
vi) Raipur Station lobby 
vii) Shadol Station 
NR 11 
i) Zonal Headquarters Control Office, Baroda House  
ii) New Delhi Control office (Division control), 
iii) New Delhi Railway Station, 
iv) Old Delhi Railway Station, 
v)  AnandVihar Railway Station, 
vi)  Delhi Sarai Rohilla Railway Station, 
vii) Ambala Division Control office, 
viii) Ambala Railway Station, 
ix) Jagadhari workshop Railway Station, 
x) Jammu Tawi Railway Station, 
xi) Amritsar Railway Station 
Total 128   
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)42
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
42 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 2 [Para 2.1.1] 
Statement showing Punctuality Performance of Trains over different Zones as test 
checked by Audit during February 2016 
 
S. 
no 
Zonal 
Railway 
Trains 
Scheduled 
for 
Reporting 
in ICMS 
Trains 
Not 
Report
ed in 
ICMS 
Punctuality 
Percentage 
during 2015-
16  
(up to 
February) 
Punctual
ity 
Percenta
ge 
During 
2014-15 
Punctual
ity 
Target 
fixed by 
R.B. for 
2015-16 
Remarks/ 
Details of Trains 
not reported 
1. NR 38811 548 70.33 78.57 90 470-PT, 24-M/ET, 
6-ST, 48-NGT 
2. WCR. 3514 139 - - 0 61-PT, 12-M/ET, 
2-ST, 1-Election 
Special, 63 HS 
3. ER 20757 113 93.78 87.31 - 47-PT, 03- M/ET, 
63-ST 
4. SWR 9205 8 94.72 93.09 96.42 3-PT, 5-M/ET 
5. CR 62078 26124 71.25 72.60 96 163 PT, 10 M/ET,  
25951 ST 
6. NER 13715 110 80.93 78.91 90 79-PT(BG), 16- 
PT (MG), 15-
M/ET 
7. NFR 6644 70 87.24 89.58  54-PT, 16-ME 
 Total 154724 27112     
PT=Passenger Trains, M/ET=Mail/Express Trains, ST=Suburban Trains, BG=Broad Gauge, MG= 
MeterGauge, HS-Holiday Special, NGT – Narrow Gauge Train 
 
 
 
Annexure 3 [Para 2.1.1] 
Statement showing details of Trains Available in ICMS but Not in PRS  
 
S. no Zonal 
Railway 
Number of trains available 
in PRS but not available in 
ICMS 
Remarks 
1 NR 6 Report No. 982 of 23.03.2016 
2 WCR 1 Report No. 982 of 07.04.2016 
3 SCR 3 Report No. 982 of 06.05.2016 
4 NER 1 Report No. 982 of 29.04.2016 
5 NFR 7 Report No. 982 
6 SWR 5 Report No. 982 of 02.05.2016 
Total 23*  
*Note: Train Nos. are 02504, 04972, 12063, 12064, 23010, 24512 (NR), 01705(WCR), 01094, 
02795 & 07115 (SCR), 05116 (NER), 05615, 05616, 23154, 52540. 52541, 52544, 54545 (NFR), 
02779, 06228, 06948, 07301, 56263 (SWR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)43
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
43 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 4 (a) [Para 2.1.3] 
Statement showing Difference in Exceptional Trains Reported by ICMS& COA 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
Exceptional 
Trains 
Cancelled Short 
terminated 
Diverted Change of 
Origin 
Change of 
Destination 
Remarks 
ICMS COA ICMS COA ICMS COA ICMS COA ICMS COA ICMS COA Date on 
which test 
checked  
NR 220 56 192 40 12 9 7 0 9 3 0 4 14.03.2016
NCR 12 85 11 31 0 5 1 38 0 0 0 11 12.04.2016
ER 4 9 0 3 0 1 1 0 0 0 3 5 31.03.2016
WCR 6 11 6 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 04.04.2016
SCR 6 13 0 5 3 8 0 0 3 0 0 0 04.05.2016
SECR 14 7 11 3 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 3 14.03.2016
CR 20 36 9 22 5 6 3 0 3 0 0 8 14.03.2016
NER 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 22.6.2016 
SER 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 12.10.2015
NFR 23 68 14 11 2 0 6 3 1 0 0 20 22.06.2016
Total 305 288 243 125 24 30 19 41 16 3 3 55 
 
Annexure 4(b)[Para  2.1.3] 
Statement showing number of trains with status Not Reported/ Not Ascertained 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
Trains  To 
be 
Reported 
Number of 
Trains 
Reported 
in ICMS 
No of 
Exceptional 
Trains 
No. of Trains 
whose status 
could  not be 
ascertained 
Remarks 
NR 558 520 37 1 ICMS Report 
for 17 
February 2016 
ER 726 723 1 2 ICMS Report 
for 31 March 
2016 
NFR 232 225 0 7 ICMS Report 
for 31 March 
2016 
Total 1516 1468 38 10  
 
Annexure 5 [Para 2.1.4] 
Statement showing cases of delay in Reported Movement of Exceptional Trains 
S. no Zonal 
Railway 
Number 
of Cases 
Cases pertaining to 
trains of the 
concerned zone 
Period of Delay/Remarks 
1 NR 450 203 3 to 71 days 
2 WCR 225 155 1 to 6 days 
3 ER 292 198 3 to 72 
4 SCR 0 78 3 to 11 days 
5 SECR 6609 0 1 to 206 days 
6 SWR 322 225 3 to 234 days 
7 CR 22 9 1 to 36 days 
8 NER 112 0 3 to 17 days 
 Total 8032 868  
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)44
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
44 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 6 [Para 2.1.6.1] 
Statement showing details of mismatch noticed between ICMS and manual records 
in respect of Arrival/Departure timings  
S. 
no 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit Observations 
1 NR As per test check at New Delhi, Amritsar, Jammu Tawi, AnandVihar and 
Delhi Sarai Rohilla, in 25 instances, the timings recorded in ICMS were 
earlier than the timings recorded in manual records and the difference was in 
the range of 5 minutes to 180 minutes. In 8 instances, the timings in manual 
records were earlier than ICMS records and difference was in the range of 5 
minutes to 332 minutes. 
2. NFR As per test check at NBQ, NJP, DBRT, DBRG, LMG & KIR stations, in 219 
cases actual departure time did not match with the record of Station Master 
Diary and in 137cases, departure time of the train was earlier than the time in 
the Station Manager’s manual Diary. 
3. ER Train no.15630 (GHY-MS Weekly Express), started on 8/4/2016, was taken 
over by Asansol Division of Eastern railway at SNT on 9/4/2016 at 7:45 
hours. Train arrived at UDL at 9:15 hours and departed at 9:22 for DGR. 
After performing journey of 28 minutes it arrived DGR at 9:50 on same day 
and departed at 10:07 hours towards UDL again. After performing journey 
of 28 minutes, train again reached UDL. But the system captured time of 
arrival of the train at UDL second time as 9:15 hours, ignoring the to and fro 
journey between UDL and DGR. 
4. SER Differences were noticed in resp ect of arrival times of various trains. 
5 SR Mismatch in arrival and departure timings of suburban trains and 
mail/express between ICMS and manual system were noticed. 
6. NWR Difference of 10-15 minutes was no ticed in Train arrival time shown in 
PAM and recorded in “Punctuality Register” maintained in Station Masters 
office Jodhpur. 
7. CR Departure/Arrival time data of DOWN and UP Trains, which were late by 15 
minutes and above, consisting of 50 and 328 instances of delayed trains was 
collected from Station Manager's Diary for July, August, September 2015 of 
at Dadar(T) and LokmanyaTilak Terminus respectively and compared with 
the departure/arrival time fed in the ICMS. It was noticed that there were 
differences in the time recorded in Station Manager's Diary and the time fed 
in ICMS and the time difference range d from 2 minutes to 2 hours and 20 
minutes.  
8. WCR During comparison, difference/inconsis tency in the train timings recorded in 
the ICMS and those recorded in stations’ manual records were noticed. 
9. SWR At Mysore, there was difference/inconsistency in the train timings recorded 
in the ICMS and those recorded in stations’ manual records. The difference 
ranged between 5 minutes to 87 minutes 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)45
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
45 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 7 [Para 2.1.7.1] 
Statement showing details of stations/stoppages available in PRS but not in ICMS 
 
 
S. no Zonal 
Railway  
Stations in PRS, 
but not in ICMS 
Remarks, if any 
1 NR 60 Report No. 983 of 23-03-16 
2 NCR 7 12.04.2016 
3 SR 7 August 2014 
4 NWR 3 16.09.2015 
5 CR 9 12.04.2016 
6 WCR 1 07.04.2016 
7 SCR 3 06.05.2016 
8 ECR 3 - 
9 NER 32 Report No. 983 
10 SECR 8 23.03.2016 
11 SWR 52 Report No. 983 of 02.05.2016 
12 NFR 2 24.05.2016 
 Total 187  
 
 
Annexure 8 [Para 2.1.8] 
Statement showing manually prepared reports used for monitoring Punctuality  
 
S. 
no 
Reports prepared manually By Railways 
1 Punctuality Performance (p ercentage) of Mail/Express, 
Suburban and Passenger Trains 
NR, WCR, ER 
2 Monthly Punctuality Performance Report NR,WCR 
3 Comparative Summary(Number of Trains) Reported Late NR, WCR 
4 Division wise Punctuality Performance of Mail/Exp. Trains, 
Passenger Trains 
NR, WCR, ER 
5 Cause-wise and Division-wise Mail/Express Trains lost in 
punctuality (Comparison), Current week/Last week, Train Lost 
Month wise and Cause wise on NR 
NR, WCR 
6 Assets failures causing loss of punctuality NR, WCR, SR 
7 Excess Section wise Engg. Restriction NR, WCR 
8 Summary of Diesel Loco Failure etc NR, WCR 
9 Traffic Density Statement ER 
10 Diesel KM/ Elec. KM(ER) ER 
11 Equivalent Failure Statement (Asset Failure) etc. ER 
 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)46
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
46 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 9 [Paras 2.1.10 and 2.2.9] 
Statement showing instances of inconsistent/inaccurate ICMS Output 
 
Zonal 
Railway  
Details of inconsistencies/inaccuracies in ICMS output 
NR On 8 April 2016, ICMS Report No. 504 indicated that arrival of eight trains and 
departure of one train was not reported in ICMS at Ambala station.  On 
examination of running movement of these trains in ICMS, ICMS depicted 
inconsistent details as is evident from on e such example. On 8 April 2016, arrival 
of Train Number 74646 of 7 April 2016 was not reported in ICMS as departure of 
this train was not done at Amritsar (Report No. 504).  On examining the running 
position of this train using Full Running option, Report No. 1002 indicated that 
departure of this train was not done from  Amritsar on 7 April 2016 but the train 
departed right time from Jalandhar on 7 April 2016.  When Train Running 
position of this train was viewed by selecting Textual option of Report No. 1002, 
ICMS indicated that this train departed right time from Amritsar and reached after 
a delay of 45 minutes at Ambala on 7 April 2016.  Similar type of inconsistencies 
were also noticed when such reports were reviewed at Delhi Sarai Rohilla Station. 
SECR ICMS report for Train Running Position for train number 18240 of 06.05.2016 
depicted two different timings for actual arrival at Bilaspur under the option 
“Textual” and “Full Running Report”. 
ER On 16 June2016, ICMS Report No. 504 indicated that arrival of 14 trains and 
departure of 7 trains was not reported  in ICMS at Asansol station.  On 
examination of running movement of these trains in ICMS, ICMS depicted 
inconsistent details.  For example, on  16 June 2016, arrival of Train Number 
53061 of 16 June 2016 was not reported in ICMS.  On examining the running 
position of this train using Full Running option, Report No. 1002 indicated that 
departure of this train was done right time from BWN on 16 June 2016.  When 
Train Running position of this train wa s viewed by selecting Textual option of 
Report No. 1002, ICMS indicated that th is train departed right time from BWN 
and reached late at ASN on 16 June 2016 after a delay of 3 minutes.   
SCR On 13 May 2016, ICMS Report No. 504 indicated that arrival of three trains and 
departure of one train was not reported in ICMS at Hyderabad station.  On 
examination of running movement of one of these trains viz., 67265, Push-Pull 
from WL to HYB Deccan dated13.05.2016 the arrival time at HYB Deccan was 
not reported in ICMS as departure of this train was no t indicated at the previous 
station viz., Khairatabad DCN station (NTES Train Running Report).  On 
examining the running position of this train using Full Running option, Report 
No. 1002 indicated that departure of this train was not done from Khairatabad 
DCN station and so it's arrival time at HYB Deccan was not indicated.  However, 
enquiries by Audit revealed that the trai n did reach Hyderabad Deccan at 9.45hrs 
as ascertained from the SS/HYB's office.  
Wrong Loco information provided by ICMS 
NR On 08-04-2016 at Ambala station, ICMS indicated under the Tab-‘Train Ready 
for Departure’ that loco number 13340 was attached with train number 54542 
which was placed at Platform number one and with 64658 which was placed at 
Platform number 2. However, VG of these trains indicated that Loco number 
13340 was attached with train number 54542 and not with train number 64548 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)47
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
47 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
SER In “Loco Master Detail” window of CTNC/TATA, current status of the loco 
number 23990 in “Division” field was wrongly shown as “CKP” division though 
in respect of “current station”, it was shown as “KGP” which is under KGP and In 
“Loco current status window” the current location of the loco was not reflected 
but the originating location. 
 Loco number 25000 attached with train number 12703 on 15/10/2015 and the 
schedule departure of the train for the or iginating station at Howrah was 7:25 am, 
the actual location of the train as well as lo co at the time of inspection (12:34 pm) 
was beyond JJKR but the current location of the loco was shown as “Howrah”. 
 
 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)48
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
48 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 10 [Para 2.2.1.1] 
Statement showing non-depiction of actual Coach Position in Rake Composition 
 
S. 
no 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit Observations 
1. NR x On 18.April 2016, coach No. 06179 and 10931 were available at station at Anand Vihar with 
status as fit and the same were physically attached with rake of Train No. 4402 but ICMS did 
not make them available for attaching with the rake of train No. 4402.  
x At AnandVihar, Coaches having numbers 143105 and 13142 were physically available on 18 
April 2016 but ICMS indicated that these coaches were at Ambala. 
x At Delhi Sarai Rohilla and New Delhi stations, attachment/detachment of coaches/VPH 
coaches (enroute) were not found updated in ICMS.  
x As per ICMS, coach number NR-17228 was on rake of train number 14674 but as per JUDW 
records, the coach was under POH at JUDW shop on 7 April 2016. 
2. SER x The following coaches were attached with train no. 18030 on 03.11.2015 at SRC (Shalimar 
Yard) whereas ICMS depicted the location of these coaches at location other than the Shalimar 
Yard on the same date as indicated below: 
Number of coaches Location Railway 
SER-GS-BG-998479 SUR CR 
WCR-RV-BG-80878 DLI NR 
x In train no. 18181, one VVN coach up to “BJU”, was attached to the rake but ICMS did not 
accept this coach and the destination station of this coach was shown in the VG as “CPR”. 
3. NFR x At NBQ (NFR), VG generated at GHY for train No 55804(arrived at NBQ on 21.01.2016) was 
found to consist of 9 coaches, but consist of the train at NBQ exhibited 10 coaches. Coach No 
GS 10438 was found to exist in the system but as per ‘Number Taker’ register,  the coach was 
not in the rake of train No 55804 on 21.01.2016, which was actually placed in the sick line at 
NBQ on 19.01.2016 which indicated that the consist of the train was not modified.  
x ICMS generated VG of Train No.55726 of 28.01.2016 consisted of 14 coaches but manual VG 
prepared consisted of 17 coaches. However, as per Number Taker register, rake consisted of 
16 coaches. Coach No.10830 was not attached with the Rake which existed in manual VG.
4. SR x Passenger trains 56105/06 and 56107/08 between Karur and Salem were operated with seven 
coaches (actual consist). However, in ICMS the consist formation displayed only five coaches 
due to the reason that two coaches shop marked for POH could not be released by Division in 
ICMS.  It was also observed th at coaches shop marked for POH could be released only by 
PWP (Perambur north). 
5. NWR x Discrepancies in Coach Number fed in Vehicle Guidance of ICMS and actual coaches 
received at locations were noticed in 12 cases. Instances noticed where coaches physically 
available in the Workshop, Ajmer for POH were shown running in regular Trains on same date 
at other station.  
x One coach (ML-107/93901) physically found available (from 17-8-2015) in Ajmer Workshop 
for POH was not shown in the ICMS on the date of inspection. 
6. CR x As per Rake Link Booklet for Train No. 12140 (Sewagram Express), the train consisted of 24 
coaches. 18 coaches from Nagpur to CSTM and 6 coaches to be attached at Wardha. The 
consist of this train was reviewed for the months of July, August and September 2015 and it 
was found that the enroute attachment of coaches at Wardha was not captured in ICMS.  
7. WCR x As per manual verification at Jabalpur, Coach number CR 15705 GSLRD was available at 
Jabalpur on 09.06.2016 but ICMS indicated that this coach was available at Varanasi. 
8. ECoR x At WAT control, type of coaches physically running in rake were not matching with the type 
of coaches shown  in consist in the ICMS system, 
 
9. SWR x As per ICMS data coach number GSCN 99391 and GSRD 07735 arrived by train number 
12779, were in Vasco on 12.03.2015 where as these coaches were available at Banaglore on 
that day.   
x Coach number ACCN 11103 arrived by train number 12779 was in Vasco on 13.3.2015 
whereas the same was physically available in NZM. 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)49
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
49 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 11 [Para 2.2.1.2] 
Statement showing incomplete depiction of Current Status of coaches 
 
*A coach is called disputed when a user marks the coach as ‘Physically not arrived’ while 
recording the arrival of a train. 
 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
coaches 
Current 
detail 
available 
Disputed
status*
Location 
on 
platform
Line 
number/ 
type not 
available 
Position 
from end 1 
was not 
available
Line 
number 
was zero 
Remarks 
NR 7975 7303 260 917 297 311 6 Disputed status of 49 of 
them was more than 12 to 
36 months old 
NCR 1625 1550 84 49 12 0 0 Disputed status of 32 of 
them was more than 12 to 
37 months old. 
ER 6519 4605 112 286 89 0 0 Disputed status of 49 of 
them was more than 12 to 
36 months old 
NFR 3474 3124 70 411 44 0 44 Disputed status of 7 of 
them was more than 8 to 
22 months old 
NWR 0 0 108 0 0 0 0 108 coaches were under 
disputed status since 
30.9.13 
WCR 1419 655 0 84 4 66 4  
SCR 5476 5372 234 474 98 113 0 Disputed status of 45 of 
them was more than 12 
months old. 
SWR 3546 3431 259 253 104 0 0 Disputed status of 36 
coaches ranged between 12 
and 32 months. 
SECR 1492 1323 63 138 24 0 0 Disputed status of 13 of 
them was more than 12 to 
36 months old. 
ECR 0 0 153 347 70 0 0 Disputed status of 83 was 
more than 12 to 80 months 
old. 
NER 3405 60 0 0 0 0 0  
CR 5163 2621 227 366 0 0 120 Disputed status of 50 
coaches ranged between 12 
and 36 months. 
Total 40094 30044 1570 3325 742 490 174  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)50
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
50 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 12 [Para 2.2.1.3] 
Statement showing non-capturing of loading/unloading details of Parcel 
Coaches/Vans of different Types such as VPH/VPU 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR As per ICMS database, there were just  98 records of loading of NR owned VPH 
coaches during 2006 to 2015 (September) whereas as per manual records, 296 
VP coaches were loaded at Delhi Station during July 2015 to September 2015.  
ER There are 968 High Capacity Parcel Vans including 3 ‘VPHX’. Out of 39 VPH 
coaches, only 11 coaches were offered for loading and they were loaded 1 to 23 
occasions during a period of April 2008 to 2015 (October).  In rest of the ER 
owned coaches, Coach ID was zero. 
WCR There were just 3 records of loading of WCR owned VPH coaches during 2009 
to 2015 in the table containing loading/unloading details of VPH/VPU coaches.  
SWR There were just 52 records of loading of SWR owned VPH coaches. No records 
were available after August 2009. 
CR There were just 84 records of loading of CR owned VPH coaches during 2008 
to 2013 whereas as per manual records, 43 VP coaches were loaded at one of 
Depot at Wadi Bunder during July 2015 to September 2015. 
 
Annexure 13 [Para 2.2.1.4] 
Statement showing incorrect Train placement data 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR At Anand Vihar station, train number 22408 was placed at platform number one 
on 18 April 2016 but as per ICMS, it was placed at platform number five. At 
Delhi Sarai Rohilla, ICMS indicted that train number 12986, 14008, 12616 and 
09726 were placed at platform number one, two, three and four whereas these 
trains were not physically available on these platforms.  Thus, actual position of 
trains was not depicted by ICMS.  
NWR At Lalgarh station of Bikaner division (on 08 December 2015), running coaching 
stock (Trains) actually found on lines/platforms and their position shown in the 
ICMS was not matching  
CR At Mumbai CST, as per ICMS, coaches were available in spare line, however, 
during joint inspection, it was seen that  no coaches were available at the 
locations. 
SWR It was observed during field visit that on 13/06/2016, as per ICMS record Rake 
of Train no. 16535 was placed at PF NO.2 whereas the rake was physically 
available at PF No.5.  Similarly, rake of train no. 16230 was shown to be at PF 
No.4, while the same was at Yard.  Thus, ICMS was not depicting actual 
position of the train. 
SR Six pit lines were actually availabl e in TVC for placement of rake/train. 
However, only 5 pit line were available fo r the Train Clerks to make entry in the 
Data Module. 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)51
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
51 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 14 [Para 2.2.1.6] 
Statement showing non-capturing of complete status of Condemned coaches 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
Coaches 
Coaches 
having 
Condemn
ation 
dates 
Condem
nation 
dates 
prior to 
October
2015 
Coaches 
having 
marked 
as 
RECDM
N(out of 
column 
'4') 
Coaches
marked 
online 
(out of 
column 
4) 
Coaches 
having 
null status
(Out of 
column 4)
Coaches 
condemne
d during 
2013-14 
and 2014-
15 (As per
ICMS 
database) 
Coaches 
condemned
during (as 
per manual
records/ 
Informatio
n made 
available 
by 
railways) 
Duration 
when 
condemned 
(As per 
Manual 
Record/Infor
mation made 
available by 
railways) 
NR 7975 1212 170 80 77 13 411 268 13-15 
ER 6519 1547 32 20 12 0 339 110 13-14 
NFR 3474 52 4 3  1 139 90 13-15 
CR** 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
WCR 1634 231 7 0 7 0 89 95 13-15 
SCR 5476 1130 0 0 1077 53 0 0  
SWR 3546 540 19 1 18 0 68 65 13-15 
SECR 1492 11 4 0 2 1490 0 68* 13-16 
NER 3405 1368 117 0 0 117 87 216  
Total 33521 6091 353 104 1193 1674 1133 912  
*Out of 68, 51 were condemned during 2013-15, **Over CR, 75 condemned coaches were 
appearing in the ICMS database with status “FITAVL /ONRAKE /INSHOP /DISPUTE/ ORUNTR/ 
SHOPCH/ RECDMN/ SICKCH”. On this being pointed out by Audit, Central Railway 
Administration informed in February 2016 that the condemned coaches have sincebeen removed 
from the ICMS database. 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)52
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
52 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 15 [Para 2.2.1.6] 
Statement showing coaches having expired Condemned dates in ICMS in Use 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR x Almost all the coaches having expired condemnation dates with 
null/online status were part of the current/live data, were in operations 
and available for usage 
x As per ICMS database, POH of 121 coaches, having expired 
condemnation dates and majority of them (63) recommended for 
condemnation, was performed after their condemnation date. 
SR x Out of 390 records, in 19 records condemnation dates of SR owned 
coaches has preceded the last POH dates.  
x One ART type coach (number 77876) which was condemned on 23-09-
2013 by the Mechanical Department had not been deleted and was still 
shown up in the coach current stock.  
x Coaches condemned during August 2015 and September 2015 by the 
Mechanical Department were also available in ICMS and appeared in 
coach current stock. 
NFR x In one coach POH was performed after its condemnation date. 
SWR x POH of six coaches was performed after the expiry of their condemnation 
dates. 
SECR x POH of one coach was performed after condemnation date. 
ECR x POH of three coaches performed after their condemnation dates. 
x Status of one coach was on line although the date of condemnation of the 
coach had already lapsed in 2013. 
ER x Almost all the coaches having null/online status were in use even after 
the expiry of their condemnation dates recorded in ICMS.  
x POH of 121 coaches, having expired condemnation dates and a majority 
of them (20) recommended for condemnation, was performed after their 
condemnation date. 
x POH of two coaches was performed after the date of condemnation. In 12 
cases reason for condemnation were not been entered. 
NER x POH of 40 such coaches was performed after their condemnation date.    
CR x All the 109 coaches after expiry of condemnation date were in use. Out of 
these, in respect of 14 coaches,  POH was done af ter the date of 
condemnation. 
WR x One coach condemned in 2012 was available in ICMS Coach Master 
Data. 
 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)53
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
53 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 16 [Para 2.2.3] 
Statement showing differences in Train Arrival/Departure timings 
recorded in COIS and PAM 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR x Out of 47765 transaction of Arrival Time pertaining to five divisions of 
NR for the period 1 July 2015 to 7 October 2015 compared, in 22854 
transactions, differences were noticed in Train Arrival Time.  In 21019 
records, COIS Train Arrival time was earlier than PAM time and 
difference was in the range of 1 minute to1719 minutes and in 1835 
transactions, COIS Arrival time was later than PAM time and difference 
was in the range of 1 minute to 6010 minutes.  
x Out of 50764 transactions of Departure Time pertaining to five divisions 
of NR for the period 1 July 2015 to 7 October 2015 compared, in 11124 
transactions, differences were noticed in Train Time.  In 10350 
transactions, COIS departure time was earlier than PAM time and 
difference was in the range of 1 minute to 5795 minutes and in 774 
transactions, COIS departure time  was later than PAM time and 
difference was in the range of 1 minute to 131 minutes.  
SECR x Over SECR, as per test check, out of  11765 transaction of Arrival Time 
pertaining to three divisions of SECR compared for the period 1 July 2015 
to 7 October 2015, in 3044 transactions, differences were noticed in Train 
Arrival Time.  In 529 transactions, COIS Arrival time was earlier than 
PAM time and difference was in the range of 1 minute to 302 minutes and 
in 2515 records, COIS Arrival time was later than PAM time and 
difference was in the range of 1 minute to 1090 minutes.  
CR x On CR, out of 27947 transactions of Arrival Time pertaining to 5 
divisions of CR compared for the period 01.07.2015 to 07.10.2015, in 
6672 transactions, differences were noticed in Train Arrival Time. In 
4871 records, COIS Arrival time was earlier than PAM time and 
difference was in the range of 1 minute to 8851 minutes and in 1801 
records, COIS Arrival time was late r than PAM time and difference was 
in the range of 1 minute to 1025 minutes. 
x Out of 28497 transaction of Departure Time pertaining to five divisions of 
CR, compared for the period 1 July 2015 to 7 October 2015, in 3372 
transactions, differences were noticed in Train Arrival Time.  In 2545 
records, COIS Departure time was ear lier than PAM time and difference 
was in the range of 1 minute to 5760 minutes and in 827 records, COIS 
Departure time was later than PAM time and difference was in the range 
of 1 minute to 300 minutes
ER Analysis of ICMS data pertaining to arrival and departure for the period 
from July 2015 to October revealed that in 41 cases actual departure time 
was earlier than actual arrival time and the difference ranged between 1 
minute and 1066 minutes. 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)54
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
54 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 17 [Para 2.2.5.1] 
Statement showing discrepancies in the Vehicle Guidance Summary 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit Observations 
NR x At Ambala Division on 8 April 2016, loco number 14067 was replaced with loco number 
22719 in Train number 11058 at 15:22. However, VG generated after replacing loco at Ambala 
station, still showed loco number 14067 instead of loco number 22719. Thus, the change was 
not reflected in the VG.  
x Coaches of Train Number 12925 get detached at  Ambala division but no VG was generated 
after detachin
g coaches at Ambala division.
SR x As per Railway Board instructions, only system generated Vehicle Guidance were to be issued 
from 1 August 2010, still manual VGs were used. 
x Rake link for the train No.56241 SA-YPR was not available due to mismatch in train consist 
between SWR and SR, as received in ICMS. The mismatch was due to the reason that the 
ICMS location concerned in SWR did not place the link rake in the ICMS while despatching 
the train from YPR. Therefore, vehicle guidance was manually prepared for despatching the 
train.  
x For train number 11063 (MS-MTDM) slip coach (56100) for the section SA-MTDM was to be 
attached and similarly for train No.11064 (MTDM-MS) slip coach (56101) for the section 
MTDM-SA was to be attached. Though provision for attachment of slip coach exists in ICMS, 
due to non-availability of adequate time betwee n receipt and despatch of these trains, slip 
coaches could not be entered in ICMS. Thus the train consist generated by ICMS was not 
reliable and manual VG prepared. 
CR x In respect of train No. 12534 of Start Da te 08/09/2015 (VGs No. 7147560), actual coach 
attached with the Train was NR GS 14406, but ICMS was not accepting the above coach 
details as the same was attached to some other Train in ICMS. Hence, VG was prepared using 
wrong coach number NR GS 12579 and the actual Coach number NR GS 14406 attached to 
train was entered in the "Remarks" column of VG.   
x Analysis of ICMS data for July, August, and September 2015 revealed 1093 instances where 
the actual Coach Number was wrongly entered in the "Remark Column rather than in the 
relevant coach column which could be due to non-availability of details of coaches, physical 
attached with the Train, in ICMS.    
NFR x Train No.75718 (DEMU) ex-Haldibari to Siliguri moved on 29.07.2015 with train consist that 
did not match with the VG. Moreover, loco a ttached with DEMU train was 12699 WDG (BG 
class) which was not a DEMU loco and was not reflected in the VG. 
ER x In the cases of non-availability of a coach in the Coach Master of ICMS, the number of the 
coach was to be collected from stock and after generation of VG, the coach number so 
collected was to be recorded in the VG manually. 
NER x There was no field to capture details of Portable  Control Phone (PCP), Fire Extinguisher (FE), 
Emergency Light Fitting (ELF), Katta (Wooden Bl ock for Gradient Section) and these details 
were manually entered in VG at Kathgodam location of NER.. 
x At Gorakhpur, Train No. 12555 dated 02/04/2016, running from Gorakhpur to Hisar consisted 
of 24 coaches but in Vehicle Gu idance(VG) generated through ICMS  for this  train, only 23 
coaches were captured and coach GSCN 13311 was manually entered in Vehicle Guidance.  
NWR x At 04 locations test checked discrepancies in Coach Number fed in Vehicle Guidance of ICMS 
and actual coaches received at locations were noticed in 12 cases. 
 
 
 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)55
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
55 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
 
 
Annexure 18 [Para 2.2.5.2] 
Statement showing details of VGs generated with incomplete details 
 
S. 
no 
Zonal 
Railway 
Period Driver 
Field 
blank 
Guard 
Field 
blank 
Loco  Remarks 
1 NR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 40569 40876 7816 
2 NCR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 10000 9980 680 
3 ER 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 37004 37075 5343 
4 ECoR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 5199 5199 0 
5 NWR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 4124 4818 163 
6 WCR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 7669 7673 321 
7 SCR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 38687 38520 14755 
8 SWR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 23281 23283 3109 
9 SECR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 9641 9742 7618 Data like DR, GD, 
H.C, VVVV, dr, 
xyz, 600, A, B, BSP, 
D, ,K, KK, KS, M, 
Mr. Shri etc. noted 
in Driver and Guard 
field 
10 ECR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 1340 1317 398  
11 CR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 15078 8860 158  
12. NFR 01/07/2015 to 15/10/2015 11917 10230 815 Data like n, SH, Shri 
noted in Driver and 
Guard Field 
 Total  204509 197573 41176 
 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)56
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
56 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 19 [Para 2.2.5.3] 
Statement showing details of manually prepared VG Summary 
 
Zonal 
Railway  
Audit observations 
NR 
x In NR at ASR station, printer was out of order since 1.4.2011 and VGs 
were being prepared manually.  
x At Jammu Station, printer was found out of order during April 2016 and 
VGs were being prepared manually. 
ECR x In ECR, VG was prepared manually at RJPB and DBG locations where 
printers were not working. 
NER 
x While going through Vehicle Guidance Summary prepared during the 
month of April 2016 at Gorakhpur Station, in respect of 12 instances (6 
regular trains and 6 special trains) VG was prepared manually and no 
reason was assigned for manual preparation of VG. 
SCR 
x In SCR, printer at SC station was out of order for a long time and VGs 
were being prepared manually.  At NED station, the ICMS operations 
were being carried out from the control office, hence, VGs were being 
prepared manually. 
CR 
x In CR, in the offices of Chief Yard Master, Mumbai CST, Dadar and 
LTT, VG details were fed into the IC MS but the details were once again 
written manually to hand it over to th e Guard. The reason for manual 
preparation of VGs was not availability of a functional printer.  
x There were 6893 VGs prepared in the system in the above stations. Out of 
these in 1841 cases VGs were not printed, resulting in preparation of VGs 
manually. 
SWR x In SWR, the data was being populated in both the applications manually. 
SR 
x It was observed that rake link for the train No.56241 SA-YPR was not 
available due to mismatch in ICMS. Therefore vehicle guidance was 
manually prepared for despatching the train. The mismatch was due to the 
reason that the ICMS location concerned in SWR did not place the link 
rake in the ICMS while despatching the train from YPR. 
x For train number 11063 (MS-MTDM) slip coach (56100) for the section 
SA-MTDM is to be attached and similarly for train No.11064 (MTDM-
MS) slip coach (56101) for the sec tion MTDM-SA is to be attached. 
Though provision for attachment of slip coach exists in ICMS, due to 
non-availability of adequate time between receipt and despatch of these 
trains, slip coaches could not be entered in ICMS.  Inclusion of slip 
coaches had to be done manually and hence only manual VG prepared 
NFR 
x ICMS is installed at Route Relay Interlocking (RRC) cabin at KIR and 
TNC office is situated at PF3 & PF4. As a result, the details of each 
attachment/detachment is communicate d over phone to ICMS users. VG 
is prepared manually at TNC office. Though VG is generated through the 
system but the same cannot be printed as no printer has been provided at 
KIR location. 
x At NJP, VG is prepared manually as there is no interface between printer 
driver and the application. 
WR 
x It was noticed that printer at New Bhuj station was out of order and VGs 
were being prepared manually.  At Bharuch station,VGs were being 
prepared manually for want of ICMS terminal. 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)57
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
57 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 20 [Para 2.2.6.1] 
Statement Showing Inconsistent/Incorrect Loco Master Data 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
 
As per ICMS database (No.) As per Manual Records (No.) Remarks 
Electric 
Loco 
Electric 
Loco 
Type 
Diesel 
Loco 
Diesel 
Loco 
Type
Electric 
Loco 
Electric 
Loco 
Type 
Diesel 
Loco 
Diesel 
Loco 
Type 
NR 384 8 653 20 376 6 566 8 
1036 locos were of gauge 
type one and one loco 
was of gauge type four. 
Out of 1037 locos, 29 
locos were dead, 29 locos 
were in failed condition 
and 1 loco was idle.    
NCR 409 5 197 13 414 5 134 5 
603 locos were of gauge 
type 01 and 03 locos were 
of gauge type 4. Out of 
606 locos, 03 locos were 
dead and 08 locos were in 
failed condition. 
WR 0 0 532 16 0 0 420 6 
ICMS showed 67 MG 
diesel locos of YDM4 
and YDM4A types on 
Western Railway whereas 
the figure given by Board 
vide their letter dated 
5/10/15 showed 62 MG 
locos without specifying 
their types. 
ER 254 6 448 13 240 5 384 8   
NFR 0 0 449 13 0 0 375 6 
404 locos were of gauge 
type 1, 27 locos were of 
gauge type 2 and 18 loco 
was of gauge type 4. Out 
of 449 locos, 8 locos were 
dead, 19 locos were in 
failed condition and 422 
loco was normal. 
WCR 631 8 456 9 588 6 394 10 
1087 locos were of gauge 
type 1. Out of 1087 locos, 
15 locos were in failed 
condition and 2 locos 
were idle 
SCR 597 7 649 12 578 7 596 8   
SECR 235 0 226 0 214 0 193 0 
SWR 0 0 353 8 0 0 153 6   
ECR 0 0 405 0 391 0 0 0   
NER 0 0 324 13 0 0 231 10  
CR 655 11 396 9 607 11 297 6 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)58
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
58 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 21 [Para 2.2.6.2(a)]  
Statement showing Wrong Loco position 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR x On 1.4.2016, as per Delhi Control office record, Loco Number 22301 was 
available in Delhi Division but as per ICMS database, this loco was in Kota 
Division.  
x Loco Number 22568 was physically available at Delhi Division but as per 
ICMS, it was at TPJ.  
x As per manual records, Loco No. 16272 and 14003 were in Delhi division on 21 
April 2016 but as per ICMS these locos were in UMB Division and HSX 
respectively.  
x Similar types of instances of wrong position of locos (e.g. Loco number 22029 
and 21883) were noted on 6 April 2016 at Control office at Ambala. 
NFR x Loco status reflected that loco No 14860 was ‘Shed In’ at LMG location on 
24.02.2016 at 18:10 hours whereas, the loco physically located at NGC shed at 
same date and time. Subsequently, the user at LMG Control office input the 
‘Shed Out’ time (expected) as 25.02.2016 00:30 hours in advance to release the 
loco from shed at LMG. In this connection, it is observed that there is no BG 
Loco Shed at LMG, which is a MG shed which clearly indicated that the wrong 
programming logic as well as creation of  virtual shed (Non-exist shed) in the 
ICMS. As such the system failed to capture the real time data. 
SER x Over SER, it was noted that particulars of loco were mainta ined by Loco control 
office but due to non-supply of loco particulars to coaching control, Vehicle 
Guidance (VG) were generated by giving fictitious loco numbers in 
Dy.SMR/ADA location. 
CR x Test check revealed 10 such instances where locos were physically available at a 
particular location while the ICMS show ed their availability at different 
location.(January to May 2015) 
WCR x Loco number 28159 was available in Jabalpur division but as per ICMS 
database, this loco was in Bilaspur division.  
x Loco number 23825 was available in Jabalpur division but as per ICMS 
database, this loco was in Allahabad division. 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)59
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
59 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 22 [Para 2.2.6.2 (b)] 
Statement Showing Instances of Non-capturing of Movement of Locos 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Number of Loco Cut-in instances noticed Date on which test checked 
NR 170 22 March 2016
NCR 54 22 March 2016
WCR 38 06 April 2016
SCR 59 6 May 2016 
ER 726 May 2016 
SECR 24 12 June 2016
SWR 38 02 May 2016 
CR 77 18 May 2016 
NER 35 22 June 2016 
NFR 390 19 July 2016
ER 3 31 March 2016
TOTAL 1614  
 
 
 
 
Annexure 23 [Para 2.2.6.2(c)] 
Statement showing cases of Electric Loco running over Diesel Track 
  
 
 
 
  
Zonal 
Railway 
Numbers Date on which test checked 
NR 
 
 
11 18 February 2016 
12 09 March 2016 
29 06 April 2016 
NCR 6 12 March 2016 
SCR 
 
1 23 December 2015 
1 04-May 2016 
ECR 
 
6 02 November 2015 
6 10 March 2016 
WCR 2 07April 2016 
1 27April 2016 
SWR 4 01May 2016 
CR 5 18 May 2016 
NER 2 22 June 2016 
ER 2 31 March 2016 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)60
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
60 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 24 (a) [Para 2.2.7] 
Statement showing mismatch between 
 ICMS Coach Master Data and Manual Coach Master Data 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Zonal 
Railway 
 
Gauge Number of Coaches Date on which test 
checked 
As Per ICMS As per Manual Coach 
Master Data 
NR 
  
  
  
7975 6160  07 October 2015 
8147 6235  29 February 2016 
NCR BG 1625 1227  16 May 2016 
NCR(BG) NG 0 64   
WR(BG)   
  
6535 4562  23 March 2016(as per 
RB) 
4714 (as per Dy.COM CCG) 
WR(MG)   558 548   
WR(NG)   14 100   
SR   7675 7803  22 March 2016 
ER 
  
  
  
6519 4152  07 October 2015
6626 4152  08 April 2016
NFR   3474 2837   
CR   4485 4414 01 January 2016 
4511 4437 01 February 2016 
SCR   5476 4722 September 15 
SWR   3546 3527 September 15 
ECoR   2764 2637 30 September 2015 
WCR   1314 1281 27April 2016 
SECR   1492 1526 7 October 2015 
ECR(BG)   3878 3756   
ECR(MG)   301 171   
NER(BG)  2640 2326  
NER(MG)  765 508  
NWR  2452 2611 as on 9 October 2015 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)61
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
61 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 24(b) [Para 2.2.7] 
Statement showing inconsistencies in data of Transferred coaches 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Year No. of 
coaches 
transferre
d from 
foreign 
Railway 
(As per 
ICMS) 
No. of coaches 
transferred 
from foreign 
Railway  (As 
per manual 
record) 
Difference No. of 
coaches 
transferred 
to foreign 
Railway (As 
per ICMS) 
No. of 
coaches 
transferred 
to foreign 
Railway (As 
per manual 
records/Info
rmation 
provided by 
Zonal 
Railways) 
Difference 
NR 
 
2013-14 62 4 58 120 99 21
2014-15 18 30 -12 35 14 21
NCR 
 
2012-13 0 0 0 1 0 1
2014-15 1 0 1 0 0 0
WCR 
 
 
2013-14 0 0 0 0 0 0
2014-15 7 0 7 10 0 10
2015-16 0 0 0 0 19 -19
SCR 
 
 
2013-14 18 23 -5 3 23 -20
2014-15 1 0 1 0 0 0
2015-16 0 27 -27 2 18 -16
SWR 
 
 
2013-14 27 21 6 7 65 -58
2014-15 19 0 19 19 0 19
2015-16 0 0 0 0 9 -9
SECR 
 
 
2013-14 0 0 0 0 0 0
2014-15 8 8 0 0 0 0
2015-16 6 6 0 0 0 0
ECR 
 
2013-14 1 0 1 1 0 1
2014-15 8 0 8 26 0 26
CR 2013-14 10 117 -107 14 35 -21
2014-15 12 0 12 7 2 5
NER 2013-14 05 08 -03 00 00 00
2014-15 00 10 -10 05 00 06
ER 
2013-14 
to  
2015-16 
27 17 10 21 15 6
NFR 
2013-14 61 2 59 40 1 39
2014-15 
 
0 17 -17 1 0 1
 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)62
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
62 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 24(c) [Para 2.2.7] 
Statement showing incorrect details of New Coaches in ICMS 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Year/ 
Period 
Coaches 
added (as 
per ICMS) 
Coaches added 
(as per the 
information/records made 
available by  
operating/mechanical 
department) 
Difference Remarks 
NR 2013-14 1099 495 604 As per master database, out 
of 7975 coaches, only 3419 
coaches had dates on which 
they were added in master 
data 
2014-15 382 388 -6 
NCR 2013-14 142 138 4  
2014-15 119 94 25  
2015-16 61 55 6 till Sep 2015 
WCR 2013-14 122 43 79  
2014-15 73 54 19  
SWR 2013-14 311 81 230  
2014-15 293 295 -2  
2015-16 3 57 -54 till Sep 2015 
SECR 2013-14 128 114 14  
2014-15 87 47 40  
2015-16 76 38 38 till Sep 2015 
NER 2013-14 244 189 55  
2014-15 238 217 21  
NFR 2013-14 161 118 43  
2014-15 251 214 37  
Total  3790 2637 1153  
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)63
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
63 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 24 (d) [Para 2.2.7] 
Statement showing differences between ICMS data and manual records of Yard 
Stock 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR At DEE (19.4.2016), DLI (4.4.2016), ANVT (18.4.2016) and UMB 
(8.4.2016) ICMS locations, comparison between ICMS and manual 
records in respect of yard stock revealed mismatches between two sets of 
same type of data. 
NFR As per ICMS, at NJP, on 30.01.2016, 38 number of spare stock were 
available whereas Trains Branch record reflected there were 40 coaches 
available at yard. At Katihar, yard stock summary dated 31.01.2016 
exhibited 15 number of spare stock in ICMS but manually, spare stock 
showed 18 coaches. The 3 number of coaches viz. SC VPU 93830, WR 
VPU 008690 & ER VPU 01844 were not available in the system but 
physically existed at the yard. 
WCR Data available in manual records of yard stock of Jabalpur did not match 
with ICMS data. 
SWR During comparison of yard stock data available in manual records of 
MYS yard, it was noticed that the details were not matching with ICMS 
data 
NWR One coach (ML-107/93901) physically found available (from 17-8-2015) 
in Ajmer Workshop for POH was not shown in the ICMS on the date of 
inspection. 
WR During comparison of yard stock data available in manual records of 
Indore yard, it was noted that yard stock details were not matching with 
ICMS data. 
 
 
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)64
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
64 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 24 (e) [Para 2.2.7] 
Statement showing differences in manual and ICMS records of PCV/OCV Coaches 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
As per ICMS As per 
Mechanical/Operating Dept. 
Records 
Difference 
PCV OCV Total PCV OCV Total 
CR 56 43 99 53 32 85 14 
ER 41 30 71 59 8 67 4 
NCR 25 20 45 23 15 38 7 
NER 33 21 54 21 3 24 30 
NR* 61 41 101 58 8 66 35 
SCR 37 34 71 28 17 45 26 
SECR 26 23 49 29 21 50 -1 
SWR 41 31 72 44 22 66 6 
WCR 46 0 46 20 0 20 26 
Total 367 245 612 335 126 461 151 
* BG coaches only 
 
 
Annexure 24(f) [Para 2.2.7] 
Statement showing differences in Manual and ICMS records of coaches (gauge-wise) 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
As per ICMS As per Mechanical/Operating 
Dept. records 
Difference 
BG MG NG Total BG MG NG Total 
CR 7046 0 0 7046 5304 0 67 5371 1675
ECR 3884 301 0 4185 3756 171 0 3927 258
ER 6519  0  0 6519 4152 0 0 4152 2367
NCR 1625 0 0 1625 1227 0 64 1291 334
NFR 3008 411 55 3474 2856 100 64 3020 454
NR 7834 0 141 7975 6048 0 179 6227 1748
NWR 2785 261 0 3046 2654 174 0 2828 218
SCR 5476  0 0 5476 4722 0 0 4722 754
SECR 1338 0 154 1492 1289 0 237 1526 -34
WCR 1498 0 0 1498 1281 0 0 1281 217
WR 6535 558 14 7107 4714 548 100 5362 0
Total 47548 1531 364 49443 38003 993 711 39707 7991
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)65
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
65 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 25 [Para 2.3.3] 
Statement showing details of defective Links (Report No.962) 
 
Zonal 
Railways 
Train 
with 
broken 
rake 
links 
Train 
with 
invalid 
links 
Train 
with no 
rake 
links 
Train 
having 
multiple 
links 
Date on which 
test checked 
NR 17 6 0 0 23 March 2016 
19 7 2 2 08 April 2016 
NCR 10 3 0 0 12 April 2016 
CR 4 4 1 0 11 April 2016  
WCR 1 0 0 2 09 June 2016 
SCR 
  
1 3 0 0 06 May 2016 
2 4 11 0 13 May 2016 
NER 19 10 2 0   
SWR 10 07 17 02 02 May 2016 
ER 10 0 0 28 01 June 2016 
13 3 0 28 16 June 2016 
NFR 7 6 1 2 21 July 2016 
 85 44 34 36  
 
  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)66
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
66 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 26 [Para 2.3.4.1] 
Statement showing cases of discrepancies in the POH data 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations  
NR x In respect of 2CCEHS coaches, difference in POH due and done dates was 
between one month and 20 months.  
x In respect of LWACCW coaches, difference in POH due and done dates was 
between zero month to 22 months.   
x In respect of RD type coaches, difference in POH due and done dates was 
between one month and 42 months 
x In respect of GS coaches, difference in POH due and done dates was between 
zero month to 48 months. 
NCR x In respect of 431 GS coaches, difference in POH due and done dates was 
between 1 month to 27 months 
SER x Out of 53405 records, POH Due Year was not updated in respect of 46050 
records. 
ER x In respect of WGSCN coaches, differ ence in POH due and done dates was 
between one months to 29 months.  
x In respect of LWACCW coaches, difference in POH due and done dates was 
between 4 months to 32 months.  
x In respect of RD and GS type coaches, difference in POH due and done dates 
was between 42 months and 48 months 
x In respect of GS coaches, difference in POH due and done dates was between1 
month to 48 month
SCR x Difference in POH due and done dates was between 1 month (done a month 
prior to the POH month) and 21 months. 
SECR x Difference between POH due dates and POH done dates was in the range of (-) 
23 months (POH done is prior to POH due date) to (+) 40 months (POH done is 
after POH due date) 
NFR x In respect of 2 GSLR coaches POH due dates marked as 35 & 30 months after 
the last POH done.  
x In respect of GS, WGSCN, WGSCZ WGACCN coaches difference in POH due 
and done date was between 1 month and 20 months. 
CR x In respect of 3 LWACCW coaches, di fference between POH due and done 
dates were between 4 months to 20 months. In respect of 240 GS coaches, 
difference in POH due and done dates was between 1 to 33 months.  
NER x ICMS data contained cases where POH Due dates were either before POH done 
dates or after POH done dates. In 1037 cases difference in POH due date was 1 
month to 41 month before POH done date. In 1698 cases difference in POH due 
dates were 1 month to 61 months after POH done dates.  
WR x It contained cases where POH Due dates were either before POH done dates or 
after POH done dates.In respect of 2CCEHS coaches, difference in POH due 
and done dates was between one month and 20 months. In respect of 
LWACCW coaches, it was up to 22 months.  In respect of RD type coaches, 
difference was 42 months and 48 months and in respect of GS coaches, it was 
up to 48 months. 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)67
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
67 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 27 (a) [Para 2.3.4.2] 
Statement showing details of POH overdue Coaches  
 
Zonal 
Railway  
No. of Coaches due for 
POH 
Date of Report Remarks 
NR 2365 23.03.2016
SCR 2561 06.01.2016 PCV 
352 06.01.2016 OCV 
ECoR 837 01.08.2016  
CR 3249 19.05.2016  
ER 889 21.06.2016  
WCR 382 09.06.2016  
SECR 657 14.06.2016 PCV-547, OCV-110 
NER 795 23.06.2016  
SWR 3078 15.06.2016 PCV-2716. OCV-362 
NFR 617 21.07.2016 PCV-508, OCV-109 
Total 15782   
 
 
 
Annexure 27 (b) [Para2.3.4.2] 
Statement showing discrepancies noticed in POH data 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR At AnandVihar, Delhi Main, Amritsar, Sarai Rohilla, Jagadhri, differences in 
the range of 1 day to 1 year in th e POH due and done dates were noticed 
between manual and ICMS (digital) records in respect of POH due/done 
dates. 
NWR Over NWR, at Ajmer workshop differences in POH date, Place of POH and 
Built year of Coaches were noticed in ICMS data.  
At Ajmer Workshop, physically more Coaches were received in the 
workshop for POH than those captured in ICMS which proved that ICMS 
data was not reliable. 
NFR Over NFR at NBQ workshop, out of 182 records of POH pertaining to 1st 
June, 2015 to 30th September, 2015, in 163 records were found mismatched. 
CR 11 instances of mismatch of last PO H done dates pertaining to August and 
September 2015 were noticed on comparing ICMS data with the records of 
Matunga location. 
SWR In SWR, lot of POH records were found in manual registers but as per ICMS 
records, POH details of only 18 Coac hes were available. Details of MYS 
Workshop were not captured at all
NER Details of coaches POH during Au gust 2015 and September 2015 were 
tallied with POH done dates at Gorakhpur workshop and a difference of 1 day 
to over 4 months was noticed in 170 coaches whose POH was done. 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)68
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
68 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 28 [Para 2.3.4.3] 
Statement showing usage of POH overdue coaches in Train Consist 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 29 (a) [Para 2.3.4.4] 
Statement of Coaches marked as Sick but not marked (reported) as Fit 
 
Zonal Railway Coaches marked as sick 
but not released as fit 
Marked sick during 
 
CR 266 October 2008 to September 2014 
ECoR 54 January 2010 to September 2014 
ECR 142 February 2009 to September 2014
ER 292 January 2010 to August 2014 
NCR 84 January 2010 to September 2013 
NER 196 September 2008 to September 2014 
NFR 323 December 2008 to September 2014 
NR 503 September 2008 to September 2014 
NWR 150 October 2008 to September 2014 
SCR 98 September 2008 to September 2014 
SECR 12 January 2010 to January 2014 
SER 99 August 2009 to September 2014 
SR 283 April 2009 to September 2014 
SWR 55 October 2010 to September 2014 
WCR 20 January 2010 to June  2014 
WR 311 December 2008 to September 2014 
Total 2888  
Zonal 
Railway  
Coaches 
overdue and 
part of train 
Audit observations  
NR 744 POH of 288 coaches was due since May 2012 to December 2014 
NCR 306 POH of 79 coaches was due since October 2011 to December 2014.
ER 2318 POH of 628 coaches was due since Ma y 2012 to December 2014.
NFR 547 POH of 175 coaches was due since Januar y 2012 to December 2014
NWR 844 POH of 243 coaches was due prior to 2013 
WCR 92 POH of 36 coaches was due si nce Nov. 2013 to December 2014 
SCR 454 POH of these coaches was due since May 2012 to June 2015 
SWR 1910 POH of these coaches was due since January 2012 to December 2014 
SECR 212 POH of these coaches was due for more than 9 months 
ECR 165 Last POH done date was more than 24 months 
WR 114 These coaches are overdue for POH as Coach Master table but these coaches 
are available in Train consist 
Total 7706  

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)69
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
69 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 29 (b) [Para 2.3.4.4] 
Statement showing Coaches Reported Sick with a Delay of 30 minutes or more 
(Cases Marked Sick w.e.f. 01 October 2013 to 7 October 2015) 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total cases 
Reported Sick 
No. of cases reported 
after 30 or more 
minutes 
Time period and difference 
between marking and reporting 
of coaches as sick 
NR 12318 3311 30 Minutes to 53437 minutes
NCR 1671 339 30 minutes to 2564 minutes 
ER 15612 8326 30 minutes to 2977 minutes 
NWR 10569 4904 30 minutes to 4407 minutes 
WCR 3255 626 30 minutes to 239 minutes 
SCR 10237 4282 30 minutes to 981 minutes 
SWR 5929 2955 30 minutes to  3049 minutes 
ECR 14069 5255 30 minutes to  2954 minutes 
CR 5739 2922 30 minutes to  11523 minutes  
SECR 4034 1447 30 minutes to 364  minutes
NER 4619 2283 30 minutes to  419 minutes 
WR 22051 8112 30 minutes to 21812 minutes 
Total 110103 44762
 
 
 
Annexure 29 (c) [Para 2.3.4.4] 
Statement showing details of Coaches reported as Fit  
but their Fit Marking Dates were not recorded 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Zonal 
Railway 
No. of cases where Fit Marking Reported dates were 
available but Fit Marking dates were not available 
NR 7129 
ER 1242 
WCR 109 
SCR 246
SWR 81
SECR 93 
ECR 1091 
CR 473
NFR 1693
Total 12157

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)70
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
70 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 29 (d) [Para 2.3.4.4] 
Statement showing details of Coaches Reported Fit after delay of 30 or more min 
(Coaches marked sick between 1 October 2013 and 7 October 2015) 
 
 
 
 
Annexure 30 (a) [Para 3.1.1]
Statement showing non reporting of PRS consists to PRS Charting Section 
Zonal 
Railway  
Test Check Date Location No. of trains 
Consists reported to PRS Consists 
not 
reported Scheduled >=4 hrs <4 hrs 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
CR 30/03/2016 All DNs 135 55 64 16
ECR 04-01-2016 All DNs 91 38 47 6
ER 30&31/03/2016 NKG 149  0  0 149
NFR 01-07-2016 All DNs 55 0 6 49
NWR 30/03/2016 Jaipur 19 1 9 9
SCR 30.03.2016 All DNs 136 58 61 17
WCR 30/03/2016 All DNs 107 8 12 87
Total     692 160 199 333
Source: COIS/ZN/CR501  
Zonal 
Railway 
No. of Coaches 
Marked and 
Reported Fit 
No. of Coaches Reported fit 
After a Delay of 30 Minutes 
and More 
Remarks/Reported Fit 
After 
NR 12054 7127 30 Minutes to 365 minutes 
(but one case after 525610 
Minutes)
ER 14880 11471 30 Minutes to 542 Minutes
SECR 3979 2400 30 Minutes to 350 Minutes 
SWR 5721 4066 30 Minutes to 392 Minutes 
NER 4332 3587 30 minutes to 405 minutes 
WR 21336 12589 30 minute to 435 minutes
NFR 17339 13947 30 minutes to 719 minutes
Total 79641 55187

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)71
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
71 Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 30 (b) [Para 3.1.1] 
Statement showing deficiencies in ICMS – PRS Integration 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NR 
 
At Ambala, Jammu and Amritsar stations, the practice of sending details of train 
consist to PRS charting section through manually prepared memo/telephone was 
followed.  
Over NR, AnandVihar, New Delhi and Delhi Sarai Rohilla stations were unable to 
send train consist of a few trains for PRS charting and ICMS system indicated error 
message while sending consists.  Late running of train was also one of the reasons for 
not sending train consist to PRS four hours before scheduled departure of the train. 
At Ambala, Jammu and Amritsar stations, PRS charting sections were not using the 
facility of getting train consist from ICMS and PRS charting officials at Ambala 
station were not aware of the operations of this facility.  
On 30 March 2016, it was noticed at PRS location (Charting Section) at IRCA 
Building, New Delhi that out of 139 trains, PRS consist of 117 train was reported to 
PRS Charting cell. PRS consist of all the trains  were not reported before preparation of 
chart i.e. four hours before the schedule departure time of the train, which did not serve 
the purpose of sending consist to PRS. 
As per ICMS Report Number 501 of NR zone, during  1 January 2016 to 31 March 
2016, data of 3616 train consist of was reported to PRS within four hours, train consist 
data of 4159 trains was reported on or after four hours and consist data of 4432 trains 
was not reported  to PRS. 
CR ICMS web page was reviewed for the months of July, August and September 2015. 
The percentage of Train consist details sent to PRS less than four hours of train 
departure was 49% and that of not reported to PRS was 20.50 %. The usage of Train 
Consist details sent from ICMS to PRS in these cases were remote as these were not 
made available to PRS before preparation of chart i.e. four hour prior to departure of 
train. 
SR In respect of trains 11013/11014 (Kurla Express) and 12676 (Kovai Express) as only 
50 minutes (less than 1 hour) were left betwee n train arrival and departure, consists for 
these trains could not be sent to PRS four hours prior to chart preparation. 
WCR The practice of sending details of train consist to PRS charting section through 
manually prepared memo/telephone was followed.  
CR, ECR, 
ER, NFR, 
NWR, 
SCR, 
WCR 
Test check of ICMS Report No. 501 showing non reporting of PRS consist to PRS 
charting section for one day was reviewed over seven Zonal Railways and it was 
noticed that out of total 692 scheduled trains, train consist was not sent to PRS charting 
section for 160 (23.12%) trains prior to 4 hours and in respect of 333 (48.12%) trains, 
the train consist was not reported to PRS chartin
g section. (Refer Annexure 30 (a))

Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)72
Report on Integrated Coaching Management SystemReport on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
72 Report No.   of 2016 (Railways) 
 
Annexure 31 
[Reference Para No. 3.4.1] 
Statement showing null/zero records out of total 71447 records in Coach Master Table 
 
S. 
no 
Zonal Railways NR CR ECoR ECR ER NCR NEFR NER NWR SCR SECR SER SR SWR WCR WR KR IR Total 
1 CoachMaxSpeed 44 0 46 178 0 0 150 75 770 0 154 1 24 1 40 294 0 129 1906 
2 Induction Date 106 70 110 384 21 130 210 194 1659 96 154 82 75 66 78 444 8 92 3979 
3 Coach Base Depot 59 70 122 452 21 171 532 459 1781 120 160 96 76 66 112 233 9 149 4688 
4 Coach POH Month 138 - 34 265 - 10 129 107 987 1 154 2 24 1 43 305 - 121 2321 
5 Coach POH  Due 
Year 
96 5 35 265 - 9 106 95 967 1 154 1 24 1 42 302 - 107 2210 
6 CoachBuiltYear 49 0 50 201 - 0 414 203 880 - 154 2 24 1 9 379 - 79 2445 
7 CoachBuiltMonth 179 0 54 329 - 1 470 768 0 1 154 2 26 1 41 569 - 135 2730 
8 Coach Factory 2 0 35 235 1 9 463 266 266 1 154 3 31 1 46 535 - 134 2182 
9 Coach Workshop 158 70 121 494 21 170 522 196 4 119 160 96 75 66 107 597 9 148 3133 
10 Coach Status 6735 6998 2003 3182 4623 1288 3433 3345 2902 4119 1490 2800 7068 2342 1215 5505 80 141 59269 
11 CoachCondemnation 
Date 
6760 5254 2149 3498 4972 1614 3422 2037 2845 4346 1481 2801 5423 3006 1267 5953 135 149 57112 
12 Coach Owning 
Division 
59 70 122 452 21 131 528 468 3 96 154 82 78 66 113 174 8 149 2774 
13 Coach Fitness Type 3 3 31 218 2 6 476 502 0 7 - 7 17 1 40 510 - 134 1957 
15 Added in Master 
Table 
4556 3699 1775 3121 3043 933 2251 2484 2118 2955 804 2369 4243 2265 802 4672 145 78 42313 
16 Added by UserID 4596 3722 1788 3143 3108 963 2294 2487 2152 3023 804 2396 4290 2302 879 4829 145 114 43035 
17 Census Flag 2687 2892 713 852 3146 546 862 713 656 2095 574 1098 2983 907 463 2676 45 15 23923 
Source:MT_Coach_Master table                 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)73
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
73 
 
Annexure 32 [Para 3.5.2] 
Statement showing details of detention data not captured 
 
Zonal Railway  Detention Sub-Codes/Sub-
Reasons Not captured 
Remarks Column Blank 
CR 14 61 
ECoR 30 9 
ECR 4 95 
ER 10 86 
NCR 54 56 
NER 7 47 
NFR 10 19 
NR 26 66 
NWR 4 12 
SCR 12 13 
SECR 10 4 
SER 22 32 
SR 46 11 
SWR 12 14 
WCR 17 31 
WR 18 34 
Total  296 590 
 
 
Annexure 33 [Para 3.8] 
Statement showing non-updation of various charges in ICMS 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Audit observations 
NCR 
ECR 
The charges viz. Repair & Maintenance and Depreciation charges for locos 
were not updated  in the report No.1521 of ICMS as charges  should have been 
as per  Railway Board’s letter No, F (C ) /2003/27/1 dated 30-04-2015 as 
detailed below.  
Particulars of charges  Rates shown in 
RB letter 
Rates shown in 
ICMS report 
Repair & Maintenance (BG 
Electrical) 
1059.27 484.85 
Depreciation  (BG Electrical) 348.72 237.02 
Repair & Maintenance (MG 
Diesel) 
484.85 1059.27 
Depreciation (MG Diesel) 237.02 348.72 
NR Over NR, the hire charges for coaching vehicle i.e. Running & Workshop 
Repair and Depreciation charges were no t found to be updated in the ICMS 
Report  number 808 as per Railway Board’s letter No, F (C ) /2003/27/1 dated 
21-04-2016 and the same were being computed manually.  
 
 
 
 

Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)74
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
 
74 
 
Annexure 34 [Para 3.9] 
Statement showing Helpdesk Complaints/Grievances pending redressal 
 
S. no Zonal Railway/ 
User 
No. of complaints 
(As on 7 October 2015) 
No. of complaints more than six 
to 12 months old 
1 CR 1 1 
2 CR 42 26 
3 ECOR 24 8 
4 ECR 36 13 
5 ER 17 4 
6 KR 4 3 
7 MT 2 2 
8 NCR 16 7 
9 NER 31 13 
10 NFR 34 21 
11 NR 46 20 
12 NWR 43 16 
13 RB 1 1 
14 SCR 23 15 
15 SECR 44 21 
16 SER 14 9 
17 SR 51 32 
18 SWR 19 15 
19 WCR 19 5 
20 WR 38 24 
 Total 505 256 
CF=ICF, MT=RB, RB=Railway Board, KR = Konkan Railway 
 
 
 