Union Government 
Ministry of Environment and Forests
No. 21 of 2013
(Compliance Audit)
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on
Compensatory Afforestation in India


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  iii | P a g e  
 Contents Page No. 
 Contents iii 
 Preface vii 
 Executive Summary ix 
Chapter I About Compensatory Afforestation in India 1-15
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Diversion of forest land for non forest purpose 1 
1.3 Compensatory afforestation in lieu of diversion of forest land 3 
1.4 Role of Supreme Court 4 
1.5 Formation of Compensatory Afforestation Fund and CAMPA 4 
1.6 Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill 6 
1.7 Formation of Ad-hoc CAMPA 6 
1.8 Composition and functioning of Ad-hoc CAMPA 8 
1.9 Formation of State/Union Territory CAMPA 8 
1.10 Collection of Compensatory Afforestation Funds by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
10 
1.11 Release of Compensatory Afforestation Funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA 10 
1.12 Accounting arrangement for Ad-hoc CAMPA and State CAMPA 11 
1.13 Audit objectives 11 
1.14 Scope of audit  12 
1.15 Non production of information/records to audit 12 
1.16 Issue of draft audit report and receipt of replies 14 
1.17 Organization of audit findings 15 
Chapter II Diversion of forest land and Compensatory Afforestation 17-62
2.1 Introduction 17 
2.2 Regulatory shortcomings in diversion of forest land 20 
2.3 Failure to promote compensatory afforestation 39 
2.4 Diversion of forest land for grant/ renewal of mining leases 46 
2.5 Environmental issues 52 
2.6 Other issues of land management 57 
2.7 Inadequate and ineffective application of penal clause 59 
2.8 Conclusions      60 
Chapter III Collection of Compensatory Afforestation Funds 63-85
3.1 Introduction 63 
3.2 Transfer of funds to Ad-hoc CAMPA by State Governments 64 
3.3 Assessment and collection of components of Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds 
75 
3.4 Conclusions 84 
Chapter IV Utilisation of Compensatory Afforestation Funds 87-109
4.1 Background 87 
4.2 Under utilisation of funds received 90 

Report No. : 21 of 2013  
 
iv | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 Contents Page No. 
4.3 Accumulation of funds with State CAMPAs 92 
4.4 Release of funds without approval/delayed APO 94 
4.5 Un-reconciled discrepancies in releases as per Ad-hoc CAMPA 
and State/UT records 
96 
4.6 Component wise release of funds 97 
4.7 Expenditure not authorised by State CAMPA guidelines and 
National CAMPA Advisory Council 
99 
4.8 Monitoring of CAMPA plantation through National Remote 
Sensing Centre 
101
4.9 Expenditure not as per MNREGA 103
4.10 Monitoring and Evaluation 104
4.11 Conclusions 109
Chapter V  Investment of accumulated Compensatory Afforestation Funds 111-133
5.1 Introduction 111
5.2 Delegation of powers with regard to investment of funds 111
5.3 The formulation of investment policy 112
5.4 Ad-hoc determination of funds available for investment 116
5.5 Idle funds 117
5.6 Deficiencies in monitoring and safeguarding investments and 
funds 
117
5.7 Deficiencies in the process for inviting bids 121
5.8 Process for evaluation of bids 123
5.9 Jammu and Kashmir State CAMPA 131
5.10 Other State CAMPAs 132
5.11 Conclusions 133
Chapter VI Oversight Arrangements 135-145
6.1 Introduction 135
6.2 Continuing provisional nature of the authority 135
6.3 Authorisation of expenditure 136
6.4 Accounting 136
6.5 Audit 142
6.6 Accountability and transparency 144
Chapter  VII State/Union Territory Specific Findings 147-343
 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 147
 Andhra Pradesh 153
 Arunachal Pradesh 160
 Assam 167
 Bihar 173
 Chandigarh 179
 Chhattisgarh 184

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  v | P a g e  
 Contents Page No. 
 Delhi 191
 Goa 196
 Gujarat 202
 Haryana  208
 Himachal Pradesh 213
 Jammu & Kashmir 221
 Jharkhand 231
 Karnataka  239
 Kerala 246
 Madhya Pradesh 251
 Maharashtra 256
 Manipur 262
 Meghalaya 268
 Mizoram 273
 Odisha 277
 Punjab 285
 Rajasthan 291
 Sikkim 297
 Tamil Nadu 304
 Tripura 311
 Uttar Pradesh 316
 Uttarakhand 325
 West Bengal 336
 Annexure  
Annexure 1 Notification of State CAMPAs 347
Annexure 2 Scope of audit 348
Annexure 3 Non transfer and mutation of the non-forest land identified by 
user agencies for Compensatory Afforestation (CA) in favour of 
the State Forest Department 
351
Annexure 4 Non declaration/ notification of non-forest land as Reserve 
Forest/ Protected Forest. 
352
Annexure 5 Non-transfer/ mutation and non declaration as RF/PF 355
Annexure 6 Non revocation of in-principle approval after lapse of five years 356
Annexure 7 Files pertaining to Bellary mining cases not produced to audit 357
Annexure 8 Files pertaining to Goa mining cases not produced to audit 360
Annexure 9 Cases of inter account transfers 361
Annexure 10 Status of preparation of Accounts as of December 2012 365
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  vii | P a g e  
 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has 
been prepared for submission to the President under Article 
151 of the Constitution for being laid before the Parliament. 
The audit was conducted during th e period January - December 
2012 through document analysis, collection of responses to 
audit queries and seeking informatio n in prescribed proformae. 
Records and documents relating to audit of Compensatory 
Afforestation in India were examined: 
• in the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), six 
Regional Offices of MoEF  at Lucknow, Chandigarh, 
Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Shillong and Bengaluru and Ad-
hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority. 
• in 30 State/ UTs, Nodal O ffices and selected Forest 
Divisions of State Forest Departments, State 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and 
Planning Authority.  
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India ix | P a g e  
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
Background 
The Supreme Court of India directed in Oc tober 2002 that a ‘Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund’ (CAF) shall be created in which all th e monies received from the user-agencies 
towards compensatory afforestation, additi onal compensatory afforestation, penal 
compensatory afforestation, net present value of forest land, catchment area treatment 
plan funds, etc. shall be deposited. CAF was to compensate for the loss of tangible as well as 
intangible benefits from the forest lands which were diverted for non-forest use. Such funds 
were to be used for natural assisted re generation, forest management, protection, 
infrastructure development, wildlife protection and management, supply of wood and other 
forest produce saving devices and other allied activities. Th e Court observed that the fund 
would not be part of general revenues of th e Union, of the States or part of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)  notified the Compensatory Afforestation 
Management Funds Management and Planning  Authority (CAMPA) in April 2004 for the 
management of the compensatory afforestation fund. 
The Supreme Court of India observed in May 2006, that CAMPA had still not become 
operational and ordered the constitution of an ad-hoc body (known as ‘Ad-hoc CAMPA’), till 
CAMPA became operational. The Court ordered th at all monies recovered on behalf of the 
CAMPA and lying with the various officials of the State Government were to be transferred 
to Ad-hoc CAMPA and to get audited all the mo nies received from the user agencies on 
behalf of the CAMPA and the income earned  thereon by the various State Government 
officials. The auditor was to be appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
The audit of Compensatory Afforestation in India was taken up as pe r aforesaid order of 
Supreme Court and reference thereon from th e Minister of Environment and Forests in 
January 2012.  
During the period 2006 and 2012, the Compen satory Afforestation Funds with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA grew from ` 1,200 crore to ` 23,607.67 crore.   
Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the compliance audit on Co mpensatory Afforestation in India were to 
examine: 
Executive Summary


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
x | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
• whether the diversion of forest land for non-forest use was permitted as per extant laws 
and all conditions in this regard were complied with; 
• whether measures taken for conservation, afforestation and preservation of forest lands 
consequent to diversion of portions of th ese lands for non-forest use were as per 
provisos of extant legislation, rules and Supreme Court judgments in this regard; 
• whether the collection, utilisation, monito ring, accounting and the arrangement for 
safeguarding of compensatory afforestatio n funds was in compliance with applicable 
legislation, rules and Supreme Court judgements  permitting diversion of forest land for 
non forest purposes; and  
• whether proper financial procedures had been followed in investing funds. 
Diversion of forest land and Compensatory Afforestation 
We noticed serious shortcomings in regulatory issues related to diversion of forest land, the 
abject failure to promote compensatory affore station, the unauthorised diversion of forest 
land in the case of mining and the attendant violation of the environmental regime. 
To be able to undertake compensatory afforestat ion on equivalent area of non-forest land, 
such land needs to be received by the Govern ment. The Ministry's records revealed that 
against the receivable non-forest land of 1, 03,381.91 hectare, 28,086 hectare was received 
during the period 2006-12 which constituted only 27  per cent of receivable  non-forest land. 
The compensatory afforestation done over th e non-forest land received was an abysmal 
7,280.84 hectare constituting seven per cent of the land which ought to have been received. 
The afforestation over the degraded forest la nd was done only on 49,733.76 hectare and 49 
km out of 1,01,037.35 ha and 54.5 km identified which worked out to 49 per cent (in area). 
Seven States viz. Gujarat, Ha ryana, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Punjab and Rajasthan 
carried out no compensatory afforestation eith er over non-forest land or over degraded 
forest land. By contrast the States of Assam and Odisha showed a high level of achievement 
with regard to compensatory afforestation, both over non-forest land and over degraded 
forest land. 
The record with regard to transfer of owners hip to the State Forest Department is equally 
dismal. Information made available by State/  UT CAMPA revealed that of the 23,246.80 
hectare of non forest land re ceived by them only 11,294. 38 hectare was transferred and 
mutated in the name of the State Forest Depart ment. Of this 3,279.31 hectare was declared 
as Reserve Forest/ Protected Forest which was only 14 per cent  of non forest land so 
received. 
Receipt of non-forest land is the starting po int for undertaking compensatory afforestation. 
Yet on this critical element there was no meeting ground on the data maintained by the 
Ministry and State Governments. The variation in data on forest land diverted and non-
forest land received was as much as 3.5 per cent and 17.3 per cent respectively between the 
data maintained by the regional offices of the Ministry and the St ate Forest Department. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India xi | P a g e  
Poor quality and unreconciled data will compromi se the quality of planning, operations and 
decision making.   
In case of non-availability or short-availability of forest land, to be duly certified by the Chief 
Secretary, compensatory afforestation was to be undertaken over the degraded forest twice 
to the extent of the forest land diverted. It was observed that compensatory afforestation 
was allowed over an area of 75,905.47 hect are without any certificate of the Chief 
Secretary, in almost all the states except Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Sikkim. 
Only in two State/ UTs viz. Chandigarh and U ttrakhand, equivalent or more non-forest land 
was received.  
Audit also observed instances where express or ders of the Supreme Court were flouted by 
Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board where the diversion of fo rest land in Nagarjunasagar 
Dam was allowed without seeking prior permission of the Supreme Court. In five other cases 
unauthorised renewal of mining leases in Ra jasthan and Odisha were  noticed, where the 
approval of Central Government was not obtained by the State Government as was directed 
by the Supreme Court. 
Numerous instances of unauthorized renewal of leases, illegal mining, continuance of 
mining leases despite adverse comments in th e monitoring reports, projects operating 
without environment clearances, unauthorized change of status of forest land and 
arbitrariness in decisions of forestry clea rances were observed. In six States where 
information was available, encroachment of 1, 55,169.82 hectare of forest land was noticed 
but MoEF did not take time bound action for eviction despite directions of the Supreme 
Court. 
Monitoring was very important considering th e scale at which irregularities have been 
noticed in this audit. Absence of MIS/ consol idated database permitted individual cases of 
irregularities to remain unchecked. MoEF faile d to appropriately discharge its responsibility 
of monitoring of compliance of conditions of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 relating to 
diversion of forest land. 
Despite such gross non-compliance with stat utory conditions and orders of the Supreme 
Court, no action was initiated by MoEF. In fa ct MoEF had invoked penal provision only in 
three cases during the period August 2009 to October 2012 and even this action was only 
limited to issue of show cause notices. In our opinion penal clause prescribed in the Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980, was largely inadequa te and ineffective to put any deterrence 
towards illegal and unauthorised practices. 
Collection of Compensatory Afforestation Funds 
The Ad-hoc CAMPA was ineffective in ensuring complete and timely transfer of all monies 
collected by States/Union Territories (UT)s towards Compensatory Afforestation Fund to the 
Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts. There is no assu rance that all the monies collected for 
compensatory afforestation funds by States/UTs have been deposited in the Ad-hoc CAMPA 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
xii | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
accounts.  This could have been ensured only if a centralised data base indicating project 
wise amounts due, collected, remitted (or utilised  by States/UTs prior to formation of Ad-
hoc CAMPA) and balance lying with States/UTs wa s created. Divergence in data of transfer 
of funds available with Ad-hoc CAMP A and collected from States/UTs was ` 6,021.88 crore 
which was 26.32 per cent of the principal amount with Ad-hoc CAMPA. Non-reconciliation of 
the same over years not only indicates laxity  in controls but also raises doubts on the 
reliability and completeness of the data provided  by all agencies concerned. Our test check 
also revealed that 23 State/ UTs had, at the least not transferred ` 401.70 crore of 
compensatory afforestation fund to Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
Non recovery/ under assessment of Net Pres ent Value and funds for Compensatory 
Afforestation/Additional Compensatory Affore station/Penal Compensa tory Afforestation/ 
Catchment Area Treatment Plan on the basis of a test check in audit was `5,311.16 crore 
which constituted 23  per cent of the total principal amount with Ad-hoc CAMPA as on 31 
March 2012. In some of the States where the amounts of non/ short recovery were 
significant include Odisha ( ` 1,235.26 crore), Jammu & Kashmir ( ` 861.80 crore), Madhya 
Pradesh ( ` 512.84 crore), Tripura ( ` 333.19 crore), Assam ( ` 223.28 crore), Uttarakhand  
(` 207.51 crore), Gujarat ( ` 176.02 crore), Jharkhand ( ` 116.18 crore), Manipur ( ` 106.45 
crore) and Chhattisgarh (` 111.29 crore). MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA/ State CAMPA did not have 
any system to case-wise moni tor the correct assessment a nd collection of dues before 
giving final clearance for diversion of forest lands. 
Utilisation of Compensatory Afforestation Funds 
Out of ` 2,925.65 crore of the compensatory afforestation funds released by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
during the period 2009-12 for compensato ry afforestation activities, only ` 1,775.84 crore 
were utilised by the State/ UTs leaving an unutilised balance of  ` 1,149.81 crore. The 
percentage of overall utilisation of released funds was only 61 per cent. In 11 of the selected 
30 State/ UTs utilisation ranged between zero to 50 per cent  which indicated poor 
absorptive capacity of the State/ UTs. Some of the States with very poor utilisation were 
Meghalaya (100 per cent), Arunachal Pradesh (91 per cent), Bihar (77 per cent), Tripura (68 
per cent), Chhattisgarh (67 per cent), Andaman & Nicobar Islands (63 per cent) and Delhi (63 
per cent ). Most State/UTs were unable to spend the monies released to them by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA due to delay in preparation of Annual Pl an of Operations, delayed release of funds 
resulting in setting in of a process of accumu lation of compensatory afforestation funds in 
the States which was the problem sought to be addressed by the Supreme Court. The under 
utilization of funds indicates non implemen tation of various Net Present Value/ 
Compensatory Afforestation schemes proposed in the Annual Plan of Operation by these 
State/UTs. 
An amount of ` 51.93 crore was utilised towards unautho rised activities in 17 State/ UTs. 
Mandatory guidelines of Mahatma Gandhi Na tional Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MNREGA) were not followed during the execution of the works in most of the State/ UTs. 
MoEF was not able to launch the nation wide e-Green watch system. Due to non 
implementation of e-Green watch system onlin e information of fund allocation, plantation 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
xiv | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Continuing provisional nature of the authority 
The Supreme Court in 2002 directed that the Un ion of India shall within eight weeks frame 
comprehensive rules with regard to the cons titution of a body and management of the 
compensatory afforestation funds. Accord ingly, MoEF notified the creation of 
Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning Authority in 2004. However, this 
authority was never operationalised. In our view the non-operationalisation of CAMPA 
which was envisaged as a permanent, inde pendent authority to provide guidelines, 
direction and oversight severely  hampered the compensatory afforestation activities in 
India. This report of the Comptroller and Audi tor General of India brings out the necessity 
for early operationalisation of CAMPA which can execute the mandate of ensuring 
compensatory afforestation effectively and effi ciently within the broader constitutional and 
legal framework. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 1 | P a g e  
Chapter I – About Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 
 
 
1.1. Introduction 
Forests are a vital component to sustain the lif e support system on Earth. Forests whether 
Government, village or private subserve the entire community and represent a community 
resource that meets the need of the millions of  rural people especially the tribals. Article 
48A of the Constitution of I ndia requires that the State shall endeavour to protect and 
improve the environment and to safeguard th e forest and wildlife of the country. Under 
Article 51A, it is the duty of every citizen to  protect and improve the natural environment 
including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures. 
Map 1: Map showing the forest cover of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Several laws and court judgements govern the use and protection of forest land in India. The 
laws include Forest (Conservat ion) Act, 1980, The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 and Indian Forests Act, 1927. 
1.2. Diversion of forest land for non forest purpose 
As per India State of Forest Report 2011 of Mi nistry of Environment and Forests, the total 
forest cover in India was assessed at  770 lakh hectare which was 23.41 per cent of the total 
Chapter - I 
About Compensatory Afforestation in India

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
2 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
geographical area of the country. The previous State of Forest Reports had assessed the 
forest cover in India as 677 lakh hectare in 2003 and 2005, 690 lakh hectare in 2007 and 692 
lakh hectare in 2009.  
1.2.1 Use of forests and circumstances that may require diversion of forest 
The forests are generally used for the lifestyle , well being of the forest dwellers, villagers 
and other people/ species wholly or partly de pendent on forests. These are also used for 
nature reserve, national park, wildlife sanctu ary, biosphere reserve, as a habitat of any 
endangered/ threatened species of flora a nd fauna and for agriculture purposes for the 
rehabilitation of the persons displaced from their residences by reason of any river valley or 
hydro electric projects etc.  
The forest land is generally diverted for facilita ting developmental activities for non forestry 
purposes like construction of power projects, i rrigation projects, roads, railways, schools, 
hospitals, rural electrification, telecommunication, drinking water facilities and mining etc. 
1.2.2 Main components of conditions imposed on diversion 
As per the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980, whenev er forest land is to be diverted for non-
forestry purpose usually the conditions relating  to transfer, mutation and declaration as 
Reserve Forest/ Protected Forest the equi valent non forest land for compensatory 
afforestation and funds for raising compensatory  afforestation etc are to be imposed. For 
mining purposes additional conditions like ma intaining a safety zone area, fencing and 
regeneration etc and for major and medium ir rigation projects, catchment area treatment 
plans are to be stipulated. 
1.2.3 Provision of land for compensatory afforestation 
As per the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980, as far as possible, the non-forest land for 
Compensatory Afforestation (CA) was to be identi fied contiguous to or in the proximity of 
Reserved Forest or Protected Fo rest. In case, non-forest land of CA was not available in the 
same district, non-forest land for CA was to be identified anywhere else in the State/Union 
Territory. If non forest land was unavailable in the entire State/ UT, funds for raising CA in 
double the area in extent of the forest land dive rted had to be provided by the user agency. 
The non-availability of suitable non-forest la nd for CA in the State / Union Territory would 
be accepted by the Central Government only on the Certificate of the Chief Secretary to the 
State/Union Territory Government to that effe ct. In case of central government/ central 
undertaking projects, extraction of minor mine ral from the river be ds above 500 hectare, 
construction of link road, small water works, mi nor irrigation works, laying of transmission 
line upto 220 KVA etc, CA was to be raised on  degraded forest land twice the forest area 
being diverted without insisting for the ce rtificate of Chief Secretary regarding non-
availability of non-forest land. 
1.2.4 Funding for compensatory afforestation 
The funds for CA were to be recovered from the user agencies on the basis of the rates fixed 
by the State Forest Department which were site specific and varied according to the species, 
type of forest and site.  The money received  for Compensatory Afforestation, Additional 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 3 | P a g e  
Compensatory Afforestation etc was to be used  as per site specific  schemes submitted by 
the State along with the approved proposals for diversion of forest land. After receipt of the 
money, State Forest Department was to acco mplish the afforestation for which money is 
deposited in the Compensatory Afforestatio n Fund within a period of one year or two 
growing seasons. These funds were to be us ed towards the development, maintenance and 
protection of forest and wildlife management. 
1.2.5 Funding for regeneration 
To compensate for the loss of tangible as well as  intangible benefits from the forest lands 
which has been diverted for non forest use, the net present value of the land was to be 
recovered from the user agencies to adequately  compensate for the loss of natural forests. 
Such funds were to be used for natural a ssisted regeneration, forest management and 
protection, infrastructure de velopment, wildlife protection and management, supply of 
wood and other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities. 
1.3. Compensatory afforestation in lieu of diversion of forest land 
Compensatory Afforestation involves identifica tion of non forest land or degraded forest 
land, work schedule, cost structure of planta tion, provision of funds, mechanism to ensure 
the utilisation of funds and monitoring mechan ism etc. Hence, it is one of the most 
important conditions stipulated by the Centra l Government while approving proposals for 
de-reservation or diversion of forest land for non- forest use. It is essential that with all such 
proposals, a comprehensive scheme for comp ensatory afforestation is formulated and 
submitted to the Central Government. The comp rehensive scheme is to include the details 
of non-forest/ degraded forest area identified  for compensatory afforestation, map of area 
to be taken up for compensatory afforestation, year wise phased forestry operations, details 
of species to be planted and a suitability cert ificate from afforestation/ management point 
of view along with the cost structure of  various operations. Between 1980 and May 2004 
about 9.21 lakh hectare1 forest land had been diverted for non forestry uses and forest land 
aggregating up to 1.14 lakh hectare2 had been diverted after formation of Ad-hoc CAMPA till 
March 2012. 
The components of conditions for diversion of forest land for non forest purpose are 
depicted in the flow Chart 1. 
  
                                                            
1Source: Foreword to amended Rule/ Guidelines issued in May 2004under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 
2Source: MoEF/ RO data. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
4 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Chart 1: Flow chart of components of condition s for diversion of forest land for non forest 
purposes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NFL – Non Forest Land; CA – Compensatory Afforestation; ACA – Additional Compensatory Afforestation; PCA – 
Penal Compensatory Afforestation; NPV- Net Present Value; CAT – Catchment Area Treatment. 
1.4. Role of Supreme Court 
From 1995, the Supreme Court of India began playing a proactive role in the matters of 
forest policy governance. In a case T.N. Goda varman Thirumulpad v/s Union of India (W.P. 
(Civil) No. 202 of 1995), the S upreme Court took action against large scale illegal felling of 
timber and denuding of forests in Gudalur Taluk, Tamil Nadu. Through the Godavarman case 
the Supreme Court continued to issue inte rim orders and judgements around several 
aspects including tree felling, operations of sa w mills, violations of approvals for forest 
diversion, de-reservation of forests and ma ny other matters rela ted to compensatory 
afforestation.  The Court in its order dated 12 December 1996, put a stop to all on-going 
activity like functioning of saw mills and mining  within any forest in  any State throughout 
the country that was being carried out without the approval of Central Government. 
The Supreme Court in its order dated 3 April 2000, fixed the responsibility of ensuring the 
proper carrying out of compensatory afforestat ion on Ministry of Environment and Forests 
and said that it was for the Ministry to monitor the conditions stipulated at the time of grant 
of forest clearance. On 9 May 2002, the Su preme Court ordered the setting up of the 
Central Empowered Committee (CEC) with ex plicit functions of monitoring the 
implementation of the Court’s orders, look into cases of non-compliance including those 
related to encroachments, implementation of working plans, compensatory afforestation, 
plantation and other conservation issues.  
1.5. Formation of Compensatory Afforestation Fund and CAMPA 
The Supreme Court of India in November 2001 ha d observed that there was poor utilization 
of funds deposited for compensatory afforestat ion and also that a large amount of money 
 
 
Land 
 
 
Fund 
Proposal for diversion of forest land
Compensatory Afforestation in lieu of diverted forest 
CA/ACA/PCA
NPV
CAT Plan
Afforestation on double the 
area of degraded forest 
land on the basis of NFL non 
availability certificate of the 
Chief Secretary 
Equivalent non forest land 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 5 | P a g e  
for compensatory afforestatio n was not realized by the St ate Governments from user 
agencies. 
The issue was examined by the CEC and it obse rved that in some of the States the funds 
were deposited by the user agency as `Forest Deposit’ which were readily made available to 
the concerned division for afforestation. In so me other States the funds were deposited as 
revenue receipts of the State Government an d could be made available to the Forest 
Department only through the budgetary provis ions. It therefore recommended that unless 
the system of release of funds through budget ary provisions is changed, the pace and 
quality of compensatory afforestation cannot be increased significantly. It was, therefore, 
desirable to create a separate fund for compen satory afforestation, wherein all the monies 
received from the user agencies  would be deposited and subse quently released directly to 
the implementing agencies as and when required. The funds received from a particular 
State would be utilized in the same State. Th is system would help undertake compensatory 
afforestation in a planned manner on a continuous basis. 
Based on the recommendations of the CEC, th e Supreme Court of India in October 2002 
directed the creation of a ‘Compensatory Afforestation Fund’in which all the monies 
received from the user agencies towards compensatory afforestation, additional 
compensatory afforestation, pe nal compensatory afforestation, net present value (NPV) of 
forest land, Catchment Area Treatment Plan Funds, etc. were to be deposited. 
The Supreme Court of India further observed that there was also consensus amongst the 
States and the Union Territories that the funds  for compensatory affo restation which were 
to be recovered from the user agencies as well as the unutilised funds lying with the States 
would be transferred to such a fund. The fund wo uld not be part of general revenues of the 
Union, of the States or part of the Consolidat ed Fund of India. It also proposed that there 
would be a body for the management of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund. 
Supreme Court directed that the user agency would also pay into the fund the net value of 
the forest land being diverted for non-fore st purpose. The present value was to be 
recovered at the rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare to ` 9.20 lakh per hectare of forest land 
depending upon the quantity and density of th e land. This was to be subjected to upward 
revision by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) in consultation with the CEC 
and such a revision was last done in 2008. 
The directions issued by the Supreme Court in October 2002 are summarised in Table 1. 
Table 1:Directions of the Supreme Court issued in October 2002 
• Government of India, in consultation wi th CEC should frame the rules regarding 
constitution of a body and management of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund. 
• Compensatory afforestation funds that ha d not yet been realis ed as well as the 
unspent funds already realised by the States should be transferred to the said body 
within six months of its constitution by the respective States and the user agencies. 
• For getting permission for diverting forest land for non forest purposes, under Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980, the user agency sh ould also pay into the said fund the net 
present value of the forest land so diverted. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
6 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
• Site specific plans for artificial regeneration, assisted natural regeneration, 
protection of forests and other relate d activities should be prepared and 
implemented in a time bound manner. 
• The funds received from the user agency in cases where forest land diverted fell 
within Protected Areas should be used exclusively for undertaking protection and 
conservation activities in protected areas of the respective States/Union Territories.  
• An independent system of concurrent monitoring and evaluation should be evolved 
and implemented through the Compensatory Afforestation Fund to ensure effective 
and proper utilisation of funds. 
1.6. Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill 
The Ministry of Environment and Forests intr oduced ‘The Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Bill, 2008’ in the Parliament. The Bill was passed in Lok Sabha but could not come up for 
voting in Rajya Sabha and lapsed with the dissolution of Lok Sabha in May 2009. 
Some of the features of the Bill were: 
• there would be an authority to be call ed as Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority. The auth ority was to consist of a Governing Body, 
and be assisted by an Executive Body, Mo nitoring Group and administrative support 
mechanism. 
• the Governing Body would be headed by th e Minister of Environment and Forest and 
would include Minister of Finance, Scie nce and Technology, Rural Development, 
Panchayati Raj, Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission and other members. 
• there would be a special fund to be called  the Compensatory Afforestation Fund under 
the Public Account of India. 
• the Authority was to maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare 
an annual statement of accounts in such form  as would be prescribed in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
• the accounts of the Authority were to be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
1.7. Formation of Ad-hoc CAMPA 
In pursuance of the Supreme Court’s order, th e Ministry of Environment and Forests on 23 
April 2004 constituted the Compensatory Affo restation Fund Management and Planning 
Authority (CAMPA) for management of money collected towards compensatory 
afforestation, NPV etc., while according appr ovals for use of forest land for non-forest 
purposes, under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 
On 5 May 2006, Supreme Court of India ob served that CAMPA had still not become 
operational and ordered the constitution of an ad-hoc body (known as ‘Ad-hoc CAMPA’), till 
CAMPA became operational. The Court also accepted the following suggestions of the CEC:  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 7 | P a g e  
• ensure that all the monies recovered on behalf of the CAMPA and lying with the 
various officials of the State Government  were to be transferred to the bank 
account(s) to be operated by this body; 
• get audited all the monies re ceived from the user agencies on behalf of the CAMPA 
and the income earned thereon by the various State Government officials. The auditor 
was to be appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The audit was to 
examine whether proper financial proce dure was being followed in investing the 
funds. 
All the State Governments/ Union Territories  were required to ac count for and pay the 
amount collected with effect from 30 October 2002, in confor mity with the order dated 29 
October 2002 to the said Ad-hoc body. 
Table 2: Fact Sheet of CAMPA/ Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Date Event 
29 October 2002 • The Supreme Court of India di rected that a ‘Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund’ was to be created in which all the monies 
received from the user agen cies towards compensatory 
afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal 
compensatory afforestation, NPV of forest land, Catchment Area 
Treatment Plan Funds, etc. were to be deposited. 
• The Supreme Court also directed that Net Present Value (NPV) of 
the forest land diverted was to be  collected from the user agency 
in addition to the monies to be paid for Compensatory 
afforestation, etc. by the user agencies under Forest 
(Conservation) Act 1980. Rates at which Present Value was to be 
recovered were also prescribed. 
23 April 2004 Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning 
Authority (CAMPA) was notified by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests. 
5 May 2006 The Supreme Court of India constituted Ad-hoc-CAMPA. 
16 September 
2006 
The Supreme Court of India order cl arified that the cases which had 
been granted in princi ple clearance before th e Supreme Court order 
dated 29 October, 2002 and final cleara nce after that date, would also 
have to pay NPV.  
13 March 2007 MoEF CAMPA (Amendment) Notification envisaged that CAMPA 
should have Corporate Accounting based double entry system and 
auditing of its accounts should be conducted by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
28 March 2008 The Supreme Court fixed the rate of  NPV which would hold good for a 
period of three years and was open to revision after every three years. 
24 April and 9 
May 2008 
The Supreme Court clarified the exemption granted to certain category 
of projects like schools, hospit als, children play ground of non-
commercial nature, community cent res of rural area, underwater 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
8 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Date Event 
drinking pipelines upto four inch diameter, relocation of villages from 
National Parks/ Sanctuaries to alternate forest land etc. 
10 July 2009 Guidelines on State Compensatory  Afforestation Fund Management 
and Planning Authority were approved by Supreme Court of India. 
10 July 2009 • The Supreme Court permitted Ad -hoc CAMPA to release a sum 
of about ` 1,000 crore per year for th e next five years, in 
proportion of 10 per cent of the principal amount pertaining to 
the respective State/ UT. 
• The Supreme Court directed that the guidelines and the 
structure of the State CAMPA as  prepared by MoEF may be 
notified/implemented. 
• The Supreme Court directed that  the State Accountant General 
was to audit the expenditure of the State CAMPA funds every 
year on annual basis. 
15 July 2009 State CAMPA guidelines were circulated to all States/UTs. 
13 August 2009 National CAMPA Advisory Council (NCAC) was constituted. 
1.8. Composition and functioning of Ad-hoc CAMPA 
As per the 5 May 2006 orders of the Suprem e Court, the ad-hoc body (Ad-hoc CAMPA) 
would comprise of Director General of Forests &Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment 
and Forests as Chairman, Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation), a 
representative of the Comptroller and Audi tor General of India and a nominee of the 
Chairman of the Central Empowered Committee as members. 
Between 2006 and 2012, Ad-hoc CAMPA held 21 meetings. From the minutes of the 
meetings and the files of Ad-hoc CAMPA that were examined, it was evident that the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA as a body was a governing body which provided overall direction and supervision. 
The executive functions and day to day deci sion making on the management of the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund and other ad ministrative issues was performed by the 
Chairman, Ad-hoc CAMPA along with Inspector General of Forests(Forest Conservation) as 
Member Secretary, subsequently also addressed as the Chief Executive Officer. In the first 
meeting of the body held on 15 May 2006, the Chairman, Ad-hoc CAMPA was authorised to 
approve outsourcing of support staff, as deemed fit, for the functioning of Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
1.9. Formation of State/Union Territory CAMPA 
Following persistent requests from Members of  Parliament, State Chief Ministers/ Forest 
Ministers as well as Chief Secretaries for rele ase of funds to the States/ UTs from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA for carrying out compensatory afforest ation activities urgently, the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests organized a consultative meeting of all States on 30 March 2009 to 
formulate guidelines for release of funds to th e States/ Union Territories. The guidelines so 
evolved were approved by the Supreme Court of India in their order dated 10 July 2009 and 
circulated by MoEF to all States/ UTs on 15 July 2009. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 9 | P a g e  
MoEF in July 2009 framed State CAMPA guidelin es for establishing CAMPAs in the States/ 
UTs and putting in place a funding mechanis m for enhancing forest and tree cover and 
conservation and management of wildlife by utilizing funds received towards Compensatory 
Afforestation, NPV, etc currently available with Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
As per the guidelines, State CAMPA was mandated to promote: 
• conservation, protection, regeneration and management of existing natural forests; 
• conservation, protection and management of wildlife and its habitat within and outside 
protected areas including the consolidation of the protected areas; 
• compensatory afforestation; and 
• environmental services, research, training and capacity building. 
It was to function through a three-tier committee hierarchy: 
• Governing Body headed by the Chief Minister of the State, mandated to lay down the 
broad policy framework for functioning of State level CAMPA and review its working 
from time to time. 
• Steering Committee headed by the Chief Secretary of  the State, mandated to lay down 
and approve rules and procedures for the fu nctioning of the body and its Executive 
Committee. Its responsibilities included moni toring utilisation of State CAMPA fund, 
approving the Annual Plan of Operation (APO ), the annual reports and audited accounts 
of the State CAMPA.  
• Executive Committee headed by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests of the State 
mandated to prepare the APO of the State for various activities, submit it to the Steering 
Committee before end of December for each financial year, supervise the works being 
implemented out of funds released from the State CAMPA. It was also responsible for 
ensuring proper auditing of both receipt and expenditure of funds. 
The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 is applicab le to whole of India except the State of 
Jammu & Kashmir. In pursuance to the directions (April 2004) of MoEF with regard to the 
constitution of State CAMPA, the Government of Jammu &Kashmir constituted two 
committees – a State Level Management Committee (SLMC)and a State Level Steering 
Committee(SLSC)in February 2005 and April 2005,  respectively. SLSC decided (February 
2006) that money available under CAMPA account would not be transferred to Central Ad-
hoc CAMPA because Jammu &Kashmir State had its own Jammu &Kashmir Forest 
(Conservation) Act. It was resolved in, February 2010, by the Central Empowered Committee 
and in February 2012 by the Supreme Court that the State CAMPA of Jammu & Kashmir may 
continue to retain the CA ch arges to be used for the implementation of APOs for the 
financial years 2009-10 and 201 0-11. The amount received towards NPV for the use of 
forest/ non forest land falling in the National parks/ Sanctuaries was to be transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA, if not already done. 
The State wise details of notification of State CAMPA are given in Annexure 1. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
10 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
1.10. Collection of Compensatory Afforestation Funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Funds started flowing into Ad-hoc CAMPA w.e.f. 16 May 2006 onwards and an amount of 
`967.89 crore was credited initially into 35 Cu rrent Accounts, maintained separately for 
each State/UT in Corporation Bank, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi and Union Bank of 
India, Sunder Nagar, New Delhi. In addition , the Central Empowered Committee remitted to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA funds amounting to ` 232.42 crore on 13 September 2006, accumulated 
with it up to September 2006. 
As of December 2012, there were 74 bank accounts in Corporation Bank, CGO Complex, 
Lodhi Road and 66 accounts in Union Bank of India, Sunder Nagar, New Delhi being 
operated by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
The growth of Compensatory Afforestation Fund with Ad-hoc CAMPA is given in Chart 2. 
Chart 2 – Trend of growth of funds with Ad-hoc CAMPA  net of disbursements to State/ UT 
CAMPA and NCAC3 
(`in crore) 
 
1.11. Release of Compensatory Afforestation Funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
In July 2009,the Supreme Court of India obse rved that substantial amount of funds ( `9,932 
crore) had been received by the Ad-hoc CA MPA and sudden release and utilization of this 
large sum at one time may not be appropriate and may lead to its improper use without any 
effective control on expenditure.  
The Court permitted Ad-hoc CAMPA to release, for the time being, the sum of about ` 1,000 
crore per year, for the next fi ve years, in proportion of 10  per cent  of the principal amount 
pertaining to the State/ UT. The amount towards NPV and protected area was to be 
released after approval of the Annual Plan of  Operation by the Steering Committee of the 
State. The amount towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory 
afforestation, penal compensatory afforestatio n and catchment area treatment Plan was to 
be released immediately for taki ng up site specific works alre ady approved by the Ministry 
of Environment and Forests, while granting approval under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 
(FC Act). An amount of five per cent of the amount released to  the State CAMPA was to be 
                                                            
3During the period 2009-12, ` 2,829.21 crore were disbursed to State/UT CAMPAs and NCAC by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
1,200
9,932
13,244
20,910
23,608
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
13.09.06 30.06.09 30.06.10 30.06.11 31.03.12

Compens
release
evaluat
As per 
hoc CA
M
Chart 3
1.12. 
The Su
afforest
the Co n
Consoli
March 
system 
Guideli
n
and ot h
may be
1.13. 
The obj
examin
i. whe
and
ii. whe
con
prov
iii. whe
safe
legi
non
satory Affore
d and uti l
tion. 
records ava
MPA and po
 – Position 
Accounting
preme Co u
tation were
nsolidated 
dated Fund
2007, CA M
as per th e
nes on Sta t
her relevan
 prescribed
Audit objec
jectives of t
e: 
ether the di
d all conditio
ether measu
sequent t o
visos of ext
ether the 
eguarding o
slation, rule
n forest purp
2,8
estation in In
lized by t h
ailable with
osition of fu
of funds w
g arrangem
urt of India
e not to be a
Fund of In d
d of India o
MPA was di
e direction s
te CAMPA e
t records a
d in consulta
ctives 
the complia
iversion of f
ons in this r
ures taken f
o diversion 
ant legislat
collection, 
of compen s
es and Sup r
poses; and 
829.21 13
ndia 
he Nation a
h Ad-hoc C A
unds release
ith Ad-hoc 
ent for Ad-
 in Octob e
a part of ge
dia. As suc h
or Public A c
rected to h
s of the S u
envisaged t
and prepar e
ation with t
nce audit o
forest land 
egard were
for conserv
of portio n
ion, rules a
utilisation
satory affo r
reme Court
 
1.28
al CAMPA 
AMPA, the 
ed as on 31
CAMPA as 
hoc CAMPA
er 2002 dir
eneral reven
h the CAM
ccounts of I
have corp o
upreme Co
that State C
e an annua
he Account
on Compens
for non for
e complied w
vation, affor
ns of these
nd Supreme
n, monitori
restation f u
t judgemen
23,607.67
Advisory C
position of 
 March 201
on 31 Marc
A and State
ected that 
nues of the 
PA funds a
ndia. As p e
orate accou
urt issued 
CAMPA wo
l statemen t
tant Genera
satory Affor
rest use was
with; 
restation an
 lands for 
e Court judg
ng, accou n
unds was i n
ts permittin
7
Re
Council, f o
f availability
12 is given in
ch 2012 (`in
e CAMPA 
the funds 
Union, of th
re currentl
er MoEF n o
nting base
on 26 Se p
uld mainta
t of accou n
al concerned
restation in 
s permitted
nd preserva
non fores t
gments in t
nting and 
n complia n
ng diversion
Funds availa
CAMPA
Funds disbu
CAMPAs
Funds transf
eport No. : 2
11 
or monitor i
y of funds w
n Chart 3. 
n crore) 
for comp e
he States o
y kept out s
otification d
d on doub
ptember 2 0
in proper a
nts in such 
d. 
India were 
d as per exta
tion of fore
t use wer e
his regard; 
arrangeme
nce with a p
n of forest 
able with Ad-h
rsed to the St
fered to NCAC
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
ing and 
with Ad-
 
ensatory 
r part of 
side the 
dated 13 
le entry 
005. The 
accounts 
form as 
to 
ant laws 
est lands 
e as per 
ents for 
pplicable 
land for 
hoc 
tate/UT 
C

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
12 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
iv. whether proper financial procedures had been followed in investing funds. 
The list of legislations, rules, judgements and directions regulating the collection and 
utilisation of Compensatory Afforestation Fund that  were referred to in the course of this 
compliance audit are listed below: 
i. Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 as amended in 1988. 
ii. Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003 as amended in 2004. 
iii. The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act, 2006. 
iv. Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. 
v. Indian Forests Act, 1927. 
vi. Supreme Court orders on the subject issued from time to time. 
vii. Various guidelines and orders issued by MoEF from time to time, as per directives of the 
Supreme Court of India. 
1.14. Scope of audit  
An all India compliance audit of  Compensatory Afforestation in India was taken up by the 
office of the Principal Director of Audit, Sc ientific Departments, in November 2011. This 
included the audit of the Ad-hoc CAMPA, State CAMPA, MoEF including its regional offices, 
audit of selected Forest Department division s in States/UTs. The core period covered in 
audit was from 2006 to 2012. Significant audit findings relating to diversion of forest lands, 
compensatory afforestation and compensatory afforestation funds pertaining to period 
prior to 2006-12, noticed during the course of  audit have also been reported with 
appropriate reference to the period to which these pertain. 
The office of the Principal Director of Audit, Scientific Departments, carried out the audit of 
MoEF and its six Regional Offices (RO) at  Lucknow, Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar, Shillong, 
Bengaluru and Bhopal. 
The State Accountants General audited the State CAMPA and the divisions to which 
Compensatory Afforestation fund had been rele ased, on a sample basis. The sample size 
was 50 per cent  of the territorial divisions that ha d received fund disbursed by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. Of the 35 States and Union Territories in India, all except Dadar & Nagar Haveli, Diu, 
Lakshwadeep, Nagaland and Puducherry were cove red in this audit exercise. The State wise 
details of units selected is in Annexure 2. 
1.15. Non production of information/records to audit 
Ministry of Environment and Forests/ Regional Offices did not furnish 64 files pertaining to 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Himachal  Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, and Uttrakhand to audit for verification of the 
details which are given in Table 3. The audi t requisitions had been issued to Inspector 
General of Forests in MoEF for the files to be made available by the Ministry and to 
Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests at the six Regional offices of MoEF. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 13 | P a g e  
Table 3: Documents not produced to audit by Ministry/Regional Offices 
Sl. 
No. 
State  Files 
requisitioned 
from MoEF 
Files 
requisitioned 
from RO 
Files not 
provided by 
MoEF 
Files not 
provided by 
RO 
1. Andhra Pradesh - 13 - 2
2. Chhattisgarh  3 10 3 2
3. Goa  24 - 12 -
4. Himachal 
Pradesh 
- 7 - 2
5. Jharkhand  3 8 1 -
6. Karnataka  92 14 29 -
7. Madhya 
Pradesh 
5 7 - 2
8. Maharashtra  4 10 2 3
9. Odisha 2 20 - 1
10. Rajasthan 4 10 2 -
11. Uttarakhand 3 8 1 2
 Total  140 107 50 14
Apart from the above, 71 specific files (40 Mining, five Transmission Line, five Thermal, eight 
Wind Power, five Irrigation, seven Hydel and one Village Conversion) were randomly 
selected and called from MoEF. Out of these, 51 files have been provided and 20 files have 
not been produced till May 2013. 
Due to non-production of records, appropriate examination of the sample size and specific 
project files could not be undertaken thus imposing a restriction on the extent of audit. 
The information which could not be made availa ble by the Regional Offices was called for 
from MoEF in July and November 2012. Despit e further pursuance, the information was not 
furnished (June 2013).  
MoEF stated (April 2013) that continuous an d strenuous efforts were on to trace the 
remaining files and provide the same to a udit. However, 84 files have still not been 
produced to audit. 29 files were furnished as late as (June 2013) and could not be examined 
prior to finalisation of this Report. We reserv e the right to comment on them, if necessary, 
in our subsequent Audit Reports. 
We had requisitioned statistical information regarding forest land diverted, revenue land 
provided in lieu of forest lands diverted, acre age of degraded forest lands identified for 
afforestation, acreage of land on which co mpensatory afforestation was undertaken, 
component wise details of funds collected an d remitted, the dates of approval of APOs, 
funds received from Ad-hoc CAMPA and expe nditure against them etc from State CAMPA 
Nodal Officers. In a number of instances th is information was not provided and it is 
mentioned in the related sections of the report. Incomplete or non availability of 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
14 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
information hindered audit analysis and constr ained audit from presenting a holistic pan 
India observation on the issues. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the State CAMPAs  have been approached by the State AsG 
with 45 different proformae to be filled and th ese proformae were not in use in the Forest 
Department or the State CAMPA and that th e audit team did not give them sufficient 
opportunity/ time for reaction. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable sinc e the information sought  w e r e  b a s i c  t o  a n y  
execution of projects which were granted forestry clearances.  Further, we noted that 234 of 
the 30 State/ UTs test checked in audit were able to provide the most of the information 
sought in the 45 proformae for the Compliance Audit.  Since majority of the State/ UTs 
could provide the requisite information, it le ads to the conclusion that neither the time 
prescribed nor the quantum of information sought was unreasonable provided basic records 
had been properly maintained.  
1.16. Issue of draft Audit Report and receipt of replies 
The draft audit report on the Functioning of the Compensatory Afforestation Funds 
Management and Planning Authority was issued  to MoEF and Ad-hoc CAMPA on 31 January 
2013,to seek their comments on the audit findings and to confirm the facts and figures 
mentioned in the Report, by 15 March 2013.  The Secretary, MoEF requested the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on 8 March 2013 to grant additional time for 
furnishing the replies and an opportunity for the officials of the Ministry to interact with the 
members of the audit team so that necessary cl arifications could be provided. The time for 
furnishing of replies by MoEF was exte nded upto 31 March 2013 and a meeting was held 
between the officers of the Principal Director  of Audit, Scientific Departments, and the 
Ministry on 2 April 2013. Part replies of Mo EF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA were received on 11 April 
2013.After taking up the matter with the Secret ary MoEF and Director General of Forests& 
Special Secretary further replies were rece ived in May and June 2013 from Inspector 
General of Forests (FC). 
MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA has been unable to gi ve any confirmation for the facts and the 
figures in the draft Audit Report pertaining to Ad-hoc CAMPA but has stated everywhere 
that the details may be obtained from the Stat e wise account statements provided to audit 
by Ad-hoc CAMPA. The statement of accounts and the balance sheet of Ad-hoc CAMPA sent 
to this office were incomplete, not authenti cated properly, nor signed by the Officer on 
Special Duty/ Financial Advisor/ Director Ge neral of Forests & Special Secretary, not 
internally audited and not approved by the co mpetent authority. Hence, these records had 
no validity as such and were only draft docu ments and could not be relied upon to present 
authenticated information. As per Regulation  208 of the Regulation on Audit and Accounts 
(2007) of the Comptroller and Auditor General of  India, the reply to the draft Audit Report 
should have clearly stated whether the department accepted the facts and figures of the 
draft Report; if not the reasons supported by  the relevant documents and evidence duly 
authenticated were to be furnished. This had been brought to the notice of the Secretary 
                                                            
4 Seven State/ UTs (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Rajasthan and Sikkim) provided information partly. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 15 | P a g e  
MoEF and CEO Ad-hoc CAMPA on 30 April 2013 and the Director General of Forests& 
Special Secretary on 15 May 2013 and 27 May 2013 wi th the request to specifically confirm 
the facts and figures in the Report. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that two or more dist inct sections/ groups (Ad-hoc CAMPA, State 
CAMPA and MoEF) may be made answerable fo r different issues mentioned in the audit 
objectives and added that the Ad-hoc CAMP A did not have any power or authority to 
supervise the actions of MoEF and/ or State/ UTs for implementation of the provisions of 
the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 
The reply is not acceptable as Ad-hoc CAMPA and MoEF forest wing are headed by the same 
officers i.e. the DGF & SS and IG Forest who are also the Chairman and the CEO of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA as well. The Supreme Court in it s order dated 3 April 2000, had fixed the 
responsibility of ensuring the proper carrying out of compensatory afforestation on Ministry 
of Environment and Forests and stated that it was for the Ministry to monitor the conditions 
stipulated at the time of grant of forest clearance. The Ministry must take final responsibility 
because as per the mandate Mo EF is the nodal Ministry in the Central Government for 
overseeing the implementation of India’s en vironment and forest policies and programmes 
relating to conservation of the country’s na tural resources including lakes and rivers, its 
biodiversity, forests and wildlife, ensuring the welfare of animals and prevention and 
abatement of pollution. 
1.17. Organisation of audit findings 
Audit reviewed the elements of scheme for compensatory afforestation along with the 
management of CA funds with respect to the pr ovisions of the regula ting Acts and Rules, 
various decisions of the Supreme Court and the MoEF guidelines. The observations of audit 
are discussed in Chapters II to VII. 
• Chapter II of this Report deals with Di version of forest land and Compensatory 
Afforestation. 
• Chapter III of this Report deals with Collection of Compensatory Afforestation Funds. 
• Chapter IV of this Report deals with Utilisation of Compensatory Afforestation Funds. 
• Chapter V of this Report deals with Investment of accumulated Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds. 
• Chapter VI of this Report deals with Oversight Arrangements. 
• Chapter VII of this Report deals with State/Union Territory specific findings. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  17 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
2.1. Introduction 
2.1.1. Provisions regulating Compensatory Afforestation 
As per para 3.1(i) of the Guidelines issued under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (FC Act) 
Compensatory Afforestation is one of the mo st important conditions stipulated by the 
Central Government while approving proposals for de-reservation or diversion of forest land 
for non-forest uses. It was essential that for all such proposals, a comprehensive scheme for 
Compensatory Afforestation (CA) was formulated and submitted to MoEF.  
Further as per para 3.2(i) of the Guidelines issued under the FC Act, 1980, CA was to be 
done over equivalent area of non-forest land subject to the following: 
• As far as possible, the non-forest land for CA was to be identified contiguous to or in 
the proximity of Reserved Forest or Pr otected Forest to enable the Forest 
Department to effectively manage the newly planted area. 
• In case, non-forest land of CA was not ava ilable in the same district, it was to be 
identified anywhere else in the State/Union Territory near to the site of diversion, so 
as to minimise adverse impact on the micro-ecology of the area. 
• Where non-forest lands were not availabl e or non-forest land was available but 
lesser in extent to the forest area bein g diverted, CA could be carried out over 
degraded forest twice in extent to the area  being diverted or to the extent of the 
difference between the forest land being diverted and the available non-forest land, 
as the case be. 
• The non-availability of suitable non-forest land for CA in the State / Union Territory 
would be accepted by the Central Government  only on the basis of a Certificate of 
the Chief Secretary to the State/Union Territory Government to that effect. 
The clarification below the para 3.2 (i) provides that as a matter of pragmatism, the revenue 
lands/zudpi jungle/chhote/bade jhar ka j ungle/jungle-jhari land/civil-soyam  lands and all 
other such categories of lands, on which the pr ovisions of FC Act, 1980 are applicable, shall 
be considered for the purpose of compensatory afforestation provided such lands on which 
compensatory afforestation is proposed shall be  notified as Reserve Forest (RF) under the 
Indian Forest Act, 1927. 
The exceptions to the general conditions laid do wn in para 3.2 (i) of the Guidelines issued 
under the FC Act, 1980, are listed below: 
• As per para 3.2(vi) of the Guidelines issued under the FC Act, 1980, certain categories 
of project are exempted from providing equi valent non forest land. In such cases CA 
Chapter - II 
Diversion of forest land and Compensatory 
Afforestation 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
18 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
was to be raised over degraded forest land twice in extent of the forest area being 
diverted/ dereserved.  
• As per para 3.2 (viii) raising CA is not to  be insisted upon in certain category of 
projects like diversion of forest land upto one hectare, cleaning of naturally grown 
trees in forest land, underground mining in forest land below three meter etc.  
• As per para 3.2 (ix) in case of central government/ central undertaking projects, CA is 
t o  b e  r a i s e d  o n  d e g r a d e d  f o r e s t  l a n d  t w i c e  i n  e x t e n t  o f  f o r e s t  a r e a  b e i n g  d i v e r t e d  
without insisting for the certificate of Ch ief Secretary regarding non-availability of 
non-forest land. 
Para 3.4(i) of the Guidelines issued under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 state that 
equivalent non-forest land identified for the purpose was to be transferred to the 
ownership of the State Forest Department a nd declared as reserved/protected forests 
(RF/PF), so that the plantation raised could be  maintained permanently. The transfer was to 
take place prior to the commencement of the project. 
2.1.2. Procedure for granting forest clearances 
As per Clause 6 of Forest (Conservation) Ame ndment Rules, 2004, every User Agency that 
seeks to use any forest land for non-forestry  purposes, under Section 2 of the Act, is 
required to make a proposal to the Nodal O fficer of the concerned State/UT Government 
and endorse a copy of the prop osal, along with a copy of the receipt obtained from the 
office of the Nodal Officer, to the concerned Di visional Forest Officer or the Conservator of 
Forests, Regional Office as well as MoEF. Afte r having received the proposal, the State/ UT 
Government is required to process and forwar d it to the Central Government within a 
period of two hundred and ten days of the receipt of the proposal. 
The Nodal Office of State/UT Government afte r having received the proposal and on being 
satisfied that the proposal is complete in all respects and requires prior approval under 
Section 2 of the Act, is requi red to send the proposal to th e concerned Divisional Forest 
Officer. The Divisional Forest Officer or the Conservator of Forests shall examine the factual 
details and feasibility of the proposal, cert ify the maps, carry out site-inspection and 
enumeration of the trees and forward the findings to the Nodal Officer within a period of 90 
days of the receipt of such proposal. The Nodal Officer, through the Principal Chief 
Conservator of Forests, shall forward the prop osal to State/ UT Government along with 
recommendations. The State/UT Government shall forward the complete proposal, along 
with its recommendations, to the Regional Office or MoEF as the case may be. 
The Regional Empowered Committee 5 is mandated to decide on the proposal involving 
diversion of forest land upto 40 hectare other than the proposal relating to mining and 
encroachments. Proposal involving forest land of more than 40 hectare, and all proposals 
relating to mining and encroachments irrespective of the area are approved by MoEF. 
Forest clearances are to be granted under Sect ion 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 
In respect of proposals involving diversion of forest area upto five hectare, Chief 
                                                            
5 Consists of Regional Principal Chief Conservator as Chairman and Conservator/ Deputy Conservator of Forests 
in the Regional Office as Member Secretary and three expert members in fields of Mining, Civil Engineering 
and Development Economics. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  19 | P a g e  
Conservator of Forests of the concerned Region al Office grants final clearance (except in 
mining leases). In respect of proposals involvin g diversion of forest ar ea above five hectare 
(including all categories of mi ning leases), the final clearanc es are granted by the MoEF on 
the advice of the Forest Advi sory Committee. The Director General of Forests & Special 
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Fore sts is the Chairperson of the committee which 
grants forest clearance under the Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. Inspector 
General of Forests (Forest Conservation) is the Member Secretary of the committee. 
As per para 4.2 (i) of Guidelines issued unde r the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (FC Act, 
1980), for diversion of forest land, forestry clea rance is to be given in  two stages. At first 
stage, the proposal is to be agreed to in prin ciple. Conditions relating to transfer, mutation 
and declaration of a Reserve Forest/Protected Forest under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 of 
equivalent non-forest land for compensato ry afforestation and funds for raising 
compensatory afforestation thereof, are stipulated at this stage. After receipt of report from 
the State Government regarding compliance with the stipulated conditions, formal approval 
under the Act is issued, also called the second stage of clearance or final clearance. 
The procedure for granting forest clearances is depicted in the flow Chart 4. 
Chart 4: Flow chart of procedure for granting pe rmission to divert forest land for non forest 
purposes 
 
NFL – Non forest land, CA- Compensatory Afforestation, PF- Protected Forest, RF- Reserve Forest 
Yes
No
No
Yes
Non availability to be certified by 
the Chief Secretary. 
CA for double the area of degraded 
Forest Land to be identified. 
Proposal for diversion of forest land
Exempted from 
providing NFL? 
 No NFL required to be given 
NFL required to be given
Is NFL available 
in State? 
NFL transferred to Forest Department
Mutated in favour of Forest Department 
Declared as RF/PF
 Stage I - ‘In 
principle’ approval 
State Government confirms compliance with Stage I conditions
Stage II – Final clearance granted by MoEF/ RO.

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
20 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
We carried out the audit of a gamut of issues  relating to diversion of forest land and 
compensatory afforestation. The audit findings have been categorised in the following six 
themes: 
• Regulatory shortcomings in diversion of forest land; 
• Failure to promote compensatory afforestation; 
• Diversion of forest land for grant/ renewal of mining leases; 
• Environmental issues; 
• Other issues of land management; and 
• Inadequate and ineffective application of penal clause. 
2.2. Regulatory shortcomings in diversion of forest land 
2.2.1. Non receipt of non forest land in lieu of diverted forest land 
Para 3.2(i) to (v) of the Guidelines issued under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 state that 
Compensatory Afforestation shall be undertaken over equivalent area of non-forest land.  
State wise details of forest land diverted and non-forest land provided between 2006-12 in 
lieu thereof, collected in audit from MoEF/ ROs are given at Table 4. 
Table 4: Details of forest land diverted a nd non-forest land less received (as per the 
records of MoEF/ ROs)   
(in hectare) 
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
 
(i) 
State 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
Forest Land 
diverted as 
per RO 
 
 
(iii) 
Exempted 
category^ 
 
 
 
(iv) 
Land 
diverted 
excluding 
exempted 
category 
(v) 
NFL 
received 
as per RO 
 
 
(vi) 
NFL less 
received 
 
 
 
(vii) 
Percentage 
of short 
receipt of 
NFL 
(viii) 
(vii)*100/ 
(v) 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands  84.55 4.07 80.48 56.88 23.60 29
2 Andhra Pradesh 13,774.57 208.18 13,566.39 9,512.17 4,054.22 30
3 Arunachal Pradesh 2,070.84 1,386.70 684.14 89.49 594.65 87
4 Assam 631.17 587.29 43.88 28.50 15.38 35
5 Bihar 3,052.36 4.03 3,048.33 2,029.80 1,018.53 33
6 Chandigarh 7.55 1.35 6.20 6.87 (-)0.67 -
7 Chhattisgarh 20,461.70 5.51 20,456.19 Nil 20,456.19 100
8 Delhi 23.09 0.94 22.15 Nil 22.15 -
9 Goa 1,513.09 Nil 1,513.09 60.85 1,452.24 96
10 Gujarat 1,882.39 115.02 1,767.37 Nil 1,767.37 100
11 Haryana  1,762.18 543.97 1,218.21 43.79 1,174.42 96
12 Himachal Pradesh 2,978.42 2,045.57 932.85 Nil 932.85 -
13 Jammu & Kashmir NA NA NA NA NA NA
14 Jharkhand 8,328.45 8.45 8,320.00 2,989.82 5,330.18 64
15 Karnataka  5,645.14 546.23 5,098.91 3,053.74 2,045.17 40
16 Kerala 171.60 95.61 75.99 25.32 50.67 67
17  Madhya Pradesh 20,795.72 55.20 20,740.52 Nil 20,740.52 100

 
Compens
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
 
(i) 
State 
 
 
 
 
18  Maha
19  Mani
20  Megh
21  Mizo
22  Odish
23  Punja
24  Rajas
25  Sikkim
26  Tami
27  Tripu
28  Uttar
29  Uttar
30  West
  Total 
 
* This d o
certificat
**For Ut
 ^RO Bh o
consolida
NA - Not 
The com
forest la
satory Affore
(ii) 
arashtra  
ipur  
halaya  
ram  
ha 
ab  
sthan  
m  
l Nadu  
ura  
r Pradesh  
rakhand** 
t Bengal  
oes not inclu d
tes from Chief
tarakhand Civ
opal and Lu c
ated list of pro
Available. 
Chart 5: D
mparison o
and receive
11,495.35
1,426.10
estation in In
de figures fo r
f Secretary we
vil-Soyam land
cknow did n o
ojects provide
Details of for
f the fores t
ed in lieu the
28,08
ndia  
Forest Land 
diverted as 
per RO 
 
 
(iii) 
2,911.45
298.88
132.44
0.59
8,820.77
3,039.41
8,248.04
1,411.04
298.15
299.89
1,239.20
4,759.38
235.20
1,14,877.26
r Delhi, Him a
ere available in
d stated to ha
ot furnish th e
ed by these RO
rest land div
t land dive r
ereof are gi
85.90
Exempted 
category^ 
 
 
 
(iv) 
44.23
32.88
12.88
0.59
6.06
889.85
95.38
1,059.50
28.82
108.47
121.96
3,478.37
8.24
11,495.35
achal Prades h
n most of the 
ave been recei
e list of exe m
Os. 
verted and no
rted exclud
iven in Char
75,905
Land 
diverted 
excluding 
exempted 
category 
(v) 
2,867.22
266.00
119.56
Nil
8,814.71
2,149.56
8,152.66
351.54
269.33
191.42
1,117.24
1,281.01
226.96
1,03,381.91
h, Meghalaya
cases.  
ived double in
mpted projec ts
on-forest lan
ding the ex e
rt 6. 
5.47
E
N
N
N
b
Re
NFL 
received 
as per RO 
 
 
(vi) 
2 Nil 
0 60.00 
6 Nil 
l Nil 
1 5,261.96 
6 Nil 
6 584.97 
4 Nil 
3 230.01 
2 10.91 
4 535.23 
1 3,315.23 
6 190.36 
1 28,085.90 
and Sikkim a
 quantity to th
ts. These we r
nd less realis
empted cat
Exempted Cate
NFL received
NFL less realise
NFL not availa
by the CS of th
eport No. : 2
21 
NFL les s
received 
 
 
 
(vii) 
2,867.22
206.00
119.56
Nil
3,552.75
2,149.56
7,567.69
351.54
39.32
180.51
582.01
(-)2,034.22
36.60
75,905.47*
as NFL non- a
he forest land
re calculated 
sed (in ha) 
tegory and 
egory
ed
ble certified 
he State/ UT
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
s Percentage
of shor t
receipt o f
NFL 
(viii) 
(vii)*100/
(v) 
2 100
0 77
6 -
l Nil
5 40
6 100
9 93
4 -
2 15
1 94
1 52
2 -
0 16
* 73
availability 
d diverted. 
from the 
 
the non 
e 
t 
f 
0
7
-
0
0
-
4
2
-
6
3

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
22 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Chart 6: Chart showing percentage of short receipt of non forest land 
 
 
*In Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Meghal aya and Sikkim, certificates from  Chief Secretary regarding non-
availability of NFL were available in most of the cases. 
**For Uttarakhand Civil-Soyam land stated to have been received double in quantity to the forest land diverted. 
***For Jammu & Kashmir the data was not provided by the Regional Office. 
# In Chandigarh all the non forest land was received and in Mizoram all diversion of forest land was for 
exempted projects.  
16
0
52
94
15
93
100
40
0
0
77
100
100
67
40
64
0
0
96
100
96
0
100
0
33
35
87
30
29
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0
West Bengal 
Uttarakhand**
Uttar Pradesh 
Tripura 
Tamil Nadu 
Sikkim*
Rajasthan 
Punjab 
Odisha
Mizoram 
Meghalaya*
Manipur 
Maharashtra 
Madhya Pradesh 
Kerala
Karnataka 
Jharkhand
Jammu & Kashmir***
Himachal Pradesh*
Haryana 
Gujarat
Goa
Delhi*
Chhattisgarh
Chandigarh#
Bihar
Assam
Arunachal Pradesh
Andhra Pradesh
Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
Percentage
State/ UTs
Percentage of short receipt of NFL

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  23 | P a g e  
From the above table and charts it would be seen that: 
i. As per information furnished by the ROs, total forest land diverted during the period 
2006-12 was 1,14,877.26 hectare. Non-forest land measuring to 1,03,381.91 hectare 
was receivable after excluding exempted categories but against this only 28,085.90 
hectare was received. In four 6 states non-availability certificates of non-forest land 
measuring to 1,426.10 hectare were availa ble. Hence non-forest land measuring to 
75,905.47 hectare was not received which was 73 per cent of receivable non-forest 
land. 
ii. State/UT-wise position regarding of short receipt of non-forest land is summarised 
below: 
Percentage of short 
receipt of NFL 
State/ UTs 
0 to 25 Chandigarh, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. 
26 to 50 Andaman & Nicobar, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Karnataka and 
Odisha. 
51 to 75 Jharkhand, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh. 
76 to 100 Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tripura.  
iii. No information was made available by the MoEF/ RO for Jammu & Kashmir. In 
Mizoram non forest land was not required to be received. In Delhi, Himachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya and Sikkim the certificate regarding non availability of non 
forest land was obtained in most of the cases. In Uttarakhand Civil-Soyam land was 
received in lieu of the non forest land, which was 100 per cent  against the forest 
land diverted. 
iv. We test checked the records in MoEF and RO to verify whether the non forest land 
reportedly received was transferred/ mu tated in favour of the State Forest 
Department (SFD). There were no document s showing the transfer and mutation of 
this land available in all 167 files pertaini ng to ROs/ MoEF scrutinized in audit. 
Further test check of 52 specific files in MoEF (Annexure 3) also revealed that non-
forest land of 2,310.86 he ctare identified for CA had not been transferred and 
mutated in favour of the State Forest Department. 
Consequently, it was observed that neither the State Nodal Officer/ PCCF nor MoEF ensured 
the receipt of non-forest land and the final cl earances were given by the committee headed 
by the Director General of Forests & Special Se cretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests 
as the Chairperson and Inspector General of Forest (Forest Conservation) as the Member 
Secretary without ensuring the receipt of equivalent non-forest land from the user agencies. 
Thus, MoEF failed in ensuring the compliance of  its own regulatory provisions for forestry 
clearance. 
                                                            
6 Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Sikkim. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
24 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that the observations made by the Audit in this para were State 
specific and, therefore would be answered in de tails by the States directly and that the data 
appeared to be based on incomplete informat ion and is therefore, not wholly correct.  
MoEF claimed that there was gross under estimati on of the area of forest land diverted for 
projects of exempted category. To support this it cited Odisha as an example stating that 
contrary to the observation of audit that of th e area of forest land diverted for the projects 
of all categories between 2006 and 2012 in Od isha, only 6.05 hectare was of exempted 
category. However, as per MoEF records out of 3,150.09 hectare of forest land pertaining to 
19 projects alone, 1,885.13 hectare was of exempted category. It attributed under-
estimation of diverted land by audit to non inclusion of some categories of exempted 
projects. It further stated that it proposed to constitute a Committee to examine, whether 
requisite non-forest land for CA, wherever appl icable, had been transferred and mutated in 
favour of the SFDs and notified as Reserve Fore st/ Protected Forest in accordance with the 
provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 / local Forest Act. The committee would inter-alia 
prepare up-to-date inventory of such land and re concile it with the la nd records and that 
MoEF would issue appropriate directions to ensu re transfer and mutation of the non-forest 
land in favour of the concerned State Forest Department within a reasonable time, say one 
year from the date of issue of such direction. 
The reply is not tenable because the informat ion presented by Audit has been collected 
from MoEF/ ROs and are based on the records of  Ministry. The same was issued both to the 
ROs and MoEF for confirmation of facts and figures who neither confirmed the figures nor 
provided authenticated alternate figures. The reply only confirms the audit observation on 
absence of a MIS and a robust monitoring syst em. Further, MoEF in its reply had only 
quoted one example of Odisha and nowhere sp ecifically and categorically confirmed, 
refuted or revised the information/ facts/ fi gures as obtained by audit from MoEF/ RO. 
MoEF has no mechanism in place to ensure that the entire NFL which is due to be 
transferred and mutated in favour of the St ate Forest Departments has actually been 
received and mutated. The situation was even mo re alarming considering the fact that such 
transfer and mutation is vital precondition to  permit diversion of forest land and ensuring 
that the forest land of the country are not deplet ed and must be fulfilled before giving final 
clearance. It is also of concern that though final clearances had been given without ensuring 
fulfilment of the key conditions, which invited invoking of the penalt y clause under Section 
3A of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.  
2.2.2. Non-transfer of non forest  land to Forest Department  and non-declaration as 
Reserve Forest/Protected Forest 
Para 3.4(i) of the Guidelines issued under the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 state that 
equivalent non-forest land identified for the purpose was to be transferred to the 
ownership of the State Forest Department a nd declared as reserved/protected forests 
(RF/PF), so that the plantation raised could be  maintained permanently. The transfer was to 
take place prior to the commencement of the project. 
Data from RO:  As per the information provided by  ROs, non-forest land received was 
28,085.90 hectare. Records to evidence that the entire NFL so received had been 
transferred and mutated in favour of Forest Department were not available. We, further, 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  25 | P a g e  
observed that no land so received was notifi ed as RF/PF by the State Forest Department 
within six months of handing over of the non forest land which was required to be done.  
Our observations on specific cases examined in ROs and MoEF are given below: 
• During the test check of records of MoEF, it was noticed that in 30 (Annexure 4) out 
of 52 cases examined, the non-forest land of 11,033.28 hectare provided by the user 
agencies to the State Governments was no t declared/ notified as Reserve Forest/ 
Protected Forest. 
• During the test check of the records of RO  Shillong it was observed that as per the 
agenda note available in Regional Office, Shillong for the first quarterly meeting of 
Nodal Officers of all North Eastern States held in September 2011, non-forest land 
measuring 5,921.03 hectare (involved in 10 projects) was transferred and notified by 
State Revenue Department as Reserve Forests during the period 1996 to 2010 under 
Mizo District (Land & Revenue) Act, 1956,  to Environment and Forest Department, 
Government of Mizoram but it was not decl ared as Reserve Forest/ Protected Forest 
under Section 15 to 21 of Mizo ram Forest Act, 1955. Under 6 th Schedule of the 
Constitution of India, these Reserve Forest lands were to be notified as Government 
Reserved Forests under Section 15 to 21 of Mizoram Forest Act, 1955. This was 
pending for 15 years. 
Data from State Authorities:  The status of non-forest land received, its transfer/ mutation 
in favour of the Forest Department and its de claration as RF/PF was also obtained from the 
State CAMPA/ Nodal Officer/ State Forest Depart ment and is at Annexure 5. As per the data 
provided by the State agencies, of 23,246.80 hectare of non-forest land received by the 
State Forest Departments during the period  2006-12 11,294.38 hectare was transferred/ 
mutated in favour of the Forest Department of  which only 3,279.31 hectare was declared as 
RF/PF.  
The conflicting and inconsistent data obtain ed from the two controlling agencies viz the 
regional offices of the Ministry & from state agencies is a matter of serious concern. Both 
sets of data indicated that final clearances were given without ensuring transfer/ mutation 
of NFL to Forest Department and notification of these areas as RF/ PF which was in gross 
violation of the conditions imposed at in prin ciple conditions as per the FC Act and such 
violation attracted the invoking of penal clause. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that the fact remain s that declaration of the non-forest area, 
identified for CA, as RF/PF is a time taking process and, therefore, keeping in mind the 
diverse administrative procedures followed by the different states and different degree of 
public resistance to declaration of area as RF/PF, uniformity and promptness in declaration 
o f  t h e  f o r e s t  a r e a  a s  R F /  P F  b y  t h e  S t a tes may not always be possible. However, 
considerable progress has been made in declar ation of CA areas as RF/PF. MoEF further 
stated that it would constitute a Committ ee in consultation with the State/ Union 
Governments to examine proposals, for whic h approval under the FC Act, 1980 had been 
accorded. The committee would ascertain, wh ether requisite non-forest land for CA, 
wherever applicable had been transferred and mutated in favour of the SFDs and notified as 
RF/PF. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
26 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
MoEF while admitting that uniformity and prompt ness in declaration of the forest area as 
RF/ PF by the States may not always be possible, it claimed that a considerable progress had 
been made in declaration of CA areas as RF/P F. This claim of MoEF is not tenable as no 
progress of declaration of the non forest land  as RF/ PF within the specified six month 
period has been noticed during the course of audit as per State/ ROs records. The reply does 
not explain the issue of complete lack of an MIS or monitoring at the level of the Ministry on 
an issue that is critical for informed decision making by it. 
2.2.3. Irregular permission to pay for afforestation on double the area of degraded forest  
Where non-forest land are not ava ilable or non-forest land is available in less extent to the 
forest area being diverted, compensatory affore station is to be carried out over degraded 
forest twice in extent to the area being dive rted or to the differe nce between forest land 
being diverted and available non-forest land, as the case may be.  
As per para 3.2 (v) of the Guidelines issu ed under the FC Act, 1980, non-availability of 
suitable non-forest land for compensatory affo restation in the entire State/ UT would be 
accepted by the Central Government only on  the certificate from the Chief Secretary to the 
State/ UT Government to this effect. In case of Jammu & Kashmir State the certificate is to 
be issued by Deputy / Divisional Commissioner. 
Audit attempted to collect data of the forest land diverted for non-fore st uses by allowing 
CA on twice the area in double degraded forest  land without the requisite certificate of the 
Chief Secretary of the state/ UT. The details collected from the Forest Department, Nodal 
officers of State CAMPA and the divisions test checked in audit (where the Nodal officers did 
not provide the information) are at Table 5. 
Table 5: Non obtaining of requisite certificate of the Chief Secretary of the State/ UT  
Sl.No. State Forest land 
diverted as per 
State Forest 
Department       
(in ha) 
Whether non-availability  certificate of 
non-forest land in the entire State/ UT 
from appropriate authority was obtained 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands  
117.74 Certificate was not required as all the land 
was diverted to government departments 
and being a UT all departments are central 
government departments. 
2 Andhra Pradesh 14,208.60 No 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 2,547.16 No 
4 Assam 2,523.35 No 
5 Bihar 2,286.25 No 
6 Chandigarh 8.67 Certificate was not required as all the forest 
land diverted/transferred in lieu of non-
forest areas was received from the user 
agencies. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  27 | P a g e  
Sl.No. State Forest land 
diverted as per 
State Forest 
Department       
(in ha) 
Whether non-availability  certificate of 
non-forest land in the entire State/ UT 
from appropriate authority was obtained 
7 Chhattisgarh 8,389.40 No, despite revenue land measuring 5.78 
lakh ha being available in state for CA as per 
information made available by Revenue 
Department. 
8 Delhi 40.29 Out of 10 cases in two cases (2.22 ha), 
Certificate from Chie f Secretary was not 
obtained. 
9 Goa 728.94 No 
10 Gujarat 5,795.82 No 
11 Haryana  2,154.89 No 
12 Himachal Pradesh 4,080.23 Certificate for Chief Secretary obtained for 
CA on 8,240.04 ha double degraded land, 
Certificate for 7.56 ha was not obtained. 
13 Jammu & Kashmir 3,967.46 In respect of J&K the certificate is to be 
issued by Deputy / Divisional Commissioner. 
Majority of certificates were not issued by 
the competent authority and in some cases 
certificates were issued by the user 
agencies themselves. 
14 Jharkhand* 15,881.06 No 
15 Karnataka  3,354.11 No 
16 Kerala 156.07 NA 
17  Madhya Pradesh  9,753.47 No 
18  Maharashtra  6,361.09 No 
19  Manipur  33.88 No 
20  Meghalaya  245.33 Obtained in all cases except for diversion of 
114.02 hectare in 2008-09. 
21  Mizoram  128.28 No 
22  Odisha** NA No 
23  Punjab  2,190.49 NA 
24  Rajasthan  2,975.84 No 
25  Sikkim  1,359.91 For 1,359.91 ha of forest land the 
certificates were not issued on individual 
case basis. However, the certificates were 
issued once by the Chief Secretary and the 
photo copy of the same were used for the 
rest of the cases for non availability of non 
forest land. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
28 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl.No. State Forest land 
diverted as per 
State Forest 
Department       
(in ha) 
Whether non-availability  certificate of 
non-forest land in the entire State/ UT 
from appropriate authority was obtained 
26  Tamil Nadu  323.09 No 
27  Tripura  696.22 NA 
28  Uttar Pradesh  2,995.23 No 
29  Uttarakhand  9,669.74 Yes. Chief Secretary issued a general 
certificate in 2002 and 2009. Separate 
certificate on case to case basis was not 
obtained. 
30  West Bengal  425.17 NA 
*Figures for Jharkhand are from 2002 onwards. 
** Odisha did not provide figures for non forest land received. 
NA - Not available 
 
From Table 5 above, it transpires that: 
• In 19 of the 26 States from which inform ation in this regard was received, non 
availability of forest land was not certif ied by the Chief Secretary/ Deputy or 
Divisional Commissioner 7. It was observed that the final clearances were given by 
the committee headed by the Director General of Forests & Special Secretary, 
Ministry of Environment and Forests by a llowing compensatory afforestation on the 
degraded forest twice the extent of forest land diverted either without obtaining the 
certificate or by accepting ineligible certificates of the competent authority. 
• In Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Meghalaya the rule was observed in most of the 
cases. In Sikkim the certificate had been i ssued once by the Chief Secretary and the 
same was used in all cases rather than obtaining fresh certificate in each case. 
• In Uttarakhand based on the certificate of the Chief Secretary, civil- Soyam land was 
received in double the extent of the forest land diverted. 
• In Chhattisgarh the Revenue Department stated in November 2006 that revenue 
land measuring 5.78 lakh hectare was available in the State for Compensatory 
Afforestation. Despite this CA on twice the extent of degraded forest land was 
allowed. 
• In Andaman & Nicobar and Chandigarh, for the period under audit, all NFL due was 
received. Hence, the certificate was not required. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that in the absence of requisite details of individual cases, it may 
not be possible for the MoEF to  comment on the observation of the audit that whether in 
such cases certificate from the Chief Secretary was required to be obtained or not. It further 
stated that CA on degraded forest land doubl e in extent was allowed in the States like 
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Jharkhand and Mahara shtra only in the exempted categories, 
                                                            
7 Jammu & Kashmir. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  29 | P a g e  
while in the States as Meghalaya, Punjab a nd Chhattisgarh the requisite certificate of the 
Chief Secretary was obtained. 
The reply is not tenable because as per the in formation obtained in Audit, the requisite 
certificate was not obtained in most of the St a t e /  U T s .  I n  c a s e  o f  C h h a t t i s g a r h ,  w h i l e  t h e  
Chief Secretary certified that “no suitable  non forest Governme nt Revenue Land was 
available in Chhattisgarh for carrying out CA”,  the State Revenue Department stated in 
November 2006 that revenue land measuring 5.78 lakh hectare was available in the State 
for CA. MoEF in particular should have verifi ed the genuineness of the certificate in such a 
situation. In Meghalaya, the certificate was issued only for 114.02 hectare in 2008-09. In the 
case of Punjab though the MoEF provided a co py of the Chief Secretary’s certificate to the 
effect of non-availability of non-forest land in Punjab, the State Forest Department reported 
that 1.51 hectare of non-forest land had been received in lieu of forest land diverted. This 
raises doubt on the reliability of the certificate. 
During the test check of individual case files of  MoEF, we observed that in the case of Sasan 
Power Limited (SPL), MoEF did not exercise due diligence in ensuring compliance with 
conditions and inexplicably overlooked the defi ciencies in the certificate pointed out by a 
subordinate authority and exempted SPL from pr oviding non-forest land on the basis of an 
ineligible certificate issued by the Chief Se cretary. The details of the audit findings are 
reported as Case Study I. 
Case Study I 
Clearance by MoEF on the basis of an inappr opriate certificate of the Chief Secretary and 
non-fulfilment of conditions of additional afforestation. 
Sasan Power Limited (SPL) was a Special Purpos e Vehicle (SPV) created for development of 
Sasan Ultra Mega Power Projec t (UMPP). SPL was a wholly owned subsidiary of Power 
Finance Corporation (PFC) but in August 2007 it was transferred to Reliance Power Limited 
(RPL).  
In June 2007, the Government of Madhya Prad esh sought prior approval of the Central 
Government for diversion of 320 .94 hectare of forest land for construction of UMPP of M/s 
Sasan Power Limited in district Sidhi of Madhya Pradesh (Power Project). In December 2008, 
MoEF gave in principle approval for the projec t subject to fulfilment of various conditions. 
The final approval for the project was accorded in April 2009. 
Further, in September 2008, the Government of  Madhya Pradesh sought the prior approval 
of the Central Government for diversion of 1,0 64.02 hectare of forest land for allocation of 
local Blocks for coal mining for Sasan UMPP un der the East Sidhi Forest Division of Madhya 
Pradesh (Coal Mining Project). In November 2009,  MoEF gave in principle approval for the 
project subject to fulfilment of various condi tions. The final approval for the project was 
accorded in May 2010. 
The following deficiencies were noted in pe rmitting diversion of forest land in these 
projects: 
According to guidelines and clarifications for diversion of forest lands for non-forest purpose 
under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, SPL had to provide equivalent area of 1,384.96 
hectare of non-forest land for the compensatory  afforestation. As far as possible, the non-

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
30 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
forest land for compensatory a fforestation had to be identified contiguous to or in the 
proximity of Sidhi district and in the ev ent that non-forest land for compensatory 
afforestation was not available in the Sidhi district, non-forest land could have been 
identified anywhere else in Madhya Pradesh. The non-availability of suitable non-forest land 
for compensatory afforestation in the entire St ate had to be accepted by the MoEF, only on 
basis of the certificate from the Chief Secretary of Madhya Pradesh to that effect. 
However in both these cases, MoEF exempted SPL from provid ing equivalent area of non-
forest land for the compensatory afforestation,  on basis of the certificate from the Chief 
Secretary that no forest  land was available in Sidhi District . MoEF did not ask SPL to furnish 
such certificate for entire Madhya Pradesh or ma ke efforts for identification of non-forest 
land for compensatory afforestation anywhere el se in the State. Instead, SPL was allowed 
compensatory afforestation over double degr aded forest land even though it was not 
eligible for such an exemption. The Deputy Co nservator of Forests, MoEF Regional Office 
(Central), Bhopal during his site visit (for Coal  Mining project) in November 2008 had also 
mentioned that compensatory afforestation on double degraded forest land was not 
admissible on the basis  of the certificate of th e Chief Secretary about one district i.e. Sidhi. 
However, MoEF ignored his opinion and based on an ineligible certificate issued by the 
Chief Secretary exempted SPL from providing non-forest land in violation of the Forest 
(Conservation) Act 1980. The Mo EF not only did not exercise due diligence in ensuring 
compliance with conditions but also inexp licably overlooked the deficiencies in the 
certificate pointed out by a su bordinate authority while granting exemption in the instant 
case.  
Further, MoEF, while considering the coal mining project proposal noted, “ in view of the 
substantial amount of good forest land bei ng diverted, in addition to Compensatory 
afforestation, additional afforestation (not pl antation) over an equivalent area of 991.81 + 
72.21 hectare should be taken up by the project. This is the bare minimum special condition 
that should be added to  the general condition. ” MoEF did not insist for any firm proposal in 
this regard from the company. Further, MoEF  had made no efforts till date to ascertain 
whether SPL had carried out additional afforestation over 1,065 hectare, as stipulated. 
Again, in July 2011, the Government of Madh ya Pradesh sought prior approval of the 
Central Government for diversion of 965.40 hect are of forest land in favour of M/s Sasan 
UMPP for their Chhatrasal Captive Coal bloc k (including 30.21 hectare forest land for 
infrastructure development) in district Sin grauli of Madhya Pradesh. In November 2012, 
MoEF gave in principle approval for the proj ect subject to fulfilment of various conditions 
including compensatory afforestation over the non-forest land equal in extent to the area of 
the forest land proposed to be diverted (i.e. 965.40 hectare). The said non forest land had to 
be transferred and mutated in favour of the State Forest Department. Further, to 
compensate the loss of good quality forests, in addition to creation of compensatory 
afforestation at normal rate, the company ha d to provide funds for rejuvenation and re-
stocking of degraded forests, double in extent to the forest land proposed for diversion. The 
final clearance to this project was still pe nding as the company was yet to submit 
compliance report to the condition s laid down by MoEF while granting in principle approval 
for the project. 
Thus, MoEF had insisted for compensatory affo restation over the non-forest land in latest 
project of the same company in nearby location in Madhya Pradesh, which clearly illustrates 
that in earlier two cases undue favour were extended to M/s Sasan Power Limited. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  31 | P a g e  
MoEF in its reply in (May 2013) was silent re garding the issue of clearance to SPL on the 
basis of an ineligible certificate of the Chie f Secretary which was also objected to by the 
officials of the Ministry.  It stated that SPL had submitted proposals for diversion of 1,064.02 
hectare of forest land without clearly indicating  its shareholding pattern and it appears that 
SPL did not bring to notice of the Forest Advi sory Committee and the MoEF that it has been 
transferred from Power Finance Corporation (P FC) to the RPL. Approv al under the FC Act, 
1980 for diversion of 1,064.02 hectare of forest  land in favour of SPL was, thus, accorded 
considering the SPL as a subsidiary of the Ce ntral PSU (i.e. PFC). However, MoEF has noted 
observations of the Audit. It further stated that approval of the competent authority is being 
sought to revise conditions pertaining to CA stipulated in the approvals under the FC Act, 
1980 accorded by the MoEF for dive rsion of the said forest land in favour of the SPL. This 
would entail that the user agency shall transfer  and mutate in favour of the SFD within one 
year of diversion of forest land. Regarding the 1,065 hectare of additional afforestation, 
MoEF stated that the additional afforest ation needs to be undertaken by the user 
agency/project proponent and that State Government of Madhya Pradesh is being 
requested to submit a report on the status of additional afforestation. 
The reply is not tenable as Sasan Power Limite d was transferred to Reliance Power Limited 
in August 2007 but the in principle approval was given by MoEF in December 2008 and the 
final approval was also accorded in April 2009. This was done on the basis of an ineligible 
certificate and by ignoring th e reservations in this regard  expressed by a subordinate 
authority. 
2.2.4. Non reconciliation of figures of land diverted/ received 
During our audit exercise, we collected information on forest land diverted and non forest 
land received in lieu of the diversion, during the period 2006-12, both from ROs and State 
Forest Department which is given in Table 6. 
Table 6: Divergence in data of forest land di verted and non-forest land received in lieu as 
per ROs and State Forest Department  
(in hectare) 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Forest Land Diverted Non Forest Land Received 
RO State Forest 
Department 
RO State Forest 
Department 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands  
84.55 117.74 56.88 112.96
2 Andhra Pradesh 13,774.57 14,208.60 9,512.17 10,168.63
3 Arunachal Pradesh 2,070.84 2,547.16 89.49 205.86
4 Assam 631.17 2,523.35 28.50 Nil
5 Bihar 3,052.36 2,286.25 2,029.80 63.51
6 Chandigarh 7.55 8.67 6.87 8.14
7 Chhattisgarh 20,461.70 8,389.40 Nil 323.08
8 Delhi 23.09 40.29 Nil Nil
9 Goa 1,513.09 728.94 60.85 28.50

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
32 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Forest Land Diverted Non Forest Land Received 
RO State Forest 
Department 
RO State Forest 
Department 
10 Gujarat 1,882.39 5,795.82 Nil 591.65
11 Haryana  1,762.18 2,154.89 43.79 51.67
12 Himachal Pradesh 2,978.42 4,080.23 Nil Nil
13 Jammu & Kashmir NA 3,967.46 NA Nil
14 Jharkhand* 8,328.45 15,881.06 2,989.82 530.11
15 Karnataka  5,645.14 3,354.11 3,053.74 2,231.96
16 Kerala 171.60 156.07 25.32 Nil
17  Madhya Pradesh  20,795.72 9,753.47 Nil 2,332.49
18  Maharashtra  2,911.45 6,361.09 Nil 4,077.99
19  Manipur  298.88 33.88 60.00 Nil
20  Meghalaya  132.44 245.33 Nil Nil
21  Mizoram  0.59 128.28 Nil 17.50
22  Odisha** 8,820.77 7,524.80 5,261.96 NA
23  Punjab  3,039.41 2,190.49 Nil  1.51
24  Rajasthan  8,248.04 2,975.84 584.97 1,698.72
25  Sikkim  1,411.04 1,359.91 Nil Nil
26  Tamil Nadu  298.15 323.09 230.01 230.95
27  Tripura  299.89 696.22 10.91 10.95
28  Uttar Pradesh  1,239.20 2,995.23 535.23 374.23
29  Uttarakhand  4,759.38 9,669.74 3,315.23 Nil
30  West Bengal  235.20 425.17 190.36 186.39
 Total 1,14,877.26 1,10,922.58 28,085.90 23,246.80
*Figures for Jharkhand are from 2002 onwards. 
**Odisha did not provide figures for non forest land received. 
NA - Not available 
From the above table, it can be seen that there are substantial variation between the figures 
provided by the RO and the State Forest Department. In fact in not a single State/ UT did we 
notice that there was convergence of data between the concerned State Forest Department 
and the Regional Office of MoEF. Not only does  it highlight lack of a system of periodic 
reconciliation of data between the two authorities but also raises doubts on the reliability of 
the data. In the absence of authenticated data  and non-production of proof of mutation/ 
transfer of identified land in favour of Forest Department, it cannot be assured that the final 
clearances were given only on the fulfilment of  all the stipulated conditions and the forest 
lands have been appropriately safeguarded. 
The percentage divergence in data of forest land diverted and non-forest land received in 
lieu as per ROs and State Forest Department are highlighted in Chart 7.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  33 | P a g e  
Chart 7: Percentage divergence in data of  forest land diverted and non-forest land 
received in lieu as per ROs and State Forest Department  
 
 
*For Jammu & Kashmir the data was not provided by the Regional Office. 
**Odisha did not provide figures for non forest land received. 
In the absence of a single agreed set of figure s, we are also unable to provide assurance on 
the completeness and reliability of data produced to us. It is a matter of grave concern that 
45
51
59
57
8
4
64
39
15
100
46
89
54
53
10
68
48
27
18
68
52
43
59
13
73
75
19
3
28
2
100
43
0
0
0
66
100
0
100
0
100
100
100
100
37
82
0
15
100
53
100
16
97
100
57
6
50
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0
West Bengal 
Uttarakhand 
Uttar Pradesh 
Tripura 
Tamil Nadu 
Sikkim 
Rajasthan 
Punjab 
Odisha**
Mizoram 
Meghalaya 
Manipur 
Maharashtra 
Madhya Pradesh 
Kerala
Karnataka 
Jharkhand
Jammu & Kashmir*
Himachal Pradesh
Haryana 
Gujarat
Goa
Delhi
Chhattisgarh
Chandigarh
Bihar
Assam
Arunachal Pradesh
Andhra Pradesh
Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
Percentage
States
divergence in non forest land received divergence in forest land diverted 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
34 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
the two controlling authorities did not have in place a robust MIS to monitor the extent to 
which forest land had been diverted and to judge the extent to which these forest lands had 
been depleted due to non-providing of NFL. This data was also critical to monitor the 
compliance with the conditions imposed at in-p rinciple clearance prior to giving final 
clearance. The absence of such a system puts to question the entire monitoring mechanism 
in MoEF and State Forest Department in this regard. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that, the Committee pr oposed to be constituted by MoEF would 
inter-alia reconcile such data. 
2.2.5. Failure to conduct Cost Benefit Analysis 
As per Annexure VI(a) of the Guidelines issued  under FC Act, 1980, for all project proposals 
involving forest land more than 20 hectare in plains and more than five hectare in hills 
including roads, transmission lines, minor, me dium and major irrigation projects and hydel 
projects, mining activities, railway lines, location specific installations like micro-wave 
stations, auto repeater centres, TV towers etc required cost-benefit analysis was required to 
be conducted to determine that the diversion of the forest land to non-forest use was in the 
overall public interest. 
During test check of 219 files of MoEF/ RO, it was observed that no records were available in 
the files to show that cost-benefit analysis had been carried out fo r the above purpose and 
the forest land was diverted without ascertaining the overall public interest. 
MoEF’s reply was silent on the issue. 
2.2.6. Non-revocation of in-principle approval 
As per para 4.2 of the Guidelines issued under the FC Act, 1980, forestry clearance was to be 
accorded in two stages.  However in cases wh ere compliance of the conditions stipulated in 
the in-principle approval was awaited for more  than five years from the State Government, 
the in-principle approval was to be summarily r e v o k e d  b y  R e g i o n a l  o f f i c e  o r  M o E F  a s  t h e  
case may be.  After the revocation of the in-p rinciple approval, if State Government/ user 
agency was still interested in the project, they would be required to submit a fresh proposal 
which was to be considered de-novo. 
During test check of records of  MoEF it was observed that 1,022 proposals involving forest 
land measuring to 2.54 lakh hectare which had not complied with the first stage conditions 
for more than five years and we re not rejected/ revoked. The st ate wise details are given in 
Annexure 6. 
There were no records to indicate the extent to which the co nditions like transfer, mutation 
and declaration of equivalent non-forest land a nd its declaration as RF/PF, funds for CA etc. 
had been complied/not complied with.  Thus th ere was no proper follow up in MoEF/ RO to 
monitor the status of compliance with conditions stipulated at in-principle approval.  
MoEF stated (May 2013) that the onus to co mply with conditions stipulated in the in 
principle approval lay with the user agency and the State/ UT Governments concerned. With 
the existing resources, it was not feasible fo r the MoEF and its regional offices to monitor 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  35 | P a g e  
compliance to the stipulated co nditions. Even in the cases where compliance of conditions 
stipulated in the in-principle approval is awaited for more than five years and the in-
principle approval has not been fo rmally revoked/ withdrawn, final  approval to such 
proposal is accorded only in rare and deserv ing cases where State Government and the user 
agencies provide valid reasons for delay in co mpliance to conditions stipulated in the in-
principle approval. MoEF has however, noted the observation of the audit and will take 
appropriate action to formally revoke/ withdraw  in-principle approval to all those proposals 
where compliance to conditions stipulated in th e in-principle approval is awaited for more 
than five years. 
2.2.7. Irregular change of status of forest land 
As per FC Act, 1980, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force in a State, no State Government or other authority was to make, except with the 
prior approval of the Central Government, any order directing that any Reserve Forest or 
any portion thereof, should cease to be reserved. 
D u r i n g  t e s t  c h e c k  o f  r e c o r d s  o f  R O  L u c k n o w  i t  w a s  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  i n  A u g u s t  2 0 0 7 ,  
Government of Uttar Pradesh, changed the status of Reserve Forest land measuring 
1,083.23 hectare in Sonbhadra district as reve nue land without prior approval of MoEF in 
contravention of FC Act, 1980. The land was handed over to M/s JP Associate Ltd for non-
forest use like establishment of cement plant,  mining and other allied activities. The matter 
was pending with Supreme Court of India. As pe r the affidavit filed in the Supreme Court by 
the RO Luknow, the value of non forest land, which would normally have been received in 
lieu of diversion was ` 133.78 crore. 
Further, in Lucknow, 2.5 hect are reserve forest land was tr ansferred unauthorisedly as 
revenue land for  construction of houses under Manyavar Shri Kanshi Ram ji Sahari Awas 
Yojna over plot number 1,308 which was recorded as ` Imarti Lakdi Ki Van’  in revenue 
records, without approval of MoEF in cont ravention of FC Act, 1980.  Similarly a road 
measuring 545 meter on forest land was laid do wn and partially constructed by State PWD 
to provide connectivity to said Sahari Awas Yojna without approval of MoEF. 
In another case, it was observed that in 1974, U.P. Government leased out five acres (two 
hectare) forest land at Gram Gehru, Lucknow to Malviya Anant Ashram  in Sarojini Nagar, 
Lucknow for construction of Pulse Polio Hospit al for a period of 30 years which expired on 
16 December 2004. Awadh forest division rene wed the lease by charging lease rent upto 
February 2009 without approval of MoEF. 
In all these cases, the State government also did not recover any money for CA, NPV etc. In 
addition in the case of M/s JP Associates Ltd,  the user agency also benefited from not being 
required to replace the diverted forest land wi th equivalent area of non-forest land which 
would have cost it at least ` 133.78 crore as per affidavit of the RO, Lucknow. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that in case of M/s JP Associates Ltd. the matter is pending in 
Supreme Court and in other cases action would be taken against the concerned officials of 
the State Government for the said violation. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
36 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
2.2.8. Irregular diversion of forest land for construction of tail pond dam 
Supreme Court of India in November 2000 dire cted that pending further orders, no de-
reservation of Sanctuaries and National Park s shall be effected.  The Supreme Court in 
February 2000 also, restrained all the States from ordering even the removal of dead, 
diseased, dying or wind fallen tr ees and grasses etc. from any National Park or Sanctuary. 
Accordingly MoEF, in May 2001 advised the States  not to submit any proposal for diversion 
of forest land in National Parks and Sanctu aries under the Forest (Co nservation) Act, 1980 
without seeking prior permission of the Supreme Court. 
During the test check of records of RO Bengal uru it was observed that Andhra Pradesh State 
Electricity Board (APSEB), in March 1996 submitted a proposal for diversion of 113 hectare 
of forest land for construction of tail pond dam downstream of Nagarjunsagar Dam.  
Regional Office, while inspecting the site in May 1996 stated that this diversion would 
submerge 52 hectare of forest land under Nalgonda Division on the left flank and 61 hectare 
of forest land under Guntur Division on the right flank out of which 20 hectare forms a part 
of Nagarjunasagar Srisailam Wildlife sanctuary which is the habitat of wild animals like deer, 
fox, wild bear, hare, chinkara and crocodiles etc. MoEF in January 1997, thus, conveyed its 
inability to approve the diversion of forest land.  The Ministry again on the request of APSEB 
dated 28 February 1998 considered the case and rejected the proposal on merits on 4 May 
1998. 
In disregard of the Supreme Court orders a nd its own observations made in January 1997 
and May 1998, MoEF, conveyed in-principle appr oval, five months after the orders of the 
Supreme Court, in April 2001 for diversion of 113 hectare of forest land for the purpose, 
subject to fulfilment of certain conditions like transfer and mutation of non-forest land, 
transferring the cost of CA, providing of f unds for eco-restoration scheme, to reduce the 
possible adverse impact on wildlife habitat etc. The final approval was also granted in June 
2006. No justification was available in the files explaining the reasons for MoEF overturning 
its earlier decisions and granting approvals in contravention of orders of the Supreme Court. 
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Andhr a Pradesh reported in December 2004, that 
sufficient correspondence was held with the us er agency and other officers concerned for 
compliance of Government of India conditions,  but so far no compliance of conditions was 
reported by the user agency.  He also inform ed that the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh 
was expected to visit for laying the foundation stone for this project in the second week of 
December 2004. 
As per monitoring report (April 2010) of RO Bengaluru, it was stated that CA of ` 0.68 crore, 
eco-restoration of ` 0.95 crore and NPV of ` 5.35 crore had been deposited into CAMPA, 
account of Corporation Bank, Lodhi Road, New Delhi. But Mo EF in their letter dated 16 
March 2012 had asked the RO to confirm the receip t. Also as per the monitoring report, the 
compliance of other in principl e approval conditions like prov iding of NFL and raising of 
funds for CA etc was not provided by the user agency i.e. APSEB. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  37 | P a g e  
MoEF, thus, overturned its earlier decision s without any reasonable justification and 
diverted the forest land involving wildlife sanc tuary land without permission from National 
Board of Wildlife and in violation of the orders of the Supreme Court of India. It also could 
not assure that all conditions attached to the irregular approval were complied with. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that the requisite in formation is being collected from the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh and the RO Beng aluru will examine the status of obtaining 
Supreme Court’s approval for diversion of 20 hectare of forest land located within the 
Nagarjunsagar Srisailam Wildlife Sanctuary. Ministry did not reply on the other irregularities 
pointed out in audit. 
2.2.9. Non- reversion of forest land in case of wind farm 
MoEF while granting in-principle approval in a case given at Table 7 stipulated that the user 
agency should develop wind farms within a sp ecified period (four years), failing which the 
entire diverted forest land was to be reverted.  
Table 7: Non creation of wind farm and non-reversion of forest land  
Name of the User 
agency 
Name of 
State 
Area of forest 
land (in ha) 
Date of 
clearance 
Period of 
compliance 
M/s Accion Wind 
Energy Pvt Limited 
Karnataka 4.82 18.03.2004 4 years 
During the test check of records of RO Bengalur u it was observed that as per the monitoring 
report the user agency had no t complied with the condition of establishment of wind farms 
within specified period of four years. The fore st land which should have been reverted was 
not reverted to the Forest Department till May 2012. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that the present stat us of the project would be verified and if 
c o m m i s s i o n e d ,  t h e  d a t e  o f  t h e  s a m e  w o u l d  b e  o b t a i n e d /  a s c e r t a i n e d .  I n  c a s e  i t  i s  f o u n d  
that, the project had not been commissioned within four years from the grant of final 
approval, MoEF would take appropriate action. 
2.2.10. Excess use of forest land 
As per Section 3A of the Forest (Conservation ) Act, 1980, whoever contravenes or abets the 
contravention of any provisions of Section 2, is punishable with simple imprisonment for a 
period which may extend to 15 days. 
Test check of records of the RO Bhubaneswar revealed that as per the monitoring reports of 
the RO the user agencies were utilising forest land in excess of the approved area as given in 
Table 8. 
 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
38 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 8: User agencies utilising forest land in excess of the approved area. 
Name of the User 
agency 
Name of 
State 
When and by 
whom reported 
Date of 
approval 
Total 
diverted 
area (in 
ha) 
Excess 
Forest 
land used 
(in ha) 
M/s CCL, Parej 
Open cast mining 
Jharkhand State Forest 
Authorities in 
February 2004 
April 1993 43.52 7.10
M/s Mahanadi 
Coal field Limited 
Odisha Regional  Office 
in August 2004 
September 
1998 
162.20 29.00
No remedial action was taken by MoEF nor any penal provision under Section 3A of the 
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was invoked. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that it has noted the observation of the Audit. Instructions were 
being issued to the State Government concerne d to take action in accordance with the 
provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 and the concerned State Forest Acts, in case the 
same have not been taken so far. 
2.2.11. Encroachment of forest land 
As per FC Act, 1980, Annexure-IV (3.1), the encroachments which have taken place after 24 
October 1980 should not be regu larised. Immediate action should be taken by State/ UT 
Government to evict the encroachers. 
Supreme Court in its order of November 2001 expressed great concern over the continued 
encroachments and directed MoEF to fram e time bound programme for eviction of 
encroachments in the country. State Forest Departments were required to prepare a 
comprehensive list of all encroachments and detailed quarterly progress report of the action 
taken, area evicted and area reclaimed/ planned etc. commencing from July 2002. 
Information regarding encroachments on forest land was not provided by 24 State/ UTs. As 
per the information furnished by six stat e CAMPA/ Nodal officers, the extent of 
encroachment on forest land is given in Table 9. 
Table 9: Details of encroachment on forest land 
Sl.No. State Area (in ha) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 3.75  
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1,341.00 
3 Assam 1,28,308.69  
4 Punjab 3,090.15 
5 Uttarakhand 9,672.43  
6 West Bengal 12,753.80  
 Total 1,55,169.82 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  39 | P a g e  
It was observed that, despite the orders of the Supreme Court on the subject no time bound 
program for eviction of encroachments was devised by MoEF/ RO. The State Forest 
Departments also did not prepare a comprehens ive list of encroachments of the forest land 
in order to proceed with the implementation of the orders of the highest Court of the 
country.  
MoEF stated (May 2013) that appropriate action  in cases of illegal encroachments on forest 
land need to be taken by the State/ UT Go vernments concerned in accordance with the 
provisions of the Indian Forest Act, 1927 and the State Forest Acts.  
It is evident that MoEF and State/ UT Gove rnments concerned failed  to comply with the 
directions of the Supreme Court by not maki ng any time bound programme for eviction of 
encroachments in the country. This indicated a ve ry casual approach and weak intent of the 
executing agencies in implementing the orders of the highest Court. 
2.3. Failure to promote compensatory afforestation 
 
2.3.1. Inadequate compensatory afforestation done in lieu of forest land diverted 
As per para 3.1(i) of the Guidelines i ssued under the FC Act, 1980 Compensatory 
Afforestation is one of the most important co nditions imposed while diverting forest land 
for non-forest uses.  
Audit attempted to determine the extent of compensatory afforestation undertaken during 
the period 2006 to 2012 and whether it was main tained properly by the Forest Department. 
The details as collected from th e nodal officers of state Forest  Department in 29 State/ UTs 
and from the 28 test checked divisions in Stat e of Rajasthan (where the Nodal officers did 
not provide the information), are at Table 10 A and 10B. The NFL receivable indicated in 
Table 10 A is based on the data obtained from Regional Offices of MoEF. 
Table 10A: Extent of Compensatory afforestation done on Non Forest Land (NFL) 
(in hectare) 
Sl. 
No. 
State NFL 
receivable 
Area of 
non-forest 
land 
identified 
for 
afforestati
on 
Area of 
non-forest 
land on 
which 
afforestati
on  done 
Percentage of  
Afforestation 
with respect 
to area 
identified for 
afforestation 
Percentage of 
Afforestation 
with respect 
to NFL 
receivable 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands  
80.48 112.96# NA NA NA
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
13,566.39 NA NA NA NA
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
684.14 NA NA NA NA

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
40 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
State NFL 
receivable 
Area of 
non-forest 
land 
identified 
for 
afforestati
on 
Area of 
non-forest 
land on 
which 
afforestati
on  done 
Percentage of  
Afforestation 
with respect 
to area 
identified for 
afforestation 
Percentage of 
Afforestation 
with respect 
to NFL 
receivable 
4 Assam 43.88 152# 152 100 346
5 Bihar 3,048.33 Nil Nil Nil  Nil 
6 Chandigarh  6.80 Nil Nil Nil
7 Chhattisgarh 20,456.19 134.82 33.18 25 0.16
8 Delhi^ 22.15 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
9 Goa 1,513.09 24.10 Nil Nil Nil
10 Gujarat 1,767.37 2,737.39# Nil Nil Nil
11 Haryana  1,218.21 52.85 Nil Nil Nil
12 Himachal 
Pradesh^ 
932.85 Nil Nil Nil Nil
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
NA NA Nil Nil Nil
14 Jharkhand* 8,320.00 NA NA NA NA
15 Karnataka  5,098.91 2,594.07 Nil Nil Nil
16 Kerala 75.99 NA Nil Nil Nil
17 Madhya 
Pradesh  
20,740.52 NA Nil Nil Nil
18 Maharashtra  2,867.22 4,913.26# Nil Nil Nil
19 Manipur  266.00 Nil Nil Nil Nil
20 Meghalaya^  119.56 2.40 Nil Nil Nil
21 Mizoram  Nil NA NA NA NA
22 Odisha** 8,814.71 4,380.46 6,951.54 159 79
23 Punjab  2,149.56 1.51 Nil Nil Nil
24 Rajasthan 8,152.66 917.07 Nil Nil Nil
25 Sikkim^ 351.54 Nil Nil Nil Nil
26 Tamil Nadu  269.33 226.95 144.12 63 54
27 Tripura  191.42 10.95 Nil Nil Nil
28 Uttar Pradesh  1,117.24 229.91 Nil Nil Nil
29 Uttarakhand  1,281.01 Nil Nil Nil Nil
30 West Bengal  226.96 186.39 Nil Nil Nil
 Total 1,03,381.91 16,683.89 7,280.84 44 7
 
# In four State/ UTs – Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Assam, Gujarat and Maharashtra, data provided to audit 
indicates that the non forest land identified for afforestation is larger than the non forest land receivable.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  41 | P a g e  
*In Jharkhand the bifurcated data of area of non-forest land and degraded forest land was not mentioned in 
the APOs. 
**In Odisha the extent of afforestation between 2006-12 has been derived from the Quarterly progress report 
on compensatory afforestation of Nodal Officer, Odisha. 
^For Delhi, Himachal Prades h, Meghalaya and Sikkim certificates of no n-availability of non forest land issued 
by Chief Secretary were available in most of the cases.  However, in Meghalaya as per information provided by 
the State Nodal Officer, non forest land was identified for compensatory afforestation.  
NA - Not Available. 
 
As per para 4.15(v) of the Guidelines issued under the FC Act 1980, the nodal officer was to 
monitor the implementation of the condition s of compensatory afforestation and the 
survival ratio of the seedlings planted. The Supreme Court also in its order dated 3 April 
2000, fixed the responsibility of ensuring th e proper carrying ou t of compensatory 
afforestation on Ministry of Environment and Forests and stated that it was for the Ministry 
to monitor the conditions stipulated at the time of grant of forest clearance. 
From the above table it would be seen that: 
i. Against the receivable NFL of 1,03,381. 91 hectare, only 28, 085.90 hectare or 27 per 
cent of NFL was received. Of the NFL so re ceived, CA activity had been undertaken 
only on 7,280.84 hectare of land which is a miniscule seven per cent of the receivable 
non forest land.  
ii. It was further observed that against rece ivable NFL of 1,03,381.91 hectare the area 
identified for compensatory afforestation was 16,683.89 hectare which works out to  
only 16 per cent of the NFL receivable. There agai nst afforestation was carried out 
only on 7,280.84 hectar e which is only 44 per cent  o f  t h e  a r e a  o f  n o n - f o r e s t  l a n d  
identified for afforestation.  
iii. The afforestation activity in non forest land was limited to only four States of Assam, 
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu. In fact, 95 per cent of all afforestation done on 
non forest land in the country was in one St ate viz Odisha. Aside of Odisha, the total 
afforestation undertaken in the country  on non forest land was a mere 329.30 
hectare. 
iv. Odisha exceeded the target for afforestat ion on NFL it set for itself and Assam 
achieved hundred per cent of the target. 
v. It was noticed that out of the 27 State/ UTs
8, seven9 State/UTs did not provide data 
with regard to non forest land targeted fo r afforestation. In the remaining 20 State/ 
UTs where targets were available it was ob served that in some like Chhattisgarh, 
Goa, Haryana, Meghalaya, Punjab, Tripura the targets set out for afforestation on 
non forest land was less than 10 per cent of the non forest land receivable.  
                                                            
8 Excluding Chandigarh, Delhi and Himachal Pradesh where NFL was neither available nor identified for 
afforestation. 
9 Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Mizoram. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
42 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
vi. In five 10 State/UTs information regarding affo restation on non-forest land was not 
provided. 
Table 10B: Extent of Compensatory afforestation done on double degraded forest land 
(in hectare) 
Sl. 
No. 
State Area of degraded 
forest land 
identified for 
afforestation  
Area of degraded 
forest land on which 
afforestation done 
Percentage of  
afforestation 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands  
112.96 37.48 33
2 Andhra Pradesh 315.87 1,481.84 469
3 Arunachal Pradesh NA NA NA 
4 Assam 1,989.06 1,989.06 100
5 Bihar 2,017.55 ha & 5.5 
km^
3,300# 164
6 Chandigarh There is no degraded forest land. 
7 Chhattisgarh 5,143.14 3,668.73 71
8 Delhi 100.00 100.00 100
9 Goa 350.67 1,007.98 287
10 Gujarat 5,800.24 Nil Nil
11 Haryana  4,182.00 Nil Nil
12 Himachal Pradesh 8,247.61 2,789.51 34
13 Jammu & Kashmir 14,312.00 7,838.00# 55
14 Jharkhand* 16,992.14 ha & 
49 km^
 10,636.87 ha & 49 
km#  
63
15 Karnataka  2,187.28 19.60 1
16 Kerala 295.92 Nil Nil
17 Madhya Pradesh  NA 5,136.97 NA
18 Maharashtra  3,916.65 Nil Nil
19 Manipur  2,415.7811 263.44  11
20 Meghalaya  521.13 Nil Nil
21 Mizoram  NA NA NA 
                                                            
10 Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Mizoram. 
11 During 2003-11. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  43 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
State Area of degraded 
forest land 
identified for 
afforestation  
Area of degraded 
forest land on which 
afforestation done 
Percentage of  
afforestation 
22 Odisha** 3,388.72 5,341.99 158
23 Punjab  2,883.40 Nil Nil
24 Rajasthan 273.72 Nil Nil
25 Sikkim  2,306.21 511.09 22
26 Tamil Nadu  147.51 66.9712  45
27 Tripura  1,597.45 80.00 5
28 Uttar Pradesh  1,731.11 1,177.40 68
29 Uttarakhand  19,339.46 4,178 13 22
30 West Bengal  469.77 108.83 23
 Total 1,01,037.35 & 
54.5 km^
49,733.76 & 49 km^ 49
^km pertains to strip plantation done along road, railway lines, canals etc. 
*In Jharkhand the bifurcated data of area of non-forest land and degraded forest land was not mentioned in 
the APOs. 
**In Odisha the extent of afforestation between 2006 and 12 has been derived from the Quarterly progress 
report on compensatory afforestation of Nodal Officer, Odisha. 
# Afforestation done during 2010-12. 
NA - Not Available. 
From the above table it would be seen that though 1,01,037.35 hectare & 54.5 km degraded 
forest land had been identifi ed for compensatory afforest ation during the period 2006-12, 
compensatory afforestation wa s undertaken only on 49,733.76  hectare & 49 km of 
degraded forest land, which was 49 per cent of the area of degraded forest land (in hectare) 
identified for the afforestation. In three 14 State/ UTs such information regarding 
afforestation on degraded forest land was not provided. In Chandigarh, no degraded forest 
land was available for afforestation. 
Overall Position: The position regarding afforestation undertaken over identified degraded 
forest land and non forest land, across the State/ UTs for which information was made 
available to audit is summarised below: 
 
 
 
                                                            
12 During 2008-09. 
13 During 2011-12. 
14 Arunachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Mizoram. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
44 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
The summary position points to the fact that seven States viz. Gujarat, Haryana, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Punjab and Rajastha n carried out no compensatory afforestation 
either over non forest land or over degraded forest land. By contrast the States of Assam 
and Odisha showed a high level of achievement with regard to compensatory afforestation, 
both over non forest land and over degraded forest land. 
The status of number of plants raised and their survival ratio was also not made available by 
the Forest Department in most of the States.  
MoEF stated in (May 2013) that in pursuan ce to Supreme Court’s order dated 5 May 2006, 
funds realized from the user agency for creation and maintenance of CA were transferred to 
the Ad-hoc CAMPA. All CA activities came to  standstill till the Supreme Court vide their 
order dated 10 July 2009 allowed th e Ad-hoc CAMPA to release a part of these funds to the 
concerned State CAMPAs with an annual ceiling of ` 1,000 crore per annum for release of 
CAMPA funds. Transfer of CA funds to the Ad -hoc CAMPA without any release to State/ UT 
Governments from 2006 to 2009 and putting up of  an annual ceiling on their release from 
2009 onwards by the Supreme Court resulted in accumulation of CA funds. The MoEF stated 
that it had initiated a proposal to obtain approval of the Supreme Court to constitute 
regular CAMPAs with adequate manpower, both at national and each State/ UT level to 
ensure expeditious utilization of CAMPA funds. 
It is a fact that between May 2006 and July 2009, no funds for compensatory afforestation 
were released to State Forest Departments by Ad-hoc CAMPA, hence, slowing down the 
activity of CA. However, an amount of ` 2,925.65 crore that was received by the State Forest 
Departments (including J&K) towards CA funds  during the period 20 09-12 out of which an 
Percentage of 
afforestation done 
Over degraded forest land Over non forest land 
No afforestation 
done 
Gujarat, Haryana, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Punjab 
and Rajasthan. 
Bihar, Chandigarh, Goa, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West 
Bengal. 
 1 to 25 Karnataka, Manipur, Sikkim, 
Tripura, Uttarakhand and West 
Bengal. 
Chhattisgarh. 
26 to 50 Andaman & Nicobar Islands, 
Himachal Pradesh and Tamil 
Nadu. 
Nil. 
51 to 75 Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh. 
Tamil Nadu. 
75 to 100 Assam, Delhi and Odisha. Assam. 
Over 100 Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Goa. Odisha. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  45 | P a g e  
amount of ` 1,149.80 crore remained unutilised in the accounts of the respective State 
Forest Departments.  
It is evident that on one of the most import ant conditions of the Guidelines under FC Act, 
1980 viz. undertaking compensatory afforestat ion on forest land diverted, the record, as 
borne out by the facts, has been very dismal. 
2.3.2. Non-maintenance of records relating to Compensatory Afforestation 
As per para 3.1(i) of the Guidelines i ssued under the FC Act 1980, Compensatory 
Afforestation was one of the most important conditions stipulated by the Central 
Government while approving proposals for dereservation or diversion of forest land for non-
forest uses. It was essential that for all such  proposals, a comprehensive scheme for CA was 
formulated and submitted to MoEF. Further, CA was to be undertaken over equivalent area 
of non-forest land or on the degraded forest  land twice in extent of forest area being 
diverted subject to certain exemptions given u nder para 3.2(viii) of the Guidelines issued 
under the  Act.   
As per CAMPA notification dated 23 April 2004 the money received for CA, ACA was to be 
used as per the site specific schemes receiv ed from the States and UTs along with the 
proposal for diversion of the forest land under FC Act, 1980. 
Test check of records of MoEF/RO revealed  that in most of the cases scheme for 
compensatory afforestation had been sent but  there were no documents available in the 
files showing that the compensatory afforestat ion had actually been carried out as per the 
approved schemes. 
We examined 102 files pertaining to 16 stat es at the ROs and 117 files at MoEF. We 
observed that although an amount of  ` 2,829.21 crore had been released from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA for compensatory afforestation dur ing the period 2009-12, there were no 
consolidated records availabl e with MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA to  evidence monitoring of 
compensatory afforestation actually undertaken in lieu of 1,14,877.26 hectare of forest land 
diverted as per the records of RO/ MoEF during the period 2006-12. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that taking up of co mpensatory afforestation as per the scheme 
was the responsibility of the States. 
The reply is not tenable because the Supreme Court in its order dated 3 April 2000, fixed the 
responsibility of ensuring the proper carrying out of compensatory afforestation on Ministry 
of Environment and Forests and said that it was for the Ministry to  monitor the conditions 
stipulated at the time of grant of forest clearance. 
The reply also confirms the absence of an y central database/ management information 
system with MoEF to monitor the actual execut ion of the CA activities  as per the approved 
schemes. Given the dismal state of compensatory  afforestation, particularly in the case of 
non forest land identified for afforestation, the absence of any cent ralised information in 
this regard will clearly impact on the quality of decision making in MoEF. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
46 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
2.4. Diversion of forest land for grant/ renewal of mining leases 
 
2.4.1. Unauthorized renewal of mining leases by State Government 
As per provisions of para 1.6 of the Guidelin es issued under the Fore st (Conservation) Act, 
1980, renewal of an existing mining lease in a fo rest area also required the prior approval of 
the Central Government.  Continuation or resumption of mining operation on the expiry of a 
mining lease without prior approval constituted a contravention of the Act. 
Supreme Court in its order of December 1996 st ated all proposals for diversion of forest 
area for any non-forest purposes irrespective  of its ownership would require the prior 
approval of the Central Government. 
Out of 219 files test checke d during audit of MoEF/RO it was observed that the State 
Governments had renewed the mining leases without approval of MoEF, in contravention of 
the orders of the Supreme Court and Rules. The details of such unauthorised renewal of 
mining lease are detailed in Table 11. 
Table 11: Renewal of Mining lease granted by  State Government without the approval of 
MoEF 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Lessee Forest 
Area (in 
ha) 
Name of 
Mineral 
State Renewal 
Period 
Period of unauthorized 
lease 
1 M/s Harish 
Vyas 
8.54 Silica 
Sand 
Rajasthan 23/07/1999 
to 
22/07/2019
12 years
2 M/s Ganesh 
Agarwal 
27.32 Marble Rajasthan 15/04/1999 
to 
14/04/2019
18 months
3 M/s Balaji 
Mineral 
13.93 Silica 
Sand 
Rajasthan 27/12/1999 
to 
26/12/2019
10 years
4 M/s Essel 
Mining 
Industries 
30 Dolomite Odisha August 1985 
to 
September 
2005 
20 years
5 M/s Udaipur 
Minerals 
Development 
Syndicate 
641.86 - Rajasthan May 1981 to 
May 200115 
20 years
In cases at (1), (2) and (3) in Table 11, the unauthorised renewal was stopped by orders of 
Rajasthan High Court in February 2012, Octo ber 2011 and November 2010 respectively, at 
the initiatives of RO Lucknow. In cases at point (4) and (5), the mining leases were further 
renewed by MoEF without initiating any action  for the earlier unauthorised renewals by the 
State Government. 
                                                            
15 Mining was reportedly continuing as of July 2010 as per RO Lucknow.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  47 | P a g e  
In the above cases it was observed that MoEF did not invoke any penal provision against the 
defaulting user agencies and also did not ra ise the issue of the unauthorised renewal with 
the State authorities except to issue specific show cause notices to the defaulting officers/ 
user agencies after the issue was raised in audit. 
We also observed that MoEF did not have  a consolidated data base/ management 
information system on the mining leases approv ed by it, the period of the mining lease, 
submission of monitoring reports by RO, date of expiry of lease, receipt of request for 
renewal and reversion of land to the Forest De p a r t m e n t  o n  t h e  e x p i r y  o f  l e a s e .  I n  t h e  
absence of such a database, MoEF is unable to  effectively monitor the mining activity in 
forest land and check unauthorised renewal of mining leases. Hence MoEF did not have any 
enforcement mechanism to check and restrain unauthorised renewals. 
MoEF in its reply (May 2013) admitted that in  the State of Rajasthan most of the mining 
leases in forest areas were granted or renewed without obtaining approval under the FC Act 
1980. MoEF stated that the Rajasthan High Co urt by their orders passed in February 2012, 
October 2011 and November 2010 has already stopped illegal renewal in three mines 
indicated at sl. No. 1 to 3. Further, it was stated that MoEF will examine the renewal of 
mining leases without requisite approval under the FC Act, 1980 in respect of mines 
indicated at sl. No. 4 and 5 and take appropriate action. MoEF also stated that it had already 
assigned a project to the Forest Survey of I ndia to prepare a Geographic Information System 
based decision support database to facilitate objective decision on applications seeking 
prior approval of Central Government under the FC Act, 1980. The database will inter-alia 
contain all relevant information as mentioned by  the audit pertaining to mining leases in 
forest areas.  
2.4.2. Mining without requisite permission 
As per provisions of para 1.6 of the Guidelin es issued under the Fore st (Conservation) Act, 
1980, renewal of an existing mining lease in a forest area required the prior approval of the 
Central Government.  Continuation or resumpti on of mining operation on the expiry of a 
mining lease without prior approval constitute a contravention of the Act.  
As per Section 3A of the Forest (Conservation ) Act, 1980, whoever contravenes or abets the 
contravention of any provisions of Section 2, is punishable with simple imprisonment for a 
period which may extend to 15 days. 
During test check of records of RO Bhubaneswar and RO Bengaluru, it was observed that the 
mining activity was going on without forestry clearances from MoEF as detailed in Table 12. 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
48 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 12: Mining activity without forest clearance 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
user 
agency 
States Forest 
land (in 
ha) 
Period of 
illegal Mining 
Reply of MoEF Audit 
comments 
1 Mining 
lease to 
Tungbhadr
a Minerals 
Pvt. Ltd, in 
Bellary 
Regions. 
Karnataka 232.70 September 
1990 to  
January 1997 
State 
Government 
reported that 
no mining 
activities have 
taken place 
after 11 June 
1999 (i.e. after 
expiry of the 
earlier 
permission) 
MoEF did not 
comment on 
the periods of 
illegal mining 
as indicated in 
the audit 
observations. 
2 OMC 
Limited, 
Jaipur 
district 
Odisha 
 
142.73 August 2007 
to October 
2009 
RO reported 
that mining has 
not been done 
after expiry of 
the lease on 7 
July 2007. 
However, the 
State 
Government has 
been requested 
to furnish the 
comments on 
the above 
observation of 
the audit. 
As per 
monitoring 
report of RO 
there was 
illegal mining 
during this 
period, hence 
the reports 
are 
contradictory. 
In the above cases it was observed that MoEF did not invoke any penal provision against the 
defaulting user agencies for mining without forest clearance. 
2.4.3. Diversion of forest land in violation of FC Act in mine leases in Bellary 
Test check of records of RO Bengaluru revealed that the permission for  diversion of forest 
land  covering the area of 6,170.25 hectare of mining leases in 92 cases only in Bellary forest 
division was granted by Regional Office (South  Zone)/ MoEF during the period 1994 to July 
2009.  Out of 92 cases only in  two cases, the National Mi neral Development Corporation 
(NMDC), a Government of India Undertaking cove ring the forest area of 949.02 hectare was 
involved.  In all other 90 cases, private agencies were engaged.   
Out of these 90 cases, in 36 cases renewals / fresh approvals were granted during March 
2006 to July 2009 involving the forest area of 3,739.51 hectare.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  49 | P a g e  
Supreme Court of India orders dated 26 February 2010 suspended/ stopped mining 
activities in the above mentioned 90 mining ca ses (excluding two pertaining to NMDC) on 
account of over exploitation and considerable damage to the environment. 
During test check of records of MoEF, 39 file s regarding above cases were requisitioned in 
audit. 29 files were not furnished to audit (Annexure 7).  
Scrutiny of these 10 files revealed: 
Sl.No. Case Details 
1 Transfer of NPV amounting to ` 64.41 crore (in 8 projects out of 10), cost of CA/ACA/PCA at 
` 9.08 crore (in 9 projects out of 10) and ` 0.53 crore as safety zone charges (in 6 projects) 
were stated to have been deposited with the PCCF of the state. It could not be confirmed 
from the files that these amounts had been transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
2 Non-forest land measuring to 311. 85 hectare in nine projects was not provided by the user 
agencies. 
From above it was observed that final clearanc es were given by MoEF without ensuring the 
compliance of in principle conditions. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that RO, Bengaluru has requested the State Government of 
Karnataka to provide details of transfer of funds to Ad-hoc CAMPA. The Government of 
Karnataka was being requested by the RO, Bengaluru to reconcile the compensatory 
afforestation areas FC clearanc e wise and furnish the details of cases in respect of which 
either compensatory afforestation has not at al l been done or has only  been partially done 
due to various reasons such as non-suitabilit y of the area for plantation, encroachment, 
litigation etc.  After receipt of the report, appropriate action will be taken. 
The reply of MoEF only confirms the abysmal fa ilure of the Ministry to put in place a robust 
system of monitoring to ensure that final clearances were given only after ensuring 
compliance with all conditions imposed while granting in principle approval. 
2.4.4. Diversion of forest land in violation of FC Act in mine leases in Goa  
During the test check of records of MoEF we requisitioned 24 files pertaining to mining in 
Goa. 12 files were not furnished to audit (Annexure 8).  
In five of the 12 cases made available to audi t, we observed violation of the FC Act during 
the period 2006-12: 
Sl.No. Name of Agency Area diverted (in ha) 
1  M/s Salgaoncar & Brothers Private Limite 44.98
2  Smt. Sashi Kala Kakodkar 48.44
3  M/s Sociedade Timblolpros Ltd. 109.94
4  M/s Panduranga Timblo Industries 32.33
5  M/s RP Timblo 63.51
 Total 299.20
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
50 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Our scrutiny revealed the following: 
i. In lieu of forest land aggregating to 299.20 hectare diverted in all these five projects, 
providing of equivalent non-forest land was not even stipulated in the in principle 
approval conditions and thus, not provided by the user agencies. They were allowed 
to give CA funds for afforestation on degrad ed forest land twice the extent of forest 
land diverted. 
ii. In one case pertaining to North District of Goa, M/s Panduranga Timblo Industries, 
covering 32.33 hectare of land no conditions of NPV, CA, PCA etc. were imposed, and 
thus, no amount was recovered on account of these heads. Thus NPV amounting to 
` 1.88 crore (calculated at the minimum rate of ` 5.8 lakh per hectare) was not 
recovered. 
iii. It was not on record in the three projec t files whether Ad-hoc CAMPA had received  
` 13.10 crore of NPV, ` 2.77 crore of CA and ` 0.08 crore of Safety zone charges, as 
stipulated as condition for permission. 
From above it was observed that final clearanc es were given by MoEF without ensuring the 
compliance/ specification of in principle approval conditions. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that it had noted the observation of audit and that it would re-
examine conditions stipulated in approval a ccorded under the FC Act 1980 for diversion of 
forest land in the five proposals examined by the audit. 
2.4.5. Non-surrender of forest land after expiry of mining lease 
As per provisions of Annexure-III of FC Act, 198 0, renewal of a lease is in effect a grant of 
fresh lease. The prior approval of MoEF in te rms of Section 2 of the FC Act, 1980 would be 
required when a mining lease granted before the commenceme nt of the Act is renewed 
after its coming into force. 
During test check of records of ROs, it was ob served that 406.32 hectare forest land was not 
surrendered to the Forest Department after cess ation of lease period during the period July 
2007 to February 2012. Case wise details are at Table 13. 
Table 13: Details of cases on non-surrender of forest land after the expiry of mining lease 
period 
Sl.No. Name of user agency States Forest land 
(in ha) 
Month of 
cessation of 
lease period 
1 M/s Gavisiddeshwara Enterprises Karnataka 5.67 April 2010
2 M/s SA Tawab Karnataka 31.60 March 2011
3 M/s Kaliapani Chromite Mines Odisha 142.73 July 2007
4 M/s Girdhari Lal Agarwal Odisha 23.24 August 2008

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  51 | P a g e  
Sl.No. Name of user agency States Forest land 
(in ha) 
Month of 
cessation of 
lease period 
5 M/s TISCO Jharkhand 109.99 May 2012
6 M/s CCL Jharkhand 43.30 February 2012
7 M/s Harish Vyas Rajasthan 8.54 February 2012
8 M/s Ganesh Agarwal Rajasthan 27.32 October 2011
9 M/s Balaji Minerals Rajasthan 13.93 November 2010
  Total 406.32 
In the absence of any record evidencing that the forest land had been surrendered after the 
expiry of the lease, it cannot be assured in au dit that no further mining activity is being 
carried out in these areas. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that in such cases, the State Forest Depart ments normally do not 
resume possession of forest land located within  such leases immediately after expiry of 
mining lease because in most of the case s, heavy machinery and ore mined out during 
validity of lease are present in the forest land. 
The reply is not tenable because the State Forest Departments were required to take 
immediate possession of the forest land after cessation of the lease period. The lessee is 
also aware of the duration of the lease a nd should make suitable arrangements for 
removing and safeguarding its assets. 
2.4.6. Non- submission of monitoring report for mining 
As per para 4.10(iv) of the Guidelines issued  under the FC Act, 1980, for the proposals of 
renewal of leases, the regional offices of the Mini stry were to submit a copy of the report of 
the latest monitoring done (o ne year before the expiry of lease period) along with the 
abstract of monitoring report of the project during the lease period specially highlighting the 
conditions which were not fulfilled, with complete details of the reasons for not fulfilling the 
stipulated conditions. The conditions which had been complied with were also to be 
highlighted with the quality of performance of the project authorities, a short note justifying 
desirability of renewal of lease and other recommendations. Based on the report, the 
renewal of lease was to be accorded by MoEF. 
During test check of records of the mining leases renewed between 2002 to 2012 in MoEF/ 
RO it was observed that in 56 cases the RO had not submitted the monitoring reports to 
MoEF as provided in the said Rule. The state wise details are at Table 14. 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
52 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 14: Status of Monitoring reports not received before renewal of mining leases 
between 2002-12.  
From the above table it was observed that Mo EF granted approvals in 56 cases of which 52 
cases pertained to private agencies involvin g forest land of 3, 889.24 hectare without 
ascertaining whether the user agencies ha d complied with the stipulated conditions 
throughout the earlier lease period or not. MoEF had effectively renewed mining leases 
without basic due diligence required of it and, thus, acted in a casual manner. 
MoEF in its reply (May 2013) admitted that the desired monitoring target could not be 
achieved due to shortage of staff at the Region al Offices. It was also  stated that the work 
load of Regional Offices has increased consider ably requiring sanction  of additional staff 
strength. However, most of the Regional Office s of the MoEF were not provided even with 
the sanctioned staff strength. 
2.5. Environmental issues 
 
2.5.1. Diversion of forest land for mining without environmental clearance 
As per para 2.3(i) of the Guidelines i ssued under the FC Act 1980, project proposals 
requiring clearance from environmental angle as per notifications issued from time to time 
under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, re quire clearance separa tely under procedure 
laid down by the Environment Wing of MoEF. Environmental clearances where required are 
to be applied for separately and simultaneo usly with forest clearance. For a project 
requiring clearances from forest as well as environment angles, separate communication of 
sanctions was to be issued, and the project was deemed to be cleared only after clearances 
were received from both the angles. 
Sl. 
No. 
 
State 
Number of 
Monitoring 
Reports 
Agencies involved Area of land involved 
(in ha) 
Private Governmen Private Governmen
1 Chhattisgarh 3 2 1 17.74 84.00
2 Madhya Pradesh 2 1 1 194.00 194.78
3 Maharashtra 6 6 Nil 71.26 Nil
4 Andhra Pradesh 8 8 Nil 598.86 Nil
5 Karnataka 8 8 Nil 861.98 Nil
6 Odisha 13 13 Nil 791.15 Nil
7 Jharkhand 7 6 1 550.01 8.70
8 Uttrakhand 2 1 1 8.09 204.00
9 Rajasthan 7 7 Nil 796.15 Nil
 Total 56 52 4 3,889.2 491.48

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  53 | P a g e  
During test check of records of RO Bengalur u it was observed that in two cases mining 
projects were operating without environmental clearances as detailed in Table 15. 
Table 15: Projects operating without environmental clearance 
User Agency States Area of 
Forest land 
(in ha) 
Remarks 
M/s Singreni 
Collieries 
Companies, 
Mancherial 
Division, Allahabad 
District 
Andhra Pradesh 278 RO in July 2008 pointed to the Special 
Chief Secretary, Government of 
Andhra Pradesh that mine was 
operating without environment 
clearance. No action was taken 
thereafter. 
M/s Mysore 
Minerals Limited, 
Bellary District 
Karnataka 80.93 RO in September 2003 wrote to 
Principal Secretary, Government of 
Karnataka to stop the mining but as 
per records available mining was not 
stopped till March 2005. Thereafter 
no records were available. 
While granting final approval, it should have  been ensured by MoEF that the environment 
clearance certificate had been obtained. In both  the above cases it was observed that even 
after reporting by the Regional offices, MoEF did not initiate any action against the 
defaulting agencies and granted final clearance without ensuring environmental clearance. 
MoEF stated (May 2013) that the observation of the Audit regarding running of two mines 
without environment clearance is being comm unicated to Environment Wing of the MoEF 
for taking appropriate action in accordance  with the provisions of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1980. 
MoEF should make a determination of lapses and fix responsibility of officials in MoEF/ State 
Forest Department for the operation of mini ng projects without environment clearance, 
inspite of the same having being pointed out by its Regional Offices. 
2.5.2. Adverse effects of mining on Forest and Wildlife 
As per para 4.16 (ii) and (iii) of the Guide lines issued under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 
1980, while according approval for diversion/renewal of forest land for mining purposes, the 
leases were to be renewed / mo nitored after every five years. The Regional Office was to 
monitor the main parameters/co nditions of formal approval as frequently as possible, at 
least once in a year. At least once in five yea rs a comprehensive monitoring as to the effect 
of mining on air and water pollution was also  t o  b e  c a r r i e d  o u t .  R e g i o n a l  O f f i c e s  w e r e  
required to send such reports/certificates in respect of the monitoring mechanism indicated 
above to the MoEF, so that a view could be taken on continuation of mining lease beyond 
five years. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
54 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
During test check of records of RO Bhubaneswar  it was observed that in monitoring reports 
on four mining leases, it was reported that the mining activity in the project was affecting 
the flora & fauna, forest and wildlife adversely. However, as of December 2012, no action in 
this regard had been taken by MoEF, despite, adverse comments in the monitoring report in 
these projects. The details of such cases are given in Table 16. 
Table 16: Cases in which RO reported adverse im pact of mining activity on forest and wild 
life, but no action was initiated by MoEF 
User Agency  States Area of 
Forest land 
( in ha) 
Date of 
monitoring 
report 
Comments in monitoring 
report 
M/s Bharat Raj 
Singh 
Jharkhand 10.08 January 2008 Project was affecting 
environment and forest. 
M/s National 
Enterprises, 
Sundargarh 
District 
Odisha 37.32 December 
2009
O p e n  c a s e  m i n i n g  w a s  
generally affecting forest 
and wildlife adversely in 
Bonai sector. 
M/s OMC 
Limited, 
Kaliapani 
Chromite mines, 
Jaipur District 
Odisha 142.73 April 2002 Project would definitely 
cause damage to 
surrounding forest and 
wildlife. The clearance in 
this case was given upto July 
2007. 
M/s Mahanadi 
Coal fields 
Limited 
Odisha 174.90 August 2004 The project is affecting the 
forest and wildlife of the 
area leaving ill effects on 
forest and wildlife. The final 
clearance was given in June 
2006 even after adverse 
comment in the monitoring 
report. 
 Total 365.03  
 From the above it was evident that the even after receiving adverse reports from the RO, 
no corrective/ remedial action was taken by MoEF and it continued to grant clearances 
ignoring the violation of the forestry guidelin es by the user agencies. MoEF did not revoke 
the mining lease granted to the user agencies.  
MoEF stated (May 2013) that in the extant case monitoring repo rts contained general 
observation that mining activities in the proj ects was affecting, flora and fauna and forest 
and wildlife adversely. Mining projects by th eir very nature does affect flora and fauna 
adversely to some extent. Violation or non-co mpliance to any of the stipulated conditions 
has however, not been reported in any of these cases. In the absence of specific violation or 
non-compliance to any of the st ipulated conditions, it is no t appropriate for the MoEF to 
take any punitive action against such lessees.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  55 | P a g e  
The reply is not tenable because MoEF did no t initiate any remedial / corrective steps to 
safeguard the environmental hazards. MoEF sh ould lay down clear cut process for taking 
suitable steps on the adverse comments pointed out during monitoring of projects 
otherwise the monitoring reports would be rendered meaningless. 
2.5.3. Renewal of environmentally damaging mining lease by MoEF  
MoEF allowed the diversion of the forest la nd of 100 hectare for mining to M/s Elray 
Minerals & Company in an arbi trary manner flouting the genera l and specific provisions of 
the forestry clearances overriding the recomme ndations in the site inspection report of its 
Regional Office not to divert the fresh area for mining. The details of the audit findings are 
reported as Case Study II.  
Case Study II 
Renewal of environmentally damaging mining lease by MoEF. 
 The Government of Portugal, in 1937 gran ted mining lease for 100 hectare of land in 
perpetuity to M/s Elray Minerals & Company. Out of this 100 hectare, 60.61 hectare and 
39.39 hectare were notified under Section 20 a nd Section 4 of Indian Forest Act 1927 in 
the year August 1979 and October 1981, resp ectively. In 1987, the Goa, Daman & Diu 
Mining Concession (Abolition & Declaration)  Act was passed by Government of India 
which abolished the perpetual mining concessions which was awarded by the Portuguese 
to this project in 1937. The ‘deemed MMRD 16 leases’ therefore were prospectively 
accorded for 20 years w.e.f. 1987 to the concessionaires by the Goa Department of Mines 
& Geology, which meant that they would come to an end in 2007.  
Government of Goa, in May 2006 submitted a proposal to MoEF for renewal of deemed 
mining lease in favour of M/s Elray Minerals  & Company for diversion of 17.84 hectare of 
forest land (12.97 hectare al ready broken + 4.87 hectare to  be broken) keeping 82.16 
hectare reserve for future use for mining in favour of the applicant.  MoEF in May 2008 
granted in principle approval (revised in Augu st 2008) and final approv al to the project in 
February 2009.  
Regional Office Southern Zone, Bengaluru in  June 2006 conducted the site inspection of 
the project and sent its report to MoEF in July  2006.  The site inspection report inter-alia 
observed the following: 
• The proposed site was merely three kilometre away from the Bhagawan Mahaveer 
Sanctuary and was frequently visited by various categories of wild animals. 
• The applicant had not attempted to identify  any non-forest land for carrying out CA. 
10 year old dumps in the area presently be ing sought for diversion, had not been 
stabilized in any manner by the applicant.  
•  It was generally estimated that every ton of  iron ore excavated from the earth in Goa 
leaves behind about three tons of mining re jects, and thus, it was totally undesirable 
that the applicant carried out the mining in an environm entally irresponsible manner. 
                                                            
16 Mines and Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
56 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
The proposal too did not contain any re clamation plan detailing as to how the 
applicant proposed to reclaim the mined out area. 
• The forest area proposed for diversion ha d a fairly big nallah which drains out the 
water from the mine into the Mandovi river.   Since the proposal did not contain any 
component of a treatment plan for the drai nage from the mine, it could be assumed 
that the mine tailing containing pollutants wo uld be drained into the Mandovi river.  
The present proposal found no mention of su ch major disturbances of natural water 
course. 
• A benefit to the cost ratio had not been projected in the proposal. 
• Since, the mining area is very close to wildlife habitat, any mining operations such as 
blasting carried out with the use of explosives would inevitably affect the wildlife 
adversely. 
• The total number of trees that were required to be felled, to facilitate the diversion of 
4.86 hectare of fresh area worked out to be more than 1000. 
• The utility of the project seemed to be limited to private gain. 
The inspection report in the end opined that  it was not desirable anymore to divert 
fresh areas for mining in Goa. 
Forest Clearance Division o f  M o E F  i n  A u g u s t  2 0 0 6  ignoring the above serious 
observations, recommended the project for appr oval of diversion of 17.84 hectare of 
forest land with the conditio n of providing of non-forest land to the extent of 4.86 
hectare along with other general conditio ns. The exemption from providing of non-
forest land was sought by the company on th e certificate from the Chief Secretary. It 
was observed in audit that this certificate was without any letter head and stamp of the 
office or the officer, which appeared suspicious prima-faci e. However, MoEF modified 
in-principle approval in Au gust 2008 and exempted the company from providing non 
forest land by allowing CA over double the degraded forest. 
The Chief Conservator of Forests, Governme nt of Goa submitted a compliance report 
mentioning the total lease area of 100 hectare,  despite the in-principle approval of only 
17.84 hectare, and depositing of ` 0.09 crore towards CA on  double degraded land for 
4.86 hectare along with receipt of NP V for 17.84 hectare of forest land. There was no 
mention of amount of NPV recovered and deposited to Ad-hoc CAMPA.  
MoEF, in February 2009 accorded final approval to the project putting in an ambiguous 
condition that the user agency was required to pay the NPV for the balance forest area 
to retain the same within the lease area. The underlying meaning of the phrase ‘ pay the 
NPV for the balance forest area ’ could not be clearly made ou t in audit. It was construed 
that MoEF permitted diversion of the whole area of 100 hectare. The NPV for entire area 
of 100 hectare was not calculated and found deposited into Ad-hoc CAMPA and amount 
of CA for the balance area of 82.16 hectare was also not collected. 
Thus the diversion of the forest land was ma de in an arbitrary manner flouting the 
general and specific provisions of the forestry clearances. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  57 | P a g e  
The audit observations were issued to MoEF in  April 2013; no reply ha s been received (July 
2013). 
2.6. Other issues of land management 
During test check of records of ROs various irre gularities were noticed in cases of diversion 
of forest land to user agencies viz. illega l mining, non compliance of conditions of in 
principle approval and improper monitoring of the projects as brought out in Table 17.  
Table 17: Other cases of illegal mining and no n-compliance of conditions of in principle 
clearance 
Name of the 
User agency 
Forest 
land 
involved 
(in ha) 
Date of 
final 
approval 
Audit Comments Reply/ Action by 
MoEF 
Omkareshwar 
Project, 
Government 
of Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
5,829.85 19/8/2004 MoEF granted approval for the 
projects without recovery of 
NPV from the user agency.  
MoEF (May 2013) 
took cognizance of 
audit observation 
and recovered 
NPV of ` 339.90 
crore from 
Narmada Valley 
Development 
Authority. 
M/s 
Swamykasi 
Ratnam, 
Batrapalam 
of 
Madinapadu,  
Andhra 
Pradesh. 
4.85 23/8/2004 Ministry in October 2003 
directed the user agency to 
deposit the cost of 
reclamation with the Forest 
Department before grant of 
final approval. The condition 
was overruled in July 2004 by 
Director RO (HQ). Second 
Stage approval was granted in 
August 2004. Reclamation 
work was not done as of 
October 2011. 
Project was 
monitored by RO 
Bengaluru in 
October 2011 and 
shortfall in 
compliance was 
reported to the 
Nodal Officer in 
the State 
Government of 
Andhra Pradesh 
for appropriate 
action. 
M/s 
Narendra, 
Hubli District, 
Karnataka. 
27.72 01/6/2004 Amount of CA realized by 
State was ` 0.40 crore 
whereas as per monitoring 
report the amount was ` 0.45 
crore.  
RO Bengaluru had 
sought 
clarification from 
the State 
Government in 
May 2004, reply 
from the State 
Government was 
still awaited and 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
58 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Name of the 
User agency 
Forest 
land 
involved 
(in ha) 
Date of 
final 
approval 
Audit Comments Reply/ Action by 
MoEF 
that MoEF would 
seek clarification 
from the State 
Government for 
the above 
discrepancy. 
M/s SA 
Tawab, 
Bellary for 
Iron Ore, 
Karnataka. 
31.60 24/4/2003 The original mining lease was 
from 3 March 1981 for 10 
years i.e. upto 3 March 1991. 
The in-principle approval 
which was given in 23 
December 1992 was  cancelled 
in 14 September 2001 stating 
that if the State Government/ 
UA was still interested in the 
project, a fresh proposal 
would be required to be 
submitted which would be 
considered de-novo. However, 
in April 2003, the final 
approval was granted w.e.f. 4 
March 1991 for 20 years. The 
fact remained that there was 
no mining lease between the 
periods 4 March 1991 to 24 
April 2003. Transfer of lease 
proposal was initiated in 04 
February 2009 but PCCF 
withheld the proposal on 
account of Lokayukta Report. 
MoEF stated that 
its approval dated 
April, 2003 covers 
the period from 4 
March 1991 to 24 
April 2003. The 
reply is not 
tenable because 
MoEF granted the 
approval from the 
retrospective date 
of March 1991 
without ensuring 
actual carrying out 
of the mining 
activity during 
March 1991 to 
April 2003.  
 
M/s Tata 
Refractories 
Ltd, Odisha. 
58.50 June 2005 Final approval was given 
without clearance from 
National Board of Wildlife as 
mining was very close to 
Chandaka Wildlife Sanctuary. 
Monitoring report in April, 
2008 revealed that the 41 
hectare area had been 
surrendered to the Forest 
Department without 
appropriate reclamation and 
the 4.50 hectare of dumping 
Reply awaited. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  59 | P a g e  
Name of the 
User agency 
Forest 
land 
involved 
(in ha) 
Date of 
final 
approval 
Audit Comments Reply/ Action by 
MoEF 
area was also not properly 
reclaimed. There was heavy 
dust and absence of water 
sprinkling arrangements and 
the water from the mine was 
being discharged without 
proper treatment. Because of 
threat to wildlife, the UA was 
advised in November 2007 to 
erect/ dig elephant proof 
barrier along the sanctuary 
boundary which was also not 
found done. The mining was 
affecting the health of forest 
and wildlife adversely due to 
fragmentation of the forest. 
UA was required to execute 
the concurrent Reclamation 
Plan in consultation with State 
Forest Department from the 
very first year and an annual 
report was to be sent to the 
Nodal Officer and the Regional 
CCF, Bhubaneswar failing 
which the mining activity was 
to remain suspended. As 
evident from RO Bhubaneswar 
letter dated October, 2009, 
there was no such plan 
received either from the user 
agency or from Nodal Officer 
and no remedial/ corrective 
action was taken by MoEF. 
  
2.7. Inadequate and ineffective application of penal clause 
Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 19 80, imposes restrictions on dereservation of 
forest or use of forest land for non forest pur poses. It envisages that no State Government 
or other authority shall make, except with th e prior approval of the Central Government, 
any order directing dereservation of reserve forest, use of forest land for non forest 
purpose, lease out the forest land and clearing  of the trees over the forest land. The 
authorities authorised to grant forest cleara nces are the Chief Conservator of Forests/ 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
60 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Fore sts of the Regional Office and the Director 
General of Forests of MoEF. 
As per Section 3A of the Forest (Conservation ) Act, 1980, whoever contravenes or abets the 
contravention of any provisions of Section 2, is to be punishable with simple imprisonment 
for a period which may extend to fifteen days . Where any offence under this act had been 
committed by any department of the Government or any authority, every person who, at 
the time the offence was committed was directly  in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
authority for the conduct of the business of the authority as well as the authority was to be 
deemed to be guilty for the offence and li able to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
It was observed in audit that against receivab le non forest land of 1,03,381.91 hectare only 
28,085.90 hectare land was receiv ed. Of this only 11,294.38 hectare was transferred and 
mutated in the favour of the State/ UT Fore st Departments and with in it 3,279.31 hectare 
was declared as Reserve Forest/ Protected Forest. Further, there were cases of non 
recovery/ under assessment of Net Present Va lue/Compensatory Afforestation/Additional 
Compensatory Afforestation/Penal Compensatory Afforestation/Catchment Area Treatment 
Plan of ` 5,311.16 crore17 which constituted 23 per cent of the total principal amount with 
Ad-hoc CAMPA as on 31 March 2012. However, no  action was initiated by MoEF even after 
gross violations of the provisions of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 
MoEF had invoked penal provis ion only in three cases during the period August 2009 to 
October 2012 and even this action was only li mited to issue of show cause notices. In our 
opinion penal clause prescribed in the FC Act, 1980, was largely inadequate and 
ineffectively applied to place any deterrence towards illegal and unauthorised practices. 
2.8. Conclusions 
Forests are a vital component in sustaining the life support system on Earth. Any 
programme for development needs to evolve a systemic approach so as to balance 
economic development and en vironmental protection. Regulating the indiscriminate 
diversion of forest land for non-forest use is, therefore, critical. Accordingly, compensatory 
afforestation has been made one of the mo st important conditions while approval is 
accorded in case of proposals for dereservatio n or diversion of forest land for non-forest 
uses. It is envisaged that compensatory affore station will be done on equivalent area of 
non-forest land which is to be transferred to the ownership of State Forest Department or 
on double the extent of area of forest land diverted on degraded forest land under certain 
circumstances.  
The chapter brings out serious shortcomings in  regulatory issues re lated to diversion of 
forest land, the abject failure to promote compensatory afforestation, the unauthorised 
diversion of forest land in the case of mining and the attendant violation of the 
environmental regime. 
                                                            
17 For details refer to Chapter III. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
 
Compensatory Afforestation in India  61 | P a g e  
To be able to undertake compensatory afforestat ion on equivalent area of non-forest land, 
such land needs to be received by the Gove rnment. The Ministry's records reveal that 
against the receivable non forest land of 1,03,381.91 hectare, only 28,086 hectare was 
received during the period 20 06-12 which constituted only 27 per cent  of receivable non-
forest land. The compensatory afforestation done over the non-forest land received was an 
abysmal 7,280.84 hectare constituting seven per cent of the land which ought to have been 
received. The afforestation over the degrad ed forest land was do ne only on 49,733.76  
hectare and 49 km out of 1,01,037.35 ha and 54.5 km identified which works out to 49 per 
cent (in area). Seven States viz. Gujarat, Haryan a, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Punjab 
and Rajasthan carried out no compensatory afforestation either over non forest land or over 
degraded forest land. By contra st the States of Assam and Odisha showed a high level of 
achievement with regard to compensatory afforestation, both over non forest land and over 
degraded forest land. 
The record with regard to transfer of owners hip to the State Forest Department is equally 
dismal. Information made available by State/  UT CAMPA revealed that of the 23,246.80 
hectare of non forest land re ceived by them only 11,294. 38 hectare was transferred and 
mutated in the name of the State Forest De partment. Of this only  3,279.31 hectare was 
declared as Reserve Forest/ Protected Forest which was only 14 per cent of non forest land 
so received. 
Receipt of non forest land is the starting po int for undertaking compensatory afforestation. 
Yet on this critical element there was no meeting ground on the data maintained by the 
Ministry and State Governments. The variation in data on forest land diverted and non-
forest land received was as much as 3.5 per cent and 17.3 per cent respectively between the 
data maintained by the regional offices of the Ministry and the St ate Forest Department. 
Poor quality and unreconciled data will compromi se the quality of planning, operations and 
decision making.   
In case of non-availability or short availability of forest land, to be duly certified by the Chief 
Secretary, compensatory afforestation was to be undertaken over the degraded forest twice 
the extent of the forest land diverted. It was observed that compensatory afforestation was 
allowed over an area of 75,905. 47 hectare without any certificate of the Chief Secretary, in 
almost all the states except Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Sikkim. Only in two 
State/ UTs viz. Chandigarh and Uttarakhand,  equivalent or more non forest land was 
received.  
Audit also observed instances where express or ders of the Supreme Court were flouted by 
APSEB in Andhra Pradesh where the diversion of forest land in National Parks and 
Sanctuaries was allowed without seeking prior permission of the Supreme Court. In five 
other cases unauthorised renewal of mining leases in Rajasthan and Odisha were noticed, 
where the approval of Central Government wa s not obtained by the State Government as 
was directed by the Supreme Court. 
The chapter also brings out numerous instance s of unauthorized renewal of leases, illegal 
mining, continuance of mining leases despite adverse comments in the monitoring reports, 
projects operating without environment clearances, unauthorized change of status of forest 
land and arbitrariness in decisions of forestry  clearances. In six States where information 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
62 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
was available, encroachment of 1,55,169.82 hectare of forest land was noticed but MoEF 
did not take time bound action for eviction despite directions of the Supreme Court. 
Monitoring was very important considering th e scale at which irregularities have been 
noticed in this audit. Absence of MIS/ consol idated database permitted individual cases of 
irregularities to remain unchecked. MoEF faile d to appropriately discharge its responsibility 
of monitoring of compliance of conditions of th e FC Act, 1980 relating to diversion of forest 
land. 
Despite such gross non compliance with statutory conditions and orders of the Supreme 
Court, no action was initiated by MoEF. In fa ct MoEF had invoked penal provision only in 
three cases during the period August 2009 to October 2012 and even this action was limited 
to issue of show cause notices.  In our opinion  penal clause prescribed in the FC Act, 1980, 
was largely inadequate and ineffective to put  any deterrence on illegal and unauthorised 
practices. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 63 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
3.1. Introduction 
As per Forest (Conservation) Act 1980, mon ey is to be collected  for compensatory 
afforestation from user agencies which incl udes money for Compen satory Afforestation 
(CA), Additional Compensatory Afforestatio n (ACA), Penal Compensatory Afforestation 
(PCA), Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plan, etc in lieu of the forest land diverted for non 
forest use. Till 2002, these funds were be ing collected and retained by the State 
Government for undertaking the activities of compensatory afforestation, advance soil 
work, maintenance etc. 
In 2001 the Supreme Court noted that there was poor utilization of funds deposited for 
compensatory afforestation and also that a large amount of money for compensatory 
afforestation was not realized by the State Governments from user agencies. It further 
observed that monies were paid by the us er agencies to the State Governments for 
compensatory afforestation but the utilisation of the money for reforestation was only 
about 83 per cent of the funds actually realised by the State Government and the shortfall 
was about nearly ` 200 crore. On 29 October 2002, the Supr eme Court directed that the 
user agency was also required to pay into the Compensatory Afforestation Fund the net 
value of the forest land diverted for non-fo rest purposes depending upon the quantity and 
density of the forest land being diverted for non-forest use.  
The Supreme Court in its order of 29 October 2002 while directing the creation of a body to 
manage Compensatory Afforestation Funds al so ordered that the amount received on 
account of compensatory afforestation but not spent or any balance amount lying with the 
States/Union Territories or any amount that wa s yet to be recovered from the user agency 
was also to be deposited in this fund. On 5 May 2006, while ordering the creation of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, the Supreme Court also accepted the suggestions of the Central Empowered 
Committee (CEC) that the ad-hoc body would ensure that all the monies recovered on 
behalf of the CAMPA and which were lying with the various officials of the State 
Government should be transferred to the bank account(s) to be operated by this body. 
CEC in its recommendations to the Supreme Co urt in 2002 had noted that as per the MoEF 
statement, as of March 2002, against ` 859.29 crore which was to be recovered from user 
agencies, ` 793.86 crore had been recovered and ` 496.22 crore had been actually spent on 
c o m p e n s a t o r y  a f f o r e s t a t i o n .  H e n c e ,  i t  w a s  c a l c u l a t e d  t h a t  i n  2 0 0 2 ,  ` 297.64 crore of 
compensatory afforestation funds were  lying with State Governments and ` 65.43 crore 
were yet to be collected from the user ag encies. By 2006, when Ad-hoc CAMPA became 
operational, the accumulation had gone above ` 1,200 crore as was evidenced from the 
transfer of funds to Ad-hoc CAMPA in the initial year. 
 
Chapter - III 
Collection of Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
64 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
3.2. Transfer of funds to Ad-hoc CAMPA by State Governments 
As per the Supreme Court’s orders of 5 May 2006, Ad-hoc CAMPA was to ensure that all 
monies recovered on behalf of the CAMPA and lying with the State Governments were 
transferred to the bank accounts to be operat ed by this body. All the State Governments/ 
Union Territories were to account for and pa y the amount collected with effect from 30 
October 2002, in conformity with the orde r dated 29 October 2002, to the said Ad-hoc 
body. 
Accordingly, Ad-hoc CAMPA arranged for opening State specific bank accounts in 
nationalised banks. Monies collected by States  from user agencies for diversion of forest 
land to non-forest use, in terms of the Fore st (Conservation) Act, 1980 were deposited into 
these accounts. 
Since 2006, Ad-hoc CAMPA operated 37 current accounts in Corporation Bank, CGO 
Complex Lodhi Road (35 curre nt accounts pertaining to the States/UTs, two current 
accounts pertaining to the management expe nses of Ad-hoc CAMPA) and 33 Current 
accounts in Union Bank of India, Sunder Nagar, New Delhi (32 current accounts pertaining to 
the States/UTs and one main account). In additi on, 37 saving bank accounts were opened in 
Corporation Bank in March 2011 (35 saving bank  accounts pertaining to the States/UTs, one 
main account and one saving bank account pert aining to the Management Expenses of Ad-
hoc CAMPA) and 33 saving bank accounts in Union Bank of India, Sunder Nagar, New Delhi 
(32 saving bank accounts pertaining to the States/U.T.s and one main account). 
The accounting period adopted by Ad-hoc CA MPA was from 1 July to 30 June. This was 
changed from 30 June 2012 onwards to match with the financial year, with the year 2012-13 
being the transition period. 
3.2.1. Directions issued by Ad-hoc CAMPA regarding collection and transfer of funds 
Ad-hoc CAMPA, in its capacity as the Governin g Body, from time to ti me in its successive 
meetings, discussed the issues relating to collection and transfer of funds and gave 
directions to ensure that all the monies due to  be rendered to Ad-hoc CAMPA by States/UTs 
were recovered, transferred and accounted fo r. These directions are summarised at Table 
18. 
Table 18: Directions issued and observations made by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Date of the 
meeting 
Directions issued and observations made by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
7 July 2006 Periodic reconciliation of the rece ipts with the concerned State/UT 
Governments was considered essential. It was decided that: 
• A Receipt-Ledger would be opened in  consultation with the Financial 
Consultant of Ad-hoc Body and properly maintained under his 
guidance and supervision.  A suitab le mechanism for cross-referencing 
of receipts with the State/UT, Co rporation Bank and Ad-hoc CAMPA 
would also be developed in consultation with the Financial Consultant.
• Monthly statement of the funds received from the State/UT 
Governments was to be referred back to them for reconciliation. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 65 | P a g e  
Date of the 
meeting 
Directions issued and observations made by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
27 
November 
2006 
• Details of the money receivable, mo ney actually received, amount of 
interest receivable, amount of interest received, money to be 
transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA and money actually transferred would 
be compiled in respect of each of the case approved under Section 2 
of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. 
• An institutionalized system should be put in place to ensure that the 
above information was compiled and audited for each of the case 
approved, in respect of the money receivable in terms of the Supreme 
Court’s order dated 30 October 2002. 
• It was also observed that though an amount of `2,414.09 crore had 
been received by Ad-hoc CAMPA as  on 24 November 2006, the details 
of money receivable were not available, and hence, it was not possible 
to take a view regarding the balanc e amount yet to be transferred by 
the States/UTs to Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
20 June 
2007 
It was observed by Ad-hoc CAMPA that reconciliation of the figures related to 
the funds received by Ad-hoc CAMPA from different States/UTs with the 
figures available at the State/UT level had not been done. As the figures were 
not compiled in meaningful format at the Ad-hoc CAMPA level, such 
reconciliation was not possible. 
It is evident from the extracts of the minutes  of the meetings of Ad-hoc CAMPA above that 
the Governing Body not only issued specific direction regarding the manner in which records 
of monies receivable and received from Stat e s / U T s  s h o u l d  b e  m a i n t a i n e d  b u t  a l s o  f o r  
maintaining case wise record to ensure all amounts due from each user agency were 
collected and accounted for. It was also conc erned about the lack of reconciliation between 
the records of the States/UTs in this regard and those kept by Ad-hoc CAMPA. However, we 
found that no concrete measures were take n by the members charged with executive 
responsibilities to introduce a system of cont rol and monitoring to ensure compliance with 
the Supreme Court orders that all the funds pe rtaining to Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
collected and lying unutilised with State/ UT Governments or to be collected were 
transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts. This wa s evident from our findings of discrepancies 
in records of Ad-hoc CAMPA and State/ UT reco rds of transfer of funds, inordinately long 
delays in transfers and instances of conti nued retention of funds in State Government 
accounts. The details of such audit observations are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the existence of Ad-hoc CAMPA was purely transient, in 
nature and the accounts format/ systems that should have been adopted by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
have not till date been specified by the CAG/ Controller General of Accounts (CGA). 
The reply of MoEF is not acceptable. Though  Ad-hoc CAMPA was purely transient it was 
created in compliance of orders of the Supr eme Court of May 2006, which also made it 
obligatory on Ad-hoc CAMPA to ensure the transf er of all the monies being recovered/ lying 
with the State and get it audited. The reply th at the format of accounts was not prescribed 
by the CAG/ CGA is not tenable because as  per the orders of the Supreme Court of 
September 2005, corporate accounting based on the principles of double entry was to be 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
66 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
followed by CAMPA. This was also confirmed by the CAMPA (Amendment) Notification of 
March 2007. 
3.2.2. Non-reconciliation of position of funds  transferred by States/UTs to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
The May 2006 order of the Supreme Court charged Ad-hoc CAMPA with the responsibility of 
ensuring that all the monies recovered on be half of the CAMPA and lying with the various 
officials of the State Government were transferred to the bank account(s) to be operated by 
this body.  
Our audit revealed that despite the directio ns of Ad-hoc CAMPA issued in 2006 and 2007 
regarding maintaining proper records of rece ipts and periodic reconciliation, no such 
reconciliation was done till May 2013, resulting in  large differences in the positions of funds 
reported as received by Ad-hoc CAMPA and cl aimed to be transferred by State/UTs as per 
the details collected from the State CAMPA/ No dal officers. The details of discrepancies are 
at Table 19. 
Table 19 : Discrepancies in amounts reported as transferred by States/UTs and amounts 
reported as received by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Amount 
deposited20 
with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA  
Amount 
transferred 
to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA as 
per state 
CAMPA 
Percentage 
Difference 
Remarks 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands  
12.63 11.27 10.77
2 Andhra Pradesh 2,514.35 2,105.54 16.26 For the period 2006-
12. 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
731.92 438.82 40.05
4 Assam 327.13 157.82 51.75
5 Bihar 195.90 172.34 12.03
6 Chandigarh 2.09 2.35 -12.44
7 Chhattisgarh 2,491.30 1,114.81 55.25
8 Delhi 35.77 34.76 2.82
9 Goa 146.29 146.97 -0.46
10 Gujarat 663.51 583.49 12.06
11 Haryana  343.17 280.00 18.41 For the period 2006-
12. 
                                                            
20 This amount includes the principal amount of ` 20,063 crore with Ad-hoc CAMPA as on 31 March 2012 and 
also the amount released to the State/ UTs during 2009-12 i.e. ` 2,829 crore to make it comparable with the 
amounts stated by State/ UT CAMPA as transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 67 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Amount 
deposited20 
with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA  
Amount 
transferred 
to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA as 
per state 
CAMPA 
Percentage 
Difference 
Remarks 
12 Himachal Pradesh 1,084.72 628.44 42.06 State not sure how 
much amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
138.43 365.90 - FDRs of ` 291.85 
crore pledged to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
14 Jharkhand 2,014.76 1,598.32 20.67
15 Karnataka  930.31 836.39 10.10
16 Kerala 24.50 30.99 -26.48
17 Madhya Pradesh 1,285.21 902.53 29.78
18 Maharashtra 1,753.15 738.45 57.88
19 Manipur 34.55 34.59 -0.12
20 Meghalaya 90.36 90.36 0.00
21 Mizoram 10.62 10.62 0.00
22 Odisha 4,394.16 3,697.26 15.86
23 Punjab 439.58 286.33 34.86
24 Rajasthan 794.28 354.75 55.34  Figures available for 
28 test checked 
divisions only 
25 Sikkim 195.49 178.86 8.50 For the period 2006-
12. 
26 Tamil Nadu 30.24 27.02 10.65
27 Tripura 82.49 57.43 30.38
28 Uttar Pradesh 643.10 584.52 9.11
29 Uttarakhand 1,364.85 1,296.96 4.97
30 West Bengal 110.90 95.99 13.44
 Total 22,885.76 16,863.88 26.31
Reconciliation of two independent  set of records reflecting the same transaction, as in the 
instant case, was an important control me chanism to ensure that the records of 
receipts/transfers of funds were complete a nd correct. Significant unr econciled differences 
between the amounts claimed to be transferred by States/UTs and the amounts reported as 
received by Ad-hoc CAMPA are indicative of laxi ty in controls. In the absence of a single set 
of reconciled figures, it cannot be assured that all Compensatory Afforestation Funds 
collected and lying unutilised with States/UTs had been transferred to Ad- hoc CAMPA as 
envisaged by the Supreme Court in its order of 5 May 2006. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
68 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the process of reconciliation of the details of the amounts 
received from the State/ UTs was in progre ss and the reconciled schedules/ ledgers would 
be provided to Audit. 
3.2.3. Funds not remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
As per Supreme Court’s order dated 5 May 2006,  all monies that had been recovered on 
behalf of the CAMPA and which were lying with the various officials of the State 
Government were to be transferred to the bank account(s) to be operated by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 
We observed that a centralised project wise data base of the amounts recoverable, amounts 
recovered and the amounts remitted by each State/UT to ensure that all amounts of 
Compensatory Afforestation F und collected by States/UTs we re remitted to the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA accounts was not prepared. This was despit e directions in this regard being issued 
by Ad-hoc CAMPA in its meeting held on 26 November 2006. 
From the details collected from Nodal office rs of State CAMPA and the divisions test 
checked in audit (where the Nodal officers di d not provide the information), we observed 
that State CAMPAs of 23 States/UTs out of 30 covered in audit had not remitted a total of  
`401.70 crore to Ad-hoc CAMPA till date (January 2013). The details of the State/UT and the 
amounts not remitted are given in Table 20. 
Table 20: Details of States/UTs that did not remit Compensatory Afforestation Funds in 
compliance with Supreme Court directions.       
(`in crore) 
Sl. No. State/UT Amount not remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands          0.45 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 5.06 
3 Assam                                                 50.81 
4 Bihar 1.44 
5 Chandigarh 0.04 
6 Chhattisgarh  0.17 
7 Goa 1.33 
8 Haryana  18.94 
9 Himachal Pradesh 21.51 
10 Jammu & Kashmir* 59.83 
11 Jharkhand**                                   28.06 
12 Karnataka  9.66 
13 Kerala**                                             1.80 
14 Maharashtra**                                 0.04 
15 Manipur 0.50 
16 Meghalaya 61.58 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 69 | P a g e  
Sl. No. State/UT Amount not remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
17  Mizoram  16.62 
18  Odisha                                                18.37 
19  Rajasthan**                                      30.57 
20  Tamil Nadu                                       19.45 
21  Uttar Pradesh                                   23.50 
22  Uttarakhand**                  24.12 
23  West Bengal  7.85 
  Total 401.70 
 
*For J&K, CA was to be retained by State CAMPA. The amount indicated in the Table is only for NPV. Records 
before 2007 were not available. 
**In these States the information was not provided by Nodal officers. Hence it was collected from divisions on a 
test check basis i.e. Jharkhand – five divisions, Kerala  – two divisions, Maharashtra – one division, Rajasthan – 
28 divisions and Uttarakhand – 13 divisions. 
As is evident from the results of the test check of records reported in Table 20, 23 out of the 
30 States/UTs covered in audit did not remit some portion of the CAF to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
which was in contravention of the Supreme Cour ts orders that all such funds should be 
transferred to the central body . In the absence of a centralised data base of case wise 
amount due, recovered and remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA either with MoEF, Ad-hoc CAMPA or 
State CAMPA, we are unable to provide assurance that ` 401.70 crore reported in Table 20 
is the total amount of CAF not remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA. Ad-hoc CAMPA also failed to 
establish a system to determine the amounts th at were lying with the States/UTs and to 
ensure the transfer of entire funds to Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that Ad-hoc CAMPA wo uld pursue the matter with the respective 
State/ UTs. It is evident that MoEF did not take concrete steps to recover the outstanding 
dues from the State/ UT Governments despite th e issue being discussed in various meetings 
of Ad-hoc CAMPA from as early as July 2006 and orders of the Supreme Court. 
3.2.4. Funds retained by State Governments 
As per the Supreme Court’s orders of 30 Oc tober 2002, Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
was not to be a part of the general revenue of  the Union, of the States or part of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. Compensatory Afforestation Funds that had not yet been 
realised as well as the unspent funds already re alised by the States were to be transferred 
to CAMPA. The State CAMPA Guidelines issu ed in 2009 also clarified that State CAMPA 
would serve as a common repository of funds  accruing on account of compensatory 
afforestation and NPV. Hence, Compensatory Afforestation Funds  were at all stages to be 
kept separate from the State/UT Government’s funds. 
Our test check of records in 30 State/UTs reve aled that in 16 State/UTs CAMPA funds of  
` 186.32 crore were deposited in State accoun ts from October 2002 onwards which was in 
violation of the Supreme Court orders. The State/UT wise details are given in Table 21. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
70 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 21: Details of transfer of Compensatory Afforestation Funds to State accounts 
( ` in crore) 
Sl. No. State/UT Deposits in State account 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 0.11
2 Arunachal Pradesh 5.06
3 Assam 26.64
4 Bihar 1.44
5 Chhattisgarh  0.17
6 Haryana 18.94
7 Himachal Pradesh 21.51
8 Jharkhand 28.06
9 Karnataka  9.66
10 Meghalaya 0.06
11 Odisha 13.61
12 Rajasthan 1.91
13 Tamil Nadu 19.45
14 Uttar Pradesh  22.93
15 Uttarakhand 8.92
16 West Bengal 7.85
 Total 186.32
MoEF stated (April 2013) that year wise details of above amounts may be provided to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA to pursue the matter with the respective  State/ UTs. The repl y reflects the poor 
follow up by Ad-hoc CAMPA which should have  taken up the matter of retention with the 
concerned State/ UTs at the earliest opportunity. 
3.2.5. Delays in transfer of Funds to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
As per the Supreme Court’s orders of 30 Oc tober 2002, Compensatory Afforestation Funds 
that had not yet been realised as well as the unspent funds already realised by the States 
were to be transferred to CAMPA within six mo nths of its constitution by the respective 
States and the user agencies. On 5 May 2006, while directing the creation of Ad-hoc CAMPA, 
Supreme Court once again directed  that it was to be ensured that all the monies recovered 
on behalf of the CAMPA and lying with vari ous officials of the State Government were 
transferred to the bank account(s) to be operated by this body. 
From the details collected from Nodal office rs of State CAMPA and the divisions test 
checked in audit, we observed that in 14 of the 30 States/UTs covered in audit, ` 4,178.92 
crore funds were remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA after a delay rang ing from one to 2,555 days 
since the formation of Ad-CAMPA in May 2006. Th e details of the delays  in remittance are 
given in Table 22. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 71 | P a g e  
Table 22: Details of delays in remittance of Compensatory Afforestation funds 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT Amount late 
remitted to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
( `in crore) 
Delay in 
remittance to  
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA* 
 (in days) 
Remarks  
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
1,467.82 252 Delay in remittance in 512 cases 
during the period September 2006 
to December 2011. 
2 Chhattisgarh 0.54 420 to 1095 Delay in remittance in four cases 
pertaining to three divisions. The 
amount collected between April 
2005 and April 2009 was remitted 
to Ad-hoc CAMPA between June 
2007 and June 2010. 
3 Himachal 
Pradesh 
534.83 141 Delay in remittance during period 
February 2007 to August 2012. The 
money was kept in a current 
account with a bank.  
4 Jharkhand 27.02 22 to 1604 Delay in remittance in three forest 
divisions.  
5 Karnataka  528.14 30 to 270 Funds accumulated with State 
CAMPA upto 31 July 2007 were 
transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
belatedly in four instalments 
during January 2007 to December 
2007. 
6 Madhya 
Pradesh  
985.92 30 to 2,555 Delay in remittance in 63 divisions. 
7 Manipur  17.47 44 to 589 Delay in remittance in five cases. 
8 Meghalaya  0.49 300 Delay in remittance in 18 cases.  
9 Punjab  51.74 16 to 2,040 Delay in remittance in 306 cases in 
six divisions during the period 
2006-07 to 2008-09. 
10 Rajasthan  151.51 30 to 1,650 Delay in remittance in 218 cases in 
28 divisions.  
11 Sikkim  1.15 203 to 541 Delay in remittance in 19 cases.  
12 Uttar 
Pradesh 
195.18 1 to 1,943 Delay in remittance in 471 cases. 
13 Uttrakhand  191.77 30 to 90 and 
above 
Delay in remittance in 192 cases.  
14 West Bengal  25.34 30 to 150  
  Total 4,178.92  
* The cases covered in the table are of transfers afte r formation of Ad-hoc CAMPA in May 2006. The delays 
reported here have been calculated after allowing a period of 14 days to arrange for transfer. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
72 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
In the absence of a centralised data base cont aining details of the money receivable, money 
actually received, money to  be transferred to Ad-hoc  CAMPA and money actually 
transferred, in respect of the money receivable in terms of the Supreme Court’s order dated 
30 October 2002, Ad-hoc CAMPA could also no t ensure that all amounts collected by 
States/UTs were remitted to the respective  Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts within a reasonable 
period of time. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the State wise figu res of delays could be  answered effectively 
by the State Governments. It was further stated  that the compensatory afforestation levies 
when deposited by the user agencies pass th rough many levels, from the Range Officer/ 
Divisional Forest Officer level in the Forest Divi sions, to the level of the Additional Principal 
Chief Conservator of Forests, viz., the Nodal Officer for Forest Clearance matters in the State 
Government. The reply of MoEF confirms the ab sence of any oversight in MoEF over timely 
transfers of compensatory levies to Ad-hoc CAMPA. This was also evident from the 
deliberations of Ad-hoc CAMPA meeting held in November 2006.  
3.2.6. Maintaining component-wise records of funds received  
In its October 2002 judgement, the Supreme Court had, inter alia , directed that funds 
received for compensatory afforestation for di version of forest land falling under protected 
areas should be used exclusively for undertakin g protection and conservation activities in 
protected areas of the respective States/UTs. Si milarly, funds collected for treatment of the 
catchment area in which the diverted forest  land fell, could be used for implementing a 
Catchment Area Treatment Plan on ly in that specific area. CAMPA notification of 23 April 
2004 specified the purpose for which each component of receipt i.e. Compensatory 
Afforestation/ Additional Compensatory Affore station/ Net Present Value/ Catchment Area 
Treatment Plan etc. for diversion of forest land, could be released. To comply with the 
Supreme Court’s orders, it was essential to put in place a system of recording receipts under 
CAF component-wise to ensure that releases  of each component of receipt was made 
towards proposals eligible under each component. 
The Ad-hoc CAMPA in its meetings recognised  the need to establish such a system and 
issued directions in this regard from time to time. These directions are summarised below: 
Date of the 
meeting  
Directions issued 
7 July 2006 
(Second 
meeting) 
Ad-hoc CAMPA noted that most of th e receipts were not accompanied by 
details which would be essentially requi red for proper record keeping, data 
management as well as quick generation and retrieval of information relating 
to various components of CAMPA funds like CA, PCA, CAT, NPV etc. It was 
decided that a format for furnishing the details of the funds transferred would 
be sent to State/UT Governments. 
9 March 
2009 
(Ninth 
meeting) 
Ad-hoc CAMPA once again noted that the breakup of funds deposited under 
different heads for execution of work and its release to the States need to be 
compiled and reconciled immediately. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 73 | P a g e  
The Ad-hoc CAMPA also wrote to the St ate Governments on 25 October 2010 seeking 
detailed information of project wise, component-wise collection of dues, their remittance to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA and the balance, if any, with State Governments. This information was also 
meant to facilitate reconciliation of receivables. 
We noted that component-wise details of re ceipt of funds and its releases were not 
available with Ad-hoc CAMPA. On a specific query in this regard, Ad-hoc CAMPA stated 
(August 2012) that the information had been  called from the States but it was not 
forthcoming. Ad-hoc CAMPA maintained its record s of receipts State-wise further divided in 
to amount of principal and interest thereon. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that even though APOs were drawn up and approved by the State 
level Steering Committee, the release of funds beyond overall limit of ` 1,000 crore was not 
possible. The reply sidesteps the audit point and has in effect led to non-conformance of the 
orders of the Supreme Court which envisaged that specific funds we re to be used for 
specific purposes. By not maintaining componen t wise records of funds the specific usages 
of this funds was not ensured by MoEF.  
In order to assess the component-wise collectio n, in the course of our audit, the State 
Accountants General attempted to collect this information from the Nodal officers in each 
State/UT. In the event the information was not available with the Nodal officers, the same 
was gathered from the Divisions selected for audit. Based on this test check, the component 
wise collection from 2002 to 2012 is given in Table 23. 
Table 23: Component wise collection in States between 2002-12 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT NPV CA ACA PCA CAT Others Total 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands  
1.85 2.93 0 0 0 0 4.78
2 Andhra Pradesh 1,310.82 132.53 6.70 43.12 33.19 26.83 1,553.19
3 Arunachal Pradesh NA NA NA NA NA NA 827.05
4 Assam 407.90 14.72 0 0 0 0 422.62
5 Bihar 148.08 23.52 0 0 0 0.09 171.69
6 Chandigarh 1.61 0.74 0 0 0 0 2.35
7 Chhattisgarh 1,178.49 161.75 14.56 6.95 9.07 0 1,370.82
8 Delhi 3.74 28.57 0 2.45 0 0 34.76
9 Goa 119.69 9.33 0.44 4.72 0 0.51 134.69
10 Gujarat 422.01 162.35 0 0 0 0.15 584.51
11 Haryana  158.44 142.28 0 0 1.86 0 302.58
12 Himachal Pradesh 378.3 97.26 240 0.35 5.54 2.05 723.5
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir(after 2007)* 
214.62 0.06 0 0 0 42.87 257.55
14 Jharkhand 1284.46 128.67 0 62.93 0 48.50 1524.56
15 Karnataka  379.23 61.04 0 0 11.54 78.07 529.88
16 Kerala 24.69 3.05 0.02 0 0.37 1.12 29.25
17  Madhya Pradesh 495.29 242.10 3.19 2.42 15.64 48.26 806.90

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
74 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT NPV CA ACA PCA CAT Others Total 
18 Maharashtra# 200.68 23.09 4.79 7 18.91 14.15 268.62
19  Manipur  26.80 8.00 0.29 0 0 0.11 35.20
20  Meghalaya  81.02 2.63 0 1.13 0.98 4.44 90.20
21  Mizoram  45.46 4.74 0 0 0 0.14 50.34
22  Odisha  3,319.41 51.01 0 7.63 45.53 261.15 3,684.73
23  Punjab  10.98 6.59 0 0.08 0 0 17.65
24  Rajasthan  280.35 32.60 10.94 9.48 0 83.10 416.47
25  Sikkim  78.93 46.81 0 0.06 39.16 13.92 178.88
26  Tamil Nadu  30.23 8.87 0 0.32 0.40 0.99 40.81
27  Tripura  49.23 9.00 0 0 0 0 58.23
28  Uttar Pradesh  237.64 122.92 0.70 0.40 0.35 65.29 427.30
29  Uttarakhand $ 954.47 82.84 0 NA NA 259.65 1,296.96
30  West Bengal  74.46 23.19 0 0 11.58 3.09 112.32
 Total 11,918.88 1633.19 281.63 149.04 194.12 954.48 15,958.39
NA- Information was not available in the State. 
* For J&K information prior to 2007 was not available. 
#  For Maharashtra the figures are for sampled divisions, Nodal Officer did not give the information. 
$ For Uttrakhand, ‘Others’ includes ACA, PCA, CAT and others. 
 
It may be noted that the total collection of ` 15,958.39 crore as per Table 23 does not 
match with ` 22,885.76 crore reported as received by Ad-hoc CAMPA and ` 16,863.88 crore 
reported as remitted by Stat e/UT CAMPA (in Table 19), due to the fact that the component 
w i s e  d e t a i l s  h a v e  b e e n  c o l l e c t e d  f r o m  t e s t  check of records and are to that extent not 
complete. 
In the absence of reliable and authenticated da ta of component wise collection of CAF in 
each State/UT, we are unable to understa nd the mechanism by which Ad-hoc CAMPA 
sought to ensure that the funds collected und er each component were  released only for 
programme/ scheme/ activities eligible unde r each component in compliance with the 
Supreme Court’s order in this regard.  
MoEF (April 2013) while keeping silent abou t the component wise collection of various 
funds as depicted in Table 23 stated that efforts were on for maintaining project wise and 
component wise details of funds and added that the Ad-hoc CAMPA did not have any 
authority over the State/ UT to  ensure timely transfer of funds to the state accounts as 
maintained by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
The reply is not tenable as MoEF should have  ensured that projects wise and component 
wise receipts are properly accounted for and transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA before granting 
final clearances. The Director General (FC) and Inspector General (FC) were also functioning 
as Chairman and CEO respectively of Ad-hoc  CAMPA hence they had every authority to 
direct the State/ UT and enforce timely transf er of funds to state accounts maintained by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA.  
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 75 | P a g e  
3.3. Assessment and collection of components of Compensatory Afforestation Funds 
3.3.1.  Components of Compensatory Afforestation Funds 
The components of CAF and the procedure for calculation of each component is as under: 
Component Authority Rates of NPV How it is to be 
calculated 
Who is to 
calculate 
Net Present Value Supreme Court 
Orders dated 
29 October 
2002 and 28 
March 2008. 
`5.80 lakh to `9.20 
lakh per hectare 
upto March 2008 
and from `4.38 
lakh per hectare to 
`10.43 lakh per 
hectare after 
March 2008*. 
To be calculated 
on the basis of 
class/ category 
and density of 
forest land 
diverted. 
Divisional 
Forest 
Officer 
concerned. 
Compensatory 
Afforestation/ 
Additional 
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
/Penal 
Compensatory 
Afforestation/Catc
hment Area 
Treatment Plan 
Principal Chief 
Conservator of 
Forests of 
State/ Nodal  
officer of State 
CAMPA. 
 To be calculated 
on the basis of 
the rates of 
various 
categories and 
sites of lands 
identified for 
afforestation. 
Divisional 
Forest 
Officer 
concerned. 
*Supreme Court fixed the rate of NPV in March 2008 wh ich would hold good for a period of three years and 
subject to variation after three years. 
3.3.2. Non-compliance with Supreme court order regarding recovery of NPV from user 
agencies that received ‘in principle’ approval prior to 2002  
As per Supreme Court’s order of September 2006,  Net Present Value (NPV) at the rate of 
` 5.80 lakh to ` 9.20 lakh per hectare, in addition to ot her levies was to be recovered in all 
those cases which had been granted in prin ciple clearance prior to 29 October 2002, but 
were allowed final clearance later. 
The Ad-hoc CAMPA in its third and seventh me etings held in November 2006 and June 2007 
respectively, noted that no State/ UT had re ported any recovery of NPV for pre-30 October 
2002 in principle approval cases. The issue was discussed in the fourth meeting of the 
National CAMPA Advisory Council held in January  2012 and it was directed that recovery of 
NPV amounts in such cases should be comple ted within next six months. Consequently, 
MoEF in March 2012 requested all the Regional Offices to check cases wise recovery on NPV 
in such cases and to send a status report to MoEF by 31 May 2012. 
It was observed that the status report of MoEF included 292 cases pertaining to 21 States/ 
UTs, in which the land measuring 29,201.30 hect are was diverted. The status report did not 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
76 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
calculate the amount of NPV to be recovered in these cases. We estimated the total amount 
of NPV due in these cases at ` 1,693.67 crore on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare. The details of such cases are given in Table 24. 
Table 24: Details of cases in which NPV has no t been collected for which the in principle 
approval was given prior to October 2002 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
States No. of 
cases 
Total land 
diverted 
( in ha) 
NPV outstanding21 
1. Andhra Pradesh 22 1,053.10 61.08
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
5 264.43 15.34
3. Chhattisgarh 17 1,160.42 67.30
4. Gujarat 18 275.94 16.00
5. Haryana 1 8.48 0.49
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
7 140.86 8.17
7. Jharkhand 12 607.57 35.24
8. Karnataka 20 1,336.36 77.51
9. Kerala 2 14.77 0.86
10. Madhya 
Pradesh 
22 6,804.25 394.65
11. Maharashtra 63 1,870.63 108.50
12. Meghalaya 1 99.00 5.74
13. Mizoram 2 143.97 8.35
14. Odisha 36 3,679.69 213.42
15. Punjab 2 401.05 23.26
16. Rajasthan 13 893.99 51.85
17. Tamil Nadu 7 107.40 6.23
18. Tripura 16 5,741.55 333.01
19. Uttar Pradesh 2 1,149.87 66.69
20. Uttarakhand 23 3,433.27 199.13
21. West Bengal 1 14.70 0.85
 Total 292 29,201.30 1,693.67
From the table it was observed that 29,201.30 hectare of forest land was diverted by MoEF/ 
RO without recovery of NPV amounting to ` 1,693.67 crore in contravention of Supreme 
Court’s order of September 2006. 
                                                            
21 calculated at the rate of ` 5.80 lakh per ha (minimum rate) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 77 | P a g e  
Apart from above 292 cases, test check of record s of State Forest Department revealed that 
NPV amounting to ` 0.41 crore in two cases and ` 3.01 crore in one case in the States of 
Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh respectively was not recovered. These cases were not included in 
the Status report of the Ministry mentioned ibid thus raising doubts on the completeness of 
the MoEF Report. As such the MoEF and Stat e Governments could not ensure that NPV was 
raised and collected as per Suprem e Courts orders and in the least ` 1,693.67 crore 
remained short collected. This amount does not include any component of interest which 
would have accrued on the funds in the normal course. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that in many cases NP V had been collected and that the audit may 
take up the matter with the respective State/ UT s. The reply is not te nable as MoEF did not 
provide any details of NPV collected out of thes e cases and it was obligatory on the part of 
Ad-hoc CAMPA to maintain the details of such cases. 
3.3.3. Non-application of rates for diversion of  land from National Park and Wildlife 
Sanctuary 
As per orders of Supreme Court of Ma rch 2008, NPV at the rate ranging from ` 4.38 lakh to 
` 10.43 lakh per hectare depending upon the dens ity and class of forest was to be charged 
and in case of National Parks this amount was to be charged at 10 times the normal rate and 
in case of Sanctuaries this amount was to be charged at five times the normal rates. 
During test check of records of MoEF it wa s observed that NPV was not recovered at the 
rates prescribed for diversion of land from w ildlife sanctuary from user agencies as per 
orders of the Supreme Court of March 2008 in respect of four cases detailed in Table 25. 
Table 25: Cases of diversion of area falling in Wildlife sanctuary in which NPV was not 
recovered  
Name of the user 
agency 
State Name of wildlife 
division 
Area of Wildlife 
Sanctuary  
( in ha) 
NPV 
unrecovered 
(`in crore) 
Andhra Pradesh 
State Electricity 
Board 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Nagarjunasagar 
Srisailam Wildlife 
sanctuary 
20.00 4.38*
Tata Refractories Odisha Chandka Wildlife 
Division 
58.50 12.81*
Travancore 
Devaswam Board 
(TDB) 
Kerala Periyar Tiger Reserve 
(PTR) 
12.68 2.77*
Indira Sagar 
(Polavaram) 
Multipurpose 
Project 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Papikonda National 
Park 
101.81 41.42**
Total   192.99 61.38
* Based on a conservative estimate of five times the minimum rate of NPV of ` 4.38 lakh per hectare. 
**NPV was to be collected at 10 times of the ` 8.03 lakh/ hectarein 88.81 hectare and 10 times of ` 8.87 lakh/ 
hectare in 13.00 hectare but collected at five times of the rates.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
78 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
No action was taken by MoEF to recover NPV at  the prescribed rates from user agencies as 
of December 2012. 
MoEF admitted (April 2013) that for Odisha a nd Kerala, the NPV was not collected at the 
prescribed rate. No reply was given for Andhra Pradesh. 
 
3.3.4. Short assessment of NPVdue to non-application of revised rates of NPV 
Supreme Court in its order dated 29 October 2002 directed that the net present value 
should be recovered at the rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare to ` 9.20 lakh per hectare of 
forest land depending upon the quantity and density of the land. In March 2008, the 
Supreme Court revised the rate s of NPV which ranged from ` 4.38 lakh per hectare to  
` 10.43 lakh per hectare depending on various factors. Ministry did not initiate any action to 
communicate the decision of the Supreme Court upto December 2008 and finally the orders 
of revised rates were communicated on 5 February 2009 to all the State Forest 
Departments, after an inordinate delay of 11 months after the Supreme Court had issued its 
orders indicating a lackadaisical approach of MoEF. 
During the test check of records of State CA MPA/ sampled divisions/ Nodal Officer for the 
period 2006-12 it was observed that the State Forest Department did not charge the NPV at 
the revised rates resulting in short assessment of NPV by ` 166.61 crore. The State/ UT wise 
details are given in Table 26. 
Table 26: State/ UT wise details of cases in which NPV was not realised at revised rates. 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT NPV short 
realised 
( `in crore) 
Number 
of cases 
Number 
of 
Divisions
Reason for non realisation 
at revised rates/ Name of 
the user agencies 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands  
0.04 5 2   
2 Assam 0.04 1  1 10per cent discount given 
to ONGC. 
3 Chhattisgarh 34.06 23 -   
4 Delhi 0.25  4 1   
5 Goa 13.67 5 1 M/s Sociedade 
TimbloImpros Ltd.  M/s 
G.N. Agarwal at Bimbol 
Iron Ore Mine aka Emco 
Goa Pvt. Ltd,  M/s Dempo 
& Co. Pvt. Ltd , M/s 
Badruddin H. Mavani & 
M/s Sova.    
6 Gujarat 89.47 3 3  Amount not recovered 
from NHAI. 
7 Haryana  0.36 1 1   

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 79 | P a g e  
 
3.3.5. Other cases of non-realisation of NPV/CA/CATP/PCA  
After October 2002 orders of the Supreme Cour t NPV had to be collected along with CA/ 
ACA/ PCA/ CAT Plan etc. for diversion of fore st land for non-forestry purposes. The rates of 
NPV prescribed by the Supreme Court in October 2002 orders were re-fixed in March 2008. 
During the test check of records of State CA MPA/ sampled divisions/ Nodal Officer it was 
noted that NPV of ` 3,145.16 crore, CA of ` 115.58 crore, CAT plan/PCA/others of `89.74 
crore  was not realised by the State Forest Department as given in Table 27. Details of 
individual cases mentioned in Table 27 are given in State specific chapters. 
Table 27: State/ UT wise details of number of  cases, amounts and number of divisions in 
which NPV/CA/PCA/CATP were short collected or not realised 
( ` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT NPV not 
collected 
CA not 
collected
PCA/CATP/others 
not collected 
No. 
of 
cases
No. 
of 
Divis-
ions 
Name of the 
user agency 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands  
1.15 0.10 - 4 2 NA 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
7.60 4 4 NA 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
32.59* 0.20  NA 
4 Assam 214.64* 8.60 4 4 NA 
5 Bihar 7.26* 4.10 1 NA 
6 Chandigarh - - - - - NA 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT NPV short 
realised 
( `in crore) 
Number 
of cases 
Number 
of 
Divisions
Reason for non realisation 
at revised rates/ Name of 
the user agencies 
8 Jammu & Kashmir 21.04 - 8   
9 Karnataka  3.28 12 7   
10  Madhya Pradesh  3.80 14 7    
11  Meghalaya  0.42 4  - World Victory Church, 
Shillong,  Sports Authority 
of India, Shillong,  North 
Eastern Power 
Transmission Company 
Private Limited, New Delhi,  
Church of God, 5 th Mile, 
Upper Shillong. 
12  Tripura  0.18 12 4   
  Total 166.61      

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
80 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT NPV not 
collected 
CA not 
collected
PCA/CATP/others 
not collected 
No. 
of 
cases
No. 
of 
Divis-
ions 
Name of the 
user agency 
7 Chhattisgarh 3.43 6.50 48 3 NA 
8 Delhi 0.68 0.98 3 2 Delhi Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
9 Goa 0.73 0.16 - 2 2 M/s 
Chandrakant F. 
Naik/Sh. Rajesh 
P. Timblo,  
10 Gujarat 62.77 2.43 5.35 3 3 M/s MPSEZL 
(Earlier known 
as M/s Adani 
Chemicals Ltd), 
South Gujarat 
Vij Company 
Limited, 
(SGVCL), 
Valsad. 
11 Haryana  3.57* 7 6 NA 
12 Himachal 
Pradesh 
26.99* 1.37 - - - NA 
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
837.76* 3.00 - - - NA 
14 Jharkhand 69.45* 10.01 1.48 - 28 NA 
15 Karnataka  216.77 19.55 2.01 33 7 NA 
16 Kerala 0.29* 2 2 NA 
17  Madhya 
Pradesh  
114.39* 36 7 NA 
18  
Maharashtra  
174.27 8.74 106 7 NA 
19  Manipur  100.99 5.17 0.29 1 1 NA 
20  Meghalaya  55.42 - - 11 2 Adhunik 
Cement 
Limited, Amrit 
Cement 
Industries 
Limited, 
Cement 
Manufacturing 
Company 
Limited & 
Subsidiaries, 
Green Valley 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 81 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT NPV not 
collected 
CA not 
collected
PCA/CATP/others 
not collected 
No. 
of 
cases
No. 
of 
Divis-
ions 
Name of the 
user agency 
Industries 
Limited, 
Goldstone 
Cement 
Limited, Hill 
Cements 
Company 
Limited and 
Meghalaya 
Cement 
Limited. 
21  Mizoram  219.33* 17.00 5 2  
22  Odisha  941.67 30.35 37.01 335 28 M/s Patnaik 
Minerals, M/s 
SAIL, M/s DC 
Jain,  M/s OMC 
Ltd., M/s KC 
Pradhan, M/s 
RB Thakur, M/s 
Dr. Sarojini 
Pradhan, M/s 
Keonjhar 
Mineral (P) 
Ltd., M/s Sri BK 
Mohanty, M/s 
SC Mallik,  M/s 
BL Newatia, 
M/s AXL 
Exploration (p) 
Ltd, M/s 
Rungta Sons,  
M/s IMFA ltd, 
M/s 
Ghanashyam 
Mishra and 
Sons (P) ltd, 
M/s 
G.S.Choubey, 
M/s 
K.K.Chourasia, 
M/s Manishree 
Refractories 
Ltd, M/s FACOR 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
82 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT NPV not 
collected 
CA not 
collected
PCA/CATP/others 
not collected 
No. 
of 
cases
No. 
of 
Divis-
ions 
Name of the 
user agency 
Ltd  and M/s 
SAIL. 
23  Punjab  -  NA 
24  Rajasthan 6.97** 6.25 0.64 91 - NA 
25  Sikkim  30.34 8.22 48 - NA 
26  Tamil Nadu  0.37 0.00 0.17 - 4 Udhagai 
Municipality 
27  Tripura  - - - NA 
28  Uttar 
Pradesh  
0.10 0.05 0.08 - 4 Bajaj Hindustan 
Sugar Industry 
Limited. 
29  
Uttarakhand  
0.01 - 8.37 8 2 M/S UVVN-
Mining lease 
30  West 
Bengal 
15.62*** 17.14 3 3 NA 
 Total 3,145.16 115.58 89.74  NA 
*NPV also included CA for some of the cases in which bifurcation of NPV/CA was not made available. 
** NPV includes CA and cost of fallen trees. 
*** NPV includes CA and Environmental loss. 
NA-Not available.  
 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the observations are to be dealt with by the States concerned 
the response received from the State/ UTs are being separately forwarded. 
MoEF’s reply is not tenable. It was obligator y on MoEF to ensure that the Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds had been appropriately assessed and collected before granting the final 
clearance. The Supreme Court in its orde r dated 3 April 2000, had also fixed the 
responsibility of ensuring the proper carrying out of compensatory afforestation on Ministry 
of Environment and Forests and said that it was for the Ministry to  monitor the conditions 
stipulated at the time of grant of forest clearance. 
3.3.6. Non recovery of NPV from user agencies not exempted from paying NPVby the 
Supreme Court 
MoEF directed all State Forest Departments/ ROs on 19 December 2005 to grant forestry 
clearance to certain projects after obtaining an  undertaking from the user agencies that in 
case it was finally decided by the Supreme Co urt that such projects were not exempted 
from payment of NPV, the user agency woul d pay the amount of NPV as determined and 
ordered by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court decided this matter on 24 April 2008 
and 9 May 2008. 
During the test check of records of Northern Regional Office, Chandigarh it was observed 
that forest land measuring 443.17 hectare had been diverted during April 2006 to June 2008 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 83 | P a g e  
in 181 cases in Himachal Pradesh, for which no  NPV, CA etc was colle cted by State Forest 
Department pending Supreme Court’s judgemen t on exempted cases. As calculated by 
Regional Office Chandigarh, an amount of ` 39.02 crore in the form of NPV was still due 
from these user agencies. These 181 projects  fall under the exempted categories from 
receipt of non-forest land but not from paymen t of NPV/CA etc. We estimated the amount 
of CA in these cases at ` 6.65 crore on a conservative basis by applying the minimum rate of 
CA (` 1.50 lakh per hectare) in Himachal Pradesh. 
The regional office had written on 4 July 2008 and subsequently on 28 July 2008 to Himachal 
Pradesh Government for recovery of NPV.  The recovery of NPV/CA/ACA etc was still 
pending as on December 2012. 
3.3.7. Non-revision of rates of NPV after every three years  
Supreme Court in its order of October 2002 di rected that, while according transfer under 
Forest Conservation Act, 1980 for change in us er agency from all non-forest purposes, the 
user agency shall also pay into the said fund the net value of the forest land diverted for 
non-forest purposes. The present value was to be recovere d at the rate of ` 5.80 lakh per 
hectare to ` 9.20 lakh per hectare of forest and depending upon the quantity and density of 
the land in question converted for non-forest use.  This will be subject to upward revision by 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests in consultation with Central Empowered 
Committee as and when necessary. 
Based on the recommendations of the Expert  Committee the Supreme Court of India re-
fixed the rates of NPV on 28 Ma rch 2008 on the basis of scientif ic data taking into view the 
ecological role and value of the forests. It fu rther stated that the NPV rate now fixed would 
hold good for a period of three years and subject to variation after three years. MoEF 
circulated the re-fixed rates of NPV vide its letter dated 5 February 2009, hence due for re-
fixation in February 2012. 
It was observed that MoEF did not re-fix these rates after three years i.e. in 2012. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that action is presently in progress for revision of the rates of NPV 
and as and when a final decision is taken in the matter, the same will apply retrospectively – 
an appropriate undertaking in this behalf is being taken from the us er agencies concerned 
making them liable to pay the revised rates of NPV from the dates these are made effective. 
The Ministry’s reply needs to be viewed in light of the fact that the revision in rates was due 
in February 2012 and had not been done even by June 2013.  
3.3.8. Non-monitoring of receipt of funds from State CAMPA/ user agencies 
As per Rule 4.2 (i) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980, for diversion of forest land, forestry 
clearance was to be given in two stages. The us er agency is to submit the proposal to the 
State Forest Department. The State Forest Depa rtment after demarcating the area, type of 
forest land and location etc with  its recommendations is to s ubmit the proposal to the RO/ 
MoEF as the case may be. The RO / MoEF is to accord the in principle approval with certain 
condition relating to transfer, mutation and declaration a Reserved Forest/ Protected Forest 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
84 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(RF/PF) under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 of equivalent non-forest land for compensatory 
afforestation and funds (NPV, CA etc) for ra ising compensatory afforestation thereof are 
stipulated. The user agency is then required to comply with the conditions including 
depositing the funds of NPV, CA, ACA etc with  the DFO/ State CAMPA. Thereafter, the State 
CAMPA/ Nodal Officer/ Principal Chief Cons ervator of Forest (PCCF) is to submit a 
compliance report to the Regional Office (RO) / MoEF as the case may be. After receiving 
compliance report and its examination, the final approval is to be granted by RO/MoEF. The 
State Forest Department remits the money in  the concerned bank account of the State 
opened with Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
It was observed that the final approval was granted by MoEF/ RO without ensuring 
compliance to the conditions stipulated in the in principle approval as evident from the 
audit observations relating to non-recovery of  NPV where in principle approval was prior to 
2002, non-realisation of NPV at prescribed rates from the National Parks and Wildlife 
Sanctuary, short assessment of NPV due to no n application of revised rated of NPV, other 
cases of non-realisation of NPV/CA/CATP/PCA,  non-revision of rates of NPV every three 
years and non-monitoring of receipts of funds given in preceding paragraphs. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that efforts have be en set afoot, by addressing the concerned 
State/ UT Governments for compilation of proj ect wise and component wise information in 
respect of all cases of diversion of forest la nd allowed since the year 1980.  Information is 
awaited from the concerned State/ UT Gove rnments. However since the year 2011, a 
system has been introduced in terms of wh ich final clearance unde r FC Act 1980 is given 
only after a specific written confirmation from the Ad-hoc CAMPA that the funds in question 
have been received in the State specific accounts maintained by them. 
The reply is not tenable as MoEF should have  ensured that projects wise and component 
wise receipts are properly accounted for, transferred and confirme d from Ad-hoc CAMPA 
before granting final clearances. From the reply also it is evident that the final approval was 
being granted by MoEF/ RO without ensuring compliance to the conditions stipulated in the 
in principle approval and even MoEF cannot pr ovide an assurance that in how many cases 
the receipts of compensatory afforestatio n funds had been correctly assessed and 
deposited. 
3.4. Conclusion 
MoEF, it is evident from this chapter, was ineffective in ensuring complete and timely 
transfer of all monies collect ed by States/UTs towards Comp ensatory Afforestation Fund to 
the Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts. There is no a ssurance even today (July 2013) that all the 
monies collected for CAF by States/UTs ha ve been deposited in the Ad-hoc CAMPA 
accounts.  This could have been ensured only if a centralised data base indicating project 
wise amounts due, collected, remitted (or utilised  by States/UTs prior to formation of Ad-
hoc CAMPA) and balance lying with States/UTs was created. Creating such a data base was 
both feasible and necessary as an instrument of  control to ensure that final clearances were 
given only when all conditions of in princi ple clearance were met and also to monitor 
transfer from States/UTs to Ad-hoc CAMPA. Divergence in data of transfer of funds available 
with Ad-hoc CAMPA and colle cted from States/UTs was  ` 6,021.88 crore which was 26.31  
per cent of the principal amount with Ad-hoc CAMPA . Non-reconciliation of the same over 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 85 | P a g e  
years not only indicates laxity in controls but also raises doubts on the reliability and 
completeness of the data provided by all agenci es concerned. Our test check also revealed 
that 23 State/ UTs have at the least not transferred ` 401.70 crore of CAF to Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
In the absence of component wise break up of  collections, we are unable to provide an 
assurance that releases have been made as per direction of the Supreme Court. 
MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA/ State CAMPA did not ha ve any system to case-wise monitor the 
correct assessment and collection of dues before  giving final clearance. This was amply 
evident from the instances of non-assessment/ under-assessment and non collection of CAF 
dues. In the absence of this, assurance that fi nal clearances were given only in cases that 
had complied with all the conditions of in principle clearances could not be provided. 
The fact that NPV/CA/ACA/PCA/CAT Plan amount  under/non-recovered, as reported in this 
chapter based on a test check, was ` 5,311.16 crore i.e. 23 per cent of the total principal 
amount with Ad-hoc CAMPA as on 31 March 2012 is indicative of serious deficiencies in 
determining the amount of NPV/CA etc fund due from user agencies and ensuring its 
collection prior to according final clearances.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 87 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
4.1 Background 
As of November 2006, the amount lying with the Ad-hoc CAMPA was `1,200.31 crore. This 
had increased to `9,932.13 crore as of 30 June 2009, and further to `23,608 crore on 31 
March 2012. 
In the fifth and sixth meetings of Ad-hoc CAMPA held in February  2007 and April 2007, it 
was decided to seek permission of the Suprem e Court of India for release of compensatory 
afforestation money for the ongoing CA projects to the States/ UTs. In the eighth meeting of 
Ad-hoc CAMPA held in April 2008 it emerged th at in spite of many requests received from 
the States for the release of funds Ad-hoc CA MPA was unable to do so in the absence of 
authority to act in this regard from the Supreme Court. Inthe tenth meeting of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA held in May 2009 it was observed that  the States/ UTs forwarded the APOs which 
lacked comparability and hence it was decided that the States should prepare the APOs 
once again and the release of money would be based on analysis of coherent and 
comparable proposals from the States and upon the directions of the Supreme Court in the 
matter. Hence, till mid 2009, though funds were  accumulating in the CAF, no releases were 
made. 
The orders of the Supreme Court and Stat e CAMPA guidelines regarding release and 
monitoring of funds are summarised below: 
Release of funds • Supreme Court in its order dated 10 July 2009 directed Ad-hoc CAMPA 
to release for the time being the sum of about  ` 1,000 crore per 
annum for the next five years to St ate CAMPAs, in proportion of 10 
per cent of the principal amount pertaining to respective State/UT. 
• The amount towards the NPV and the protected area was to be 
released after the schemes had b een reviewed by the State level 
executive committees and the a nnual plan of operations was 
approved by the Steering committee. 
• The amount towards the CA, ACA, PCA and the catchment area 
treatment plan was to be released in the respective bank accounts of 
the States/ UTs immediately for taking up site specific works already 
approved by the MoEF while granti ng prior approval under the Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980. 
Monitoring of 
funds 
• As per Supreme Court’s order dated 29 October 2002, an independent 
system of concurrent monitoring was to be evolved and implemented 
through the Compensatory Afforestation Fund to ensure effective and 
proper utilisation of fund.  
Chapter - IV 
Utilisation of Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
88 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
• In July 2009, Supreme Court directed that an amount of five per cent 
of the amount released to the Stat e CAMPA was also to be released 
and utilised by the National CAMPA Advisory Council (NCAC), for 
monitoring and evaluation and for the implementation of the various 
schemes as given in para 19 of the Guidelines of the State CAMPA.  
• Further, the State CAMPA guideline notified in August 2009 also 
authorised State CAMPA to earmark upto two per cent of the funds for 
monitoring and evaluation.  
Confirming the position, the Ad-hoc CAMPA in  its reply (April 2013) stated that the funds 
that were transferred to Ad-hoc CAMPA co mmencing May 2006 remained with this body, 
and were accumulating with fresh receipts of  compensatory levies received through the 
State Governments from time to time. It wa s only in July 2009 that the Supreme Court 
permitted the release of the funds to State CA MPAs, which were constituted in terms of the 
guidelines issued with their approval. It is  notable here that be tween May 2006 and July 
2009 no funds were released for the purpose of compensatory afforestation and Ad-hoc 
CAMPA started releasing funds w.e.f. from 17 August 2009. 
In compliance with the Supreme Courts direct ions, Ad-hoc CAMPA started releasing funds 
from 2009 onwards. Table 28 brings out the aggr egate position of accumulated funds as on 
31 March 2012 and funds released between 2009 and 2012. 
Table 28: State/UT wise aggregated position of accumulated funds as on 31 March 2012 
and funds released between 2009 and 2012. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. No.  State/UT Total Balance (including 
interest) with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
As on 31 March 2012     
Total Releases by Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
(2009-10 to 2011-12) 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands  
22.98 1.89 
2 Andhra Pradesh 2,359.09 329.09
3 Arunachal Pradesh 799.01 75.35
4 Assam 353.81 17.17
5 Bihar 167.20 24.44 
6 Chandigarh 6.89 0.31 
7 Chhattisgarh 2,239.09 356.86
8 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 10.73 0.32 
9 Daman & Diu 0.77 Nil
10 Delhi 37.20 3.25 
11 Goa 171.71 22.37 
12 Gujarat 691.44 80.42 
13 Haryana  390.34 38.00 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 89 | P a g e  
Sl. No.  State/UT Total Balance (including 
interest) with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
As on 31 March 2012     
Total Releases by Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
(2009-10 to 2011-12) 
14 Himachal Pradesh 1,131.44 135.97
15 Jammu & Kashmir 139.89   -  
16 Jharkhand 2,057.88 260.66 
17 Karnataka  1,028.60 151.04 
18 Kerala 37.37 1.75
19 Lakshadweep Nil Nil
20 Madhya Pradesh  1,341.19 157.53
21 Maharashtra  1,859.09 257.47
22 Manipur  37.33 2.08
23 Meghalaya  96.92 0.10 
24 Mizoram  12.42 Nil
25 Nagaland  Nil Nil
26 Odisha 4,570.17 437.26
27 Punjab  464.08 68.98
28 Pudducherry  Nil Nil
29 Rajasthan  857.07 106.55
30 Sikkim  202.45 27.28 
31 Tamil Nadu  8,832.95 3.67
32 Tripura  92.73 6.13
33 Uttar Pradesh  752.94 82.45 
34 Uttarakhand  1,527.93 164.40 
35 West Bengal  114.96 16.42 
  Total 23,607.67 2,829.21
As per rule 11(i) of the State CAMPA guidelin es, the money available with State CAMPA was 
to be utilised for meeting the expenditure towards the development, maintenance and 
protection of forests and wildlife manageme nt as per the approved Annual Plan of 
Operation. 
Ad-hoc CAMPA was to release funds based on  Annual Plan of operation received from 
respective State/UTs. These plans were to be formulated by the State Level Executive 
Committee and approved by the Steering Commi ttee before being sent to Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
The released funds were then to be disburse d by the Nodal Officers amongst the DFOs for 
implementation of programme and utilisation of funds. The procedure of release of funds is 
depicted pictorially in Chart 8. 
 
 

Report N
90 | P a
Chart 8
4.2 
Funds f
reviewe
and the
already
(Conser
expend
Table 2
Sl. 
No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
State 
Execu
Comm
e prep
the A
No. : 21 of 20
ge  
8: Procedure
Under utili
for NPV a n
ed by the S
e catchment
y approve d
rvation) Act
iture thereo
29: Details o
Stat
Andaman 
Islands  
Andhra Pr
Arunacha
Assam 
Bihar 
Chandigar
Chhattisga
Delhi 
Goa 
Gujarat 
Haryana  
Himachal 
Jammu & 
Jharkhand
Karnataka
level 
utive 
mitte
pares 
APO
013 
e for releas
sation of fu
nd Protect e
State level e
t area treat
d by the 
t, 1980. Ta b
of and unut
of receipts, 
te/UT 
& Nicobar 
radesh 
l Pradesh 
rh 
arh 
Pradesh 
Kashmir* 
d 
a  
APO is 
approved 
by the 
Steering 
Committe
e
e of funds
unds receive
ed Area w
executive c
tment plan 
MoEF w h
ble 29 con t
tilised amou
expenditur
Tota
Receip
per St
CAM
(2009-
32
7
2
2
35
2
8
3
13
6
26
15
APO
receiv
at Ad-h
CAMP
ed 
were to be 
ommittees.
were to be 
hile granti
tains the St
unts. 
re and unut
al 
ts as 
tate 
PA 
-12) 
T
Exp
e in
as p
R
(200
1.89
29.09
75.35
22.83
24.44
0.31
57.95
3.25
22.37
80.42
38.00
35.98
67.09
60.66
51.04
O 
ed 
hoc 
PA
a
by
C
Com
released a
. The amo u
released fo
ng prior 
ate/UT wis
tilised amou
Total 
penditur
ncurred 
per State 
Report 
09-2012)
0.69
247.26
6.53
11.54
5.60
0.30
118.04
1.20
10.89
70.11
27.40
79.97
55.68
185.31
139.38
APO  & 
fund 
transfer 
approved 
y DGF&SS 
and 
Chairman 
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA
mpensatory A
after the s
unt towards
or taking up
approval u
e details o f
unts 
Unutilised
amount 
1.
81.
68.
11.
18.
0.
239.
2.
11.
10.
10.
56.
11.
75.
11.
Ad-hoc
CAMPA
transfer
funds t
Nodal
Officer
through
RTGS
Afforestation
schemes h a
s the CA, A
p site specif
under the 
f receipts o
(` 
d Perce
Unut
20 
83 
82 
29 
84 
01 
91 
05 
48 
31 
60 
01 
41 
35 
66 
c 
A 
rs 
o 
 
s 
h 
N
o
tra
mo
th
n in India 
 
ad been 
CA, PCA 
ic works 
Forest 
of funds, 
in crore) 
entage 
tilised 
63
25
91
49
77
3
67
63
51
13
28
41
17
29
8
Nodal 
officer 
ansfers 
the 
oney to 
he DFO

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 91 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Total 
Receipts as 
per State 
CAMPA 
(2009-12) 
Total 
Expenditur
e incurred 
as per State 
Report 
(2009-2012)
Unutilised 
amount 
Percentage 
Unutilised 
16 Kerala 1.37 0.97 0.40 29
17  Madhya Pradesh  157.54 82.53 75.01 48
18  Maharashtra  256.64 219.00 37.64 15
19  Manipur  2.09 2.00 0.09 4
20  Meghalaya  0.10 0 0.10 100
21  Mizoram  0 0 0 0
22  Odisha  447.33 219.85 227.48 51
23  Punjab  81.65 45.41 36.24 44
24  Rajasthan  106.54 63.00 43.54 41
25  Sikkim  27.28 27.85 -0.57 -2
26  Tamil Nadu  5.05 2.98 2.07 41
27  Tripura  6.12 1.93 4.19 68
28  Uttar Pradesh  82.45 38.56 43.89 53
29  Uttarakhand  164.40 103.88 60.52 37
30  West Bengal  16.42 7.98 8.44 51
  Total 2,925.65 1,775.84 1,149.81 39
*In case of Jammu & Kashmir the receipts are the amounts released by the J&K State CAMPA. 
As can be seen from Table 29, during the period 2009-12 the amount of funds received by 
State/ UT CAMPA from Ad-hoc CAMPA was `2,925.65 crore (including Jammu &Kashmir) of 
which only ` 1,775.84 crore could be expende d by the State/UT sleaving `1,149.81 crore 
unutilised.  
While the percentage of underutilisation of funds vis a vis the amounts released was 39  
percent, it was significant in states like Meghalaya (100 per cent), Arunachal Pradesh (91 per 
cent), Bihar (77 per cent ),Tripura (68 per cent ), Chhattisgarh (67 per cent ), Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands(63 per cent ) and Delhi (63 per cent).States with low underutilisation were 
Sikkim (zero  per cent ), Chandigarh (three  per cent ), Karnataka (eight  per cent ) and 
Manipur(four percent). 
The amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA were  against APOs which also included schemes 
that were identified at the stage of granting  clearance and for which land was also claimed 
to have been identified at the time of giving  clearances. The fact remained that large sums 
of monies released based on approved plans could not be utilised. This indicated poor 
planning and execution by the MoEF/ State Forest Departments. 
Under utilisation of funds raises concerns abou t the absorptive capacity of the State/ UT 
Forest Departments. This concern was further reinforced when viewed in the context of 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
92 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
`23,607.67 crore lying accumulate d with Ad-hoc CAMPA as on 31 March 2012 which has to 
be specifically utilised for activities relating  afforestation, development, conservation and 
protection of forest lands by State implementing agencies. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that no funds were  released to States between 2006 and 2009, 
and only when the Supreme Court permitted, funds  were released to the States.  It further 
stated that funds were released for taking up compensatory afforestation activities, as late 
as, April 2010 and such activities require a lot of preparatory work to be undertaken. It was 
further stated that it was not possible to undertake afforestation work immediately after 
the funds became available and, thus, the time  lag between the belated dispersal of funds 
to the states, and their taking up activities fr om these funds was inescapable and it resulted 
inthe under utilisation of funds. 
While it is a fact that the CA funds were re leased by Ad-hoc CAMPA only from August 2009 
onwards, the justification for under utilisatio n of the released funds is not acceptable 
because these funds were released based on the APOs received from the State/ UTs and 
should have been used completely on ac tivities envisaged in APOs which included 
preparatory works in certain States. This reflec ts on the poor planning, inefficient execution 
of works and lack of absorptive capacity of the released funds. 
4.3 Accumulation of funds with State CAMPAs 
The main concern underlying Supreme Court’s order of October 2002, directing the creation 
of Compensatory Afforestation Fund and a body (CAMPA) to manage it, was the 
accumulation of amounts received from us er agencies and lying unspent or being 
misutilised by the States. Since 2009 the Ad-hoc CAMPA had started release of 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund to States/U T for implementing approved schemes but 
only 61 percent of the amount released during 2009-12 could actually be expended. Since 
the unspent balances were neither reverted to Ad-hoc CAMPA on the expiry of the financial 
period (1 July- 30 June in the instant case) nor were these adjusted in the following year 
releases, it resulted in setting in of a process of accumulation of Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds with States/UTs, which if allowed to continue unc hecked may result in 
reversion to the pre-2002 condition sought to be addressed by the Supreme Court by 
creating Central CAMPA.  
Based on the information collected in audit in States/UTs the position of accumulated 
balance at the end of June 2010, 2011 and 2012 is given in Table 30. 
Table 30: State wise position of closing balance of funds with State/UT CAMPA. 
(`in crore) 
Sl. No. State/UT 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 0 0 1.20
2 Andhra Pradesh 78.91 116.82 81.83
3 Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 27.63 68.82
4 Assam  12.38 22.71 11.29
5 Bihar 7.73 10.80 18.84
6 Chandigarh 0.18 0.04 0.01

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 93 | P a g e  
Sl. No. State/UT 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
7 Chhattisgarh 119.27 234.29 239.91
8 Delhi 1.85 3.24 2.05
9 Goa 12.12 17.46 11.48
10 Gujarat 16.39 12.78 10.31
11 Haryana 19.11 26.77 10.60
12 Himachal Pradesh 35.33 40.43 56.01
13 Jammu & Kashmir 8.40 8.10 11.41
14 Jharkhand 95.00 122.64 75.35
15 Karnataka  58.56 28.82 11.66
16 Kerala 0.40 0.40 0.40
17 Madhya Pradesh  53.05 71.36 75.01
18 Maharashtra  0.00 0.00 37.64
19 Manipur 0.75 0.20 0.09
20 Meghalaya 0.10 0.10 0.10
21 Mizoram  0.00 0.00 0.00
22 Odisha  6.97 74.99 227.48
23 Punjab  33.05 44.74 36.24
24 Rajasthan 32.59 48.83 43.54
25 Sikkim  3.58 0.46 -0.57
26 Tamil Nadu  1.97 2.00 2.07
27 Tripura  3.54 5.58 4.19
28 Uttar Pradesh  0 14.59 43.89
29 Uttarakhand  81.65 120.80 60.52
30 West Bengal 5.30 6.46 8.44
 Total  688.18 1,063.04 1,149.81
In most of the State/UTs the amount released in 2009-10 could not be spent. This could be 
attributed to delayed releases and non subm ission of APO. In some states there was 
persistent under spending as compared with releases as i ndicated in gradual growth of 
accumulated reserve over three year period . It is noted with concern that in 11 1 of the 30 
States/UTs from which the data could be co llected, the amount of unspent accumulated 
balance had been steadily increasing. Most of the State/UTs improved their spending 
patterns in the second and third year. 
In its reply MoEF (April 2013) admitted that the funds were released after a gap of many 
years in succession and the inability of the St ates to spend these funds immediately as they 
were released was clearly evident.  It further stated that there was no question of return of 
unspent funds as these were non-lapsable and were to be carried over. It further stated that 
the fact of closing balances as mentioned in Table 30 required to be confirmed by the State 
Governments concerned. It, however, admitted  the fact of persistent under spending of 
funds and stated that funds were sanctioned to the State/ UTs after a ga p on many years. It 
was natural that it took a reasonable time fo r the expenditure to pick up especially in the 
area of compensatory afforestation. 
                                                            
1 Andaman & Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
94 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
The reply is not tenable because the funds were released based on the APOs from the States 
and should have been used as per the APOs. Carrying out compensatory activities including 
conservation, protection, regeneration and mana gement of existing natural forests etc was 
not a new activity for the Forest Department which presumably has the skill and experience 
to plan and execute these activities. 
Ad-hoc CAMPA in its 17th meeting held in September-October 2011 noted with concern that 
in some States, the funds sanctioned in the year 2009-10 had not been adequately used.  It 
was decided that the observations of the Su preme Court in its order dated 10 July 2009, 
that recommendations for the release of additional funds, if any, will be made in due course 
from time to time after seeing the prog ress made by the State level CAMPA and the 
effectiveness of the accounting monitoring and evaluation systems be given effect to. 
However, we did not find evidence of follow up on these decisions and observations. 
MoEF stated (April 2013)that, in recent years, the unspent balances in the States were being 
closely monitored by quarterly progress reports received from the States, e-Green Watch 
where applicable and Global Positioning Sy stem coordinates of work under taken from 
CAMPA funds, and that the allocation to futu re years would be made only after closely 
examining the inputs from the State CAMPA on the above parameters. It was further stated 
that in some of the laggard States where expendi ture in the past has not been in pace with 
the allocations, including in case of some “m ajor” States, the same is picking up slowly but 
surely. 
Despite the explanation and assurance given by MoEF, it is a matter of  concern with regard 
to CA that an anomalous situation has built  up. While there are fu nds to the tune of  
` 23,607.67 crore lying in CAF with Ad-hoc CAMP A, during the period of review the CA was 
done only on 44  per cent  of the non forest land planned to be covered and 49  per cent  of 
the degraded forest area and 39 per cent of the funds sanctioned for the purpose between 
2009-12 remained unutilised. 
4.4 Release of funds without approval/ delayed APO 
As per the prescribed process, Ad-hoc CAMPA was to release funds after an APO approved 
by the Steering Committee was received from the State CAMPA. The State/UT wise and year 
wise details of instances in which funds were  released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without approval 
of the APOs are in Table 31. 
Table 31: Instances when CAMPA funds were re leased to State CAMPA prior to receiving 
approved APO 
Year Release of fund by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
without preparation of APOs by State/ 
UTs 
Release of funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA prior to
receipt of approved APOs 
2009-10* Assam, Delhi, Goa, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, 
Uttarakhand and West Bengal. 
Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Odisha and Sikkim. 
2010-11 Assam, Chandigarh, Delhi, Madhya 
Pradesh, Odisha and West Bengal. 
Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, 
Sikkim and Uttarakhand. 
*No information was provided by Bihar, Gujarat and Meghalaya for the year 2009-10 regarding the 
preparation of APOs. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 95 | P a g e  
The funds transferred to States by Ad-hoc CA MPA without receipt and preparation of APOs 
were ` 653.43 crore and ` 406.43 crore for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11, respectively. 
In Jammu & Kashmir an overall APO of the St ate was not prepared. APOs were prepared 
separately by individual Implementing agenci es (IAs). There were  45 IAs in J&K. The 
implementing agencies prepared project proposals (PPs) for five years (2010-15) as a first 
phase in respect of their respective territorial  divisions. APOs were being carved out from 
these PPs and submitted to Executive Commi ttee of the CAMPA for recommendations  
and submission to Steering Committee for fi nal approval. Steering Committee approved 40 
APOs amounting to `32.33 crore in 2010-11 and 65 APOs amounting to ` 58.37 crore in 
2011-12. 
From the above it was observed that the Stat e CAMPA guidelines rega rding preparation of 
APOs were not followed uniformly and the funds  were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without 
receiving the APOs approved by the Steering Committee. Therefore it could not be ensured 
that the funds were used for defined purpose s as per the State CAMPA guidelines and the 
underutilisation of funds released could also partly be attributed to poor planning. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the observations made by Audit were not wholly correct. The 
APOs sent by the States before May 2009 lacked comparability and it was decided that the 
States should prepare APOs once again. The proforma for APOs had not been prescribed 
centrally until the 3
rd NCAC meeting in June 2010. By that  time funds had been released to 
most of the States for the year 2009-10, consider ing that no funds had been released to the 
States since the year 2006 and it was deemed a ppropriate to release funds as the State had 
forwarded some APOs even though no prof orma was prescribed till then. This was 
necessary to ensure that the States could take  up afforestation activities without losing any 
more time. 
The reply of MoEF is not tenable because mo ney was released to 18 State/ UTs (2009-10) 
and to 11 State/ UTs (2010-11) without preparat ion/ approval of APOs. As per the Supreme 
Court’s order of July 2009 the amount towa rds CA, ACA, PCA and CAT Plan was to be 
released in the respective bank accounts of the State/ UTs immediately for taking up site 
specific works already approv ed by the MoEF while granti ng approval under FC Act 1980 
and the amount towards NPV and protected area was to be released after the schemes have 
been reviewed by the State level Execut ive Committee and the APO approved by the 
Steering Committee. MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA releas ed funds without ensuring that the funds 
for CA, ACA, PCA and CAT Plan are used to taki ng up site specific works already approved by 
the MoEF while granting approval under FC Act 1980 nor that the funds for NPV and 
protected area are used as per the approved AP Os. MoEF should have a database of all the 
CA works approved by them while granting a pproval for diversion of forest land for non 
forest use and the funds from the CA funds from Ad-hoc CAMPA should be released for sites 
and works as mentioned in approved diversions. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
96 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4.5 Un-reconciled discrepancies in releases as per Ad-hoc CAMPA and State/UT 
records 
We cross checked the amount shown as releas ed by Ad-hoc CAMPA to States/UTs and the 
amounts recorded in the States/UTs CAMPA as  received. The details of the discrepancies 
found in the records of the two bodies are given in Table32. 
Table 32: Details of discrepancies in releases from Ad-hoc CAMPA and receipts in State/UT 
CAMPA during 2009-12. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT Total releases as 
per Ad-hoc CAMPA
(2009-10 to 2011-
12) 
Total amount stated 
to have been received 
by State CAMPA 
(2009-2012) 
Percentage of 
discrepancy 
in funds 
released and 
received* 
1 Assam 17.17 22.83 (-) 32.96
2 Chhattisgarh 356.86 357.95 (-) 0.31
3 Kerala 1.75 1.37 21.71
4  Madhya Pradesh  157.53 157.54 (-) 0.01
5  Maharashtra  257.47 256.64 0.32
6  Odisha  437.26 447.33 (-) 2.30
7  Punjab  68.98 81.65 (-) 18.37
8  Tamil Nadu  3.67 5.05 (-) 37.60
  Total 1,300.69 1,330.36 (-) 2.28
*(-) indicates short receipt by State CAMPA. 
As is evident from Table 32, in eight of the 30 States/UTs test checked, the amounts 
released by Ad-hoc CAMPA did not match with the amount shown to have been received by 
the State Nodal officer. 
Such discrepancies and lack of reconciliation over the three year period (2009-12) reflects 
poor management, internal control and monitoring by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
MoEF stated (April 2013)that the amounts dis bursed to the State CAMPA are sent through 
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) remittances  through nationalised banks and therefore 
there is no chance of discrepancies in remi ttance from Ad-hoc CAMPA and their receipt by 
the Nodal Officer. 
MoEF confirmed the figures only for Ad-hoc CAMPA and said that the position regarding 
funds received by the State CAMPAs needed be  replied by them. This confirms the audit 
findings that there is no standard process of  reconciliation and monitoring between the Ad-
hoc CAMPA and State CAMPA. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 97 | P a g e  
4.6 Component wise release of funds 
As per State CAMPA guidelines, based on orde rs of the Supreme Court dated 10 July 2009, 
the disbursement of funds collected under di fferent components were to be used for 
defined purposes as given below: 
Component Purpose 
Compensatory 
afforestation/ 
Additional 
Compensatory 
afforestation 
To be used as per site specific schemes received from States and 
Union Territories along with the pr oposals for diversion of forest 
lands under the Forest (Conservation), Act 1980. 
As seen from State APOs, these generally include nursery raising, 
advance soil work and plantation. 
Net Present Value To be used for naturally assisted regeneration, forest management 
and protection, infrastructure deve lopment, wildlife protection and 
management, supply of wood and other forest produce saving 
devices and other allied activities. 
As seen from State APOs, these generally include forest protection, 
infrastructure & HRD, strengthen ing of wildlife management, soil & 
water conservation, strengthening of Van Panchayats, allied 
activities including research, bio- diversity management, contractual 
engagement, monitoring, operational expenses and contingencies. 
Monies realised in 
cases of diversion of 
forest lands in 
protected areas 
To be used exclusively for undertak ing protection and conservation 
activities in protected areas. 
As seen from APOs, these included area specific plans. 
We observed that no component-wise details of receipt of funds and its releases were 
available with Ad-hoc CAMPA. In the absenc e of the same, we are unable to draw an 
assurance that the releases made to States fo r various schemes proposed in Annual Plan of 
Operation were being accounted for against the fund accumulation of the State in a 
particular component. The information availa ble with Ad-hoc CAMPA pertained only to 
State-wise accumulation which was further broken up into principle and interest. 
In order to assess the component- wise releases and utilisation, in the course of our audit, 
the State Accountants General attempted to colle ct this information from the Nodal officers 
in each State/UT. Based on this test check,  the component wise releases from 2009-12 as 
per APOs are given in Table 33. Inform ation was not made available by four 2 of the 30 
states/UTs covered in this audit. 
 
 
                                                            
2 Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Delhi, Sikkim and West Bengal 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
98 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 33: Component wise release of funds as  per Annual Plan operations as obtained 
from States/UTs. 
( ` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT NPV CA Wildlife 
Management
CATP Others  Total 
1  Andaman & 
Nicobar NA NA NA NA NA 1.89
2  Andhra Pradesh 324.05 57.42 0 0 0.94 382.41
3  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
16.99 4.40 0.00 0.56 1.01 
22.96
4  Assam 29.99 68.63 11.47 0.00 17.72 127.81
5  Bihar 9.38 4.34 1.00 0.00 1.84 16.56
6  Chandigarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.31 0.31
7  Chhattisgarh 192.77 46.04 0.00 0.00 25.50 264.31
8  Delhi NA NA NA NA NA 3.25
9  Goa 3.15 2.92 0.00 0.00 3.86 9.93
10  Gujarat 41.61 38.87 0.00 0.00 0.00 80.48
11  Haryana 23.76 13.71 0.00 1.28 0.03 38.78
12  Himachal 
Pradesh 
31.35 3.24 0.00 41.06 13.18 
88.83
13  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0 0 0 0 67.09 
67.09
14  Jharkhand 260.66 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 260.66
15  Karnataka  120.82 27.26 0.00 8.49 0.00 156.57
16  Kerala 3.40 0.35 0.00 0.00 0.32 4.07
17  Madhya 
Pradesh 
80.78 92.45 12.00 0.49 11.68 
197.40
18  Maharashtra 133.87 85.13 0.00 0.00 0.00 219.00
19   Manipur  0.00 0.05 1.60 0.00 0.31 1.96
20   Meghalaya  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0
21   Mizoram  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0
22   Odisha  147.68 161.55 50.00 0.00 74.90 434.13
23   Punjab  63.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.38 74.88
24   Rajasthan  53.10 16.84 12.06 0.00 3.55 85.55
25   Sikkim  NA NA NA NA NA 27.28
26   Tamil Nadu  1.08 1.56 0.00 0.00 0.54 3.18
27   Tripura  4.54 0.35 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.89
28   Uttar Pradesh  11.94 34.07 0.00 0.00 2.53 48.54
29   Uttarakhand  109.30 13.29 1.54 2.68 1.80 128.61
30  West Bengal NA NA NA NA NA 16.42
 Total 1,663.72 672.47 89.67 54.56 238.49 2,767.75
* Component wise break up of funds released was not provided by Andaman & Nicobar, Delhi, Sikkim and West 
Bengal hence the total amount of CA Funds received by the State/ UT was taken. 
**The figures of Table 33are for the amounts released by the State CAMPA to the State Forest Department and 
hence will not match with Table 28 and 29 the figures for actual expenditure done by the State Forest 
Department. 
NA-Not Available. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 99 | P a g e  
From the limited data collected it appears that  the component wise releases (26 State/UTs), 
did not exceed the component wise collectio n. However, Ad-hoc CAMPA and State/UT 
CAMPA must maintain component wise/state wise  data base of collections and releases to 
ensure compliance with Supreme Court’s orders. 
As can be seen from Table 33, 60 per cent  of the funds released  were from the NPV 
component, 24 per cent from the Compensatory afforestation component and 10 per cent 
for other activities like roadside plantations, ga p filling etc. From this distribution, it can be 
inferred that larger emphasis was on protecti on and maintenance of existing forest land 
(largely covered under NPV) a nd fresh plantations on newly acquired revenue lands or on 
degraded forests to compensate for forest cut due to diversion received lesser attention.  
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the orders of  Supreme Court did not require funds to be 
released by the Ad-hoc-CAMPA component wise .  The only requirement was for release of 
funds on the basis of the approved APOs. 
The reply of MoEF is not tenable as a record of component wise releases was necessary to 
Watch and monitor component wise expenditure , in order to ensure compliance to the 
Supreme Court’s order of July 2009 but no comp onent wise details of receipt of funds and 
its releases were available with Ad-hoc-CAMPA.  
As per the Supreme Court’s order of July 2009 the amount towards CA, ACA, PCA and CAT 
Plan was to be released in the respective bank accounts of the State/UTs immediately for 
taking up site specific works already approved  by the MoEF while granting approval under 
FC Act 1980 and the amount towards NPV and pr otected area was to be released after the 
schemes have been reviewed by the State level Executive Committee and the APO approved 
by the Steering Committee. By not mainta ining component wise records of the fund 
received and disbursed, MoEF has not put in place a mechanism to monitor compliance with 
the above orders of the Supreme Court. 
4.7 Expenditure not authorised by State CAMPA guidelines and National CAMPA 
Advisory Council 
As per Rule 11(i) of the State CAMPA guidelin es the money available with State CAMPA was 
to be utilised for meeting the expenditure towards the development, maintenance and 
protection of forests and wildlife management as per the approved APOs. 
NCAC in its third and fourth meetings held on 24 June 2010 and 24 January 2012, 
respectively directed that certain expenditure s were not permissible out of the CA funds 
such as administrative expenditure, expend iture on strengthening infrastructure at 
headquarters, petrol, oil and l ubricants expenditure on vehicl es, construction, repairs and 
renovation of office, residential building, fore st rest house, ministerial staff quarters etc 
above Range Forest Office level and purchase of vehicles – part icularly for use by officers 
etc. 
Test check of records of State CAMPA/ sampled division/ Nodal Officers revealed that during 
2009-12 an expenditure of `51.93 crore was incurred in contravention of the State CAMPA 
guidelines and NCAC directions as detailed at Table 34. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
100 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 34: Expenditure incurred in contrave ntion of the State CAMPA guidelines and 
directions of National CAMPA Advisory Council 
 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT Amount 
 (` in crore) 
Description 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh  
3.16 Purchase of vehicles ( ` 0.79 crore), construction 
of residential buildings ( ` 2.19 crore), office 
equipment, mobiles and furniture ( ` 0.12 crore) 
etc. 
2  Bihar  4.51 Purchase of vehicles (` 3.38 crore) during 2010-11 
and 2011-12, construction of residential buildings 
(` 1.13 crore) during 2011-12. 
3  Chhattisgarh  11.98 Purchase of vehicles ( ` 1.30 crore), construction 
of buildings ( ` 5.82 crore of that ` 2.03 crore 
already spent) and eco-tourism ( ` 4.86 crore of 
that ` 0.71 crore already spent). 
4  Delhi  0.06 Purchase of Maruti gypsy ( ` 0.05 crore), six 
mobile phones (` 0.29 lakh) and a laptop ( ` 0.01 
crore). 
5 Goa 0.75 Purchases of executive table, vehicles, 
computers/laptops etc. 
6  Haryana   0.15 Renovation of Van Bhawan building. 
7 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0.31 Purchase of carpets, light emitting diodes, air 
conditioners, i-pods, sofa sets, projectors, 
installation of office cabins, installation of electric 
transformer, vehicles etc. 
8  Karnataka   6.71 Purchase of vehicles ( ` 3.36 crore), maintenance 
of guest house/office building ( ` 2.55 crore), 
financial assistance to defunct VFC’s (` 0.61 crore) 
and improvement to tree parks (` 0.19 crore). 
9  Kerala  0.96 Purchase of vehicles ( ` 0.96 crore i.e.70 per cent 
of total provision). 
10  Maharashtra  6.19 Purchase of vehicles for officers, furniture, 
computers and eco-tourism, repair of forest rest 
houses and trainings ( ` 0.40 crore) and 
construction & renovation of Van Bhawan 
building (` 4.88 crore), purchase of solar energy 
equipment for Van Bhawan building ( ` 0.91 
crore). 
11  Manipur  0.26 Construction of community hall, assistance to 
local club, distribution of sewing machines and 
development of eco-tourism etc. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 101 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT Amount 
 (` in crore) 
Description 
12  Odisha 0.07 Purchase of vehicle. 
13  Punjab  0.10 Purchase of vehicles etc. 
14  Rajasthan  2.04 Maintenance of building, POL charges and cellular 
phones charges. 
15  Sikkim  2.24 Purchase of vehicles (` 0.25 crore), extension and 
fencing of Forest Secretar iat building, repair of 
DFO residences and offices, Assistant Conservator 
of Forests quarters etc (` 1.99 crore). 
16  Uttarakhand  12.26 Renovation of official residence of Principal 
Secretary ( ` 0.16 crore), maintenance of 
residential quarters ( ` 0.24 crore), purchase of 
vehicles for PCCF-VP ( ` 0.05 crore), office 
expenses ( `  0.72 crore), briquetting machines 
(` 0.13 crore), Atal Adarsh Gram Yojna ( ` 4.99 
crore), strengthening Van Panchayats and 
operational expenses ( ` 5.35 crore), honorarium 
(` 0.62 crore) etc.  
17  West Bengal  0.18 Foundation stone laying ceremony and hiring of 
vehicles etc. 
   Total  51.93   
MoEF stated (April 2013) that following the 4 th meeting of NCAC, the issue of utilisation of 
CAMPA funds for the perceived list of non-perm issible items have been referred to a High 
Level Committee, in which some States were associated. The recommendations of the High 
Level Committee on the issue were to be placed  before next meeting of NCAC – thereafter, 
approval of Supreme Court of India would be re quired in this behalf as existing orders of 
Supreme Court do not provide for any modifi cation in the approved Annual Plans of 
Operation by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
The reply of MoEF is not te nable as the CAMPA Funds we re to be utilised towards 
development, maintenance and protection of forests and wildlife management as per the 
approved APOs and any deviation of expenditu re was to be supervised and monitored by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA and NCAC. The above expenditure has been incurred in contravention of the 
NCAC guidelines.  
4.8 Monitoring of CAMPA plantation through National Remote Sensing Centre 
An effort was made to analyse the growth of the CAMPA plantations using satellite data. 
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) of Department of Space was approached for 
identification of plantation activity at specified sites using pre and post planting date remote 
sensing data. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
102 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
During audit the State Accountants General collected the Global Positioning System 
coordinates and area of the planted sites from the State Forest Departments for the CAMPA 
plantations done during the period 2009-12. Yo ung plantations in early growth have very 
thin foliage (species specific) and till they ar e fully established, the remote sensing signal 
may not capture them fully. Hence data in wh ich plantation was done in the year 2009-10 
was selected. Only two States Chhattisgarh an d Odisha had done CAMPA plantation in the 
year 2009-10. 
Based on the area of plantation and the number of trees planted, 10 per cent  of the 
plantation sites were selected for monitoring through satellite imagery. In Chhattisgarh 10 
plantation sites and in Odisha three plantation sites were selected. 
NRSC was the expert agency engage d for this purpose. The methodology 3 adopted was 
detection of plantation including use of sate llite imagery and field observations for which 
the NRSC teams visited 10 sites in three distri cts in northern part of Chhattisgarh (Korba, 
Bilaspur and Jangir Champa) and three sites of Kendujhar district in Odisha. 
The general observations of NRSC for the 13  sites selected were that the plantation 
activities were initiated during 2009-10 and also raised in 2011. The average height of many 
saplings were around 1.5 meter and the growth was not sufficient to be  detected on LISS-IV 
imagery. Protection and forestry operations on  growth from root stock/ extant vegetation 
before plantation were evident in the imagery. 
The exceptions to the general observations reported based on field observations are 
detailed below: 
4.8.1 Rocky exposures and poor growth 
At Hardi, Chhattisgarh it was ob served that the teak plantati on had been taken up in June-
July 2011. The average height of trees was less than one meter. In the central part growth 
was seen to be five to six feet and very tall grasses were also seen. The northern area had 
rocky exposures and poor growth. On the ot her hand the data provided by Chhattisgarh 
Forest Department indicated that 1,16,500 plan ts had been raised in 50 hectare area. The 
field observations do not match with the data of afforestation provided by the Chhattisgarh 
Forest Department. 
                                                            
3The plantation detection by NRSC was mainly carried out using the Resources at-LISS-IV data having five 
meter spatial resolution. Based on the geolocations prov ided for the plantations, Bhuvan image database (the 
ISRO Geovisualisation portal) of digita lly merged natural colour high reso lution composite (Carotsat + LISS IV) 
pertaining to the green season of 2008-09 was inte rpreted for pre-planting/ planting season, wherever 
needed, open source high resolution imagery suiting to requirements was also referred. Similarly, for the same 
locations, as mentioned above, corresponding LISS-IV green season ortho-corrected images for 2012-13 were 
acquired for one to one comparison for the plantation gr owth with reference to pre-planting period of 2008-
09. Thus, the visual interpretation of the plantation growth was done from the two time period images and 
observations were recorded. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 103 | P a g e  
 
Teak plantation at Hardi, Chhattisgarh 
4.8.2 Heavy biotic pressure and missing saplings 
At Marwahi-1405, Chhattisgarh it was observed that there was very heavy biotic pressure, 
pits were seen and there were no saplings in the area. 
The audit observations were issued to MoEF on 10 July 2013. The reply of the Ministry is 
awaited. 
4.9 Expenditure not as per MNREGA 
As per Supreme Court’s order dated 14 July 2009, while carrying out the work of utilising the 
CAMPA funds, the broad guidelines adopte d by the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act were to be followe d and as far as possi ble work was to be 
allocated to the rural unemployed people, maintaining the minimum wages level. 
During the test check of records of State CAMPA it was observed that in nine States (Andhra 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Tripura and West Bengal) data re lating to number of people depl oyed on field activities to 
be undertaken under CAMPA was not maintained. Th erefore, it could not be ascertained as 
to whether employment was given to rural unemployed persons and the guidelines of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was observed that suitable site for teak 
plantation was not properly identified which 
led to poor growth of plants.  
 


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
104 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
MNREGA were adhered to. Further, there was nothing on record to show engagement of 
rural unemployed youths in carrying out planta tion works by implementation agency. It was 
observed in Jammu & Kashmir that payments we re made to labourers in cash instead of 
account payee cheques. Further, seven States 4  had not followed MNREGA guidelines while 
making payment of wages to labourers. In remaining 14 State/ UTs 5 such records were not 
found maintained hence no comments in this regard could be made in audit. 
MoEF stated(April 2013) that this needed be replied by the State Government. 
4.10 Monitoring and Evaluation 
As per Supreme Court’s order dated 29 October 2002, an independent system of concurrent 
monitoring was to be evolved and implemen ted through the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund to ensure effective and proper utilisation of fund. In July 2009, Supreme Court directed 
that five per cent of the amount released to the Stat e CAMPA shall also be released and 
utilised by the National CAMPA Advisory Counc il, for monitoring and evaluation of schemes 
implemented in the State/ UT utilising CAMPA money, setting up of institutes, societies, 
centre of excellence in the field of forest and wildlife, pilot schemes, standardization of 
codes/ guidelines, etc., for the sector. Furthe r, the State CAMPA guidelines notified in 
August 2009 also authorised State CAMPA to earmark upto two per cent  of the funds for 
monitoring and evaluation6. 
4.10.1 National CAMPA Advisory Council  
As envisaged in the State CAMPA Guidelines  of 2 July 2009, National CAMPA Advisory 
Council (NCAC) was constituted by an order of the Ministry of Environment and Forests on 
13 August 2009.   It was to be headed by the Minister of Environment and Forests with ten 
other members. 
Till 31 March 2012 an amount of ` 131.28 crore had been transferred to the account of 
NCAC. 
As per State CAMPA Guidelines, NCAC was to: 
• Lay down broad guidelines for State CAMPA; 
• Regularly monitor and evaluate, in consultati on with States, projects being undertaken 
by State CAMPAs. 
• Facilitate scientific, technological and other assistance that may be required by State 
CAMPAs 
• Make recommendations to State CAMPAs based on a review of their plans and 
programmes. 
                                                            
4 Delhi, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand. 
5Andaman & Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab and Sikkim. 
6 The expenditure on monitoring and evaluation was subject to overall ceiling of two per cent of the amount to 
be spent every year. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 105 | P a g e  
• Provide a mechanism to State CAMPAs to reso lve issues of an inter State or Centre-
State character. 
4.10.1.1 Development of Integrated CAMPA Concurrent Monitoring and Evaluation 
System (e-Green Watch) 
NCAC in third meeting dated 24 June 2010 conveyed in-principle approval for developing 
the Integrated CAMPA Concurrent  Monitoring and Evaluation System (i-CCMES). National 
Informatics Centre on the request of MoEF wa s to evolve the system working closely with 
the Government of Madhya Pradesh. 
NCAC in its fourth meeting held on 24 January 2012 decided to form a Committee for 
finalisation of roll out of i-CCMES (now called `e-Green Watch’) on a nationwide level and 
web based proposal monitoring system for the Forest Conservation Division. The Committee 
noted that there were slippages of time in implementation of the schemes. The Committee 
was to complete its deliberations and furnish its report within a period of three months. 
Test check of records of Ad-hoc CAMPA revealed that Ad-hoc CAMPA had released an 
amount of `1.05 crore to NIC since September 2010 to May 2011 for development of i) 
Integrated CAMPA Concurrent Monitoring and Evaluation System (i-CCMES), now known as 
`e-Green Watch’ and ii) web-based proposal monitoring system for FC Division. Both these 
monitoring systems which were required to be developed by November 2011 had not been 
developed yet (June 2013). Thus, no online monito ring of afforestation was being done by 
MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA, though funds of `2,829.21 crore were released to various States 
upto 31 March 2012. MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA neit her succeeded in developing any online 
monitoring mechanism through web based moni toring system or e-Green Watch etc nor 
directed its Regional Offices to physically moni tor the physical and financial progress of the 
projects being run out of the CAMPA funds. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that progress in evol ution of e-Green Watch and its application to 
other States is being continuously monitored.  For launch of the programme in any State, 
extensive planning and coordination is necessa ry, and some time overruns are inescapable. 
The CAMPA activities are in take off stage, and that monitoring and evaluation is at the 
development stage and it would take reasonable  time to settle. A proforma for continuous 
input of information has been initiated through quarterly progress reports and Geographic 
Information System confirmations of all CAMPA based works undertaken in the States. 
The reply is not convincing as non-implementa tion of the monitoring system even after a 
period of more than 48 months after the issue of guidelines in July 2009 cannot be termed 
as reasonable. Supreme Court’s order of October 2002 required that an independent system 
of concurrent monitoring and evaluation wa s to be evolved and implemented through the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund to ensure e ffective and proper utilisation of the funds. 
Also as reported by most of the States beca use of non implementation of e-Green Watch by 
MoEF concurrent monitoring and evaluation could not be done. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
106 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4.10.2 Monitoring by State CAMPA 
 
4.10.2.1 Irregular meetings of State CAMPA committees 
As per State CAMPA guidelines the Governing body headed by the Chief Minister of the 
State was to lay down the broad policy framework for the functioning of the State level 
CAMPA and review its working from time to time. The Steering Committee headed by the 
Chief Secretary was to approve the APOs an d monitor the progress of utilisation of the 
funds released by the State CAMPA and it wa s to meet atleast once in six months. The 
Executive Committee headed by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) was to 
prepare the APOs, to take all steps for givi ng effect to State CAMPA and overarching 
objectives and core principle, and to superv ise the works being implemented in the State 
out of the funds released from State CAMPA. 
During the test check of records of State CAMP A/ Nodal Officers it was observed that the 
meetings of the bodies of the State CAMPA were not being held at regular intervals in all the 
States due to which preparation of APOs, supervision of utilisation of funds and progress of 
projects being undertaken out of the CAMPA fu nd etc. could not be monitored as per the 
State CAMPA guidelines. The State wise deta ils of the meetings of the State CAMPA 
committees are at Table 35. 
Table 35 :  State wise details of the meetings of the State CAMPA committees. 
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT Number of meetings during the period 2009-12 
Governing 
Body 
Steering 
Committee 
Executive 
Committee 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands  
0 3 3 
2 Andhra Pradesh _ 3 3 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 2 2 2 
4 Assam 0 1 2 
5 Bihar 1 3 3 
6 Chandigarh _ 3 2 
7 Chhattisgarh _ 4 7 
8 Delhi _ 2 3 
9 Goa 0 2 3 
10 Gujarat _ 2 4 
11 Haryana  _ 4 4 
12 Himachal Pradesh 0 7 4 
13 Jammu & Kashmir _ _ _ 
14 Jharkhand _ 4 4 
15 Karnataka  _ 3 _ 
16 Kerala _ 2 2 
17  Madhya Pradesh  _ 2 7 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 107 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No.  
State/UT Number of meetings during the period 2009-12 
Governing 
Body 
Steering 
Committee 
Executive 
Committee 
18  Maharashtra  _ 3 13 
19  Manipur  0 2 4 
20  Meghalaya  0 1 1 
21  Mizoram  0 1 1 
22  Odisha _ 4 4 
23  Punjab  _ _ _ 
24  Rajasthan  1 2 2 
25  Sikkim  _ 3 3 
26  Tamil Nadu  _ 2 2 
27  Tripura  _ 2 1 
28  Uttar Pradesh  1 3 6 
29  Uttarakhand  1 3 _ 
30  West Bengal  0 3 7 
`-’ indicates information not available. 
Form the Table 35 it was observed that there were meetings of Governing Body in five 
States while in eight State/ UTs it did not m eet even once. In 17 State/ UTs no record of 
meetings of Governing body was available. In  no State/ UT except Himachal Pradesh the 
Steering Committee met more than four times against the norm of six times during 2009-
12.The Executive Committee meetings were not he ld at regular intervals due to which the 
monitoring of progress of utilisation of funds of ` 1,775.84 crore, supervision of works being 
implemented out of these funds and laying do wn of broad policy framework for functioning 
of the State CAMPA could not be adequately done. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that this issue n eeded be answered by respective State 
Governments. 
4.10.2.2  Non existence of moni toring and evaluation system  
As per para 17(1) of the State CAMPA guide lines an independent system for concurrent 
monitoring and evaluation of the works im plemented in the States utilizing the funds 
available was to be evolved and implemented to  ensure effective and proper utilization of 
funds.  
As per para 11(iii) of the State CAMPA guidel ines the expenditure incurred on monitoring 
and evaluation was subject to an overall ceiling of two per cent of the amount to be spent 
every year. 
 During the test check of records of State CAMPA/ State Forest Departments it was observed 
that no specific monitoring and evaluation system for monitoring of projects was in place in 
any of the 30State/ UTs. An amount of ` 4.39 crore only was incurred on monitoring and 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
108 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
evaluation in four States 7 during the period 2009-12, other State/ UTs did not incur any 
expenditure. MoEF failed to ensure that a prop er system for monitoring and evaluation of 
the projects in the State/ UTs was done. 
4.10.2.3  Non implementation of e-Green Watch system   
During test check of records of State CAMPA/ No dal officers in all the States it was noticed 
that except the State of Karnataka, data ba se relating to CAMPA fund was not updated on 
the e-Green Watch website managed by National  Informatics Centre (NIC), Government of 
India. Due to non implementation of e-Gr een Watch system online information for fund 
allocation, plantation work estimates, other wo rk estimates, FCA projects, land  diverted,  
CA, land management, plantation works progress re port etc. could not be made available to 
the stakeholders. 
M o E F  s t a t e d  ( A p r i l  2 0 1 3 )  t h a t  e - G r e e n  W a t ch monitoring and evaluation system has had 
time overruns. It stated that the system was formally launched in Andhra Pradesh and 
Karnataka in November 2012 and it was proposed to launch the project in all State/ UTs in 
the country after assessment of the state of preparedness of the respective State/ UTs.  
The fact remains that there was no system fo r concurrent monitoring and evaluation of 
projects during the period 2006-12 and even no w it has been launched in only two States. 
No time frame for its launch in other State/ UTs was available.  Supreme Court’s order of 
October 2002 called for an indepe ndent system of concurrent mo nitoring and evaluation to 
be evolved and implemented through the Co mpensatory Afforestation Fund to ensure 
effective and proper utilisation of the funds. Fu rther, as reported by most of the States 
because of non implementation of e-Green Watch by MoEF concurrent monitoring and 
evaluation could not be done. 
4.10.2.4 Voluntary movement of youth and students 
As per overarching objectives and core principles of the St ate CAMPA guidelines, the State 
CAMPA was to also promote a voluntary move ment of youth and students for supporting 
ongoing conservation activities and new activities initiated in the State Forest Department. 
During test check of records of 30 State/UT CA MPA/ Nodal officers in all the States it was 
noted that six States (Goa, Jharkhand, Karnat aka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur and Rajasthan) 
accepted that no youth awareness program ha d been pursued while the other States/UTs 
did not furnish any reply on the subject. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that all the above po ints needed be answered by the respective 
State Governments. 
The reply is not tenable as MoEF was tasked with the overall responsibility of monitoring 
and evaluation. 
                                                            
7 Haryana (` 2.72 crore), Himachal Pradesh (` 0.04 crore), Tamil Nadu (` 1.34 crore), Uttarakhand (` 0.29 
crore). 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 109 | P a g e  
4.11 Conclusions 
Out of an amount of ` 2,925.65 crore of the Compensatory  Afforestation Funds released 
during the period 2009-12 for compensato ry afforestation activities, only ` 1,775.84 crore 
were utilised by the State/ UTs leaving an unutilised balance of  ` 1,149.81 crore. The 
percentage of overall utilisation of released funds was only 61 per cent. In 11 of the selected 
30 State/ UTs utilisation ranged between zero to 50 per cent  which depicted the poor 
absorptive capacity of the State/ UTs. Most  State/UTs were unable to spend the monies 
released to them by Ad-hoc CA MPA due to delay in preparatio n of APOs, delayed release of 
funds resulting in setting in  a process of a ccumulation of CAF in the States which was the 
problem sought to be addressed by the Supreme Court. 
It is a matter of concern with regard to CA that an anomalous situation has built up. While 
there are funds to the tune of ` 23,607.67 crore lying in CAF with Ad-hoc CAMPA, during the 
period of review the CA was done only on 44  per cent of the non forest land planned to be 
covered and 49 per cent of the degraded forest area. 
Ad-hoc CAMPA released funds to 18 State/ UTs in 2009-10 and 13 State/ UTs during 2010-11 
without receipt of approved APOs which reflec ted the casualness in release of funds to the 
State/ UTs. Funds were released without ensu ring that their utilisation was for defined and 
approved purpose. Out of the funds spent an amount of ` 51.93 crore was utilised towards 
unauthorised activities in 17 State/ UTs. Funds  to be utilised for meeting the expenditure 
towards the development, maintenance and prot ection of forests and wildlife management 
were used for administrative expenses. Ma ndatory guidelines of MNREGA were not 
followed during the execution of the works in most of the State/ UTs. 
MoEF was not able to launch the nationwide e-Green Watch system which was required to 
be developed by November 2011 for monitoring and evaluation of schemes implemented in 
the State/ UT utilising CAMPA money. Due to non implementation of e-Green Watch system 
online information of fund allocation, plantation work estimates, other work estimates, 
Forest Conservation projects, land divert ed, CA, land management, plantation works 
progress report etc. could not be made available to the stakeholders. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 111 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
5.1. Introduction 
CAMPA was to be the custodian of all Compen satory Afforestation Funds collected from 
user agencies while allowing diversion of forest land for non forest purposes under the 
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and also the amounts received towards net present value of 
the forest land so diverted as per Supreme Courts directions. The collected money was to be 
held in trust by CAMPA for each State/UT and released to respective State/UT Governments 
based on approved Annual Plans of Operation.  The accumulated funds were to be kept 
invested in the interim. The directions issued by the Supreme Court and MoEF in this regard 
from time to time are summarised below: 
Date Directions 
23 April 2004 The MoEF notification constituti ng CAMPA, among other things, 
prescribed: 
• The powers and functions of Executive Body, CAMPA included 
‘investment of funds’. 
• The amount collected by CAMPA shall be invested in Reserve Bank 
of India, Nationalised Banks, Po st office, Government Securities, 
Government Bonds and Deposits. 
6 May 2006 The Supreme Court vide its order crea ting Ad-hoc CAMPA also directed 
the body to get audited all the monies received from the user agencies on 
behalf of the CAMPA and the income earned thereon by the various State 
Government officials. The auditors we re to be appointed by the CAG. The 
audit was to examine whether prop er financial procedure had been 
followed while investing the funds. 
During the period 2006 and 2012, the Compen satory Afforestation Funds with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA grew from ` 1,200 crore to ` 23,608 crore.  As on 31 March 2012, its accumulated 
funds comprised of principal amounting to  `  20,063 crore and an interest component of  
` 3,545 crore.  
5.2. Delegation of powers with regard to investment of funds 
In the first meeting of Ad-hoc CAMPA held  on 15 May 2006, it was decided that the 
Chairman Ad-hoc CAMPA would approve the gene ral guidelines for investment to be made 
out of the funds to be deposited in Ad-hoc  CAMPA. The Chairman and Member Secretary 
(Chief Executive Officer) Ad-h oc CAMPA, assisted by Offi cer on Special Duty were 
responsible for managing the investments of  CAF and taking investment decisions. 
Occasionally, in the absence of Chairman, the investment proposals we re approved by the 
Chapter - V 
Investment of accumulated Compensatory
Afforestation Funds 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
112 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
representative of CEC on the Ad-hoc CAMPA wi th the caveat that the file notings may be 
shown to the Chairman on his return to office. 
This arrangement was reconfirmed in the 18 th meeting of Ad-hoc CAMPA held on 19 April 
2012 by noting that in terms of the order of the Supreme Court of India, decisions in the 
matter of the procedure for investment of CA MPA funds were to be taken internally in 
terms of the considered decisions taken in the past in the Ad-hoc CAMPA itself. There was 
no scope for involving member of the Ad-hoc CAMPA viz. CAG’s representative on Ad-hoc 
CAMPA and or Member Secretary CEC (also member Ad-hoc CAMPA) in day-to-day 
decisions relating to management of the invest ment portfolio in respect of funds available 
with Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that investment of CAMPA funds followed the policy approved at 
the level of the Chairman Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
5.3. The formulation of investment policy 
Any entity whether in the public or private se ctor, dealing with large volumes of surplus 
cash ought to have a formally documented  investment policy s upplemented by detailed 
procedures. Such policy and procedures would lay down among other things, the following: 
• The roles and responsibilities of different functionaries; 
• The process for estimation of surplus cash, the periods for which such cash would 
continue to remain surplus to the organisa tion’s requirements, and the frequency of 
estimation/re-estimation of such surplus cash. 
• The instruments to which investments would be restricted – this would cover : 
 The type of instrument (e.g. Fixed Deposits, Government of India Bonds); 
 The maturity period of the instrument (whi ch would be consistent with the period 
for which the cash would remain surplus to the organization’s requirements); 
 The credit rating of instruments, where applicable; 
 The issuers of such instruments and their financial credibility; 
 The mix of instruments of different types,  maturity periods, issuers and credit 
ratings required to optimize credit risk, li quidity, interest rate risk, and any other 
public policy objectives/constraints etc. 
The detailed procedures to be complied with wh ile making day to day investment decisions 
would generally include: 
• The process of estimating surplus cash requirements(projected cash flow statements); 
• The process for inviting of bids, indicating  the approximate amount of investment, the 
maturity period, the validity period for bids, mode of receipt of bids (sealed covers, fax, 
e-mail etc.); 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 113 | P a g e  
• The process for comparative analysis and evaluation of bids and finalization of 
investments (including negotiations with bidders); 
• Time frame for each activity; 
• Documentation to ensure that the prescribed processes have been carried out diligently, 
fairly, transparently, and with due professional care. 
We noted that there were repeated discussi ons in the meetings of Ad-hoc CAMPA on 
framing an investment policy to guide the in vestment of the accumulated Compensatory 
Afforestation Funds. Ad-hoc CAMPA members in the meetings of the body not only urged 
the Executive members (i.e. the Chairman and Member Secretary) to formulate an 
investment policy and approve it but also prov ided guidelines and parameters for drafting 
the investment policy. The directions given at different times by the body are detailed 
below: 
Date of 
meeting 
Extract of the minutes of Ad-hoc CAMPA meetings 
15 May 2006 • The funds shall be suitably kept in  Fixed Deposits in Nationalised 
Banks/Reserve Bank of Indi a/Post office/Government 
Securities/Government Bonds/Deposits. 
• Chairman shall approve general guidelines for investment to be 
made out of the funds to be deposited in Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
7 July 2006 An investment policy may be evolved.   New Delhi Municipal Corporation 
guidelines for similar investments were to be considered for evolving 
such investment policy. 
Criteria for inclusion in the investment policy were prescribed: 
• Investment by Ad-hoc CAMPA was to be done in the Scheduled 
Banks/Reserve Bank of India/Post Office only. 
• Funds to ordinarily be invested in six-monthly Fixed Deposits 
(FDs). 
• Funds to be invested with Banks covered by Delhi clearing system. 
• Different Scheduled Banks offering  next lower interest rates may 
also be considered for making Fixed Deposits in addition to the 
Bank offering the highest interest  rates in order to minimize the 
risk involved. 
• The format of quotation (to be so ught from different Banks) was 
to be standardized by the Financi al Consultant in consultation 
with member representing CAG. Validity-period of the quotations 
was to be invariably prescribed together with slabs of deposits 
intended. 
• The Chairman reserved the right to decide the distribution of 
investment in different Banks/Post Office according to the 
guidelines. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
114 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Date of 
meeting 
Extract of the minutes of Ad-hoc CAMPA meetings 
• As investment was not intended to be made on day-to-day basis, 
the broad guiding principle for making investment was to wait for 
receipts to become an amount of ` 5 0  c r o r e ,  o r  f o r  1 5  d a y s  
whichever is earlier. This genera l principle would be subject to 
exigencies of other responsibilities that the Chairman and other 
Members are discharging. 
20 November 
2006 
The Financial Consultant of Ad-hoc CAMPA was to finalise the draft 
format for calling quotations and the draft guidelines for investment in 
consultation with the representative  of CAG, which was to be placed 
before Ad-hoc CAMPA for approval. 
15 February 
2007 
Quotations for one and two years were to be invited, and in the event of 
the interest rate for two years being more than 0.5  per cent than that for 
one year, investment was to be made for a period of two years. 
20 June 2007 • The matter of resignation submitte d by the Financial Consultant, 
and the issues raised therein including allegation involving an 
investment of ` 250 crore against the then  Chairman, came up for 
discussion.   
• In view of the huge financial angle involved therein, it was felt 
necessary to enquire into the alle gation made in the resignation 
letter of the Financial Consultant. The representative of the CAG 
was also of the view that such actions were in violation of the 
financial norms and were of serious concern.  The Chairman 
directed that the Member-Secretary  would inquire into the issues 
raised by the Financial Consultant and submit a report which 
would be placed in the next meeting of Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
• It was also decided that th e quotations would be called 
telephonically, but it would be received in sealed cover giving the 
bidders a fixed deadline for making the submission. 
16 April 2008 • As regards procedure to be followed for calling of quotations to 
ensure that the quotations are received, opened, compiled and 
decided properly, it was decided that the representatives of the 
Banks would be asked to be present at the time of opening the 
sealed envelopes. 
9 March 2009 On the alleged violation of financial norms by the then Chairman, Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, the views of the CAG’s repr esentative on Ad-hoc CAMPA were 
placed in the meeting and noted for future. 
(The views expressed by CAG’s repres entative have been discussed in 
detail in the Case Study III in this Chapter). 
The CAG’s representative on 24 November 2008 had also suggested 
objectives and parameters of defining an investment policy 
supplemented by detailed procedures. He concluded that : 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 115 | P a g e  
Date of 
meeting 
Extract of the minutes of Ad-hoc CAMPA meetings 
• The mechanism for investment of surplus funds by the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA was an ad-hoc one, which was executed on a case to case 
basis, without systemic policy and associated procedures. 
• The human resources available to  the Ad-hoc CAMPA were also 
not consistent with the require ments, given that the primary 
objective of the Ad-hoc CAMPA was not treasury/investment 
management, which was commonly a ssociated with professional 
organizations specializing in this area. 
• The scale of surplus cash wi th CAMPA was, however, not 
appropriate for such an ad-hoc approach, and issues relating to 
arbitrariness, lack of transparency  etc. may crop up in the future 
as well. 
• To avoid these issues and divest responsibility for investment, the 
ad-hoc CAMPA may also consider  making a proposal to the 
Government of India for keepin g surplus cash in the Public 
Account of India. 
17 January 
2011 
CAMPA funds were to be so invested  during the year 2011 in banks as to 
mature on pre-determined dates, sa y, 30 March, 2012, 29 June, 2012, 30 
December, 2012 and so on depending on  the anticipated pattern of fund 
requirements of the States so that there is no loss of interest of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA on this account. A transparent process for ascertaining of interest 
rates from the nationalized Banks was to be formalized. 
14 September 
and 17 October 
2011 
• Of the accumulated funds in the Ad-hoc CAMPA, an amount of 
` 20,000 crore only was to be kept separately, in a way ‘frozen’ in 
FDRs in nationalized Banks and the funds over and above this 
utilized for ongoing releases. 
• The limit of investment in a part icular Bank was to be linked to 
the net worth of the Bank, for which figures were to be accessed 
from the internet. The proposals in this behalf should be placed 
before the next meeting of the Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
• Instead of asking for quotations only once in a month, the Banks 
were allowed to quote two workin g days ahead of the date of 
maturity of FDRs.  The practice of informing the Banks only once 
in a month about the funds likely to be available in the course of 
the month, however, remained una ltered. The hard copies of e-
mails sent on the 25th day of every month were to be sent 
officially to all CMDs of Banks,  and also the nominated General 
Managers and Deputy General Managers. 
20 January 
2012 
It was reiterated that there was a need for formulating an investment 
policy. 
19 April 2012 It was felt that a formal Investment Policy should be finalised and placed 
on the website of CAMPA. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
116 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the observat ions of the representative of CAG were 
considered at the time wh en the Compensatory Afforestation Bill 2008 was in the 
Parliament and the uncertainty over the future of the Ad-hoc CAMPA loomed large. Further, 
it also stated that Ad-hoc CAMPA had no time to take long term decisions as the future of its 
existence was itself very uncertain. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the observations of the CAG’s representative 
were not given due consideration. Irregulariti es in investment of CAMPA funds occurred as 
evident from the audit observations discussed in succeeding paragraphs, due to absence of 
well crafted investment policy and weak procedures and internal controls. 
As is reflected in the chronology tabulated ab ove, despite repeated directions from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, no comprehensive investment policy wi th detailed procedures was approved by 
Chairman, Ad-hoc CAMPA betwee n 2006 and 2012. Further, deta iled procedures to ensure 
proper assessment of investable surpluses, competitive bidding and evaluation of bids, 
monitoring of maturities and safeguarding investments were not prescribed. Investment 
decisions were generally guided by broad criteria laid down Ad-hoc CAMPA in its meetings. 
MoEF (April 2013) accepted that the investment  policy was not formally notified keeping in 
view the very uncertain nature of these f unds and their management . It, however, added 
that the decisions taken in Ad-hoc CAMPA we re scrupulously followed. The fact remained 
that no investment policy was formulated for the funds received by Ad-hoc CAMPA since its 
inception. However, investment policy for the investment of funds with the banks by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA was framed and ratified in the 22 nd meeting of Ad-hoc CAMPA held in February 
2013, six years after the creation of Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
5.4. Ad-hoc determination of funds available for investment 
In the absence of any prescrib ed process for periodic determ ination of funds available for 
investment, we examined Ad-hoc CAMPA’s reco rds to ascertain the practice being followed 
for estimating of surplus cash, the periods fo r which such cash would continue to remain 
surplus, and the frequency of such estimation/re-estimation. 
We observed that there was no documentary ev idence available to show that a process of 
periodically estimating the quantum of funds available with Ad-hoc CAMPA for investment 
taking into account the maturity pattern of fixed deposits and the probable inflows and 
outflows of cash, was being followed in pr actice. Investment proposals were found on 
noting sheets that indicated a lump-sum amount available for investment which included 
the amounts available from maturity of the FD Rs as well as the fres h deposits. There were 
no working papers indicating the period to wh ich this investable surplus pertained, whether 
all FDRs maturing within the period had been included, whether all fresh deposits received 
from the States/UTs during the period had been included. Hence, from the evidence 
available on record, we were una ble to derive an assurance th at the entire funds available 
for investment had been accounted for while ta king investment decisions at a particular 
point of time. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that Ad-hoc CAMPA from  the date of its constitution performed in 
a very uncertain scenario as to its future a nd longevity. The best possible decisions were 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 117 | P a g e  
taken in matter of investment of funds. The Mo EF’s reply does not justify the absence of 
clear cut internal procedures to manage investment of substantial sums of money given that 
the Supreme Court had entrusted Ad-hoc CAMPA with their responsibility. 
5.5. Idle funds 
Financial prudence dictates that no monies should lie idle. A proper estimation of cash flows 
should be made and all surplus funds should  be immediately invested. The timing of 
maturity of investments should match the timing of requirement for liquidity. 
In our test check of 10 bank accounts with Ad-hoc CAMPA of the States of Chhattisgarh, 
Uttarakhand, Odisha, Maharashtra and Jharkha nd in Union Bank of India and Corporation 
Bank for the period 2006-12, we noted 204 inst ances where there was a delay ranging from 
three to 22 working days in investing funds whic h were lying in the accounts resulting in the 
loss of interest of ` 8.70 crore.  
MoEF stated (April 2013) that considering the magnitude of funds managed by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA it was not possible or practical to conduc t a daily review of the funds available for 
investment. The scenario in the matter of require ment of funds for disbursal to the states is 
also one of total uncertainty as Ad-hoc CAMPA was in no position to guide or dictate the 
outward flow of funds which was to be done on ly on the approval of APOs by State CAMPA. 
It further added that the investment guid elines for CAMPA funds placed on the web 
prescribed a fortnightly review of funds available in the banks, and a decision on investment 
of funds in fixed deposits in banks. Given this  background, the observation by audit pointing 
to a delay of two days in investment of funds was absurd. 
The reply is not tenable becaus e the investment policy for the investment of funds with the 
banks by Ad-hoc CAMPA was framed and ratified only in the 22nd meeting of Ad-hoc CAMPA 
held in February 2013 and the instances pointe d out in preceding paragraphs pertain to 
period prior to framing of invest ment policy. Further, a loss of ` 8.70 crore pointed out in 
audit pertains to only 10 accounts of the 140 accounts operated by Ad-hoc CAMPA and 
cannot be trivialised. 
The fact, remained that there were no sta nding and prescribed system for cash flows 
estimation, timing of maturity of investments and requirement of funds for liquidity in Ad-
hoc CAMPA, resulting in idling of funds. 
5.6. Deficiencies in monitoring and safeguarding investments and funds 
In our test check of records, we observed the following failures in monitoring funds and 
satisfactorily accounting for them: 
5.6.1. Fixed Deposit Registers not maintained properly 
For proper monitoring of Fixed Deposits (FD)  and safeguarding the assets, a Fixed Deposit 
Register indicating the Fixed Deposit Receipt number, the principal, the date of opening the 
fixed deposit, the maturity date, the maturity  amount, the bank with  which FD had been 
kept and the account to which the amount on  maturity had been credited, for each FD, 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
118 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
should have been maintained. The register should have been regularly reviewed and 
authenticated by an authorised person for completeness and correctness. We observed that 
though a Fixed Deposit Register was maintained  it did not indicate the accounts to which 
the amounts has been credited on maturity an d the amount credited. These registers were 
also not authenticated for completeness and correctness. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the Fixed Deposi t registers were maintained by hand and had 
all the details and they were re flected in the files maintained for investment of the funds, 
that itself was a proof of these records having been authenticated at a higher level in Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 
The reply is not tenable as the fact remains that the Fixed Deposit Registers were not 
maintained in the format which would capture all relevant information thus compromising 
its function as a control point. The consequenc es of the absence of this control point were 
reflected in instances of fixed deposit amounts not traceable in the bank accounts of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, premature encashment of Fixed Deposits , delayed credit and short credit of Fixed 
Deposit maturity amounts which came to no tice of audit and are reported in the 
subsequent para. 
5.6.2. Inter-Account postings of funds without any proper documentation 
Separate bank accounts were maintained fo r each State/UT. Movement within these 
accounts could only be to adjust a wrong cred it/debit to these accounts. Such movements 
were required to be properly  authorised. There are in total 140 bank accounts being 
operated by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
We noted several instances of inter-account movement of the funds as detailed in Annexure 
9, for which satisfactory evidence justifying su ch movement was not provided to us. About  
` 300 crore and ` 90.25 crore were transferred from current account of Central Empowered 
Committee to the account of Chhattisgarh and Andhra Pradesh respectively. There were 23 
cases where funds were transferred from variou s states into an account of Chief Accounts 
Officer. These accounts do not feature in th e list of 140 accounts maintained by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 
Transfer of funds to accounts which were no t maintained by Ad-hoc CAMPA was highly 
irregular and the possibility of misappropriation of funds could not be ruled out. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the inter acco unt postings of funds is a normal accounts 
function (in double entry system being follo wed by the Ad-hoc CAMPA), and has to be 
appreciated in the background of sound financia l principles being followed. There was no 
loss of interest of any State CAMPA account in these account transactions. The final 
accounts books would reflect the position in a correct manner. 
The reply is not tenable as it does not addre ss the issue raised in audit. Funds of a State 
after maturity of FDR were to be posted in the respective accounts of the States concerned 
and it was highly irregular to transfer them to any other accounts without proper 
documentation and that also to accounts not being maintained by Ad-hoc CAMPA. There 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 119 | P a g e  
were no guidelines for authorisation of inter- account transfers. Moreover, the figures were 
not being reconciled with the State/ UTs hence the risk was even more. 
5.6.3. Funds retained with banks post maturity of Fixed Deposits resulting in loss of interest to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
It is imperative for any fund manager to clos ely watch maturity of investments to ensure 
that funds at no point remain idle or uninvested.  
We noticed that during the period December 2006 to March 2012, in 3,048 FDs there were 
delays in crediting the maturity amounts in to bank account and Ad-hoc CAMPA did not 
receive any interest from the concerned banks for the period of delayed credit. This resulted 
in an interest loss of ` 4.45 crore calculated at the prevailing rate of interest and 
corresponding gain to the banks concerned. The details of the cases are given in Table 36. 
Table 36: Cases of delayed credit of amounts on maturity of FDs 
(` in crore) 
Year No. of FDRs Loss of Interest 
2006 178 0.23 
2007 346 1.62 
2008 598 1.50 
2009 803 0.42 
2010 932 0.67 
2011 191 0.01 
Total 3,048 4.45 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that given the scenario where the funds to the tune of `25,000 
crore were being managed by Ad-hoc CAMPA whose period of  existence was uncertain and 
given the exercise required to be undertaken for renewal of deposits the loss of ` 4.45 crore 
is infinitesimal and should not be treated as a notional loss of additional interest that may 
have been received. 
The reply is not tenable as so und financial management system was not enforced in Ad-hoc 
CAMPA because of which regular and timely wa tch over the deposit and maturity of FDR 
could not be taken, which resulted in loss of interest. 
5.6.4. Short credit of FD maturity amounts  
In five cases pertaining to the period January  2008 to January 2011, the maturity amount of 
Fixed Deposits received in the State Accounts was short by ` 1.08 crore as detailed in  
Table 37. 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
120 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 37: Instances of short credit of maturity amounts  
(` in crore) 
Sl.No. State Maturity 
Date 
Maturity amount 
as per FDR 
Maturity amount 
received 
Short 
credit 
1.  Uttar Pradesh 23.2.2008 2.66 2.58 0.08
2.  Maharashtra 14.1.2010 185.92 185.19 0.73
3.  Odisha 14.1.2010 16.86 16.79 0.07
4.  Odisha 8.12.2010 58.56 58.45 0.11
5.  Uttar Pradesh 15.12.2010 53.07 52.98 0.09
 Total    1.08
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the instances of short credit except in two cases are incorrect. 
The two instances of short credit which repres ent the deduction of income tax at source 
from the maturity proceeds have been take n up with the concerned nationalised banks 
seeking refund of TDS. 
The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as all the instances of ‘short credit’ were rechecked 
and found to be true. According to the repl y given by Ad-hoc CA MPA on 22 January 2013 
there is no ‘short credit’ in the first case and full amount ha d been credited into the bank 
which is untrue. The rest were because of TDS deducted by the ba nk and the matter was 
being taken up with the banks. The fact remains that ` 1.08 crore has still not been credited 
into the respective bank accounts. 
5.6.5. Funds kept in interest free current accounts resulting in loss of interest 
The funds kept in Current Accounts in any bank do not yield any interest and thus, remain 
idle. It is, therefore, prudent that the funds are kept in Savings accounts and/or Fixed 
Deposits with the banks so that additional funds are generated during the period in which 
these are not required for any usage. 
However, we observed that CAMPA Funds were kept in Current accounts in Corporation 
Bank, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road and Union Bank of India, Sunder Nagar, New Delhi  
during the period May 2006 to April 2011. This resulted in loss of interest amounting to 
`7.80 crore (approx. calculated at the rate of 3.5 per cent per annum ) during May 2006 to 
March 2011. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that State/UT CAMPA accounts that were earlier current accounts 
have since been converted into saving banks ac counts and flexi accounts. Earlier too, flexi 
accounts were in operation in UBI generating more interest than Saving Bank Accounts. 
The reply is not tenable as the Ministry sustained a loss of interest of ` 7.80 crore as worked 
out by audit due to amounts being kept in the current accounts instead of saving/ flexi bank 
accounts. 
Ad-hoc CAMPA was the custodian of the funds be longing to the States/UTs. Hence it was its 
fiduciary responsibility to take all measures to  ensure the safeguarding of the assets and 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 121 | P a g e  
prevent any financial loss to the states/UTs in managing its funds. The lack of clearly laid 
down procedures and controls to regulate the investment function did result in financial loss 
to concerned states as reported in para 5.6.4 and 5.6.5. 
5.7. Deficiencies in the process for inviting bids 
Sound investment practices require that there should be a clearly laid down process for 
inviting of bids, indicating the approximate am ount of investment, the maturity period, the 
validity period for bids and the mode of receipt of bids (sealed covers, fax, e-mail etc.). 
The issue of process of inviting bids was discussed in the various meetings of Ad-hoc CAMPA 
as detailed below: 
Date of 
meeting 
Extracts of the minutes of Ad-hoc CAMPA meetings 
7 July 2006 The format of quotation (to be soug ht from different Banks) would be 
standardized by the Financial Consultant in consultation with the 
Member representing CAG.  
20 November 
2006 
The Financial Consultant of Ad-hoc CAMPA was to finalise the draft 
format for calling quotation and the dr aft guidelines for investment in 
consultation with the representative  of CAG, which was to be placed 
before the Ad-hoc CAMPA for approval. 
15 February 
2007 
Quotations for one and two years may be invited, and in the event of the 
interest rate for two years being more than 0.5 per cent than that for one 
year, investment may be made for a period of two years. 
20 June 2007 The quotations would be called telepho nically, and it will be received in 
sealed cover giving the bidders a fixed deadline for submission. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that as is evident fr om the Ad-hoc CAMPA meet ings, it was left to 
the financial consultant to adopt a proforma for acceptance of bids and in a meeting held on 
26 June 2007 an unequivocal decision was taken to allow bids being called for 
telephonically. 
The reply is not tenable because there was noth ing on record to show that a format for 
calling quotations had been devised by the fina ncial consultant in consultation with the 
representative of the CAG and there was no  codified procedure in Ad-hoc CAMPA for 
inviting bids and acceptance thereof. In this regard we further observed the following: 
5.7.1. Invitation of bids telephonically prior to decision taken to this effect 
It was decided in the meeting of Ad-hoc CA MPA held in 20June 2007 that the quotations 
could be called telephonically but these were to  be received in sealed cover. However, we 
observed that innine cases prior to the deci sion taken by the Ad-hoc CAMPA as given in 
Table 38, the interest rates specified in the quo tations were either received over phone or 
informed by AIG (Forests)and not received in a sealed cover as was laid down. Such bids 
were included in bidding process. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
122 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 38: Cases where interest rate specified in the quotations were either received on 
phone or informed by AIG (Forests) 
Sl. No. Details Manner in which bids 
received 
1 Canara Bank- 9.00 per cent dated:  05.2.07  Telephonically  
2 Canara Bank- 9.50 per cent dated: 13.2.07  Telephonically  
3 Union Bank of India-10.88 per cent dated: 
02.03.07   
Telephonically  
4 Union Bank of India-10.00 per cent dated: 
08.03.07   
Telephonically  
5 Union Bank of India-10.00 per cent dated: 
15.03.07   
Telephonically  
6 Union Bank of India-10.80 per cent dated: 
22.03.07   
Telephonically  
7 Vijaya Bank – 11.35 per cent dated: 22.3.07   Informed by AIG(F) 
8 SBBJ- 10 per cent, Allahabad Bank- 9.75 per cent   
dated: 4.4.07 
Telephonically  
9 Allahabad Bank- 10.70 per cent dated: 14.5.07 Telephonically  
Such instances highlight the adhocism, lack of  transparency and objectivity in the bidding 
process and are also fraught with risks of favouritism. 
Accepting the facts, MoEF stated (April 2013) that prior to the decision taken on 26 June 
2007, where the bids would be telephonically in vited, there was no prescribed procedure 
and as such calling for bids cannot be faulted a nd that, it had to be borne in mind that the 
Supreme Court ordered the creation of an ad-hoc  body. In the scenario of uncertainty as to 
the tenure of this ad-hoc body the commission of any irregularity is not evident. 
The reply is not tenable as it was public mo ney and Ad-hoc CAMPA/ MoEF being custodian 
of these funds the provisions of Rule 171 of GFRs should have been followed which 
envisaged that Request for Proposal (RFP) of Standard formats for technical and financial 
proposals should be prepared while issuing a le tter of Invitation of bids. The fact remained 
that in the cases reported ab ove the investment of funds was made without invitation of 
quotations in a fair and transparent manner. 
5.7.2. Investment of funds without inviting quotations  
Investment of funds through competitive bidding  is essential to get the maximum return on 
investment and to demonstrate fairness and equity in decision making process.  
We observed that for investments of ` 368.27 crore made on  24 February 2009 no 
quotations were invited for bidding. In the noting s it was stated that the prevailing rate of 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 123 | P a g e  
interest viz. 7.50 per cent was same for all scheduled bank s and the funds may be allocated 
to Corporation Bank, CGO Complex ( `191.99 crore) and Union Bank of India, Sunder Nagar 
(`176.28 crore). Further, on 13 October 2009, an amount of `40.64 crore was invested with 
the Corporation Bank without giving opportunity  to other banks to bid on the ground that 
the amount was already in an FD with the sa me bank and matured on 10 October 2009. The 
investment was made in the Corporation Bank at six  per cent  but this rate of interest was 
valid only till 12 October 2009. Neither was a revised quotation called for nor were other 
banks given the opportunity to quote for the rates.  
These cases once again go to establish the arbi trariness that prevailed in making investment 
decisions. 
Ministry (April 2013) accepted that the first incident relates to March 2009 when the CAF 
Bill 2008 was in Parliament and had it been pa ssed by the Parliament, Ad-hoc CAMPA would 
have to be wound up. So ther e was no way that the proce dure of calling for detailed 
quotations could have been gone through. The second instance is of the time when large 
number of FDRs had to be closed prematurel y to provide for release of funds to State 
CAMPAs. 
The reply is not tenable as the process of in viting quotations was not followed only in the 
above cases. The fact that the Compensa tory Afforestation Fund Bill 2008 was in the 
Parliament at that point of time had nothing to do with the compliance of due process of 
inviting quotation for investment. Ad-hoc CAMPA/MoEF being custodian of these funds 
which was public money, the provisions of Ru le 171 of GFRs should have been followed 
which envisaged that Request for Proposal (R FP) of Standard formats for technical and 
financial proposals should be prepared while issuing a letter of Invitation of bids. 
5.8. Process for evaluation of bids  
After inviting bids for any investment process,  it is necessary to evaluate the bids with 
proper documentation and prep are comparative statements to  ensure correct investment 
decision for maximum return on investment. 
We observed that the process for comparat ive analysis of bids and finalization of 
investments were arbitrary and various irregularities occurred. Instances of deposits not 
being placed with banks that were amongst the highest bidders, absence of any internal 
controls, lack of review and monitoring of the investment decisions, handwritten quotation 
being allowed in the bidding process etc. are presented in the following paragraphs. Also 
Case Study III amply demonstrates the arbitr ariness and subjectivity in some of the 
investment decisions. Poor internal controls  and lack of clearly laid out procedures 
permitted instances of such irregularities to occur. 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
124 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Case study III 
Arbitrariness and irregularities in investment decision 
The arbitrariness and irregularities in invest ment of Compensatory Afforestation Fund were 
evident from the resignation episode of Shri  R.K.Tuli, Financial Consultant (FC), Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. The FC was working in Ad-hoc CAMPA since 4 July 2006. He was responsible for 
calling of quotations from various banks for in vestment of funds, supervision of accounts 
and other allied matters. The FC tendered his resignation vide his letter dated 22 May 2007 
wherein he alleged serious irregularities a nd unethical work procedure compelled him to 
resign. He made specific allegations of impropriety with regard to a deposit of ` 250 crore in 
May 2007 with Corporation Bank which are listed below: 
After collecting quotations, FC had recommend ed on 14 May 2007, placing the deposits of  
` 256 crore with three Nationalized Banks, wh o had offered the highest interest rate of 
10.76 per cent . Corporation Bank had offere d the interest rate of 10.65 per cent  and 
therefore was not recommended. 
Subsequently, a fresh quotation of 10.77 per cent was obtained from the Corporation Bank 
and the entire deposit of ` 256 crore was placed with it on  21 May 2007 – after a gap of six 
days. 
The other banks were not given opportunity of giving revised rates. No reasons for by 
passing FC, obtaining of revised quotation fr om one Bank only and not seeking revised 
quotations from the Banks giving highest offer were given. 
The three banks, that had earlier offered 10.76 per cent interest rate, subsequently offered 
enhanced rate of 10.80 per cent. These quotations were not considered. 
In the meetings of Ad-hoc CAMPA held on 20 June 2007 it was observed that: 
The manner in which a particular Bank (Corpor ation Bank) was allowed to submit another 
quotation with marginal higher rate (than the hi ghest eligible bid received) after all the bids 
were opened, a comparative statement was ma de and the highest eligible bid finalized 
without giving similar opportunity to other bidders to revise their bids, was prima-facie in 
violation of the rules/procedure in this regard. This type of arbitrary, whimsical and highly 
questionable way of dealing with the amount in volving thousands of crore of rupees should 
not have taken place. 
The query raised in the file to ascertain whethe r the State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur (SBBJ) is 
a nationalized bank is quite surprising cons idering that a large sum of money has already 
been deposited by the Ad-hoc CAMPA with this Ba nk (i.e. SBBJ). It is also surprising that 
after raising the above query, on the same day revised quotation was obtained from a 
particular Bank, and no opportunity was given to those banks who had offered the highest 
rate. 
It was felt necessary to enquire into the allega tion made in the resignation letter of the FC.  
The representative of the CAG was also of the view that such actions are violation of the 
financial norms and are of serious concern.  The Chairman directed that the Member 
Secretary inquire into the issues raised by the Financial Consultant and submit a report to be 
placed in the next meeting of Ad-hoc CAMPA. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 125 | P a g e  
The case was subsequently ex amined by the representative of CAG who opined in 
November 2008 that from the papers made availa ble to him, it was clear that the decision 
of the DGF & SS to discard the best quotations of 10.76 per cent from the three banks (SBBJ, 
Canara Bank and OBC) and obta in a revised quotation for 10.77 per cent from another bank 
Corporation Bank, CGO Complex, which was only 6th in the list of attractiveness of bids – 
and that too after discussion by the DGF with  the Corporation Bank, without providing any 
opportunity to the other three banks, was in complete violation of accepted financial norms, 
was arbitrary, and completely lacked transparency.  
The opinion of CAG representative was supported by following reasoning: 
“While it is not clear that the Government of India’s General Financial Rules, 2005 apply 
directly and specifically to the case, the fundamental principles of public buying specified 
under these rules indicate that “offers should be invited following a fair transparent and 
reasonable procedure”. Further, the guide lines of Central Vigilance Commission for 
procurement by any Government Department/PSU  clearly prohibit negotiations with any 
bidder other than the L-1 bidder in  a contracting process. The ac t of discussion by the then 
DGF & SS with a bidder who has not offered the best bid – in this case Corporation Bank, 
CGO Complex branch – and not offering a chance  (either in writing or orally) to the banks 
who offered the best bids was totally irregular and improper. 
The query raised by the then DGF & SS as to whether SBBJ was a nationalized bank was 
unwarranted and shows evidence of bias, espe cially when the Ad-hoc CAMPA already had 
substantial deposits with SBBJ. Further, it does not require a great deal of financial 
knowledge to be aware that State Bank of Bika ner and Jaipur is one of the associate banks 
of the SBI group. 
A comparison of the quotations dated 16 May 2007 and 14 May 2007 from Corporation 
Bank, CGO complex revealed that they quote diff erent rates of interest , different ranges of 
periods and different slabs of deposit amount  while referring to the same circular No. 
360/07 and being effective from the same date of 13 May 2007. It is not clear how the best 
rate of 10.77 per cent was not offered in the first bid itse lf when the circular stipulated an 
effective date of 13 May 2007. These discrepancies give rise to serious suspicion. 
The timing of obtaining the FDRs from Corp oration Bank on 21 May 2007 and rejecting the 
revised quotations (copies of which have not been forwarded to me) on 22 May 2007 on the 
grounds that the requisite investments had already been made raises further grounds for 
suspicion. 
A case could be made that the final rate of 10.77 per cent  quoted on 16 May 2007 was 
higher than the best rate of 10.76 per cent quoted two days earlier. However, interest rates 
on investments of large amounts (in this case exceeding ` 200 crore) are fluid and volatile 
and move on a day to day (and even hour to  hour basis) depending on the supply and 
demand position for liquid cash from banks, financial institutions and other players. A 
comparison of the rates quoted on 16 May 2007 with those quoted on 14 May 2007 is thus 
inappropriate. On the other hand, the fact that the revised rate of 10.77 per cent is exactly 
0.01 per cent  higher than the earlier best rate of 10.76 per cent  raises further ground for 
suspicion.” 
On the issue of the Enquiry ordered by Ad-hoc  CAMPA it was observed the no such Enquiry 
was conducted by the Member Secretary, Ad-hoc CAMPA.  Instead an Enquiry was 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
126 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
conducted by Shri Sudhir Mittal, Joint Secretary in MoEF. The CEC representative on the Ad-
hoc CAMPA, had objected to this. A copy of th is report which was sought for in September 
2012, was not made available to Audit. From related documents it was evident that the 
Enquiry found the allegation that one bank was allowed to increase its interest rate after the 
bids were opened to be true . It was also found that the FC  had also been repeatedly 
committing irregularities in investment of the funds, accepting higher offers of interest after 
bid statements had been prepared and changing the bid of banks in his own hand. 
MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA stated (April 2013) that th e allegation in the incident involving the 
investment of ` 250 crore was against the Chairman, Ad-hoc CAMPA and not against the 
Financial Consultant and the enquiry conducted by a serving Joint Secretary of MoEF was 
without competence and approv al of the Ad-hoc CAMPA. Further, the Ministry/ Ad-hoc 
CAMPA stated that enquiry report on this ca se was not traceable in the Ministry/Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 
The reply is not tenable as the enquiry was ordered by th e Chairman, Ad-hoc CAMPA but 
the then Secretary, MoEF got the matter inquired from the Joint Secretary and the 
clarification in this regard was also called fo r by the Prime Minister’s office. The reply was 
silent about the issue of arbitrary, whimsica l and highly questionable way of dealing with 
the amount involving thousands of crore of rupees. 
Our findings regarding lacunae observed in bi d evaluation process are discussed in the 
following paragraphs below: 
5.8.1. Arbitrary allocation of deposits  
We observed a number of instances where large sums of monies were deposited with banks 
that had not bid or deposits were not placed  with banks that were amongst the highest 
bidders. These cases are listed below:  
5.8.1.1. Deposit without bids 
Instances of deposits placed with banks that did not bid are tabulated as under: 
Date Amount to 
be invested  
(` in crore) 
Banks that bid Banks that did not 
bid 
Remarks 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) 
1 January 
2009 
172.22 Union Bank of India, 
Allahabad Bank, 
Syndicate Bank, State 
Bank of Bikaner & 
Jaipur, Oriental Bank 
of Commerce, Indian 
Overseas Bank & 
Canara Bank 
Corporation Bank Investment made 
in Corporation 
Bank and Union 
Bank of India 
17 February 
2009 
859.07 Oriental Bank of 
Commerce 
Corporation Bank and 
Union Bank of India 
Investment made 
in all the banks in 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 127 | P a g e  
Date Amount to 
be invested  
(` in crore) 
Banks that bid Banks that did not 
bid 
Remarks 
4 March 
2009 
320.32 Oriental Bank of 
Commerce 
Corporation Bank, 
Union Bank of India 
and Allahabad Bank 
column (iii) & (iv), 
irrespective of the 
fact that they had 
bid or not. 19 March 
2009 
646.86 Vijaya Bank and 
Canara Bank 
Corporation Bank, 
Union Bank of India 
and Oriental Bank of 
Commerce 
 
5.8.1.2. Arbitrariness in selection 
On 6 November 2009, three banks namely, Punj ab & Sind Bank, UCO Bank and Vijaya Bank 
had quoted six  per cent  rate of interest. Although the amount of `318.16 crore  was to be 
invested in all three banks, Vijaya bank was dropped on the pretext that the bank had been 
allocated a substantial amount for investment purpose over the period of about one year. 
However, on 24 Novemb er 2009 an amount of ` 113.33 crore was invested in Vijaya Bank 
again. 
On 15 June 2010, three banks namely, Central Ba nk of India(CBI), Union Bank of India(UBI), 
East Patel Nagar and UBI, Sunder Naga r quoted the interest rate as 6.92 per cent  and 
consequently the investment was made in these three banks. We observed that UBI, Sunder 
Nagar appeared to have been favoured as its quotation showed a hand written alteration to 
a printed interest rate. Simila rly, CBI sent a handwritten quotation which was against the 
norms and the interest rate  that it quoted was for `1,000 crore but the amount that was 
invested in it was only ` 400 crore. 
5.8.1.3. Failure to follow guidelines 
In the meeting of Ad-hoc CAMPA held on 7 July 2006, it was decided that different 
Scheduled Banks offering next lower interest ra tes may also be considered for making Fixed 
Deposits in addition to the Bank offering the highest interest rates in order to minimize the 
risk involved. However, we observed that on 21 May 2010, a total amount of `576.61 crore 
was invested in Central Bank of India whic h quoted the highest interest rate of 6.36 per 
cent. It was observed that although quotations were received from nine banks and one of 
the banks namely Vijaya Bank quoted a marginally lower rate of 6.35 per cent, the same was 
not included in the investment process. Simila rly, on 10 November 2010, an investment of  
` 412.07 crore was made in Punjab & Sind Bank, Ka rol Bagh as it quoted the highest interest 
rate of 8.62 per cent. The next highest bidder was Central Bank of India with 8.61 per cent as 
its interest rate. The amount column of Punj ab & Sind Bank’s quotation which read “Upto  
` 200 crore” was crossed out with pen and the Interest column was also written with the 
same pen without any authentication from th e bank. Moreover, there was only a marginal 
change in the interest offered by the two Banks. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
128 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
These instances noticed in audit are indicative of arbitrariness and absence of any internal 
controls, review and monitoring of the invest ment decisions to ensure that these were 
taken as per directions of the Ad hoc CAMPA and as per prudent practices to ensure fairness 
and equity and also safeguard the funds. 
Accepting the facts, the Ministry stated (Apr il 2013) that all instances being referred to 
belong to the period when the CAF Bill 2008 wa s pending in the Parlia ment and the period 
of absolute financial uncertainty with the Supreme court having ordered the release of 
funds to the States throwing the fund management  task into a state of flux. In this dynamic 
state of affairs where each day began with uncertainty as to the future setup and the need 
for finances for disbursement to the States, th e decisions that were taken were in the best 
interest of Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
The reply is not tenable because despite uncer tainty, Ad-hoc CAMPA could not have shown 
laxity in discharging the functions entrusted to  it as it was the custodian of these funds 
which was public money. Also the passage of the CAF Bill 2008 had nothing to do with the 
due process of inviting quotations for investment. 
5.8.2. Cases where handwritten quotations were allowed in the bidding process 
According to the letters issued by CAMPA inviting the bids for the investment, the 
quotations should be typewritte n or computer print-out as pe r the Notice Inviting Tender 
dispatched to various banks for purpose of investments. However, it was observed that Ad-
hoc CAMPA allowed submission of bids whic h were hand written, bids where certain 
columns were handwritten, different inks were used  in bids. Since, it is difficult to ascertain 
whether these were done at the time of su bmission of quotation or subsequently, the 
possibility of manipulation is not ruled out. These cases are listed in the Table 39. 
Table 39: Cases where entire/partial handwritt en quotations were allowed in the bidding 
process 
Nature of irregularity No. of 
cases 
Details 
Quotations accepted were 
handwritten. 
26 There was an instance where a hand written 
quotation was received from Canara Bank, 
R.K.Puram on 4 November 2008 and it qualified 
as the highest bidder. 
Interest column of the quotation 
was written in a different ink and 
signed by the authorized person 
with a different ink. 
 
3 • On 29 November 2010, investment of 
`263.81 crore was made in Union Bank of 
India, Sunder Nagar. The interest column of 
the bank’s quotation was found to be written 
in different ink.  
• On 10 December 2010, investment of `122 
crore was made in Oriental Bank of 
Commerce, Rajiv Chowk. The interest column 
of the bank’s quotati on was written in 
different ink.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 129 | P a g e  
• On 20 December 2010, investment of 
` 138.03 crore was made in Union Bank of 
India, Sunder Nagar The interest column of 
the bank’s quotation was written indifferent 
ink. 
Whole quotation was a computer 
printout while the column entailing 
the interest rate and the period of 
deposits was written in hand 
writing. 
58 The cases were noted during 2008-10 involved 
nine banks namely Union Bank of India, 
Corporation Bank, Oriental Bank of Commerce, 
UCO Bank, Andhra Bank, Indian Overseas Bank, 
Central Bank of India, Punjab & Sind Bank and 
Allahabad Bank. 
Changes /alterations in the 
quotations sent by banks for 
investments. 
14 Changes/alterations w e r e  m a d e  i n  t h e  
quotations sent by banks either for the interest 
rate, validity and minimum amount of deposit 
without proper authentication/approval of the 
bank. 
MoEF in its reply (April 2013) stated that fault need not be found with the handwritten 
quotations as at times the authorized representa tives of the bank would fill the rate of the 
quotations after ascertaining the  same from the Central/Regional office at the last minute. 
The reply is not tenable because the hand written quotations were accepted despite 
instructions of Ad-hoc CAMPA. Further, MoEF kept silent over the other issues highlighted in 
the table. 
5.8.3. Other Irregularities 
Deposits on quotations can be made only durin g the validity period of quotations. Once the 
validity of period of quotation expires, fresh quotations must be called for. However, we 
observed that there were cases where the va lidity of the quotations was overlooked. As 
decided in the second meeting of Ad-hoc CAMP A (7 July 2006), the Chairman would reserve 
the right to decide the distribution of investme nts in different banks/Post Office according 
to the guidelines to be framed in this regard . We observed that no specific criteria were 
followed for the quantum of money to be inve sted in various banks. The bids normally 
indicated the maximum/minimum amounts banks we re willing to accept at the quoted rate 
of interest. Accordingly, the amount of deposi t with the bank should neither be below nor 
exceed the quoted limits. In our test check, we noted instances where amounts in excess of 
maximum limit were placed with banks on the basis of telephonic requests made by banks 
on the bidding date. Though these diversions did not entail a loss of revenue to the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, but these demonstrate lack of clarity in procedures and arbitrariness of decision 
making. 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
130 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Table 40: Cases where the validity of quota tions was overlooked and cases where the 
amounts in excess of the maximum limit were placed with the banks 
Type of Irregularity Details 
Investment placed after the 
expiry of the validity of quotation. 
• On 23 May 2008, investments of ` 297.99 
crore were made in S.B.B.J after the expiry of 
validity of quotation. The quotation was valid 
till 22 May 2008. 
MoEF in its reply (April 2013) stated that it was 
not unusual for the banks especially when 
large posse of funds are involved to extend the 
validity of their quotation by a day or two. 
The reply is not tenable as no revised 
quotation for extended validity was taken from 
the Bank and as per th e practice followed at 
the time of investment, the bank should not 
have qualified at the first place as the validity 
of the quotation had expired. 
Investment placed with the 
highest bidder of amount short or 
in excess of the amount specified 
in the quotation. 
• On 13 May 2008, ` 424.36 crore was invested 
in Central Bank of India, Greater Kailash-II 
although the maximum amount that the bank 
could accept was ` 400 crore. 
• On 23 May 2008, ` 297.99 crore was invested 
in State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur, Faiz Road 
although the maximum amount that the bank 
could accept was ` 100 crore. 
• On 27 April 2009, ` 528.08 crore was invested 
in Vijaya Bank although the maximum amount 
that the bank could accept was ` 200 crore. 
• On 19 May 2009, `330.74 crore was invested 
in UBI although the maximum amount that the 
bank could accept was ` 235 crore. 
• On 6 July 2009, ` 357.10 crore was invested in 
UBI, Sunder Nagar although this bank did not 
qualify for an amount less than ` 500 crore. 
• On 16 September 2010 , ` 315.87 crore was 
invested in Central Bank of India, Wright Gunj, 
Ghaziabad although this bank did not qualify 
for an amount less than ` 500 crore. 
The Ministry (April 2013) accepted that in 
these cases funds were parked in excess of the 
limits earlier set by banks and said that it was a 
prudent and a laudable decision because had 
the banks not accepted the funds which were 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 131 | P a g e  
Type of Irregularity Details 
in excess of the limits set by them, the option 
would have gone to the next lower bidder 
which would have led to a financial loss to Ad-
hoc CAMPA.  
The reply is not tenable as the option of 
another bidding process was available with Ad-
hoc CAMPA in such cases. Parking of funds 
with banks in excess of their maximum limits 
clearly highlighted favouritism towards banks. 
As is amply demonstrated by the case stud y of an event that happened in 2007 and the 
series of irregularities that have been brought out in audit, there were never any clearly laid 
out procedures for making investment decision s. The directions issued by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
from time to time in this regard were blatantly disregarded. Telephonic/handwritten 
quotations were accepted, inve stments were made with ba nks which had not submitted 
bids or were not offering the best intere st rates, validity period of quotations was 
overlooked and proportions in which money was to be invested with different banks 
quoting the same interest rate were arbitrarily determined. 
5.9 Jammu & Kashmir state CAMPA 
In pursuance to the directions (April 2004) of Mo EF with regard to the constitution of State 
CAMPA, the Government of Jammu and Kashmir constituted two committees one State 
Level Management Committee (SLMC) and the ot her State Level Steering Committee (SLSC) 
in February 2005 and April 2005,  respectively. SLSC decide d (February 2006) that money 
available under CAMPA account will not be tr ansferred to Central Ad-hoc CAMPA on the 
basis that J&K State has its own J&K, Forest (Conse rvation) Act. It was opined that it will be 
utilized in the State as per Annual Plan of Operation to be prepared by the SLMC and 
approved by the SLSC. Finally, it was resolv ed (February 2010) by the Central Empowered 
Committee that the State CAMPA of Jammu and Kashmir has to deposit only NPV of the 
compensation received in lieu of diversion of forest land under Forest (Conservation) Act to 
the Central Ad-hoc CAMPA.  
A review of the management of funds by Jammu and Kashmir CAMPA revealed the 
following: 
5.9.1. Maintaining Fixed Deposits with Jammu and Kashmir Bank only 
To obtain maximum returns for investing the CAMPA money in deposits, the State CAMPA 
should have called quotation from the various na tionalized banks. This was also directed by 
the Executive Committee in its only meet (D ecember 2009). However, no quotations were 
called from nationalized banks and FDs were ke pt with Jammu & Kashmir Bank only despite 
lapse of considerable time period. Besides, no  follow up action was take n by the EC in their 
subsequent meetings on this count. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
132 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 
5.9.2. Loss of interest due to non-invest ment of J&K CAMPA funds in fixed deposit 
During test check of records of J&K State CAMP A it was observed that funds of NPV/CA etc. 
received from various user agencies were deposited by State CAMPA in current account 
instead of investing it in FDRs or in interest bearing accounts during the period January 2007 
to March 2012 resulting in loss of interest of ` 8.94 crore (if funds deposited in savings 
account) to ` 14.60 crore (if invested in FDs). 
Further, during test check of records of various forest divisions it was found that the 
divisions kept the funds in current account inst ead of interest bearin g account resulting in 
loss of interest of ` 0.27 crore. 
5.9.3. Non maintenance of records of FDRs by J&K State CAMPA 
No FDRs register indicating FDs opening bala nce/fresh/renewals/closing balance etc. was 
maintained by State CAMPA. Al so, bank confirmations indicating actual amount of FDs, 
actual date of investments, reinvestment, date  of maturity, interest  earned etc. was not 
available with State CAMPA. As  per details available on loose papers, the principal amount 
of FDs was ` 545.30 crore with accruable interest of ` 71.91 crore and maturity value was  
` 617.21 crore. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that J&K State CAMP A came within the ambit of the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA only pursuant to the order dated 30 January 2012 of the Supreme Court. As the 
Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 did not apply to Jammu & Kashmir, CA funds collected in J&K 
are outside the purview of the Ad-hoc CAMPA; only NPV/WL funds come within its purview. 
The reply is not tenable as MoEF did not re spond to the specific observations on non-
maintenance of records of FDRs by J&K State CAMPA. 
5.10. Other State CAMPAs 
 
5.10.1. Non opening of interest bearing accounts. 
As per the State CAMPA Guidelines, the monies  received in the State CAMPA were to be 
kept in interest-bearing account(s) in nation alized bank(s) and periodically withdrawn for 
the works as per the Annual Plan of Operat ions (APOs) approved by the Steering 
Committee. Test check of records of some of the selected state forest divisions revealed few 
cases of loss of interest due to retention of funds in non-interest bearing current accounts. 
Three such cases are detailed below: 
• In Banderdewa division of Arunachal Pradesh, funds were kept in a non-interest bearing 
current account (CA) of a nationalised bank. As  a result, the division failed to earn any 
interest on the funds available in the account over the period of time. 
• In Yamunanagar division of Haryana, funds of ` 0.34 crore (` 0.17 crore in October 2011 
and ` 0.17 crore in January 2012) received on account of compensatory afforestation 
were deposited in current account instead of interest bearing account. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 133 | P a g e  
• In Awadh, Gorakhpur and Faizabad forest division of Uttar Pradesh, there was loss of 
interest of ` 0.08 crore due to delay in opening of interest bearing account. 
5.10.2.  Deposit of f unds in non nationalized bank in Jharkhand 
In five1 test checked divisions in Jharkha nd, we noted that an amount of ` 9.14 crore was 
deposited in IDBI/AXIS Bank between July 201 0 and March 2012 both being private sector 
banks in violation of provisions of the guidelines . In reply the DFOs stated that the IDBI bank 
has been treated at par with public sector banks by the RBI (May 2008), whereas the DFO, 
Giridih Afforestation Division stated (Novembe r 2012) that the fund kept in AXIS bank will 
be withdrawn immediately. 
5.11. Conclusions 
The mechanism for investment of surplus f unds by the Ad-hoc CAMPA was arbitrary and 
lacked in fairness and transparency. There were  frequent and unjustified deviations from 
the instructions issued by Ad-hoc CAMPA while  executing the investment decisions. Despite 
repeated directions from the Ad-hoc CAMPA body, a comprehensive investment policy was 
not formulated and approved by Chairman Ad-hoc CAMPA till 2012. It was observed in audit 
that the out sourced staff engaged by Ad-hoc  CAMPA was also not suitably qualified or 
equipped to manage the large sums of money to be invested 2. The size of funds to be 
invested required a more professional approa ch and experience of treasury management 
function. 
Audit observed that there were instances of deposits amounting to ` 1,998.47 crore being 
placed in banks that did not even bid. There was loss of interest of ` 8.70 crore, ` 7.80 
crore and ` 4.45 crore on account of delay in invest ment of funds, retaining the funds in 
interest free current accounts and delay in crediting the maturity amount into bank 
accounts respectively, besides short credit of ` 1.08 crore on maturity of FDs.  
There was clearly evidence that neither the present arrangement of financial management 
and accounting had the benefit of existing go vernment financial discipline, nor had an 
alternative system of accounting and financia l control, been developed by Ad-hoc CAMPA, 
as was contemplated by the Supreme Court. It is our view the Government should move the 
Supreme Court so that the amounts lying in Ad-hoc CAMPA are transferred into the Public 
Account of India in an interest bearing section with interest to be paid at the rates to be 
decided by the Union Government.
 
 
                                                            
1Giridih Afforestation, Hazaribag WL, Hazaribag East, Ha zaribag Afforestation and Hazaribag Social Forestry 
divisions 
2 Ad-hoc CAMPA was requested to provide the details of names, job description, educational qualification and 
duration of appointment of its employees. Such information has still not been provided (July 2013). 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 135 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
6.1 Introduction  
The genesis of CAMPA lay in the 29 October 2002 order of the Supreme court that a 
‘Compensatory Afforestation Fund’ shall be crea ted in which all monies received from the 
user agencies towards compensa tory afforestation, additional  compensatory afforestation, 
net present value of forest land, Catchment  Area of Treatment  Plan Funds, etc. shall be 
deposited. The rules, proce dure and composition of the bo dy for management of the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund was to be fina lised by the MoEF with the concurrence of 
the CEC. In compliance with these orders, creati on of CAMPA was notified by MoEF in April 
2004 as a custodian of CAF with the responsibilit y of receiving, managing and disbursing the 
monies and monitoring and evaluation of work s. Ad-hoc CAMPA was an interim body which 
was created till CAMPA became operational.  In itially its mandate was collection of monies 
and its investment. In 2009, Ad-hoc CAMPA wa s authorised to disburse funds as per 
prescribed guidelines. Simultaneously guidelin es for creation of State/UT CAMPA were 
notified. 
6.2 Continuing provisional nature of the Authority 
The Supreme Court of India in November 2001 ha d observed that there was poor utilization 
of funds deposited for compensatory afforestat ion and also that a large amount of money 
for compensatory afforestation was not rea lized by the State Governments from user 
agencies. It observed that in some of the States the funds were deposited as `Forest 
Deposit’ and were readily made available for afforestation while in other States the funds 
were deposited as revenue receipts of the St ate Government and could be made available 
to the Forest Department only through the bu dgetary provisions. In order to increase the 
pace and quality of compensatory afforestat ion, the Court created a separate fund in 
October 2002, so that compensatory afforest ation could be taken up in a planned manner 
on a continuous basis and to ensure timely and adequate release of money, to provide 
necessary flexibility in implementation of th e schemes etc but the intended purposes could 
not be met. It also directed that the Un ion of India shall within eight weeks frame 
comprehensive rules with regard to the cons titution of a body and management of the 
compensatory afforestation funds. 
Initially, an amount of ` 297 crore for CA was lying unutilised  with the Forest Departments 
in the respective State/ UTs and this increased to ` 1,200 crore and credited to the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA in 2006. This amount further increased to ` 9,932 crore in 2009 and accumulated to 
` 23,607.67 crore by March 2012. No funds were released dur ing the period 2006-09 while 
an amount of ` 2,829.21 crore was released by Ad-hoc CAMPA during 2009-12. 
We observed that despite the notification of MoEF for creation of CAMPA in April 2004 the 
body did not become operational. This nece ssitated the Supreme Court in May 2006 to pass 
Chapter - VI 
Oversight Arrangements 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
136 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
the order for creating Ad-hoc CAMPA which wa s to function till such time that regular 
CAMPA became operational. The functioning of Ad-hoc CAMPA was restricted to the 
mandate or directions given to it by the S upreme Court. Between 2006 and 2009 it only 
collected the CAF from the States and manage d its investment. There was no release of 
funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA during the period 2006 to  2009. Effectively, this stalled the process 
of compensatory afforestation in India. Releas es for CA activities commenced in July 2009 
when the Supreme Court granted it a limited mandate to release only ` 1,000 crore per year 
or 10 per cent of the principal amount pertaining to the respective State/ UT for the next 
five years. MoEF/ Ad-hoc CAMPA did not have an  MIS regarding the diversion of forest land, 
collection and utilisation of the CAMPA funds. 
In our view the non-operationalisation of CAMPA which was envisaged as a permanent, 
independent authority to provide guidelines, direction and oversight severely hampered the 
CA activities in India. This report of the Co mptroller and Auditor General of India high lights 
the necessity for operationalizing CAMPA wh ich can execute the mandate of ensuring 
compensatory afforestation effectively and effi ciently within the broader constitutional and 
legal framework. 
6.3 Authorisation of expenditure 
The institutional design for incurring expenditure from the CAF under Ad-hoc CAMPA and by 
State CAMPA is somewhat distinct from the ex penditure being incurred by both the Union 
Government and State Government.  
In the case of expenditure being currently incurred by Ad-hoc CAMPA and by State CAMPA 
there is no legislative authorisation for the incurrence of such expenditure. The money in 
the fund is kept out of Consolidated Fund of India based on the directions/orders of the 
Supreme Court and the expenditure is incurred without authorisation from Parliament. The 
Court passed its orders in 2002 when the quantum  of expenditure was negligible during the 
initial years. Now by the end of March 2012, the expenditure incurred was ` 1,775.84 crore 
against releases of `2,829.21 crore. Given the large amounts being collected from user 
agencies under compensatory a fforestation under the provisions of Forest (Conservation) 
Act, 1980, and in the context of the objectives of CAMPA, it may be necessary to review the 
existing institutional design in consonance with the constitutional scheme with regard to the 
authorization of incurring of expenditure on CAMPA related activities by approaching the 
Supreme Court, where considered necessary. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that these were statement of facts and require no comments. 
6.4 Accounting 
 
6.4.1 Proper accounting format and maintenance of accounts 
 
6.4.1.1 Ad-hoc CAMPA 
The initial notification issued by MoEF 23 Apr il 2004, did not contain any specific mention of 
the accounting system or formats of accounts to  be followed by CAMPA. Subsequently, as 
per MoEF notification dated 13 March 2007, CAMPA was di rected to have corporate 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 137 | P a g e  
accounting based on double entry system as per the directions of the Supreme Court on 26 
September 2005. 
Maintenance of accounts as per a prescribed  financial reporting framework lays the 
foundation of establishing controls, accountab ility and monitoring. Since the CAMPA was to 
have corporate accounting based on double entr y system, the readily available professional 
reference was the Technical Guide on accounting for Not for Profit institutions issued by the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, th e standard setting body for accounting in the 
non-government sector. 
From the minutes of the Ad-hoc CAMPA meetin gs we noted that the issue of prescribing 
appropriate financial accounting system in te rms of format of accounts, records to be 
maintained, reconciliation of accounts, etc was periodically discussed in the Ad-hoc CAMPA 
m e e t i n g s  a n d  d i r e c t i o n s  i n  t h i s  r e g a r d  i s s u e d  f r o m  t i m e  t o  t i m e .  A  s u m m a r y  o f  s u c h  
directions is given in Table 41. 
Table 41: Summary of directions/ observations issued by Ad-hoc CAMPA on accounting 
issues 
Meeting 
number  and 
date 
Directions/ observations issued 
1st meeting  
(15 May 2006) 
As the funds to be deposited in Ad -hoc CAMPA are to be treated other 
than Government revenue, proper financial accounting system needs to 
be adopted. 
2nd meeting 
(7 July 2006) 
• Periodic reconciliation of the receipts with the concerned 
State/UT Governments was essential. 
• A Receipt-Ledger shall be opened in consultation with the 
Financial Consultant of Ad-hoc Body, which shall be properly 
maintained under his guidance and supervision. 
• A suitable mechanism for cross-re ferencing of receipts with the 
State/UT, Corporation Bank and Ad-hoc CAMPA shall also be 
developed in consultation with the Financial Consultant. 
• Monthly statement of the funds received from the State/UT 
Governments shall be referred back to them for reconciliation. 
4th meeting  
(27 November 
2006) 
• Details of the money receivab le, money actually received, 
amount of interest receivable, amount of interest received, 
money to be transferred to Ad -hoc CAMPA and money actually 
transferred should be compiled in  respect of each of the case 
approved under Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
• An institutionalized system should be put in place to ensure that 
the above information is compile d and audited for each of the 
case approved. 
• In the absence of the above info rmation, no meaningful audit 
can be carried out by the CAG. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
138 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Meeting 
number  and 
date 
Directions/ observations issued 
6th meeting 
(11 April 2007) 
It was observed that hardly any progress has been made for 
reconciliation of the Compensatory Afforestation funds which were to 
be transferred by the State/UT Gove rnments, and that deposited in Ad-
hoc CAMPA by them. 
7th meeting 
(20 June 2007) 
It was observed that reconciliation of the figures related to the funds 
received by Ad-hoc CAMPA from diffe rent States/UTs with the figures 
available at the State/UT level has not been done as yet.  As the figures 
are not compiled in meaningful format at the Ad-hoc CAMPA level, such 
reconciliation is not possib le at present.  Moreover, in this situation, no 
meaningful audit by the CAG is feasible. 
9th meeting 
(9 March 
2009) 
The break-up of funds deposited under different heads for execution of 
works and for its release to the States should be compiled and 
reconciled immediately. 
12th meeting 
(17 January 
2010) 
It was decided that the non-receipt of  reports from the States, in regard 
to deposit of money in the Ad-hoc CAMPA, should be brought up for 
consideration at the next meeting of the National CAMPA Advisory 
Council. 
17th meeting 
(14 September 
and 17 
October 2011) 
The procedure for maintenance of a ccounts be considered in detail and 
where necessary such procedures be properly codified with the 
approval of the CAG’s Office. 
The CAG’s representative in his letter date d 19 April 2012 noted that no annual financial 
statement in the nature of balance sheet has b een presented to any of the meetings of the 
body. He desired to know specifically wh ether Ad-hoc CAMPA was maintaining proper 
books of accounts and preparing annual financial statement; keeping records in the form of 
bank statements and details of amounts deposited in Fixed Deposits. 
The agenda note prepared by Member Secret ary CEC and Member Ad-hoc CAMPA in July 
2012 regarding  ‘Maintenance of the books of accounts of the Ad-hoc CAMPA and 
associated issues’ clearly brings out the dismal state of Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts, as depicted 
below: 
• The books of accounts of the Ad-hoc CAMPA have  not been maintained at all for the last 
two years or so. The books of accounts for ea rlier years have also  not been properly 
maintained/reconciled; 
• The yearwise/periodic reconciliation of the am ount received towards NPV, CA etc. from 
the various States/UTs, the interest received from the investments made by way of FDRs 
in the nationalized banks, the amount invested in the FDRs in the various nationalized 
banks, the amount received after maturity from the FDRs and the outstanding amount 
of the FDRs during the validity period of th e FDRs have not been done and for this 
purpose so far no effective system has been put in place;  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 139 | P a g e  
• A proper system of checks and balances, fo r the periodic verification to ascertain 
whether the amount invested by way of FDRs  have actually been invested and whether 
it has not been pre-maturely encashed (unauthorisedly), has not been put in place;  
• The yearwise/periodic reconciliation of th e amounts received by the Ad hoc CAMPA 
from the various States/UTs with the amount  deposited by the concerned State/UT has 
not been done; 
• The above state of affairs is most disturbing and it is imperative that immediate 
remedial measures are taken. A list of such measures was also proposed. 
In this regard, we observed that the directio ns issues by the Ad-hoc CAMPA were hardly 
complied with and implemented. No proper  accounting records were maintained as 
indicated below:   
• Since its inception, no annual financial stat ement was prepared for the Ad-hoc CAMPA’s 
receipt and payments, income and expenditure and assets and liabilities; 
• Primary records like cash book and journal ledgers were not maintained; 
• No reconciliation of funds received from  the user agencies, amounts remitted by 
states/UTs, amounts received by Ad-hoc CAMPA, amounts lying in different banks 
accounts and Fixed Deposits, interests received/accrued thereon was done; and 
• Fixed Deposit Registers maintained were inadequate and unauthenticated. 
Ad-hoc CAMPA intermittently engaged the serv ices of professional accountants. Shri R.K 
Tuli, was the Financial Consultant from 7 July 2006 to 20 June 2007. In June 2007, Ad-hoc 
CAMPA contemplated engaging a Chartered Acco untants firm as Financial consultant and 
CA articles who had completed Professional  Educational and II as accountants. An 
administrative sanction to spend ` 25,000 to procure suitable a ccounting software was also 
accorded. Though a list of Chartered Accoun tant firms empanelled with the CAG was 
forwarded to the Ad-hoc CAMPA by the repr esentative of the CAG on 14 September 2007, 
no such appointment was made. Shri K. S. Achar was appointed as consultant in May 2010 
and it was as late as April 2011 that he was made OSD and was assigned with the additional 
work of maintaining accounts of the Ad-hoc CAMPA funds. M/s RK Tuli was appointed as 
financial advisor to Ad-hoc CAMPA on 1 August  2012 for an initial period of six months. 
Their duties included close scrutiny and assistan ce in finalising accounts of Ad-hoc CAMPA, 
preparation of financial account statements for the financial year 2006-07 onwards in a time 
bound manner, providing the assistance of an Art icle Assistant/ Accountant well versed in 
the matter of accounts and any other assistance in the area of finance/ accounts that may 
be sought from time to time. There was lack of seriousness on the part of the executive 
members of the Ad-hoc CAMPA to maintain proper account for the funds and to put in place 
suitably qualified man power for ensuring prep aration of periodic financial statements 
based on corporate accounting double entry system. These accounts were not prepared and 
produced for approval of Ad-hoc CAMPA and for audit. 
In our opinion the first principle of accountabili ty that the body entrusted with funds must 
render an account for the same was, therefore, grossly violated. The Ad-hoc CAMPA was 
required to expeditiously develop a suitable framework for financial reporting, ensure 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
140 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
adequate resources were provided to render pr oper accounts  and accounts giving a true 
and fair view of the state of affairs were gene rated periodically. Its fa ilure to do so over a 
sustained period of time has put public assets to risk and jeopardised their safeguarding. 
The accounts for 2006-12 were prepared after July 2012.In the 22 nd meeting held on 7 
February 2013, the Ad-hoc CAMPA decided to  adopt the accounts for the period 2006-12 
subject to, and pending, the completion of in ternal audit by CAG empanelled firm of 
Chartered Accountants. The statement of accoun ts and balance sheet of the 30 States were 
sent for audit on 7 February 2013 by Ad-hoc CAMPA. These were not properly authenticated 
or signed by a competent authority and were conditionally approved by the Ad-hoc CAMPA 
pending internal audit. They also did not include format of financial statements approved by 
the competent authority, approved accounting po licy and notes to accounts, list of all bank 
accounts and bank reconciliation statements of all bank accounts. As such, these accounts, 
at the best were draft accounts, the financial information in which was not authenticated by 
the authority charged with the preparation a nd hence could not be audited by external 
auditors i.e. the CAG. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the CAG of Indi a was approached in communication from the 
Minister (Independent Charge) of State for Environment and Forests, for accounts format 
for Ad-hoc CAMPA and the State CAMPA. CAG advised that Controller General of Accounts 
(CGA) may be approached but the CGA declined  to lay down the accounts procedure for the 
Ad-hoc CAMPA, insisting instead that the funds be held in Consolidated Fund of India/ Public 
Accounts. It is a grey area still whether the re quirement of corporate accounting, based on 
double entry system, applies to Ad-hoc CAMPA alone, or to the State CAMPAs. 
The reply is not tenable because the CAG wa s approached by the Minster (Independent 
Charge) of State for Environment and Forests in November 2011 that is more than five years 
after the formation of Ad-hoc CAMPA to suggest a format of accounts. The fact remains that 
Ad-hoc CAMPA did not prepare financial statemen ts till February 2013. It was only in early 
2013 that the accounts for the period 2006-12 we re first presented to the Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
Further, MoEF intimated (July 2013) that the in ternal audit of the CAMPA funds was on the 
verge of conclusion and once the financial st atements and audit report was adopted by Ad-
hoc CAMPA, these would be forw arded to Audit. Accountants General were responsible for 
prescribing format of accounts for State CAMPA, which was done suomoto in 2012. 
6.4.1.2 State/UT CAMPA 
As per Supreme Court’s orders dated 10 July 2009, the State Level Executive Committee was 
to evolve an appropriate and effective acco unting process for maintenance of accounts, 
returns and for audit. The Guidelines on St ate CAMPA (2 July 2009) envisaged that State 
CAMPA would maintain proper accounts and ot her relevant records and prepare an annual 
statement of accounts in such  form as may be prescribed in consultation with the 
Accountant General concerned. 
A uniform format of accounts was suomoto prescribed by the office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India for the State/UT CAMPA in May 2012. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 141 | P a g e  
No State/ UT prepared its accounts upto Dece mber 2012 in the prescr ibed format except 
Andhra Pradesh and Assam. The status of prepar ation of accounts of State/UT CAMPA as of 
December 2012 is given in Annexure 10. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that it is the grey area still whether the requirement of corporate 
accounting, based double entry system, applies to Ad-hoc CAMPA alone, or also to the State 
CAMPAs. In the background mentioned above there is lack of clarity at the Accountants 
General end as to the accounts format to be followed in the State CAMPAs. 
The reply should be viewed in light of the fact that as per the State CAMPA guidelines of July 
2009, the State CAMPA shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation 
with the Accountant General concerned which was prescribed in May 2012. 
6.4.2 Reconciliation of funds 
Reconciliations are in the nature of a cross verification and independent confirmation of 
balances between the accounts of two or more  parties which are engaged in transactions 
with each other.  
In order to maintain complete and correct ac counts and ensure that all monies collected 
and disbursed were properly  accounted for and to conf irm existence and complete 
accounting of assets (receivables /bank balances /Fixed Deposits),   it was necessary that 
reconciliation of the  following  should have been done: 
• Project wise reconciliation of amount reco verable for permitting diversion of forest 
lands for non forest uses and amounts remitte d by user agencies to the Ad-hoc CAMPA, 
State/UT CAMPA or State/UT Government; 
• Amounts received by the State/UT CAMP A or State/UT Government and amount 
remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA; 
• Amount received by the Ad-hoc CAMPA as per its accounts records and amount 
remitted by State/UT CAMPA; 
• Amounts disbursed to the State/UT CAMPA as per the accounts of Ad-hoc CAMPA and 
amounts recorded as received in the State/UT CAMPA;  
• Amounts recorded as held in Fixed Deposits  as per the Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts with an 
independent confirmation from each bank of  the Fixed Deposits of Ad-hoc CAMPA held 
by it; 
• Reconciliation of bank balances as per the Ad-hoc CAMPA accounts and each Bank 
statement. 
Maintaining records to show that all Compensatory Afforestation Funds receivable had been 
received and their periodic reconciliation wi th corresponding figures in the State CAMPA 
records was central to discharging the responsibility of ensuring that all amounts lying with 
the State CAMPA are transferred to CAMPA fund.  The issue of deficiencies in records and 
the urgent need to reconcile  Ad-hoc CAMPA records with State/UT CAMPA was discussed 
repeatedly in the Ad-hoc CAMPA meetings as is recorded in Table 41,but no such 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
142 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
reconciliations were conducted as  indicated from the discrepa ncies in figures of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA and State/UT CAMPA reported in the pr evious chapters of this Report. We found, 
that despite such directions, discrepancies in the records of Ad-hoc CAMPA and State 
CAMPAs remained and could no t be reconciled with State records. Thus the issue of 
reconciliation of receipts was discussed in almo st all the meetings but nothing concrete has 
been done. The whole exercise remained on paper only. 
6.5 Audit 
 
6.5.1 Ad-hoc CAMPA 
As per the Gazette notification of 23 April 2004 regarding constitution of CAMPA, the 
CAMPA was to get its annual accounts audited internally as well as externally through 
Chartered Accountant(s) who are on the panel of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India and the auditor(s) were to be selected with the approval of the Governing Body of 
CAMPA.  
On 4 May 2006, Principal Director of Audit, Sc ientific Departments, the designated audit 
office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, tasked with audit of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, in a report to CEC highlighted the following: 
• MoEF does not have a central database on the details of funds collected under CAMPA; 
• CAMPA is yet to become operational; 
• Exercise of ascertaining volume of audi t work and manpower requirement has been 
initiated; 
• Many State Accountants General have conducted test check of some of the DFOs and at 
the initial stages of examination trends of loss of interest and diversion of CAMPA funds 
have been observed.  
On 5 May 2006, the Supreme Court of India wh ile ordering the creation of Ad-hoc CAMPA 
also directed that it should get audited all the monies received from the user agencies on 
behalf of the CAMPA and the income earned  thereon by the various State Government 
officials.  The auditors may be appointed by the CAG.  The audit may also examine whether 
proper financial procedure has been following  in investing the funds. On 13 March 2007 the 
auditing arrangement for CAMPA was revised and audit of accounts was to be conducted by 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
However, no audit of the Ad-hoc CAMPA Acco unts could be undertaken in the absence of 
maintenance of proper records. This issue was repeatedly brought to the notice of other Ad-
hoc CAMPA members by the CAG’s representative  on the body. In it meeting of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA held on27 November 2006 and 20 June  2007 it was pointed out by CAG’s 
representative that no meaningful audit co uld be conducted in the absence of proper 
compilation of figures in a meaningful form at and reconciliation of amounts. Principal 
Director of Audit, Scientific Departments in his letter date d 29 April 2009 addressed to Joint 
Secretary and Financial Adviso r, MoEF pointed out that since huge amounts of funds are 
lying with Ad-hoc CAMPA for investment purpose s, it is prudent that a regular system of 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 143 | P a g e  
audit is initiated, keeping in view the risks in volved. From the records available with us, it 
does not appear that Ad-hoc CAMPA has appointed an auditor (on the advice of CAG) so far. 
He also sought information whether any inte rnal audit arrangements have been put in 
place. 
The amendment notification issued on13 Marc h 2007 was based on Su preme Courts orders 
of 26 September 2005. We noted that in the order ibid, the Supreme Court had also 
directed that the internal audit of the CA MPA shall be conducted every six months by 
statutory auditors on the panel of CAG. Ho wever, no such mention was made in the 
notification. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the account books for the years 2006-07 to 2011-12 have 
been drawn by a firm of CA empanelled with the CAG, and forwarded to the Audit, who 
have observed that the account books should be signed by the officials of the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA before they could take cognizance. This  is inspite of these accounts books having 
been formally adopted in the 22nd meeting of the Ad-hoc CAMPA “subject to audit”. 
The reply is not tenable because it is a generally accepted prin ciple that a body at the helm 
of affairs is responsible for the accounts of the organisation and is the owner of the 
accounts. Also, as per Rule 64 of GFR, the Se cretary of a Ministry/ Department who is the 
Chief Accounting Authority of the Ministry/ Department shall be responsible and 
accountable for financial management of his Ministry/ Department, and be responsible for 
preparation of expenditure and other statements  relating to his Ministry, and shall ensure 
that his Ministry/ Department maintains full and proper records of the financial transactions 
and adopts systems and procedure that will a ll times afford internal controls. As per 
instructions on the audit of autonomous bodi es of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India, audit should not generally be taken up before the competent authority of the 
Autonomous Body approves the accounts.  
Thus, as is accepted practice the Governing Body should have got the accounts prepared 
and signed. Mere conditional acceptance of the accounts in the 22
nd meeting of Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, pending, the completion of internal audit by CAG empanelle d firm of Chartered 
Accountants does not accord ownership of the accounts by Ad-hoc  CAMPA nor does it 
constitute final accounts of Ad-hoc CAMPA, to  be taken up for audit. Ad-hoc CAMPA was 
apprised of the position on 7 February 2013, the same day as the draft accounts were sent 
by it to audit. Further, MoEF intimated (Jul y 2013) that the intern al audit of the CAMPA 
funds was on the verge of conclusion and once the financial statements and audit report 
was adopted by Ad-hoc CAMPA, these would be forwarded to Audit.  
6.5.2 State CAMPA 
As per the State CAMPA guideline dated 2 July  2009, the accounts of the State CAMPA shall 
be audited by the Accountant Ge neral at such intervals as may be specified by him. The 
accounts of the State CAMPA as certified by the Accountant General or any other person 
appointed by him in this behalf together wi th the audit report thereon and annual report, 
shall be forwarded annually to the State Go vernment, the MoEF and the Ad-hoc CAMPA by 
the State CAMPA. The State Government and the MoEF shall have the power to conduct 
special audit or performance audit of the State CAMPA. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
144 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Supreme Court vide its order dated 14 July 2009, directed that the State Accountant General 
shall carry out the audit of the expenditure do ne out of the State CAMPA Funds every year 
on annual basis. 
It was observed that the only the state of  Andhra Pradesh got the accounts for the years 
2009-11 audited by the state Accountant Gene ral. The states of Uttar Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand got their accounts for the years 2010-12 audited by charted accountants only. 
No other state got their accounts in prescrib ed format audited by the State Accountant 
General. 
MoEF stated (April 2013) that the State CAMPAs  have been approached by the State AsG 
with 45 different proformae to be filled and th ese proformae were not in use in the Forest 
Department or the State CAMPA and that th e audit team did not give them sufficient 
opportunity/ time for reaction. 
The reply is not tenable because the said pr oformae related to the Compliance Audit being 
reported in the instant audit report and not the regular audit of the Annual Accounts of Ad-
hoc CAMPA.  Further, we noted that 23
1 of the 30 State/ UTs test checked in audit could 
provide the most of the information sought in  the 45 proformae for the Compliance Audit.  
Since majority of the State/ UTs could provid e the requisite information, it leads to the 
conclusion that neither the ti me prescribed nor the quantum  of information sought was 
unreasonable provided basic records had been properly maintained. 
6.6 Accountability and transparency 
 
The existing paradigm of collection of moni es due towards CAF from user agencies, its 
accountal, expenditure by CAMPA authorities at  the Union/State/UT level, the arrangement 
with regard to the exhibition of this fund a nd the receipts and expendi tures from it in the 
financial statements of the Government, its re porting to Parliament and State Legislatures 
reflects significant issues that merit the at tention of the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests. 
• The existing amounts of funds with the cent ral CAMPA are significant. As of 31 March 
2012 they were of the order of ` 23,607.67 crore. 
• The aggregate release made to the State/ UT CAMPA authorities till 31 March 2012 was  
` 2,829.21 crore and the expenditure reported by them was ` 1,775.84 crore.  
• While receipts and expenditure have been sign ificant, there exists no system devised by 
the Ministry to report incomes and outgoings regarding CAF to either the Parliament or 
the State Legislatures. 
• The amounts collected and spent are not on ly not known to the Parliament and the 
State Legislature, there also does not ex ist any methodology for authorisation of 
incurrence of expenditure by legislative authorities. 
• Given the fact that the amount received to wards compensatory afforestation are very 
substantial, it is equally disconcerting to note  that there exists no system both in the 
                                                            
1 Seven State/ UTs (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Rajasthan and Sikkim) provided information partly. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 145 | P a g e  
Centre and in the States by which the authorities in the Ministry or in the States at the 
apex level satisfy themselves that the amo unts being collected are in conformity with 
the extant orders under the Forest (Conser vation)Act 1980, and various other Acts, 
Rules and orders of the Supreme Court regulating the collection and utilization of CAF. 
Audited Accounts of an entity provide assu rance to all stakeholders regarding the 
transactions entered into by it in the cour se of the accounting pe riod. The Central CAMPA 
(Ad-hoc) since its inception in 2006 has not submitted audited accounts till date. Audit also 
observed that the books of accounts are not being maintained properly in the Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. Receipt and Payments Accounts, In come and expenditure account and Balance 
Sheets were not prepared. This clearly impinges adversely on transparency and 
accountability of CAMPA. MoEF intimated (Jul y 2013) that the internal audit of the CAMPA 
funds was on the verge of conclusion and once the financial statements and audit report 
was adopted by Ad-hoc CAMPA, these would be forwarded to Audit.  
Given the substantial amounts of funds being collected under the compensatory 
afforestation; the expenditure therefrom; the overall objectives of conservation, protection, 
regeneration and management of forests, co nservation, protection and management of 
wild life & its habitats and compensatory affore station; the clear public purpose involved in 
the work relating to CAMPA, th ere is need by the Ministry to  review the existing paradigm 
of CAMPA by approaching the Supreme Court, wh ere considered necessary. This should be 
done in a way that enhances transparency, br ings CAMPA within the broader focus of both 
Parliament and State Legislatures and in grea ter public view so as to ensure the largest 
possible stakeholders’ participation. Towards this end it would be appropriate if the 
amounts lying in Ad-hoc CAMPA are transferred into the Public Account of India, as was 
envisaged in the Compensatory Afforestatio n Fund Bill, 2008 that was passed by Lok Sabha 
in 2009 and subsequently lapsed on dissolution of the House. Transfers to individual States 
can be made transparent so as to provide a ll stakeholders necessary information on the 
subject. This will ensure that budgetary, financial and performance related 
indicators/information on CAMPA are suitably reflected in public docu ments, at the Centre 
and State level for income and outflows from CA MPA, so as to effect greater transparency 
and accountability in the existing arrangement. 
Except on the issue of status of accounts Mo EF did not respond to the above observations 
of audit with regard to accountability and transparency. 

Compens
1. Ba
The tot
& Nicob
the int
Decem
b
forest c
hectare
State’s 
forest 
c
had 3, 7
very d e
area u
and 54
,
forest. 
assess
m
showed
hectare
 
Forest c
               
1Source: 
5,70
Chap
Stat
satory Affor
ackground1
al geograph
bar is 8,24,9
erpretation
ber 2008- 
cover in th
e which was
geographic
canopy den
76,100 he c
ense forest ,
nder mod e
,700 hectar
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a margi n
e in the 201
cover – Typ
                      
India State of
2,41
54,700
00
pter - VII 
te/Un
restation in I
1 
hical area of
900 hectare
n of satelli t
December 
e State w a
s 81.51 per 
cal area. I n
sity classes
ctare of a
, 2,41,600 
erately de
re of area u
d with th e
009, the f o
nal increas e
1 assessme
pes of forest
                      
f Forest Repor
1,600
1,46,800
ion Te
ndia 
Anda
f Andaman 
e. Based on 
te data of 
2009, the 
as 6,72,400 
cent of the 
n terms of 
s, the State 
rea under 
hectare of 
nse forest 
under open 
e previous 
orest cover 
e of 6,200 
ent. 
t (in hectar
 
rt 2011 publis
errito
 
 
 
 
man & Ni
re)-2011
hed by Forest
3
ry Spe
icobar 
t Survey of Ind
3,76,100 V
M
O
S
N
ecific F
R
dia. 
Very dense fo
Moderately de
Open forest
Scrub
Non forest are
Findin
eport No. : 2
147 
rest
ense forest
ea
ngs 
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
148 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
2.  Compensatory Affore station Fund of the State 
State CAMPA was constituted in August 2009. Funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, funds released by Ad-hoc CAMPA to State CAMPA and expenditure incurred there 
against during the period 2006-07 to 2011-12 were as  detailed below. 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount transferred 
to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from Ad-
hoc CAMPA during 
2009-12 
Expenditure 
incurred by 
State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA2 
2006-123 11.27 1.89 0.69 1.20
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 17 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of `1.89 crore released against APOs, 63 per cent 
remained unutilised, leading to accumulati on of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of ` 0.11 
crore were not remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in State 
Government account. 
APO for the year 2010-11 was submitted after a delay of one year and APO for the year 
2011-12 was submitted in June 2012 i.e. afte r the lapse of the financial year. The 
expenditure incurred by State CAMPA was 37 per cent of the total amounts released by Ad-
hoc CAMPA for the years 2009-12. Therefore concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of 
the State considering that ` 22.98 crore (including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be 
released only for specified forestry related activities. 
3.  Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Andaman & Nicobar that 
came to the notice of audit are given below. Th e gist of these cases is also given in table26 
and 27 in Chapter 3. 
(`in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. Test check revealed 
that in five cases, NPV was not collected at revised rates. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action had been initiated for the recovery of 
NPV from user agencies. 
0.04 
2 In Nicobar forest division, revenue land allotted to the Indian Navy for 
establishment of Defence Signal Intellig ence Unit at Lal Tekri had a forest 
canopy of 0.8 ha classified as deemed forest and 485 naturally growing trees 
1.15 
                                                            
2 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by Ad-
hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
3The year wise details of amount released by Ad-hoc CAMPA and the expenditure incurred by State CAMPA 
were not made available to audit 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 149 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Description Amount
were to be felled. Proposal for diversio n was sent to MoEF and it was approved 
in January 2007. However, NPV of ` 1.15 crore due from the user agency was 
not included in the proposal. Ministry (April 2013)accepted the lapse.  
3 In two cases of South Andaman division, CA of `0.10crore was short realized 
from user agency due to application of incorrect rates of CA. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action was being initiated for the recovery of 
CA from user agencies. 
0.10 
4 In one case of Nicobar division while sending the proposal to MoEF, 8.43 ha 
forest land in Great Nicoba r Island was diverted in April 2012 for construction 
of North-South road from Shastri Nagar to Indira Point. The report of the 
division classified the density of forest land to be diverted between 0.5 and 0.8, 
i.e., eco class-I with eco value- very dense forest. However, on receipt of 
approval, the division applied the rate of eco class-I with eco value- dense 
forest (density from 0.1 to 0.4). This resulted in short- assessment and short 
recovery of NPV of `0.09 crore. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that NPV of 0.09 crore had been realised from user 
agency in March 2013.  Thus, NPV was recovered at the instance of audit. 
0.09 
5 No norms were fixed by MoEF /State Go vernment for recovery of cost of CA 
from user agencies. In the absence of prescribed norms, CA was recovered from 
various user agencies on the basis of current price index, without taking price 
escalation into consideration. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that it would not be possible to prescribe any 
norms for recovery of cost of CA. The repl y of the Ministry is not tenable as the 
norms for the cost of CA had been prescribed by the other State Governments. 
 
 Total 1.38 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds  
4.1  Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Irregular 
expenditure on 
a project 
without 
approval of 
APO 
 
State CAMPA had undertaken a project for establishment of 
city forest at Aberdeen village  on revenue land in Port Blair 
and incurred an expenditure of `0.13 crore out of CAMPA 
funds in the year 2010-11 without approval of Ad-hoc CAMPA 
which considered it to be an eco-tourism activity. Ministry 
stated (April 2013) that expenditure incurred on this project 
was not totally unfruitful and status report on existing 
vegetation, contour mapping would be required for raising the 
suitable forestry species in the project area. 
The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the project was 
undertaken without approval of Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
0.13 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
150 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
2 Unfruitful 
expenditure on 
disputed land 
 
In Diglipur forest division, title of non forest land received for 
CA in lieu of 12 ha forest land diverted for laying 33 KV high 
tension single circuit transmission line from Kalara junction to 
Parangara junction in September 2005, was not clear. The CA 
carried out on non forest land at an expenditure of `0.02 crore 
was encroached by local villagers rendering it unfruitful. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that planted area was not 
encroached and there was no damage to the compensatory 
afforestation. 
The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the CA was carried out 
on the non-forest land not having clear title. 
0.02 
3 Underutilization 
of CA funds 
 
Five forest divisions 4could not utilize CA funds provided by 
state CAMPA during the years 2009-12.The percentage of 
unspent amount ranged 14.40 to 80.92 per cent in above five 
divisions during the years 2009-12. Ministry stated (April 2013) 
that underutilisation of CA fund was due to variation in market 
prices of stores, procedural delays, remoteness of the CA areas 
etc. 
The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the provisions for CA in 
the APO should have been made after taking into account all 
relevant factors. 
 
 Total  0.15 
5.  Land Management 
5.1   Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO5– 80.48 ha6 
As per records of NO – 117.74 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 56.88 ha 
As per records of NO – 112.96 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 23.60ha 
As per records of NO – 4.78 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 112.96 ha 
On Non forest land – 112.96 ha 
                                                            
4 Middle Andaman, Mayabunder, Nicobar, Diglipur and Silviculture 
5 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department  
6 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 151 | P a g e  
Particulars (2006-12) 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 37.48 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 65.11 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 26 ha 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes wa s 80.48 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only 71 per cent while as per records of NO the 
figures were 117.74 ha and 96 per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no forest land 
was transferred /mutated in favour of the fore st department and notified as RF/PF while as 
per NO out of65.11 ha non forest land transferre d/ mutated in favour of forest department 
of which only 26 ha non forest land was decl ared as RF/PF. As per records of NO, no 
afforestation was done on non forest land and afforestation done on degraded forest land 
was33per cent of the area to be afforested. 
5.2  Irregularities in land management  
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Failure to notify 
non forest land as 
RF/PF 
 
In two cases, 34.43 ha non forest land received from user agencies in lieu of 
diversion of forest land during 2006-2012 was not notified as RF/PF as of 
December 2012. 
In another case, out of 23.29 ha non forest land received from user agency in 
lieu of diversion of forest land for co nstruction of North-South Road from 
Campbell bay to Shastrinagar in Grea t Nicobar Island during 2006-07, only 
22.05 ha non forest land was declared as RF. Thus, 1.24 ha non forest land was 
not declared/notified as RF as of De cember 2012.Ministry stated (April 2013) 
that action was being taken for notifying the non-forest land received in lieu of 
diversion of forest land. 
6.  Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper ac counts, these could not be audited. The State 
CAMPA did not reconcile the accounts with Ad-hoc CAMPA. There was a difference of ` 0.49 
crore between the amount remitted by the St ate CAMPA and the amount actually received 
by Ad-hoc CAMPA. No action was taken by st ate CAMPA to reconcile the difference as of 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
152 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
December 2012.It was observed that no separate account under corpus fund for 
conservation and protection of protec ted areas was maintained for a sum of `1.5 crore 
received from user agency for diversion of 0.43 ha from Mahatma Gandhi National Park, 
South Andaman as required in State CAMPA guidelines. Further, as per State CAMPA 
guidelines, the State Government and the MoEF  had the powers to conduct special audit or 
performance audit of the state CAMPA. However, no such audit was conducted. 
Ministry accepted the audit observations (April 2013). 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Andaman & Nicobar CAMPA met three times during 2009-12 as 
against six times. The Executive Committee met three times during 2009-12. The Governing 
body did not meet in the years 2009-12.  

Compens
1. Bac
The to t
Pradesh
on the 
Octobe
cover 
hectare
State’s 
forest 
c
had 85 ,
dense f
under 
19,29,7
forest. 
assess
m
showed
the 201
Forest c
 
2. Com
State C
hoc CA
there a
g
 
               
7Source: 
satory Affor
ckground7 
tal geogra p
h is 2,75,0
interpretat
r 2008- M a
in the S
e which was
geographic
canopy den
,000 hecta r
forest, 26,2
moderately
700 hectar e
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a decrease
11 assessme
cover – Typ
mpensatory
AMPA was 
MPA, fund s
gainst durin
                      
India State of
2,28,6
restation in I
phical area 
6,900 hec t
ion of satel
arch 2009, 
tate was 
s 16.86 per 
cal area. I n
nsity classes
re of area 
4,200 hecta
y dense f
e of area u
d with th e
009, the f o
e of 28,100
ent. 
pes of forest
y Afforestat
constitute
s released 
ng the perio
                      
f Forest Repor
85,0
68,100
ndia 
And
of Andhra
tare. Based
lite data of
the fores t
46,38,900
cent of the
n terms o f
s, the State
under ver y
are of area
forest and
under open
e previou s
orest cove r
0 hectare in
t (in hectar
tion funds o
d in Septe m
by Ad-hoc 
od 2006-07 
 
rt 2011 publis
000 26,24,
dhra Prad
 
 
f 
t 
0 
 
f 
 
y 
 
 
 
s 
r 
 
re)-2011 
of the State
mber 2009.
CAMPA to 
to 2011-12
hed by Forest
,200 19,2
desh 
e 
 Funds re m
State CA M
 were as de
t Survey of Ind
9,700 10,7
R
mitted by S t
MPA and ex
etailed belo
dia. 
76,800
Very den
Moderat
Open for
Scrub
Non fore
eport No. : 2
153 
tate CAMPA
penditure i
w. 
se forest
ely dense fore
rest
st area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
A to Ad-
incurred 
est
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
154 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received 
by State CAMPA 
from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA8 
2006-07 270.85 Nil Nil  
2007-08 270.42 Nil Nil  
2008-09 234.83 Nil Nil  
2009-10 677.84 89.78 10.87 78.91 
2010-11 467.64 120.74 82.83 116.82 
2011-12 183.96 118.57 153.56 81.83 
Total 2105.54 329.09 247.26  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 16 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 329.09 crore released, 25 per cent remained 
unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Andhra Pradesh that came 
to the notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table24, 26 and 
27 in Chapter 3. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 There were 22 cases 9 involving forest land of 1,053.10 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 10 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
61.0811 
2 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NP V in March 2008. However test check of 
records of Paloncha and Bhadrachalam forest divisions revealed that NPV was not 
collected from user agency12  at revised rates. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that at the time of stage-I clearance, the area of 
101.81 ha was part of wildlife sanctuary and the area became part of national park 
only after compliance of stage-I conditions and there was no justification to apply 
the rate of NPV retrospectively.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the revised 
rates of NPV were applicable in all cases where final approval was granted by 
MoEF after 28 March 2008, for diversion of forest land. 
41.42 
                                                            
8Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilise d with State CAMPA out of the funds released by Ad-
hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
9 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
10 NHAI, M/s Prasad seeds ltd., Vamshadhara Project,  SCCL, Ananthapur mining corpn., M/s Amara Raja 
Batteries Ltd., M/s S. Shankar Reddy, Kakatiya Cement Sugar Industrial, M/s SwamyKasiRatnam, M/s KCP Ltd, 
M/s NCL Industries, M/s Essar Steels Ltd., M/s Singareni Collieries Company, M/s Tirumala Granites etc. 
11Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in these cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare (1,053.10 x 5.80). 
12Indira  Sagar Polavaram Project 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 155 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
3 In Nalgonda forest division while permitting diversion of 377 ha forest land for 
construction of Pulichintala Reservoir Project in Nalgonda during August-October 
2007, 102.80 ha forest land was not included in the initial proposal. This resulted 
in non-recovery of NPV from user agency besides non providing of non-forest land 
by user agency. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the a dditional area of 102.80 ha was still under 
the control of state forest department  and the user agency had also been 
informed to stop the work immediately.  There was ambiguity in the Ministry’s 
reply as on one hand it clarified that additional area of 102.80 ha was under the 
control of state forest department and on th e other, it directed the user agency to 
stop the work on forest area. 
7.20 
4 In three forest divisions 13 NPV of  ` 3.86 crore was not realised from the user 
agencies to whom final approval was granted during 1998 to 2004. Of this amount 
` 3.46 crore was recovered from user agency and deposited into Ad-hoc CAMPA 
on 23 November 2012 at the instance of audit. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action fo r recovery of NPV from user agency or 
cancellation of mining lease was being taken in these cases. 
0.40 
 Total 110.10 
 
4.  Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and 
utilisation of the funds released. 
  ( ` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by  
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by 
 Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by  
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 14  64.52 7.28 101.60 73.18 157.93 142.44
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
 22.77 3.59 23.37 9.31 11.28 10.52
Protected 
Area15 
 0 0 0 0 0 0
CAT Plan  0 0 0 0 0 0
Other 
specified 
activities 
 0 0 0.34 0.34 0.60 0.60
Total 89.78 87.29 10.87 120.74 125.31 82.83 118.57 169.81 153.56
                                                            
13Anantapur (Diversion of forest land of 4.00 ha in Mutchukota Reserve Forest of Gooty Range in favour of M/s 
Mahaboob Minerals Pulivendula), Vishakapatanam (Diversion of 1.88 ha of forest land in Bayyavaram forest 
block for widening of NH 5) and Eluru (Diversion of 39.27 ha of Reserve Forest land of construction of 
Reservoir across Kovvada Kaluva in West Godavari District) 
14 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
15 Protected Area Funds is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
156 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
From the table, it is evident that the percentage of expenditure incurred as against the 
amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA was 12 per cent in 2009-10 and 69 per cent in 2010-11. 
Further, the implementing agencies could no t expend the entire amount released by the 
State CAMPA in the years 2009-10, 2010-11 and 201 1-12. The levels of expenditure were 12 
per cent in 2009-10 and 66 per cent in 2010-11 and 90 per cent  in 2011-12 when compared 
with amounts released. APOs for 2010-11 an d 2011-12 were approved by the Steering 
Committee after a delay of five months and funds released in October 2010 for the year 
2010-11 and in August 2011 for the year 2011-12.  Though the percentage of expenditure 
had increased progressively over the last three years, concerns remain on the absorptive 
capacity of the State considering that ` 2,359.07 crore (including interest) are accumulated 
with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Affo restation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) 
and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO16– 13,566.39  ha17 
As per records of NO – 14,208.60 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 9,512.17 ha 
As per records of NO –  10,168.63 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 4,054.22  ha 
As per records of NO – 4,039.97 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of non 
forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 315.87 ha 
On Non forest land – NA 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 1,481.84 ha 
On Non forest land – NA 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 2,360.39 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 230.80 ha 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 13,566.39 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only 70 per cent  while as per records of NO the 
figures were 14,208.60 ha and 72  per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest 
land was transferred /mutated in favour of th e forest department and notified as RF/PF 
                                                            
16 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
17 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 157 | P a g e  
while as per NO out of2,360.39 ha non forest la nd transferred/ mutated in favour of forest 
department only 230.80 ha non forest land was declared as RF /PF. As per records of NO, 
afforestation was done on 1,481.84 ha degraded forest land and no afforestation was done 
on non forest land. 
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 False 
reporting of 
compliance 
with in 
principle 
approval 
conditions 
 
In Kothagudem forest division taking over of 210.44 ha non forest land in 
Kadapa forest division in compliance with Stage I condition for diversion 
of 231.94 ha forest land in favour of Singareni Colleries Company (P) Ltd in 
2006 was wrongly reported and based on it Stage II clearance was given. 
Subsequently, in January 2009 demarcation of boundaries of 210.44 ha 
could not be done. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that user agency had been informed to 
provide alternative CA land at the earliest. 
2 Non 
declaration of 
CA land as 
sanctuary as 
per orders of 
MoEF 
 
In Kurnool forest division in Ma rch 1993, MoEF granted approval for 
diversion of 177.47 ha forest land for Srisailam Right Branch Canal with 
the condition that the character of non-forest land identified for CA 
should be maintained as habitat for Great Indian Bustard (GIB) and 
declared a ‘Sanctuary’. The user ag ency provided 246.77 ha non forest 
land for execution of CA in Rollapadu and Sunkesula villages in Midthur 
Mandal of Kurnool in 1990 to State Forest Department but it was not 
declared as sanctuary to be maintained as habitat for GIB as of December 
2012. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the concerned forest division had now 
been instructed to get the area notified as sanctuary under Wildlife 
Protection Act 1972 within a month. 
3 Non raising of 
canal bank 
plantations as 
per orders of 
MoEF 
 
In Anantapur forest division in November 2006 MoEF granted approval for 
diversion of 118.71 ha of forest land 18 for Chitravathi balancing Reservoir 
canal, with the condition that canal bank plantation shall be undertaken at 
the project’s cost. However, neither an  action plan for raising of canal 
bank plantation was prepared by the forest department nor funds 
obtained from the user agency (Irrigation Department), as a result no such 
work was done (December 2012). 
Ministry stated(April 2013) that action for canal bank plantations were 
being taken by concerned divisions. 
4 Non 
establishment 
In Anantapur forest division in May 2002, diversion of 4.05 ha of forest 
land in Mutchukota RF was permitted by MoEF on the condition that a 
                                                            
18110.78 ha in Dadithota RF of Anantapur Division and 7.93 ha in Dorigallu RF of Proddatur Division 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
158 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
of green belt 
as per orders 
of MoEF 
 
plan for enriching surrounding areas of the cluster of mines by developing 
green belt/enrichment plantation and SMC 19 works would be 
implemented at the cost of all lease holders. However, no such activity 
was undertaken despite a provision of ` 0.04 crore made for the purpose. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that green  belt plantation would be taken up 
during the year 2013-14. 
5 Transfer of 
disputed land 
 
In June 1999, MoEF granted approval for diversion of 100 ha forest land in 
Mancherial Forest Division for mini ng of lime stone in favour of M/s 
Orient cement company Limited, which was later revised in favour of M/s 
AP Mineral Development Corporation. Of the 100 ha non forest land 
provided by user agency for CA, 40 ha non forest land was identified by 
forest department as disputed land a nd under cultivation by the villagers. 
Ignoring this fact, MoEF granted renewa l of lease for a further period of 
20 years in June 2009.     
Ministry stated (April 2013) that th e matter was being pursued with the 
district collector, Adilabad for allotment of alternative CA land of 40 ha. 
6 Forest land 
transferred to 
Forest 
Department 
 
339.34 ha of forest land accepted in Sr ikakulam division for raising CA in 
lieu of diversion of 567 ha of forest land in favour of M/s Singareni 
Colleries Company (P) Ltd during th e period 2006-08, was subsequently 
found to be already in the possession of the forest department as un-
notified forest blocks with growth stock since 1976. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that matter for early notification of CA land of 
339.34 ha and raising of CA thereon would be pursued vigorously. 
7 Acceptance of 
already 
afforestated 
land for 
afforestation  
In Kadapa forest division, the 25.08 acres of purportedly non forest land 
transferred in lieu of diversion of 6. 70 ha forest land in August 2010 for 
development of Dr. YSR Smruthi Vanam,  was found to have been already 
afforestated with red sanders planta tion raised during 2007-08 by A.P. 
Forest Development Corporation at a cost of ` 0.17 crore.  
  
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
Accounts for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 had been prepared in the prescribed format. 
Accounts for the year 2011-12 had no t been received as of December 2012. Audit of annual 
accounts for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 had been completed and Separate Audit 
Reports on the Accounts were in the process of  being finalised (April 2013). Further, as per 
state CAMPA guidelines, the State Government  and the MoEF had the powers to conduct 
special audit or performance audit of the state CAMPA. However, no such audit was 
conducted. 
                                                            
19 Soil and Moisture Conservation 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 159 | P a g e  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the formats of account were adopted as prescribed by state 
forest department and these accounts were also audited by chartered accountants. The fact 
remains that the accounts were not prepared in the format prescribed by the Accountant 
General. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee and Executive Committee of  Andhra Pradesh CAMPA met three times 
during 2009-12 as against six times.   

Report N
160 | P
1. Ba
The t
Arunac
hectare
satellite
2008, t
67,41,0
cent of 
terms o
the Stat
under 
hectar
e
dense f
area un
the pr e
forest 
7,400 h
Forest c
 
2.  C o
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
               
20 Source
1
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground2
total geo g
hal Prad e
e. Based on 
e data of N
he forest c o
000 hectar e
the State’s 
of forest ca
te had 20,8
very den s
e of area 
forest and 
nder open fo
evious asse
cover sho
ectare in th
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
15,02,30
12,200
013 
20 
graphical 
esh is 
the interpr
ovember - 
over in the 
e which wa s
geographic
nopy densi
6,800 hecta
se forest, 
under m
15,02,300 
orest. Comp
ssment of 
wed a d e
he 2011 ass
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
00
16,21,100
Arun
area of 
83,74,300 
retation of 
December 
State was 
s 80.50 per 
cal area. In 
ity classes, 
are of area 
31,51,900 
moderately 
hectare of 
pared with 
2009, the 
ecrease of 
essment. 
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Octob e
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
nachal Pra
re)-2011 
of the Stat
er 2009. Fu
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
20,86,800
31,51,900
Com
adesh 
te 
nds remitte
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
st Survey of In
pensatory A
ed by State
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very dense f
Moderately 
Open forest
Scrub
Non forest a
Afforestation
e CAMPA t o
ture incurre
forest
dense forest
area
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 161 | P a g e  
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA21 
2006-07 111.28 Nil Nil  
2007-08 24.80 Nil Nil  
2008-09 20.27 Nil Nil  
2009-10 53.00 Nil Nil Nil 
2010-11 184.19 34.16 6.53 27.63 
2011-12 45.28 41.19 NA22 68.82 
Total 438.82 75.35 6.53  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 17 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2010-12. Of ` 34.16 crore released in 2010-11, 81  per cent  
remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of ` 5.06 
crore were not remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in State 
Government account. 
3.  Receipts into State CAMPA  
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Arunachal Pradesh that 
came to the notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table 24 
and 27 in Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 There were 5 cases 23 involving forest land of 264.43 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 24 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
15.3425 
2 NPV/CA of ` 32.59 crore 26  was not realized from user agencies 27 to whom 
diversion of forest land was granted by MoEF during the years 2010-12 
(December 2012). Ministry stated (Apr il 2013) that user agencies invariably 
transfer the fund at their convenience within a period of five years for 
32.59 
                                                            
21 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
22 Information not made available by State CAMPA 
23 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
24 BRTF 
25Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in these cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(264.43 x 5.8) 
26NPV of `24.25 crore and CA of ` 8.34 crore 
27BRTF, PWD, M/s Adishankar Power Private Ltd, M/s KSK Dubbin Power Private Limited, etc. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
162 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
compliance of stipulated conditions of stage-I approval as per FC Act 1980 and 
Ministry’s letter dated 14 September 2001.   Ministry’s reply was not based on 
facts as no such condition was stipulated in Ministry’s in principle approval for 
grant of diversion of forest land. 
3 PCA of `0.20 crore was not realized from user agency (State PWD) to whom 
diversion of forest land was granted by MoEF in 2001 for construction of roads 
from Etalin to Malinye and from Anini to Mipi. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that efforts were being made to recover outstanding 
dues from user agency. 
0.20 
 Total 48.13 
4.  Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise break up of funds allotted to State CAMPA and 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by  
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by  
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by  
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 28     16.99 4.56  NA NA 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    4.40 1.72  NA NA 
Protected 
Area29 
    0 0  NA NA 
CAT Plan     0.56 0.22  NA NA 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    1.01 0.03  NA NA 
Total Nil  Nil   Nil  34.16 22.96 6.53 41.19 NA NA 
No APO was prepared and submitted for the year 2009-10. APO for the years 2010-11 and 
2011-12 was submitted after a delay of four mo nths, as a result, State CAMPA could utilize 
only 19 per cent of the funds released by Ad-hoc CAMP A in the year 2010-11. Further, there 
was delay in release of funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA to State CAMPA for the year 2011-12. The 
funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA in the month of November for the year 2011-12. 
State CAMPA released funds to its four divisions30 in the month of March. The percentage of 
release of funds in the month of March ranged from 36 to 100. Low level of spending raises 
concerns on the absorptive capaci ty of the State considering that ` 799.01 crore (including 
                                                            
28 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
29 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 
30Likhabali, Banderdewa, Hapoli, Anjaw 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 163 | P a g e  
interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund for 
the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that late prepar ation of APO was inevitable as it involved 
multiple level offices, like field, CAMPA Cell, Executive Committee & Steering Committee.  
However, efforts would be made to prepare APO in advance in future. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
1 Expenditure 
not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test check 
of records of State CAMPA revealed that expenditure was 
incurred on purchase of vehicles ( ` 0.79 crore), construction of 
residential buildings ( ` 2.19 crore), office equipment, mobiles 
and furniture (` 0.12 crore). 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that restrictions for incurring 
expenditure on certain items had been objected by the states 
and to settle these objections of states, a high level committee 
was constituted by NCAC.  Deci sion of NCAC was awaited.  
Action would be taken in accordance with the decision taken in 
this regard. 
3.16 
2 Irregular 
expenditure 
on Integrated 
Agro-Horti-
Silviculture 
Scheme 
State CAMPA’s proposal to implement “Rehabilitation of 
Jhumed areas through Integrated Agro-Horti-Silvicultural 
Cultivation” Scheme in the APO for 2010-11 was disallowed by 
the MoEF (Sept 2011) as such activity was not permitted from 
CAF. The State CAMPA wrote a letter to MoEF (Jan 2012) 
justifying the expenditure on the scheme and implemented it 
in Sanglee Forest division from CAF. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that restrictions for incurring 
expenditure on certain items had been objected by the states 
and to settle these objections of states, a high level committee 
was constituted by NCAC.  Deci sion of NCAC was awaited.  
Action would be taken in accordance with the decision taken in 
this regard (April 2013). It further added that Governing body 
had passed a resolution to continue with the scheme in view of 
weaning away the people from destruction of forest in the 
interest or conservation of forests and therefore it should be 
allowed being site specific scheme. The reply of the Ministry is 
not tenable as the said scheme was undertaken without the 
approval of MoEF/NCAC. 
0.06 
3 Excess 
Expenditure 
on 
Banderdewa forest division in curred excess expenditure of  
` 0.05 crore on procurement of 20 Global Positioning System 
(GPS) at the rate of ` 0.45 lakh/GPS in March 2011 whereas the 
0.05 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
164 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
procurement 
of Global 
Positioning 
System (GPS). 
same division purchased 40 GPS at the rate of ` 0.21 lakh/GPS 
in March 2012. 
Ministry stated that concerned division had been requested to 
furnish factual position justifying the action taken on this issue. 
4 Diversion of 
funds to 
activities 
other than 
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
Anjaw Forest Division incurred excess expenditure of ` 2.58 
lakh (` 7.03 lakh – ` 4.45 lakh) on Construction of SPT Type – II 
building whereas no expenditure was made on Compensatory 
afforestation and Human Resource Development though funds 
amounting to ` 2.82 lakh and ` 2.50 lakh respectively were 
released for the same. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that DFO’s had been directed to 
maintain financial discipline. 
 
 Total  3.27 
4.3 Non-furnishing of information/records to Audit. 
State CAMPA did not furnish the following information/records though called for in Audit. 
• Records of collection of amounts from user  agencies and its remittance to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 
• Records of diverted forest lands falling within protected areas under Wildlife Act and 
in case of diversion whether a separate corpus fund created. 
• Records of cases wherein non-forest land wa s provided/not provided by user agency 
in lieu of forest lands. Further, if provided whether it is declared as RF/PF. 
• Details for Amount of CA spent on double degraded forest land and non-
forest/degraded forest areas identified for Afforestation. 
• Cases wherein non availability of non-forest land was certified by Chief Secretary and 
Afforestation was done over double area of degraded forest. 
• Cases wherein exemption were allowed to certain categories of user agencies such 
as school, hospital, PWD road etc. for the period w.e.f. January 2006 to April 2008. 
• Cases wherein diversion of forest land was made for mining purpose.  
• Cases wherein rights of forest dwellers we re infringed by the ac tion/ steps taken by 
the department. 
• Records regarding number and type of tr ees felled /planted in the process of 
diversion and Afforestation respectively and survival report of plantations.  
• Cases wherein legal status of forest lands were changed. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that record of collection of amounts was provided to audit and 
other information /records were provided to audit in tabular form.  The fact remains that 
Ministry/concerned divisions did not provide the original records as called for by audit for 
verification. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 165 | P a g e  
Photos of some selected field plantations 
Beat Office of forests at Kimin under DFO Banderdewa Plantation at Gogar Village at DFO Likhabali
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact Sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO31 – 684.14 ha32 
As per records of NO – 2,547.16 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 89.49 ha 
As per records of NO – 205.86 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 594.65 ha 
As per records of NO – 2,341.30 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – NA 
On Non forest land – NA 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – NA 
On Non forest land – NA 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – NA 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – NA 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 684.14 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only 13 per cent while as per records of NO the 
figures were 2,547.16 ha and eight per cent . As per records of RO and NO, no non forest 
land was transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF, no 
afforestation was done on non forest land as well as on degraded forest land. 
 
                                                            
31 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
32 Excluding exempted projects 


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
166 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Nature of irregularity Description 
Shortfall in execution 
of CA work  
CA was done only on 6,748 ha land against 19,198 ha forest land diverted 
upto the year 2010-11 which was only 35 percent of total area. Further, 
against CA on 10,500 ha land planned per cent for the years 2010-11 to 2014-
15, CA only on 2,047 ha land i.e. 19.50 only was done. Accepting the facts, 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that shortfall in execution of CA work was due to 
(i) fund constraint (ii) non completion of process for notification of identified 
land (iii) limitation of manpower resources in the field. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
state CAMPA did not prepare its annual account s for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. During 
the test check of records of State CAMPA it  was found that State CAMPA did not maintain 
cash book and subsidiary ledgers properly fo r the funds received from Ad-hoc CAMPA and 
expenditure incurred there from. In the absence of cash book and subsidiary ledgers, the 
receipts and payments of the year 2011-12 could not be verified in audit. No reconciliation 
of CAMPA balances was done with bank st atements, the variations ranged between ` 0.01 
crore and ` 0.55 crore for the period 2010-12. 
Further, as per state CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. Ministry accepted the audit observations(April 2013). 
6.1 Less expenditure on compensatory afforestation in regular budget of State. 
It was seen from detailed appropriation a ccounts for the year 2010-11 & 2011-12 that the 
expenditure against Compensatory Afforestat ion from the regular budget of the State 
Government decreased from ` 4.16 crore in 2010-11 to ` 1.25crore in 2011-12.It indicated 
that the State Government had reduced its share of expenditure on CA. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steer ing Committee was to meet twice in a year. 
During test check of records CAMPA it was found that there was shortfall in the meetings of 
Steering Committee and Executive Committee during the years 2009-10 to 2011-12. 
Steering Committee and Executive Committee did not meet in the year 2009-10 and these 
met only once in place of twice in the yea rs 2010-11 and 2011-12. Th e Governing body met 
twice during 2009-12. 
Accepting the facts Ministry stated (April 2013) that efforts were being made to conduct 
required number of meetings in future.  

Compens
1. Ba
The t o
Assam 
on the
data o f
2009, t
was 2
7
35.28 
geogra
p
forest c
State h
under 
v
hectare
dense f
of ar e
Compar
assessm
cover sh
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
               
33Source:
satory Affor
ackground3
otal geogr a
is 78,43,80
 interpret a
f Novemb e
he forest c
7,67,300 h e
per cent  
phical are a
canopy de n
ad 1,44,400
very dense 
e of area u
forest and 1
ea under 
red with 
ment of 2
howed a ma
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
50,58,300
restation in I
33 
aphical ar e
00 hectare. 
ation of s a
er 2008- J a
over in th e
ectare whic
of the S
a. In ter m
nsity class e
0 hectare o
forest, 11,4
nder mod e
14,82,500 h
open f
the pr e
009, the 
arginal loss 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
0
ndia 
ea of 
Based 
atellite 
anuary 
e State 
h was 
State’s 
ms of 
es, the 
of area 
40,400 
erately 
ectare 
forest. 
evious 
forest 
of 1,900 he
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Augus t
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
1,44,400
11
Assam
ectare in th
re)-2011 
of the Stat
t 2007. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
shed by Fores
1,40,400
14
e 2011 asse
te 
nds remitt e
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
st Survey of In
4,82,500
18,200
R
essment. 
ed by State 
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very dense
Moderately
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest 
eport No. : 2
167 
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
 forest
y dense forest
t
area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
t

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
168 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received 
by  State CAMPA 
from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA34 
2006-07 4.86 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 5.39 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 102.23 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 13.91 12.38 NIL 12.38 
2010-11 18.77 10.45 0.12 22.71 
2011-12 12.66 Nil 11.42 11.29 
TOTAL 157.82 22.83 11.54  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 14 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between2009-12.Of ` 22.83 crore released against APOs, 49 per cent 
remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of ` 26.64 
crore were not remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in State 
Government account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of N P V / C A / P C A  e t c .  i n  A s s a m  t h a t  c a m e  t o  t h e  
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table26 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check 
of records of Sivasagar division revealed  that NPV was not collected from user 
agency (ONGC) at revised rates for diversion of 4.09 ha forest land. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that there wa s no short realisation of NPV as 10 
percent discount was not allowed in this case.  The reply of Ministry was not 
based on facts as 10 per cent discount on inadmissible items was allowed with 
the result NPV was short realised. 
0.04 
2 User agency (M/s NEEPCO Ltd.) unauthor isedly occupied 3,685.60 ha forest land 
in 1976-1977 for construction of Kapili hydroelectric project which was 
regularised by MoEF in 1993. The following irregularities were noted in this case 
• NPV of ` 2.44 crore @ ` 6,625.55 per ha was collected instead of at minimum 
rate of NPV ` 5.80 lakh per ha fixed by the Supreme Court, resulting in short 
 
 
 
211.32 
                                                            
34 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 169 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Description Amount
realization of NPV of ` 211.32 crore and consequent loss of interest of  
` 59.17 crore. 
• CA of ` 7.15 crore was also short realized due to non-consideration of double 
the area of forest diverted to cover CA which also resulted in loss of interest 
of ` 4.79 crore 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that cost of CA and overheads were estimated as per 
the procedure prevailing at that point of time.  The reply of Ministry is not 
tenable as cost of CA and overheads was short realised due to non-consideration 
of double the area of forest diverted as required in FC Act 1980. 
 
 
 
7.15 
3 NPV/CA etc. of ` 2.96 crore was not realized from the user agency (PWD, NEC 
Division) to whom 35.79 ha forest land was diverted for construction of 
Zamuang-Haripgow-Dullavcherra road in 2008. This also resulted in loss of 
interest of ` 0.53 crore.  
Ministry stated (June 2013) that the user agency had not deposited the amount 
of NPV/CA in compliance of stipulated conditions and the proposal had still not 
been finalised.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the Ministry had not 
initiated any action to revoke the in principle approval granted in this case. 
2.96 
4 A bank draft for CA and other charges for ` 1.45 crore was received from user 
agency (NHPC Ltd, Dhemaji) in July 2004 in lieu of diversion of 245 ha forest land 
for lower Subarnasiridam project but the draft was not deposited into the 
account of Ad-hoc CAMPA in time due to which it became time barred and was 
returned to user agency. It was seen that revalidated draft for ` 1.45 crore was 
not received as of December 2012 resultin g in non-realization of CA and other 
charges of ` 1.45 crore and consequent loss of interest thereof of ` 0.51 crore.  
Ministry stated (June 2013) that am ount of CA and other charges of ` 1.45 crore 
with the interest had been realised from user agency and deposited into Ad-hoc 
CAMPA account.  However, relevant details  o f  d e p o s i t s  s t a t e d  t o  h a v e  b e e n  
enclosed with the reply were not furnished.  
1.45 
5 In Dhemaji forest division, NPV of ` 0.36 crore was short realized from a user 
agency to whom 816.3 ha forest land was diverted for two projects in 2004 
resulting in loss of interest of ` 0.12 crore for eight years. No action was taken to 
recover outstanding amount of NPV of ` 0.36 crore and interest of ` 0.12 crore 
from the user agency. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that NPV had been realised in these cases and 
deposited into CAMPA account/state gove rnment account.  However, relevant 
details of deposits stated to have been enclosed with the reply was not 
furnished. 
0.36 
 Total 223.28 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
170 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 35  3.75   12.77 0  13.47 0.46 
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
 2.01   0 0.12  66.62 1.06 
Protected 
Area36 
 1.97   3.94 0  5.56 0 
CAT Plan  0   0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
 1.16   10.97 0  5.59 9.90 
Total 12.38 8.89 Nil  10.45 27.68 0.12 Nil 91.24 11.42 
Funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA for the year 2009-10 without submission of the 
APO. The percentage of expenditure incurred as against the amounts released by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA was zero per cent in 2009-10 and one per cent in 2010-11. No funds were released 
by Ad-hoc CAMPA in 2011-12. Further, the implementing agencies could not expend 
substantial portion of amount released by the State CAMPA in the years 2009-10 and 2010-
11. The levels of expenditure were zero per cent  in 2009-10, below one per cent in 2010-11 
and 13 per cent in 2011-12 of the amounts released. Th ough the percentage of expenditure 
had increased progressively over the last three years, concerns remain on the absorptive 
capacity of the State considering that ` 353.81 crore (including in terest) are accumulated 
with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Affo restation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) 
and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Irregular 
release of 
funds  
 
An amount of ` 0.33 crore was released in July 2010 by state 
CAMPA without ascertaining the availability of 4.5 ha suitable 
land for nursery and as such the entire amount remained 
unutilized in Jorhat & Karimganj forest division.  
0.33 
                                                            
35 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
36 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 171 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
Ministry stated (June 2013) that in Jorhat division, the work of 
establishment of nurseries had been undertaken and in 
Karimganj division, the work would be undertaken soon.  The 
reply of Ministry is not tenable as the work to be taken up in the 
year 2010-11, was yet to be completed. 
2 Non creation 
of distinct 
corpus 
 
No distinct corpus was created out of monies realized from the 
user agencies for undertaking pr otection and conservation of 
forest exclusively in protected areas of the State as required in 
the Supreme Court’s orders and State CAMPA guidelines. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that amount realised from user 
agency had been kept with Chief wild life warden and a separate 
corpus would be formed as soon as the money would be spent 
for wild life area.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as no 
distinct corpus was created for the funds received for protected 
areas as required under the Supreme Court’s orders and State 
CAMPA guidelines. 
 
 Total  0.33 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO37  – 43.88 ha38 
As per records of NO – 2,523.35 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 28.50 ha 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 15.38 ha 
As per records of NO – 2,523.35 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 1,989.06 ha 
On Non forest land – 152.00 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 1,989.06 ha 
On Non forest land –  152.00 ha 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
                                                            
37 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
38 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
172 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes wa s 43.88 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only 65 per cent while as per records of NO the 
figures were 2,523.35 ha and zero per cent, respectively. As per records of RO and NO, no 
non forest land was transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as 
RF/PF.  As per records of NO, afforestatio n was done on 152 ha non forest land and on 
1,989.06 ha degraded forest land. 
5.2 Irregularities in land management  
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Shortfall in 
execution of CA 
work 
 
Against target of 1,389.06 ha degraded fo rest land, funds were released for CA 
on 165.79 ha land only for the year 2010-11. Reasons for short release of funds 
for execution of CA work were not on record. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) th at remaining plantation had 
been undertaken during 2011-12 and was in progress. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
prepared in the common format of accounts pr escribed for Autonomous Bodies. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare its annual accoun ts for the year 2009-10 in the prescribed 
format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. Annual Accounts was 
prepared in prescribed format for the year 2010-11 only. During the test check of records of 
State CAMPA it was found that State CAMPA di d not maintain cash book and subsidiary 
ledgers for the funds received from Ad-hoc CAMPA and expenditure in curred therefrom. In 
the absence of cash book and subsidiary ledg ers, the receipts and payments of the years 
2009-10 to 2011-12 could not be verified in audit. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. Ministry stated  (June 2013) that the accounting procedure 
adopted by state CAMPA had since been formul ated and circulated to all concerned units 
for implementation. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year.  The 
Steering Committee of Assam CAMPA met once during 2009-12 as against six times. The 
Executive Committee met two times during 20 09-12. The Governing body did not meet 
since its establishment in August 2009.Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) that 
the meeting of governing body was being organised shortly.  

Compens
1. Bac
The tot
is 94,1 6
interpre
Novem
forest 
6,84,50
per ce n
area. I
density
hectar
e
forest, 
under 
m
3,33,40
forest. 
assessm
cover sh
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
               
39Source:
satory Affor
kground39 
tal geograph
6,300 hect a
etation of 
ber 2008- J
cover in 
00 hectare 
nt of the St
n terms o
 classes, the
e of area u
3,28,000 
moderately
00 hectare o
Compared 
ment of 2
howed an in
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
87,18,400
restation in I
hical area o
are. Based 
satellite d
January 20
the Sta t
which w a
ate’s geogr
of forest 
e State had
under ver y
hectare o
y dense for e
of area unde
with the p
2009, the 
ncrease of 4
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
23,100
ndia 
of Bihar 
on the 
data of 
09, the 
te was 
as 7.27  
raphical 
canopy 
 23,100 
y dense 
of area 
est and 
er open 
previous 
forest 
4,100 hecta
t (in hectar
ation funds
d in Janua r
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
3,28,000
Bihar 
are in the 20
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
ry 2010. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
shed by Fores
3,33,40
011 assessm
te 
nds remitte
e CAMPA a n
as  detailed
st Survey of In
00
13,400 V
M
O
S
N
R
ment.. 
ed by State
nd expendit
d below. 
ndia. 
Very dense for
Moderately de
Open forest
crub
Non forest are
eport No. : 2
173 
 CAMPA t o
ture incurre
rest
ense forest
a
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
174 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA40 
2006-07 42.23 Nil Nil 
2007-08 0.56 Nil Nil 
2008-09 45.82 Nil Nil 
2009-10 22.20 7.73 Nil 7.73
2010-11 22.80 8.67 5.60 10.80
2011-12 38.73 8.04 NA41 18.84
Total 172.34 24.44 5.60 
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 14 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestatio n funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released be tween 2009 and 2012. Of ` 16.40 crore rele ased between 2009 
and 2011, 66 per cent  remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State 
CAMPA. Funds of ` 1.44 crore were not remitted by  State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMPA and 
were deposited in State Government account. 
Ministry accepted the audit observation (April 2013).  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc in Bihar that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table27 in Chapter 
(` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 Against total demand of NPV/CA etc. of ` 75.83 crore raised during the years 
2007-10, the user agencies42 paid ` 68.57 crore as of December 2012 resulting in 
short realisation of ` 7.26 crore. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the user agencies were being directed for 
depositing the outstanding amount of NPV/CA. 
7.26 
2 In Nawada Forest division, though ‘in principle’ approval to diversion of 330.70 
ha of forest land for construction of Ko derma-Tilaiya Railway line was granted in 
June 2011, the demand for CA of ` 4.10 crore was sent to the Railway authorities 
in October 2012 i.e. after a delay on 16 months and it remained unpaid as of 
January 2013. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that amount of CA was not 
deposited by the user agency despite several reminders. 
4.10 
 Total  11.36 
                                                            
40Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by Ad-
hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
41 Information not provided by State CAMPA 
42National Highways Authority of India, Eastern Railway s, IRCON, CPWD, Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd 
and State agencies 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 175 | P a g e  
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and 
utilisation of the funds released. 
 (` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 43    4.05 3.26 5.33 NA
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
   1.09 0.95 3.25 NA
Protected 
Area44 
   1.00 0.56 0 NA
CAT Plan    0 0 0 NA
Other 
specified 
activities 
   1.03 0.83 0.81 NA
Total 7.73 Nil  Nil 8.67 7.17 5.60 8.04 9.39 NA
From the table, it is evident that the impl ementing agencies could not expend substantial 
portion of amount released by the Ad-hoc CAMP A. The levels of expenditure were zero in 
2009-10, and 64per cent in 2010-11 of the amounts released. The low levels of spending 
could be attributed to delayed release of funds. The funds for 2009-10 were released in 
November 2009 and for 2010-11 in March 2011. In fact, the release for 2009-10 and 2010-
11 was made without the receipt of APO. Further, there was delay of 12 and 15 months in 
preparation of APOs for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12, respectively. Thus, there was 
inadequate planning and identification of key activities to be taken up during the year by the 
State CAMPA, which may also ha ve resulted in under utilization of funds released e.g. State 
CAMPA made provision of ` 0.09 crore for plantation under Added Natural Regeneration on 
forest land at Narayanur and Karmdih without ensuring availability of forestland in the year 
2011-12 resulting in its non utilization. The slow pace of spending the released funds raises 
concerns about the absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 167.20 crore 
(including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only fo r specified forestry related 
activities. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that there was delay in preparation of APOs 
due to collection of records and compilation and finalisation of future plan of action. 
 
 
                                                            
43 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation and Management of forest 
44 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
176 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure 
at State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on purchase 
of vehicles ( `3.38 crore) during 2010-11 and 2011-12, 
construction of residential buildings ( ` 1.13 crore) during 
2011-12. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) th at audit observation is not 
correct as expenditure on purchase of vehicles and 
construction of departmental buildings was allowed in the 
State CAMPA guidelines.  The reply of Ministry is not 
tenable as expenditure on purchase of vehicles and 
construction of buildings was allowed upto the range level 
officials In the instant case such expenditure was incurred 
for officials above the range level. 
4.51 
2 Change of 
plantation site 
without prior 
approval of MoEF 
 
Plantation sites were changed without prior approval of 
MoEF for carrying out bamboo and iron gabion plantation 
in Singhi-Gundi Raod, Ara and Aurangabad-Amba-
Hariharganj road which was in contravention of State 
CAMPA guidelines. 
The Ministry accepted the facts (April 2013). 
0.45 
3 Sub-standard 
plantation 
 
In Jamui division, the survival rate of plantation was only 50 
per cent which was much below the desirable norms of 80 
per cent  in first year. Thus, the expenditure incurred of  
` 0.23 crore on substandard plantation was nugatory to the 
extent of cost of plantation not survived. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that due to 
naxal problems all operations could not be carried out in 
time and excessive bushes covered the new plants which 
resulted in low survival. 
0.23 
 Total   5.19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 177 | P a g e  
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO45 – 3,048.33 ha46 
As per records of NO – 2,286.25 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 2,029.80 ha 
As per records of NO – 63.51 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 1,018.53 ha47 
As per records of NO – 2,222.74 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 2,017.55 ha & 5.5 km 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 3,300 ha48 (during 
2010-12) 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO-Nil 
As per records of NO – 2.51ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil  
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 3,048.33ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was 2,029. 8 ha while as per reco rds of NO the figures 
were 2,286.25 ha and 63.51 ha, re spectively. As per records of  RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of2.51 ha non forest land transferred/ mutated in favour of forest department no 
non forest land was declared as RF/PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation was done on 
non forest land and afforestation was done on 3,300 ha degraded forest land.  
 
 
 
                                                            
45 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
46 Excluding exempted projects 
47 Arrear land received during this period. 
48 for2010-11 to 2011-12 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
178 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Execution of works 
on forest land 
without approval of 
MoEF. 
 
MoEF granted in principle approval fo r diversion of 397.94 ha forest land in 
five forest divisions for non forest purposes subject to deposit of NPV/CA/PCA 
of `30.42 crore in 95 cases of Road Construction Department. Though the 
user agency deposited ` 6.77 crore, the work on forest land was started 
without final approval of MoEF.  
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that in Bihar state, large scale 
developmental works were started from  2006-07 in which road construction, 
strengthening and widening were given top most priority and in 80 of 95 such 
cases of violation granting of post facto approval under process. 
 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare its annual accounts for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the annual accounts for 2010-11 had been prepared in the 
departmental format and the annual account s for the year 2011-12 were being compiled 
and prepared in the prescribed format. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Bihar CAMPA met three times during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met three times durin g 2009-12. The Governing body met once 
only during 2009-12.  

Compens
1. Ba
The tot
is 11 ,
interpre
2008, 
Territor
was 1
geograp
canopy 
hectare
955 h e
dense 
under 
previou
cover sh
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
49Source:
satory Affor
ackground4
tal geograp
,400 hec t
etation of s
the fores t
ry (UT) w a
14.72 per 
phical are a
density c l
e of area u
ectare of a
forest an d
open fore s
us assessm e
howed no c
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
9,6
restation in I
49 
hical area o
tare. Bas e
satellite da t
t cover i n
as 1,678 h
r cent o
a. In ter m
lasses, the 
under very 
area unde
d 588 he c
st. Compar
ent of 20 0
change in th
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
135
68
ndia 
C
of Chandiga
ed on t
ta of Octo b
n the Un i
hectare wh
f the U
ms of for e
UT had 1
dense for e
r moderat
ctare of a r
red with t
09, the for e
he 2011 ass
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Augus t
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
955
Chandigar
arh 
the 
ber 
ion 
ich 
T’s 
est 
135 
est, 
ely 
rea 
the 
est 
essment.. 
re)-2011 
of the UT
t 2009. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
shed by Fores
588
rh 
nds remitt e
e CAMPA a n
as  detailed
st Survey of In
54
V
M
O
S
N
R
ed by State 
nd expendit
d below. 
ndia. 
Very dense for
Moderately de
Open forest
Scrub
Non forest are
eport No. : 2
179 
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
rest
ense forest
ea
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
180 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
UT CAMPA from Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure incurred 
by UT CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with UT 
CAMPA50 
2006-07 1.25 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 0.79 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 Nil 0.18 Nil 0.18 
2010-11 0.26 0.13 0.27 0.04 
2011-12 0.05 Nil 0.03 0.01 
Total 2.35 0.31 0.30  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 13 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by UT CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12.  
3. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
3.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to UT CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 51  0   0 0   0 
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
 0   0 0   0 
Protected 
Area52 
 0   0 0   0 
CAT Plan  0   0 0   0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
 0.18   0.13 0.27   0.03 
Total 0.18 0.18 Nil  0.13 0.13 0.27 Nil Nil  0.03 
 
UT Chandigarh CAMPA did not prepare APO fo r the financial year 2010-11 and APO for the 
financial year 2011-12 was prepared at the fag end of financial year in March 2012.From the 
                                                            
50 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with UT CAMPA out of the funds released by Ad-
hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
51 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
52 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 181 | P a g e  
table, it is evident that  the UT CAMPA did not incu r any expenditure out of ` 0.18crore 
released by Ad-hoc CAMPA based on APO dur ing the year 2009-10. However, it incurred 
expenditure of ` 0.27 crore out of ` 0.31 crore available during the year 2010-11. Further, 
no funds were released to State CAMPA by Ad-hoc CAMPA for the year 2011-12 as APO for 
the year 2011-12 was not approved by Ad-hoc CAMPA. However, ` 6.89 crore (including 
interest) were accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
for the State (31 March 2012) and can be rele ased only for specified forestry related 
activities. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013)  that due to non-receipt of funds against 
APO for 2009-10, APO for 2010-11 was not submitted and APO for 2011-12 had been 
submitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA in March 2012, the funds against which had still not been 
received.  
3.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
Unfruitful 
expenditure  
The forest division incurred ` 27.14 lakh on stone masonry wall for 
chain link fencing during 2010-11 and ` 3.47 lakh for purchase of 
construction materials during 2011-12. It was seen that construction 
work of stone masonry wall was completed and chain link fencing was 
yet to be installed as of December 2012 .  Further, no plantation work 
was done on the site though the cost of plantation/maintenance and 
fixing of chain link fence was included  in the sanctioned APO.  Thus, the 
entire expenditure of `0.31 crore remained unfruitful. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that chain link fence and plantation work 
could not be completed due to non-release of funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
in time.  
0.31 
4. Land Management 
4.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO53 – 6.20 ha54 
As per records of NO – 8.67 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  –6.87 ha 
As per records of NO – 8.14 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO –  (-) 0.67 ha 
As per records of NO – 0.53 ha 
                                                            
53 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
54 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
182 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
N/A- All the forest land diverted/transferred in 
lieu of non-forest areas received from user 
agencies 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – U.T Chandigarh has no 
degraded forest land. 
On Non forest land – 6.80 ha 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land –  Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non fo restry purposes was 6.20ha and the non forest 
land received in lieu thereof was 6.87  ha while  as per records of NO the figures were 8.67 
ha and 8.14 ha, respectively. As per reco rds of RO and NO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest  department and notified as RF/PF. As per 
records of NO, afforestation was not done on non forest land. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that mutation of non-forest land received in lieu of forest land 
diverted was under process and after mutation, this land would be declared as RF. 
4.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Non 
maintenance of 
permanent 
record register 
of forest land 
 
Permanent record register was not maintained in forest division of UT 
Chandigarh.  In the absence of this record it could no t be ascertained 
correctly as to which area/type of fo rest land was diverted/transferred for 
non-forest use and also which non-forest  land was received in lieu of forest 
land for compensatory afforestation.  
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) that permanent record 
register of forest land had since been maintained. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 183 | P a g e  
5. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoE F, the accounts of States/UTs CAMPA were to 
be audited by the Accountant General at such  intervals as may be specified by him. 
However, UT Chandigarh CAMPA did not prep are its annual accounts for the years 2009-10 
to 2011-12 in the prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these accounts 
could not be audited. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013)  that accounts would be maintained for the 
years 2009-10 to 2011-12 as well as in future in the prescribed format. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performance audit of the States/UTs CAMPA. However, 
no such audit was conducted in UT Chandigarh CAMPA. 
6 Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Chandigarh CAMPA met three times during 2009-12 as against six 
times. The Executive Committee met two times during 2009-12.  

Report N
184 | P
1. Bac
The 
Chhatti
Based 
data of 
forest c
hectare
State’s 
forest 
c
had 4, 1
dense f
under 
16,60,0
forest. 
assess
m
showed
Forest c
2. Com
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
               
55Source:
No. : 21 of 20
age  
kground55 
total ge o
sgarh is 
on the in t
f October 2 0
cover in t h
e which wa
geographi
canopy de n
16,300 hec t
forest, 34, 9
moderate
000 hectar e
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a loss of 4
cover – Typ
mpensatory
CAMPA wa s
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
79,39,800
013 
ographical 
1,35,19,10
terpretation
008 - Janu a
he State w a
s 41.18 per
cal area. 
nsity class e
tare of are a
91,100 he c
ly dense 
e of area 
d with t h
009, the f
00 hectare 
pes of forest
y Afforestat
s constitut e
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
0
C
area 
00 hecta r
n of satelli
ary 2009, t h
as 55,67,4 0
r cen t of t h
In terms 
es, the Sta
a under ve
ctare of ar e
forest a n
under op e
he previo u
forest cov
in the 2011
t (in hectar
tion Funds o
ed in July 
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
4,16,300
hhattisga
of 
re. 
te 
he 
00 
he 
of 
te 
ry 
ea 
nd 
en 
us 
er 
1 assessmen
re)-2011 
of the State
2009. Fun d
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
shed by Fores
34,91,10
16,60
11,
Com
rh 
nt. 
e 
ds remitte d
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
st Survey of In
00
,000
,900
pensatory A
d by State 
nd expendit
 below: 
ndia. 
Very dense
Moderate
Open fore
Scrub
Non forest
Afforestation
CAMPA to 
ture incurre
e forest
ly dense fores
st
t area
n in India 
 
Ad-hoc 
ed there 
st

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 185 | P a g e  
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received 
by State CAMPA 
from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA56 
2006-07 45.82 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 42.87 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 127.03 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 450.59 123.21 3.94 119.27 
2010-11 68.66 135.20 20.18 234.29 
2011-12 379.84 99.54 93.92 239.91 
Total 1,114.81 357.95 118.04  
As can be seen from the table, in complianc e with the orders of the Supreme Court, 32 
percent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 357.95 crore released against APOs, 67 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of  
` 0.17 crore were not remitted by State CAMP A to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in 
State Government account.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in Chhattisgarh that came to 
the notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table24, 26 and 
27 in Chapter 3. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1. There were 17 cases 57 involving forest land of 1,160.42 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 58 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
67.3059 
2 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check of 
records of CCF (Land Management ) revealed that in 23 cases 60 NPV was not 
collected at revised rates. The Ministry accepted the facts (April 2013). 
34.06 
                                                            
56 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unu tilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
57 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
58 State Government departments, Bhilai Steel Plant, M/s OCL India Ltd., M/s SECL (Coal Mining), M/s Nagpur 
Alloys Casting Ltd., etc. 
59Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in these cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(1160.423 X 5.80) 
60M/s Savitri Power Project Pvt. Ltd., M/s CG Energy Co nsortium Pvt. Ltd., M/s Godavari Power & Steel Ltd., 
M/s SECL, M/s Prakash Industries, Powergrid Corporation,  M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd., Bhilai Steel Plant, 
NTPC, state agencies etc. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
186 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
3. There was under assessment of CA in 46 cases due to non-inclusion of 10 per cent 
annual increase in rates of CA on account of inflation in wages. Ministry stated 
(April 2013) that recovery had been made from user agencies as per instructions 
issued by State Government in March 2002.  The reply is not tenable as the rates of 
CA prescribed for the year 2001-02 were applied for the year 2002-03.  This led to 
short realisation of cost of CA. 
5.15 
4. Demand for payment of NPV/CA/PCA raised against Prakash Industries Limited in 
2009 remained unrecovered (November 2012).Ministry stated (April 2013) that the 
matter of recovery of NPV/CA/PCA from user agency was sub-judice and action for 
the recovery of NPV/CA/PCA would be taken after decision of the court. 
3.43 
5. Against diversion of 61.64 ha of forest land for construction of Pasid reservoir the 
user agency transferred 4.13 ha of revenue land and 57.07 ha of orange land 61. 
Despite orders of the Regional CCF, Bhopal  that cost of CA on double degraded 
forest land (i.e. 114.14 ha) amounting to `1.35 crore should be deposited, it was 
yet to be deposited (December 2012).The Ministry accepted the facts(April 2013). 
1.35 
 Total 111.29 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 62  64.83 3.79  39.90 10.84  88.04 83.97 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
 18.14 NIL  16.90 8.87  11.00 9.47 
Protected 
Area63 
 0 0  0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan  0 0  0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
 15.00 0.15  10.00 0.47  0.50 0.48 
Total 123.21 97.97 3.94 135.20 66.80 20.18 99.54 99.54 93.92 
 
                                                            
61Orange land is a forest land that has not been demarcated and its notification as forest land has not been 
made. 
62 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
63 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 187 | P a g e  
From the table, it is evident that the St ate CAMPA did not release the entire amount 
received from Ad-hoc CAMPA against APOs to the implementing agencies. The amount 
released was 80  per cent  in 2009-10, 49  per cent  in 2010-11 and 100  per cent  in 2011-12. 
The percentage of expenditure incurred as ag ainst the amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
was three per cent  in 2009-10, 15 per cent in 2010-11 and 94 per cent in 2011-12. Further, 
the implementing agencies coul d not expend substantial portion of amount released by the 
State CAMPA in the years 2009-10 and 2010-11. The levels of expenditure were four per 
cent in 2009-10 and 31 per cent in 2010-11 of the amounts released. Though the percentage 
of expenditure had increased progressively over  the last three years, concerns remain on 
the absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 2,239.09 crore (including interest) 
are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Co mpensatory Afforestation Fund for the State 
(31 March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1. Expenditure not 
authorised by State 
CAMPA guidelines 
and NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure 
at State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on purchase 
of vehicles viz. Tata Sa fari, Toyota Etios etc. ( ` 1.30 crore), 
construction of DFO office, residence etc.  ( ` 5.82 crore of 
that ` 2.03 crore already spent) and eco-tourism ( `4.86 
crore of that ` 0.71 crore already spen t).Ministry stated 
(April 2013) that there was no instruction in the guidelines 
regarding restriction of purchase of vehicles for officers 
above range level.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as it 
was clearly mentioned in the State CAMPA guidelines that 
the funds would be used to strengthen infrastructure upto 
the range level only. 
11.98 
2. Compensatory 
Afforestation done in 
dense forest 
In Dharamjaigarh, East Raipur and East Surguja divisions, CA 
was undertaken in dense forests kept in Selection cum 
Improvement working circle 64 instead of degraded forests. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that CA was not done in the 
dense forest.  The reply of Ministry was not based on facts as 
the audit had given particular instances where CA was done 
on dense forest in the above divisions. 
1.40 
3. Doubtful 
expenditure on 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
In East Surguja division plan tation was undertaken on 52.43 
ha of blank/under stock area during 2006-08 and again in 
2010-11 on 50 ha in the same area under CAMPA, whereas 
no area was available for further plantation raising doubts 
0.18 
                                                            
64Dense forests of higher quality, middle and mature age are kept in selection cum improvement working 
circles where activities like assisted natural regeneration and main felling are taken up. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
188 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
 about genuineness of the plantation. Ministry stated (April 
2013) that matter would be ex amined and intimated to 
audit. 
4 Plantation on 
unsuitable site 
In Bilaigarh bamboo plantation was done on a site 
dominated by red soil and boulders/rocks. Joint physical 
verification of the site by audit and department officials 
(June 2012) revealed that most of the plants had either died 
or were dying. As such, the site selected for bamboo 
plantation was not appropriate for the plantation. Ministry 
stated (April 2013) that bamboo plants had lost the leaves 
due to excessive heat in summer season.  The reply Ministry 
is not tenable as physical verification of site revealed that 
terrain was rocky and full of boulders and the plantation was 
unsuccessful. 
0.29 
 Total  13.85 
 
Photos of some selected plantations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 189 | P a g e  
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO65 - 20,456.19 ha66 
As per records of NO – 8,389.40 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – 323.08 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO - 20,456.19 ha 
As per records of NO – 8,066.31 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
No, despite Revenue department indicating that 
5.78 lakh ha revenue land being available 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 5,143.14 ha 
On Non forest land – 134.82 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 3,668.73 ha 
On Non forest land – 33.18 ha 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 20,456.19ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu there of was zero  per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 8,389.40 ha and four  per cent , respectively. As per records of RO and NO, no non 
forest land was transferred /mutated in favour  of the forest department and notified as 
RF/PF. As per records of NO, afforestation was done on 33.18 ha non forest land and 
afforestation done on degraded forest land was 71 per cent of the area to be afforested. 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1. Use of forest 
land without 
payment of 
NPV/CA/PCA 
In Janjgir-Champa, 44 ha of revenue land were transferred to Madhya 
Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation which in turn leased the 
land (1990) to Prakash Industries Li mited (user agency). The forest 
department objected as this was forest land and consequently, the 
allotment was cancelled in 1991. Based on an application made by the user 
agency, MoEF accorded an ‘in princi ple’ approval in 1993 for the same 
land. The demand for payment of NPV/CA/PCA of ` 3.43 crore was raised 
as late as 2009, after a gap of 16 year s but it remained unpaid (November 
                                                            
65 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
66 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
190 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
2012). In the meantime, the user agency continued to use the forest land. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that th e matter of recovery of NPV/CA/PCA 
from user agency was sub-judice and action for the recovery of 
NPV/CA/PCA would be taken after decision of the court. 
2. Use of forest 
land for non-
forestry 
purpose 
without MoEF 
approval 
In Bastar 77.50 ha of reserve forest land was used to develop Wildlife 
Conservation and Education Centre (L amni Park) to encourage tourism, 
which was a non-forest activity without the approval of MoEF. Ministry 
stated (April 2013) that developm ent of Wildlife Conservation and 
Education Centre was under the provis ion of FC Act 1980.  The reply of 
Ministry is not tenable as the work of development of said centre was 
undertaken without approval of MoEF for diversion of forest land. 
 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
The Steering Committee of State CAMPA, in its meeting held on 3 May 2010 decided that 
the State CAMPA shall adopt the accounting pr ocedures applicable to the State Forest 
Department. The compiled accounts of State CAMPA were to be submitted to CCF (Finance/ 
Budget) along with the accounts of Forest Department and a copy forwarded to State 
CAMPA. At State CAMPA headquarters, fund management, auditing etc. was to be done by 
the Chartered Accountants appointed by the St ate CAMPA. The prepared accounts were to 
be submitted to the Steering Committee durin g 31 March to 30 June each year. However, 
the accounts for the years 2009- 10 to 2011-12 were still to be prepared in the prescribed 
format and submitted for audit as per State CAMPA Guidelines(December 2012).  
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Chhattisgarh CAMPA met four times during 2009- 12 as against six 
times. The Executive Committee met seven times during 2009-12.   

Compens
1. Bac
The to
1,48,30
interpre
Novem
cover i
which w
geograp
canopy 
hectare
4,948 h
dense f
under 
previo
u
cover sh
Forest c
2. Com
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
 
 
 
 
               
67Source:
satory Affor
kground67 
tal geogra
00 hecta r
etation o
ber - Dec e
in the Sta
was 11.88 
phical are a
density cl a
e of area u
hectare of 
forest and 
open fore s
us assessm e
howed a los
cover – Typ
mpensatory
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
restation in I
phical are a
re. Base d
of satellit e
ember 20 0
te was 1 7
per cent  o
a. In ter m
asses, the S
under very 
area und e
11,996 he
st. Compa r
ent of 20 0
ss of 38 hec
pes of forest
y Afforestat
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
676
1,30,610
ndia 
a of Delhi 
d on t
e data 
08, the for e
7,620 hect a
of the Sta t
ms of for e
State had 6
dense for e
er moderat
ctare of a r
red with t
09, the for e
ctare in the 
t (in hectar
tion Fund o
d in Octob e
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
4,948
Delhi 
is 
the 
of 
est 
are 
te’s 
est 
676 
est, 
ely 
rea 
the 
est 
2011 asses
re)-2011 
f the State 
er 2009. Fu
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
shed by Fores
11,996 70
ssment. 
 
nds remitte
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
st Survey of In
R
ed by State
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very Den
Moderat
Open Fo
Scrub
Non fore
eport No. : 2
191 
e CAMPA t o
ture incurre
nse Forest
tely Dense Fo
rest
est area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
rest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
192 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount transferred 
to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA68 
2006-07 Nil Nil Nil  
2007-08 5.17 Nil Nil  
2008-09 12.81 Nil Nil  
2009-10 Nil 1.85 Nil 1.85 
2010-11 3.66 1.40 0.01 3.24 
2011-12 13.12 Nil 1.19 2.05 
Total 34.76 3.25 1.20  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, nine per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009 and 2012. Of ` 3.25 crore released, 63 per cent  
remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc in Delhi that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table26 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check 
revealed that in 4 cases69 NPV was not collected at revised rates. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that NPV at the rate of ` 9.20 lakh per ha had been 
justified in above four cases.  The reply is not tenable as the NPV was not 
recovered as per the rates revised by the Supreme Court in March 2008. 
0.25 
2 DMRC occupied the following areas of fo rest land without proper authorization 
and did not pay the NPV/CA 
i. 1.35 ha excess forest land for Airport Link Express Project in 2008. 
ii. 0.38 ha forest land for construction of diaphragm wall of underground 
railway line in November, 2002. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the diversion of area of4.37 ha was approved 
on payment of NPV/CA etc.  The reply wa s silent regarding recovery of NPV/CA 
for unauthorised occupation of 1.35 ha excess area for Airport Link Express 
Project and0.38 ha area for construction of diaphragm wall of underground 
railway line. 
 
 
0.56 
0.12 
                                                            
68 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds 
released by Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
69 Delhi Tourism & Transport Development Corporation,  National Highways Authority of India, Delhi 
Development Authority and Central Public Works Department.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 193 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Description Amount
3 Two cases (Delhi PWD and New Delhi Municipal Corporation) were treated as 
central government projects, and Compensatory afforestation was under 
assessed /recovered. Ministry stated (A pril 2013) that in all projects were 
examined by Regional Office, MoEF, at Chandigarh and CA was realised.   
The Ministry’s reply was general in nature and was silent regarding non-
recovery of CA of ` 0.98 crore in two cases due to non-furnishing of certificate 
from Chief Secretary to the effect that non-forest was not available in the state. 
0.98 
 Total 1.91 
 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV70         0.16 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
        1.01 
Protected 
Area71 
        0  
CAT Plan         0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
     0.01   0.02 
Total 1.85 NA Nil 1.40 NA 0.01 Nil NA 1.19 
No APO was prepared and submitted for th e years 2009-10 and 2010-11. APO for the year 
2011-12 was approved in July 2011, no funds we re released by Ad-hoc CAMPA for 2011-12. 
Expenditure was incurred in 2010-11 and 2011-12 wi thout approval of APO. From the table, 
it is evident that the percentage of expendi ture incurred against the amounts released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA was zero per cent in 2009-10 and less than one per cent in 2010-11. In 2011-
12, expenditure was incurred without any spec ific release for that year. Though the 
expenditure had increased progressively over th e last three years, conc erns remain on the 
absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 37.20 crore (including interest) are 
                                                            
70 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forests. 
71 Protected Area Fund is spent of wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
194 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compen satory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 
March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
1 Expenditure not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating 
infrastructure at State Forest headquarters and 
ecotourism. However test check revealed that expenditure 
was incurred on purchase of vehicles - Maruti gypsy  
(` 0.05 crore), six mobile phones (` 0.29 lakh) and a laptop 
(` 0.01 crore). 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that Steering Committee had 
accorded ex-post facto approval for expenditure incurred 
on these items.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the 
expenditure on these items was not authorised by State 
CAMPA guidelines and NCAC. 
0.06 
2 Expenditure 
without approval 
of the APO 
The expenditure incurred by State CAMPA was 
unauthorised as APO for the year 2010-11 was not 
prepared and APO for 2011-12 though approved by the 
Steering Committee was not approved by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) th at ex-post facto approval of 
steering committee had been obtained for the said 
expenditure.  The reply is not tenable as the expenditure 
was incurred without approval of APO by MoEF/Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 
1.20 
 Total  1.26 
5. Land Management  
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO72– 22.15 ha73 
As per records of NO – 40.29 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 22.15 ha 
As per records of NO – 40.29 ha 
                                                            
72 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
73 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 195 | P a g e  
Particulars (2006-12) 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
In two of 10 cases, (2.22 ha),Chief Secretary’s 
Certificate was not obtained. 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 100.00 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 100.00 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes wa s 22.15 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was zero per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 40.29 ha and zero per cent, respectively. As per records of RO and NO, no non forest 
land was transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF. As 
per records of NO, no afforestation was done on non forest land and afforestation done on 
degraded forest land was 100 per cent. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper ac counts, these could not be audited. Further, 
as per State CAMPA guidelines, the State Go vernment and the MoEF had the powers to 
conduct special audit or performance audit of the state CAMPA. However, no such audit 
was conducted. Ministry replied that the st atuary audit of field accounts had been 
completed till 31 March 2012. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year.  The 
Steering Committee of Delhi CAMPA met twice during 2009-12 as against six times. The 
Executive Committee met thrice during 2009-12. Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 
2013) that henceforth meetings of the committees  would be organised as per provisions of 
guidelines. 
  

Report N
196 | P
1. Ba
The tot
hectare
satellite
cover in
was 59.
area. I
classes,
under v
area u
1,09,10
Compar
2009, t
700 he
c
Forest c
2. Com
State C
CAMP
A
against 
 
               
74Source:
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground7
al geograph
e. Based 
e data of 
n the State 
.94 per cent
In terms 
, the State 
very dens e
under mod
00 hectare 
red with t h
he forest c o
ctare in the 
cover – Typ
mpensatory
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
0
1,48,30
013 
74 
hical area o
on the i n
February 2
was 2,21,90
t of the Stat
of forest 
had 54,300
e forest, 5 8
erately d e
of area un
he previou
over showe
2011 asses
pes of forest
y Afforestat
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
0
f Goa is 3,7
nterpretatio
2009, the 
00 hectare 
te’s geogra
canopy d
0 hectare o
8,500 hect a
ense fores t
der open f
s assessm e
ed an incre a
ssment.. 
t (in hectar
tion Fund o
d in Janua r
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
54
1,0
Goa 
70,200 
on of 
forest 
which 
phical 
ensity 
f area 
are of 
t and 
forest. 
ent of 
ase of 
re)-2011 
f the State
ry 2010. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
shed by Fores
4,300
09,100
Com
nds remitte
e CAMPA a n
as  detailed
st Survey of In
58,500
pensatory A
ed by State
nd expendit
d below. 
ndia. 
Very dense
Moderatel
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest
Afforestation
 CAMPA t o
ture incurre
e forest
ly dense fores
st
t area
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
 
st

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 197 | P a g e  
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA75 
2006-07 28.21 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 68.93 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 20.40 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 23.25 12.12 Nil 12.12 
2010-11 4.40 10.25 4.91 17.46 
2011-12 1.78 Nil 5.98 11.48 
Total 146.97 22.37 10.89  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 15 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 22.37 crore released against APOs, 51 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Goa that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table26 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check 
revealed that in 5 cases76 NPV was not collected at revised rates. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that final action taken in this regard would be 
intimated to audit.  
13.67 
2 NPV of ` 0.73 crore was short collected from lease holder M/s Chandrakant F. 
Naik/ Sh. Rajesh P. Timblo as the NPV was collected for 22.25 ha instead of 38.60 
ha land actually diverted. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that NPV at the rates prevailing at the time had been 
recovered for the total forest area of 38.60 ha in the lease.  The reply of Ministry 
was not supported with the relevant documents. 
0.73 
                                                            
75 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unu tilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
76M/s Sociedade TimbloImpros Ltd.,  M/s G.N. Agarwal at  Bimbol Iron Ore Mine, M/s Emco Goa Pvt. Ltd, M/s 
Dempo & Co. Pvt. Ltd , M/s Badruddin H. Mavani & M/s Sova.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
198 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
3 As per the order of the Supreme Court of 4 January 2008, if the mine owner was 
unable to provide degraded forest land for carrying out compensatory 
afforestation in lieu of fresh broken up area sanctioned for mining lease then the 
mine owner had to pay an amount equal to twice the forest area included in the 
new mining lease to Government at the rate of ` 92,368 per ha. However, in one 
case, CA of ` 0.16 crore 77  was not recovered from the mining lease holder who 
was granted fresh broken up area of 8.44 ha in October 2010 which also resulted 
in loss of interest of ` 0.01 crore. 
Ministry endorsed (April 2013) the reply of State CAMPA wherein it was stated 
that no response was received from the Ministry despite repeated reminders for 
clarification sought for the recovery of CA of ` 0.16 crore from user agency. 
0.16 
 Total  14.56 
 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 78     1.87 0.86  1.28 0.77 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    1.42 0.85  1.50 1.46 
Protected 
Area79 
    0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan     0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0.81 3.20  3.05 3.75 
Total 12.12 Nil  Nil  10.25 4.10 4.91 Nil  5.83 5.98 
Funds for the year 2009-10 were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without APO. APO for the year 
2011-12 was approved by Steering Committee in August 2011 and no funds were released 
by Ad-hoc CAMPA for 2011-12.  
From the table it is evident that the Stat e CAMPA did not release the entire amount 
received from Ad-hoc CAMPA against APOs to the implementing agencies. The amount 
                                                            
77(8.44x2x ` 92,368) 
78 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
79 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 199 | P a g e  
released by State CAMPA to its various units was nil in 2009-10, 40 per cent in 2010-11. The 
levels of expenditure were zero per cent  in 2009-10 and 48 per cent  in 2010-11 of the 
amounts released. Though the percentage of expenditure had increase d progressively over 
the last three years, concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of the State considering 
that ` 171.71 crore (including interest) are a ccumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and ca n be released only 
for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure 
not authorised 
by State 
CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test check 
revealed that expenditure was incurred on purchase of 
executive table, vehicles, computers/laptops etc.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) th at vehicles, computers, small 
furniture, etc. were purchased for the maintenance of records 
and protection of forests and these items were purchased by 
head office and distributed to sub-ordinate offices.  The reply 
of Ministry is not tenable as purchases of these items were not 
covered under State CAMPA guidelines. 
0.75 
2 Deficiencies in 
plantations  
 
Test check of records of 19 sites of plantations under State 
CAMPA revealed the following deficiencies in plantations.  
• Plantations were carried out in area with existing 
plantation and some in areas surrounded with dense 
vegetation. The area of plantations seemed to already 
have a density of 0.40 and above. 
• Plantation register did not contain the reasons for 
selecting the area for plantation. 
• Density of the area of plantation had not been 
mentioned in the plantation register against any of the 
plantation.  
• The plantations had been carried out in places with 
already existing Acacia and Eucalyptus plantation.  
• The plantations were to be carried out in degraded 
forest land and not in areas with high density of forest 
with fully grown matured trees. However, in none of the 
area selected this criterion was followed. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that  CA plantations were carried 
out on degraded forest land to improve the tree cover so as 
to compensate for the loss of forest cover over the area 
diverted.  However, in future directions would be issued to 
the concerned divisions to record the plantation density at 
the time of raising the plantation. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
200 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 
Photos of some selected plantations 
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars(2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO80– 1,513.09 ha81 
As per records of NO – 728.94  ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 60.85 ha 
As per records of NO – 28.50 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 1,452.24 ha 
As per records of NO – 700.44 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 350.67 ha 
On Non forest land – 24.10 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 1,007.98 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 24.10 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 4.40 ha 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land dive rted for non forestry purpose s was 1,513.09 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was four per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 728.94 ha and four per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of 24.10 ha non forest land transferred/ mutated in favour of forest department 
only 4.40 ha non forest land was declared as RF /PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation 
was done on non forest land and afforestatio n was done on 1,007.98 ha degraded forest 
land.  
                                                            
80 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
81 Excluding exempted projects 


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 201 | P a g e  
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare its annual accounts for the yea r 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper a ccounts, these could not be audited. The State 
CAMPA did not maintain cash book and subsidia ry ledgers for the funds received from Ad-
hoc CAMPA and expenditure incurred therefrom. In the absence of cash book and subsidiary 
ledgers, the receipts and payments of the yea rs 2009-10 to 2011-12 could not be verified in 
audit.  There was a difference of ` 1.33 crore between the amount deposited by State 
CAMPA and the amount acknowledged by Ad -hoc CAMPA which remained un-reconciled 
(December 2012). UCs for a sum of ` 0.81 crore released during 2010-11 and ` 0.52 crore 
released during 2011-12 to implementing divisions were not received in State CAMPA. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. Ministry accepted the audit observations (April 2013). 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Goa CAMPA met two times during 2009-12 as against six times. The 
Executive committee met three times during 2009-12. The Governing body did not meet in 
the year 2010-11. Ministry stated (April 2013) that it was not possible to convene the 
minimum number of meetings of various committees because of sessions of State 
Legislative Assembly, election to State Legisl ative Assembly and other local bodies.  The 
reply of Ministry is not tenable as minimum two meetings of Steering Committee in a year 
were prescribed. 
  

Report N
202 | P
1. Bac
The to t
1,96,02
interpre
-Novem
State w
7.46 pe
area. I n
classes,
area u n
hectare
forest a
open fo
assessm
showed
2011 as
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
               
82Source:
1,79,9
No. : 21 of 20
age  
kground82 
tal geograp
2,200 hec t
etation of s
mber 2008, 
was 14,61, 9
er cen t of t
n terms of 
, the State 
nder very 
e o f  a r e a  un
and 9,01,20
orest. Comp
ment of 2 0
d a decreas
ssessment.. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
92,400
013 
hical area o
tare. Bas e
satellite dat
the forest 
900 hectar e
he State’s g
forest ca n
had 37,60 0
dense for e
nder mode
0 hectare o
pared with 
009, the f
e of 100 h e
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
of Gujarat 
ed on t h
a of Octobe
cover in t h
e which w a
geographic
nopy densi t
0 hectare o
est, 5,23,1 0
rately den s
of area unde
the previou
forest cov e
ectare in t h
t (in hectar
ation funds
d in Augus t
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
37,600
Gujarat
is 
he 
er 
he 
as 
al 
ty 
of 
00 
se 
er 
us 
er 
he 
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
t 2009. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12were a
shed by Fores
5,23,1
9,01,20
1,47,
Com
te  
nds remitt e
e CAMPA a n
as detailed 
st Survey of In
100
00
,900
V
M
O
S
N
pensatory A
ed by State 
nd expendit
below. 
ndia. 
Very dense for
Moderately de
Open forest
Scrub
Non forest are
Afforestation
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
rest
ense forest
ea
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 203 | P a g e  
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure incurred 
by State CAMPA 
Accumulation of funds 
with State CAMPA83 
2006-07 64.74 Nil Nil  
2007-08 55.84 Nil Nil  
2008-09 81.96 Nil Nil  
2009-10 170.44 24.96 8.57 16.39 
2010-11 112.11 29.16 32.77 12.78 
2011-12 98.40 26.30 28.77 10.31 
Total 583.49 80.42 70.11  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 14 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 80.42 crore released against APOs, 13 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in Gujarat that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of th ese cases is also given in table24, 26and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 There were 18 cases 84 involving forest land of 275.94 hectare in which NPV was 
not collected from the user agencies 85 to whom in principle approval was 
granted before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
16.0086 
2 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check 
of records of three forest divisions 87  revealed that NPV was not collected from 
user agency (NHAI) at revised rates. Ministry stated (April 2013) that user agency 
had been requested to deposit outstanding amount of NPV. 
89.47 
3 MoEF accorded in principle approval for diversion of 1,840 ha and 168.42 ha 
reserve forest land in May and June 2004, respectively, in favour of MPSEZL 
(earlier known as M/s Adani Chemicals Ltd) subject to deposit of NPV. However 
NPV of ` 15.16 crore for 168.41 ha forest la nd was assessed and recovered in 
October 2007 at a rate of `9 lakh per ha, thereafter it was wrongly revised and 
66.86 
                                                            
83Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by Ad-
hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
84 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
85 M/s ESSAR Steel Co., Bharat Oman Refineries etc. 
86Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in these cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(275.94 x 5.8) 
87Patan, Palanpur and Rajkot 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
204 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
reassessed at ` 4.38 lakh per ha in March 2009, which was not permissible under 
the rules and excess amount of ` 7.78 crore was adjusted against the NPV 
amount recovered of diversion of 1,840 ha land. 
Similarly, NPV for diversion of 1,840 ha forest land was assessed (March 2009) 
and recovered in July 2009 at a rate of ` 4.38 lakh per ha considering thorny 
forest though it was littoral and swamp fo rest which required to be assessed at  
` 7.30 lakh per ha. This resulted in short assessed and recovery of `53.73 crore. 
Thus, total short recovery of NPV worked out to `61.51 crore ( ` 7.78 crore +  
` 53.73 crore). 
Audit also noticed that MPSEZL had not paid ` 5.35 crore recoverable on account 
of difference in cost of fire wood in 168.41 ha forest land. The MPSEZL was also 
to furnish bank guarantee of `7.73 crore and ` 19 lakh on account of fencing and 
protection works as required in State Government’s order of 17 November 2009. 
However, no bank guarantee was given by MPSEZL as of December 2012.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that dive rted forest land was under Eco-class-IV, 
Tropica and Thorn forest and not under the category of Eco-class-II in Littoral and 
Swamp forest and therefore the NPV was charged from user agencies at the rate 
of `4.38 lakh per ha for Eco-class-IV.  The reply is not tenable as the area 
diverted under these projects was under Eco-class II Littoral and Swamp forest 
and the NPV was to be charged from user agencies at the rates revised by the 
Supreme Court.  As regards recovery of `5.35 crore being difference in cost of 
firewood from user agency, Ministry stat ed that the user agency had been asked 
to deposit the money. 
4 In Bhuj forest division (East), additional CA of `2.43 crore was credited by NHAI 
into account of Dy. CF Bhuj (East) operated in Indian Bank at Bhuj on 9 
September 2011 for diversion 171 ha forest land for widening of Gandhidam 
Kandla National Highway. Instead of remitting the amount to State CAMPA for 
onward transmission to Ad-hoc CAMPA, it was utilised by the DFO directly in 
contravention of the Supreme Court’s directions. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the amount of ` 2.43 crore was deposited in the 
account of Deputy Conservator of Forest, Kach chh East division in Indian bank as  
the same was not pertaining to NPV or CA  and was utilised on the work to avoid 
delay in implementation of the scheme.  The reply is not tenable as the amount 
of ` 2.43 crore was utilised unauthorisedly and the same was to be remitted to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA as per State CAMPA guidelines. 
2.43 
5 In Valsad (South) forest division, NPV of ` 1.26 crore was not recovered from 
Dakshin Gujarat Vij Company Limited, (SGVCL), Valsad to whom in principle 
(stage I) approval was granted by MoEF  for diversion of 14 ha forest land in 
January 2003. Despite periodical reminders by the DyCF, Valsad (South), DGVCL 
had not paid NPV till October 2012. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the matter of recovery of NPV was being 
pursued vigorously. 
1.26 
 
 Total  176.02 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 205 | P a g e  
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 88  8.31 2.92  14.90 13.00  18.40 12.24 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
 15.60 5.65  15.60 19.77  7.67 16.53 
Protected 
Area89 
 0 0  0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan  0 0  0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
 0 0  0 0  0 0 
Total 24.96 23.91 8.57 29.16 30.50 32.77 26.30 26.07 28.77 
 
From the table it is evident that the percen tage of expenditure incurred as against the 
amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA was 34 per cent in 2009-10. Though the percentage of 
expenditure has increased progressively over the last three years, concerns remain on the 
absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 691.44 crore (including interest) are 
accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compen satory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 
March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
(` in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
1 Plantation of 
clone 
eucalyptus in 
contravention 
of  the Supreme 
Court orders 
As per the Supreme Court’s orders of 30 January 2002 and 
State CAMPA guidelines, the plantation of clone eucalyptus 
was not to be taken up which was also objectionable as per 
Bio-diversity Act. In Nadiad and Anand forest divisions, work 
of plantation of clone eucalyptus was done in 95 ha and 60 ha 
in 2011-12 at an expenditure of ` 2.30 crore (with the 
approval of the Steering Committee despite the Additional 
PCCF objecting to it). Subsequently, clone Eucalyptus 
Plantation was also done in another 50 ha in 2011-12 and 
2012-13 at `0.80 crore from the savings of the earlier year, in 
anticipation of approval of Steering Committee. 
3.10 
                                                            
88 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 
89 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
206 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
2 Wasteful 
expenditure on 
CA works 
In Bhuj forest division, though the proposal for diversion of 
forest land was under consideration, the steering committee 
of Gujarat State CAMPA, approved compensatory 
afforestation in 161.27 ha, to be taken up during 2009-10 to 
2011-12 which included CA in 88.27 ha on Bhuj-Bhachau road 
being widened. An expenditure of `0.60 crore had been 
incurred on CA without final approval of MoEF for diversion 
of forest land.  Since the widening work was in progress in 
the road width, taking up CA work on same area would result 
into wasteful expenditure of ` 0.60 crore as planted trees 
would be removed from the land width under consideration 
for diversion. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that henceforth CA was avoided 
on the road side and the same was being taken up in the 
block forest areas. 
0.60 
 Total  3.70 
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted As per records of RO90 – 1,767.37 ha91 
As per records of NO – 5,795.82 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – 591.65 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 1,767.37 ha 
As per records of NO – 5,204.17 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of non 
forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 5,800.24 ha 
On Non forest land – 2,737.39 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 591.65 ha 
Non forest land received notified as reserved/protected 
forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 5.43 ha 
                                                            
90 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
91 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 207 | P a g e  
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 1,767.37ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only zero per cent while as per records of NO the 
figures were 5,795.82 ha and ten per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest 
land was transferred /mutated in favour of th e forest department and notified as RF/PF 
while as per NO out of591.65 ha non forest land was transferred/ mu tated in favour of 
forest department only5.43  ha non forest land was declared as RF/PF. As per records of NO, 
no afforestation was done on non forest land and degraded forest land. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper  accounts, correctness of its income and 
expenditure for the year 2009-10 to  2011-12 could not be verified  and ascertained in audit. 
State CAMPA did not maintain cash book and s ubsidiary ledgers for the funds received from 
Ad-hoc, in the absence of which the receipts and payments of the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 
could not be verified in audit. In Bhavnagar fore st division it was found that an amount of  
` 0.23 crore was lying unspent with the exec utive engineer, Panchayat R & B Division, 
Bhavnagar (December 2012) for construction of road, no action was taken to recover the 
amount. In Valsad (north) forest division th e RFO failed to produce vouchers for forest 
advance of ` 0.41 crore relating to plantations for the year 2010-11. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the annual ac counts had now been prepared and would be 
submitted to executive committee and steering committee for approval and the cash book 
for 2011-12 would be prepared shortly.  As regards non-submissi on of vouchers of ` 0.41 
crore, it was stated that the said vouchers had been located and kept in division office. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Gujarat CAMPA met two ti mes during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met four times during 2009-12.  
  

Report N
208 | P
1. Ba
The tot
44,21,2
interpre
Octobe
cover i n
which w
geograp
canopy 
2,700 h
forest, 
moder
a
hectare
Compar
of 2009
of 1,400
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
92Source:
42,45,40
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground9
al geograph
200 hecta
etation o f
r- Novem b
n the Stat e
was 3.64 p
phical are a
density c
hectare of a
45,700 h e
ately dens e
e of area 
red with t h
9, the fore s
0 hectare in
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
: India State o
00
013 
92 
hical area o
re. Base d
f satellit e
ber 2008, 
e was 1,60, 8
per cen t of 
a. In term
lasses, th e
area under 
ectare of 
e forest a n
under o p
he previous 
st cover sh o
n the 2011 a
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
of Haryana i
d on th e
e data o
the fore s
800 hectar e
the State’
s of fore s
e State ha d
very dens e
area und e
nd 1,12,40 0
pen fores t
assessmen
owed a gai n
assessment
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Janua r
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publi
2,700 4
Haryana
s 
e 
of 
st 
e 
s 
st 
d 
e 
er 
0 
t. 
nt 
n 
. 
res)-2011 
of the Stat
ry 2010. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
shed by Fores
45,700
1,12,400
15,00
Com
te  
nds remitte
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
st Survey of In
0
00
pensatory A
ed by State
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very den
Moderate
Open fore
Scrub
Non fores
Afforestation
 CAMPA t o
ture incurre
se forest
ely dense fore
est
st land
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
 
est

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 209 | P a g e  
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA93 
2006-07 28.01 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 18.26 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 50.25 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 103.10 19.11 Nil 19.11 
2010-11 49.57 18.89 11.23 26.77 
2011-12 30.81 0.00 16.17 10.60 
Total 280.00 38.00 27.40  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 14 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009 and 2012. Of ` 38 crore released against APOs, 28 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of  
` 18.94 crore were not remitted by State CAMP A to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in 
State Government account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Haryana that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table 24, 26 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 There was one case 94 involving forest land of 8.48 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agency to wh om in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
0.4995 
2 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. State Government 
had also fixed an NPV at uniform rate of ` 9.20 lakh per ha. However test check 
of records of Hisar forest division revealed that NPV was not collected from 
user agency at revised rates. Ministry stated (April 2013) that final approval of 
the project was yet to be granted a nd balance amount, if any, would be 
recovered from the user agency soon. 
0.36 
3 In seven cases of six forest divisions 96 NPV/CA was short realized from user 
agencies for diversion of 37.28 ha forest land during the years 2006-07 to 2008-
09. Ministry stated (April 2013) that ac tion for the recovery of outstanding 
amount of NPV/CA from user agencies was being taken. 
3.57 
 Total  4.42 
                                                            
93 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unu tilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
94 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
95Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in thes e cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(8.48 x 5.8) 
96Sonipat, Jind, Hisar, Kurukshetra, Pinjore and Mahendergarh 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
210 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 97     11.17 6.26  12.59 10.31 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    7.10 4.41  6.61 5.09 
Protected 
Area98 
    0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan     1.28 0.56  0 0.77 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0.03 0  0 0 
Total 19.11 Nil Nil 18.89 19.58 11.23 Nil 19.20 16.17 
APOs for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 were not submitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA and APO for 
the year 2011-12 was submitted in May 2012 after close of financial year.  Thus the funds 
were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without APOs  for the years 2009-12. From the table it is 
evident that the State CAMPA did not releas e the amount received from Ad-hoc CAMPA 
against APOs to the implementing agencies in the year 2009-10. The State CAMPA released 
` 19.58 crore to implementing agencies dur ing 2010-11 out of funds received during 2009-
10 and 2010-11. In 2011-12, though the Ad-h oc CAMPA did not release any funds, State 
CAMPA released funds from the monies accumu lated in the previous two years. The levels 
of expenditure were 57 per cent in 2010-11 and 84 per cent in 2011-12 when compared with 
amounts released to implementing agencies. Though the percentage of expenditure had 
increased progressively over the last three years, concerns remain on the absorptive 
capacity of the State considering that ` 390.34 crore (including in terest) are accumulated 
with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Affo restation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) 
and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
 
 
                                                            
97 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
98 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 211 | P a g e  
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC. 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure 
at State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on renovation 
of Van Bhawan building, State Forest Headquarters. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that NCAC in its meeting held on 
24June 2010 decided that infrastructure at the headquarters 
level would be developed from the interest earned on FDs 
and renovation of Van Bhawan was done with the approval 
of Executive Committee who is authorized to provide 
financial and administrative sanctions up to an expenditure 
of ` 0.50 crore in any case.  The reply is not tenable as the 
expenditure of ` 0.15 crore was incurred on renovation of 
Van Bhawan in contravention of State CAMPA guidelines. 
0.15 
2 Compensatory 
Afforestation 
done in 
unapproved sites. 
In four divisions 99 of the 11 forest divisions test checked it 
was found that CA was carried out on 25 unapproved sites 
over an area of 336.35 RKM100.  
0.93 
 Total   1.08 
  
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars(2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO101 – 1,218.21 ha102 
As per records of NO – 2,154.89 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 43.79 ha 
As per records of NO – 51.67 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 1,174.42 ha 
As per records of NO – 2,103.22 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 4,182.00 ha 
On Non forest land – 52.85 ha  
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 51.67 ha 
Non forest land notified as reserved/protected 
forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 7.77 ha 
                                                            
99Panipat, Karnal, Sonipat and Gurgoan 
100 Route Kilometre 
101 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
102 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
212 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land dive rted for non forestry purpose s was 1,218.21 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only four per cent while as per records of NO the 
figures were 2,154.89 ha and two per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest 
land was transferred /mutated in favour of th e forest department and notified as RF/PF 
while as per NO out of 51.67 ha non forest la nd transferred/ mutated in favour of forest 
department only 7.77  ha non forest land was declared as RF/P F. As per records of NO, no 
afforestation was done on non forest land and degraded forest land. 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Diversion of forest 
land without 
fulfilling all 
conditions 
i. In seven cases of six forest divisions103 37.28 ha forest land was diverted 
to user agencies during the years 2006-07 to 2008-09 without recovery 
of NPV/CA of ` 3.57 crore (December 2012). 
ii. In Pinjore division, Irrigation Department executed the work on 11.70 
ha of forest land without final approval of MoEF and depositing 
NPV/CA. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that state forest department had taken possession 
of non-forest land and mutation of the lands in favour of the department was 
under process.  Ministry’s reply was silent regarding recovery of outstanding 
amount of NPV/CA. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
The annual accounts for 2010-11 and 2011-12 we re submitted by State CAMPA as per 
prevalent system of Forest Department wh ich were not approved by the Principal 
Accountant General, as these were not in the prescribed format. Further, as per State 
CAMPA guidelines, the State Go vernment and the MoEF had th e powers to conduct special 
audit or performance audit of the state CAMPA. However, no such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Haryana CA MPA met four times during 2009- 12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met four times during 2009-12.  
  
                                                            
103Sonipat, Jind, Hisar, Kurukshetra, Pinjore and Mahendergarh 

Compens
1. Bac
The to t
Pradesh
the in t
Octobe
in the S
was 2
geogra
p
canopy 
3,22,40
dense 
under 
5,07,4
0
forest. 
assessm
showed
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
 
 
 
               
104Source
satory Affor
kground104
tal geogra p
h is 55,67,
terpretation
r-Decembe
State was 1
6.37 per 
phical are a
density c
00 hectare 
forest, 6,3
moderate
00 hectare 
Compared
ment of 2 0
d an increas
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
40
restation in I
 
phical area 
300 hecta r
n of satel
r 2008, the
14,67,900 h
cent of 
a. In ter m
classes, th e
of area 
8,100 hec t
ly dense 
of area 
d with t h
009, the f
se of 1,100 h
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
0,66,600
ndia 
Him
of Himac h
re. Based o
lite data 
e forest cov
ectare whic
the Stat e
ms of for e
e State h a
under ve
tare of ar e
forest a n
under op e
he previo u
forest cov
hectare in t
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Augus t
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
3,22,400
achal Pra
hal 
on 
of 
er 
ch 
e’s 
est 
ad 
ry 
ea 
nd 
en 
us 
er 
the 2011 ass
re)-2011 
of the Stat
t 2009. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
6,38,10
5,07,400
desh 
sessment.
te  
nds remitt e
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
est Survey of I
00
32,800
R
ed by State 
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very dense
Moderately
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest 
eport No. : 2
213 
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
e forest
y dense forest
st
area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
t

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
214 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure incurred 
by State CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA105 
2006-07 61.11 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 22.97 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 35.80 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 99.37 36.68 1.35 35.33 
2010-11 370.07 42.17 37.07 40.43 
2011-12 39.12 57.13 41.55 56.01 
Total 628.44 135.98 79.97  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 22 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of  ` 135.98 crore released, 41 per cent remained 
unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of ` 21.51 crore were 
not remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMP A and were deposited in State Government 
account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Himachal Pradesh that 
came to the notice of audit are given below.  The gist of these cases is also given in 
table24and 27 in Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 There were seven cases 106 involving forest land of 140.86 ha in which NPV was 
not collected from the user agencies to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
8.17 
2 State CAMPA did not recover NPV of ` 26.99 crore from user agencies for 
diversion of forest land during the period October 2002 to March 2009. 
26.99 
3 Test check of records of State CAMPA revealed that CA of ` 1.37 crore was 
recoverable in 121 cases of illegal construction of roads. No action was taken by 
State CAMPA to recover CA from user agencies as of December 2012. 
1.37 
 Total  36.53 
                                                            
105 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
106 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 215 | P a g e  
In respect of above observations Ministry stated (April 2013) that recovery of NPV involved 
considerable number of user agencies, hence it  would take some more time and progress in 
this regard would be intimated to audit in due course of time. 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 
(Protection, 
Conservation & 
Management of 
forest) 
 4.44 0.18  11.48 10.72  15.43 12.71 
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
(CA) 
 0 0  0.70 0.60  2.54 2.12 
Wildlife 
Management 
(PA) 
 0 0  0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan  2.85 1.17  21.83 22.59  16.38 15.69 
Other specified 
activities, if any 
 0 0  4.41 3.16  8.77 6.30 
Misc refunds  0 0  0 0  0 4.73 
Total 36.68 7.29 1.35 42.17 38.42 37.07 57.13 43.12 41.55 
From the table it is evident that the Stat e CAMPA did not release the entire amount 
received from Ad-hoc CAMPA against APOs to the implementing agencies. The amount 
released was 20 per cent in 2009-10, 91 per cent in 2010-11 and 75 per cent in 2011-12. The 
percentage of expenditure incurred against the amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA was 
four per cent  in 2009-10, 88 per cent  in 2010-11 and 73 per cent  in 2011-12. Though the 
percentage of expenditure has increased progressively over th e last three years, concerns 
remain on the absorptive capacity  of the State considering that ` 1,131.44 crore (including 
interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund for 
the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
216 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Non utilization of 
funds on 
maintenance 
and protection 
of Wild Life 
 
State CAMPA could utilise ` 17.59 crore out of ` 29.31 crore 
received from Ad-hoc CAMPA during the years 2009-10 to 
2011-12 leaving a balance of ` 11.72 crore unutilised as of 
March 2012. This indicates that  APOs were prepared on 
unrealistic basis besides important activities viz. 
conservation, development, maintenance and protection of 
forests and wild life etc. could not be undertaken as planned 
for the years 2009-12. Ministry stated (April 2013) that 
spending of State CAMPA on various activities constantly 
increased during the years 2009-12.  The reply of Ministry is 
not tenable as during the years 2009-12 out of `135.98 crore 
only `79.97 crore could be utilised i.e. 59 percent leaving a 
balance of `56.01 crore which could have been utilised on 
maintenance and protection of wildlife. 
11.72 
2 Non 
achievement of 
physical and 
financial targets 
under a scheme 
 
Under a scheme “Uhal stage III” HEP CAT Plan was prepared 
for ` 10.00 crore to execute various activities such as 
enrichment planting, subsidia ry silvicultural operation, 
consolidation and demarcation, forest protection, 
construction of roads, cons truction of buildings, soil 
conservation and contingency. Th e plan was to be executed 
with in a period of 10 years from 2002-03 to 2012-13. Against 
the target of 540 ha forest land, plantation work only on 291 
ha forest land could be done at a cost of ` 4.00 crore upto 
2011-12 leaving 249 ha forest land yet to be planted with the 
unspent amount of ` 6.00 crore as of December 2012.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that with the funds available with 
State CAMPA the implementation of CAT Plan had been 
geared up and was expected to be completed innext two or 
three years. 
6.00 
3 Diversion of NPV 
funds  
on monkey 
sterilisation 
program 
 
State CAMPA released a sum of ` 4.97 crore during the year 
2011-12 for implementation of monkey sterilisation program 
whereas as per appropriation account of state government 
for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 expenditure of ` 4.77 crore 
was incurred by the State gove rnment on this program.  
Thus, prior to release of funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA to State 
CAMPA for implementation of this program, the expenditure 
was borne by the state government. Therefore, State CAMPA 
4.97 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 217 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
incurred an irregular expenditure of `4.97 crore on 
implementation of said scheme. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that monkey sterilisation 
programme was included in the APO and approved by State 
CAMPA steering committee.  The fact remains that upto the 
year 2011-12, the said programme was being executed by 
the State Government. 
4 Irregular 
expenditure  
on purchase of 
stores items  
 
In six forest divisions, some  stores items were purchased 
during the years 2009-12 at a cost of ` 2.53 crore without 
competitive bidding and approval of competent authority 
and adopting proper financial procedures which was in 
contravention of GFRs and therefore, the entire expenditure 
of ` 2.53 crore was irregular.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that details of offices as well as 
articles were being obtained and reply to audit observation 
would be furnished in due course of time. 
2.53 
5 Unauthorised 
expenditure  
on procurement 
of GPS 
instruments 
 
State CAMPA purchased 200 GPS instruments from M/s Asim 
Industries, New Delhi at a cost of `0.20 crore in December 
2010. However as per orders of the Supreme Court, GPS 
instruments were to be provided  by Forest Survey of India, 
Dehradun to the concerned State. Thus, the expenditure of  
` 0.20 crore incurred on procurement of GPS instruments 
was in contravention of orders of the Supreme court of India.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that it was not aware of the fact 
that GPS instruments would be supplied by FSI, Dehradun. 
0.20 
6 Uneconomical 
plantation 
through outside 
agency 
 
User agency had deposited ` 9.15 crore for rim plantation 
over an area of 1,531 ha near Kol Dam reservoir at 
departmental financial norms of ` 0.60 lakh per ha.  The 
work was allotted to Eco Task Force (ETF) in February 2006.   
Audit observed that despite incurring an excess expenditure 
of ` 7.34 crore over ` 9.15 crore deposited by the user 
agency, plantation on 581 ha land was still to be done.  To 
complete this work the department had diverted ` 7.34 
crore from other components of Kol Dam HEP CAT Plan, 
which would affect the scope of other activities of CAT Plan. 
In another case, total cost of Larji HEP CAT Plan was ` 12.80 
crore of which ` 8.93 crore was earmarked for execution and 
maintenance of afforestation over an area of 2,859 ha at 
departmental financial norms of ` 0.31 lakh per ha. The 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
218 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
department did not carry out the work itself but the same 
was allotted to ETF-B in March 2010.  During 2010-12, the 
ETF carried out plantations in 614 ha and was paid ` 7.87 
crore (including establishment costs of ` 1.50 crore diverted 
from Sainj HEP CAT Plan).  It was seen that only 21 per cent 
(614 hectare) of the work was completed after utilisation of 
88 per cent  of total earmarked funds.  The remaining work 
would be completed by incurring an additional expenditure 
of ` 23.29 crore at the present rate of ETF.  Thus, the 
allotment of work to ETF was uneconomical. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the case for reconsideration 
of the establishment of ETF had been taken up with the State 
Government and the final outcome in the matter would be 
intimated in due course of time. 
7 Loss to 
environment 
due to non-
execution of CA 
work  
 
As per state CAMPA guidelines, compensatory afforestation 
(CA) in double the area diverted was required to be carried 
out within one year of final approval. 
In 106 cases of diversion of forest land for non-forestry 
purpose which were approved between June 2002 and 
November 2011 by MoEF, CA was not carried out by the 
department within one year of approval although the user 
agencies had deposited the cost of CA of ` 8.20 crore 
resulting in loss to the environm ent.  Ministry stated (April 
2013) that state government had geared up the 
implementation of CA works and was also concentrating to 
clear the entire backlog. 
 
8 Non survival of 
plants under CA 
State forest department planted 71,87,592 plants of different 
species during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12.  Out of these 
15,50,217 plants lived out mid way due to heavy draught, fire 
incidents and poor soil conditions. The mortality of plants 
was 22 per cent. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that  survival of plantations were 
78 percent which was good in hilly terrain of the state and 
climatic conditions.  The fact remains that the mortality of 
plants was 22 per cent. 
 
 Total  25.42 
 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 219 | P a g e  
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO107 –932.85 ha108 
As per records of NO – 4,080.23 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 932.85 ha 
As per records of NO – 4,080.23 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non 
availability of non forest land attached  
Certificate for Chief Secretary obtained for CA on 
8,240.04 ha double degraded land, certificate for 7.56 
ha was not obtained 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land –  8,247.61 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 2,789.51 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land 
transferred/mutated  
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 932.85ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was zero per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 4,080.23 ha and zero per cent , respectively. As per reco rds of RO and NO, no non 
forest land was transferred /mutated in favour  of the forest department and notified as 
RF/PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation was done on non forest land and afforestation 
done on degraded forest land was 34 per cent of the area to be afforested. 
 
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Diversion of forest 
land without prior 
approval of MoEF 
In Karsog forest division, HPPWD and Block Development officer had 
constructed 27 roads measuring 42.9 km without prior approval of MoEF 
during the period 1997-98 to 2008-09 on 34.2 ha forest land. No action 
                                                            
107 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
108 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
220 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
 was taken by state CAMPA to obtain approval of MoEF for the diversion 
of forest land. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the matter of diversion of forest land 
was under consideration of High Court of Himachal Pradesh and final 
action would be initiated as per orders of the High Court. 
2 Irregular diversion 
of forest land 
 
16.28 ha forest land was diverted in 1987 for construction of Larjil HEP in 
Mandi and Kullu districts without receipt of non forest land from user 
agency and the CA was allowed on 32.56 ha degraded forest land during 
1992-94 without certificate of Chief Secretary of the state to the effect 
that non forest land was not available in the state. Accepting the facts, 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the case was being referred to 
government of Himachal Pradesh for obtaining the signature of chief 
secretary. 
 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts  
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format as of December 2012. In th e absence of proper accounts, these could not 
be audited. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted as of December 2012.A ccepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 
2013) that compilation of annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 had been 
assigned to a chartered accountant firm and th e final accounts would be submitted to audit 
on its receipt from the CA firm. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steer ing Committee was to meet twice in a year. 
However, the Executive Committee met four ti mes as against six times during 2009-12. The 
Steering Committee met seven ti mes during 2009-12. The Gove rning Body did not meet 
during 2009-12. Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that since the accounts and 
final reports had not been compiled, the meetin g of general body could not been convened.  
Now, the accounts were being compiled and were in the advanced stage of completion, thus 
the meeting of Governing body would be convened in near future.  
  

Compens
1. Ba
The to t
& Kas
Based o
data of
forest c
hectare
the Sta
of for
e
State h
under 
hectare
dense f
area u
with th
the fo r
increase
assessm
Forest c
2. Co
Central 
(J&K). J
As per 
J&K ha
retaine
the CA 
financia
               
109Source
satory Affor
 
ackground1
tal geogra p
hmir is 2
on the inte r
f October - 
cover in the
e which w a
te’s geogra
est canopy 
had 4,14,0
very den s
e of area 
forest and 
under ope n
e previous 
rest cover 
e of 200 h
ment. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
 Forest (Co
&K State Fo
directions (
d to depo s
d by the Sta
by J&K St a
al years 20 0
                      
e: India State o
4,14,0
1,9
restation in I
109 
phical area 
2,22,23,600
rpretation o
December 
e state was 
as 10.14  p e
aphical area
density cl a
00 hectar e
se forest, 
under m
9,63,900 h
n forest . 
assessmen
showed a
hectare in 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
nservation)
orest Depar
(February 2
sit only NP V
ate CAMPA
ate CAMP A
09-10 and 2
                      
of Forest Repo
000 8, 7
97,59,200
ndia 
Jamm
of Jammu 
 hectare. 
of satellite 
2008, the 
22,53,900 
er cen t of 
a. In terms 
asses, the 
e of area 
8,76,000 
moderately 
hectare of 
Compared 
nt of 2009, 
a marginal 
the 2011 
t (in hectar
ation funds
) Act, 1980 
rtment is go
2010) of Ce n
V with Ad -
. Further CE
A could be 
2010-11 sub
 
ort 2011 publ
76,000 9
mu & Kas
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
is applicab
overned by 
ntral Empow
-hoc CAMP A
EC recomm
used for t h
bject to th e
ished by Fore
9,63,900
2,10,500
shmir 
te  
le to all St a
J&K Forest
wered Com
A and rest 
ended that 
he implem e
e overall ce i
est Survey of I
V
M
O
Sc
N
R
ates except 
t Conservati
mmittee (CE
viz. CA/ A
the amoun
entation o f
iling impose
ndia. 
Very dense for
Moderately de
Open forest
crub
Non forest are
eport No. : 2
221 
Jammu & 
ion Act (FCA
EC) State C A
ACA etc. w a
nt received t
f the APOs 
ed by the S
rest
ense forest
a
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
Kashmir 
A) 1997. 
AMPA of 
as to be 
towards 
for the 
Supreme 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
222 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Court, and Ad-hoc CAMPA would release the required amounts for the implementation of 
the APOs for the subsequent years. 
Since J&K is governed by its own Conservation Act, 1997, the APOs of the State CAMPA are, 
therefore, not sent to Ad-hoc CAMPA for approval. The implementing agencies have 
prepared project proposals (PPs) for the five years (2010-15) as a first phase in respect of 
their respective territorial divisions. APOs  are being carved out from these PPs and 
submitted to Executive Committee of the CA MPA for recommendations and submission to 
Steering Committee for final approval. 
State CAMPA was constituted in April 2011.  Funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, funds released by Ad-hoc CAMPA to State CAMPA and expenditure incurred there 
against during the period 2006-07 to 2011-12 were as  detailed below. 
  (` in crore) 
Year Amount transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Releases made by 
J&K State CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by 
State CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA110 
2006-07 ` 74.05 crore transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA on 27-04-
2011 and FDRs amounting 
` 291.85 crore were shown 
pledged in the name of 
Central Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
Nil Nil NA 
2007-08 Nil Nil NA 
2008-09 Nil Nil NA 
2009-10 11.15 2.75 8.40 
2010-11 15.70 16.00 8.10 
2011-12 40.24 36.93 11.41 
Total 365.90 67.09 55.68  
It was observed that Ad-hoc CAMPA did not release any funds to J&K State CAMPA during 
2009-12. J&K CAMPA also did not maintain head-wise /user-wise account of receipts, 
instead all money i.e. NPV/ CA etc. had been mingled. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of  NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Jammu & Kashmir that 
came to the notice of audit are given below. Th e gist of these cases is also given in table26 
and 27 in Chapter 3. 
 
 
                                                            
110Cummulative amount at the end of the year lying untulised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 223 | P a g e  
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check 
of records of eight divisions 111 revealed that NPV was not collected at revised 
rates. 
21.04 
2 Forest department diverted (1991 to March 2012) 10,683.86 ha of land to user 
agencies for non-forest purposes but NPV/CA of ` 795.75 crore was not realised 
from user agencies.  
795.75 
3 Diversion of Wild Life Sanctuary land (679.12 hectare)–  
• In October 2007, NPV of ` 25.04 crore was short realised from user 
agency (Mugal Road Division Shopian) in lieu of diversion of land from 
wild life sanctuary for construction of  Mugal road due to non-application 
of revised rates of NPV and non-charging five times of the normal rate of 
NPV prescribed for wildlife sanctuary. Further, NPV/CA etc. of ` 13.72 
crore was also outstanding against the user agency as of December 2012. 
• In six cases, against diversion of 600.68 ha forest land during March–July 
2010, CA of `3.00 crore was also not recovered from user agencies 
(Border Road Task Force and Indo Tibet Border Police) as of December 
2012. 
• In February 2007, NPV of ` 3.25 crore was short realized from user 
agency in lieu of diversion of land from wild life sanctuary for 
construction of tunnel on NH1A from Banihal to Srinagar. 
45.01 
 Total  861.80 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 112  0 0  0 0  0 0 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
 0 0  0 0  0 0 
Protected 
Area113 
 0 0  0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan  0 0  0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
 11.15 2.75  15.70 16.00  40.24 36.93 
Total Nil  11.15 2.75 Nil  15.70 16.00 Nil  40.24 36.93 
                                                            
111Bhaderwah, Jammu, Kamraj, Anantnag, Langate, Udhampur, Lidder, Shopian 
112 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 
113 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
224 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Head-wise / Component wise details of availability of funds vis-à-vis allocation / expenditure 
in respect of implementing agencies (IAs ) were not available with State CAMPA. 
Transactions had been mingled in one account / single book of accounts. Accounts were not 
consolidated at any stage due  to pending accounts and prog ress reports from IAs. As a 
result actual consolidated position of amount  spent by all IAs was not available and also 
could not be ascertained. However, works pr ojected in the APOs 2010-11 were taken in 
advance during the year 2009-10. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that the financial and physical figures in terms of outlays and 
achievements were being compiled for the state.   However, the details thereof stated to 
have been enclosed with the reply, had not been furnished. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of irregularity Description Amount
1 Unauthorised 
expenditure  
 
As the central Act was not applicable to Jammu and 
Kashmir, state level steeri ng committee (SLSC) decided 
in April 2007 that CAMPA funds shall not be utilised by 
the state government till the matter was resolved by 
the Supreme Court. 
During test check of records of state CAMPA it was 
found that contrary to SLSC’s aforesaid decision state 
CAMPA spent ` 5.25 crore of CAMPA funds on payment 
of loan, advances, sports meet, payment to private 
hotels etc. This resulted in an unauthorised expenditure 
of ` 5.25 crore. 
5.25
2 Diversion of CA funds 
 
Test check of records of 20 state forest divisions 
revealed that `8.78 crore in 2010-11 and `12.55 crore 
in 2011-12 was spent on plantations, of which `5.04 
crore in 2010-11 and `8.41 crore in 2011-12 was spent 
on chain-link fencing/angle iron etc. which was 57 per 
cent in 2010-11 and 67 per cent  in 2011-12 of the 
expenditure incurred on plantations. This had resulted 
in diversion of funds to that extent and consequently 
deprived of prime objective of plantation and 
consequent afforestation. 
Accepting the facts,  Ministry stated (June 2013) that 
effective fencing mechanism was required during the 
last turbulent period in Jammu & Kashmir and to make 
the fencing more effective, low cost barbed wire 
fencing was being supplemented with live hedge 
fencing from the year 2 013-14 onwards. This would 
keep the proportion of fencing expenditure to 
minimum. 
13.45

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 225 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Nature of irregularity Description Amount
3 Expenditure not 
authorised by State 
CAMPA guidelines 
and NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating 
infrastructure at State Forest headquarters and 
ecotourism. However test check revealed that 
expenditure was incurred on purchase of carpets, LEDs, 
ACs, i-pods, sofa sets, projectors, installation of office 
cabins, sofa sets, installation of electric transformer, 
vehicles etc. 
0.31
4 Underutilisation of 
funds 
 
During the years 2009-12, unspent balance of funds 
available with the State CAMPA ranged from 24 to 75 
per cent at the end of the financial year. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that during last two years 
the unspent amount ranged between 30 per cent to 33 
per cent  due to the reason that scheme was in its 
infancy stage and in many cases based on the ground 
conditions.  The fact remained that state CAMPA could 
not fully utilise the funds provided for NPV schemes 
during the years 2009-12.  
5 Large variation in 
figures of allocation 
and expenditure of 
state CAMPA and 
forest divisions  
 
Test check of records of ei ght State forest divisions 
revealed that there was large variation in figures of 
allocation and expenditure of state CAMPA and forest 
divisions for the year 2011-12. The variation in 
allocation of funds ranged from ` 0.03 lakh to ` 93.52 
lakh and variation in expenditure ranged from ` 31.27 
lakh to ` 1.43 lakh in the year 2011-12. Thus, 
reconciliation of figures of allocation and expenditure 
of forest divisions was not done with the figures of 
state CAMPA. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) that for 
the year 2011-12 division wise allocation was made 
with the details of expenditure and unspent balance.  
However, the supporting documents stated to have 
been furnished with the reply, had not been furnished.  
6 Non follow up of 
decisions of Steering 
Committee regarding 
confirmation of CA 
Steering Committee decided in  April 2011 that before 
any area was taken up for afforestation, its coordinates 
in terms of latitude and longitude was to be recorded 
and the existing condition of the area was to be 
documented in terms of photography / videography as 
well as on satellite imaginaries. It was noticed that no 
follow up action regarding confirmation of CA was 
taken by state CAMPA as of December 2012.  
 Total  19.01

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
226 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO114 - NA 
As per records of NO – 3,967.46 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – NA 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO - NA 
As per records of NO – 3,967.46 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on 
non availability of non forest 
land attached  
In respect of J&K the certificate is to be issued by 
Deputy/Divisional Commissioner. Majority of certificates were 
not issued by the competent au thority and in some cases, 
certificates were issued by the user agencies themselves. 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 14,312.00 ha 
On Non forest land – NA 
Area on which CA done as per 
NO 
On degraded forest land – 7,838.00 ha(2010-11 &2011-12)  
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land 
transferred/mutated  
As per records of RO- NA 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received 
notified as reserved/protected 
forest 
As per records of RO- NA 
As per records of NO – Nil 
FC Act, 1980 is not applicable to the state of Jammu and Kashmir. As per records of NO, the 
forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 3,967.46 ha and no non forest land was 
received in lieu thereof.  Afforestatio n done on degraded forest land was 55 per cent of the 
area identified to be afforested during the years 2010-12. 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Diversion of Wild 
Life Sanctuary 
land 
 
During test check of records of state CAMPA it was found that in six cases, 
against diversion of 600.68 ha forest land in sanctuary during March–July 2010, 
non forest land for carrying out CA was not transferred to State forest 
department as of December 2012. 
                                                            
114 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 227 | P a g e  
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
Accounting procedure for CAMPA has to be evolved in consultation with Accountant 
General, Jammu and Kashmir in accordance wi th the State Government provisions of SRO-
354.The audit of the accounts of the State CA MPA has to be conducted under section 19 (3) 
of CAGs (DPC) 1971. 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare its annual accounts in the prescribed format. 
It was observed that important records/regist ers required to be maintained as per CAMPA 
guidelines viz. assets register, stock register s, materials purchase register, works registers 
and muster roll register etc. were not maintained by state CAMPA and its various divisions. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) that the finalisation of CAMPA accounts 
manual was under process and as regards mainte nance of important records and registers, 
implementing agencies had been instruct ed for strict compliance wherever the 
discrepancies existed in this regard. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
The state CAMPA did not maintain cash book a nd subsidiary ledgers properly for the funds 
received from user agencies and expenditu re incurred therefrom. Due to improper 
maintenance of cash book and subsidiary ledg ers, the receipts and payments of the years 
2007-08 to 2011-12 could not be verified in audit.  Some of the deficien cies because of this 
were: 
• Non reconciliation of figures with the bank: There were large variations ranging from  
` 0.09 crore to ` 5.41 crore of figures of balances shown in the cash book maintained 
by state CAMPA and figures shown in the bank statement at the end of financial year 
during 2007-12.  
 Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) that cash book would now be 
maintained properly as require d under the rules.  It was al so stated that variation of 
figures between the progress report and cash  book as pointed out by audit was being 
reconciled. 
• Withdrawals shown by the Bank but not existing in the Cash Book: As per bank 
statement ` 90.62 crore were shown withdraw n during March 2005 to January 2011 
from bank account of state CAMPA which included ` 84.00 crore on account of seven 
FDRs However, no such entries were found in the cash book of the CAMPA.   

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
228 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
• Missing cheques of ` 33.27 crore: As per entries recorded in the cash book, there were 
25 cheques numbers 8659423, 8659425, 8659428, 8659432 to 8659444,  8659446 to 
8659450, 7285401, 7285402, 7285405, 7285409 found missing .  The details of these 
missing cheques was not recorded in the cash book. Further 162 cheques of ` 33.27 
crore were found missing in the account of st ate CAMPA. This resulted in a loss of ` 
33.27 crore. 
• Non-accountal of credit of NPV/CA of ` 66.58 crore: Cheques / demand drafts of ` 
66.58 crore were received on account of NP V, CA etc. but credit thereof was not 
traceable from the bank accounts. Thus, the receipts appearing in the cash book but 
not in bank accounts of state CAMPA indica ted either cheques were not remitted to 
bank or credits thereof were not afforded by the bank.  This resulted in loss/non-
accountal of credits of ` 66.58 crore. 
• Non-accountal of advances in cash book: The entries for ` 8.49 lakh withdrawn from 
bank on account of self cheques and advance of ` 5.00 lakh paid in July 2007 were not 
made either on the receipt or payment side  in the cash book. Further genuineness of 
opening balance of ` 33 lakh as of March 2008 and opening balance of ` 7.06 crore as 
of July 2007 could not be ascertained in Audit due to non-maintenance of proper 
records.    
• There was variation of ` 3.07 crore and ` 2.01 crore in amounts released to 
implementing agencies as shown in progress reports and those depicted in cash book 
maintained by state CAMPA during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 respectively. 
• Non maintenance of records of FDRs: No FDRs register indicating FDR’s opening 
balance/fresh/renewals/closing balance et c. was maintained by state CAMPA Also, 
bank confirmations indicating actual amount of FDRs, actual date of investments, 
reinvestment, date of maturity, interest earned etc. was not available with State 
CAMPA. As per details availa ble on loose papers, the prin cipal amount of FDRs was  
` 545.30 crore with accruable interest of ` 71.91 crore and maturity value was  
` 617.21 crore. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that complete comput erised record of FDRs was available in the 
PCCF office.  However, the relevant documents stated to have been enclosed with the reply 
had not been furnished. Thus there was no system in place for follow up of standard rules 
and procedures in maintenance of annual accounts and cashbooks and other connected 
records and for reconciliation of bank and cashbook balances. As a result, cases of 
misappropriation could not be ruled out.  
7. Investment of Compensatory Afforestation funds 
7.1  Absence of investment policy framework 
• Amount which was not required for immediat e disbursement was to be kept in the  
FDR.No such policy of investment of funds  was prepared and adopted and approved 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 229 | P a g e  
by the apex body of the State CAMPA. Non framing of investment policy had resulted 
in loss of interest that could have been realized in case funds were kept in FDR. 
• To obtain maximum returns for investing the CAMPA money in deposits, the CAMPA 
should have called quotation from the va rious nationalized banks. This was also 
directed by the EC (Decem ber 2009). However, no quotat ions were called from 
nationalized banks and FDRs were kept with J&K Bank only despite lapse of 
considerable time periods. Besides, no fo llow up action was taken by the EC in their 
subsequent meetings on this count. 
The impact of non-existence of a laid down investment policy are reflected in the cases 
reported below. 
7.2 Loss of interest 115 of  ` 14.60 crore due to non-investment of CAMPA funds in FDs  
During test check of records of state CAMPA it was found that funds of NPV/CA etc. received 
from various user agencies were deposited by  state CAMPA in current account instead of 
investing it in FDs or in interest bearing accounts during the period January 2007 to March 
2012 resulting in loss of interest of ` 8.94 crore (if funds deposited in savings account) to 
 ` 14.60 crore (if invested in FDs). 
Further, during test check of records of various forest division it was found that the divisions 
kept the funds in current account instead of interest bearing account  resulting in loss of 
interest of ` 0.27 crore. 
7.3 Loss of interest of ` 8.12 crore due to delay in remi ttance of funds to state CAMPA by 
user agencies.   
During test check of records of various stat e forest divisions it was found that there was 
delay ranging from one to 95 months in remitt ance of CA funds by various user agencies 
during the years 2002-12 resulting in loss of interest of ` 8.12 crore.  
7.4 Loss of interest of ` 1.68 crore due to delay in remittance of funds to State CAMPA by 
state wildlife department     
During test check of records of Leh forest di vision it was found that user agency deposited 
funds of ` 55.87 crore with State wildlife department  in September 2010 instead of State 
CAMPA in lieu of diversion of 124.80 ha forest land for constr uction of Chushmule-demchok 
road. The funds were transferred to State CAMP A by wildlife department in June 2011 after 
a delay of more than nine months resulting in loss of interest of ` 1.68 crore. 
 
 
                                                            
115 Interest calculated at 4 per cent. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
230 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
7.5 Non reconciliation of CA funds received by various state forest divisions 
During test check of records of state CAMPA and its various forest divisions it was found 
that no reconciliation was done by state CAMPA with its various forest divisions for CA funds 
received from various user agencies in lieu of  diversion of forest land to ascertain amount 
due, amount received and the amount outstanding of CA funds.    
7.6 Loss of interest of ` 2.62 crore due to delay in deposit of cheques in bank 
During test check of records of state CAMPA it  was found that there was loss of interest of  
` 2.62 crore due to delay ranged from 8 to 369 days in remittance of 352 cheques for credit 
to bank account during 2007-12. 
7.7 Unauthorised deposit of funds of ` 32.08 crore by other departments/agencies 
During test check of records of state CAMPA it was found that in 37 cases, various 
departments/agencies had deposited funds of  ` 32.08 crore with state CAMPA without any 
proposal for diversion of forest land  during the years 2007-12. 
Thus, in the absence of investment policy/proce dure there were cases of loss of interest of 
substantial amounts due to delay in investment of funds by Stat e CAMPA and delay in 
receipt of funds from State forest divisions/user agencies. 
8. Monitoring  
Executive Committee and Steering Committee had to hold its meetings after every six 
months. It was observed that EC had met with  an intervening period ranging from 1 month 
to 10 months. The SC had met with an inte rvening period ranging from 4 months to 11 
months. There was no defined time schedule for holding meetings of ECs / SCs. 

Compens
1. Ba
The to t
79,71,4
interpre
2008- J
State w
28.82pe
area. I
classes,
area u
hectare
forest a
open f o
assessm
showed
2011 as
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
               
116Source
5
satory Affor
ackground1
tal geograp
400 hect a
etation of s
anuary 200
was 22,97 ,
er cen t of 
n terms o
, the State 
under very 
e of area 
and 10,47,0
orest. Com
ment of 2
d an increa s
ssessment.. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
56,05,400
restation in I
116 
hical area o
are. Bas e
satellite dat
09, the for e
,700 hect a
the State ’
of forest c
had 2,59, 0
dense f o
under mo d
000 hectar e
mpared wit h
2009, the 
se of 8,30 0
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
2,59,00
ndia 
J
of Jharkha n
ed on 
ta of Nove m
est cover i n
are which 
’s geograp h
canopy de n
000 hecta r
orest, 9,91
derately d e
e o f  a r e a  un
h the pre v
forest c
0 hectare i n
t (in hectar
ation funds
d in Octob e
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
 
ort 2011 publ
00
9,91,700
10,4
Jharkhand
nd is 
the 
mber 
n the 
was 
hical 
nsity 
re of 
,700 
ense 
nder 
vious 
over 
n the 
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
er 2009. Fu
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
47,000
68,
d 
te  
nds remitte
e CAMPA a n
as  detailed
est Survey of I
300
R
ed by State
nd expendit
d below: 
ndia. 
Very dens
Moderate
Open fore
Scrub
Non fores
eport No. : 2
231 
e CAMPA t o
ture incurre
se forest
ely dense fore
est
st area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
st

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
232 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA117 
2006-07 822.09 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 76.23 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 55.82 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 187.64 95.00 Nil 95.00 
2010-11 272.00 103.16 75.52 122.64 
2011-12 184.54 62.50 109.79 75.35 
Total 1,598.32 260.66 185.31  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 16 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 260.66 crore received, 29 per cent remained 
unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of ` 28.06 crore were 
not remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMP A and were deposited in State Government 
account.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Jharkhand that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table 24 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 There were 12 cases 118 involving forest land of 607.57 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 119 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
35.24120 
2 In eleven forest divisions, NPV/CA of ` 70.05 crore was not realized from user 
agencies121 to whom in principle/final approval was granted by MoEF between 
November 1993 and July 2012 for diversion of 2,334.99 ha forest land for non 
forestry purposes. The State forest depart ment, while accepting the facts, stated 
that an amount of ` 0.60 crore pertaining to Koderma forests divisions had since 
been collected (November-December 2012). 
69.45 
                                                            
117Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of  the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
118 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
119 TATA Iron and Steel Co. Ltd., M/s CCL, Sports Authority of  India, M/s Eastor Coal Field Ltd., M/s SAIL, Bharat 
Raj Singh etc. 
120Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(607.57 x 5.8) 
121 DVC, NTPC, Nilanchal Iron & Power Ltd., CCL, JSEB, NHAI and State Government agencies etc. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 233 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
Accepting the facts,  Ministry stated (June 2013) that amounts had since been 
realised from user agencies in two out of eleven forest divisions and deposited into 
CAMPA account.  However, Ministry did not furnish any supporting documents. 
3 In six forest divisions, demand for recovery of CA of ` 5.69 crore was not raised 
from five user agencies to whom in prin ciple /final approval was granted by MoEF 
during January 1995 to June 2012 for diversion of 415.10 ha forest land for non 
forestry purposes even after lapse of 6 to 25 months as of November 
2012.Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (J une 2013) that position in this regard 
was being reconciled by the concerned DFOs and final outcome would be reported 
to audit. 
5.69 
4 In ten forest divisions, CA of `4.32 crore was short realized from seven user 
agencies to whom in principle/final approval was granted during October 2003 to 
May 2012 for diversion of 833.87 ha forest land for non forestry purposes. 
Accepting the facts, Minist ry stated (June 2013) that demand for realisation of 
balance amount of CA had since been raised from user agency.  
4.32 
5 In Chatra (South) forest division , demand for recovery of PCA of `1.48 crore was 
not raised from user agency (CCL) who continued the mining of coal beyond the 
lease period i.e. 16 February 2012 on 43.30 ha forest land. Accepting the facts, 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that demand for recovery of PCA of ` 1.48 crore had 
since been raised from user agency. 
1.48 
 Total  116.18 
 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 122  95.00   103.16 75.52  62.50 109.79 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
 0   0 0  0 0 
Protected 
Area123 
 0   0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan  0   0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
 0   0 0  0 0 
Total 95.00 95.00 Nil  103.16 103.16 75.52 62.50 62.50 109.79 
                                                            
122 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 
123 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
234 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
During 2009-10 an amount of ` 95 crore was received in March 2010 by State CAMPA from 
the Ad-hoc CAMPA for execution of different schemes, but no money was transferred to any 
divisions due to non approval of APO for th e year 2009-10. This indicated lack of co-
ordination between the Ad-hoc CAMPA and th e State CAMPA. Though  the percentage of 
expenditure increased progressive ly over the last three year s, concerns remain on the 
absorptive capacity of the State considering that `2,057.88 crore (including interest) are 
accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compen satory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 
March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) that due to non-approval of APO in the year 
2009-10 and late receipt of f und from Ad-hoc CAMPA, no money could be transferred to 
forest divisions.  
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Irregular 
expenditure  
i. In eight forest divisions 124, expenditure was incurred on 
various schemes during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 
without obtaining the technical sanction of site and specific 
estimate of the competent authority resulting in irregular 
expenditure. 
Accepting the facts,  Ministry stated (June 2013) that all 
concerned officers had been directed to start the execution 
of any scheme after obtaining technical sanction of site and 
specific estimate from the competent authority. 
ii. Despite instructions of steering committee given in June 
2010 that no entry point activities were to be carried out 
under establishment of natural forest and greening of hills 
scheme, test check of records of five forest divisions 
revealed that entry point activities were carried out during 
the years 2010-11. 
M i n i s t r y  s t a t e d  ( J u n e  2 0 1 3 )  t h a t  i n  s c h e d u l e  o f  r a t e s  o f  
establishment of natural forests and greening of hills 
scheme for the year2010-11 no en try point activities were 
included.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as entry 
point activities were carried out in five forest divisions 
during 2010-11. 
 
 
 
23.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.16 
                                                            
124Chatra North, Chatra South, Dhanbad, Hazaribagh Afforestation, Hazaribagh East, Giridh Afforestation, 
Ranchi West and Ranchi Wildlife 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 235 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
2 Unauthorised 
expenditure 
i. In Hazaribag West forest division, 16 check dams were 
constructed against 12 check dams approved in APO for 
2011-12. Further, one check dam was constructed on a 
site different from the approve site.  
Ministry stated (June 2013) that 16 check dams were 
constructed within the approved amount.  The reply of 
Ministry is not tenable because as per approved APO for 
2011-12 only 12 check dams were  to be constructed.  
Further, Ministry’s reply was silent regarding construction 
of a check dam on a different site from the approved site. 
ii. In Wildlife forest division, Ranchi, as per approved APO 
for 2010-11 the protection was to be done without trench 
fencing/constructing stone wall under NPV scheme 
‘Establishment of Natural Forests’. Advance work was 
undertaken on ten sites on 500 ha land in Palkot Wildlife 
Sanctuary, Gumla during 2011-12 and in seven of the ten 
sites, work was executed with trench fencing. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that fencing was done with 
the approval of district administration.  The reply of 
Ministry is not tenable as trench fencing/constructing 
stone wall was not approved in the APO for 2010-11. 
0.20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.14 
3 Wasteful 
expenditure  
In Wildlife forest division, Ranchi, advance work under NPV 
schemes in 300 ha was done during 2010-11 but no fund was 
released in the year 2011-12 for execution of work rendering the 
expenditure incurred on advance work a waste. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that plantation could not be done in 
the year 2011-12 as one year plants were not available and the 
same was completed in the year 2012-13.  The reply of Ministry 
was silent regarding survival of plantations in the absence of their 
maintenance in the year 2011-12. 
0.18 
4 Infructuous 
expenditure  
In Deoghar forest division, the existing plantation at two sites 
Jalathar and Karipahari failed due to non execution of first and 
second year maintenance works resulting in infructuous 
expenditure incurred on the advance works under intensive forest 
development and KalamiAam Programmes in the year 2008-09 
and 2009-10, respectively. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that plantations were undertaken 
under the state plan scheme for which no funds were provided by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA/State CAMPA  for their maintenance leading to its 
failure. 
0.15 
5 Doubtful 
expenditure  
In Hazaribag Social Forestry division, plants sapling works under 
CA was reportedly carried out over 77ha and 60 ha land at Rekua 
0.13 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
236 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
and Bandhdih, respectively instead of 20 ha and 30 ha land which 
was available for execution of works as per survey report resulting 
in extra expenditure of ` 0.13 crore. 
 Total   24.36 
 
Photos of some selected plantations 
 
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact Sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO125 – 8,320.00 ha126 
As per records of NO – 15,881.06 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 2,989.82 ha 
As per records of NO – 530.11 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 5,330.18 ha 
As per records of NO – 15,350.95 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non 
availability of non forest land 
attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 16,992.14 ha & 49 km (In 
Jharkhand the bifurcated data of area of non-forest land 
and degraded forest land was not mentioned in the APOs). 
On Non forest land – NA 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 10,636.87 ha& 49 km (during 
2010-12) 
On Non forest land – NA 
                                                            
125 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
126 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 237 | P a g e  
Particulars (2006-12) 
Received Non forest land 
transferred/mutated 
As per records of RO - Nil 
As per records of NO – 530.11 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO - Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 8,320.00ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only 36 per cent while as per records of NO the 
figures were 15,881.06 ha and three per cent , respectively. As per records of RO, no non 
forest land was transferred /mutated in favour  of the forest department and notified as 
RF/PF while as per NO out of530.11 ha non fore st land transferred/ mutated in favour of 
forest department no non forest land was de clared as RF/PF. As per records of NO, 
10,636.87 ha & 49 km (during 2010-12) of forest land was afforested. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that notification  of non-forest land made available by user 
agencies was in progress and concerned DFOs had been directed to get it notified as RF/PF. 
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Excess diversion of 
5.87 ha forest land 
In Dhalbhum forest division, MoEF granted final approval (Stage II) in April 
2005 for diversion of 130.82 ha forest land despite request of user agencies for 
diversion of 124.95 ha forest land resulting in excess diversion of 5.87 ha forest 
land. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that there wa s no excess diversion of forest land as 
user agency had applied for diversion of  130.82 ha forest land.  The reply of 
Ministry was not based on facts as user  agency had applied for diversion of 
124.95 ha forest land. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare its annual accounts for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. 
Scrutiny of the records made available revealed that in Dhalbhum Social Forestry, 
Jamshedpur and Ranchi forest divisions an amount of ` 5.67 crore and in Bokaro, Deoghar 
and Dhanbad forest divisions, interest of ` 0.12 crore was not accounted for in the cash 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
238 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
book. In Giridh afforestation division cash b ook was not monthly closed in 2010-11 due to 
non adjustment of vouchers of ` 0.92 crore. In Deoghar and Chatra South forest divisions 
forest advances of  ` 0.31 crore were lying outstanding. Further, the bank reconciliation was 
not done by the State CAMPA for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12.  
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013)  that format of accounts was being finalised 
and meanwhile the accounts at division level were being maintained in the same way as 
being maintained for the department funds and the accounts would be got audited by 
C&AG empanelled CA in the year 2013-14.  As regards, non-accountal of government 
money/bank interest and non-adjustment of ou tstanding forest advances, Ministry stated 
that action was being taken to comply with the audit observations. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Jharkhand CAMPA met fo ur times during 2009-12 as against six 
times. The Executive Committee met four times during 2009-12. 
  

Compens
1. Ba
The to t
1,91,79
interpre
2008- F
State w
18.87pe
area. I
classes,
area u
hectare
forest a
open f o
assessm
showed
2011 as
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
127Source
satory Affor
ackground1
tal geograp
9,100 he c
etation of 
February 20
was 36,19,
er cen t of 
n terms o
, the State 
nder very 
e of area 
and 14,23,8
orest. Co m
ment of 2
d an incre a
ssessment. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA wa s
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
1
1,52,4
restation in I
127 
hical area o
ctare. Ba s
satellite d a
09, the fore
400 hecta
the State’
of forest c
had 1,77, 7
dense for
under mo d
800 hectare
mpared wit h
2009, the 
ase of 400 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
s constitut e
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
1,77,700
42,200
ndia 
of Karnata k
sed on 
ata of Oct o
est cover in
re which 
s geograp h
canopy de n
700 hectar e
est, 20,17 ,
derately d e
e of area u n
h the prev
forest c o
hectare in 
t (in hectar
ation funds
ed in June 
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
20,17,90
Karnataka
ka is 
the 
ober 
 the 
was 
hical 
nsity 
e of 
,900 
ense 
nder 
ious 
over 
the 
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
2010. Fun d
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
00
14,23,800
3,17,50
a 
te  
ds remitte d
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
est Survey of I
00
R
d by State 
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very de
Modera
Open fo
Scrub
Non fore
eport No. : 2
239 
CAMPA to 
ture incurre
nse forest
ately dense fo
orest
est area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
Ad-hoc 
ed there 
rest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
240 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA128 
Before 
2006 
235.69 Nil Nil Nil 
2006-07 238.10 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 69.53 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 38.11 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 62.27 58.56 Nil 58.56 
2010-11 111.37 50.91 80.65 28.82 
2011-12 81.32 41.57 58.73 11.66 
Total 836.39 151.04 139.38  
As can be seen from the table, in complianc e with the orders of the Supreme Court, 18 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of  ` 1 51.04 crore released against APOs, eight 
per cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of 
` 9.66 crore were not remitted by State CAMP A to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in 
State Government account.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Karnataka that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table24, 26 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore)   
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 There were 20 cases 129 involving forest land of 1336.36 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 130 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
77.51124 
2 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check of 
records of seven forest divisions 131 revealed that in 12 cases 132 NPV was not 
collected at revised rates. 
3.28 
                                                            
128Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of  the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
129 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
130M/s Balaji Mines & Minerals (P) Ltd, Mysore Cements Ltd., M/s Kirloskar Ferrous Industries Ltd., M/s Mysore 
Minerals Ltd., M/s Tungbhadra Minerals Ltd. M/s Subhash Project and Marketing Ltd., M/s S A Tawab 
124Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of Rs. 5.80 lakh per hectare (1336.36 x 5.8) 
131Hassan, Belgaum, Bangalore Urban, Ramanagar, Sagar, Bangalore Rural, Bannerghatta. 
132WPP, KNNL, BMIC Project, KPTCL etc.  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 241 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Description Amount
3 NPV/CA/PCA/CATP/ SMC works etc. we re not realized in eight cases 133 of 
diversion of 2,535.90 ha forest land in six forest divisions during 2002-12as of 
December 2012. 
188.37 
4 In twelve cases, where 489.58 ha forest land was diverted during the years 2002-
12, NPV of ` 28.40 crore was not realized from user agencies 134 as of December 
2012. Of this, in one case recovery of NPV of ` 2.88 crore was reported to be 
pending in the court.  
28.40 
5 In 11 cases, CA of ` 18.47 crore was short realised from user agencies 135 due to 
non-application of correct rates of CA, felling trees, cost towards payment of 
medicinal plants, cost of raising strip plantation.  
18.47 
6 CA of ` 1.08 crore and CATP of ` 2.01 crore in two cases was not realized from 
user agencies as on December 2012 for diversion of 449.55 ha of forest land for 
Upper Tunga Project.  
3.09 
 Total  319.12 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 136  56.64  37.67 68.98  26.51 42.32
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
 3.54  10.63 9.19  13.09 12.22
Protected 
Area137 
 0  00  0 0
CAT Plan  0.68  2.50 2.48  5.31 4.19
Other 
specified 
activities 
 0  00  0 0
Total 58.56 60.86 Nil 50.91 50.80 80.65 41.57 44.91 58.73
                                                            
133The user agencies included M/s KIOCL Ltd., M/s KNNL, M/s Sarjan Realities Ltd., M/s Suzlon Energy Ltd, M/s 
Enercon India PvtLtd.etc. 
134The user agencies included M/s KNNL, M/s Subash Project and Marketing, M/s KMPSSL, M/s Hind Traders 
etc. 
135The user agencies included M/s KPTCL, M/s KIOCL, M/s KNNL, M/s Suzlon Energy Ltd., Railways, Army etc. 
136 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 
137 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
242 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
APO for the years 2009-12 was approved by steeri ng committee in May-  June, after a delay 
of six months. Though the percentage of expe nditure has increased progressively during the 
years 2009-10 & 2010-11, concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of the State 
considering that ` 1028.60 crore (including interest) ar e accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA 
in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund for th e State (31 March 2012) and can be released 
only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure not 
authorised by State 
CAMPA guidelines 
and NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure 
at State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on purchase 
of vehicles (`3.36 crore), maintenance of guest house/office 
building (` 2.55 crore), financial assistance to defunct VFC’s 
(` 0.61 crore) and improvement of tree parks (` 0.19 crore). 
Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that there were no 
instructions in State CAMPA guidelines and NCAC that 
expenditure on creation of infrastructure at State forest 
headquarters and purchase of vehicles etc. would not be 
incurred.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as it was 
decided in the third meeting of NCAC that expenditure on 
creation of infrastructure at headquarters should not be 
incurred from CAMPA funds and it was allowed upto the 
range level officers. 
6.71
2 Non-maintenance 
of separate 
accounts 
 
As per state CAMPA guidelines, moneys realised from the 
user agencies in pursuance of the Supreme court’s orders or 
decision taken by the National Board for Wildlife involving 
cases of diversion of forestland in protected areas shall form 
a distinct corpus and shall be used exclusively for 
undertaking protection and conservation activity. However, 
no separate account for the amount of ` 8.08 crore received 
towards conservation and protection of protected areas was 
maintained by state CAMPA.  
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that 
action would be taken to maintain the separate bank 
account for money collected from user agencies for 
diversion of forest land in protected areas. 
8.08
3 Irregular sanction of 
forest advances to 
range forest officers 
 
As per instructions issued by  state CAMPA, forest advance 
upto ` 0.02 crore only should be sanctioned in exceptional 
cases and it should be adjusted within one month. However, 
in thirteen state forest divi sions, forest advance upto ` 0.58 
crore was sanctioned by State forest divisions during 2010-
12. Further, forest advances amounting to ` 0.41 crore paid 
in March 2011 were adjusted during May 2011 and 
September 2011 i.e. after delay of 2 to 6 months. 
0.58

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 243 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that all 
controlling officers and implementing officers had been 
instructed to strictly follow the instructions issued by the 
State CAMPA in regard to sancti on of forest advance and its 
adjustment. 
4 Excess expenditure Bandipur forest division incurred an extra expenditure of  
` 0.12 crore on work of desilting from tank/channel bed in 
slushy condition at higher rate of ` 107 per cum in place of  
` 58 per cum prescribed in SR of forest department.   
In another case, the division incurred an extra expenditure 
of ` 0.04 crore due to payment for work of excavation for 
formation of tank at the rate higher than prescribed in SR of 
forest department. Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that 
these works were executed at the technically scrutinised 
rates and there was no excess expenditure in these cases.  
The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the rates prescribed in 
SR of forest department for these works were not adopted 
and the works were executed at higher rates. 
0.16
 Total  15.53
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO138 –  5,098.91 ha139 
As per records of NO –  3,354.11  ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  –  3,053.74 ha 
As per records of NO –   2,231.96 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO –   2,045.17 ha 
As per records of NO –   1,122.15 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non 
availability of non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 2,187.28 ha 
On Non forest land –  2,594.07 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 19.60 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land 
transferred/mutated 
As per records of RO - Nil 
As per records of NO – 2,231.96 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – NA 
                                                            
138 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
139 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
244 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was5,098.91ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was 60 per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 3,354.11 ha and 67per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of2,231.96 ha non forest land was tr ansferred/ mutated in favour of forest 
department no non forest la nd was declared as RF/PF. As per records of NO, no 
afforestation was done on non forest land and afforestation done on degraded forest land 
was less than one per cent of the area to be afforested. 
5.2 Irregularities in land management. 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Instances of 
violation of FC  
Act, 1980 
In six cases of four forest divisions, forest area of 323.05 ha was diverted 
in violation of FC Act. Cases noticed included forest land leased to golf 
club, usage of forest area beyo nd the lease area, commencement of 
works by user agency even before granting Stage II approval, etc. 
2 Non 
compliance 
with the 
Supreme 
Court’s orders 
 
In Karkala forest division, as per the Supreme Court’s orders of October 
2002 mining operations on 4,605 ha forest land diverted to KIOCL in 
Kudremukh National Park were stopped from 1 January 2006. In spite of 
the Supreme Court’s above orders , in January 2007, state forest 
department notified an area of 3,703.55 ha as forest land which included 
major part of 3,203.55 ha on which mining operations were stopped 
from 1 January 2006. No action was taken by State forest department to 
resume control of 3,203.55 ha forest land from user agency as of 
December 2012. 
3 Inaction of 
state forest 
department 
for 600.16 ha 
unutilised 
forest land 
lying with user 
agency 
 
• In Banglore (Rural) forest division, 102 ha forest land was found 
unutilised out of 565 ha forest land diverted in August 2002 for 
establishing Banglore International Airport. MoEF directed (June 
2010) PCCF to conduct survey and re sume back excess forest land 
lying unutilized with the lessee. However, no further progress was 
made in this regard (October 2012). 
• In another case, 411.16 ha forest  land was found unutilized which 
was diverted in July 2000 for rehabilitation of displaced persons of 
“Sea Bird” project. Further, forest land was changed to revenue land 
in revenue records without approval of MoEF. 
• In yet another case, 87 ha forest land lying unutilized out of 330 ha 
forest land diverted to PGCIL for laying higher power transmission 
line in 2002-03 was not taken back by forest department. 
4 Non execution 
of CA work  
 
In 224 cases, against diversion of 8,692.96 ha forest land during 2002-09, 
CA was to be carried out on 8,363.87 ha non forest land (3,853.29 ha 
degraded forest land and 4,510.58 ha non-forest land). As of 31 March 
2012, CA was carried out in 5,658.82 ha (2,918.89 ha degraded forest 
land and 2,739.93 ha non-forest land) and CA in 2,917.14 ha (1,079.60 ha 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 245 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
degraded forest land and 1,837.54 ha non-forest land) was yet to be 
undertaken. Ministry stated (April/J une 2013) that efforts were being 
made to gear up the machinery to take up CA works on priority by 
sorting out the difficulties in execution of CA works. 
5 Incorrect 
identification 
of non-forest 
land for CA 
works 
 
• In Bellary forest division, CA could not be taken up on 659.30 ha 
non forest land as the area identified was hill rock area and was 
not fit for raising plantations. 
• Further, in Bhadravati forest di vision 72.52 ha non forest land 
identified in October 2010 was in the possession of State Forest 
Department from 2003-04 and 12.98 ha out of 72.52 ha non 
forest land was already afforestated in 1990-91. 
Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that non-forest land received from user 
agencies for CA had already been mutated in favour of forest 
department.  The reply is not tenabl e as non-forest land received from 
user agencies was not fit for raising plantations. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts  
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines, the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Karnataka CAMPA met three times during 2009-12 as against six 
times.  
Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that since the Chief Secretary of the state was chairman of 
Steering Committee, many times the meeting were cancelled due to busy schedules of Chief 
Secretary and it would be  difficult to convene the meeting of steering once in six month as 
per State CAMPA guidelines.  However, necessary action would be taken to convene the 
meetings of Steering Committee as per guidelines. 
  

Report N
246 | P
1. Ba
The t o
38,86,3
interpre
2009, 
17,30,0
the St a
forest c
1,44,20
forest, 
moder
a
of area 
previo
u
showed
2011 as
Forest c
2. Co
State CA
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
140Source
21,
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground1
otal geogr a
300 hec t
etation of 
the forest 
000 hectare 
ate’s geog r
canopy de n
00 hectare 
9,39,400 
ately dense 
under open
us assessme
d a decrea s
ssessment. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A , funds rel
during the 
                      
e: India State o
,50,500
013 
140 
aphical ar e
tare. Ba s
satellite d
cover in 
which was
raphical ar
nsity class e
of area u n
hectare 
forest and 
n forest. Co
ent of 2009,
se of 2,40 0
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
1,44,2
ea of Ker
sed on 
data of Fe b
the Stat e
 44.52per c
ea. In ter m
es, the Sta t
nder very 
of area 
6,46,400 he
ompared wi
, the forest
0 hectare i
t (in hectar
ation funds
d in Novemb
Ad-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
200
9,39,40
6,46,
5,800
Kerala
ala is 
the 
bruary 
e was 
cent of 
ms of 
te had 
dense 
under 
ectare 
th the 
 cover 
in the 
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
ber 2009. Fu
MPA to State
11-12 were
ished by Fore
00
,400
Com
te  
unds remitt
e CAMPA an
as detailed
est Survey of I
pensatory A
ted by State
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very 
Mode
Open
Scrub
Non f
Afforestation
e CAMPA to
ture incurre
dense forest
erately dense 
n forest
b
forest area
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
 
forest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 247 | P a g e  
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA141 
Before 
2006 
11.69 Nil Nil Nil 
2006-07 10.98 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 5.93 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 0.59 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 0.34 1.37 0.97 0.40 
2010-11 0.03 Nil Nil 0.40 
2011-12 1.43 Nil Nil 0.40 
Total 30.99 1.37 0.97  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, four per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released during 2009-12. Of ` 1.37 crore released, 30 per cent  remained 
unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V / C A / P C A  e t c .  i n  K e r a l a  t h a t  c a m e  t o  t h e  
notice of audit are given below.  The gist of these cases is also given in table24and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 There were 2 cases 142 involving forest land of 14.77 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 143 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
0.86144 
2 In Punalur and Konni forest divisions, recovery of  NPV/CA of ` 0.29 crore from a 
user to whom in principle approval wa s granted by MoEF in November 2005 for 
diversion of 4.4 ha forest land for  drawing transmission line was not made. The 
user agency completed the work during 2006 without final approval of MoEF. No 
action was taken by MoEF for recovery of NPV/CA (December 2012). 
0.29 
3 During test check of records of State CAMPA it was found that no NPV/CA was 
collected for diversion of 7,693.23 ha forest land for rehabilitation of tribals after 
30 October 2002 as the matter was sub-judice  in a court of law. Ministry stated 
(April 2013) that the matter of exemptio n from payment of NPV was pending in 
the Supreme Court. 
 
 Total 1.15 
                                                            
141Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
142 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
143 Plantation Corpn.  
144Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (14.77 x 5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
248 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA fund 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and utilisation of the 
funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 145  1.34 0.97  2.06     
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
 0 0  0.35     
Protected 
Area146 
 0 0  0     
CAT Plan  0 0  0     
Other 
specified 
activities 
 0.03 0  0.29     
Total 1.37 1.37 0.97 Nil 2.70 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
For the year 2009-10 Ad-hoc CA MPA released funds in the month of March 2010 but the 
APO was approved in the month of March 2011. For the year 2010-11 APO was approved by 
Steering Committee in February 2012 but no funds  were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA. APO 
was not prepared for the year 2011-12. The percentage of expenditure incurred as against 
the amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA was 71 per cent in 2009-10. No expenditure was 
incurred in the years 2010-11 and 2011-12. Concer ns remain on the absorptive capacity of 
the State considering that ` 37.37 crore (including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc 
CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be 
released only for specified forestry related activities. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that funds agains t APOs for 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 had 
not been released by Ad-hoc CAMPA.  The reply was not based on facts as State CAMPA 
received a sum of ` 1.37 crore in the year 2009-10 from Ad-hoc CAMPA, and thereagainst 
an expenditure of ` 0.97 crore was incurred during the year. 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
145 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
146 Protected Area Funds is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 249 | P a g e  
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
 (` in crore) 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
Expenditure not 
authorised by State 
CAMPA guidelines 
and NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test check 
revealed that expenditure of ` 0.96 crore was incurred on 
purchase of vehicles i.e. entire amount expended. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that vehicles were purchased for 
strengthening the functioning of fo rest stations and for execution 
of CA works.  The reply of Ministry was not based on facts as no 
site specific compensatory afforestation was envisaged in the APO 
for 2009-10 and the entire money was expended only on these 
vehicles. 
0.96 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
 
Particulars(2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO147 – 75.99 ha148 
As per records of NO – 156.07 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 25.32 ha 
As per records of NO –  Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 50.67 ha 
As per records of NO – 156.07 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
NA 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 295.92 ha 
On Non forest land – NA 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land 
transferred/mutated 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO –Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
                                                            
147 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
148 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
250 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 75.99ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only 33 per cent while as per records of NO the 
figures were 156.07 ha and zero per cent, respectively. As per records of RO and NO, no non 
forest land was transferred /mutated in favour  of the forest department and notified as 
RF/PF. As per records of NO, no afforestatio n was done on non forest land and degraded 
forest land. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. Ministry stated (April 2013)  that account would be prepared after 31 
March 2013 as funds for APOs for 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 had not been released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA.  The reply was not based on  facts as State CAMPA received a sum of ` 1.37 
crore in the year 2009-10 from Ad-hoc CAMPA,  and thereagainst an expenditure of ` 0.97 
crore was incurred during the year. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Kerala CAMPA met two times during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met two times during 2009-12. 
Accepting the facts, (April 2013) Ministry stated  that frequency of meetings of state level 
committees would be regularised as per the guidelines hereafter. 
  

Compens
1. Ba
The t o
Pradesh
interpre
Decemb
was 77
cent of 
of for e
had 6,
dense 
f
modera
hectare
with t h
forest c
the 201
Forest c
2. Co
Funds r
State CA
were as
 
 
 
               
149Source
2
satory Affor
ackground1
otal geogr
h is 3,08,2 4
etation of 
ber 2008, t
,70,000 he
the State’s 
est canopy 
64,000 he c
forest, 34,98
ately den s
e of area u n
he previou s
cover doe s
11 assessme
cover – Typ
ompensato
remitted b y
AMPA and 
s detailed b
                      
e: India State o
2,24,14,900
restation in I
149 
aphical a r
4,500 hecta
satellite d a
he forest c o
ctare whic h
geographic
density cl a
ctare of a
8,600 hecta
se forest 
nder open f
s assessme
s not show 
ent. 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
y State CA M
expenditur
elow. 
                      
of Forest Repo
6,64,00
ndia 
Mad
rea of M a
re. Based o
ata of Oct o
over in the
h was 25. 2
cal area. In t
asses, the 
area under 
are of area 
and 36, 0
orest. Com
nt of 200 9
any chan g
t (in hectar
ation funds
MPA to Ad -
re incurred 
 
ort 2011 publ
00 34,9
36,07
dhya Prad
adhya 
on the 
ober - 
 state 
21 per 
terms 
State 
very 
under 
07,400 
pared 
9, the 
ges in 
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
-hoc CAM P
there again
ished by Fore
98,600
7,400
6,3
desh 
te 
PA ,funds r e
nst during t
est Survey of I
9,600
R
eleased by 
he period 2
ndia. 
Very d
Mode
Open 
Scrub
Non fo
eport No. : 2
251 
Ad-hoc C A
2006-07 to 
dense forest
erately dense 
forest
orest area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
AMPA to 
2011-12 
forest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
252 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 (`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of funds 
with State CAMPA150 
No date 49.43 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 225.7 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 103.51 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 114.38 53.05 Nil 53.05 
2010-11 285.1 50.97 32.66 71.36 
2011-12 124.41 53.52 49.87 75.01 
Total 902.53 157.54 82.53  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 17 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 157.54 crore released against APOs, 48 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Madhya Pradesh that came 
to the notice of audit are given below. The gist  of these cases is also given in table 24, 26 
and 27 in Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount 
1 There were 22 cases151 involving forest land of 6,804.25 ha in which NPV was 
not collected from the user agencies 152 to whom in principle approval was 
granted before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
394.65153 
2 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test 
check of records of seven forest division 154  revealed that in 14 cases NPV 
was not collected at revised rates. 
3.80 
3 NPV/CA etc. of ` 68.72 crore was not realized from user agencies to whom 
forest land had already been diverted. 
68.72 
4 In 36 cases of land diversion sanctioned from 1984 to 2011 in six divisions, 
NPV and CA of ` 45.67 crore as worked out by audit was not calculated by 
the Nodal Officer, FCA. 
45.67 
 Total  512.84 
                                                            
150 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
151 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
152 These included Mundia Khera Tank, Omkareshwar Multipurpose Project, Arjungawa Undarvahan Project, 
NMDC, Manish Dixit, M/s NCL, M/s BLA Industries etc.  
153Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in these cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(6804.25 x5.8) 
154Indore, Dhar, Sendhva, Satna, North Sivni, Narshingpur, Devas 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 253 | P a g e  
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
     (` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 155     2.48 2.35  78.30 21.83 
Compensatory 
Afforestation 
    42.76 28.64  49.69 23.80 
Protected 
Area156 
    0 0  12.00 1.00 
CAT Plan     0.47 0.16  0.02 0.04 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    8.05 1.51  3.63 3.20 
Total 53.05 Nil  Nil  50.97 53.76 32.66 53.52 143.64 49.87 
Funds for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without APOs. 
APO for the years 2011-12 was submitted after a delay of seven months. The percentage of 
expenditure incurred as against the amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA was zero per cent 
in 2009-10, 64 per cent  in 2010-11 and 93 per cent  in 2011-12 though the levels of 
expenditure were 61 per cent  in 2010-11 and 35 per cent  in 2011-12 of the amounts 
released. Though the expenditure had increase d progressively over the last three years, 
concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 1,341.19 crore 
(including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only fo r specified forestry related 
activities. 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO157 – 20,740.52 ha158 
As per records of NO – 9,753.47 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – 2,332.49 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 20,740.52 ha 
As per records of NO – 7,420.98 ha 
                                                            
155 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
156 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management  
157 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
158 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
254 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non 
availability of non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – NA 
On Non forest land – NA 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 5,136.97 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land 
transferred/mutated 
As per records of RO- 492.80 ha 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 20,740.52 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was zero per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 9,753.47 ha and 24 per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, 492.80 ha non forest 
land was transferred /mutated in favour of th e forest department and no land was notified 
as RF/PF while as per NO non forest land was no t transferred/ mutated in favour of forest 
department and declared as RF/PF. As per reco rds of NO, no afforestation was done on non 
forest land and afforestation was done on 5,13 6.97 degraded forest land. Ministry stated 
(June 2013) that afforestation would be done in 137 projects in current financial year. 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Irregular grant 
of mining lease 
 
As per FC Act 1980, approval for diversion of forest land for 
grant/renewal of mining leases shall normally be granted for a period co-
terminus with the period of mining lease proposed to be granted under 
MMDR Act, 1957 or rules frames thereunder, but not exceeding 30 years.
In Shivpuri forest division, a stone mining lease was sanctioned for 
217.06 ha forest land in July 2005 stipul ating that period of mining lease 
shall be for a period co-terminus with the period of mining lease 
proposed to be granted under MMDR Act, 1957. The sanction however 
did not restrict the lease period to 30 years as required under FCA.   
2 Irregular 
utilisation of 
wildlife 
protection 
money 
According to para 11(ii) of State CAMPA Guidelines, the recurring as well 
as non-recurring expenditure for the management of State CAMPA, will 
be met by utilizing a part of the income from interest received on funds 
invested by it, but the income from the funds received from the user 
agencies under provisions of sect ions 18, 26A or 35 of the Wildlife 
Protection Act, 1972 will be used for under taking the activities related to 
protection of biodiversity and wildlife. 
However, Jabalpur division utilized ` 0.45crore on training and other 
activities which was in violation of  Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 255 | P a g e  
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
During test check of records of State CAMPA it was found that State CAMPA did not prepare 
annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the prescribed format and cash book 
for the funds received from Ad-hoc CAMPA an d expenditure incurred therefrom. Further, 
State CAMPA failed to provide payment vouchers and receipt books for audit scrutiny. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action was being taken to prepare the annual accounts in 
the prescribed format and these would be submitted to audit. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Madhya Pradesh CAMPA met two times during 2009-12 as against 
six times. The Executive Committee met seven times during 2009-12.  
8. Good practices in the state 
According to information provided by Nodal Offi cer, FCA, regular monitoring and evaluation 
of plantation was done as per standardised mechanism by using e-Green watch software. 
  

Report N
256 | P
1. Ba
The 
Mahara
on the 
Octobe
in the 
S
was 1
geogra
p
canopy 
8,73,60
forest, 
moder
a
hectare
Compar
of 200
assess
m
Forest c
2. Co
State C
hoc CA
there a
g
 
 
               
159Source
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground1
total ge
ashtra is 3,0
interpretat
r-Decembe
State was 5
6.46 per 
phical are a
density c
00 hectare o
20,81,500 
ately dens e
e of are a
red with t h
9, the for e
ment. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
MPA , fun d
gainst durin
                      
e: India State o
2,
013 
159 
ographical 
07,71,300 h
tion of sat e
r 2008, th e
50,64,600 h
cent of 
a. In ter m
classes, th
of area unde
hectare o f
e forest a n
a under o
he previou s
est cover 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constitute
ds released 
ng the perio
                      
of Forest Repo
52,91,000
M
area 
ectare. Bas
ellite data 
e forest co v
hectare whi
the Stat e
ms of for e
e State h
er very den
f area un d
nd 21,09,5 0
open fore
s assessm e
showed a 
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Septe m
by Ad-hoc 
od 2006-07 
 
ort 2011 publ
8,73,600 20,
Maharasht
of 
ed 
of 
ver 
ch 
e’s 
est 
ad 
nse 
der 
00 
st. 
ent 
marginal 
re)-2011 
of the Stat
mber 2009.
CAMPA to
to 2011-12
ished by Fore
,81,500
21
Com
tra 
decrease o
te   
 Funds re m
o State CA M
 were as de
est Survey of I
,09,500
4,15,700
pensatory A
of 400 he c
mitted by S t
MPA and e x
etailed belo
ndia 
0
Very dense
Moderatel
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest
Afforestation
ctare in t h
tate CAMPA
xpenditure i
w. 
e forest
ly dense fores
st
t area
n in India 
he 2011 
 
A to Ad-
incurred 
st

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 257 | P a g e  
 
 
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA160 
2006-07 NA Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 NA Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 NA Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 243.05 Nil Nil Nil 
2010-11 176.60 89.00 89.00 Nil 
2011-12 318.80 167.64 130.00 37.64 
Total 738.45 256.64 219.00  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 35 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 256.64 crore released against APOs, 15 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in Maharashtra that came to 
the notice of audit are given below. The gist of  these cases is also given in table 24 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount 
1 There were 63 cases 161 involving forest land of 1870.63 ha in which NPV was 
not collected from the user agencies 162 to whom in principle approval was 
granted before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
108.50163
2 In 106 cases, NPV of ` 111.79 crore was not recovered from user agencies 164 in 
lieu of diversion of 1927.38 ha forest land during the years 2003 to 2007. The 
forest land diverted was used for mining, laying pipe line, hydro projects, stone 
quarry, tank, wind project etc. Accepting th e facts, Ministry stated (June 2013) 
that efforts were being made to recover outstanding NPV from user agencies.  
111.79 
                                                            
160 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
161 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
162M/s Swastik Complex, Shri Mahesh H Khedia, Shri Neeraj H. Khedia, M/s Sawala Traders, M/s BR Akre M/s 
Western Coalfields Ltd., M/s Manganese Ore India Ltd. , M/s Sabir Stone, Smt. Baranbai Sitaram Kamble, M/s 
Indirabai Girade, Shri Chandrajit Singh Bagga 
163Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (1870.63 x 5.8) 
164 Irrigation Department, PWD, MSEB, M/s D R Matre, M/s D N Pawar, M/s M A Patil, M/s H M Shaha, M/s 
Mumbra Stone Crushing, M/s Shafi Ibrahim Shaikh, Patel Engineering etc. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
258 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Description Amount 
3 In Gadchiroli, Central Chanda, Thane, Shahapur and Nandurbar forest 
divisions, NPV of ` 62.48 crore was not realized from user agencies 165 to whom 
in principle approval was granted by MoEF. Accepting the facts, Ministry 
stated (June 2013) that efforts were be ing made to recover outstanding NPV 
from user agencies.  
62.48 
4 CA of ` 8.41 crore was short-assessed from user agency 166  in lieu of diversion 
of 171.58 forest land for construction of national highway no. 16 from 
Sironcha to Patalagudam due to non application of prescribed rates of CA. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that proposal  of diversion of forest land was not 
finally approved and it would be consid ered for final approval after collection 
of all dues.  Thus, the CA at revised rates as pointed out by audit was yet to be 
recovered from the user agency. 
8.41 
5 In Alibag forest division CA of ` 0.33 crore was short realized from user agency 
in lieu of diversion 39.48 ha forest land as CA was to be executed on double 
degraded forest land.  
Ministry stated (June 2013) that recovery of twice the amount of CA was not 
required as non-forest land was provided by user agency to forest department.  
However, Ministry’s reply was not supported with relevant documents. 
0.33 
 Total  291.51 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released by 
Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 167     53.30 53.30  80.57 80.57 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    35.70 35.70  49.43 49.43 
Protected 
Area168 
    0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan     0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0 0  0 0 
Total Nil Nil Nil 89.00 89.00 89.00 167.64 130.00 130.00 
                                                            
165These included BSNL, Irrigation Department, State PWD, MMRDA, Narmada Development Department, M/s 
Chetak Stone, Mahavir Construction etc. 
166Border Road Organisation 
167 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
168 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 259 | P a g e  
APO for the year 2009-10 was not prepared and no funds were releas ed for the year 2009-
10. APO for the year 2010-11 was approved by the Steering Committee in April 2011 i.e. 
after the close of the financial year and funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without 
approved APO in February 2010. APO for the year 2011-12 was approved after a delay of 10 
months and funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without approved APO.  
From the table it is evident that the implem enting agencies could not expend substantial 
portion of amount released by the State CAMPA in the years 2011-12. The level of 
expenditure was 78 per cent in 2011-12 of the amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA. Though 
the expenditure had increased progressively during the years 2010-12, concerns remain on 
the absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 1,859.09 crore (including interest) 
are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Co mpensatory Afforestation Fund for the State 
(31 March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure 
at State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure of ` 6.19 crore was incurred 
on purchase of vehicles for officers, furniture, computers and 
eco-tourism, repair of forest rest houses and trainings (` 0.40 
crore) and construction & renovation of Van Bhawan building 
(` 4.88 crore), purchase of solar energy equipment for Van 
Bhawan building ( ` 0.91 crore) etc. Ministry stated 
(April/June 2013) that there were no instructions of NCAC 
that expenditure for creation of infrastructure at State forest 
headquarters would not be incurred.  The reply of Ministry is 
not tenable as it was decided in the third meeting of NCAC 
that expenditure on creation of infrastructure at 
headquarters should not be incurred from CAMPA funds. 
6.19 
2 Wrong 
utilization 
certificate of 
the CCF 
 
Out of ` 1.19 crore released for construction of division office 
building and staff quarter and supply of water etc. during  
June- November 2011, an amount of ` 0.91 crore was lying 
unspent with state PWD, whereas this amount was shown as 
expenditure during the year 2010-11. The PWD had not 
incurred any expenditure and did not submit utilization & 
completion certificate, however a utilization certificate was 
submitted by CCF to Additional PCCF (WL), Mumbai. Further, 
staff quarters were also not constructed as of December 
2012. This resulted in blocking of ` 1.19 crore for over one 
year and the entire expenditure and issue of false Utilisation 
certificate. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that construction work could not 
be started for want of clearance under FC Act, 1980 and the 
UC furnished by implementing agency was normal procedural 
1.19 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
260 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
work.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the UC was 
issued by implementing agency without incurring 
expenditure on the sanctioned work. 
3 Blocking of 
CAMPA funds of 
` 18.77 lakh  
 
During the year 2011-12, an amount of ` 20.00 lakh was paid 
to two Village Eco Develo pment Committee (VEDC) for 
plantation under NPV component for preparation of micro 
plan, drinking water facility, LPG gas, planting drumstick 
trees. The VEDC had utilized only ` 1.23 lakh (4 per cent  of 
released amount) as of Decemb er 2012. This resulted in 
blocking of CAMPA funds of ` 18.77 lakh for one year. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that funds would be utilised fully 
by the end of year 2012-13.  The reply of Ministry is not 
tenable since the work which was to be completed in the 
year 2011-12, had still not been completed. 
0.19 
 Total  7.57 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO169 – 2,867.22 ha170 
As per records of NO – 6,361.09 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – 4,077.99 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 2,867.22 ha 
As per records of NO – 2,283.10 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 3,916.65 ha 
On Non forest land – 4,913.26 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 3,349.07  ha  
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land dive rted for non forestry purpose s was 2,867.22 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was zero per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
                                                            
169 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
170 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 261 | P a g e  
were 6,361.09ha and 64 per cent. As per records of RO, no non forest land was transferred 
/mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per NO out of 
3,349.07  ha non forest land transferred/ muta ted in favour of forest department, no non 
forest land was declared as RF/PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation was done on non 
forest land and degraded forest land.  
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Non execution of 
CA work 
 
In Nagpur forest division, during 2008-11,  no CA work was carried out on non-
forest land received from various user agencies in lieu of diversion of forest 
land though an amount of ` 21.73 crore was received from user agencies on 
account of CA. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that CA work had been planned in APO for 2013-
14. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare its annual acco unts for the years 2010-11and 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. It was 
observed that the state CAMPA did not maintain  cash book and subsidiary ledgers properly 
for the funds received from Ad-hoc CAMPA and expenditure incurred therefrom. Due to 
improper maintenance of cash book and subsid iary ledgers, the receipts and payments for 
the years 2010-12 could not be verified in audi t. It was also observed that there was a 
difference of ` 0.07 crore between cash book and bank pass book which could not be 
reconciled (December 2012).In three divisions (Thane, Shahapur and Nandurbar) it was 
observed that assets register as required to be maintained as per GF Rs was not maintained 
by these divisions. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (June 2013)  that accounts would now be maintained in 
the prescribed format. As regards reconcilia tion of cash book and bank passbook and 
maintenance of assets register Ministry stated that action had been initiated.  
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Maharashtra CAMPA me t three times during 2009-12 as against six 
times. The Executive Committee met thirteen times during 2009-12.  

Report N
262 | P
 
1. Bac
The to t
22,32,7
interpre
Februar
was 17,
cent o f
terms o
State ha
dense 
under 
10,20,
9
forest. 
assessm
showed
hectare
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
171Source
No. : 21 of 20
age  
kground171
tal geogra p
700 hect a
etation of 
ry 2009, th e
,09,000 hec
f the Stat e
of forest c a
ad 73,000 h
forest, 6, 1
moderate
900 hectar
Compare
ment of 2
d a margi
e in the 201
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
100
013 
 
phical area 
are. Bas e
satellite d a
e forest co v
ctare which
e’s geogra p
anopy den s
hectare of a
15,100 he
ely dense 
e of are a
ed with 
2009, the 
nal decre a
1 assessme
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
10,20,900
5,23,600
of Manip u
ed on 
ata of Jan u
ver in the S
h was 76.5 4
phical are a
sity classes,
area under 
ctare of a
forest 
a under o
the pre v
forest c o
ase of 19 ,
ent. 
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Augus t
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
73,000
0
Manipur
ur is 
the 
uary-
State 
4 per 
a. In 
 the 
very 
area 
and 
open 
vious 
over 
,000 
re)-2011 
of the Stat
t 2009. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
6,15,100
Com
 
te 
nds remitt e
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
est Survey of I
pensatory A
ed by State 
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very dense
Moderatel
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest
Afforestation
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
e forest
y dense fores
st
 area
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
t

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 263 | P a g e  
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA172 
2006-07 7.46 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 11.40 0.75 Nil 0.75 
2010-11 12.71 1.34 1.89 0.20 
2011-12 3.02 Nil 0.11 0.09 
Total 34.59 2.09 2.00  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, six per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 2.09 crore released  against APOs, four per 
cent remained unutilized.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in Manipur that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table27 in Chapter 3. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount 
1 NPV/CA etc. of ` 63.78 crore 173 was not realized from user agencies (Central 
government undertakings/state departments) in lieu of diversion of 918.00 ha 
forest land during the years 2009-11 even after lapse of one to four years of in 
principle (stage-I) approval of MoEF. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that NPV/CA of ` 47.64 crore had since been 
realised leaving a balance of outstanding NPV/CA of ` 16.14 crore as of 
February 2013. 
63.78 
2 NPV/CA etc. of ` 42.67 crore (NPV- ` 38.73 crore CA- ` 3.84 crore, PCA - ` 0.10 
crore) was not recovered by the forest department from NF/NE Railways 
though the user agency started executio n of work without final approval of 
MoEF. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the prop osal of diversion of forest land was 
under consideration of MoEF. 
42.67 
 Total 106.45 
 
 
                                                            
172 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
173NPV – ` 62.26 crore, CA – ` 1.33 crore,  ACA – ` 0.19 crore. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
264 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 174     0 0   0 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    0.05 0.05   0 
Protected 
Area175 
    1.60 1.56   0.11 
CAT Plan     0 0   0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0.31 0.28   0 
Total 0.75 Nil  Nil  1.34 1.96 1.89 Nil Nil 0.11 
Funds released by Ad-hoc CAMPA during 2009 -10 could not be utilized as APO for 2009-10 
was not approved by the steering committee duri ng the year. Further, APO for 2011-12 was 
forwarded to MoEF, at fag end of the year . As such, no fund was released during 2011-12 
and hence the APO could not be executed during 2011-12. Concerns remain on the 
absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 37.33 crore (including interest) are 
accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compen satory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 
March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure 
not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines 
and NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test check 
revealed that expenditure was incurred on construction of 
community hall, assistance to local club, distribution of sewing 
machines and development of eco-tourism etc. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that expenditure was incurred on 
the activities related to wildlife protection and management.  
The reply is not tenable as the expenditure listed above were 
not authorised by State CAMPA guidelines and NCAC. 
0.26 
2 Irregular use 
of wildlife 
fund 
No separate account under cor pus fund was maintained for a 
sum of ` 5.04 crore received from user agency for diversion of 
10.00 ha of protected area of forest land for Reconnaissance 
0.11 
                                                            
174 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
175 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 265 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
Survey and Track Clearance works. Further, state CAMPA 
utilized ` 0.11 crore out of ` 5.04 crore on wildlife 
conservation works without approval of Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation had been 
noted for future reference in similar cases and opening of 
separate corpus fund would be discussed with the State 
CAMPA to comply with guidelines. 
3 Non 
maintenance 
of records 
In two forest divisions (Senapati & Eastern), an expenditure of  
` 0.28 crore on 172 ha land during 2004-11 by Senapati forest 
division and expenditure of ` 0.18 crore and their maintenance 
on 63 ha land during 2004-08 by Eastern forest division was 
incurred on plantations and maintenance. However no records 
of plantations and their maintenance were maintained by 
these divisions. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation regarding 
maintaining of records of deforestation and felling of trees had 
been noted for compliance in future. 
0.46 
 Total     0.83 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO176 – 266.00 ha177 
As per records of NO – 33.88 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 60.00 ha 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 206.00ha 
As per records of NO – 33.88 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 2,415.78 ha (2003-11) 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 263.44 ha  
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
                                                            
176 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
177 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
266 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 266ha and the non forest 
land received in lieu thereof was 23 per cent while as per records of NO the figures were 
33.88 ha and zero per cent, respectively. As per records of  RO and NO, no non forest land 
was transferred /mutated in favour of the fore st department and notified as RF/PF. As per 
records of NO, no afforestation was done on non forest la nd and afforestation done on 
degraded forest land was11per cent of the area to be afforested. 
5.2   Irregularities in land management 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Non- 
maintenance 
of records of 
deforestation  
 
During the years 2003-12, 1,207.89 ha forest land was diverted involving 
deforestation/felling of trees. However, no records of 
deforestation/felling of trees and number of trees required to be planted 
in lieu was maintained by the state fo rest divisions.  In the absence of 
these records, the extent of afforest ation done in lieu of deforestation 
could not be ascertained in audit. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation had been noted for 
compliance in future. 
2 Project 
without 
approval of 
MoEF 
The state government made a proposal for diversion of 491.67 ha of 
forest land within the jurisdiction of the DFO, Tamenglong, DFO Jiribam 
and DFO Northern Forest Divisions to the MoEF during June, 2012. Cross 
verification of records maintained by the Commissioner of Taxes, 
Manipur however, disclosed that the said project had been taken up by 
the User Agency viz. NF/NE Railways, Imphal since 2010. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that proposal of diversion of forest land was 
under consideration of MoEF. 
3 Infringement 
of rights of 
the dwellers 
of the 
diverted land 
 
404 families residing in the forest land were displaced from their 
residences as a result of diversion of forest land of 595 ha during 2009-10 
for taking up Thoubal Multipurpose Project with consequential effect of 
infringement of right to hold and live in the forest area for habitation or 
for self-cultivation. No action was ta ken by the forest department for the 
resettlement of affected families. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that responsibility of providing rehabilitation 
and resettlements to the affected families was of the State Government 
and not of the forest department.  The fact remains that Ministry did not 
take up the matter of rehabilitation of affected families with the State 
Government. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 267 | P a g e  
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. The financial statemen ts for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 were 
prepared by the Chartered Accountant on cash receipts and disbursement basis. Further, 
State CAMPA did not reconcile th e amount deposited with Ad-h oc CAMPA. Further, as per 
State CAMPA guidelines, the St ate Government and the MoEF  had the powers to conduct 
special audit or performance audit of the state CAMPA. However, no such audit was 
conducted. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action for preparation of accounts in prescribed format and 
reconciliation of receipts had been initiated. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Manipur CAMPA met two ti mes during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met four times during 2009-12.Accepting the facts, Ministry 
stated(April 2013) that meetings of the Steering Committee and Executive Committee would 
be held as per guidelines. 
  

Report N
268 | P
1. Ba
The t
Meghal
on the 
Novem
cover 
hectare
State’s 
forest 
c
had 43 ,
dense f
under 
7,06,70
forest. 
assessm
showed
hectare
Forest c
2. Co
State CA
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
178 Sourc
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground1
total geo
laya is 22, 4
interpretati
ber-Decem
in the s t
e which was
geographic
canopy den
,300 hecta r
forest, 9,7 7
moderately
00 hectare 
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a margin
e in the 201
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State 
7,0
48,500
013 
178 
graphical 
42,900 hec t
ion of satel
ber 2008, 
tate was 
s 77.02 per 
cal area. I n
sity classes
re of area u
7,500 hect a
y dense f
of area u n
d with th e
009, the f o
al decreas e
1 assessme
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Rep
06,700
4,66,900
M
area of 
tare. Based 
lite data of 
the forest 
17,27,500 
cent of the 
n terms of 
s, the State 
under very 
are of area 
forest and 
nder open 
e previous 
orest cover 
e of 4,600 
ent.. 
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Decemb
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
port 2011 pub
43,300
Meghalay
re)-2011 
of the Stat
ber 2009. Fu
PA to Stat e
11-12were a
blished by Fore
9,77,5
Com
ya 
te 
unds remitt
e CAMPA a n
as  detailed
est Survey of 
00
pensatory A
ted by State
nd expendit
 below. 
India. 
Very dense
Moderatel
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest
Afforestation
e CAMPA to
ture incurre
e forest
y dense fores
st
t area
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
st

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 269 | P a g e  
 (` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA179 
2006-07 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 0.64 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 0.33 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 Nil 0.10 Nil 0.10 
2010-11 88.11 Nil Nil 0.10 
2011-12 1.28 Nil Nil 0.10 
Total 90.36 0.10 Nil  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 0.11 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released  between 2009-12. Of ` 0.10 crore released against APOs, 100 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. This shows 
that no schemes of NPV/CA were undertaken  by state CAMPA during the years 2009-12. 
Concerns remain on the absorptive ca pacity of the State considering that ` 96.92 crore 
(including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only fo r specified forestry related 
activities. Funds of ` 0.06 crore were not remitted by State CAMPA to Ad -hoc CAMPA and 
were deposited in State Government account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Meghalaya that came to 
the notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table 24, 26 and 
27 in Chapter 3. 
(`in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 There was one case 180 involving forest land of 99.00 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agency 181 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
5.74182 
2 The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV in March 2008. However test check 
of records of State CAMPA revealed that in four cases 183 NPV was not collected 
at revised rates. 
0.42 
                                                            
179 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
180 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
181 Hydro Electric Project 
182Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(99 x5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
270 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Description Amount
3 In three cases 184 there was short realisation of NPV due to short application of 
NPV rates prior to March 2008.Ministry stated (April 2013) that action had been 
taken for the recovery of NPV from user agencies.  
0.37 
4 State CAMPA audit revealed th at seven cement companies 185 had a declared 
land holding 2,608.43 ha. Out of this 8 38.04 ha was assessed forest land. The 
companies were operating without obta ining forest clearance from MoEF. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action had been taken for the recovery of NPV 
from user agencies, where necessary. 
55.05186 
 Total 61.58 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
(`in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Non 
execution of 
CA work 
 
CA work was not executed during the year 2010-11 as funds of 
CA of ` 0.10 crore remitted by Ad-hoc CAMPA to state CAMPA 
in April 2010 were still lying unu tilised with the state CAMPA 
even after lapse of over two and a half years. Ministry did not 
furnish reply to audit observation (April 2013).  
0.10
2 Non 
execution of 
CA work in 
lieu of felling 
of trees 
 
As per orders of MoEF of September 2008, CA was to be done 
by the state forest department by way of planting of 10 times 
of the number of trees felled. MoEF granted permission for CA 
work in lieu of felling of trees to 10 user agencies 187 during the 
period 1999-2011 against payment of ` 1.39 crore. However, 
seven out of 10 user agencies did not execute CA work in lieu 
of felling of trees. Ministry stated (April 2013) that in lieu of 
number of trees fallen in 25 proposals implementation of CA 
would be taken up. 
1.39
Total    1.49
                                                                                                                                                                                         
183World Victory Church, Shillong,  Sports Authority of India, Shillong,  North Eastern Power Transmission 
Company Private Limited, New Delhi,  Church of God, Sadew, 5th Mile, Upper Shillong 
184 Kendriya Vidyalaya, Barapani, North Eastern Hills University, Myntdu Leska Hydro Electric Project.  
185 These included Adhunik Cement Limited, Amrit Cement Industries Limited, Cement Manufacturing 
Company Limited & Subsidiaries, Green Valley Industries Limited, Goldstone Cement Limited, Hill Cements 
Company Limited and Meghalaya Cement Limited. 
186Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in this case by applying the minimum rate of ` 6.57 lakh per 
hectare (838.04 x 6.57) 
187 These included IGNOU Regional Centre, North Eastern Power Transmission, Sports Authority of India 
Training Centre, Public Work Department, Greater Shillong Water Supply Scheme, Meghalaya Energy 
Corporation Limited, North Eastern Hill University, North East Police Academy, North Eastern Indira Gandhi 
Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences (NEIGRIHMS), Engineering Wing  Director of Health Services 
etc. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 271 | P a g e  
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO188 – 119.56 ha189 
As per records of NO – 245.33 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 119.56 ha 
As per records of NO – 245.33 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of non 
forest land attached  
Obtained in all cases except for diversion of 
114.02 hectare in 2008-09. 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 521.13 ha 
On Non forest land – 2.40 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMPA and the conc erned Regional Office of MoEF.As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 119.56 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was zero per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 245.33 ha and zero per cent, respectively. As per records of RO and NO, no non forest 
land was transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF. As 
per records of NO, no afforestation was done on non forest land and degraded forest land.  
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Irregular 
mining  
 
User agency-M/s Lafarge Umiam Mining Pvt. Ltd. (LUMPL) had started the mining 
operation in April 2005 and continued mini ng operations unauthorisedly till April 
2010 when MoEF accorded final approval for diversion of 116.59 ha forest land 
for lime stone mining in favour of M/s LUMPL. Further, out of CAMPA funds of 
` 136.73 crore 190  collected from M/s LUMPL in July 2010, ` 79.99crore only was 
deposited with Ad-hoc CAMPA and balance of ` 56.74 crore was lying with State 
CAMPA. It was seen that no CA work wa s executed on 270 ha degraded land in 
Garo hills identified for the purpose even after lapse of over five years. Ministry 
did not furnish reply to audit observation (April 2013). 
                                                            
188 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
189 Excluding exempted projects 
190NPV/CA/PCA of  ` 75.06 crore and SPV of  ` 56.73 crore, CA of Safety Zone Area/ CATP etc. of ` 4.94 crore 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
272 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper ac counts, these could not be audited. The State 
CAMPA did not maintain cash book and subsidia ry ledgers for the funds received from Ad-
hoc CAMPA and expenditure incurred therefrom. In the absence of cash book and subsidiary 
ledgers, the receipts and payments of the yea rs 2009-10 to 2011-12 could not be verified in 
audit.  The reconciliation of the funds deposited with Ad-hoc CAMPA was done by State 
CAMPA only upto May 2009. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Meghalaya CAMPA met once during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met once during 2009-12.  

Compens
1. Ba
The tot
is 21, 0
interpre
January
State w
90.68 
geograp
canopy 
13,400 
dense f
under 
12,89,
7
forest. 
assessm
showed
the 201
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
               
191Source
satory Affor
ackground1
al geograph
08,100 hec
etation o f
y 2009, th e
was 19,11,70
per cen
phical are a
density cl
hectare o
forest, 6,0 8
moderately
700 hectar e
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a decreas
11 assessme
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
12,
restation in I
191 
hical area o
tare. Base
f satellite 
e forest co
00 hectare 
t of th e
a. In term s
asses, the 
of area u
8,600 hect a
y dense f
e o f  a r e a  u
d with th e
009, the fo
e of 6,600 
ent. 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
89,700
100 1,96
ndia 
of Mizoram 
d on the 
data of 
ver in the 
which was 
e State’s 
s of forest 
State had 
nder very 
are of area 
forest and 
nder open 
e previous 
rest cover 
hectare in 
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Augus t
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
13,400
6,300
Mizoram
re)-2011 
of the Stat
t 2009. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
6,08,600
m 
te 
nds remitt e
e CAMPA a n
as  detailed
est Survey of I
R
ed by State 
nd expendit
d below. 
ndia. 
Very dense
Moderately
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest 
eport No. : 2
273 
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
e forest
y dense forest
st
area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
t

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
274 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure incurred 
by State CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA192 
2006-07 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 10.62 Nil Nil Nil 
2010-11 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2011-12 Nil Nil Nil Nil 
Total 10.62 Nil Nil Nil 
 
As can be seen from the table, in complianc e with the orders of the Supreme Court, no 
funds were released by Ad-hoc  CAMPA to state CAMPA though  State CAMPA had remitted  
` 10.62 crore to Ad-hoc CAMPA between 2009-12.  Ad-hoc CAMPA did not comply with the 
orders of the Supreme Court.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in Mizoram that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table 24 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
(`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 There were two cases193 involving forest land of 143.97 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 194 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final appro val was granted thereafter. Ministry 
stated (April 2013) that action had been taken for recovery of amount of NPV 
from the user agencies. 
8.35195 
2 In three cases196 of diversion of 3,002.80 ha forest land for non-forestry purposes 
NPV of ` 219.20 crore was not realized from user agencies. In two out of three 
cases, work was undertaken without final approval of MoEF. Ministry stated 
(April 2013) that action had been taken fo r recovery of amount of NPV from the 
user agencies. 
219.20 
                                                            
192 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
193 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
194 HFO based Diesel Generating Power Plant, State Government Agency. 
195Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare (143.97 x 5.8) 
196Power & Electricity, Home and State PWD. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 275 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
3 CATP fund of ` 17 crore for diversion of 30 sq. km forest land for Serlui ‘B’ hydel 
project for which in principle approval was granted by MoEF in March 1991, was 
not realized from the user agency though the project was technically 
commissioned in April 2010. Ministry stat ed (April 2013) that the revised project 
had been submitted to it along with fres h proposal for recovery of amount of 
CATP from user agency. 
17.00 
4. In Vanlaiphai forest division, there was unauthorized diversion of 1.66 ha forest 
land by state PWD during 2004-05 for constr uction of roads and NPV/CA of  
` 12.99 lakh 197 was not recovered from State PWD as of December 2012. 
Ministry stated(April 2013) that matter wo uld be taken up with user agency for 
recovery of amount of NPV/CA. 
0.13 
5 Test check of records of State CAMPA reve aled that there was loss of interest of 
` 4.62 crore due to non-recovery of balance amount of CA/CATP/APS of ` 16.51 
crore for seven years under Tuirialhydel project for which in principle approval 
was granted for diversion of 5,380 ha of land by MoEF in September 1994 and 
final approval was granted in March 2000.  In the instant case final approval was 
granted by MoEF without fu lfilling the conditions stipulat ed in the in principle 
approval.  The balance amount of ` 16.51 crore was received in June 2012 i.e. 
after delay of seven years resulting in loss of interest of ` 4.62 crore.   
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the project was abandoned by the State 
Government/user agency due to technical reasons, public litigations, etc. and as 
a result, payment of funds was adversely affected.  The reply was silent regarding 
recovery of interest of ` 4.62 crore. 
 
 Total  244.68 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
APO for the year 2009-10 was not prepared and APOs for the year 2010-11 though prepared 
but this was not approved by Ad-hoc CAMPA. No funds were released by Adhoc CAMPA to 
State CAMPA for CA for the years 2009 -12. 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO198 – Nil199 
As per records of NO – 128.28 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – 17.50 ha 
                                                            
197NPV of  ` 12.14 lakh and CA of  ` 0.85 lakh. 
198 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
199 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
276 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – Nil 
As per records of NO – 110.78 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – NA 
On Non forest land – NA 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – NA 
On Non forest land – NA 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – NA 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – NA 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, no forest land diverted for non forestry purposes exce pt exempted category 
and while as per records of NO the figures were 128.28 ha and 14 per cent, respectively. As 
per records of RO, no non forest land was tran sferred /mutated in favour of the forest 
department and notified as RF/P F. As per records of NO, no afforestation was done on non 
forest land degraded forest land.  
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specified by him. No funds 
were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA to State CAMP A for CA for the years 2009 -12.  As such, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. Further, as per State CA MPA guidelines, the State Government and the 
MoEF had the powers to conduct special audit or performance audit of the state CAMPA. 
However, no such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steer ing Committee was to meet twice in a year. 
However, Steering Committee and Executive Committee met once only during the years 
2009-12 and Governing body did not meet during 2009-12. 
  

Compens
1. Ba
The to t
1,55,70
interpre
2008-Ja
the St a
was 3
geograp
canopy 
7,06,00
dense f
under 
20,47,7
forest. 
assessm
showed
Forest c
 
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
               
200Source
satory Affor
ackground2
tal geograp
0,700 hec t
etation of s
anuary 200
ate was 48
1.41 per 
phical are a
density c
00 hectare 
forest, 21, 3
moderatel
700 hectar e
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a margina
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A , funds rel
during the 
                      
e: India State o
1,02,07,0
restation in I
200 
hical area 
tare. Bas e
atellite data
9, the for e
,90,300 he
cent of 
a. In term
classes, th e
of area 
36,600 hec t
ly dense 
e of area 
d with t h
009, the f
l increase o
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
000
ndia 
of Odisha i
ed on th
a of Octobe
est cover i
ctare whic
the State ’
s of fore s
e State ha
under ve r
tare of are
forest an
under ope
he previo u
forest cov e
of 4,800 hec
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Augus t
Ad-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
 
ort 2011 publ
7,06,000
Odisha
is 
e 
er 
n 
h 
’s 
st 
d 
ry 
a 
d 
n 
us 
er 
ctare in the 
re)-2011 
of the Stat
t 2009. Fu n
MPA to State
11-12 were
ished by Fore
0
21,36,600
20,4
2011 asses
te  
nds remitt e
e CAMPA an
as detailed
est Survey of I
47,700
4,7
R
sment. 
ed by State 
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
3,400
Very dense
Moderatel
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest
eport No. : 2
277 
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
e forest
y dense fores
st
t area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
st

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
278 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure incurred 
by State CAMPA 
Accumulation 
of funds with 
State 
CAMPA201 
2006-07 448.25 Nil Nil  
2007-08 408.26 Nil Nil  
2008-09 337.14 Nil Nil  
2009-10 499.40 131.06 124.09 6.97 
2010-11 1889.42 140.18 72.16 74.99 
2011-12 114.79 176.09 23.60 227.48 
Total 3,697.26 447.33 219.85  
 
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 12 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 447.33 crore released against APOs, 51 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of 
` 13.61 crore were not remitted by State CAMP A to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in 
State Government account.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V / CA/ P CA et c.  i n  O d i s h a t h at  cam e t o  t h e 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table 24 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount 
1 There were 36 cases 202 involving forest land of 3,679.69 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 203 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
213.42204
2 Against demand of NPV of ` 2,476.26 crore in 320 cases pertaining to 23 divisions 
` 1,567.08 crore only could be realised from user agencies 205 leaving a balance of  
` 909.18 crore unrealised.  
909.18 
                                                            
201 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
202 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
203 M/s OMC Ltd., M/s Mahanandi Coal Fields Ltd., Od isha Mining Corpn Ltd., M/s Rungta Mines Ltd., M/s 
National Enterprises (IRON), DC Jain , M/s Meenakshi Power Ltd., Girdharilal Agrawal, M/s AOIKATH, M/s KJS 
Ahluwalia, M/s TATA Refractories 
204Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (3,679.69 x 5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 279 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that all the mining leases where NPV had not been 
paid fully or partly were of non-working mining leases and in some cases, user 
agency had not applied for renewal of mining lease.  The fact remained that 
Ministry had not initiated any action for re covery of NPV in these cases or return 
of forest land after expiry of mining lease. 
3 Government of Odisha issued instructions in December 2005 for implementation 
of the comprehensive Wild life Management Plan in mining affected areas in 
Keonjhar and Bonai Forest Divisions. This plan was extended to all other Districts 
of the State from 23 March 2008. Under th e Management Plan, the mine owners 
were liable to deposit ` 20,000 per ha ( ` 15,000 per ha upto 22 March 2008) on 
lease hold area basis with the divisional forest officer concerned. MoEF approved 
diversion of 23,609.87 ha forest land of mining lease areas in 105 cases of nine 
forest divisions during October 2009 to Ja nuary 2012. As per project reports there 
was existence of Wildlife species in the forest land diverted for mining purpose. 
Under Wildlife Management Plan lessees were to deposit ` 47.21 crore of which 
only user agencies in three divisions deposited ` 10.21 crore resulting in non 
realisation of ` 37.01 crore. 
37.01 
4 NPV of ` 32.49 crore was either non-recovered or short recovered from six user 
agencies pertaining to three divisions 206. In three out of six cases 207 NPV was not 
demanded on the ground that the lessee had not applied for renewal of mining 
lease in due time. However the delayed submission of applications for renewal of 
mining lease were neither rejected nor was the lease terminated. Thus NPV was 
recoverable in these cases. In another case NPV was demanded on pre revised 
rate whereas NPV was revised after 28 March 2008. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that in these cases non/short levy of NPV was ` 23.19 
crore and action for recovery of NPV in th ese cases had been initiated.  The reply 
of Ministry was not based on facts as re coverable amount of NPV in these cases 
worked out to be ` 32.49 crore. 
32.49 
5 In Bonai forest division, 2,341.93 ha forest  land was diverted for mining and other 
allied activities in favour of M/s SAIL for 2nd renewal of mining lease period. MoEF 
granted in principle approval in March 2011 and allowed the user agency to work 
on broken up area of forest land in the lease hold area as per approved land use 
plan for a period of one more year. In this case additional CA of ` 28.09 crore was 
payable. No demand was raised by Stat e CAMPA as of December 2012 even after 
lapse of over one year.  
28.09 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
205 These included M/s Patnaik Minerals, M/s SAIL, M/s DC Jain,  M/s OMC Ltd., M/s KC Pradhan, M/s RB 
Thakur, M/s Dr.Sarojini Pradhan, M/s Keonjhar Mineral (P) Ltd., M/s Sri B K Mohanty, M/s S C Mallik,  M/s B L 
Newatia, M/s AXL Exploration (P) Ltd, M/s Rungta Sons,  M/s IMFA ltd, M/s Ghanashyam Mishra and Sons (P) 
ltd, M/s G.S.Choubey, M/s K.K.Chourasia, M/s Manishree Refractories Ltd, M/s FACOR Ltd etc. 
206Bolangir, Bonai and Keonjhar. 
207 These included M/s Sarkunda Mines of EM &I ltd, Toda Iron Mines of M/s SAIL, Rajabhasa Bhaludungri 
Soapstone mines of SDS, M/s Deepak Steel and Power Ltd, M/s Sree Metalliks Ltd., Lower Suktel Irrigation 
Project. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
280 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount 
Ministry stated (Jun e 2013) that ACA of ` 18.45 crore had been recovered from 
the user agency in February 2013.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as 
recoverable amount of ACA worked out to be ` 28.09 crore out of which ` 18.45 
crore only had been recovered from the user agency.  
6 In seven cases of diversion of forest land during 1984-85 to 1993-94 against total 
demand of CA of ` 4.93 crore from user agencies 208 ` 2.67 crore only was 
deposited by user agencies resulting in non realisation of ` 2 . 2 6  c r o r e .  M i n i s t r y  
stated (June 2013) that concerned DFOs were being directed to submit the 
compliance report in these cases. 
2.26 
 Total 1,222.45 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(`in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amou
nt 
releas
ed by 
Ad-
hoc 
CAMP
A 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expendit
ure 
Amou
nt 
releas
ed by 
Ad-
hoc 
CAMP
A 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expendit
ure 
Amou
nt 
releas
ed by 
Ad-
hoc 
CAMP
A 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expendit
ure 
NPV 209  19.97 19.96  40.12 32.98  87.59 13.55 
CompensatoryAffores
tation 
 70.00 70.00  58.71 22.85  32.84 0.31 
Protected Area210  15.00 13.08  15.00 3.12  20.00 0.57 
CAT Plan  0 0  0 0  0 0 
Other specified 
activities 
 26.09 21.05  19.35 13.21  29.46 9.17 
Total 131.
06 
131.06 124.09 140.
18 
133.18 72.16 176.
09 
169.89 23.60 
 
Funds for 2009-10 were released  by Ad-hoc CAMPA without submission of APO. Further, 
APOs for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 were r unning concurrently. Only one APO for 2009-
10 was closed on 31 October 2011 and othe r two APOs for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 
were still ongoing. 
                                                            
208The user agencies include Ordnance Factory, Irrigation Department etc. 
209 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
210 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 281 | P a g e  
From the table it is evident that the percen tage of expenditure incurred as against the 
amounts release by Ad-hoc CAMPA was 95 per cent  in 2009-10, 51 per cent in 2010-11 and 
14 per cent  in 2011-12 till date. Further, the im plementing agencies  could not expend 
substantial portion of amount released by the State CAMPA in the years 2010-11 and 2011-
1 2 .  C o n c e r n s  r e m a i n  o n  t h e  a b s o r p t i v e  capacity of the State considering that ` 4,570.17 
crore (including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund for the State (31 March 2012)  and can be released only for specified 
forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure 
at State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on purchase of 
car 
0.07
2 Non utilisation of 
CA funds  
 
Of the CA funds of ` 97.31 crore realised from user agency in 
384 cases during 1982-83 to 2011-12 only ` 42.44 crore were 
spent leaving ` 54.87 crore remained unspent. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that compliance to audit 
observation would be furnished on receipt of information 
from field offices. 
54.87
3 Shortfall in 
achieving physical 
targets in 
infrastructure 
development  
 
Out of total outlay of ` 238.39 crore projected in APO for 
2009-10,` 131.06 crore were received from Ad-hoc CAMPA 
and` 6.97crore remained unutilised. The physical targets of 
all the components of development of infrastructure 
remained unachieved. The shortf all in achievement of targets 
ranged from 53 to 100 percent. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that shortfall in achievement of 
physical targets in infrastructure development was due to 
delay in receipt of funds from Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
6.97
4 Irregular 
diversion of 
CAMPA fund 
 
In Nandankanan Zoological Park, Bhubaneswar in violation of 
State CAMPA guidelines, a sum of ` 0.41 crore was diverted 
to general items of expenditure, which was not provided in 
APO of State CAMPA. 
Further, from APO for 2009-10. It was observed that in STR, 
Baripada ` 16 lakh was diverted for construction of Range 
office building at UBK Range fr om unutilised balance of other 
components. 
0.57
5 Blocking of 
CAMPA funds   
 
In four cases pertaining to four forest divisions a sum of  
` 17.46 lakh on account of disallowed vouchers and 
unadjusted advance of ` 7.24 lakh remained blocked due to 
non settlement. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that 
concerned DFO had been instructed to recover outstanding 
CAMPA funds. 
0.25

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
282 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
6 Excess 
expenditure  
Plantation on 33,465.60 ha land was carried out during 2009-
10 in place of physical target of 50,000 ha at an expenditure 
of ` 50.88 crore. As per cost norm at ` 12,150 for the zero 
year in the scheme, the expenditure was to be ` 40.66 crore 
only. This resulted in excess expenditure of ` 10.22 crore with 
a shortfall of physical target of 16,534 ha. 
Further, test check of records two forest divisions 211 revealed 
that there was excess expenditure of ` 0.23 crore on different 
components resulting in total excess expenditure of ` 10.45 
crore. 
Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that the targets had to be 
revised due to reduction of funds by Ad-hoc CAMPA and the 
expenditure was approved by Executive Committee of State 
CAMPA. 
10.45
7 Execution of 
works without 
administrative 
approval/sanction 
of estimate 
14 works were executed at an estimated cost of ` 0.51 crore 
from CAMPA fund without administrative approval and 
sanction of estimates in three forest divisions. 
Ministry accepted the audit observations (April/June 2013). 
0.51
8 Non utilisation of 
funds on theme 
based trainings  
 
Bargarh forest division could not utilise ` 0.02 crore allocated 
in APO for 2010-11 for theme based trainings as of November 
2012 due to non-utilisation of funds on the stipulated 
component, the very purpose of the scheme of theme based 
trainings was defeated. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April/June 2013) that 
concerned divisions had been instructed to submit necessary 
compliance. 
0.02
 Total  73.71
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO212 – 8,814.71 ha213 
As per records of NO – 7,524.80 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 5,261.96 ha 
As per records of NO – NA 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 3,552.75 ha 
As per records of NO – NA 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
No 
                                                            
211Keonjhar and Baripada 
212 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
213 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 283 | P a g e  
Particulars (2006-12) 
Area identified for  CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 3,388.72 ha 
On Non forest land – 4,380.46 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 5,341.99 ha 
On Non forest land – 6,951.54 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- NA 
As per records of NO – NA 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 2,238.74214 ha 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 8,814.71ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was only 60 per cent while the NO did not provide the 
year wise break up of non forest land received  during the period 2006-12. As per records of 
RO, no non forest land was transferred /mutated  in favour of the forest department and 
notified as RF/PF while as per NO, information pertaining to transfer/mutation of non forest 
land in favour of state forest department was not furnished to audit. Yet 2,238.74 ha of non 
forest land was declared as RF/PF. As per re cords of NO, afforestation was done on non 
forest land was 159 per cent and afforestation done on degraded forest land was 158 per 
cent of the area to be afforested. 
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management. 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Unfruitful 
expenditure 
towards 
compensatory 
afforestation 
In 15 cases though expenditure of ` 0.54 crore was incurred by eight 
forest divisions 215 over a period from 1996 to 2011 no afforestation 
was taken up against any project. Reasons for non-afforestation were 
not furnished to audit. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that in  six out of 15 cases progress of 
plantation was being ascertained from the concerned DFOs and in the 
rest nine cases plantation work would be taken up in the year 2012-13. 
2 Diversion of land 
from wildlife 
sanctuary/national 
park  
 
In seven wildlife divisions there was a diversion of 1,950.93 ha forest 
land in 28 cases. However there was no record to show details of 
category wise land diverted under Wildlife sanctuary and National 
Park. In the absence of these details correctness of the NPV collected 
could not be verified in audit. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that no forest land had been diverted in 
the protected forest area.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as forest 
land was diverted from the protected area and in lieu thereof NPV was 
recoverable from user agencies. 
                                                            
214 39 cases of six divisions 
215Angul, Cuttack, Jeypore, Rourkela, Bonai, Keonjhar, Bhadrak (WL), Rajnagar (WL) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
284 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. General 
deficiencies noted in the accounting records are given below: 
• No reconciliation of funds deposited with Ad-hoc CAMPA was done by State CAMPA to 
ensure that funds deposited by State CAMPA had actually been deposited into Ad-hoc 
CAMPA. 
•  PCCF (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden, Odisha did not maintain cash book due to 
which the closing balance as on 31 March 2012 could not be ascertained. 
• In three216 forest divisions CAMPA cash book a nd bank pass book were not reconciled. 
Also interest earned in saving bank acco unt of state CAMPA was not accounted for in 
the CAMPA funds. 
• In Puri Wildlife division there was a difference of ` 0.83 crore between cash book and 
bank pass book as of 31 March 2012 was not reconciled as of December 2012. 
• In State CAMPA it was found that at the close of APO for 2009-10 in October 2011 
there was an unspent balance of  ` 6.97 crore. Neither the amount of unspent balance 
was refunded to Ad-hoc CAMPA nor revalidated by Steering Committee as of 
December 2012. 
Ministry stated (June 2013) that reconciliation  of CAMPA fund was being done with the Ad-
hoc CAMPA.  
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Odisha CAMPA met four times during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met four times during 2009-12.  
  
                                                            
216Puri Wildlife division, Chandaka Wildlife division, Sundergarh division. 

Compens
1. Ba
The to
50,36,2
interpre
2008, t
17,64,0
the St a
forest c
no are a
hectare
forest a
open f o
assessm
showed
2011 as
Forest c
2. Com
State C
hoc CA
there a
g
 
               
217Source
satory Affor
ackground2
tal geogra p
200 hect a
etation of s
the forest 
00 hectare w
ate’s geogr a
canopy den
a under v e
e of area 
and 1,02,8 0
orest. Com
ment of 2
d an increas
ssessment. 
cover – Typ
mpensatory
AMPA was 
MPA , fun d
gainst durin
                      
e: India State o
1,02,800
4
restation in I
217 
phical are a
are. Bas e
satellite dat
cover in 
which was 3
aphical ar e
sity classes
ery dense 
under mo d
00 hectare 
mpared wit h
2009, the 
se of 10,000
pes of forest
y Afforestat
constitute
ds released 
ng the perio
                      
of Forest Repo
0
0
48,56,100
ndia 
a of Punja
ed on 
ta of Novem
the State 
3.50 per cen
ea. In term
s, the State 
forest, 73 ,
derately d e
of area u n
h the pre v
forest c o
0 hectare in
t (in hectar
tion funds o
d in Septe m
by Ad-hoc 
od 2006-07 
 
ort 2011 publ
73,600
3,7
Punjab
b is 
the 
mber 
was 
nt of 
s of 
had 
,600 
ense 
nder 
vious 
over 
n the 
re)-2011 
of the State
mber 2009.
CAMPA to
to 2011-12
ished by Fore
700
e  
 Funds re m
o State CA M
 were as de
est Survey of I
R
mitted by S t
MPA and e x
etailed belo
ndia. 
Very
Mod
Ope
Scru
Non
eport No. : 2
285 
tate CAMPA
xpenditure i
w. 
y dense forest
derately dense
n forest
ub
 forest area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
A to Ad-
incurred 
t
e forest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
286 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 (` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by 
State CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA218 
Before 2006 38.59 Nil Nil Nil 
2006-07 63.01 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 34.26 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 31.17 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 73.63 33.05 Nil 33.05 
2010-11 28.02 26.52 14.83 44.74 
2011-12 17.65 22.08 30.58 36.24 
Total 286.33 81.65 45.41  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 29 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 81.65 crore released against APOs, 44 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The case of non recovery of NPV in Punjab that  came to the notice of audit is given below. 
The gist of the case is also given in table 24 in Chapter 3. 
(` in crore) 
Description Amount
There were two cases219 involving forest land of 401.05 ha in which NPV was not collected 
from the user agencies220 to whom in principle approval was granted before October 2002 
and the final approval was granted after that.  
23.26221 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
218Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of  the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
219 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
220 M/s Kandi Canal 
221Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (401.05 x 5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 287 | P a g e  
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
 (` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 222     21.83 11.09  41.67 23.21 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    0 1.53  0 5.15 
Protected 
Area223 
    0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan     0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    5.90 2.21  5.48 2.22 
Total 33.05 Nil  Nil  26.52 27.73 14.83 22.08 47.15 30.58 
Funds for the year 2009-10 were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without APO and APO for the 
year2010-11 and 2011-12 were approved by st eering committee after a delay of over six 
months. No expenditure was incurred by St ate CAMPA during the year 2009-10.Though the 
percentage of expenditure increased progressi vely over the last three years, concerns 
remain on the absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 464.08 crore (including 
interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund for 
the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure 
not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines 
and NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test check 
revealed that expenditure was incurred on purchase of vehicles 
etc. by diversion of funds from other heads. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that expenditure on purchase of 
vehicles was incurred out of the provisions made in APO.  The 
reply is not tenable as diversion of funds was made for purchase 
of vehicles from other heads which was irregular. 
0.10 
                                                            
222 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 
223 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
288 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
2 Blocking of 
funds 
 
Patiala forest division purchased materials valuing ` 1.65 crore 
for construction of chain link fencing in years 2010-12. The 
materials valuing ` 56.40 lakh only could be utilized and balance 
materials valuing ` 1.09 crore was still lying unutilized which 
resulted in blocking of funds.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that efforts were being made to 
complete the chain link fencing of wildlife sanctuaries in the 
financial year 2013-14. 
1.09 
3 Excess 
expenditure  
Hoshiarpur forest division incurred expenditure of ` 34.96 lakh 
on construction of 115 RKM single live hedge against the 
estimated cost of ` 7.13 lakh for construction of 125 RKM single 
live hedge in 2010-11 resulting in excess expenditure of ` 27.83 
lakh besides short achievement of physical target of 10 RKM 
single line live hedge.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that provisions made in the APO 
were revised later and the same was not found sufficient as the 
rates of vegetative live hedge were revised.  The reply of 
Ministry is not tenable as the revised rates were adopted 
without proper justification. 
0.28 
4 Irregular 
expenditure  
In Ropar forest division advance work of enrichment planting 
and rehabilitation of degraded forest of 575 ha forest land was 
done at a cost of ` 56.15 lakh but actual plantation work was 
done on 395 ha only and balance 180 ha area remained 
unplanted. Thus there was irregular expenditure of ` 56.15 lakh. 
 Ministry stated (April 2013) that plantation against the advance 
work of 180 ha was got done by Mohali division during 2011-12.  
The reply of Ministry was not supported with the relevant 
documents. 
0.56 
5 Unfruitful 
expenditure 
Dasuya and Hoshiarpur forest divisions, purchased chassis of the 
vehicles of ` 14.18 lakh for fire tender to extinguish fire in forest 
area in 2010-11.  The chassis could however be used only after 
installation of fire tender on it which had not been installed as 
of December 2012 resulting in unfruitful expenditure of ` 14.18 
lakh. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that tenders 
were being floated for installation of fire tenders on the chassis 
already purchased and the work would be completed in 
financial year 2013-14. 
0.15 
 Total   2.18 
 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 289 | P a g e  
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO224 – 2,149.56 ha225 
As per records of NO – 2,190.49 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO –1.51 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 2,149.56 ha 
As per records of NO – 2,188.98 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of non 
forest land attached  
NA 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 2,883.40 ha 
On Non forest land – 1.51 ha 
Area on which CA was done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as reserved/protected 
forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land dive rted for non forestry purpose s was 2,149.56 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was zero per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 2,190.49 ha and zero per cent. As per records of RO and NO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest  department and notified as RF/PF. As per 
records of NO, no afforestation was done on non forest land and degraded forest land. 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Irregular 
retention of 
funds by PSFDC  
 
Punjab Government framed policy for purchase of non forest land for 
compensatory plantation on behalf of Forest Department through 
Punjab State Forest Development Corporation (PSFDC) in November 
2011.  The land was to be purchased out of amount deposited by user 
agency for this purpose. 
PSFDC received ` 51.59 crore from user agencies in the years 2010-12 
for purchase of non forest land in lieu of forest land diverted for non 
forestry use.  However, PSFDC incurred an expenditure of ` 1.44 crore 
                                                            
224 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
225 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
290 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
only on purchase of non forest land resulting in short utilization of funds 
of ` 50.15 crore which was not credited to CAMPA account. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that funds of ` 51.59 crore received by 
PSFDC received from user agencies for purchase of non-forest land in 
lieu of diversion of forest land were not under the purview of CAMPA 
guidelines.  The reply of Ministry was vague and misleading as all funds 
received from user agencies in lieu of  diversion of forest land were to 
be credited to CAMPA account. 
2. Unauthorized 
occupation of 
forest land 
 
In Amritsar forest division, 558 kanal 3 marla forest land was 
unauthorisedly occupied by the pri vate parties and being used for non 
forest purposes. 
Accepting the facts, Ministries stat ed (April 2013) that legal action was 
being taken for eviction of encroachments. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts  
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that receipts and payments accounts fo r the year 2009-10 to 
2011-12 had been prepared and subm itted to audit.  The reply of  Ministry is not tenable as 
the annual accounts were not prepared in the prescribed format. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steer ing Committee was to meet twice in a year. 
However, no information regarding meetings  of the Governing Body, Steering Committee 
and the Executive Committee held during the years 2009-12 was furnished to audit. 
  

Compens
1. Ba
The tot
3,42,23
interpre
Decemb
State w
4.70 pe
area. I n
classes,
under v
of area 
11,56,7
forest. 
assess
m
showed
assessm
Forest c
2. Co
State CA
CAMPA
against 
 
 
 
               
226Source
satory Affor
ackground2
tal geograph
3,900 hec
etation of s
ber 2008, 
was 16,08, 7
er cen t of 
n terms o f
, the State h
very dense 
under mod
700 hectar e
Compare
ment of 2
d a gain of 5
ment. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
7,20
3,21,7
restation in I
226 
hical area o
tare. Bas
atellite data
the forest 
700 hecta r
the State’ s
f forest c a
had 7,200 h
forest, 4, 4
derately den
e of area 
d with t
2009, the 
5,100 hecta
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
00
4,44,80
79,500
ndia 
of Rajasthan
ed on t
a of Octobe
cover in t
re which w
s geograph i
anopy den s
hectare of a
44,800 hect
nse forest a
under o p
the previ o
forest co
re in the 20
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Novemb
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
001 1
Rajasthan
n is 
the 
er – 
the 
was 
ical 
sity 
rea 
are 
and 
pen 
ous 
ver 
011 
re)-2011 
of the Stat
ber 2009. Fu
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
1,56,700
4,35,700
n 
te   
unds remitt
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
est Survey of I
R
ted by State
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very d
Mode
Open
Scrub
Non f
eport No. : 2
291 
e CAMPA to
ture incurre
dense forest
erately dense 
 forest
b
forest area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
forest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
292 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(`in crore) 
Year Amount transferred 
to Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by 
State CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA227 
Before 2006 1.53 Nil Nil Nil 
2006-07 69.16 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 85.12 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 28.61 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 81.26 32.59 Nil 32.59 
2010-11 60.27 42.06 25.82 48.83 
2011-12 28.80 31.89 37.18 43.54 
Total 354.75 106.54 63.00  
As can be seen from the table, of ` 106.54 crore released, 41 per cent remained unutilised, 
leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of  `1.91 crore were not 
remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in State Government 
account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in Rajasthan that came to the 
notice of audit are given below.  The gist of these cases is also given in table24and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 There were 13 cases228 involving forest land of 893.99 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies 229 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
Accepting the facts, Minist ry stated (April 2013) that efforts were being made 
to recover outstanding amount of NPV from user agencies. 
51.85230 
2 In the four cases in three divisions231  forest land was diverted without 
recovering NPV of ` 6.97 crore and CA of `0.08 crore.  
7.05 
3 During test check, in 84 cases it was ob served that CA was short assessed due 
to non revision of wage rates. 
Ministry accepted the audit observation (April 2013). 
6.17 
4 In Jaipur (Central) forest division it was found that cost of construction of 0.44 
                                                            
227Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of  the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
228 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
229 Oriental TALC Products Pvt. Ltd., M/s Udaipur Mineral Development Syndicate, Sh. Shah Kastoor Mal, Vinod 
K Aggarwal, Mahavir Trading Co., M/s RSMDC 
230Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (893.99 x 5.8) 
231Chittorgarh, Baran and Dholpur 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 293 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Description Amount
boundary wall and plantation of ` 0.44 crore was not recovered for diversion of 
9.40 ha forest land in respect of a project for Eco tourism near Laxman Dungari 
in Badanpura, Jaipur for which in principle approval was granted by MoEF in 
September 2006. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (A pril 2013) that action was being taken for 
recovery of outstanding amount from user agency. 
5 Test check revealed that cost of fa llen trees was not recovered in following 
projects 
i. project of diversion of 4.32 ha fore st land in submerged area of Rohini 
irrigation project in Udaipur (Central) forest division 
ii. project of development of Ghatki Guni and construction of tunnel in 
Jaipur (Central) division. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that cost of  fallen trees was the receipts of state, 
however, compliance in this regard would be shown to audit. 
 
 
0.03 
 
0.17 
 Total 65.71 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 232     22.83 18.12  30.27 23.75 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    5.25 3.98  11.59 8.41 
Protected 
Area233 
    4.50 3.42  7.56 4.96 
CAT Plan     0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0.98 0.30  2.57 0.06 
Total 32.59 Nil Nil 42.06 33.57 25.82 31.89 51.99 37.18 
Funds for the year 2009-10 were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without APO and APO for the 
year2010-11 was approved by steering committee in December 2010 and APO for the year 
2011-12 was approved by steering committee in September 2011. No expenditure was 
incurred by State CAMPA in the year 2009-10.Fro m the table it is evident that the State 
CAMPA could not expend the entire amount re leased by the Ad-hoc CAMPA in the years 
                                                            
232 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
233 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
294 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
2009-10 and 2010-11. The levels of expenditure were zero per cent in 2009-10 and 61 per 
cent in 2010-11 when compared with amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA. Though the level 
of expenditure has increased progressively over the last three years, concerns remain on the 
absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 857.07 crore (including interest) are 
accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compen satory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 
March 2012) and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2    Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1. Expenditure 
not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines 
and NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test check 
revealed that expenditure was incurred on maintenance of 
building, POL charges and cellular phones charges.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that expenditure on purchase of 
vehicles etc. was incurred in the year 2010-11 which was 
objected by it and from subsequent years expenditure on such 
items was being incurred from the interest earned on deposits 
in State CAMPA. The reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the 
funds were not spent on the activities for which these were 
released.   
2.04 
2. Excess on 
construction 
of boundary 
wall 
In six cases expenditure was incurred in excess of rates 
prescribed for construction of boundary wall in APOs for 2010-
11 and 2011-12.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that excess expenditure was 
incurred due to subsequent modi fications in boundary walls as 
per local needs.  The reply is not tenable as excess expenditure 
was beyond the provisions made in APOs and was not approved 
by competent authority. 
0.33 
3. Irregular 
charge of 
expenditure 
on patrolling 
vehicles 
In Jaipur (central) forest division expenditure incurred on 
patrolling vehicles was charged irregularly on works i.e. 
plantation, construction of pucca walls etc. without approval of 
APO. 
Ministry did not furnish reply (April 2013). 
0.02 
4 Delay in 
release of 
funds to 
divisional 
offices  
 
During test check of records of 28 forest divisions it was found 
that amount of ` 4.13 crore and ` 4.43 crore could not be 
utilized by forest division during 2010-11 and 2011-12 
respectively due to delay in release of funds to divisional offices. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that savings of previous year were 
being utilised in the subsequent year along with interest 
accrued.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the funds were 
allocated for various activities to  be undertaken during financial 
year as mentioned in approved APO. 
 
 Total  2.39 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 295 | P a g e  
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars(2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO234 - 8,152.66 ha235 
As per records of NO – 2,975.84 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 584.97 ha 
As per records of NO – 1,698.72 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO - 7,567.69 ha 
As per records of NO – 1,277.12 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of non 
forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 273.72 ha 
On Non forest land – 917.07 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 914.95 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 645.32 ha 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land dive rted for non forestry purpose s was 8,152.66 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was seven per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 2975.84 ha and 57 per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of 914.95 ha non forest land transferre d/ mutated in favour of forest department, 
only 645.32  ha non forest land was declar ed as RF/PF. As per records of NO, no 
afforestation was done on non forest land and degraded forest land. 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
234 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
235 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
296 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Nature of irregularity Description 
Diversion of forest 
land without final 
(Stage II) approval 
i. In Chittorgarh it was found that 16.10 ha forest land was diverted to 
Indian Railways without receipt of in principle approval from MoEF and 
30.00 ha forest land was diverted to Irrigation Department without 
transfer of 14.04 ha of non-forest land in favour of Forest Department.  
ii. In Baran 52.30 ha of forest land was diverted to Irrigation Department 
without Stage II approval. 
iii. In Dholpur 13.00 ha forest land was diverted to Public Works 
Department without receiving CA of ` 0.08 crore. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013)that action for grant of final 
approval was in process. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
The State Government approved the account ing procedure for State CAMPA on 14 March 
2012 without consultation of PAG. As per State CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF, the 
accounts of State CAMPA were to be audited by  the Accountant General at such intervals as 
may be specified by him. However, State CAMPA did not prepare its annual accounts for the 
years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the prescribed form at. Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, 
the State Government and the MoEF had the powers to conduct special audit or 
performance audit of the state CAMPA. However, no such audit was conducted. 
Ministry accepted the audit observations (April 2013). 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Rajasthan CAMPA met two times during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met two times durin g 2009-12. The Governing body met once 
only during 2009-12. 
  

Compens
1. Ba
The to t
7,09,60
interpre
Decemb
State w
47.34pe
area. I n
classes,
area u n
hectare
forest a
open fo
assessm
showed
assessm
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
236Source
3,
satory Affor
ackground2
tal geogra p
00 hecta r
etation o f
ber 2008, t
was 3,35,9 0
er cent of t
n terms of 
, the State 
nder very d
e of a rea un
and 69,800 
orest. Comp
ment of 2 0
d no ch
ment. 
cover – Typ
ompensato
CAMPA was
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
,37,400
restation in I
236 
phical area 
re. Based
f satellit e
the forest c
00 hectare 
he State’s g
forest ca n
had 50,00 0
dense fore
nder moder
hectare o f
pared with t
009, the f
ange in 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
 constitute
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
50
36,300
ndia 
of Sikkim i
 on th
e data o
cover in th
which w a
geographica
nopy densi t
0 hectare o
st, 2,16,10
rately dens
f area und e
the previou
forest cov e
the 201
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Augus t
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
0,000
2,1
69,800
Sikkim
is 
e 
of 
e 
as 
al 
ty 
of 
0 
se 
er 
us 
er 
1 
re)-2011 
of the Stat
t 2009. Fu n
PA to Stat e
11-12  were
ished by Fore
16,100
te 
nds remitt e
e CAMPA a n
e as detailed
est Survey of I
R
ed by State 
nd expendit
d below. 
ndia. 
Very d
Mode
Open 
Scrub
Non f
eport No. : 2
297 
CAMPA t o
ture incurre
dense forest
erately dense 
forest
orest area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
forest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
298 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA237 
2006-07 11.60 Nil Nil  
2007-08 34.36 Nil Nil  
2008-09 24.79 Nil Nil  
2009-10 47.64 8.01 4.43 3.58 
2010-11 40.63 10.23 13.35 0.46 
2011-12 19.84 9.04 10.07 (-)0.57 
Total 178.86 27.28 27.85  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court , 15 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of  ` 27.28 crore released against APO, full 
amount was utilized by State CAMPA.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Sikkim that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table27 in Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount 
1 NPV of ` 30.34 crore was not realized from user agencies in 25 cases of 
diversion of forest land for non forestry purposes during 1992-93 to 2011-12. 
The user agencies included M/s Sikkim Breweries Ltd, Army, BRO, State 
Government Departments like WS&PHED, RM&DD, Tourism etc. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that matter of recovery of NPV 
was being pursued with the user agencies. 
30.34 
2 CA of ` 8.22 crore was not recovered from user agencies in 23 cases of 
diversion of forest land for non forestry purposes during 2001-02 to 2011-12. 
The user agencies included M/s Sikkim Breweries Ltd, Army, BRO, State 
Government Departments like WS&PHED, RM&DD, Tourism etc. 
Accepting the facts, Mini stry stated (April 2013)that the matter was being 
pursued with the user agencies. 
8.22 
 Total  38.56 
 
                                                            
237Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of  the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 299 | P a g e  
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and the utilisation of 
the funds released. 
 (` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 238  NA 1.66  NA 1.92  NA 1.88 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
 NA 1.35  NA 1.50  NA 2.24 
Protected 
Area239 
 NA 0.05  NA 0  NA 0.55 
CAT Plan  NA 1.37  NA 9.93  NA 5.40 
Other 
specified 
activities 
 NA 0  NA 0  NA 0 
Total 8.01 NA 4.43 10.23 NA 13.35 9.04 NA 10.07 
APOs for 2009-12 were approved  after a delay of five to 10 months. In the year 2009-10 
expenditure was 55 per cent  of the funds released by Ad-hoc CAMPA. Though the 
percentage of expenditure has increased pr ogressively during the years 2009-10 and 2010-
11, concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 202.45 crore 
(including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only fo r specified forestry related 
activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure not 
authorised by 
State CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure 
at State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on purchase 
of vehicles on purchase of vehicles ( ` 0.25 crore), extension 
and fencing of Forest Secretariat building, repair of DFO 
residences and offices, Assistant Conservator of Forest 
quarters etc. (` 1.99 crore). 
The Ministry (April 2013)accepted the audit observation. 
2.24 
                                                            
238 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 
239 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
300 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
2 Extra expenditure During January 2006 to May 2008, MoEF approved 
diversion of 236.73 ha forest land for construction of hydel 
projects by five power agencies. As per approved 
conditions, CAT programme was to be completed within 
the period ranging between three to five years. However, 
work was executed after a delay upto three years which led 
to cost escalation in these projects by  ` 1.89 crore. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that excess 
expenditure was due to increase in wages and cost of 
materials. 
1.89 
3 Excess 
expenditure  
 
State CAMPA incurred expenditure under CAPT in excess of 
rates approved in APOs for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 
resulting in excess expenditure of  ` 1.15 crore. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that user 
agency had been requested to pay the difference amount 
for the remaining part of the CAT plan. 
1.15 
4 Deprival of 
benefits and 
blocking up of 
fund 
 
State CAMPA made an advance payment of ` 8.99 lakh to 
the State Trading Corporation of Sikkim (STCS) for supply of 
193 LPG gas cylinders during 2009-10 for distribution to the 
beneficiaries for preventing them from felling of trees for 
fuel woods. However, no LPG gas cylinders were supplied 
by the STCS. Thus, the intended beneficiaries were deprived 
of the benefits besides blocking of ` 8.99 lakh with STCS.  
Ministry accepted the audit observations (April 2013). 
0.09 
5 Non 
implementation of 
schemes on 
conservation and 
protection of bio-
diversity and 
wildlife  
 
Out of receipt of ` 9.29 crore (NPV – ` 6.55 crore, CA –  
` 1.70 crore and Wildlife/Bio-diversity Conservation and 
Management Plan - ` 1.04 crore) from various user 
agencies for diversion of 20.89 ha of wildlife sanctuaries 
(2008-09 & 2009-10), the activities  for the protection of 
bio-diversity and wildlife were confined to only ` 16.42 
lakh. Reasons for not undertaking the activities for 
protection and conservation in protected areas were not on 
record. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that due to less receipt of funds 
from Ad-hoc CAMPA, more conservation and protection 
activities in protected areas could not be taken up in some 
cases and biodiversity conservation works were in progress 
in adjoining wildlife rich areas outside the protected areas 
falling under the catchment of Teesta Stage III hydro 
electric power project in North Sikkim.  The fact remained 
that activities for the protection of bio-diversity and wildlife 
could not be undertaken due to funds not being released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 301 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
6 Non opening of 
separate bank 
account under 
Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 
1972 
 
State CAMPA had not opened separate bank account for 
funds collected from user agencies under Wildlife 
(Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking activities relating to 
protection of biodiversity and wildlife.  
Accepting the facts, Ministry  stated (April 2013) that 
separate bank account for corpus fund under Wildlife 
Protection Act, 1972 would be opened after consultation 
with the Ad-hoc CAMPA and state forest department. 
 
7 Non maintenance 
of records relating 
to Enumeration of 
trees 
 
The territorial divisions of the forest department were to 
carry out census of the existing trees, specifying the 
standards regarding the number and kind of trees to be 
planted for compensatory affore station to retain ecological 
balance of the affected forest area. However, no census 
was carried out and no records were maintained in 
territorial divisions of the forest department. Consequently, 
effect on ecological balance of the diverted forest area 
could not be assessed. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry  stated (April 2013) that 
henceforth an enumeration register of the project affected 
trees and separate records of project affected trees would 
be maintained in the state nodal office. 
 
8 Delayed 
implementation of 
Catchment Area 
Treatment (CAT) 
Project 
 
MoEF approved in January 2006 diversion of 7.46 ha of 
forest land for construction of 99 MW Chuzachen Hydro 
Electric Project at Chuzachen, Rongli by Gati Infrastructure 
Limited (GIL). In March 2007, funds of ` 1.69 crore were 
paid by GIL to the State CAMPA. As per the terms of 
environment clearance, the CA T plan was to be completed 
within three years from the date of approval of project i.e., 
by January 2009. However, work of 1 st phase was 
commenced after three years in 2009-10.  
In another case, MoEF approved in May 2008 diversion of 
32.05 ha of forest land for construction of 96 MW 
Jorethang Loop Hydro Electric Project in South and West 
Sikkim by Dans Energy Private Limited (DEPL). In March 
2008, funds of ` 1.37 crore were paid by DEPL to the State 
CAMPA. As per the terms of environment clearance, the 
CAT plan was to be completed within five years from the 
date of approval of the project. However, work of 1 stphase 
was commenced in 2009-10 after delay of one year.  
Accepting the facts, Ministry  attributed the delay in 
implementation of the CAT plan to insufficient funds (April 
2013). 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
302 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
9 Shifting of burden 
of implementation 
of afforestation 
scheme by state 
Government to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA    
In the years 2010-11 and 2011-12, budget allocation by 
State Government for CA was one per cent  and zero per 
cent as against 2006-07. Thus, State Government had 
shifted the burden in totality to Ad-hoc CAMPA in 
implementation of afforestation scheme. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the cost of maintenance of 
CA was reduced gradually in the state budget and the 
allocation for CA in the state budget was stopped from the 
year 2011-12. 
 
 Total  5.37 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact Sheet 
Particulars(2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO240 – 351.54 ha241 
As per records of NO – 1,359.91 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 351.54 ha 
As per records of NO – 1,359.91 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
For 1,359.91 ha of forest land the certificates 
were not issued on individual case basis.  
However, the certificates were issued once by 
the Chief Secretary and the Xerox copy of the 
same was used for the rest cases for non 
availability of non forest land. 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 2,306.21 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 511.09 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
                                                            
240 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
241 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 303 | P a g e  
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 351.54ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was zero per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 1,359.91 ha and zero per cent , respectively. As per reco rds of RO and NO, no non 
forest land was transferred /mutated in favour  of the forest department and notified as 
RF/PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation was done on non forest land and afforestation 
done on degraded forest land was 22per cent of the area to be afforested. 
5.2 Irregularity observed in land management 
Nature of irregularity Description 
Non verification of the 
certificate of Chief 
Secretary 
State CAMPA forwarded the proposals to the Regional Office without 
the original certificates and instead enclosed the photo copy of the 
already issued certificates in routine manner. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that it was not possible to process the 
proposal for obtaining the certificat e from the chief secretary for each 
case repeatedly as the subject matter related to the same purpose.  The 
reply of Ministry is not tenable as forest land was diverted without 
proper verification of certificate of chief secretary. 
 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper  accounts, correctness of its income and 
expenditure for the year 2009-10 to 2011-12 could not be verified and ascertained in audit. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the work for preparation of accounts had been assigned to 
CAs and the accounts would be submitted to a udit as soon as preparation of accounts was 
completed by the CAs. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Sikkim CAMPA met three ti mes during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Committee met three times during 2009-12.  

Report N
304 | P
1. Ba
The t o
Nadu i s
the in t
Octobe
in the S
was 1
geogra
p
canopy 
2,94,80
dense f
under 
10,35,6
forest. 
assessm
showed
Forest c
2. Co
State C
hoc CA
there a
g
 
 
               
242Source
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground2
otal geogr a
s 1,30,05, 8
terpretation
r 2008-May
State was 2
8.16 per 
phical are a
density c
00 hectare 
forest, 10, 3
moderatel
600 hectar e
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a margina
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
MPA, fund s
gainst durin
                      
e: India State o
1,05
013 
242 
aphical ar e
800 hectar e
n of satel l
y 2009, the 
3,62,500 he
cent of 
a. In ter m
classes, th e
of area 
32,100 hec t
ly dense 
e of area 
d with t h
009, the f
l increase o
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constitute
s released 
ng the perio
                      
of Forest Repo
5,27,300
T
ea of Ta m
e. Based o
lite data o
forest cove
ectare whic
the State ’
ms of fore s
e State h a
under ve r
tare of ar e
forest a n
under op e
he previo u
forest cov e
of 4,600 hec
t (in hectar
ation funds
d in Septe m
by Ad-hoc 
od 2006-07 
 
ort 2011 publ
2,94,800
Tamil Nad
mil 
on 
of 
er 
ch 
’s 
st 
ad 
ry 
ea 
nd 
en 
us 
er 
ctare in the 
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
mber 2009.
CAMPA to 
to 2011-12
ished by Fore
10,32,100
Com
u 
2011 asses
te  
 Funds re m
State CA M
  were as de
est Survey of I
10,35,600
1,16,0
pensatory A
sment. 
mitted by S t
MPA and ex
etailed belo
ndia. 
0
000
Very dense
Moderately
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest 
Afforestation
tate CAMPA
penditure i
ow. 
e forest
y dense forest
st
area
n in India 
 
A to Ad-
incurred 
t

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 305 | P a g e  
 (` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received 
by  State CAMPA 
from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA243 
2006-07 2.00 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 7.56 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 9.56 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 3.53 1.97 Nil 1.97 
2010-11 0.97 1.70 1.67 2.00 
2011-12 3.40 1.38* 1.31 2.07 
Total 27.02 5.05 2.98  
*    The amount of ` 1.38 crore was received in June 2012 
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 19 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released during 2009-12. Of  ` 5.05 crore released without APOs, 41 per cent 
remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of ` 19.45 
crore were not remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in State 
Government account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Tamil Nadu that came to 
the notice of audit are given below. The gist of  these cases is also given in table 24 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
1 There were seven cases 244 involving forest land of 107.40 ha in which NPV was 
not collected from the user agencies 245 to whom in principle approval was 
granted before October 2002 and the fina l approval was granted after that. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the action is being pursued by the concerned 
DFOs. 
6.23246 
                                                            
243Cummulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
244 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
245Vallakkal Reservoir, Varattar Reservoir  
246Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (107.40 x 5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
306 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount
2 NPV of ` 0.37 crore was short collected (Wildlife Warden, Chennai- ` 0.25 crore, 
DFO Nilgiris South – ` 0.08 crore and DFO, Sivaganga- ` 0.04 crore) and CA of  
` 0.87 lakh was short collected by DFO Shivaganga. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that there wa s no short collection of NPV/CA etc. in 
these cases.  However, the reply was not supported with the relevant 
documents. 
0.37 
3 PCA of ` 0.17 crore remained unrealised from Udhagai Municipality. 
Ministry stated(April 2013) that concer ned forest division was pursuing the 
matter of recovery of PCA with user agency. 
0.17 
4 PCA was not recovered by Wildlife Warden, Chennai despite being cognizant of 
the fact of carrying out of work by the user agency before formal approval. 
M i n i s t r y  s t a t e d  ( A p r i l  2 0 1 3 )  t h a t  r e c o v e r y  o f  P C A  f r o m  u s e r  a g e n c y  w a s  n o t  
included in the final approval and hence recovery of PCA from user agency did 
not arise.  Thus, Ministry had accepted th at PCA could not be recovered as it was 
not included in its final approval. 
 Total  6.77 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and the utilisation of 
the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 247     0.66 0.66  0.42 0.43 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    0.60 0.56  0.96 0.87 
Protected 
Area 
    0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan     0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0.49 0.45  0.05 0.01 
Total 1.97 Nil  Nil  1.70 1.75 1.67 1.38 1.43 1.31 
The funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA fo r the year 2009-10 without APO and without 
mentioning head of account or the purpose of which it was released. Funds for the year 
2011-12 were received in the month of June 2012. Concerns remain on the absorptive 
                                                            
247 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 307 | P a g e  
capacity of the State considering that ` 33.95 crore (including in terest) are accumulated 
with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Affo restation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) 
and can be released only for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds. 
(`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Irregular 
expenditure 
A sum of ` 0.48 crore was spent by State CAMPA during 2010-11 
on certain items (extension of training hall in three Van Vigyan 
Kendras, infrastructure facilities in Geographic Information 
Systems laboratory and for State CAMPA Cell) which were 
disallowed by the MoEF. MoEF had instructed that expenditure 
on these items would be met from the interest earned on the 
deposits held. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the said items would be 
brought to notice of Steering Committee during its next meeting 
for appropriate orders/ratification. 
0.48 
2 Incurring 
expenditure 
not covered 
under 
APO/Model 
estimate 
A sum of ` 0.26 crore was incurred on the works not sanctioned 
in APO from the savings and a sum of ` 0.10 crore was incurred 
on the work not included in the model estimate. Thus, the entire 
expenditure of` 0.36crores on these works was incurred without 
any provisions in APO. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that  concerned forest divisions had 
been instructed to furnish full details of the case. 
0.36 
3 Irregular 
diversion of 
CA funds for 
land eviction 
 
A sum of ` 0.15 crore was sanctioned to DFO Kancheepuram for 
CA works which was diverted to DFO Tiruvallur by State CAMPA 
for CA works done in the encroachment evicted land instead of 
land identified for CA, of which ` 0.06 crore was already spent as 
of September 2012. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) th at expenditure was incurred on 
plantations for avoiding reoccurrence of encroachment.  
Ministry’s reply was not based on facts as said expenditure was 
not incurred on plantations but it was incurred on eviction of 
encroachments. 
0.15 
4 Non 
production of 
payment 
vouchers  
 
Payment vouchers for a sum of ` 0.04 crore and ` 0.01 crore for 
payment to village forest co uncil in March 2011 were not 
available with State CAMPA.   
Ministry stated (April 2013) that concerned forest division had 
now furnished relevant vouchers to State CAMPA. The fact 
remained that these vouchers were yet to be shown to audit.  
0.05 
 Total  1.04 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
308 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars(2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO248 – 269.33 ha249 
As per records of NO – 323.09 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  –230.01 ha 
As per records of NO – 230.95 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 39.32 ha 
As per records of NO – 92.14 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 147.51 ha 
On Non forest land – 226.95 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 66.97 ha (2008-09) 
On Non forest land – 144.12 ha 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 226.95 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 57.01 ha 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 269.33 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was 85 per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 323.09 ha and 71 per cent , respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of 226.94 ha non forest land was tr ansferred/ mutated in favour of forest 
department only 57.01 ha non forest land was declared as RF /PF. As per records of NO, 
afforestation was done on 144.12 ha non forest  land and afforestation done on degraded 
forest land was 45 per cent of the area to be afforested. 
The Ministry stated (April 2013) that CA in th e remaining areas would be done in a phased 
manner. 
 
 
 
                                                            
248 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
249 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 309 | P a g e  
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of irregularity Description 
1 Unauthorised 
diversion of Forest 
Land 
 
Reservoir across Vaddkku Pach ayarriver was constructed 
unauthorizedly on 191.60 ha forest land in Tirunelveli district 
during 1996-2003. MoEF granted ex-post facto in principle 
approval in July 2005 subject to deposit of NPV/PCA/CA etc of 
` 19.17 crore and CATP dues of ` 1.78 crore by user agency. 
However, NPV/PCA/CA of ` 19.17 crore remained unrealized and 
amount of CATP dues of ` 1.78 crore deposited with state forest 
department was wrongly classified to crop husbandry head and 
not remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA. The execution of project was done 
without prior approval of MoEF. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that concerned division had been 
instructed to recover NPV /PCA/CA of ` 19.17 crore from user 
agency and to submit compliance report to get final approval.  As 
regards non-remittance of ` 1.78 crore to Ad-hoc CAMPA it was 
stated that action was being taken. 
2 Irregular grant of 
second stage approval  
 
MoEF granted second stage approval for diversion of 1.46 ha 
forest land for construction of high level bridge at Pulicat lake 
without receipt of non forest land of 2.91 ha. The grant of second 
stage approval without receipt of non forest land in cases of non 
exempted categories was irregular. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action was being taken to obtain 
non-forest land from user agency. 
3 Unauthorized 
occupation of forest 
land for five years  
 
The diversion of 27.51 ha forest land was granted by MoEF on 
lease basis for 25 years from 21 September 1966 to 20 September 
1991 to Radio Astronomy Centre Ooty. The lease was renewed for 
fifteen years from 21 September 1996 leaving a gap of five years. 
Thus, 27.5 ha forest land remained in possession of lessee 
unauthorisedly for five years. 
In another case, diversion of 2.23 ha forest land was granted by 
MoEF on lease basis upto 1992 to  Udhagamandalam Municipality. 
Thereafter, the lease was not renewed. It was reported by Nilgiris 
south range in August 1994 that the Udhagai Municipality had 
occupied 4.80 ha RF land for dumping solid waste against the 
original leased out land of 2.02 ha. MoEF granted first stage 
approval for diversion of 6.07 ha forest land to Municipality in 
August 2007. No second stage appro val could be granted due to 
non compliance of the conditions viz. transfer of non forest land 
and remittance of PCA etc. by the Municipality. Thus, 4.80 ha 
forest land remained in possession of lessee unauthorisedly for 
eighteen years. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
310 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of irregularity Description 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action for renewal of lease was 
being taken.  As regards unauthorised occupation of forest land by 
Udhagamandalam Municipality it was stated that the concerned 
forest division was pursuing the matter with the user agency. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. It was found that out of ` 22.65 crore remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA upto 
2009-10 amount of ` 0.32 crore remained unreconciled with Adhoc CAMPA. The 
reconciliation for the years 201 0-11 to 2011-12 was not done . No bank reconciliation was 
done by the State CAMPA for the funds released to the field officers. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Tamil Nadu CAMPA met two times during 2009-12 as against six 
times. The Executive Committee met two times during 2009-12.  
  

Compens
1. Bac
The tot
10,49,1
interpre
January
State w
76.04 
geogra
p
canopy 
10,900 
dense 
f
under 
3,18,2
0
forest. 
assessm
showed
hectare
 
Forest c
2. Co
State C
CAMPA
against
               
250Source
7
satory Affor
kground250
al geograph
100 hecta r
etation o f
y 2009, th e
was 7,97,7 0
per cen
phical are a
density c l
hectare o
forest, 4,6 8
moderately
00 hectare 
Compared
ment of 2 0
d a margi n
e in the 201
cover – Typ
mpensator
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the p
                      
e: India State o
3,1
7,200
restation in I
 
hical area o
re. Based 
f satellite 
e forest c o
00 hectare 
t of th
a. In term s
lasses, the 
of area u
8,600 hect a
y dense f
of area u
d with th e
009, the f o
nal decrea
1 assessme
pes of forest
ry Afforesta
constituted
eased by A d
period 2006
                      
of Forest Repo
18,200
2,44,200
ndia 
of Tripura is 
on the 
data of 
over in the 
which was 
e State’s 
s of forest 
State had 
under very 
are of area 
forest and 
nder open 
e previous 
orest cover 
se of 800 
ent. 
t (in hectar
ation Fund o
d in Octob e
d-hoc CAM
6-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
10,900
Tripura 
re)-2011 
of the State
er 2009. Fu
PA to Stat e
1-12 were a
ished by Fore
4,68,6
e 
nds remitte
e CAMPA a n
as detailed 
est Survey of I
00
R
ed by State
nd expendit
below: 
ndia. 
Very dense
Moderately
Open fores
Scrub
Non forest 
eport No. : 2
311 
e CAMPA t o
ture incurre
e forest
y dense forest
st
area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
 
 
t

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
312 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 (`in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Amount received 
by  State CAMPA 
from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA 
Expenditure incurred by 
State CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA251 
2006-07 9.67 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 4.53 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 2.78 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 2.19 3.54 Nil 3.54 
2010-11 34.23 2.58 0.54 5.58 
2011-12 4.03 Nil 1.39 4.19 
Total 57.43 6.12 1.93  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 11 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of  ` 6.12 crore released against APOs, 68 per cent 
remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA.  
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Tripura that came to the 
notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also given in table 24 and 26 in 
Chapter 3. 
Sl. No. Description Amount 
1. There were 16 cases 252 involving forest land of 5,741.55 ha in which NPV 
was not collected from the user agencies 253 to whom in principle approval 
was granted before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after 
that.  
333.01254 
2. The Supreme Court revised the rate of NPV from March 2008 based on the 
recommendations of an Expert Committe e. However test check of records 
of four forest divisions255 revealed that in 12 cases NPV was not collected at 
revised rates. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that acti on had been taken for recovery of 
outstanding NPV from user agencies. 
0.18 
 Total 333.19 
 
 
                                                            
251 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
252 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
253 Rubber Plantation, GAS Based COMBI-NED Cycle Power Project, Govt. Agencies 
254Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (5741.55 x 5.8) 
255Teliamura, Bagafa, West and Trishna 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 313 | P a g e  
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and utilisation of the 
funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 256     2.30 0.54  2.24 1.31 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    0.09 0  0.26 0.08 
Protected 
Area257 
    0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan     0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0 0  0 0 
Total 3.54 Nil Nil 2.58 2.39 0.54 Nil 2.50 1.39 
*The figures of allotment and expenditure pertain to only  six divisions test checked in audit. Information for 
entire state not made available by Nodal Office. 
Funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA with out submission of APO for the year 2009-10. 
APO for the year 2010-11 was submitted in Octo ber 2010 and the funds were released in 
January 2011 after a delay of ten months. 
The percentage of expenditure incurred as ag ainst the amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA 
was zero per cent in 2009-10 and 9 per cent in 2010-11. Further, the implementing agencies 
could not expend substantial portion of amount  released by the State CAMPA in the years 
2010-11 and 2011-12. Though the percentage of  expenditure had increased progressively, 
concerns remain on the absorptive ca pacity of the State considering that ` 92.73 crore 
(including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only fo r specified forestry related 
activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
256 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
257 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
314 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
Excess 
expenditure over 
allotment of funds 
 
Direction and Administrative division, Agartala incurred 
expenditure of ` 0.07 crore on TA against the provision of ` 0.04 
crore in APO for 2011-12 and Sadar forest division incurred 
expenditure of ` 0.08 crore on TA against the provision of ` 0.06 
crore and incurred expenditure ` 0.22 crore on strengthening of 
forest protection mechanism against provision of ` 0.13 crore in 
APO for 2011-12 by diverting funds from other activities. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that expenditure was incurred within 
the provisions made in APO.  The reply was not based on facts as 
expenditure on the above heads was incurred by diverting funds 
from the provisions made in the APO for other activities. 
0.14 
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars(2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO258 – 191.42 ha259 
As per records of NO – 696.22 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 10.91 ha 
As per records of NO – 10.95 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO –180.51 ha 
As per records of NO – 685.27 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
NA 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 1,597.45 ha 
On Non forest land – 10.95 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 80.00 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 10.95 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 191.42 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was six per cent while as per records of NO, the figures 
                                                            
258 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
259 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 315 | P a g e  
were 696.22 ha and two per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of10.95 ha non forest land transferred/ mutated in favour of forest department no 
non forest land was declared as RF/PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation was done on 
non forest land and afforestation done on degraded forest land was five per cent of the area 
to be afforested. 
 
5.2 Irregularities in land management 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Shortfall in 
execution of CA 
work  
 
Against diversion of 696 ha forest land in 124 cases during 2006-12, CA was to be 
done on 1,608 ha land (1,597 ha forest land and 11 ha non forestland). However, 
CA was carried out only in two cases of 60 ha forest land at a cost of ` 0.17 crore 
in the year 2006-07. Thereafter, no CA was done during last five years 2007-
2012. Further, provision of ` 0.09 crore only for CA was made in the APO for 
2010-11 and no provision was made for CA in the APO for 2011-12. It clearly 
indicates that CA activities were ignored in the state. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that CA could not be undertaken by State CAMPA 
due to non-provision of funds under CA. Th e reply only confirms the low priority 
accorded by the State CAMPA to the CA activities. 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per State CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of State CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper accounts, these could not be audited. 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that annual account s of State CAMPA for the years 2009-10 to 
2011-12 were under preparation and would be submitted shortly. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the State CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Tripura CAMPA met two times during 2009-12 as against six times. 
The Executive Commi ttee met once during 2009-12.Min istry accepted the audit 
observations (April 2013). 
  

Report N
316 | P
1. Ba
The t o
Uttar 
hectare
interpre
Octobe
forest 
14,33,8
per cen
area. I
density
1,62,60
very de
of are a
forest a
under o
the pr e
the fore
Forest c
2. Co
It was d
State CA
1862. W
these s
               
260Source
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground2
otal geogr a
Pradesh 
e. Base d
etation of 
r 2008- Ja
cover in 
800 hectar e
t of the Sta
n terms o
 classes, 
00 hectare 
ense forest, 
a under m
and 8,15,30
open forest
evious ass e
est cover sh
cover – Typ
ompensato
decided in 4
AMPAs sho
Wherever S
o as to co n
                      
e: India State o
4,55,900
2,25,8
013 
260 
aphical ar e
is 2,40, 9
d on 
satellite d a
nuary 200 9
the stat e
e which wa
ate’s geogra
of forest c
the Stat e
of area 
4,55,900 he
moderately 
0 hectare o
t. Compared
essment of 
howed a ma
pes of forest
ory Afforest
4th meeting
ould not w o
tates had r
nform to th
                      
of Forest Repo
1,62,6000
84,500
Ut
ea of 
92,800 
the 
ata of 
9, the 
e was 
s 5.95 
aphical 
anopy 
e had 
under 
ectare 
dense 
of area 
d with 
2009, 
arginal decr
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
g of CAMPA
ork as Socie
registered t
e State CA
 
ort 2011 publ
0
8,15,300
ttar Prade
ease of 300
re)-2011 
of the Stat
A Advisory C
ties registe
he State C A
MPA Guide
ished by Fore
74,500
Com
esh 
0 hectare in
te 
Council held
ered under t
AMPAs as S
elines. Durin
est Survey of I
pensatory A
 the 2011 a
d on 25 Ja n
the Societie
Societies, th
ng test che c
ndia. 
Very d
Mode
Open
Scrub
Non f
Afforestation
assessment.
nuary 2012 
es Registrat
hey should 
ck records 
dense forest
erately dense 
 forest
b
forest area
n in India 
. 
 
that the 
tion Act, 
disband 
of State 
forest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 317 | P a g e  
CAMPA it was found that State CAMPA was re gistered as a societ y under the Societies 
registration Act of the State and still functioning as such. 
State CAMPA was constituted in August 2010. Funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, funds released by Ad-hoc CAMPA to State CAMPA and expenditure incurred there 
againstduring the period 2006-07 to 2011-12 were as detailed below. 
 
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA261 
2006-07 303.37 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 91.21 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 35.97 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 16.90 Nil Nil Nil 
2010-11 95.23 47.10 32.51 14.59 
2011-12 41.84 35.35 6.05 43.89 
Total 584.52 82.45 38.56  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 14 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 82.45 crore released against APOs, 53 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of 
` 22.93 crore were not remitted by State CAMP A to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in 
State Government account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short  recovery/excess recovery of NPV/CA/PCA etc. in Uttar 
Pradesh that came to the notice of audit are given below. The gist of these cases is also 
given in table24and 27 in Chapter 3. 
(` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount
1 
 
There were 2 cases 262 involving forest land of 1,14 9.87 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agencies to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that. 
66.69238
 
2 State Government order of 5 December 2007 provided that due to difficulties in 
providing the land on sites of felling of trees, NHAI shall make available the 
54.11 
                                                            
261 Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unut ilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
262 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
238Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (1,149.87 x 5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
318 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Description Amount
amount equivalent to market price of land equivalent to 10 meter strip and 
plantation cost on the strip. In Nove mber 2009, State Government waived the 
condition and provided that apart from land or its cost made available by NHAI 
up to 14 January 2009, no additional demand in that respect would be raised. 
In spite of State Government’s order of December 2007 no demand for the cost 
of land equivalent to 10 meter strip on length of highway in 13 districts 
amounting to ` 54.11 crore was raised to NHAI. The project was completed in 
the year 2009-10. In view of order of State Government of November 2009, no 
demand could be raised. 
Thus, due to inaction of division s, State CAMPA sustained loss of ` 54.11 crore 
(considering the circle rates of respective district for rural agricultural land) in 
respect of 652.31 hectare land in 13 districts involved in the project. 
3 In Gonda forest division, 4.10 acre fore st land was diverted to Bajaj Hindustan 
Sugar Industry Limited in November  2006 without recovery of PCA of ` 0.01 
crore stipulated in MoEF’s approval for diversion of land.  Further, premium of  
` 0.07 crore and interest on premium had also not been recovered. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that PCA of ` 0.01 crore has been recovered from 
user agency.  The reply of Ministry was silent regarding recovery of premium and 
interest of ` 0.07 crore from user agency. 
0.08 
4 In three forest divisions (Mathura, Bahraich and Chitrakoot) NPV/CA of ` 0.10 
crore remained unrecovered from user agencies. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that instructions had been issued to all forest 
divisions to take steps to recover NPV/CA. 
0.10 
5 In Bahraich Forest division, diversion of  3.32 ha forest land was allowed to U.P 
Network Pvt. Ltd. without deposit of CA of ` 0.05 crore. The amount remained 
unrecovered as of December 2012 for which no responsibility was fixed. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that user agency did not deposit CA of ` 0.05 crore 
despite pursuance through several reminders and in fact no CA was required in 
this case and the user agency was aske d to deposit the amount on account of 
recovery of loss as precautionary measure.  The fact remains that amount of ` 
0.05 crore could not be recovered from user agency by the state forest 
department. 
0.05 
6 As per order of the Supreme Court of 9 th May 2008, full exemption from 
payment of NPV was allowed for laying of underground optical fibre cable if (a) 
no felling of tree was involved; and (b) area fell outside National Park/Sanctuary. 
However, forest department made irregular recovery of ` 2.81 crore during the 
period 2009 to 2011 for laying of optical fibre cable. 
2.81 
7 Three forest divisions (Bahraich, Najibabad and Barabanki) made excess recovery 
of NPV of ` 0.82 crore due to wrong classification of diverted forest land. The 
user agencies included N.E Railway, PGCIL, MORT and IOC. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that as a matter of abundant precaution the NPV 
was recovered at the highest rate i.e. ` 9.20 per ha from user agencies. 
(-) 0.82 
Total  123.84 
 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 319 | P a g e  
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of  funds allotted to State CAMPA and the 
utilisation of the funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 263     11.94 11.34  0 0 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    21.75 20.56  12.32 6.05 
Protected 
Area264 
    0 0  0 0 
CAT Plan     0 0  0 0 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    2.53 0.61  0 0 
Total Nil Nil Nil 47.10 36.22 32.51 35.35 12.32 6.05 
No APO was prepared for the year 2009-10 and no funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA. 
APOs for the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 were submitted after a delay of eight to 12 months.  
From the table it is evident that the Stat e CAMPA did not release the entire amount 
received from Ad-hoc CAMPA against APOs to the implementing agencies. The amount 
released was 77 per cent  in 2010-11 and 35 per cent  in 2011-12. The percentage of 
expenditure incurred as against the amounts release by Ad-hoc CAMPA was 69 per cent in 
2010-11 and 17 per cent in 2011-12. Further, the implem enting agencies could not expend 
substantial portion of amount released by the State CAMPA in the years 2010-11 and 2011-
12. Concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of the State considering that ` 752.94 crore 
(including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the Compensatory Afforestation 
Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and can be released only fo r specified forestry related 
activities. 
 
 
 
 
                                                            
263 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation and Management of forest 
264 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
320 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Irregular 
diversion of 
afforestation 
money  
 
Afforestation in 20 hectare area was done along Lucknow-
Faizabad highway out of fund received from Airtel for other 
project in 2008 at a cost of ` 0.97 crore. Diversion of CA 
money received from a user agency for afforestation against 
project of another user agency was irregular. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) th at as per sanction of State 
Government, plantation could be carried out along road side 
anywhere in eastern UP.  The reply is not tenable as diversion 
of money from one project to another project was irregular. 
0.97 
2 Delay in release 
of funds to units 
by State CAMPA 
 
State CAMPA released funds to its various units in March 
2011 out of a sum of ` 47.10 crore received from Ad-hoc 
CAMPA for 2010-11. Thus, release of funds by State CAMPA 
at the fag end of the year in the month of March 2011 for the 
works to be undertaken in the year 2010-11 was improper. 
Ministry accepted the audit observation (April 2013). 
 
3 Doubtful 
expenditure on 
works  
 
Basti forest division raised additional demand of ` 0.33 crore 
for the works in first phase and ` 0.11 crore for second phase 
in October 2011 on the basis of rates revised in June 2011 
whereas in UC for ` 6.70 crore sent by Basti forest division on 
23 August 2011 it was mentioned that the entire sum had 
been utilised up to 20 August 2011. Thus, demand of 
additional amount and its release to the division was not 
justified as the work was already completed. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that reply was awaited from 
concerned divisions. 
0.44 
4 Extra 
expenditure on 
afforestation  
 
Faizabad division procured barbed wire on short term tender 
basis at the rate of ` 63,000/MT instead of rate contract 
adopted by other divisions. Furt her, Faizabad division also 
procured RCC, pillars at the rate of ` 281 per piece whereas 
approved estimate was ` 170 per piece. This resulted in extra 
expenditure of ` 0.29 crore. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that extra expenditure was due 
t o  i n c r e a s e  i n  c o s t  o f  m a t e r i a ls.  The fact remains that the 
materials were not procured at the rate contract adopted by 
other divisions. 
0.29 
5 Extra 
expenditure on 
plantation in 
brick guard 
 
Awadh Forest division executed plantation in iron tree guard 
in area falling under city/populated areas and Gorakhpur 
forest division planted trees in  3,000 brick guards at various 
location of Gorakhpur city at an extra expenditure of ` 0.21 
crore. As per norms of social forestry, brick guard is used in 
area where human population is very few or along highways 
whereas iron tree guard is used in urban/populated areas. 
The use of brick guard in city limits was in violation of norms 
of social forestry and also led to extra expenditure of ` 0.21 
crore. 
0.21 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 321 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
Ministry stated (April 2013) that  creation of brick guards was 
as per approved working plan of Gorakhpur division.  The 
reply is not tenable since installation of brick guards/iron 
guards was not as per norms of social forestry.. 
6 Excess 
expenditure on 
construction of 
jeepable road  
In Banki and Kampierganj range, 48,500 metre jeepable road 
was constructed at the rate of ` 57.70 per metre against the 
approved rate of ` 45 per metre resulting in excess 
expenditure of ` 0.06 crore. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that reply was awaited from 
concerned divisions. 
0.06 
7 Disproportionate 
allocation of CA 
funds 
 
APOs were prepared without any rational basis, because 
allocation of CA money was not based on receipts. For 
instance Faizabad and Unnao received 96 and 92 per cent of 
receipts as allocation of CA whereas Shivalik and Renukoot 
received 15 and 2 per cent  of receipts and Lalitpur got no 
allocation in APO for 2009-10 despite having receipt of ` 6.83 
crore. This disproportionate a llocation of CA was also not 
corrected by State Steering Committee while according 
approval of APOs. The allocation of CA should have been 
made proportionately on the basis of receipts. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that disproportionate allocation 
of CA funds was due to non-submission/delay in submission 
of APOs. 
 
8 Non compliance 
of the Supreme 
Court order for 
execution of 
work 
As per guidelines of MNREGA, work was to be given to rural 
people having job card and payment was to be made directly 
into their bank accounts. Test check of records revealed that 
all the forest divisions made cash payment to labourers 
through muster roll and the payments were made at the rate 
of ` 100 per day instead of ` 120 per day applicable up to 
December 2011 and ` 125 per day from January 2012 for the 
works executed under MNREGA. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that payment to labourers was 
made at the rate ` 100 per day as per notification of state 
government of 2007.  The fact remains that payment to 
labourers was not made at the revised rates and payment 
was made in cash and it was not deposited into their bank 
account as per guidelines of MNREGA. 
 
9 Fake utilisation 
certificates 
 
State CAMPA released a sum of ` 0.70 crore for installation of 
solar lights at the rate of ` 23,351 per light to various 
divisions. However, a subsidy of ` 7,100 was available during 
2011-12 if purchases were made from NEDA. Forest divisions 
procured solar lights from NEDA at the rate of ` 16,251 per 
light after availing subsidy. The UCs was however sent for  
` 23,351 per light. Hence, ` 7,100 per light was irregularly 
shown as utilised in the UCs. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that all the divisions did not avail 
subsidy available for solar light. 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
322 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
10 Diversion of 
plantation sites 
without approval 
of MoEF 
Awadh forest division executed afforestation works in 22 out 
of 27 cases at sites which were different from the sites 
approved in APO for 2009-10 without approval of the MoEF. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the modifications were 
made through revised APOs.  The reply of Ministry is not 
tenable as plantation sites were changed without approval of 
MoEF. 
 
11 Loss of interest 
due to late 
opening of 
interest bearing 
bank account 
 
As per state CAMPA, the monies received in the State CAMPA 
shall be kept in interest-bearing account in nationalized bank 
and periodically withdrawn for the works as per APOs 
approved by the Steering Committee. In Awadh, Gorakhpur, 
Faizabad forest divisions there was loss of interest of ` 8.60 
lakh (@ 4 per cent ) due to delay in opening of interest 
bearing bank account for the funds received from state 
CAMPA. 
Ministry accepted the audit observation (April 2013). 
 
 Total   1.97 
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact Sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO265 – 1,117.24 ha266 
As per records of NO – 2,995.23 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 535.23 ha 
As per records of NO – 374.23 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – 582.01 ha 
As per records of NO – 2,621.00 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
No 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 1,731.11 ha 
On Non forest land – 229.91 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 1,177.40 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 255.77 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 61.04 ha 
                                                            
265 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environmen t & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
266 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 323 | P a g e  
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for non forestry purposes was 1,117.24ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was 48 per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 2,995.23 ha and 12 per cent, respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of 255.77ha non forest land transferred/  mutated in favour of forest department 
only 61.04 ha non forest land was declared as RF/PF. As per re cords of NO, no afforestation 
was done on non forest land and afforestat ion done on degraded forest land was 68 per 
cent of the area to be afforested. In 38 forest divisions, against 29,271.22 ha of forest land 
diverted (since 2002) for non forest purpose, non forest land of 374.24 ha (1.28 per cent of 
land diverted) was received. 28,838.61 ha of non forest land was not received. The valuation 
of non forest land of 28,838.61 ha worked out to ` 3,323.84 crore (calculated on the 
applicable circle rates of respective district267). 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that in all cases, it was not required to get equivalent non-forest 
land in lieu of diversion of forest land.  However, Ministry did not furnish details of cases 
where non-forest land was not received in lieu of diversion of forest land. 
5.2  Irregularities in land management  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Use of forest 
land for non-
forest purpose 
without 
approval of 
MoEF 
 
In Lalitpur forest division, state irrigation department executed four 
irrigation projects on 70.84 ha fore st land and UP SMDC (a State PSU) 
executed mining work on 32.78 ha forest land without the approval of 
MoEF. No NPV/CA was recovered in these cases.  
Land measuring 368.10 ha was used by irrigation department for 
construction of Shajad dam during 1974 to 1992 without approval of 
MoEF. As before the completion of pr oject, Forest (Conservation) Act, 
1980 came into existence, proposal fo r post facto approval for diversion 
of forest land was sent by the Stat e Government in July 2000. The final 
approval of the project was still awaited. Against the demanded 
NPV/CA/PCA of ` 53.29 crore only ` 2.10 crore were realised and a sum 
of ` 51.19 crore remained unrealised. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that no mining was permitted on the forest 
land and the matter was under consideration of State Government. 
2 Grant of mining 
lease in 
violation of 
rules  
 
Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 and MMDR Act 1957 stipulates that for 
diversion of forest land for grant/rene wal of mining leases shall normally 
be granted for a period not exceeding 30 years. In Renukoot forest 
division, mining lease for NCL, Dudhi Chua and Kharia was granted by 
MoEF for 40 years which was contrary to the rules. 
                                                            
267The value of land has been calculated taking the minimu m of circle rates of agricultural land which could be 
obtained . Efforts were made to arrange all the circle rates to work out the total value of non forest land which 
could not be received. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
324 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that sanction of mining lease for 40 years was 
issued after due consideration by State Government.  The fact remains 
that grant of mining lease beyond 30 years was in violation of FC Act 
1980 and MMDR Act 1957. 
3 Execution of 
project in 
violation of 
MoEF orders 
 
As per MoEF OM dated 2 December 2009,  all projects that fall within 10 
km boundary of National Parks and Sanctuaries would be subject to 
recommendation of standing committ ee of National Board of Wildlife 
(NBWL).In Kaimoor wildlife division, JP Associates limited (JAL) started 
construction of 4x60 MW captive power plant at a place close to Kaimoor 
wildlife sanctuary (about 1.5 km) without obtaining clearance from NBWL 
as it involved change of land use and construction within 10 km of the 
sanctuary. 
Ministry accepted the audit observation (April 2013).  
4 Construction of 
approach road 
without 
approval of 
MoEF 
Approach road was constructed for petrol pumps, hotels and other 
commercial establishments along protected forest area without approval 
of MoEF which was in contravention of FC Act, 1980. 
Accepting the facts, Mini stry stated (April 2013) that all forest divisions 
had been instructed to get ex-post facto sanction in these cases. 
 
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per State CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of State CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2010-11 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format and got the accounts audited by Chartered Accountants.    
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Uttar Pradesh CAMPA me t three times during 2009-12 as against six 
times. The Executive Committee met six ti mes during 2009-12. The Governing body met 
once only during 2009-12. 
  

Compens
1. Ba
The tot
is 53, 4
interpre
Decemb
State w
45.80 p
area. I n
classes,
area u n
hectare
forest a
open f o
assessm
showed
in the 2
Forest c
2. Co
State CA
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
268Source
28,7
satory Affor
ckground26
al geograph
48,300 h e
etation of s
ber 2008, 
was 24,49, 6
per cen t of 
n terms o f
, the State 
nder very 
e of area u
and 5,56,70
orest. Com
ment of 2
d a margina
2011 assessm
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A , funds rel
during the 
                      
e: India State o
71,600
restation in I
68 
hical area o
ectare. Ba
satellite dat
the forest 
600 hecta r
the State’ s
f forest c a
had 4,76, 2
dense for e
under mod
00 hectare 
pared wit h
2009, the 
al increase o
ment. 
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
ndia 
U
of Uttarakha
sed on t
a of Octobe
cover in t
re which w
s geograph i
anopy den s
200 hectar e
est, 14,16, 7
erately de n
of area un d
h the previ o
forest co
of 100 hect
t (in hectar
ation funds
d in Novemb
Ad-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
4,76
Uttarakhan
and 
the 
er - 
the 
was 
ical 
sity 
e of 
700 
nse 
der 
ous 
ver 
are 
re)-2011 
s of the Stat
ber 2009. Fu
MPA to State
11-12 were
ished by Fore
6,200
14,1
5,
27,100
nd 
te 
unds remitt
e CAMPA an
as detailed
est Survey of I
16,700
,56,700
R
ted by State
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very d
Mode
Open 
Scrub
Non f
eport No. : 2
325 
e CAMPA to
ture incurre
dense forest
erately dense 
 forest
b
forest area
21 of 2013 
| P a g e  
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
forest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
326 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 
 (` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by  
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA269 
2005-06 228.34 Nil Nil Nil 
2006-07 206.96 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 226.34 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 161.17 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 299.15 81.65 Nil 81.65 
2010-11 105.52 82.75 43.60 120.80 
2011-12 69.48 Nil 60.28 60.52 
Total 1296.96 164.40 103.88  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 13 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released between 2009-12. Of ` 164.40 crore released against APOs, 37 per 
cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation  of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of 
` 8.92 crore were not remitted by State CAMP A to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in 
State Government account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in Uttarakhand that came to 
the notice of audit are given below. The gist of  these cases is also given in table 24 and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. No. Description Amount 
1 There were 23 cases 270 involving forest land of 3,433.27 ha in which NPV was 
not collected from the user agencies 271 to whom in principle approval was 
granted before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that.  
199.13272 
2 In Haridwar forest division, against the requirement of ` 18.10 crore, only  
` 12.45 crore was deposited by the user agency (UVVN) to whom mining lease 
was granted for ten years for the period upto 2012 resulting in short realization 
5.65 
                                                            
269Cummulative amount at the end of the year lying untu lised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
270 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
271 M/s Haldwani Stone Co. Lalkuan, Govt. Agency 
272Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of `5.80 lakh per hectare(3433.27 x 5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 327 | P a g e  
Sl. No. Description Amount 
of `5.65 crore. 
Further, after formation of Ad-hoc CAMPA in 2006, all funds were to be 
transferred to it. However, DFO Haridwar utilised ` 5.60 crore out of  
` 9.77crore deposited by UVVN during 2006-12 and remitted an amount of  
` 4.17 crore only to State Nodal Office in contravention of State CAMPA 
guidelines.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation pertained to the field level 
officers and reply would be submitted later. 
3 Four mining leases for extraction of  minor minerals from 2,358.69 ha from 
rivers273 to UVVN were granted by MoEF in April 2011 for a period of one year 
with the condition that the user agency shall transfer the cost of raising and 
maintaining the CA at the current wage rate, to the forest department and all 
the funds received from the user agency under the project shall be transferred 
to Ad-hoc CAMPA. It was also specified that 50 per cent of the net profit earned 
by the UVVN from the collection of mino r minerals shall be deposited for a SPV 
which shall be used exclusively for river training activities and 
management/protection of forests & wildlif e in the same vicinity of forest land 
diverted for collection of minor minerals.   
Audit observed that an amount of ` 16.04 crore out of ` 20.81 crore realized in 
respect of Gaula river was remitted to Ad-hoc CAMPA, resulting in short 
transmission of ` 4.77 crore. No funds were received in respect of Kosi, Dabaka 
and Sharda rivers though lease peri od had already expired in April 2012. 
Further, no information regarding crea tion of corpus under SPV by the state 
Government and funds deposited under it by the user agencies was furnished 
to audit.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the amount had been deposited with the Ad-
hoc CAMPA account.  The reply of Mi nistry was not supported with the 
relevant documents. 
4.77 
4 In Tarai East forest division, Haldwani, user agency (UVVN) to whom mining 
lease for diversion of 468 ha in Nandor and Kailash rivers of districts Nainital 
and Udham Singh Nagar for ten years was granted by MoEF in October 2006 
deposited only an amount of ` 47.85 lakh with DFO against the requirement of 
` 2.78 crore resulting in short realization of ` 2.30 crore. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation pertained to the field level 
officers and reply would be submitted later. 
2.30 
5 An amount of ` 25.45 lakh was not recovered from user agency (Border Road 
Organisation) on account of disposal debris pertaining to Pithoragarh-Tawaghat 
motor road as of November 2012. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that matter was being pursued with the user 
agencies for the recovery of NPV. 
0.25 
                                                            
273Gaula (1497 ha), Kosi (254 ha), Dabka (223 ha), and Sharda (384.69 ha) of district Nainital 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
328 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. No. Description Amount 
6 An amount of ` 16.55 lakh was not recovered from two user agencies 274 as 
required in terms and conditions of in principle (Stage I) approval granted by 
MoEF in June 2008 and final (Stage II) approval granted by MoEF in March 
2012. However, the forest land had already been transferred to user agencies. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that matter was being pursued with the user 
agencies for the recovery of CAMPA funds. 
0.17 
7 In three cases, NPV was charged only for 13.14 ha forest land instead of 13.25 
ha forest land resulting in short realization of NPV of ` 1.28 lakh.   
Ministry stated (April 2013) that matter was being pursued with the user 
agencies for the recovery of NPV. 
0.01 
 Total    212.28 
 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and the utilisation of 
the funds released. 
 (` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 275     51.99 43.43  57.31 45.45 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
    0 0  13.29 11.90 
Protected 
Area276 
    0.75 0.17  0.79 0.79 
CAT Plan     0 0  2.68 0.57 
Other 
specified 
activities 
    0 0  1.80 1.57 
Total 81.65 Nil  Nil 82.75 52.74 43.60 Nil 75.87 60.28
Funds were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA for the year 2009-10 without APO. The APO for the 
year 2009-10 was not prepared by State CAMPA instead a 10 year project was sent to MoEF 
on 16 March 2010. The APOs for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 were  prepared after a 
delay of five to seven months. Further, St ate CAMPA revised APO for the years 2010-11 and 
2011-12 in May 2011 and October 2012  after the close of financial years. Thus, the delay in 
submission of APOs and its revision after close of the financial years indicated poor 
planningfor the activities take up during the particular years. 
                                                            
274State Public Works Department and Uttarakhand Rural Road Development Agency 
275 NPV is spent on Protection, Conservation & Management of forest 
276 Protected Area Funds is spent on Wildlife Management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 329 | P a g e  
From the table it is evident that the Stat e CAMPA did not release the entire amount 
received from Ad-hoc CAMPA against APOs to the implementing agencies. The amount 
released was zero per cent  in 2009-10 and 64 per cent  in 2010-11. The percentage of 
expenditure incurred as against the amo unts release by Ad-hoc CAMPA was zero per cent in 
2009-10 and 53 per cent in 2010-11. Further, the implem enting agencies could not expend 
substantial portion of amount released by the State CAMPA in the years 2010-11 and 2011-
12. The levels of expenditure were 83 per cent in 2010-11 and 79 per cent  in 2011-12 of the 
amounts released. Though the percentage of expenditure had increase d progressively over 
the last three years, concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of the State considering 
that ` 1,527.93 crore (including interest) are accumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and ca n be released only 
for specified forestry related activities. 
First instalment of ` 81.65 crore was released by Ad-h oc CAMPA  in August 2009 for 
implementation of CAMPA programme in the st ate but no funds were utilised by the State 
CAMPA during the year 2009-10 due to non-prepar ation of APO.  In the years 2010-11 and 
2011-12, the CAMPA programme was implemented/  executed in five categories viz. Net 
Present Value (NPV), Compensatory Affore station (CA), Protected Area (PA), Others 
Activities277 and Catchment Area Treatment (CAT) Plan. Only two activities viz. NPV and PA 
were implemented and no emphasis on basic acti vities of CAMPA viz. CA and CAT plan was 
given by the state CAMPA in the year 2010-11.  Ministry stated (April 2013) that emphasis 
was given on CA and CAT Plans in the year 2010- 11 and 2011-12.  The reply is not tenable as 
no expenditure was incurred under CA and CAT Plans in the year 2010-11. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
1 Expenditure 
not authorised 
by State 
CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on renovation of 
official residence of Principal Secretary ( ` 0.16 crore), 
maintenance of residential quarters (` 0.24 crore), Purchase of 
vehicles for PCCF-VP ( ` 0.05 crore), office expenses ( ` 0.72 
crore), briquetting machines ( `0.13 crore), Atal Adarsh Gram 
Yojna ( ` 4.99 crore), Strengthening Van Panchayats and 
operational expenses etc. ( ` 5.35 crore), Honorarium ( ` 0.62 
crore) etc. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation pertained 
to the field level officers and reply would be submitted later. 
12.26 
2 Irregular 
expenditures 
out of CAMPA 
Following irregular expenditure were made from CAMPA funds 
• In Dehradun forest division, an expenditure of ` 2.84 lakh 
was incurred for providing lunch on the event of budget 
6.14 
                                                            
277Road side plantation, gap-filling, dwarf species plantation, monitoring & evaluation etc. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
330 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
funds 
 
approval (March 2011) of forest department by State 
Assembly and ` 0.02 crore on printing of Uttarakhand 
Forest Statistics 2010-11. 
• State CAMPA provided a financial assistance of ` 0.22 crore 
to ‘Sparsh Ganga Board’ during the year 2011-12 for 
conducting special campaign against pollution and plastic 
eradication despite the fact the Board was established by 
State Government. 
• An expenditure of ` 2.13 crore was incurred on 19 activities 
which were not provided in the approved APO for 2010-11 
and 2011-12. 
• An expenditure of ` 3.74 crore was incurred on 25 activities 
in excess of provisions made in APO for 2010-11.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that expenditure on the above 
works was incurred as per approved APOs.  The reply of 
Ministry is not tenable as the expenditure on the above works 
was in contravention of State CAMPA guidelines. 
3 Irregular 
expenditure on 
protected area 
and other 
activities  
 
In the year 2011-12, an expenditure of ` 0.35 crore was 
incurred out of CAMPA funds on celebration of platinum 
jubilee of Corbett Tiger Reserve National Park which was not 
approved in the APO for 2011-12. Further, during the years 
2010-11 and 2011-12, an expenditure of ` 0. 15 crore was 
incurred on construction of buildings for forest guard chowkies 
which was in contravention to the provisions of the FC Act 
1980 prohibiting any new construction in the National Parks.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation pertained 
to the field level officers and reply would be submitted  
later. 
0.50 
4 Non execution 
of CAT Plan 
work 
 
A CAT Plan was intended to mitigate erosion and landslide 
hazards resulting from the Hydro Power Project (HEP) 
activities.  Accordingly, a comprehensive CAT plan taking care 
of soil erosion and landslide hazards was required to be 
undertaken in accordance with the State CAMPA guidelines.  
The cost of CAT plan of forest area was to be borne by the 
respective owner of the HEP which was around two per cent of 
the total project cost and forms the part of the CAMPA  
fund. 
However, funds earmarked for CAT plan of ` 9.21 crore were 
not utilised in the year 2010-11 and only a meagre amount of  
` 0.57 crore (six per cent) could be utilised in the year 2011-12. 
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that corrective 
measures had now been taken for execution of CAT Plans work 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 331 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount
from the year 2011-12. 
5 Deficiencies in 
implementation 
of programmes  
There were deficiencies in implementation of various 
programmes in the state CAMPA. Steering committee (SC) met 
on 04 October 2012 for approval of current outlay for the year 
2012-13 but no detailed APO showing units wise/ activity wise 
proposals was put before the SC. Only a size of main 
components278 amounting to ` 100 crore was approved by the 
SC and units/activities wise APO was not prepared (November 
2012) with only four months left for its execution/ 
implementation.  It was also de cided by the SC that advance 
soil work in 4,681 ha and CA work in 540 ha would be done in 
the current year (2012-13) knowing the fact that the CA work 
in hilly areas could only be done in monsoon season; hence, it 
was not clear, how these targets of CA work could be achieved 
by the implementing agencies. 
 
6 Retention of 
funds in non-
nationalised 
banks 
Audit observed that CAMPA funds provided by state CAMPA to 
DFO, soil conservation division, Ranikhet; Pithoragarh forest 
division and Rudraprayag forest division were initially kept in 
non-nationalised banks (Rural/Co-operative Banks) for a 
period ranging from 13 to 15 months whereas funds of ` 1.90 
c r o r e  p r o v i d e d  t o  D F O ,  C h a m p w a t  w e r e  k e p t  i n  a  c u r r e n t  
account of non-nationalised bank for a period 16 months.  
Thus, keeping of CAMPA funds in non-nationalised banks by 
DFOs was in contravention of the CAMPA Guidelines.  
 
7 Interest earned 
on CAMPA 
funds 
During the test check of records of State CAMPA it was 
observed that funds available with State CAMPA were invested 
and a return of ` 18.02 crore was earned.  However, at the 
same time this signifies that the funds made available by the 
Ad-hoc CAMPA were not being utilized timely by the State for 
intended purposes.   
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the focus of State CAMPA had 
been to provide enabling framework for execution of CAMPA’s 
works strictly as per guidelines.  The reply of Ministry is not 
tenable as instead of remitting the unspent funds to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA, these were invested with the banks as evident from 
the audit observation. 
 
 Total  18.90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
278NPV (`54.06 crore), CA (`15 crore), PA (`2crore), CAT Plan (`20.94 crore), Others(`8 crore). 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
332 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12) 
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO279 – 1,281.01 ha280 
As per records of NO – 9,669.74 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 3,315.23 ha 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO – (-) 2,034.22 ha 
As per records of NO – 9,669.74 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability 
of non forest land attached  
Yes. Chief Secretary issued a general certificate in 
2002 and 2009. Separate certificate on case to 
case basis was not obtained. 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 19,339.46 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – Nil for 2006-2011. 
4,178 ha in 2011-12 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – Nil 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land dive rted for non forestry purpose s was 1,281.01 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was 3,3 15.23 ha (Civil-Soyam land was stated to have 
been received double in quantity to the forest land diverted) while as per records of NO the 
forest land diverted was 9,669.74 ha and no non forest land was received in lieu thereof. As 
per records of RO and NO, no non forest land was transferred /mutated in favour of the 
forest department and notified as RF/PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation was done 
on non forest land and afforestation done on degraded forest land was 22  per cent of the 
area to be afforested. 
Further, CA on 19,339.48 ha degraded land was to be carried out by State CAMPA for which 
an amount of ` 82.84 crore was deposited with Ad-hoc  CAMPA by the user agencies during 
the period 2006-12. It was however seen that CA on 4,178 ha degraded land was carried out 
during the year 2011-12 at a cost of ` 11.90 crore. It was further seen that despite of 
availability of funds, the State CAMPA did not make any provision fo r CA during the years 
2009-10 and 2010-11. Further the provision made for CA for the year 2012-13 remained 
                                                            
279 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
280 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 333 | P a g e  
unutilized as the growing monsoon season has already passed without carrying out any 
plantation work. Besides, it was also observed in audit that per hectare cost of CA work was 
not in consonance with the cost of CA being recovered from the user agencies.  The CA work 
in the year 2011-12 was carried out by the department at the rate of ` 34,000 per ha 
whereas the user agencies were charged at the rate of ` 74,100 per ha.  Ministry stated 
(April 2013) that Chief Secretary had certified in 2002 and 2009 that non-forest land was not 
available in the state.  The reply of Mini stry was not supported with the relevant 
documents. Ministry further stated that data  pertaining to diversion of forest land and 
reconciliation of CA funds with Ad-hoc CA MPA would be verified by concerned Nodal 
Officer.  It was also stated that the rates of CA were revised by CCF and the revised rates 
included in APO were approved by Steering Committee. 
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management. 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Deficiencies in 
grant of 
mining leases  
 
As per paragraph 4.16 (i) of FC Act 1980, the approval for diversion of 
forest land for grant/renewal of mining leases was to be granted for a 
period co-terminus with the period of mining lease granted under Mines & 
Mineral Development (Regulation) Act,  1957 or rules framed their under.  
However, it was seen that in two cases of renewal of mining leases of 
major mineral was not co-terminus with the mining leases granted under 
MMDR Act as detailed below: 
• A mining lease in favour of M/s Almora Magnesite Ltd., was 
initially granted in August 1984 by erstwhile State of Uttar 
Pradesh for a period up to May 2003 and as per provision of the 
FC Act, the MoEF could grant le ase only up to February 2003.  
However, in contravention to th is provision, lease under the FC 
Act was renewed by the MoEF in May 2001 for a period of 20 
years (upto 2021) whereas the renewal of mining lease under 
MMDR Act was not permitted. 
• Similarly, another mining lease for mining of soap stone in 
favour of M/s N.S. Corporation, Jharkot which was initially 
granted in 1974 for 20 years was renewed in June 1995 for 
another 20 years (upto 2015).  The permission for diversion of 
forest land under FC Act was granted by MoEF in July 2000 with 
the condition that period of diversion would be coterminous 
with the renewal of lease (i.e. upto May 2015).  However, 
contrary to above condition, it was seen that the lease granted 
by the forest department to th e firm under FC Act was for 20 
years (upto 2020) from the date of issue of order (September 
2000) by the state government.   
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation pertained to the field 
level officers and reply would be submitted later. 
2 Encroachment 
of forest land 
 
9,672.44 ha forest land was lying encroached, no efforts were made by the 
state forest department for its vacation.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observation pertained to the field 
level officers and reply would be submitted later. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
334 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
The audit also visited four CA sites at Chakrata, Mussoorie, Almora, and Pauri wherein the plantation 
works executed were found in existence but survival rate of these plantations could not be 
ascertained as the plantation was done in the year  2011-12 only.  Some of the photographs taken by 
audit from these sites are given below: 
Plantation work at Panuwa-I (DFO, Kalsi) Plantation work at Mussoorie Forest Division
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per state CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of state CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. In the absence of proper ac counts, these could not be audited. The State 
CAMPA did not maintain cash book and subsidia ry ledgers for the funds received from Ad-
hoc CAMPA and expenditure incurred there from. In the absence of cash book and 
subsidiary ledgers, the receipts and payments  of the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 could not be 
verified in audit 
Further, as per State CAMPA guidelines, th e State Government and the MoEF had the 
powers to conduct special audit or performanc e audit of the state CAMPA. However, no 
such audit was conducted. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that annual account for the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 had been 
prepared in the prescribed and submitted to audi t.  The reply of Ministry is not tenable as 
the annual accounts for the years 2009-12 submitte d to audit, were not in the prescribed 
format. 
7. Declining budgetary commitment towards forest 
An analysis of State’s budget and expenditure of Forest Department for the period 2008-09 
to 2011-12 revealed that there was declining trend in departmental budget provisions and 
expenditure incurred, as detailed below: 
(` in crore) 
Year  Major head (MH) wise expenditure*  Expenditure under plantation and 
conservation of Forest  MH-2406 (Plan) MH-4406 MH-6406 
BE Actuals 
2008-09 195.23 146.89 17.35 Nil 49.68 
2009-10 139.08 88.09 13.40 Nil 27.41 
2010-11 109.65 95.05 16.47 Nil 40.33 
2011-12 115.83 79.04 16.36 Nil 28.71 
Source:  Department & Finance Accounts figures (*summerised position of grant no. 27, 30 & 31). 


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 335 | P a g e  
The revenue expenditure under Major Head -2406 (plan) during 2009-10, 2010-11 and 
2011-12 in comparison to the year 2008-09  stood at 60 per cen t, 65 per cent  and 54 per 
cent  respectively which coincided with the on set of CAMPA programme in the State from 
the year 2009-10. Thus, the gradual withdrawal of budgetary support for forest 
management in the State was a set back as the funds received under CAMPA were meant 
for compensating the damages which occurred due to the implementation of various 
developmental projects in the State. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that audit observat ion pertained to the field level officers and 
reply would be submitted later. 
8. Monitoring 
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee of Uttarakhand CAMPA me t three times during 2009-12 as against six 
times.  The Governing Body met once only during 2009-12. 
9. Good practices in the state 
A work of road side plantation (Pauri-Srinagar road) carried out by Garhwal Forest Division, 
Pauri was physically verified by audit and th e work was commendable as can be seen from 
the photographs given below: 
 
Photograph of a constructed building in Dhella 
Range (taken by audit team during physical 
verification) can be seen alongside. 
  


Report N
336 | P
1. Ba
The to t
Bengal 
the int
Novem
forest c
hectare
the Sta
of for e
State h
under 
hectar
e
dense f
area un
the pr e
forest c
Forest c
 
2. Co
State CA
CAMPA
against 
 
 
               
281Source
No. : 21 of 20
age  
ackground2
tal geogra p
is 88,75,2 0
erpretation
ber 2008- 
cover in the
e which w a
te’s geogra
est canopy 
had 2,98, 4
very den
e of area 
forest and 
nder open fo
evious asse
cover showe
cover – Typ
ompensato
AMPA was 
A, funds rel e
during the 
                      
e: India State o
2,98,4
013 
281 
phical are a
00 hectare.
n of satelli t
January 2
e State was 
as 14.64 pe
aphical are a
density cl
400 hectar e
se forest, 
under m
5,36,500 h
orest. Comp
ssment of 
ed an increa
pes of forest
ory Afforest
constituted
eased by A d
period 200
                      
of Forest Repo
400
75,72,800
W
a of West 
 Based on 
te data of 
2009, the 
12,99,500 
er cen t of 
a. In terms 
asses, the 
e of area 
4,64,600 
moderately 
hectare of 
pared with 
2009, the 
ase of 100 h
t (in hectar
ation Fund 
d in Septem
d-hoc CAM
06-07 to 201
 
ort 2011 publ
4,64,600
West Beng
hectare in t
re)-2011 
of the Stat
ber2009. Fu
PA to Stat e
11-12 were
ished by Fore
5,36,
2
Com
gal 
he 2011 ass
te 
unds remitt
e CAMPA a n
as detailed
est Survey of I
,500
2,900
pensatory A
sessment. 
ted by State
nd expendit
 below. 
ndia. 
Very de
Modera
Open fo
Scrub
Non for
Afforestation
e CAMPA to
ture incurre
nse forest
ately dense fo
orest
est area
n in India 
 
o Ad-hoc 
ed there 
rest

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 337 | P a g e  
(` in crore) 
Year Amount 
transferred to Ad-
hoc CAMPA 
Amount received by 
State CAMPA from 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 
Expenditure 
incurred by State 
CAMPA 
Accumulation of 
funds with State 
CAMPA282 
2006-07 0.00 Nil Nil Nil 
2007-08 27.51 Nil Nil Nil 
2008-09 22.32 Nil Nil Nil 
2009-10 32.62 5.30 Nil 5.30 
2010-11 10.38 6.28 5.12 6.46 
2011-12 3.16 4.84 2.86 8.44 
Total 95.99 16.42 7.98  
As can be seen from the table, in compliance with the orders of the Supreme Court, 17 per 
cent of the total Compensatory Afforestation funds remitted by State CAMPA to Ad-hoc 
CAMPA were released be tween 2009 and 2012. Of ` 16.42 crore released against APOs, 51 
per cent remained unutilised, leading to accumulation of funds with State CAMPA. Funds of 
` 7.85 crore were not remitted by State CAMP A to Ad-hoc CAMPA and were deposited in 
State Government account. 
3. Receipts into State CAMPA 
 
The cases of non recovery/short recovery of NP V/CA/PCA etc. in West Bengal that came to 
the notice of audit are given below. The gist of  these cases is also given in table24and 27 in 
Chapter 3. 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount 
1. There was one case 283 involving forest land of 14.70 ha in which NPV was not 
collected from the user agency 284 to whom in principle approval was granted 
before October 2002 and the final approval was granted after that. 
0.85285 
2. In Durgapur forest division, MoEF granted approval for diversion 90.30 ha forest 
land at Jhanjra area for coal mining by the ECL for a period of 10 years in 
January 1996. The user agency paid only ` 1 crore in 1995 against the assessed 
amount of environmental loss of ` 9.15 crore. Subsequently, the environmental 
loss was revised to ` 18.14 crore in accordance with the revised guidelines of 
MoEF. Durgapur forest division did not pursue the case thereafter and the 
amount remained unrecovered. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that realisation of the amount on the basis of the 
17.14 
                                                            
282Cumulative amount at the end of the year lying unutilised with State CAMPA out of the funds released by 
Ad-hoc CAMPA 2009 onwards. 
283 As per status report of MoEF issued on 16 March 2012. 
284Bakreswar Thermal Power Project 
285Audit estimated the total amount of NPV due in th ese cases on a conservative basis by applying the 
minimum rate of ` 5.80 lakh per hectare (14.7 x 5.8) 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
338 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Description Amount 
present assessment would be realised after renewal of lease was approved.  The 
reply of Ministry is not tenable as the user agency was liable to make payment 
of environmental loss at revised rates for the lease period. 
3. Stage I approval to divert 238.54 ha forest land for construction of Reservoir at 
Bakreswar Thermal Power Plant (August 1994) was given to West Bengal Power 
Development Corporation. The user agency started construction of reservoir 
without depositing NPV/CA. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that fresh proposal was sought from user agency 
and NPV at prevailing rate would be collected from user agency. 
14.93 
4 Stage I approval to divert 10 ha of forest land in Kakdwip Char (September 
2004) was given to State Fisheries Depa rtment for construction of fishing 
harbour. The user agency started construction of fishing harbour on the forest 
land without depositing NPV/CA etc. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action was being taken for recovery of NPV/CA 
etc. from user agency. 
0.69 
 Total 33.61 
4. Utilisation of CAMPA funds 
4.1 Year wise and component wise breakup of funds allotted to State CAMPA and utilisation of the 
funds released. 
(` in crore) 
Main-Components 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure Amount 
released 
by Ad-
hoc 
CAMPA 
Amount 
released 
by State 
CAMPA 
Expenditure 
NPV 286      3.77   1.86 
Compensatory 
Afforestation  
     0.40   0.77 
Protected 
Area287 
     0   0 
CAT Plan      0.95   0.02 
Other 
specified 
activities 
     0   0.21 
Total 5.30 NA Nil 6.28 NA 5.12 4.84 NA 2.86 
Component-wise details not furnished. 
                                                            
286 NPV is spent on protection, conservation and management of forest 
287 Protected Area Fund is spent on wildlife management 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 339 | P a g e  
Funds for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 were released by Ad-hoc CAMPA without APO and 
APO for the year2011-12was approved by Steering Committee in April 2011. No expenditure 
was incurred by State CAMPA in the year 2009-10 
From the table it is evident that the percen tage of expenditure incurred as against the 
amounts released by Ad-hoc CAMPA was zero per cent in 2009-10, 82 per cent in 2010-11 
and 59 per cent in 2011-12. Considering the underutilizat ion of the amount released over 
the last three years, concerns remain on the absorptive capacity of the State considering 
that ` 114.96 crore (including interest) are a ccumulated with Ad-hoc CAMPA in the 
Compensatory Afforestation Fund for the State (31 March 2012) and ca n be released only 
for specified forestry related activities. 
4.2 Irregularities in utilisation of funds 
 (`in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
1 Expenditure 
not authorised 
by State 
CAMPA 
guidelines and 
NCAC 
CAMPA funds should not be used for creating infrastructure at 
State Forest headquarters and ecotourism. However test 
check revealed that expenditure was incurred on foundation 
stone laying ceremony and hiring of vehicles etc.  
0.18 
2. Non opening 
of separate 
account under 
corpus fund 
No separate account under co rpus fund was maintained for 
money received in July 2009 fo r diversion of 0.99 ha forest 
land for construction of a water reservoir from Senchel 
Wildlife Sanctuary though prescribed under State CAMPA 
guidelines.  
2.46 
3 Outstanding 
UCs from 
forest divisions 
UCs for amount released by st ate CAMPA to various forest 
divisions during the years 2009-12 were outstanding from 
forest divisions.  
Accepting the facts, Ministry stated (April 2013) that action 
was being taken to collect outstanding UCs from forest 
divisions. 
1.36 
4 Idle 
expenditure 
on Tiger 
Rescue Centre 
 
In 24 Parganas (South) forest division, Tiger Rescue Centre 
Jharkhali in Sunderbans area could not be operationalised in 
the absence of some essential items even after incurring 
expenditure of ` 1.23 crore (December 2012). 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that tiger rescue centre could not 
be operationalised due to some  administrative reasons viz. 
non convening of meetings of executive committee and 
steering committee and action in this regard was being 
initiated. 
1.23 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
340 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description Amount 
5 Quality of CA 
not exemplary 
Test check of records and GPS reading in four divisions 288 
revealed that the CA was not exemplary in four 289out of 10 
locations. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that shortfall in CA alongwith 
maintenance of old plantations would be undertaken from the 
available CAMPA funds. 
0.39 
6 Blocking of 
CAMPA funds  
 
In Kurseong forest division, boundary pillars for demarcation 
of non-forest land received from NHPC in connection with 
Teesta Low Dam were lying unutilized as of November 2012. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that works could not be 
undertaken due to political unrest in Darjeeling Hills and 
efforts were being made to obtain LOC from the government 
to place the funds with Kurseong division again to undertake 
the work. 
0.22 
7 Unfruitful 
expenditure  
In Kangsbati (North) forest divi sion, staff quarters constructed 
out of CAMPA funds in March 2010 were not occupied by the 
staff members for want of electric connection and found to be 
in dilapidated condition as of December 2012.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that the division was being 
directed to get the staff quarters utilised for the purpose for 
which these were built. 
0.08 
 Total  5.92 
 
Photos of some selected plantations 
Tondu Revenue Mouza was effected by flood in July 
2012 but not renovated due to insufficient fund  flow 
CA Plantation showing elephant depredation at Lalfa Block, 
Bagdogra Range 
                                                            
288Kangsabati (North), Kurseong, Wild Life-II and Darjeeling  
289Puapur Mouza, Lalfa Block ,Tondu Revenue Mouza and Peshok-1 Beat 


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 341 | P a g e  
 
5. Land Management 
5.1 Fact sheet 
Particulars (2006-12)  
Forest land diverted  As per records of RO290  – 226.96 ha291 
As per records of NO – 425.17 ha 
Non forest land received in lieu  As per records of RO  – 190.36 ha 
 As per records of NO – 186.39 ha 
Non forest land short received As per records of RO -   36.60 ha 
As per records of NO – 238.78 ha 
Chief Secretary Certificate on non availability of 
non forest land attached  
NA 
Area identified for CA as per NO On degraded forest land – 469.77 ha 
On Non forest land – 186.39 ha 
Area on which CA done as per NO On degraded forest land – 108.83 ha 
On Non forest land – Nil 
Received Non forest land transferred/mutated  As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 186.39 ha 
Non forest land received notified as 
reserved/protected forest 
As per records of RO- Nil 
As per records of NO – 2.80 ha 
As is evident from the table, there were un-reconciled variations in the data provided by the 
Nodal Officer of the State CAMP A and the concerned Regional Office of MoEF. As per the 
records of RO, forest land diverted for no n forestry purposes was 226.96 ha and the non 
forest land received in lieu thereof was 84 per cent while as per records of NO the figures 
were 425.17 ha and 44 per cent , respectively. As per records of RO, no non forest land was 
transferred /mutated in favour of the forest department and notified as RF/PF while as per 
NO out of 186.39 ha non forest  land transferred/ mutated in favour of forest department 
only 2.80 ha non forest land was declared as RF /PF. As per records of NO, no afforestation 
was done on non forest land and afforestat ion done on degraded forest land was 23 per 
cent of the area to be afforested.  
5.2 Irregularities observed in land management 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
1 Non-
maintenance of 
plantation 
No maintenance of the CA carried out on 30 ha of non forest land at a 
cost of ` 0.23 crore by Wildlife forest division-II in 2011 resulting in 
damage to these plantations. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that maintenance of plantations was done 
with the available funds with State CAMPA. 
                                                            
290 Regional Office (RO) of Ministry of Environment and Forests and Nodal Officer (NO) of State Forests 
Department 
291 Excluding exempted projects 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
342 | P a g e  Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
irregularity 
Description 
2 Transfer of 
unsuitable non-
forest land for 
CA. 
 
Of the 183.49 ha non forest land received from user agency (NHPC) 292 in 
January 2004, 72.60 ha forest land was found un-suitable for CA (16.53 
ha rocky and stony, 3.24 ha sinking and landslip, 1.48 ha Jhora and 51.35 
ha already having vegetative cover, tree growth and other miscellaneous 
advance growth). 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that during execution of work of project, an 
area of 21.25 ha was found to be unsuitable for plantation work and 
required stabilisation through soil conser vation measures prior to taking 
up plantation works and accordingly matter was being taken up with the 
concerned divisions for successful implementation of the project.  The 
fact remains that non- forest land which was unsuitable for CA was 
accepted from the user agency. 
3 Diversion of 
forest land 
without stage II 
approval of 
MoEF 
 
In the following instances, forest land was diverted without fulfilling the 
conditions stipulated with stage I approval and obtaining stage II 
approval: 
i. State Fisheries Department was permitted to divert 10 ha of 
forest land in Kakdwip Char (September 2004) for construction of 
fishing harbour, which was co nstructed without fulfilling the 
conditions stipulated; and  
ii. West Bengal Power Development Corporation was permitted to 
divert 238.54 ha forest land for construction of Reservoir for 
Bakreswar Thermal Power Plant (August 1994). The user agency 
started construction of reservoir without fulfilling stipulated 
conditions.  
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action was being taken to regularise the 
diversion of forest land. 
4 Irregular re-
diversion of 
forest land  
 
In South 24 Parganas forest division, in 1954, 8,054 acres forest land in 
Herobhanga 1, 2 and3 blocks was diverted to Refugee Relief & 
Rehabilitation (RR&R) department wh ich in turn transferred about 1400 
acres out of 8,054 acres forest land to Sunderban Development Board 
(SDB) in 1991 without obtaining MoEF’s approval. The re-diversion of 
1400 acre forest land to SDB require d regularisation as per FC Act 1980 
with the payment of NPV of ` 35.15 crore293. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that action was being taken to regularise the 
diversion of forest land. 
5 Scattered and 
encroached 
non forest land 
received from 
user agency 
 
In Bankura (South) forest division, in lieu of 14.30 ha forest land diverted 
(in 2007) to the railways for Bankura Mukutmanipur Railway line, the 
user agency (in September 2009) transf erred vested land to State forest 
department in five different mouzas at scattered locations. The forest 
department could not take possession of 6.7 acre non forest land in 
Baraghatumouza of Bankura district as the entire area was encroached 
by a local women self-help group and the land was already covered with 
babui grass, asan and arjun plants. 
Ministry accepted the audit observation (April 2013). 
                                                            
292in lieu of diversion of 302.49 ha forest land for construction of Teesta Low Dam Project (stage III) 
293calculated at minimum rate of NPV of ` 6.26 lakh per ha 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
Compensatory Afforestation in India 343 | P a g e  
6. Status of Accounts and audit of State CAMPA Accounts 
As per State CAMPA guidelines issued by MoEF , the accounts of State CAMPA were to be 
audited by the Accountant General at such inte rvals as may be specif ied by him. However, 
State CAMPA did not prepare it s annual accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 in the 
prescribed format. The annual accounts were  prepared by Chartered Accountant firm, 
which were not approved by any Committee of State CAMPA. Further, as per State CAMPA 
guidelines, the State Government and the MoEF  had the powers to conduct special audit or 
performance audit of the state CAMPA. However, no such audit was conducted. 
7. Monitoring  
As per the state CAMPA guidelines the Steering Committee was to meet twice in a year. The 
Steering Committee met three times during 2009- 12 as against six times. The Executive 
Committee met seven times durin g 2009-12.  The Governing Body did not meet during the 
years 2009-12. 
Ministry stated (April 2013) that efforts would be made to convene the meetings of the 
above committees as early as possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Gurveen Sidhu) 
New Delhi                                                           Principal Director of Audit, 
Dated: 20 August 2013 Scientific Departments  
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
Dated: 20 August 2013 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  347 | P a g e  
Annexure 1 
Notification of State CAMPAs 
Sl. No. States Month of notification 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands August 2009 
2 Andhra Pradesh September 2009 
3 Arunachal Pradesh October 2009 
4 Assam August 2007 
5 Bihar January 2010 
6 Chandigarh August 2009 
7 Chhattisgarh July 2009 
8 Delhi October 2009 
9 Goa January 2010 
10 Gujarat  August 2009 
11 Haryana January 2010 
12 Himachal Pradesh August 2009 
13 Jammu & Kashmir April 2011 
14 Jharkhand October 2009 
15 Karnataka June 2010 
16 Kerala November 2009 
17 Madhya Pradesh Not Available 
18 Maharashtra September 2009 
19 Manipur August 2009 
20 Meghalaya  December 2009 
21 Mizoram August 2009 
22 Odisha August 2009 
23 Punjab September 2009 
24 Rajasthan November 2009 
25 Sikkim August 2009 
26 Tamil Nadu September 2009 
27 Tripura October 2009 
28 Uttar Pradesh August 2010 
29 Uttarakhand November 2009 
30 West Bengal September2009 
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
348 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Annexure 2 
Scope of audit 
Sl. 
No. 
States Units audited 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Three (South Andaman Division, Diglipur Division and Nicobar) 
out of six States Forest divisions.  
2 Andhra Pradesh 21 divisions and headquarters office (PCCF). 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Five out of nine divisions to whom funds were provided  
4 Assam Office of PCCF cum Hea d of Forest Forces Assam, CCF (CA MPA) 
and Nodal Officer and 23 out of 45 State Forest divisions 
5 Bihar Office of State CAMPA and 10 DFOs (Araria, Aurangabad, Banka, 
Bhojpur, Gaya, Jamui, Kaimur , Muzaffarpur, Nawada, and 
Saharsa) out of 22 State Forest divisions. 
6 Chandigarh One unit out of two forest units in the Union Territory 
7 Chhattisgarh Office of Additional Principa l Chief Conservator of Forest 
(APCCF), State CAMPA; Chief conservator of Forest, Land 
Management (CCF,LM) (Nodal officer, FC Act) in the Forest 
Headquarters and 18 (Bhanupratappur  (East), Dhamtari, Janjgir-
Champa, Katghora, Kondagaon (South), Korba, Koriya, 
Mahasamund, Manendragarh, Marwahi, Raigarh, Raipur, Raipur 
(East), and Surguja (East and South)  territorial Divisions; Bilaspur, 
Jagdalpur and Raipur Research and Extension Divisions.) out of 
35 divisions where allotment was made from CAMPA funds. 
These divisions were selected on the basis of Simple Random 
Sampling method. 
8 Delhi Out of 11 cases of diversion of forest land, 10 cases were test 
checked in audit  
9 Goa Six (DCF (North), DCF (south), DCF (Wildlife North). DCF (Working 
Plan), DCF (Social forestry), DCF (Soil Conservation)) out of the 11 
DCFs. 
10 Gujarat  23 out of 46 State Forest divisions  
11 Haryana Office of State CAMPA and 19 fi eld offices of State Forest 
Department. 19 out of total 36 units , were selected by adopting 
the Probability Proportional to size Without Replacement 
(PPSWOR) method. 
12 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Office State CAMPA and 23 (An i, Bharmaur, Chamba, Churah, 
Dalhausie, Dharamsala, Jogindernagar, Karsog, Kinnaur, Kotgarh, 
Kullu, Kullu (WL), Mandi, Nachan, Nichar (CAT Plan), Nurpur, 
Palampur, Pangi, Rampur, Sarahan (WL), Shimla(WL), Shimla (Zoo 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  349 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
States Units audited 
& Rescue), Suket) out of 46 State Forest divisions  
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Office of State CAMPA and 22 divisions out of 45 State Forest 
divisions.  
14 Jharkhand Office of the PCCFs, and Divisional Forest Officer and 26 
(Adityapur SF (Jamshedpur), Bokaro, Chatra North, Chatra South, 
Deoghar, Deoghar SF,  Dhanbad, Dhalbhum (Jamshedpur), 
Giridih, Giridih Afforestation, Gumla, Hazaribag East, Hazaribag 
West, Hazaribag SF, Hazaribag WL, Hazaribag Afforestation, 
Koderma, Koderma SF, Ramgarh,  Ranchi West (Lohardaga), 
Ranchi) East, Ranchi WL, Ranchi Afforstation, Ranchi SF, Simdega 
and Simdega SF). out 52 State Forest divisions 
15 Karnataka Offices of two APCCF and 36 (Bangalore (U), Bangalore (R), 
Ramanagar, Kolar, Tumkur, Hunsur (T), Mysore, Belgaum, Gokak, 
Karkala (WL), Hassan, Chickmagalur (T), Chickmagalur (WL), 
Bellary, Chitradurga, Davanger e, Kundapura, Mangalore, 
Madikeri, Bannerghatta (WL), Dandeli (WL), Yellapur, Karwar, 
Haliyal, Dharwad, Sagar, Shimoga, Shimoga (WL), Gadag, 
Gulbarga, Bandipur (WL), Bhadravathi, Sirsi, Honnavar, Madikeri 
(WL), Chamarajanagar (WL)) out of 72 State Forest divisions 
16 Kerala 15 out of 25 territorial divisions and 3 out of 11 wildlife divisions  
17 Madhya Pradesh Office of the APCCF and 22 (Badwaha, Balaghat South, Betul 
west, Chhindwara East, Chhindwara West, Dewas, Dhar, Guna, 
Gwalior, Jablapur, Jhabua, Katni, Khandwa, Morena, Ratlam, 
Sagar North, Sagar South, Seoni North, Shivpuri, Sidhi, Singrauli 
and Vidisha) out of 63 State Forest divisions  
18 Maharashtra Office of APCCF State CAMPA; CCF, Land Management and Nodal 
officer and 26 out of 52 State Forest divisions 
19 Manipur Three divisions of the DFOs, Sena pati, Eastern Forest Division 
(Ukhrul) and the DCF, Park and Sanctuary out of four divisions 
20 Meghalaya  Two Territorial Divisions (Khasi Hills and Jaintia Hills) out of three 
Territorial Divisions 
21 Mizoram Test check of records of Nodal Office. 
22 Odisha office of the PCCFs, Territorial and Wildlife and 25 out of 50 State 
Forest  divisions 
23 Punjab Three wildlife units and 18 units  State Forest divisions were 
selected by adopting Stratified Random Sampling 
24 Rajasthan 28 out of 56 State Forest divisions where allotment was made 
from CAMPA funds. These divisions were selected on the basis of 
expenditure incurred. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
350 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
States Units audited 
25 Sikkim 5 out of 10 State Forest divisions  
26 Tamil Nadu Office of State CAMPA and 13 (Kancheepuram, Tiruvallur, 
Dindugal, Kodaikannal, Karur, Salem,  Attur, Coimbatore, Nilgiris 
(South), Nilgiris (North), Vellore, Tiruvannamalai, Tirupattur) out 
of 22 State Forest divisions and 3 out of six National Parks & 
Sanctuaries and 8 Administrative & other implementing units 
27 Tripura Office of PCCF and six out of 12 State Forest divisions 
28 Uttar Pradesh 38 out of 81 State Forest divisions and two wildlife divisions 
29 Uttarakhand 19 (Almora Forest Division (FD), Bageshwar FD,  Champwat FD,  
Pithoragarh FD,  Garhwal FD, Rudraprayag FD, Kalagarh Tiger 
Reserve FD, Alknanda Soil Conservation FD, Gopeshwar  
Dehradun FD,  Mussoorie FD, Utta rkashi FD,  Muni-ki-reti, FD 
Lansdowne, FD, Kotdwar Haridwar FD, Chakrata FD, Kalsi Civil 
and Soyam FD, Pauri, Soil Conservation, FD, Kalsi, Soil 
Conservation FD, Ranikhet, and Soil Conservation FD, 
Lnasdowne) out of 37 State Forest divisions  
30 West Bengal Office of State CAMPA and 12 out of 24 State Forest divisions 
where allotment was made from CAMPA funds. These divisions 
were selected on the basis of Simple Random Sampling method. 
 
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  351 | P a g e  
Annexure 3 
Non transfer and mutation of the non-forest land indentified by user 
agencies for Compensatory Afforestation (CA) in favour of the  
State Forest Department 
Sl. No. Name of Project Area of non-forest 
land (in hectares) 
1.  Diversion of 1,157.20 ha of forest land for construction to 
Publichintala Reservoir Project across Krishna river in 
Nalgonda and Guntur districts of Andhra Pradesh. 
1,157.20
2.  Diversion of 374.87 ha of fore st land for captive coal mine 
in Tokisud North Block District Hazaribagh and Ramgarh in 
favour of M/s GVK Power (Govindwal Sahoi) Ltd. 
Jharkand. 
376.36
3.  Diversion of 188.33 ha of forest land (960.286 ha 
originally proposed) for  open cast/ underground mining 
project in favour of M/s Prakash Industries Limited  in 
Korba district of Chhattisgarh. 
188.33
4.  Diversion of 726.35 ha of forest land (188.33 ha already 
diverted on 29.3.2006 out of 960.29 ha originally 
proposed) for underground / open cast mining project in 
favour of M/s Prakash Industries Limited  in Korba district 
of Chhattisgarh. 
588.97
Total  2,310.86
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
352 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Annexure 4 
Non declaration/ notification of non-forest land as  
Reserve Forest/ Protected Forest. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project Area of non-
forest land 
(in hectare) 
1  Diversion of 374.87 ha of forest la nd for captive coal mine in Tokisud 
North Block District Hazaribagh an d Ramgarh in favour of M/s GVK 
Power (Govindwal Sahoi) Ltd. Jharkand. 
376.36
2  Diversion Of 130.00 Ha Of Forest La nd (Section 4 Forest land) for 4000 
MW Ultra Mega Power Project at Mundr a in Bhuj district of Gujarat in 
favour of M/s Coastal Gujarat Power Ltd., New Delhi. 
130.00
3  Diversion of 85.55 ha forest land in Sidhamath Reserve Forest in 
favour of Dr. Sarojini Pradhan for Iron and Manganese ore mining in 
Keonjhar District, Orissa 
85.55
4  Diversion of 145.329 ha of forest land in village Bamebari, Jaribahal 
etc. in Keonjhar Forest Division for Iron & Manganese Ore Mining by 
M/s TISCO Ltd, Orissa 
60.30
5  Diversion of Forest Land For KJST Mines of Late S. N. Mohanty by his 
Legal heir Sri Prabodh Mohanty. 
177.52
6  Diversion of 1,157.20 ha of fore st land for construction to 
Publichintala Reservoir Project across Krishna river in Nalgonda and 
Guntur districts of Andhra Pradesh. 
1,157.20
7  Diversion of 653.15 ha(Approved area 453.150 ha) of forest land for 
3rd renewal of Khadbandh Iron and Manganese Ore Mines Keonjhar 
Forest Division of in favour  of M/s TISCO Ltd. , in Keonjhar district of 
Orissa. 
317.00
8  Diversion of 110.00 ha of forest land for iron-ore mine in respect of 
M/s Ispat Godawari Limited, Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh. 
220.00
9  Diversion of 149.330 ha of forest land for construction of a dam on 
Halon River for Halon Irrigation Project in Buffer Zone Division, Kanha 
Tiger Reserve in District Mandla, Madhya Pradesh 
149.33
10  Diversion of 629.22 ha forest land In Sy. No. 376 (Compt. Nos. 5-6) in 
Budawada Reserve Forest of Krishna Division in Krishna district of 
Andhra Pradesh in favour of M/s Jaypee Balaji Cement Project, for 
limestone mining. 
693.73
11  Diversion of 140.30 ha of forest land for Khairaguda Opencast Project 
in favour of M/s Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. in Adilabad district, 
Andhra Pradesh. 
140.30
12  Diversion of 726.35 ha of forest la nd (188.33 ha already diverted on 
29.3.2006 out of 960.29 ha orig inally proposed) for underground / 
open cast mining project in favour  of M/s Prakash Industries Limited  
in Korba district of Chhattisgarh. 
777.30

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  353 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project Area of non-
forest land 
(in hectare) 
13  Diversion of 3,731.07 ha of forest  land for Indira Sagar (Polavaram) 
Multipurpose Project across Godava ri river in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh. 
3,731.07
14  Diversion of 175.69 ha of forest la nd in Ploncha Division of Khamam 
District for open cast coal mining  (OCP II Managuru) in favour of 
Singareni Collieries Company Limited.  
175.69
15  Diversion of 100 ha out of proposed 301.88 ha of forest land for 
mining of lime stone in Lakheri Ch amovali Mine in favour of M/s ACC 
Cement Works in Bundi district of Rajasthan.  
100.00
16  Diversion of 163.12 ha forest land for installation of Chavaneshwar 
Wind Farm Project in Satara District of Maharashtra in favour of M/s 
Enercon (India) Limited.  
163.12
17  Diversion of 49.20 ha of already brok en up  forest land for renewal of 
mining lease for iron ore mining in   favour of Karampada mines M/s 
MishriLal Jain & Sons in Jharkhand. 
49.20
18  Diversion of 503.68 ha (Approved ar ea 436.68ha) of forest land for 3 rd 
renewal of Joda West Mines in Villa ge Kamarjoda, Joda, Banspani and 
Baitarani RF, for mining of Iron and Manganese Ores in Keonjhar 
Forest Division in favour of M/s TI SCO Limited in Keonjhar district of 
Orissa.  
250.00
19  Diversion of 157.85 ha of forestland Kappatgudda Hiils in Gadage 
Division for establishing 75 MW Wi nd Power Project in favour of M/s 
Suzlon Energy Limited, District Gadag, Karnataka 
157.85
20  Diversion of 461.09 ha (Approval ar ea 400.00 ha) of forest land for 
Panem Captive Coal Mines in favour of Panem Coal Mines Limited, in 
District Pakur, Jharkhand. 
461.09
21  Diversion of 212.52 ha of forest land for construction of 225 MW Wind 
Power Project in favour M/s Suzlon En ergy Limited in Dhule District of 
Maharashtra.  
212.52
22  Diversion of 209.54 ha of Additional forest land in addition to 42.42 ha 
of broken up Reserve forest land already diverted earlier in Guali Iron 
Ore Mines in Barbil Tahasil in Keonjhar District, Orissa for Iron ore 
mining by Shri Ramesh Prasad  Sao during 2 nd Renewal of Mining 
Lease. (Approval Granted for 95 ha only). 
209.54
23  Diversion of 215.55 ha of forest land for installation of Wind Power 
Project in Ramadurga and Soundati Taluk in Belgaum district in  favour 
of M/s Enercon (India) Ltd., in Karnataka.  
215.55
24  Diversion of 96.79 ha of forest land for establishment of 46.4 MW 
Wind Power Project in favour of  M/s J.N Investments & Trading 
Company Limited in Tumkur (52.13 ha in Dasudi RF of Bukkapatna 
R a n g e )  a n d  C h i t r a d u r g a  ( 4 4 . 6 6  h a  i n  M a r i k a n i v e  R F  i n  H i r i y u r /  
Hosadurga Ranges) Districts of Karnataka.  
96.79

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
354 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project Area of non-
forest land 
(in hectare) 
25  Diversion of 338.05 ha of forest la nd for construction of Teesta Low 
Dam Project Stage-IV in favour of  National Hydro Electric Power 
Corporation in West Bengal- Diversion of 4.90 ha of additional forest 
land. 
338.05
26  Diversion of 174.18 ha of forest land   in favour of M/s Enercon (India) 
Limited for establishment of 112 MW   Wind Power Project in Belgaum 
and Bailahongal Taluks in Belgaum district of Karnataka.  
174.18
27  Diversion of 194.66 ha of forest  land for Andhra Lake Wind Power 
Project in favour of M/s Enercon (I ndia) Limited in Pune district of 
Maharashtra. 
194.66
28  Diversion of 61.60 ha of forest land ( Approved 52.74 ha involving 
38.59 ha of Protected forest+ 13.79 ha DLC forest and 0.36 ha PRF) 
within mining lease area of 147.17ha  for mining of iron ore in village 
San Indpur and Orghat in favour of M/s Rungta Sons (p) limited in 
Bonai  Forest Division, District Sundergarh, Orissa. 
52.74
29  Diversion of 146.73 ha forest land fo r iron ore mining in respect of 
Thakurani Iron Ore Mines in favour  of M/s Kaypee Enterprises in 
Keonjhar District, Orissa. 
107.02
30  Diversion of 59.62 ha. Of forest la nd for formation of reservoir across 
Ubbalamadugu Vagu in Chittoor district of Andhra Pradesh. 
59.62
 Total 11,033.28
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  355 | P a g e  
Annexure 5 
Non-transfer/ mutation and non declaration as RF/PF 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Non-Forest Land 
received as per 
state CAMPA (in 
ha) 
Non-Forest Land 
transferred/ 
mutated in favour 
of Forest 
Department (in ha) 
Non-Forest 
Land declared 
as RF/PF (in 
ha) 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands  112.96 65.11 26.00
2 Andhra Pradesh1 10,168.63 2,360.39 230.80
3 Arunachal Pradesh 205.86 NA NA
4 Assam Nil Nil Nil
5 Bihar 63.51 2.51 Nil
6 Chandigarh 8.14 Nil Nil
7 Chhattisgarh 323.08 Nil Nil
8 Delhi Nil Nil Nil
9 Goa 28.50 24.10 4.40
10 Gujarat 591.65 591.65 5.43
11 Haryana  51.67 51.67 7.77
12 Himachal Pradesh Nil Nil Nil
13 Jammu & Kashmir Nil Nil Nil
14 Jharkhand 530.11 530.11 Nil
15 Karnataka  2,231.96 2,231.96 NA
16 Kerala Nil Nil Nil
17 Madhya Pradesh 2,332.49 492.80 Nil
18 Maharashtra 4,077.99 3,349.07 Nil
19 Manipur Nil Nil Nil
20 Meghalaya Nil Nil Nil
21 Mizoram 17.50 NA NA
22 Odisha NA NA 2,238.742
23 Punjab 1.51 Nil Nil
24 Rajasthan 1,698.72 914.95 645.32
25 Sikkim Nil Nil Nil
26 Tamil Nadu 230.95 226.95 57.01
27 Tripura 10.95 10.95 Nil
28 Uttar Pradesh 374.23 255.77 61.04
29 Uttarakhand Nil Nil Nil
30 West Bengal 186.39 186.39 2.80
 Total 23,246.80 11,294.38 3,279.31
 
                                                            
1 Figures are from 2009-10 onwards. 
2Figures pertain to six divisions only. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
356 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Annexure 6 
Non revocation of in-principle approval after lapse of five years 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State No. of Cases Total land (in ha) 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands  30 1,464.18
2 Arunachal Pradesh 19 13,837.34
3 Assam 26 4,923.76
4 Bihar  6 165.88
5 Chhattisgarh  57 13,388.58
6 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 4.64
7 Goa  4 70.19
8 Gujarat 116 7,518.89
9 Haryana 28 74.37
10 Himachal Pradesh 53 907.29
11 Jammu & Kashmir  1 843.63
12 Jharkhand  13 814.01
13 Karnataka  36 1,414.19
14 Kerala  5 257.98
15 Madhya Pradesh 90 1,41,040.58
16 Maharashtra  179 37,328.48
17 Manipur  4 288.39
18 Meghalaya  2 12.10
19 Mizoram  6 14,059.48
20 Odisha  47 5,648.87
21 Punjab 45 414.31
22 Rajasthan 110 4,432.09
23 Sikkim 23 93.86
24 Tamil Nadu 9 191.60
25 Tripura 41 238.72
26 Uttar Pradesh 21 1,459.06
27 Uttarakhand 40 2,938.30
28 West Bengal  8 78.11
 Total  1,022 2,53,908.88
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  357 | P a g e  
Annexure 7 
Files pertaining to Bellary mining cases not produced to audit 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Of Proposal Area 
Diverted      
(ha.) 
Date of Approval 
1 Diversion of forest land for mining of iron ore 
in RM block of Yeswanthnagar village of 
Sandur Taluk in favour of M/s Kumaraswamy 
mineral exports. 
30.80 11/08/1994
2 Renewal of mining lease for iron ore and 
manganese ore in Swami Malai block of 
Sandur Taluk in favour of M/s Hothur Traders 
21.11 13/03/1997
3 Renewal of mining lease for iron ore in Neb 
range SandurTaluk in favour of M/s H.G. 
RanganGowda 
36.50 15/01/1993  
21/11/2006 
(renewal)
4 Renewal of mining lease for iron ore in 
Nalvatti Village Sandur Taluk in favour of H.R. 
Gaviappa 
32 24/10/1994  
13/2/2004  
(renewal)
5 File No. FCA/11.1/105/KAR/MIN  
Renewal of mining lease no. 2045 for iron 
ore and manganese ore in Nandihalli village 
Sandur Taluk in favour of M/s Bharat Mines.  
26.20 25/02/1997
6 Diversion of forest land for renewal of mining 
lease in favour of M/s Trident Mining Co. ltd. 
5.26 04/07/1997
7 Diversion of forest land for mining lease for 
iron ore in Neb block Sandur Taluk in favour 
of Shri Abubaker. 
14 04/12/1994
8 Diversion of forest land for mining of orange 
quartz at Keriyaginahalli RF in Sandur Taluk in 
favour of Smt. V.S. Padmavathi.  
6.75 02/04/1999
9 Diversion of forest land at Subbarayanahalli 
village for iron ore mining in favour of M/s 
Mysore Minerals ltd. 
80.93 20/11/2000
10 Renewal of mining lease in RM block Sandur 
Taluk in favour of M/s K.C. Thimma Reddy 
Adoni (Sri Shantipriya Minerals Pvt. Ltd). 
80.97 22/02/1999
11 Diversion of forest land for Mining lease for 
iron ore & manganese ore in favour of M/s 
Zeenath Transport Company in Bellary Distt. 
50 05/01/2004
12 Renewal of mining lease no.1952 in SM block 
and RM block Sandur Taluk in favour of M/s 
Smiore. 
142.58 6/12/1996 
12/03/2007 
(renewal)

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
358 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Of Proposal Area 
Diverted      
(ha.) 
Date of Approval 
13 Renewal of mining lease no.1179 for 
manganese and iron ore in favour of M/s 
Smiore. 
1,615.64 11/12/1996  
14/03/2007
14 File No. FCA/11.1/124/MIN  
Renewal of mining lease no.1193 for iron ore 
in Belagal Village of Bellary in favour of M/s 
Vibhutigudda Mines Pvt. Ltd. 
55 22/07/1999
15 File No. FCA/11.1/121/KAR/MIN  
Renewal of mining leas e no. 2093 in favour 
of M/s Gogga Gurushanthaiah & Bros. over 
32.38 ha. of already broken up forest land in 
Bellary District. 
32.38 07/08/2003
16 File No. F.NO.FCA/11.3/121/KAR/MIN  
Diversion of forest land for renewal of mining 
lease no.622 in favour of M/s Ramgad 
Minerals & Mining Pvt. Ltd. 
20.23 16/03/2005
17 File No. FCA/11.3/124/MIN  
Diversion of forest land for renewal of mining 
lease no.2002 in favour of M/s Mysore 
Minerals Ltd in Bellary district. 
78.50 18/04/2001
18 File No. FCA/11.3/133/KAR/MIN  
Renewal of mining leas e no. 1634 in favour 
of M/s S.V. Srinivasulu 
60 02/02/2005
19 File No. FCA/11.3/131/KAR/MIN  
Renewal of mining lease no.1046 for iron ore 
mining in Neb range Sandur Taluk in favour 
of Sri P. Venganna Shetty & Bros. 
50 16/03/2005
20 File No. FCA/11.2/142/MIN  
Renewal of mining lease no.1676 for 
manganese mining in favour of Shri V.N.K. 
Menon in Bellary Distt. 
22.45  25/07/2003
21 Diversion of 10.52 ha. of forest land in 
respect of already approved proposal (for 
diversion of 32.38 ha. of already broken up 
forest land) for renewal of mining 
leaseno.2093 in favour of M/s Gogga 
Gurushanthaiah & Bros in Bellary District. 
10.52 05/07/2006

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  359 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Name Of Proposal Area 
Diverted      
(ha.) 
Date of Approval 
22 File No. FCA/11.3/85 KAR/MIN  
Diversion of additional  15.077 ha. of forest 
land (2.74 ha. for OB dump + 11.46 ha. for 
road + 0.877 ha. for in stallation of conveyor 
belt) in respect of already approved proposal 
of mining lease no. 1524 in favour of M/s V.S. 
Lad & Sons.  
15.07 03/09/2007
23 File No. 4-KRA 208/2006-BAN  
Diversion of forest land for renewal of iron 
ore mining lease no. 626 in NE block of 
Sandur range in favour of M/s Ashwatha 
Narayan Singh & Co. 
56.50 04/07/2006
24 File No. FCA/11.1/114/MIN  
Diversion of additional 4.2 ha. of forest land 
(4 ha. for road and 0.2 ha. for magazine 
building) in respect of already diverted 
101.50 ha. of forest land in favour of Smt. R. 
Mallamma (R. Pampapathi) for renewal of 
mining lease. 
4.20 03/07/2007
25 Extraction of iron ore in favour of A.M. 
minerals in SandurTaluk. 
 2.03  10/07/1997
26 Renewal of mining lease (iron ore) no. 1625 
in favour of  Smt. K.M. Parvathamma 
 15.24  01/06/1999
27 Grant of mining lease in favour of Sh. H.G. 
Ranganagowda, hospet to an extent of 23.75 
ha. In Dharmapura village, S.M. block of 
Sandur Taluk, Bellary district. 
 23.75  07/12/2006
28 Renewal of mining lease no. 1894 for iron 
ore mines in favour of M/s Ramghad 
minerals in RM block,  Sandur Taluk, Bellary 
Distt.- 26.36 ha. (24.28 ha. already broken up 
area and 2.08 ha. for use of existing road) 
 26.36  11/12/2006
29 Diversion of  forest land for mining lease 
no.1028 in Joga RF, Hospet Taluk in favour of  
M/s Gogga Gurushanthaiah & Bros. 
 15.10  25/08/2006
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
360 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Annexure 8 
Files pertaining to Goa mining cases not produced to audit 
 
S.No Name of the Proposal/File No. Area diverted (in 
hectare) 
1  Diversion of Forest Land for iron ore mining lease TC 
No. 43/53 in favour of Sh. Noor Mohd. Abdul Karim 
9.40
2  Renewal of mining lease No. 29/54 in favour of V. M. 
Salgaokar& Bros. Ltd. 
11.31
27.98 (renewal)
3  Renewal of Deemed mining lease No. 21/54 in favour 
of V.S. Dempo& Co. Ltd. 
15.08
24.98 (renewal)
4  File. No. FOA/11.3/21/GOA- Diversion of forest land 
in South Goa for renewal of mining lease for 
extraction of iron & manganese ore under TC 
No.17/49 in Colomba & Curpem villages of 
Sanguemtaluka in favour of M/S Atma Ram Poi 
Palondicar 
44.69
34.18 (renewal)
5  F.No.4-GOC 377/2007-BAN -Diversion of Forest Land 
for renewal of iron ore mining lease T.C. No. 12/53 
located at village Maina/Cavorem in Quepemtaluka in 
favour of Sh. Ajit V M Kadnekar. 
14.34
6  Diversion of Forest Land for iron ore mining in favour 
of M/S Sova 
44.92
80.22 (renewal)
7  Diversion of Forest Land for renewal of deemed 
mining lease No. 13/55 for iron ore open cast mining 
in favour of M/s V M Salagoancar Brs. Ltd. 
35.15
56.236 ( renewal)
8  Diversion of Forest Land for iron ore mining lease in 
favour of Shri JN Aggarwal 
67.859
78.23 (renewal)
9  Diversion of renewal of deemed mining lease No. 
88/52 in favour of M/s Sociedade Fomento Industries 
Ltd. 
88.60
10  Diversion of Forest Land for renewal of deemed 
mining lease No. 35/1952 in favour of M/s VS Dempo 
& Co. 
64.75
11  Diversion of Forest Land for renewal of  mining lease 
No. 3/51 in favour of M/s VS Dempo & Co. 
84.62
84.62 (renewal)
12  Diversion of Forest Land for renewal of  mining lease 
No. 40/1954 in favour of M/s VS Dempo & Co. 
51.00
51.00 (renewal)
 
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  361 | P a g e  
Annexure 9 
Cases of inter account transfers 
(` in crores) 
Date Amount  
 
Account from 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Account to 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Remarks 
15/09/2006 100.00 Account of CEC Chhattisgarh  
20/10/2006 0.28  Chhattisgarh Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 
04/11/2006 200  Account of CEC Chhattisgarh  
16/11/2006 0.42  Uttaranchal Kerala  
05/01/2007 5.78  Madhya Pradesh Rajasthan  
12/05/2007 0.02  Madhya Pradesh Andaman & 
Nicobar Island
Andaman & Nicobar had 
only ` 1.05 crore on this 
date, therefore ` 2.00 lakh 
had to be diverted from M.P 
Account temporarily. It was 
also mentioned that as any 
deposit is made by A& N this 
amount of ` 2.00 lakh would 
be deposited back in M.P. 
04/07/2007 51.11  Account of CEC A.P.  
31/07/2007 39.14  Account of CEC A.P.  
05/09/2007 0.02  Andaman & 
Nicobar Island 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
10/01/2008 22.69  Bihar Punjab  
11/02/2008 0.55  Punjab Himachal 
Pradesh 
`.54.86 lakh were 
transferred from Himachal 
Pradesh to Punjab due to 
insufficient balance in 
Punjab Account on date of 
investment. 
12/04/2008 111.16  Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh  
01/05/2008 0.06  Chhattisgarh, 
Tripura & 
Management 
expenses 
Haryana  
06/05/2008 0.32  Chhattisgarh Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 
06/10/2008 24.88  Source not 
known 
Jharkhand  
31/01/2009 10.41  Madhya Pradesh Madhya 
Pradesh 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
362 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Date Amount  
 
Account from 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Account to 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Remarks 
24/04/2009  0.35  Goa Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
 
18/05/2009  28.37  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Chhattisgarh  
18/05/2009  11.35  Meghalaya Himachal 
Pradesh 
Entry rectified as per letter 
dt.12.5.2009 
18/05/2009 14.81  Uttaranchal Uttaranchal  
26/05/2009 0.53  Kerala Uttaranchal  
04/07/2009 1.97  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
A.P.  
24/08/2009 82  Maharashtra Uttaranchal  
26/08/2009 24  Uttaranchal Maharashtra  
08/10/2009 14.73  Jharkhand A.P.  
08/10/2009 6.84  Maharashtra A.P.  
10/10/2009 0.17  Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
A.P.  
05/11/2009 38.11  Uttar Pradesh A.P.  
11/12/2009 25.14  Rajasthan A.P.  
11/12/2009 1.81  Tamil Nadu A.P.  
14/01/2010 7.91  Bihar A.P.  
14/01/2010 5.41  West Bengal A.P.  
14/01/2010 122.46  Delhi Rajasthan  
14/01/2010 1.12  Andaman & 
Nicobar 
A.P.  
01/02/2010 2.92  Tripura A.P.  
17/02/2010 0.074  Tripura A.P.  
17/02/2010 59.62  Uttaranchal Maharashtra  
07/04/2010 0.04  Jharkhand Manipur  
07/04/2010 0.27  Jharkhand West Bengal  
07/04/2010 0.39  Jharkhand Bihar  
07/04/2010 0.01 Jharkhand Chandigarh  
07/04/2010 0.96  Jharkhand Haryana  
07/04/2010 2.48  Jharkhand Karnataka  
07/04/2010 0.41  Jharkhand Sikkim  
07/04/2010 0.62  Jharkhand Delhi  
07/04/2010 0.01 Jharkhand Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  363 | P a g e  
Date Amount  
 
Account from 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Account to 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Remarks 
07/04/2010 1.25  Jharkhand Gujarat  
07/04/2010 2.65  Madhya Pradesh Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.26  West Bengal Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 2.35  Uttar Pradesh Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 4.08  Uttaranchal Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 1.62  Rajasthan Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010  0.39  Bihar Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 2.92  Karnataka Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 4.75  Jharkhand Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.96  Haryana Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.34  Assam Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 6.16  Chhattisgarh Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.18  Tripura Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 1.83  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.82  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.05  Andaman & 
Nicobar islands 
Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.40  Sikkim Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 6.55  Orissa Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.61  Delhi Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.0084  Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Account of 
the CEO 
 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
364 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Date Amount  
 
Account from 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Account to 
which the 
money was 
transferred 
Remarks 
07/04/2010 1.24  Gujarat Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.08  Kerala Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 4.46  Maharashtra Account of 
the CEO 
 
07/04/2010 0.0088  Chandigarh Account of 
the CEO 
 
17/04/2010 0.54  Goa Jharkhand  
14/06/2010 0.27  West Bengal Jharkhand  
09/07/2010 0.25  Maharashtra Uttar Pradesh  
02/08/2010 0.04  Manipur Jharkhand  
02/08/2010 62.14  A.P. and Tamil 
Nadu 
Jharkhand  
02/08/2010 61.49  A.P. Jharkhand  
02/08/2010 37.01  Uttaranchal  Assam   
13/09/2010 1.96  Uttaranchal Chhattisgarh  
13/09/2010 14.39  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Jharkhand  
13/09/2010 0.20  Tamil Nadu Jharkhand  
19/10/2010 2.86  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Maharashtra  
Total 1,246.84    
 
  

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
  
Compensatory Afforestation in India  365 | P a g e  
Annexure 10 
Status of preparation of Accounts as of December 2012 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Account Format 
 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Accounts for the years 2009-10 & 2010 -11 prepared in prescribed 
format. Accounts for the year 2011-12 not submitted to audit. 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
4 Assam Accounts for the years 2009-10 not pr epared in prescribed format. 
Accounts for the year 2010-11 were prepared in the prescribed 
format. 
5 Bihar Accounts for the years 2010-11 & 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
6 Chandigarh Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
7 Chhattisgarh Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared.  
8 Delhi Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared. 
9 Goa Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared. 
10 Gujarat Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared. 
11 Haryana  Accounts for the years 2010-11 & 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
12 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared. 
13 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared. 
14 Jharkhand Accounts for the years 2010-11 & 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
15 Karnataka  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
16 Kerala Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
17  Madhya 
Pradesh  
Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared. 
18  Maharashtra  Accounts for the years 2010-11 & 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
19  Manipur  Accounts for the years 2009-10 & 2010-11 not prepared in 
prescribed format. Accounts for the year 2011-12 still not 
prepared. 

Report No. : 21 of 2013 
366 | P a g e   Compensatory Afforestation in India 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Account Format 
 
20  Meghalaya  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
21  Mizoram  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
22  Odisha  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
23  Punjab  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
24  Rajasthan  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
25  Sikkim  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
26  Tamil Nadu  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 still not prepared. 
27  Tripura  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
28  Uttar Pradesh  Accounts for the years 2010-11 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format and were audited by CAs. 
29 Uttarakhand Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
30  West Bengal  Accounts for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12 not prepared in 
prescribed format. 
 