Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social Sector
(Non-Public Sector Undertakings)
for the year ended 31 March 2016
Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi
Report No. 3 of the year 2016

Overview
i
Table of Contents
Description Reference to
Paragraph Page No.
Preface iii
Overview v - viii
CHAPTER I: Performance Audit
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Prevention and Control of Dengue in the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi 1.1 1
CHAPTER II: Compliance Audit
Department of Urban Development
Re-development of Rajiv Gandhi Chowk 2.1 31
Directorate of Information and Publicity
Advertisement and Publicity Campaigns of the Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi 2.2 43
ANNEXURE
Extract of contents of advertisements/snapshots
from TV clips 2.2.2.1 57

Overview
iii
PREFACE
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the Lieutenant Governor of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi under Section 48 of the Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi Act, 1991 for being laid before the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi.
The Report for the year ended 31 March 2016 contains the findings of 
performance audit and compliance audit of the departments of the Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi under the Social Sector (Non-Public 
Sector Undertakings).
The cases mentioned in the Report are among those which came to notice in 
the course of test audit of accounts of the year 2015-16 as well as those which 
had come to the notice in earlier years but could not be dealt with in previous 
Reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2015-16 have also been 
included, wherever necessary.
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
(March 2002) by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Overview

Overview
v
OVERVIEW
This Report contains one performance audit on Prevention and Control of 
Dengue in the National Capital Territory of Delhi with financial implication of 
` 53.69 crore and two paragraphs involving ` 83.28 crore.
Some of the major findings detailed in the Report are summarized below:
PERFORMANCE AUDIT
Prevention and Control of Dengue in National Capital Territory of Delhi
Delhi has been experiencing outbreaks of dengue since 1967 and various steps 
had been initiated over the years by the government, municipal corporations 
and other concerned agencies to prevent and control its occurrence as well as 
provide medical assistance and relief to afflicted persons. However, dengue 
continues to occur every year necessitating commitment of significant financial 
resources to tackle the problem. A performance audit covering the period from 
January 2013 to December 2015 was conducted to assess whether the steps 
taken by government agencies and municipal corporations to control dengue 
were adequate and effective. 
Audit observed that despite the recurrence of dengue over the years in the 
NCT of Delhi and the spike in dengue cases as well as mortalities during 
2015, the steps taken by the departments as well as the municipal corporations 
were not commensurate with the magnitude of the problem though funds 
were not a constraint. The three municipal corporations (MCsD) of East, 
North and South as well as New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) lacked 
an effective surveillance mechanism and only 289 out of 967 reporting units 
(30 per cent) reported data of dengue patients to the State Surveillance Unit 
thereby undermining its objective of meaningful surveillance enabling timely 
intervention. There was also no institutional mechanism for collaboration or 
coordination with concerned departments/agencies for solid waste management, 
proper sanitation and regulation of construction sites, tyre markets, etc. to 
control mosquito breeding. The Malaria circle, which is the primary unit 
for anti-mosquito field operations, also lacked basic infrastructural facilities 
necessary for them to effectively function. Over 67 per cent of the malaria 
circles lacked water connections, 22 per cent lacked electricity connection 
and 88 per cent lacked a landline telephone which impaired their ability to 
effectively carry out their functions.
Further, the institutional arrangement to respond to outbreaks of dengue 
was weak. The Dengue Task Force constituted to formulate action plans for 
containment of dengue remained inactive and Rapid Response Teams were not 
constituted in MCsD, NDMC, Northern Railway and Delhi Cantonment Board 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
vi
for taking emergency action to interrupt or reduce transmission and eliminate 
mosquito breeding sites. Out of 67,578 positive dengue cases reported by 
hospitals, South Delhi Municipal Corporation, as the nodal agency, intimated 
only 22,436 cases to the Directorate. For the year 2015, while the hospitals 
reported 409 dengue deaths, the Death Review Committee confirmed only 60 
deaths. 
Absence of adequate monitoring of spraying and fogging exercises coupled 
with lack of standard procedures for selection of suitable insecticides and 
techniques to be adopted undermined the effectiveness of the anti-mosquito 
operations. MCsD incurred an expenditure of ` 109.43 crore on domestic 
breeding checkers for targeting larvae in houses without any supervision of 
the work done or an assessment of their effectiveness. Further, expenditure 
totalling ` 42.85 crore was incurred on anti-mosquito operations adopting 
techniques and chemical formulations that are not prescribed or recommended 
by either the Directorate of National Vector Borne Disease Control Program 
or the Program Guidelines for Containment of Chikungunya and Dengue 
Epidemic Outbreak. In addition, there was no record of usage of insecticides 
valued at ` 79.76 lakh. 
The Government of Delhi spent ` 10.04 crore on awareness campaigns for 
prevention of dengue during 2013-14 to 2015-16. However, the advertisements 
were released between September and November i.e. after the outbreak of 
dengue which defeated the objective of creating awareness of measures to 
prevent the outbreak. Similarly, the MCsD also started their public awareness 
campaigns in October every year after the monsoons.
Compliance Audit
Re-development of Rajiv Gandhi Chowk 
Connaught Place (CP) was originally designed in 1929 as a shopping-cum-
residential complex. Connaught Place was re-named as Rajiv Gandhi Chowk 
in the year 1995. Over the years, the ageing process as well as adhoc changes 
and additions to the structure had resulted in deterioration of the overall 
condition of the heritage complex and defacement of its original façade. 
Further, development of the underground Palika Bazar and Rajiv Chowk Metro 
Interchange Terminal inside the inner circle increased footfalls and number of 
vehicles in CP resulting in traffic congestion and conflict between vehicular and 
pedestrian on roads. Increase in commercial activities and growing population 
put additional pressure on the civic infrastructure of CP.
The over-arching objective of the project was to restore the architectural and 
heritage character of CP while at the same time facilitating and easing traffic 

Overview
vii
and pedestrian movement to improve the overall ambience and experience 
of the visitors to this premier commercial centre in the national capital. This 
objective could not be achieved. The scope of the project as envisaged in 
the Detailed Project Report was drastically reduced from ` 615.20 crore to  
` 477.02 crore. Restoration of the facade was completed only in the outer and 
inner circles while study to ascertain the structural stability of the buildings was 
not carried out. Facilities like subways, escalators, underground parking space 
and improvement of landscaping and lighting intended to ease both traffic and 
pedestrian movement and improve visitors’ experience were not completed.
Audit also observed that expenditure amounting to ` 18.05 crore on utility 
corridors, surface development, water supply and flooring of corridors was 
either unfruitful or was avoidable. In addition, the efficacy of augmentation 
of fire-fighting capabilities done at a cost of ` 4.97 crore could not be assured 
in audit. The turnkey consultant, Engineers India Limited, did not submit 
the financial implication of change in technology adopted for construction of 
service tunnel to NDMC for review and decision despite increase in cost from 
the original ` 71.21 crore to ` 192.95 crore. 
Advertisement and Publicity Campaigns of the Government of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi
The Directorate of Information and Publicity (DIP) of the Government of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi is responsible for informing and publicising 
the programs, policies and activities of the Government of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) and looks after the publicity requirements of all 
its departments. 
In May 2015, the Hon’ble Supreme Court approved ‘Guidelines on Content 
Regulation of Government Advertising’ with a view to preventing arbitrary 
use of public funds for advertising without any attendant public interest. Audit 
test checked the records of DIP as well as that of five other departments and 
the Delhi Jal Board relating to advertisements released during the period from 
1 April 2013 to 31 March 2016 in order to ascertain whether expenditure on 
publicity and advertisements was being incurred economically, efficiently and 
effectively in accordance with general principles of financial propriety. The 
guidelines and principles approved by the apex Court were adopted as the 
benchmark for assessing and evaluating the expenditure incurred.
GNCTD incurred an expenditure of ` 47.74 crore during 2013-14 and  
` 27.43 crore during 2014-15. During 2015-16, the expenditure incurred was 
` 101.46 crore including ` 20.23 crore paid by DIP in 2016-17 but relating 
to advertisements of 2015-16. In addition, there was expenditure by other 
departments and committed liabilities in respect of print and outdoor media 
during 2015-16 details of which were not provided to Audit.    

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
viii
Advertisements and publicity campaigns funded from the public exchequer 
should be related to the Government’s responsibilities and be explicitly 
directed at informing the public of the State/Union Territory concerned of 
the government’s policies, programs, services and initiatives. On test check 
of records, Audit observed that expenditure of ` 24.29 crore was incurred 
on advertisements and publicity campaigns that were not in conformity with 
the generally accepted principles of financial propriety or the guidelines on 
content regulation approved by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Further, over 
85 per cent of expenditure of ` 33.40 crore incurred in one specific publicity 
campaign pertained to advertisements released outside the NCT of Delhi 
which was beyond the responsibility of the GNCTD. There was also no 
prior exercise to identify target audiences or necessary visibility or outreach 
nor was there any post campaign impact assessment. Audit also noted that 
while ‘Shabdarth’ was established with the stated objective of economizing 
expenditure on advertisements, this was not achieved. Non-adherence to 
extant instructions relating to inclusion of cost estimates in proposals for 
release of advertisements/publicity campaigns while seeking approval of the 
competent authority coupled with improper or non-maintenance of necessary 
registers undermined expenditure control and provided no assurance as to the 
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the expenditure incurred and liabilities 
created on advertisements and publicity.

Chapter I 
Performance Audit

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
1
CHAPTER I 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT
 Department of Health and Family Welfare
1.1 Prevention and Control of Dengue in National Capital Territory 
     of Delhi
Delhi has been experiencing outbreaks of dengue since 1967 and various steps 
had been initiated over the years by the government, municipal corporations 
and other concerned agencies to prevent and control its occurrence as well as 
provide medical assistance and relief to afflicted persons. However, dengue 
continues to occur every year with the number of reported dengue cases 
fluctuating cyclically over the years necessitating commitment of significant 
financial resources to tackle the problem. A performance audit covering the 
period January 2013 to December 2015 was conducted to assess whether the 
steps taken by government agencies and municipal corporations to control 
dengue were adequate and effective. The Directorate of National Vector Borne 
Disease Control Program identified eight key elements for prevention and 
control of dengue. The existing systems and actions taken by the concerned 
departments/agencies were evaluated against these key elements. The main 
audit findings are summarized as below:
Highlights
•	 The first critical element for dengue prevention is effective surveillance 
that could provide early warning of impending outbreak. The three 
municipal corporations (MCsD) of East, North and South as well 
as New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) had neither developed a 
Standard Operating Procedure for epidemiological and entomological 
surveillance nor was there any laboratory facility for this purpose. 
Consequently, epidemiologists and entomologists were not utilized for 
their primary purpose of evaluating epidemiological and entomological 
data to assess risks. Moreover, only 289 out of 967 reporting units  
(30 per cent) reported data of dengue patients to the State Surveillance 
Unit thereby undermining its objective of meaningful surveillance 
enabling timely intervention.
(Paragraphs 1.2.1, 1.2.2 and 1.2.3)
•	 Mosquito breeding can be controlled through environment modification 
that includes solid waste management, proper sanitation and regulation 
of construction sites, tyre markets, etc. However, no institutional 
mechanism was in place either in the MCsD or NDMC for collaboration 
or coordination with other line departments/agencies for environmental 
modification to control mosquito breeding.
(Paragraph 1.3.1) 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
2
•	 The municipal corporations deployed domestic breeding checkers 
to target larvae in houses within their jurisdictions. While NDMC 
deployed Anti-Malaria Gangmen who were on their regular staff for the 
purpose, MCsD engaged 3,358 unskilled persons for the task incurring 
an expenditure of ` 109.43 crore. However, there was no monitoring 
or supervision of the work done or an assessment of their effectiveness. 
(Paragraph 1.3.2)
•	 An expenditure of ` 88.26 crore was incurred on procurement of 
insecticides, diluents and equipment during April 2013 to March 2016 
for control of adult mosquitoes.  However, in the absence of a definitive 
policy on use of chemicals and entomological surveillance, there was 
no system for selecting the most suitable insecticide and techniques 
to deal with a particular type of situation and identifying localities/
premises where chemicals could be effectively used. 
(Paragraph 1.3)
•	 A total of 83.63 lakh houses were treated with six different types of 
insecticides applying three different techniques. Of these, 72.07 lakh 
houses (86.17 per cent) were treated adopting techniques/chemical 
formulations that are not prescribed or recommended by either the 
Directorate of National Vector Borne Disease Control Program or the 
Program Guidelines for Containment of Chikungunya and Dengue 
Epidemic Outbreak. The expenditure incurred on such treatment was 
` 2.55 crore. There was also no assessment as to the effectiveness of 
the methods adopted in vector control.
(Paragraph 1.3.4.1)
•	 Outdoor space fogging is generally recommended only in emergency 
situations to suppress an ongoing epidemic or to prevent an incipient 
one. It is ineffective in most normal conditions. However, MCsD and 
NDMC undertook outdoor fogging during 2013-2015 as a routine 
exercise at a cost of  ` 95.10 lakh. No study was carried out to ascertain 
the efficacy of the exercise. 
(Paragraph 1.3.4.2)
•	 The	 formulations	 used	 or	 methods	 adopted	 by	 MCsD	 and	 NDMC	
for chemical control of larvae were not in accordance with those 
recommended in the guidelines. The Corporations used an insecticide 
in flowing drains and at a frequency which was not envisaged in the 
guidelines. The expenditure incurred was ` 37.26 crore. In addition, 
there was no record of usage of insecticides valued at ` 79.76 lakh 
while larvicide valued at ` 2.09 crore was used in circumstances that 
could have been better dealt with by simply mandating regular cleaning 
of containers in which water was liable to collect.
(Paragraph 1.3.5) 

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
3
•	 The Delhi Cantonment Board could not utilize 74 per cent of funds 
totalling ` 1.80 crore allocated for anti-mosquito operations during  
2013-14 to 2015-16. No action plan was prepared for fogging and 
spraying of areas under its jurisdiction nor was there any record of any 
work actually done. 
(Paragraph 1.3.10)
•	 The institutional arrangements to respond to outbreaks of dengue were 
weak. The Dengue Task Force constituted to formulate action plans for 
containment of dengue remained inactive. There was no mechanism 
in place for reporting outbreaks of dengue and Rapid Response Teams 
were not constituted in MCsD, NDMC, Northern Railway and Delhi 
Cantonment Board for taking emergency action to interrupt or reduce 
transmission and eliminate mosquito breeding sites.
(Paragraphs 1.4.1, 1.4.2 and 1.4.3) 
•	 A Dengue Death Review Committee was to be constituted to carry out 
medical audit of all dengue cases and guidelines were to be developed by 
the Directorate of the National Vector Borne Disease Control Program 
for the Committee. No such guidelines were developed. Out of 67,578 
positive dengue cases reported by hospitals, South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation, as the nodal agency, intimated only 22,436 cases to the 
Directorate. For the year 2015, while hospitals reported 409 dengue 
deaths, the Death Review Committee confirmed only 60 deaths.
(Paragraph 1.5.2)
•	 A Malaria circle is the primary unit from where all field operations 
are carried out. Over 67 per cent of the Malaria circles lacked basic  
infrastructure facilities like water connections while 22 per cent lacked 
electricity connection and 88 per cent lacked a landline telephone which 
impaired their ability to effectively carry out their functions. About 
26 per cent and 65 per cent of available pumps/machines were not  
functional in MCsD and NDMC respectively.
(Paragraphs 1.7.2 and 1.7.3) 
•	 The Government of Delhi spent ` 10.04 crore on awareness campaigns 
for prevention of dengue during 2013-14 to 2015-16. However, the 
advertisements were released between September and November i.e. 
after the outbreak of dengue which defeated the objective of creating 
awareness of measures to prevent the outbreak. Similarly, the MCsD 
also started their public awareness campaigns in October every year 
after the monsoons.
(Paragraph 1.8.2) 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
4
1.1.1 Introduction
Dengue fever is a mosquito-borne viral disease transmitted through the bite of 
the female Aedes (Ae) mosquito viz. Ae Aegypti, which in its severe form of 
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF) can be life threatening. The first three stages 
in the life cycle of the Ae Aegypti (egg, larvae and pupa) are largely aquatic 
and typically last for seven to 14 days depending upon ambient temperature 
and humidity. Ae Aegyptus breeds almost entirely in domestic areas around 
man-made water receptacles. An upsurge in the cases of dengue fever/DHF 
is generally observed during the months of July to November every year. The 
World Health Organization (WHO) had identified dengue as one of the 17 
neglected tropical diseases in its first report on ‘Neglected Tropical Diseases 
(2010).’
DHF outbreaks have been reported in Delhi since 1967 with a major outbreak 
in 1996. The number of reported dengue cases and deaths in Delhi during 
the period 2006-15 has fluctuated with an upsurge during 2015 as depicted in  
Table 1.1.1 below:
Table 1.1.1:  Reported Cases of Dengue and Dengue Deaths
Year 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Dengue 
cases
3,366 548 1,312 1,153 6,259 1,131 2,093 5,574 995 15,867
Dengue 
Deaths
33 1 2 3 8 8 4 6 3 60
The Government of India’s (GoI) National Malaria Control Program, 
which was started in 1953, was re-organized in 2004 (10 th Plan Period) as 
the National Vector Borne Disease Control Program (NVBDCP) to include 
dengue and other vector borne diseases
1. The program is implemented 
through the Directorate of National Vector Borne Disease Control Program  
(the Directorate) as a centrally sponsored State program to be implemented by the 
States/Union Territories through their respective Health Departments. In 2007, 
the Directorate issued Program Guidelines for Containment of Chikungunya 
and Dengue Epidemic Outbreak (Program Guidelines) and also a Long Term 
Action Plan for prevention and control of Dengue and Chikungunya. A Mid-
Term Plan for prevention and control of Dengue and Chikungunya (MTP) 
was formulated in 2011. These plans are largely based on WHO Guidelines 
for Diagnosis, Treatment, Prevention and Control of Dengue Fever (WHO 
guidelines). The Directorate also published Guidelines in 2009 for Integrated 
Vector Management (IVM guidelines) for control of dengue/DHF.
1  Japanese Encephalitis (JE), Malaria, Chikungunya, Kala-Azar and Lymphatic Filariasis.

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
5
In the National Capital Territory of Delhi, this program is implemented by the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare of the Government of Delhi (DHFW) 
and five local bodies
2. There is a State Program Officer (SPO) in DHFW 
to implement this program. The Municipal Corporations in Delhi (MCsD) 
implement the program in their respective jurisdictions through their respective 
Malaria Department which is a wing of their Public Health Department (PHD) 
headed by the Municipal Health Officer (MHO). In addition, the Ministry of 
Railways and the Delhi Cantonment Board also undertake measures to control 
mosquito population in the areas within its jurisdiction.
Keeping in view the upsurge in dengue cases and higher mortality rate over the 
years as brought out in Table 1.1.1 above, a performance audit was conducted 
to appraise the effectiveness of the existing institutional mechanisms to prevent 
and control outbreak of dengue in the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
1.1.2 Audit objectives 
The broad audit objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether:
•	 preventive steps taken by the GNCTD and local bodies to control 
occurrence of  dengue were effective, in consonance with guidelines 
issued by the Directorate of National Vector Borne Disease Control 
Program (DNVBDCP) and commensurate with the magnitude of the 
problem in NCT of Delhi; and
•	 Sentinel Surveillance Hospitals (SSHs) were adequately prepared to 
handle the numbers of dengue patients and whether they adhered to the 
directives issued by the Government of NCT Delhi (GNCTD) in this 
regard.
1.1.3 Audit scope and methodology
The performance audit covering the period from January 2013 to December 
2015 was conducted from 15 October 2015 to 22 April 2016. Out of a total 
of 33 Sentinel Surveillance Hospitals (SSH) in NCT of Delhi, Audit selected 
10 hospitals
3 of GNCTD and one of East DMC4 through random sampling for 
scrutiny of records. In addition, records of two hospitals5 of the Union Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare were examined by the office of the Director 
General of Audit (Central Expenditure). Two hospitals
6 of the Ministry of 
2 North MCD, South MCD, East MCD, NDMC and  Delhi Cantonment Board.
3 10 of GNCTD – Lok Nayak Hospital (LNH), Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital (GTBH), Baba Saheb 
Ambedkar Hospital (BSAH), Deen Dayal Upadhyay Hospital (DDUH), Satyawadi Raja Harish Chand 
Hospital (SRHCH), Bhagwan Mahavir Hospital (BMH), Dr. Hedgewar Arogyan Sansthan (DHAS), Jag 
Parvesh Chandra Hospital (JPCH), Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel Hospital (SVBPH), Pt. Madan Mohan 
Malviya Hospital (PMMMH).
4 Swami Dayanand Hospital (SDH).
5 Lady Hardinge Hospital and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital.
6 Base Hospital and RR Hospital.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
6
Defence along with the Cantonment General Hospital and one hospital 7 of 
Northern Railway were also audited by the office of the Director General 
of Audit (Defence Services) and the Director General of Audit (Northern 
Railway) respectively. Relevant records were also examined at the Directorate 
of Health Services of GNCTD and the Public Health Departments of NDMC, 
Delhi Cantonment Board (DCB), Northern Railway and respective MCsD.
Entry conferences were held with the Director Health Services and GNCTD 
hospitals on 20 November 2015 and with North DMC, South DMC and East 
DMC on 19 November, 20 November and 4 December 2015 respectively 
wherein the audit objectives and methodology were explained and discussed.
The exit conference with these organizations was held on 2 June 2016 to 
discuss the audit findings. The views expressed in the exit conference and 
received subsequently have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
1.1.4 Financial outlay and expenditure
Municipal Corporations of Delhi: Funds for non-plan expenditure are arranged 
by the Corporations from their own budget while expenditure on plan activities 
for mosquito control such as procurement of insecticides, equipment, salary 
of Domestic Breeding Checkers (DBCs), expenditure on public awareness 
campaigns, etc. is met out of grants-in-aid received from GNCTD. Details of 
grants-in-aid released by GNCTD and actual expenditure by MCsD on plan 
activities during 2013-15 are given in Table 1.1.2.
Table 1.1.2: Allocation and expenditure (MCsD)
    (` in lakh)
Year North DMC South DMC East DMC
Grants-in-
Aid
Expenditure Grants-in-
Aid
Expenditure Grants-in-
Aid
Expenditure
2013-14 3,663.61 3,266.95 3,018.31 2,574.66 1,200.00 1,145.75
2014-15 4,118.66 3,398.54 3,285.65 2,926.17 1,639.25 2,187.91
2015-16 4,642.12 3,923.53 3,515.48 3,316.50 1,688.00 1,654.94
Total 12,424.39 10,589.02 9,819.44 8,817.33 4,527.25 4,988.60
New Delhi Municipal Council: Funds for non-plan as well as plan activities are 
arranged by NDMC from their own resources. During the period from April 
2013 to March 2016, NDMC incurred an expenditure of ` 3.81 crore on plan 
activities. 
Delhi Cantonment Board: Details of allocation of funds and expenditure 
incurred during April 2013 to March 2016 on anti-mosquito operations out  
7 Northern Railway Central Hospital.

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
7
of funds arranged by DCB from their own resources are in Table 1.1.3 as  
under:
Table 1.1.3: Allocation and expenditure (DCB)
(` in lakh)
Year Budget Expenditure
2013-14 58.58 8.91
2014-15 35.95 4.63
2015-16 85.98 33.96
Total 180.50 47.50
Northern Railway : No separate budget allocation was made by Northern 
Railway for the Chief Health Inspector for anti-mosquito operations. Funds 
were arranged out of the budget allocation for the Medical Department of 
Northern Railway.
Audit findings
The Mid-Term Plan (MTP) issued by the Directorate NVBDCP in 2011 
stipulates eight key elements
8 for prevention and control of dengue. Audit 
examined the existing systems in GNCTD, MCsD and NDMC against these 
key elements and observed inadequacies in program implementation as brought 
out in the succeeding paragraphs.
1.2 Surveillance
Surveillance is a critical component of dengue prevention and control and requires 
an active laboratory that can provide early warning of impending epidemic 
transmission and facilitate civic authorities in deciding appropriate timings 
for intervention. MTP defines two types of surveillance i.e. epidemiological 
surveillance and entomological surveillance.
1.2.1. Absence of early warning system for impending disease
Epidemiological surveillance or disease surveillance is ongoing systematic 
collection, recording, analysis, interpretation and dissemination of data of a 
disease so that action may be taken to prevent or control it. Audit observed 
that:
•	 there was no Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for epidemiological 
surveillance and there was no laboratory facility in North and East 
MCsD and NDMC. In South DMC, a laboratory existed but it was not 
operational; and
•	 MCsD had failed to not only collect disease data through epidemiologists 
for epidemiological analysis but also to utilize critical data of confirmed 
8  Surveillance, Vector management, Capacity building, Monitoring and supervision, Outbreak response, 
Inter-sectoral co-ordination, Behavior change communication  and Case management.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
8
dengue cases provided by hospitals for forecasting the disease, assessing 
the actual disease burden and planning their anti-dengue activities. 
Thus, there was no institutional mechanism to promulgate early warning of 
impending disease. 
South DMC stated (May 2016) that entomologists regularly kept surveillance on 
relevant vectors while North DMC asserted that epidemiologist surveillance was 
being carried out for suspected and confirmed dengue cases. East DMC stated 
that there was no need for epidemiological surveillance as it had very limited 
terrain. The replies are not tenable as (i) epidemiological surveillance relates to 
dengue patients/epidemic which is to be carried out by epidemiologists (study 
of transmission and control of epidemic diseases) and not by entomologists 
(study of insects), (ii) North DMC merely collected the data of houses treated 
with chemicals which cannot be deemed as epidemiological surveillance, and 
(iii) the response of East DMC ignores the fact that the need for surveillance is 
not related to the size of the terrain but its vulnerability to conditions conducive 
to vector breeding.
1.2.2 Lack of mechanism required for control of mosquito population
Entomological surveillance is used for operational research purposes to 
determine changes in geographical distribution of vectors for monitoring and 
evaluating control programs, obtaining relative measurements of the vector 
population over time and facilitating appropriate and timely interventions. 
The entomological parameters prescribed by the MTP-2011 include vector 
surveillance
9 and larval surveillance10.  
After the dengue epidemic in 1996, Government of India (GoI) decided 
in March 1997 to establish Entomology Units in each of the 12 zones of 
MCsD and appoint one entomologist in each of the zones. Subsequently, eight 
entomologists were appointed in July 1997 on contract basis. As of December 
2015, there were 11 entomologists to organize vector surveillance, ensure the 
efficacy of insecticide, check the parasite susceptibility of vector and to build 
up the Department of Entomology.
However, since the entomology units and entomological laboratories were 
not established nor were standard operating procedures for functioning of 
entomologists developed, the appointed entomologists were deployed on other 
tasks such as checking different premises for domestic breeding. In the absence 
of an entomological surveillance system, MCsD and NDMC were not in a 
position to assess changes in geographic distribution of vectors and severity of 
9 Vector surveillance determines adult mosquito density and an index is calculated for each vector  
species. It includes determining per man hour density and per room density of mosquitoes.
10 Larval surveillance is used to determine the density of larvae. Houses are the  
basic sampling units which are systematically searched for water holding containers.

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
9
an outbreak in a particular area and initiate appropriate and timely institutional 
intervention to control mosquito population and intensify public awareness.
While North and South DMCs stated (May 2016) that there was a beat wise 
daily schedule for checking breeding, East DMC and North DMC stated that 
laboratory facilities were being set up.
1.2.3 Incomplete Integrated Disease Surveillance Program
GNCTD decided to collect data relating to dengue in its Integrated Disease 
Surveillance Program (IDSP) portal for disease surveillance. However, out of 
967 reporting units (933 private hospitals/nursing homes and 34 government 
hospitals), only 289 units (30 per cent) reported the data of dengue patients 
to the State Surveillance Unit, set up under IDSP, during the year 2015. 
The State Program Officer (SPO) made no efforts to collect data from the 
remaining units. The Department informed that the State Surveillance Unit 
evaluated the effectiveness of prevention and control program by examining 
the data. However, no documentary evidence was provided to audit in this 
regard. In the absence of complete data from all the reporting units and non-
availability of trained manpower, the objective of meaningful and effective 
surveillance like timely detection of epidemics, monitoring trends in spread of 
dengue and measuring the burden of disease was not achieved.
1.2.4  No vector surveillance even in hospital premises
Each selected hospital vouched to become zero tolerance zone by enhancing 
sanitation and vector surveillance activities within their premises. However, the 
Directorate inspected hospitals during July and August 2015 and found larvae 
of dengue mosquito in their premises. None of the hospitals furnished report 
of the inspection and action taken thereon. Though in a meeting held in August 
2015, Secretary, GNCTD directed for constitution of Dengue Surveillance 
Committee in each hospital to check the mosquito breeding, yet report of these 
committees were not submitted to higher authorities.
1.2.5 No arrangement for operational research
The Long Term Plan 2007 and WHO guidelines stipulate that operational 
research should be oriented to the priority needs of the program in order to 
generate evidence base for adaptation of strategies and interventions. This 
may include studies on the ecology of the vector, the efficacy, effectiveness 
and cost-effectiveness of existing and new vector control methods, formative 
research on relevant cultural practices and guidance for engaging communities 
in program activities. Action plans of MCsD 2013 for prevention and control 
of vector borne diseases envisaged that operational research projects would 
be initiated in collaboration with the National Institute of Malaria Research 
(NIMR), the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), NVBDCP, medical 
colleges and non-governmental organisations. However, no initiative was taken 
by the MCsD in this direction and there was no arrangement for studies on 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
10
local ecology of vector and the efficacy, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness 
of existing vector control methods in order to generate an evidence base for 
adaptation of strategies and interventions. 
MCsD stated (May 2016) that operational research was the domain of central 
government research institutes. The reply is not tenable since it was the 
responsibility of the MCsD as per their own Action Plans to initiate operational 
research in collaboration with central government research institutes. 
1.3 Vector Management
According to WHO guidelines, prevention or reduction of dengue virus 
transmission was dependent entirely on control of mosquito vectors and 
interruption of human-vector contact. Actions to control transmission should 
target Ae Aegypti in its habitats in households and other settings where human-
vector contact occurs. The importance of such measures was illustrated when 
MCsD failed to carry out its annual exercise of spraying adulticide in all 
school buildings, community centers, public halls, underground parking sites, 
JJ clusters, river belts, etc. during the year 2015 and the number of dengue 
cases spiked to 15,867 with 60 mortalities.
The main emphasis of a vector management program should be on control 
of mosquito population through (i) source reduction by way of environment 
modification and manipulation, (ii) chemical control for larval and adult control 
and (iii) legislation for effective enforcement.
MCsD and NDMC incurred an expenditure of ` 88.26 crore on procurement 
of insecticides, diluents and equipment during April 2013 to March 2016. Of 
this, insecticides valued at ` 43.65 crore were used for fogging and spraying 
operations during the same period.
1.3.1 Source reduction through outdoor environmental modification
As per WHO guidelines, Ae Aegypti uses a wide range of larvae habitats, both 
man-made and natural. Control efforts should target the habitats that are most 
productive and epidemiologically important. MCsD and NDMC identified the 
following primary causes creating conditions suitable for mosquito breeding:
(i) Inadequate solid waste management particularly of discarded containers 
such as plastic glasses, packing containers, etc. in which rain water  
collects providing favourable conditions for mosquito breeding.
(ii) Poor sanitation conditions and absence of adequate drainage systems  
resulting in water stagnation that becomes prominent breeding sites.
(iii) Unregulated construction sites that provide favourable conditions for 
mosquitoes breeding in water storage tanks, buckets, rubbish bins, pits 
and other cavities.

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
11
(iv) Un-sheltered used tyre storage sites and workshops in different parts of 
the city that are highly productive larval habitats.
(v) Irregular or no piped water supply which compel households to store 
water in containers/tanks that are suitable sites for mosquito breeding.
Mosquito breeding can be controlled through environment modification.
Issues relating to solid waste management, adequate sanitation arrangements, 
proper regulation of construction sites and tyre markets are the subject 
matter of MCsD and NDMC which need to be addressed through a well-knit 
collaboration among their own wings such as the Department of Environment 
Management and Sanitation and the Building and Health Departments. 
Matters relating to regular piped water supply can be taken up with Delhi  
Jal Board. However, no institutional mechanism was in place either in MCsD 
or NDMC to ensure necessary collaboration amongst their wings and other line 
departments of GNCTD for environmental modification to control mosquito 
breeding.  
South and East DMC stated (May 2016) that inter-sectoral co-ordination 
meetings were held involving their own wings and other line departments for 
environmental modifications. North DMC stated that efforts were being made 
for sensitization of all stake holders. However, the fact remained that the 
efforts made so far has had little perceptible impact. 
1.3.2 Monitoring of domestic breeding checkers 
Ae Aegypti mosquito normally breeds in domestic/peri domestic conditions. 
Water storage vessels, flower vases, potted plants with saucers, blocked roof 
gutters, discarded buckets and used tyres are prominent breeding sites inside 
a house. 
While Northern Railway had a robust system for checking mosquito breeding 
by Domestic Breeding Checkers (DBCs) and monitoring and supervision of 
the activities of DBCs by supervisory staff of its Health department, there 
were many inadequacies in the system followed by the MCsD. The Municipal 
Corporations contracted unskilled persons as Domestic Breeding Checkers 
(DBCs) who were to target larvae in their habitat by visiting every house. 
As of December 2015, MCsD had 3,358 DBCs in their 12 zones covering  
67.36 lakh houses and incurred an expenditure of ` 109.43 crore for the 
period from April 2013 to March 2016. NDMC gets the checking of domestic 
breeding done through Anti-Malaria Gangmen (AMG) who are part of their 
regular staff. MCsD and NDMC fixed a norm for DBCs/AMGs to visit at 
least 50 houses per day for checking each and every water holding container 
including overhead water tanks and carrying out anti-larvae measures.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
12
Audit observed as follows:
•	 Incubation period of a mosquito egg is at least seven days. Going by 
the norm set by MCsD and NDMC, there was a requirement of 22,453 
DBCs to visit all the houses in NCT of Delhi at an interval of six days. 
Given the existing number of DBCs, it is not possible for a DBC to re-
visit a house before 44 days.
•	 In case a house owner denies entry to his house or a house is found 
locked for any reason, DBC/AMG would leave the premises unchecked 
for mosquito breeding. Thus, there remains a possibility of gaps in 
detection of dengue in that locality. 
•	 Domestic breeding checking requires regular combing of the locality 
with comprehensive mapping and indexing of houses. But no systematic 
data was maintained by MCsD and NDMC. In the absence of such data, 
it may not be possible to systematically undertake anti-larval activities in 
a locality.
•	 There is no system to supervise and monitor the work of DBCs or 
to collect feedback from the households on the work actually done by 
DBCs.
•	 MCsD and NDMC had never evaluated the effectiveness of DBCs/AMG 
in controlling indoor mosquito breeding and there was no feedback as to 
their work from the targeted areas.
Inadequate number of DBCs coupled with lack of any systematic mapping and 
monitoring of the actual checking done by them provides no assurance as to the 
effectiveness of their checking and eliminating mosquito breeding in domestic 
houses. It was further noted that though the necessity of DBCs is only for six 
months i.e. from June to November, the MCsD hired them for the whole year. 
Accepting the facts, MCsD stated (May 2016) that the role and responsibilities 
of DBCs would be enhanced.
1.3.3 Use of insecticides without ascertaining their susceptibility
The WHO guidelines state that insecticide resistance must be considered as 
a potentially serious threat to effective dengue vector control. The initial and 
continued susceptibility of vector to specific insecticides is of fundamental 
importance for the success of larviciding or adulticiding operations. The 
Manual for Malaria Technical Supervisors and IVM of NVBDCP stipulate that 
the choice of insecticides must be based on susceptibility testing which should 
be carried out every second year in one locality. Though MCsD and 
NDMC 
had been relying on chemicals to control the mosquito population, the chemicals 
used were never tested for susceptibility to ensure their continued efficacy. 
East DMC stated (May 2016) that as Central Government Institutes undertake 
the susceptibility testing there was no need to re-check. However, East DMC 

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
13
did not produce any evidence that susceptibility test of insecticides were ever 
tested by Central Government institutes. South DMC stated that insecticides 
used were tested in approved lab before their use. North DMC stated that 
entomological labs were being upgraded to carry out such tests.
1.3.4 Chemical control for adult mosquitoes
1.3.4.1 Deviations from prescribed techniques for spraying and fogging 
As per NVBDCP guidelines, chemical sprays are not effective in most 
conditions and it is rare that an epidemic would be controlled by using these 
methods. In the last three years, MCsD and NDMC chemically treated  
79.15 lakh and 4.48 lakh premises respectively using six different types of 
synthetic insecticides and applied three different techniques i.e. Insecticidal 
Residual Spray (IRS), Indoor Space Spray and Indoor and Outdoor Space 
Fogging. However, details of the premises treated with chemicals such as name 
of the owner of house, house number, address, type of premises and reasons 
for resorting to chemical treatment were not maintained by the MCsD and 
NDMC. An analysis of techniques used by MCsD and NDMC for chemical 
treatment to kill mosquitoes inside houses revealed the following: 
(i) Insecticidal Residual Spray (IRS)
The Directorate prescribes this technique of vector control in rural settings 
only. The Directorate did not prescribe adoption of IRS for Delhi. However, 
MCsD and NDMC adopted this technique to treat 13.79 lakh houses during 
January 2013 to December 2015 at a cost of ` 1.12 crore. The reasons and 
circumstances under which this non-prescript technique was used were not on 
record.
Further, the Directorate stipulated that IRS, being a technical task, should be 
carried out by trained persons with Stirrup Pumps
11. Audit noticed that out of 
12.52 lakh houses treated with IRS by South and North DMC, Knapsack Pump 
instead of Stirrup Pump was used in 8.97 lakh houses. NDMC also did not use 
Stirrup Pump for IRS. As proper technique was not used for IRS, it could not 
be ascertained whether the desired results were achieved.
The Directorate prescribed a protocol to be followed for concurrent and 
consecutive supervision for IRS. Nothing was on record to establish whether 
officials at supervisory levels had verified the quality and coverage of spray 
through IRS as specified in the guidelines. 
(ii) Indoor Space Sprays
In this technique, a solution of pyrethrum is sprayed in indoor conditions with 
hand operated pumps with micro discharge nozzles. Program guidelines state 
11  Stirrup Pumps with spray nozzle tip having the discharge rate of 740 to 850 ml per minute and  
10-15 cm plunger movement at a pressure of 10 PSI.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
14
that chemical space sprays are not effective in most conditions and it is rare 
that an epidemic will be controlled by use of these methods. While NDMC 
did not use this technique, MCsD treated 11.51 lakh premises during January 
2013 to December 2015 with this technique using 9,508.04 litres of pyrethrum 
costing ` 1.43 crore.
It was further noticed that though the guidelines and IVM prescribe use of the 
pyrethrum mixed in kerosene for indoor spray, North DMC sprayed pyrethrum 
diluted with diesel in 3.64 lakh (50 per cent) out of 7.22 lakh houses. Spraying 
houses with solution of pyrethrum and diesel was a deviation from prescribed 
norms. The Directorate confirmed to Audit in July 2016 that pyrethrum can 
only be used with kerosene in indoor sprays as distinct from indoor fogging 
with diesel. 
Further, program guidelines prescribe periodic indoor space sprays to achieve 
the desired results. But no record was maintained to indicate the number of 
houses where indoor spray was repeated nor was any study conducted to 
ascertain the impact of this technique on the mosquito population.
(iii) Indoor fogging 
IVM prescribes a formulation of pyrethrum and kerosene for indoor space 
fogging through hand held fogging machine. Program guidelines state that this 
formulation is a natural product and non-toxic to humans and other non-target 
organisms and that vectors had not developed resistance to this formulation. 
Pyrethrum is also widely regarded as more environment friendly as it was 
relatively bio-degradable. The Directorate clarified to Audit in July 2016 that 
pyrethrum with diesel can be used for indoor fogging and not malathion. It was 
however noticed that while NDMC carried out indoor fogging of pyrethrum 
with diesel in 3.69 lakh houses, MCsD deviated from this formulation and 
carried out indoor fogging in 54.64 lakh houses with a formulation of malathion 
with diesel instead of using pyrethrum and kerosene which is prescribed for 
such indoor fogging.
1.3.4.2 Outdoor fogging
WHO guidelines recommend outdoor fogging only in emergency situations 
to suppress an ongoing epidemic or to prevent an incipient one. Program 
guidelines state that chemical space spray is not effective in most conditions 
and fogging often creates a false sense of security. The Program guidelines 
defines two techniques for outdoor fogging when it is to be used viz.  
(i) thermal fogging by a vehicle mounted thermal fogging machine using a 
mixture of Malathion and Diesel and (ii) Ultra Low Volume Spray (ULV) 
of any of organo-phosphorous insecticide. The guidelines recommend water 

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
15
based ULV of liquid insecticide as being more cost effective than thermal 
fogging since no diluent is used in this technique.
MCsD and NDMC undertook thermal outdoor fogging during the dengue 
season in the years 2013 to 2015 at a cost of ` 95.10 12 lakh as a routine 
exercise without exploring the possibility of adoption of ULV spray which 
is more cost effective. Further, no study was carried out by the MCsD and 
NDMC to ascertain the efficacy of the thermal fogging.
South and North DMC stated (May 2016) that outdoor fogging was carried 
out mainly during outbreak like situation and was not a regular exercise. The 
reply is not factually correct as records of both corporations established that 
fogging exercise was carried out regularly during the period from September to 
November in the last three years.  East DMC confirmed that outdoor fogging 
had limited effect and it was an appeasement exercise which was undertaken 
as per demand/complaint/media coverage. The replies were silent on the issue 
of not adopting the ULV technique for outdoor treatment.
1.3.5 Chemical control for larvae
WHO guidelines prescribe that larvae habitats should be treated with chemicals 
only if environmental management methods or other non-chemical methods 
cannot be easily applied or are too costly. IVM states that application of 
chemicals is difficult and expensive on a long term basis and therefore chemical 
larvicides are best used in situations where vector surveillance indicate the 
existence of certain periods of high risk and in localities where outbreaks might 
occur. Audit observed the following: 
(i) Injudicious and excess application of chemical
Bacillus Thuringiensis Israelensis (BTI) is used as larvicide for biological 
control of larval stages. BTI is sprayed on water having already developed 
larva killing it in 24 to 48 hours. BTI solution destroys already developed 
larva and is not meant to prevent breeding. Audit noticed that BTI was being 
regularly sprayed on flowing water in drains without ensuring presence of 
larvae instead of ensuring their cleanliness through environmental modification 
methods. Moreover, the prescribed frequency for applying BTI is once in two 
weeks whereas MCsD were applying this chemical on weekly basis resulting in 
excess usage of this biological agent. During January 2013 to December 2015, 
MCsD and NDMC used 553.14 tons and 5,765 liters of this larvicide in small 
drains in residential colonies at a cost of ` 37.26 crore. 
Since neither WHO nor the program guidelines envisaged use of BTI in drains 
nor had the corporations carried out any study to ascertain its impact on 
12 Includes cost of Malathion used in indoor fogging.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
16
mosquito population in and around the areas sprayed, its utility or effectiveness 
could not be established.
South and North DMC confirmed (May 2016) that BTI was sprayed on flowing 
drains while East DMC accepted (May 2016) that no larvicide was to be 
sprayed on free flowing water of drains and field workers were supposed 
to spray on the polluted water mainly on the banks of water bodies once a  
week. 
(ii) No records kept of use of a larvicide
Temephos EC 50 per cent is a larvicide sprayed on water having already 
developed larva. During January 2013 to December 2015, MCsD and NDMC 
used 11,684 liters and 1,306 liters Temephos EC 50 respectively incurring an 
expenditure of ` 79.76 lakh. However, no record was maintained of locations 
and circumstances under which this larvicide was used.
(iii) Use of unapproved Temephos granules
WHO prescribes that larviciding should be considered as complementary to 
environment management and should be restricted to containers that cannot 
otherwise be managed. Use of Temephos granules is not approved for the 
program by the Directorate. However, MCsD and NDMC issued 345.50 tons 
and 4.46 tons of it respectively to DBCs/AMGs to be applied in household 
water containers, money plants, flower vases, overhead tanks, bird pots, 
discarded tyres, air coolers etc. during the period from January 2013 to 
December 2015 although these containers could have been managed by simply 
draining the water out of them and periodically refilling them with fresh water. 
The expenditure incurred on this was ` 2.09 crore. No study was conducted to 
assess the impact of this larvicide on mosquito population.
1.3.6 Vector control was not an integrated exercise
Destroying adult mosquitoes and destroying of larvae are complementary to 
each other. Both exercises should be taken up simultaneously for effective 
vector control. Though MCsD and NDMC had carried out insecticidal residual 
spray, space focal spray and indoor fogging in 83.63 lakh houses between 
January 2013 and December 2015, there was nothing found on record to 
indicate that larviciding had also been undertaken simultaneously. Killing 
mosquitoes without destroying larva and vice versa is an incomplete vector 
control exercise and dilutes the effectiveness of the entire effort.
1.3.7 No action to eliminate breeding sites identified by DNVBDCP
Cross Checking Organization (CCO) of the Directorate undertakes random 
exercises to independently check breeding of mosquitoes in different parts of 
NCT of Delhi and sends its reports on locations where breeding was detected 
to the concerned officials to take appropriate action. Audit however noticed 

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
17
that no records of action taken on the report of CCO were being maintained nor 
had the Directorate pursued the matter as a measure of monitoring and oversight. 
1.3.8 No assurance of quality of insecticides procured
Insecticide being used by MCsD and NDMC are recommended by the WHO 
for use in public health with the stipulation that the recommendations are 
valid only if linked to WHO specifications as to quality control. South DMC 
and North DMC had been procuring insecticides through a consultant since 
2006. As per the consultancy agreement (17 March 2006), the consultant 
was to ensure quality compliance with technical specifications and parameters 
by conducting inspections at pre and post-dispatch stage of the consignment 
of insecticides in accordance with the prevailing Drug and Cosmetics  
Act, 1940, and the Pharmacopoeia, Standards and Insecticide Acts and Rules. 
The consultancy agreement further provides that samples drawn during the pre/
post-dispatch inspection will be tested only at the Sri Ram Institute of Industrial 
Research (SRIIR). However, the agreement did not mention the procedure of 
taking the sample and the person authorized to take such sample. It was noticed 
that though samples were sent to SRIIR by the consultant before dispatch of 
the consignment, these were not drawn in the presence of officers either from 
South DMC, North DMC or SRIIR.  Test reports of SRIIR submitted by 
the consultant also did not have the name of person who took the samples. 
Thus, there was no assurance that samples tested by the SRIIR were from the 
consignment that was actually delivered to MCsD. It was further noticed that 
no sample was drawn or tested at post-dispatch stage or at the time of receiving 
the consignment by South DMC and North DMC. However, East DMC and 
NDMC sent samples at post-dispatch stage.
1.3.9 Vector control through legislation
MTP-2011 provides that the plan for prevention of dengue should be supported 
with legislation and suggests measures for dengue control in urban areas by 
introducing necessary building bye-laws. Audit observed that:
•	 Annual Action Plan of MCsD of 2013 mentioned that existing building 
bye-laws should be revised on the pattern of the Mumbai Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1928, where owners of houses are compelled to make 
necessary arrangements for keeping their premises free from mosquito 
breeding.
•	 A high level meeting held on 18 March 2015 decided to revise the 
building bye-laws on the Mumbai pattern and to increase the penalty of 
` 500 to ` 5,000 to be charged from the owners of premises where  
mosquito breeding is detected.
•	 Annual Action Plan also mentioned that section 269 of the Indian Penal 
Code should be invoked for legal actions against regular offenders for 
creating/encouraging mosquito breeding conditions. 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
18
However, no action was initiated on the above proposals. MCsD and NDMC 
did not even consistently impose the existing penalty on offenders. Out 
of a total of 6,06,257 houses found with mosquito breeding, only 65,545  
(11 per cent) were challaned. Similarly in NDMC, challans were issued in 
only 7.65 per cent of positive breeding cases.
Absence of enabling legislative provisions to compel owners to keep their 
premises mosquito free coupled with lack of enforcement of even existing 
provisions that could act as a deterrent undermined effective vector control and 
efforts to eradicate dengue. 
1.3.10 Preventive measures in areas with Cantonment Board and Railway 
Scrutiny of the records of Chief Health Inspector/Malaria, Delhi Main under 
Northern Railway revealed that a roster was maintained and area wise teams 
were deputed to carry out fogging and spraying on daily basis to cover all 
Railway premises. In addition, fogging and spraying was done immediately 
as and when any information or report was received regarding a confirmed 
dengue case in railway colonies. Survey of the houses of railway colonies was 
also conducted along with the officials of Municipal Corporation of Delhi and 
challans were issued to defaulters during the monsoon season.
Pursuant to a decision (May 2012) of the Inter sectoral co-ordination committee 
that Northern Railway would run special trains in the month of July every 
year for anti larval measures, a special train with power spray for anti-larval 
measures along the railway track had run during the years 2013 to 2015 during 
the period from August to October.
Insofar as the Delhi Cantonment territory is concerned, the Station Health 
Officer (SHO) is responsible for anti-mosquito operations in areas occupied 
by serving defence personnel while the Delhi Cantonment Board (DCB) caters 
to the 0.82 lakh civilian population living in the Cantonment area. While 
SHO took the requisite measures for mosquito management in his jurisdiction, 
action on the part of the DCB was lacking. DCB could utilize only about  
26 per cent of its budget allocation for anti-mosquito operations during the 
three years (as depicted in Table 1.1.3). DCB did not prepare any annual 
program during the years 2013-2015 for fogging and spraying of insecticides 
in the civilian area under its jurisdiction nor were any details of fogging 
actually done and premises treated maintained. No action plan was prepared 
for source reduction to eliminate mosquito breeding nor was any report on 
reduction of mosquito breeding sent to the Directorate. 
Thus, while necessary steps had been taken by the Northern Railway, 
preventive measures undertaken by MCsD and the Delhi Cantonment Board 
did not provide any assurance as to their effectiveness.

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
19
1.4 Response to Outbreaks
1.4.1 Inactive Dengue Task Force
A Dengue Task Force was constituted by GNCTD in November 2012 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Health) GNCTD with Director of Health Services, 
GNCTD and MHO, SDMC as Vice Chairmen. Additional Director (Public 
Health), GNCTD, MHOs of North/East MCD and NDMC and SHO of Delhi 
Cantonment Board were its members. The Task Force was to formulate action 
plan for containment of dengue and other vector borne diseases in NCT of 
Delhi. However, Audit noticed that neither any action plan for containment of 
dengue and other vector borne diseases was finalized by this Task Force nor 
any meetings or activities undertaken in 2014 and 2015.
1.4.2 No mechanism for reporting of outbreak of dengue
The Long Term Plan defines the term “outbreak of dengue”
13 and prescribes that 
on receipt of the report of occurrence of fever, the medical officer/zonal health 
officer would visit the affected area to conduct epidemiological investigations 
to find out the probable causes of fever and to collect 5-10 per cent blood 
samples randomly from the affected population to send to Sentinel Surveillance 
hospitals for serological/virological confirmation. Fifty per cent  of the serum 
samples received by the hospital would be transported to the apex referral 
laboratory for virological diagnosis. In case any blood sample is found positive 
for dengue by the SS hospital laboratory or the apex referral laboratory, the 
locality would be declared as having outbreak of dengue. However, no such 
mechanism was developed in GNCTD/MCsD/NDMC. 
1.4.3 Rapid Response Teams not constituted
MTP 2011 stipulates that outbreak of arboviral diseases like dengue require 
quick emergency action to immediately control infected mosquitoes in order 
to interrupt or reduce transmission and reduce or eliminate the mosquito 
breeding sites. MTP also suggests constitution of a Rapid Response Team 
(RRT) comprising of epidemiologists, entomologists, microbiologists and 
Information, Education and Communication personnel to take the following 
steps on receipt of report of a suspected or confirmed case from a Sentinel 
Surveillance Hospital (SSH):
•	 Confirm whether any case was reported earlier from the area andanalyze/
compare the previous and current data; and
•	 Visit the area as early as possible to collect information on cases, 
their clinical signs/symptoms, history of exposures and other relevant 
epidemiological/entomological and laboratory information to substantiate 
the outbreak. 
13  An outbreak of fever would be considered if the number of fever cases of similar nature reported by health 
workers are five or more in a locality having population 10-15 thousand during a period of seven days.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
20
It further provides that the findings should be communicated to the State/
District Vector Borne Disease Control Program and the Municipality Health 
Officer for implementation of control measures. However, no RRT was 
constituted in MCsD and NDMC. No mechanism was in place to plan anti-
mosquito activities and there was no system to assess the disease burden to 
judge whether it is an epidemic or isolated occurrence of the disease. 
In Northern Railway also, no RRT was formed although 64 cases of dengue 
fever in 2013-14, 24 cases in 2014-15 and 339 cases in 2015-16 were reported 
in the Central Hospital, Northern Railway. Similarly no RRT was formed in 
the Delhi Cantonment Board.
1.4.4 Hospitals not equipped for testing the dengue virus during 
outbreak
As per the Long Term Action Plan, each SS Hospital should have an Elisa 
reader, Elisa washer and other necessary equipment for dengue serology. In 
case equipment are not available, SPO should immediately arrange for the 
same in consultation with the Directorate of NVBDCP to ensure availability 
of these facilities in the hospitals. It was observed that in Pt. MMM Hospital
14 
and Satyawadi Raja Harish Chandra Hospital, one Elisa Reader remained 
non-functional since 2013. These hospitals purchased new Elisa Reader each 
only in September and October 2015. In another instance, BSAH
15 purchased 
Elisa Micro Plate Reader on 22 September 2015, but the same was issued to 
Microbiology Lab 66 days after its receipt i.e. on 28 November 2015. Thus, 
these three hospitals were not fully equipped for testing the dengue virus in 
patients when the outbreak was at its peak. It is only when the outbreak was 
receding that these hospitals received the machines.
1.4.5 Inadequate facilities in Railway and Cantonment Board Hospitals
Bed nets, mosquito repellent were not provided to dengue patients in the 
Central Hospital, Northern Railway, to prevent spreading of dengue virus 
from infected persons to non-infected ones.
There are three hospitals of the Ministry of Defence functioning in the 
Cantonment area in NCT. While the Base Hospital and Army Hospital are for 
the treatment of service personnel, the Cantonment Board Hospital provides 
medical facilities to the civilian population residing in the cantonment area. 
Both the Base Hospital and Army Hospital were appropriately equipped and 
staffed for treatment of dengue patients. However, the Cantonment Board 
General Hospital lacked any facility for indoor patient treatment. A total of 
353 patients detected by this hospital as positive dengue cases in 2015 were 
treated in Outdoor Patient Department (OPD) or referred to other Government 
Hospitals.
14 Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya Hospital.
15 Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital.

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
21
1.5 Monitoring and Supervision
1.5.1 No mechanism for supervision and monitoring
Municipal Health Officers (MHOs) of respective MCsD are overall in-charge 
of Public Health Departments divided into 12 zones with a Deputy Health 
Officer (DHO) heading each zone. Zones are further divided into circles which 
is the primary unit for field work. However, there was no mechanism or 
prescribed procedure for supervision and monitoring of anti-mosquito activities 
undertaken by the field staff at circle levelby the MHOs or other authorities. 
MCsD and NDMC maintained no record of the observations made by MHO 
or of any directions issued to the field staff. 
Moreover, MCsD and NDMC did not develop a mechanism to take feedback 
from public on the anti-larval work done by the DBCs/AMGs or the work done 
by field workers in their respective beat. In the absence of proper supervision 
by the management and a feedback from the public, there is no method for an 
empirical periodic evaluation of the level of effectiveness and efficiency of the 
anti-mosquito measures taken by MCsD.
1.5.2 Under reporting of dengue cases and dengue deaths
South DMC, as the nodal agency in NCT of Delhi, collects data of positive 
dengue cases from the hospitals for further transmission to Government of 
India (GoI). The exercise facilitates GoI in assessing the actual disease burden. 
Details of the positive cases reported by hospitals to the nodal agency and the 
cases actually further intimated by the nodal agency to the Directorate during 
the last three years are depicted in Table 1.1.4:
Table 1.1.4: Cases reported by Hospitals and those intimated to Directorate
Year Positive cases reported by hospitals Cases intimated to 
the Directorate
2013 23,451 5,574
2014 4,596 995
2015 39,531 15,867
Total 67,578 22,436
Out of the total 67,578 cases reported by hospitals, the nodal agency reported 
only 22,436 cases (33 per cent) to the Directorate. Remaining cases were 
deleted on various grounds such as cases which were tested positive through 
Rapid Kit Test (11,345 cases), cases where complete address was not available 
(2,564 cases), cases declared suspected by hospitals (13,417 cases), cases not 
traceable (4,140 cases), cases where patients acquired the infection from other 
States (1,711 cases), cases which pertained to other States (2,611 cases) and 
cases where addresses were of other States (9,354 cases). 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
22
The Action Plans of 2014-15 and 2015-16 for prevention and control of vector 
borne diseases in Delhi stipulated that a Dengue Death Review Committee would 
be constituted to carry out medical audit of all dengue cases. Guidelines for this 
Committee were to be developed by the Directorate of NVBDCP. Action plan 
further stipulated that dengue death should be notified only after it had been 
confirmed by the Dengue Death Review Committee. It was, however, noticed 
that neither DNVBDCP developed the guidelines nor did GNCTD pursue the 
matter with DNVBDCP. During 2015, hospitals reported 409 dengue deaths 
to the nodal agency who in turn forwarded these cases to the Dengue Death 
Review Committee. Out of these 409 death cases, the Committee confirmed 
only 60 deaths (46 from Delhi and 14 from outside Delhi) as dengue deaths. 
In 2014, nodal agency sent 50 dengue death cases, but Committee confirmed 
only three cases. In the absence of any criteria/guidelines for the Committee 
to review the reasons for death, it is not clear how the remaining deaths were 
not considered as dengue deaths though these were confirmed by the hospital 
as dengue deaths.
In 2015, out of 967 medical units (933 private hospitals and Nursing Homes 
and 34 Government Hospitals) which were required to report the dengue cases/
dengue deaths to SDMC, only 27 SSH and 43 private hospitals and nursing 
homes reported dengue positive cases and death cases to nodal agency. But the 
nodal agency made no arrangement to collect data from the remaining private 
hospitals and nursing homes. Thus, the disease data communicated by the 
nodal agency to the Directorate was incomplete and could not be said to be 
comprehensive or reliable. 
South DMC stated (May 2016) that details of dengue cases on being received 
from hospitals are investigated by the concerned civic body and only those 
cases which belong to Delhi are considered as positive dengue cases. 
1.5.3 Delay in reporting of severity of impending disease 
DENV-1 and 3 cause mild dengue with high morbidity and low mortality. 
DEN V-2 and 4 are known as the more virulent serotype among the four 
and cause complications and high mortality. The Directorate identified the 
National Center for Disease Control (NCDC) and the All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Delhi as Apex Referral Laboratories (ARLs) for 
virus isolation of dengue in Delhi. As per the advisory issued to all ARLs by 
NVBDCP on 29 May 2013, ARLs were responsible for providing information 
about the circulating dengue serotypes/genotypes in linked States. In a meeting 
held on 8 May 2014, it was decided that ARLs would carry out viral serotyping 
in the beginning of the transmission period and reports would be shared with 
all the implementing agencies for wider circulation among the clinicians. 
However, it was noticed that both the ARLs of Delhi reported the serotypes in 
September 2015 when epidemic had already broken out in Delhi. Had ARLs 

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
23
submitted their reports timely, health authorities would have been able to 
assess the severity of impending disease and make timely preparations.
Moreover, the Union Ministry of Health & Family Welfare instructed  
(February 2015) that all SSHs should collect blood samples from suspected 
patients with fever syndrome and process on a timely basis for serologic 
confirmation. Further, as per the Action Plans 2014 and 2015, all SSHs were 
required to test 10 per cent of fever cases for dengue during non-transmission 
period for disease forecasting. Audit observed that neither of these instructions 
were followed by hospitals in 2015 nor had any mechanism been developed 
by GNCTD to ensure compliance by hospitals to these instructions. Only 
when Dean, Maulana Azad Medical College Delhi requested the Medical 
Superintendent, Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan Hospital Delhi in October 
2015 to submit Positive Cases Reported (PCR) samples for serotypes of dengue 
patients which would help in determining the profile of dengue fever/strain did 
DHS forward the request to several other hospitals on 19 October 2015. Hence, 
there was clearly a lack of diligent observance of the instructions issued by GoI.
1.6 Inter-sectoral Coordination 
Public Health Department, South DMC organized workshops every year 
jointly with East DMC, North DMC and NDMC on prevention and control 
of vector borne disease in Delhi and brought out a document highlighting the 
measures to be taken to control and prevent vector borne diseases. In these 
workshops, several decisions are taken which are to be implemented by various 
implementing departments. Audit observed that 38 out of 138 decisions taken 
in the workshop held in 2015 were to be implemented by MCsD themselves, 
22 by all civic bodies, three by Delhi Government departments, one by 
departments of Government of India, five by South DMC and 11 by Sentinel 
Surveillance hospitals. Fifty-eight decisions were to be implemented by more 
than one agency including all MCsD, GNCTD Departments and civic bodies.
Audit observed that no arrangements were made to monitor compliance of 
these decisions nor was there any Action Taken Report from the concerned 
departments on the implementation of the decisions taken at the workshop. 
Moreover, there was no evidence that MCsD and NDMC themselves initiated 
action on the decisions which were identified to be implemented by them.
1.7 Capacity Building
1.7.1 Inadequate organizational structure
MCsD were implementing the National Anti-Malaria Program (NAMP) 
through their Malaria Department (MD). Though both malaria and dengue are 
spread by mosquitoes, they are different diseases. Malaria is a parasitic disease 
whereas dengue is an arboviral disease. Therefore, inclusion of viral diseases 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
24
like dengue in the program of MD required re-structuring to make it capable of 
tackling dengue and other viral diseases. However, no such change in structure 
of MD was effected. There are posts of Anti Malaria Officer (AMO) in each 
zone of the Public Health Department (PHD) to implement and supervise anti-
malaria activities but no corresponding posts for dengue or other viral diseases. 
Similar position prevailed in NDMC also. 
1.7.2 Lack of adequate infrastructure
A Malaria Circle is the primary unit from where all field operations are carried 
out to implement the program. A survey of all the 292 circle offices of MCsD 
showed that even basic infrastructure/facilities were not available in most of 
the offices. Some instances are given in Table 1.1.5 below:
Table 1.1.5: Circles with Inadequate Infrastructure/Facilities
Sl.No. Lack of  infrastructure/facilities No. of circles
1. Electricity connection 64 (22%)
2. DJB water connection 195 (67%)
3. Proper office accommodation 76 (26%)
4. Ceiling fan and lighting arrangement 70 (24%)
5. Toilet and washroom facilities 97 (33%)
6. Storage space for chemicals and insecticides 167 (57%)
7. Space for storing empty containers 176 (60%)
8. Landline telephone 258 (88%)
9. Sweeping and cleaning arrangements 177 (61%)
It was observed that:
(i) Though BTI is the most widely used chemical in MCsD and is mixed 
with water to prepare a solution, 67 per cent of circles did not have 
water connection.
(ii) About 88 per cent of circles did not have telephone facility to keep 
in touch with public or senior officers and 22 per cent were without 
electricity connection.
(iii) Proper office accommodation was not available in 26 per cent of circles 
and toilet facilities were not available in 33 per cent of circles.
(iv) DNVBDCP guidelines define a protocol for transportation and storage of 
insecticides and disposal of remains of insecticides and empty packing. 
Zonal offices of MCsD are situated at a distance of one to 25 kms from 
PHD headquarters and circle offices are situated from one to 18 kms 
away from zonal offices. Insecticides are frequently transported from 
zonal stores to circle offices through bicycles for utilization. 
(v) In 57 per cent of circles, proper space was not available for storing 

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
25
insecticides and petroleum products, while 60 per cent of circles had no 
space for storing used and empty containers.
1.7.3 Non-functional equipment
Chemical control measures of vector management are undertaken with the 
help of various types of pumps. Audit noted that 26 per cent of available 
pumps/machines were not working in the MCsD while 65 per cent of available 
pumps/machines were not working in NDMC.
In Northern Railway against the requirement of three fogging machines only 
one fogging machine was available while another was lying out of order. 
Further, only 10 Knap Sack pumps were available against a requirement of 15 
pumps.
1.7.4 Shortage of human resources
The Malaria Department was formed in the early fifties. Though the inhabited 
area and the population of Delhi has increased manifold since then, the 
sanctioned posts in Malaria Department has not been reviewed. MCsD were 
suffering from shortage of supervisory staff ranging from 46 to 97 per cent and 
in workmen cadre from 20 to 36 per cent.
In NDMC, there was no sanctioned post of entomologist, while sanctioned 
posts of epidemiologist and sanitation officer were lying vacant as of January 
2016. There was 12 per cent shortage of Anti Malaria Gangmen (AMGs) 
and 47 per cent shortage of Anti-Malaria Jamadaars (AMJs). Though there 
was shortage of field staff, many Malaria Inspectors (MIs), Assistant Malaria 
Inspectors (AMIs) and Field Workers (FWs) were deployed on ministerial 
work.
There was a shortage of 22.22 per cent of manpower in field worker cadre 
with the Chief Health Inspector (Northern Railway) and necessary training for 
vector management was also not provided to the field workers.
Mosquito control is a labour intensive task requiring regular supervision. The 
current availability of human resources is clearly not commensurate with the 
extent of the problem and the concerned departments were not in a position to 
fully and effectively implement IVM in NCT of Delhi. 
MCsD stated (May 2016) that matter for filling up vacant posts was being 
pursued. 
1.8 Behaviour Change Communication
1.8.1 Non-formation of multi-disciplinary planning team
As per WHO guidelines, dengue fever epidemiology requires a mixture of 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
26
expertise in different disciplines to define the required set of technically sound 
solutions. This necessitates assembling of a multi-disciplinary planning team.  
However, the same was not formed by the State Program Officer in Delhi.
1.8.2 Ineffective public awareness campaign 
Public awareness campaigns are intended to increase community awareness 
about dengue related prevention and control measures. 
(i) Government of NCT of Delhi
The main period for the spread of dengue viruses (outbreak) is June to 
November every year and publicity campaigns relating to prevention of 
dengue was to be released before the spread of dengue viruses i.e. in June 
and July. During the last three years, GNCTD incurred an expenditure of 
` 10.04 crore on awareness campaigns for prevention of dengue as shown in  
Table 1.1.6.
Table 1.1.6:  Details of expenditure on awareness campaign
Year Expenditure
(` in crore)
Period of advertisement
2013-14 4.23 31 August  to 19 November 2013
2014-15 0.41 25 October  to 23 November 2014
2015-16 5.40 September  to October 2015
The advertisements were released between September and November in all 
the three years i.e. after the outbreak of dengue. Thus, the very objective of 
the expenditure of creating awareness of the measures to prevent outbreak of 
dengue was defeated. 
(ii) Municipal Corporations of Delhi
Field publicity campaigns of MCsD started in the month of October every 
year. Launching of public awareness campaign after monsoon season has little 
justification.
1.9 Case Management
1.9.1 Use of non-recommended Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) 
The National Guidelines for Clinical Management of dengue fever state that 
Rapid Diagnostic Kits (RDTs) used for detection of dengue are not considered 
very accurate and tend to show a high rate of false positives compared to 
standard tests. WHO guidelines also stipulate that these kits should not be used 
to guide management of dengue/DHF. Reliance on such tests could result in 
increase in the case fatality ratio. Hence use of RDTs is not recommended. 
Only ELISA based kits were to be procured instead of RDTs.

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
27
Audit observed that 43 RDT kits were purchased by hospitals at a total cost of  
` 4,15,543 as detailed in Table 1.1.7.
Table 1.1.7: Procurement of RDT Kits
Sl.No. Hospital No. of kits purchased Cost (`)
1. RML 10 15,500
2. BMH 2 27,800
3. GTBH 22 1,94,670
4. SRHCH 9 1,77,573
Total 43 4,15,543
Use or RDT kits does not provide the requisite degree of assurance as to the 
accuracy of the diagnosis and assessment of the actual number of dengue cases.
1.9.2 Inadequacies in testing in suspected dengue cases
A large number of OPD and IPD patients of dengue fever were treated during 
the dengue period from August to November 2015. However, blood sample 
testing ratio in six selected hospitals revealed that only 44 per cent dengue 
fever patients in OPD and IPD of Medicine and Pediatrics Departments were 
tested for basic blood tests from August to November 2015. Audit could not 
ascertain as to how patients in IPD received treatment without pathological 
tests or follow ups as basic pathological test was a pre-requisite for effective 
management of patients.
1.10 Conclusion
Despite the recurrence of dengue over the years in the NCT of Delhi and 
the spike in dengue cases as well as mortalities during 2015, the institutional 
mechanisms and actions taken by the departments as well as the municipal 
corporations were not commensurate with the magnitude of the problem 
though funds were not a constraint. There was no set mechanism for 
reporting outbreaks or responding to outbreaks and surveillance system for 
early warning of impending disease and assessing severity of outbreak of 
disease was inadequate. Malaria circles which are the primary units for field 
operations suffered from an almost debilitating shortage of basic infrastructure 
and facilities. Stereo-typical implementation of anti-mosquito measures without 
mapping with actual delivery of service undermined containment of vector 
borne diseases. 
Environmental modification which is a key element in sustainable vector 
control was not given due emphasis and MCsD and NDMC largely relied 
on chemical insecticides to control mosquito population. While extensive 
spraying and fogging operations for control of adult mosquitoes and other 
chemical measures for control of larvae were undertaken by all the municipal 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
28
corporations at an overall cost of ` 43.65 crore, the techniques adopted as 
well as formulations used differed from that recommended in the Program 
guidelines raising questions as to their effectiveness. There was no monitoring 
of the effectiveness of the work done by domestic breeding checkers. The 
MCsD incurred an expenditure of ` 109.43 crore on hiring of these breeding 
checkers. Absence of a policy for chemical use, not conducting susceptibility 
tests for insecticides, not carrying out any impact study on techniques applied 
to control mosquito population and adoption of non-prescript method to control 
mosquito population indicated absence of informed decision making process in 
MCsD and NDMC.
While the Northern Railway had undertaken systematic fogging and spraying 
operations in the areas under their jurisdiction, the Delhi Cantonment Board 
did not maintain any record of anti-dengue operations in areas under its 
jurisdiction. The Board utilized only 26 per cent of the funds available to it for 
anti-mosquito operations during the period under review. 
1.11 Recommendations
Based on the audit findings, it is recommended as follows:
•	 Mapping of dengue prone and sensitive areas in NCT of Delhi may be 
undertaken and plans framed and prioritized and resources allocated on 
this basis. The Dengue Task Force should meet at regular intervals for 
this purpose.
•	 Given the multiplicity of agencies dealing with dengue prevention and 
control in NCT of Delhi, an inter-agency coordination mechanism may 
be established to address the matter of prevention and control of dengue 
in a coordinated and coherent manner. 
•	 A Standard Operating Procedure may be developed and instituted for 
epidemiological surveillance along with requisite laboratory facilities for 
early warning of impending disease and assessing severity of outbreak of 
disease.
•	 An impact assessment may be undertaken of the fogging and spraying 
exercises undertaken by the municipal corporations keeping in view the 
Program Guidelines and those of the NVBDCP to assess their efficacy 
and for corrective action if required. 
•	 The engagement of DBCs/AMGs by municipal corporations should be 
reviewed so as to ensure that they are commensurate with the task at 
hand. The period of their engagement should be synchronized to see that 
they are engaged during the period when they can actually be deployed 
for the intended task. The work done by them should be monitored and 
supervised. 

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
29
•	 The reporting mechanism may be strengthened whereby all concerned 
units communicate accurate and timely information relating to dengue 
cases and dengue deaths to the nodal agency and the same is further 
transmitted to the Directorate of NVBDCP.
•	 Public awareness campaigns should be planned to commence well before 
the onset of dengue as a preventive measure and not after its occurrence 
or when it is on the wane. 
•	 Basic infrastructure may be ensured in a time-bound manner to the 
malaria circles to enable them to effectively discharge their functions. 
Facilities at hospitals to attend to the upsurge of dengue patients should 
be reviewed before start of the dengue period and gaps in terms of testing 
facilities addressed.
The matter was communicated to the Government of Delhi (May 2016 and July 
2016) and to the Union Ministries of Health (July 2016), Delhi Cantonment 
Board (July 2016) and Railways (July 2016). While Delhi Cantonment Board 
accepted the facts (July 2016), the replies of other agencies were awaited  
(16 August 2016).

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
31
Chapter II 
Compliance Audit

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
31
Chapter-II
COMPLIANCE AUDIT
Department of Urban Development
2.1 Re-development of Rajiv Gandhi Chowk
The re-development of Rajiv Gandhi Chowk was undertaken to 
restore its architectural and heritage character while easing traffic and 
pedestrian movement to improve the overall ambience of this premier 
commercial center of the national Capital. This was not achieved. 
Lack of realistic planning coupled with poor execution and monitoring 
of implementation of works led to non-achievement of the project 
objectives of upgradation of public conveniences and improvement in 
civic services. The scope of the project as originally envisaged was 
drastically reduced from ` 615.20 crore to ` 477.02 crore. Expenditure 
amounting to ` 18.05 crore on utility corridors, surface development, 
water supply and flooring of corridors was either unfruitful or 
avoidable. The efficacy of augmentation of fire-fighting capabilities 
done at a cost of ` 4.97 crore could not be assured in audit. 
Connaught Place (CP), originally designed in 1929 as a shopping-cum-
residential complex has three circles – outer, middle and inner. The 
buildings, all private, are aligned along these circles. Connaught Place was 
renamed as Rajiv Gandhi Chowk in the year 1995.  Over the years, the 
ageing process as well as adhoc changes and additions to the structure had 
resulted in deterioration of the overall condition of the heritage complex and 
defacement of its original façade. Further, development of the Underground 
Palika Bazar and Rajiv Chowk Metro Interchange Terminal inside the inner 
circle increased footfalls and number of vehicles in CP resulting in traffic 
congestion and conflict between vehicular and pedestrian on roads. Increase 
in commercial activities and growing population put additional pressure on 
the civic infrastructure of CP.
A meeting was held in February 2005 under the Chairpersonship of the 
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), Government of India 
(GoI), that was attended by Chairperson, New Delhi Municipal Council 
(NDMC) and officers from other agencies viz. Delhi Urban Art Commission 
(DUAC), Delhi Development Authority (DDA), Central Public Works 
Department (CPWD), and Delhi Traffic Police, where the Engineer-in-
Chief, NDMC made a presentation highlighting the status of the area and 
its problems.  Based on the discussions, NDMC submitted a Status Note 
to the Secretary MoUD, GoI on 30 May 2005 recommending preparation 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
32
of a comprehensive Redevelopment Plan for CP including the augmentation/ 
upgradation of engineering services. The New Delhi Municipal Council (the 
Council) in February 2006 approved this recommendation and resolved that 
the final proposal shall be brought before it for administrative approval and 
expenditure sanction. 
New Delhi Municipal Council entered into an agreement with Engineers India 
Limited (EIL) on 03 May 2006 for consultancy services for re-development of 
Connaught Place and its precincts.  EIL submitted a Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) for re-development of Connaught Place comprising of sub plans with 
cost estimates, for: 
a. Restoration of architectural/heritage character of CP and examining the 
structural stability of its buildings;
b. Construction of new subways, re-modeling of existing subways and  
re-designing of roads to make the outer circle signal free to enable free 
flow of traffic and safe movement of pedestrians;
c. Enhancing the parking capacity of CP by construction of new underground 
parking facilities and development of surface level parking;
d. Upgradation of public conveniences, environmental improvement, 
landscaping and streetscaping; and
e. Engineering improvement of civic services viz. water and electricity 
supply, drainage and sewer system. 
The Council approved the Project Report (November 2007) and decided to 
fund the project under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNURM). The Council also approved (28 April 2008) entering into a 
turnkey consultancy agreement with EIL for the project (signed on 21 May 
2008) where under EIL would be responsible for conceptualization, planning, 
design, engineering and execution of the project including award of works 
to contractors and subsequent inspection, testing and handover of the project 
to NDMC in a fully operational state. This agreement superceded the earlier 
agreement of May 2006. The consultancy fee was 8 per cent of the executed 
cost of the project (plus service tax) or ` 48 crore (plus service tax) whichever 
is less and was applicable upto December 2010. In the event of any delay in 
completion of project which was not attributable to EIL, additional fee beyond 
December 2010 was to be settled based on mutually agreed terms. The Council 
also accorded administrative approval and expenditure sanction of ` 615.20 
crore for the implementation of the DPR.  
Meanwhile, a DPR for ` 448.03 crore prepared for those works which were 
to be funded under JNNURM was sent to Government of India (GoI) on  
15 April 2008 against which GoI sanctioned ` 88.82 crore as its share and 

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
33
released the first instalment of ` 22.21 crore in February 2009. The Government 
of NCT of Delhi also released ` 38.06 crore as its share in the project to 
NDMC under JNNURM.  Remaining expenditure on the project was met by 
NDMC from its own resources.
As per the turnkey consultancy agreement entered into with EIL in May 2008, 
the project was to be completed by November 2010. The final responsibility 
for implementation of the Project rested with the Engineering Department of 
NDMC under the supervision of its Engineer-in-Chief. A Project Co-ordination 
Committee (PCC) comprising of officers from NDMC was formed on 14 May 
2008 to monitor the progress of the project and to give decisions as may 
be necessary during implementation. Subsequently, EIL with the approval of 
PCC, awarded 15 contracts to different contractors between April 2009 and 
July 2012 with a total contractual cost of ` 462.12 crore with stipulated dates 
of completion falling between 05 April 2010 and 10 November 2013. The 
contracts were actually executed between April 2010 and December 2014.
Since some major items
1 included in the DPR were not ultimately implemented 
by EIL, the Council reduced the scope of the project and revised the expenditure 
sanction from ` 615.20 crore to ` 477.02 crore in June 2012. As of March 
2016, NDMC had transferred ` 423.77 crore to the ‘EIL-CP Project Account’. 
EIL had paid ` 387.05 crore to the contractors as of April 2016. Though EIL 
had withdrawn its work force from the site in December 2014, the project was 
yet to be formally declared complete and the accounts were yet to be closed 
(April 2016).
The first audit appraisal of the project appeared in Audit Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (No. 6 of 2011-12) on XIX Common 
Wealth Games, 2010, relating to the Union Government (Civil), highlighting 
undue delay in completion of the project, change in scope of work, improper 
project planning and contract management. These findings were re-produced 
along with other audit observations on extra expenditure in the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2011, 
relating to GNCTD. The Action Taken Notes on these Reports have not been 
submitted by GNCTD as of January 2016. The present audit appraisal of 
the project was conducted to assess the achievement of the project objectives 
and level of compliance with the extant rules and the principles of financial 
propriety.
2.1.1 Planning and preparation
Proper planning and preparation is a pre-requisite for effective and timely 
implementation. This is all the more imperative in a project that involves 
1 DMRC vomitories (` 5.60 crore), Horticulture (` 2.24 crore), CCTV/PA system in underground parking 
(` 6.72 crore), Underground parking (` 111.99 crore), Retrofitting (` 5.60 crore).

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
34
multiple stakeholders/agencies and execution in a busy commercial center 
in an urban area. Effective planning entails realistic conceptualisation and 
assessment of all factors that are relevant to execution of the project including 
identification and availability of site, allotment of resources to ensure optimal 
utilisation, timely execution of contracts and mechanisms for effective 
monitoring to ensure quality and timeliness of works done. Deficiencies in 
realistic conceptualization and planning would be reflected in the extent of 
achievement of the stated objectives.
Audit observed that the achievements of the project were not commensurate 
with some of the established objectives as originally envisioned as reflected in 
Table 2.1.1 below:
Table 2.1.1: Short Achievement of Project Objectives
Sl. 
No.
Primary objective Item of work to be 
executed
Work Executed/ Not 
Executed
Status of Work
1. Conservation of 
heritage character 
and structural stability 
of buildings.
Restoration of façade 
of buildings in outer, 
middle and inner 
middle circles.
Restoration of façade 
was done only in outer 
and inner circles at an 
expenditure of ` 40.02 
crore Middle circle 
was not covered.
In August 2010, PCC 
asked EIL to forward 
a plan for middle 
circle to be taken up 
after CWG 2010. PCC 
raised the issue in its 
meeting in November 
2010 and March 2011. 
However, there was no 
further progress.
2. Flooring of façade 
corridors.
Providing symmetrical 
flooring of sand stone 
in façade corridors 
matching with the 
original architecture 
of CP, as suggested by 
DUAC.
EIL included this work 
in three contracts, but 
it was not executed.
No reasons were 
produced to audit for 
non-execution of this 
item of work.
3. Assessment of 
structural stability of 
buildings
EIL was required to 
appoint a specialized 
agency to study 
structural stability of 
buildings and forward 
recommendations/
suggestions to NDMC. 
Owners were to take 
remedial measures 
directly.
Desired structural 
stability study report 
was not obtained by 
NDMC from EIL and 
owners were not made 
aware of stability status 
of their buildings.
No reasons were 
produced to audit for 
non-execution of this 
item of work. 

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
35
4. Free flow of 
vehicular traffic and 
safety of pedestrians.
Construction of 
8 subways and 
remodeling of existing 
5 subways adding 
extra mouths all along 
outer circle, to provide 
uninterrupted signal 
free flow of traffic on 
outer circle and safe 
passage to pedestrians.
EIL awarded the work 
in November 2009 at a 
cost of ` 56.05 crore. 
Only two subways 
were completed and 
three existing ones 
were remodeled at 
a cost of ` 22.31 
crore. Two other new 
subways, though taken 
up, were abandoned 
midway after incurring 
an expenditure of 
` 3.21 crore.
Reasons not on record. 
PCC never pursued 
the matter with 
EIL for remaining 
subways. Expenditure 
of ` 3.21 crore  
on the abandoned 
subways was rendered 
unfruitful.
5. Improvement in 
riding quality and 
longevity of roads.
Reconstruction of 
outer, inner and radial 
roads by cement 
concrete and middle 
circle road by granite 
cobbles at a cost of  
` 12.56 crore.
Outer circle, inner 
circle and radial roads 
were resurfaced with 
bituminous concrete as 
extra item or deviation 
in the quantity 
through other ongoing 
contract. Middle circle 
was reconstructed with 
cement concrete.
Under the terms of the 
turnkey agreement, all 
statutory clearances to 
be obtained by EIL and 
any assistance required 
from government 
bodies was to be 
provided by NDMC. 
Hence, it was the 
responsibility of both 
EIL and NDMC to 
obtain the requisite 
clearances. The work 
was held up due to 
delay in tree cutting 
permission from Forest 
department. Due to 
the delay in seeking 
requisite clearance and 
release of work orders 
and the ensuing cycling 
event of CWG 2010, 
NDMC was left with no 
option but to construct 
the bituminous road.  
6. Providing escalators 
in subways 
to facilitate  
pedestrian movement 
and encourage people 
to use subways.
Installation of 64 
escalators in new and 
existing subways at a 
cost of ` 80 crore. All 
subways were to be 
roofed.
EIL awarded the work 
for 58 escalators at a 
cost of ` 29.24 crore 
without the provision 
of roofed enclosures. 
Only 22 escalators 
were provided at a cost 
of ` 11.17 crore but 
no roof was provided 
to any of them. 
Fourteen of them 
were dysfunctional 
(18 March 2015) as 
expensive components 
were stolen.
36 escalators were not 
constructed. Further, 
of the 22 constructed, 
14 were dysfunctional. 
Hence, only eight 
out of the originally 
envisaged 58 escalators 
were actually functional 
and the objective of 
facilitating pedestrian 
movement was not 
achieved.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
36
7. Augmentation of 
parking facilities.
Construction of two 
level underground 
parking of a capacity 
of 2200 Equivalent 
Car Space (ECSs) 
below the inner circle 
at a cost of ` 112 
crore. 
No such works were 
taken up for execution. 
NDMC deleted the 
parking facility from 
the scope of the work 
on 25 June 2012.
PCC asked (December 
2008), EIL to give 
a presentation for 
automatic underground 
parking in inner circle. 
When EIL was asked 
to submit feasibility 
of new parking, EIL 
submitted on 04 March 
2010 a concept of semi-
automated parking.  In 
December 2011, PCC 
deferred the parking 
project for next phase. 
As such there was 
no construction of 
underground parking 
facility in CP that 
would have eased 
congestion.
8. Rain water 
harvesting system.
Rain water harvesting 
system in CP at a cost 
of ` 60.82 lakh to use 
surface run-off water 
from roofs, central 
park and pedestrian 
plaza for recharging of 
ground water purpose.
The proposed system 
was not constructed. 
EIL attributed (May 
2015) the reasons 
to space constraints 
which was indicative of 
deficient planning and 
conceptualisation.  
As evident from above, none of the primary objectives of restoring the 
heritage character of Connaught Place, ascertaining the structural stability of 
the building and of easing traffic and pedestrian movement was achieved. 
This was attributable to lack of realistic planning as reflected in the drastic 
curtailment of the scope of work of the original DPR from ` 615.20 crore to 
` 477.02 crore as well as delay in execution of works.
Audit also noted the following:
(i) EIL constructed an underground feeder corridor of 200 m length behind 
Madras Hotel in P-Block at a cost of ` 2.83 crore as part of a service corridor 
network to place power cables, water mains and other utilities.  However, this 
feeder corridor was not connected to the main tunnel or to any other service 
tunnel and was lying idle. EIL stated (May 2015) that feeder corridor could 
not be completed as NDMC could not resolve issues of encroachment and 
tehbazari on construction site. Failure of NDMC to provide hindrance free site 
to EIL resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ` 2.83 crore.
(ii) As per the approved plan, an underground service trench was to be 
constructed all along the outer circle to place electric cables and other utilities. 
It was noticed that out of 2,317 meters only 1,000 meter of trench was 
constructed at a cost of ` 1.40 crore, as NDMC did not provide work site to 

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
37
EIL. The incomplete trench was lying idle rendering the entire expenditure of 
` 1.40 crore unfruitful.
Under the turnkey agreement, it was the obligation of NDMC to remove 
hindrances and provide land free from encumbrances to EIL for execution of 
work. Thus, failure of NDMC to provide hindrance free site to EIL coupled 
with  taking up of work before ensuring encumbrance free site resulted in 
unfruitful expenditure of ` 4.23 crore.
2.1.2 Surface development plan
The Surface Development Plan, as approved by the Council, included 
environmental improvement, enhancement in landscaping, up-gradation of public 
conveniences and adequate lighting arrangements.  EIL awarded the work on 
11 March 2010 to a contractor with stipulated date of completion as 10 October 
2010. The work was actually completed on 15 March 2013.  Details of items 
included in the contracts and actually executed are given in Table 2.1.2 below: 
Table 2.1.2: Non/short execution of contract items of public utility
Sl. 
No.
Item of work Nos. to be 
constructed/Installed
Nos. actually 
constructed/Installed
Shortfall 
(%)
1. New toilets 34 11 63
2. Kiosks 36 Nil 100
3. Street lights 267 116 57
4. High mast lights 10 Nil 100
5. Litter bins 214 60 72
6. Garden lights 1449 154 89
7. Street furniture 300 Nil 100
8. Drinking water fountains Nos. not specified Nil 100
9. Playground equipment -do- Nil 100
10. Development of gardens 
on terrace of Palika 
Bazar and Palika Parking 
along with two foot over-
bridges to connect both 
02 Not constructed 100
11. A viewing platform of 
15 m height to provide a 
spectacular view of CP
01 Not constructed 100
In terms of numbers, the percentage of shortfall ranged from 57 per cent to 
100 per cent. The reasons for short execution of contract items were neither 
on record nor pursued by the PCC with EIL. Non/short execution of contract 
items of public utility deprived the general public of improved civic facilities 
and upgraded environment of CP as conceptualized in the approved DPR.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
38
Audit also noted the following:
(i) EIL incurred an expenditure of ` 1.27 crore on construction of plant beds 
along the inner circle, inner side of outer circle and radial roads and for 
providing good earth and manure in these plant beds. It was, however, 
noticed that no plant bed was existing at the inner side of the outer circle. 
NDMC informed (April 2015) that since the plant beds at inner side of 
the outer circle were creating problems for commuters and vehicles were 
being parked on these plant beds, the space wast subsequently covered 
by stone slabs. Thus, construction of plant beds at an unsuitable location 
resulted in wasteful expenditure of ` 60 lakh out of ` 1.27 crore incurred 
on construction of plant beds at the inner side of the outer circle.
(ii) Similarly, an expenditure of ` 64.73 lakh was incurred on providing grass, 
grass grid and other line items inside the inner circle. Subsequently, EIL 
dismantled these items due to objection raised by New Delhi Traders 
Association (NDTA) rendering the expenditure infructuous.
(iii) EIL provided 581 bollard lights valuing ` 31 lakh in CP. As some of 
the lights were stolen, EIL removed the remaining lights and handed 
them over to NDMC where they were kept in storage. Thus, providing 
these lights without ensuring their suitability for the location resulted in 
wasteful expenditure of ` 31 lakh.
(iv) DUAC had approved use of sand stone in place of proposed granite 
flooring in the corridors of the façade. However, EIL used granite stone 
slabs. This resulted in extra expenditure of ` 2.69 crore as granite stone 
is costlier than sand stone. No reasons were found on record for use of 
granite in place of sandstone.
(v) At a meeting held with the Secretary, NDMC, on 16 December 2011, 
it was decided that work for facade lighting should be executed in such 
a way as to avoid maintenance problem in future. EIL awarded two 
contracts for facade lighting work at a cost of ` 3.29 crore. During a 
joint survey with the officers from NDMC and EIL, it was found that 
LED lights in the floor and LED strips at upper Jalies were either not 
in place or broken in most of the blocks, electrical wirings were not in 
place and the system had become defunct. EIL stated (May 2015) that 
complete façade lightings in inner circle were handed over (February 
2014) to NDMC, which did not maintain them.
(vi) The contract for the work of surface development had two items for 
providing granite kerbs of sindoori red color or equivalent at the rate 
of ` 43,000 and ` 54,000 per cubic meter respectively. Audit scrutiny 
showed that EIL considered these items as extra items and made a 
payment of ` 1.99 crore at the rate of ` 68,981 per cubic meter. The cost 
of this item as per contracted rate works out to ` 1.30 crore, resulting in 
additional expenditure of ` 69 lakh.  EIL stated (May 2015) that rajshree 
red granite stone was provided in place of sindoori red stone as directed 

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
39
by NDMC. However, EIL did not produce documentary evidence in 
support of its contention and also did not mention the reason for the 
change in the specifications after award of the contract.
Thus, deficiencies in planning and implementation resulted in unfruitful 
expenditure of ` 4.84 crore as well as extra expenditure of another ` 3.38 crore
.
2.1.3 Water supply system
Audit noted the following:
(i) In order to address the issue of intermittent water supply in CP, the 
Council approved construction of a new underground water tank of 
2,700 KL capacity and laying of a new water supply network to ensure 
24x7 water supply. The proposed water tank was also to be used for 
water treatment and to supply water to Palika Bazar and Palika Parking. 
Audit scrutiny of records revealed that EIL incurred expenditure of 
` 3.16 crore on laying a new water supply network. However, the 
proposed underground water tank could not be constructed because the 
land identified earlier for the underground water tank was not found 
feasible and NDMC failed to arrange any alternate land space for the 
same. The new network thus only connects to the existing underground 
old water tank and the objective for 24x7 water supply in CP, Palika 
Bazar and Palika parking remained unachieved.
(ii) The Council approved an expenditure of ` 1.28 crore for an irrigation 
system in CP for maintenance of green spaces. Audit scrutiny revealed 
that EIL incurred ` 2.44 crore on two contracts during November 2009 
to December 2012, for providing an irrigation system comprising of 
underground distribution lines and garden hydrants. However, this newly 
constructed irrigation system was not connected to any source of water 
and was lying idle. EIL informed (May 2015) that decision regarding 
location of water tank and source of water was not finalised by NDMC. 
Thus, laying the new irrigation system without ensuring availability of 
source of water resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ` 2.44 crore.
Audit observed that it was the responsibility of NDMC under the consultancy 
agreement to provide the requisite land for the works. Further, general 
principles of execution of works, as also stipulated in CPWD Works Manual 
adopted by NDMC require that encumbrance free site should be ensured before 
commencement of work. Failure of NDMC and EIL to ensure availability of 
site for all elements of water supply network before commencement of work 
resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ` 5.60 crore.
2.1.4 Firefighting system
The Council approved an expenditure of ` 9.50 crore for the firefighting 
system. As against this, EIL incurred an expenditure of ` 4.97 crore on a new 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
40
system including underground water tank and fire equipment. Audit scrutiny 
revealed the following:
(i) 129 hydrant boxes were installed near fire hydrants across CP, all of 
these were damaged and rendered unserviceable as their doors were 
stolen. As a result, essential firefighting equipment to be placed in each 
hydrant box for use in case of fire emergencies (viz. six 15 m hose pipes 
and fire axe and other equipment) were not placed in these boxes, though 
such items were supplied by the contractor.
Empty and damaged Fire Hydrant Box
(ii) Fire hydrants were to be provided with flow switches along with 
control wiring from these flow switches to the central control room for 
ascertaining the exact location of a fire. However, neither the control 
room was setup nor the flow switch, control wiring and indicating panel 
provided.
(iii) A single head type hydrant valve to operate fire hydrants in case of fire 
emergencies was to be provided in each hydrant box. These valves were 
provided in chambers in the ground covered with mechanically locked 
covers.  No tool or mechanism to remove the cover of underground 
chamber housing the valve was provided in the hydrant boxes. As such, 
possibility of operating these valves in case of fire was problematic. 
Further, there were multiple chambers covered with similar types of 
lid for other services such as telecommunication, water, electricity, 
sewerage, etc. situated around each hydrant. Since the chamber having 
valve to be used in case of fire to make the system operational is not 
marked distinctly, it would be difficult to identify the lid to be removed 
to operate the valve.
Hence, the efficacy of the works to augment fire fighting capabilities was not 
established despite expenditure of ` 4.97 crore.
2.1.5 Construction of service tunnel in middle circle
The DPR approved by NDMC provided for an expenditure of ` 71.21 crore 
for construction of underground service tunnel (corridor) below the middle 
circle having a height of 23 feet and width of 22 feet to be constructed by 
Open Cut Technology for placing the trunk water lines, telecommunication 
cables, irrigation pipeline, IGL pipelines, power cables and transformers with 


Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
41
a view to avoiding excavation for replacement of pipes and cables in future. It 
also provided for an expenditure of ` 70.40 crore for revamping of electrical, 
water, drainage and sewerage system in CP. The total cost approved for doing 
these works was ` 141.61 crore.
EIL invited common tenders in June 2009 for both these works.  After pre 
bid meeting (June 2009) and on the request of a contractor, EIL changed the 
‘Open Cut Technology’ to the costlier ‘Diaphragm Wall Technology’.  A 
combined work was awarded at a cost of ` 236.70 crore in November 2009 
(` 157.85 crore for the construction of the service tunnel and ` 78.85 crore for 
revamping of electrical, water, drainage and sewerage system).
As of May 2015, EIL had incurred ` 180.48 crore on construction of the 
service tunnel and an additional ` 12.47 crore on other items required to make 
the tunnel operational, which was not included in the cost approved by the 
Council. Thus, as against an allocation of ` 71.21 crore and contractual cost of 
` 157.85 crore, EIL incurred ` 192.95 crore on service tunnel, due to change 
in technology and execution of unapproved items.  Neither prior nor ex-post-
facto approval of the Council was sought for the revised estimate and change 
in technology despite the huge increase in cost of 171 per cent.
Audit observed that, Clause 2.3.4 of CPWD works manual stipulates that 
material deviations that significantly alter the scope of work from the original 
sanction should not be made without the approval of the authority that accorded 
administrative approval to the work, even though the cost of the same may be 
covered by savings on other items. Further, under the consultancy agreement 
also, EIL was to periodically appraise NDMC regarding design, cost and 
program to achieve the best value for money in terms of technology, quality 
and operational performance. Further, at any stage during the execution of 
works, if it was felt that the work is not going as per the conceptual/re-
development plan already approved by NDMC, the Council will have a right to 
intervene for corrective measures and decision will be binding on EIL. Given 
the higher escalation in cost involved, EIL should have referred the adoption 
of Diaphragm Wall technology to NDMC for acceptance before execution of 
the work.
2.1.6 Conclusion
The over-arching objective of the project was to restore the architectural and 
heritage character of CP while at the same time facilitating and easing traffic 
and pedestrian movement to improve the overall ambience and experience 
of the visitors to this premier commercial centre in the national capital. This 
objective could not be achieved.  The scope of the project as envisaged in the 
original DPR was drastically reduced from ` 615.20 crore to ` 477.02 crore. 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
42
Even after delay ranging upto over four years in completion of the contracted 
works, restoration of the façade was completed only in the outer and inner 
circles while study to ascertain the structural stability of the buildings was not 
carried out. Facilities like subways, escalators, underground parking space 
and improvement of landscaping and lighting intended to ease both traffic and 
pedestrian movement and improve visitors’ experience were not completed. 
Further, expenditure amounting to ` 14.67 crore was rendered unfruitful while 
extra expenditure of ` 3.38 crore was incurred in flooring of corridors and 
providing of kerbs. The efficacy of augmentation of fire-fighting capabilities 
done at a cost of ` 4.97 crore could not be assured in audit. The project is yet 
to be formally declared complete and accounts were yet to be closed (March 
2016).
The matter was earlier referred to the Government and NDMC in September 
2015 and again in May 2016; their replies were awaited (16 August 2016).

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
43
Directorate of Information and Publicity
2.2  Advertisement and Publicity Campaigns of the Government of National   
     Capital Territory of Delhi
Test check of records of GNCTD brought out expenditure of ` 24.29 crore 
on advertisements and publicity campaigns that were not in conformity 
with the fundamental principles governing expenditure from public 
funds and the guidelines approved by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Over 
85 per cent  of expenditure of ` 33.40 crore incurred in one specific 
publicity campaign pertained to advertisements released outside the NCT 
of Delhi which was beyond the responsibility of the GNCTD. Establishment 
of Shabdarth as a dedicated agency to handle advertisements and 
publicity campaigns of GNCTD did not result in any cost benefit. There 
was neither any prior assessment of necessary visibility or outreach nor 
any post campaign impact assessment. Weak expenditure controls and 
internal controls provided no assurance as to the comprehensiveness and 
accuracy of the expenditure incurred or liabilities created. 
The Directorate of Information and Publicity (DIP) is responsible for informing 
and publicizing the programs, policies and activities of the Government of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) and looks after the publicity 
requirements of all its departments. As per guidelines for empanelment of 
newspapers/journals issued by DIP on 7 June 2007, all heads of departments 
have full powers to sanction expenditure at prescribed rates of Directorate of 
Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) or DIP.  However, they have to take 
administrative approval of the Hon’ble Chief Minister or authorities authorized 
by him and then get financial concurrence of Finance Department for incurring 
expenditure for advertisements at DIP’s ‘special rates’ i.e. commercial rates. 
The guidelines reiterate existing instructions that all display ad-creatives 
in print and outdoor media and jingles or spots in radio or TV need prior 
approval of the Hon’ble Chief Minister before they are released. On 30 March 
2015, DIP issued instructions that the designs are required to be put up to the 
Deputy Chief Minister through the Director Information & Publicity or the 
Principal Secretary (Public Relations) to the Deputy Chief Minister. In June 
2015, the Delhi Government set up ‘Shabdarth’ as a society under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860, that became the advertising agency through which all 
government advertisements were routed. 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court, in its judgement dated 13 May 2015, approved 
the ‘Guidelines on Content Regulation of Government Advertising’ with a 
view to preventing arbitrary use of public funds for advertising without any 
attendant public interest. The apex Court enunciated five principles of content 

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
44
regulation viz. (a) advertising campaigns should be related to government 
responsibilities, (b) advertisement material should be presented in an objective, 
fair and accessible manner and be designed to meet the objectives of the 
campaign, (c) advertisement materials should be objective and not directed 
at promoting political interests of ruling party, (d) advertisement campaigns 
should be justified and undertaken in an efficient and cost-effective manner, 
and (e) government advertising must comply with legal requirements and 
financial regulations and procedures.
In pursuance of the directions of the Hon’ble Court, the Union Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting instructed all Ministries/agencies on 20 May 
2015 to issue suitable directions to take note of all aspects of the judgement 
for compliance. DIP uploaded the Court’s judgement on its website. GNCTD 
subsequently issued a circular on 3 August 2016 circulating the guidelines 
on content regulation approved by the Supreme Court for reference by all 
departments/autonomous bodies/corporations. 
In order to ascertain whether expenditure on publicity and advertisements was 
being incurred economically, efficiently and effectively in accordance with 
general principles of financial propriety, audit test checked the records of DIP 
relating to advertisements released during the period from 1 April 2013 to 31 
March 2016.  In addition, audit selected five other departments
2 as well as 
the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) on the basis of number of advertisements released 
for audit scrutiny. The guidelines and principles approved by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court were adopted as the benchmark for assessing and evaluating 
the expenditure incurred.  
2.2.1 Budget and Expenditure
During the period 2013-15, DIP met the expenditure on advertisements out 
of the budget allotted under the head ‘Other Charges’ viz. ` 29.66 crore in 
2013-14 and ` 20.23 crore in 2014-15. There was no allocation under the head 
‘Advertisement and Publicity’.  For the budget of 2015-16, DIP proposed an 
allocation of ` 26.90 crore which included ` 20 crore for ‘Other Charges’ 
and the balance for salary and other recurring expenditure. However, DIP 
was allocated ` 500 crore under the head ‘Advertisement and Publicity’ 
and ` 22 crore under the head ‘Other Charges’ totaling ` 522 crore. This 
allocation was subsequently reduced to ` 100 crore in the Revised Estimates. 
2  Department of Education, Department of Environment, Department of Transport, Department of 
Health & Family Welfare and Public Works Department.

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
45
The Budget (Revised Estimates) and expenditure on advertisements during 
2013-16 is in Table 2.2.1.
Table 2.2.1: Budget and Expenditure for Advertisement and Publicity
(` in crore)
Year Budget 
(Revised Estimates)
Expenditure
DIP Other  
Departments
Total DIP Other  
Departments
Total
2013-14 29.66 26.48 56.14 25.25 22.49 47.74
2014-15 20.23 21.65 41.88 11.12 16.31 27.43
2015-16 122.00 12.11 134.11 81.23 Not available
Note: 1. Figures have been sourced from Detailed Demand for Grants under 
the head ‘Advertisement and Publicity’. Actual figure may be higher 
than that shown in the table as other departments had also incurred 
advertisement expenditure from other heads such as Office Expenses, 
Projects, Schemes, Programs, etc.
2. Figures of other departments include expenditure on publication of 
tenders, notices, etc. also.
3. Expenditure of DIP for 2015-16 also includes expenditure on tender and 
other notices.
4. RE for 2015-16 under DIP includes Other Charges of ` 22 crore.
Scrutiny of expenditure registers revealed that apart from the expenditure of 
` 81.23 crore by DIP, a further amount of ` 20.23 crore was paid by DIP in 
2016-17 for advertisements released in 2015-16 bringing the total expenditure 
on advertisements released during 2015-16 to ` 101.46 crore. DIP informed 
audit that there was also a committed liability of approximately ` 12.75 crore 
in respect of audio-visual advertisements released during 2015-16. The details 
of committed liability in respect of print and outdoor media were not provided 
by DIP though requested for. Thus, the actual cost of advertisements released 
during 2015-16 may go beyond ` 114.21 crore.  
2.2.2 Content of publicity material
2.2.2.1 Projecting personality/party in publicity campaigns
The Guidelines on Content Regulation of Government Advertising stipulate 
that advertisement material should be objective and not directed at promoting 
political interests of the ruling party. It further stipulates that government 
advertising shall maintain political neutrality and avoid glorification of political 
personalities and projecting a positive impression of the party in power or 
a negative impression of parties critical of the government. It adds that 
advertisement material must not mention the party in government by name or 
include party political symbol, logo or flag.  

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
46
Test check of advertisements and television clips (Annexure) brought out the 
following: 
(i) DIP approved in June 2015 the telecast of a TV clip of 120 seconds 
duration in 14 news channels for a period of seven days from 16 June 
2015 at a cost of ` 1.74 crore. In the same month, DIP approved another 
TV clip to inform the general public about increase in the Education 
Budget, the Education Loan Guarantee Scheme for students in Delhi and 
the concern of the government for education. This TV clip of 90 seconds 
was approved to be telecast on 18 news channels from 9 July 2015 for 
a period of seven days with 60 spots a day. The period of telecast of 
this TV clip was extended for 10 more days i.e. up to 25 July 2015 
and two more news channels were added to the previously approved 18 
channels. The total expenditure incurred on telecast of this TV clip was 
` 5.38 crore. Both these TV clips referred to the “Delhi Government” 
as “Kejriwal Sarkar” and refers specifically to “Kejriwal” at a number 
of places attributing achievements of the Government to his personal 
endeavors. 
(ii) During August and September 2015, DIP launched a media campaign 
through 13 creatives displayed at sites like bus queue shelters, public 
utilities/garbage dumps, unipoles, bill boards, railway bridges, inside 
metro trains, media screens and rent free sites.  Audit observed that all 
the creatives included the caption line “Kejriwal Sarkar ke 6 mahine” 
(six months of Kejriwal government). The records relating to payments 
made to only three out of the 23 agencies were made available to audit. 
An amount of ` 95.51 lakh was sanctioned to these three agencies. The 
total expenditure incurred on this campaign could not be worked out as 
records of payments made/due to the remaining 20 agencies were not 
made available to audit. 
(iii) Government approved (12 February 2016) publishing of advertorials 
(two full pages each on 14, 15, 16 and 17 February 2016) in 26 national 
newspapers and 37 regional newspapers in 14 States. Nine TV clips 
were also approved for telecast on 89 TV channels including regional 
language channels of other States as well as seven radio jingles for 
broadcast on seven FM channels.  The TV clips were telecast for seven 
days between 15 February and 1 March 2016 and radio jingles were 
broadcast between 13 and 19 February 2016. The total expenditure 
incurred on the campaign was ` 33.40 crore. Test check of expenditure 
of ` 15.50 crore brought out the following:
(a) In the advertorial published in ‘Dainik Jagran’ in different editions 
from 30 cities on 14 February 2016, the text of the article read ‘Aam  
Admi Party Sarkar ne shiksha ke budget ko doguna kar racha itihaas’ 
(Aam Admi Party Government made history by doubling the budget 
for education);

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
47
(b) In the advertorials published in ‘Hindustan Times’ on 14 to 17 Feb-
ruary 2016, Delhi Government was almost invariably referred to as 
‘AAP Government’ or simply ‘AAP’;
(c) ‘Daily Excelsior’ of 29 February and 1 March 2016, a newspaper 
published from Jammu, carried the heading of the page, as - ‘First 
year success of AAP Government’;
(d) Similarly, the advertorial released in February 2016 contained critical 
comments on the Central Government and other State Governments. 
The advertorial alleged that Central Government misused govern-
ment machinery and an agency to suppress financial irregularities  
committed by them while the same agency was used to implicate 
Delhi Government and the office of the Chief Minister;
(e) One TV clip shows a person in a group of people waving a broom 
which is the political symbol of a political party while the display 
on the screen in Hindi says “Yeh hai AAP ki Sarkar, Pehla Saal 
Bemissal.” The caption (slogan) is written in Hindi except the word 
“AAP” which is in English. It also shows a procession with a banner 
displaying “Aam Admi Party”. The term “AAP” evidently signifies 
the political party;
(f) In another TV clip, improvement in the education in Government 
schools was claimed to have been brought about by “Kejriwal Sarkar;”
(g) In two other TV clips, Delhi Government was referred to as “Kejri-
wal Sarkar;”
(h) Another TV clip refers to specific achievements of “Aam Admi 
Sarkar” and reference is made to hurdles faced by the government 
and seeks to project the Central Government and Delhi Police in a 
negative light; and 
(i) Similarly, radio jingles relating to educational facilities, compensa-
tion to farmers for crop damage, odd-even scheme, medicines and 
tests in government hospitals and reduction in electricity and water 
bills refer to “Kejriwal Sarkar”  
(iv) Further, as part of an advertisement campaign on “Safety of Women,” 
a TV clip of 105 seconds duration was telecast for seven days from 21 
to 27 July 2015 at a cost of ` 71.65 lakh which attempts to project the 
Central Government and the Delhi Police in a negative light as respon-
sible for “deteriorating law and order situation in Delhi.”
The expenditure incurred on the above advertisements and publicity campaigns 
that were not in conformity with the guidelines as brought out during the test 
check was `
 24.29 crore.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
48
The Directorate stated (July 2016) that the audit observation was subjective 
and that ‘Kejriwal Government’ was simply a nomenclature used by the public 
and the media to refer to the Delhi Government which was used for effective 
communication. It added that the expression ‘AAP Government’ refers to 
the ‘Delhi Government’ and is only about the achievements of the Delhi 
Government.  Regarding the negative comments, the Directorate cited various 
observations/remarks of Courts/media relating to crime against women and 
role of Delhi Police to assert that the law and order situation in Delhi had 
worsened.  Insofar as mention of the Central Government was concerned, the 
Directorate stated that it was a political issue between two legally constituted 
governments which was put before the public and there was no targeting of 
any other political party.  
Audit observed that advertisement and publicity campaigns that are funded from 
the public exchequer should be to inform the public of their rights, obligations 
and entitlements as well as to explain government policies, programs, services 
and initiatives. Advertisements that attribute the achievements of Delhi 
Government to personalities and include specific written, pictorial and visual 
reference to a political party or its symbol are evidently directed at promoting 
the political interests of a political party and were contrary to the fundamental 
principles governing expenditure from public funds as well as the guidelines 
approved by the apex Court. Content relating to other governments cannot 
be said to be politically neutral or free of political argument and partisan 
standpoint as they tended to project a positive impression of the party in power 
and a negative impression of parties critical of the government.
2.2.2.2 Non-verifiable content in advertisements
The Guidelines state that contents of advertisement must nable the recipients of 
the information to distinguish between facts and analysis and where information 
is presented as a fact, it should be accurate and verifiable.  Audit observed the 
following: 
(a) TV clips telecast in February 2016 asserted that three bridges were 
completed at a cost that was less than the estimates by about ` 350 crore. 
Audit requested the Public Works Department for details of the projects and 
expenditure incurred. However, no details were provided. In response to 
the draft report, Government stated (July 2016) that there was a saving of 
` 347 crore in construction of three bridges (Mangolpuri to Madhuban Chowk, 
Madhuban Chowk to Mukarba Chowk nd Prembari Pul to Azadpur) when 
compared to the sanctioned cost. Of these, one bridge had been completed on 
25 January 2016 while “minor items of work” were in progress in respect of the 
remaining two bridges. The remaining works included widening/strengthening 
of roads, construction of service road, footpath, drain, street lights, etc. The 
total expenditure projected was only an “assessment” and was not the actual 
expenditure incurred.  

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
49
 Audit observed that two of the three bridges were yet to be fully completed 
though they had been opened to traffic and the projected savings was 
admittedly based on an assessment and not on actual expenditure. The 
cost of the balance works were not informed to Audit. In the absence 
of the project records that detail the item-wise sanctioned cost and the 
expenditure actually incurred, Audit is unable to verify the accuracy of 
the savings asserted in the advertisements.
(b) One of the TV clips telecast in February 2016 also stated that earlier one 
dispensary used to be built at ` 5 crore whereas similar dispensary was 
now being built at cost of ` 20 lakh. However, the relevant file in DIP 
contained neither any evidence in support of the claim made in the TV 
clip nor any documents indicating that the contents were provided by the 
respective department.  In response to an audit query, the Directorate of 
Health Services (DHS) stated that no new dispensary was constructed 
during the year 2015-16. Thus, there was no basis for comparison of cost 
of dispensaries built earlier and those built now. As such, the claim relating 
to construction of dispensaries at a lower cost was not verifiable. 
2.2.2.3 Inclusion of photographs of Ministers in advertisements
The Guidelines stipulate that government 
advertisements should avoid photographs of 
political leaders and if it is felt essential for 
effective government messaging, only the 
photographs of the President/Prime Minister 
or Governor/Chief Minister should be used. 
Subsequently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court stated 
on 18 March 2016 in 
a review petition that 
in lieu of the photograph of the Chief Minister, the 
photograph of the departmental (Cabinet) Minister/
Minister in charge of the concerned Ministry may be 
published, if so desired. 
DIP released three advertisements on 31 March 2016 
in newspapers of Delhi regarding inauguration of Aam 
Aadmi Mohalla Clinics, inauguration of scheme to grow 
tree on the side of roads, opening of Ashram Loop Sun 
Dial Park, Sarai Kale Khan and loop at Silver Oak Park, 
Jungpura. Audit observed that photographs of Hon’ble Deputy Chief Minister 
and Hon’ble Minister (PWD) were included in the advertisements in addition to 
that of the Chief Minister. Since the guidelines envisaged display of photograph 
of either the Chief Minister or the Minister concerned in lieu of that of the 


Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
50
Chief Minister, inclusion of the photographs of Hon’ble Ministers in addition 
to that of the Hon’ble Chief Minister was contrary to the guidelines.
2.2.3 Identification of target population
One of the fundamental principles underlying the guidelines was that publicity 
and advertisement campaigns must serve specific objectives and the content of 
advertisements should be relevant to the government’s constitutional and legal 
obligations as well as the citizens’ rights and entitlements. This pre-supposes 
that the target audience/section of the society be identified and the campaign be 
tailored to target this identified population in the most cost effective manner. 
Audit observed that no such exercise had been undertaken while designing the 
campaign or selecting media. There was blanket coverage in print, electronic 
and outdoor media without any analysis of the visibility/outreach required. 
In smaller campaigns which include only one of the media, the selection of 
newspapers was made randomly except in one instance of chat shows aired 
on TV/radio in the year 2013-14. Selection of media without identifying the 
targeted audience or the visibility of media to such targeted audience provided 
no assurance as to the effectiveness of the advertisement campaigns. 
Further, the responsibility of a particular government is towards the public 
of that particular State/Union Territory. Out of the total expenditure of 
` 33.40 crore incurred on the publicity campaign cited in para 2.2.2.1(iii) 
above, ` 28.71 crore (86 per cent) was incurred in releasing advertisements 
outside NCT of Delhi as in Table 2.2.2 below.
Table 2.2.2: Details of Expenditure on advertisements in other States
(` in crore)
Media Newspapers/TV 
channels/Radio 
channels
Records  
provided in respect 
of payments made
Total  
expendi-
ture
Expenditure 
pertaining  
to Delhi
Expenditure 
pertaining 
to other 
States/Cities
Print 26 National news-  
papers and 37 
regional newspapers
11 National news-  
papers and 30 
regional newspapers
24.04 2.76 21.28
TV 3 agencies covering 
98 channels 
Two out of three  
agencies
7.86 1.30 6.56
Radio 7 7 1.50 0.63 0.87
Total 33.40 4.69 28.71
The actual figure is likely to be higher since this figure does not include 
expenditure on advertorials in 15 mainstream newspapers, seven regional 
newspapers and TV clips released through ‘Shabdarth.’
The Directorate stated (July 2016) that there was immense potential to 
promote tourism, trade and retail businesses in Delhi and generate large 

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
51
scale employment.  The achievements made in critical sectors such as health, 
education, water supply, etc. were highlighted to attract businesses, best talent, 
best doctors, best engineers and best teachers to the national capital. 
The reply is not tenable as the advertorials, TV clips and jingles depicted the 
achievements of the Delhi Government as that of a political party and the 
advertisements were not linked to GNCTD’s constitutional and legal obligations 
towards the citizenry of NCT of Delhi or of informing the populace of NCT 
Delhi of government schemes and initiatives.
2.2.4 Effectiveness of advertisements
The guidelines stipulate, inter alia, that it should be the policy of governments 
to use public funds in such a manner so as to obtain maximum value for 
taxpayers’ money. 
While releasing advertisements for telecast on TV channels under four 
advertisement campaigns
3 in May to July 2015, DIP stipulated that the clips 
should be telecast between 8.00 AM and 11.00 PM. Audit noted from the 
telecast certificates submitted by the agencies that some of the clips were 
telecast even before 7.00 AM though the total number of telecast per day was 
kept as mentioned in the release orders. Audit observed that viewership is 
likely to be lower during time slots before 7 AM thereby reducing their impact 
and cost effectiveness.  The expenditure incurred on these advertisements was 
` 29.64 lakh. 
The Directorate assured (July 2016) that the audit observation had been noted 
for future compliance.
2.2.5 Absence of post-campaign impact assessment
The guidelines provide that in case of large volume advertisement campaigns, 
post-campaign impact assessment is necessary to be included in the planning 
process itself which should identify the indicators to measure success when the 
campaign has ended. Audit scrutiny revealed that neither was post-campaign 
impact assessment included in the planning process for advertisement campaigns 
nor was it conducted after the advertisement campaigns were over.  
2.2.6 Setting up of ‘Shabdarth’
The proposal for the setting up of Shabdarth submitted to the Delhi Council of 
Ministers brought out that DIP was completely dependent on empaneled private 
advertising agencies which deprived the Delhi Government of the 15 per cent 
discount that is offered by the media since the discount was retained by the 
3 Advertisement campaigns on Electricity tariff, Women Safety, Increase in Education Budget and 
Completion of 100 days of Delhi Government.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
52
agencies. It proposed that the agency may be allowed to retain 5 per cent of 
the discount to meet its expenses and become self-sustaining and Government 
can still avail of 10 per cent discount. It was also proposed that a loan of  
` 50 lakh may be provided to Shabdarth to meet its set up and operational 
expenses which was to be repaid in five years. 
The Cabinet approved (16 April 2015) the setting up of Shabdarth with the 
change that the entire 15 per cent is count may be retained by Shabdarth and 
the ` 50 lakh be given as a one-time grant instead of loan. 
Shabdarth subsequently commenced functioning from August 2015 under the 
chairmanship of the Minister in charge of Information and Publicity of NCT 
of Delhi. It was provided space and office facilities in the DIP building.  The 
Memorandum of Association of Shabdarth stated, inter alia, that its objective 
was “Publications and production of print, outdoor TV/radio/other electronics 
productions and creatives pertaining to the activities, policies, programs and 
achievements of GNCTD and its communications with citizens.
Audit observed that the changes from the proposal approved by the Council 
of Ministers allowing Shabdarth to retain 15 per cent discount negated the 
financial benefit that had been put forward in the proposal as justification for 
the establishment of the society. 
Audit further noted that at a meeting chaired by Secretary (Public Relations)/
DIP on 9 February 2016 with marketing representatives of mainstream print 
media relating to the publicity campaign that was to be launched in that 
month, the newspapers were instructed to submit drafts of the advertorial 
for approval of the competent authority. Subsequently, DIP released ` 24.04 
crore to Shabdarth for the advertorials that were published in 26 national 
and 37 regional newspapers from 14 to 17 February 2016. This included a 
discount of ` 4.04 crore to Shabdarth in respect of 11 national and 30 regional 
newspapers. Bills of remaining newspapers were not made available to Audit. 
The bills submitted by the newspapers provided for a discount of 15 per cent. 
However, Shabdarth added the discount back in the bills submitted by it to 
DIP. Since the work of designing and creatives were done in this instance 
by the respective newspapers, there was no justification for payment through 
Shabdarth and for the society to avail of the discount.    
The Directorate stated (July 2016) that Shabdarth performed all activities 
relating to release, billing and payment for advertisements. It added that even 
if the Directorate had released the advertisements, it would not have saved 
commission as it was between newspapers and the agency. The reply is not 
tenable as the agency discount in this case would have been available to DIP 
had it released the advertorials directly to newspapers.

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
53
2.2.7 Lack of budgetary control 
GFR provides that due approvals of the competent authority should be 
obtained before incurring expenditure. This involves making an estimate of 
the expenditure which should be apprised to the sanctioning authority in order 
to enable him to accord an informed sanction. DIP issued instructions on 
30 March 2015 to all departments to include the estimated total cost of the 
campaign, cost break up, discount offered by the agencies, etc. while seeking 
approval of the competent authority for advertisements to be released.
Examination of records in DIP revealed that proposals relating to eight 
advertisement campaigns involving an expenditure of ` 33.46 crore were 
submitted to and approved by the competent authority during 2015-16 though 
their estimated cost were not worked out nor brought out in the proposal 
submitted to the competent authority. Thus, there was no way for the 
competent authority to know the quantum of expenditure being authorized nor 
any mechanism to ensure availability of sufficient funds to meet the liability. 
Similarly, Directorate of Higher Education (DHE) and Directorate Health 
Services also accorded approval for advertisements without the availability 
of estimated cost. The actual expenditure by these two Departments was 
` 27.02 lakh in 10 cases and ` 1.05 crore in 11 cases respectively during 
2013-15.
Releasing advertisements without assessing the expenditure involved violated 
the fundamental norms of expenditure control and amounted to creating 
liabilities without reference to budget allocations or funds availability. 
The Directorate stated (July 2016) that budgetary allocation was always kept in 
mind before releasing advertisements. It added that DIP had reiterated Standard 
Operating Procedures in June 2016 to all departments/autonomous bodies/
corporations of GNCTD to include the estimated cost of each advertisement 
in the proposal for administrative approval. However, the fact remained that 
proposals involving expenditure of ` 34.78 crore was submitted and approved 
without the competent authority being apprised of the financial implications 
and expenditure outgo of the proposal. 
2.2.8 Lack of internal control
Internal controls are safeguards that are put in place by the management of 
an organization to provide assurance that its operations are proceeding as 
planned. These are also designed to provide reasonable assurance that the 
entity’s general objectives are being achieved. Reasonable assurance provided 
by such internal controls strengthens accountability of public authorities. Audit 
noticed general weaknesses in maintenance of records as detailed below:

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
54
a) Improper maintenance of Registers: DIP maintains a year-wise 
Advertisement Register for print media advertisements published through 
different advertisement agencies. The register contains columns viz. DIP 
No., name of newspapers, type of advertisement (display/classified/
tender notice/public notice) and name/address of the department. DIP also 
maintains an Expenditure Register for print media for payment of bills 
raised by advertisement agencies against the advertisement published, in 
which details of payments such as file number, occasion, issued by, name 
of firm/newspapers, bill number and date, amount, etc. are recorded. 
Audit observed that there was no link between the two registers in the 
absence of which Audit could not ascertain whether payment against all 
the advertisements released during a year had been made and whether 
there remained any outstanding liability.
b) Non-maintenance of registers for outdoor campaigns and audio visual 
media: DIP was not maintaining any release order register for outdoor 
media and electronic media advertisements although an expenditure 
register was being maintained in which payment details are recorded. As 
a result, the number of advertisements released and whether bills against 
advertisements released had been received and payments made there 
against could not be ascertained. 
The Directorate stated (July 2016) that in most of the instances, due to paucity 
of time, it was not viable to ascertain the estimated cost of advertisements.  
Further, the Directorate is fully aware of the budget and did not exceed 
the budget allocation. The reply is not tenable as such registers constitute 
primary instruments necessary for effective internal control and monitoring of 
expenditure and their improper or non-maintenance is fraught with the risk of 
double payments.
2.2.9 Conclusion
Advertisements and publicity campaigns funded from the public exchequer 
should be related to the Government’s responsibilities and be explicitly 
directed at informing the public of the State/Union Territory concerned of the 
government’s policies, programs, services and initiatives. Test check brought 
out that expenditure of ` 24.29 crore was incurred on advertisements and 
publicity campaigns that were not in conformity with the generally accepted 
principles of financial propriety or the guidelines on content regulation approved 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Over 85 per cent of expenditure of ` 33.40 
crore incurred in one specific publicity campaign pertained to advertisements 
released outside the NCT of Delhi which was beyond the responsibility of the 
GNCTD. There was no prior exercise to identify target audiences or necessary 
visibility or outreach nor was there any post-campaign impact assessment. 

Chapter-II : Compliance Audit
55
While Shabdarth was established with the stated objective of economizing 
expenditure on advertisements, this was not achieved. Lastly, non-adherence 
to extant instructions relating to inclusion of cost estimates in proposals for 
release of advertisements/publicity campaigns while seeking approval of the 
competent authority coupled with improper or non-maintenance of necessary 
registers undermined expenditure control and provided no assurance as to the 
comprehensiveness and accuracy of the expenditure incurred and liabilities 
created on advertisements and publicity. 
The matter was referred to the Government on 8 July 2016; their reply to the 
report was awaited (16 August 2016).
 New Delhi
 Dated : 21 August 2016
(DOLLY CHAKRABARTY)
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Delhi
New Delhi
Dated : 22 August 2016
(SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Countersigned

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
57
Annexure

Chapter-I : Performance Audit
57
Annexure
Extract of contents of advertisements/snapshots from TV clips
(Referred to in Paragraph 2.2.2.1)
Paragraph 2.2.2.1(i)
(a) TV Clip telecast in June 2015
A voice in the background says - “Roj TV dekhte hai to aisa lagta hai jaise 
saare beiman ikatthe ho gaye. Kejriwal ke haath dhokar peechhey pade hai” 
(While watching TV daily, it seems that all dishonest people have joined 
together and are after ‘Kejriwal’) and prays - “ Roz Bhagwan se dua mangti 
hoon, Bhagwan hamare Arvind ko salamat rakhen” (Every day I pray to God 
to keep ‘our Arvind’ safe).
(b) TV Clip telecast in July 2015
“Bhrastachariyon ki sajishon ke bawzood, ‘Kejriwal Sarkar’ ne racha itihaas,” 
(despite conspiracy hatched by corrupt, Kejriwal Government made history) 
and “Ye hai Kejriwal Sarkar ka vada, jo kaha vo kiya”(This is the promise of 
Kejriwal Government, as said as done).
Paragraph 2.2.2.1(iii) (d) 
Extracts from advertorial appeared in ‘Daily Excelsior’ dated 1 March 
2016 
Officers harassed, CBI misused to cripple governance
(First four paragraphs of the advertisement are reproduced below)
‘‘In a blatant misuse of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), BJP lead Central 
Government unleashed the agency (CBI) on the AAP ruled Delhi Government 
apparently to protect Finance Minister Arun Jaitley who was at the centre of 
a row over alleged financial irregularities in the Delhi and District Cricket 
Association.
Around 9 AM, on December 15, CBI officials walked into the Delhi Secretariat 
and after nearly 20 minutes, the investigators were in the office of the Delhi 
Chief Minister’s Principal Secretary Rajender Kumar which is situated in the 
premises of the CMO.  The CBI sleuths sealed the entire floor.  
What was shocking in all was the fact that when the CBI was so active in 
raiding the office of the Delhi Chief Minister, there was a conspicuous silence 
on some other important cases like Vyapam in BJP ruled Madhya Pradesh and 
Lalitgate in Rajasthan in which BJP Chief Minister and some RSS members 
are believed to be involved.

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
58
The CBI proceeded and acted with unprecedented haste for the obvious reasons 
under undue political pressure.  So far the agency has not been able to explain 
the relevance of the documents pertaining to Delhi Government which are 
totally unrelated for the purpose of investigating either before the trial court or 
before the high court but were seized indiscriminately by the CBI on December 
15, 2015 from the office of the Chief Minister under the garb of search 
warrants.  It is also pertinent to mention that CBI could not file any FIR 
against Kumar and released him after several hours of questioning for three 
days.’’
Paragraph 2.2.2.1(iii)(e) 
Snapshots from TV clips telecast in February 2016
(i)  A person waving a broom which is the symbol of a political party
(ii)  Caption displayed in a TV clip
(iii)  Procession with a banner saying ‘Aam Admi Party’


Chapter-I : Performance Audit
59
Paragraph 2.2.2.1(iii) (h)
TV clips telecast in February 2016 
A voice in the background says 
“Lekin unhone adchane lagaane me koi kasar nahi chhodi” (But they did not 
spare any efforts to create hurdles) and show a procession of people carrying 
a placard displaying “Outraged - Brutality by Delhi Police”.
The clip also contained comments as:
“Kendra Sarkar ne central force bhej kar Dilli Sarkar ki Anti-Corruption 
Branch par kabza kiya.  Mukhyamantri ke daftar par CBI ke chhape dalvaye”
(Central Government took over Anti-Corruption Branch of Delhi Government 
by sending Central Forces. Got CM’s office raided by CBI).
Paragraph 2.2.2.1(iv)
TV clips telecast in February 2016
A voice says that 
•	 "Abhi kuchh din pehle Dilli me ek ladki ko sare aam 32 bar chakoo se 
god-god kar mar dala gaya” (Just few days back, a girl was publicly 
stabbed 32 times and murdered in Delhi).
•	 "Main aur Manish us ladki ke parivaar walo se milne gaye thhe" (I and 
Manish met the family of the girl).
•	 "wahan par log bahut dare hue hain. Unka kehna hai ki roz door door 
kahin bhi police dikhaayi nahi deti” (People there are frightened and say 
that police is not seen anywhere near the place).
•	 "Dilli me is kism ki ghatnayen lagataar badhti ja rahi hain" (In Delhi, 
such incidents are increasing continually).
•	 "Kanoon vyavasthha charmara gayee hai" (The law and order have col-
lapsed).
•	 "Khaastor par mahilayaen apne aapko bahut asurakshhit mahsoos karne 
lagi hai" (Especially women feel insecure).
This was followed by an appeal to the Prime Minister as:
“Main desh ke Pradhanmantri se hath jodkar appeal karna chahta hoon. Sir, 
aap to jaante hain, Dilli Police par Dilli Sarkar ka kisi tarah ka koi control 
nahi hai. Kanoonan Dilli Police seedhe aapke under me aati hai. Aap uske 
liye bilkul time nahi de pa rahe hain. Aap to desh ke Pradhanmantri hain. 
Aapko poora desh sambhana hai, isliye Dilli Police poori tarah se nirankush 
ho chuki hai, us pe kisi ka control nahi bacha hai. Sir, aisa nahi hai ki police 
wale kharaab hain, unkaa system hi kharaab hai. Vo log to khud bahut dukhi 
Annexure

Audit Report-Social Sector (Non-PSUs) for the year ended 31 March 2016
60
hain. Sir, meri aap se ek chhoti si vinti hai. Vinamra vinti hai, ya to aap har 
haphte kam se kam ek ghanta Dilli ki kanoon vyavastha ke liye nikala keejiye. 
Dilli Police ki javab dehi tay kiya keejiye. Yaa phir Dilli Police ka control 
aap hamein de dee jiye, janta ke sath milkar hum Dilli Police ki vyavastha ko 
thheek karenge. Aur haan, jahan Meenashi ka katal hua thha, Anand Parvat 
pe, vahan ke log bahut dare hue hain. Please, vahan par police ka uchit 
bandobast kara deejiye.Shukriya”.
(I wish to appeal to the Prime Minister of the country with folded hands. Sir, 
as you know, Delhi Government has no control over Delhi Police. As per law, 
Delhi Police directly falls under you but you are unable to give time for Delhi 
Police. You are the Prime Minister of India and you have to take care of the 
whole nation and therefore, the Delhi Police is totally out of control. It is not 
that the police personnel are incompetent, but the system is not good. They are 
unhappy themselves. Sir, I have a small request that either you devote at least 
one hour for law and order in Delhi and fix responsibility of Delhi Police or 
hand over control of Delhi Police to us. We will rectify the system of Delhi 
Police in cooperation with the people. And yes, please arrange police presence 
in Anand Parbat area where Meenakshi was murdered as the people are very 
frightened. Thank you).