Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India

for the year ended March 2011

%
%
z
g
a
g
8

Wy

Union Government (Civil)
Compliance Audit Observations
No. 13 of 2012-13



Disbursement of National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) Wages through Post
Offices

Stocking of cash certificates, stamps and _ postal 2.3 22
stationery

Short deduction of commission on purchase of revenue 2.5 27
stamps
Infructuous expenditure due to delay in construction of 2.6 29
postal complex

Department of Telecommunications

Functioning of DoT 2.7 32
Recovery of excess subsidy paid at the instance of 2.8 38
Audit
Performance of Consular wings | 3.1 | 40

Recovery at the instance of Audit | 3.2 | 54



Failure to observe the prescribed rules and procedures
leading to overpayments

Non-application of due diligence in awarding of a
contract

55

Overpayments due to weak internal controls

56

Non-pursuance of a claim for eligible discount on bulk
booking of speed post fees

56

Splitting up of sanctions

Improper procurement planning leading to delay in
execution of a project and idling of equipment

Recovery of Workers’ Welfare Cess at the instance of
Audit

Corrective action at the instance of Audit

Non-recovery of rental dues



Andaman and Nicobar Administration

Directorate of Shipping Services

Loss due to delay in disposal of a decommissioned po | ” |
vessel

Avoidable expenditure on an outlived vessel

| Lakshadweep Administration

Procurement of X-ray Baggage Inspection Systems

Recovery of an amount of excess release of grants, at
the instance of Audit

Irregular release of Central share under the Integrated
Child Protection Scheme

Follow-up on Audit Reports

Response of the Ministries/Departments to draft
paragraphs

Details of Revenue realisation and Revenue expenditure

जा ||Amount of non/short deposit of One Time Deposits by State
authorities as on 31 March 2011

30 September 2011

Number and amount of unrealized NREGS cheques as on | 87

iii


Number and amount of dishonoured NREGS cheques as on
30 September2011

Vv Statement showing overstocking of Cash Certificates in | |
CSDs and HPOs as on 31 March 2011

Statement showing overstocking of stamps and postal pe
stationery in CSDs as on 31 March 2011

| Short levy of Business Visa Fees | 93
Non-levy of additional fees for the Indian Community 95
Welfare Fund

Details of passports, visas, OCI cards, PIO cards and other 97

services provided by various Indian Missions/Posts in USA
during May 2010 to March 2011 where ICWF charges were

not levied
XIL Delays in remittance of fees | 9 |
Recoveries effected in respect of Missions/Posts at the |

instance of audit

XVI || Chronology of events leading up to the construction of staff 103
quarters

Details of theatres discontinued and closed down

Summarised position of Action Taken Notes awaited fro
various Ministries/Departments up to the year ended Marc!
2011 as of March 2012



PREFACE

This Report for the year ended March 2011 has been prepared for submission
to the President under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.

The Report contains findings emerging out of compliance audit of financial
transactions of Civil Ministries.

The cases mentioned in this Report are among those which came to notice
during the course of audit in 2010-11. However, matters relating to earlier
years which could not be included in the previous Reports and matters relating
to the period subsequent to 2010-11 have also been included, wherever
considered necessary.



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

ERVIEW

This Report contains significant audit findings which arose from the
compliance audit of the financial transactions of Civil Ministries. It contains
12 chapters. Chapter I gives a brief introduction while Chapters II to XI
present detailed audit observations. Chapter XII presents a summarised
position of the Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries.

Some of the important findings included in this Report are given below :

Ministry of Communications and Information Technology

Department of Posts

Disbursement of National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(NREGS) Wages through Post Offices

With 4.90 crore NREGS accounts in operation, the Department of Posts
provides a large network for disbursement of wages under NREGS. A
significant amount of हैं 4284 crore was lying in workers’ accounts as on
March 2011. Weak monitoring mechanisms, both at the Headquarters and
Circle levels, along with non-observance of procedures in post offices,
resulted in a shortfall to the tune of € 1920 lakh as on 31 March 2011 in One
Time Deposits required to be made by State Governments with Head Post
Offices. Irregularities in the operation of NREGS accounts such as delays in
disbursement of wages, opening of accounts without verification, incomplete
data entry in ledgers, errors in data compilation, interest not credited and
wages being disbursed without attestation of left hand thumb impressions of
illiterate wage earners were also noticed.

Paragraph 2.2
Stocking of cash certificates, stamps and postal stationery

The Department of Posts failed to follow the prescribed procedure for
indenting and forecasting of cash certificates, stamps and postal stationery.
This, coupled with a weak internal control mechanism, resulted in
overstocking of cash certificates bearing face value of % 3840.66 crore and
overstocking of stamps and postal stationery carrying face value of % 498.52
crore as on 31 March 2011, thereby exposing these valuables to the risk of
misuse/pilferage and damage.

Paragraph 2.3

vii


Report No 13 of 2012-13
Irregular payment of interest

Post offices in six circles failed to follow the provisions relating to the Public
Provident Fund (PPF) Scheme, resulting in irregular payment of interest of
% 2.26 crore to the subscribers.

Paragraph 2.4

Short deduction of commission on purchase of revenue stamps

Failure of the Chief Post Master General, Delhi to deduct commission in
advance on purchase of revenue stamps from the State Government, led to
short realization of revenue to the extent of € 98.36 lakh.

Paragraph 2.5

Infructuous expenditure due to delay in construction of postal complex

Department of Posts failed to construct a postal complex on a plot acquired in
1990. This resulted in infructuous expenditure of = 64.62 lakh.

Paragraph 2.6

Department of Telecommunications
Recovery of excess subsidy paid at the instance of Audit

Subsidy of % 2.17 crore to service providers for Rural Community Phones
(RCP) was incorrectly paid by West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh (East) circles.
Of this, हैं 1.62 crore was recovered at the instance of Audit.

Paragraph 2.8

Ministry of External Affairs

Performance of Consular wings

A number of Missions and Posts were not levying fees for visas and other
consular services as per the rates prescribed by the Ministry, resulting in short
levy of % 37.26 crore. Delays in the implementation of the Indian Community
Welfare Fund scheme by the Missions and Posts resulted in non-levy of fees
of € 21.55 crore. There were considerable delays in remittances of consular
receipts in the Government account. Missions abroad were outsourcing visa
services in violation of the laid down provisions, resulting in financial
impropriety and lack of transparency in selecting service providers.

Paragraph 3.1

viii


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Failure to observe the prescribed rules and procedures leading to
overpayments

Failure of the Missions/Posts abroad to observe the prescribed rules and
procedures led to overpayment of pay and allowances and other miscellaneous
payments amounting to हैं 91.96 lakh by 56 Missions in 263 cases. These were
recovered at the instance of Audit during 2009-11.

Paragraph 3.2.1
Non-application of due diligence in awarding of a contract

Lack of due diligence in evaluation of bids for setting up an IT Laboratory in
Indonesia led to awarding of a contract at an extra amount of % 51.67 lakh on
account of unwarranted Annual Maintenance Charges and exempted Value
Added Tax. At the instance of Audit, the Mission recovered हैं 30.56 lakh and
payment of f 21.11 lakh was averted.

Paragraph 3.2.2
Ministry of Home Affairs
Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force
Splitting up of sanctions

The Director General, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force accorded 19 split
sanctions between June 2010 and March 2011 for an aggregate value of हैं 4.72
crore. Each sanction was limited within the financial powers of हैं 25 lakh,
purportedly to avoid the necessity of referring the matter to the Ministry.

Paragraph 4.1
Intelligence Bureau

Improper procurement planning leading to delay in execution of a project
and idling of equipment

Failure of the Intelligence Bureau to synchronize various related activities for
commissioning of the Intelnet Network before going in for procurement of
encryptors led to idling of equipment worth हैं 2.89 crore for a period of two
years.

Paragraph 4.2



Report No 13 of 2012-13
Inordinate delay in construction of staff quarters

TInordinate delay in the construction of staff quarters by the Subsidiary
Intelligence Bureau, Lucknow led to cost escalation of € 2.17 crore. This also
resulted in avoidable expenditure of हैं 86.59 lakh towards payment of House
Rent Allowance to its staff members.

Paragraph 4.3

Ministry of Human Resource Development
Department of Higher Education

Corrective action at the instance of Audit

The Ministry failed to follow the extant rules and extended a loan of € 100
crore to the IIT Madras Research Park at an interest rate of three per cent
instead of the applicable 11.5 per cent. At the instance of Audit, the Ministry
took corrective action to change the rate of interest, thereby averting a loss of
₹ 46.75 crore.

Paragraph 5.1

Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
Non-recovery of rental dues

Films Division, Mumbai failed to recover rental charges amounting to हैं 60.73
lakh from discontinued and closed down exhibitors.

Paragraph 6.1

Union Territories

Andaman and Nicobar Administration

Directorate of Shipping Services

Loss due to delay in disposal of a decommissioned vessel

Delay in initiating timely action and consequential delay in fixing the
appropriate reserve price of an outlived vessel resulted in avoidable
expenditure of € 6.29 crore.

Paragraph 8.1

Avoidable expenditure on an outlived vessel

Ineffective co-ordination and follow-up by the Andaman and Nicobar
Administration led to delay in surrendering an outlived vessel and
consequential avoidable expenditure of % 3.69 crore.

Paragraph 8.2



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Lakshadweep Administration

Procurement of X-ray Baggage Inspection Systems

Failure of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration to synchronize
the supply, installation and commissioning of two X-ray baggage inspection
systems with creation of the necessary infrastructure, resulted in non-
achievement of the objective of strengthening the safety and security of
passengers, despite incurring रैं 61 lakh on the purchase of the systems.

Paragraph 8.3
Ministry of Women and Child Development
Recovery of an amount of excess release of grants, at the instance of Audit

Failure of the Ministry to exercise due diligence while releasing grants to the
State Governments resulted in excess release of %3.45 crore. This was
subsequently recovered at the instance of Audit.

Paragraph 9.1

Irregular release of Central share under the Integrated Child Protection
Scheme

The Ministry of Women and Child Development released grants twice,
totalling %1.08 crore under two Central schemes viz the Programme for
Juvenile Justice in February 2008 and the Integrated Child Protection Scheme
in December 2010, for construction of two observation homes at Ambala and
Hisar.

Paragraph 9.2
Department of Atomic Energy
Avoidable expenditure of % 3.32 crore

Failure of the Directorate of Purchase and Stores under the Department of
Atomic Energy in adhering to the purchase procedure and consequent delay in
finalising a purchase proposal within the validity period resulted in avoidable
expenditure of हैं 3.32 crore.

Paragraph 10.1

xi


| No 13 of 2012-13
Department of Space
Avoidable payment of demand charges

Failure of the ISRO Satellite Centre and ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and
Command Network to assess their power consumption needs accurately,
coupled with delays in taking action to reduce contracted demand resulted in
avoidable payment of € 3.72 crore on consumption of electricity.

Paragraph 11.1

xii



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Compliance audit refers to examination of transactions relating to expenditure,
receipts, assets and liabilities of audited entities to ascertain whether the
provisions of the Constitution of India, applicable laws, rules, regulations and
various orders and instructions issued by competent authorities are being
complied with. Compliance audit also includes an examination of the rules,
regulations, orders and instructions for their legality, adequacy, transparency,
propriety and prudence.

Audits are conducted on behalf of the Comptroller and Auditor General
(C&AG) as per the Auditing Standards! approved by him. These standards
prescribe the norms which the auditors are expected to follow in conduct of
audit and require reporting on individual cases of non-compliance and abuse,
as well as on weaknesses that exist in systems of financial management and
internal control. The findings of audit are expected to enable the executive to
take corrective action as also to frame policies and directives that will lead to
improved financial management of the organizations, thus, contributing to
better governance.

There are about 50 Ministries/independent Departments of the Union
Government excluding the Ministries of Railways and Defence. The gross
expenditure of these 50 Ministries and departments of the Government during
the last three years is given below:

@ in crore)

2008-09 % 31,59,075
2009-10 % 41,31,321
2010-11 % 40,37,399

In this Report, significant audit findings relating to nine
Ministries/Departments have been included in different chapters.

' www.cag.gov.in/html/auditing_standards.htm



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The authority for audit by the C&AG and reporting to the Parliament is
derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the Constitution of India respectively
and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1971. C&AG conducts audit of expenditure of
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India under Sections 137 and
17° of the C&AG’s (DPC) Act*. The principles and methodologies for
compliance audit are prescribed in the Regulations on Audit and Accounts,
2007, issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

The audit process starts with the assessment of risks in the
Ministry/Department as a whole and their various units, based on the
expenditure incurred, the criticality and complexity of their activities, the level
of delegated financial powers, their overall internal controls and concerns of
stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also considered in this exercise.
Based on this risk assessment, the frequency and extent of audit are decided.
An annual audit plan is formulated to conduct audit on the basis of such risk
assessments.

After completion of the audit of the units, Inspection Reports, containing the
audit findings are issued to the heads of the units. The units are requested to
furnish replies to these findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection
Reports. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are settled or further
action for compliance is advised. Important audit observations arising out of
these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports,
which are submitted to the President of India under Article 151 of the
Constitution of India.

2 Audit of (i) all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India, (ii) all transactions relating to
Contingency Funds and Public Accounts and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, profit & loss accounts,

_ balance-sheets and other subsidiary accounts

3 Audit and report on the accounts of stores and stock kept in any office or department of the Union or of

a State.

* Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The postal system in India has a history of handling communications
infrastructure for the country for almost 150 years and currently has the largest
network in the world.

The primary services rendered by the Department of Posts (DoP) are as
follows:

> Communication services — Letters, Post Cards,

> Transport services — Parcel, Logistics,

> Financial services — Savings Bank, Money Order, Insurance,
>

Value added services — Speed Post Service, Business Post, Direct Post,

As part of its Universal Service Obligation, the postal system is expected to
ensure provision of efficient postal services at affordable prices to users all
across the country. Transmission and delivery of mail is the core traditional
business of the Postal Department. Over the years several value added services
like bulk mail, business post and speed post have been introduced by DoP.

The Post Office Savings Bank Scheme is an agency function performed by the
DoP on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Government of India for which the
Ministry of Finance remunerates the DoP at rates fixed from time-to-time. In
discharge of its agency functions, DoP represents the oldest and largest
banking network in the country and plays a critical role in mobilizing small
savings, primarily in rural areas.

The Department of Posts also provides life insurance. Postal Life Insurance
(PLI) has been providing life insurance coverage since 1884 to Government
employees. Since 1995 PLI has been extended to the rural population of the
country under a new scheme Rural Postal Life Insurance.

DoP is also engaged in disbursement of pension and family pension to military
and railway pensioners, family pension to families of coal mine employees
and industries covered by the Employees Provident Fund Scheme.



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Department of Posts is part of the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology, Government of India. The Secretary, Department of
Posts, as the Chief Executive of the Department, is also the Chairperson of the
Postal Services Board and Director General, India Post. The Board has six
Members for the portfolios of Personnel, Operations, Technology, Postal Life
Insurance and Chairman Investment Board, Human Resource Development
and Planning.

The Board directs and supervises the management of postal services
throughout the country with the assistance of Chief Postmasters General in 22
Circles and Senior/Deputy Directors General in the Directorate General of
Posts. A Business Development Directorate (BDD) was set up in DoP in 1996
to ensure focused management of value added services viz., Speed Post, Speed
Post Passport Service, Business Post, Express Parcel Post, Media Post,
Meghdoot Post Card, Greetings Post, Data Post, E-Bill Post and E-Post. Postal
Life Insurance (PLI) and Rural Postal Life Insurance (RPLI) Schemes are
monitored by PLI Directorate headed by the Chief General Manager, PLI.

The total revenue receipts during 2010-11 showed an increase of 11.10 per
cent over the previous year whereas the revenue expenditure increased by 3.34
per cent over the same period. The revenue receipts and revenue expenditure
for the last three years is shown in the chart below:

14000 13346.94 13793.67

12000
dil
10000
8000 6962.33
6266.70
5862.33 208.7
6000
4000
2000
ot

2008-09 2009-10 2010-11

(in crore)

GRevenue Receipts BRevenue Expenditure

The total revenue receipts and revenue expenditure of the Department of Posts
is given in the table below and the details are given in Annex-I.



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

@ in crore)

2008-09 5862.33 300.82 9756.23 3593.08
2009-10 6266.70 438.94 13346.94 6641.30
2010-11 6962.33 485.72 13793.67 6345.62

The earning of the Department during the years was in the form of ‘Revenue
Receipts’ and ‘Recoveries’ which was less compared to the expenditure. The
reasons for deficit were mainly due to the expenditure on Pay & Allowances,
Dearness Allowance, Contingencies and Pensionary Charges etc.

There was a net loss of % 6345.62 crore on postal services’ in 2010-11. The
comparative position for the period 2008-09 to 2010-11 is as under:

Net losses on postal services
7200 6641.30 6345.62
6200
5200
4200 A

3200

(@ in crore)

2200

1200

200
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
Year

The audit was primarily conducted with a view to examine and assess whether
the established systems were functioning effectively, stipulated procedures
were adhered to and whether financial propriety was observed. Subjects for
compliance audit were selected on the basis of an assessment of the risk

1 * Net loss was calculated as the difference between revenue receipts & recoveries and
revenue expenditure, ie., {(% 6962.33+% 485.72)-% 13793.67}.



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

associated with various activities carried out by postal units. The audit process
helps the auditee to identify areas of financial and management controls that
need attention for efficient and effective management. Audit has also proved
to be an aid in effective revenue recoveries.

Some of persistent deficiencies that have appeared in the audit reports relating
to DoP in the last five years include:

1. Non-realization of pension/family pension dues from other
departments

2. Irregular payment of interest

3. Irregular payment of commission

4. Failure to levy service tax

During the year, audit observed that Head Post Office (HPO), Aizwal under
the North East Postal Circle issued Kisan Vikas Patra (K VPs) to an Institute in
January — February 2003 in contravention of the rules which were effective
from 1 April 1995 and made payment of % 1.12 crore towards interest besides
irregular payment of commission to the agents. At the instance of audit,
Postmaster, HPO Aizwal refunded the principal amount of हैं 1.12 crore. The
amount of interest irregularly paid to the investor was treated as void and the
re-investment of the amount cancelled.

National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) came into force on
February 2, 2006 with the aim of enhancing livelihood security of rural
households by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed employment
in a financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do
unskilled manual work. State Governments were made responsible to make
National Rural Employment Guarantee Schemes (NREGS) for giving effect to
the Act.

Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) in consultation with Department of
Post (DoP) prepared a model Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) in 2008
to be entered into between State Governments and DoP for timely and
transparent disbursement of NREGS wage through post offices. The MoUs
were signed in 18 Postal Circles with 20 State Governments between 2008 and



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

2009. No MoUs were signed with the State Governments of West Bengal,
Tamil Nadu, Jammu & Kashmir, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Nagaland and
Delhi. In the North East Circle the MoUs were signed with three State
Governments viz. Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Manipur. In Assam Circle,
though MoUs were signed only at the district level, these were actually signed
in only four districts. In the States of West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh and
Tripura, NREGS wage was disbursed through post offices without signing the
MoU.

The central objective of the MoU was to ensure payment of due wages earned
by the NREGA workers in a timely and transparent manner through special
saving accounts to be operated in their name in the post offices. In order to
achieve the objectives of the MoU and to make the implementation of NREG
Scheme through post offices successful, DoP issued (April 2008) the Model
Operating Procedure (MOP) and other instructions from time to time, to all
Heads of Circles. The MOP and the instructions in that connection, envisaged
inter-alia, guidelines relative to cash flow arrangement, adherence to time line,
monitoring and coordination between representatives of the State Government
Departments and DoP, as also procedures for disbursement of wages under
NREGS through Post Office Savings Banks.

The Organizational Structure of both the parties to this arrangement i.e. State
Government and the Department of Posts (DoP), at State/Circle, District/Head
Post Office, Block/Sub Office and Gram Panchayat/Branch Office level, is
indicated by chart given below:



@
Level

Report No. 13 of 2012-13

State Government (Rural
Development Department)

Pr. Secretary’

Department of Posts

Circle

Pr. Chief Postmaster General/

Gram Panchayat/ Gram
Rozgar Sevak/
Panchayat Secretary

Secretary, RD Director of Postal Services (10 & —
Commissioner, RD Mktg)
District Programme Regl. Level |] Regl. Nodal
Coordinators (DPCs) Officer
Div. Head/
ie कल ol Divi, Nodal
Officer
Dist. HQ
HPO Level Head Postmaster
- Divl. Head/
Programme Officers i Level Divl. Nodal
(POs)/ Additional Program Officer
Officers (APOs)
ial Divi. Level Sub Divi. Head
Sub Post Offices Sub Postmaster
Level (SPM)

Sub Postmaster

| —— | Postmaster

Ces)
Level



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

With a view to review the implementation of the scheme, identify the problems and
find out appropriate solutions, and for smooth functioning of the Scheme, the
organizational components of both the State Governments and the DoP were
required to participate in the periodical coordination meetings to be arranged at
State, District and Block level. At the State level, Principal Secretary/Secretary,
Rural Development was to convene coordination meeting with the Chief Post
Master General (CPMG) on monthly basis or as and when required. At the district
level, District Programme Coordinators (DPCs) of the districts were to hold
monthly meetings with the identified Nodal Officers in the Postal Divisions.
Programme Officers/Additional Programme Officers (POs/APOs) also were
required to convene coordination meetings on fortnightly basis with the Sub
Postmasters/Branch Postmaster (SO/BO) at Block level. The State Governments
were further responsible for maintaining average monthly NREGS wages as a One
Time Deposit (OTD) for each quarter in the Head Post Offices (HPOs) located at
each district Headquarter.

The details of number of accounts operated for NREGS workers, amount
deposited, withdrawn and balance amount in those accounts in various Post
Offices in all Postal Circles in the country for the period 2008-09 to 2010-11,
given in the table below indicated that the number of accounts, amount
deposited and withdrawn under NREGS increased significantly during the

period.
Table: 1
(% in crore)
2008-09 2.92 N/A 3863 Loz | [ - |
2009-10 4.25 8448 7900 548 6.49
2010-11 4.90 13463 9179 4284 31.82

(Source: The Data collected from DoP Head Quarters)

The balance amount in accounts which represents amount not withdrawn by
the beneficiaries grew manifold from % 548 crore in 2009-10 to ¥ 4284 crore
in 2010-11.



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

We conducted the audit during May to July 2011 selecting one Postal Region
in each of eight Postal Circles” except Karnataka Circle’ where two Postal
Regions were selected. Postal Divisions under each Postal Region were
selected on the basis of volume of transactions. The transactions of randomly
selected post offices under Postal Divisions as given below were test checked
for the period 2008-09 to 2010-11.

Table: 2

fs [| 9 | wi | 29 57 233

We conducted audit to examine whether:

e disbursement of wages under the NREGA Scheme through postal
network was generally made as per the terms of the model MoU
between the DoP and the MoRD at the Centre and between the Heads
of Postal Circles and State Governments at the field level

e the provisions of Model Operating Procedure (MOP) as issued by the
DoP to Postal Circles for opening of NREGA Accounts and disbursal
of wages were complied with

* overall reporting monitoring and management of the implementation of
the scheme was adequate

The sources of criteria used for audit scrutiny were

> the MoUs entered into between State Governments and the respective

Postal Circles
> MOP and other instructions issued by DoP for implementation of the
scheme and Post Office Savings Account Rules 1981.

2 Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Orissa, Rajasthan, Kamataka and West Bengal
* Volume of transactions in one Postal Region was not adequate thus two regions were selected by the Audit.

10


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Our scrutiny of disbursement of NREGS wages through Post Offices
highlighted a number of deficiencies in the overall operation of the scheme. It
also brought out instances of a weak and ineffective monitoring mechanism.

As per the scheme DoP was required to maintain adequate availability of
funds at all SOs and BOs to ensure timely payment to NREGS workers as per
agreed time lines under the MoU and MOP. This pre-supposed timely flow of
necessary fund from HPOs to BOs through SOs. However the desired steps
required to meet the fund requirements at the levels of SOs/BOs were not
taken by HPOs leading to delays in payment of wages as discussed in the
following sub-paras:

ee

As per the MoU and the MOP, the Divisional Nodal Officer (DNO) of DoP
was required to approach the District Programme Coordinator (DPC) of Rural
Development Department of State Government, and obtain One Time Deposit
(OTD), being the amount equal to one month's approximate wages payable to
NREGS workers in the district plus the minimum amount required for opening
of new accounts in the District Headquarters. The purpose of making a one
time deposit with the HPOs at the district level was to enable the post offices
to disburse the NREGS wages without waiting for realization of wages
cheque/demand drafts received with wages list. The DNO was also required to
review the position of wages paid every quarter to ensure that the DPC
supplements the one time deposit to the extent nece:
monthly average of wages actually paid.

ary as per the latest

Our scrutiny revealed that in 19 HPOs under eight test checked circles’, either
OTD was not insisted upon by the Postal Circles or was received short in
different HPOs to the extent of = 12 lakh to ¥ 401 lakh. The DNOs had not
conducted the quarterly review of OTD to enable them to get these deposits
appropriately supplemented from the Programme Coordinators. This is evident
from the fact that in 19 HPOs in eight Circles the aggregate deficiency in
funds as on 31 March 2011 worked out to हैं 1920 lakh which averaged at
59.48 per cent. In eight HPOs under three Circles, no OTD was made by the
DPCs and in five HPOs under two Circles it was either around or more than

+ Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Kamataka, Orissa, Rajasthan and West Bengal

11


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

50 per cent (Annex-II). It was also observed that in four Circles” , follow up
with the State Government authorities was not done regularly.

On this being pointed out by us, six Circles® accepted that the required OTD
was not provided by the respective State Governments. The Ministry in its
reply stated that MoRD was requested at regular intervals to ensure
availability of rolling funds and to advise the State Governments to provide
rolling funds at each HPO. Further, this issue was also raised by the Secretary,
DoP in a meeting with the Hon'ble Minister of MoRD.

Thus, insufficient OTD in HPOs could lead to non availability of sufficient
funds resulting in either delayed payment of wages or in case of delayed
realization of wage cheques, temporary outflow of DoP fund.

Timely realization of NREGS wage cheques was a pre-requisite for smooth
flow of funds to BOs and to ensure timely payment of wages. To ensure this,
the Divisional Head/Divisional Nodal Officer and the Head Postmaster
concerned were required to keep a close watch over, timely remittance of all
NREGS cheques into the bank accounts and crediting of the proceeds thereof
in the post office accounts without any delay. Clearance of each cheque was to
be watched by Head Postmaster through a register to be maintained for
recording dates on which cheques were received and sent for clearance.

Our scrutiny in seven’ out of eight test checked circles revealed deficiencies in
monitoring and control over realization of cheques in the Head Post Offices as
explained below:

e As per the Scheme, each HPO was required to maintain a separate
register of NREGS cheques received and cleared. However, three
HPOs one each in Bihar®, Karnataka’ and Rajasthan"? Circles and two
HPOs of Chhattisgarh'' Circle did not maintain a separate register of
NREGS cheques received and cleared. Consequently, we could not
ascertain age wise break up and details of un-cleared NREGS cheques.

. th and West Bengal

* Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka and Orissa

7 Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Orissa and Rajasthan, In West Bengal, money is received
through demand draft.

* Purnea, Katihar and Saharsa

° Chitradurga, Gulbarga, Kolar

१ Jodhpur, Nagaur and Didwana

"' Raipur and Bilaspur



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

¢ In three Circles’, as of 30 September 2011, 371 unrealized cheques
amounting to हैं 234,51 lakh and 150 dishonored cheques amounting to
% 150.18 lakh had not been recouped by DoP from the State
Governments authorities. (Annex—III & IV)

e There was delay ranging from 7 to 52 days in clearance of 217 NREGS
cheques valuing हैं 156 lakh in two HPOs' and three SOs of
Rajasthan Circle.

In the absence of availability of total number of cheques and amounts thereof
received and realized from all Circles, the percentage of un-cleared cheques
and dishonored cheques as well as delay could not be ascertained.

On this being pointed out by us, postal circles replied that necessary action
was being taken for clearance of all pending cheques. PMG Western Region
Jodhpur under Rajasthan Circle replied that the delay in clearance was due to
mistake in account numbers, differences in cheque amount and wage list and
also due to delay in clearance by banks. CPMsG Karnataka, Bihar and
Chhattisgarh Circles replied that necessary action was being taken.

The reply of Circles was not convincing. Considering the shortfall in one time
deposit and delay in encashment of NREGA fund cheques, the monitoring
mechanism was evidently not effective enough.

The DNOs were responsible for arranging sufficient cash to meet the
requirements of the Sub Postmasters and the Branch Postmasters with the
assumption that 100 percent of the weekly/fortnightly wages will be
withdrawn within two or three days of receipt of the wage lists. Sub
Postmasters were to credit the wages to the accounts of the individual workers
immediately on receipt of wage list and send intimation to the Branch
Postmaster concerned. In any case, as per the MOP, all payments were to be
completed within three days from the date of receipt of the wage list.

Test check revealed that during the period 2008-09 to 2010-11 there was
considerable delay in disbursement of wages in respect of 3457 wage lists in
seven circles'®. The delay ranged from 15 to 30 days and above as detailed
below:

” Bihar, Chhattisgarh and Orissa

" Jaisalmer & Deedwana

“* Pokhran, Borawar & Kuchaman

5 Bihar, Gujarat, Orissa, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Chattisgarh and West Bengal

13


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Table: 3

Delay in disbursement of wage to NREGS workers

| 1. | Bihar

2. Gujarat 238 217 35 | 49 [|
3. Orissa 287 34 12 333
| 4. | West Bengal | 148 | | ४ | 2 158
5. Karnataka 573 19 92 684
| 6. | Chhattisgarh 865 313 128 1306
7. Rajasthan. 38 12 3 53

(Source: The data collected from post offices)

Main reasons for the delay, as cited by postal offices, were as follows:

e Lack of mechanism for handling huge cash flow from SOs to BOs
(CPMG Orissa)

e Shortage of staff for making payment under wage lists received in bulk
(CPMG Gujarat).

e Delay in receipt of cash and short supply of cash (BOs of Bihar and
West Bengal).

e Delay in receipt of wage list, opening of accounts & issue of passbook
etc., large number of accounts and contradictory instructions on time
limit by Circle office. (Chhattisgarh Circle).

The reply given by Circles was not acceptable since disbursement of wages
was to be regularly reviewed by the DoP Directorate which had to ensure that
there was availability of sufficient cash balance in the post offices. Moreover
wage list registers were invariably found not to be maintained in some post
offices under Chitradurga and Koppal HPOs of Karnataka Circle checked by
audit. The Ministry had accepted the audit findings.

Post Offices were required to open workers wage accounts, credit wage
amounts and allow withdrawals as per POSB Rules which inter alia prescribe
the procedures to be followed while opening the SB Account as well as its
operation. Complete verification of the identity of the wage earners through
job card, application forms, complete data entry, data accuracy and timely

14


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

credit of interest into accounts were some of the critical aspects for which DoP
staff had to take action. Further, MoU signed with respective State
Governments and Model Operating Procedure provided for immediate credit
of wage amount to the workers account.

We observed the following serious deficiencies in the operations of NREGS
wage accounts:

Post Office Savings Account Rules and other orders issued by DoP on the
subject stipulate that while opening NREGS accounts, particulars of the
NREGS workers as indicated in the application forms (SB-3) were to be
verified by the concerned Post Master from the original job card of the
applicant. The Post Master was also required to certify this fact under his own
signature.

However, our scrutiny revealed that in four!® out of eight test checked circles,
78602 NREGS accounts were opened without verification of application
forms (SB-3) with reference to job cards as detailed below:

Table: 4

Accounts opened without verification of application form (SB-3 Form)
with job cards

1. Chhattisgarh 45229
2. Gujarat 31182
3. Bihar 1278
4. Orissa 913

(Source: The data collected from post offices)

Non adherence with relevant procedures by the Post Masters was fraught with
the risk of irregular/ fraudulent payments through accounts the bona-fides of
which were suspect.

On this being pointed out, the Postmasters of Chhattisgarh Circle stated that
verification of SB-3 forms was not done due to heavy work load; the
Postmasters of Gujarat Circle attributed the laxity to non-availability of job
cards at the time of opening of accounts and as also absence of clear

° Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, and Orissa

15


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

instructions on the subjects. Postal Circles'’ replied that necessary instructions
would be issued to the post offices to follow the standard operating
procedures. The Ministry replied that all concerned had been instructed to
collect job cards in Gujarat and Orissa Circles.

The replies of the Ministry and the Circle Offices confirm our observation that
due diligence was not observed by the post offices in opening of the accounts
which could have facilitated irregular/ fraudulent payments.

Rule 33 (1) of POSB Rules provided that thumb impression or mark of the
depositor on the application for withdrawal should be attested by a respectable
witness in respect of a blind, illiterate or a depositor who is unable to write.
This procedure for disbursement of wages was also reiterated in the Model
Operating Procedure (MOP).

During test check in six Circles'*, we noticed 6811 cases of payments having
been made without attestation of Left Hand Thumb Impressions of illiterate
wage earners, which was in violation of the Post Office Savings Bank (POSB)
Rules, as per details given in the table below:

Table: 5
Payment made without attesting Left Thumb Impression of Workers

| 1. | : Chhattisgarh 3999
2. Gujarat 1294
3. Orissa 897
4. Bihar 553
5. Rajasthan 36
| 6. | Karnataka 32

(Source: The data collected from post offices)

Failure of Post Offices to follow the codal provision left scope open for
fraudulent payment under NREGS.

'’ Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat and Orissa
७ Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Orissa and Rajasthan

16


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Circle offices’? did not contest the above facts and replied that remedial
actions would be taken and stated that Post Offices were instructed to follow
the codal provisions. The Ministry in their reply stated that necessary
instructions had been issued to all concerned to invariably follow the payment
procedure.

Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs in August 2008, had
issued a gazette notification amending the Post Office Savings Accounts Rules
1981 for introduction of a special category of savings account i.e. Workers
Wage Account under NREGS. In the same month, DoP introduced a separate
block of account numbers for opening the new type of savings account under
NREGS.

Just as maintenance of ledger cards for each savings account at Sub Post
Office level was mandatory under Post Office Saving Bank Rules, ledgers for
NREGS accounts were also to be maintained at Sub Post Office level. Further,
on receipt of wage list and related cheques, the Sub Postmasters were required
to send the cheques for realization to HPO and ensure credit of wage amounts
to the accounts of individual workers. An intimation of credit was to be sent to
each of the Branch Postmaster concerned.

Our scrutiny of the records revealed that in seven Circles” ledgers in respect
of NREGS workers were either not maintained or not updated. Some of the
SOs and HPOs”' ascribed shortage of staff as one of the major causes for this
situation. However, five Circle offices” replied that data entry work was
under way and would be completed soon.

The reason cited for arrears in the work of maintenance and updating the
ledgers of NREGS accounts were not convincing since DoP had provided to
each Circle/HPO funds under NREG scheme for administrative expenditure.
These funds could clearly have been used for data entry work and training of
necessary manpower. Further, to ensure that the funds for wages
received/disbursed were accounted for correctly in time, maintenance and

updation of data in the ledgers was essential.

As per Clause 8.1 of MOP, the amount deposited under the Scheme can earn
interest from time to time as applicable to all other POSB accounts. 'NREGS

" Bihar, Chhatti it, Karnataka and Orissa
+h, Gujarat, Kamataka, Orissa, Rajasthan and West Bengal
*"HPO- Bardoli, Suri and Barasat; Jamankira, Echoda, Asifabad, Indervelly and Chennur

” Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and Orissa

7


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

workers accounts! were therefore entitled to earn interest as applicable to other
savings accounts. It was seen that in Karnataka and Chhattisgarh Circles,
incompleteness of ledgers had resulted in interest on balances in workers
accounts not being credited. In Chhattisgarh Circle the work of crediting
interest to wage accounts was incomplete for three years viz., 2008-09 to
2010-11. In HPO Koppal of Karnataka Circle, interest was not credited in
184091 accounts on closing balance of % 260 lakh as on 31 March 2011.
Though similar instances did not come to our notice in the post offices
sampled by us in other Circles/HPOs, owing to generally poor monitoring of
the scheme in all the Circles, the possibility of such irregularities having
occurred elsewhere could not be entirely ruled out.

CPMsG Karnataka and Chhattisgarh Circles assured that remedial action
would be taken. The Ministry in their reply stated that in Karnataka Circle the
calculation of interest was under process.

Test check of records in BOs and SOs under Bardoli HPO of Gujarat and three
HPOs”* of Karnataka Circles, revealed that wages amounting % 95.21 lakh
were disbursed on the basis of xerox copies of 145 wage lists received without
indicating therein muster roll number, signature or stamp of any State
Government authority.

CPMG Karnataka Circle replied that after making thorough enquiry,
concerned Divisional Heads would be directed to initiate action against the
officials responsible for the lapses and to take remedial action to ensure
transparency in NREGS activities. The Ministry in their reply re-iterated the
assurances given by the CPMG Karnataka Postal Circle.

Failure to ensure the mandatory checks in disbursement of wages enhanced
the risk of wages being paid to ineligible persons and exposed the scheme to
fraudulent practices. Weakness in monitoring the scheme was self evident.

Model Operating Procedure (MOP) stipulated preparations of periodical
statements of various kinds of data pertaining to SB accounts, credit/deposits
made in accounts and withdrawals allowed etc., at Post Offices and
maintenance of Deposit Register at Postal Account Offices and HPOs and
their submission to higher authorities.

2 Kolar, Gulbarga and Chitradurga



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Test check of records in three Circles” showed that these instructions were
largely ignored resulting in un-reconciled data amongst various postal offices
of the concerned circles as also with State Governments as elaborated below:

In Karnataka Circle figures of wages deposited and wages disbursed as
maintained by CPMG Office and O/o Director of Accounts Postal
(DAP) did not match. The wages deposited and disbursed for the
period 2008-11 in four HPOs”? under the circle as shown in the records
of CPMG were more by % 4696.60 lakh and % 3954.62 lakh
respectively than the figures booked by the DAP. CPMG Karnataka
Circle stated that opening of normal SB accounts in the name of
NREGS beneficiaries before the introduction of special type of SB
Account (Workers’ Wage Account) for NREGS had resulted in the
differences in figures.

In two Postal Divisions”® of Chhattisgarh Circle the wages disbursed
for the period April 2008 to October 2010 in Bilaspur and Raipur
divisions were shown less by % 7360.72 lakh and % 1374.77 lakh,
respectively, than the amount shown as disbursed in the State
Government data. The discrepancy had arisen because instead of
giving the figures of amount of wages credited in the NREGS accounts
had shown only the withdrawals from NREGS account by the workers
as wages disbursed which was obviously incorrect.

In Andhra Pradesh Postal Circle, the amount of wages withdrawn by
workers in the years 2008-09 and 2010-11 respectively was shown in
excess by हैं 23.52 crore and % 2.56 crore than the amount of wages
deposited by Andhra Pradesh State Government. CPMG Chhattisgarh
& CPMG Andhra Pradesh Circles did not clarify the reasons for this
discrepancy except stating that the data entry in the Sanchay Post
Software was under way.

The Ministry in their reply stated that the necessary instructions had been
issued to the circles for strict compliance of POSB Rules to avoid systemic
failure in opening, operation and maintenance of workers accounts in ledgers.

The instances cited above clearly indicate that errors in data compilation were
prevalent at all levels in the Department. Even the data collected from DoP
Head Quarters’ office revealed compilation errors. Moreover, the data
compilation in the field offices of DoP was erroneous from the very beginning

* Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Karnataka
> Chitradurga, Gulbarga, Kolar & Koppal
36 Bilaspur & Raipur division



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

as Circle offices generally failed to differentiate actual withdrawals by the
workers from NREGS account and treated it as wages disbursed to the worker
ignoring the actual amount of wages credited in the NREGS accounts. It was
only after the matter was clarified by DoP Headquarter in January 2011 that
the amount of wages credited to the NREGS wagers’ account was treated as
wages disbursed.

Due to implementation of NREG Scheme, number of cash withdrawal
transactions had increased substantially. These transactions were over and
above the normal volume of postal transactions in savings accounts at BO
level. This made it necessary for postal authorities to provide better security
measures for safe transportation and custody of cash handled by the BOs.

Following deficiencies relate to internal controls and security arrangements
were noticed in the test checked postal offices.

As notified by the DoP Headquarter from time to time, Branch Postmasters
can allow on each occasion withdrawal from a NREGS account up to a
maximum amount of हैं 2000 per account up to 9 February 2010 and हैं 5000
per account per occasion thereafter. Withdrawals beyond the said limit were
required to be referred to the concerned Sub Postmaster for sanction.

However, in four Sub Post Offices of the three circles’ instances of
withdrawals having been allowed beyond the prescribed limit by Branch
Postmasters without the sanction of SPM were noticed.

Circle offices”* stated that instructions to follow the prescribed procedures
while allowing withdrawals from NREGS accounts had been since issued. The
Ministry in their reply stated that necessary instructions had since been issued
to the Circles for strict adherence to rules.

Non-compliance with rules increased the risk of fraudulent payments. An
instance of fraud was noticed during audit in Andhra Pradesh Circle where a
Branch Post Master (BPM) had allowed 326 bogus withdrawals of हैं 3200
each in 187 accounts.

37 Kamataka, Gujarat and Orissa
35 Kamataka, Gujarat and Orissa



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

ee

Dynamic line limits”” were introduced from August 2008 by DoP for the
purpose of facilitating payments of wages to NREGS workers. This further
enhanced the level of cash already being handled in the Post Offices.

In six Circles” it was noticed that Branch Postmasters were carrying high
amounts of cash from Sub Post Offices at their own risk, without any security
being provided to them. Lack of security arrangements was evident from
robbery/theft cases involving हैं 5.68 lakh in two postal offices*' of Karnataka
Circle.

Four circle offices* replied that instructions would be issued to divisional
heads to ensure security during conveyance of cash.

The Ministry in their reply stated that arrangements were made for police
escort for heavy cash conveyance from HPOs and that services of Home
Guards were utilized for cash conveyance and security of post offices.

The Scheme of disbursal of wages under NREGA through the postal network
was successfully implemented as evident from the fact that the number of
accounts for disbursal of NREGA wages grew from almost three crore to
almost five crore accounts during the period 2008-11. The amount disbursed
(withdrawn) also grew from हैं 3863 crore (6 हैं 9179 crore. However, the
undisbursed fund in workers accounts lying with DoP was significantly high at
& 4284 crore in 2010-11 constituting 32 per cent of the total funds received
from the State Governments. In 19 HPOs of eight Circles, the one time deposit
required to be received in the post offices by the District Programme
Coordinator of State Governments was either not received or there was
shortfall in deposit to the tune of हैं 1920 lakh as on 31 March 2011. The
shortfall reflected that in eight HPOs under three Circles no OTD was made
by the DPCs and in five HPOs under two Circles it was either around or more
than 50 per cent, The procedures for opening of accounts under MOP and
POSB, were not followed by a significant number of test checked post offices
as evident from accounts being opened without verification of SB-3 forms,
incomplete data entry in ledgers, interest not credited and wages being

Limit prescribed for conveyance of cash between post offices

* Andhra Pra har, Gujarat, Karnataka, Rajasthan and West Bengal
*' BO Balla & SO Bewoor

* Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat & Kamataka

21


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

disbursed without attestation of left hand thumb impression of illiterate wages
earners, OTDs not being obtained and reviewed periodically, delay in
disbursement of wages or in watching timely deposit of wages cheques, errors
in data compilation etc. besides inadequate security arrangements for
transportation/custody of cash, which had increased due to operation of
NREGS through the postal Network. Most of the irregularities noticed were
facilitated due to weak monitoring and insufficient internal controls.

> DoP need to coordinate more effectively with MoRD at the one end
and the State Governments at the other to fully operationalize MoUs
already entered into.

> Monitoring of wage payments under MNREGS needs to be made
regular, comprehensive and effective. This may be made a part of
DoPs ‘Result Framework Document’.

> Internal controls over the wage distribution under MNREGS through
post offices need to be reviewed and strengthened.

> Appropriate disciplinary action may be taken against all officials
found responsible for negligence in implementing the MoUs.

> Efforts may be made to enter into MoUs with all State Governments.

Failure of the Department to follow the prescribed procedure for
indenting and forecasting and a weak internal control mechanism
resulted in substantial overstocking of cash certificates, stamps and postal
stationery thereby exposing these valuables to the risk of misuse/pilferage
and damage.

Postal articles viz; stamps and postal stationery are sold through post offices
spread across the country. Department of Posts (DoP) also discharges an
agency function on behalf of Ministry of Finance (MoF) for sale of Cash
Certificates through Post Offices. For this, the MoF remunerates the DoP at
rates fixed from time-to-time.

The Cash Certificates (CCs), Stamps and other postal stationery are printed at
India Security Press (ISP) Nasik and Security Printing Press (SPP) Hyderabad
and are supplied to Circle Stamp Depots (CSDs) spread across in 22 Postal
Circles. The CSDs are required to send to ISP Nasik/SPP Hyderabad the six
monthly advance indents for the printing of Cash Certificates and quarterly
indents for stamps based on the requirement received by them from Head Post

22


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Offices (HPOs) taking into account their own requirement and that of Sub-
Post Offices (SOs) under their jurisdiction.

Our scrutiny (June 2011 to August 2011) of records of CSDs and HPOs in
seven Postal Circles selected randomly covering 20 per cent of the HPOs
under each Circle revealed overstocking of Cash Certificates, Stamps, Postal
Stationery, various deficiencies including inadequate internal control
mechanism in the department as enumerated below:

ee

Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) Manual Volume II stipulates that a
quarterly indent to meet the requirements of Cash Certificates 1.6. National
Savings Certificates/Kisan Vikas Patras (NSCs/KVPs) shall be submitted by
the HPOs to the CSD on Ist of June, September, December and March. The
information to be given by the HPOs to CSDs would include types of
certificate required, their denomination, the number of certificates sold during
the last quarter, balance in hand, the number of certificates required and
reasons for indenting more certificates than those sold during the last quarter
as well as the balance in hand. The CSDs in turn are required to send six
monthly advance indents for the printing of Cash Certificates to the ISP Nasik
on due date. For correct assessment of the requirement, the CSDs are required
to furnish to the printing press the information such as stock at the time of last
indent, supply received since then, quantity issued during the previous half
year/quarter, balance available on the date of submission of the present indent,
quantity due from printing press against the previous indent and quantity
required for the next six months in the prescribed proforma. Utmost care is
required to be taken to ensure that excessive stocks are not held in the post
offices to obviate any possibility of pilferage, misuse or damage to such value
bearing stationery.

Our scrutiny of records in test checked HPOs and CSDs in the seven Circles
revealed that indents in respect of Cash Certificates were placed without
complying with the required procedures. This resulted in overstocking of cash
certificates bearing face value of = 3840.66 crore in the test checked CSDs and
HPOs as on 31 March 2011, as has been indicated in the Annex—V. It was also
observed that indents were placed by CSDs Delhi, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and
Uttar Pradesh despite having sufficient stock in hand, without taking into
account the past consumption patterns.

23


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

On this being pointed out by us, CSDs at Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra Circles
accepted the facts and figures; CSD Kanpur stated that overstocking of KVPs
and NSCs was due to irregular supply by the printing press; CSD Lucknow
stated that overstocking was due to allotment of surplus stock by the Postal
Directorate; CSD Ludhiana stated that blank NSCs of € 5000/- held in stock
carried no intrinsic value till these are actually issued; the Postmasters of
selected HPOs accepted the facts and stated that corrective action would be
taken and in future the indents would be placed as per the prescribed
procedure.

The reply of CSD Ludhiana was not acceptable because despite having no
intrinsic value, the possibility of misuse of blank certificates by fraudulent
encashment did exist as was demonstrated by one case reported in Bihar
Circle. In that case blank certificates worth = 1.25 crore were lost in transit,
fraudulently issued and en-cashed by a Sub-Postmaster under Munger HPO.
The reply of CSD Kanpur was also not acceptable as departmental rules
clearly envisage that quantity due from printing press against the previous
indent should be taken into account while placing the present indent.

Thus omission on the part of CSDs and HPOs to scrupulously follow the
prescribed procedures before placing indents for cash certificates as discussed
above and absence of monitoring of stock position at supervisory levels
resulted in overstocking of Cash Certificates worth face value of % 3840.66
crore in CSDs and HPOs. Overstocking of cash certificates to such a huge
level clearly carried risk of misuse by unscrupulous elements, besides
damage/pilferage over a period of time.

ee

Post Office Savings Certificate Rules provide that a statement in 'manuscript',
indicating the total number of cash certificates along with the first and last
serial numbers of certificates of each denomination and of each different series
remaining unsold on 31st March of each year, shall be prepared by all post
offices stocking the cash certificates. Utmost accuracy must be ensured in
writing the serial numbers. The distinguishing letter prefixed to such serial
numbers should on no account be omitted. A certificate should be endorsed on
the statement under the personal and dated signature of the Postmaster that the
balance as per the stock register had been verified with the actual balance in
hand and found correct. The HPO should check the statements received from
the SOs with the register maintained for the purpose in that office and send

24


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

them to Postal Accounts Offices along with its own statement, positively by
30" April each year.

Our scrutiny revealed that the statement of unsold cash certificates was not
being sent by HPO Varanasi Cantt to Director of Accounts (Postal), Lucknow
(DAP). Ifthe prescribed procedure as described above had been scrupulously
followed that would have prevented the fraudulent encashment of KVPs/NSCs
worth हैं 9.01 crore between 1996 and 2004.

The Office of the Director of Accounts (Postal) Lucknow stated that an
internal enquiry in the case was in process. Had DAP Lucknow ensured
receipt of the statement of unsold cash certificates from HPO Varanasi Cantt,
as provided in the departmental rules, and reconciled it with the issue and
discharge register of NSCs/KVPs maintained at DAP, Lucknow, such
fraudulent encashment could perhaps have been avoided.

Further test check conducted by us in 55 HPOs of six Postal Circles for the
period 2008-11 revealed that the statement of unsold certificates had not been
submitted by 33 HPOs to their concerned Postal Accounts Offices within the
prescribed time. This indicated that despite the cases of fraudulent encashment
being known to the DoP, sufficient steps had, obviously, not been taken to
tighten the internal controls to ensure timely submission and reconciliation of
statements of unsold certificates in the HPOs and the Postal Accounts Offices.

ee

"Stamps" include postal stamps, non-postal stamps, envelopes and post cards
and "Postage Stamps" include postal stationery. Apart from the maximum
authorized cash balance, every post office is required to keep stock of stamps
as fixed by authorities. The HPOs are required to obtain from CSD supply of
stamps not exceeding their respective maximum authorized stamp balances.
The CSDs in turn are required to submit quarterly indents to the ISP
Nasik/SPP Hyderabad to meet the estimated consumption of stamps for the
ensuing quarter.

Test check of records of CSDs located in Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab
and Kerala Circles revealed that CSDs placed indents for stamps and postal
stationery without complying with the prescribed indenting procedure. Orders
for these items were placed without taking into account the stock in hand and
consumption pattern of previous quarter. This resulted in overstocking of
stamps and postal stationery carrying face value of हैं 498.52 crore as on 31

25


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

March 2011, as shown in the Annex—VI. It was also observed that apart from
having sufficient stock in hand the indents were placed for stamps and postal
stationery without analyzing the actual demand by CSDs.

CSDs Lucknow and Kanpur accepted the facts. They also stated that the
indents were placed on the basis of increased demand and the Postal
Directorate had been requested to divert these stamps to other CSDs. CSD
Ludhiana stated that there was acute shortage of postage stamps in the circle
during 2008 and 2009 and the indents for these periods were received only in
2010 resulting in overstocking of stamps.

These replies are not acceptable as before accepting first supply against
indents placed in 2008 and 2009 the CSDs should have considered the existing
consumption pattern in respect of stamps and postal stationery and taken into
stock the material supplied by ISP Nasik/SPP Hyderabad. Since stamps do not
require any authorization for sale, their overstocking exposed the department
to the risk of fraudulent sale of stamps/postal stationery by unscrupulous
elements.

The matter was referred to the DoP in February 2012. Their reply was awaited
as of June 2012.

Post offices in six circles did not scrupulously follow the provisions
relating to the Public Provident Fund (PPF) Scheme resulting in irregular,
payment of interest of = 2.26 crore to the subscribers.

Departmental Rules provide that an individual may subscribe to the Public
Provident Fund (PPF) Scheme on his/her own behalf or on behalf of a minor
of whom he/she is a guardian subject to the condition that the deposits in all
accounts taken together should not exceed = 70,0007 in a year. Contributions
in excess of the limit should be treated as irregular subscription and the excess
amount should be refunded to the subscriber without any interest. Further,
declarations to the effect that the subscriber is not maintaining any other PPF
Account and that the subscriber agrees to abide by the provisions of the PPF
Scheme, 1968 and the amendments issued thereto from time to time are
required to be obtained from the subscriber along with his/her application
form at the time of opening of the account. The Department of Posts (DoP)
had issued orders (May 2004) for detection of irregular opening of accounts by
the depositors under PPF Scheme at the initial stages itself.

3 % 1,00,000/- with effect from 1/12/2011

26



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Departmental Rules further stipulated that a subscriber may, on the expiry of
15 years from the end of the year in which the initial subscription was made
but before the expiry of one year thereafter, may exercise an option (Form H)
that he would continue to subscribe for a further period of a block of five
years, failing which these deposits will be treated as irregular deposits and will
not carry any interest and be disallowed for rebate under Section 80 C of IT
Act.

Our scrutiny of the records (August 2009 to March 2011) of 28 Post Offices in
Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and
Gujarat Postal Circles revealed that, deposits made by subscribers beyond the
prescribed limit (₹ 70,000); multiple accounts in name of one subscriber and
deposits continued after maturity of the accounts, led to incorrect payment of
interest of % 2.26 crore (Annex-VII) on these PPF accounts. These
irregularities remained undetected by the PPF authorities until pointed out in
audit.

On this being pointed out in audit, Post Office, Jaipur City under Rajasthan
Circle recovered % 14.97 lakh. Some Post Offices admitted opening of
irregular accounts due to lack of knowledge of the Rules (Annex-VII). Most
of the Post Offices stated that the necessary action would be taken after
verification of the records.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in January 2012; their reply was
awaited as of May 2012.

Failure of the Chief Post Master General, Delhi to deduct commission in
advance on purchase of revenue stamps from the State Government, led
to short realization of revenue to the extent of रं 98.36 lakh.

All revenue stamps, both judicial and non-judicial, which form sources of
central revenue, are printed at the Security Press at Nasik Road. The Press
prints and supplies such revenue stamps as may be required by various States
on such terms as the Government of India may determine from time to time.

The Department of Posts (DoP) through its post offices sells revenue stamps to
the public on behalf of State Governments for which the commission at
prescribed rates, fixed from time to time, is receivable by DoP from the
respective State Governments. The prescribed commission is to be deducted in

27


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

advance by Post Offices while purchasing revenue stamps from State
Government Treasuries.

Ministry of Finance (MoF) in consultation with the State Governments fixed
the following rates of commission to be charged by the DoP for sale of
revenue stamps through post offices:

From 01.10.2003 3%
From 01.10.2004 6%
From 01.10.2005 10%

DoP issued (February 2004) instructions to all Heads of
Circles/Regions/Postal Accounts inter-alia stipulating that while purchasing
stamps from the State Treasuries, the commission, as decided by MoF, will be
deducted in advance by the Head Post Offices. These instructions were again
reiterated by the DoP in October 2006, wherein Postal Circles were clearly
advised to dispense with the sale of stamps if the State Governments are not
inclined to pay commission at above rates.

A mention was made in Paragraph no. 4.1 of Report No. 16 of 2011-12,
Compliance Audit Observations (Civil) regarding non-deduction of
commission by the Postal Circles of DoP on purchase of revenue stamps in
Gujarat, Maharashtra, North East and West Bengal Circles. The Ministry's
reply in this regard is still awaited (April 2012).

Our scrutiny of records of three HPOs in Delhi Postal Circle (November 2010
- August 2011) however, revealed that despite the discrepancy having been
brought to the notice of DoP at the highest level in January 2011 and the
matter having been commented in C&AG's Audit Report, ibid, these post
offices continued to purchase revenue stamps during the period October 2004
to June 2011 by deducting commission at three per cent that had ceased to be
valid w.e.f. 1 October 2004. This lapse resulted in short-deduction of
commission to the extent of = 98.36 lakh as shown in the table below:

28


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(₹ in lakh)

GPO Delhi October 2005
to
October 2010
HPO May 2005 25.60 1.54 0.77 0.77
Caniament November 2005 to 238.40 23.84 715 16.69
May 2010
October 2004 108.80 6.52 3.26 3.26
to
HPO Lodhi September 2005
Road October 2005 572.80 57.28 17.18 40.10
to
June 2011

(* As per CPMG, Delhi the amount is हैं 37.54 lakh)

On this being pointed out by Audit, the Postmasters of the concerned Post
Offices confirmed the facts and figures. The Chief Postmaster General
(CPMG) Delhi Circle stated (January 2012) that the matter had been taken up
with the Government of NCT Delhi several times, but the matter of revision of
commission remained inconclusive.

The reply of CPMG, Delhi does not address the issue raised by audit because
the instructions issued by DoP in February 2004 and October 2006 had clearly
advised the Circle Offices to advise the Head Post Offices to deduct
commission at the revised rates.

Thus, failure of the CPMG, Delhi to ensure implementation of DoP
instructions resulted in short-deduction of commission of € 98.36 lakh.

The matter was referred to DoP in January 2012; their reply was awaited as of
May 2012.

ee

Failure of Department of Posts to construct a postal complex on a plot
acquired in 1990 resulted in infructuous expenditure of 64.62 lakh.

The Department of Posts (DoP) acquired a plot measuring 1970 sq. meters in
1990 in Goa for construction of a Postal building. This land was acquired on
lease basis from the Economic Development Corporation (EDC) of Goa,



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Daman & Diu Limited for which हैं 14.38 lakh was paid as an advance. The
lease agreement stipulated completion of the building within five years from
the date of commencement of the lease or from the date of taking possession
of the plot whichever happened to be earlier.

Our scrutiny (February 2011) of records of O/o Post Master General (PMG)
Panjim, Goa revealed that the Schedule of Accommodation (SOA) required to
kick start the process of seeking necessary approval for construction on the
land was sent to Postal Directorate in September 1992 i.e., two years after the
acquisition of plot. The project was approved by the Postal Directorate in
December 1993. However, while seeking its approval, the Directorate was not
informed about the time limitation of five year for completion of the building.
This fact was intimated by CPMG, Mumbai to the Postal Directorate as late as
in 1997 i.e. seven years after the date of acquisition of plot. A revised SOA
was sent to the Directorate for approval in February 1997, was approved in
May 1998. While conveying the approval for preliminary drawings in June
1998 the Directorate instructed Sr. Architect, Mumbai to have the preliminary
estimates prepared by the civil wing and send the same for approval. The draft
preliminary estimate for हैं 5.47 crore was sent to the Directorate in October
1998. However, the necessary funds amounting to हैं 3.50 crore were not
allotted up till 2003-04. Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction
for the work were issued in October 2005 for हैं 4.40 crore.

It was also seen that tenders for the construction of the postal building were
called for, nine times between December 2006 and September 2009. However,
these were either rejected because bidders were ineligible or were cancelled on
account of being a single tender. The notice inviting tender for pile foundation
work was floated in January 2006 but the bids received in response were
rejected because the lowest tender was much above the estimated cost.
Tenders were again floated for pile foundation work in March 2006 and work
was awarded in August 2006. Although the date of completion of pile
foundation work was March 2007, it was actually completed in July 2008.
Scrutiny further revealed (February 2011) that due to non-completion of
building within the stipulated time period of five years; DoP had to pay
extension fee and penalty to the extent of % 40.95 lakh for the period from
1995 to 2010 and licence renewal fee of हैं 6.99 lakh for the period up to
March 2008 to EDC. Besides, an expenditure of % 2.30 lakh was incurred on
payment of ground rent up to June 2011.

On this being pointed out by Audit, the Assistant Director, Postal O/o PMG
Goa while accepting the facts (August 2011) stated that the construction was

30


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

delayed partly due to administrative reasons and partly due to inadequate
funding by Directorate. It was further stated by Assistant Director, Postal O/o
PMG Goa (February 2012) that no funds were allotted for construction of the
project. On being pointed out to the Secretary, DoP in November 2011, she
urged the authorities to expedite the construction work.

DoP replied (March 2012) that though there was no clause for seeking
extension fee or penalty in the original lease deed, two extensions were
granted by EDC authorities for construction of EDC complex only on payment
of extension fee. The building is being constructed through the civil wing of
the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL), a Public Sector Undertaking.

Failure in planning and delay in decision making on construction of Postal
complex at Goa by DoP on leased land even after 15 years of acquisition of
land has resulted in infructuous expenditure of € 64.62 lakh.

31


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Department of Telecommunications (DoT) is responsible for policy
formulation, performance review, monitoring, international cooperation,
Research & Development and grant of licences to operators for providing
basic, mobile and value added services in various cities and telecom circles as
per approved policy of the Government. In pursuance of the New Telecom
Policy 1999, the Government of India decided to corporatise the service
providing functions of the DoT. Accordingly, Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
(BSNL) was incorporated as a wholly owned Central Government Company
and the business of providing telecommunication services in the country was
transferred to it with effect from 1 October 2000. The DoT is responsible for
facilitating various activities for the growth and expansion of the telecom
sector.

> Policy formulation, licensing and coordination matters relating to
telegraphs, telephones, wireless, data, facsimile and Telematics
services and other similar forms of communications.

Administration of Universal Obligation Fund.

International cooperation in matters connected शांति
telecommunications, including matters relating to all concerned
international bodies such as International Telecommunication Union,
its Radio Regulation Board, Radio Communication Sector,
Telecommunication Standardization Sector, Development Sector,
International Telecommunication Satellite Organization, International
Mobile Satellite Organization, Asia Pacific Telecommunication.

> Promotion of standardization, research and development in
telecommunications.

> Promotion of private investment in Telecommunications.

32


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The revenue and expenditure of DoT for the last three years is given below:

% in crore.

2008-09 12997.80 1685.00
2009-10 15879.49 5314.97
2010-11 120547.63 3421.00

The Indian Telecom sector has come a long way since liberalization started
with New Telecom Policy, 1999. Telecom sector has witnessed exponential
growth especially in the wireless segment in the last few years and has
evolved as a basic infrastructure like electricity, roads, water etc. Further, it
has emerged as one of the critical components of economic growth required
for overall socio economic development of the country.

The Telecom sector continued to register an impressive growth during the last
five years 2006-07 to 2010-11 and the details are in the table given below.
During the period, the number of telephone subscribers increased from 206
million to 846 million, registering a growth of 310 per cent. While the
wireless subscriber base increased by 647 million, the wireline base recorded a
decline of 6 million. The wireless segment continued to dominate with a total
base of 812 million connections as of March 2011. The overall teledensity in
the country registered an increase from 18 at the end of March 2007 to 71 at
the end of March 2011. The rural teledensity which was 6 as on 31st March
2007 increased to 34 at the end of March 2011, as compared to the urban
teledensity of 47 and 157 respectively. However, the growth rate of
subscribers in rural areas during the last five years was higher at 485 per cent
compared to 233 per cent in urban areas. The internet and broadband
subscribers had also gone up from 9.27 million in 2006-07 to 19.67 million in
2010-11.

33


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

2006-07 | 205.86 | 45.71 |160.15| 40.75 165.11 18.22 5.78 47.24 9.27
2007-08 | 300.48 | 73.92 |226.56] 39.41 261.07 | 25.64 9.34 63.67 | 1109 | 1.09
2008-09 | 429.73 | 120.29 |309.43| 37.97 391.76 | 36.98 15.02 88.11 13.54
2009-10 | 621.28 | 200.81 |420.47| 36.96 584.32 | 52.74 24.29 119.73 16.18
2010-11 | 846.32 | 282.23 |564.08| 34.73 811.59 | 70.89 33.79 157.32 19.67
(Source: TRAI Annual Reports and TRAI's reply)
The capital employed in the sector also increased from % 1,98,011 crore in

2006-07 to %3,37,683 crore in 2010-11 indicating a healthy growth of
investment in the sector. Correspondingly the capital investment also grew
from % 2,40,711 crore in 2006-07 to  4,79,278 crore in 2010-11. The growth
in subscriber base resulted in an increase in the gross revenue of telecom
services as detailed below:

(@ in crore)

2006-07 1,04,595 93,416 | 1,98,011 | 1,34,552 | 1,06,159 | 2,40,711 1,07,832
2007-08 1,04,247 | 1,15,462 | 2,19,709 | 1,41,149 | 1,37,450 | 2,78,599 1,32,785
2008-09 1,03,856 | 1,70,651 | 2,74,507 | 1,49,201 | 1,88,587 | 3,37,788 1,51,693
2009-10 96,103 | 1,90,734 | 2,86,837 | 1,89,615 | 2,26,814 | 4,16,429 1,57,985
[2010-11 | 89,040 | 2,48,643 | 3,37,683 | 1,97,332 | 2,81,946 | 4,79,278 1,71,719

(Source: 11९01 Annual Reports and TRAI's reply)

It can be seen that the capital employed and the investments made by Private
Telecom Companies is more than the share of Public Sector Telecom
Companies. Further, the subscriber base of Private Telecom Companies has
increased manifold as compared to Public Sector Telecom Companies as given
below:

34


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

900

846,33,

800

700

720.33,

600

500

400

—$ Total No. of subscribers
(in milion)

BE No. of Subscribers in

300

Private Network (in million)

—t- No. of Subscribers in PSU

200

Network (in million)

100

7133-7955 (895510587

30.06__46,29 _ 61.08

2004 = 2005-2006. «2007S 2008) 2009 2010S 2011
Year

(Source: DoT Annual Report)

The main guiding policy for the telecom sector in India is the New Telecom

Policy 1999. The objectives of the policy are as follows:

>

Vv

Make available affordable and effective communications for all
citizens. This is at the core of the vision and goal of the telecom policy,
as access to telecommunications is of utmost importance for

achievement of the country’s social and economic goals,

Strive to provide a balance between the provision of universal service
to all uncovered areas, including the rural areas, and the provision of
high-level services capable of meeting the needs of the country’s

economy,

Encourage development of telecommunication facilities in remote,
hilly and tribal areas of the country,

Create a modern and efficient telecommunications infrastructure taking
into account the convergence of IT, media, telecom and consumer
electronics and assist emergence of India as an IT superpower,

Convert PCOs, wherever justified, into Public Tele-info Centres
having multimedia capability like ISDN services, remote database
access, and assist emergence of community information systems etc.,

35


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

> Transform the telecommunications sector in a time bound manner to a
greater competitive environment in both urban and rural areas
providing equal opportunities and level playing field for all players,

> Strengthen research and development efforts in the country and
provide an impetus to build world-class manufacturing capabilities,

Achieve efficiency and transparency in spectrum management,
Protect defence and security interests of the country,

Enable Indian telecom companies to become truly global players.

The Telecom sector policies and programmes are carried out by the following
wings of DoT:

The Telecom Commission was
Resolution dated April 11, 1989 with administrative and financial powers of
the Government of India to deal with various aspects of Telecommunications.
The Commission consists of a Chairman and four full time members, who are
ex-officio Secretaries to the Government of India in the Department of
Telecommunications, besides there are four part time members who are the
Secretaries to the Government of India of the concerned Departments. The
major functions of the Telecom Commission include policy formulation,

set up by the Government of India vide

review of performance, licensing, wireless spectrum management,
administrative monitoring of PSUs, research and development,
standardization/validation of equipment and International Relations.

Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAID)'s mission is to ensure that the
interests of consumers are protected and at the same time to nurture conditions
for growth of telecommunications services in the country in a manner and at a
pace which will enable India to play a leading role in emerging global
information society. One of the main objectives of TRAI is to provide a fair
and transparent policy environment which promotes a level playing field and
facilitates fair competition. It issues directions, orders and regulations
covering a wide range of subjects including tariff, interconnection and quality
of service as well as governance of the Authority.

36


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Controller of Communication Accounts (CCA) is responsible for the
assessment and collection of licence fee from all commercial licensees of
Cellular, Basic, Unified Access Service, NLD, ILD, Commercial VSAT,
PMRTS services, Internet Service Providers, New Licensees of Internet
service and licences of Captive VSAT, CMRTS, Radio links, Microwave links
and OFC links. Further, it performs the statutory functions such as Pension
payments, Audit functions etc. USO Disbursement and the Administrative
functions.

The Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) Wing in DoT, deals with the
policy of spectrum management, wireless licensing, frequency assignments,
international coordination for spectrum management and administration of
Indian Telegraph Act 1885, (ITA, 1885), for radio communication systems
and Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act 1933, (IWTA, 1933).

Telecommunications Engineering Centre (TEC) is the Technical wing of DoT.
Its responsibilities include among other things; preparing Standards and
Specifications for harmonious growth of the Indian Telecom Network,
carrying out evaluation of equipment and services, according approvals for
equipment, technology and services. Technical and advisory support to TRAI,
TDSAT, USOF, BSNL and MTNL, drawing up Fundamental Technical Plans
of DoT, interaction with multilateral agencies like APT, ETSI and ITU ete.
through DoT and develop necessary expertise to imbibe the latest technologies
and results of R & D.

Centre for Development of Telematics (C-DOT) is the telecom research and
development centre of the Government of India under administrative control
of the Department of Telecommunications. C-DOT develops total telecom
solutions, technologies and applications for the fixed-line, mobile and packet-
based converged networks and services. C-DOT has also developed
technologies which are intensively based on Software and are useful to the
service providers for provisioning of services, as also for operations and
management of networks and services. C-DOT technologies have a significant
presence in the Indian telecom network directly as well as through its licenses.

37


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

C-DOT's recent focus has been on development and deployment of Next
Generation Networks, cost-effective rural wireless solutions, software based
systems, optical and satellite transport and access technologies and solutions
required for strategic sectors.

Subsidy of € 2.17 crore to service providers for Rural Community Phones
(RCP) was incorrectly paid by West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh (East)
circles of which, = 1.62 crore was recovered at the instance of Audit.

The New Telecom Policy (NTP) of 1999 laid emphasis on Universal Service
Obligation (USO) which inter alia sought to achieve objective of increasing
tural tele-density from the level of 0.4 to 4.0 per hundred population by 2010.
As per the policy, the resources for meeting the USO would be raised through
a 'universal access levy', which would be a percentage of the revenue earned
by all the operators under various licenses, as decided by the Government. The
implementation of the universal telephone services for rural/remote areas
would be undertaken by all fixed service providers who would be reimbursed
net cost of providing this service from the USO Fund. Accordingly, a USO
Fund was formed with effect from April 2002. One of the activities to be
subsidized from the USO Fund was provision of Rural Community Phones
(RCPs) for promoting rural telephony.

As per Clause 30.15 of the Agreement for provision of RCPs, an RCP meant a
public phone installed in a village with a population exceeding 2000 as per
Census 1991 and where no Public Call Office (PCO) existed. Clause 18.13 of
the agreement also envisaged that the Administrator, to ensure proper and
correct verification of subsidy paid, could if deemed necessary, modify, alter
or substitute and amend whatever was stated therein. Agreements were entered.
into (2004) with Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and Reliance
Infocomm Limited (RIL) in different service areas for provision of 46253
RCPs.

Our scrutiny of records in the office of the Controller of Communication
Accounts (CCA) West Bengal Circle, Kolkata in February 2010, and CCA,
U.P. East Circle, Lucknow in October 2011 revealed that in violation of
licence agreement conditions which stipulated proper verification of subsidy
claims, an amount of % 2.17 crore was paid in excess for the period March
2005 to December 2010, to M/s RIL and BSNL in respect of 836 RCPs though
PCOs existed in these villages as shown in the following table:

38



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

@ in crore)

CCA, West Bengal RIL 595 1.62
Circle, Kolkata

CCA, UP. East,[ RL | 215 0.48
Lucknow BSNL 26 0.07

Thus, the CCAs did not scrupulously follow the licence conditions resulting in
excess payment of subsidy to the extent of % 2.17 crore.

On this being pointed out by us, the CCA, West Bengal Circle, Kolkata raised
(July 2010) a claim for € 1.62 crore against M/s RIL and recovered the entire
amount (November 2011) at the instance of Audit. The CCA, U.P East,
Lucknow stated that the matter was being investigated and a reply would
follow.

The matter was referred to DoT in January 2012; their reply was awaited as of
May 2012.

39


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

CHAPTER III: MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

Indian Missions and Posts abroad provide passport, visa and other consular
services to foreign nationals and Indians abroad through their consular wings.
The Consular, Passport and Visa (CPV) Division of the Ministry of External
Affairs (MEA) provides these services to Indian citizens through the Central
Passport Organisation (CPO) in India. The policies, rules, regulations and
procedures in this regard are framed by the CPV Division of the Ministry. This
division is mainly responsible for implementing the provisions of the Passport
Act, 1967 and the Passport Rules 1980, in coordination with other ministries
and passport issuing authorities! in India.

The receipts of the Ministry comprise mainly of passport fees realized by the
Regional Passport Offices/Passport Offices (RPOs/POs) in India and consular
fees charged by the Missions and Posts abroad. The accounts of the revenue
realized by all the Missions and Posts abroad are maintained by the Principal
Chief Controller of Accounts (Pr. CCA), Ministry of External Affairs, New
Delhi. The receipts on account of the passport and visa fees of the Ministry
during the last four years were as follows:

i
2007-08 1667.27
2008-09 2045.85
2009-10 2101.13
2010-11 2266.65

A test check of the records of the consular wings of 92 out of 176 Missions
and Posts abroad was conducted by Audit. The details are given in Annex-
शा.

The audit findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:

According to the Ministry of External Affairs’ instructions of June 2008
(effective from 1 July 2008), business visas were to be issued for a minimum

1 Regional Passport Offices



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

validity of one year. The instructions further stipulated that registration would
be required if the stay on each visit exceeded 180 days (except for the
countries specified in para 50 of the Visa Manual 2003, as amended from time
to time). The rates of business visa fees were different for specified and
unspecified countries.

Audit noted that 25 Missions and Posts” issued visas of less than one year’s
validity in contravention of the instructions. This resulted in short realization
of visa fees to the extent of ¥ 36.85 crore in respect of 1,38,711 cases for
unspecified countries and % 21 lakh in respect of 489 cases for specified’
countries. These are detailed in Annex-IX (a and b).

Audit further noted that the Missions at Abu Dhabi and Dushanbe, while
issuing business visas for more than one year had incorrectly charged visa fees
prescribed for one year. This resulted in total short levy of हैं 20 lakh in
respect of 536 cases as detailed in Annex-IX (c).

The Ministry accepted the audit observation and stated (November 2010) that
the instructions on business visa fees had been reiterated to all the Missions
and Posts abroad. It also stated that the concerned Heads of the Missions and
Posts had also been requested to explore the possibility of recovering the fees,
wherever feasible. The Ministry issued (November 2010) a further
clarification that the Missions and Posts may issue visas valid for less than one
year if desired by the applicants, but the fees must be charged for one year.

ee

The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) was established in October
2009 in the Indian Missions in 17 Emigration Check Required countries’ and
Maldives with the approval of the Cabinet. The Fund was established to carry
out welfare activities for overseas Indian citizens in distress. The coverage of
the Fund was further extended to 24 Indian Missions in April 2010 and to the
remaining 157 Indian Missions and Posts in March 2011. Under this scheme,
the Missions and Posts were required to raise funds by levying an additional

2 Abu Dhabi, Addis Ababa, Algiers, Bahrain, Beijing, Beirut, Brussels, Damascus, Dar-es-
salaam, Dubai, Dushanbe, Guangzhou, Jeddah, Kathmandu, Mahe (Victoria), Mandalay,
Milan, Mombasa, Nairobi, Osaka, Rome, Seoul, Shanghai, The Hague and Tripoli

3 One year business visa fee for UAE (one of the specified countries where visa fees are
collected on reciprocal basis) is US $ 415, whereas one year business visa fee for the rest of
the countries (unspecified countries) is US $ 120.

4 Afghanistan, Bahrain, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Oman,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Thailand, UAE and Yemen.

41


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

fee of = 100 (rounded off in local currency) for each type of consular service
{issue of passport, visa, Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) and Person of
India Origin (PIO) cards} rendered by them.

It was noticed in Audit that in 17 Missions and Posts, there were considerable
delays of two to 17 months in the implementation of the scheme, resulting in
non-collection of additional fees of € 15.29 crore (Annex-X).

The Missions and Posts in USA were brought under the ICWF scheme
through MEA’s orders of April 2010. Audit noted that the Indian Missions
and Posts in the United States of America (USA) had not implemented the
ICWF scheme. This led to non-collection of additional fees of हैं 6.26 crore
(Annex-XI).

The Mission at Luanda and the Post at Rajshahi informed (August and
September 2011 respectively) that they did not get any orders/instructions
from the Ministry regarding levy of ICWF fees. The Mission at Colombo
stated (January 2012) that the scheme was being implemented from 1 June
2011 onwards, after working out the modalities between the Mission and the
Posts, as no time frame had been fixed by the Ministry. The Mission at
Kampala stated (September 2011) that the leaders of various Indian
associations in Uganda felt that the levy on consular services would put an
additional financial burden on the local visa seekers. It also stated that it did
not come across any such case in the past. The Mission at Bangkok attributed
(December 2011) the delay in implementing the scheme to administrative,
functional, financial and technological modalities required before
implementation. The Post at Hong Kong stated (December 2011) that the
delay was due to non-receipt of the Ministry’s order dated 24 March 2011 in
time. It further stated that the scheme guidelines in the order were unclear and
required consultation with MEA and other Missions.

The Mission at Washington DC, stated (April 2011) that the scheme was not
being implemented in view of the discontent among the Indian community in
USA regarding several other levies and visa restrictions. It further stated that
the decision to implement the scheme was deliberately deferred, keeping in
view the fact that the incidence of Indian citizens in distress in USA was
minimal.

5 Bangkok, Berlin, Birmingham, Colombo, Edinburgh, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Hong Kong,
Kampala, London, Luanda, Milan, Munich, Paris, Rajshahi, Rome and The Hague.

42


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The replies of the Missions and Posts about non-receipt of orders from the
Ministry are not convincing as these orders were communicated through
e-mail as well as by post and clearly mentioned the date of implementation.
Further, it was noticed that the scheme was implemented by the Missions and
Posts in USA from April 2011 after the audit observations (December 2010).
The replies of the Missions were also indicative of absence of a proper
monitoring mechanism in the Ministry, which did not seek compliance of its
orders from the Missions.

The ICWF was meant to carry out on-site welfare activities for overseas
Indian citizens who were in distress and were not to be diverted for any other
purpose. Audit noted that the Indian Posts at Sydney and Melbourne made
payments of €7.13 lakh and हैं 6.05 lakh respectively, towards salaries of
contingent staff from the ICWF, in contravention of the scheme provisions.

The Post at Sydney stated (February 2012) that the payments were made with
the approval of the Mission at Canberra, exclusively for dealing with matters
concerning the welfare of the Indian community and not for regular consular
work. The Post at Melbourne stated (October 2011) that the staff hired from
October 2010 to January 2011 was for managing the initial launch of the
scheme and it had not asked for additional manpower to handle the ICWF
thereafter.

The fact remains that the payments towards salaries of contingent staff were
outside the scope of the ICWF framework and were, therefore, irregular.

In September 2002, the Government of India revised the Persons of Indian
Origin (PIO) card scheme that allowed people of Indian origin living across
the world, visa free entry to India for 15 years. Subsequently, the Government
introduced the Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) scheme with effect from
2 December 2005 to provide lifelong visa benefits to foreign nationals of
Indian origin. The prescribed fee for the OCI scheme was US $ 275 (₹ 12537)
for non-PIO card holders and US $ 25 for PIO card holders.

The fee of US $ 25 for PIO card holders was revised to US $ 145 in respect of
child PIO card holders as per a Government of India, Ministry of Home
Affairs (MHA) notification dated 25 February 2009. The order to this effect
was issued by the MHA on 30 July 2009. In the Mission and Posts in the USA,

43


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

revised fees of US $ 145 in respect of child PIO card holders were collected
from varying dates between September and October 2009, depending on the
receipt of MHA’s orders in the Missions and Posts. Audit noted that during
the intervening period between the dates of issue of the orders and the dates of
actual collection of revised fees, 503 child PIO card holders were converted to
OCI card holders. The delay in the implementation of the revised fee structure
due to late receipt of orders from the Ministry led to a loss of € 27.16 lakh.

According to Para 16 of the Consular Manual, all fees must be paid before the
services concerned are rendered. The Ministry reiterated (October 2000) that
consular services should be provided by the Missions and Posts only after
realisation of consular fees.

Audit noted that in the Mission at Washington DC, 60 cheques received
against the fees remained unreconciled, as the Mission was unable to link
them with the applicants. Out of these 60 cheques, four cheques amounting to
US $ 580 (= 26,4425) became time-barred and could not be realized. Further,
in the Post at Chicago, cheques amounting to US$ 2043 (₹ 93,140) were
dishonoured as the applicants advised their banks to stop payment after
availing of the consular services. Thus, due to non-compliance of the
Ministry’s instructions, the Mission and the Post failed to realize consular fees
of US $ 2623 (₹ 1,19,583).

Thus, as a result of non-observance of the laid down provisions, Government
receipts were not duly realized, accounted for and promptly deposited into the
bank for inclusion in the Government accounts. This indicated the weak cash
control mechanism in the Missions and was also fraught with the risk of
leakage of Government money.

The Government of India had appointed Honorary Consulates General (HCG)
in Barcelona and Tenerife under the jurisdiction of the Mission at Madrid
since 1969 and 1993, respectively. Both the HCGs, inter alia, helped the
Missions in discharging their consular functions, viz issue of visas, registration
of passports, attestation of documents of members of the Indian community,
etc. Their work included accepting visa applications, collecting the prescribed

४] US$ = 245.59 (as per official rate of exchange for the month March 2011)

a


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

fees from the applicants and forwarding the applications and the receipts to the
Mission.

In Madrid, consular fees amounting to हैं 5.60 crore collected by the HCGs
during the period 2005 to 2011 were remitted to the Mission after delays
ranging between 30 days to three years (Annex-XII).

Thus, the amount collected towards consular fees was not promptly deposited
into the Government Account. This also exposed the Mission to the risk of
misappropriation of Government money.

In November 2006, the Ministry decided to outsource visa support services’ in
19 Missions and Posts. This was further extended to 56 Missions and Posts*.
The Missions and Posts were instructed to outsource the services through
competitive bidding in a transparent manner, in accordance with the guidelines
laid down by the Ministry and the provisions of the General Financial Rules
(GFRs).

The Ministry also circulated (April 2007) a model contract to the Missions and
Posts laying down the essential terms and conditions to be incorporated in the
outsourcing contracts.

Audit revealed a number of deficiencies in the process of evaluation of
tenders, selection of service providers (SP), terms and conditions negotiated
and contracted with the SPs and execution of the contracts. These are
described below:

The Post at Hamburg outsourced its visa support services to a firm (M/s
IGCS) for a period of 10 years at the rate of Euro 13.50 including VAT as
service charge, without following any competitive tendering process. This was

7 Visa support services broadly include distribution of blank application forms, collection and
scrutiny of visa applications with supporting documents and prescribed visa fees, depositing
of fees with Missions and Posts, capturing the visa application data in electronic format and
transferring the same to the Missions and Posts

$ Abu Dhabi, Amman, Athens, Bangkok, Beijing, Berlin, Bern, Birmingham, Brussels,
Canberra, Chicago, Chittagong, Colombo, Dhaka, Dubai, Edinburgh, Frankfurt, Guangzhou,
Hamburg, Hong Kong, Houston, Islamabad, Jeddah, Kabul, Kathmandu, Khartoum, Kobe,
Kuala Lumpur, Kuwait, London, Madrid, Melbourne, Milan, Moscow, Munich, New York,
Osaka, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Petersburg, Riyadh, San Fransisco, Seoul, Shanghai, Singapore,
Stockholm, Sydney, Tel Aviv, The Hague, Tokyo, Toronto, Vancouver, Vienna, Warsaw,
Washington DC

45


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

justified on the grounds that the same company was providing visa support
services in the Post at Frankfurt at the same rate. The reasons advanced were
in violation of the provisions of the GFRs and the instructions of the Ministry.
Further, the rates agreed to by the Post were uneconomical in comparison to
those in the Mission at Berlin and the Post at Munich, where the services had
been outsourced after carrying out a combined competitive tendering process,
at the rate of Euro 11.78 per visa application.

The Mission at Ottawa received four bids for outsourcing visa support
services. Two bids qualified technically and their financial bids were opened.
M/s VFS Global Services (one of the two technically qualified firms) was
adjudged the lower one, though the treatment of Goods and Services Tax
(GST) while arriving at the rates quoted was not comparable between the two
bids. The firm was awarded the contract at the rate of C$ 15.75 per
application, exclusive of GST and other charges. The other technically
qualified bidder, M/s TT Services quoted a uniform price of C$ 16.45,
inclusive of all applicable local taxes plus courier and logistic costs.

The tender committee rejected the financial bid of M/s TT Services on the
ground that the quoted price was essentially indeterminate, being inclusive of
local taxes, which varied from province to province in Canada. Audit,
however, noted that after including the minimum GST of five per cent in any
State of Canada the quoted price of M/s VFS, worked out to be C$ 16.54,
which was more than the price quoted by M/s TT services, even if courier and
other logistic components were excluded. This resulted in undue benefit of CS
512,000 (₹ 2.33 crore’) annually to the service provider with an additional
financial burden on the applicants.

The Mission stated (January 2010) that the Request for Proposal (RFP) had
sought unconditional bids exclusive of local taxes. It further stated that while
the bid of VFS was in conformity with the RFP document, the bid of TT
services carried a clause that it included applicable local taxes. The reply
may be viewed in light of the fact that even if minimum five per cent GST was
added to the rates of VFS (GST rates in Canada were more than five per cent
GST in all provinces), the rates would be more than the rate quoted by TT
services, which was inclusive of taxes.

१1 ₹ = 0.022 Canadian Dollar (C$) (as per official rate of exchange for the month March
2011)

46


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

6) The Mission at Canberra received eight bids for outsourcing of visa
support services. Five of these bids were rejected on technical grounds and
the remaining three were shortlisted for opening of their financial bids. The
Mission awarded the contract to M/s VFS Global at the rate of A$ 16.36" plus
GST per application, in November 2007.

Audit noted that at the time of opening of bids, M/s Mercantile Pacific Pvt.
Ltd., one of the technically qualified firms, quoted the lowest rate of A$ 16.46
plus GST per application while M/s VFS Global quoted a rate of AS 17.50
plus GST per application. The Mission, without making any attempt to
negotiate with the lowest bidder, held negotiations and awarded the contract to
the L2 bidder (M/s VFS Global). Further, M/s Mercantile Pacific Pvt. Ltd.
corresponded on several occasions with the Mission and offered to bring down
its rates even further. The Mission, however, did not respond. Hence, the
selection of M/s VFS Global was inappropriate and in contravention of the
guidelines of the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). The Mission replied
(July 2010) that M/s VFS Global was selected because it had the knowledge of
the Ministry’s requirements and had been providing services in other Indian
Missions also, while M/s Mercantile Pacific Pvt. Ltd. lacked sufficient
knowledge and experience in the required field. The reply of the Mission does
not recognize that M/s Mercantile Pacific Pvt. Ltd. was an ISO 9001 certified
Company with nine years of experience in Australia and above all, its
suitability had already been accepted during the technical evaluation by the
Mission. The action of the Mission to award the work to M/s VFS Global was,
thus, irregular.

(id) As per the General Financial Rules (GFRs), every authority delegated
with financial powers of procuring goods shall be responsible for bringing
efficiency, economy and transparency in public procurement.

In the Mission at The Hague, out of the seven bids received, financial bids of
two technically qualified bids were opened. The contract was awarded
(November 2010) to the L2 bidder (M/s VFS Global). The contract was
awarded at the rate of Euro 11.50"), inclusive of all local taxes and VAT, in
comparison to the rate of Euro 7.70 per application, inclusive of VAT quoted
by the lowest bidder M/s IVS Global. Hence, the provisions of the GFR and

10 1 & = 0.022 Australian Dollar (A$) (as per official rate of exchange for the month March
2011)
11 Buro =& 62.570 (as per official rate of exchange for the month March 2011)

47


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

instructions of the Ministry were not observed. The manner of selection
indicated lack of transparency.

The Mission replied (July 2011) that VFS Global quoted Euro 11.50, inclusive
of VAT, for all the services. IVS Global quoted Euro 7.70, inclusive of VAT
for passport and visa services and no service charge for OCI and PIO cards.
The experience of VFS Global was vastly superior to that of [VS Global. M/s
VFS Global had been providing successful services, among others, to the
Mission at London as well as to the Dutch Embassy and Consulates in India.
Tt was felt that M/s VFS Global, because of its experience of working with the
Dutch Missions in India, could prove to be more effective and efficient. In
view of the fact that the Netherlands had an Indian diaspora comprising
200,000 Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) and PIOs, the Committee felt that the
offer of gratis services by M/s IVS Global for OCI and PIO cards might not be
sustainable because of the increasing number of OCI and PIO card
applications. Given the above circumstances, it was evident that the selection
of M/s VFS Global was totally fair.

The justification advanced by the Mission is not convincing in view of the fact
that both the firms were technically qualified. As such, the Mission should
have selected the lowest bidder.

ee

The Mission at Stockholm signed (September 2008) an agreement with M/s
TT Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. for outsourcing of visa support services for a period
of three years with effect from December 2008.

Audit noted that the service provider was selected for award of a contract on
the basis of its lowest financial quote of SEK? 171 per application (inclusive
of all local taxes and VAT) as service charge. However, the agreement was
concluded at SEK 170 per application, exclusive of any applicable taxes and
the service provider effectively charged SEK 212 (SEK 170 as service charge
plus SEK 42 towards VAT) per application from the applicants. During
December 2008 to May 2011, the service provider had processed 87207
applications and received SEK 1,84,87,884 as service charges. This included
SEK 36,62,694 (₹ 2.38 crore) towards VAT, which should not have been
borne by the applicants.

7 1 % = 0.154 Swedish Krona (SEK) (as per official rate of exchange for the month August
2010)

48


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

On this being pointed out (October 2010) by Audit, the Mission took up the
matter with the service provider in October 2010 to rectify the error. The
service provider contended that it was allowed to charge SEK 170 per
application, exclusive of VAT during the discussion with the Mission, which
was later translated into the final agreement. However, the Mission confirmed
(November 2010) that no such record of any meeting or discussion as alleged
by the service provider had been found. This indicated that due care had not
been exercised by the Mission in drafting the agreement. This led to undue
financial burden on the applicants, with consequent unintended benefit to the
service provider by SEK 36,62,694 (% 2.38 crore). The Ministry stated
(October 2011) that the Mission had issued a notice to the service provider to
refund the amount, failing which the amount would be recovered from the
guarantee money and the Company blacklisted.

6) The Mission at Paris entered into an agreement in February 2008
with M/s VFS for providing visa support services for a period of three years at
the rate of Euro 12 per ordinary application and Euro 22 per application for
urgent services. The service provider represented to the Mission in April 2009
for revision of service charges as it was incurring heavy losses on its
operations in France. Based on the representation, the Mission revised the
service charge from Euro 12 to Euro 14 per ordinary application and from
Euro 22 to Euro 25 for urgent applications from April 2009 in an arbitrary
manner, without following the re-tendering process.

Any ad hoc increase in the service charges midway through the contracted
period defied the very purpose of selecting the lowest bidder through open
tendering. The Mission stated (June 2011) that on the instructions of the
Ministry, the service charges had been reverted to the original rates with effect
from 6 June 2011. The fact remains that the Mission incorrectly revised the
service charges upwards without assigning sufficient justification. This
resulted in an unintended benefit of हैं 5.34 crore to the service provider which
was collected as enhanced service charges on 3,41,656 ordinary visas and
56,596 emergency visas issued during the period April 2009 to June 2011.

(ii) _In the Mission at Madrid, the visa support services were outsourced to
M/s VPS, (a division of M/s BLS Detectives Ltd.) in March 2009. It was,
however, noted that the service provider subsequently subcontracted the
services to a local firm, which was in contravention of the provisions of the
model contract of the Ministry, which stipulated that only small activities like

बढ


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

couriering, catering and appointment of security guards etc. may be sub-
contracted.

The service provider was required to commence partial operations from two
locations (Madrid and Barcelona) within four months of signing the contract
and full operations within two months of starting the partial operations. The
service provider commenced the operations at Madrid from June 2009. The
centre at Barcelona, however, was not made operational till 16 January 2011.
In March 2010, considering the low volume of applications, the Mission
concluded that opening of the centre at Barcelona would not serve any useful
purpose and took up the matter with the Ministry. The Ministry
communicated (September 2010) that the service provider should be advised
to open the centre at Barcelona in fulfilment of its contractual obligations. The
Mission then took belated action to open the centre in January 2011. Delay by
the service provider to open the centre at Barcelona constituted violation of
contractual obligations.

The Ministry of Finance allocated a sum of % 39 crore in April 2008 for
improvement of infrastructure facilities in the consular wings of the Missions
and Posts abroad. The Ministry further instructed that the sums allocated
should be spent for specified purposes under the overall control of Head of
Missions and Posts in accordance with the prescribed Government procedures
and rules.

However, a review of the funds allocated and utilized in 137 Missions and
Posts revealed that comprehensive proposals for improvement of consular
facilities were not drawn up by many Missions and Posts. Further, in eight
Missions, more than 30 per cent of the allocated funds were surrendered or
allowed to lapse. A table indicating the allocation and utilization of the special
budget is given below:

( in lakh)
1. Oslo 12.30 0.79 11.51(93.58)
2. Vancouver 100.00 20.93 79.07(79.07)
3. Helsinki 28.50 13.18 15.32(53.75)
4. Milan 84.75 48.50 36.25(42.77)

“Athens, Brussels, Copenhagen, Edinburgh, Helsinki, London, Madrid, Milan, Oslo, Paris,
Rome, The Hague and Vancouver

50



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

5.__| Edinburgh 5.00 2.92 2.08(41.60
[ 6. [Rome sd 60.00 37.00 23.00(38.33)
7.__| Paris 129.00 82.36 46.64(36.16)
[ 8. | Copenhagen 32.05 21.97 10.08(31.45)
[ 9. | Brussels 45.00 36.35 08.65(19.22)
| 10. |

'._| London 1100.00 985.00 | 115.00(10.45)

Substantial savings indicate that the funds were not allocated by the Ministry

on a realistic basis.

Other irregularities noticed in utilization of the special budget are discussed

below:

The allocation of funds was made by the Ministry of Finance with the specific

condition that the sums should be spent for improvement of facilities that
included hiring of extra space if needed, construction of adequate number of
counters, adequate seating arrangements for visitors, provision of basic

amenities such as toilets and water and provision of additional equipment for

the consular and visa wings.

However, a review of the works carried out by the Missions and Posts

indicated that expenditure of F 198.84 lakh was incurred on works which were

not in conformity with the intended purpose of this special allocation of funds,

as shown below:

HCI, London

Repair and polish of old broken chair of antique value.

(₹ in lakh)

42.29

Purchase of office equipment like PCs, software, printers for | 28.68
use in other wings

Refurbishment of refreshment hall*

100.11

Embassy of India, | Painting of stairwell of Chancery, purchase and installation 10.45
Athens of reception desk which was not for the consular wing and
construction of book shelves for libra

Consulate General | Purchase of stationery and other miscellaneous items 8.59
of India, Milan
Consulate General | Purchase of furniture for Consular Wing delivered to 8.72

of India, Vancouver | Consul-General’s residence

* For general public, there was no free access to the refreshment hall.

51


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Instances of diversion of funds like the above indicated weak financial
management and internal controls within the Missions and Posts.

The Post at Vancouver stated (October 2011) that the consular services were
outsourced in 2009 and it was expected that the number of visitors to the
Consulate would go down drastically from 300 to 20-25 every day. Therefore,
it was decided to buy furniture, keeping in mind the condition of the Consular
Wing.

The purchase of furniture for the residence of the Consul-General was in
violation of the objectives of the special budget allocated by the Ministry to
the Post. Moreover, the furniture for the residence of the Consul-General was
to be purchased from the budget of Office Expenses of the Mission and not
from the special allocation for the Consular Wing.

No replies were received from the other Missions/Post.

6) In terms of Rule 176 of the GFRs, single source selection is
permissible only under special circumstances and after recording detailed
justification, special interest and purpose to be served, with the approval of the
competent authority. The Mission at London, however, deviated from the laid
down procedures and appointed (May 2008) a consultancy firm viz. M/s
Cuthbert Lake Chartered Surveyor without any competitive tendering, which
was irregular. The firm was paid हैं 30.14 lakh (May 2008 to April 2009) for
providing building and works consultancy services.

The Mission replied (March 2010) that M/s Cuthbert Lake Chartered Surveyor
had been involved in a number of projects in India House since the beginning
of 1942 and their professional fees were as per rates of the Royal Institute of
Chartered Surveyors and were found to be competitive. However, in the
absence of competitive tendering, the reasonableness of the rates could not be
ensured.

a बााआआआआणणणछएणएछएछएछएछछाआ

Under the scheme for improvement of facilities, the Post at Milan purchased
(March 2009) one digital data storage system’ for electronic archiving of visa,

a LCD Monitors, PCs, Scanners, Servers and complete backup system

52


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

passport and consular records for easy retrieval, from a local firm'’. The cost
of the system was Euro 44,089 (₹ 27.78 1810) 7,

Audit noted that the system could not be put to use for want of application
software which was to be provided by National Informatics Centre (NIC).
The Ministry failed to ensure availability of the required software for running
the equipment. Meanwhile, the warranty of the system also expired in March
2010.

The Post stated (March 2012) that the NIC team had not visited the Post at
Milan despite repeated requests for installation of the software and provision
of training. It further informed that all peripherals (computer systems and
scanners) were being used for various types of office work and only the server
and back up system remained unused.

The fact remains that lack of necessary coordination by MEA led to non-
utilisation of the data storage system worth हैं 27.78 lakh for the intended
purposes for the last three years.

The Missions and Posts are responsible for administration and delivery of
consular services. In carrying out these responsibilities, they are required to
comply with the rules and procedures prescribed by the Government of India.

Audit noted that the Missions and Posts were not levying fees for visa and
other consular services as per the rates prescribed by the Ministry, resulting in
short levy of हैं 37.26 crore. The implementation of the ICWF scheme by the
Missions and Posts was delayed, resulting in non-levy of fees of € 21.55 crore.
Besides, there were considerable delays in remittances of consular receipts in
the Government accounts. The Missions abroad were outsourcing visa services
in violation of the laid down provisions, resulting in financial impropriety and
lack of transparency in selecting service providers.

The Missions and Posts could not utilize the special budgets provided for
improvement of infrastructure facilities for consular services and diverted the
funds to other activities in some cases.

M/s Opimaint, Milan
One Euro ~ हैं 63.010 (as per the official rate of exchange for the month of March
2009)



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Ministry stated (October 2011) that the Missions and Posts abroad had
agreed with and taken note of the observations of Audit and had initiated steps
to prevent such lapses in future. It also stressed the need for complying with
the rules and procedures governing the functioning of the consular wings.

> The Missions and Posts may ensure that the amount of fees levied and
collected is remitted into banks promptly. The Missions may also
ensure that consular receipts are duly realized and taken into the
Government account before rendering the services.

> The Missions may ensure compliance with the Ministry’s guidelines
and GFRs for outsourcing of services. They may also ensure that the
contractual obligations are fulfilled by the service providers.

> The Ministry may ensure proper assessment of budgetary allocations
as per the specific requirements of each Mission and Post. The
Missions and Posts may ensure proper utilization of special budgets
meant for specific objectives.

> The Ministry may put in place a monitoring mechanism to ensure that
the recipients acknowledge the receipt of its communications/orders
and comply with their orders promptly.

Audit of the transactions of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Missions
and Posts abroad revealed weak internal controls leading to overpayments. On
this being pointed out by Audit, necessary recoveries were effected, as
discussed below:

eee

Failure of the Missions/Posts abroad to observe the prescribed rules and
procedures led to overpayment of pay and allowances and other
miscellaneous payments amounting to हैं 91.96 lakh by 56 Missions in 263
cases. These were recovered at the instance of Audit during 2009-11.

Para 3.3.3 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India’s Report No. 14 of
2008-09 had highlighted recovery of overpaid pay and allowances of हैं 36.55
lakh from the employees of the Missions/Posts abroad at the instance of Audit
during 2005-08.



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Ministry, in its Action Taken Note, had admitted (January 2010)
occurrence of lapses resulting in overpayments to employees of the Missions/
Posts abroad. Further, the Ministry had stated that instructions had been
issued to all the Missions/ Posts abroad to strictly observe the prescribed
procedures in financial matters.

Subsequent audit of the records of various Indian Missions/ Posts abroad
revealed that overpayments of pay and allowances and other miscellaneous
payments continue to occur which indicated that their financial controls were
weak. Recovery of % 91.96 lakh in 263 cases was made at the instance of
Audit during 2009-11 as detailed in Annex-XIII.

Lack of due diligence in evaluation of bids for setting up an IT
Laboratory in Indonesia led to awarding of a contract at an extra amount
of = 51.67 lakh on account of unwarranted Annual Maintenance Charges
and exempted Value Added Tax. At the instance of Audit, the Mission
recovered € 30.56 lakh and payment of € 21.11 lakh was averted.

The Embassy of India floated (September 2010) tenders in connection with the
setting up of an IT Laboratory project for the Indonesian Army. Based on the
technical and commercial evaluation of the four bids received, the offer of
M/s PT Citra Karya Semesta was found to be the lowest at a total contract
value of US $ 5,24,882.91, which included US $ 40,925.17 towards VAT and
US $ 74,706.04 towards Annual Maintenance Charges for a period of five
years. A work order was, therefore, placed (February 2011) on the firm.

Audit examination of the records disclosed that as per the approval of the
Ministry, maintenance of the equipment after expiry of the warranty was the
responsibility of the Indonesian Government. Further, the Mission was
exempted from payment of VAT by the Indonesian Government and a
certificate in this regard had been given to the vendor by the Mission. The
Mission had thus erred in evaluation of the bid documents and placed an order
on the lowest tenderer at an extra amount of US $ 1,15,631.21 (₹ 51.67 lakh).

On this being pointed out (May 2011) by Audit, the Mission took up the
matter with the firm and recovered (May 2011) overpayment of
US $ 68,391.75 (₹ 30.56 lakh!”) and stated that the VAT amount would not be
paid. Thus, at the instance of Audit, हैं 30.56 lakh was recovered and payment
of 21.11 lakh was averted.

77 @1US $=% 44.69

55



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Weak internal controls coupled with lack of due diligence in authorizing
claims of an agency hired by the Embassy of India for organizing the
Festival of India in China resulted in repeated payments on duplicate
invoices. The overpayment on this account recovered at the instance of
Audit was हैं 13.32 lakh.

Embassy of India in Beijing hired the services of an agency for hosting dance
and music troupes from India in different cities of China for the Festival of
India, during April to October 2010. The services to be offered by the agency
included hotel accommodation, air ticketing, baggage and local transportation
of the troupes.

Examination of the related invoices and payment vouchers by Audit revealed
over-payments of RMB 1,63,840 1.०.₹ 13.32 lakh (Annex-XIV) on account of
the following:

a. Three invoices with identical invoice numbers and description of
services were raised thrice by the agency and paid thrice by the
Mission.

b. Eight invoices with identical invoice numbers and description of
services were raised thrice by the agency and paid twice by the
Mission.

On the above being pointed out (July 2011), the Mission recovered (December
2011) the entire overpaid amount.

el

Non-pursuance of a claim for eligible discount on bulk booking of speed
post fees, by the Regional Passport Office (RPO), Mumbai resulted in
avoidable expenditure of % 19.80 lakh. At the instance of Audit, the RPO
got the amount of f 11.66 lakh refunded.

The Business Development and Marketing Directorate (BD & MD) under the
Department of Posts, provided (August 2001) discount of 20 per cent on
Speed Post fees to customers giving monthly Speed Post business of
% 2,50,001 and above. The Speed Post booking data was required to be
submitted in electronic format for availing of the full discount. BD & MD
clarified (July 2009) that with effect from September 2009, if the booking data
was provided on paper manifest instead of electronic format, the bulk discount
would be reduced by half.

56


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Regional Passport Office (RPO) Mumbai had been regularly providing
monthly Speed Post business of above @ four lakh. It was noticed in audit that
the RPO had availed of the discounts on bulk booking till December 2008.
However, the practice of obtaining discounts was discontinued from January
2009, for which no reasons were on record. At the instance of Audit, RPO,
Mumbai raised (August 2010) a demand for the eligible discount for the
period from January 2009 on the postal authorities.

Following this, an amount of % 11.66 lakh for the period January 2009 to
March 2010 was recovered (September 2010).



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

F HOME AFFAIRS

The Director General, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force accorded 19
split sanctions between June 2010 and March 2011 for an aggregate value
of € 4.72 crore. Each sanction was limited within the financial powers of
= 25 lakh, purportedly to avoid the necessity of referring the matter to the
Ministry.

In terms of the financial powers delegated by the Ministry of Home Affairs to
the Director General, Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force (DG, ITBP), the latter
was authorised to purchase computers and peripherals to the extent of हैं 25
lakh in each case. The Ministry, while conveying (August 2009) the
delegation of powers, stressed the need for following the General Financial
Rules in all procurements. The Rules provide that demands for goods should
not be divided into small quantities to make piece-meal purchases to avoid the
necessity of obtaining sanctions of higher authorities.

ITBP procured computer systems, software and related accessories between
June 2010 and March 2011 for its various field units to meet their operational
and training requirements. Audit observed that the procurements were
staggered to limit each purchase within the authorized ceiling of the DG,
ITBP. The DG accorded 19 split sanctions between June 2010 and March
2011 for an aggregate value of f 4.72 crore. Each sanction was limited within
the financial powers of = 25 lakh, purportedly to avoid the approval of the
Ministry. The amount incurred on each occasion was extremely close to the
authorised limit. In 18 cases, the sanctioned amounts ranged between हैं 24.82
lakh and हैं 24.99 lakh. The details of procurement are given in the Annex-XV.

On this being pointed out by Audit, the Directorate General, ITBP stated (June
2011) that the sanctions had been accorded as the requirements were
extremely urgent and the rate contract was expiring within a few days. It also
stated that it had noted the audit observation for future compliance.

The reply is not convincing as compliance with established rules and
procedures should not have been compromised on the grounds of urgency.
The fact remains that there were multiple sanctions for procurements that were
purportedly staggered to avoid the necessity of referring the matter to the
Ministry, thus undermining its authority.

58


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The matter was referred to the Ministry in December 2011; their reply was
awaited as of May 2012.

Failure of the Intelligence Bureau to synchronize various related activities
for commissioning of the Intelnet Network before going in for
procurement of encryptors led to idling of equipment worth % 2.89 crore
for a period of two years.

The Intelligence Bureau (IB) implemented (April 2006) Phase I of the Intelnet
Network Project with the objective of providing secure and reliable
communication connectivity between the IB Headquarters and Subsidiary IBs
(SIBs) across the country. The network was intended to facilitate exchange of
sensitive information through the medium of telephone connectivity, video-
conferencing and bulk data transactions. Under this project, 22 SIBs were
connected with the IB Headquarters. Eighteen more locations were added to
the Intelnet Project for its Phase-Il implementation. This activity was
completed in December 2009.

IB decided (May 2008) to procure 72 encryptors' for implementation of Phase
वा of the project. These were required to be installed at 21 locations
countrywide. The requirement was worked out on the following basis:

> 42 encryption units were required for 21 locations and the remaining
18 for standby purposes

> 12 encryption units were for providing secure connectivity to the Main
Frame Computer from the different buildings at IB headquarters

The Director, IB accorded (May 2008) approval for procurement of these
encryptors on the basis of a Proprietary Article Certificate’ from M/s BEL.
Procurement and installation of devices were expected to be completed within
seven months from the date of approval. IB placed (September 2009) the
supply order with the firm for procurement of 72 encryptors at a cost of = 2.93
crore. Delivery of the devices was received between October and November
2009. The final payment to the firm was made in June 2010, afier deducting
liquidated damages of € 4.39 lakh, for delays in the supply of equipment.

1 This is a secrecy device. Encryption is the conversion of data into a form called a cipher text
that cannot be easily understood by unauthorized people
2 A certificate to the effect that an item is patently owned by a single manufacturer/Company.

59


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The implementation of the project involved several actions including proper
site selection for installation of equipment, procurement of hardware and
leasing of telephone lines. Audit, however, noticed that IB had failed to
synchronize various activities related to the procurement process. Action for
leasing of lines which was one of the important factors leading up to the
installation was initiated only in June 2011, almost two years after the receipt
of the equipment. Consequently, the equipment could not be put to use as of
January 2012. Meanwhile, the warranty period of these machines had also
expired.

Audit noted that out of the 72 encryptors, 27 were issued to various units and
45 were lying in stock. The locations for their installation had not been firmed
up by the Bureau until August 2011. The locations for Intelnet connectivity
underwent frequent changes as compared to the initial proposal. Against the
21 locations initially identified, only 18 locations (including eight locations
which were not covered by the initial proposal) were finally proposed (August
2011) for providing connectivity. Thus, the locations were finalised almost
two years after the procurement of the encryptors.

The above facts establish that the procurement process was characterised by
poor planning and implementation. Failure of IB to ensure availability of
related infrastructure for commissioning the project, coupled with inordinate
delay in finalising locations, led to idling of equipment worth हैं 2.89 crore for
more than two years.

The Ministry stated (June 2012) that while IB was in the middle of the
implementation of Phase-III of the Intelnet Network Project, the Government
assigned another project, viz MAC-SMAC a nation-wide network for
collaboration of different intelligence inputs to IB, in view of the terrorist
attack in Mumbai in November 2008. As a result of the increase in the
quantum of work, which was at its peak in June 2009, the Intelnet project had
to be accorded less priority. Therefore, the procurement of hardware and
leasing of lines for Phase-III of the project could not materialize in time and it
was delayed.

The Ministry also stated that under the new operational requirement, some
new sites had been included, while some were omitted. It further stated that
the case of leasing of lines had now been cleared and the project was expected
to be implemented in June 2012.

60


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The reply establishes that IB was aware of the stated reasons of increase in
quantum of work at the time of placing the supply order in September 2009.
Thus, it was in a position to defer the procurement process for the Intelnet
project to prevent the idling of equipment.

Thus, improper procurement planning led to idling of equipment worth हैं 2.89
crore for more than two years.

Tnordinate delay in the construction of staff quarters by the Subsidiary
Intelligence Bureau, Lucknow led to cost escalation of रैं 2.17 crore. This
also resulted in avoidable expenditure of % 86.59 lakh towards payment of
House Rent Allowance to its staff members.

The Intelligence Bureau (IB) decided to construct 118 quarters for the staff of
the Subsidiary Intelligence Bureau (SIB), Lucknow in 1999. The decision for
construction of the staff quarters was taken in anticipation of savings of
& 12.12 lakh per annum, on account of house rent allowance being paid to the
staff. Accordingly, IB, with the approval of the Ministry of Home Affairs,
acquired (November 1999) land measuring three acres in Gomti Nagar,
Lucknow from the Lucknow Development Authority (LDA). The cost of the
land was % 2.45 crore. Subsequently, IB submitted (July 2003) a proposal
prepared by the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) for construction of
residential quarters at an estimated cost of % 6.17 crore, to the Ministry. The
time schedule for completion of the project included six months for
preparation of drawings, design, tendering etc. and two years for the
construction work. The project was thus scheduled for completion by
December 2005.

Audit observed inordinate delay in construction of the staff quarters. The
chronology of events leading up to the construction of the staff quarters is
given in Annex-XVI.

There were delays in preparing the plans for the project. After acquiring the
land in November 1999, IB requested CPWD, Lucknow only in May 2002 for
obtaining the layout plan. IB attributed this delay to construction of a
boundary wall. However, Audit observed that the construction of the
boundary wall was a separate issue, having no direct link with the processes
involved in obtaining the layout plan. The layout plan was submitted by the
CPWD in July 2002. This was further modified and re-submitted in
September 2002. Subsequently, CPWD was requested (December 2002) to

61


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

prepare preliminary estimates for the work, which were received by IB in
January 2003. Thereafter, approval of the Ministry was sought (July 2003).

The Ministry took almost two years in obtaining clarifications regarding
whether the estimates had been prepared as per authorisation (January 2004),
the exact cost of the bulk services’ (December 2004) etc. Thus, the Ministry
took more than two years to finally approve the project. Consequently, the
cost of the project, which was initially estimated at हैं 6.17 crore in January
2003, increased to हैं 9.67 crore in May 2005.

The civil works of the project were completed in July 2009. Audit noted that
TB had incurred an expenditure of = 10.79 crore’ on the project till December
2011. The possession of the complex was taken over by IB in February 2012.
It was observed that an avoidable expenditure of at least %86.59 lakh on
account of House Rent Allowance was paid to the prospective allottees during
April 2010 to February 2012°.

On this being pointed out in Audit, IB informed (November 2011) that
although the civil work of the project was completed in July 2009, the
possession of the complex could not be taken over due to some deficiencies
relating to energizing the electrical substation and water supply. It also
attributed the delay in taking over the possession of the complex to various
procedures involved in construction of the complex.

The Ministry stated (November 2011 and March 2012) that the delay in taking
over the building was mainly due to non-cooperation of CPWD in obtaining
clearances from the local bodies.

The Ministry cannot lay the entire blame on CPWD because delays on the part of
IB and the Ministry also contributed significantly to the cost escalation of = 2.17
crore and time escalation of more than six years. This delay had a financial
implication as House Rent Allowance was paid to the prospective allottees during
this period. Audit noted that an avoidable expenditure of हैं 86.59 lakh was
incurred on this account during April 2010 to February 2012, due to non-
allotment of the houses in time.

3 Overhead tanks, sewer connection, tube well etc.

4% 2.45 crore (cost of land) plus € 8.34 crore towards reported expenditure on construction

5 A period of eight months has been considered as reasonable for completion of necessary
activities prior to allotment of accommodation. Hence, the avoidable expenditure has been
worked out from April 2010 to February 2012.

62


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Thus, inordinate delay in the construction of staff quarters led to substantial time
and cost overruns on the project. This also led to avoidable payment towards
House Rent Allowance to the staff members of IB.

The National Security Guard recovered Construction Workers’ Welfare
Cess of = 12.84 lakh out of the short recovery of € 38.54 lakh, pointed out
by Audit.

The Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996
provides for collection of cess from employers of building workers at such rate
not exceeding two per cent but not less than one per cent of the cost of
construction. The cess so collected has to be paid to the Building and Other
Construction Workers’ Welfare Board, after deducting the cost of collection of
such cess.

The Construction Squadron Wing of the National Security Guard (NSG),
Manesar executed different construction works costing % 38.54 crore, by
engaging various contractors during April 2005 to March 2011. However,
Audit noted that cess of हैं 38.54 lakh on these works was not deducted.

On this being pointed out (October 2010) by Audit, NSG recovered & 12.84
lakh till February 2012. The remaining amount was still to be recovered.

63


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Ministry failed to follow the extant rules and extended a loan of
₹ 100 crore to the IIT Madras Research Park at an interest rate of
three per cent instead of the applicable 11.5 per cent. At the instance of
Audit, the Ministry took corrective action to change the rate of interest,
thereby averting a loss of f 46.75 crore.

In terms of Rule 221(1) of the General Financial Rules, interest is charged at
the rate prescribed by the Government for any particular loan or class of loans.
The Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, through its OM of
October 2007, had prescribed an interest rate of 11.5 per cent per annum on
investment loans given by the Central Government to industrial and
commercial undertakings in the public sector as well as to cooperatives.

The Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of Higher
Education released a loan of हैं 100 crore to the IIT Madras Research Park, a
Company set up under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956. The
Expenditure Finance Committee of the department, in its meeting held in July
2009, observed that the loan should bear the interest rate applicable for
investment loans to the public sector/cooperative undertakings. The
Committee also stipulated that all procedures prescribed in GFRs 2005 for
sanction of loan should be followed.

Audit noted that the agreement executed between the department and the
Company, in February 2010 provided for levying of interest at the rate of three
per cent per annum on the balance of the loan amount, against the applicable
rate of 11.5 per cent. The repayment of the loan was to commence from
2013-14 for a period of 10 years.

The action of the Ministry was in contravention of the GFRs and the decision
of the Expenditure Finance Committee. After this was pointed out (June
2011) by Audit, the Ministry replied (June 2012) that the agreement with the
Company had since been revised and the latter had agreed to pay interest at the
applicable rate of 11.5 per cent per annum.

Thus, as a result of timely intervention by Audit, impending interest loss
amounting to % 46.75 crore, was averted.

64


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Films Division, Mumbai from discontinued and closed down
exhibitors.

Section 12(4) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952, provides that the Central
Government may, from time to time, issue directions to licensees
generally or to any licensee in particular for the purpose of regulating the
exhibition of any film or class of films, so that scientific films, films
intended for educational purposes, films dealing with news and current events,
documentary films or indigenous films secure an adequate opportunity of
being exhibited. Where any such directions have been issued, those directions
would be deemed to be additional conditions and restrictions, subject to which
the licences had been granted.

The Cinematograph Act, 1952 made the screening of documentary
films compulsory throughout the country. The scheme of compulsory
exhibition of approved films by cinema houses implied an obligation on the
part of the Government to keep the cinema houses supplied with such
approved films at regular intervals. The Films Division was the national
body which released documentaries, news-based films or animation films
every Friday for the theatres spread across the country, in 15 national
languages.

The exhibitors i.e. the cinema houses were to pay rental charges to the Films
Division calculated on a fixed percentage of their net collections of the
theatre. For this purpose, the Films Division and the exhibitors were to enter
into agreements for supply of films for exhibition. The following were the
terms and conditions of the agreement:

> The exhibitors would pay rental charges at the rate of one per cent of
their net weekly collections to the distributors against the supply of the
films.

Vv

At any time, during the continuance of the agreement, if the exhibitors
failed to pay the rental in time, the distributor would stop the supply of
films to the defaulters, keep the films ready with them at the cost, risk
and responsibility of the exhibitor and the exhibitor would be liable to

65


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

pay all the damages sustained by the distributor by keeping the films so
ready, including the rentals.

> Ifthe dues payable by an exhibitor to a distributor exceeded two thirds
of the security deposits collected, the distributor would have to
terminate the agreement and discontinue the supply of films to the
exhibitor. The exhibitor would, if demanded by the distributor, in
exercise of his absolute discretion, pay to the distributor, on default on
punctual payment of rentals by the exhibitor to the distributor, interest
on all arrears of rentals at the rate of eight per cent per annum,
computed from the date of default of payment of such rentals up to the
dates of actual payment.

Audit scrutiny of the records of the Films Division, Mumbai revealed that during
the period June 2000 to July 2009, 20 and 15 theatres were discontinued! and
closed down’ respectively in the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat. The total
amount outstanding in respect of these 35 exhibitors on account of rental
charges since 1996 was % 60.73 lakh (Annex-XVII). Audit noticed that the
recovery of rentals was not monitored by the Films Division, which resulted in
the accumulation of these dues. The Films Division did not invoke the
enabling provisions of the agreements with the exhibitors that once the dues
payable exceeded the security deposit collected, the agreement would be
terminated and the supply of films discontinued. The exhibitors were allowed to
operate the theatres without payment of rent, which resulted in accumulation of
arrears of revenue amounting to हैं 60.73 lakh.

The matter was brought (September 2011) to the notice of the Ministry, which
confirmed (November 2011) the facts and figures and stated that the theatres
had closed down /been discontinued without intimating the Films Divi
the concerned branch offices of the Films Division. Although the Films
Division had been following up with the Managements of these theatres

ion and

for recovering the dues, it had not been possible to recover the same. The
Ministry further stated that the District Magistrates of the concerned districts,
who were the licensing authorities, had been requested (January 2012) not to
renew the licenses of these theatres and to recover the pending dues of the
Films Division. The matter regarding recovery of dues was being followed
up vigorously with the district authorities.

1 Discontinued exhibitors — Exhibitors who discontinued exhibiting films distributed by the
Films Division.
* Closed down exhibitors — Exhibitors who closed down their theatres due to loss etc.

66


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The reply does not bring out the reasons for not taking timely action against
the defaulting theatres. The fact remains that the recoveries were not made by
the Films Division in accordance with the agreement. The theatres were
discontinued, or had closed down exhibition of films on much later dates.

Thus, the failure of the Films Division to properly monitor the recovery of
rental charges led to non-recovery of revenue amounting to हैं 60.73 lakh.

67


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

PERSONNEL, PUBL
NCES AND PENSIONS

At the instance of Audit, the Union Public Service Commission
recovered licence fees of = 14.88 lakh from the Bank of Maharashtra for
the period January 2001 to September 2011, out of short recovery of = 26
lakh pointed out by Audit.

The Directorate of Estates periodically prescribes the rates of licence fees
payable by banks and post offices operating from the General Pool Office
accommodation allotted by it. A branch of the Bank of Maharashtra and a
post office occupying a space of 99 sq. m. and 55 sq. m. respectively, were
operating from the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) complex.

Audit noted that the demands of licence fees raised by the Directorate from the
bank since January 2001was based on carpet area of 49 sq. m. as against the
actual area of 99 sq. m., resulting in short levy of licence fees of हैं 18.58 lakh
during the period January 2001 to September 2011. Similarly, licence fees of
% 7.54 lakh were recoverable from the post office for the same period.

On the above being pointed out (September 2010) by Audit, UPSC stated
(October 2011) that the matter had already been taken up with the bank and
the post office authorities.

The Ministry endorsed (January 2012) the reply of the UPSC, stating that
₹ 14.88 lakh on account of licence fees had been deposited (November 2011)
by the bank. Recovery of the balance amount was awaited (December 2011).

68


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Delay in initiating timely action and consequential delay in fixing the
appropriate reserve price of an outlived vessel resulted in avoidable
expenditure of % 6.29 crore.

The TSS Yerava built in 1965 and owned by the Andaman and Nicobar
Administration (Administration), was being run by the Shipping Corporation
of India (SCI) for inter-island services. The vessel was operational till 7
February 2008 and then laid up for the Annual Passenger Survey. Since then,
the vessel became non-operational till its decommissioning (September 2009).

As per the Merchant Shipping Act 1958, vessels were to be safely manned till
they were finally disposed off.

SCI had intimated (January 2008) the Director of Shipping Services of the
Administration (Director) that the plying permission of the vessel was expiring
on 7 February 2008 and after that, the vessel would remain idle for want of
instructions as no more extensions were possible due to the stringent
regulations imposed by the Director General, Shipping.

Audit scrutiny of the records of the Director revealed that they had approached
the Administration for decommissioning of the vessel only in June 2008 and
the Administration had sought the approval of the Ministry in January 2009,
after a gap of seven months. The Ministry ultimately conveyed the approval in
September 2009, after a gap of eight months.

A committee was constituted (November 2009) by the Administration to fix
the reserve price of the decommissioned vessel and to decide the mode of
disposal. The committee fixed (November 2009) the reserve price at हैं 1.49
crore. After fixing of the reserve price by the Committee, attempts were made
by the department to auction the vessel locally. However, no party turned out
10 purchase the vessel since there was no ship-breaking facility available in the
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

69


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

The Metal Scrap Trading Corporation, Kolkata, a PSU, was approached
(August 2010) to e-auction the said vessel after eight months of fixing of the
reserve price. However, due to higher fixation of reserve price, the firm’s e-
auction failed to dispose of the vessel on three occasions. Consequently, in
March 2011, the reserve price was lowered by 20 per cent and the vessel was
auctioned (April 2011) at € 1.21 crore.

Audit noted that between April 2008 and March 2011, the Administration had
incurred हैं 10.12 crore towards the establishment costs of the vessel.

The Director, in a reply to an Audit query, stated (November 2011) that the
vessel was to be safely manned till such time it was finally disposed off. In
case the vessel sank in the funnel area, the loss to the Government would be
unimaginably higher and creation of a new berthing facility would take a lot of
time, leading to more time and cost overruns.

The fact remains that timely and prompt action for the safe disposal of the
vessel and its effective follow-up, could have saved at least हैं 6.29 crore!,
incurred during 2009-10 and 2010-11.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 2011. The reply had not been
received as of February 2012.

Ineffective co-ordination and follow-up by the Andaman and Nicobar
Administration led to delay in surrendering a vessel and consequential
avoidable expenditure of 3.69 crore.

The Andaman and Nicobar Administration (Administration) engaged a vessel
viz MV Ramanujam, built in 1972 and owned by the Shipping Corporation of
India (SCI), in the Port Blair-Havelock sector on cost plus contract basis for
ferrying passengers. The vessel turned unproductive from 2006 and remained
‘out of service’ for almost six months in a year. Since the vessel had outlived
almost double its lifespan, leading to huge repair/refit costs, SCI proposed
(May 2007) to replace it with a high speed one, of the required capacity. The
Administration took up (August 2007) the matter regarding replacement of the
vessel with SCI but no concrete proposal was made by them for surrender of
the existing vessel. The vessel was to be withdrawn by May 2009 on expiry of

1 Expenditure incurred towards establishment cost of the vessel after allowing a reasonable period of one year icc
2008-09 within which DSS could have disposed of the vessel, has been treated as avoidable.

Total expenditure incurred during the period 2008-2011 (10.12 crore ) less expenditure incurred during the year
2008-09 (-%3.83crore) = Avoidable expenditure (6.29 crore)

70



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

its sea-worthiness certificate. The Director of Shipping Services (DSS) of the
Administration, however, proposed to surrender the vessel to SCI only in
October 2009. The Administration asked SCI to stop incurring expenditure
for refit/repair of the vessel and arrange to shift it to another location.

SCI declined (November 2009) to withdraw the officers and crews engaged in
the vessel immediately, on the ground that the Administration had not given
the minimum six months’ notice as stipulated in the operation and
maintenance contracts for other Administration vessels. No further action was
taken even on expiry of six months 1.6 by April 2010. Thereafter, the
Directorate of Tourism, another department under the Administration
proposed (July 2010) to procure the vessel for operating it as a floating
restaurant and cinema hall on Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. SCI
agreed (September 2010) to hand over the vessel to the Administration at a
cost of fone crore. The modalities of the PPP had, however, not been
finalized by the Administration as of December 2011 and the surrender
proposed by DSS was not accepted by SCI as in the case of surrender, SCI
would have to incur the maintenance expenditure of the vessel for the entire
period.

SCI incurred an expenditure of 3.69 crore during the period November 2009
to March 2011 on the outlived vessel and charged the amount to the
Administrations’ Accounts held by them. Accounts for the period April 2011
onwards had not been finalized by SCI as of March 2012.

In January 2012, the Administration informed SCI that the vessel had been
surrendered w.e.f. 31 March 2010 and as such, € 2.38 crore charged by the
latter for the period 2010-11 was incorrect. The Administration further
requested that the amount already charged from their account may be refunded
to them.

Audit scrutiny of the records of the Administration revealed that there was no
agreement between Administration and SCI regarding the operation and
maintenance of the vessel. Though the Administration kept observing that the
vessel was of no use and needed replacement, its surrender to the SCI was not
formally communicated even in November 2010. As the vessel could not be
disposed of due to the pending proposal of Directorate of Tourism with SCI,
the Administration was bound to pay the expenses incurred on the vessel
amounting to हैं 3.69 crore during the period November 2009 to March 2011.

71


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Thus, delay in initiating the surrender formalities, coupled with lack of co-
ordination between the Shipping and Tourism Departments of the
Administration resulted in an avoidable expenditure of % 3.69 crore on fuel
charges, indirect operating expenses and management expenses on the
outlived vessel which was worth & one crore.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 2011. Their reply has not been
received as of March 2012.

Lakshadweep Administration

8.3. Procurement of X-ray Baggage Inspection Systems

Failure of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration to
synchronize the supply, installation and commissioning of two X-ray
baggage inspection systems with creation of the necessary infrastructure,
resulted in non-achievement of the objective of strengthening the safety

and security of passengers, despite incurring रैं 61 lakh on the purchase
of the systems.

In view of the high security alerts across the country, especially at all airports,
ports and other important institutions, the Administrator, Union Territory of
Lakshadweep (UTL) decided (December 2008) to install X-ray baggage
inspection systems at six places i.e. Agatty airport, Agatty jetty, Beypore port,
Kavaratti helibase, Kavaratti jetty and Mangalore port. The objectives were to
strengthen security, check passengers’ baggages bound for helicopter and
shipping services and ensure safe travel of passengers. Installation of the
systems involved creation of necessary infrastructure and procurement of
equipment. Synchronization of these two activities was required for timely
commissioning of the equipment.

Audit scrutiny (March 2011) revealed that without creating the necessary
infrastructure required for installation of the equipment, the UTL authorities
placed (January, February, October and November 2009) orders on M/s ECIL
Rapiscan Ltd., for supply, installation and commissioning of six X-ray
baggage systems at a total cost of € 1.84 crore. These systems were delivered
by the firm between May 2009 and April 2010. It was observed that two out
of the six systems 1.6 those supplied to Agatti airport (vide invoice dated 27
March 2010), and Kavaratti jetty (vide invoice dated 1 April 2010) costing a
total of ¥ 61 lakh had not been installed as of April 2012.

On this being pointed out by Audit, the UTL Administration accepted the
facts and stated (April 2012) that the two systems could not be installed due to



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

non-completion of civil construction works of Passengers’ Halls in those
locations by the Lakshadweep Public Works Department though land had
been handed over and the full amount had already been released to those
agencies. On completion of the buildings, the department would ensure
installation of the machines without further delay.

The fact remains that because of the delay of over 15 months in installing and
commissioning the systems, the UTL Administration not only lost the benefit
of testing the equipment during the warranty period but also compromised the
objectives of strengthening security and ensuring safety of the passengers.

The matter was brought to the notice of the Ministry of Home Affairs
(November 2011) and reminded in April 2012. Their reply was awaited.

B


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

CHAPTER IX : MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD

DEVELOPMENT

ee

Failure of the Ministry to exercise due diligence while releasing grants to
the State Governments resulted in excess release of हैं 3.45 crore. This
was subsequently recovered at the instance of Audit.

As per the guidelines of the Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of
Adolescent Girls— ‘Sabla’, nutrition to adolescent girls! at the rate of 600
calories per day, for 300 days in a year (25 days per month) was admissible.
The scheme guidelines provided for sharing of the cost of nutrition with the
State Government to the extent of 50 per cent of the admissible amount of
₹ 5 per beneficiary per day.

Audit noted (June 2011) that the Ministry made errors in calculating the actual
amount of funds admissible to Rajasthan. The Ministry adopted the number of
days when nutrition was supplied to the girls as 67 as against 55 days
admissible for the period 24 January 2011 to 31 March 2011. This resulted in
excess release of funds amounting to हैं 1.81 crore. In three other cases during
2010-11, the Ministry adopted incorrect figures for the number of
beneficiaries for calculating admissibility of funds, resulting in excess release
to three States, as detailed below:

(@in lakh)
Bihar 1305200 1403311 1957.80 2104.97 147.17
Himachal Pradesh 90016 98974 168.78 185.58 16.80
Sikkim 8783 9116 10.98 11.40 0.42

Thus, the failure of the Ministry in exercising due diligence in working out
the entitlements of the State Governments resulted in excess release of
= 3.45 crore.

1 Age group 11 to 18 years



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

On this being pointed out (June 2011) by Audit, the Ministry recovered
(September 2011) the excess amount of %3.45 crore from the subsequent
releases made to the concerned States during 2011-12.

ee

The Ministry of Women and Child Development released grants twice
under two Central schemes viz ‘Programme for Juvenile Justice’ in
February 2008 and the Integrated Child Protection Scheme in December
2010, totalling = 1.08 crore, for construction of two observation homes at
Ambala and Hisar.

istry of Women and Child
Development initiated a ‘Programme for Juvenile Justice’, in accordance with

During the Seventh Five-Year Plan, the Mi

the implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act 1986. The programme aimed
at care, protection, development and rehabilitation of neglected and delinquent
children in all the districts of the country, except for Jammu and Kashmir.

As per the norms of the scheme, the Central share of grants for construction of
an observation home for 50 inmates was to be हैं 9.03 lakh. The remaining
expenditure for construction of the homes was to be met by the State
Governments from their own budgets.

The Government of Haryana submitted (August and November 2007)
proposals for construction of two observation homes at Ambala and Hisar at
estimated costs of = 1.45 crore and हैं 1.86 crore respectively. The Ministry
intimated (December 2007) the Government that they were in a position to
sanction Central share of grants of = 18.06 lakh only for construction of the
two homes as per the norms of the scheme. The Ministry authorised (February
2008) the State Government to utilise हैं 18.06 lakh as the Central share with
the condition that the balance amount would be met from the budget of the
State Government. The State Government had spent % 3.82 crore over and
above the Central share for construction of these homes as of August 2009.

It was noticed in audit that the Ministry, with the approval (February 2009) of
the Cabinet, introduced a new Centrally sponsored scheme viz. the Integrate
Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) to create a solid foundation for protective
environment for children. Audit observed that the State Government of
Haryana submitted (September 2010) a proposal under ICPS for release of
grants for the construction of the same observation homes at Ambala an

Hisar mentioned earlier. The Ministry accepted the proposal and released
(December 2010) the Central share of € 89.58 lakh to the State Government

75


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

for construction of the homes, without linking the fact that these homes were
already being funded under another Central scheme. The action of the
Ministry to release funds of हैं 89.58 lakh under ICPS for the construction of
the observation homes at Ambala and Hisar was irregular, as both the homes
were already being financed under the ‘Programme for Juvenile Justice’.

The Ministry admitted (February 2012) that the grants for the same homes had
been given twice and stated that the excess amount would be deducted
appropriately from future grants to the State Government.

It was noted that the Ministry acknowledged the lapse only on confirmation of
the facts including the status of construction of the two homes from the State
Government. This indicated that the Ministry did not have a system of
ising due diligence while releasing the grants and did not maintain proper
records regarding utilisation of the same.

exer

The Ministry may, thus, institute a suitable mechanism to avoid release of
grants under different schemes for the same purposes. Regular follow-ups
may also be done with the State Governments to derive assurance that the
funds released to them are utilised for the intended purposes.

76


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

CHAPTER X : DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY

Failure of the Directorate of Purchase and Stores under the Department
of Atomic Energy in adhering to the purchase procedure and consequent
delay in finalising a purchase proposal within the validity period resulted
in avoidable expenditure of % 3.32 crore.

The General Financial Rules, 2005, enjoin that in the case of high value
purchases, bids should be obtained in two stages, with the technical bid being
evaluated first and the financial bid thereafter. As per the Exercise of Financial
Rules, 1978 of the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), cases involving
limited tenders with financial outlays exceeding f three crore are required to
be sent for the concurrence of the Member (Finance), DAE. The timelines
prescribed (2005) by the Directorate of Purchase and Stores (DPS), the
centralized purchase unit of DAE, for processing two-part tenders specify that
proposals for approval of the Member (Finance) should be sent within six
months from the date of raising of indents.

The DPS received an indent raised in June 2007 for manufacturing of a
discharge assembly transfer cask’ from the Light Water Reactor Division of
the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre. It invited (August 2007) limited tenders
from three firms for manufacturing, material procurement, fabrication
mockup, inspection testing and safe delivery of a discharge assembly transfer
cask along with accessories at an estimated cost of = 13 crore, with the due
date for receipt of tenders being 24 September 2007.

The tender document included a Purchase Preference clause’, according to
which, a Central Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) participating in a tender
would get purchase preference over other participating private sector firms,
provided, (i) its offer was technically suitable, (ii) the difference of price
quoted by it and the lowest priced offer was within 10 per cent and (iii) the
CPSE was willing to match the lowest quoted price. The Price Preference
Policy (PPP) of the Department of Public Enterprises was valid only till 31
March 2008.

The DPS received offers from M/s. Godrej & Boyce, Mumbai (Godrej) and
the Central Manufacturing Technology Institute (CMTI), Bangalore. On
opening of the technical bids on 25 September 2007, both the bidders were

' Transfer cask is required to transfer the spent fuels to spent fuel storage pool
२ This clause was based on the Purchase Preference Policy prescribed by the Department of
Public Enterprises, Government of India. This policy was discontinued afier 31 March, 2008.

77


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

declared as technically qualified. The price bids were opened on 30 November
2007. Godrej quoted a basic price of हैं 11.35 crore®, whereas CMTI quoted
% 12.18 crore’. The indenting division conveyed (28 December 2007) its
recommendation for placing the order on CMTI. After due negotiations, CMTI
agreed (January 2008) to match its price with that of Godrej at = 12.77 crore
(post tax). The Stores Purchase Committee (SPC) approved the proposal for
the purchase on 30 January 2008.

Scrutiny in audit revealed the following:

0)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Godrej was the lowest bidder after opening of the price bids. However,
subsequent to opening the bids, CMTI submitted a letter on 6
December 2007, along with a certificate issued by the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry, Government of India dated 5 December 2007
that the firm may be treated at par with CPSUs with regard to price
preference. It is to be noted that CMTI was a registered society and not
a CPSE and was thus not covered under the Purchase Preference
Clause. The decision of DAE to accept the offer of CMTI, which was
not a CPSE was, therefore, irregular.

Despite Godrej being the lowest and the only eligible bidder on the
opening of price bids, DPS accepted the Ministry's certificate for
treating CMTI at par with CPSEs with regard to price preference, even
though this certificate was received after the opening of the price bid
on 30 November 2007.

As this case was being processed on a limited tender basis and had a
financial outlay exceeding ¥ three crore, it required the approval of the
Member (Finance), DAE. While the instructions of DAE prescribed a
time limit of six months for processing such purchase cases, it was
observed that in the instant case, the proposal was sent to the Member
(Finance) DAE for approval only on 21 April 2008, ic. 10 months
after raising of the indent. Secretary, DAE turned down the proposal
on 29 July 2008 on the ground that the validity of the PPP was no
longer valid and instructed the DPS to issue a fresh limited tender.

It was observed that there were considerable delays within the DPS in
examining the proposal. As against the prescribed time limit of six
months for processing such purchase cases, the DPS took two months
to issue the limited tender inquiries to the three firms and a further

3 Post tax price of € 12.77 crore.
Post tax price of & 13.70 crore.

78


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

three months to approve the technical bid. The stages thereafter
included opening and examining the financial bids and in the instant
case, sending it to Member (Finance), DAE for obtaining his approval.

(v) The DPS again invited tenders in August 2008 from the same three
firms. However, only Godrej responded to the tender notice and quoted
a basic price of % 15.80 crore’. DPS negotiated the price and a
purchase order was placed on the firm at हैं 16.09 crore (post tax) in
February 2009. Godrej received final payment for this order in
December 2010.

The procurement exercise adopted by DAE in the instant case revealed flaws
in tender evaluation such as making an offer to an entity which was not
eligible to be considered for the price preference benefit at the price evaluation
stage. Further, there were protracted delays at various stages in processing of
the purchase case, leading to rejection and retendering, which finally resulted
in an additional expenditure of € 3.32 crore.

DAE replied (May 2012) that the qualification process for any Company after
submission of the offer is based on the status of the Company/its offer, on the
due date of submission of the offer as per the purchase price procedure in
vogue, which was 25 September 2007 in this case. Therefore, DPS had the
perception that the PPP would be applicable to M/s CMTI in this purchase file.
The offer of M/s CMTI, Bangalore was kept valid upto 31 July 2008.

The reply is not acceptable as DPS had overlooked the fact that the firm was
not eligible for price preference benefit on the date of opening of the financial
bid on 30 November 2007, since the certificate of eligibility for treating it at
par with CPSEs with regard to price preference was issued to it only on 5
December 2007. Further, even if we consider that DAE was not aware of the
fact that the benefit of price preference would lapse on 31 March 2008, the
decision of DAE to accept the offer of CMTI, which was not a CPSE, was
irregular.

Thus, by failing to place the purchase order on the lowest valid bidder in the
first instance, DAE not only delayed the entire procurement process but also
incurred an additional expenditure of % 3.32 crore.

है Post tax price of 17.78 crore.

79


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

CHAPTER XI : DEPARTMENT OF SPACE

Failure of the ISRO Satellite Centre and ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and
Command Network to assess power consumption needs accurately and
delay in taking action to reduce the contracted demand resulted in
avoidable payment of = 3.72 crore for consumption of electricity.

The ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC) and the ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and
Command Network (ISTRAC), Bangalore, constituent units of the Indian
Space Research Organisation (ISRO) under the Department of Space (DoS)
entered into agreements with the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company
(BESCOM) in April 2007 and April 2008 respectively for supply of electricity
for their units at Bangalore. The agreements were entered into for supply of
5500 KVA power supply (contracted demand) by ISAC and 2500 KVA power
supply (contracted demand) by ISTRAC.

As per BESCOM's tariff policy for high tension lines, if the power
consumption was less than the contracted demand, the billing demand which
was a minimum of 75 per cent of the contracted demand or the maximum
demand recorded during the month, whichever was higher, had to be paid.

Audit examination of records revealed that the monthly consumption of
electricity never reached the contracted demand during the period April 2007
to December 2011 at ISAC and during the period April 2008 to April 2011 at
ISTRAC. Since, the consumption of power was far below the contract
demand, payment of 75 per cent of contract demand (4125 KVA for ISAC and
1875 KVA for ISTRAC) being the billing demand was being paid each month
as per the BESCOM tariff policy for high tension lines. The maximum actual
demand recorded vis-a-vis contract demand during the period was mere 33 per
cent in case of ISAC and 39 per cent for ISTRAC, which clearly indicated that
the contracted demand was significantly higher than the actual requirement.
Thus, the agreement for higher contract demand resulted in incurring an
avoidable excess expenditure of हैं 372 crore, towards cost of power not
actually utilized as detailed in the following table :

80


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

ISRO 5500 4125 1182-1788 | April 2007 162.22 456.23 294.01
Satellite to

Centre- December

ISAC 2011

ISTRAC- | 2500 1875 165-979 Apr 2008 39.48 117.52 78.04
IDSN to

Project April 2011

On this being pointed out (December 2009) in audit, ISAC, accepting the fact,
replied (January 2012) that on the basis of need assessment, the expected
power requirement up to the end of year 2014 would be about 4000 KVA and
therefore they had applied (September 2011) to BESCOM for entering into a
fresh agreement to reduce the contract demand of the Centre from 5500 KVA
to 4000 KVA (entailing a minimum chargeable demand of 3000 KVA). It was
further added that ISAC was pursuing the matter with BESCOM to reduce the
contracted demand to 4000 KVA and their application was under process
(January 2012).

In its reply, ISTRAC stated (May 2011) that as per the revised assessment, the
optimum maximum demand was likely to reach 1100 KVA and it had
requested (June 2010) BESCOM to reduce the contract demand from 2500
KVA to 1250 KVA.

Based on the audit observations pointing to the excess contract of power
demand, ISTRAC and ISAC initiated action to reduce the contract demand
only in June 2010 and September 2011 respectively. Thus, the failure of ISAC
and ISTRAC to accurately asses power consumption needs in the first
instance, together with delay in taking action to reduce the contracted demand,
resulted in avoidable payment of % 3.72 crore (as of December 2011) for
consumption of electricity towards billing demand.

81


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

[APTER XII : GENERAL

‘Despite repeated instructions/recommendations of the Public Accounts
‘Committee, various Ministries/Departments did not submit
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on 59 audit paragraphs even
after the lapse of the time limit prescribed by the Public Accounts
Committee.

The Lok Sabha Secretariat issued instructions in April 1982 to all Ministries to
furnish notes to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure),
indicating remedial/ corrective action taken on various paragraphs contained
in the Audit Reports, soon after these were laid on the Table of the House.

In their Ninth Report (Eleventh Lok Sabha) presented to the Parliament on 22
April 1997, the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) desired that submission of
pending Action Taken Notes (ATNs) pertaining to Audit Reports for the years
ended March 1994 and 1995 should be completed within a period of three
months and recommended that ATNs on all paragraphs pertaining to the Audit
Reports for the year ended March 1996 onwards be submitted to them duly
vetted by Audit, within four months from the laying of the Reports in
Parliament.

Further, the Committee, in their Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
presented to the Parliament on 29 April 2010, recommended that the Chief
Accounting Authorities should be made personally accountable in all cases of
abnormal delays in taking remedial action and submitting ATNs to PAC.

A review of the position of receipt of ATNs on paragraphs included in Audit
Reports, Union Government (Civil) up to the period ended 31 March 2011
(Appendix-I) revealed that the Ministries did not submit remedial/corrective
ATNs in respect of a large number of paragraphs despite the above
instructions. Out of 271 paragraphs on which ATNs were required to be sent,
ATNs in respect of 59 paragraphs had not been received at all as of March
2012 as shown in the following chart:

82


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

Summarised position of ATNs
300 271
250
Tot
w 200
=
= 150
S St
3
= 100
59
हु [|
0
ATNs due ATNs not received ATNs under
correspondence
Position of ATNs

The final ATNs in respect of 212 paragraphs, which were under
correspondence, were pending at various stages. Out of these 212 paragraphs,
56 paragraphs pertained to Audit Reports which were more than 10 years old.

Despite directions of the Ministry of Finance, issued at the instance of the
Public Accounts Committee, Secretaries of Ministries/Departments did
not send responses to eight out of 25 draft paragraphs included in this
Report.

On the recommendation of the PAC, Ministry of Finance issued directions to
all Ministries in June 1960 to send their responses to the draft paragraphs
proposed for inclusion in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India within six weeks of receipt of the paragraphs.

83


Report No, 13 of 2012-13

In eight out of the 25 paragraphs included in this Report of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2011, replies from the
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments had not been received. The details
are indicated in Appendix-II.

i, (५6५...

New Delhi (ROY MATHRANI)
Dated: 21 August 2012 Director General of Audit
Central Expenditure

Countersigned
Vo Bo ~

New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated: 21 August 2012 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

84


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 2.1.3)

Details of Revenue realisation and Revenue expenditure

(५). Revenue Realisation
@ in crore)
Sale of stamps 605.76 617.82 614.31
Postage in cash 2036.45 2097.27 2313.10
Commission on MOs/IPOs 3171.94 3507.99 3963.31
Other receipts. 174.79 133.83 172.79
Net receipts from other postal administrations -126.61 -90.21 -101.18

(8). Revenue expenditure

in crore)

(a) Pay and allowances, contingencies, Bonus, Dearness 6819.72 9233.76 9802.63
allowances, etc.

(b) Pensionary charges 2274.30 3339.31 3177.41
(c) Stamps, Post Cards etc. 27.34 22.08 43.97
(d) Stationery and Forms printing ete. 55.17 64.99 57.21
(०) Conveyance of Mails (payments to Railways and Air 271.59 317.20 351.06
mail carriers)

(f) Accounts and Audit 240.89 298.11 278.95
(g) Maintenance of Assets 67.22 71.49 82.44

85


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.6.2)

Amount of non/short deposit of One Time Deposits by State authorities as on 31 March 2011

(in lakh)

"| Gujarat Godhra 52 | 0 | 52 | 100 [|

Bardoli 103 jo 103 100

Dahod 212 | 0 0 |[ 212 100

2. | Rajasthan Jodhpur mam | 0 | | 100 [|

Jaisalmer 49 jo 49 100

Nagaur | 69 | | 0 0 [| | | | 100 |

Didwana 45 | 0 i 45 | 100 [| 00

Karanataka Koppal 108 | 0 |[ 108 100

Bihar [Pumea | 511 110 401 78

Katihar 340 | 180 | 160 47

Saharsa 405 150 255 63

5. | West Bengal’ Barasat | % | 35 63 64

Bashirhat 81 25 56 | 69 [|

Suri | 94 | | 60" | 34 36

| * | Andhra Pradesh | Adilabad & 298 200 | * | 33
Mancherial

7. om | Sundargarh 127 | 100" | 27 21

Uditnagar 82 70 12 15

| 8. | Chhattisgarh Bilaspur 413 378 35 |

(Sources: Information supplied by HPOs)

1 In the West Bengal postal circle, 1/5 of the wages paid in a month through post offices was to be deposited as an
advance in the Head Post Offices by West Bengal State Government.

86


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.6.3)

Number and amount of unrealized NREGS cheques as on 30 September 2011

Orissa circle

1. | Udit Nagar 114 39.17 April to August 2011
Bihar circle

2. | Saharsa 202 136.36 fol

3. | Katihar 38 33.13 August 2010 to August 2011
Chhattisgarh circle

4. | Korba 17 25.85 June 2010 to June 2011

87


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.6.3)

Number and amount of dishonoured NREGS cheques as on 30 September2011

Orissa circle

1. | Udit Nagar | 9? [ 5.37 March 2011 to September 2011
Bihar circle

2. | Purnea 74 44.46 LST

3. | Saharsa 62 96.94 [oF
Chhattisgarh circle

4. [Raipur 3 0.49 May to November 2009

5. | Korba 2 2.92 March 2011

88


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.1)

Statement showing overstocking of cash certificates in CSDs and HPOs as on 31 March 2011

Delhi 2037520 | 74733 | 423564] 19776 | 1613956 | 54957 | 530.55| 8.71] 150000
Kerala 230900| NA| 77400; NA| 153500 NA| 59.89 | 1७ | 40000
Maharashtra | 969000 | 201910 | 681990 | 65706 | 287010 | 136204] 15.93 | 18.20 NA
Punjab 748000 | 51614 | 291000 | 12252] 457000 | 39362 | 228.50] 2.85 NA
TamilNadu | 485115 | 146222 | 223452] 28842] 261663 | 117380] 307.90 | 39.15 | 120000
Uttar 15553962 | 567254 | 1803232 | 160614 | 13750730 | 406640 | 2536.73 | 56.36 | 122000
Pradesh

Uttarakhand | - | 154997] -| 25002[ =| 129995]  -| 3589] -|



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.1.2)

Statement showing overstocking of stamps and postal stationery in CSDs
as on 31 March 2011

[1 | | 2 | | 3 | | 4 | | 5 | | 6 | 7
Kerala Ermakulum 630098 3629552 2999454 203.49 140000
Maharashtra | Nasik 12563916 55114500 42550584. 39.36 87800
Punjab Ludhiana 28048002 | 155072000 | 127023998 70.03 N/A
Uttar Pradesh | Kanpur 58760050 | 167773791 | 109013741 146.50 Nil

Lucknow 15927276 89966282 74039006 39.14 6800000

90



(Referred to in paragraph 2.4)

Details of irregular payment of interest

Report No. 13 of 2012-13

@ in lakh)

Uttar Pradesh Postal Circle HPOs under UP Circle stated
[1] HPO Deoria 28.64 (February/March 2011) that
2 HPO Faizabad 12.58 due to lack of knowledge of
3 HPO Badaun 9.79 tules irregular accounts were
| | HPO Aligarh | _ | opened and necessary action
would be taken after
verification.
Rajasthan Postal Circle SSPO of Jaipur City under
5 HPO Bikaner 4.44 Rajasthan Circle stated (May
[6 _| HPO Jawahar Nagar 3.65 2011) that an amount of
7 | HPO Sri Ganganagar 15.65 ₹ 14.97. lakh had been
[8 | HPO Udaipur 3.09 16.26 recovered.
Andhra Pradesh Postal Circle GPOs/HPOs stated that the
9 GPO Hyderabad 4.27 6.71 depositors would be addressed
10 | HPO Palakol | 06७. [ 3.50 to withdraw the deposits made
11 | HPO Nizamabad 28.39 in PPF irregularly and excess
12 | HPO Jubilee 3.98 10.06 paid interest would be
13 | HPO Visakhapatnam 2AT recovered after verifications.
14 HPO Guntur 1.75
Tamil Nadu Postal Circle HPOs under Tamil Nadu
15. | HPO Trichurapalli 0.39 6.19 Circle stated that action would
| 16 | HPO Namakkal 0.70 be taken to recover the excess
17. HPO Dindigul 1.69 paid interest.
18 | HPO Vridhachalam 0.35
19 | HPO Krishnagiri 0.31
20 HPO Dharampuri 2.16
21 HPO Salem 7.70
22 HPO Tallakulam 2.22
Karnataka Postal Circle GPOs/HPOs accepted the facts
23 | HPO Bijapur TAT and stated that the depositors
24 | GPO Bangalore 11.06 would be addressed to
25 | HPO Shimoga 8.52 withdraw excess deposits.
Gujarat Postal Circle GPO/HPOs under Gujarat
26 | GPO Ahmedabad 3.35 Circle stated that all the
27 | SPO _ District Court 6.20 accounts would be verified and
Ahmedabad recovery particulars intimated.
28 | HPO Navsari 5.02

91


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 3.1)

(List of Missions/Posts audited)

1. Abu Dhabi 32. Houston 63. Paramaribo
2. Accra 33. Islamabad 64. [Pais sd

3. Addis Ababa 34. Jakarta 65. Phnom Penh
4, Algiers 35. Jeddah 66. Port Moresby
5. Ankara 36. Kampala 67. | Prague

[6 | Astana 37. Kandy (68. | Pretoria

7. Bahrain 38. Kathmandu (69. | Rajshahi
(8. | Bangkok 39. Khartoum 70. | Riyadh
[9. | Beijing 40. | Kuala Lumpur 71. | Rome
[10. | Birmingham 41. Kuwait 72. Santiago

11. Bratislava 42. Kyiv 173. Seoul

12. Brussels 43. Lagos 74. Shanghai
13. | Budapest 44. | Lebanon 75. | Singapore
[14. | Cairo 45. Ljubljana 76. Stockholm
15. Canberra 46. London 71. Suva

| 16. _| Chicago 47. | Luanda 78. | Sydney

17. Colombo 48. Madrid 79. Tehran

18. Dar-es-salam 49. Mandalay [80. | Tel Aviv

[ 19. | Dhaka 50. Manila 81. The Hague
20. Doha 51. Maputo 82. Tokyo

21. [Dubai | 52. Milan 83. Toronto

22. Durban 53. Minsk 84, Tripoli

23. Dushanbe 54. Mombassa 85. Ulaanbaatar
24. Frankfurt 55. Moscow [86. | Vancouver
25. Guangzhou 56. Munich 87. Vienna

26. Geneva 57. Muscat (88. | Warsaw

27. Hamburg 58. Nairobi 89. Washington DC
28. [Hanoi, | 59. New York [90. | Wellington
29. Harare 60. Nicosia 91. Yangon

30. Helsinki (61. | . [oso si 92. Zagreb

31. Hong Kong 62. Ottawa

92


Report No, 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 3.1.1)

(a) Short levy of Business Visa Fees (Non-specified Countries)

(®in lakh)
1 Abu Dhabi# January 2009 to July 2010 [| 966 | 52.85 35.23 17.62
2 Addis Ababa# | July 2008 to July 2010 1520 83.16 55.44 27.72
3. Algiers# July 2008 to June 2010 1016 55.58 37.06 18.52
4. Bahrain? July 2008 to June 2010 601 32.88 21.92 |__10.% |
5. Beijing July 2008 to June 2010 587 40.76 27.20 13.56
[6 | Beirut# July 2008 to March 2011 1665 91.09 60.73 30.36
7 Brussels July 2008 to March 2011 13300 1173.38 782.25 391.13
(8. | Damascus# August 2008 to August 2011 1843, 100.83 67.22 33.61
P| Dar-es- Tuly 2008 to June 2010 1088 59.52 39.68 19.84
salaam#
10, | Dubai# July 2008 to August 2011 4702 257.24 171.49 85.75
11. _| Dushanbe# September 2008 to July 2011 446 24.40 16.27 8.13
12. | Guangzhou January 2009 to June 2010 74 5.01 3.33 [168 |
13._| Jeddahit June 2010 to July 2011 610 33.37 22.25 11.12
14. | Kathmandu August 2008 to March 2011 [6 | 0.33 0.22 0.11
15. | Mahe July 2008 to September 2011 | ™| 5.96 3.98 ; |
(Victoria)
[ 16. | Mandalay# March 2009 to March 2011 39 2.13 1.42 0.71
17. | Milan July 2008 to March 2011 29583 2609.92 1739.95 869.97
18. | Mombasa# July 2008 to December 2010 300 16.41 10,94 5.47
19. | Nairobi# October 2010 to July 2011 1250 68.39 45.59 22.80
20. | Osaka# June 2009 to June 2010 36 1.97 1.31 | 0.66 |
21. | Rome July 2008 to March 2011 10690 943.11 628.74 314.37
22. | Seoul September 2009 to December 31850 2162.31 1441.69 720.62
2010
Shanghai July 2008 to July 2010 2193 119.97 79.98 39.99
The Hague July 2008 to March 2011 33336 3087.03 2064.98 1022.05
Tripoli# July 2008 to July 2010 901 49.29 32.86 16.43
Note:
* Business visa fees to be collected @ US $ 120 (for nationals of non-specific countries) for issue
of business visa for less than one year
कं Fees collected by the Mission/Post @ US $ 80 for issue of business visa for less than one year

wee Official rate of exchange for the month March, 2011: 1 US $ = % 45.590 in respect of #
countries in the annex.

93



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(b) Short levy of Business Visa Fees (Specified Countries)

(@ in lakh)
1. | Abu Dhabi January 2009 to 70 6.73 2.61 4.12
July 2010
2. | Dubai July 2008 to 343 26.78 12.87 13.91
June 2010
Kathmandu August 2008 to March 2011 3 0.30 0.11 [| 0.19 | 19
| * | Mahe (Victoria) | July 2008 to September 16 1.16 0.58 0.58
2011
5. | Nairobi October 2010 to July 2011 57 3.91 2.08 1.83

(c) Short levy of Business visas issued for more than one year (Non-specified countries)

@ in lakh)

|| ‘Abu Dhabi August 2010 to 527 48.05 28.83 19.22
March 2011

2. | Dushanbe September 2008 to |? 0.82 0.49 0.33
July 2011

94


५6

(06°94 2 = ठैणाएग5 punog 4 1)

EI-7107 0 Ef ON oday

pung aaeyoay AuMuMD weTpUT dup 40g s99q [EUORIPPE Jo AAd]-WON *ए

(टप*६ ydeadeaed ur 0) poaaayoy),

X-XONNV

bE OLGLIOL 00°C9IZIT 00% 1809५ IvlZ 687 009 9061५ Srl 110८ HzR ण 010८ UNL yorun [02 | “TT
OLTITS60E 00°89b6r 00८ 142424 9101 99 1८६ &06ट८ ILE TLOZ Hore, ० 010८ UNL smquey [92 | “Or
OL 8Z61SL9 00°016L01 00% ५५6६५ 8८८2 9ce | 6Lll 19@8h 10124 TLOZ HORN 03 010८ UNL angyuerg [02 | 6
79 1Z6S09T 00°999S7 00% €€871 Sto 31 607 O9€IT 9cS 1102८ Hore 03 00८ SUN WPM TT | 8
SE TPLLOIOT 00'SSE6TE 00६ S8L601 6SLT vl 858६ | I8Pl01 Isl 010८ 9quiacad 01 010८ भणा[ sued Ta | ६
Ob I9ESTLT OO'LSser 00६ 1103॥ 80L1 has x4 L617 x4 010८7शगाए ५010८ uN andeH UL Ia | 9
76'6L8S9011 00°9S89LT 00६ 2568५ ५4४:४3॥ £67 8५६ 6959६ 988L 010८ 7०वृष्पघ०००(1 ० 010८ भया[ ue IO) | ५
009566द##? 00°0080L 00६ 009६८ 8S0L ol bL GEST 619६ 010ट स्ग्पृषा०००6 01 010८ Sune Setlist | #
009187961 00087992८ 00८ क्त्व्धा SIZI +9 916 IZLOL 6 110८ Areraqay ० 010८ गया पृथ्णावणएव 190 | ६
Ob'P8676791 00°78S617Z 00८ T6L601 ५6 75६1 | 860६1 | 7६६&/४8 0६५9 [10८ Azeraqoy ० OTOZ Pung | WeYysuUNG {D9 | 2
09६66#2८085५ 00°80078L 00% #0016६ 6886 ट#६ | 0६9४८ | DETTE LOL6T 1107 Aremuqa ण 010८ eung uopuoTIOH | 1



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

B. Non-levy of additional fees for Indian Community Welfare Fund

1. | Rajshahi April 2011 to August 2011 22472 2247200
2. | Colombo April 2011 to May 2011 23872 2387200
3. | Luanda April 2011 to July 2011 863 86300
| 4. | Kampala April 2011 to August 2011 3564 356400
| 5. | Bangkok November 2009 to March 2011 131182 13118200
| 6. | Hong Kong April 2011 to June 2011 8090 1077588

96


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 3.1.2)

Details of passports, visas, OCI cards, PIO cards and other services provided by various Indian
Missions/Posts in USA during May 2010 to March 2011 where ICWF charges were not levied

EI, Washington DC 11093 49725 | 9001 | 3625 10427 [| - | 83871
CGI, New York 26625 97178 26399 10114 17765 | _- || 178081
CGI, San Francisco 18792 91462 10015 8350 7566 347 136532
CGI, Chicago 11228 45059 18434 5129 28426 | - | 108276
CGI, Houston 15905 52807 6802 6819 36937 | =] 119270

Total services = 6,26,030
ICWF surcharge = 100 per service

Total surcharge (during May 2010 to March 2011) 5₹ 6,26,03,000 (₹ 6.26 crore)



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 3.1.6)

(Delays in remittance of fees)

1 Up to 31 December 2005 1,16,586.00 5 April 2006
2. | January 2006 to December 2007 2,64,493.00 28 August 2008
3 January to December 2008 1,19,086.00. € 1,18,728.75 deposited in November 2009
4, | January to September 2009 83,874.00 € 83,622.38 deposited in November 2009
5. | December 2009 6,117.00 March 2010
| 6. | January-February 2010 15,585.00 March 2010
7. | March 2010 7,471.00 May 2010
| 8. | April 2010 5,138.00 June 2010
| 9. | May 2010 10,444.00 July 2010
| 10. | June 2010 11,315.00 July 2010
11. | July 2010 12,205.00 September 2010
12. | August 2010 12,742.00 October 2010
[ Subtotal | 665,056.00

1. Up to 31 December 2005 31,755.04

2. January to December 2006 24,073.00

3. January to December 2007 19,922.83 23 February 2009
4. January to December 2008 23,110.00

5. January to November 2009 21,060.00 November 2011
| 6. | |_.्ः् | 552.44 December 2009
‘te किस) 5,315.67 March 2010
| 8. | March to May 2010 4,387.05 June 2010
| 9. |

5,372.11

September 2010



Report No, 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.1)

Recoveries effected in respect of Missions/Posts at the instance of Audit

CGI, Munich fo i 0.0220
EOI, Prague | 6 [ 0.4040
EOI, Copenhagen 1 0.0530
EOI, Lisbon 3 0.6305
EOI, Baku 5 1.0720
EOI, The Hague a [ 1.2090
EOI, Oslo |__ 8 | 2.6540
EOI, Paris 11 18.8900
EOI, Berlin 5 0.7530
CGI, Vladivostok 4 1.5220
CGI, Frankfurt 6 2.0580
EOI, Dublin 4 1.2170
EOI, Bishkek 1 0.2630
EOI, Brussels 5 8.0070
EOI, Bucharest 1 0.4110
EOI, Madrid 3 1.1600
EOI, Rome 4 2.1000
EOI, Helsinki 2 0.3640
EOI, Minsk 1 0.0630
EOI, Tashkent 2 0.0790
CGI, Milan 3 0.1400
(01, St. Petersburg 5 0.2300
EOI, Moscow 3 15.5700
FOI, Belgrade 2 0.0900
EOI, Warsaw 2 0.0300
EOI, Stockholm 3 0.8900
CGI, Hamburg 3 0.7900
EOI, Berne 1 0.6900
CGI, Geneva 3 4.0600
EOI, Budapest 3 0.5200
EOI, Vienna 3 2.6900
EOI, Ljubljana 1 0.0400
CGI, Edinburgh 5 0.1900
HCI, London 2 0.2700

99


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

EOI, Washington DC 24 6.256
HCI, Port of Spain 3 0.403
CGI, Sao Paulo 2 0.020
CGI, New York 10 2.468
PMI, New York 13 | 1.49 |
EOL, Panama | 9 | 0.274
HCI, Georgetown | ६ | 0.389
HCI, Ottawa 13 2.656
CGI, Vancouver 2 0.284
CGI, Chicago a | 0.917
CGI, Toronto js [ 0.290
EOL, Bogota 4 0.120
CGI, Houston 3 0.320
EOI, Havana poi 1.787
EOI, Buenos Aires 20 2.738
HCI, Kingstown | 9 [ 1.035
CGT, San Francisco 3 0.358
EOI, Santiago 1 0.160

EOI, Beijing fF 1 [ 0.0029
CGI, Guangzhou. 2 0.6981
HCI, Kuala Lumpur 1 0.0435,
EOI, Tokyo 2 0.5550

100


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 3.2.3)

Cases of overpayment

sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-991022-a 3150 30.03.2011 1990 3800
3115 28.03.2011 1900
| 1609 | 07.10.2010 1900
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-991022-b 3150 30.03.2011 4460 8920
3115 28.03.2011 4460
| 1609 [| 07.10.2010 4460
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-991022-bb 3150 30.03.2011 5800 11600
3115 28.03.2011 5800
1609 07.10.2010 5800
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-99bb 3150 30.03.2011 6450 6450
3116 28.03.2011 6450
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-9910212bb b 3153 30.03.2011 8540 8540
3116 28.03.2011 8540
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-991010 3153 30.03.2011 18600 18600
3116 28.03.2011 18600
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-D 3153 30.03.2011 38920 38920
3116 28.03.2011 38920
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-99aa 3153 30.03.2011 55660 55660
3116 28.03.2011 55660
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-991022-aa 3150 30.03.2011 1820 1820
3115 28.03.2011 1820
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00-99aa 3153 30.03.2011 4370 4370
3116 28.03.2011 4370
sha/mstsl/2010/00111-00 3153 30.03.2011 5160 5160
3115 28.03.2011 5160

RMB 1 =% 8.129

101


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 4.1)

Details of procurement of computer systems, software and related accessories

[1 | 1-45024/32/2010-IT-1347 13.12.2010 | 48 computers for Itanagar Sector 24.99
A 1-45024/33/2010-IT-1367-71 16.12.2010 | 48 computers for Gangtok Sector 24.99
3. 1-45024/30/2010-IT-160-67 25.01.2011 | 48 computers for Tejpur Sector and its units 24.99
4,9 and 25 Bns
4. 1-45024/3 1/2010-IT-168-76 26.01.2011 | 48 computers for ANO Sector and its units 24.97
29, 34, 35, 36 and 38 Bns
1-45024/36/2010-IT-177-80. 27.01.2011 | 48 computers for SHQ BBR, 41 and 45 Bns 24.98
1-45024/38/2010-IT-211-15 28.01.2011 | 48 computers for SPT, TPT, SS, CH.CHD 24.97
BNS and CIJW School
7. 1-45024/52/2010-IT-237-41 28.01.2011 | 48 computers for SHQ Amritsar and its 24.97
units 21, 26, 30 and 43 Bns
| * | 1-45024/48/2010-IT-252-56 29.01.2011 | 48 computers for Bareilly and Almora 24.97
Sectors
| 9. | 1-45024/50/2010-IT-267-71 29.01.2011 | 48 computers for Dehradun Sector 24.97
10. | 1-45024/53/2010-IT-282-86 29.01.2011 | 48 computers for SHQ (Shimla) and its 24.98
units 2,15,17,19 Bns
| | 1-45024/54/2010-IT-297-301 29.01.2011 | 48 computers for SHQ(Delhi), Unicipol, 24.97
22, 28, 39 and 44 Bns
12. | 1-45024/39/2010-IT-334-38 31.01.2011 | 48 computers for SHQ (LDK) and its units 24.97
13. | 1-45024/47/2010-IT-349-53 31.01.2011 | 48 computers for Lucknow Sector 24.97

1-45024/05/2010-IT-484-88

01.06.2010

Blade server Chassis

22.92

2. 1-45024/06/2010-11-494-98

02.06.2010

Server Softwares

24.82

1. 1-45024/29/2011-IT-1000-04 | 30.03.2011 | Interactive Equipment for RTC Karera 24.83
(MP)

2. 1-45024/27/2011-IT-990-94 30.03.2011 | Interactive Equipment for RTC Shivganga 24.83
(Tamil Nadu)

3. 1-45024/28/2011-IT-995-99 30.03.2011 | Interactive Equipment for RTC Kimin 24.83
(Arunachal Pradesh)

4. 1-45024/31/2011-IT-1005-09 | 30.03.2011 | Interactive Equipment for CIJW School, 24.83

Mahidanda (Uttarakhand)

102


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 4.3)

Chronology of events leading up to the construction of staff quarters

November 1999 Proposal for purchase of the land at Gomti Nagar, Lucknow was
approved by MHA.

July 2002 CPWD submitted the layout plan and drawings for the residential
quarters.

September 2002 1B sought clarification from the CPWD regarding the layout plan
and drawings.

December 2002 The plan was approved by the IB and the CPWD was requested to
provide the Preliminary Estimates (PE) for the project.

January 2003 CPWD submitted the PE of % 6.17 crore.

July 2003 1B forwarded the proposal to the Ministry for their approval.

December 2004 The Ministry sought clarification regarding exact cost of bulk
services and total cost of the project. It also asked the IB to tone
down the projected cost towards the bulk services.

February 2005 The case was resubmitted to the Ministry, clarifying that it was not
possible to bring down the cost on account of the bulk services. It
was pointed out by CPWD that the work services were very
essential and reduction in cost would render the residential complex
useless.

March 2005 The Ministry communicated that the estimates for the project were
based on the cost index of 1992 and requested for a revised estimate
based on the latest cost index.

May 2005 The proposal was re-submitted to the Ministry with a revised
estimate of हैं 9.67 crore.

June 2005 The Ministry approved the proposal and issued necessary sanction.

June 2006 IB reminded SIB, Lucknow to expedite the approval from local
bodies to the drawings/building plan submitted by CPWD.

August 2006 SIB, Lucknow requested for allocation of funds as approval of the
building plan was expected to be accorded by the local bodies
shortly.

August and December 2006 | The Ministry released the first and second installments.

July 2009 Civil work of the project was completed.

February 2012 The possession of the complex taken over by the IB.

103



Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in paragraph 6.1)

Details of theatres discontinued and closed down

a Number of theatres discontinued: 20
| 1 | Chitra Mandir Nashik M452 31493 01.08.08 :
2 Prabhat Nashik M458 45452 01.08.08
3 Vijay Nashik M460 691010 07.10.09
4 Mamta. Nashik M 462 295111 07.10.09
5 Magestic Jalna M304 244062 08.04.08
| 6 | Inox Leisure Pune M524-A 524066 01.05.05
7 Inox Audit IT [Pune | M524-B 927026 01.01.05
| 8 | Inox Audit 11] Pune M524-C 566949 01.01.05
9 Inox Audi IV Pune M524-D 794944 01.01.05
10 |Nishat Pune M533 251555 19.09.08
11 ५1811९51-1 Raigad M223 239442 31.12.08
12 State Aurangabad M42 188520 08.04.08
13 Mohan Beed M20 66805 19.07.08
14. [Gulzar Aurangabad M35 122789 01.07.08
15 Jayshree Jamnagar G 227 191916 01.07.09
16. |Jayshree Jamnagar G 207 115098 31.03.09
17__|Mehul Jamnagar G207A 61075 17.05.08
18 Mehul IL Jamnagar G207B 52039 17.05.08
19 Mehul UL Jamnagar G207-C 23066 01.06.08
20. |Shreyas Kheda G310 3672 01.06.08

104


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(b) Number of theatres closed down: 15

| 1. | .__|Laxmi C. Mandir Nanded M 433 4480 2006
2. _|Sundar C Mandir _|Raigad M392 69172 06.01.2008
3. [Raj Laxmi Ratnagiri M614-A 7640 05.12.2007
4. |Daulat [Pues M585 29816 01.01.2009
5. _|Bhatwl Dhule M 262 20432 01.04.2007
| 6. | Vijay Usmanabad M677 3876 01.01.2008

th BK Mehsang G512 23064 30.03.2007
[ 38. | Swastik Valsad G 344 53246 31.12.2004
[ 9. | Shakti Surendranagar G 185 91842 01.09.2006
| 10. | Gopi Amrcli G46 152578 16.10.2007
11. Pritilad Amreli G 263 29502 01.03.2007
12. Natraj Surendranagar (518 59245 01.06.2000
13. Vasant Valsad 0491 56050 01.10.2002
14. Geeta Junagarh G225 8994 01.12.2007
15. Prabhat Khede G 309 26843 01.01.2005

105



LOI

1007

0007

6661

8661

5661

9661

ABroUR oT} Jo yWoUyedaqy

010८

L007

६00८

1007

L661

S661

yoreasayy
JeaM[NoLsy Jo [०1०0 uerpuy

ZLOZ HARI 1० 5४ 1107 Youeyy] popua Ava ayy ण dn spuounrvdaqysal.xysiurA| snolswa Woy poyEae 5०१०)३ UayE], UO!
(VZL ‘ON ydeaSeseg णु ० pa.zay9y)

£1-7107 JO £1 ON Hodoy

6007

souoysty SurAmeq,
‘Aipueqsnyy [ewuruy ‘oimjnousy

[>'प 10 uoKIsod ए०#जष्प्रापरा ए



801

I I z - - : I i z ८00८
- c ‘4 - - - - c 4 9007
T - T - - - qT - T 100८
- I I - - - - I T £007 जाया) 8
- I I - - : : I I 10८ sumpy ग्शाया00 | ६
I - T I - 1 - 2 2 6007 pleog vay -soJauIWI0D,
T - T - - - I - I 00८
c I ६ - - - (4 I ६ 6007
T - T - - - I - I S007 Aysnpuy pue sorouu10>, 9
- 1 I - - - - 1 1 L107
पु z z पु पु . - @ z 6007 uoneay fag | ५
T - T - - - qT - 1 010८ अण्टाफ्रश्प pue (एगप्पण्प हा
T - T T - T - - - TOOT ASopouyoajorg Jo youryzedaq, लू
I - T I - T - - - 6007
z - t t - 4 - - - 8007

- ६ & - € - - - L007
c - c (4 - 4 - - - ५00८
1 - I i - I - - - 007

£1-C107 JO €1 ‘ON Hoday


601

61

61

6l

00८

L007

S007

4007

६00८

6661

L661

डप्रणाए॒प्राप्रप्रा००जू० |,
Jo qusuniedag:

IL

010८

8007

L007

alata

9007

£007

s\sog Jo yuounsedoq
ASojouyso,
प्रणाश्प्रण॒पर एप suopeorMUTOD

010८

9007

५002८

६00८

इग्रष्प्रभूण्‌,
उ०1एणारतणु०0०्त Joy aud,

£1-7107 JO £1 ON Hodoy

8007



011

6007

8007

L007

५00८

7007

1007

0007

L661

qsoloJ pue 179ए7ण्र॒# पर

00८

8007

L007

9007

1007

saoualog Wey

“ST

1107

sep yeImen pue umojorog

nae

00८

$9०0४४००७
pue हैपरप्रपशूत ouuosieg

L007

५002८

7002

raya

1007

ABojouyoa |,
प्रणाश्परणुणु Jo yuounsedaq:

£1-C107 JO €1 ‘ON Hoday



M1

00८

6007

als

“|=

8007

L007

५00८

000८

arya वीएपथ्व pue प्राथ्णा

00८

8007

L007

9007

6661

1766]

३०प्रष्पातु

“81

00८

6007

8007

L007

9007

smegyy [एप्प

£1-7107 JO £1 ON Hodoy

1107



TI

t 9007 quowXoduag pue inogey | “Sz
7 ६00८ oousng pue meq | फट
t 0002 Suyseopeoig pue uoyeuuoyuy | “EZ
T 00८

I 3007 quoudojaaag comosay ueunp | 'दट
I 00८ (59त्रणाप91 प्रणव)

I 8002 लिख OOH

c 0०5 smeyy awoyy | पट
- 00८

- 8007

- 9007

- 007

- ६00८

a 100८

- 2008 yorasoy

- 6661 Teorpay] Jo [LounoD uerpuy | 0८

1-C107 JO £1 ‘oN today



ell

c - ‘4 4 4 - 8661
v - v v v - L661
Yoreasoy [eEsnpuy
c - c (6 6 - S661 एप oynuarog Jo yuounsedag | "0६
i t ६ I € - 8007
c - ‘4 t 4 - L007
- T T - T - 9007
T - T T T - ५002८
T - T I T - 100८
ASojouyoay,
T - T I I - £007 pur sousiog Jo yuounredag | 6८
I - T - - qT 6007
i - I - - I L007
| - I . - I coe quauidojaaag jeny | “gz
T - T I T - 010८
T - T I T - LOOT ABroug a[qemauoy -UON | “LZ
i - I I I - 00८
I - T I T - 8007
vipuy Jo Aaamg [एजविणु०ण)
I 2 I I 1 2 8661 samp | 9८

£1-7107 JO £1 ON Hodoy



vil

6007

L007

2०४१5 Jo wwounredag | -p¢

00८

9007

६00८

9661

वप्णपा३४००पात pue sonsng (श०0०5 | ६६

6007

suiddiyg | “ze

6007

uoneyuowsydury
oulumeiSo1g pue sonsung | “1¢

010८

8007

L007

900८

700८

६00८

7007

1007

0007

6661

£1-C107 JO €1 ‘ON Hoday



SI

0107

६00८

6661

quewidojaaaq शाप) pur weuto A,

“Or

8007

saammosay JaqeA\,

6007

quowdoyaaagy weqiy)

“BE

8007

9007

8661

ध्याशाफ्र [equ

“LE

6007

wsLino]

“Of

6007

L007

६00८

ब्गप्र्ण्‌

“SE

£1-7107 JO £1 ON Hodoy

010८



911

re ee ee जल

€1-t107 fo ला ON odoy


Report No. 13 of 2012-13

(Referred to in Paragraph No. 12.2)

Response of the Ministries/Departments to draft paragraphs

Communications and Information

|. | Technology os 4 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 2.8
2. External Affairs 5 fC शिकार
3. Home Affairs [| 4 | 1 41
4. Human Resource Development | 1 [| |: [| किम
5. | Information and Broadcasting 1 ee

Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions

a

Th Union Territories 3 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3

| 8. | ‘Women and Child Development

| 9. _| Atomic Energy

+ | + ०

| 10. | Space

117