 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Economic Sector 
for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 1 of the year 2017 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Presented to the Legislature on 30 March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
on  
 
Economic Sector 
for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 1 of the year 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 

(i) 
 
Table of Contents 
 Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Preface - (iii) 
Chapter I  
Introduction 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of Audited Entities 1.2 1 
Authority for Audit 1.3 2 
Organisational Structure of the Office of the Accountant 
General ( Economic an d Revenue Sector Audit ), 
Rajasthan 
 
1.4 
 
2 
Planning and conduct of audit 1.5 3 
Significant audit observations 1.6 3 
Response of the Departments to Performance 
Audit/Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
1.7 
 
8 
Follow-up on Audit Reports 1.8 8 
Chapter II 
Performance Audit 
Water Resources Department 
Irrigation potential created in Narmada Canal Project 2.1 9 
Chapter III  
Compliance Audit 
Environment Department 
Planning, Implementation and Monitoring of Common 
Effluent Treatment Plants 3.1 27 
Water Resources Department 
Rajasthan Minor Irrigation Improvement Project 3.2 41 
Forest Department   
Soil and water conservation in catchments of River 
Valley Projects 3.3 51 
 
  
 
   

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 (ii) 
 Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Public Works Department   
Irregular inclusion of pro-rata charges of ₹ 7.44 crore 3.4 60 
Infructuous expenditure of ₹ 3.99 crore 3.5 61 
Non-levy of compensation of ₹ 4.66  crore and irregular 
payment of price escalation of ₹ 0.44 crore 
3.6 63 
Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 2.05 crore 3.7 65 
Unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 1.78 crore 3.8 66 
Unauthorised utilisation of funds of ₹ 1.72 crore 3.9 67 
Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 1.42 crore 3.10 67 
Forest Department   
Non-recovery of ₹ 1.52 crore 3.11 68 
Water Resources Department   
Encroachment on Government land 3.12 69 
Avoidable expenditure on price escalation of ₹ 6.85 crore 3.13 70 
 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.1 List of amendments to be made in RFPMIS rules  as 
per project report  
73 
Appendix 2.2 Details of cases in which time extension not desired 
or granted under clause 5 and action not taken  under 
clause 2 of agreement 
74 
Appendix 3.1 Statement showing position of samples analysed and 
result thereof 
79 
Appendix 3.2 Work-wise details of work orders issued, 
expenditure incurred and price escalation paid to 
contractors 
80 
Appendix 3.3 Details of works in which span -wise progress not 
maintained by contractor 
81 
Appendix 3.4 Details of compensation paid to contractor under 
clause 2 and 3 of agreement 
84 
Appendix 3.5 Statement showing inclusion of items of excavation 
of earth, GSB and WBM under Gramin Gaurav 
Path Scheme 
85 
 

 
 (iii) 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended 31 March 2016  has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of the State of Rajasthan under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the  departments of the  Government of Rajasthan under 
the Economic Services carried out under the provisions of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (DPC) Act, 1971 and the Regulations on Audit and 
Accounts, 2007 issued there under by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India.  
The instances men tioned in this Report are those  which came to notice in the 
course of test audit during the period 2015-16 as well as those  which came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be reported in the p revious Audit Reports; 
instances relating to the period subsequent to 2015-16 have also been 
included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 

 1 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 1.1  About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) relates to 
matters arising from performance audit of selected programmes and acti vities 
and compliance audit of economic sector departments and autonomous bodies. 
Compliance audi t refers to examination of the transactions relating to 
expenditure of the audited entities. This is to ascertain whether the provisions 
of the Constit ution of India, applicable laws, rules and regulations,  various 
orders and instructions issued by the competent authorities are being complied 
with. Performance audit examines whether the objectives of the programme or 
activity are achieved economically, efficiently and effectively. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice, important results 
of au dit to the State Legislature. Auditing Standards require that the 
materiality level for reporting should  be commensurate with the nature , 
volume and magnitude of transactions. T he findings of au dit are ex pected to 
enable the Executive to take corrective measures. This would enable them  to 
frame policies and directives to i mprove financial management of the 
organisations for better governance. 
This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and extent of audit, 
provides a synopsis of the significant  deficiencies noticed in Performance and 
Compliance Audit. Chapter II of this Report contains findings arising out of 
performance audit of  Irrigation potential created in Narmada Canal Project . 
Chapter III contains observations arising out of  compliance audit of the 
Government Departments.  
 1.2  Profile of Audited Entities 
The Accountant General (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan, 
Jaipur conducts Audit of the expenditure of Twelve economic sector 
department. These Departments are  headed by Additional Chief 
Secretaries / Principal Secretar ies / Secretaries, who are assisted by 
Commissioners /Deputy Secretaries and subordinate officers.  
The comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government of 
Rajasthan during 2013-14 to 2015-16 is given in Table 1 as follows: 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 2 
Table 1: Comparative position of expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
Revenue expenditure 
General services 23,339 27,868 31,016 
Social services 31,486 37,754 43,349 
Economic services 20,436 28,920 31,874 
Grants-in-aid and Contribution 249 -* -** 
Total  75,510 94,542 1,06,239 
Capital and other expenditure 
Capital Outlay 13,665 16,103 21,985 
Loans and Advances disbursed 811 701 36,602 
Payment of Public Debt 4,116 4,960 4,959 
Contingency Fund - 300 - 
Public Accounts disbursement 1,05,605 1,22,061 1,40,432 
Total 1,24,197 1,44,125 2,03,978 
Grand Total 1,99,707 2,38,667 3,10,217 
Source: Audit Reports on State Finances of the respective years  
* ₹ 9 lakh only ** ₹ 10 lakh only 
 
 1.3  Authority for Audit 
The authority for audit by the CAG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of 
the Constitution of India and the CAG’s Duties, Powers and Conditions  of 
Service (DPC) Act, 1971. 
The Accountant Gener al ( Economic and Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan, 
Jaipur conducts audit of expenditure of Economic Sector Departments, 
including Public Sector Undertakings  and Autonomous Bodies  of the 
Government of Rajasthan under the provisions of the CAG's DPC Act, 1971 
and the C&AG’s Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 issued there under. 
The principles and methodology for the performance and compliance audit are 
prescribed in the guidelines and manual issued by the CAG. 
 
1.4 Organisational Structure of the Office of t he Accountant 
General (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan 
Under the directions of 
the CAG, the office of the 
Accountant General 
(Economic and Revenue 
Sector Audit), Rajasthan,  
Jaipur conducts audit of 
Revenue and Economic 
Sector Depart ments, 
including Public Sector  


Chapter  I: Introduction 
 3 
Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies of the Government of Rajasthan 
through three groups.  
 1.5  Planning and conduct of audit 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risk exposure of various 
Government departments /organisations / autonomous bodies and sche mes / 
projects, etc. Risk assessment s are based on expenditure, criticality of 
activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of overall  internal 
controls and the conc erns of stakeholders. Previous a udit findi ngs are also 
considered in this exercise. 
After completion of audit of each unit, an Inspection Report containing audit 
findings is issued to the head of the unit. The units are requested to furnish 
replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt  of the  Inspection 
Report. Whenever replies are received, audit  findings are either settled or 
further compliance is advis ed. The important audit observations ari sing out of 
these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports. 
 1.6  Significant audit observations 
During the last few years, Audit has reported several significant deficiencies 
relating to  implementation of various program mes/activities as  well as the 
quality of inter nal controls. These findings had i mpacted the successful 
implementation of program mes and functioning of the depart ments through 
Performance Audit . The deficiencies noticed d uring compliance audit of the 
Government departments/organisations were also reported. 
The present report contains one Performance Audit on Irriga tion Potential 
created in Narmada Canal Project, three Compliance Audits covering themes 
on Planning, Implementation and Monitoring of Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants, Rajasthan Minor Irrigation Improvement Project and Soil and water 
conservation in catch ments of Riv er Valley Projects and 10 individual 
paragraphs. The highlights are given in the following paragraphs. 
 1.6.1 Performance Audit of programmes/activities 
Performance Audit of Irrigation potential created in Narmada Canal 
Project. 
The Narmada Can al Project is an inter -state project shared by the State s of 
Gujarat and Rajasthan. The Narmada Canal starts from the Sardar Sarovar 
Dam and after traversing 458 km in Gujarat enters in Rajasthan . The total 
length of the main canal, distributaries and seco ndary canal system  in 
Rajasthan is 1792.67 km. The N armada Canal Project in Rajasthan was 
approved (January 1996) by G overnment of India with stipulated date of 
completion as March 2003. The Culturable Command Area was taken as  
1.35 lakh hectares which were subsequently increased from 1.35 lakh hectares 
to 2.46 lakh hectares. 
The Narmada Canal Project has som e unique features like irrigation through 
micro-irrigation system, delivery of irrigation water to farmer groups through 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 4 
Water User Associations , plantation along canal for bio -drainage and 
conjunctive use of surface and ground water for prevention of water logging. 
The concerns in implementation of key  aspects of the project are highlighted 
below:  
In the progress reports, the Department had shown  the irrigated area as  
2.15 lakh hectares (87.40 per cent) against 2.46 lakh hectares as envisaged in 
project report. Till March 2016, only 1193 diggies (55 per cent ) were 
electrified which showed  that the command area shown as irrigated was not 
actually irrig ated through spri nkler or drip irrigation system. This was an 
important aspect of the project.  The land acquired for construction of canal, 
distributaries, minors and sub -minors was not mutated in the name of the 
Water Resources Department. 
The Department had formed 2145 Water User Associations against 2236 to be 
formed and handed over assets like diggies, pipelines and mono block pumps  
to 1885 Associations. The Distributary and Project Committees were not 
formed in any of the water  user areas. In absence o f electrification of diggies 
(45 per cent), the Water User Associations remained largely non -functional. 
Necessary amendments in rules framed under ‘ Rajasthan Farmers’ 
Participation in Management of Irrigation Systems Act, 2000’ were not carried 
out to strengthen Participatory Irrigation Management. Water charges were not 
recovered by Water User Associations as required and absence of 
recovery/less recovery of water charges indicated lack of monitoring by the 
Department. The Narmada Main Canal and its distr ibutaries and minors 
suffered the problem of water theft by nearby cultivators who lifted water 
from canals to irrigate their fields by using their own water pumps. 
The objective of providing bio -drainage in the command area suffered  due to 
lesser plantation and planting of species other than the species mentioned in 
the project report.  No action was taken by the Department to ensure the 
conjunctive use of ground and surface water for prevention of water logging.  
 (Paragraph 2.1) 
 1.6.2 Significant audit observations arising out of Compliance Audit 
Planning, Implementation and Monitoring of Common Effluent 
Treatment Plants 
Under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, every 
industry has to provide adequate treatment of its effluent before  disposal 
irrespective of whether it is discharged in stream, land, sewerage or sea. The 
Common Effluent Treatment Plants are considered a viable treatment solution 
for collective or centralized treatment of effluent, particularly generated from 
small and medium scale industries. Common Effluent Treatment Plants  
potentially help in achieving treatment of combined waste water from various 
industries at lower unit cost and to facilitate compliance with waste water 
discharge standards.  

Chapter  I: Introduction 
 5 
Rajasthan State Polluti on Control Board is the facilitator to coordinate and 
provide financial assistance, technical guidance and monitoring of the 
Common Effluent Treatment Plants.  
The Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board had neither prepared any 
comprehensive programme for  establishing Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants in areas where large number of small and medium scale industries were  
functioning without proper treatment of effluent. It also did not  prepare a 
policy for conducting periodical survey to identify industries which were 
contributing to water pollution. The Board had also not taken any concrete 
action for setting up of Common Effluent Treatment Plant in Sanganer, Jaipur 
in a timely manner. 
In Pali district, the functioning of all Common Effluent Treatment Plants  was 
not satisfactory. The  treated waste water did not conf orm to the prescribed 
standards and was being discharged into Bandi river. In Bhiwadi, dried 
hazardous sludge was lying on open Kaccha land in huge quantity without 
covering shed near a residential  area. The Common Effluent Treatment Plant, 
Jodhpur never operated at its optimum capacity and excess effluent discharged 
by industrial units was being discharged into Jojri river. The Plant also 
discharged treated waste water into same channel from where it was 
withdrawing untreated water resulting in mixing of treated waste water with 
untreated waste water. 
Consent to operate/authorization was being given with retrospective effect 
without ascertaining the compliance of the conditions included in the conse nt 
letter. No third party monitoring mechanism was evolved. There was huge 
shortfall in collection and analysis of samples to ensure that the prescribed 
effluent standards were met. 
 (Paragraph 3.1) 
 
 Rajasthan Minor Irrigation Improvement Project 
The Rajasthan Minor Irrigation Improvement Project  was approved (March 
2005) by the Government of Rajasthan.  The main objective of the project was 
to rehabilitate the existing minor irr igation facilities and improve  water 
management and agricultural practices, the reby enhancing agriculture income 
and alleviating poverty. In order to achieve the desired objectives, three 
components i.e. civil works, technical and institutional support services and 
consulting services were determined. The main executing agency and th e focal 
point in implementation of the project was the Water Resources Department . 
The Agricultural Department was responsible for implementation of agriculture 
extension activities and Medical and Health Department was responsible for 
controlling malaria. 
The delay in appointment of Engineering and Management  Consultant 
adversely affected all activities under civil work component . As a result, the 
project was delayed and the objective of utilizing surface water through 
rehabilitation of sub -projects was no t fully achieved. Loan from Japan 
International Cooper ative Agency could not be fully availed due to less 
utilization of budget by implementing agencies. Premature closure of sub -

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 6 
projects resulted in less creation of capacity for storage of water  and less 
irrigation of C ulturable Command Area. Non-completion of work of 
construction of watercourse  structures resulted in non-achievement of the 
objectives to check the water losses, enhance cultivable area up to the desired 
extent and extend the benefit of irrigation facilities to the farmers . The failure 
of Water User Associations in realizing water charges  resulted in non -
availability of funds for operation and maintenance of  sub-projects. The 
consultant clearly indicated in its report that the evaluation of the impact of the 
project was premature and the system to succeed w ould require financial base, 
enforcement of power and experience of running the system. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
 
 Soil and water conservation in catchments of River Valley Projects 
The soil and wate r conservation scheme in the catchments of River Valley 
Projects was undertaken under ‘Macro Management of Agriculture’ up to 
2012-13. Thereafter this scheme was under ‘Rashtriya  Krishi Vikas Yojana’. 
The main objectives of the scheme were to p revent land degradation; soil loss 
by adoption of multi -disciplinary integrated approach of soil conservation and 
watershed management; improvement of land capability and moisture regime 
in the watersheds; promotion of land use to match land capability from the 
catchments to reduce siltation of multipurpose reservoirs. 
In absence of the c onstitution of Watershed Development Teams, t he project 
was deprived of the expertise required for execution of watershed and other 
activities. Unplanned construction of permanent stru ctures without ensuring 
that the vegetative soil conservation works had taken shape . This resulted in 
non-achievement of the objective of the project to prevent siltation and 
enhance surface rainwater storage in the multipurpose reservoirs. In absence of 
the constitution of Self Help Groups , the revolving fund was not disbursed for 
executing the farming. The allied activities to improve the living  standards of 
the beneficiaries  and the objective of the scheme to develop livelihood 
activities for the landles s persons,  production system and micro enterprises, 
therefore, got defeated.  
The work of operation and maintenance of assets cre ated under the project 
suffered due to non -constitution of User Groups. T he objective to enhance 
knowledge and skill of functio naries could not be achieved as workshops and 
training programmes were not held. Non-utilisation of Corpus Fund and non -
collection of user charges affected the maintenance of assets created under the 
project. Due to non -development of o nline web -based moni toring system,  
watershed-wise and activity -wise data for ongoing watershed works were not 
fed on the website. Third party evaluation of the projects was not done. 
 (Paragraph 3.3) 
 
Public Works Department  (PWD), Rajasthan included pro-rata charges of  
₹ 7.44 crore on works executed by Rajasthan State Road Development 
Construction Corporation Limited in contravention to the Rules 5(a) and (d) of 
Appendix V of Public Works Financial and Accounting Rules  (Part-II). 
According to Rule,  when the construction works are executed by an agency 

Chapter  I: Introduction 
 7 
other than the P ublic Works Department , then agency charges  should not be 
recovered by PWD.  
(Paragraph 3.4) 
Lack of proper assessment  of diversion of traffic  from other roads , degree of 
overloading and non-preparation of co st estimates for normal traffic  led to 
infructuous expenditure of ₹ 3.99 crore on upgradation of road, before the lapse 
of defect liability period, under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana. 
(Paragraph 3.5) 
Non-levy of compensation of ₹ 4.66 crore for no t maintaining the span -wise 
progress of work and irregular payment of price escalation of ₹ 0.44 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.6) 
The construction of road under Gramin Gaurav Path  Scheme had to be 
undertaken on already existing C ement Concrete/bitumen roads. A new sub -
base on preparation of ground for fresh Cement Concrete  roads was not 
required. The P ublic Works Department,  Rajasthan incurred an a voidable 
expenditure of ₹ 2.05 crore by inclusion of items of excavation of earth, 
construction of granular sub -base and laying of compacted graded stone 
aggregate in the estimates prepared under Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme. 
(Paragraph 3.7) 
The work of construction of bituminous road was awarded above the 
administrative and financial sanction without proper fund arrangements. This 
resulted in failure to complete the  work and non-fulfilment of the objective of 
road connectivity even after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 1.78 crore  under 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana.  
(Paragraph 3.8) 
The P ublic Works Department,  Rajasthan utilised funds of ₹ 1.72 crore  for 
maintenance of urban roads under 13th Finance Commissio n. This was 
unauthorised as the funds released were meant  only for the maintenance and 
renovation of village roads. 
(Paragraph 3.9) 
Out of 30 roads, 3 roads had already been sanctioned and constructed five to 
15 months earlier under other schemes and were under guarantee period. 
These road s were again sanctioned  by the Public Works Department  and 
constructed by incurring an avoidable expenditure of ₹  1.42 crore against the 
rule of financial propriety. 
(Paragraph 3.10) 
The excavated material such as the muck including soil and hard/soft rock 
generated on account of tunnel excavation was to be used in the construction 
of road. The cost o f the same was required to be deposited by the user agency 
to the Forest Department. The Forest Department did not raise the 
demand/realise the cost of excavated material of ₹ 1.52 crore.  
(Paragraph 3.11) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 8 
 
Lack of proper watch and ward and no n-transfer of  the surplus land costing   
₹ 9.12 crore by Water Resources Department  to Revenue Department resulted 
in encroachment of the land. 
(Paragraph 3.12) 
The work was awarded by Water Resources Department  before finalisation of 
the detailed technical estimates . T his resulted in a voidable expenditure of  
₹ 6.85 crore o n price escalation and also delayed the work for more than five 
years. 
(Paragraph 3.13) 
1.7 Response of the Departments to Performance Audit /Compliance 
Audit Paragraphs 
The draft paragraphs are forwarded to the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal 
Secretary/Secretary of the departments concerned, drawing their attention to 
the audit findings and seeking their response on these findings. It is brought to 
their personal attention that in view of likely inclusion of such paragraphs in 
the Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, which are 
placed before State Legislature, it would be desirable to include their 
comments. They are also advised to have meetings with the Accountant 
General to discuss the performance audit/draft paragraphs proposed for 
inclusion in the Audit Report. Accordingly, the performance audit/draft 
paragraphs proposed for inclusion in this Report are forwarded to the 
Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary/Secretary concerned.  
All the replies to draft paragraphs and perfor mance audit furnished by the 
State Government have been appropriately incorporated in the Report. 
 1.8 Follow-up on Audit Reports 
The Finance Depart ment of the Sta te Govern ment deci ded (Dece mber1996) 
that Action Taken Notes on all p aragraphs/performance audits that have 
appeared in Audit Reports be su bmitted to the Public Accounts Com mittee, 
duly vetted by Audit, within three months from the date of laying of the 
Reports in the State Legislature. A review of the outstanding Action Taken 
Notes on paragraphs/perfor mance audits included in the Reports of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India pertaining to  various Economic 
Sector Departments as of December 2016 revealed that  three Action Taken 
Notes were pending from the concerned Departments. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
 
Performance Audit 

9 
 
Chapter II 
Performance Audit 
This chapter includes the performance audit  of Irrigation potential created in  
Narmada Canal Project. 
Water Resources Department 
 
2.1  Irrigation potential created in Narmada Canal Project   
Executive Summary 
 
The N armada Canal Project in Rajasthan was approved (January 1996) by 
Government of India with March 2003 as stipulated date of completion . The 
Culturable Command Area was taken as 1.35 lakh hectares . On the basis of 
findings of the Water and Power Consultancy Services Lim ited, p ressure 
irrigation using sprinkler/drip irrigation system was made mandatory and 
Culturable Command Area  was increased from 1.35 lakh hectares to  
2.46 lakh hectares . The plantation along canal for bio -drainage and 
conjunctive use of surface and gro und water were also proposed to prevent 
water logging.  
The irrigated area was shown as 2.15 lakh hectares (87.40 per cent) whereas 
only 1193 diggies (55 per cent) were electrified till March 2016. It show ed 
that the command area shown as irrigated was not  actually irrigated through 
sprinkler or drip irrigation system. The area  irrigated by farmers by taking 
water from minors by arranging their own water pumps instead of micro 
irrigation system was incorrectly included in the achievement of Culturable 
Command Area  irrigated. The land acquired for construction of canal, 
distributaries, minors and sub -minors was not mutated in the name of the 
Water Resources Department. 
Out of 2236 Water User Associations to be formed, only 2145 Associations 
were formed and 18 85 Associations were handed over assets like diggies, 
pipelines and mono block pumps.  The Distributary and Project Committees 
were not formed in any of the water  user areas. In absence of electrification 
of diggies (45 per cent ) and collection of water cha rges, the Water User 
Associations remained largely non-functional. Necessary amendments in 
rules framed under ‘ Rajasthan Farmers’ Participation in Management of 
Irrigation Systems Act, 2000’ were not carried out to strengthen Participatory 
Irrigation Management. Absence of recovery/less recovery of water charges 
indicated lack of monitoring  by the Water Resources Department . The 
Narmada Main Canal and its distributaries and minors suffered the problem 
of water theft by nearby cultivators who lifted water fr om canals to irrigate 
their fields by using their own water pumps.  
Due to lesser plantation and planting of species other than the species 
mentioned in the project report, the objective of providing bio-drainage in the 
command area suffered. Further, no a ction was taken by the Department to 
ensure the conjunctive use of ground and surface water for drainage of low 
lying areas.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
10 
 
 Introduction 
The Narmada Canal Project (NCP) is an inter-state project shared by the States 
of Gujarat and Rajasthan. The annual share of water for Rajasthan was fixed 
by the Narmada Water Dispute Tribunal as 0.5 Million Acre Feet ( MAF) 
water out of total 28 MAF utilis able quantity of water in Narmada Canal. The 
storage reservoir ‘Sardar  Sarovar Dam’ is located in Gujarat from where  the 
Narmada Canal starts and after traversing 458 km in Gujarat enters in 
Rajasthan near Silu village in Sanchore Tehsil of Jalore district. The discharge 
capacity of the canal at the border of Rajasthan is 73.5 m 3/second. The total 
length of main canal in Rajasthan is 74 km. There are nine major distributaries 
and the total length of the main canal, distributaries and secondary canal 
system is 1792.67 km. The NCP has some unique features in comparison  to 
other projects: 
 Irrigation water is  to be  delivered to farmer groups through Water User 
Associations (WUAs) and not to individual farmers.  
 WUAs are responsible  for the operation and maintenance of field water 
channels. 
 Micro-irrigation system such as drip and sprinkler irrigation system has 
been envisaged for efficient water usage.  
The NCP in Rajasthan was approved (January 1996) by G overnment of India 
(GoI) at an estimated cost of ₹ 467.53 crore with stipulated date of completion 
as March 2003. The Culturable Command Area (CCA) was taken as 1.35 lakh 
hectares. The method of irrigation  adopted was flow irrigation system. Under 
this system, the water allowance was taken as 7.41 c usecs1 per one thousand 
acres. 
According to the suggestions made by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests (MoEF), GoI an environment action plan should be prepared and 
implemented pari-passu with the construction work. Water and Power 
Consultancy Service s Limited (WAPCOS)  conducted the study for 
environment impact assessment, ground water quality and drainage design  and 
submitted (September 1998) its report which envisaged that: 
(i) the static groundwater table was high and still higher in the ‘Ned’ 2 area 
where sweet groundwater flows as a s heet of narrow thickness above 
saline ground water underneath, 
(ii) the soil in the area was saline/alkaline, and  
(iii) the canal irrigation m ight lead most of the command area to get water 
logged in few years which might render fertile land unfit for agriculture. 
Necessitated by the findings of the WAPCOS, p ressure irrigation by using 
sprinkler/drip irrigation system was made mandatory in the entire command 
area to prevent water logging. The CCA was increased from 1.35 lakh hectares 
to 2.46 lakh hectares and water allowance for irrigation was reduced to 1.31-
2.51 cusecs against 7.41 cusecs per thousand acres.  The plantation along canal 
for bio -drainage and conjunctive use of surface and ground water were also 
proposed to prevent water logging. 
                                                 
1  Cubic feet per second 
2  Deltaic region of Luni river 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
11 
 
Due to revision in the scope (from 1.35 lakh hectares to 2.46 lakh hectares) 
and introduction of additional items of works like construction and 
electrification of diggies3; laying of pipelines and installation of pump s; 
construction of wells and plantation along canal side;  the cost of the project 
was revised (August 2007) to ₹  1541.36 crore . The stipulated date of 
completion was decided as March 2014.  The cost of the project was further 
revised (July 2010) to ₹ 2481.49 crore on account of abnormal increase in cost 
of labour, material, fuel, etc. and the stipulated date of completion was 
advanced to March 2013. Against the revised cost  of ₹ 2481.49 crore , an 
amount of ₹ 2368.90 crore had been incurred up to  March 2016. The 
Department has sought fu rther extension up to March 2017 for completion of 
the project. 
Flow chart of the project 
 
 
 
 
 Organisational Set-up 
At State level, the Secretary is the administrative head of the Water Resources 
Department (WRD). At Department level , the Chief Eng ineer (CE) WRD 
functions as an Additional Secretary for technical matters . There is a CE for 
NCP at Sanchore  at the field level.  There are six 4 divisions headed by 
Executive Engineers (EEs) which are supervised by two Superintending 
Engineers (SEs). 
 Audit objectives 
The performance audit  of irrigation potential created in Narmada Canal 
Project in Rajasthan was conducted to assess whether: 
 the irrigation potential through sprinkler/drip irrigation system as envisaged 
was created and utilised; 
 participatory irrigation management activities were able to achieve the 
objectives of ‘Rajasthan Farmers ’ Participation in Management of 
Irrigation Systems Act, 2000’; 
 the activities like bio -drainage and conjunctive use of ground and surface 
water were implemented effectively; and 
 the financial control and monitoring was effective. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
3  Water storage tanks. 
4 Executive Engineer, NCP Division -I, NCP Division -II, NCP Division -III, NCP Division -IV, NCP 
Division-V and  Regional Workshop, NCP, Sanchore 
Narmada 
Main 
Canal 
Distributary/ 
Minor/ 
Sub-Minor 
 
Diggies Farmers’ fields 
(Through HDPE pipes for 
sprinkler/drip irrigation) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
12 
 
 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria were derived from: 
 Detailed Project Report of NCP  
 Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules  
 Rajasthan General Financial and Accounts Rules  
 Annual Progress Report of the WRD/NCP 
 Rajasthan Farmers’ Participation in Management of Irrigation Systems Act, 
2000. 
 Scope and Methodology 
The field study of the P erformance Audit for the period from 2011 -12 to  
2015-16 was conducted in the offices of the CE, WR D Jaipur, NCP, Sanchore 
and EEs, NCP, Sanchore. Apart from these , records of Deputy Conservator of 
Forests (DCFs) at Jalore and Barmer  were also scrutinized as f unds for the 
plantation were allotted to these DCFs. 
The broad audit objectives,  scope and meth odology of Performance Audit 
were discussed in the Entry Conference held (April 2016) with the Secretary, 
WRD, Rajasthan, Jaipur. The audit findings were discussed in the Exit 
Conference held (October 2016) with the Additional Secretary cum Chief 
Engineer, WRD. The replies of the State Government received (October 2016) 
have been considered while finalising the Performance Audit Report. 
 Audit Findings 
 
 2.1.1  Irrigation through sprinkler/drip irrigation system 
Originally, flow irrigation system was adopte d in the NCP. O n the basis of 
findings of WAPCOS, as discussed above, pressure irrigation by using 
sprinkler/drip system was made mandatory in the entire command area. 
 2.1.1.1 Non-utilisation of irrigation potential in C ulturable Command 
Area as envisaged in project report 
One of the unique features of the NCP was to adopt micro-irrigation system 
such as drip and sprinkler irrigation system . This was envisaged in the project 
report for efficient water usage . The  area was  to be  considered as CCA on 
completion of all civil and mechanical works relating to construction of canal, 
diggies and installation of micro-irrigation system. 
The progress reports of the divisions selected disclosed that the civil works5 up 
to the extent of 97.32 per cent  and mechanical wo rks6 up to the extent of 
88.06-96.02 per cent were completed as of March 2016 . The CCA irrigated 
was shown as 2.15 lakh hectares ( 87.40 per cent) against the total command 
area of 2.46 lakh hectares. The fact that the 2.15 lakh hectares area shown as 
irrigated was not correct as out of 2183 diggies completed, only 1193 diggies 
                                                 
5    Construction of diggies, pump room, sump well, boundary wall, etc. 
6  Supplying, l aying, jointing, testing and commissioning of pipeline and installation of mono block 
pumps. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
13 
 
(55 per cent) were electrified till March 2016. The area irrigated by farmers by 
taking water from minors by  arranging their own water pumps instead of 
sprinkler/drip irrigation syste m was also incorrectly included in the CCA 
irrigated. The irrigation potential created, therefore, could not be utilized as 
envisaged in the project report because of non -electrification of diggies  
(45 per cent). 
The State Government stated that the irrig ated area had increased from 0.18 
lakh hectares in 2006 to 1.60 lakh hectares in 2016 but target of electrification 
of diggies could not be achieved due to educational and economic 
backwardness and lack of understanding and faith among the cultivators. It 
was also stated that utmost efforts at departmental level were being made to 
accelerate the pace of electrification of diggies. The reply of the State 
Government contradicts with the facts mentioned in the progress report  that 
the CCA of 2.15 lakh hectares  was irrigated. The actual area irrigated only 
through drip and sprinkler irrigation system was to be adopted in the CCA 
irrigated. In the absence of electrification of diggies, the CCA was being 
irrigated through flow system. It had the serious risk of wa ter logging due to 
excessive recharge of ground  water by overdrawal of water  thereby defeating 
the objective of economic use of water and preventing of water logging.  
It is recommended that electrification work should be executed 
simultaneously with the canal works . The remaining diggies (45 per cent) 
should be electrified on priority basis.  
 2.1.1.2 Actual availability of culturable command area  not ensured 
before construction of canal 
The construction of Surachand minor of Bhimguda Distributary having 
discharge capacity of water of 0.715 cumecs7 was completed in September 
2011 at a cost of  ₹ 3.71 crore . The CCA proposed for the minor was  
6369.31 hectares and 51 diggies in the command area were to be constructed. 
To utilize the water of this minor  for irrigation, the work of  laying, jointing, 
testing and commissioning of distribution network was awarded  (February 
2011). The work was scheduled to be completed by 4 March 2012. The 
contractor when submitted the dra wing and design for laying pipe line in the 
command area, it was found that 3391.04 hectares  of CCA covering the area 
of 25 diggies were Government land. In the command area of these diggies, 
sprinkler irrigation system was not developed. In the remaining area  
(2978.27 hectares), the work of laying of pipeline, installation of pump set and 
construction of 26 diggies was executed by incurring an expenditure of   
₹ 4.93 crore up to October 2015. 
It showed that p roper survey was not conducted before preparing the Detailed 
Project Report ( DPR) for assessing the actual availability of CCA at site and 
the Surachand minor was constructed without proper planning  and assessing 
the actual requirement of diggies. This resulted in avoidable expenditure  on 
construction of canal of higher discharge capacity. The avo idable expenditure 
on the minor could not be worked out in Audit since the minor was 
constructed long back. 
                                                 
7    Cubic metre per second 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
14 
 
The State Government stated that in the sanctioned DPR of the project, CCA 
of each diggi was taken as determined by the consultancy firm 8. In the instant 
case, when the work of laying of High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE) pipeline 
was taken up as per the alignment fixed by the Consultant, the Department for 
the first time noticed that the area of 25 diggies, out of 51 was lying either 
under forest land or was saline but prior to this, the construction of Surachand 
minor had been completed.  
2.1.1.3 Award of civil and mechanical works s eparately resulted in  
deprivation of irrigation benefit  to farmers for more than five 
years 
Para 14 (vi) of the revised guidelines (1998) of Central Water Commission for 
environment monitoring of water resources projects  envisaged that Command 
Area Development (CAD) plan should be prepared and implemented in such a 
manner that gap between irrigation potential created and uti lized was 
minimized. This was meant to  ensure that the outlay on the project was 
converted into enduring outcome in the form of assured and sustainable 
irrigation benefits to farmers. 
It was noticed that the civil works of various minors/sub-minors were awarded 
between February 2007 and October 2009 and completed in 2011. The  
mechanical works were, however, not completed (May 2016) due to awarding 
of the works  separately to other contractors during the period between  
December 2007 and November 2008. This re sulted in blocking of funds of  
₹ 72.11 crore9 incurred on civil works  and depriving the farmers of assured 
and sustainable irrigation benefits for more than five years. It was  also noticed 
that in compliance to the order issued (July 2010) by WRD, the civil and 
mechanical works were being awarded simultaneously to the single bidder on 
turnkey basis. Keeping in view the CWC guidelines, had the decision to award 
the civil and mechanical works simultaneously to single bidder been taken 
earlier by WRD, blocking of funds on the civil works could have been avoided 
and could have provided the benefit of irrigation to the farmers side by side. 
The State Government stated that awarding of civil and mechanical works 
separately resulted in lack of coordination between civil and mechanical 
contractors and therefore, composite civil and mechanical works were 
awarded from 2010-11. It was also stated that during 2008 -12, available canal 
water was utilized because of the completion of civil works. The fact remained 
that the farmers utilized the water using their own water pumps  and timely 
benefit of irrigation to the farmers as envisaged in the project  report was not 
provided. 
 2.1.1.4 Non-acquisition of land before awarding of work resulted in non -
completion of works 
Rules 298 and 351 of Public Works Fina ncial and Accounts  Rules 
(PWF&AR) provide that the availability of land is a pre-requisite and it should 
be acquired well in advance . No work should commence on land which has 
                                                 
8    M/s Tahal Consultancy 
9    Division-I  ` 17.29, II- ` 15.24, III- ` 21.06, IV- ` 11.26, V- ` 7.26 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
15 
 
not been physically in possession or has not been duly made over by  the 
responsible civil officer. 
It was  observed that the works of execution of earth work, single precast 
cement concrete (PCC) block lining, pucca structure, diggies, pump room, 
sump well and boundary wall of Malwar sub-minor and Karawadi minor were 
awarded (February 2010) to the contractor  for ₹  1.33 crore .  The  stipulated 
date of completion was November 2010. The work of Karawadi minor could 
not be completed within stipulated time, as owner of the land created obstacles 
and obtained a stay order from the Court. As the matter could not be finalized, 
the work was withdrawn (April 2011) under clause 32 of the Agreement. The 
contractor was paid ₹  1.12 crore for 84 per cent  completion of work . 
Subsequently, after a gap of five years, the remaining work of Karawadi minor 
was awarded (June 2015)  to another contractor for  ₹ 20.88 lakh with 
scheduled date of completion as 19 September 2015. The contractor was paid  
₹ 11.95 lakh (March 2016).  
Due to not following the governing rules for ensuring the availability of land 
before c ommencement of work, the work was delayed for more than five 
years. This also postponed the benefit of irrigation to the farmers.  
The State Government stated that the works were allotted after issuance of 
land award but due to court stay and non -vacating of land by a cultivator till 
September 2016, the works remained  incomplete. The  fact remain ed that 
works were allotted without ascertaining clear title of land. 
 2.1.1.5  Non-mutation of land 
The D epartment had acquired 4833.353 he ctares land for construct ion of 
various canals/distributaries/minors/sub -minors, etc. The compensation of  
₹ 65.45 crore was paid up to March 2016 but mutation of the land in the name 
of the Department was not done. As a result,  the land acquired had not come 
under the clear title of the Department. 
The State Government stated that the process of mutation of acquired land was 
in progress.  
It is recommended that l and acquired should be mutated in the name of the 
Department as early as possible to avoid any possible encroachment and  
legal complications. 
 2.1.2   Participatory Irrigation Management activities 
The Rajasthan Farmers’ Participation in Management of Irrigation Systems 
Act, 2000 (RFPMIS Act)  was introduced (July 2000 ) to govern  the 
distribution of water among the farmers . Accordingly, farmers’ organizations 
had to be constituted in the command area of any irrigation project. For 
operation and management of irrigation system , elected bodies of  farmers 
namely WUAs  at primary level 10; Distributary Committee at secondary 
                                                 
10 For preparing plan for mainten ance, extension, improvement, renovation and modernization of 
irrigation system including distributary and field drains 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
16 
 
level11; and the Project Committee at project level 12 had to be formed.  The 
Government of Rajasthan (GoR) also framed Rules, 2002 under the Act. 
 2.1.2.1   Lack of   Participatory Irrigation Management 
According to  Section 4 of RF PMIS Act  (Act), there shall be one WUA for 
every water user area, consisting of all the water users who are land owners in 
such area as members. Section 17  of the Act stipulates that the WUA shall 
prepare and implement a plan of maintenance, extension, improvement, 
renovation and modernizat ion of irrigation system ; regulate the use of water 
among the various outlets ; promote economy in use of water;  monitor flow of 
water in irrigation , etc. Similarly, under S ection 6 and 8 of the Act, one 
Distributary Committee for two or more water user are as and one Project 
Committee for the project area shall be formed for execution of the functions 
as given in section 18 and 19 of the Act. 
It was observed that against  the requirement of  2236 WUAs to be formed , 
only 2145 WUAs were formed ( March 2016) and only 1885 WUAs were 
handed over the assets . It was also observed that in absence of electrification 
of diggies (45 per cent ) and collection of water charges, the WUAs were 
largely not functional. Similarly, no Distributary and Project Committees were 
formed in any of the water user areas. As a result,  the work to be assigned to 
these committees under the Act could not be performed. 
 
Section 17 of Act stipulates that WUAs shall prepare and implement a 
warabandi schedule13 for each irrigation season. For this, WUAs were also 
required to maintain certain registers, inventory of irrigation system, accounts, 
etc. It was observed that no warabandi schedule had been prepared by any of 
the WUAs formed  and no mechanism existed in the Department for 
verification of records, registers, inventory of irrigation system, etc. 
 
The State Government stated that  WUAs were not supposed to prepare the 
warabandi schedules but had to implement the warabandi schedules. The  
Department had prepared the warabandi schedules according to the HDPE 
pipeline design and  capacity of motor pumps . The reply was not tenable as 
section 17 of RFPMIS Act stipulated that WUAs should prepare and 
implement warabandi schedule. The warabandi schedules were not 
implemented by WUAs even in areas where diggies were electrified. The State 
Government did not address on  the formation of Distributary and Project 
Committees.    
The Department should ensure formation of Water User Associations, 
Distributary and Project committees and transfer of assets to the Water User 
Associations according to provisions of RFPMIS Act. 
 
                                                 
11  For preparing operational plan for the extension, improvement, renovation, modernization and annual 
maintenance of both distributaries and medium drains and to regulate the use of water among various 
WUAs 
12 For approving plan for the extension, improvement, renovation, modernization and annual 
maintenance of irrigation system including major drains. 
13  Warabandi schedule is a system of water allocation to water users by turn according to an approved      
schedule indicating the day, duration and time of supply. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
17 
 
 2.1.2.2 Lifting of irrigation water from canals  by farmers  by using 
motor pumps  
One of the consequences of lack of participatory irrigation management was 
the problem of water theft from the main canal, distributaries and minors.  
In the NCP, compulsory pressure irrigation was adopted by using sprinklers or 
drip. It was observed that the Narmada Main Canal and its distributaries and  
minors suffered the problem of water theft by nearby cultivators who lifted 
water from canals to irrigate their fields by using motor pumps . A campaign 
was launched (28 April to 30 April 2016) to remove motor pumps and other 
encroachments from Narmada Main Canal and a number of motor 
pumps/engines and pipes were seized . It was observed that no such campaign 
was undertaken for checking draw al of water from distributaries and minors , 
although these also suffered the problem of water theft. 
The Government stated that utmost efforts were being made to remove all 
encroachments from the canal system. 
The Department should develop monitoring mechanism to prevent lifting of 
irrigation water from canals by farmers till the Water User Associations 
become fully functional.  
 2.1.2.3 Collection of Water Charges 
Section 17 of RF PMIS Act stipulates that the WUAs should prepare demand 
and collect water charges. Section 32 stipulates  that all the amount payable or 
due to farmer’s organization,  if not paid on demand, should be recovered as 
arrears of land revenue. 
It was noticed that against an outstanding demand of  ₹ 18.75 lakh and  
₹ 60.80 lakh raised by Divisions-II and IV, NCP, Sanchore, only ₹ 0.17 lakh 
and ₹ 1.65 lakh respectively were recovered from farmers during 2011-2015. 
Division-V did not even raise the demand of water charges and Division -I and 
III did not have the information of collection of water charges.  
According to section 24 of the Act , the funds of the farmer’s  organisation 
would comprise grants received from the Government as a share of water tax 
collected in the area of operation.  It was observe d that no mechanism was 
developed to make available the share of water tax to the WUAs. In addition, 
as per the data pertaining to Narmada Main C anal, 227.63 mcum 14 to 597.01 
mcum water was received during July 2011 to June 2015 and 0.80 lakh to  
2.15 lakh  hectares area was irrigated .  No demand for water charges was , 
however, raised by Division -V and only an amount of ₹ 1.82 lakh  was 
collected by Divisions-II and IV. 
The State Government stated that  due to presence of mistrust and politics 
among the cultiva tors, the recovery of water charges for elected body was a 
very difficult job.  It f urther added that  patwaris were not available in the 
project for recovery of water charges.  The reply of the State Government 
indicated the lack of persuasion and monitoring  by the Department  as the 
collection of water charges was an important element in participatory 
                                                 
14    Million cubic metre 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
18 
 
management. A bsence of recovery/less recovery also had  an adverse impact 
on the upkeep and sustainability of the project. 
 2.1.2.4 Necessary amendments in rules were not carried out to 
strengthen Participatory Irrigation Management 
The RFPMIS Rules, 2002 were framed for flow system of distribution of 
water. In NCP, drip/sprinkler irrigation system was adopted under which water 
was to be distributed through diggies and WUAs were to manage the 
distribution of water from diggies.  Therefore, some amendments as suggested 
in project report  (Appendix-2.1) like diggi-wise formation of WUAs, 
responsibility of WRD for maintenance and repair of pre-diggi canals till 
formation of Distributary Committees, formation of Consultancy Committee 
for providing all nature of consultations, etc. required to be made in the rules 
were not carried out. The State Government accepted the facts.  
The State Government may carry out n ecessary amendments in Rajasthan 
Farmers’ Participation in Management of Irrigation Systems Rule, 2002 for 
strengthening of Water User Associations.  
 2.1.3 Bio-drainage and conjunctive use of ground and surface water to 
prevent water logging  
Plantation of trees along canal system and on the boundaries of the fields of 
farmers had been proposed in the project report. This was required for bio -
drainage to drain out any excessive ground water. Besides, for vertical 
drainage, conjunctive use of surface and ground wate r had been proposed in 
the project command to prevent water logging. 
 2.1.3.1  Non achievement of target of plantation  
Pursuant to the suggestions of the M oEF, GoI  stipulated that environment 
action plan be prepared, a study was conducted  (September 1998)  by 
WAPCOS. WAPCOS found that introduction of flow irrigation 15 might lead 
to water logging in most of the command area in a few years. This might pose 
a serious threat to agriculture.  One of the measures to be adopted for drainage 
in the low lying area was  planting of trees of  certain species 16 along canal 
system. These species have deep roots and provide adequate bio -drainage to 
drain out the excessive ground water. For the purpose of planning for 
plantation, an average consumptive tree water use of 30 litr e per day /per tree 
in the flow area and 20 litre per day /per tree in the Ned area was proposed.  A 
provision of  ₹ 74.88 crore for plantation along canal side was made in the  
project report. 
It was observed that against the alloted budget of ₹ 9.57 crore for Barmer and 
₹ 37.46 crore for Jalore between the period December 2010 and January 2016 , 
₹ 5.11 crore and ₹ 17.75 crore  respectively were utilized for plantation . The 
physical targets for plantation along the main canal, distributaries and minors 
were fixed (July 2011) in 3941 running km for DCF, Barmer and DCF Jalore 
                                                 
15    It is a method of irrigation in which water is transported by natural flow. 
16    Arjun, Babul, Jangli keekar, Farash, Khejri etc. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
19 
 
which were to be achieved up  to 2012 -13. Against the target fixed, the 
plantation was done in only 1977 running km (50.67 per cent) up  to March 
2016. In addition , plantation of species other th an the species mentioned in 
project report was done. 
Due to lesser plantation and planting of species other than the species 
mentioned in project report, the objective of providing bio -drainage in the 
command area suffered. The project authorities had also  not monitored the 
plantation of species of plants with reference to the aim of bio-drainage. 
The CE NCP, Sanchore stated (May 2016) that budget allotment for plantation 
work was directly made to the Forest Department . Therefore, the number of 
plants and species were decided by Forest Department. The DCF, Jalore stated 
(June 2016) that plantation was done as per budget allotted. The repl ies were 
not convincing as the very purpose of planting specific species was to ensure  
bio-drainage. By shifting the onus in this regard to the Forest Department, the 
WRD abdicated its responsibility of monitoring and  supervising the project . 
Besides, only 47 per cent of the budget allotted for plantation w as utilized by 
DCF, Jalore which indicated inadequate plantation  done. The reply of the 
State Government was awaited (October 2016). 
 2.1.3.2  Conjunctive use of ground and surface water not ensured 
There was a great  possibility of water logg ing within a few years  because of 
the high static ground water table ; saline/alkaline soil in the command area  
and with the introduction of canal irrigation . It was, therefore, proposed 
(August 2007)  by WAPCOS that one of the measures to be adopted for 
drainage of low lying area may be conjunctive use of surface and ground 
water. This would drain out the entire annual ground water recharge including 
the water recharged due to irrigation application.  A mandatory provision of 
conjunctive use of ground and surface water (30:70 ratio) was proposed in the 
command area. Ground water was to be us ed by the farmers with  surface 
water for vertical drainage and to prevent rise in ground  water table.  It was 
also stated in the project report that the cultivators would have wells in their 
fields for ground  water and would be taking surface water from diggies 
through sprinkler pipes. As per project report , the position of existing Dug 
cum Bore (DcB) well against required number of wells for pumping out 
ground water was as under: 
Particular Flow area17 Lift 
area18 
  Total 
Normal Ned 
Number of required DcB well in zone area 5063 3428 9134 17625 
Number of existing wells 3068 87 3694 6849 
Difference in number of required wells 1995 3341 5440 10776 
Source: Project report and information provided by CE, NCP, Sanchore.  
The above position indicated that large  numbers of wells were required to be 
dug. It was envisaged in the project report that motivation would be provided 
to the farmers to dig more wells and make greater use of ground water.  
                                                 
17  Area in which water is transported by natural flow. 
18  Area in which water is lifted from lower level to higher level with the help of pumps. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
20 
 
It was also observed that no action was taken by the Department to ensure the 
conjunctive use of ground and surface water.  
The State Government stated that due to availability of limited staff in the 
project, the data regarding number of wells existing in the project area was not 
available. The reply indicated lack of act ion by the department to ensure 
implementation of conjunctive use of ground and surface water to prevent 
water logging. 
It is recommended that conjunctive use of ground and surface water as per 
provisions of the project report should be ensured  besides the plantation of 
specified species of trees. 
 2.1.3.3  Recharge and quality of ground water not monitored 
Paragraph 17.23 of the project report envisaged establishment of piezometer 
wells for regular monitoring of quality and recharge of ground water in the 
project area. For this purpose, a provision of  ₹ 2.14 crore was taken in the 
project report for establishing 277 piezomet er wells in the project command 
but no piezometer wells were established. 
The State Government stated that the level of ground water was being 
measured by the Ground Water Department . The Department, however, 
intimated (June 2016) that no piezometer wells were established. The reply did 
not mention that in the absence of establishing piezometer wells, how the 
quality and recharge of ground water in the project area was being monitored  
by the Department. 
 2.1.4  Contract Management 
 
 2.1.4.1 Avoidable expenditure on construction of additional lamina  
The technical estimate of work for construction of additional lamina 19 on 
Arniyali Lift Minor at km 16.700 to 17.000 was sanctioned (July 2014) by EE, 
NCP Division-IV, Sanchore for ₹ 38.64 lakh. As per its technical report, the 
reason for providing  additional lamina was that the canal portion in this 
particular reach was in heavy filling 20 and strong winds blowing in the region 
damaged the banks of the canal. The work of additional lamina was completed 
(December 2014) and payment of  ₹ 38.34 lakh was made  (February 2015) to 
contractor.  
It was observed that as per communication (14 June 2013) of the SE, NCP 
Circle-II to CE, NCP, Sanchore, the re asons stated for providing additional 
lamina in the project report  were not based on  facts. The main reason for 
taking additional lamina was that the net head difference calculated for canal 
syphon21 was worked out as 0.640 metres 22 whereas at site, it was o nly 0.380 
metres. This caused that the designed discharge of water  could not pass 
through the canal sy phon. It was also noticed that the decision taken for 
                                                 
19    A layer of sedimentary rock, organic or other material. 
20   Filling of earth by more than three meters. 
21    A tube used for drawing  liquid from one container to another on a lower level 
22  Difference between full storage level of canal at km 17.000 (45.555 metres) and at km 18.850 (44.915 
metres) 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
21 
 
construction of additional lamina was a temporary solution of the problem and 
for remedial measures, an estimate of ₹ 3.70 crore submitted (August 2014) to 
SE, NCP Circle II , Sanchore. The approval of the same was pending   
(October 2016) for approval. Had the canal been designed properly, it would 
have avoided an expenditure of ₹ 38.34 lakh incurred as a temporary measure. 
Besides, action to fix responsibility for faulty design of the canal was not 
taken. 
The State Government stated that the work of additional lamina was taken up 
to keep the canal banks stable and safe. The reply was not tenable as stated 
above, additional lamina would not have been required if canal banks were 
constructed after proper design.  
 2.1.4.2   Lack of action under clause 2 and 5 of the Agreement 
Under clause 2 of the Contract Agreement, the contractor was liable to pay 
compensation for not maintaining the pro-rata progress of the work. Under 
clause 5, on the ground of unavoidable hindrance in execution of work, the 
contractor should apply for extension  of time for completion of work  to the 
engineer-in-charge within 30 days of the date of the hindrance. The competent 
authority would grant such extension within a period of 30 days from the date 
of receipt of application from contractor and sh ould not wait for finality of 
work. 
It was  observed that 18 works (Appendix-2.2) were in pr ogress even after 
expiry of  the stipulated date of completion. The Department, however, had  
neither taken action under clause  2 of the Agreement against the contractors 
for not maintaining the pro-rata progress of the works  nor was any time 
extension granted under clause 5 of the Agreement.  
The State Government stated that 12 out of 18 works were pending due to not 
providing electricity for testing . In five works,  civil works were in progress 
along with mechanical works  and in respect of one work,  time extension was 
under consideration.  The reply was not tenable as span -wise time extension 
was to be granted as per provision of the Agreement or the contractor had to 
be penalized for not maintaining the progress of work accordingly. 
Similarly, t he execution o f works23 of the different minors, sub -minors of 
Balera Distributary (off taking from km 16 ) and Basan  sub-minor of Vank  
Distributary (off taking from 7.88 km ) of NMC was awarded (December 
2011) on turnkey basis to a contractor24 for ₹ 12.48 crore. The stipulated dates 
of commencement and completion were 22 December 2011 and 21 December 
2012 respectively. The contractor, des pite issuance of several notices by the 
Department, failed to commence the work. As a result,  compensation of  
₹ 1.25 crore was imposed (August 2012) on the contractor under clause 2 of 
the Agreement. The action to get the work completed at the risk and cost of 
the contractor under clause 3(c) of the Agreement was also taken by the 
Department. It was observed that recovery of only ₹ 7.65 lakh had been made 
on account of compensation out of  the earnest money and the remaining 
                                                 
23  Earth work, single PCC block lining, pucca structure, pump room, sump well and supplying,  laying, 
jointing, testing and commissioning of distribution network including designing and layout of 
mechanical works. 
24   M/s Banco Construction, Gwalior 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
22 
 
amount of ₹ 1.17 crore was yet to be recovered from the contractor (October 
2016). 
The State Government stated that action under P ublic Demand Recovery 
(PDR) Act was being taken for recovery of balance amount of ₹ 1.17 crore 
from the contractor. 
 2.1.4.3  Overpayment made due to adoption of wrong Basic Schedule of 
Rates  
The work of construction of pumping station s at km 0.400 of Kothra Lift 
Minor and at  km 17.100 of Gudamalani Lift Minor was awarded (August 
2009) for ₹ 1.41 crore. The work was completed (November 2011) at a cost of 
₹ 1.01 crore. 
It was observed that during construction of pumping stations , payment of  
earthwork (29747.73 cum) was made on the basis  of rates given in the Basic 
Schedule of Rates (BSR), 2008 of Public Works Department (PWD). The 
rates of earth work in BSR of PWD were  higher in comparison to the BSR of 
WRD which resulted in extra payment of ₹ 25.12 lakh to the contractor. 
The State Government stated that it had been clearly provided in the BSR of 
WRD that rates given in BSR of PWD would be applicable for building works 
and since the construction of pumping station was a building work, the rates of 
BSR of PWD were applied. It further stated that if BSR of WRD was adopted, 
the Department would have to allow extra lead for disposal of excavated earth. 
The reply was not tenable as in the case of pumping station, earthwork was 
done in large area and not in trenches as provided in BSR of PWD. Besides, 
there was uniform  provision of initial lead in  both BSRs and , therefore, 
application of BSR of PWD was not in order.  
 2.1.4.4  Mix design test not conducted for cement concrete works 
Clause 4.5 of specific condition of contract provides that concrete mix shall be 
designed on the basis of preliminary test. 
In the works 25 awarded to various contractors , the ratios of ingredients i.e. 
cement, water, sand and aggregate in concrete mix material w ere pre-
determined in the estimates. Preliminary test was, however, not conducted and 
the concrete mix was not designed accordingly. 
The State Government stated that in the contracts where cement concrete was 
in lesser quantity, the provision of design mix being impracticable was not 
included in the agreement. It was added that where minimum level of cement 
consumption per cubic metre was less than 250 kilograms, mix design was not 
to be conducted. The reply was not tenable as concrete mix was not designed 
despite inclusion of the above specification in the agreement. In absence of the 
concrete mix design, the right proportion of ingredients could not be 
determined and specific strength, workability and durability of concrete could 
not be ensured. 
 
                                                 
25   Earth work, pucca structure and single PCC block lining of various distributaries/ minors/sub -minors 
and construction of diggies, pump room, sump well boundary wall, etc. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
23 
 
 2.1.5  Financial control and Monitoring 
Funds for NCP are provided through regular budget allotment by State 
Government under capital head of accounts. Funds under Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme are also received as central assistance from GoI. 
 2.1.5.1 Short realization of share cost from Public Health and 
Engineering Department 
The project report envisaged that share cost of ₹ 246.65 crore was payable by 
Public Health and Engineering Department (PHED) for utilization of Narmada 
water for drinking water supply scheme. It was observed that against the share 
cost, only ₹ 10 crore w as adjusted to NCP head , ₹ 100 crore w as lying 
unadjusted under head 8443 -Deposit-III in NCP Division -I, Sanchore since 
April 2013 and ₹ 136.65 crore had not been realized from PHED. 
The Department stated that  ₹ 5 crore had further been r eceived from the 
PHED and efforts at the level of the State Government were being made for 
recovery of the remaining amount of ₹ 131.65 crore.  
 
 2.1.5.2 Diversion of funds 
 
 Expenditure on items without provision in project report 
Provision of plantation of trees on either side of main canal, distributaries and 
minors had been taken under sub-head M-plantation of the project report with 
the objective of controlling the ground water recharge through bio-drainage.  
It was observed that an expenditure of ₹ 1.22 crore  was incurred from sub -
head M-Plantation on construction of buildings such as residence of Assistant 
Conservator of Forest , Forest chowki, Forester’s office, etc. and  purchase of 
vehicles, computers and printers as detailed below for which no provi sion was 
made in the project report. 
       (₹ in lakh) 
S.No. Name of work DCF Barmer DCF Jalore 
1 Building construction 12.52 53.21 
2 Vehicles 14.02 29.96 
3 Office and Communication Management 1.00 10.96 
 Total 27.54 94.13 
Source: Information provided by DCF, Barmer and Jalore. 
Finance Department, GoR had directed (September 2014)  the Department not 
to incur any expenditure on these items but prior to this, the above mentioned 
expenditure of ₹ 1.22 crore had already been incurred on the above items. This 
resulted in extra financial burden on the project.  
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
24 
 
 2.1.5.3   Bank Guarantee expired due to lapse in monitoring 
The work of execution of earth work, pucca structure and block lining of 
Bhimguda Distributary was awarded (December 2005) to a contactor 26 by EE, 
NCP Division-V, Sanchore for ₹  19.67 crore. The work was to be completed 
by 18 June 2007. The contractor firm furnished (December 2006) Bank 
Guarantee of ₹ 75.00 lakh and ₹ 50.00 lakh (February 2007) issued by Bank of 
Baroda, KFTZ Branch (Kutch) in support of the security deposit. The bank 
guarantees were valid up to 18 June 2008.  
The WRD extended (October 2007) the stipulated date of completion of work 
up to 28 February 2008. The contractor firm did not complete the work and as 
such, compensation of ₹ 35.17 lakh was imposed (January 2011) under clause 
2 of the agreement and action to get the work completed at the risk and cost of 
the contractor under clause 3 (c) of the agreement was taken. The remaining 
work was allotted to another contractor for ₹ 9.33 crore. 
The validity of the bank guar antees was, however, not extended beyond  
18 June 2008. The bank denied encashment of bank guarantees stating that it 
was not its responsibility to make payment after expiry of validity of the bank 
guarantees. Had the bank guarantees been renewed, ₹  1.25 crore could have 
been recovered out of the amount of compensation of ₹  6.18 crore levied  
under clause 3 (c) of agreement. 
Note-1 below Rule 595 of PWF&AR provides that register of bank guarantees 
should be kept in Division office in the personal custody of the EE. He would 
review the register to take timely action for extension of the period or 
encashment of the bank guarantees , as required. The requisite action was not 
taken at the level of concerned officer.  
The State Government stated that disciplinary a ction against officials at fault 
was in process. 
 2.1.5.4  Enquiry not conducted for damages due to flood 
An administrative sanction was issued (October 2015) by Disaster 
Management and Relief Department, Rajasthan for immediate relief/ 
rehabilitation of m ain canal/distributaries damaged due to heavy rains in 
monsoon season of 2015. 
State Government allotted (March 2016) budget of ₹ 15.96 crore. Against the 
sanction issued, an expenditure of ₹ 15.87 crore was incurred during 2015 -16 
on immediate repair and rehabilitation of flood damaged canals. 
As per R ule 21 of General Financial and Accounts Rules  (GF&AR), an 
enquiry about the quantum and extent of loss should be c onducted in case of 
flood; cyclone, fire, earthquake etc ., and its report should be submitted  to 
Department concerned/Government. It was, however, observed that no such 
enquiry had been conducted and the Department had not even taken action to 
probe the reasons of the flood and take remedial measures to prevent future 
recurrence.  
The State Government accepted the facts. 
                                                 
26   M/s Mepa Bhai Mandan (now MMC Project), Gandhi Dham 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
25 
 
 2.1.5.5 Administrative Inspection 
Paragraphs 3.4.9 and 3.5.5 of Manual of Water Resources provide that SE and 
EE would inspect all important and major construction works.  The 
Department issued (May 2009) a circular fixing the year ly norms 27 for 
inspection of works and night halts outside the  headquarter. The details of 
achievements against norms are given in table below: 
Table-1: Details of achievement against norms in respect of inspections 
and night halts 
Year Achievement (Inspection) Achievement (Night halt) 
EE-II 
(percentage 
of shortfall) 
EE-IV 
(percentage 
of shortfall) 
EE-V 
(percentage 
of shortfall) 
EE-II 
(percentage 
of shortfall) 
EE-IV 
(percentage 
of shortfall) 
EE-V 
(percentage 
of shortfall) 
2011-12 88 (8.33) 75 (21.88) 96 (-) 24 (66.67) 35 (63.54) 72 (-) 
2012-13 91 (5.21) 81 (15.63) 96 (-) 22 (69.45) 56  (22.23) 72 (-) 
2013-14 88 (8.03) 72 (25.00) 101 (-) 24 (66.67) 71 (1.39) 11 (84.73) 
2014-15 86 (10.42) 48 (50.00) 113 (-) 30 (58.34) 40 (44.45) 52 (27.78) 
2015-16 89 (7.30) 102 (-) 84 (12.5) 28 (61.11) 72 (-) 77 (-) 
Source: Information provided by CE, NCP, Sanchore. 
During 2011-16, the targets of inspections and night halts were not achieved 
by EEs. The shortage of night halts in Division-II was from 58.34 to 69.45 per 
cent; in Division-IV, the shortage was up to 63.54 per cent; and in Division-V, 
it was up to 84.73 per cent. The SEs and EE-I and EE-III did not provide the 
information.  
The State Government stated that all the engineers were inspecting the works 
as per norms. The reply was not based on facts as record maintained in various 
NCP Divisions showed shortfall in inspections/night halts. 
 2.1.6  Conclusion  
The change in scope of work resulted in extension in completion period from 
2003 to 2013 and more than five  times increase in overall cost. V arious 
activities like civil work of distributaries, minors and sub -minors; land 
acquisition; earth work ; mechanical works like supplying, laying, join ting, 
commissioning of pipeline and  installation of mono block pump set s; and 
electric connection to diggies were, however, not fully completed as of March 
2016.  
The irrigated area  was shown as 2 .15 lakh hectares (87.40 per cent) whereas 
only 1193 diggies (55 per cent) were electrified till March 2016. It shows that 
the comm and area shown as irrigated was not actually irrigated through 
                                                 
27   Norms for inspection of work CE-30, ACE-90, SE-90, EE-96 and for night halt CE-20, ACE-60, SE-
60, EE-75. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
26 
 
sprinkler or drip irrigation system , which was the key element  of the project. 
The areas irrigated by farmers by taking water from minors by arranging their 
own water pumps , ins tead of micro ir rigation system , were incorrectly 
included in achievement of  Culturable Command Area  irrigated. The land 
acquired for construction of canal, distributaries, minors and sub -minors was 
not mutated in the name of the Water Resources Department.  
Out of 2236 W ater User Associations to be formed, only 2145 Associations 
were formed and 1885 Associations were handed over assets like diggies, 
pipelines and mono block pumps. The Distributary and Project Committees 
were not formed in any of the water  user areas. In absence of electrification of 
diggies (45 per cent ) and collection of water charge s, the Water User 
Associations remained largely non-functional. Necessary amendments in rules 
framed under ‘ Rajasthan Farmers’ Participation in Management of Irrigation 
Systems Act, 2000’ were not carried out to strengthen Participatory Irrigation 
Management. Collection of water charges was an important element in 
participatory mana gement and absence of recovery/ less recovery indicated 
lack of monitoring by the Department. Besi des, it w ould have an adverse 
impact on the upkeep and sustainability of the project. The Narmada Main 
Canal and its distributaries and minors suffered the problem of water theft by 
nearby cultivators who lifted water from canals to irrigate their fields b y using 
motor pumps. 
Due to lesser plantation and planting of species other than the species 
mentioned in the project report, the objective of providing bio -drainage in the 
command area suffered. The project authorities had not monitored th e 
plantation of species of plants with reference to the aim of bio -drainage. There 
had no action been taken by the Department to ensure the conjunctive use of 
ground and surface water for drainage of low lying areas. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
 
Compliance Audit 

27 
 
Chapter III 
Compliance Audit 
 
Environment Department 
 
3.1 Planning, Implementation and Monitoring of Common Effluent 
Treatment Plants 
 
 Introduction 
The Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) are considered a viable 
treatment solution for collective or c entralized treatment of effluent, 
particularly generated from small and medium scale industries. CETPs 
potentially help in achieving treatment of combined waste water from various 
industries at lower unit cost. These also help to facilitate better monitoring and 
compliance with waste water discharge standards. 
Under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (Act), every 
industry has to provide adequate treatment of its effluent before disposal, 
irrespective of whether it is discharged in str eam, land, sewerage or sea. 
Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB) is the facilitator to 
coordinate and provide financial assistance, technical guidance and monitoring 
of the CETPs. As per section 17 (1) (f) of the Act, the functions of the State 
Board are to inspect sewage/trade effluent, works and plants for the treatme nt 
of sewage and trade effluent,  to review plans, specifications or other data 
relating to plants set up for the treatment of water and the system for the 
disposal of sewage or tra de effluent or the grant of any consent as required by 
this Act. 
In order to manage the CETP, there should be a Special Purpose Vehicle 
registered under an appropriate statute.  The operation and maintenance of 
CETP are done by the Trust registered under the appropriate statute. 
 Funding pattern 
The MoEF, GoI initiated an innovative scheme in 1991 for CETPs to promote 
common facilities for treatment of effluent generated from Small Scale 
Industries (SSIs) located in clusters. The scheme was revised in March 2012, 
according to which Central, State and proponent share was fixed as 50:25:25. 
Prior to this, the share was 25:25:50. The current central share is restricted to  
₹ 1.50 crore per Million Litre Daily (MLD) for a CETP without Zero Liquid 
Discharge (ZLD) subject to a ceiling of  ₹ 15 crore and for project with 
provision of ZLD, it was restricted to  ₹ 4.50 crore per MLD subject to a 
ceiling of ₹ 20 crore. 
In Rajasthan, 14 CETPs were established in five districts, f ive in Pali, six in 
Barmer and one each in Alwar, Jaipur and Jodhpur between the period 1983 
and March 2016. 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
28 
 Scope of Audit and objectives 
The scrutiny of records for the period from 2011-12 to 2015-16 was conducted 
(March-May 2016) in respect of all 14 CETPs at Regional Offices 1 (ROs), 
Head office of RSPCB and Central Laboratory. The records were examined to 
ascertain whether assessment of requirement of CETPs and planning for 
establishment of CETPs were ade quate. The impact of the scheme on 
environmental pollution and the role of the RSPCB in monitoring the working 
of CETPs were also scrutinised. 
The reply received from the State Government (August 2016) has been 
considered while finalising the paragraph. 
 Audit Findings 
 
 3.1.1 Planning 
According to the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, one 
of the main functions of the RSPCB was to make a comprehensive programme 
for the prevention, control or abatement of pollution of streams and wells i n 
the State and to secure the execution thereof. The Board was also required to 
collect and disseminate information relating to water pollution and  to advise 
the State Government on any matter concerning the prevention, control or 
abatement of water pollution. 
3.1.1.1 Lack of data and absence of comprehensive programme for 
establishment of CETPs 
It was observed that the Board did not prepare any comprehensive programme 
for establishing CETPs in areas where large number of SSI and medium scale 
industries were functioning without proper treatment of effluent. The RSPCB 
also did not prepare a policy for conducting periodical survey for identifying 
industries which were contributing to water pollution in the State. The RSPCB 
did not provide information like category wise number of industries running in 
the state; number of industries connected either with the Effluent Treatment 
Plants (ETPs) or CETPs; quality/volume of effluent discharged per day;  steps 
taken to adopt better treatment option after examining the compatibility, etc. In 
absence of relevant data and information, the RSPCB was not in a position to 
fulfil its mandate regarding prevention, control or abatement of water 
pollution. This was also manifested in absence of any policy or comprehensive 
programme for establishing CETPs, as discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
The State Government stated that identification of polluting units was a 
continuous process and new units were identified by the Regional Officers 
during their routine inspections. It further  stated that the Board also 
maintained records of all the water polluting units established in major textile 
clusters of the State. The reply of the State Government was not convincing as 
data/records relating to quality/volume of effluent discharged per d ay and 
steps taken to adopt  better treatment option, etc. were not maintained by the 
Board.  
                                                 
1  Jaipur, Pali, Bhiwadi, Balotra and Jodhpur 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
29 
 
The Board should prepare a comprehensive programme for establishing 
CETPs in areas where large number of small/medium scale industries are 
functioning without prop er treatment of effluent. There should be a proper 
system for periodic survey and identifying the polluting units. 
3.1.1.2 Lack of planning for establishing CETPs  
 
Non establishment of CETP in Sanganer, Jaipur 
 
The Sanganer area in Jaipur district is well known as a centre for production of 
traditional hand-printed textile fabric. As per joint survey conducted (29 April 
2013 to 2 May 2013) by the team members of RSPCB, District 
Administration, District Industries Centre and Revenue Department, about 893 
textile dyeing and printing units were in operation in and around Sanganer 
area. About 12.3 million litres of effluent per day were being discharged by 
these units on open land and in Dravyawati  river without any treatment. 
In absence of effluent treatment plants, industrial waste was being released 
continuously without treatment on open land causing deterioration in quality  
of ground water. There was discharge of hazardous chemicals by the textile 
units into the Dravyawati river. Various studies 2 manifested that heavy 
metals like Nickel, Lead and Cadmium concentrations were above the 
various national and international permissible limits in the vegetables and 
cereal crops. Consumption of foodstuff with elevated level of heavy metals 
may lead to high level of accumulation in the body and thereby cause health 
disorder like nausea, vomiting, hypertension, sporadic fever, anaemia, 
cardiovascular collapse and death. 
 
Hon’ble High Court  of Rajasthan  had passed order (May 2015) that in 
compliance of its previous order (March 2004), the polluting units should have 
been shut down till installation of CETP or relocated to a different place. The 
High Court also ordered ( April 2015) that all such units which were running 
without obtaining ‘No objection Certificates’ (NOC)  from the RSPCB should 
be shut down immediately. In compliance of these, the RSPCB issued 
(between 2010-14 and April 2015) directions for closure and disconnection of 
electricity and water supply to all 893 units. Electricity connection of only 51 
units out of 893 was disconnected during April 2015 to August 2015. 
The RSPCB, therefore, except issuing notices had neither taken any concrete 
action against all such polluting units nor taken any concrete measure for 
setting up of CETPs by polluting units in a timely manner. 
 Non-operation of Effluent Treatment Plants 
The Sanganer Kapda Rangai Chhapai Association assured (August 2015) by 
way of an affidavit in Hon’ble High Court of Rajasthan that till the installation 
of CETP within a period of one year (August 2 016), each and every unit 
would establish individual ETP in two phases: 
 Major units discharging more than 1000 Kilo Litre per Day effluent would 
have their functional ETPs within 30 days. 
                                                 
2     (i) International Journal of innovative research in science, engineering and technology (July 2015). 
(ii)  International Journal of geology, earth and environmental sciences. (January-April 2014). 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
30 
 All other units would have their ETPs within next 30 days. 
The Hon’b le High Court ordered (August 2015) that the RSPCB would 
continue to inspect and supervise the establishment of ETPs as well as 
construction of CETP. RSPCB would also submit a report immediately on the 
expiry of two months about the progress made. 
In compliance of the Court’s directions, a joint team comprising officials of 
District Administration, Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited, RSPCB and 
representative of Association inspected 221 units out of 776 member units of 
the Association during October 2015 to January 2016, though the deadline had 
already passed in October 2015. Of these, 165 units had installed ETPs,  21 
units were in process of installing ETP and 35 units did not install ETPs. 
Further, out of 165 installed ETPs, only 22 (13 per cent ) ETPs were  found 
operative. In order to evaluate the performance of ETPs, samples of 24 units 
were collected and analysed by the Board during December 2015 and January 
2016. The results of 23 out of the above 24 units indicated that the samples 
exceeded the paramete rs of pollutants. Action taken by the RSPCB against 
defaulters was not found on record. 
The State Government stated (November 2016) that all 776 member units had 
installed individual ETPs and the work order for installation of CETP at 
Sanganer had been awarded (September 2016) but the construction had not yet 
started. The reply was not in consonance with the facts as out of 776 ETPs  
installed, only 296 ETPs were in operation (November 2016). In absence of 
establishing CETP, and non -operation of ETPs, the te xtile industries were 
continuously releasing effluent into Dravyavati  river or on open land. 
 
3.1.1.3 Non establishment of CETPs in three districts 
 
The Annual Report (2010-11) of RSPCB envisaged plan to establish eight new 
CETPs in industrial clusters of  three districts 3. The RSPCB was required to 
motivate the industries for setting up of CETPs. 
It was observed that no progress for setting up of CETPs had been made so 
far. Information regarding number of ETPs installed in these districts, volume 
of effluent discharged, physical and chemical characters of the effluent and the 
site where the effluent was being discharged was not provided by the RSPCB.  
The State Government did not address on establishment of these eight CETPs. 
  
 
 3.1.2 Implementation  
We n oticed the following significant points during test check of records of 
CETPs in the concerned Regional Offices. 
CETPs in Pali District 
The Industrial Town, Pali has SSIs, which are largely located in its four 
industrial areas namely Mandiya Road, RIICO 4-I and II and Punayata. There 
                                                 
3    Alwar (five), Bikaner (two) and Hanumangarh (one) 
4    Rajasthan State Industrial Development and Investment Corporation 
Due to non -establishment of CETPs in these districts as required, the 
objective of prevention, control and abatement of water pollution suffered. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
31 
 
are about 550 red category 5 units engaged in textile processing like bleaching, 
mercerizing, dyeing and printing of cotton and synthetic fabric. All five 
CETPs in Pali were operated by Pali Water Pollution Control Treatment and 
Research Foundation (PWPCTRF). The CETP units I and III (Mandiya and 
Punayata Road) were closed presently (July 2016) due to upgradation work 
since July 2015 and November 2015 respectively. 
 3.1.2.1 Conveyance system 
Conveyance system plays an important ro le in cost effectiveness of the 
treatment besides ease in plant operation. In Pali district, where about 550 red 
category textile units were connected with CETPs, the effluent discharged by 
these units (except Punayata road located units) was being carried  through 
tankers to CETPs. The industries of Pali were being incurring around ₹ three 
crore every month on conveyance which was more expensive than conduit 
pipeline. After treatment, water was being discharged into Bandi river through 
open Nallah. 
It was o bserved that in the meeting (July 2011) headed by the Principal 
Secretary, Environment  in the presence of Chairman, RSPCB directed  
PWPCTRF to lay a conduit pipeline in RIICO industrial area I, II  and 
Mandiya Road industrial area. Subsequently, a decision to lay pipeline by the 
PWPCTRF in RIICO industrial area I, II and Mandiya road was taken 
(September 2013) in the meeting of Monitoring Committee chaired by the 
District Collector. No work was, however, executed despite lapse of about five 
years since decision (July 2011) was taken by the Government . The National 
Green Tribunal also recommended (8 October 2015) that RIICO should 
construct closed conduit system for conveyance of effluent from individual 
industries.  
In Pali, conveyance through piping system c ould have been feasible, 
appropriate and economic as all homogeneous member industries are located 
close to each other. In absence of conduit pipeline and transportation of 
effluent by tankers, the possible discharge of effluent or left into river or open 
drains without treatment c ould not be ruled out. There was  no mechanism 
evolved by the RSPCB to ensure that effluent were discharged in the CETP 
inlet and not elsewhere. 
The State Government stated that it was vigilant about the issue and following 
up with  the Trust to ensure to lay down closed conduit pipeline in the 
remaining areas also.  
 3.1.2.2 Overflow of effluent 
It was observed from the records of Regional office, Pali that the industrial 
units at Pali had discharged  effluent in excess of the quantity prescribed by 
RSPCB, due to which overflowing effluent got mixed with city sewerage  and 
flowed into the river Bandi. In many instances, RIICO drains and many of the 
city roads were also full of effluent due to overflow. 
To overcome the overflow problem and to ensure that member units should  
not contribute their effluent in excess of the prescribed quantity and to treat the 
trade effluent up to the conforming limits of the prescribed standards, the 
                                                 
5  Highly polluting units 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
32 
Board had issued directions (September 2013) to the PWPCT RF. The 
directions were to operate the CETP s at 50 per cent of the capacity so that it 
would be able to meet the standards as prescribed under Environmental 
(protection) Act, 1986 and to ensure that the member units run at reduced 
capacity (50 per cent ). T he RSPCB further enhanced (February 2014) this 
limit up to 60 per cent. 
The PWPCTRF did not make available any record regarding implementation 
of discharge restriction on member units. In absence of which, compliance of 
the order could not be ensured. The results of various reports of RSPCB  
indicated that treated effluent discharged by CETPs contained pollutants in 
excess of the prescribed standards. There was no mechanism developed by the  
RSPCB to check whether the discharge restriction was being adhered to by the 
CETPs and member units. 
The State Government stated that it had directed the Trust to ensure that the 
member units d id not discharge effluent beyond the allowed quantity. It was 
also stated that RO, Pali was conducting regular inspections and moni toring to 
ensure that the quantity of effluent remains within the restricted quantity. The 
reply was not tenable as the order issued  (October 2016) by National Green 
Tribunal for closure of units discharging effluent in river  Bandi till the joint 
inspection of CETPs was carried out . This showed that the problem of 
overflowing persisted (October 2016). 
3.1.2.3 Non-achievement of prescribed parameters 
According to MoEF, GoI guidelines (March 2012), the inlet and outlet effluent 
standards of the CETP should be  complied with irrespective of the degree of 
treatment i.e. primary, secondary or tertiary. The RSPCB prescribed  
(26 November 2015)  parameters in the ‘consent to operate’ to the concerned 
CETP Trust. 
Scrutiny of analysis results prepared by Central Labora tory revealed that out 
of 240 samples collected during August 2012 to January 2016 from CETP -I, 
II, III and IV and four samples during 2015 -16 from Unit VI, 87 per cent 
samples were not in consonance with the prescribed parameters and Total 
Suspended Solid s (TSS), Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), Chemical 
Oxygen Demand (COD), Oil and Grease exceeded the set standards 
(Appendix-3.1). This showed that the functioning of CETPs in Pali District 
was unsatisfactory and waste water was not being treated so as to co nform to 
the prescribed standards. Resultantly, CETPs were still discharging polluted 
water into Bandi river. No concrete steps were taken by the Board to ensure 
that effluent standards were achieved. 
The State Government reply did not address the audit observation. 
3.1.2.4 Upgradation of technology 
According to reports of Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services  
Ecosmart Limited (September 2009), the appropriate technologies were to be 
identified based on the characteristics of effluent to arrive at t he probable 
combination of treatment technologies. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
33 
 
The CETP Units I, II, III and IV , Pali  District were designed for treatment 
upto secondary 6 level and Unit VI upto tertiary 7 level. It was also observed 
that Units I and III were not in operation due to up gradation work for tertiary 
treatment. The only Units II, IV and VI were running and Unit V was under 
construction (July 2016 ). The CETP Trust proposed (February and March 
2016) upgradation of technology upto tertiary level for Unit s II and IV and 
Units V and VI were proposed (January 2015) for ZLD.  Most of the  CETPs 
were established between 1983-2009 and were required timely upgradation to 
ensure to meet the prescribed norms for treated effluent.  
The State Government stated that the State Board was contin uously pursuing 
the Trust to upgrade and retrofit the CETPs so that the treated effluent was 
able to meet the prescribed norms. It was also  apprised that the upgradation 
and retrofitting of CETP unit -III had recently been completed and results of 
newly constructed CETP-VI were continuously improving. The reply of the 
Government, however, was not specific as to whether the treated waste water 
was within the prescribed norms. 
Treated water discharged by CETPs into Bandi river failed to achieve the 
outlet parameters thereby causing risk of deterioration in quality of river 
water. 
The Board should initiate action against units which regularly fail ed to 
achieve the prescribed parameters and should ensure that no treated water 
was released into the main stream  unless prescribed standards were met. It 
should closely monitor the problem caused by excess discharge and overflow 
of effluent and take concrete action against defaulter units. 
CETP in Bhiwadi (Alwar) 
A CETP with the capacity of 6 MLD was established (2004)  in the Bhiwadi 
Industrial Area to treat industrial effluent, by RIICO. The operation and 
maintenance of CETP was handed over (June 2007) to Bhiwadi Jal Pradushan 
Nivaran Evam Anusandhan Samiti (Samiti). The Samiti executed (February 
2011) a trust deed and  was named as Bhiwadi Jal Pradushan Nivaran Trust 
(BJPNT). The CETP was upgraded (2009) for treatment up to tertiary level 
and the capacity was being upgraded upto 9 MLD. 
3.1.2.5 Unscientific disposal of treated water 
Scrutiny revealed that the effluent af ter treatment from CETP (Industrial area, 
Bhiwadi) was being pumped through a closed conduit pipeline upto the Sabi 
river. As the outlet parameters 8 were not fulfilled by the CETP since 2012-13 
and polluted water continuously affected the farmers land, clo sed conduit 
pipeline in Khushkhera industrial area was blocked by the local farmers as a 
mark of protest. The treated water  was flowing on vacant plot of RIICO in  
Khushkhera industrial area (March 2016). Scrutiny of inspection reports 9 
                                                 
6    Secondary treatment involves purification of waste water primarily with microbial action. 
7  Tertiary treatment includes sand filters, activated carbon filters, micro filtration, ultra filtration, nano 
filtration, reverse osmosis, ion exchange, evaporation, uv filtration etc. 
8    TSS, COD, BOD etc 
9  Inspection report of Assistant Environment Engineer, Regional Office, Pollution Control Board, 
Bhiwadi 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
34 
further revealed that the treated water was getting mixed with untreated water 
released by industrial units of Khushkhera industrial area. 
It was also noticed that the results of outlets did not improve though the 
RSPCB had issued notices10 to the Trust. Unscientific disposal of treated water 
on open land in Khushkhera industrial area and its mixing with untreated 
hazardous waste water, thus, defeated the objective of setting up of CETP in 
the area.  
The State Government stated that Board had been taking all possible steps to 
resolve the issue related with disposal of treated effluent.  The BJPNT had 
commenced tertiary treatment and upgraded processes and had also attained 
the norms of discharge prescribed by the State Board for about last two 
months. The reply was not convincing  as CPCB and RSPCB in their test 
reports (September 2016) confirmed that outlet parameters were not being 
achieved by CETP.  
3.1.2.6 Unscientific storage of hazardous sludge 
As per condition given in the consent to establish, the sludge generated from 
the CETP was to be stored under the covered shed and disposed of as per the 
provisions of the Hazardous Waste (Management and handling) Rules, 2000. 
Review of records and site inspection (April 2016) by audit for examining the 
working of CETP disclosed that hu ge quantity of dried hazardous sludge was 
lying on open Kaccha land without covering shed near  a residential area . 
There was a covered tin shed built for the purpose of keeping sludge lying 
vacant. This practice was continuously being adopted by the CETP o perators. 
RSPCB also in its various inspection reports 11 had mentioned that hazardous 
waste was being kept on open land. RSPCB issued (December 2014) a show 
cause notice to the CETP. The position, however, remained unchanged (July 
2016).  
The State Governme nt confirmed the facts and stated (August 2016) that the 
RO, Bhiwadi had written a letter to the Trust (May 2016) directing it to stop 
the practice of storing the sludge in open area. 
                                                 
10  5 September 2011, 13 December 2012, 31 March 2014, 4 June 2014, 7 S eptember 2015 and 13 
January 2016 
11   13 November 2014, 28 February 2015 and 12 January 2016  

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
35 
 
 
Picture: Dried hazardous sludge lying near a residential area outside CETP Bhiwadi 
 
In Bhiwadi, treated water was being released on open land where it was 
getting mixed with untreated effluent. Besides, there was no scientific storage 
of sludge as huge quantity of hazardous sludge was found lying on open 
Kaccha land without shed. This posed danger to the environment and could 
be harmful to the residents. 
CETP Jodhpur 
The CETP with hydraulic treatment capacity of 20 MLD in Jodhpur by 
Jodhpur Pradushan Niwaran Trust (JPNT) was established (2004) to treat 15 
MLD alkaline effluent of textile mills and 5 MLD acidic effluent of steel re -
rolling mills. Acidic waste water is received through HDPE pipeline and 
alkaline waste water through RIICO open drain and conduit pipeline laid in 
July-August 2015. The open RIICO drain near the  CETP collects alkaline 
waste water from industrial drains apart from collecting industrial sewage and 
domestic waste water gene rated from residential colonies enroute. The CETP 
presently treats the effluent up to tertiary level. 
3.1.2.7 Under-utilization of CETP 
According to MoEF, GoI guidelines (March 2012), guarantee of performance 
at full design load should be ensured by the RSPCB. 
Scrutiny revealed that CETP was never operated at the optimum capacity of 
20 MLD. During the year 2013 -14, 2014 -15 and 2015 -16, average treated 
effluent was only 9.32, 9.16 and 11.59 MLD respectively which was far below 
its capacity.  
On being pointed out, JPNT intimated that inlet parameters of Potential of 
Hydrogen (pH) of CETP did not match with the designed criteria of CETP . 
One by one upgradation works were undertaken and in absence of stand  by 
arrangements, CETP did not utilize its full capacity in the past. The reply itself 
admitted the fact that there was under -utilization of CETP due to non -
adherence of inlet parameters by  member units of CETP. N o punitive action 
was, however, taken by RSPCB against defaulter units.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
36 
The State Government stated that the Trust had now engaged an expert agency 
to ensure proper operation and maintenance of CETP and it was expected that 
CETP would be operated at its optimum capacity in near future. 
3.1.2.8 Overflowing effluent being discharged through open drain 
During scrutiny of records of Regional Office, Jodhpur, a major problem of 
overflowing of untreated effluent was noticed. In the inspec tion report (June 
2014) of Regional Officer, RSPCB, Jodhpur, it was mentioned that the total 
flow of alkaline waste water was 46.478 MLD 12. The treated alkaline waste 
water during the same period was only 10.468 MLD and remaining 36 MLD  
effluent was discharged into Jojri river through RIICO open drain. Other 
inspection reports and documents also confirmed the discharging of effluent 
without treatment. During June 2010 to November 2015, RSPCB in 37 out of 
50 samples analyzed , found that outlet parameters were  not achieved. It was, 
thus, evident that release of untreated waste water was leading to pollution in 
Jojri river. 
It was further noticed that the Zonal Officer, CPCB also pointed out (August 
2012) that around 50 per cent  of the effluent load received thr ough RIICO 
drain was discharged into Jojri river without any treatment. The CPCB issued 
directions (April 2013) to the RSPCB for preventing discharge of effluent. 
RSPCB was expected to issue directions to the CETP Trust and compliance 
was to be ensured. RS PCB issued show cause notices 13 to the CETP Trust. 
The problem of discharging of untreated waste water, however, continued 
(March 2016). RSPCB, thus, failed to take concrete steps to prevent overflows 
by industrial units. Resultantly, huge quantity of untre ated waste water was 
being discharged into Jojri river. 
The State Government stated that waste water flowing in open RIICO drain 
was mostly domestic effluent from the industrial units or nearby residential 
areas. The reply of the State Government was not tenable as it was evident 
from the Inspection Report (September 2016) of RSPCB that untreated 
industrial effluent was flowing in RIICO open drain.  
Overflowing untreated effluent discharged by industrial units flowed through 
open RIICO drain into Jojri river thereby causing water pollution. 
 
 
3.1.2.9 Absence of pre-treatment by member industries 
Effluent from industrial processes requires some form of pre-treatment prior to 
sending the effluent for further treatment at CETP to minimize corrosion and 
clogging and to prevent reduction in biological treatment process efficiency 
due to toxic constituents. 
In Jodhpur, where heterogeneous industries were operating, pre -treatment at 
individual industries would have been more conducive in the operation and 
maintenance of CETP. In a joint inspection with the representative of the 
RSPCB, audit observed (April 2016) that pre -treatment was not being done by 
the member industries and effluent received at CETP was not in consonance 
                                                 
12   From 16 June 2014  (1 pm)  to 17 June 2014 (12 pm) 
13  31 March 2010, 4 February 2011, 30 November 2012 and 22 May 2015 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
37 
 
with the inlet parameters. It was observe d that pH of effluent in Acidic Grit 
Chamber was only one instead of between 5.5 and 9 as required and the 
chamber was full of solid sludge up to about 3 feet. In absence of pre -
treatment, CETP had never utilized its full capacity of treatment and outlet 
parameters were also not achieved. No monitoring mechanism to check the 
inlet parameters of member industries on a regular basis was evolved by the 
Board. Action taken against defaulting units was also not found on record.  
The State Government stated that it would ensure that primary treatment 
facilities were properly operated by the units so that operation of CETP did 
not get affected adversely. 
3.1.2.10 Lack of re-use of treated waste water  
According to the directions (May 2014) of Department of Environm ent, 
Government of Rajasthan, the entire waste water after treatment upto tertiary 
level should be reused.  
It was observed that CETP, Jodhpur was upgraded up to tertiary level. The 
CETP was discharging treated waste water into the same channel from where 
it was drawing untreated water resulting into mixing of treated waste water 
with untreated waste water. During visit of CETP campus, it was found that 
the treated waste water was flowing into RIICO drain. The CETP operator 
intimated that treated water was being used in chemical preparation and 
horticulture. This was not convincing as there was no evidence to support that 
the entire treated water was being re-used for the above purposes. 
The State Government stated that the treated effluent could be utilized  for 
agriculture/horticulture purpose and the Trust had been directed to make 
necessary arrangements. 
3.1.3 Financial management 
 
3.1.3.1 Delayed release of funds by RSPCB 
The MoE F, GoI sanctioned (March 2010) C entral share of  ₹ 7.02 crore for 
construction of two CETPs (V & VI) at Pali. The RSPCB sanctioned 
(February 2010) S tate share of ₹ 7.58 crore. Against the sanctioned amount, 
GoI released (March 2010) first instalment of  ₹ 41.13 lakh each for both 
CETPs. This amount was , however, released (January 2013/January 2014) by 
the RSPCB to implementing agency with delay s ranging between 35 and 45 
months. The RSPCB released State share of ₹ 2.00 crore to implementing 
agency (₹ 1.00 crore each for two CETPs) in February 2010 and ₹ 3.13 crore 
during 2015-16. Thus, GoI share and State share was less received by ₹ 6.20 
crore and ₹ 2.45 crore respectively.   
The State Government stated that GoI released ₹ 41.13 lakh in March 2010 for 
each CETP which was subsequently transferred to the Tr ust after ascertaining 
the progress as notified under the scheme . It further stated that the State share 
of Unit VI, Pali was pending with the State Board for want of extension in the 
date of validity for release of payment from Department of Environment, GoR. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
38 
The fact remained that this also caused delay 14 in construction of CETPs V 
and VI which were scheduled to be constructed by 2010.  
3.1.4  Monitoring 
 
3.1.4.1 Lack of Laboratory 
In December 2009, State Government accorded sanction for establishing 
eight15 new Regional Laboratories for analysing samples of air and water as 
part of restructuring and strengthening of RSPCB. 
It was observed that the laboratories in Balotra and Pali were not established 
(May 2016) whereas out of total 14 CETPs established in R ajasthan, 11 
CETPs were being operated in Balotra and Pali districts. The District 
Magistrate, Pali had also directed (July 2013) the Regional Officer, Pali to 
establish a laboratory within three days. No laboratory, however, had yet been 
established (May 2016).  
The State Government stated that regional laboratories were under 
construction and would be made operational by January 2017. 
3.1.4.2 Motivational camps/workshops not organized  
As per MoEF communication (March 2012) to RSPCB, RSPCB was expected 
to publicise Centrally Sponsored Scheme . C amp/workshop was also to be 
organized, if needed, with the SSIs to familiarize them with the nuances of the 
scheme so that maximum SSIs could be benefitted. 
It was observed that no such camps/workshops were organized . In absence of 
this, the required publicity to generate awareness of the benefits of scheme 
could not be made. 
The State Government stated that it had taken all possible action to educate the 
industries about various funding schemes. There was no supporting evidence 
noticed which confirmed that motivational camps/workshops were organized 
by the RSPCB.  
3.1.4.3 Consent to operate issued with retrospective effect 
Consent to establish/operate a CETP is given by the RSPCB to the proponent 
under Section 25 and 26 of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974 and under Section 2 1(4) of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1981. Authorization for operating a facility for collection, disposal, 
storage, transportation and treatment of hazardous waste is given under 
Hazardous Waste (Management, Handling and Trans -boundary movement) 
Rules, 2008. The consent to establish/operate is to be given within four 
months and authorisation for sludge management within 120 days from the 
date of application. This is valid for the period specified therein. 
It was observed that in 30 cases during the period 2009 -10 to 2014 -15, there 
was an inordinate delay in issuing consent which ranged between 24 and 1612 
days. In six cases, t here was delay of 72 to 1863 days in  issuing authorization 
                                                 
14   CETP-V under construction and VI completed in August 2015 
 
15   Balotra (Barmer), Bharatpur, Bhilwara, Bikaner, Chittorgarh, Kishangarh (Ajmer), Pali and Sikar. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
39 
 
for sludge management. It was also observed that the consent to 
operate/authorization were made effective retrospectively from the date of 
application for the period under which CETPs remained operational.  
The State Government stated that the Board was putting all possible efforts to 
address this issue. 
3.1.4.4 Absence of third party monitoring 
As per paragraph 7.10.7 of MoEF guidelines (March 2012), a three tier 16 
monitoring mechanism was to be evolved. It was noticed that no third p arty 
monitoring mechanism was evolved. The RSPCB stated that there was no 
provision for third party monitoring, which was not correct. 
The State Government, however, stated that it would ensure submission of 
analysis report from third party by the CETP.  
3.1.4.5 Non-submission of quarterly report to CPCB regularly 
Under Section 18 (1 ) (b) of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974, t he CPCB issued directions (September 2008) to the RSPCB for 
initiating monitoring programme  of all CETPs at lea st every quarter . It was 
also directed to take up follow up action against industries/CETPs which were 
not complying with the prescribed standards.  The Action Taken Reports 
(ATRs) were to be submitted to the CPCB regularly. 
The CPCB had written (December 2 013 and August 2015) letters to RSPCB 
about non-receipt of ATRs regularly.  
The State Government apprised that online data was being transferred to State 
and CPCB server. The reply was not convincing as the information required to 
be furnished as per quart erly ATR was not being transferred online on CPCB 
server. 
3.1.4.6 Delayed commissioning of GPRS based flow meters  and non -
setting up of IT based linkage  
As per MoEF, GoI guidelines (March 2012), member industries of CETP were 
to monitor specified quality parameters and flow rate of the effluent on daily 
basis.  They had to  submit the monitoring data to CETP operator on regular 
basis. The CETP operator was to monitor specified quality parameters and 
flow rate at outlet of CETP on daily basis and IT based li nkage was to be 
provided by the CETP operator to the RSPCB. The CETP operator was also 
required to submit the monitoring data to the RSPCB on a regular basis. The 
RSPCB was to ensure display of 24 hour data on its website. The RSPCB had 
issued instructions  (December 2014) for installation of GPRS based flow 
meters at inlet and outlets of CETPs as well as of all member industries.  
It was observed in twelve17 CETPs out of 14 that  GPRS based flow meters 
were installed (January 2016) with an inordinate delay of five years. Further, it 
was observed that in three districts, 18 IT based linkage was not set up by 
                                                 
16    At industry level, SPCB level and third party level. 
17   CETP-II, IV, VI Pali, CETP -I, II, III Balotra, CETP Bithuja, CETP -I & II Jasol, CETP -    Jodhpur, 
CETP-Bhiwadi, CETP-Machedi, Jaipur 
18    Alwar, Jaipur and Jodhpur 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
40 
member industrial units of CETPs while in Barmer District, though a 
Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition system  (SCADA) was established 
by the member ind ustrial units, no data was being  generated (May 2016). As 
such, the RSPCB was not in a position to adequately monitor the adherence to 
inlet parameters and flow rate of effluent.  
The State Government stated that the CPCB issued directions (March 2014) 
and imposed final deadline as 31 March 2015 which was further extended to 
September 2016. The process was delayed due to limited internet connectivity 
and now the online data from CETPs was being received at the State Boards 
server. The Government did not ap prise about  non-setting up of IT based 
linkage by member industries of CETPs. 
3.1.4.7 Shortfall in sample testing by Central and Regional Laboratory 
As per RSPCB’s directions (March 2014), the samples of treated effluent from 
CETPs19 were to be collected and analyzed every week by Central Laboratory, 
Jaipur and Regional Laboratory, Jodhpur. The Chief Scientific Officer (CSO) 
was to monitor the same on a weekly basis. 
It was observed that Central (Jaipur) and Regional Laboratory (Jodhpur) did 
not achieve their targets. During 2014-15 and 2015-16, only131 samples of 11 
CETPs were collected and analysed against required 941 samples leading to  
shortfall ranging between 64 and 100 per cent.  
In reply, CSO stated (February 2016) that in absence of required manpower , 
targets had been revised and analysis was to be done on a monthly basis. The 
reply was not convincing as targets were revised in December 2015 and were 
to be made applicable subsequently. The huge shortfall in sample testing 
indicated failure on the part  of the RSPCB to monitor the sample and ensure 
that prescribed effluent standards were met. 
The Board should ensure that s amples of treated effluent from Common 
Effluent Treatment Plant are collected and analyzed by Central and 
Regional Laboratories as per norms and prescribed standards are met. 
3.1.5 Conclusion 
The Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board  had not prepared any 
comprehensive programme for establishing Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants in areas where large number of Small Scale and medium scale  
industries were functioning without proper treatment of effluent. It did not 
have a policy for conducting periodical survey to identify industries which 
were contributing to water pollution in the State. The Board also failed to take 
any concrete step for  setting up of Common Effluent Treatment Plant in 
Sanganer, Jaipur in a timely manner.  
The functioning of Common Effluent Treatment Plants in Pali District was 
unsatisfactory as the treated waste water did not conform to the prescribed 
standards. As a res ult, Common Effluent Treatment Plants were discharging 
polluted water into Bandi river. In Common Effluent Treatment Plant, 
Bhiwadi, huge quantity of dried hazardous sludge was lying on open Kaccha 
                                                 
19   Pali, Jodhpur, Balotra, Bithuja and Jasol. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
41 
 
land without covering shed near a residential area. The Co mmon Effluent 
Treatment Plant, Jodhpur never operated at its optimum capacity . Further, 
there was excess discharge of effluent by industrial units  and large quantity of 
untreated waste water was discharged into Jojri river. Common Eff luent 
Treatment Plant,  Jodhpur discharged  treated waste water into same channel 
from where it was withdrawing untreated water resulting in mixing of treated 
waste water with untreated waste water.  
Consent to operate/authorization was being given with retrospective effect 
without ascertaining the compliance with the conditions included in the 
consent letter. No third party monitoring mechanism was evolved. There was 
huge shortfall in collection and analysis of samples to ensure that the 
prescribed effluent standards were met. 
Water Resources Department 
 
3.2 Rajasthan Minor Irrigation Improvement Project 
 
Introduction 
Rajasthan Minor Irrigation Improvement Project (RAJAMIIP), assisted by 
Japan International Cooperative Agency (JICA) , was approved (March 2005)  
by GoR. The objective of the project was to increase agriculture productivity in 
south eastern region of the State by rehabilitating existing minor irrigation 
facilities and improving water management and agricultural practices, thereby 
enhancing agriculture income and allevia ting poverty. In order to achieve the 
desired objectives, three components i.e. civil works, technical and institutional 
support services and consulting services were  determined. The main executing 
agency and the focal point in implementation of the projec t was the Water 
Resources Department ( WRD). The Agricultural Department was responsible 
for implementation of agriculture extension activities and Medical and Health 
Department was responsible for controlling malaria. 
As per the minutes of discussions (Nov ember 2004) among JICA, Government 
of India and Government of Rajasthan , 393 sub -projects having CCA of  
1.54 lakh hectares were selected for rehabilitation. Of  these, in 35 3 sub -
projects having CCA of 1.4 8 lakh hectares, civil works 20 and capacity 
building21 programmes were executed  and in remaining 40 sub-projects, only 
capacity building programmes were organized . The project scheduled to be 
completed by March 2013 was actually completed in June 2015. 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
20  (i) Rehabilitation, renovation, and upgradation of dams and distribution systems of minor irrigation 
schemes (ii ) related survey, investigation and design works.  
21 To help WUAs to build their capacity in book keeping, water management, technical matters, 
leadership, equal water distribution, agricultural activities with a view to enabling them to perform 
their functions and to enhance agriculture productivity. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
42 
Financial Management 
The original cost of the projec t was ₹ 612.29 crore, of which ₹ 481.45 crore 
was to be financed by the JICA  on the terms and conditions 22 envisaged in the 
Loan Agreement (31 March 2005) betwe en JICA and GoI. The  remaining  
₹ 130.84 crore (administrative cost and taxes) was to be borne by  the Go R. 
Under the project, ₹ 431.34 crore was spent up to June 2015. 
The position of allocation of funds and exp enditure incurred on sub-projects 
during 2005-06 to 2015-16 was as under: 
Table 1: Position of allocation of funds and expenditure incurred 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Water Resource 
Department 
Agriculture Medical and Health Total 
Allotment Expenditure Allotment Expenditure Allotment Expenditure Allotment Expenditure 
2005-11 178.17 27.64 0.36 0.19 0.09 0.00 178.62 27.83 
2011-12 104.07 79.61 4.90 1.32 0.22 0.05 109.19 80.98 
2012-13 141.52 131.73 3.40 2.00 0.25 0.03 145.17 133.76 
2013-14 131.10 98.86 3.00 2.71 0.45 0.13 134.55 101.70 
2014-15 92.34 70.82 2.38 1.45 0.28 0.23 95.00 72.50 
2015-16 15.00 14.57 - - - - 15.00 14.57 
Total 662.20 423.23 14.04 7.67 1.29 0.44 677.53 431.34 
Source: Information provided by SE, PMU, RAJAMIIP, Jaipur. 
Audit Scope and Methodology 
The scrutiny of records for the period 2011 -12 to 2015 -16 was conducted  
(February-May 2016) in eight23 out of 35 divisions selected by adopting simple 
random sampling method. In addition to this, records of CE, Investigation, 
Design and Research, Irrigation Management and Training Institute (IMTI),  
Kota and SE, Project M anagement Unit (PMU), RAJAMIIP w ere also 
examined. As the project was sta rted in 2005, the main focus of audit was to 
ascertain whether the project was fully implemented in accordance with the 
action plan prepared ; the technical and institutional support services were 
provided to ensure successful implementation of the project and progress of the 
project was monitored with reference to the action plan. 
The replies (August 2016) of the State Government has been considered while 
finalizing the issue. 
Audit Findings 
 
3.2.1 Implementation 
The deficiencies noticed in implementation of acti on plan are narrated in   
succeeding paragraphs. 
                                                 
22  The loan provided by the Government of Japan is an Overseas Development Agency loan at favorable 
conditions of an interest rate of 1.3 per cent per annum and repayment period of 30 years including 
grace period of 10 years. 
23    Ajmer, Bhilwara-II, Bundi, Chittorgarh, Dausa, Dungarpur, Sawai Madhopur and Sirohi 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
43 
 
3.2.1.1 Part availment of JICA loan  
According to Minutes of Discussion (MoD)  (November 2004), GoR should  
ensure timely execution of project  by meticulous planning and adequate 
monitoring in view of the limi ted period available for improvement of sub -
projects. 
It was observed that loan amounting to ₹ 481.45 crore was sanctioned by JICA 
under RAJAMIIP. Out of this, ₹ 304.18 crore (63.18 per cent ) only was 
utilized and reimbursed between March 2007  and July 2015. The shortfall in 
utilization of loan was due to  under-utilization of budget by all the thr ee 
implementing agencies i.e. Water Resources, Agriculture and Medical and 
Health Department.  
The State Government stated that provision for price escalation, physical 
contingency and interest during construction amounting to ₹  79.34 crore was 
made in MoD  and due to awarding of most of the works below G-schedule24 
rate this amount could not be utilized and reimbursed by JICA.  The reply was 
not tenable as total cost of all civil works as per DPR shown in Final 
Completion Report (May 2015) of the project was  ₹ 303.47 crore whereas the 
amount of contract value of these works was shown as ₹  364.89 crore which 
was higher than the G-schedule rates. Besides, the Department had paid price 
escalation in many cases  and there were many incomplete projects , discussed 
in succeeding paragraphs. 
 3.2.1.2 Delay in completion of project 
According to Term of Reference 25 (Attachment 10) of MoD, Engineering and 
Management (E&M) Consultants were to be appointed to assist G oR in 
carrying out: (a) screening and appraisal of sub -projects in terms of technical, 
economic, social and environmental aspects; (b) engineering works including 
survey, investigation, design, estimate, tender preparation , evaluation, 
construction supervision and monitoring; (c) review, monitoring and evaluation 
of training and institutional strengthening activities; (d) guidance and 
monitoring of WUA s, information and capacity building; (e) review and 
monitoring of agriculture extension, pro -poor and health components; and (f) 
overall project management.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
24  It is a schedule of quantities and prices included in contract document. 
25  The E&M Consultant shall assist the GoR in smooth communication and c oordination with JICA for 
the project implementation and provide necessary advice to GoR  about JICA procedures and also 
help in preparation of disbursement request to JICA. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
44 
The contemplated date of completion as per action plan enclosed with MoD 
and actual date of completion of various activities are as per table given below: 
Sl. 
No 
Name of activity Responsible 
Person/Agency 
 
Target date of 
completion as 
per  MoD 
Actual date of 
completion 
1 Selection of Management 
and Engineering  
Consultant 
CE (ID&R) and 
PMU 
October 2005 March 2008 
2 Execution of Survey, 
investigation and design 
PMU January 2008 December 2011 
3 Completion of 
rehabilitation work 
PMU December 2011 June 2015 
4 Start of WUA formation PMU February 2006 October 2007 
5 Agriculture extension Agriculture 
Department 
March 2012 March  2015 
6 Health Component Medical & Health 
Department 
March 2012 March  2015 
7 Training WUA/ 
Government officials 
PMU & IMTI March 2012 June 2015 
Source: Final completion report of consultant as on May 2015 and  information provided by SE, 
PMU, RAJAMIIP, Jaipur. 
It could be seen  that there was a delay of 30 months in appointment of E&M 
Consultant which adversely affected all activities under civil work component 
like screening and appraisal of sub -projects, survey, investigation, design, 
estimate and tender preparation . As a result, the project was delayed and 
completed in June 2015  against the stipulated completion date ( March 2013). 
The delay in appointment of E&M Consultant was due to delay in  procedure of 
tendering and lack of coordination between WRD and JICA. 
The State Government stated that E&M Consultant was engaged for the first 
time in WRD and for getting necessary approval for  the appointment of E&M 
Consultant, normally 12 to 18 months were re quired. The fact was  that the 
target date for appointment of E&M consultant as per MoD was October 2005 
and it took abnormally long time to appoint the E&M consultant. 
 3.2.1.3 Awarding of  work of construction of buildings without 
availability of land  
As per attachment 6 of MoD, the project would support formation and capacity 
building of WUAs in the project area. WUAs would take over the management 
and maintenance of the whole system of t he minor irrigation scheme.  For 
smooth functioning of WUAs, provision for construction of buildings was 
included in the action plan.  Rule 351 of PWF&AR stipulates that no work 
should be commenced on land which ha d not been duly made over by the 
responsible civil officer. Rule 298  (1) also stipulates that availability of land 
was a pre- requisite for planning and designing of a work. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
45 
 
It was noticed that 1 6 WUA buildings 26costing ₹ 24.15 lakh could not be 
constructed due to non-availability of land. The work orders for construction of 
WUA buildings were issued without ascertaining the availability of land in 
these cases. This also hampered the plan of strengthening of WUAs in 
discharge of their duties of management and maintenance of sub-projects. 
The State Government stated that suitable land was not provided by the 
respective Gram Panchayats due to non-availability of land and dispute among 
farmers. 
3.2.1.4  Premature completion of sub-projects 
As per Final Completion Report (Civil Works) prepared by Consultant27, out of 
353 sub -projects covering CCA of 1.48 lakh hectares selected under 
RAJAMIIP for rehabilitation in the State , work of 295 sub -projects was 
completed.  Work of five sub-projects was completed without additional works 
stipulated in scope of work. T hree sub-projects were completed without 
ancillary works and work of 14 sub -projects was in progress. 36 sub -projects 
covering 14,678.7 hectares (9.94 per cent) area of cultivable land with contract 
value of ₹ 27.22 crore were closed prematurely/dropped after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹ 15.31 crore (56.2 per cent) leaving incomplete works of 23 
dams, 36 irrigation systems, 15 WUA offices, 33 linkages to watercourses, 29 
fixing of outlets, 18 installation of measurement devices and 21 watercourse 
rehabilitation works. Due to dropping and premature closure of sub - projects, 
the objective of the project to provide irrigation to the farmers in the CCA as 
envisaged could not be achieved completely. 
In two selected divisions28, improvement of minor irrigation projects was  
approved at contract price of ₹ 9.32 crore. It was noticed that these projects 
could not be completed within the stipulated period of project . After 
completion (June 2015) of the project period,  these incomplete projects were 
treated as  finalized. An expenditure of ₹ 3.91 crore was inc urred on these 
projects. No concrete steps were taken by the Department to complete the 
minor irrigation projects within the prescribed time.  
The State Government stated that 23 sub -projects at incomplete stage were 
treated as finalized due to non -receipt of bids in remaining works even after 
repeated invitation . Eight  sub-projects were dropped with the concurrence of 
JICA. The facts remained that  despite having financial assistance at  a low 
interest rate the Department could not complete the projects as e nvisaged. This 
resulted in non-accrual of desired benefits to the people in the command area.  
3.2.1.5 Non-completion of watercourse rehabilitation  works resulted in 
non-enhancement of cultivable area up to the desired extent 
One of the major objectives of  the project was to improve the performance 
efficiency of the surface irrigation system and strengthen  support to 
agricultural through i ncreased involvement of users. The w atercourse 
rehabilitation works of the sub -projects commenced after signing of MoU 
                                                 
26   Ajmer-I (11), Sawai Madhopur (1)  Bhilwara-II  (2) and  Bundi (2) 
27   GITEC Consult GmbH, Germany 
28   Dausa and Sawai Madhopur 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
46 
between WRD and WUAs. WUAs were to participate in survey, planning, 
designing and execution of works related to watercourse rehabilitations.  
As per reports of the Consultant, the zone wise status of work of watercourse 
rehabilitation completed up to 31 May 2015 was as given below: 
Name of 
Zone 
Number of watercourse 
structures29 
Shortfall of 
completion 
(in per cent) 
Length of 
watercourses 
(in kms) 
Shortfall of 
completion 
(in per cent) 
Planned Completed Planned Completed 
Jaipur 13,679 1,497 89.06 1,755.25 954.80 45.60 
Jodhpur 4,132 166 95.98 583.21 343.00 41.19 
Kota 2,755 95 96.55 468.73 404.05 13.80 
Udaipur 5,241 198 96.22 1,711.43 954.20 44.25 
Total 25,807 1,956 92.42 4,518.62   2,656.05 41.22 
Source: Status report of consultant as on 31 May 2015. 
It is ev ident from the above table that  between 89.06 per cent and 96.55 per 
cent construction of structures remained incomplete in the above zones . The 
shortfall in terms of length of watercourses completed ranged between 13.80 
per cent and 45.60 per cent up to 31 May 2015 . The reasons for short fall as 
mentioned in the report of the Consultant were lower sanctioned rates than 
market rates; no provision of advance payment to WUA s; farmers did not see 
merit in rehabilitation works ; and unwillingness of farmer s to give up land for 
watercourses. Non-completion of works of construction of watercourse 
structures resulted in failure to check the water losses and, non-enhancement of 
cultivable area to the desired extent . The farmers were deprived  of benefits of 
irrigation facilities within the scheduled time. 
The State Government stated that WUAs had expressed their unwillingness to 
execute the watercourse rehabilitation works because watercourses already 
existed. It was also stated that existing watercourses were being maintained by 
the respective farmers . It appea red from the reply  that steps were either not 
taken to motivate farmers and address the issues pointed out by Consultant or 
the action plan was flawed. 
3.2.1.6 Non-achievement of the objective to ensure opt imum utilization of 
water through use of measurement devices 
Measurement devices30 help in accurate accounting for proper allocation of 
water. 
It was noticed that in selected divisions,  ₹ 1.10 crore was spent on installation 
of measurement devices. In order  to ensure the utilization of measurement 
devices, warabandi schedule31 was to be prepared and record related to flow of 
water was to be maintained by WUAs. SE (PMU) had issued (October 2012) 
directions for use of measurement devices.  There was also a provision in DPR 
of sub -projects for installation of measurement devices to ensure optimum 
                                                 
29   It includes cross drainages and Nakas constructed by farmers for irrigation of land. 
30   Instrument that shows the extent, quantity or degree of something. 
31  Warabandi schedule is a system of distribution of water allocation to water users by turn according to 
an approved schedule indicating the day, duration and time of supply.  

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
47 
 
utilization of water. It was also directed by SE (PMU) to submit the progress of 
installation of measurement devices and the calibration mechanism adopted for 
measurement at Junior/Assistant/Executive Engineer level. 
The information furnished by  divisions in relation to measurement devices 
revealed that warabandi schedule was not prepared and implemented by any 
WUA. The record relating to the m onitoring of flow of water as well as 
distribution of water to the different land users was not maintained by WUAs . 
As a result, optimum utilization of water was not ensured. The  expenditure of  
₹ 1.10 crore incurred on installation of measurement devices, thus,  did not 
yield any benefit. 
The State Government stated that warabandi schedule was not directly related 
to measuring devices. It was applicable only after water distribution below the 
outlet. The reply was not convincing because warabandi schedule was 
necessary for judicious and economic use of water and WUAs were to measure 
and control the flow of water through measuring devices. 
 3.2.1.7 Creation of liability after completion of the project 
The project was scheduled to be completed in March 2013 but due to non -
completion of work s within scheduled time, the completion period was 
extended up to  June 2015. The WRD issued (July 2015 ) directions for final 
submission of claim s up to 23 July 2015 failing which individual liability was 
to be fixed. It was noticed that EE, WRD Bhilwara-II did not submit claims of 
₹ 67.66 lakh. In absence of timely submission of claims,  the Department had 
created State Government’s liability of ₹ 67.66 lakh.  
The State Government stated that the pending liabilities would be paid from its 
fund after getting permission from the Finance Department. It added that 
disciplinary action against the defaulting officers/officials was in process. 
3.2.1.8 No safety measures taken for checking theft and mixing of 
polluted water into the canal 
During physical verification by audit (April 2016) with the officers of the 
Department, it was noticed that the Left Main Canal of Guvardi Min or 
Irrigation Project passed through a textile  factory32 and polluted water of the 
factory was being discharged in the canal. Also, there was a possibility of theft 
of canal water for industrial use. The concerned Assistant Engineer accepted  
(April 2016 ) that no arrangement s to prevent theft of water and m ixing of  
polluted water in the canal  were made. It was also  intimated that direction s 
were issued to the factory to stop discharging of polluted water in the canal . 
The pollution of canal water has serious consequences for the farmers as well 
as the consumers of the farm products. 
The State Government apprised that necessary action against the owner of the 
factory under Rajasthan irrigation and drainage Act, 1954 was in process 
(August 2016). 
 
                                                 
32 Super Gold Suiting Mandpiya. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
48 
3.2.1.9  Recovery of risk and cost and compensation of delay 
As per clause 2 of contract  agreement, the time al lowed for carrying out the 
work should be strictly observed by the contractor. If the contractor fail ed to 
complete the work in accordance with the time schedule and the delay in 
execution of work was attributable to the contractor . The contractor should be 
liable to pay compensation for every time span.  Clause 3(c) provides that the 
engineer-in-charge ha d power to measure the work of the contractor which 
remained unexecuted and give it to another contractor to  complete it. A ny 
expenses incurred in excess of the sum to be  paid to the original contractor , 
should be borne and paid by the original contractor and might be deducted 
from any money due to him. 
During review of selected divisions, it was observed that in 12 sub-projects, the 
contractors did not execute the work s within the stipulated time  and works 
were executed through another contractors . The compensation under clause 2 
of ₹ 48.94 lakh and under clause 3 (c) of ₹ 3.02 crore levied by the Department 
was not recovered from contractors. 
The State Government stated that efforts were being made for early recovery of 
the compensation amount. 
3.2.2 Technical and institutional support activities 
 
3.2.2.1 Non-achievement of target of health component  
As per S.No. IX (3) of Annexure -II of MoD, the health component focused on 
implementation of measures to control malaria including treatment of 
depressions33 and introduction of specific fish into tanks rehabilitated under the 
project. Breeding of malaria vectors was  to be controlled through cons truction 
of hatcheries for fish in the vicinity of tanks. 
It was observed that against the target of 38  hatcheries to be constructed by the 
Medical and Health Department during the period 2011-12 to 2014-15, only 33 
hatcheries were constructed. The CE, WRD allotted ₹ 1.20 crore to Director, 
Medical and Health for construction of hatcheries but only ₹ 44.26 lakh was 
spent.  
Further, in order to verify the usefulness and effectiveness of constructed 
hatcheries, Audit conducted (August 2016 ) physical verification of eig ht 
hatcheries constructed in Ajmer, Dausa and Jaipur districts with the officials of 
the Department of Medical and Health. During physical verification, it was 
learnt that Chief Medical and Health Officers (CM&HO) of the respective 
districts were not acqua inted with the areas to be benefited under the scheme. 
In absence of the knowledge of the area and tanks rehabilitated under the 
project, training was not imparted t o the WUAs for transfer of fish  from 
hatcheries to the tanks . No fish were supplied to the WUAs of the relevant 
areas for introduction into tanks. No record relating to detection of malaria 
cases was maintained and no impact assessment on infestation was done b y the 
respective CM&HO. I n absence of fulfilment of targets for construction of 
hatcheries and introduction of fish  into tanks, the objective to control malaria 
                                                 
33  Low level area 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
49 
 
in the specified areas could not be achieved.  The report of the C onsultant also 
confirmed that medical and health component was not properly implemented. 
3.2.2.2 Non-accrual of benefit of training due to t ransfer and retirement 
of overseas trained officials before completion of project 
Scrutiny of records of IMTI Kota revealed that Senior Representative, JICA 
conveyed (August 2012) ‘no objection’ to the proposal for undertaking 
overseas training in Germany by  24 participants. The condition was that WRD 
might endeavour to ensure that each participant serve the project for a period of 
three years  (till expiry  of loan) after  return from the overseas training.  In 
compliance, IMTI Kota org anized two foreign training programmes from 24  
September 2012 to 4  October 2012 and 22  October 2012 to  
1 November 2012 for 24 officers in Germany. 
During scrutiny of information provided by PMU, it was observed that out of 
24 officers who got overseas tra ining, 15 officers retired and 3 officers were 
transferred to a post not related to the project before completion of the 
stipulated period of three years. The knowledge gained by the officers through 
training, therefore, could not be utilized fully and the  expenditure of ₹72 lakh  
incurred on it was rendered partially unfruitful. 
The State Government stated that out of 24 participants, two were from 
administrative service whose transfers  were done by State Government and 22 
were from WRD who were serving/served the project during their service 
period. The reply  was not acceptable as JICA allowed only those officers for 
overseas training whose services could exclusively be utilized in the project for 
three years.  
3.2.2.3 Non-collection of water charges  
 
As per attachment 6 of MoD, the project would support formation and capacity 
building of WUAs in the project area. WUA consisting of all the water users 
would take over the management and maintenance of the whole system of the 
minor irrigation scheme including assessment and collection of water charges. 
During review of selected divisions , it was observed that water charges were 
not being collected by WUAs. Only one WUA in Govta village of Bhilwara -II 
division realized ₹ 1.13 lakh during 2011 -13.The failure of WUAs in realizing 
water charges  resulted in non -availability of funds for operation and 
maintenance of  sub-projects which would ultimately burden the State 
exchequer. 
The State Government stated that some WUAs had started collecting water 
tariff and with passage of time they would be more sustainable and would 
perform their responsibility effectively. The fact was that out of 393 sub -
projects, water charges were collected in only 13 sub -projects in the absence of 
strengthening the WUAs. 
The State Government should carry out an assessment of requirement of 
funds for operation and maintenance of the structures created under the 
project. Water User Associations should be strengthened and water charges 
should be realised for operation and maintenance of sub-projects. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
50 
3.2.3 Monitoring and Evaluation 
3.2.3.1 Impact Assessment 
The task of monitoring and evaluation was entrusted on 23 February 2010 to 
DHV India Private Limited and the contract agreement was signed on 2 March 
2010. The aim of assignment was to assist the GoR in mon itoring and 
evaluation of project. This included preparation of design, planning and 
conduct of baseline study and then to undertake mid -term evaluation and 
impact evaluation of sample sub-projects. 
The Consultant submitted the Project Completion Report on 26 May 2015. The 
Consultant clearly indicated in its report that the evaluation of the impact of the 
project was premature due to the following reasons: 
 In few cases , the system ha d started degenerating and getting damaged 
even before its handing over. 
 The system along with other infrastructures like WUA office buildings , 
etc., could not be formally transferred to the WUAs. 
 The WUA functionaries would need intensive follow up and guidance for 
at least one year after the syste m was formally handed over. In  absence of 
such a situation, the project as a whole based on WUAs might collapse. 
It was stressed that in its present form with no financial base, enforcement 
power and authority, the system could n ot succeed in long term . None of the 
sample project s could be formally and fully transferred to WUA . The  
experience of managing the system independently was almost nil. The structure 
before transfer show ed the symptoms of damage which in long run w ould 
affect the sustainability of the project . The minor irrigation projects were very 
small and m ight not have adequ ate revenue and therefore  even to remain 
sustainable would regularly need external financial support from Government 
or any other body. 
The State Government stated that the project had been completed with 
remarkable success and the impact of the project was quite impressive and 
positive in achievement of objectives. The reply was not borne out by the Final 
Completion Report prepared by the Consultant which indicated that the 
evaluation of the outcome of the  project was premature. No other impact 
evaluation study was  carried out by the Department and, therefore, the 
Department was not in a position to conclude on achievement of basic 
objectives of the project. 
3.2.3.2 Non -compliance of quality observations re sulted in execution of 
sub-standard work 
It was essential that the works were executed in conformity with the 
construction standards to achieve durability, reliability and sustainability in 
their functioning. In order to ensure the quality measures in exec ution of work, 
quality control manual was prepared by E&M Consultant.  
During review of records and reports of Consultant, it was noticed that out of 
16014 observations made in respect of poor quality of work by the Site 
Supervising Engineer of Consultant during inspection of works, compliance 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
51 
 
with 2465 quality observations was not made (May 2015) by the WRD 
Officers. The quality management and control system was , therefore, deficient 
and compliance to quality observations could not be ensured. 
The State Government stated that compliance with the observations had been 
ensured by Quality Control Officers of WRD before completion of project. The 
reply was not convincing as the project completion report was submitted by the 
Consultant in May 2015 and project en ded in June 2015. The Department held 
an amount of ₹  0.74 crore to be paid to the contractors due to non -compliance 
of quality observations which  supported the view that compliance of quality 
observations was not made.  
3.2.4  Conclusion 
 
The objective of utilizing surface water through rehabilitation of sub -projects 
was not fully achieved due to delay in completion of activities under civil work 
component. Loan from Japan International Cooper ative Agency could not be 
fully availed due to less utilization o f budget by implementing agencies.  
Premature closure of sub -projects resulted in less creation of capacity for 
storage of water and irrigation of C ulturable Command Area. Non-completion 
of work of construction of watercourse  structures resulted in non-achievement 
of the objectives to check the water losses, enhance cultivable area up to the 
desired extent and extend the benefit of irrigation facilities to the farmers . The 
failure of WUAs in realizing water charges resulted in non-availability of funds 
for operation and maintenance of sub-projects. The consultant clearly indicated 
in its report that the evaluation of the impact of the project was premature and 
the system to succeed will require financial base, enforcement of power and 
experience of running the system. 
Forest Department 
 
3.3 Soil and water conservation in catchments of River Valley Projects 
 
Introduction 
The scheme of soil and water conservation in the catchments of River Valley 
Projects was started in the third five year plan (1962). This sch eme was 
centrally sponsored. In Rajasthan, there are four River Valley Projects 34 in 
which watershed35 activities were carried out in 52 watershed areas36. 
The soil and water conservation in the catchments of River Valley Projects was 
undertaken under the sch eme ‘Macro Management of Agriculture’ (MMA) up 
to 2012-13 and thereafter under ‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana’ (RKVY). The 
main objectives of the scheme were to p revent land degradation  and soil loss  
by adoption of multi -disciplinary integrated approach of  soil conservation and 
watershed management . This included  improvement of land capability and 
moisture regime in the watersheds , promotion of land use to match land 
capability from the catchments to reduce siltation of multipurpose reservoirs. 
                                                 
34   Dantiwara, Sabarmati, Mahi and Chambal  
35  A region or area bounded peripherally by a divide and draining ultimately to a particular  watercourse 
or body of water. 
36   Abu Road (24), Banswara (11), Begun (15), Jhalawar (2) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
52 
The GoI deve loped (2008) Operational Guidelines for Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of Soil conservation in the catchments of River Valley projects 
perceiving the problems in implementation of the programme based on 
different guidelines at different intervals.  
Under the scheme, the activities were divided into following three phases:  
Preparatory Phase:  It include d Entry Point Activities 37 for creating rapport 
with the rural community, preparation of detailed project report and 
institutional and capacity building.  
Watershed Works Phase:  It include d activities like watershed development 
works such as treatment of land, contour bunding, construction of Gabion38 
structure, silt detention structures and water harvesting structures for ground 
water recharge, development of liveli hood activities for the asset  less persons 
and production system and micro enterprises such as livestock improvement, 
fisheries development, etc.  
Consolidation: It include d activities for completion of various works and 
sustainable management of natural resources during post project period.  
 Organizational Set-up 
Forest Department , Rajasthan  was the implementing agency of the Scheme. 
The Additional Principle Chief Conservator of Forest (APCCF), (Soil 
Conservation) exercised administrative control over the scheme and maintained 
liaison with the Go R and GoI. The Chief Conservator of Forest (CCF) and  
Director, Project (Soil Conservation), Kota was the overall in charge for 
implementation and supervision of the scheme.  He was assisted by Deputy 
Conservator of  Forest (DCF) Project, Abu Road (Sirohi), Banswara, Begun 
(Chittorgarh), and Jhalawar. 
 
Funding Pattern 
 
The expenditure on developmental activities in the MMA scheme was shared 
by Ministry of Agriculture, GoI and GoR in the ratio of 90:10 during the year 
2011-13. During 2013 -14 and 2014 -15, the C entral share was revised to 100 
per cent and from October 2015, the Central and State share was in the ratio of 
60:40. The details of allotment of budget and expenditure incurred are given in 
table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
37 It includes the activities based on urgent needs of local communities,  repair, restoration and         
upgradation of existing structures and productivity enhancement activities. 
38   Wall for retention of water 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
53 
 
Table 1: Details of allotment of budget and expenditure incurred          
(` in crore) 
Year Allotment Expenditure 
Central State Total 
2011-12 11.68 1.30 12.98 12.98 
2012-13 11.59 1.29 12.88 12.88 
2013-14 05.88 - 05.88   5.64 
2014-15 16.82 - 16.82 16.14 
2015-16 11.75 5.10 16.85 15.98 
Total 57.72 7.69 65.41 63.62 
Source: Information provided by CCF, Kota and three divisions. 
Audit Coverage 
 
Audit for the period from 2011 -12 to 2015 -16 was undertaken (February -May 
2016) by covering all four Divisions i .e. Abu Road, Banswara, Begun and 
Jhalawar39. Besides, records of APCCF, Soil Conservation, CCF and Director, 
Project (Soil Conservation), Kota were also examined. The audit was 
conducted with a view to ascertain the adequacy of institutional arrangements 
in successful delivery of project and to assess  whether soil and water 
conservation activities were carried out as envisaged in guidelines and 
adequately monitored. 
The reply of the State Government (September 2016) has been considered 
while finalizing the issue.  
Physical Status 
The targets and achievements in respect of the area fixed for land treatment and 
the structures to be created under the scheme are given below. 
Table 2: Year-wise position of physical targets and achievement 
Year Target Achievement Percentage of 
shortfall 
Area 
 ( hectare) 
Structures  
(number) 
Area 
 ( hectare) 
Structures  
( number) 
Area 
 
Structures  
2011-12 16085 8053 11635 4536 27.66 43.67 
2012-13 13449 9187 7980 4343 40.66 52.73 
2013-14 5469 4900 1494 2632 72.68 46.29 
2014-15 11792 6628 11420 6577 3.15 0.77 
2015-16 10800 5163 10023 4775 7.19 7.52 
Source: Information provided by CCF, Kota and three divisions. 
                                                 
39   In  Jhalawar, watershed activities concluded in 2012-13. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
54 
During 2012-13 and 2013-14, there was shortfall of 40.66 per cent and 72.68 
per cent respectively in respect of area f ixed for land treatment . In respect of 
structures constructed, the shortfall was from 43.67 per cent to 52.73 per cent 
during 2011-12 to 2013-14. The achievement during 2014 -15 and 2015-16 in 
respect of lan d treatment  was 96.85 per cent and 92.81 per cent respectively 
and in respect of structures constructed, the achievement was 99.23 per cent  
and 92.48 per cent respectively. The shortfall in achievement was mainly due 
to short release of funds against the budget allotted as per replies furnished by 
DCF, Abu Road and Begun. The DCF, Banswara did not furnish any reply. 
 
Audit Findings 
3.3.1 Planning 
The annual work plans for executing the watershed activities were prepared by 
the Project Implementing Agency (PIA) , Forest Department and approved by 
the Ministry of Agriculture, GoI, under the scheme MMA up to 2012 -13. From 
the financial year 2013 -14 onwards, the work plans were approved by State 
Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) i.e., Agriculture Department, GoR, under RKVY  
to provide flexibility and autonomy to the State in planning and executing the 
activities. 
3.3.1.1 Lack of institutional arrangements at Project Level 
As per paragraph 5.3 of Common Guidelines for  Watershed Development 
Projects and paragraph 14 of Operational Guidelines, the PIA  had to set up 
watershed development t eam (WDT) for providing guidance to Watershed 
Committees ( Committees) in preparation of watershed action plans, assisting 
Gram Sabha in formation of Committees and their functioning, organising and 
nurturing Self Help Groups and User Groups,  conducting participatory base 
line survey, training and capacity building.  Each WDT was required to be 
constituted with at least four members having broad knowledge and experience 
of agriculture, social science, water management, soil mobilization and 
institution building. The WDT was required to have at least one woman as 
member.  
It was observed that out of four divisions,  in two divisions i.e.  Banswara and 
Begun, WDTs  were not constituted during 2011 -16. In Abu Road and 
Jhalawar, WDTs were not constitu ted during 2011 -12 and 2012 -13. In 
Jhalawar, watershed activities concluded in 2012 -13. In Abu Road, during 
2013-14, WDT was constituted but not as per norms. The employees of the 
Department were included as members of the WDT. The preparation of 
detailed resource development plan s was not done by the subject experts. The 
Committees deprived of the expert guidance in preparation of annual action 
plans and functioning of watershed activities. 
The State Government replied (September 2016) that Common Guidelin es for 
Watershed Development Projects issued in 2008 was not applicable on the 
works executed under the projects as all River Valley Projects were sanctioned 
prior to the is suance of the guidelines. It  added that revised guidelines on 
Macro Management of A griculture, 2008 were applicable on the works and it 
had no provision for constitution of WDTs. It was also stated that there was no 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
55 
 
need to appoint separate subject specialists as departmental employees had 
wide knowledge of soil and water conservation works. 
The reply was not convincing . Perceiving the problems in implementation of 
the programme based on three sets of guidelines40, the Operational Guidelines 
for Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Soil Conservation in the catchments of 
River Valley Projects were developed in the XI Five Year Plan. These aimed to 
make the treatment more focused, cost effective and also to promote multi -
disciplinary approach involving greater public participation in the programme 
with active involvement of Gram Panchayat /Watershed Committees. The 
Operational Guidelines issued had provision for constitution of WDTs. In 
addition to this, all watershed projects were sanctioned after 2008 and project 
reports prepared for the watershed projects clearly provided that Operational 
and Commo n Guidelines would be applicable for implementation of the 
projects. Thus, non-constitution of WDTs was against the guiding principle of 
decentralization envisaged in the guidelines. Also, the project was deprived of 
expertise required for execution of wat ershed and other activities. The works 
were executed in an unplanned manner and the project suffered as observed in 
succeeding paragraphs.  
It is recommended that as per provisions of Common Guidelines and 
Operational Guidelines, Watershed Development Team s should be 
constituted to avail knowledge of subject experts. 
3.3.1.2 Unplanned construction of permanent structures. 
As per paragraph 10.3 of Operational Guidelines, 2008, permanent structures41  
have to be constructed in the second or third year of the implementation of the 
project. This was  to ensure that vegetative soil conservation measures like 
construction of contour/graded bunds supported by vegetation and drainage 
line treatments initiated in the first year acquired some definite shape before 
supplemental engineering structures were put up in the second or third year. 
Scrutiny of records in three divisions i.e. Abu Road, Banswara and Begun, 
disclosed that 192 42 permanent structures costing ₹2.36 crore were constructed 
in the first year of the project contrary to the guidelines.  
The State Government stated that all the pucca structures were constructed in 
the first year after stabilization of watersheds and 61 Gabion structures were 
loose stone structures which were constructed for detention of silt. The reply 
was not convincing.  The construction of pucca structures, excluding Gabion 
structures, in the first year of treatment  defeated the objective of the project  of 
preventing silt ation and enhanc ing surface rainwater storage in the 
multipurpose reservoirs.  
It is recommended that p ermanent structures should be  constructed after 
ensuring that the vegetative soil conservation works had taken shape to 
prevent siltation and enhance surface rainwater storage in the reservoirs. 
 
                                                 
40  Comprehensive guideline for planning, implementatio n and monitoring of RVP and FPR, Macro  
Management of Agriculture, 2008, Common Guidelines for Watershed Development Projects, 2008 
41   Gabion, Silt Detention structures, Water Harvesting structures. 
42   Abu Road (12;  ` 10.37 lakh), Banswara (81;  ` 1.09 crore), Begun ( 99;  ` 1.17 crore)  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
56 
3.3.2   Implementation 
 
3.3.2.1 Non-constitution of Self Help Groups and User Groups 
As per paragraph 6.1  and 6.2  of Common Guidelines for  Watershed 
Development Projects , the Committees shall constitute Self Help Groups 
(SHGs) and User Groups  in the watershed areas with the help of WDTs . The 
members of the SHGs would be small and marginal farmers, landless/asset less 
poor agricultural labourers, women, shepherd s and schedul e caste/schedule 
tribe persons. The SHGs sh ould be homogenous, having common identity and 
interest and dependent on the watershed area for their livelihood; and the SHGs 
would be provided with a revolving fund of an amount to be decided by the 
nodal Ministry for improvement in living standard and building up of financial 
resources. The User Groups w ould be responsible for the operation and 
maintenance of all assets created under the project in close collaboration with 
the Gram Panchayat and the Gram Sabha.  
It was noticed that in all the divisions,  SHGs were not constituted in the 
watershed areas . In their absence, the revo lving fund was not disbursed for  
executing the farming and allied activities to improve the living standards of 
the beneficiaries. The objective of the scheme to develop livelihood activities 
for the landless persons,  production system and micro enterprise s was not 
fulfilled.  It was also noticed that in all divisions, no User Groups were 
constituted. The work of operation and maintenance of assets created under the 
project, therefore, suffered.  
The State Government stated that SHGs and User Groups were not constituted 
due to absence of any provision for constitution of SHGs  and User Groups  in 
Revised Guidelines of Macro Management of Agriculture. The reply was not 
acceptable as Common  Guidelines issued had provi sion for constitution of 
SHGs and User Group . The DCFs of all the divisions had also accepted  
(March/April/May 2016) that SHGs and User Group were not constituted. The 
DCF, Begun stated that SHG would be constituted during 2016-17.  
It is recommended that Self Help Groups need to be constituted to im prove 
the living standards of the beneficiaries and User Groups should be formed 
for operation and maintenance of assets. 
3.3.2.2 Constitution of Watershed Committees not done as per the norms 
As per paragraph 6.3 of Common Guidelines for Watershed Develop ment 
Projects and paragraph 16 of Operational Guidelines, the Gram Sabha would 
constitute the Committees to implement the watershed project s with the 
technical support of the WDTs. The Committee would comprise at least 10 
members, half of wh om would repres ent SHGs and User Groups, SC/ST 
community, woman and landless persons in the village. One member of WDT 
should be represented in the Committee. 
It was noticed that contrary to the guidelines, there was no representation of 
SHGs and User Groups in the 52 Committees formed in 52 watersheds in the 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
57 
 
four divisions. In nine Committees43, the number of members included was less 
than 10; in five WC s44, there was no participation of woman and i n Abu Road, 
there was no representation of WDT during 2011 -12 and 2012-13. Due to non-
constitution of Committees as per norms, community participation and 
involvement of primary stakeholders in the planning, budgeting, 
implementation and management of watershed projects could not be ensured. 
The State Government replied that the Revised Guidelines of Macro 
Management of Agriculture had no provision for constitution of Committees 
and therefore instead of Committees, Watershed Development Committees 
(WDCs) were constituted. The reply was not convincing as Committees were 
not constituted as per the norms provided in guidelines. 
3.3.3 Capacity Building  
Capacity building support is a crucial component to achieve the desired results 
from watershed development projects. The Common Guidelines for Watershed 
Development Projects  included, i nter-alia, annual action plan for capacity 
building, pool of resource persons, well prepared training modules, reading 
materials and mechanism for effective monitoring and follow-up.  
3.3.3.1  Workshop and training programmes were not conducted 
 As per para graph 19.1 of Operational Guidelines and para graph 10.1 of 
Common Guidelines, capacity building and training to the officials, non -
governmental organizations and farmers would  be given the highest priority .  
A state level workshop for leaders of the projec t, team in  charge of 
implementation of each watershed project and officers monitoring the River 
Valley Projects should be held once in a year to discuss the new thrust areas 
and future action plan for implementation of the project.  The workshop was 
meant t o provide an opportunity for in -depth analysis of problems and 
measures in relation to the individual watershed project.  
Scrutiny of records disclosed that APCCF, Jaipur did not conduct even a single 
State level workshop for capacity building of the officials during last five years 
i.e. 2011-16. As per p aragraph 19.2 of Operational Guidelines and paragraph 
10.1 of Common Guidelines, Regional/D istrict training programmes would be 
conducted for the PIAs (in -charge of execution of various S ectoral 
pragrammes) and at least one training programme would be organized annually 
for each catchment area. Regional/District level training programmes for PIAs  
were, however, not conducted during last five years i.e. 2011-16. 
 As per p aragraph 19.3 of Operational Guidelines  and para graph 10.1 of 
Common Guidelines, farmer s’ workshop at the projec t level would  be held 
once in a year, wherein G overnment functionaries, in -charge of the watershed 
management projects and the members of the local community would 
participate. About 25 participants per watershed projects were to be covered in 
the workshop every year. 
                                                 
43  Watera (Abu Road), Hariyagari (Banswara), Kulantiya, Dhamancha, Dhaurakuri, Muwanda, Phut 
talab, Rath kankra and Naya gawn (Begun) 
44    Kankarli, Watera, Kalakheter (Abu Road), Dhamancha, Sodarshanpura (Begun) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
58 
No farmers’ workshop at project level was held by the Banswara, Begun and 
Jhalawar divisions during 2011-15. As the workshops and training programmes 
as above were not he ld, the objective to enhance knowledge and skill of 
functionaries could not be achieved. 
The State Government stated that state level workshop was conducted during 
2011-12 and 2013-14; regional level training programmes were conducted a nd 
officers trained;  and farmer s’ workshop at project level was conducted in 
Banswara division during 2015 -16. The reply was not convincing as no 
evidence in support of the workshops/training programmes conducted was 
made available  and farmers’ workshops at project level were  also not 
conducted during 2011-15 in any of the divisions. 
It is recommended that w orkshops and training programmes should be held 
for enhancement of knowledge and skill of functionaries 
 
3.3.3.2 Non-utilisation of Corpus Fund 
During scrutiny of records at Abu Road, Banswara and Begun divisions, it was 
observed that the Corpus Fund deposited in the bank accounts of the 
Committees during the period from 1990 -91 to 2012 -13 for maintenance of 
constructed structures was lying unutilized in the form of Fixed De posits 
(FDs). The amount of F Ds including interest as on March 2016 was  ₹ 2.0845 
crore.  
The State Government stated that Corpus Fund could not be utilized  as no 
structures were damaged or reported damaged by any of the WDCs for repair 
and, therefore, it was lying in banks as fixed deposits. The fact remained that 
due to  non-formation of user groups, the maintenance of the assets was not 
ensured and the corpus fund meant for maintenance of assets was thus lying 
unutilised.  
3.3.3.3 Non-recovery of user charges 
As per para graph 9.5 of Common Guidelines for Wat ershed Development 
Project 2008, the Gram Sabha through the Committees should put in place a 
mechanism for collecting user charges from t he beneficiaries. No charges 
would be taken from landless, disabled /widow for work done on private or 
public land. The user charges collected sh ould be credited to the Watershed 
Development Fund for maintenance of assets. 
It was observed that in all four divisions, the user charges were not collected 
from the users of the assets created under the project.  
The State Government stated that User Groups were not constituted and user 
charges were not collected due to absence of any provision for constitution of 
User Groups and collection of user charges in Revised Guidelines o f Macro 
Management of Agriculture. The reply was not convincing as Common 
Guidelines had provision for constitution of User Groups and , therefore, 
recovery of user charges was necessary for maintenance of assets.  
It is recommended that the user charges sh ould be collected for maintenance 
of assets created under the project.  
 
                                                 
45   Abu Road (₹ 49.67 lakh), Banswara  (₹ 94.64 lakh), Begun (₹ 64.16 lakh) 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
59 
 
3.3.4 Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
3.3.4.1   Non-development of online web-based monitoring system 
Paragraphs 21 and 22 of Opera tional Guidelines and paragraph 11.1 (85) of 
Common Guide lines provide that for improving the monitoring system, a 
website on monitoring system for centrally sponsored scheme of soil 
conservation had been created by GoI and the watershed-wise and activity-wise 
data for the ongoing watershed activities was to be fed by the State 
Government on the website. The PIA had to submit quarterly progress reports 
(countersigned by Committee) to the Watershed Cell cum Data Centre for 
further submission to the SLNA. The SLNA was required to send the report to 
GoI.  
It was obs erved that no system was in place either in the Department or at the 
Committee level (basic level of implementation) to feed/update the data on the 
website. In absence of any directions from the management, the watershed -
wise and activity -wise data for ong oing works were not  uploaded on the 
website. The State Government stated that the monthly progress reports were 
sent to higher authorities regularly and due to shortage of trained staff and 
availability of resources , web-based monitoring system could not b e 
developed.  
3.3.4.2 Third party evaluation and periodic visits not made 
As per paragraph 12.3 of Operational Guidelines of RKVY, out of the projects 
sanctioned by the State during the year, twenty five per cent projects should 
compulsorily be taken up for third party evaluation. 
The State Government stated that the responsibility of third party evaluation 
vested with the Nodal agency i.e. Agriculture Department.  The nodal agency 
had reported (May 2016) that no third party evaluation was conducted. 
As per paragraph 21.7 of Operational Guidelines and paragraph 11.1 (85) of 
Common Guidelines,  periodic visits by the regional, state and n ational level 
functionaries were required to  be made for inspection of the project.  No such 
periodic visits by the national level functionaries were observed for monitoring 
the project. As regards regional/state level functionaries, the State Government 
apprised that inspections were carried out by the CCF and APCCF.  
It is recommended that o nline web -based monitoring system sho uld be 
developed and watershed -wise and activity -wise data for ongoing watershed 
works should be uploaded on the website. Third party evaluation should be 
done for evaluation of various activities of the project. 
3.3.5    Conclusion 
Lack of institutional arrangements at project and village level led to unplanned 
execution of project works  which defeated the objective of decentralization. 
Due to non -constitution of Watershed Development Teams, the Watershed 
Committees were constituted without subject expert/ knowledge persons.  
Unplanned construction of permanent structures without ensuring that the 
vegetative soil conservation works had taken shape resulted in non -

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
60 
achievement of the objective of the project to prevent siltation and enhance 
surface rainwater storage in the multipurpose reservoirs. 
Non-constitution of Self Help Groups resulted in non -disbursement of 
revolving fund for execution of farming and allied activities to improve the 
living standards of the beneficiaries.  User Groups were not formed due t o 
which the work of operation and maintenance of assets created under the 
project suffered. The objective to enhance knowledge and skill of functionari es 
could not be achieved as workshops and training programmes were not held. 
Non-utilisation of Corpus Fund and non-collection of user charges affected the 
maintenance of assets created under the project. Due to non -development of 
online web -based monitoring system,  watershed-wise and activity -wise data 
for ongoing watershed works were not fed on the website.  Third party 
evaluation of the projects was not done. 
Public Works Department 
 3.4 Irregular inclusion of pro-rata charges of ₹ 7.44 crore  
Irregular inclusion of pro-rata charges of ₹ 7.44 crore by the Public Works 
Department on works executed by Rajastha n State Road Development 
Construction Corporation Limited 
Rules 5(a) and (d) of Appendix V of Public Works Financial & Accounts Rules 
(PWF&AR) (Part-II) provide  for recovery of cost of establishment and tools 
and plants charges ( pro-rata) at percentage rat es by the Division operating the 
Capital Major Heads of expenditure and for work done for other departments 
of the Government , when the cost is chargeable to or recoverable from those 
Departments.  
The Finance Department clarified (February 2012) that if the construction work 
was executed by an agency other th an the Public Works Department (PWD),  
viz Rajasthan State Road Development Construction Corporation (RSRDCC) 
Limited, Rajasthan Housing Board, Avas Vikas Limited, etc., then PWD would 
not recover agency charges. 
The PWD, Rajasthan, Jaipur accorded (September 2010) sanction of  
₹ 37.86 crore for construction of Negedia High Level Bridge on Kekri -Deoli 
road in District Tonk . The work was to be executed  under Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund funded by National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD). An additional sanction of ₹ 22.95 crore was issued 
on 31 May 2013. The work of construction of High Level Bridge was entrusted 
(June 2011) to RSRDCC Limited. The scheduled date of completion of work 
was September 2015. The work was completed in November 2015 after 
incurring an expenditure of ₹ 59.60 crore.  
It was observed that PWD Division, Todaraisingh deposited ₹  33.50 crore 
between March 2014 and January 2015 with RSRDCC Limited for execution 
of this work. The Division, however, debited  ₹ 37.86 crore (including pro-rata 
charges of ₹  4.36 crore) to the Capital Major Head -5054-Capital outlay on 
Roads and Bridges towards  payment made to RSRDCC Limited and 
simultaneously credited (minus debited ) ₹ 4.36 crore to the Revenue 
expenditure head 2059 and 3054 Establishment, Too ls and Plants. As the 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
61 
 
Division did not execute the work of High Level Bridge, its action to include 
pro-rata charges on the works executed by RSRDCC Limited was against the 
prescribed accounting and financial rules and was, thus, irregular. This also led 
to capital outlay being unauthorisedly used for revenue expenditure. 
The State Government stated (April 2016) that rule 5(a) and (d) of Appendix V 
of PWF&AR provided that recovery of pro-rata charges would be made by the 
Division when cost of the work had been charged to the Capital Major Head of 
expenditure.  It added that Rule 6 (h) also did not prohibit levy of agency 
charges ( pro-rata) on these works. The reply was not convincing as in the 
instant case, the work was not executed by the Department and no 
establishment, tools and plants were deployed on the work. All activities 46 for 
executing the work were done by RSRDCC Limited for which it had charged 
the agency charges from the Department. The action of the PWD to include 
pro-rata charges while debiting the Capital Major Head-5054 was irregular and 
not as per the instructions (February 2012) of the Finance Department, 
Government of Rajasthan.   
In other case, PWD, Rajasthan, Jaipur accorded sanction of ₹ 24.36 crore for 
construction of Road Over Bridge on  Mania-Marena Road in district 
Dholpur47.  The work was entrusted to RSRDCC Limited.  
It was  observed (October 2015) that PWD Division, Rajakhera deposited  
₹ 23.62 crore during September 2011 to September 2015 with RSRDCC 
Limited for execution of this work  and ₹ 3.07 crore was debited as pro-rata 
charges on this road. The Division, debited ₹ 26.69 crore to the Capital Major 
Head-5054-Capital outlay Road and Bridges towards payment made to 
RSRDCC Limited. As the Division did not execute the work of Road Over  
Bridge, its action to include pro-rata charges violated the PWF&AR rule ibid 
and was thus irregular. This also led to  capital outlay being unauthoris edly 
used for revenue expenditure 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Department (January 2016). T he 
reply was awaited (October 2016). 
3.5 Infructuous expenditure of ₹ 3.99 crore 
Infructuous expenditure of ₹ 3.99 crore on upgradation of road under 
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna. 
To resolve the problem of premature failure of roads due to plying of heavy 
mining vehicles/other heavily loaded commercial vehicles on the roads 
constructed under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yoj na (PMGSY), Ministry of 
Rural Development , GoI  issued (May 2011) guidelines for preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports for rural roads which provided that: 
 the location of the proposed through road/link  road and its connectivity 
with higher order roads was to be assessed properly in order to get information 
on possible diversion from such higher order roads in the event of non-
maintenance of such roads or the proposed road providing a shorter route; 
                                                 
46 Execution like tendering, allotment, measurement of actual execution of work, site engineering  
activities, preparation of bill, etc. 
47   Job No. 1072/5054/Distt&OR (March 2007). 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
62 
 if the road was taken for upgradation, the normal traffic plying on the road  
for three continuous days (t wo working days and one weekend  as prescribed 
for traffic census data analysis)  had to be collected with classification of 
vehicles, laden and un -laden condition for the classified commercial vehicles, 
degree of overloading, if any, etc; 
 very high degree of overloading  could be considered in the design   as this 
was a mining area; 
 having assessed the expected traffic in the base year, it was to be projected 
for the design life period. Likelihood of additional mining traffic should also be 
taken into account; 
 due diligence was required in the estimation of possible diversion of traffic 
due to location of the designed road; 
 having designed the road as per the re quirements and after making sure 
that the design was sustainable for the expected heavy vehicle operations, the 
cost estimation was to be done based on the Bill of Quantities for the designed 
road with normal traffic as well as traffic due to heavy vehicles used in mining, 
industry, etc. 
The State Government accorded (October 2009) sanction of ₹ 3.77 crore for 
upgradation of Dhabadeh to Kundayala road in the length of 8.500 km (block 
Khairabad, district Kota)  under PMGSY Bharat Nirman (regular PMGSY 48). 
The work was undertaken to strengthen and improve the road as the crust size 
of the road was inadequate . The work was awarded (March 2010) to a 
contractor49 at an estimated cost of ₹ 3.23 crore and with stipulated date to be 
completed by February 2011. The work  was complete d ( March 2011) after 
upgradation of the road stretch from 0/0 to 8.150 km . An expenditure of  
₹ 3.99 crore was incurred. 
It was noticed (April 2015) from the records of Public Works Department 
(PWD) Division, Ramganj Mandi that the designed life of the aforesaid road 
was 10 years . Within a period of only 38 months ( March 2011 to June 2014 ), 
the crust of the road was not able to cope with the requirements of heavy traffic 
due to diversion of traffic from two nearby roads. Also, the road was adjo ining 
an industrial area (RIICO Industrial Park in Kudayala ) where almost all the 
transport companies of Ramganj Mandi were located. 
The f ailure of crust even before the lapse of defect liability period  
(up to 29 March 2016) or  within one-third of the design life period indicated 
that at the time of preparation of DPR , the instructions provided in  the 
aforesaid guidelines were not complied with for  ensuring construction of 
quality road which could cope with heavy traffic/heavily loaded vehicles. 
Lack of pr oper assessment of diversion of traffic from other roads , degree of 
overloading, non-preparation of cost estimates for normal traffic and traffic due 
to heavy vehicles used in mining, industry, etc. led to expenditure of  
₹ 3.99 crore on upgradation of the road being largely infructuous. 
The State Government stated (March 2016) that  strengthening and upgradation 
works of two  nearby roads were sanctioned in April 2013 and work was in 
progress up to  June 2014.  The traffic of both the roads was diverted on this 
                                                 
48   Package no. RJ-23-BN-UG-18 
49   M/s M.M. Construction Company, Taranagar 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
63 
 
road and this was not presumed at the time of preparing the DPR . It was also 
stated that after completion of this road, 250 new Kota stone industrial units 
were established in the industrial area located at  Kudayala which increased the 
intensity of traffic. The reply was not convincing as the PWD Division, 
Ramganj Mandi and PWD Circle, Kota had admitted (June 2014  ) that out of 
three roads (including the two referred above) approaching Kota, Dhabadeh to 
Kundayala road was  the shortest. This fact was  not taken into account besides  
likelihood of expected additional traffic due to adjoining industrial area. As 
such, heavy mining vehicles/other heavily loaded commercial vehicles used the 
road for going to Kota due to which the crust of the road failed.  
 3.6  Non-levy of compensation and irregular payment of price escalation  
Non-levy of compensat ion of ₹ 4.66 crore for not-maintaining the span -
wise progress of work and irregular payment of price escalation of ₹ 0.44 
crore. 
 
General condition number 7 of Clause 45 of contract agreement stipulate d that 
price variation clause would be applicable only  for the work that was carried 
out within the stipulated time or extension thereof  on account of reasons not 
attributable to the contractor. The note below Clause 2 of contract agreement  
also provided that price variation, if any, under clause 45 would be admissible 
only on such rates and cost of work, as would be admissible if work had been 
carried out in that particular time span.   
Clause 2 of the contract agreement provide d that if the contractor  failed to 
complete the work in accordance with the time s chedule  and the delay was 
attributable to the contractor, he should be liable to pay compensation to the 
Government for every time span. The entire amount of compensation  should   
not exceed 10 per cent  of the value of the contract.  Clause 3 of the contra ct 
agreement stipulated that if the contractor did not complete the work and the 
remaining work was executed by another contractor at higher cost, the 
difference of cost should be recovered from the previous contractor. 
 The Executive Engineer, Public Works  Department ( EE, PWD) Medical 
Division, Jodhpur, issued seven work orders between March 2011 and April 
2012 to various contractors  for execution of construction works in S.N. 
Medical College , Jodhpur. These works were scheduled to be completed 
between July 2012 and October 2013. The work -wise details of work orders 
issued and  expenditure incur red within the scheduled time are  given in 
Appendix-3.2. 
Scrutiny of records of EE, PWD Medical Division, Jodhpur revealed that in 
seven cases, payment of ₹ 1.02 crore was made to the contractors on account of 
price escalation (Appendix-3.2). In all the seven cases, the contractors had 
neither completed the span -wise quantum of work nor the  Engineer-in-charge 
had granted span -wise time extension on grounds n ot attributable to the 
contractors. In view of the above provisions of the contract, the price escalation 
charges were not payable to the contractors.  
Besides, in all the above seven cases, the contractors had not maintained the 
span-wise progress of work . As such, they were liable to pay compensation 
under clause 2 of the contract agreement. On review of records of the Division, 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
64 
it was  observed that compensation of ₹ 3.13 crore as required under the 
aforesaid clause was not levied on the contractors (Appendix-3.3).  
The State Government replied (August 2016) that in case of price escalation, 
out of total amount of ₹  1.02 crore pointed out by audit, ₹  58.35 lakh were 
payable to contractors . Action had been initiated  for recovery of the balance 
amount of ₹  43.57 lakh . In case of non -levy of compensation, the State 
Government stated that a sum of ₹  18.45 lakh had been withheld from bills of 
contractors and after  granting of final time extension by competent authority, 
proper action would be taken.   
The reply was not convincing as the contractor had not maintained the span -
wise progress of work as required in aforesaid clause. Non levy of 
compensation and price escalation  made without approval of time extension   
was, therefore, irregular and resulted in undue benefit to the contractors. 
 The PWD Rajasthan, Jaipur accorded sanction 50 of ₹ 6.55 crore for 
construction of various roads. The PWD Division , Ratangarh and Bengun 
awarded (September 2011 to November 2011) works of all packages to a 
contractor51 at a cost of ₹  5.16 crore 52 which were scheduled to be completed 
by February 2012 and May 2012 respectively. 
Scrutiny of records at PWD Division,  Ratangarh and Bengun revealed that the 
contractor had completed (October-November 2012) the works of ₹  1.21 crore  
(₹ 0.51crore of package RJ 11 -04, ₹  0.49 crore of package RJ 11 -05 and  
₹ 0.21 crore  of package RJ10 -03) only despite issuance of repeated 
letters/notices by the Department. As such, works were rescinded (October -
November 2012) by the Department applying Clauses 2 and 3 mentioned ibid 
and the remaining works were executed through other co ntractors after 
incurring an extra expenditure of ₹ 1.18 crore53. 
As per Clauses 2 and 3 of the contract agreement, compensation amounting to  
₹ 0.52 crore and ₹  1.18 crore respectively, aggregating to ₹  1.70 crore 
(Appendix-3.4) was to be levied on the contractor . The concerned divisions , 
however, levied and recovered compensation of ₹  0.17 crore 54 only under 
Clause 2 of the contract agreemen t. The balance amount of ₹  1.53 crore was 
unrecovered (October 2016) since October 2012. 
The State Government stated (February 2016) that District Collector, Churu 
and Jaipur had been informed (January /February 2016) to register a case under 
Public Debt Recovery Act  for recovery of compensation. The facts remained 
that the Department initiated action only after pointed out by Audit and did not 
take any effective steps fo r recovery of compensation for more than three 
years. 
 
 
 
                                                 
50   ₹ 4 crore for package No. RJ11 -04 and 05/RIDF-XVII/ML-III/2011-12 and ₹ 2.55 crore for package  
No.RJ10-03/SHW/Plan/2011-12 
51    M/S Surya Construction Company, Jaipur 
52  ₹ 2.80 crore for pa ckage No. RJ11 -04 and 05/RIDF -XVII/ML-III/2011-12 and ₹ 2.36 crore for 
package No. RJ10- 03/SHW/Plan/2011-12 
53    RJ11-05 ₹ 33.17 lakh, RJ11-04 ₹ 33.85 lakh and RJ 10-03 ₹ 51.17 lakh 
54    ₹ 0.14 crore against package No. RJ11-04 & 05 and ₹ 0.03 crore against package No. RJ 10-03 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
65 
 
 3.7 Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 2.05 crore 
Avoidable expenditure of  ₹ 2.05 crore by inclusion of items of excavation 
of earth, construction of granular sub -base and laying of compacted 
graded stone aggregate in the estimates prepared under Gramin Gaurav 
Path Scheme 
As per circular (De cember 2014) of, Public Works Department ( PWD), 
Rajasthan, Jaipur, the construction of Cement Concrete (CC) roads under 
Gramin Gaurav Path  Scheme (GGPS) would be undertaken on already 
existing CC/bitumen road  and, therefore, a new sub -base or preparation o f 
ground for fresh CC roads would not be required. It was stipulated that while 
giving the work orders under GGP S, Department would  ensure that items like 
excavation of earth, construction of granular sub -base and laying of compacted 
graded stone aggregate were not included in the estimates . This would exhaust 
the entire budget of the Phase-I of the Scheme given for the purpose without 
having quality construction. According to the circular,  avoidable expenditure 
on items as mentioned above, was to be taken care of at all stages to reduce the 
cost and use the money to connect more areas with CC roads. 
The, PWD Rajasthan, Jaipur accorded (December 2014) sanction for 
construction of CC roads under GGPS in Merta City and Nagaur divisions of 
Nagaur district and Rajakhera division of Dholpur district. The work orders for 
execution of the works were issued (November-December 2014) by  respective 
divisions. 
Scrutiny of  records (September-October 2015) of the divisions revealed that , 
the Department included the item s of excavation o f earth, construction of 
granular  sub-base and laying of compacted graded stone aggregate in the 
estimates of works . T he works were awarded/executed  accordingly. The 
Department could have avoided an expenditure of  ₹ 2.05 crore (Appendix-3.5) 
by not including these items in the estimates  and constructed the CC roads on 
already existing CC/bitumen roads as per the existing instructions. . This would 
have helped the Department to use the money to connect more areas with  CC 
roads. 
The State Government  in respect of  Merta City and Nagaur divisions replied 
(January 2016) that the design of CC roads was prepared by Malviya National 
Institute of Technology  (MNIT), Jaipur. It was further stated that the  roads 
executed under G GPS were badly damaged and hence  provision of said items 
was taken in the technical estimates. In respect of Rajakhera division, the 
Government stated (April 2016) that provision of these items was taken to 
prepare the base for CC road. 
The reply of the St ate Government was not convincing as inclusion of these 
items was against the directions of the Government . No survey reports , in 
support of the roads  badly damaged  or other reasons  were furnished by the 
Government/available in the records . The contention of the State Government 
as regards the the design of the CC roads , prepared by the MNI T was also not 
convincing as it was for  new alignment of road as per specifications of India n 
Road Congress-62.  
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
66 
3.8 Unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 1.78 crore 
 
Non-achievement of intended objective due to non -completion of work 
led to unfruitful expenditure of ₹ 1.78 crore 
Paragraph 4.1 of guidelines of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna ( PMGSY) 
provided that proper planning was imperative to achieve the objective of the 
programme in a systematic and cost effective manner. Paragraph 11.5 of the 
guidelines also provided that in case the value of tenders received  was above 
the estimates that had been cleared by the Ministry of Rural Development, the 
difference (tender premium) pooled for the entire District/State for works 
cleared in a phase/batch would be borne by the State Government. 
The State Government accorded (March 2013) sanction of ₹ 1.83 crore for 
construction of bituminous road from Indira Gandhi Nahar Project/General 
Reserve Engineering Force road to Bangrala km 0/0 to 9/0 55 under PMGSY. 
Technical estimate for the work was sanctioned (April 2013) by Public Works 
Department, (PWD), Zone, Bikaner for ₹ 1.82 crore. The work was awarded 
(March 2014) at an estimated cost of ₹ 2.46 crore and was stipulated to be 
completed by November 2014. Note below the work order provided that the 
work was to be restricted up to  the amount of administra tive and financial 
sanction. As of October 2014, the contractor had executed the work in the 
length of 6.9 km (from 0/300 to 7/200 km) after incurring an expenditure of  
₹ 1.78 crore. The remaining work in the length of 2.1 km could not be executed 
due to paucity of funds. 
Test check of the records  of the Superintending Engineer ( SE), PWD Circle, 
Bikaner revealed that value of tenders received was above the estimate 
sanctioned and additional funds were required to complete the remaining work. 
In spite of re peated requests (July 2014 onwards) by field officers, additional 
funds for completing the remaining work were not provided by the State 
Government. The Department finalized the incomplete work after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹ 1.78 crore. 
Awarding of work above the administrative and financial sanction without 
proper funds arrangement resulted in failure to the work and non-fulfilment of 
the objective of road connectivity to that extent even after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹ 1.78 crore.  
The State Government accepted (March 2016) the facts and stated that the 
work was restricted up to  the amount of sanction issued . There was  no 
provision in the guidelines for revised administrative and financial sanction. It 
was further state d (June 2016) that out of proposed 9 km road, construction 
was completed in 7 km and habitations on both sides of the road were 
benefitted. It was also stated that saving of ₹5.00 lakh in package no.  
RJ-08-WB-10-01 would be used to construct gravel road in the remaining 
reach of 2 km. The reply was not convincing as technical report enclosed with 
the estimate provided that no habitation exc ept Bangrala was to be connected 
by this road. Further, Construction of gravel road in the remaining reach of  
2 km would also not serve the purpose of providing all weather road 
connectivity to the habitation (Bangrala) as required under PMGSY guidelines.  
                                                 
55   Package No. RJ-08-WB-10-01. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
67 
 
 3.9 Unauthorised utilisation of funds of ₹ 1.72 crore 
Unauthorised utilisation of funds  of ₹ 1.72 crore sanctioned under 13th 
Finance Commission   
Rule 11  of General Financial and Accounts Rules ( GF&AR) provided that a 
controlling Officer sh ould see that the funds allotted to expending units were 
expended in public interest and upon objects for which the money was 
provided. 
The Public Works Department (PWD), Rajasthan, Jaipur accorded (November 
2012) sanction of ₹ 1.78 crore for maintenance and renovation of eight roads 56 
in Jodhpur city  under 13th Finance Commission. As per the sanction, t he 
expenditure was chargeable to the budget  head 3054 -Roads & Bridges – 04 
District & Other Roads  - 800 other expenses  - (02) village roads  – (03) 
Maintenance work on recommendation of 13th Finance Commission – 54 
Maintenance (Material).  The Executive Engineer ( EE), PWD City Division, 
Jodhpur issued (January 2013) work order for ₹ 2.07 crore with scheduled date 
of completion as 5 July 2013. The work was completed in December 2013 after 
incurring an expenditure of ₹ 1.72 crore. 
During scrutiny (January 2015) of records of EE, City Division , Jodhpur, it 
was observed that these roads  were urban roads within the Jodhpur Municipal 
area. The funds sanctioned under 13 th Finance Commission under above 
mentioned budget head were meant for maintenance and renovation of village 
roads. As such, funds of ₹ 1.72 crore utilised for maintenance of  urban roads 
under 13th Finance Commission were diverted in contravention to the sanction 
issued.  
The State Government stated (February 2016)  that the work was executed as 
per the sanction issued by the competent authority under 13th Finance 
Commission. The reply was not tenable  as roads constructed were urban roads 
within the Municipal limit of Jodhpur City and funds released under 13th 
Finance Commission were meant only for the maintenance and renovation of 
village roads.  
 
3.10 Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 1.42 crore 
 
Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 1.42 crore  incurred against the rule of 
financial p ropriety on roads already constructed five to fifteen months 
earlier 
 
Rule 10 of  General Financial and Accounts Rules  (GF&AR) provided that 
every Government serv ant incurring or authorising expenditure from public 
funds should be guided by high standa rds of financial prop riety. Every 
Government servant should also enforce financial order and strict economy at 
every step . He  was expected to exercise the same vigila nce in respect of 
                                                 
56 (1) Puri Tiraha to Bombay Motor Circle, (2) Jalori gate circle to olyampic, (3) Jalori gate to Gol 
building and chopasni road,(4)Paota choraha to circuit house,(5) Ashuji ki piau to Mandore railway 
station, (6) BDO office Mandore to Gokulji ki piau, (7) Kayalana to chopasni area  (8) Nagori gate to 
vidyashala road 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
68 
expenditure incurred from public money as a person of ordinary prudence 
would exercise in respect of expenditure of his own money.  
The Chief Engineer (CE), Roads, Public Works Department (PWD), Rajasthan, 
Jaipur accorded (December 2014) sanction of ₹ 20.54 crore for  executing 30 
CC roads in village portion under Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme  (GGPS) in 
Jhalawar District. The work of construction of roads  was awarded (December 
2014) for ₹ 16.76 crore which was scheduled to be completed by August 2015.  
Test check o f records of Executive Engineer ( EE), PWD, D ivision, Jhalawar 
revealed that out of 30 roads sanctioned, three  roads57 had already been 
sanctioned and constructed 5 to 15 months  earlier under other schemes. These 
roads were under guarantee period. Despite knowing this fact, these roads were 
again sanctioned under GGPS and completed in July 2015 after incurring a n 
avoidable expenditure of ₹ 1.42 crore against the rule of financial propriety.  
The State Government replied (June 2016) that the se CC roads were not 
removed due to their being under guarantee period and instead of construction 
of these CC roads, new roads58 in village area had been constructed.  
The reply is not acceptable as there was no administrative and financial 
sanction for the construction of new roads as intimated by the Department. The 
payments were made against the amount booked for the roads sanctioned under 
GGPS. This was irregular as in disguise of construction of sanctioned CC roads 
under GGPS, new roads were constructed for which no sanction existed. 
Forest Department 
3.11 Non-recovery of ₹ 1.52 crore 
Non-recovery of cost of excavated material of ₹ 1.52 crore 
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was entered (November 2009) 
between the Department of Road Transport and Highways, GoI and Public 
Works Department (PWD), Government of Rajasthan f or rehabilitation and 
upgradation of existing two lane road, Gomati Chauraha -Udaipur section of 
National Highway -859 to four lane road. This work was awarded on Design, 
Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer basis . The scope of work included the 
provision of construction of 450 meter length tunnel at Chirva Ghat.  
As per MoU and an undertaking given by the user agency National Highways 
Authority of India , the muck including soil and hard/soft rock (112230 cubic 
metre approximately) generated on account of tunn el excavation was to be 
used in the construction of road. The cost of the same was required to be 
deposited by the user agency before commencement of the work on demand of 
the Forest Department.  
Scrutiny of records (May 2015) at the office of the DCF  (North), Udaipur 
disclosed that the department did not raise the demand for recovery of cost of  
₹ 1.52 crore60 (as per rates of BSR  July 2013) of usable quantity of excavated 
                                                 
57  Dhabli se Gailani ( ₹ 0.48 crore), Pidawa Rampuria via Kalyanpura ( ₹ 0.45 crore), Osaw -Mathania  
(₹ 0.49 crore) 
58    In village Sangria, village Rampuria and in village Mathuria 
59    km 177/000 to km 260/100 
60  ₹ 450 x 33669 cum (30 per cent  of 112230 cum) 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
69 
 
material. The construction work of the tunnel was completed (December 2015) 
at a cost of ₹ 100.83 crore.  
The DCF (North), Udaipur accepted (July 2015) the fact and raised (July 2015) 
the demand on NHAI, Udaipur, the recovery of which was awaited (October 
2016). 
Water Resources Department 
 
 3.12 Encroachment on Government land 
Non-surrender of Government land costing ₹ 9.12 crore to Revenue   
Department resulted in  encroachment of the land 
As per rule 324 (2) of General Financial and Accounts Rules ( GF&AR), any 
land which was in the possession of a Department for departmental use only 
and when any portion of the land assigned to it cease d to be required for 
departmental  purposes, it should be surrendered to the Revenue Department. 
The non-agriculture land (471.17  bighas) acquired (1975 -76) by Water 
Resources Department (WRD) for rehabilitation of residents of Galiacoat town 
of Dungarpur District . This land was  evacuated from the  site of submergence 
of the Kadana Dam  and was allotted to the evacuees free of cost. The whole 
process of rehabilitation was completed during the period from 1975 to 1980. 
Later on, after more than twenty eight years, the Executive Engineer ( EE), 
Mahi Proj ect, Sagwara informed (August 2008) Chief Engineer ( CE), Mahi 
Project, Banswara that after completion of the process of rehabilitation, 100 
bighas surplus land costing ₹ 47.68 crore had under the possession of the 
Water Resources Department. 
The, Revenue (Rehabilitation) Department and Finance (Revenue) Department 
issued (October 2009 and April 2010) general directions to all Departments for 
transferring the surplus land to local bodies for further allotment . The District 
Collector, Dungarpur and Sub-Divisional Officer, Sagwara  further directed 
(January 2012 and May 2012) EE, Kadana Mahi Rehabilitation Division, 
Sagwara for demarcation and surrender of surplus land  to Tahsildar, Sagwara 
for transfer to local bodies for further allotment. EE, Sagwara took (May 2012) 
stock of surplus land and measured it as 76 bighas and 4 biswas which was 23 
bighas and 16 biswas less than the land measured in August 2008.  
During the State Government programme ‘Prashashan Apke Dwar’ (August 
2014), a public complaint was  received about e ncroachment on this land and 
issuance of  fake pattas by the officers of the WRD. In  various inter -
departmental correspondences, EE, Sagwara had accepted that due to shortage 
of staff and budget, it was difficult to have a proper watch on land and there 
were frequent cases of encroachment. On directions of the District Collector, 
Dungarpur, EE proposed (December 2014) to constitu te a Departmental 
committee for examining the matter. No further action in this regard had been 
taken by the Department (April 2016). 
As the WRD  was not in a position to arrange watch and ward, therefore, the 
Government land should have been surrendered to the Revenue Department in 
1980 i tself soon after completion of the process of Rehabilitation instead of 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
70 
retaining it for three decades without any use . This resulted in that 23 bighas 
and 16 biswas Government land costing ₹9.12 crore 61 did not remain in the 
possession of the Department and had either been encroached or allotted by 
issuing fake pattas.   
The matter was referred (October 2015) to State Government, the reply was 
awaited (October 2016). 
3.13 Avoidable expenditure on price escalation of ₹ 6.85 crore 
Avoidable expenditure on price escalation  of ₹ 6.85 crore due to 
awarding of work before finalisation of technical estimates  
As per Rules 285 (b) and 348 (a) of Public Works Financial & Accounts Rules   
(PWF&AR), deta iled technical estimates should be prepared and sanctioned 
after working out all technical details , completion of surveys , investigations 
and formulation of  working drawings/designs. It was a fundamental rule that 
no work should be commenced unless a prope rly detailed design and estimate 
had been sanctioned. The Water Resource Department ( WRD) had issued 
office orders/standing orders/circulars (May 2004 and June 2008) about 
preparation of estimates only after detailed geological investigations. 
The WRD, Zon e, Kota issued (October 2007) technical sanction of  
₹ 20.57 crore for construction of earthen dam, chute spillway, wing wall, 
training wall and head out sluice at Lhasi Medium Irrigation Project in district 
Baran. This  was further revised (September 2011)  to ₹  47.64 crore . After 
tendering process, the work was allotted  (January 2008) to a contractor  for  
₹ 24.14 crore and was scheduled to be completed by January 2011. An 
expenditure of ₹ 56.02 crore was incurred till February 2016 and the work was 
in progress. 
Scrutiny of records at WRD, Chabra -II revealed that after conducting geo -
technical investigation (March 2007), Geological Survey of India (GSI) 
recommended that the  foundation of spill way might be decided on the basis of 
permeability and geo-mechanical tests on sub -soil in the field as well as in the 
laboratory.  
The WRD allotted (August 2007) the soil investigation work to a private Soil 
Investigating firm62 which conducted the investigation work between 
December 2007 and January 2008. The firm advis ed the WRD to get the 
foundation depth confirmed by Geotechnical Engineer/Geologist after 
excavation of foundation trenches. The Senior Geologist from GSI visited 
(March 2008) the site, and found calcareous decomposed sandstone which was 
dispersible and he nce not a suitable foundation media under water charged 
condition. Considering  the complex nature of soil stratum and adverse nature 
of foundation, Chief Engineer (CE), Investigation, Design and Research (IDR), 
WRD, Jaipur advised (April 2008) CE, WRD Zon e, Kota to get the opinion of 
Central Water Commission (CWC), New Delhi. The CE, WRD, Zone Kota, 
referred (May 2008) the case to CWC, New Delhi to investigate and suggest 
the remedial measures as well as to provide the design and drawing for the 
                                                 
61 23.16 bigha x174 24 = 414691 square feet x ₹ 220  (at the DLC rate  effective from  
1 October 2014) 
62    M/s PNT Design (P) Limited, Kota. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
71 
 
spillway. After detailed investigations, visits and model testing, CWC finalised 
(June 2011) the drawing and design and thereafter the work was started. 
The awarding of work, without finalisation of drawing, design and foundation 
strata of spillway and issuing of technical sanction was in violation of the rule 
mentioned ibid. This had not only  delayed the work for more than five years  
but also led to  avoidable payment of price escalation of ₹ 6.85 crore to the 
contractor. 
The State Government stated (March 2016) t hat effective geological 
investigations were done before approval of drawing and design. It further 
added that geological investigation was always carried out in a small area 
which was representative of the large area.  
The reply was not tenable because detailed technical estimates were to be 
prepared and sanctioned after working out all technical details and after 
completion of surveys and investigations as per rules mentioned ibid. In the 
instant case, the work was awarded despite conclusive recommendatio ns by 
GSI, Soil Investigation Firm  and IDR wing of the Department. It was also 
pertinent to mention that the State Level Empowered Standing Committee 
accorded revised sanction of work subject to the condition that charge sheet of 
responsible officers under Conduct Rule 16 be submitted to the Department of 
Personnel. No action in this regard had been initiated (February 2016). 
 
 
 
(S. ALOK) 
Accountant General 
JAIPUR,                            (Economic & Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan 
The 10 FEB 2017 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
(SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
NEW DELHI,                           Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
The 17 FEB 2017 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
72 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Appendices 

Appendices 
73 
 
Appendix  2.1 
(Refer paragraph 2.1.2.4; page 18) 
List of amendments to be made in RFPMIS rules as per project report  
 
 Since the formation of territorial rules constituencies in Narmada project can  not be 
according to rule 3 of „Rajasthan Farmers ‟ Participation in Management of Irrigation 
Systems Act, 2000‟ as every „ diggi’ has to have a WUA to manage distribution of water 
from the diggi, the territorial constituency for a WUA will be one chak in which „diggi’ is 
situated. 
 In addition at the primary level W UAs, there can be a committee of such WUAs of the 
entire village area where minimum one representative of each WUA will be a member. 
This committee will look after the interests of all WUAs of the village and each WUA will 
act as a constituency of voters f or this committee. Then there will be distributary and 
project committees with their already defined functions. The modalities for the rights, 
responsibilities and functioning of WUAs and the village WUA committees will have to 
be worked out. 
 Rule 50 may h ave to be revised according to the pattern of water distribution in the 
project. Responsibility of pre -diggi water course in this system will be initially of the 
Irrigation Department till the distributary committees are constituted after which the M&R 
role upto distributary level could be taken by the distributary committee. 
 A constant assistance from Irrigation Department  officials is recommended. Farmers 
opined tha t the department representative  (AEN level ) should be present in the WUA 
committee meetings . This will ensure discipline in the organization. This will also 
facilitate funds collection and punishment to defaulters. 
 Representation of all castes in the WUA management committee should be ensured. This 
is a suggestion that came from the farmers from the point of view of harmony. 
 System of reward and punishment should be introduced. There should be clear norms to 
punish the defaulters. Rights of WUA president and managing committee should be 
clearly defined in this respect. Reward and punishment can b e either in the form of cash 
incentive or disincentive (penalty) or in the form of appreciation or deprivations. 
 A consultancy committee should be available to the WUA office bearers for „as and when 
needed‟ consultations of all nature. The committee should have experts from various fields 
like irrigation, agriculture, environment, legal advisor and other related specialists. 
 Capacity building of WUA is very important to get results. Training of WUA officials 
should be made mandatory in every project. 
 Clear norms for allocation of water should be defined. Three type of suggestions came 
forward during discussions. 
a. Since the water is limited , all farmers big or small should get equal allocation of 
water. This is important for social justice. 
b. In one round equal  water can be given and then the remaining water be distributed 
according to requirement. 
c. Water should be allotted on the basis of land size. 
 As the number of women farmer is limited , there is a possibility that they are deprived of 
representation in WUA m anagement committee. To ensure their representation as in 
Panchayat system, reservation for women farmers is recommended for inclusion in rules. 
 Similarly, reservation for small farmers will give them proper deal.

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
74 
 
Appendix  2.2 
(Refer paragraph no. 2.1.4.2; page 21) 
Details of cases in which time extension not desired or granted under clause 5 and action not taken under clause 2 of agreement   
 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of work Stipulated date of 
commencement  
Stipulated date 
of completion 
Status of 
work 
Action taken by  
Department 
Reasons of  delay 
 EE Division-IV  Sanchore 
1. Execution of earthwork, single PCC block lining, 
pucca structure, diggies, pump room, sump well 
and boundary wall of Halibav Minor, sub -minor 
km 0.000 to 7.600, Halibav “A” sub -minor km 
0.000 to 1.000 and “B” km 0.000 to 1.425 of 
taking from km 3.900 left from Virawa minor. 
14.12.2012  13.12.2013 Work in 
progress 
Provisional extension 
granted by EE upto 
31.08.2014, but not 
sanctioned by 
competent authority. 
Standing of crop,  
permission sought for 
road cutting from 
GREF,         land 
compensation, ban on 
shifting of utilities.  
2. Execution of earthwork, single PCC block lining, 
pucca structure, diggies, Pump room, sump well 
& different minors, sub -minors of Bhadrai Lift 
Distributary off -taking fro m 55.600 km and 
supplying, jointing, testing and commissioning of 
distribution network. HDPE pipe with electrically 
operated motor with accessories on the minors, 
sub-minors of Arniyali Lift M inor off -taking 
from 6.310 km.   
08.07.2012  07.01.2014 Work in 
progress 
Extension proposed by 
EE upto 30.09.2014 but 
not sanctioned by 
competent authority. 
Land acquisition,                                            
standing of crops,                                        
supply of material like 
bajri. 
 
 
 
 
3. Execution of earthwork, single PCC block lining, 
pucca structure, diggies, pump room, sump well 
and supplying, jointing, testing and 
commissioning of distribution network . HDPE 
pipe with electrically operated motor on 
Sanawada Khurd minor off -taking from 
Dangariya minor km 0.050. 
 
 
17.08.2013 16.08.2014 Work in 
progress 
- 
 - 

Appendices 
75 
 
 EE Division-II Sanchore 
4. Supplying, laying, jointing, testing and 
commissioning of distribution network (main and 
sub-main) of HDPE pipes for semi permanent 
sprinkler system of command area of Ranod er 
minor of Ratoda Distributary  
08.08.2008 07.12.2008 Work 
abandoned 
by 
contractor 
- Contractor withheld 
the work but no action 
under clause 2 and 3 
(c) was taken.  
5. Execution of  earth work, pucca structure, pump 
well, sump well, diggies and Supplying, laying, 
jointing,  testing and commissioning  of 
distribution net work (main and sub -main) of 
HDPE pipes with electrically operated motor 
with desired accessories on minor and sub-minors 
of Ratoda Distributary off taking from 44.225 of 
NMC i ncluding designing and layout of 
mechanical works on turnkey basis  
08.07.2012  07.01.2014 Work in 
progress 
- - 
 EE Division-III Sanchore 
6. Supplying, laying, jointing , testing  and 
commissioning of distribution net work  of HDPE 
pipe with electrically op erated motor , desired  
accessories on different minors, sub -minors upto 
34.00 km  of SLD off taking from 7.88 of NMC 
including designing and lay out of mechanical 
work on turnkey basis  
17.03.2010 17.03.2012 Work in 
progress 
Applied but not 
sanctioned by 
competent authority 
Standing of crops, 
non-construction of 
pumping house of 
Choura system 
and non -electrification 
of pumping houses. 
 EE Div.-V Sanchore 
7. Execution of earth work, pucca structure, pump 
room, sump well, diggies and supplying, laying, 
jointing, testing and commissioning of 
distribution net work of HDPE pipe with 
electrically operated motor with desired 
accessories on  Surachand  minor and sub -minor 
of Bhimguda Distributary off taking from 74.400 
of NMC  
04.03.2011  03.03.2012 Work in 
progress 
Applied but not 
sanctioned by 
competent authority 
Due to excess rain, 
fields were filled with 
water. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
76 
 
8. Execution of earth work, single PCC block lining, 
pucca structure, pump room, sump well, diggies, 
boundary wall  and supplying, laying, jointing, 
testing and commissioning of distribution net 
work of HDPE pipe with electrically operated 
motor with desired accessories on  Pantail minor 
and other minor s/sub minors of Panoriya Lift 
Distributary off taking from 5.375 of Bhimguda 
Distributary of NMC  
01.10.2011  30.09.2013 Work in 
progress 
Applied but not 
sanctioned by 
competent authority 
- 
9. Execution of earth work, pucca structure, single 
PCC block lining,  pump room, sump  well, 
diggies, boundary wall  and supplying, laying, 
jointing, testing and commissio ning of 
distribution net work of HDPE pipe with 
electrically operated motor with desired 
accessories on different minors/sub -minors of 
Panoriya Lift Distributary off taking from 5.375 
of Bhimguda Distributary of NMC.  
02.10.2011  01.10.2013 Work in 
progress 
Applied but not 
sanctioned by 
competent authority 
- 
10. Execution of earth work, single PCC block lining, 
pucca structure, pump room, sump well, diggies, 
boundary wall  and supplying, laying, jointing, 
testing and commissioning of distribution net 
work o f HDPE pipe   with electricity operated 
motor with desired accessories on system of 
Arwa, Ogala, Dudhwasan minor of Panoriya Lift 
Distributary off taking from 5.375 of Bhimguda 
Distributary including mechanical work  
21.07.2012 20.01.2014 Work in 
progress 
Applied but not 
sanctioned by 
competent authority 
Change in structure of 
GREF road, court case 
regarding land 
acquisition 
and standing of crops. 
11. 
 
Execution of earth work, single PCC block lining, 
pucca structure, pump room, sump well, diggies, 
boundary wall and supplying, laying, jointing, 
testing and commissioning of distribution net 
work of HDPE pipe of Bhakhasar minor of 
19.07.2013  18.07.2014 Work in 
progress 
Applied but not 
sanctioned by 
competent authority 
Delay in payment of 
compensation 
to farmers,  
standing of crops. 
 

Appendices 
77 
 
Panoriya Lift Distributary off taking from 
5.375(R) of Bhimguda Distributary  of NMC  
including mechanical work  
 
 EE Division-I NCP Sanchore 
12. Supply, laying, jointing and commissioning of 
distribution network  (mains and sub -mains) of 
HDPE pipe for semi -permanent sprinkler system 
of command area of Vank Distributary Chak 
VNK 3(R) Km 4.625 to Chak 5(L), Km 5.750 
Bhadwal minor Chak BHW1(L) to BHW10(T) 
and  new minor chak new1(L) to new5(T) total 
18 chaks of NCP         
05.08.2007 04.11.2007 Work in 
progress 
Time extension 
sanctioned 
Standing of crops, 
civil works not 
completed 
13. Supply, laying, jointing and commissioning of 
distribution network(mains and sub -mains) of 
HDPE pipe for semi -permanent sprinkler system 
of command area of Isrol Distributary, Siwara 
minor chak SWD 1(R) to SWD -8 and Paldi 
minor chak PLD-1 to PLD-7 of Narmada Canal   
28.12.2007 27.06.2008 Work in 
progress 
EE recommended for 
withdrawal of work 
under clause 32 and 
action to be taken u/c 
3(c) against contracto r 
on12.12.2011 but no 
action had yet been 
taken 
 
14. Supply, laying, jointing and commissioning of 
distribution network(mains and sub -mains) of 
HDPE pipe for semi -permanent sprinkler system 
of command area of Isrol minor and Isrol „A‟, „B‟ 
& „C‟ minor and Isrol Distributary on chak 1 to 
16 total ch -40 and 4886 ha of Isrol Distributary 
System of Narmada Canal          
31.07.2008 30.01.2009 Work in 
progress 
EE submitted time 
extension case to 
competent authority. 
Time extension had yet 
not been sanctioned by  
competent authority. 
Standing of crops, 
electric connection on 
diggies not done. 
15. Supply, laying, jointing and commissioning of 
distribution network(mains and sub -mains) of 
HDPE pipe for semi -permanent sprinkler system 
of command area of Vank minor an d Bhuwana 
minor and Vank Distributary, on chak VNK 6 to 
31.07.2008 30.01.2009 Work in 
progress 
CE vide letter dated 
05.06.2014 sanctioned 
ex post facto time 
extension but w ork was 
still in progress 
Standing of crops 
Civil work not 
completed in Vank 
Distributary 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
78 
 
31 (R) total chak 49 and 4951.28  ha. of Vank 
Distributary System of Narmada Canal   
16. Supply, erection, testing and commissioning of 
electrically operated motor with horizontal 
centrifugal mono block pump set including all 
necessary mechanical and  electrical accessories, 
control panel, filters on various diggies total 
no.81 and CCA 8278.71  ha. on Bam bi minor, 
Bawarla minor, Jetha minor, Lalji minor, Janvi 
minor off taking at km. 16.00 of NMC including 
designing on turnkey basis  
03.12.2012 02.06.2012 Work in 
progress 
EE submitted time 
extension case to 
competent authority but 
not yet sanctioned 
Election of WUAs not 
held, electric 
connection not done in 
diggies 
17. Supply, laying, jointing and commissioning of 
distribution net work (main and sub - mains) of 
HDPE pipe for semi -permanent sprinkler system 
and electrically operated motor with horizontal 
centrifugal mono block pumping set including all 
necessary mechanical and electrical accessories, 
control penal, filter etc. of command area of 
Akoda and Dhingpura minor of Ballera 
Distributary of NMC including designing and 
layout on turnkey basis.    
21.02.2010 20.11.2010 Work in 
progress 
EE submitted time 
extension upto 
31.03.2012 but not yet 
sanctioned by 
competent authority 
Civil work not 
completed 
18. Supply, laying, jointing and commissioning of 
distribution net work (main and sub -mains) of HDPE 
pipe for semi -permanent sprinkler system and 
electrically operated motor with horizontal centrifugal 
mono block pumping set including all necessary 
mechanical and electrical accessories, contro l penal, 
filter etc. of command  area of Bandiya, Tail minor 
and Naldhar sub -minor of Ballera Distributary of 
NMC including designing and layout on tu rnkey 
basis. 
21.02.2010 20.11.2010  EE submitted time 
extension up to 
31.3.2012 but not yet 
sanctioned 
 
Civil work was not 
completed 

Appendices 
79 
 
Appendix 3.1 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.2.3; page 32) 
Statement showing position of samples analysed and result thereof 
 
CETP Period of 
samples 
taken 
Total no. 
of Tests 
No. of 
samples 
failed 
No. of 
samples 
passed 
Parameters not 
fulfilled 
CETP-I, 
Pali 
3.8.2012 to 
18.6.2015 
53 44 09 TSS,COD,BOD 
CETP-II, 
Pali 
3.8.2012 to 
9.1.2016 
60 51 09 TSS,COD,BOD 
CETP-III, 
Pali 
3.8.2012 to 
8.9.2015 
59 49 10 TSS,COD,BOD 
CETP-IV, 
Pali 
3.8.2012 to 
9.1.2016 
64 62 02 TSS,COD,BOD, 
Oil & Grease 
CETP-VI, 
Pali 
8.9.2015 to 
9.1.2016 
04 04 00 TSS,COD,BOD 
Total  240 210 30  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
80 
 
 Appendix 3.2 
(Refer paragraph 3.6; page 63) 
Work-wise details of work orders issued, expenditure incurred and price escalation paid to contractors 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of work Name of Firm 
 
Agreement 
No. 
Work Order No. Date of 
commencement  
Stipulated 
date of 
completion  
Actual date of 
completion 
Amount of 
work done 
Price 
escalation 
paid 
1. Construction of Lecture Theatre   M/s Sayad Lukman  
and  Sons 
01/2012-13 EE M/JU/11-12/05 
dated 5.04.2012 
15.4.2012 14.01.2013 6.4.2015 1,27,62,605 2,02,116 
2. Construction of PG hostel at 
MDM Hospital  
M/s Anandi Lal 
Lalpuria 
116/2011-12 EE M/JU/11-
12/1651 dated 
29.03.2012 
8.4.2012 7.10.2013 Work in 
progress 
10,38,02,343 8,87,613 
3. Construction of Emergency and 
OPD Block at MG Hospital 
M/s Anandi Lal 
Lalpuria 
16/2011-12 EE M/PWD Med 
Dn JU/365 dated 
5.9.2011 
15.9.2011 14.12.2012 January 2016 8,83,35,737 13,26,003 
4. Construction of UG Boys Hostel 
Building at MDM Hospital 
M/s Jai Baba 
Construction Company 
117/2011-12 EE M/PWD Med 
Dn JU/1661 dated 
30.3.2011 
9.4.2012 8.04.2013 25.8.2015 2,73,56,888 3,23,007 
5. Construction of Mother and Child 
wing at MDM Hospital  
(Gynaecology OPD and 
PaediatricEmergency) 
M/s Neevn Infra. 
Mumbai 
09/2011-12 EE M/PWD Med 
Dn JU/09/2011-12 
18.7.2011 17.10.2012 30.9.2013 10,74,57,285 32,90,597 
6. Construction of Mother and Child 
wing at MDM Hospital (OT, 
Common Nurses  and Labour 
Room  and two floor OT for three 
floors) 
M/s Anandi Lal 
Lalpuria 
10/2011-12 EE M/PWD Med 
Dn JU/162 dated 
8.7.2011 
18.7.2011 17.10.2012 30.9.2013 10,49,13,921 29,88,875 
7. Construction of  Sankramak Rog 
Sansthan at KN Chest Hospital, 
Jodhpur 
M/s Fazlur Rehman 17/2011-12 EE M/PWD Med 
Dn JU/400 dated 
10.9.2011 
20.9.2011 19.07.2012 23.12.2013 6,20,79,366 11,73,880 
Total 1,01,92,091 

Appendices 
81 
 
 Appendix 3.3 
(Refer paragraph 3.6; page 63) 
Details of works in which span-wise progress not maintained by contractor 
 
Construction of Lecture Theatre   
 
Time Span 
I 
15.04.2012 to 
21.05.2012 
II 
22.05.2012 to 
29.08.2012 
III 
30.08.2012 to 
6.11.2012 
IV 
7.11.2012 to 
14.1.2013 
Work to be 
executed 
19,67,020 59,01,062 1,18,02,123 1,57,36,165 
Amount of work 
executed  
- 37,87,864 45,60,561 1,15,80,195 
Amount of work 
not executed 
19,67,020 21,22,198 34,58,438 41,55,970 
Amount of 
compensation 
49,176 1,06,110 2,59,383 4,15,597 
Total compensation 8,30,266 
Construction of PG Hostel  
 
Time Span 
I 
8.04.2012 to 
23.08.2012 
II 
24.08.2012 to 
07.01.2013 
III 
8.01.2013 to 
24.05.2013 
IV 
25.05.2013 to 
7.10.2013 
Work to be 
executed 
1,30,54,730 3,91,64,191 7,83,28,382 10,44,37,843 
Amount of work 
executed  
3,10,69,720 5,34,09,599 7,41,50,768 8,42,08,722 
Amount of work 
not executed 
- - 41,77,614 2,02,29,121 
Amount of 
compensation 
- - 3,13,321 20,22,912 
Total compensation 23,36,233 
Construction of Emergency and OPD Block 
 
Time Span 
I 
15.09.2011 to 
6.01.2012 
II 
7.01.2012 to 
29.04.2012 
III 
30.04.2012 to 
21.08.2012 
IV 
22.08.2012 to 
14.12.2012 
Work to be 
executed 
1,04,51,335 3,13,54,004 6,27,08,007 8,36,10,676 
Amount of work 
executed  
65,23,019 1,17,47,452 1,91,41,118 1,91,41,118 
Amount of work 
not executed 
39,28,316 1,96,06,552 4,35,66,889 6,44,69,558 
Amount of 
compensation 
98,208 9,80, 328 32,67,517 64,46,957 
Total compensation limited to ten per cent of work order 83,61,068 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
82 
 
Construction of UG Boys Hostel Building 
 
Time Span 
I 
9.04.2012 to 
08.07.2012 
II 
09.07.2012 to 
07.10.2012 
III 
8.10.2012 to 
06.01.2013 
IV 
07.01.2013 to 
8.04.2013 
Work to be executed 40,90,756 1,22,72,267 2,45,44,533 3,27,26,045 
Amount of work 
executed  
52,23,282 1,24,36,933 1,83,65,160 2,43,08,359 
Amount of work not 
executed 
- - 61,79,373 84,17,686 
Amount of 
compensation 
- - 4,63,453 8,41,769 
Total compensation 13,05,222 
Construction of Mother and Child wing,  Entrance Hall,  Gynaecology OPD and 
Paediatric emergency for two floor and Child OPD for first floor 
 
Time Span 
I 
18.07.2011 to 
8.11.2011 
II 
9.11.2011 to 
1.03.2012 
III 
2.03.2012 to 
24.06.2012 
IV 
25.06.2012 to 
17.10.2013 
Work to be executed 1,48,24,000  4,44,72,000  8,89,45,000  11,85,93,000  
Amount of work 
executed  
53,95,000 4,47,66,000  5,86,76,000 7,02,06,000  
Amount of work not 
executed 
94,29,000 - 3,02,69,000 4,83,87,000  
Amount of 
compensation 
2,35,725 - 22,70,175 48,38,700 
Total compensation 73,44,600 
Construction of Mother and Child wing ICU Ward, Operation Theatre, Common 
Nurses and Labour Room and (two floor) Operation Theatre for three floors 
Time Span I 
18.07.2011 to 
08.11.2011 
II 
09.11.2011 to 
02.03.2012 
III 
3.03.2012 to 
24.06.2012 
IV 
25.06.2012 to 
17.10.2012 
Work was to be 
executed 
1,45,63,036 4,36,89,109 8,73,78,218 11,65,05,106 
Amount of work 
executed  
2,03,69,981 4,06,02,525 5,34,23,923 6,60,05,106 
Amount of work not 
executed 
- 30,86,584 3,39,54,295 5,04,99,185 
Amount of 
compensation 
- 1,54,329 25,46,572 50,49,919 
Total compensation limited to ten per cent of work order 75,96,491 
 
 
 

Appendices 
83 
 
Construction of  Sankramak Rog Sansthan at KN Chest Hospital 
Time Span I 
20.09.2011 to 
4.12.2011 
II 
5.12.2011 to 
17.02.2012 
III 
18.02.2012 to 
4.05.2012 
IV 
5.05.2012 to 
19.07.2012 
Work to be executed 79,61,123 2,38,83,370 4,77,66,740 6,36,88,987 
Amount of work 
executed  
69,46,786 2,63,78,910 3,33,46,004 3,92,20,140 
Amount of work not 
executed 
10,14,337 - 1,44,20,736 2,44,68,847 
Amount of 
compensation 
25,358 - 10,81,555 24,46,885 
Total compensation limited to ten per cent of work order 35,51,798 
Grand Total of compensation 3, 13, 25,678 
   

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
84 
 
 Appendix 3.4 
(Refer paragraph 3.6; page 64) 
Details of compensation paid to contractor under clause 2 and 3 of agreement 
 
Compensation under clause 2 
                                                                                                                                                                 (` in lakh) 
Span First span up to Second up to Third span up to Fourth up to Total Total Total 
6.11.2011 9.1.2012 14.12.2011 24.2.2012 21.1.2012 9.4.2012 29.2.2012 24.5.2012 
Package  11-05 11-04 10-03 11-05 11-04 10-03 11-05 11-04 10-03 11-05 11-04 10-03 11-05 11-04 10-03 
Work to be 
executed  
17.97 17.00 78.73 53.91 50.99 157.96 107.81 101.99 177.15 143.75 135.98 236.19    
Work 
executed  
- - - - 15.65 20.80 22.11 29.15 20.80 42.91 39.70 20.80    
Work not 
executed  
17.97 17.00 78.73 53.91 35.34 137.16 85.70 72.84 156.35 100.84 96.28 215.39    
Percentage of 
compensation 
2.5 2.5 5 5 7.5 7.5 10 10    
Compensation  0.45 0.42 1.97 2.70 1.77 6.86 6.43 5.46 11.73 10.08 9.63 21.54 19.66 17.28 42.10 
Limited to ten per cent of Total work 14.38 13.60 23.62 
Grand Total 51.60 
Compensation under clause 3 
Name of Package 11-05 11-04 10-03 Total 
Work not executed 103.51 92.10 198.94  
Difference of  T.P in 
percentage 
32.05 36.75 25.72  
Amount of compensation 33.17 33.85 51.17 118.19 
 

Appendices 
85 
 
 Appendix 3.5 
(Refer paragraph 3.7; page 65) 
Statement showing inclusion of items of excavation of earth, GSB and WBM under 
Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme  
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Division  
Name of Package Excavation 
Earth  
GSB WBM Total 
1. Merta City RJ-24-
03/5054/GGP/P/ 
2014-15 
 1486.93 @ 
₹516.00 = 
₹ 7,67,255.88 
1402.777 @ 
₹1136.00 = 
₹15,93,554.67 
1110.277 @ 
₹1193.00 = 
₹13,24,560.46 
36,85,371.01 
Less : Tender Premium 22.87 per cent (-) 
8,42,844.35 
Total 28,42,527.00 
 
1. Nagaur RJ-24-
01/5054/GGP/P/ 
2014-15 
20621.64 @  
₹32.00 =  
₹6,59,892.00 
 5010.50 @ 
₹1136.00 =  
₹56,91,928.00 
5010.50 @ 
₹1193.00 =  
₹59,77,526.00 
12329346 
Less : Tender Premium 16.71 per cent (-) 
2060234.00 
Total 10269112.00 
 
1. Rajakhera RJ-3-
02/5054/GGP/P/ 
2014-15 
3106.25 cum 
@  
₹57.00 =  
₹1,77,056 
6813.57 cum 
@ ₹448.00 =  
₹30,52,479 
4688.66 cum @ 
₹1252.00 =  
₹58,70,202 
9099737 
Less : Tender Premium 18.54 per cent 16,87,091 
Total 74,12,646.00 
Grand Total 20524285.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
86 
 
 

87 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Expanded form 
A 
APCCF Additional Principle Chief Conservator of Forest 
ATR Action Taken Report 
B 
BJPNT Bhiwadi Jal Pradushan Nivaran Trust  
BOD Biological Oxygen Demand 
BSR Basic Schedule of Rates  
C 
CAD Command Area Development  
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
CC Cement Concrete  
CCA Culturable Command Area  
CCF Chief Conservator of Forest  
CE Chief Engineer  
CETP Common Effluent Treatment Plant 
CM&HO Chief Medical and Health Officers  
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand 
CSO Chief Scientific Officer 
CWC Central Water Commission  
D 
DCB Dug Cum Bore  
DCF Deputy Conservator of Forest  
DPR Detailed Project Report  
E 
E&M Consultant Engineering and Management Consultant 
EE Executive Engineer  
ETP Effluent Treatment Plant 
G 
GF&AR General Financial and Accounts Rules 
GGPS Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme  
GoI Government of India  
GoR Government of Rajasthan  
GSI Geological Survey of India  
H 
HDPE High-Density Polyethylene  
I 
IDR Investigation, Design and Research  
IMTI Irrigation Management and Training Institute  
IOC Indian Oil Corporation  
J 
JICA Japan International Cooperative Agency 
JPNT Jodhpur Pradushan Niwaran Trust  
 
 

Glossary  
88 
 
M 
MAF Million Acre Feet  
MLD Million Litre Daily  
MMA Macro Management of Agriculture 
MNIT Malviya National Institute of Technology 
MoD Minutes of Discussion  
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests  
MoU Memorandum of Understanding  
N 
NCP Narmada Canal Project  
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
P 
PCC Precast Cement Concrete  
PDR Act Public Demand Recovery Act 
PHED Public Health and Engineering Department  
PIA Project Implementing Agency  
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  
PMU Project Management Unit  
PWD Public Works Department  
PWF&AR Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules 
PWPCTRF Pali Water Pollution Control Treatment and Research 
Foundation  
R 
RAJAMIIP Rajasthan Minor Irrigation Improvement Project  
RFPMIS Act Rajasthan Farmers’ Participation in Management of 
Irrigation Systems Act  
RKVY Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
RO Regional Office  
RSPCB Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board  
RSRDCC Rajasthan State Road Development Construction 
Corporation  
S 
SE Superintending Engineer  
SHG Self Help Group  
SLNA State Level Nodal Agency  
SSI Small Scale Industry  
T 
TSS Total Suspended Solids 
W 
WAPCOS Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited 
WDC Watershed Development Committee  
WDT Watershed Development Team  
WRD Water Resources Department  
WUA Water User Association  
Z 
ZLD Zero Liquid Discharge  
 

Government of Rajasthan           Report No. ------of the year 2016 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://agraj.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 