Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 on  
Economic Sector  
for the year ended March 2016 
Government of Telangana 
Report No. 7 of 2016 
 
 
www.cag.gov.in  

  Page i  
  
Table of contents 
Subject 
Reference to 
Paragraph(s) Page(s) 
Preface  iii 
Chapter - I Overview of Economic Sector 
Introduction 1.1 1 
Expenditure of Economic Sector 
Departments 1.2 1-2 
About this Report 1.3 2 
Authority for Audit 1.4 2 
Planning and conduct of Audit 1.5 3 
Response to Audit  1.6 3-4 
Significant audit findings 1.7 4-9 
Chapter - II Performance Audit    
Irrigation and Command Area Development 
Department 
Implementation of selected  Medium 
Irrigation Projects 
 
 
2.1 
 
 
11-34 
Chapter - III Compliance Audit    
Industries and Commerce Department 
Development of Textile and Apparel 
Parks 
 
3.1 
 
35-42 
Agriculture and Co-operation Department 
Implementation of Crop Loan Waiver 
Scheme 
 
3.2 
 
43-55 
Transport, Roads and Buildings Department 
Telangana Road Sector Project 
 
3.3 
 
56-67 
Irrigation and Command Area Development 
Department 
Excess payment of price escalation for 
fuel and lubricants 
 
 
3.4 
 
 
67-69 
Appendices   71-80 
Glossary   81-83 
  

  Page ii  
  
Appendices 
 
Appendix 
No. Subject  Page(s) 
1.1 Department-wise break-up of outstanding Inspection 
Reports and Paragraphs 71 
2.1 
Details of Original Grant, Supplemental Grant, Re-
appropriation, Total Grant, Expenditure and Excess 
or Savings in respect of five medium irrigation 
projects 
72-73 
2.2 Details of central assistance received under AIBP 74 
2.3 Details of irrigation potential stipulated in agreement 
and proposed to be localized in Mathadivagu  75 
2.4 Time taken for completion of Survey and 
Investigation 75 
2.5 Time taken for receipt and approval of designs  76 
3.1 Details of Textile/ Apparel Export Parks 77 
3.2 Statement showing the details of funds allotted, 
released and expenditure incurred on the parks 78 
3.3 Statement showing the time-overrun in completion 
of parks 79 
3.4 The section-wise pending and deleted items and 
their financial implications 80 

  Page iii  
  
P R E F A C E 
 
 This Report for the year ended March 2016 has been  prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Telangana under Artic le 151 of the 
Constitution of India. 
 The Report contains significant results of the per formance audit and 
compliance audit of the Departments of the Governme nt of 
Telangana under the Economic Services including Dep artments of 
Agriculture and Co-operation; Rain Shadow Areas Dev elopment; 
Animal Husbandry and Fisheries; Energy; Environment , Forests, 
Science and Technology; Industries and Commerce; In formation 
Technology, Electronics and Communications; Infrast ructure and 
Investment; Irrigation and Command Area Development ; Public 
Enterprises; and Transport, Roads and Buildings.  H owever, the 
other Departments are excluded and covered in the R eport on 
General and Social Services. 
 The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to 
notice in the course of test audit for the period 2 015-16 as well as 
those which came to notice in earlier years, but we re not reported 
earlier.  Instances relating to the period subseque nt to 2015-16 have 
also been included, wherever necessary. 
 The audit has been conducted in conformity with th e Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 

  
Chapter Chapter Chapter Chapter -- --    II II    
Overview of Economic Sector Overview of Economic Sector Overview of Economic Sector Overview of Economic Sector    
 

Chapter - I 
Overview of Economic Sector 
1.1  Introduction 
Telangana State has a population of 3.50 crore and a geographical area of 
1,12,077 sq.kms.  For the purpose of Administration, there are 32 Departments 
at the Secretariat level headed by Principal Secret aries/Secretaries who are 
assisted by Directors/Commissioners and subordinate  officers under them. 
This Report covers the functioning of 11 Department s of the Economic Sector 
listed in Table 1.1.   
1.2  Expenditure of Economic Sector Departments 
Expenditure incurred by the Departments during the period 2011-16 is given 
in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1:  Table showing the expenditure* during 2011-16 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
1 Agriculture & Co-
operation 3334.54 3633.36 2874.65 5380.31 5668.08 2 Rain Shadow Areas 
Development 1 
3 Animal Husbandry & 
Fisheries  729.58 830.61 839.18 325.17 543.00 
4 Energy 4367.68 6249.03 7553.28 3504.49 5195.32 
5 Environment, Forests, 
Science and Technology  343.01 391.25 399.56 211.75 364.71 
6 Industries & Commerce 380.74 760.53 705.66 670.96 777.56 
7 Information Technology, 
Electronics & 
Communications 
57.72 199.37 155.10 136.40 87.33 
8 Irrigation and Command 
Area Development 17787.39 19704.27 18760.67 8052.87 10978.72 
9 Public Enterprises 1.46 1.40 1.44 0.54 0.80 
10 Roads and Buildings 
3043.04 4188.66 4948.75  2598.97 2917.20 11 Infrastructure & 
Investment 2 
Total 30045.16 35958.48 36238.29 20881.46 26532.72 
* These figures represent the expenditure figures of the erstwhile composite AP State from 01 April 2011 
to 31 March 2014 and expenditure figures of Telanga na State from 02 June 2014 to  
31 March 2016.  Expenditure figures from 01 April 2 014 to 01 June 2014 were depicted in Audit 
Report on Economic Sector Departments of Andhra Pradesh State 
(Source: Appropriation Accounts of Government of Andhra Pradesh/Telangana for the relevant years) 
                                                 
1 Expenditure of this Department is covered under Gr ant No. XXVII – Agriculture 
2 Expenditure of Infrastructure & Investment is cove red under Grant No.XI – Roads, 
Buildings and Ports 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 2  
  
Of the 11 Departments, with a total expenditure of ` 26532.72 crore, covered 
in this Report, a major portion of the expenditure was incurred by Irrigation 
and Command Area Development Department (41.38 per cent) , Agriculture & 
Co-operation Department (21.36 per cent), and Energy Department (19.58 per 
cent) during 2015-16. 
1.3  About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) relates to 
matters arising from the audit of 11 Government Dep artments and 
Autonomous Bodies under the Economic Sector. Compli ance Audit covers 
examination of the transactions relating to expendi ture of the audited entities 
to ascertain whether the provisions of the Constitu tion of India, applicable 
laws, rules, regulations and various orders and ins tructions issued by the 
competent authorities are being complied with. Perf ormance Audit examines 
whether the objectives of the programme/activity/De partment are achieved 
economically, efficiently and effectively. 
1.4  Authority for audit 
The authority for audit by the CAG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of 
the Constitution of India and the Comptroller and A uditor General's (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (DPC Ac t). CAG conducts audit 
of expenditure of the economic sector Departments o f the Government of 
Telangana under Section 13 3 of the DPC Act. CAG is the sole auditor in 
respect of four 4 autonomous bodies which are audited under Sections  19(2) 5, 
19(3) 6 and 20(1) 7 of the DPC Act. In addition, CAG also conducts aud it of 
other autonomous bodies under Section 14 8 of DPC Act which are 
substantially funded by the Government.  Principles and methodologies for the 
various audits are prescribed in the Auditing Stand ards and the Regulations on 
Audit and Accounts, 2007 issued by the CAG. 
                                                 
3 Audit of (i) all transactions from the Consolidate d Fund of the State, (ii) all transactions 
relating to the Contingency Fund and Public Account s and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, 
profit and loss accounts, balance sheets and other subsidiary accounts kept in any 
Department of a State 
4 Telangana State Electricity Regulatory Commission (TSERC) under Section 19(2), 
Telangana Khadi and Village Industries Board (TKVIB ) under Section 19(3), Environment 
Protection Training and Research Institute (EPTRI) under Section 20(1) and Telangana 
State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management an d Planning Authority 
(TSCAMPA) under Section 20(1) of DPC Act 
5 Audit of the accounts of Corporations (not being C ompanies) established by or under law 
made by the Parliament in accordance with the provisions of the respective legislations 
6 Audit of accounts of Corporations (not being compa nies) established by or under law made 
by the State Legislature in accordance with the provisions of respective legislations 
7 Audit of accounts of any body or authority on the request of the Governor, on such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed upon between the CAG and the Government 
8 Audit of all receipts and expenditure of (i) any b ody or authority substantially financed by 
grants or loans from the Consolidated Fund and (ii)  any body or authority where the grants 
or loans to such body or authority from the Consoli dated Fund in a financial year is not 
less than ` one crore 

Chapter-I Overview of Economic Sector 
  Page 3  
  
1.5  Planning and conduct of audit 
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to t he notice of the State 
Legislature important results of Audit. Auditing St andards require that the 
materiality level for reporting should be commensur ate with the nature, 
volume and magnitude of transactions. The audit fin dings are expected to 
enable the executive to take corrective action as a lso to frame policies and 
directives that will lead to improved management of  the organisations, thus 
contributing to better governance.  
The Audit process starts with the assessment of ris ks faced by various 
Departments of Government, based on expenditure inc urred, criticality/ 
complexity of activities, level of delegated financ ial powers, assessment of 
overall internal controls and concerns of stakehold ers. Previous Audit findings 
are also considered in this exercise. Based on this  risk assessment, the 
frequency and extent of Audit are decided. 
After completion of Audit, Inspection Reports conta ining Audit findings are 
issued to the heads of Departments, who are request ed to furnish replies to the 
Audit findings within one month of receipt of the I nspection Reports. 
Whenever replies are received, Audit findings are e ither settled or further 
action for compliance is advised. Important Audit o bservations arising out of 
these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusio n in the Audit Reports 
which are submitted to the Governor of the State un der Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. During 2015-16, various Depa rtments/ Organisations 
under the Economic Sector were audited and 153 Insp ection Reports 
containing 954 paragraphs were issued. 
1.6  Response to Audit 
1.6.1  Performance Audit and Compliance Audit observations 
One Performance Audit and four compliance audit par agraphs included in this 
Audit Report were forwarded demi-officially to the Principal Secretaries/ 
Secretaries of the Departments concerned between Au gust and October 2016, 
with a request to send their responses. Government/  Department’s responses 
were received for Performance Audit and two complia nce audit paragraphs. 
Responses of Government/Departments have been taken  into account while 
finalising this Report.   
1.6.2  Follow-up on Audit Reports 
Finance and Planning Department had issued (May 199 5) instructions to all 
Administrative Departments to submit Action Taken N otes (ATNs) on the 
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee (P AC) relating to the 
paragraphs contained in Audit Reports within six mo nths. Audit reviewed the 
outstanding ATNs as of 31 October 2016 on the parag raphs pertaining to 
Economic Sector Departments of the Telangana State,  included in the Reports 
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Go vernment of Andhra 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 4  
  
Pradesh and found that two 9 Departments did not submit ATNs for the 
recommendations pertaining to seven audit paragraphs discussed by PAC. 
1.6.3  Outstanding replies to Inspection Reports 
The Accountant General (E&RSA), Andhra Pradesh and Telangana arranges 
to conduct periodical inspections of the Government Departments to test check 
transactions and verify maintenance of important ac counts and other records 
as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These in spections are followed up 
with Inspection Reports (IRs) incorporating irregul arities detected during the 
inspection and not settled on the spot, which are i ssued to the heads of the 
offices inspected with copies to the next higher Au thorities for taking prompt 
corrective action. The heads of the offices/Governm ent are required to 
promptly comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the 
defects and omissions and report compliance through replies. Serious financial 
irregularities are reported to the heads of Departments and the Government. 
1944 IRs containing 7007 paragraphs issued upto 31 March 2016 were 
pending settlement as of 30 September 2016.  The Department-wise details are 
given in Appendix 1.1 . 
1.7  Significant Audit Findings  
Performance Audit 
Implementation of selected Medium Irrigation Projects 
The Government had taken up (2005) nine Medium Irri gation (MI) projects 
with a cost of ` 888 crore to create an Irrigation Potential (IP) of 1.1 lakh acres 
in two years. Performance Audit of five selected MI  projects was conducted 
(from January to June 2016) to assess (i) whether planning for the projects was 
comprehensive and individual projects were formulat ed properly; (ii) whether 
the execution of the project packages was systemati c and in accordance with 
relevant provisions and (iii) whether the intended benefits were achieved . 
                                                 
9 Irrigation and Command Area Development Department : 5 ATNs and Animal Husbandry 
and Fisheries Department: 2 ATNs 

Chapter-I Overview of Economic Sector 
  Page 5  
  
Major audit findings are summerised below:  
 Though all the five projects were targeted to be co mpleted within two 
years, only two were completed, except for some anc illary works. The 
remaining projects were not completed due to improp er planning, 
delays in submission and approval of designs, rehab ilitation and 
resettlement activities, obtaining forest clearance s etc. Irrigation 
Potential (IP) of 13900 acres only was achieved (Ma y 2016) against 
the targeted 52000 acres. 
 There were consistent savings ( `` `` 319.02 crore) across the projects and 
across the years. There were also reductions ( `` `` 224.56 crore) from 
original grants through re-appropriations in at least six years. 
 Despite receiving almost full grants under Accelera ted Irrigation 
Benefit Programme (AIBP), three projects viz., Goll avagu, Neelwai 
and Peddavagu at Jagannathapur were yet to be compl eted even after 
11 years. There were shortfalls in utilization of A IBP funds in respect 
of Gollavagu ( `` `` 2.24 crore) and Peddavagu at Jagannathapur ( `` `` 41.53 
crore). Since none of the projects were completed w ithin the time 
stipulated by AIBP, possibility of conversion of gr ants to loans cannot 
be ruled out. 
 Suggestions of the Central Water Commission (CWC), relating to 
adoption of rainfall – runoff relationship of Kadda m project to these 
projects, to review flood discharges and establish gauzing stations at 
dam sites were not complied with.  As a result, aud it could not verify 
the scientific basis for calculation of dependable yield for the projects. 
 Irrigation Potential to be created in each village,  as prescribed in 
Public Works Department Code, was not contemplated in the Detailed 
Project Reports (DPR).  In three projects, only man dal-wise IP was 
stipulated to contracting agencies.  Though, villag e-wise IP was 
stipulated in the agreement in case of Mathadivagu project, the 
contracting agency did not comply with the stipulat ion, resulting in 
leaving out two villages and reduction of the propo sed IP in six 
villages. 
 In Mathadivagu and Peddavagu at Jagannathpur projec ts head 
regulators were planned and constructed without corresponding canal 
systems. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 6  
  
 There were cases of delays in survey and investigat ion (S&I) activities 
by the contracting agencies, non-submission of S&I reports as 
envisaged, delay in submission of proposal for fore st land, defective 
S&I leading to deletion of IP, improper S&I resulti ng in delay in 
execution etc. 
 There were delays in submission and approval of des igns, non-
compliance with Government instructions in respect of timelines in 
finalisation of designs. 
 Estimates were not prepared by the agencies as stip ulated in the 
agreements.  Payment schedules were revised several  times without 
justifications / recorded reasons. 
 There were cases of non extension or delay in exten sion of benefits of 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) to the projec t affected 
families, resulting in delays in execution of projects. 
 There were instances of accepting changes in basic project 
parameters without corresponding changes in the cos t of the 
agreement, leading to undue benefits to contracting agencies.  
 Drinking water facilities to villages en-route, as envisaged, were not 
ensured. 
[Paragraph 2.1] 
Compliance Audit 
Development of Textile and Apparel Parks 
Textile and Apparel Parks were established with an objective of increasing the 
textile exports and to generate employment opportun ities in handloom and 
textile sector.  Audit of selected four Parks, out of eight Parks in Telangana 
were conducted during May-June 2016 to  ascertain the reasons behind delay 
in completion of parks and non-achievement of specified targets. 
Major audit findings are summerised below:  
 There were significant time overruns in completion of the Parks 
ranging from seven months to 151 months. 
 The expenditure so far incurred by the State Govern ment ( `` `` 6.04 
crore) and GoI ( `` `` 14.34 crore) could not yield expected results in 
respect of Textile Park, Siricilla and Whitegold In tegrated Spintex 
Park Private Limited (WISPL). 

Chapter-I Overview of Economic Sector 
  Page 7  
  
 In Textile Park, Siricilla, the Department had incu rred an 
expenditure of `` `` 5.86 crore on power supply, water supply and 
internal road network against the originally approv ed cost of `` `` 1.64 
crore. 
 There were no export sales in respect of Textile Pa rk, Siricilla and 
WISPL against the targets of `` `` 10 crore and `` `` 650 crore per annum 
respectively. In Handloom Park, Pochampally, the ex port sales were     
`` `` 1.53 crore (upto 2015-16) against targeted `` `` 17.50 crore per annum.   
 There was shortfall in establishment of units in th e Parks ranging 
from zero to 100 per cent and, in respect of employ ment generation, it 
ranged from 81 to 100 per cent. 
 Due to delay in creation of the infrastructure for the Textile Park, 
Siricilla, the Department had lost the Government o f India assistance 
to the extent of `` `` 1.04 crore. 
 In the Textile Park, Siricilla, the Common Effluent  Treatment Plant 
constructed at a cost of `` `` 1.04 crore was not functional and Common 
Waste Water Treatment Plant constructed in Apparel Export Park, 
Gundlapochampally was not functioning since November 2011. 
 In Apparel Export Park, Gundlapochampally, 53 per c ent of the total 
units belong to non-textile/apparel manufacturers, the Park had not 
achieved its intended purpose of being an apparel hub.  
[Paragraph 3.1] 
Implementation of Crop Loan Waiver Scheme 
Government of Telangana had introduced (August 2014 ) Crop Loan Waiver 
Scheme to alleviate the hardship of the farmers due  to their indebtedness.  The 
scheme covered short term production loans and crop  loans disbursed by 
banks to farmers against gold.  Each farmer family was eligible for waiver of 
crop loan amount which had been disbursed and was o utstanding as of 31 
March 2014, together with applicable interest on ou tstanding loan, up to 31 
August 2014 or ` one lakh per farmer family, whichever was lower.   
Major audit findings are summerised below:  
 Verification of beneficiaries under ‘farmer family’  norm was 
conducted without Aadhar numbers, despite being man datory in the 
scheme guidelines. No social audit was conducted to  eliminate 
duplicate/multiple financing of beneficiaries.   

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 8  
  
 The Department did not verify the crop loans taken by farmers from 
other district bank branches on agriculture lands i n multiple 
districts/mandals. 
 Crop loans to Rythu Mitra Groups/ Rythu Mitra Sanga ms were 
waived, against the scheme guidelines to treat farm er families as 
units. 
 Banks claimed excess interest of `` `` 183.98 crore on the total 
outstanding crop loan of beneficiaries.  Some of th e banks did not 
claim interest, though stipulated in the scheme guidelines, resulting in 
eligible farmers being deprived of waiver of intere st to an extent of 
`` `` 66.16 crore. 
 There was delay in remittance of unspent amount int o Government 
account both by Joint Directors of Agriculture and banks, mainly due 
to delayed reconciliation of accounts by banks. 
 There were unspent balances with the nodal banks an d also with the 
bank branches, even after furnishing of utilization  certificates to 
Department. 
[Paragraph 3.2] 
Telangana Road Sector Project 
In order to reduce the growing funding gap in the r oad sector, a loan 
agreement (January 2010) was entered into between I nternational Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and Governmen t of India. After 
bifurcation, the loan was divided and a separate Pr oject Agreement was 
concluded between IBRD and Government of Telangana,  fixing Telangana’s 
loan at 66.5 Million USD.  The objective of the pro ject was to provide better 
quality, capacity and safe roads to users in a sust ainable manner through 
enhanced institutional capacity of the Government in road sector. 
Major audit findings are summerised below:  
 In one upgradation package, the Roads and Buildings  (R&B) 
Department had not levied delay damages of `` `` 19.23 crore while 
granting extension of time, despite dismal progress of the work 
 The R&B Department deleted some road stretches from  the scope of 
contract due to their conversion as National Highways or having been 
taken up under other State schemes, resulting in sh ort utilization of 
the loan. No efforts were made by the Department to  fill the gaps by 
identifying alternate roads in lieu of the deleted stretches. 

Chapter-I Overview of Economic Sector 
  Page 9  
  
 The PPP component of the Project remained underutil ised, as only 
one road was identified to be executed under PPP mo de, prior to 
bifurcation of the Andhra Pradesh State. After bifu rcation, the R&B 
Department had not conducted any further studies to  identify more 
roads to be developed under PPP mode. 
 The formulation of Road Safety Action Plan was lagg ing behind the 
schedule as the works related to demonstration corr idor were yet to be 
completed and in only two out of ten black spots im provement works 
were completed. 
[Paragraph 3.3] 
 Department incorrectly adopted ‘total value of the work’ for 
computation of fuel factor, leading to excess payme nt of `` `` 4.74 crore 
towards price escalation for fuel and lubricants. 
[Paragraph 3.4] 
 

 
  
Chapter Chapter Chapter Chapter -- --    II II II II     
Performance Audit Performance Audit Performance Audit Performance Audit    
 

Chapter - II 
Performance Audit 
Irrigation and Command Area Development Department 
2.1  Implementation of selected Medium Irrigation Projects  
2.1.1  Introduction 
Medium Irrigation (MI) projects are projects that h ave Culturable Command 
Area (CCA) 1 between 5000 and 25000 acres. The Government had t aken up 
nine MI projects in 2005 with a cost of ` 888 crore to be completed in two 
years. These were to create an irrigation potential (IP) of 1.1 lakh acres. 
2.1.2  Scope and Methodology of Audit 
A Performance Audit on implementation of selected M edium Irrigation 
projects was carried out during January to June 201 6. Out of nine MI projects, 
five projects viz., Gollavagu, Mathadivagu, Neelwai , Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur and Ralivagu were selected, using sim ple random sampling 
without replacement method. In the process, Audit s crutinized the records of 
Special Chief Secretary, Irrigation and Command Are a Development 
(I&CAD) Department, Chief Engineer (Projects), Adil abad (CEADB), two 
Superintending Engineers (SE) 2 and three Executive Engineers (EE) 3.  
Audit methodology involved study of documents relat ing to Government 
decisions, policies, circulars, budgetary allocatio ns etc., and joint inspections. 
Audit conclusions were drawn after obtaining inform ation from I&CAD 
Department through issue of audit enquiries and rep lies thereto have been 
suitably incorporated in this Report. Audit objecti ves, scope and methodology 
were discussed with the Special Chief Secretary to Government of Telangana, 
I&CAD Department in the Entry Conference held on 6 May 2016. An Exit 
Conference was held on 31 October 2016 and the view s of the Government 
have been taken into account in the Report. 
2.1.3  Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit on “Implementation of selecte d Medium Irrigation 
Projects” was conducted to assess: 
                                                 
1 The area, which can be irrigated from a scheme and  is fit for cultivation is called command 
area 
2 (i) Irrigation Circle, Nirmal and (ii) Dr BRAPCSS Construction circle, Bellampally 
3 (i) IB division, Adilabad; (ii) Dr BRAPCSS Constru ction division, Bellampally and  
(iii) Medium Irrigation Projects division, Mancherial 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 12  
  
(i)  whether planning for the projects was comprehensive  and individual 
projects were formulated properly; 
(ii)  whether the execution of the project packages was s ystematic and in 
accordance with relevant provisions; and 
(iii)  whether the intended benefits were achieved.  
2.1.4  Audit Criteria 
Performance Audit findings were benchmarked against the following sources: 
(i)  Central Water Commission (CWC)/ Ministry of Environ ment and 
Forest (MoEF) / Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) /  Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) guidelines; 
(ii)  State Financial Code and State Public Works Departm ent (PWD) 
Code; 
(iii)  Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy - 2005  of the State 
Government; 
(iv)  Guidelines relating to Engineering, Procurement and  Construction 
(EPC) contracts and Internal Benchmark (IBM) estima tions with 
relevant Schedule of rates; 
(v)  Government Orders, memos and circulars issued from time to time; 
(vi)  Provisions of Agreements for respective packages of  projects 
concerned; 
(vii)  Annual Budgets and annual action plans; and 
(viii)  Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). 
2.1.5  Organizational Setup 
The organizational setup in respect of selected med ium irrigation projects is 
depicted in the following organizational chart. 
 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 13  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Source: Information furnished by Chief Engineer, Projects, Adilabad) 
Audit Findings 
2.1.6  Physical and financial targets and achievements 
All the five projects selected for Audit were entru sted (March 2005) to 
different agencies under Engineering, Procurement a nd Construction (EPC) 
contracts for completion within two years i.e., by March 2007. The present 
status of the projects is shown below.  
Table 2.1: Details of contemplated irrigation potential and created, original 
cost, revised cost, expenditure and present status 
Sl. 
No. Project 
Contemplated 
Irrigation 
Potential (IP) 
in acres 
IP 
created 
in 
acres 
Original cost 
(revised cost)  
(`` ``     in crore) 
Expenditure 
as of March 
2016 
(`` ``     in crore) 
Present status  
(as of May 2016) 
1 Gollavagu 9500 4000 83.61  
(96.61) 87.79 
Head works and 
excavation of main 
canals completed. 
2 Mathadivagu 8500 6900 50.40  
(58.50) 58.50 Completed, except for 
a railway crossing. 
3 Neelwai 13000 1000 90.50 
(137.71) 119.39 Head works 
completed. 
4 Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur 15000 0 124.64 
(163.78) 95.25 Head works in 
progress. 
5 Ralivagu 6000 2000 33.30 (*) 48.00 Completed, except for 
ancillary works. 
 Total 52000 13900 382.45 408.93  
* Revised Administrative approval is yet to be accorded 
(Source: Information furnished by CEADB, SEs of projects concerned and VLC data from AG (A&E)) 
As can be seen from above, only one out of the five  projects was completed 
fully (except for a railway crossing) and another p roject was completed except 
for ancillary works. The remaining projects were no t completed due to 
improper planning and delays in land acquisition, s ubmission and approval of 
Special Chief Secretary (I&CAD) to 
Government of Telangana 
Chief Engineer (Projects), Adilabad 
 
Superintending Engineer,  
Irrigation Circle, Nirmal  
 
Superintending Engineer, 
Dr. BRAPCSS Construction 
Circle, Bellampally 
 
Executive Engineer, 
Medium Irrigation 
Projects 
Division, Mancherial 
(Gollavagu, Neelwai,   
Ralivagu)  
Executive Engineer, 
Dr. BRAPCSS 
Construction 
Division, Bellampally 
(Peddavagu @ 
Jaganathapur)  
 
Executive Engineer, 
IB Division, Adilabad 
(Mathadivagu 
Project) 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 14  
  
designs, rehabilitation and resettlement activities , obtaining forest clearances 
etc., as discussed in the following paragraphs. 
Government stated (October 2016) that two 
4 out of the five projects were 
completed. In respect of Neelwai Project, the first  contract was terminated 
(March 2011) due to slow progress and stoppage of w ork by the agency. 
Subsequently, the work was entrusted (December 2011 ) to another agency for 
completion by June 2013. 
2.1.6.1  Funding pattern 
All selected projects reviewed by Audit were includ ed under the Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) of the Central Government which aimed 
at completion of the irrigation projects timely to derive early benefits.  
A review of original grants, supplementary grants, re-appropriations, total 
grants and actual expenditure incurred on the proje cts showed that an amount 
of ` 224.56 crore was re-appropriated from the original budget allocation of 
` 948.15 crore from 2004-05 to 2015-16, while the Dep artment could not 
spend ` 319.01 crore, as detailed below. 
Table 2.2: Details of Excess / Savings of five selected medium irrigation 
projects 
        ( `` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Project Original 
Grants 
Supple-
mental 
Grants 
Re-appro-
priations 
Total 
Grants Expenditure  Excess (+) / 
Savings (-) 
1 Gollavagu 129.40  0.00 4.26 133.66  87.79 (-)45.87 
2 Mathadivagu 104.30  0.00 (-)12.89 91.41  58.50 (-)32.91 
3 Neelwai 260.21  2.95 (-)42.93 220.23  119.39 (-)100.84 
4 Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur 375.84  0.00 (-)166.62 209.22  95.25 (-)113.97 
5 Ralivagu 78.40  1.40 (-)6.38 73.42  48.00 (-)25.42 
 Total  948.15  4.35 (-)224.56 727.94  408.93 (-)319.01 
(Source : Information furnished by CEADB, SEs of projects concerned and VLC data from AG (A&E)) 
As can be seen from above, there were consistent sa vings across the projects. 
The original grants were also reduced through re-appropriations in eight out of 
12 years in respect of Peddavagu at Jagannathapur, in seven years in respect of 
Mathadivagu and Neelwai projects and in six years f or Gollavagu and 
Ralivagu projects (year-wise, project-wise details are given in Appendix 2.1 ). 
The Government stated (October 2016) that the budge t allocations could not 
be utilized in the initial years as preliminary iss ues were to be tackled for 
starting the works and, in the later years, due to issues in Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement (R&R) and land acquisition process. 
                                                 
4 Mathadivagu and Ralivagu 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 15  
  
2.1.6.2  Assistance under AIBP 
Information pertaining to Central assistance to the  five selected projects under 
AIBP is given in Appendix 2.2 . As per clause 6 of AIBP Guidelines of 2006, 
in case State Governments failed to comply with the agreed date of completion 
i.e., four years, grants given under AIBP were to b e converted into Central 
loans and recovered as per usual terms of recovery of Central Loans. 
Though the Department had received financial assist ance of ` 228.63 crore out 
of ` 238.04 crore under AIBP from Government of India (G oI) by 2010-11, it 
could complete only two projects (Mathadivagu and R alivagu).  Three 
projects, viz., Gollavagu, Neelwai and Peddavagu at  Jagannathapur have not 
yet been completed even after lapse of 11 years. Th e expenditure incurred 
(March 2016), when compared to revised administrative approvals, was 90.87, 
86.69 and 58.15 per cent, respectively. It was further observed that there we re 
shortfalls in utilization of funds released under A IBP in respect of Gollavagu 
(` 2.24 crore) and Peddavagu at Jagannathapur ( ` 41.53 crore).  
Thus, despite receiving 96.05 per cent of assistance under AIBP, the objective 
of the projects to create IP of 52000 acres was not  achieved as only IP of 
13900 acres has been created so far. Since none of the projects were 
completed within four years as contemplated under A IBP, the possibility of 
conversion of grants to loans as per the clause ibid  cannot be ruled out. 
The Engineer in Chief (Irrigation) stated (February  2016) that the shortfall in 
utilization was due to obstruction from farmers/lan downers, problems in land 
acquisition and slow progress of works. 
2.1.7  Planning 
Planning a MI project involves checking water avail ability and estimating the 
location and extent of land to be irrigated. As per  Public Works Department 
(PWD) Code, it starts with the preparation of a pre liminary investigation 
report wherein the feasibility of the project is ch ecked. If the project is found 
to be feasible, a Detailed Project Report (DPR) is to be prepared by the 
Department.  The DPR forms the blue print for execution of the project. 
2.1.7.1  Non-compliance with CWC guidelines 
As per Section 3.8.6 of Central Water Commission (C WC) Guidelines on 
preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR), avail ability of water and 
proposed gross utilization under the project, live storage 5 and water quality 
should be considered while preparing DPR.  River fl ow discharge particulars 
for a minimum period of 10 years should be consider ed while calculating 
water availability. 
                                                 
5 Active or live storage is the portion of the reser voir that can be used for flood control, 
power production, navigation and downstream releases 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 16  
  
It was observed that the river flow discharge obser vations were not made at 
the proposed dam sites while preparing DPRs in resp ect of four projects 6. 
Instead, rainfall–run off relationship 7, earlier derived for the Kaddam Project 8, 
was adopted to work out the dependable yield of the se projects. While 
according clearance, based on the above DPRs, CWC h ad suggested (June and 
November 2006) that flood studies used in the desig n be reviewed by using 
flood data and catchment rainfall at proposed dam s ites.  It had also suggested 
establishing gauging stations at the proposed dam s ites for this purpose in 
Gollavagu and Ralivagu projects.  However, neither flood studies used for 
designing of the projects were reviewed nor gauging  stations were established 
at proposed dam sites as recommended by CWC.  In th e absence of flood 
studies at the proposed dam site, as suggested by t he CWC, audit could not 
verify the scientific basis for calculating the dependable yield. 
It was also observed that execution of works was en trusted (March 2005) to 
agencies prior to clearance of the projects by CWC (June 2006). 
The Government stated (October 2016) that it was no t feasible to set up 
individual gauging stations at all proposed sites a s MI projects were scattered. 
Kaddam relationship was taken as only Kaddam projec t was the nearest 
available project with previous historical data of discharges etc. 
The reply was not acceptable since rainfall-runoff relationship arrived at 
earlier for Kaddam might not be applicable in case of MI projects as 
dependable yield calculations could vary from major  to medium projects. 
Further, the Department did not review flood studies as suggested by CWC. 
2.1.7.2  Identification of area to be covered 
According to Paragraph 391 of PWD code, if it is de cided that a complete 
investigation be undertaken for a project, reports,  plans and estimates should 
be prepared with full details; IP should be definit ely fixed by the Department; 
main and minor channels and distributaries should b e aligned and concurrence 
of farmers for inclusion of their lands in IP in the form of written statements or 
agreements by the Revenue Divisional Officer should  be taken. Audit scrutiny 
showed the following: 
• IP to be created in each of the villages, as prescr ibed in PWD code, was 
not contemplated in the DPRs in any of the projects . The agreements 
9 also 
did not prescribe village-wise IP to be created.  Instead, IP to be developed 
in mandals was stipulated. As per agreements, the c ontracting agencies 
                                                 
6 Gollavagu, Mathadivagu, Neelwai and Ralivagu 
7 Rainfall-runoff relationship depends on the dynami c interaction between rain intensity, soil 
infiltration and surface storage. Runoff occurs whe never rain intensity exceeds infiltration 
capacity of the soil. This is useful in preparation of DPRs 
8 Kaddam is a major irrigation project in erstwhile Adilabad district 
9 Except in agreements of Mathadivagu and Peddavagu a t Jagannathapur projects, wherein 
village-wise IP was prescribed in agreements 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 17  
  
were to prepare command survey plans marking villag es for the command 
area and fix alignments.   Thus, the contracting ag encies had the flexibility 
of creating IP in villages, as the Department had n ot fixed the area at the 
time of preparation of DPRs.  
Further, even in case of Mathadivagu, where village -wise IP was 
prescribed in agreements and project was completed,  deviations from IP 
stipulated in agreement were observed as detailed below: 
(i)   According to the agreement, IP of 766 and 489 acre s was to be 
developed in Boraj and Sirisanna villages, respecti vely.  However, 
no IP was created in these villages.  The details o f IP to be created as 
per agreement, IP created and proposed to be locali zed with the 
Revenue Department are shown in Appendix 2.3. 
(ii)   Further, IP proposed to be localized 
10  in six villages 11  was less than 
the IP stipulated to be created as per agreement.  In four villages 12 , IP 
created was higher than the IP stipulated in the agreement. 
(iii)  Moreover, IP of 977.06 acres was proposed to be lo calized in five 
villages 13  under Mathadivagu, though these were not stipulated in the 
agreement. 
Government replied (October 2016) that actual avail ability of IP in 
different villages could only be ascertained after joint inspection (joint  
azmoish ) with Revenue Department, which was conventionally  taken up 
after execution of canal system. It would not be fe asible to ascertain 
village-wise command area with the Revenue Departme nt at the planning 
stage. 
The reply was not acceptable as the target IP was t o be defined in the 
planning stage itself as per the PWD code. 
• Concurrence of farmers in the form of written statements / agreements was 
not available on records.  Not taking the stakehold ers into confidence 
resulted in deletion of 1220 out of 6000 acres in R alivagu project in May 
2012, consequent to objections from land owners due  to urbanization of 
Mancherial town in the vicinity of the project. 
Government replied (October 2016) that the command area proposed in 
Mancherial was still under cultivation and had not yet been urbanized at 
the time of entrustment of work.  However, audit sc rutiny showed that 
                                                 
10   Localization is the term used for gazette notific ation of IP after joint inspection by the 
Irrigation and Revenue Department 
11  (i) Jamidi, E.Swargaon, Bandal Nagapur, Ghotkuri v illages of Thamsi Mandal;  
(ii) Bhimsari and Jamdapur of Adilabad Mandal (6 villages) 
12   Mallapur, Waddadi, Khapparala of Thamsi Mandal an d Chanda – T villages of Adilabad 
Mandal (4 villages) 
13   Tharoda (358.87 acres), Dimma (359.15 acres), Fou zpur (161.76 acres), Pochera (97.28 
acres) under Adilabad Mandal, One village Nipponi (93.41 acres) in Thamsi Mandal 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 18  
  
permission to conversion of land use for residentia l purposes from 
agricultural purposes was given in 1995 itself by t he Government and 
Mancherial was a class I urban area as per Census 2 001, much before the 
project was taken up in 2005. 
2.1.7.3  Planning for construction of head regulators without canals 
In two projects (Peddavagu at Jagannathapur and Mat hadivagu), the 
Department had planned for construction of regulato rs without corresponding 
canals leading to unfruitful expenditure apart from  non-creation of IP for 
which the regulators were planned. 
(i)  Regulator on left flank in Peddavagu at Jagannathap ur : The work of 
construction of Peddavagu at Jagannathapur was entr usted (March 2005) to an 
agency for 
`` `` 118.90 crore.  The scope of work as per agreement i ncluded 
construction of head sluices / regulators for both Left and Right Flank canals. 
However, only Right Flank (RF) canal, to serve an I P of 15000 acres, was 
contemplated and included in the scope of agreement , leaving out the Left 
Flank (LF) Canal.  Audit scrutiny showed that though the Left Flank canal was 
neither contemplated nor included in the scope of t he agreement, the 
Department went ahead with construction (September 2014) of the LF 
regulator at a cost of ` 30.91 lakh.  However, corresponding LF canal was no t 
taken up rendering the expenditure on LF regulator unfruitful. 
Government replied (October 2016) that surveys were  being taken up and 
proposals were being formulated for LF canal for an IP of 500 acres. 
However, the reply was silent on not taking up LF c anal along with the 
project, leading to farmers being deprived of benefit of 500 acres IP and idling 
of the LF regulator for more than two years.  This was also indicative of 
inadequate planning.  
(ii)  Regulator for right flank canal in Mathadivagu: The work of 
construction of Mathadivagu was entrusted to an age ncy for ` 37.80 crore.  
The DPR as well as the agreement contemplated a lef t flank canal and 
corresponding regulator.  There was no proposal for  right canal system either 
in DPR or in agreement.  
Subsequently, based on representation received from  the public representative 
(August 2005) for construction of Right Flank (RF) canal to create an 
additional IP of 1200 acres, the Department constru cted a Right Flank (RF) 
regulator to release water into the right canal on Mathadivagu at a cost of 
` 28.92 lakh (September 2009).  However, no canal was  constructed even after 
seven years of completion of RF regulator, resultin g in unfruitful expenditure 
of ` 28.92 lakh, besides non-achievement of IP of 1200 a cres.  It was also 
indicative of lack of planning by the Department. 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 19  
  
Government replied (October 2016) that tenders for RF canal had since been 
invited for creating additional IP of 1200 acres.  
The reply was silent about delay in execution of ca nal even after seven years 
of completion of RF head regulator. 
Further, audit scrutiny also showed that the Depart ment had clarified (July 
2005) in a public discussion that construction of RF canal was not feasible due 
to non-existence of IP on right side and presence of three local streams. 
2.1.8  Execution of the Projects 
The agencies selected for execution under the system were to carry out Survey 
and Investigation (S&I), submit designs, prepare es timates and execute the 
works.  Audit observed delays in / improper S&I act ivities, leading to delays 
in commencement of works, as discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
2.1.8.1  Survey and Investigation 
The executing agencies were to finalize alignment, land acquisition and forest 
clearance proposals on completion of S&I activities .  As per agreement 
conditions 14 , the agency had to prepare land plan schedules and  land 
acquisition proposals (private land, government lan d, forest land, etc), based 
on S&I.  Audit observed delay in S&I and deficienci es leading to delay in 
completion as mentioned in subsequent paragraphs. 
(i) Delay in completion of S&I activities : The stipulated time for completion 
of S&I activities in four Projects as per agreement  was six months - three 
months for head works and main canal and another th ree months for 
distributary network. In the case of Mathadivagu Pr oject, the time stipulated 
was three months. 
Audit observed that in none of the projects, S&I ac tivities were completed 
within the time stipulated in the agreement.  The d elays in completion of S&I 
activities ranged from six months (Mathadivagu) to 10 years (remaining four 
projects).  In fact, S&I activities relating to fie ld channels have not been 
completed till date (October 2016) in any of the Pr ojects except Mathadivagu. 
The details are given in Appendix 2.4. Inordinate delays in completion of S&I 
activities commensurate with milestones prescribed in the agreements resulted 
in delay in commencement of works and consequent de lays in completion of 
projects. 
Government stated (October 2016) that S&I was an on going activity which 
was being taken up concurrently along with executio n, especially in the canal 
system. 
                                                 
14  Clause 3.8 of Scope of Services – Survey and Investigation (Appendix SI) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 20  
  
The reply of the Government was not acceptable as t he agencies had failed to 
adhere to the milestones prescribed in the respective agreements. 
(ii) Non-submission of S&I reports : The agencies were to submit S&I 
Reports 15  to the Department on completion of the S&I activit y. They were also 
required to prepare estimates as per basic project parameters, based on S&I. 
Audit observed that S&I reports were not on record even for the components 
for which S&I activities were completed, except for  Gollavagu and Neelwai 
projects. In the absence of S&I reports, there was no assurance that S&I 
activities were conducted by agencies in accordance  with the norms and 
requirements of the Department.  
The Government stated (October 2016) that though re ports might not have 
been prepared in standard format, approval of struc tures, alignment etc., were 
based on S&I data. 
The reply, however, was silent on non-submission of  the S&I Reports by the 
agencies, as per the requirement of the agreements. 
(iii) Delay in submission of proposals for acquisit ion of forest land : As per 
the agreement, the agency for Peddavagu at Jagannat hapur had to prepare land 
plan schedules and land acquisition proposals, incl uding forest land etc., based 
on S&I by September 2005. 
However, the agency reported (March 2007), 18 month s after due date, that 
forest lands were required for execution of canal a t Km 18.50 to Km 21.00. 
The delay on the part of the executing agency led t o delay in initiation of 
process of obtaining forest clearances. Final forest clearances have not yet been 
obtained (May 2016). This led to delay in execution  of main canal and 
consequent delay in completion of the project. 
(iv) Defective S&I leading to deletion of IP : Preparation of village-wise 
ayacut 
16  register was a part of S&I activity as per agreeme nt 17  of Ralivagu 
project.  
It was, however, observed that Mancherial village, selected for creation of IP 
under Ralivagu project had become urbanized and the  same was not noticed by 
the agency during S&I activities.  The Department w as informed (June 2010) 
that the command area proposed in Mancherial village was near the Mancherial 
municipality and that approval for layouts including house sites had been given 
by Municipal Administration and Urban Development D epartment (1995)  
before entrustment of work (March 2005).  No other land was made available 
for development of command area.  Consequently, Gov ernment had to delete 
                                                 
15  Clauses 1.3, 2.4 of Scope of Services – Survey and Investigation (Appendix SI) 
16  Local term for command area 
17  Clause 3.5 of Scope of Services – Survey and Investigation (Appendix SI) 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 21  
  
(May 2012) the distributary and field channels unde r it from the scope of the 
agreement with a cost reduction of ` 56.14 lakh. 
Due to defective S&I, the Department had allowed th e agency to execute the 
original irrigation infrastructure facilities i.e.,  reservoir and canal systems for 
irrigating 4500 acres, instead of 3280 acres that w ere actually available, 
leading to execution of main canal with higher discharge. 
Government stated (October 2016) that though the co mmand area was 
reduced, the infrastructure created could be used i n good monsoon years for 
supplementing drinking water and recharging of ground water.  
The reply was not acceptable as no separate mechani sm had been established 
for providing drinking water facilities, as mention ed in paragraph 2.1.9.2. 
Moreover, the main canal also could not serve to re charge ground water as it 
was a lined canal through which water would not percolate down. 
(v) Delay in execution of canal work due to imprope r soil investigation : It 
was also observed that soil investigation, which fo rmed part of S&I, was not 
properly carried out by the agencies in Gollavagu, Neelwai and Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur projects. During execution of lining of main canals of these 
projects, the executing agencies, however, informed  the Department (October 
2013 to April 2014) that the canal banks were slipp ing into the canal at certain 
places due to poor nature of soils and lining of ca nals would not stand in these 
reaches. 
The first executing agency of Neelwai Project, whic h conducted S&I for main 
canal, did not inform the Department about non-suit ability of soils. 
Subsequently, the second agency, to whom the balanc e work was awarded, 
noticed (October 2013) slippage of canal banks into  the canals during 
execution and suggested for construction of guide /  trough walls at a cost of 
` 55.29 crore.  Similarly, agencies executing Gollava gu and Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur projects also informed (November 2013  and April 2014) the 
Department about the issue only during execution, w hen the concrete lining 
executed was found to be slipping into the canal.  In Gollavagu project, 
construction of RCC trough for the damaged portion was proposed with a cost 
of ` 0.87 crore.  The contracting agency of Peddavagu at  Jagannathapur had 
submitted a proposal for alternative methods with a  cost of ` 22.54 crore.  
These proposals are yet to be approved by Government (May 2016). 
Thus, improper S&I by the agencies and delay in fin alization of the 
alternatives suggested by the Department has result ed in delay in execution of 
canal works and completion of projects. 
The Government replied (October 2016) that certain geological anomalies in 
isolated patches would only be exposed during execu tion and it was not 
feasible to conduct sub-soil exploration at minute level due to cost constraints. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 22  
  
Moreover, the cost of repairs of damaged portion wa s the liability of 
contractor. 
The reply was not acceptable as the scope of work i ncluded survey and 
investigation by the agencies including exploration .  Further, the reply was 
also silent on the alternative measures to be taken up.  
2.1.8.2  Submission and approval of designs 
As per the milestones prescribed in the agreement, executing agencies were to 
complete survey, detailed investigation, designs an d drawings within six 
months.  SE/CE of the project concerned or Chief En gineer, Central Designs 
Organization (CECDO) was to approve the designs sub mitted by the agencies 
depending upon the size and complexity of the structure. 
• Information furnished by CECDO showed that the offi ce had returned 
several times the designs submitted by the agencies  in all projects for 
want of information / lack of data, indicating that  the agencies were not 
submitting proposals as per the standards required.   The Department had 
not included any criteria relating to experience in  designing of projects 
while empanelling the agencies for medium irrigatio n projects.  Thus, 
non inclusion of professional experience in designi ng in the eligibility 
criteria at the time of tendering had an adverse im pact on timely 
finalization of designs.  
Government replied (October 2016) that it would be difficult to prescribe 
the eligibility criteria relating to designs.  Furt her the nature of designs 
and drawings was not uniform across the projects an d, hence, additional 
data had to be supplied to CECDO.  However, lack of  uniformity and 
requirement of additional data did not justify the abnormal delays in 
finalization of designs. 
• There were considerable delays in submission of des igns and drawings 
to the CECDO in Mathadivagu and Peddavagu at Jagann athapur 
(Appendix 2.5).  In respect of Peddavagu at Jagannathapur project , the 
agency had not submitted nine out of 93 designs for  main canal, and 182 
out of 281 designs for distributaries (March 2016). 
• Audit also observed that no specific timelines were  prescribed for the 
CECDO to approve the designs received by it.  As a result, CECDO took 
two to 99 months for approval of designs (Appendix 2.5) , leading to 
delay in execution. 
• Considering the delays in finalization of designs, Government had 
prescribed (April 2007) a procedure for approval of  designs of structures 
in EPC packages, which stipulated inter alia  that on receipt of design 
proposals, the CE concerned had to examine the desi gns for structures 
and send the same to CECDO for approval within thre e days.  The CE 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 23  
  
concerned was to inform CECDO the expected date of approval of 
designs, depending on priority; 
Information furnished by CECDO to audit showed that  expected date of 
approval by CE and expected delay by CECDO to the C E concerned , as 
prescribed by the Government, were not communicated / kept on record.  This 
indicated that the Government orders intended for e arly finalization of designs 
were not complied with, leading to continued delay in finalization of designs. 
2.1.8.3  Preparation of estimates by agencies 
As per the basic project parameters of the agreemen ts, the agencies were 
required to prepare estimates for head works, main canal, distributaries, CM & 
CD works and submit the same to the Department for approval.  
In none of the projects, the agencies had submitted  detailed estimates to the 
Department as per the terms of the contract.  Execu tive Engineer, Mancherial 
division (EEMCL) confirmed that the agency for Goll avagu had not submitted 
any detailed estimate.  In respect of four out of f ive projects, estimates were 
prepared by the Department and not by the executing  agencies, as prescribed 
in the agreement. 
The Government replied (October 2016) that the paym ent to the agencies was 
governed by payment schedules which were being calc ulated on percentage 
basis of the contract and there was no direct effec t of the detailed estimate on 
payment schedule. 
The reply was silent on non-preparation of estimate s by the agencies in 
compliance with agreement conditions. 
2.1.8.4  Payment Schedules 
Payments under EPC turnkey system adopted by the Go vernment were to be 
regulated on percentage basis relating to portions of work completed as per 
payment schedules mentioned in the agreements. The payment schedule was 
to be revised in the light of later information. 
The Department approved several revisions of paymen t schedules as detailed 
below. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 24  
  
Table 2.3: Revisions to payment schedules 
Sl. 
No. Project S&I actually 
completed in 
Number of 
revisions to 
payment 
schedules 
Payment Schedules 
revised in month/year 
1 Gollavagu NA 3 
August 2006, 
May 2007,  
February 2016 
2 Mathadivagu December 2005 4 
December 2006, May 
2007, May 2008, 
November 2008 
3 
(a) Neelwai 
(First 
agency) 
January 2007 for 
canals,  
S&I not completed for 
distributary, field 
channels  
3 
December 2006, 
February 2008, 
 May 2008 
(b) Neelwai 
(Second 
agency) 
Not furnished 4 
January 2012, May 
2013, November 2013, 
December 2015 
4 Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur 
In progress as of May 
2016 3 August 2007, August 
2013, November 2013 
5 Ralivagu 
November 2005 for 
distributary,  
field channels not 
completed 
3 August 2006, June 
2007, November 2007 
 (Source:  Information furnished by Superintending Engineers concerned ) 
The Department allowed payment schedules to be revi sed in Neelwai and 
Peddavagu at Jagannathapur even before completion o f S&I activities and 
without submission of detailed estimates by EPC age ncies.  The Department 
also allowed revision of payment schedules in Matha divagu and Ralivagu 
Projects, four and three times respectively, after completion of S&I without 
detailed estimation / justification, thus giving scope for manipulation and front 
loading of payments.  Further, frequent revision of  payment schedules after 
completion of S&I was also indicative of improper S &I and cost analysis by 
executing agencies. 
The Government replied (October 2016) that percenta ges fixed for major 
components were not modified and further breakup wa s done within such 
percentages fixed for major components. 
However, revision/ breaking up of payment schedules  were made without any 
recorded reasons/ justification. 
2.1.8.5  Implementation of Rehabilitation and Resettlement  
Government had introduced (April 2005) Rehabilitati on and Resettlement 
(R&R) policy to address the issue of displacement d ue to construction of 
projects.  To take up R&R, the Government was to ap point an Administrator 
for R&R who would conduct socio economic survey to arrive at the benefits to 
be provided.  R&R Policy defined Project Affected F amily (PAF) as “a family 
whose source of livelihood is substantially affecte d by the process of 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 25  
  
acquisition of land for the project or practicing a ny trade, occupation or 
vocation continuously for a period of not less than  three years in the affected 
zone.” 
Timely completion of R&R was also essential for smo oth and timely 
completion of the projects. 
• In Mathadivagu, Peddavagu at Jagannathapur and Ralivagu projects, it was 
observed that lands measuring 1182, 825 and 203.76 acres were acquired 
within full reservoir level (FRL) from 945, 1236 an d 284 land owners, 
respectively. However, despite submergence of the l ands, R&R was not 
taken up on the ground that no family was displaced from the villages. 
 Government replied (October 2016) that the village  referred to in 
Mathadivagu project was not isolated due to constru ction of project and 
hence R&R was not extended.  The reply was not acce ptable as the issue 
raised in audit was about extension of R&R benefits  to PAFs whose land 
was submerged under FRL and not whether villages we re submerged 
leading to displacement of families.  The land was acquired in respect of 
three projects within FRL and PAFs were eligible fo r financial assistance 
under R&R benefits as per Government policy, which was not extended to 
them. 
• In Neelwai project, the Department had contemplated  R&R for three 
villages 
18  at the DPR stage (June 2001).  However, the CE had  requested 
(July 2006) appointment of Project Administrator fo r R&R after 15 
months of award of the work (March 2005).  The Gove rnment took two 
months to appoint R&R Administrator.  Due to non-co mpletion of R&R 
activities, the contracting agency had stopped (Jun e 2009) the work. 
Consequently, the Department had terminated (March 2011) the contract. 
The Department entrusted (December 2011) the work t o a second agency 
for completion in 18 months.  However, the Departme nt failed to ensure 
that the R&R activities were completed even before awarding the balance 
work to the second agency.  Consequently, due to no n-shifting of Project 
Affected Families (PAFs) from the reservoir area, e xtension of time 
totalling 390 days was granted to second agency also.  
Government replied (October 2016) that the remainin g work had to be 
entrusted to a second agency immediately as the ori ginal agreement was 
terminated under clause 61 of PS to APDSS 19 . 
                                                 
18  Katepalli, Gudepalli and Gerregudem 
19  Clause 61 of preliminary specifications to Andhra Pradesh Detailed and Standard 
Specification (APDSS) stipulates that if the expend iture incurred by the Department for 
completion of the work by a second agency exceeds a mount that would have been payable 
to the first agency, the difference shall be paid by the first contractor to Government 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 26  
  
The reply was not acceptable, as the department fai led to ensure 
completion of R&R activities before entrustment of work to second 
agency.  Moreover, extension of time for 390 days h ad to be accorded to 
second agency also due to non-shifting of PAFs. 
2.1.8.6  Extension of Time  
As per clause 24.10 of general conditions of contra cts (general), reasonable 
extension of time (EoT) was to be allowed by the of ficer competent to 
sanction EoT for unavoidable delays which resulted from causes which were 
beyond the control of the contractor.  Further, the  officer was to permit 
extension of time for additional 25 per cent over and above the actual working 
period lost, if such loss of working period was on account of written 
instructions issued by the officer. 
However, it was observed that on 15 occasions, wher e EoT was granted, the 
Department added 25 per cent  extra time to the working period actually lost in 
respect of Gollavagu (156 days), Mathadivagu (156 d ays), Neelwai (169 days 
for first agency), Peddavagu at Jagannathapur (198 days) and Ralivagu (74 
days) although no written instructions were given b y the EEs / SEs for 
stopping the work. 
The Government stated (October 2016) that the exces s working period of 25 
per cent over and above the actual period was calculated by the concerned 
EEs, based on the records, which reflected the prog ress/ stoppage of work at 
site. 
The reply was not acceptable, as additional 25 per cent was to be given only 
when the Engineer in Charge gave instructions to stop the work or if there was 
hindrance caused due to his written instructions; the additional time was not to 
be given in any other case. 
In Gollavagu Project, the Department had recommende d EoT for two years 
from 31 December 2009 to 31 December 2011 (730 days ), though actual time 
loss due to hindrance was noted as 246 days.  No re asons for grant of EoT for 
the additional 484 days were on record. 
The Government stated (October 2016) that EoT of tw o years was granted 
without any financial liability to the Department.  The reply was not 
acceptable, as allowing EoT beyond actual time lost  had delayed the 
completion of the projects.  The reply also did not  take into account the 
financial liability on the Department owing to pric e variation with efflux of 
time. 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 27  
  
2.1.8.7  Undue benefit to the contractors 
In all the EPC contracts, as per the clarification 20  issued by the Government, 
the change in cost, except due to change in basic p arameters, was to be borne 
by or was to accrue to the contractor.  In case the re were changes in basic 
parameters, the modalities for effecting consequent changes in the cost were to 
be worked out.  It was seen that there were multipl e instances where changes 
in designs proposed by the agency were approved by the Department.  
However, no reductions in value of agreements were effected, leading to 
undue benefit to agencies, as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
(i)  In Peddavagu at Jagannathapur project, the origina l agreement proposal 
(March 2005) was for providing an anicut for a leng th of 390 meters. 
Accordingly, the work was awarded to a contracting agency for a contract 
value of ` 118.90 crore.  The Internal Benchmark (IBM) for the  work 
estimated by the Department was ` 120.39 crore.  As per this IBM, the 
Department estimated the cost of anicut at ` 65.69 crore.  Subsequently, the 
agency requested the Department for construction of  barrage / falling shutters, 
instead of an anicut, which was accepted by the Dep artment without any 
reduction in the agreement value.  The Department e stimated the cost of 
construction of the barrage to be ` 62.83 crore.  However, no cost adjustment 
was made, though basic project parameters were chan ged, resulting in undue 
benefit of ` 2.82 crore 21  to the agency. 
Government replied (October 2016) that the savings due to change in the 
scope from anicut to barrage did not cover the cost  of the road bridge over the 
barrage which would be required.  The total cost had increased by ` 3.63 crore.  
The reply was not tenable as the Department had fai led to reduce the cost due 
to change in basic parameters from anicut to barrag e.  Further, the Department 
had also not executed the road bridge till the date  of audit.  Moreover, the 
accepted revised design from anicut to barrage had provision for construction 
of Road Bridge also. 
(ii) In the case of Ralivagu project, the agreement had stipulated design 
discharge of left and right main canals at 1.486 cu mecs 
22  and 0.771 cumecs, 
respectively, as basic project parameters.  It was to have an IP of 6000 acres of 
Khariff as per the DPR.  
However, during execution, the design discharges we re reduced (March 2007) 
to 0.869 cumecs and 0.493 cumecs, respectively.  Si milarly, the lengths were 
also decreased from six km to 5.3 km in respect of left main canal and from 
five km to 4.2 km in case of right main canal.  It was observed that these 
                                                 
20  Government Memo No.34843/Reforms/2006, dated 7 May 2008 
21  (` 65.69 crore - ` 62.83 crore) X (100 - 1.2449)/100; 1.2449 being ten der discount as per 
agreement 
22  Cubic meter per second 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 28  
  
changes were initially adopted in the designs submi tted by the agency though 
not stipulated in the agreement.  Further, the IP w as also changed as 4500 
acres Khariff and 1500 acres Rabi in the agreement,  when compared to 6000 
acres of Khariff as per DPR, for reasons not on rec ord.  This was again 
reduced to 3280 acres Khariff due to urbanization o f Mancherial as mentioned 
in earlier paragraphs. 
However, no cost adjustment was done for reduction in design discharge, 
which was a basic project parameter as per the norm s defined (May 2008) by 
the Government. 
Government replied (October 2016) that the discharg es and lengths of canals 
shown in basic parameters were only a projection an d could be assessed 
accurately only after detailed survey and investigation. 
The reply was not acceptable as it was in contrast with the clarification of the 
Government which had defined basic project parameters (May 2008). 
(iii) The work of construction of Mathadivagu was entrust ed to an agency for 
` 37.80 crore.  The work included construction of a bridge on a distributary for 
crossing National Highway (NH).  As per agreement c onditions 23 , all the 
crossings of canal system in respect of NH, State H ighways, R&B Roads and 
Panchayat Raj Roads were to be provided with suitab le bridges as per the 
standards of the respective Departments and as per the permissions granted by 
them.  The costs of the bridges were deemed to have  been included in the 
contract price quoted and no claim whatsoever on ac count of the condition 
were to be entertained. 
However, the bridge on the distributary was constru cted by National Highway 
Authority of India (NHAI).  Despite this, the Depar tment did not recover the 
cost of the bridge (assessed at 
` 32.55 lakh in May 2008) from the agency.  
The Government replied (October 2016) that recovery  was not affected as the 
provision for NH was excluded from the Internal Benchmark (IBM).  
The reply was not acceptable as the agreement had c learly stipulated that the 
bid value was to include cost of the bridges on Nat ional Highways too.  IBM 
value was to be used only for internal assessment o f the Department and 
tender evaluation.  The bidders had quoted their pr ices based on the tender 
conditions, as per which the costs of the bridges o n National Highways were 
deemed to have been included in the contract price quoted by the bidders. 
(iv)  As per the bid documents of Gollavagu project, the  bidders were advised 
to quote taking into account that the works of the canal systems were likely to 
have several crossings in respect of National Highways etc., and costs of those 
                                                 
23  Clause 21.0 Appendix – OS, “System requirements and conditions” in Volume I part D” 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 29  
  
crossings were to be included in the bid.  The same  condition was included in 
the agreement 24  concluded with the contractor for ` 53.60 crore. 
Scrutiny of records showed that though the Departme nt had included 
construction of crossings in the agreements by the agency, the NHAI 
constructed the crossing for which the Department d eposited ` 2.25 crore 25 . 
The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) had recom mended (September 
2015) to the Government deletion of construction of  NH crossing from the 
scope of the work.  Accordingly, the Department had  deleted NH crossing 
from the scope of agreement.  However, it reduced t he cost of agreement by 
` 14.90 lakh only, instead of ` 2.25 crore deposited to NHAI. 
Government replied (October 2016) that NHAI would n ot have allowed the 
agency to take up the work.  Further, the scope of crossing as per agreement 
was only for a double lane bridge and hence the cos t as per provision made in 
the IBM was recovered from the agency. 
The reply was not tenable as the agreement did not mention the number of 
lanes on the bridge.  Since the works were entruste d on turnkey basis, the 
Department should have recovered 
` 2.25 crore from the agency, which was 
paid by it to NHAI. 
2.1.8.8  Avoidable expenditure  
As per 61 of PS to APDSS, when possession of work a nd site is taken by 
Government, the portion of the work not completed b y contractor is to be 
completed by the Government through another agency at the risk and expense 
of the contractor until whole of the work is completed by other agency.  
In Neelwai Project, the first executing agency had stopped the work after June 
2009.  As no work was done in spite of giving EoT u p to March 2011, the 
contract was terminated (March 2011) by the Departm ent as per clause 61 of 
PS to APDSS.  The remaining work was entrusted (Dec ember 2011) to 
another agency.  The second agency had informed (Ma rch 2012) the 
Department that bund in gorge portion from 1212 met ers to 1325 meters, from 
1600 meters to 1625 meters and from 3960 meters to 4100 meters, stated to 
have been completed by the first agency, was not av ailable on ground.  Since, 
these reaches were outside the scope of the second agreement, the agency 
requested for extra amount for completion of the mi ssing portion.  This was 
accepted by the Department and a supplementary agre ement for ` 79.70 lakh 
was concluded (December 2015) with the second agency. 
The Government replied (October 2016) that the cost  of repair of damaged 
portion for the length of 125 meters would be recov ered from the first agency 
as the first agreement was terminated under clause 61 of PS to APSS. 
                                                 
24  Clause 21.0 Appendix - OS 
25  September 2008 – ` one crore;  March 2011 – ` 1.25 crore 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 30  
  
However, the Department had not initiated any actio n to recover the amount 
from the first agency till the date of audit. 
2.1.9  Completion and Maintenance 
All the five projects were targeted to be completed  within two years. Audit 
observations on completion of projects, achievement  of irrigation potential, 
accrual of benefit contemplated, maintenance of pro ject system and drinking 
water facilities are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
2.1.9.1  Achievement of Irrigation Potential 
Out of the five projects, two projects viz., Mathad ivagu and Ralivagu were 
completed.  IP contemplated and IP created in the s elected projects are shown 
below:  
Table 2.4: Details of Irrigation potential contemplated  
as per DPR and created 
(in acres) 
Sl. 
No. Project  IP Contemplated as 
per DPR for Khariff IP created so far 
1 Gollavagu 9500 4000 
2 Mathadivagu 8500 6900 
3 Neelwai 13000 1000 
4 Peddavagu at Jagannathapur 15000 0 
5 Ralivagu 6000 # 2000 
 Total 52000 13900 
# Target was revised to 3280 acres Khariff and 1500 acres Rabi due to urbanization around 
Mancherial town  
 (Source: Information furnished by Executive Engineers of res pective projects and Chief Engineer 
(Projects), Adilabad during Entry Conference) 
• As may be seen from the table, while Mathadivagu pr oject was completed 
in full to yield intended IP, except for a railway crossing to be completed 
by Railways department, Peddavagu at Jagannathpur, it did not yield even 
partial benefits due to non-completion of head work s. The remaining three 
projects achieved partial IP ranging between 7.66 per cent  (Neelwai) and 
42 per cent  (Gollavagu) of the targeted IP.  
• In DPR of Mathadivagu 18.978 m.cu.m of water was as sessed as the 
requirement for irrigation for 8500 acres.  Against  this, only 6900 acres of 
IP was created due to non-construction of a railway  crossing at the time of 
audit.  On a proportionate basis, irrigating 6900 a cres would require 15.40 
m.cu.m per annum .  Information furnished by Executive Engineer, 
Adilabad division (EEADB) for the past four years s howed that water 
releases in all the years were less than the propor tionate requirement for 
6900 acres as shown below:  

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 31  
  
Table 2.5: Water releases during last four years from  
Mathadivagu for 6900 acres 
 
  2012 2013 2014 2015 
1 Releases for irrigation (in m.cu.m) 
(Requirement – 15.40 m.cu.m) 
5.73 3.21 5.78 4.03 
2 IP that can be served (in acres) 2566 1438 2589 1805 
(Source: Information furnished by Executive Engineer, IB division, Adilabad)  
While the IP created as of 2011 was only 6900, the Department had proposed 
(January 2014) localization of IP of 8750.01 acres.   No joint inspection with 
Revenue Department ( Joint Azmoish ) was, however, conducted.  Without 
localization and Joint Azmoish , actual coverage of land under command area 
could not be confirmed. 
Government replied (October 2016) that created IP w as not related to the 
actual IP irrigated.  Quantity of water released va ried from year to year.  
Further, the crop in the command area was cotton, f or which water 
requirement was less, compared to groundnut and pad dy which were proposed 
in the DPR.  It also stated that Joint Azmoish  with Revenue Department would 
be taken up after execution of canal system. 
The reply was not acceptable since, as per the DPR,  the Department had 
proposed Jowar, Groundnut and Cotton and not Paddy.  
2.1.9.2  Drinking water facilities 
The DPRs of the projects also provided for drinking  water facilities to villages 
en route .  Establishment of drinking water facilities was m entioned as one of 
the objectives in the Administrative Approvals.  Th e number of beneficiaries 
envisaged under the Projects are given below: 
Table 2.6: Details of persons to be benefited with drinking water facilities 
Project No. of persons 
Gollavagu 18650 
Mathadivagu 12500 
Neelwai 16000 
Peddavagu at Jagannathapur 9750 
Ralivagu 9550 
(Source : Administrative Approvals of projects concerned) 
Basic project parameters of respective agreements ( March 2005) also 
stipulated provision of drinking water to villages en route,  by providing 
sluices at appropriate places as per requirement.  In all the DPRs, drinking 
water needs were specifically taken into account.  Water was to be supplied 
through Rural Water Supply (RWS) Department in rural areas. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 32  
  
However, there was no record to show that the I&CAD  Department was 
providing drinking water to villages en route  by itself or through any 
arrangement/ memorandum of understanding (MoU) made  with RWS 
Department. 
Government replied (October 2016) that no separate system was being 
provided for drinking water and that it was to be t aken in conjunction with 
irrigation. 
The reply confirmed that drinking water facilities were not created, though 
contemplated as one of the objectives.  
2.1.9.3  Maintenance of project systems 
As per the agreements, the agency was to be respons ible for maintenance of 
the project for two years or two Khariff seasons, w hichever was later, after 
completion of work.  
In Mathadivagu and Ralivagu projects, the works wer e completed to an extent 
of 96.49 per cent  (July 2011) and 92.06 per cent  (July 2009), respectively. 
However, it was observed that agreements for Mathad ivagu and Ralivagu 
projects were not extended after August 2011 and July 2009, respectively. The 
Department had neither taken over the projects for maintenance nor had 
entrusted the same to any agency. 
In reply, EEADB stated (March 2016) that the agency  had taken up 
Operations and Maintenance (O&M) works before letti ng out water to the 
distributaries every year.  Water regulation and op eration were being done by 
the agency though agreements were not in force for the last five years. 
The reply was not acceptable as the agencies were n ot contractually liable for 
the maintenance of canal system as the agreements w ere not in force after 
August 2011.  Further, O&M was a continuous activity, not to be taken up just 
before letting out water into the distributaries. 
2.1.9.4  Non-utilization of building constructed at dam site  
In Mathadivagu project, the Department had construc ted (December 2011) 
quarters, section office with store room, flood con trol room and Water User 
Association (WUA) meeting hall at a cost of ` 36.76 lakh through the EPC 
agency.  However, it was seen that the infrastructu re had not been utilized till 
date as shown in the photograph below: 

Chapter-II   Performance Audit 
 
 
 Page 33  
  
 
The Executive Engineer, Adilabad stated (April 2016 ) that the WUA meeting 
hall would be utilized whenever meetings would be c onducted and flood 
monitoring would be done during flood operations in  monsoon period. 
However, as confirmed by the EE, no WUA was formed (April 2016) and 
there were no field officials to whom staff quarter s could be allotted or who 
would use the flood control room. 
This indicated that the Department had created infr astructure worth 
` 36.76 
lakh without ascertaining actual requirement. 
2.1.10  Conclusion 
Projects were planned without properly taking into account water availability 
and planning village-wise irrigation potential. Sur vey and investigation 
activities were deficient and delayed.  Submission of designs by the agencies 
was deficient and delayed.  There were also delays in approval of designs. 
R&R activities were taken up with delay leading to grant of extensions of time 
to agencies. Payment schedules were repeatedly revi sed without adequate 
justification on record.  There were instances of c onferring undue benefits to 
the agencies with changes in basic parameters or ow ing of agencies’ 
liabilities by the Department.  Drinking water faci lities, as envisaged, were 
not provided in any of the projects.  Localization of IP created was yet to be 
completed.  Only Mathadivagu project, out of the fi ve sample projects was 
completed and it was serving full IP as intended (e xcepting for IP of 1600 
acres not created due to non-completion of railway crossing); Ralivagu 
project, though completed except for ancillary work , could only serve 3280 
acres against 6000 acres contemplated.  The constru ction of remaining 
projects was in progress even after 11 years. 
2.1.11  Recommendations 
 Tenders should include specifications regarding exp erience in major 
activities like survey, investigation and designing  of projects in 
addition to experience in executing civil works.  
 Department may consider completing R&R activities b efore taking 
up execution of the project works.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 34  
  
 Department may consider prescribing specific timeli nes for approval 
of designs to facilitate completion of projects within time schedules.  
 Department may consider putting in place a mechanis m for 
achieving the objective of drinking water facilitie s along with the 
creation of irrigation facilities.  
 Joint exercises with Revenue Department may be cond ucted within 
specific time schedules to arrive at actual IP created. 
 
 

 
  
Chapter Chapter Chapter Chapter -- --    III III III III     
Compliance Audit Compliance Audit Compliance Audit Compliance Audit    
 

Chapter - III 
Compliance Audit 
Industries and Commerce Department 
3.1  Development of Textile and Apparel Parks 
3.1.1  Introduction 
As part of implementation of government policies, p lans were formulated to 
establish Textile and Apparel Parks starting from 1 995-96. The objective of 
setting up of these parks was to increase textile e xports and to generate 
employment opportunities in handloom and textile se ctor. The agencies 
chosen to implement them were the Directorate of Ha ndlooms and Textiles 
(DHT), Telangana State Industrial Infrastructure Co rporation Limited 1 
(TSIIC) and private parties.  Currently there are e ight such Parks in the State 
as detailed in Appendix 3.1 .  Out of the eight Parks, two Parks received 
assistance from Government of India (GoI) under the  Scheme for Integrated 
Textile Parks (SITP) 2, three Parks under Textile Centre Infrastructure 
Development Scheme (TCIDS) and one Park under Criti cal Infrastructure 
Balancing Scheme (CIB) 3.  
Audit reviewed four Parks, two developed by private  parties with Government 
support (Handloom Park, Pochampally and Whitegold Integrated Spintex Park 
Private Limited (WISPL)), one under TSIIC (Apparel Export Park (AEP), 
Gundlapochampally) and one under DHT (Textile Park,  Siricilla). The 
Handloom Park, Pochampally and WISPL received GoI a ssistance under 
SITP, AEP Gundlapochampally under CIB and Textile P ark, Siricilla under 
TCIDS.  The funds allotted, released and expenditur e incurred on these parks 
are detailed in Appendix 3.2 . 
Records maintained at the Offices of the Assistant Directors of the Parks 
developed by DHT, Zonal Managers of the concerned Z ones in case of the 
Parks developed by TSIIC and at the Offices of the private developer were 
reviewed (May-June 2016) to ascertain the reasons b ehind delay and non-
achievement of targets. Significant audit findings are discussed below: 
 
                                                 
1 Andhra Pradesh Industrial Investment Corporation L imited (APIIC) before bifurcation. 
2 SITP was launched in July 2005 to create new texti le Parks of international standards at 
potential growth centres. Under the scheme GoI supp ort by way of grant or equity will be 
limited to 40 per cent  of the project cost subject to a ceiling of ` 40 crore for Parks 
3 Critical Infrastructure Balancing Scheme is for as sistance from GoI for providing 
appropriate infrastructure for the development and growth of exports 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 36  
  
Audit findings 
3.1.2  Preparation of faulty Detailed Project Reports 
Detailed Project Reports (DPR) were prepared to imp lement the Textile and 
Apparel Parks, which envisaged creation of common i nfrastructure and 
common facilities in the Parks.  Out of the four pr ojects reviewed, DPRs of 
two projects were not prepared properly as discussed below: 
In Textile Park, Siricilla, the extent of land earmarked for setting up of units in 
the Park, as proposed in the DPR, could not meet th e demands of the 
entrepreneurs.  Thus, the areas identified for esta blishment of infrastructure 
facilities like cotton processing and sizing units,  texturizing unit and common 
facility centre were sold out to entrepreneurs, lea ving no area for development 
of the above stated facilities.  Further, though th e DPR had recognised the 
problem of water scarcity, an unreliable source was  identified to meet the 
requirements.  The source dried up, leaving the Par k unable to meet the water 
requirement.  Due to non-availability of water, pro cessing units were not 
established and though Common Effluent Treatment Pl ant (CETP) was 
constructed, it could not be used.  Had a reliable water source been identified 
and secured, the situation could have been avoided. 
In case of Handloom Park, Pochampally, the DPR init ially submitted in April 
2006 was revised in May 2008, increasing the total outlay from ` 18.49 crore 
to ` 34.00 crore mainly to improve the common facilities , such as effluent 
collection and treatment system, testing equipment,  etc.  As per both the 
DPRs, 2000 looms were to be installed, whereas only  500 were installed. The 
DPR overestimated the international demand for its products and the increased 
outlay did not serve its purpose. 
3.1.3  Delay in completion of the project 
Audit observed significant time overruns in complet ion of the Parks ranging 
from seven months to 151 months, as detailed in Appendix 3.3 . 
Two projects viz., Textile Park, Siricilla (with a delay of 151 months) and 
WISPL (with a delay of seven months) have not been completed (July 2016), 
even though they were proposed to be completed by D ecember 2003 and 
December 2015, respectively.  
In respect of AEP Gundlapochampally and Handloom Pa rk, Pochampally, 
there were delays of 60 and 42 months, respectively , in completion of the 
Parks.  The delays were attributed to revision of D PRs, problems in 
acquisition of land and delay in conversion of land use. 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 37  
  
3.1.4  Cost overrun 
Out of the four Parks reviewed, in case of two Park s, significant cost overruns 
were observed.  
In Textile Park, Siricilla, it was observed that th ere was increase in the cost of 
the components such as power supply, water supply and internal road network. 
The cost overrun was 
` 4.22 crore, as the Department incurred an expenditu re 
of ` 5.86 crore (July 2016) on the above three component s against the 
originally approved cost of ` 1.64 crore.  Further, the park has not been 
completed even after incurring expenditure of ` 8.88 crore (July 2016), against 
the original outlay of ` 7.73 crore.  
In Handloom Park, Pochampally, there was an overall  increase in the project 
cost by ` 1.04 crore (actual cost of ` 35.04 crore against the approved cost of 
` 34.00 crore). 
The reasons for cost and time overrun are discussed below: 
3.1.5  Non-provision of utilities 
As per Textile and Apparel Promotion Policy of 2005 , State Government was 
to give necessary assistance in providing power, water and other utilities to the 
Integrated Textile Parks developed by the Private P arties. The Government 
was also responsible for providing the same utiliti es to the Parks being 
developed either by DHT or by TSIIC.  Once the unit s in the Parks became 
functional, the developers were required to maintai n the utilities by collecting 
service and user charges from unit holders in the P arks as per the SITP 
guidelines.  TSIIC was also to collect user charges  from the units in the Parks 
developed by it. 
Audit observed that the provision of utilities was deficient in three Parks. 
Textile Park at Siricilla did not have water supply  and WISPL had no water 
supply and connectivity with external roads. In AEP , Gundlapochampally, 
water supply was stopped (October 2010) as unit own ers were not paying user 
charges.  The Park-wise details are given below:  
3.1.5.1  Textile Park, Siricilla 
As per the progress report of the Textile Park at S iricilla as on 30 June 2016, 
water supply and storm water drains were not comple ted.  Construction of 
common facilities like processing, sizing and warpi ng units, creche, medical 
centre and security quarters were not yet started.  The peak water requirement 
in Siricilla Park was estimated to be 1.25 lakh gal lons /day in the DPR.  Till 
the year 2010, the water requirement was met from M anair river at Rallapet at 
a cost of ` 97.63 lakh ( ` 40.85 lakh was reimbursed under TCIDS).  However, 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 38  
  
the supply of water was stopped afterwards, purport edly due to depletion of 
groundwater levels and damage to pipelines carrying  water to the Park.  Audit 
also observed that from April 2011 to November 2014 , no expenditure was 
incurred by the Park Administration for providing w ater to the units.  The 
Assistant Director (Handlooms and Textiles), Karimn agar, who was also the 
Park Administrator, had requested (February 2014) for sanction of ` 2.75 crore 
for drawing water from Lower Manair Dam at Ragudu a nd ` two crore was 
sanctioned (August 2014) by State Government for th e purpose.  A contract 
was entered into (September 2015) with Kaveri Infra  Projects Private Limited 
for construction of the pipeline at a cost of ` 2.61 crore with a stipulation to 
complete the work within six months. However, the w ork has not been 
completed (July 2016).  Meanwhile, the units were m eeting their needs by 
getting water through private tankers. 
3.1.5.2  Whitegold Integrated Spintex Park Private Limited, 
Ibrahimpatnam 
Whitegold Integrated Spintex Park Private Limited h ad requested (November 
2011) the Government for external road connectivity  to National/ State 
Highway.  The Government accepted 4  the request and proposed the road 
connectivity at a cost of ` two crore.  Subsequently, TSIIC requested 
(November 2013) Roads and Buildings (R&B) Departmen t to examine the 
feasibility of developing a service road of Hyderab ad Metropolitan Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board (HMWSSB), instead of the existing R&B roads 
and Panchayat Raj roads connecting the area to the State Highway. R&B 
Department had informed that the road pertained to Panchayat Raj 
Department.  The matter is still pending (August 2016). 
Similarly, water supply was to be provided to the P ark by HMWSSB as per 
Government instructions.  However, the same was not  provided to the Park 
(August 2016).  Thus the Park had no reliable exter nal road connectivity and 
source of water supply. 
3.1.5.3  Apparel Export Park, Gundlapochampally 
As per DPR, the establishment of AEP, Gundlapochamp ally was to be 
completed by December 2003.  However, the works rel ating to approach road, 
internal roads, side drains and street lights were completed during the period 
from March 2004 to March 2010.  More importantly, w ater supply and 
common effluent pipe line from the Park to main sew erage was completed in 
March 2008 and the common waste water treatment plant was established only 
in March 2009.  All these led to considerable delays in completion of the Park. 
                                                 
4 G.O.Ms. No. 162 of Industries and Commerce (Tex) Department dated 30 November 2012. 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 39  
  
As per the agreement between HMWSSB and TSIIC, inte rnal water supply 
was being provided by HMWSSB using the distribution  system developed by 
TSIIC.  TSIIC had been paying the bills for units i n the Park upto 2005, 
irrespective of whether the amount was actually col lected or not.  The TSIIC 
had failed to collect the dues from the unit owners  from the beginning and 
stopped payment of dues to HMWSSB.  Subsequently, w ater supply was 
stopped by HMWSSB due to non-payment of dues to the  tune of ` 35.27 lakh 
in October 2010. 
The TSIIC – Industrial Area Local Authority (IALA) had informed (October 
2010) unit holders to make independent arrangement for water supply.  TSIIC 
had intimated HMWSSB (November 2010) of discontinua tion of water supply 
made to AEP, Gundlapochampally.  The water supply c an be renewed only if 
entrepreneurs approached the HMWSSB or TSIIC entere d into a fresh 
agreement with HMWSSB.  However, no agreement was s igned and the units 
were deprived of reliable water supply. 
3.1.6  Non-achievement of objectives  
Audit observed substantial shortfalls in achievemen t of the objectives of 
increase in export sales and employment generation. 
Shortfall in export sales ranged from 94.8 to 100 per cent .  There were no 
export sales in respect of Textile Park, Siricilla and WISPL against the targets 
of ` 10 crore and ` 650 crore per annum, respectively.  In Handloom Par k, 
Pochampally, the export sales were ` 1.53 crore (upto 2015-16) against 
targeted ` 17.50 crore per annum.  AEP, Gundlapochampally stat ed that 
information relating to export sales was not availa ble and no targets were 
mentioned in the DPR.  
While the shortfall in establishment of units was i n the range of zero to 100 
per cent,  it ranged from 81 to 100 per cent  in employment generation. 
• No units have been established in WISPL so far, res ulting in non-
generation of any employment till date against prop osed employment for 
5000 persons. 
• Handloom Park Pochampally, developed as a single un it, was to install 
2000 looms (cotton looms: 1495; silk looms: 505) as proposed in the DPR. 
However, 500 looms (cotton looms: 425 and silk loom s: 75) could be 
installed (July 2016), and out of these, only 150 t o 200 looms could be 
operated on an average per month due to inadequate working capital and 
other allied reasons.  This resulted in generation of employment for only 
300 to 350 persons on an average per month against the expected direct 
employment of 5050 and indirect employment of 3000 persons. It was also 
observed that the Park had been incurring losses ra nging from ` 0.44 crore 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 40  
  
to ` 4.73 crore since its inception (2009-10 to 2014-15)  and was being 
sustained mainly through grants received from the GoI. 
• In AEP, Gundlapochampally, against 58 units contemp lated, only 56 units 
were established, thereby generating employment for  only 2500 persons 
against the proposed 55350. 
• In Textile Park, Siricilla, out of 192 units propos ed to be established, only 
114 units were completed and functioning as of July  2016.  Against the 
proposed generation of employment for 6600 persons,  the Park could 
generate employment for 1250 only. 
3.1.7  Non-availability of financial assistance from Gover nment of 
India 
As mentioned in preceding Para 3.1.1, out of four P arks, GoI did not release 
full assistance to Textile Park, Siricilla due to d elay in completion of work as 
discussed below. 
The GoI share was 
` 4.11 crore out of the approved project outlay of ` 7.73 
crore.  However, due to the slow progress of the Pa rk and also due to 
discontinuation of TCIDS scheme, the GOI stopped its financial support to the 
Park from September 2011 after releasing ` 2.83 crore towards development of 
common facilities like common processing unit, sizi ng unit, sectional/ beam 
warping unit, etc on reimbursement basis.  Thus the  department lost the GoI 
assistance to an extent of ` 1.04 crore and this affected the construction of 
storm water drainage in the Park, for which an amou nt of ` 0.24 crore had 
been committed by Government of India. 
3.1.8  Idling of infrastructure created 
In the Textile Park Siricilla, the Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) 
established in 2006 at a cost of ` 1.04 crore was not functional due to water 
problem.  The last trial run of the CETP was conduc ted in September 2008 
and has been lying idle since then.  Due to water s carcity, even further trial 
runs had not been conducted, and as a result it was  not possible to ascertain 
whether the CETP facility was in working condition. 
Similarly, in AEP Gundlapochampally, the Common Was te Water Treatment 
Plant (CWWTP) has not been functioning in the Park since November 2011 as 
the unit holders, responsible for running the plant , were unable to form an 
association or collect charges for running it.  As a result, the sewage water has 
been flowing through open spaces, thereby causing p ollution.  No permission 
or clearance from Pollution Control Board was obtained. 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 41  
  
3.1.9  Allotment of plots to non-textile/ apparel units in  Apparel 
Export Park at Gundlapochampally 
As per the terms of sale deeds, each allottee was t o use the land for setting up 
of factory for readymade garments only and no struc ture/ building other than 
factory building was to be put up without prior per mission from TSIIC. 
Change in the line of manufacturing activity was to  be approved by the 
Corporation. 
A total of 126 plots were sold to 58 investors to s et up apparel units.  It was 
observed from the Joint Inspection Report on AEP co nducted by the officials 
of DHT and TSIIC (April and May 2016) that out of t he 58 units, 45 had 
commenced production and, out of these 45 units, 31  units were not involved 
in manufacturing of garments.  Though 16 units had been approved by TSIIC 
to change their line of activity, the remaining 15 units had changed their line 
of activity without the approval of TSIIC.  As 53 per cent of the total units 
belonged to non-textile/ apparel manufacturers, the  Park had not achieved its 
intended purpose of being an apparel hub. 
There was no mechanism in TSIIC to ensure that cond itions of sale deeds 
were being adhered to. Audit observed that there wa s no clarity in the sale 
deeds as to the course of action to be taken in the event of change in the line of 
activity by the developers without the approval of TSIIC. 
The Zonal Manager replied (August 2016) that notice s had been issued to the 
units for changing their line of activity without prior approval. 
3.1.10  Financial impact on Government exchequer in terms of 
acquisition of land, incentives received under State 
Industrial Policy 
The acquisition of land for these Parks followed different procedures, based on 
the implementing agency and the scheme, if any, und er which they were 
covered.  
• In case of Parks developed under DHT, the land was being provided by 
the District Administration 
• As per the SITP guidelines, in case of Parks develo ped by private 
parties, the entity developing the Park was to proc ure the land. The 
State Government was to assist in identification an d procurement of 
suitable land. 
• The objectives of establishment of the Park include d creation of 
common infrastructure for pre-weaving operations su ch as warping, 
sizing and yarn processing, design development and textile processing. 
Processing unit is required for removing impurities  from the woven 
fabric in its loom state and for further treatment to develop its full 
textile potential. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 42  
  
For Textile Park at Siricilla, DHT had requisitione d (February 2002) the 
District Collector for 75 to 100 acres in Siricilla  and was allotted (May 2003) 
60 acres of land.  All the plots demarcated were al lotted to weaving units, 
leaving no space for setting up cotton sizing and dyeing units, processing units 
and common facility centre.  Additional 15 acres we re released (October 
2004) to the Park on further requisition by DHT (Ap ril 2004) for extension of 
the Park.  It was noticed by the Department (July 2 011) that only 11 acres 
were available against 15 acres allotted.  Even aft er five years (June 2016), 
survey to finalise the 15 acres had not been taken up .  Audit observed that in 
the absence of Common Facilities Centre and processing units, the project was 
not fully functional and could not achieve its intended objective. 
• Whitegold Integrated Spintex Park Private Limited h ad purchased 
(February 2012) 135 acres in Ibrahimpatnam from TSIIC.  As per the sale 
deed, the plot was situated in an industrial Park.  However, as per the 
Draft Metropolitan Development Plan 2031 of Hyderab ad Metropolitan 
Development Authority (HMDA), the land was classifi ed as ‘Residential, 
Public, Semi-public and utilities’.  Due to this di fference in classification, 
the layout approval from HMDA for the Park was obta ined only in 
December 2015 after paying ` 1.07 crore to the Authority for the same as 
development and processing charges.  This delayed t he establishment of 
the Park by seven months (upto July 2016), which ot herwise was to be 
completed by December 2015. 
• In respect of Handloom Park Pochampally and AEP Gun dlapochampally, 
Audit observed that there were no issues relating t o land.  The land was 
acquired by the developers themselves. 
Due to the delayed acquisition of additional land f or Textile Park, Siricilla and 
delayed re-classification of land in respect of WIS PL, the expenditure so far 
incurred by the State Government ( ` 6.04 crore) and GoI ( ` 14.34 crore) could 
not yield expected results. 
3.1.11  Conclusion 
The establishment of handloom and textile parks was  intended to increase 
employment and export of handlooms and textiles. Th ere were delays ranging 
from seven to 151 months in establishment of parks due to non-completion of 
utilities.  Functioning of parks was hampered due t o non-provision of 
amenities and utilities.  Further, units changed th eir line of activity without 
approval of competent authority.  This resulted in non-achievement of 
objectives of parks as envisaged. 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 43  
  
Agriculture and Co-operation Department 
3.2  Implementation of Crop Loan Waiver Scheme 
3.2.1  Introduction 
Government of Telangana had introduced (August 2014 ) Crop Loan Waiver 
Scheme 5 (Scheme) to alleviate the hardship of the farmers due to their 
indebtedness. The scheme covered short term production loans 6 and crop loans 
against gold, disbursed by lending institutions 7 to farmers.  Each farmer family 
was eligible for waiver of crop loan amount which w as disbursed and 
outstanding as of 31 March 2014 together with appli cable interest on 
outstanding loan up to 31 August 2014 or ` one lakh per farmer family 8, 
whichever was lower.  The expenditure under the sch eme was estimated to be 
` 17000 crore to be released in four installments of ` 4250 crore each.  Out of 
these, two installments of ` 4250 crore and ` 4086 crore were released in 
September 2014 and July/August 2015. 
The scheme was implemented by the Department of Agr iculture and 
Cooperation.  The Department functions under the ad ministrative control of 
the Principal Secretary, who is assisted by the Dir ector of Agriculture, 
Additional and Joint Directors of Agriculture (JDA) in the Directorate and one 
Joint Director for each district other than Hyderabad.  
Audit of the implementation of the scheme was taken  up to assess whether the 
beneficiaries selected were eligible for the waiver  and implementation of the 
scheme was as per the scheme guidelines.  A test-ch eck of records pertaining 
to the periods 2014-15 and 2015-16 relating to the scheme in offices of three 
out of nine JDAs viz., Mahabubnagar, Nalgonda and W arangal, and Office of 
Director of Agriculture were scrutinised during May - July 2016 
3.2.2  Budget releases and Expenditure 
Details of release of funds and expenditure incurre d for implementation of the 
scheme during 2014-15 and 2015-16 in the State are as follows: 
Table 3.1: Budget releases and Expenditure 
(`` `` in crore)  
Year  Releases  Expenditure  Unspent amounts 
refunded as per UC  
Number of 
beneficiaries 
2014-15  4250  4040  171.32 35,29,944 2015-16  4086  4040  Not available 
(Source:  Budget figures of 2014-15 and 2015-16, Socio Economic Survey 2016 and records of the department) 
                                                 
5 G. O. Rt. No. 69 Agriculture and Cooperation (Agri . II) Department dated 13 August 2014 
6 A loan given in connection with the raising of cro ps which is to be repaid within 18 
months 
7 Includes scheduled commercial banks, cooperative c redit institutions (including urban 
cooperative banks) and regional rural banks 
8 Defined as head of family, spouse and dependent ch ildren 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 44  
  
In the sampled districts, JDAs had released ` 3509.23 crore to banks of which 
an amount of ` 3441.68 crore was utilised for implementation of sc heme 
during 2014-15 and 2015-16.  The position of releas e and utilisation of funds 
in the test-checked districts were as under: 
Table 3.2: Budget release and utilisation of funds 
 (`` `` in crore)  
District  Year Releases  Expenditure  
Unspent amount 
remitted into 
Government 
account as per UCs  
Number of 
beneficiaries  
Mahabubnagar  2014-15 681.46  673.91  7.55 5,98,990 2015-16 673.91  671.75  2.15 
Nalgonda  2014-15 633.61  587.86  45.89 4,96,629 2015-16 587.86  587.86  Not available 
Warangal  2014-15 472.24  460.15  12.06 4,03,856 2015-16 460.15  460.15  Not available 
Total  3509.23 3441.68  14,99,475 
(Source:  Records of the Department) 
Audit findings 
3.2.3  Improper verification of beneficiaries 
The stages of beneficiary identification are given in the chart below: 
Each bank branch prepares Annexure A (list of crop lo ans) and Annexure B (list of agricultural gold loans ). 
They were compared to arrive at Annexure C (list of eligible farmers who had outstanding crop loan toget her 
with agriculture gold loan limited to a maximum exte nt of ` one lakh). Annexures A, B and C were to be 
sent to Lead District Manager (LDM) and District Collector. 
 
At Joint Mandal Level Bankers’ Committee (JMLBC) mee ting, Annexures C containing beneficiaries of 
different bank branches were compared in each mandal  and Mandal Tahsildars checked the land records to 
eliminate fake beneficiaries. Co-operation Departmen t was also to cross-verify Annexures A, B, and C 
pertaining to Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies and District Co-operative Central Banks.  After this, 
final Annexure D (list of farmers with loans from mul tiple banks) was shared with bank branches at mandal 
level 
 
Each bank prepared initial Annexure E based on Annexu re C and the common Annexure D. This Annexure 
was to be exhibited village-wise and social audit was  to be conducted by a team of Mandal Parishad 
Development Officer, Tahsildar, Assistant Registrar/Su b Divisional Level Cooperative Officer and Branch 
Manager. 
 
After social audit and taking into consideration obj ections raised, final Annexure E (village-wise benefi ciary 
list) was to be prepared and displayed at each of ba nk branches after authentication. It was also to be sent to 
the LDM and the District Collector. 
 
District Level Bankers’ Committee convened by LDM sen t district details of loan waivers bank-wise and 
farmer -wise to State Level Bankers’ Committee (SLBC).  SLBC  was to intimate Bank wise, Branch wise 
farmers’ eligible amounts to the Government in Annexure E. 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 45  
  
For release of amount, all the banks consolidated d istrict-wise and village-
wise claims from lists prepared by District Level B ankers’ Committees 
(DLBC) and submitted claims to the Government.  The  amounts were 
reimbursed to the banks by Directorate of Agricultu re through Joint Director 
of Agriculture.  
For release of scheme funds, all banks designated a  nodal branch of each bank 
in the district and informed the details like name of the branch, account 
number (nodal bank account number), to which the loan waiver amount was to 
be credited, etc., to JDA and LDM. The process was to be completed by 
30 September 2014. 
Audit observed that the date for completion of the process was extended 
multiple times and supplementary claims were allowe d based on decisions 
taken by DLBC/SLBC. This continued till June 2015 w hen the JDAs were 
finally instructed by Government to stop the payments. 
This showed that the verification of beneficiaries was not done in time despite 
the mandatory verification process at different lev els as there were additions/ 
deletions in final Annexure E. 
3.2.3.1  Verification of beneficiaries under ‘farmer family’ norm without 
Aadhar 
As per scheme guidelines, verification of beneficia ries by the bank branches, 
elimination of duplicate/multiple financing and res tricting the benefit of loan 
waiver to ` one lakh to a farmer family was to be done at manda l level.  For 
detecting multiple claims by farmers, Aadhar number  of each of the 
beneficiaries was to be recorded in the prescribed Annexures containing list of 
beneficiaries.   
It was observed that, Aadhar numbers were not recor ded in the list of 
beneficiaries (Annexure E) pertaining to six banks viz., SBI, APGVB, HDFC 
Bank, Andhra Bank, Axis Bank and ICICI Bank in the sampled districts in 
more than 95 per cent of the cases. 
Agriculture Department had no mechanism to ensure that the amounts released 
were going to the eligible farmers as it was not in volved in the verification 
process at any stage i.e., preparation of list of e ligible beneficiaries’, 
verification of Annexures A to E and participation in social audit 
.  The Chief 
Secretary to Government and Secretary (Institutiona l Finance), in a meeting 
(June 2015) with the District Collectors, had assur ed that a software package 
would be developed at the Centre for Good Governanc e for updating the 
Aadhar numbers and other details such as voter card s, bank accounts, etc., for 
integrating the data.   In the absence of Aadhar card details, Audit could  not 
verify whether beneficiaries had availed the benefits from multiple sources. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 46  
  
Government stated (November 2016) that the scheme w as implemented in a 
short span of time.  Further, mentioning of Aadhar number in the Annexures 
was not mandatory as few farmers had Aadhar cards.   
However, 95 per cent of the population of Telangana had Aadhar cards 
(December 2014).  Further Department had itself pre scribed mentioning the 
Aadhar card number in Annexures A to E. 
3.2.3.2  Non conducting of Social Audit 
After consolidating the loan details of farmer fami ly members, who had taken 
loans from more than one bank branch (comparing Ann exure C and D), each 
bank was to prepare Annexure E.  Annexure E was the n to be exhibited 
village-wise and social audit was to be conducted b y a team consisting of 
MPDO, Tahsildar, Branch Manager or his representati ve. After conducting 
social audit and settlement of all objections bank- wise the final list of farmers 
was to be prepared in Annexure E (final). This, alo ng with the farmer-wise 
amounts eligible for waiver, was to be displayed at  all bank branches after due 
authentication and sent to the LDM and the District Collector. 
In the sampled districts, documents relating to con ducting of social audit, 
verification and elimination of duplicate/multiple financing of beneficiaries 
were not made available to Audit.   
Government stated (November 2016) that for social a udit the data was sent to 
villages in Annexure E by the banks.  After conduct ing of social audit, final 
village-wise Annexure E was prepared by bank branches and sent to LDM and 
District Collectors. 
However, no document to support the reply was furni shed, during audit or 
even at the time of reply. 
3.2.3.3  Waiver of loan pertaining to beneficiaries of other district 
branches 
In order to avoid the risk of excess loan waiver to  beneficiaries who had 
borrowed funds from multiple mandals, Government ha d clarified (September 
2014) that each lending bank should send village-wi se beneficiary lists for 
social audit to other mandals where the beneficiari es were holding agriculture 
land.  This was to be taken into consideration while preparing Annexure-E. 
Audit observed that the village-wise beneficiary li st was not furnished by the 
banks situated in other mandals.  The verification process was not conducted 
due to the non-availability of details relating to loans taken by the villagers 
from other mandals.  In the three districts test ch ecked, HDFC Bank, Axis 
Bank and ICICI Bank included beneficiaries who had availed of crop loans on 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 47  
  
their agricultural land from the bank branches of o ther mandals in other 
districts. 
The details of accounts and amount waived off (June  2016) in three banks 
were as follows. 
Table 3.3: Details of beneficiaries whose loan amount was waived off 
pertaining to other mandals in sampled districts 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Name of bank 
No. of beneficiaries 
pertaining to other 
districts 
Total amount 
waived off in two 
installments 
Mahabubnagar  
HDFC Bank 245 117.62 
Nalgonda  
AXIS Bank 23 10.01 
HDFC Bank 51 25.50 
ICICI Bank 13 6.50 
Warangal  
HDFC Bank 11 5.50 
ICICI Bank 19 6.33 
Total 362 171.46 
(Source : Records of test checked banks) 
LDMs in the selected districts stated that many of the banks had not submitted 
the lists to them for such cross verification. This  clearly showed that 
Annexures E were prepared without proper verificati on and Government 
instructions were not followed. 
Government stated (November 2016) that the RBI had removed the service 
area approach and the banks could now lend to farme rs of other mandals.  
However, the title deed book was taken by the bank while sanctioning the 
loan, due to which farmers could not avail of loan from other banks.  For 
social audit purpose, the farmers belonging to same  village in the mandal, 
covered by the banks within the mandal were covered  under JMLBC.  But 
there were very few cases as pointed out by the aud it wherein the bankers had 
issued crop loans to farmers of other mandals by ta king their land title pass 
book in the custody of the bank, so that farmers co uld not avail crop loan/ 
other loan from other banks. 
However, Government reply was silent on non verific ation of loans taken by 
the beneficiaries who availed crop loans in multipl e mandals on their 
agriculture lands.  In the absence of beneficiary v erification, the possibility of 
waiver of crop loan in excess of prescribed limit o f 
` one lakh to the 
beneficiary could not be ruled out. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 48  
  
Deficiencies in utilisation of funds 
3.2.4  Scheme implementation by Banks 
3.2.4.1  Waiver of crop loan to ineligible beneficiaries 
The beneficiary unit, as per the scheme guidelines,  was to be a farmer family 
consisting of the head of the family, spouse and dependent children. 
A test-check of list of beneficiaries showed that b anks had extended the 
benefit of loan waiver ( ` 2.75 crore) to 455 Rythu Mitra Groups/Rythu Mitra 
Sangams (RMGs) by splitting the group accounts into  1159 individual 
accounts, though this was against the scheme guidel ines. The details are 
furnished in the table below: 
Table 3.4: Details of loan waiver to Rythu Mitra Groups 
Rythu Mitra Sangams 
(`` `` in crore) 
Name of Bank No. of 
Groups 
No. of 
beneficiaries 
Amount waived 
off 
Mahabubnagar    
Andhra Bank 97 97 0.32 
State Bank of India 32 32 0.15 
APGVB 84 84 0.36 
District Cooperative 
Central Bank* 3 44 0.04 
Nalgonda    
APGVB 17 34 0.11 
State Bank of India 40 40 0.17 
Warangal    
APGVB 166 811 1.56 
State Bank of India 16 17 0.04 
Total 455 1159 2.75 
* in test-checked Devarakadra Branch, Mahabubnagar district only 
(Source : Records of test checked banks) 
Further, as seen from the table, while some banks t reated an entire group as a 
single beneficiary, others treated each group member as a separate beneficiary. 
Government stated (November 2016) that the individu al loan requirement 
prepared by the convener of the group was submitted  to the bank for sanction 
of crop loans. Based on the crop loan sanctioned, w aiver benefit has been 
extended to the farmers under RMG. 
The reply of the Government was not tenable since a s per the scheme 
guidelines, crop loan waiver was to be given only f or farmer families as units. 
In cases where loans were waived off taking groups as individual 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 49  
  
beneficiaries, the possibility of farmer families r eceiving inadmissible excess 
benefits could not be ruled out.  
3.2.4.2  Discrepancies in release of funds 
Audit observed that the scheme guidelines were not followed while releasing 
the amounts, as discussed below: 
• For the release of amounts to banks towards first i nstalment, SLBC was to 
furnish final Annexure E as received from all the L DMs to the Director, 
Agriculture.  However, the data furnished by SLBC w as not as prescribed 
in scheme guidelines i.e., it did not have list of ‘bank-wise branch-wise’ 
beneficiaries.  Instead, it contained ‘mandal-wise bank branch-wise’ list of 
beneficiaries or ‘had different formats’.   
• It was seen that while the Director had sanctioned the total amount to each 
JDA, list of beneficiaries was not communicated alo ng with the sanction.  
There was no mechanism for JDAs to verify whether t he utilisation 
certificates (UCs) furnished by banks corresponded to disbursements made 
to actual eligible beneficiaries. 
• The JDA was required to release the payment to bank branches through the 
nodal bank in his mandal as per the Annexure E rece ived from the 
Director, Agriculture.  However, the JDA released t he payment on the 
basis of a bank-wise statement of amounts received from District Collector 
in violation of the scheme guidelines.   
These discrepancies caused differences between the amounts claimed by 
banks and amounts made available to JDAs for releas e.  Final releases were 
not in line with the initial lists prepared due to improper beneficiary 
verification.  Audit test-checked the documents rel ating to claims and 
disbursements in six 
9 out of 25 banks in Warangal district and observed the 
following deviations: 
Initially, based on decisions taken in DLBC , District Collector had 
communicated (September 2014) to JDA that claims wo rth 
` 240.11 crore 
were to be waived off in these six banks.  Accordin gly, JDA released ` 243.38 
crore to these banks, though finally loans worth ` 227.62 crore were waived 
off till April 2015.  However, as per the data made  available to Director of 
Agriculture by SLBC for first instalment (produced to Audit in July 2016), the 
amount of claims received was ` 229.82 crore.  No explanation was furnished 
to Audit regarding the discrepancy. As the list of beneficiaries were not 
available with the Department, Audit could not veri fy reasons for discrepancy 
in release of funds.   
                                                 
9 AP Grameena Vikas Bank, HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank, Pun jab National Bank, State Bank of 
India and Warangal District Co-operative Central Bank  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 50  
  
As the list of supplementary claims was not furnish ed, Audit could not verify 
whether these were included in the list communicate d by SLBC to the 
Director, Agriculture. Further, neither the list of  beneficiaries for 
supplementary claims nor the final list of benefici aries, to whose accounts the 
amounts were credited under the scheme, was available with the JDAs. 
Government stated (November 2016) that there was no  major deviation from 
guidelines in furnishing of beneficiaries’ data in Annexures-A to E by SLBC.  
The list of beneficiaries, bank branch-wise, was pr epared by banks and was 
available with bank branches, District Collectors, LDM and mandal level 
team. The Department released the actual amount onl y as mentioned in the 
Annexures of bank branches.  
However, JDAs did not maintain list of beneficiarie s, because of which no 
verification could be done by the Department. 
3.2.4.3  Discrepancies in amounts waived off  
Under the scheme, loan waiver was applicable to the  outstanding crop loan 
and gold loan as on 31  March 2014, along with the interest upto 31 August 
2014. Government clarified 10  that penal charges including penal interest, 
inspection charges, etc. would not be covered under  the scheme. The only 
amount eligible for waiver other than the loan amou nt was the premium paid 
for crop insurance and notice charges.  In the samp led districts, the UCs 
furnished by nodal banks showed the total eligible amount of claims, together 
with/without interest amount calculated upto 31 Aug ust 2014, as ` 7529.63 
crore 11  
• Audit observed from UCs furnished by banks in the t hree test-checked 
districts that in 26 out of 35 banks, interest clai med upto 31 August 2014 
was in excess when computed at seven per cent  per annum 12 .  On the total 
outstanding claim of ` 5229.33 crore as of March 2014, interest claimed 
was ` 336.50 crore, instead of the permissible ` 152.52 crore.  Thus, there 
was excess claim of interest to the extent of ` 183.98 crore. The banks 
confirmed that they had utilised the amount to waiv e off the loans which 
had higher interest rates on account of non-repayme nt of loans and had 
included other charges like inspection charges in t he outstanding loan 
amount.  Though the banks had undertaken to refund the excess amount, 
neither the banks had refunded the amount on their own nor did the JDAs 
take any action for the recovery of the excess amou nt of interest charged 
by the banks.   
                                                 
10  In Inter-departmental Committee Meeting dated 14.8 .2014 and errata issued by 
Agricultural and Cooperation Department dated 14.8.2014 
11  Mahabubnagar district: ` 2778.64 crore, Nalgonda district: ` 2739.06 crore and Warangal 
district: ` 2011.93 crore 
12  Interest on crop loans 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 51  
  
• It was observed in the test checked districts that four to 13 banks did not 
claim interest upto 31 August 2014 on the outstandi ng loan of ` 2268.28 
crore as on 31 March 2014 though the scheme guideli nes stipulated that 
the eligible amount of waiver included interest upt o 31 August 2014.  Due 
to non-inclusion of the interest amount, the eligib le farmers were deprived 
of the benefit of interest waiver to the extent of ` 66.16 crore, as detailed 
below: 
Table 3.5: Details of non-claiming of interest amount by banks 
(`` ``  in crore) 
District 
Number of banks in 
which discrepancy 
was noticed 
Eligible 
amount 
excluding 
interest 
Interest amount 
up to 31.08.2014 
not included 
Mahabubnagar  13 out of 29 808.10 23.57 
Nalgonda 8 out of 25 1084.07 31.62 
Warangal 4 out of 25 376.11 10.97 
Total  2268.28 66.16 
(Source : Utilisation Certificates furnished by banks) 
The differences in implementation of the scheme by the banks showed that 
instructions regarding waiver were not clearly communicated. 
Government stated (November 2016) that instructions  were issued to all the 
controllers of bank branches through SLBC about the  interest calculation on 
outstanding crop loans. 
However, in both the cases, the Department took no action to recover the 
excess amount waived off or ensure that the beneficiaries received their dues. 
3.2.4.4  Delay in remittance of unspent balances to JDAs  
Utilisation certificates were to be submitted by al l the bank branches to the 
JDAs within 30 days from the date of receipt of the  amount from the 
Government.  Unutilised amount, if any, was to be remitted to the Government 
accounts within 30 days of release by the Government. 
Audit observed in the sampled districts that the un utilised amounts were 
refunded by banks to the bank accounts of JDAs dire ctly, instead of 
Government account. Further, the details/reasons fo r refunds were also not 
furnished to JDA.   
Audit also observed delay in remitting the amounts.   In Nalgonda district, 
there were delays ranging from 101 days to 233 days  in refund of unutilised 
amount by banks to JDA concerned.  Banks stated tha t the delay was mainly 
due to non-finalisation of list of eligible benefic iaries and delay in 
reconciliation of amounts by banks. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 52  
  
Government accepted the delay in refunding the unut ilised amounts by banks 
to JDAs.  
3.2.4.5  Retention of unspent balances for which utilisation certificates 
were submitted 
In Mahabubnagar district, out of the total release amount of ` 1355.37 crore, 
banks had furnished UCs for ` 1343.62 crore and remitted the unspent 
balances to JDA. 
However, in nodal bank accounts of Andhra Bank and District Co-operative 
Central Bank, 
` 61.98 lakh had been lying in the designated bank ac counts 13  
though UCs were furnished including this amount as ‘being credited to 
beneficiary accounts’.  The details were as follows:  
Table 3.6: Details of amounts retained by the banks  
without waived off 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Name of bank Account No. Amount retained 
Andhra Bank 035011100001167 8.61 
District Co-operative Central Bank 068905000514 53.37 
Total  61.98 
(Source : Utilisation Certificates furnished by banks) 
Three out of eight test-checked bank branches also retained ` 28.83 lakh even 
after furnishing of UCs, without surrendering the amounts to their nodal bank. 
Table 3.7: Details of amounts not surrendered by the banks 
 (`` ``  in lakh) 
Name of bank branch Account No. Amount retained 
State Bank of Hyderabad, ADB, Mahabubnagar 62372058659 26.52 
State Bank of Hyderabad, Devarakadra 62372119716 2.06 
State Bank of India, Bijinepally 34244638341 0.25 
Total  28.83 
(Source : Utilisation Certificates furnished by banks) 
Audit observed that nodal branches not only failed to reconcile the released 
amounts with the amounts credited to beneficiaries’  account by their bank 
branches, they also retained amounts without remitt ing them to Government 
Account. The Department also failed to detect it as  the UCs were not verified 
by them. 
Government stated (November 2016) that books of acc ounts of the banks 
relating to crop loan waiver scheme would be audite d by Co-operation 
                                                 
13  For the receipt of scheme funds from treasury thro ugh JDA and release of funds out of the 
received funds to their bank branches for crediting it to beneficiaries’ loan accounts 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 53  
  
Department in respect of co-operative banks and spe cial audit as per Reserve 
Bank of India (RBI) norms would be taken up in respect of scheduled banks. 
3.2.4.6  Delay in furnishing of utilisation certificates to JDAs 
In the sampled districts, none of the nodal banks f urnished the UCs for the 
utilised amount within 30 days and there were delay s ranging from 137 to 266 
days.   
The delay in furnishing of UCs was mainly due to no n-finalisation of 
beneficiaries and the amounts retained by banks wit hout crediting to 
beneficiaries’ loan account.  Banks did not furnish  list of beneficiaries whose 
accounts were credited, along with UCs. 
In Nalgonda and Warangal districts, nodal banks did  not furnish UCs for the 
second instalment even after lapse of 10 months, wh ich indicated that the 
initial verification of the beneficiaries was not done properly.  
Government stated (November 2016) that there was de lay in sending UCs by 
banks to JDAs as the reconciliation of accounts and  further verification of 
beneficiaries had taken much time for bankers.    
3.2.5  Scheme implementation by Agriculture Department 
3.2.5.1  Delay in remittance of unspent balances by JDAs 
As per the Government instructions, unspent amounts  were to be remitted into 
Government account within 30 days of release of funds.  
The banks had remitted the funds into accounts of J DAs instead of 
Government account. There were delays ranging from 125 to 249 days in 
remittance of unspent amounts of ` 67.65 crore into Government account by 
JDAs after the stipulated time of 30 days from the release of funds.   
The delayed remittance of unutilised funds into Gov ernment account by JDAs 
was due to delayed refund of unutilised amounts by banks. The JDAs also 
waited for banks to remit the entire unutilised amo unt, instead of remitting 
partial amounts as soon as they were received, thereby delaying the process. 
Government stated (November 2016) that the JDAs had  asked the bankers to 
refund the unutilised amounts pertaining to the scheme. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 54  
  
3.2.5.2  Unauthorised operation of bank accounts by JDAs for unspent 
amount refunded by banks 
Out of the total amount of ` 3509.23 crore 14  released to banks, the unspent 
amount of ` 117.66 crore was refunded by banks to JDAs, instead  of remitting 
the amounts directly to Government account.  An amo unt of ` 40 lakh was 
also credited to bank accounts of Nalgonda and Wara ngal JDAs towards 
accrued interest on scheme funds.  As the amounts w ere released on the basis 
of claims, banks should have furnished reasons whil e refunding the amount. 
However, no reasons were furnished by the banks while refunding. 
Further, instead of remitting the unspent amounts r eceived into Government 
account, JDAs irregularly opened bank accounts and parked the unspent 
amounts.  JDAs, Warangal and Nalgonda opened saving s bank accounts and 
JDA Mahabubnagar opened a current account.  Out of ` 117.66 crore 
refunded, ` 67.65 crore was remitted into Government account by  JDAs and 
an amount of ` 45.67 crore were again released by JDAs to nodal ba nks for 
waiving off subsequent claims in three sample distr icts, leaving a balance of 
` 4.34 crore in the JDAs accounts of Warangal and Nal gonda, though this was 
not permissible.  
It was observed that JDA, Nizamabad had utilised 
` 9.70 lakh out of the 
accrued interest on the unspent balances available in saving bank account for 
implementation of other schemes, instead of remitti ng it to Government 
account. 
Government stated that JDAs had to open a bank acco unt for depositing the 
unutilised amounts received from banks through dema nd drafts/ cheques.   
JDAs remitted the unspent amount to Government acco unt after releasing the 
amounts for supplementary claims by banks.   
However, no instructions had been officially issued  allowing JDAs to open 
bank accounts.  The amounts were to be remitted to the Government account. 
The reply was also silent on unauthorised expenditu re incurred from the funds 
in these accounts . 
3.2.5.3  Delay in furnishing of Utilisation Certificates by JDAs for the 
utilised amount 
There were delays ranging from 185 to 229 days in f urnishing of UCs.  JDAs 
Nalgonda and Warangal did not furnish UCs for the s econd instalment due to 
non-receipt of UCs from nodal banks even after laps e of 10 months which 
indicated lack of monitoring.  
Government accepted the delay in furnishing the UCs by JDAs. 
                                                 
14   First and subsequent releases for initial and sup plementary claims. This is the gross 
amount released and not the net amount 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 55  
  
3.2.6  Conclusion 
The implementation of Crop Loan Waiver Scheme in th e Telangana State to 
alleviate the hardship of the farmers due to their indebtedness through waiver 
of outstanding agricultural loans was not achieved fully.  Proper verification 
of eligible beneficiaries in accordance with scheme  guidelines was not done. 
There was no coordination between various agencies involved in 
implementation of scheme. There were discrepancies in claiming of interest 
amounts by banks on outstanding crop loans.  While some banks charged 
higher rate of interest on outstanding crop loans, some banks did not claim 
interest thereby depriving the benefit of loan waiv er to farmers. There was 
delay in remittance of unspent amounts into Governm ent account and in 
furnishing of utilisation certificates. The departm ental officers in some cases 
parked the unspent amounts received from banks unau thorizedly in separate 
bank accounts and in one case part of interest rece ived was utilized for 
implementation of other schemes. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 56  
  
Transport, Roads and Buildings Department 
3.3  Telangana Road Sector Project 
3.3.1  Telangana Road Network 
The Roads and Buildings Department, Telangana has i ts jurisdiction over 
National Highways (NHs) - 2592 Km, State Highways a nd Major District 
Roads (MDR) - 11211 Km, Rural Roads - 9014 Km, and Core Road 
Network 15  (CRN) - 4020 Km, totalling 26837 Km.  In the combi ned State of 
Andhra Pradesh, CRN was managed and maintained by t he Andhra Pradesh 
Road Development Corporation (APRDC).  After the St ate of Telangana was 
formed in June 2014, it is being managed and mainta ined by the Roads and 
Buildings Department of Telangana. 
In order to reduce the growing funding gap in road sector, a Loan Agreement 
(January 2010) was entered into between Internation al Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and Governmen t of India (GoI). 
After bifurcation, the loan was divided and a separ ate Project Agreement was 
concluded between IBRD and Government of Telangana (5 May 2015), fixing 
Telangana’s loan at 66.5 Million USD, including exp enditure incurred on the 
project during the period before bifurcation.  As p er the original agreement, 
the project was to be completed by June 2015.  Afte r bifurcation of State into 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, it was rescheduled to May 2017. 
3.3.2  Project Components 
As per the terms of loan agreement, the project com prised (a) Road 
Improvement component, (b) Public Private Partnersh ip (PPP) facilitation 
support component, (c) Institutional Strengthening component and (d) Road 
Safety component. 
3.3.3  Implementing agencies 
The Roads and Buildings Department, Telangana (T-RBD) was entrusted with 
the overall responsibility for implementation 16  of the project.  Audit of the 
implementation of the Project was conducted to asce rtain whether the Project 
components were effectively implemented in a timely  manner and the 
objective of providing better quality, higher capacity and safe roads to users in 
a sustainable manner through enhanced institutional  capacity had been 
achieved. 
                                                 
15   The roads with high traffic and strategic importa nce selected from the State Highways and 
Major District Roads 
16  In the combined State of Andhra Pradesh, the Roads  and Buildings Department of Andhra 
Pradesh assisted by APRDC was the implementing agency  

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 57  
  
Audit examined the project records since inception (January 2010) to March 
2016 at Roads and Buildings Department, Telangana H eadquarters Office 17  
and seven field Divisions 18  during the period from January to February 2016 
and during June to July 2016.  Six out of 11 Long-t erm Performance Based 
Maintenance Contracts (LTPBMC) works and all upgrad ation packages were 
selected for test check.  
Audit findings 
3.3.4  Road Improvement Component 
The component comprised upgradation of 125 km of pr iority state highways 
and maintenance of 1717 km of the CRN under Long-te rm Performance based 
Maintenance Contracts. 
3.3.4.1  Upgradation packages 
APRDC had engaged a consultant (2007) for feasibili ty study, design and 
detailed engineering of 2000 km of state roads. Based on the recommendations 
of the consultant, Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation had 
identified Kandi – Shadnagar (KS-05) road and Jagit yal – Peddapalli (JP-06) 
road for upgradation under the project.  
(i) Kandi – Shadnagar Road : The Kandi – Shadnagar (KS-05) road provides 
connectivity between NH 7 and NH 9.  The road start s at Kandi on NH 9 and 
passes through Shankarpalli, Chevella and ends at S hadnagar on NH 7.  The 
upgradation work was awarded to a contractor in Aug ust 2012 at a contract 
value of 
` 163.03 crore for completion by March 2015.  The cos t was later 
revised (September 2015) to ` 192.31 crore due to the proposal for four laning 
of the road stretch from 12.540 km to 35.050 km. 
The observations on this up-gradation work are discussed below: 
• Granting of extension of Time without delay damages : As per the 
agreement, the work was stipulated for completion b y March 2015. 
Extension of Time (EoT) for the work was given (Mar ch 2015) upto 30 
September 2015, based on the request of the contrac tor.  The consultant 
appointed for supervising the work recommended (Nov ember 2015) 
termination of the contract, owing to dismal progre ss.  The Department 
accordingly requested (December 2015, April 2016 & May 2016) the 
Government to terminate the contract and entrust it  to a new contractor so 
as to utilize the loan amount before closure of the  agreement with IBRD 
                                                 
17  Engineer-in-Chief (R&B), Roads, CRN & Joint MD, AP RDC, Hyderabad  
18  EE, R&B Divisions at Bodhan, Hyderabad, Jagtial, K alwakruthy, Nirmal, Sangareddy and 
Wanaparthy 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 58  
  
(May 2017).  Government, however, instead of termin ating the contract, 
decided (June 2016) to grant EoT up to May 2017 wit hout levying 
damages on the condition that the contractor would furnish additional 
performance security of ` 10 crore.  
Audit observed that granting of EoT on furnishing o f additional 
performance security was not governed by the contra ct.  As per clause 8.7 
of the agreement, delay damages upto a maximum of 1 0 per cent  of final 
contract price had to be levied for non-completion of work within 
stipulated time.  Despite continued slow progress, the Department had not 
levied delay damages of ` 19.23 crore while extending the completion 
time.  This resulted in extension of undue benefit to the contractor. 
• Changes in the scope of work at the fag end of loan  closure period: 
During execution, the Government accorded approval (May 2015) for 
modification of the existing proposal of upgradatio n from double lane 
between Kandi – Chevella to four-lane from Shankarp alli to Chevella 
deleting the stretch from Kandi to Shankarpalli and  entrusted the work to 
the existing contractor.  
It was observed that though the contractor had not shown interest in 
completing the original work and the consultant as well as the Department 
had recommended termination of the contract due to slow progress, the 
additional work of four-laning was also awarded (Oc tober 2015) to the 
same contractor with additional scope worth of 
` 29.28 crore at the fag end 
of the loan closure period.  During the extended pe riod upto September 
2015, the contractor completed only 40 per cent  of the original scope of 
work.  Despite dismal progress, awarding the additi onal work to the same 
contractor was injudicious.  The contractor’s work progress till July 2016 
was only 39 per cent inclusive of additional work. 
(ii) Jagityal – Peddapalli Road : The work of Jagityal- Peddapalli road  
(JP-06) for a length of 58.750 Km was awarded to a contractor in March 2010 
for ` 64.01 crore and the work was completed in December, 2013. 
 The observations on this upgradation work are discussed below: 
• Irregular Issue of Taken Over Certificates: The Department had issued 
Taken Over Certificates (TOC) for the Sections as p er clause 10.1 of the 
agreement. The date of TOC of Section I comprising 31.360 Km was  
5 July 2013.  Similarly, the date of TOC of Section  II comprising 27.390 
Km was 31 December 2013. 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 59  
  
However, some components were still pending for completion when TOCs 
were issued.  This included works worth ` 1.01 crore for Section I and 
` 1.89 crore for Section II.  Details are given in Appendix 3.4. 
While granting TOC for Section I, the department ha d instructed the 
contractor to complete the balance works by October  2013.  However, 
these works remained unattended even though TOC of Section-II was 
issued.  It may be mentioned here that the consulta nt appointed for 
monitoring the work had issued many notices to the contractor to complete 
the works.  Though the Department extended the Defe ct Notification 
Period 19  (DNP) upto June 2015, the contractor has not compl eted all the 
balance works. 
The department deleted (March 2015) certain items o f works like 
construction of bus shelters, drains, access roads,  and minor bridges etc., 
worth 
` 1.46 crore from the scope of work after issuing TOC s citing 
reasons such as problems in land acquisition, shift ing of utilities etc.  The 
financial implication of some of the works like con struction of minor 
bridges and construction of slab culverts has not b een included in the 
above figure. However, the problems cited for delet ion were not 
mentioned either in the records relating to these c omponents or in the 
notices issued to the contractor.  These deleted works will have to be taken 
up through separate contracts, which may lead to in crease in cost.  The 
situation could have been avoided had the Departmen t insisted upon the 
contractor to complete the work before issuing TOCs. 
• Non submission of Maintenance Manual: As per Task 4.7 of 
Consultant’s Methodology 20 , the Construction Supervision Consultant 
(CSC) supervising the work was to prepare a Mainten ance Manual 
outlining the routines to be adopted for maintenanc e of the roads and 
bridges which would be adopted during and beyond DN P.  It was to be 
submitted within 12 months from the date of commenc ement of the work 
being supervised by him.  However, the same had not  been submitted by 
the consultant though the Jagityal-Peddapalli road has been taken over by 
T-RBD and DNP was over in December 2015. 
The Department replied that the Manual was under pr eparation and would 
be submitted.  However, the Manual was to be adopted during the DNP.  
 
                                                 
19  the time line to complete the balance works 
20  Agreement with the Consultant 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 60  
  
3.3.4.2  Long Term Performance Based Maintenance Contracts 
Telangana Roads and Buildings Department had taken up 11 works across 
various districts in Telangana under Phase - I & II  under Long Term 
Performance Based Maintenance Contracts which provided for maintenance of 
CRN.  The stated economic benefits of these works w ere savings in vehicle 
operating costs, travel time costs, distance and ma intenance costs.  While the 
Phase-I works were completed by March 2014, Phase-I I works were nearing 
completion. 
As per the Project agreement, the T-RBD had to maintain a length of 1717 Km 
for a five year period under LTPBMC.  It was, howev er, observed that the 
works were awarded only for a length of 1663 Km.  T hus there was a shortfall 
of 54 Kms in initial award of works.  The Departmen t had not stated specific 
reasons for short award of work. 
(i) Absence of Strategic Road Development Plan : Audit observed that  
T-RBD had no strategic plan in place for improvemen t/ widening of 
MDR/Rural Roads. The maintenance works were brought under other schemes 
on ad hoc basis. 
It was observed that in the absence of a strategic plan, out of the 921.243 Km 
of road length test-checked under LTPBMC works, 43. 600 Km had been 
proposed to be upgraded as National Highways and an other 88.200 Km were 
taken up for widening/ improvement by the State Gov ernment.  Both these 
roads were deleted from the scope of the project an d the Department had not 
evolved any replacement plan for the packages, though the terms of the loan as 
well as the agreement did not prohibit taking up of  other reaches for 
maintenance.  This resulted in deletion of stretche s from LTPBMC packages 
and short utilization of loan to the extent of the length deleted. 
For example, for the LTPBMC Package no. 23 in Medak  District, proposal for 
improvement of 114 Km was administratively sanctioned for 
` 36 crore.  After 
bid evaluation (September 2012), the package was ca ncelled by the IBRD 
(May 2013) on the request of the Department, due to  declaration of a major 
stretch under this package as National Highway. Sub sequently, the 
Department had not taken any action to identify any  other stretch under CRN 
for maintenance and failed to utilise the related loan amount. 
Absence of strategic road development plan led to deletion of stretches of road 
after awarding the work and consequent short utilization of the loan.  
(ii) Non evaluation of benefits : As per Section II.A.1 of the Project 
agreement, the T-RBD was to monitor and evaluate th e progress of the project 
on the basis of indicators agreed with the IBRD.  T hough Phase-I works under 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 61  
  
LTPBMC were completed upto March 2014, no study on evaluation of 
benefits was carried out.  It was also observed tha t no analysis was conducted 
to study the trend of accidents. Hence audit could not assess decrease/increase 
in road accidents in respect of completed Phase-I works. 
The Department replied that the APRDC report on the same would be used for 
future guidance.  However, applying the results obt ained in Andhra Pradesh to 
Telangana would be injudicious as the problems face d by the states might not 
be the same.  
(iii) Remedial actions not taken despite survey res ults showing marginal/ no 
improvements in LTPBMC works : The APRDC had appointed (December 
2010) a consultant to carry out the Road User Satis faction Survey (RUSS) for 
all the package works taken up under the Project.  The goal was to help in 
improving road transport in State by giving senior management in the RBD an 
insight into the issues raised by road users and th ereby making better future 
strategic and operational decisions.  The survey on  these roads was to be 
conducted twice, i.e. before implementation (RUSS-I ) and during 
implementation (RUSS-II) of works.  The consultant had submitted reports for 
RUSS-I in March 2013, RUSS-II in August 2015 for th e combined State and 
RUSS-II in June 2016 exclusively for Telangana Stat e.  The report was to be 
made public as per clause 3.2 of the contract agreement with the consultant. 
As per the survey results, the Project had not show n considerable 
improvement over the existing road features (before  commencement of these 
works), in terms of overall user satisfaction and i n particular road safety 
aspect.  Despite this, the Department had neither t aken any action on the 
recommendations/ suggestions made therein nor made the report public. 
The Department stated that the Report would be made  public after 
incorporation of all suggestions/ information.  
3.3.5  Public Private Partnership Facilitation Component 
The component was included to strengthen the capaci ty of the Government to 
develop selected high traffic density corridors under Public Private Partnership 
(PPP), via toll revenues and viability gap support from the Central 
Government.  Except for one PPP in Telangana i.e. H yderabad – Karimnagar– 
Ramagundam road, for which agreement had been execu ted by APRDC in 
August 2010, Audit observed that no further studies  were conducted to 
identify high traffic density corridors under PPP arrangement by T-RBD.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 62  
  
3.3.6  Institutional Strengthening Component 
This component was to provide technical assistance,  training and advisory 
services for strengthening of T-RBD, with requisite  capacity for its 
responsibilities in managing the CRN and aiding in various aspects of project 
implementation, including the Asset Management Prog ram, the Governance 
and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) and the Insti tutional Strengthening 
Action Plan (ISAP), plus associated monitoring and coordination.  The 
following observations are made: 
3.3.6.1  Non-formation of Project Implementation Unit 
A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was to be estab lished within T-RBD for 
assisting it in the implementation of the Project i n the areas of procurement, 
contract management, financial management, safeguar ds, environment and 
social management, etc.  
It was observed that PIU and sub-committees were not formed even after lapse 
of more than a year after conclusion of the amended loan agreement.  Thus the 
assistance/ support in implementation of the projec t, envisaged in loan 
agreement, was not utilized. 
The Department replied that the CRN wing was functi oning as the PIU for the 
Project and though a sub Committee was not formally  constituted, the works 
were being reviewed periodically.  
However, the CRN wing had no staff with background in financial, 
environmental or social management which adversely affected the 
implementation of the Project.  
3.3.6.2  Non-implementation of recommendations of consultant  
The Government of Andhra Pradesh had accorded Admin istrative Sanction 21  
(February 2011) for the work “Consultancy Service t o Institutional 
Strengthening Action Plan” (ISAP) for ` 5.50 crore.  The work was awarded 
(March 2011) to a consultant for ` 9.49 crore for completion by December 
2013.  
The Consultant had submitted (February 2014) recomm endations for the 
combined State.  The Department did not take any ac tion on the final report 
stating that the Policy of the State was under development. However, after two 
years, the Government extended the services of the consultant (June 2016), 
though the contract had not been awarded. The loan period is due to end in 
May 2017 and the State may lose the opportunity to utilize this component in 
                                                 
21  G.O.Ms.No.28, TR&B R(IV) Department, dated 18 February 2011 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 63  
  
case immediate action is not taken.  Due to non-imp lementation of the 
recommendations and delay in policy formulation, th e intended objective of 
institutional strengthening could not be achieved. 
3.3.6.3  Non-revision of Institutional Strengthening Framework  
As per Section-I (E) of the Project Agreement, the Project Implementing 
Entity was to ensure that the Project was carried o ut in accordance with the 
terms, conditions and procedures set forth in the E nvironmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement & Rehabil itation (R&R) 
Policy Framework, Environmental Management Plans (E MPs), Resettlement 
Acton Plans (RAPs), Governance Accountability Actio n Plan (GAAP) and 
Institutional Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP) etc.   In the light of 
incorporation of Telangana as a new State, the Proj ect Implementing Entity 
was to revise and re-disclose the content of the ab ove policy frameworks so as 
to reflect the new implementation requirements on o r before 31 May 2015. 
Further, the project envisaged formation of an Inst itutional Strengthening (IS) 
Cell to provide support on ISAP implementation, coo rdination and progress 
monitoring. 
Audit observed that neither the revised policy framework was prepared nor the 
IS cell formed.  
The Department replied that revisions were being ex amined in consultation 
with the Bank experts. The proposal for engaging co nsultants for ISAP had 
been submitted to IBRD and the IS cell would be ini tiated after the 
formulation of ISAP. 
However, as the loan period is due to end in May 20 17, it is unlikely that the 
component would be completed due to paucity of time. 
3.3.6.4  Non-adherence to Governance Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) 
The GAAP referred to the governance and accountabil ity action plan of the 
Project Implementing Entity adopted on April 1, 200 9 which set out the key 
actions to be undertaken by it to strengthen govern ance, transparency and 
accountability under the Project.  The same plan wa s adopted by Telangana 
State after bifurcation.  
However, the GAAP was not adhered to as discussed below: 
(i)  As per the agreed disclosure policy under GAAP, th e Department needed 
to disclose information related to the Project for allowing greater access to 
information including disclosure of mid-term review  reports, environmental 
and social safeguard information/policies, audit re ports, results of the road 
user satisfaction surveys etc.  The expectation for the RBD, besides complying 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 64  
  
with on-demand access to information, was to fully comply with provisions on 
suo motu  disclosure under section 4 of the RTI Act. 
Audit observed that the Department had not establis hed a website, though 
required as per the policy for disclosure of the project related information. 
(ii)  The GAAP inter alia included third party field-based physical 
verification of quality by reputable engineering un iversity professors and their 
post-graduate students to ensure that the contracto r, the supervision consultant 
and the Department were following the agreed engine ering design in the 
construction of the proposed roads projects.  Howev er, such a monitoring of 
the project works was not undertaken, though Phase- I of the LTPMBC works 
were completed (2014) and Phase-II works were nearing completion (2017). 
The Department replied that as per Supervision Matr ix in the Project 
Appraisal Document, the need for engaging universit y professors and students 
had to be assessed by IBRD.  As such, it had no role in it. 
The reply was not tenable since as per the Procurem ent Plan approved by 
IBRD, the third party field-based physical verifica tion was to be done and the 
Government had given administrative sanction for the same. 
3.3.6.5  Road Management System  
As a part of institutional strengthening, a Road Ma nagement System (RMS), 
to significantly improve the Road Development Corpo ration (RDC)/T-RBD 
planning for both capital and maintenance budget re ceived from various 
sources, was to be rolled out.  
The consultancy work to establish RMS was awarded ( April 2011) to a 
consultant for 
` 6.18 crore.  The consultant had not delivered the o utput owing 
to non-furnishing of basic road data by the APRDC i n the erstwhile combined 
State.  After bifurcation of State, though T-RBD ha d compiled road data 
relating to 9000 Km out of a total requirement of 2 4,245 Km, the Department 
neither engaged a consultant for establishing the R MS nor took any action to 
complete the balance road data collection.  It was observed that the draft 
Request for Proposal (RFP) for appointing the consu ltant had been submitted 
to IBRD for no-objection in July 2016 and the contract was yet to be awarded.  
3.3.7  Road Safety Component 
This component was to help in providing safer road corridors by initiating 
measures to reduce road accidents on major corridor s by assisting the  
T-RBD to:  

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 65  
  
(a)  Undertake ‘demonstration projects’ on selected  CRN corridors;  
(b)  Carry out an extended black-spot 22  improvement program; and  
(c)  Implement institutional and policy action plan s for improving the State’s 
road safety responsibility framework and capacities. 
3.3.7.1  Development of a demonstration corridor 
The Demonstration (demo) corridor was to be a model  corridor to be 
developed with multi sector road safety measures ad opted by different 
Departments viz., Roads and Buildings, Transport, P olice and Medical & 
Health.  Taking into account the results of the dem onstration project, the 
Department was to develop and adopt a policy and strategy for improving road 
safety in Telangana by 31 December 2016. 
Considering the increase in number of accidents due  to high traffic and also 
due to diversion of traffic from NH9 to NH7, the Go vernment of Andhra 
Pradesh had identified (January 2010) Hyderabad - B ijapur Road as the demo 
corridor to test and implement a new road safety pr ogramme. It was proposed 
to undertake geometric improvements to the road, st reet lighting, translocation 
of trees etc.  The work was awarded (February 2014)  to a contractor for 
` 13.37 crore for completion in 12 months.  On scruti ny of records relating to 
the work, the following audit observations are made: 
• The financial progress of the work after more than 29 months was only 
71 per cent . Three curve improvement works were not taken up f or 
want of forest clearance and two junction improveme nt works were not 
taken up as the utilities had not been shifted. 
• Procurement of goods/services by other stakeholder Departments was 
not done due to multiple modifications and delay in  submission of 
estimates. The civil works were yet to be completed .  Lack of co-
ordination among the stakeholder Departments result ed in delay in 
procurement of goods/ services for demo corridor. 
The Department in its reply accepted that finalizat ion of the 
specification/estimate and co-ordination with other  Departments had taken 
time.  It also stated that the estimates had since been finalized and 
procurement had already been initiated. The entire process would be 
completed well before the loan closure period. 
                                                 
22  a location on a road where accidents are highly co ncentrated based on historical data  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 66  
  
3.3.7.2  Improvement of Black Spots 
A black spot is defined as a location on a road whe re accidents are highly 
concentrated based on historical data.  A black spo t could be a curve, 
intersection or a regular stretch of a road and can  vary in length, but usually is 
about 200 - 400m. It was proposed to take up 10 bla ck spots improvement 
works under the amended loan agreement and ` 38.84 crore was allocated 
under the programme. 
Though the Department had instructed (April, 2013) all Superintending 
Engineers(SEs) to furnish information regarding fiv e black spots in each 
District along with details for the previous five y ears, only one out of eight 
SEs had submitted the required information, based o n which the Department 
identified two black spots against the target of 10 .  The work was awarded 
(May 2014) for 
` 3.33 crore and completed at a cost of ` 3.27 crore.  However, 
no evaluation study was taken up to ascertain the r eductions in number of 
accidents to assess the effectiveness of the improv ement works.  Besides, the 
loan component was also not fully utilized. 
The Department in its reply stated that the remaini ng eight black spots had 
been identified on Hyderabad-Medak-Bodhan road and the design and 
estimate have been finalized.  It was also stated t hat the road stretch passed 
through forest area and action was being taken for getting permission from the 
Forest Department.  
3.3.8  Non adherence to Procurement Plan timelines 
The Procurement Plan which included different procu rement methods or 
consultant selection methods was to be updated at least annually or as required 
to reflect the actual project implementation needs and improvements in 
institutional capacity. 
It was observed from the records that though timeli nes were given in the 
procurement plan, they were not being adhered to.  Timelines for some of the 
components were not provided and those of others we re revised multiple 
times.  This led to delay in completion of various component/sub-components 
of the project. 
3.3.9  Conclusion 
The Project was taken up to remedy the funding gap in road sector in the 
State.  However, significant deficiencies were obse rved.  Despite continued 
dismal progress, the Department had not levied dama ges on the contractor in 
one case and, instead, had given EoT.  Additional w ork was also awarded to 
the same contractor without considering his poor pe rformance.  The JP-06 

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 
 
 Page 67  
  
upgradation package, although stated to have been c ompleted, remained 
incomplete and certain amenities were deleted, inst ead of getting them 
executed by the contractor.  Due to absence of stra tegic road development 
plan, road stretches were deleted from the scope of  contract due to their 
conversion as NHs or having been taken up under oth er State schemes 
resulting in short utilization of the loan.  No eff orts were made by T-RBD to 
fill the gaps by identifying alternate roads in lie u of the deleted stretches.  The 
PPP Component of loan was underutilized.  After bifurcation, sufficient efforts 
were not made towards Institutional Strengthening a nd separate PIU was not 
formed.  The works relating to Demo corridor remain ed incomplete, two 
works in respect of black spot improvements were co mpleted against the 
proposed 10 and road safety action plan was lagging behind the schedule. 
 
Irrigation and Command Area Development Department 
3.4  Excess payment of price escalation for fuel and lubricants 
The work “Investigation, Design, Execution of Tunne l of minimum internal 
diameter 4.00 m ‘D’ shaped/modified horse shoe with  carrying capacity of 
15.30 cumecs water from Dharmasagar tank to Railway  Station Ghanpur in 
Warangal district (Package-IV/Phase-III of JCRDLIS 23 )” was entrusted 
(February 2009) to an agency under EPC 24  turnkey system for ` 855.87 crore 
for completion by February 2012.  Extensions of tim e were granted from time 
to time by the Department up to August 2016.  Total  value of work done and 
paid to the agency was ` 725.92 crore (July 2016), including price adjustment. 
Agreement clause 14.16.1 provided price adjustment of contract prices for 
increase/decrease in cost of fuel.  The rates preva iling in the nearest fuel 
station/stations to work spot on the last day of fi ling bids were to be adopted 
as base rates.  Any increase or decrease of more th an five per cent  over base 
rates was to be compensated in accordance with the following formula. 
  V f = 0.85 x P f /100 x R 1 (F 1 – F0)/F 0 
Where 
Vf =  Increase or decrease in the cost of work done d uring the quarter 
under consideration due to change in the rates for fuels and 
lubricants; 
                                                 
23  JCRDLIS – J.Chokka Rao Devadula Lift Irrigation Scheme 
24  EPC - Engineering, Procurement and Construction 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 Page 68  
  
Pf =  Percentage of fuel and lubricants component of the work; 
R1 =  Value of work done during the quarter; 
F0 =  The average official retail price of High Speed  Diesel (HSD) at 
the existing consumer pumps of IOC/IBP/HP/ Reliance nearest to 
the work spot on the last day of filing the bids; and 
F1 =  The average official retail price of High Speed  Diesel (HSD) at 
the existing consumer pumps of IOC/IBP/HP/ Reliance nearest to 
the work spot on the 15 th  day of the middle calendar month of the 
quarter under consideration. 
The State Level Standing Committee (SLSC) constitut ed by the Government 
was to decide the “Percentage of fuel and lubricants component of the work 
(Pf)” based on the inputs furnished by the Department for each work.  For 
computing the percentage of fuel and lubricants, SL SC was to consider the 
components of total value of fuel in the work and total value of the work.  
Scrutiny of calculations relating to computation of  the P f factor for this work 
showed that for arriving at the P f factor, the SLSC had considered the value of 
civil works only and had excluded the components of  electro-mechanical 
works and hydro-mechanical works from the total val ue of the work.  As a 
result, the P f factor arrived at was 9.283 per cent , instead of 6.273 per cent  as 
explained in the table below: 
Total value of the work ` 855,86,72,500 
Total value of civil works excluding value of 
Electro-mechanical works and Hydro-
mechanical works 
` 578,31,60,000 
Value of fuel and lubricants for the work as 
worked out by Department 
` 53,68,47,379 
Fuel factor (P f) approved by SLSC ` 53,68,47,379  X 100 
` 578,31,60,000  
= 9.283 per cent  
Fuel factor (P f)  to be taken  
(as computed by Audit) 
` 53,68,47,379  X 100 
` 855,86,72,500 
= 6.273 per cent  
The Department, as a result of this, paid ` 13.48 crore calculated at 9.283 per 
cent  towards price adjustment for fuel to the agency on  total value of work 
done for the period from July 2009 to March 2016 (u pto Running Account bill 
No.74) paid in July 2016 against admissible amount of ` 8.74 crore calculated 
at 6.273 per cent .   

Chapter-III   Compliance Audit 
 Page 69  
  
Thus, incorrect adoption of ‘total value of the work’ by the Department for 
computation of percentage of fuel and lubricants for the work, resulted in 
excess payment of 
` 4.74 crore towards price adjustment for fuel. 
Department accepted (December 2016) the error in ca lculation of price 
escalation for fuel.  However, the Department was silent on recovery of excess 
amount paid to the agency. 
Hyderabad 
The 
(LATA MALLIKARJUNA) 
Accountant General 
 (Economic & Revenue Sector Audit) 
Andhra Pradesh and Telangana
Countersigned 
New Delhi  
The
(SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India


 
  
AppendicesAppendicesAppendicesAppendices    
 

Appendix 1.1 
(Reference to paragraph 1.6.3, page 4) 
Department-wise break-up of outstanding Inspection Reports and 
Paragraphs 
Department  
Number of IRs/Paragraphs issued 
up to 31 March 2016 and pending  
as of  30 September 2016  
IRs  Paragraphs  
Agriculture and Cooperation 411 1711 
Animal Husbandry and Fisheries   148 757 
Energy  5 20 
Environment, Forests, Science and 
Technology  
253 789 
Industries and Commerce  136 526 
Information Technology, Electronics and 
Communications  
8 70 
Infrastructure & Investment  4 27 
Irrigation and Command Area Development  730 2304 
Rain Shadow Areas Development 4 13 
Roads and Buildings 224 713 
Works and Projects wing of Finance 
Department 
21 77 
Total 1944 7007 
 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 72  
  
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference to paragraph 2.1.6.1, page 14) 
Details of Original Grant, Supplemental Grant, Re-appropriation, Total Grant, 
Expenditure and Excess or Savings in respect of five Medium Irrigation Projects 
(`` `` in crore) 
Project  
(Head of 
account) 
Year Original 
Grant 
Supple-
mental 
Grant 
Re-
appropriation 
Total 
Grant Expenditure Excess / 
Savings 
Gollavagu 
(4701-03-207) 
2004-05 0.00 0.00 5.68 5.68 2.68 -3.00 
2005-06 5.00 0.00 7.00 12.00 11.97 -0.03 
2006-07 35.00 0.00 12.94 47.94 36.16 -11.78 
2007-08 34.00 0.00 -10.53 23.47 14.11 -9.36 
2008-09 12.50 0.00 0.00 12.50 8.63 -3.87 
2009-10 12.50 0.00 0.00 12.50 4.49 -8.01 
2010-11 11.05 0.00 -3.76 7.29 3.65 -3.64 
2011-12 5.60 0.00 -1.16 4.44 0.84 -3.60 
2012-13 3.36 0.00 -0.27 3.08 3.08 0.00 
2013-14 5.00 0.00 -4.47 0.53 0.53 0.00 
2014-15 2.15 0.00 -1.16 0.99 0.99 0.00 
2015-16 3.25 0.00 0.00 3.25 0.66 -2.59 
Total 129.41 0.00 4.26 133.66 87.79 -45.88 
Mathadivagu 
(4701-03-211) 
2004-05 0.00 0.00 3.78 3.78 1.89 -1.89 
2005-06 5.00 0.00 6.50 11.50 10.08 -1.42 
2006-07 35.00 0.00 -6.35 28.65 21.79 -6.86 
2007-08 35.00 0.00 -13.00 22.00 10.73 -11.27 
2008-09 12.50 0.00 0.00 12.50 7.95 -4.55 
2009-10 5.00 0.00 -2.47 2.53 2.48 -0.05 
2010-11 2.30 0.00 -1.49 0.82 0.19 -0.63 
2011-12 1.50 0.00 1.58 3.08 1.55 -1.53 
2012-13 0.50 0.00 -0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2013-14 2.00 0.00 -0.44 1.56 1.56 0.00 
2014-15 0.50 0.00 -0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2015-16 5.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 0.28 -4.72 
Total 104.30 0.00 -12.89 91.41 58.50 -32.91 
Neelwai 
(4701-03-237) 
2004-05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.95 2.95 
2005-06 6.00 2.95 5.25 14.20 9.87 -4.33 
2006-07 40.00 0.00 3.00 43.00 34.67 -8.33 
2007-08 39.00 0.00 0.00 39.00 10.55 -28.45 
2008-09 30.10 0.00 -13.00 17.10 2.55 -14.55 
2009-10 24.00 0.00 -0.43 23.58 5.35 -18.22 
2010-11 24.10 0.00 -3.03 21.08 2.94 -18.14 
2011-12 8.50 0.00 -0.51 7.99 4.99 -3.00 
2012-13 28.51 0.00 -5.11 23.40 23.40 0.00 

Appendices 
  Page 73  
  
 
 
2013-14 35.00 0.00 -24.33 10.67 10.67 0.00 
2014-15 10.00 0.00 -4.77 5.23 5.23 0.00 
2015-16 15.00 0.00 0.00 15.00 6.24 -8.76 
Total 260.21 2.95 -42.93 220.23 119.39 -100.84 
Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur  
(4701-03-225) 
2004-05 0.10 0.00 9.36 9.46 5.95 -3.51 
2005-06 9.21 0.00 0.00 9.21 8.55 -0.66 
2006-07 50.00 0.00 -34.40 15.60 8.89 -6.71 
2007-08 70.00 0.00 -28.10 41.90 16.60 -25.30 
2008-09 45.50 0.00 -8.50 37.00 12.12 -24.88 
2009-10 49.00 0.00 0.00 49.00 14.30 -34.70 
2010-11 47.00 0.00 -46.00 1.00 0.07 -0.93 
2011-12 28.50 0.00 -16.04 12.46 7.87 -4.59 
2012-13 18.54 0.00 -17.79 0.75 0.75 0.00 
2013-14 22.00 0.00 -15.24 6.76 6.76 0.00 
2014-15 13.00 0.00 -9.92 3.08 3.08 0.00 
2015-16 23.00 0.00 0.00 23.00 10.30 -12.70 
Total 375.85 0.00 -166.62 209.22 95.25 -113.97 
Ralivagu 
(4701-03-236) 
2004-05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.40 1.40 
2005-06 5.00 1.40 4.19 10.59 8.42 -2.16 
2006-07 35.00 0.00 3.17 38.17 31.13 -7.04 
2007-08 20.00 0.00 -11.00 9.00 2.52 -6.48 
2008-09 5.10 0.00 1.00 6.10 3.35 -2.75 
2009-10 4.50 0.00 0.00 4.50 0.74 -3.76 
2010-11 2.25 0.00 -1.32 0.93 0.00 -0.93 
2011-12 1.20 0.00 -0.25 0.95 0.00 -0.95 
2012-13 0.60 0.00 -0.52 0.08 0.08 0.00 
2013-14 1.00 0.00 -1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2014-15 1.00 0.00 -0.64 0.36 0.36 0.00 
2015-16 2.75 0.00 0.00 2.75 0.00 -2.75 
Total 78.40 1.40 -6.38 73.42 48.00 -25.42 
Grand Total 948.16 4.35 -224.56 727.95 408.93 -319.02 
(Source: Information furnished by Chief Engineer (Projects), Adilabad; Pay and Accounts Officer, 
Nirmal and VLC data from Office of the Principal Accountant General (A&E), Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana) 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 74  
  
Appendix 2.2 
(Reference to paragraph 2.1.6.2, page 15) 
Details of central assistance received under AIBP 
 
Gollavagu Mathadivagu Neelwai Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur Ralivagu 
Year of inclusion in 
AIBP 2006-07 2006-07 2006-07 2006-07 2006-07 
Proposed for 
completion as per CWC 2008-09 2008-09 2008-09 2009-10 2008-09 
Cost approved under 
AIBP ( `` `` in crore) 75.68 42.21 77.77 124.64 29.82 
Percentage of financial 
assistance from GoI 90 90 25 90 25 
Financial assistance to 
be provided ( `` `` in crore) 60.975 37.99 19.44 112.176 7.455 
Financial assistance 
received so far  
(`` `` in crore) 
60.470 37.020 18.40 106.025 6.710 
Shortfall in Utilization 
of AIBP assistance as of 
March 2016 ( `` `` in crore) 
4.30 -- 1.39 57.19 -- 
Expenditure as on 
March 2016 87.79 58.50 119.39 95.25 48.00 
(Source: Information furnished by Chief Engineer (Projects), Adilabad, Chief Engineer, 
Central Water Commission, Krishna Godavari Basin Organization) 
 
  

Appendices 
  Page 75  
  
Appendix 2.3 
(Reference to paragraph 2.1.7.2, page 17) 
Details of Irrigation potential stipulated in agreement and proposed to be 
localized in Mathadivagu  
(in acres) 
Sl. 
No. 
Mandal Village Extent of IP to be 
created in acres (as 
per agreement) 
Proposed command area 
to be localized with 
Revenue authorities 
1 
Thamsi 
Waddadi 250 581.93 
2 Jamidi 227 79.98 
3 Khapparla 731 948.98 
4 E.Swargaon 1348 1306.02 
5 BandalNagapur 916 876.27 
6 Gotkuri 339 224.67 
7 Mallapur 269 458.74 # 
8 Nippani 0* 93.41 
9 Jainath Sirsanna 489 0 
10 Boraj 766 0 
11 
Adilabad  
Bhimsari 579 369.33 
12 Jamdapur 1507 1377.36 
13 Chanda – T 1079 1456.26 
14 Taroda 0* 358.87 
15 Dimma 0* 359.15 
16 Fouzpur 0* 161.76 
17 Pochera 0* 97.28 
Total 8500 8750.01 
(Source:  Information furnished by Executive Engineer, IB division, Adilabad)  
# shown under Adilabad mandal 
* Not stipulated as per agreement 
Appendix 2.4 
(Reference to paragraph 2.1.8.1, page 19) 
Time taken for completion of Survey and Investigation 
Sl. 
No. Project 
Date by 
which S&I 
was to be 
completed 
S&I completed in 
Head 
works Canals Distributaries Field 
Channels 
1 Gollavagu September 
2005 * Not 
completed 
2 Mathadivagu June 2005 December 2005 
3 (a) Neelwai (First 
agency) 
September 
2005 
September 
2005 
January 
2007 
Not 
completed 
Not 
completed 
 
(b) Neelwai (Second 
agency) June 2012 Not 
applicable 
Not 
applicable 
Information 
Not furnished 
Not 
completed 
4 Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur 
September 
2005 In progress 
5 Ralivagu September 
2005 May 2005 May 2005 November 
2005 
Not 
completed 
(Source:  Information furnished by Executive Engineers concerned) 
*Completion dates not furnished to audit. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 76  
  
Appendix 2.5 
(Reference to paragraph 2.1.8.2, page 22) 
Time taken for receipt and approval of designs 
Sl. 
No. 
Project  
(Month / Year of 
agreement) 
Date by which 
S&I, drawings 
and designing 
to be completed 
Period during 
which CECDO 
received designs 
and drawings 
Delay 
in 
months 
Time taken 
for approval 
(range in 
months) 
1 Gollavagu  
(March 2005) 
September 
2005 
April 2005 –  
June 2005 Nil 1-2  
months 
2 Mathadivagu  
(March 2005) -do- November 2005 – 
April 2008 
2 – 35 
months 
1 – 99 
months 
3 Neelwai -1st Agency 
(March 2005) -do- August 2005 Nil 3 – 6  
months 
4 Neelwai -2nd  Agency 
(26-12-2011) 
June  
2012 NA NA NA 
5 
Peddavagu at 
Jagannathapur  
(March 2005) 
September 
2005 
November 2007– 
March 2013  
26 –78 
months  
1 – 36 
months 
6 Ralivagu  
(March 2005) -do- June 2005 Nil 2 -30 
 months 
(Source:  Based on information furnished by Chief Engineer, Central Designs Organization) 
 
  

Appendices 
  Page 77  
  
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.1, page 35) 
Details of Textile/ Apparel Export Parks 
Sl. 
No. 
Park  
(District) Developer GoI 
Scheme 
Year of 
sanction 
Total outlay  
(( ((`` `` in crore) 
1 Textile Park, Siricilla 
(Karimnagar) DHT TCIDS 2002-03 7.73 
2 Textile Park, Malkapur 
(Nalgonda) DHT TCIDS 2003-04 3.31 
3 Textile Park, Warangal  DHT * 2005-06 12.8 
4 
Handloom Park, 
Gadwal 
(Mahabubnagar) 
DHT * 2006-07 8.21 
5 
Apparel Export Park, 
Gundlapochampally 
(Rangareddy) 
TSIIC CIB 1995-96 14.11 
6 
Textile Park, 
Pashamylaram 
(Medak) 
TSIIC TCIDS 2002-03 13.37 
7 
Handloom Park, 
Pochampally 
(Nalgonda) 
Private 
party 1 SITP 2005-06 34.00# 
8 
White Gold Integrated 
Spintex Park Pvt. Ltd, 
Ibrahimpatnam 
(Rangareddy) 
Private 
party 1 SITP 2011-12 108.12 
* DPRs were not finalized and no progress made  
# The project was approved (July 2006) by the Proje ct Approval Committee (PAC) under the 
SITP with an estimated project cost of ` 18.49 crore out of which Govt. of India grant was 4 0 
per cent , i.e. ` 7.40 crore. However, this was revised subsequently on submission of revised 
proposal (May 2008) by the Park developers for incl uding better facilities in the Park. The 
investment in the Park was increased from ` 18.49 crore to ` 34 crore (June 2008 ).  
 
                                                           
1 Special Purpose Vehicle  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 78  
  
Appendix 3.2 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.1, page 35) 
Statement showing the details of funds allotted, released and expenditure incurred on the parks 
(`` `` in crore)  
Sl. 
No Name of the park Project 
outlay 
Govt. of India funds State Govt. funds Expenditure 
from other 
sources # 
Total 
expenditure  Allocated Released Expenditure 
incurred Allocated Released Expenditure 
incurred 
1 Textile Park, Siricilla 7.73 4.11 2.83 2.83 5.43 5.43 5.43 0.61 8.87 
2 White Gold Integrated 
Spintex Park Pvt. Ltd, 
Ibrahimpatnam  
108.12 38.40 11.52 11.51 0 0 0 19.74 31.25 
3 Apparel Export Park, 
Gundlapochampally 14.11 6.03 6.03 6.03 2.88 2.88 2.88 3.69 12.60 
4 Handloom Park, 
Pochampally 34.00 13.60 13.60 13.60 2.00 2.00 2.00 19.44 35.04 
Total 163.96 62.14 33.98 33.97 10.31 10.31 10.31 43.48 87.76 
# Expenditure from other sources include sale proceeds, interest in case of Textile Park, Siricilla. In respect of WISPL and Handloom Park, Pochampally, other source 
was SPVs and in respect of  AEP Gundlapochampally, other source was TSIIC own funds . 
  

 
Appendices 
  Page 79  
  
 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference to paragraph 3.1.3, page 36) 
Statement showing the time-overrun in completion of parks 
Sl. 
No. Park 
Project 
outlay 
(`` `` in 
crore) 
Year of 
sanction 
Schedule 
date of 
completion 
Actual date 
of 
completion 
Time over 
run 
(in 
months) 
as on July 
2016 
No. of 
units 
contem-
plated 
No. of 
units 
completed 
No. of 
units 
function 
-ing 
Employ-
ment 
envisaged 
Employ-
ment 
generated 
1 Textile Park, Siricilla 7.73 2002-03 December 
2003 
Not 
completed 151 192 114 114 6600 1250 
2 
White Gold Integrated 
Spintex Park Pvt. Ltd, 
Ibrahimpatnam 
108.12 2011-12 
December 
2015 
Not 
completed 7 10 NIL NIL 5000 NIL 
3 Apparel Export Park, 
Gundlapochampally 
14.11 1995-96 December 
2003 
2008# 60 58 56 45* 55350 2500 
4 Handloom Park, 
Pochampally 
34.00 2005-06 December 
2007 
June 2011 42 01 01 01 5050 350 
 # Exact date of completion is not known. However, the Park was completed in 2008  
* includes 31 non-garment units 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 80  
  
Appendix 3.4 
(Reference to paragraph 3.3.4.1, page 59) 
The section-wise pending and deleted items and their financial 
implications 
(`` `` in lakhs)  
Sl. 
No. Items of work 
Financial implication  
Value of 
pending items 
Section I 
Value of 
pending items 
Section II 
Value of 
deleted 
items 
1 Bus Shelters 8.28 12.42 20.70 
2 Line open drains    20.80 0 13.97 
3 Unlined drains  19.15 22.29 21.25 
4 Rectangular Brick 
Masonry  0 103.71 77.42 
5 Turfing in slopes   0 17.12 1.16 
6 Pitching and filter 
media  3.45 10.35 2.76 
7 Construction of Cement 
concrete Kerb – with  
325 mm high  
1.19 1.48 2.67 
8 Construction of Cement 
concrete Kerb – with 
250 mm high  
1.23 2.82 4.05 
9 Access roads  47.15 18.52 1.68 
Total 101.25 188.71 145.66 
 
 
 

 
 
 
GlossaryGlossaryGlossaryGlossary    
 

Glossary 
 
AEP : Apparel Export Park 
AIBP : Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme 
APDSS : Andhra Pradesh Detailed Standard Specification 
APGVB : Andhra Pradesh Grameena Vikas Bank 
APRDC : Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation 
CCA :  Culturable Command Area 
CE ADB : Chief Engineer, Adilabad. 
CE Projects : Chief Engineer, Projects 
CECDO : Chief Engineer, Central Designs Organisation 
CETP : Common Effluent Treatment Plant 
CIB : Critical Infrastructure Balancing  
CM & CD Works : Cross Masonry and Cross Drainage Works 
CRN : Core Road Network 
CSC : Construction Supervision Consultant 
Cumecs : Cubic Meter per Second 
CWC : Central Water Commission 
CWWTP : Common Waste Water Treatment Plant 
DHT : Directorate of Handlooms and Textiles 
Director  M&A : Director (Monitoring and Appraisal) 
DLBC : District Level Bankers Committee 
DNP : Defect Notification Period 
DPR : Detailed Project Report 
Dr.BRAPCSS : Dr. Bheem Rao Ambedkar Pranahita Chevella Sujala 
Sravanthi 
EE : Executive Engineer 
EE ADB : Executive Engineer, Adilabad 
EE MCL : Executive Engineer, Mancherial 
EMP : Environmental Management Plan 
EoT : Extension of Time 
EPC : Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended March 2016 
  Page 82  
  
ESMF : Environmental and Social Management Framework 
FRL : Full Reservoir Level 
GAAP : Governance and Accountability Action Plan 
GoI : Government of India 
HMDA : Hyderabad Metropolitan Development Authority 
HMWSSB : Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board 
I&CAD : Irrigation & Command Area Development  
IALA : Industrial Area Local Authority 
IBM : Internal Benchmark 
IBRD : International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
IP :  Irrigation Potential 
IS : Institutional Strengthening 
ISAP : Institutional Strengthening Action Plan 
JC : Joint Collector 
JCRDLIS : J.Chokka Rao Devadula Lift Irrigation Scheme 
JDA : Joint Director of Agriculture 
JMLBC : Joint Mandal Level Bankers Committee 
KGBO : Krishna and Godavari Basin Organisation 
LDM : Lead District Manager 
LF canal : Left Flank Canal 
LF Regulator : Left Flank Regulator 
LTPBMC : Long Term Performance Based Maintenance Contract 
m.cu.m : Million Cubic Meters 
MDDL : Maximum Drawn Down Level 
MDR : Major District Road 
MPDO : Mandal Parishad Development Officer 
NH : National Highway 
PAC : Project Approval Committee 
PIU : Project Implementation Unit 
PPP : Public Private Partnership 
R & B  : Roads and Buildings  
R&R : Resettlement & Rehabilitation 
 

Glossary 
  Page 83  
  
RAP : Resettlement Action Plan 
RFP : Request for Proposal 
RMG : Rythu Mitra Group/ Rythu Mitra Sangam 
RMS : Road Management System 
RUSS : Road User Satisfaction Survey 
SBI : State Bank of India 
SITP : Scheme for Integrated Textile Parks 
SLBC : State Level Bankers Committee 
SLSC : State Level Standing Committee 
TCIDS : Textile Centre Infrastructure Development Scheme 
TOC : Taken Over Certificate 
T-RBD : Roads and Buildings Department, Telangana 
TSIIC : Telangana State Industrial Infrastructure Corporation 
Limited 
UCs : Utilisation Certificates  
WISPL : Whitegold Integrated Spintex Park Private Limited 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.agap.cag.gov.in 