 


 
 
REPORT OF THE  
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
on 
GENERAL AND SOCIAL SECTOR 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA 
Report No. 5 of the year 2017 
 

 
 i 
CONTENTS 
 
Description 
Reference 
Paragraph Page 
PREFACE  v 
CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 1.2 1 
Authority for Audit 1.3 2 
Organisational structure of the Office of the Principal 
Accountant General (General and Social Sector Audit) 1.4 3 
Planning and conduct of Audit 1.5 3 
Significant Audit Observations 1.6 3 
Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 1.7 7 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT 
CHAPTER II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 9 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
CHAPTER III - Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 35 
HOME AND VIGILANCE DEPARTMENT 
CHAPTER IV - Implementation of Government initiatives in Judicial 
system 58 
CHAPTER V - COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
AUDIT OF SELECTED TOPICS 
HOME AND VIGILANCE DEPARTMENT 
Enforcement of fire safety provisions in  respect of  
buildings by the Kerala Fire and Rescue Services 
Department 
5.1 73 
FAILURE OF OVERSIGHT/ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROLS 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Misappropriation of funds in Government TD Medical 
College, Alappuzha 5.2 86 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
ii 
Description 
Reference 
Paragraph Page 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Fraudulent drawal of remuneration for valuation 5.3 88 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT 
Loss of rent due to defective lease agreement  5.4 90 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure on a recording theatre 5.5 92 
WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT 
Unproductive expenditure on work due to 
non-availability of adequate land 5.6 93 
 
  

 
 
Table of Contents 
iii 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 
No. Description Page 
1.1 Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) as on 
30 June 2016 95 
1.2 Details of Statements of Action Taken pending as of September 
2016 96 
1.3 Statement showing the details of paragraphs pending discussion 
by the Public Accounts Committee as of September 2016 97 
2.1 List of Corporations and Companies, Societies and Local 
Authorities in respect of which Recruitment Rules do not exist 98 
2.2 Status of framing of Recruitment Rules in selected Corporations 
and Companies, Co-operative Societies 99 
2.3 Selected cases of delay in reporting of fresh vacancies by 
Government Departments and Companies 101 
2.4 Details of delay in reporting of Not Joining Duty (NJD) vacancies 
in selected Departments 102 
2.5 Loss of turns due to non-considering of pending NJD turns 103 
2.6 Details of delayed completion (from Notification to Ranked List) 
in respect of selected cases 104 
2.7 Statement showing attendance of candidates in selected 
examinations 106 
3.1 List of officials promoted in violation of Pay Revision Orders 107 
4.1 District wise pendency of cases as on 31 March 2016 108 
5.1 Absence of minimum fire safety standards in buildings 109 
5.2 Details of understating and overstating of entries in cashbook 111 

 
 v 
PREFACE 
 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2016 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of 
Kerala under Article 151 of the Constitution for being laid before the State 
Legislature. 
 
The report contains significant results of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the Departments and Autonomous Bodies of the 
Government of Kerala under the General and Social Services including 
Departments of General Administration, Health and Family Welfare, Higher 
Education, Home and Vigilance and Water Resources. 
 
The instances mentioned in this report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 201 5-16 as well as those which came to 
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports. 
Instances relating to per iod subsequent to 201 5-16 have also been included, 
wherever found necessary. 
 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 

 
 

 
 1 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C& AG) relates 
to matters arising from performance audit of selected programmes and 
activities and compliance audit of Government Departments and Autonomous 
Bodies. 
Performance audit  includes examination  of whether the objectives of the 
programme/activity/department are achieved economically , efficiently and 
effectively. Compliance audit , on the other hand,  refers to examination of 
transactions relating to expenditure of the audited entities to ascertain whether 
the provisions of the Constitution of India, app licable laws, rules, regulations 
and various orders and instructions issued by the competent authorities are 
being complied with.  
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State 
Legislature important results of audit. The audit findings are expected to 
enable the Executive to take corrective action as also to frame policies and 
directives that will lead to improved financial management of the 
organisations, thus, contributing to better governance. 
This chapter, in addition to expla ining the planning and extent of audit, 
provides a synopsis of the significant deficiencies and achievements in 
implementation of selected schemes, significant audit observations made 
during performance and compliance audit  and follow -up on previous Audit 
Reports.  
1.2 Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 
There were 4 2 Departments in the State at Secretariat level during 2015 -16. 
The Principal Accountant General (General and Social Sector Audit), Kerala 
conducts audit of 2 3 Secretariat Departments, all Public Sector Undertakings/ 
Autonomous Bodies thereunder and Local Self-Government Institutions in the 
State. The Departments are headed by Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries, who are assisted by Di rectors/Commissioners and 
subordinate officers under them. The remaining 1 9 Departments are audited 
by Principal Accountant General (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit) , 
Kerala. 
The comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government during 
the year 2015-16 and in the preceding two years is given in Table 1.1: 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
2 
Table 1.1: Comparative position of expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Disbursements 
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 
Plan Non 
plan Total Plan Non 
Plan Total Plan Non 
Plan Total 
Revenue Expenditure 
General Services 126.65 26478.44 26605.09 133.76 31298.99 31432.75 116.98 35967.70 36084.68 
Social Services 4645.93 16333.95 20979.88 5893.10 17825.01 23718.11 7591.56 20011.73 27603.29 
Economic Services 2301.08 5627.98 7929.06 4255.73 5941.84 10197.57 4369.95 6728.47 11098.42 
Grants-in-aid and 
Contributions  4971.47 4971.47  6398.00 6398.00  3903.08 3903.08 
Total 7073.66 53411.84 60485.50 10282.59 61463.84 71746.43 12078.49 66610.98 78689.47 
Capital Expenditure 
Capital outlay 3497.62 796.71 4294.33 3880.54 374.05 4254.59 6518.48 981.56 7500.04 
Loans and advances 
disbursed 537.53 926.64 1464.17   743.09 407.61 434.64 842.25 
Repayment of 
public debt    3244.81   5842.77   6060.73 
Contingency Fund   67.39   -   - 
Public Account 
disbursements   120992.20   136242.59   162824.67 
Total   130062.90   147083.04   177227.69 
GRAND TOTAL   190548.40   218829.47   255917.16 
1.3 Authority for Audit 
The authority for audit by the C& AG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of 
the Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (C&AG's (DPC) Act). C&AG 
conducts audit of expenditure of the Departments of the Government of 
Kerala (GOK) under Section 13 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. C&AG is the sole 
auditor in respect of 22 Autonomous Bodies in the General and Social Sector 
which are audited under Sections 19  and 20(1) of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. In 
addition, C& AG also conducts audit of 242 Autonomous Bodies which are 
substantially funded by the Government under Section 14 and 15 of the 
C&AG’s (DPC) Act. There are also 748 educational institutions1, 24 Public 
Sector Undertakings, Buildings Divisions of the Public Works Department and 
1200 Local Self-Government Institutions 2 under the audit jurisdiction in the 
General and Social Sector. Principles and methodologies for various audits 
have been prescribed in the Auditing Standards and the Regulations on Audit 
and Accounts, 2007 issued by the C&AG. 
                                                 
1 Government-aided Colleges: 158 
 Government-aided Higher Secondary Schools: 464 
 Government-aided Vocational Higher Secondary Schools: 126 
2 Grama Panchayaths: 9 41, Block Panchayaths : 152, District Panchaya ths: 14, 
Municipal Corporations: 6 and Municipalities: 87 

 
 
Chapter I - Introduction 
3 
1.4 Organisational structure of the Office of the Principal 
Accountant General (General and Social Sector Audit) 
Under the dir ections of the C&AG, the Office  of the Principal Accountant 
General (General and Social Sector Audit), Kerala (PAG (G&SSA)) conducts 
audit of Government Departments, Offices, Autonomous Bodies  and 
Institutions under the General and Social Sector which are spre ad all over the 
State. The PAG (G&SSA) is assisted by four Deputy Accountants General. 
1.5 Planning and conduct of Audit 
The audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various 
Departments of Government based on expenditure incurred, 
criticality/complexity of activities, level of delegated financial powers, 
assessment of overall internal c ontrols and concerns of stakeholders. Previous 
audit findings are also considered in this exercise. Based on this risk 
assessment, the frequency and extent of audit are decided.  
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports containing audit 
observations are issued to the heads of the offices and Departments. The 
Departments are requested to furnish replies to the audit observations within 
four weeks from the date of receipt of the Inspection Reports. Whenever 
replies are received, audit observations are either settled or further action for 
compliance is advised. The important audit observations arising out of these 
Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the Reports  of the C&AG of 
India, which are submitted to the Governor of the State under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India for placing in the State Legislature.  
During 2015-16, the Office of the PAG (G &SSA) utilised 13151 party days to 
carry out the audit of 1696 units (compliance , performance and financial 
audits) of various d epartments/organisations under its jurisdiction. The audit 
plan covered those units/entities which were vulnerable to significant risks as 
per risk assessment.  
1.6 Significant Audit Observations 
 
1.6.1 Performance audits of programmes/activities/departments 
Chapter II includes Performance Audit o f ‘Functioning of Kerala Public 
Service Commission’, Chapter III includes Performance Audit of ‘Functioning 
of Mahatma Gandhi University’  and Chapter IV includes Performance Audit 
of ‘ Implementation of Government initiatives  in Judicial system ’. The 
highlights are given in the following paragraphs. 
1.6.1.1 Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
Article 315 of the Constitution of India lays down that , there shall be a Public 
Service Commission for each State.  The duties and f unctions of the P ublic 
Service Commission are to conduct examinations for appointments to the 
services of the State and was required to be consulted on all matters relating to 
methods of recruitment to civil services/civil posts, making promotions and 
transfers from one service to another, disciplinary matters affecting a 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
4 
Government servant, etc. The Kerala Public Service Commission ( KPSC) was 
established on 01 November 1956. The Chairman and Members of KPSC are 
appointed by the Governor of the State for a period of six years or till they 
attain the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier. The expenses connected with 
the KPSC are charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State. Every year , the 
KPSC has to present an Annual Report on the work done to the Governor  for 
laying before the Legislature. During the period 2011 -12 to 2015 -16, the 
KPSC had conducted 1233 examinations for notified posts and issued 
appointment advices to 1.51 lakh candidates. 
The Performance Audit of the Functioning of Kerala Public Service 
Commission focussed on the performance of its mandated functions and 
duties. The Performance Audit revealed deficiencies in framing of Special 
Rules, reporting of vacancies and publishing of notifications, denial of 
selection for appointment to the Differe ntly Abled and defects in rendering 
advice to Government. KPSC had not issued notifications in respect of at least 
452 vacancies to be filled up against 128 posts in different Departments/ 
Institutions. Delay ranging from 11 to 77 months was noticed in publication of 
notifications by KPSC which delayed the selection process. KPSC had altered 
the eligibility criteria fixed by Government of India for the Differently Abled 
thereby denying appointment to pe rsons with disabilities , which was a 
violation of rights and opportunities guaranteed by Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 1995. Data on pendency in selection to various services of the State 
pertaining to the years 2010 to 2015 showed that only 17 to 28 per cent of 
selections were completed within one year. Decision of KPSC to consider Not 
Joining Duty (NJD) vacancies as fresh vacancies resulted in loss/gain of 
several turns to various communities/categories including loss of 11 vacancies 
to Differently Abled  candidates. Though the facility of scribe was to be 
allowed in an examination to any visually challenged person with disability of 
40 per cent or more, if so desired by the person, KPSC permitted facility of 
scribe only to visually challenged candidates w ith disability of 75  per cent or 
more. Failure of KPSC to complete the work of computerisation of rotation 
process through the entrusted agency/team resulted in non -completion of 
computerisation process in KPSC. 
(Chapter II) 
1.6.1.2 Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
Mahatma Gandhi University (MGU), Kottayam, was established in October 
1983 to provide higher education to the students belonging to the districts of 
Kottayam, Ernakulam, Idukki and parts of Pathanamthitta and Alappuzha. The 
MGU conducts Un der Gra duate, Post Graduate, M. Phil and Doctoral level 
courses through 17 University departments, sev en Inter-University Centres, 
10 Inter-School Centres, eight Self Financing Institutions and 250 affiliated 
colleges (10  Government colleges, 63 aided colleges and  177 unaided 
colleges). It imparts education in the conventional disciplines of Science, 
Social Science as well as in professional disciplines of Medicine,  Nursing, 
Pharmacy, Engineering, etc. MGU is accredited by National Assessment and 
Accreditation Coun cil at ‘B’ level.  The Performance Audit focussed on the 
academic activities and the financial management of MGU. 

 
 
Chapter I - Introduction 
5 
MGU commenced a five year Integrated Interdisciplinary MS programme and 
Integrated Double Degree BA (Criminology) -LLB (Honours) which did not 
have the approval of University Grants Commission (UGC). The MGU failed 
to frame uniform syllabus as directed by UGC. The College Development 
Council envisaged by UGC was ineffective due to non -appointment of full 
time Director. There was a delay ranging from one to nine months in declaring 
examination and revaluation results. Fifty nine per cent of degree certificates 
were issued after six months from the date of application. One hundred ninety 
seven teachers identified as Research Guides by MGU did not pos sess the 
eligibility criteria as prescribed by UGC. MGU failed to implement Syndicate 
decision, made dilution to contractual terms and failed to obt ain UGC/ GOK 
assistance leading to loss of revenue of `3.98 crore. The Syndicate of the 
MGU irregularly creat ed 10 non -plan posts of Section Officers without the 
approval of GOK. Irregular payment of House Rent Allowance against GOK 
directives resulted in undue benefit of `2.20 crore to the staff of MGU. 
Payment of inadmissible remuneration of `13.97 crore to reg ular teachers 
towards valuation of answer scripts  was observed . Promotions made against 
the abolished posts in violation of orders of GOK resulted in excess payment 
of `13.36 lakh. Failure of MGU to enrol employees into EPF Scheme from the 
date of entry into service resulted in avoidable expenditure of `2.20 crore and 
potential liability of `3.78 crore towards interest and damages. There was no 
internal audit wing in the MGU which resulted in lack of inter nal control 
mechanism. 
(Chapter III) 
1.6.1.3 Implementation of Government initiatives in Judicial system 
The justice delivery mechan ism in the country comprises different types of 
courts, each with varying powers depending on the tier and jurisdiction 
bestowed upon them. They form a hierarchy with the Supreme Court of India 
at the top, followed by High Courts of respective States, District/Chief Judicial 
Magistrate Courts, Subordinate Courts and Munsiff/Judicial First Class 
Magistrate Courts at the bottom. 
A Perfor mance Audit of the Implementation of Government initiatives in 
Judicial system was conducted focussing mainly on the award of Thirteenth 
Finance Commission (ThFC) Grant to Kerala for improving Justice Delivery. 
The Performance Audit revealed under-utilisation of ThFC grant, foregoing of 
eligible share from Government of India (GOI), etc. 
Evening Courts could not be set up as planned and establishment of Special 
Judicial First Class Magistrate Courts was delayed. Failure on the part of GOK 
to issue orders to  include direct recruitment also as one of the modes of 
appointment of Court Managers resulted in delay in their appointment and 
restricted their services to the period 2014 -15 to 2016 -17. Failure to set up 
adequate Alternate Dispute Resolution Centres had  resulted in poor utilisation 
of funds leading to lapse of ThFC grant to the extent of `13.31 crore. 
Clearance of cases filed in the Lok Adalats was lower than the target set by the 
ThFC. The request of the High Level Monitoring Committee to expand the 
base of beneficiaries among the marginalised sections by suitably enhancing 
the income limit for availing legal aid was not complied with by Kerala State 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
6 
Legal Services Authority. The State did not avail GOI assistance of `134.91 
crore under the Centrally Spo nsored Scheme for Development of 
Infrastructure facilities for Judiciary. 
(Chapter IV) 
1.6.2 Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
Audit identified certain key compliance issues based on risk factors and 
topical importance for conduct of regularity audit in addition to conduct of 
regular propriety audit. Significant deficiencies observed during such audits 
are detailed in the following paragraphs. 
1.6.2.1 Enforcement of fire safety provisions in  respect of buildings by the 
Kerala Fire and Rescue Services Department 
The Kerala Fi re and Rescue Services Department (Fire and Rescue 
Department) with five Divisional Offices, 14 District Offices and 121 fire 
stations is entrusted with the responsibilities of fire fighting 
operations/salvaging or rescue of life and property  during fire 
accidents/hazards. The Fire and Rescue Department is governed by the Kerala 
Fire Force Act, 1962 (Fire Force Act). While the Home and Vigilance 
Department is in overall control of the Fire and Rescue Department at the 
Government level, the administrative po wers are vested with the Director 
General of Fire and Rescue, Home Guard and Civil Defence (DG). 
As the new Kerala Fire Force Act was not enacted as per National Disaster 
Management Authority guidelines, th ere were no enabling provisions 
empowering the Fire and Rescue Department to proceed legally and impose 
penalty on perpetrators of fire safety violations. In the absence of Rules, the 
activities of the Fire and Rescue Department were regulated by standing 
orders issued by the DG which did not possess statutory backing. 
GOK did not issue appropriate notifications resulting in inability of officers of 
the Fire and Rescue Department to conduct inspections legally , to discharge 
their duties effectively  and to ensure the availability of fire safety 
arrangements. Joint verification by us revealed deficiencies in compliance to 
fire safety standards, thereby exposing the buildings to grave threat of  fire 
accidents. Failure of GOK to adopt good practices as prescribed in National 
Building Code led to non-inclusion of such provisions in the Kerala Municipal 
Building Rules, 1999, to ensure safety of life and property of people. 
Fire fighters were also exposed to risk due to shortage of safety equipment like 
breathing apparatus, fire fighting suits and walkie ta lkies. In the absence of 
equipment like Aerial Platform Ladder and Turn Table Ladder, the Fire and 
Rescue Department was not capable of conducting rescue operations beyond 
the fourth floor of high rise buildings in the State. 
The failure of GOK in ensuring  the above aspects of fire protection and 
prevention has put the life and property of people at risk. 
(Paragraph 5.1) 

 
 
Chapter I - Introduction 
7 
1.6.2.2 Failure of Oversight/Administrative Controls 
The Government has an obligation to improve the quality of life of the people 
as it works towards fulfilment of certain goals in the area of health, education, 
development and upgradation of infrastructure and public service , etc. We 
noticed instances where funds released by the Government for creating public 
assets for the benefit of the communit y remained unutilised/blocked and/or 
proved unfruitful/unproductive due to indecisiveness, lack of administrative 
oversight and concerted action at various levels. The details are given below. 
 Failure of supervisory authorities to exercise stipulated check s and 
laxity of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer in complying with the 
codal provisions relating to maintenance of Cash Book resulted in 
misappropriation of `17.20 lakh in Government TD Medical College, 
Alappuzha. 
(Paragraph 5.2) 
 Violation of prescribed procedure by the Finance Officer, Mahatma 
Gandhi University in payment of remuneration to examiners for 
valuation of answer scripts led to a fraudulent drawal of `11.26 lakh. 
(Paragraph 5.3) 
 A portion of Travancore House in New Delhi was leased out to State 
Bank of Travancore on the basis of ‘carpet area’ instead of ‘plinth 
area’ resulting in loss of `3.68 crore to GOK. 
(Paragraph 5.4) 
 A recording theatre constructed and fully equipped at a co st of 
`1.48 crore remained idle since August 2011 due to failure of GOK to 
engage technical and administrative staff. 
(Paragraph 5.5) 
 Contrary to the directions of K erala Water Authority, tenders were 
invited for a water supply scheme without ensuring phys ical 
possession of adequate land, resulting in unproductive expenditure of 
`4.18 crore, besides denial of potable water to the targeted population. 
(Paragraph 5.6) 
1.7 Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 
 
1.7.1 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit 
Objections/Inspection Reports/timely disposal of draft audit paragraphs and 
matters pertaining to the Public Accounts Committee,  issued by the State 
Government in 2010 provides for prompt response by the Execu tive to the 
Inspection Reports (IRs) issued by the Accountant General  for rectification in 
compliance with the prescribed rules and procedures and accountability for the 
deficiencies, lapses etc., noticed during audit inspection. The Heads of Offices 
and next higher authorities are required to comply with the audit observations 
contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and promptly report 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
8 
their compliance to the Accountant General within four weeks of receipt of 
Inspection Reports. Half -yearly reports of pending IRs are being sent to the 
Secretaries of the Departments to facilitate monitoring of audit observations. 
It was noticed that , as of 30 June 2016, 913 IRs (3086 paragraphs) were 
outstanding in respect of  Scheduled Caste Development, Rura l Development, 
Labour and Skills and Planning and Economic Affairs Department. Even 
initial replies in respect of 308 Inspection Reports containing 1283 paragraphs 
issued up to 2015 -16 were pending from the Scheduled Caste Development 
Department and Rural Development Department. 
Year-wise details of IRs and paragraphs outstanding are given in 
Appendix 1.1. 
1.7.2 Response of Departments to the paragraphs  included in th is 
Report 
Performance and Compliance Audit paragraphs were forwarded to the 
Principal Secretaries /Secretaries of Departments concerned during July to 
December 2016 to send their re plies within six weeks.  Replies from 
Government for  one out of three Performance Audits and all the six 
compliance paragraphs featured in this Report were received. These replies 
have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
1.7.3 Follow-up on Audit Reports 
According to the Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit 
Objections/Inspection Reports /timely disposa l of draft audit paragraphs and 
matters pertaining to the Public Accounts Committee, issued by the State 
Government in 2010, the Administrative Departments should submit 
Statements of Action Taken Notes on audit paragraphs included in the Reports  
of the C&AG directly to the Legislature Secretariat, with copies to the AG 
within two months of their being laid on the Table of the Legislature. The 
Administrative Departments did not comply with the instructions and nine 
Departments, as detailed in Appendix 1.2, had not submitted Statements of 
Action Taken for 2 3 paragraphs for the period 201 1-12 to 2014 -15, as of 
September 2016. 
1.7.4 Paragraphs to be discussed by the Public Accounts Committee 
The details of paragraphs pending discussion by the Public Accounts 
Committee as of 30 September 2016 are given in Appendix 1.3. 

 
 9 
  
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 

 
 
Audit Report (General and Social Sector for the year ended 31 March 2016 

 
 9 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT 
Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
Highlights 
The Performance Audit o f the  Functioning of Kerala Public Service 
Commission focussed on the performance of its mandated functions and 
duties. The Performance Audit revealed deficiencies in framing of Special 
Rules, reporting of vacancies  and publishing of notifications, denial of 
selection for appointment to the Differently Abled  and defects in rendering 
advice to Government. Major findings in Audit are given below: 
The Kerala Public Service Commission ( KPSC) ha d not issued 
notifications in respect of at least 452 vacancies to be filled up against 128 
posts in different Departments/Institutions. Delay ranging from 11 to 77 
months was noticed in publication of notifications by KPSC which 
delayed the selection process. 
(Paragraph 2.6.3.1) 
KPSC had altered the eligibility criteria fixed by Government of India for 
the Differently Abled thereby denying appointment to persons with 
disabilities which was a violation of rights and opportunities guaranteed 
by Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995. 
(Paragraph 2.6.8) 
Data on pendency in selection to various services of the State pertaining to 
the years 2010 to 201 5 showed that only 17 to 28 per cent  of selections 
were completed within one year. 
(Paragraph 2.6.10) 
Decision of KPSC to consider Not Joining Duty (NJD) vacancies as fresh 
vacancies resulted in loss/gain of several turns to various communities/ 
categories including loss of 11 vacancies to Differently Abled candidates. 
(Paragraph 2.6.7.2) 
Though the facility of scribe was to be allowed in an examination to any 
visually challenged person with disabilit y of 40 per cent  or more, if so 
desired by the person, KPSC permitted facility of scribe only to visually 
challenged candidates with disability of 75 per cent or more. 
(Paragraph 2.6.8.1) 
Failure of KPSC to complete the work of computeri sation of rotation 
process through the entrusted agency/team  resulted in non -completion of 
computerisation process in KPSC. 
(Paragraph 2.6.11.3) 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
10 
2.1 Introduction 
Article 315 of the Constitution of India lays down that , there shall be a Public 
Service Commission for each State.  The duties and functions of the P ublic 
Service Commission are to conduct examinations for appointments to the 
services of the State  and was required to be consulted3 on all matters relating 
to methods of recruitment to civil services/civil posts, making promotions and 
transfers from one service to another, disciplinary matters affecting a 
Government servant, etc. The Kerala Public Service Commission ( KPSC) was 
established on 01 November 1956. The Chairman and Members of KPSC are 
appointed by the Governor of the State for a period of six years or till they 
attain the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier. The expenses connected with 
the KPSC are charged on the Consolida ted Fund of the State. Every year , the 
KPSC has to present an Annual Report on the work done to the Governor for 
laying before the Legislature. During the period 2011 -12 to 2015 -16, the 
KPSC had conducted 1233 examinations for notified posts and issued 
appointment advices to 1.51 lakh candidates. 
2.2 Organisational set up 
The Governor of the State may, by regulations, determine  the number of 
members of KPSC. The present KPSC comprises the Chairman and 20 
members (March 2016).  The Head Office of KPSC is located at 
Thiruvananthapuram. The Head of office of the KPSC is the Secretary, who is 
appointed by the Commission with prior approval of the Governor and is in 
general charge of all offices of the KPSC. The KPSC has three Regional 
Offices at Kollam , Ernakulam and Kozhikode and a District Office in each 
District. The  Regional and District Offices are headed by Regional Officers 
and District Officers respectively. 
2.3 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
 the mandated function of conducting examinations and interviews for 
appointments to various services was carried out efficiently and 
effectively by KPSC; 
 the advice sought by Government relating to recruitments, 
appointments to services/disciplinary action was rendered by  the 
KPSC and acted upon timely by Government and; 
 adequate financial and human resources were available with the 
KPSC to discharge its constitutional functions. 
 
                                                 
3 The Governor of the State by virtue of proviso to Art icle 320 (3) of the Constitution may make 
regulations specifying matters in which consult ation with KPSC is not necessa ry. The Kerala Public 
Service Commission (Consultation) Regulations, 1957 was framed invoking this provision. 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
11 
2.4 Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria derived from the 
following documents.  
 The Kerala Public Services Act, 1968 
 Kerala Public Service Commission Rules of Procedure, 1976 
 Kerala Public Service Commission (Consultation) Regulations, 1957 
 Various Acts/Regulations providing additional functions to KPSC 
 Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules (KS&SSR), 1958 
 Special Rules/Executive Orders/Orders of Government of 
Kerala/Circulars 
 Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights 
and Full Participation) Act, 1995 
 KPSC Manual 
2.5 Scope and methodology of Audit 
The Performance Audit covered the period 2011 -12 to 2015 -16 and was 
carried out from April 2016 to October 2016,  by test check of the relevant 
records in the Departments of General Administration (GAD) and Personnel 
and Administrative Reforms (P&ARD) in the Government Secretariat, the 
Headquarters of the KPSC, one selected Regional Office at Ernakulam and 
five selected District Offices viz. Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, 
Malappuram, Wayanad and Kannur. We applied Stratified Random Sampling 
Method to initially select districts of Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, 
Pathanamthitta, Wayanad and Malappuram for detailed audit. However, based 
on the suggestion of the Secretary, KPSC, it was decided to replace 
Pathanamthitta with Kannur district, where the recruitment rate was high.  
Audit methodology included scrutiny of records and gathering of evidence by 
issue of Audit Enquiries. An Entry Conference with the Secretary, GAD, 
Secretary, KPSC and officers of the Finance Department was held on 05 May 
2016 wh erein the scope, objectives, criteria and methodology of the 
Performance Audit were discussed in detail.  An Exit Conference was held 
with the Additional Chief Secretary, GAD and Secretary , KPSC on 
21 December 2016, in which the audit findings were discussed in detail. 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
12 
Audit Findings 
2.6 Mandate of KPSC to conduct selection for appointments to 
various services4 of the State and compliance thereof 
2.6.1 Framing of Special Rules 
2.6.1.1 Delay in framing/amendment of Special Rules for Government 
Departments 
As per the constitutional mandate, selection to the posts of the State and 
Subordinate Services of all Departments were to be made through KPSC. 
Further, as per Section 2 of Kerala Public Services Act 1968 (Act), 
Government of Kerala (GOK) had to make Rules for regul ating the 
recruitment and conditions of services of persons appointed to public services 
and posts in connection with the affairs of the State. Accordingly, various 
circulars were issued by GOK, detailing the procedure for framing of Special 
Rules according to which  the Administrative Department s concerned were 
required to finalise the Special Rules. 
We noticed that, even after 47 years of enactment of the Act, Special Rules 
were not framed for 12 services5. We scrutinised the Government files related 
to eight of these 12 services and observed that non -framing of Special Rules 
was due to delay on account of discussions with Service Associations, 
examination by the Subject Committee of the Legislature, etc.  In the absence 
of Special Rules, the method of appointment, qualification, etc., for 
appointment to posts under these services were regulated through Executive 
Orders of the Government. Despite GOK issuing instructions to take 
expeditious action for framing of Special Rule s to give statutory validity to 
Executive Orders, Special Rules for the above services were yet to be framed 
(January 2017). 
We also observed that , even in the case of Departments where Special Rules 
were framed, the Rules needed to be amended, as they were framed prior to 
1980 and major changes had since occurred in the qualifications stipulated and 
the method of appointment. It was seen that , despite KPSC rendering advice 
on the amendment proposals sought for by GOK 6 on different subjects like 
qualification, method of appointment, etc., amendments to Rules in respect of 
15 services/posts7 were pending with GOK. 
KPSC replied (December 2016) that, its role was limited to rendering advice 
to GOK and that the responsibility of framing the Special Rules rests with the 
concerned Department in GOK.  GOK while stating (December 2016) that, 
there could be delay/irregularit ies in recruitments consequent to delay in 
                                                 
4 Service as defined in Rules of Procedure of KPSC 
5 Kerala Agricultural State and Subordinate Services, Kerala Health State and Subordinate Servi ces 
(except for Medical Officers and Nursing in Hospital), Kerala Medical Education State and 
Subordinate Services (except Nursing in Hospital), Kerala Sports and Youth Affairs State and 
Subordinate Services, Kerala Ministerial Subordinate Service, Kerala General Subordinate Service, 
Kerala Soil Conservation Subordinate Service and Kerala Local Fund Subordinate Service 
6 73 occasions during 2011-12 to 2015-16 
7 PWD Architectural wing, Scheduled Caste Development Department, Tractor Driver in Ground Water 
Department, Government Presses Subordinate Service, Livestock Inspector/Refrigerator Mechanic/ 
Chick Sexer in Animal Husbandry Department, Range Forest Officer in Forest Department, Women 
Protection Officer in Social Justice Department, Museum and Zoos Depar tment, Police, Fisheries, 
Revenue, Legal Metrology, National Cadet Corps, Sainik Welfare, Archives Department etc. 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
13 
framing/amending rules and imparting statutory validity to Executive Orders, 
informed that, directions had been issued (August 2016) to all Administrative 
Departments to finalise the process of framing Special Rules by 31 December 
2016 in respect of posts for which Special Rules were yet to be framed. 
Thus, the objective of giving statutory validity to appointments to the services 
under the State and avoiding any irregularity in recruitments through framing 
of Special Rules has not been fully achie ved. This resulted in inability of the 
KPSC to discharge its mandated responsibility of making selection to various 
services of the State in various instances, as stated in paragraph 2.6.3.1. 
2.6.1.2 Non-framing of Special Rules in Institutions brought under the 
purview of KPSC through enactment of Additional Functions Acts 
Recruitment to posts in Kerala State Electricity Board Ltd. (KSEB), Kerala 
State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC), Corporations 8 and Companies, 
Co-operative Societies and Local Authorities was  additionally entrusted to 
KPSC through enactment of Additional Functions Acts 9 by the State 
Legislature and Rules made thereunder. These institutions were to consult the 
KPSC on all matters relating to the method of recruitment and principles to be 
followed in making appointments.  
Though the Administrative Departments were to finali se the Recruitment 
Rules, we noticed that , Recruitment Rules were not framed in respect of 41 
(Appendix 2.1) out of 147 Institutions and Local Authorities in the State. 
Though we sought records (May 2016) from KPSC relating to framing of 
Special Rules/Recruitment Rules in respect of 15 institutions, records relating 
to 12 institutions only were prod uced to us (June 2016) for scrutiny.  It was 
seen that, though KPSC had rendered advice in 11 out of these 12 institutions, 
framing of rules was pending with GOK (Appendix 2.2). As evident from the 
Appendix, GOK was yet to submit draft Recruitment Rules des pite KPSC 
rendering advice as early as in 1985 in respect of Kerala State Warehousing 
Corporation (KSWC) and in 1998, in respect of Kerala State Cashew Workers 
Apex Industrial Co -operative Society ( CAPEX). Similarly, draft Recruitment 
Rules in respect of Kerala State Co -operative Marketing Federation 
(MARKETFED) was pending approval of GOK since 2009. In the absence of 
Special Rules, KPSC was not conducting selections to posts in any of the 
above 41 organisations.  
We further conducted test check of record s maintained by five of the 11 
institutions which had obtained advice of KPSC for framing of Special Rules, 
which was pending with Government. Regular/temporary/contractual 
appointments to 224 persons were offered by four of these institutions 
bypassing th e KPSC during 2011 -12 to 2015 -16. This included t he KSWC, 
which offered regular appointments to 150 persons to various posts. These 
                                                 
8 The KPSC (Consultation by Corporations and Companies) Rules 1971 defined ‘Corporation’ to mean 
any of the Corporations specified viz., The Kerala State Financial Corporation, The Kerala State 
Warehousing Corporation, The Kerala Khadi and Village Industries Board, The Kerala Headload 
Workers’ Welfare Fund Board, the Kerala Motor Transport Workers’ Welfare Fund Board, The 
Kerala Labour Welfare Fund Board and Toddy Workers’ Welfare Fund Board. 
9 As per provisions in Article 321 of the Constitu tion, Additional Functions Act  1963 for KSEB, Act 
1970 for KSRTC, Act 1970 for certain Corporations and Companies, Act 1973 for Local Authorities 
and Act 1996 for certain Societies 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
14 
appointments were made based on the Recruitment Rules approved by their 
respective Board of Directors.  
We observed that , the appointments made by the institutions themselves 
without involving the KPSC, was against the Circular (May 2007) of GOK on 
framing of Special Rules which instructed that , appointments in 
Companies/Corporations were to be made through KPSC to avoid corrup tion 
and to ensure provisions of reservations in appointments. 
KPSC confirmed (December 2016) that, framing of Special Rules for which 
advice has already been rendered by KPSC was pending with GOK. 
Recommendation 1: We recommend GOK to ensure framing of  Special 
Rules for all services and institutions prescribing conditions of service and 
qualifications and their timely implementation. 
2.6.2 Reporting of vacancies to KPSC 
2.6.2.1 Delay in reporting of fresh vacancies 
With a view to minimi se the delay in recruitment of candidates to various 
posts in public service, GOK in consultation with the KPSC issued (between 
August 1971 and August 2015) instructions to all Heads of 
Departments/Appointing Authorities to report the vacancies estimated for the 
ensuing year in each category of posts to the KPSC by 01 June of every year 
in the proforma prescribed ( September 1992). If no vacancies were 
anticipated, a ‘Nil’ report was to be sent. The existing/arising vacancies were 
also to be reported on a monthly basis.  
During test check of recruitment files and connected records in KPSC, we 
noticed delays ranging f rom five months to nine years in reporting of fresh 
vacancies by State Departments such as General Education, Agriculture and 
Forests and Wild life. We also noticed delay s ranging from eight months to 
five years in reporting vacancies by companies such as Kerala State Handloom 
Development Corporation Ltd. and Kerala State Drugs and Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. ( Appendix 2.3). Thus, the delays in reporting of fresh vacancies by 
Government Departments and Companies had a cascading effect on filling up 
of vacancies in time. 
2.6.2.2 Delay in reporting of vacancies due to Not Joining Duty 
The appointing authorities were to issue appointment orders to the candidates 
advised by the KPSC within three months, failing which the fact was to be 
reported to the KPSC. GOK fixed (August 19 86) the time period of joining 
duty as 45 days with provision for extension beyond 45 days in specific cases 
to be decided by Government. As per the instructions (February 1983/April 
2013), if a candidate d oes not join duty within the prescribed period of 45 
days, the vacancy is to be reported to the KPSC as Not Joining Duty  (NJD) 
vacancy on the expiry of the joining period. 
We noticed that, there were delays of more than three years in reporting NJD 
vacancies by the Department of Education (Appendix 2.4). Delayed reporting 
of such vacancies would result in delayed offer of appointment to other 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
15 
eligible candidates from the same Ranked List  and resultant impact on 
functioning of Departments concerned.  
During Exit Conference (December 2016) GOK stated that, they have deputed 
teams to inspect and report upon the vacancy position in Departments. 
2.6.2.3 Failure of KPSC to upload vacancy reports 
As per the instructions of KPSC (July 2010), the vacancy positions were to be 
uploaded in the web site of KPSC to ensure transparency in the functioning of 
the KPSC and timely dissemination of information to the candidates.  The 
KPSC Manual stipulated that, the Section Officer in the Head Office/Regional 
Office/District Office shall send details of vacancies reported for a post to the 
e-mail account of the website . The Joint Secretary (Research and Analysis 
Wing) was responsible for  uploading it on the website of the KPSC, 
immediately or on the next working day . Scrutiny of  the web content of 
KPSC, however, revealed that the vacancy position was uploaded only in 
cases where the selection notifications were issued by the KPSC. The details 
of cases for which notifications were yet to be issued were not available in the 
website. Thus, the KPSC failed to ensure transparency and timely 
dissemination of vacancy position to the candidates. 
The KPSC stated (January 2017) that , the vacancies could be uploaded in the 
website only after completion of procedures like issue of category number, 
etc., for notification of the post. 
The reply was not tenable since the KPSC Manual clearly stipulated that, 
details of vacancies received were to be uploaded on that day or on the next 
working day. 
Recommendation 2: GOK may issue instructions to G overnment 
Departments and institutions to promptly report yearly vacancies. KPSC may 
ensure timely publishing of vacancy position. 
2.6.3 Publication of notification for recruitment 
2.6.3.1 Vacancy requisitions pending notification 
As per provisions of the KPSC Manual, d efect free vacancy requisitions 
received in KPSC were to be acted upon immediately and if there was no 
Ranked List for the post, notification to the post was to be published within 30 
days of reporting vacancy to the post. However, we observed that, as of 
31 March 2016, the KPSC was yet to issue notifications in respect of at least 10 
452 vacancies pertaining to 128 posts  in different departments /institutions. 
While delay in notification of 107 vacancies ranged from one to five years, 
there was a delay of five to ten years in issuing notifications for 103 vacancies. 
Delay in issue of notifications ranged between 16 to 18 years in respect of two 
vacancies. The reasons for non-issue of notifications included delay in framing 
of Special Rules/amendment to Special Rules/clarification regarding Rules, 
court cases, clarification from Departments, etc. 
On a scrutiny of selected recruitment files, we noticed delays ranging from 11 
to 77 months in publishing of notification as shown in Table 2.1. 
                                                 
10 Four out of 22 sections in the KPSC did not furnish relevant information to us 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
16 
Table 2.1: Delay in publishing notification in test checked cases 
Sl. 
No. Name of Post 
Date of first 
reporting of 
vacancy 
No. of 
vacancies 
Date of publication 
of notification 
Period of 
delay 
1.  Blacksmith Grade II in Kerala State 
Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) 23 May 2006 13 30 December 2009 42 months 
2.  Sales Assistant in Handicrafts 
Development Corporation of Kerala Ltd. 03 June 2005 1 31 December 2011 77 months 
3.  Assistant Engineer (Civil) in Kerala 
State Housing Board/KSRTC 05 July 2007 10 30 April 2009 20 months 
4.  
Assistant District Industries Officer in 
Industries Department - Special 
Recruitment for SC/ST 
05 August 2008 1 31 December 2011 39 months 
5.  Agricultural Officer – Special 
Recruitment for ST 20 March 2007 7 16 July 2012 62 months 
6.  Agricultural Assistant 12 March 2008 8  31 March 2009 11 months 
(Source: Records of KPSC) 
KPSC stated (August/November 2016) that , delay in issue of notification in 
the case of items 1, 4 and 6 was due to amendment effected to the qualification 
prescribed in May 2009, the Unit handling the notifications being vacant for 
about two years and delay occurring in obtaining clarifications sought for in 
the absence of Special Rules respectively. 
KPSC failed to explain why notification was not issued in respect of item 1 
between May 2006 (date of reporting of vacancy) and May 2009 (amendment 
to qualification). The delay in issue of notifications resulted in delay in 
offering of appointments to candidates. 
Recommendation 3: KPSC may consider evolving an action plan to ensure 
prompt notification of all defect free vacancy requisitions received. 
2.6.3.2 Lapsing of Ranked Lists without advising even a single candidate 
due to non-reporting of vacancy  
As per instructions of Government issued from time to time since 1971 in 
consultation with the KPSC, the appointing authorities were to report 
anticipated/existing vacancies to KPSC for making recruitment. Further, as per 
instructions contained in the KPSC Manual (Paragraphs 202, 204 and 307), 
process of issuing notifications was to start only upon receipt of vacancy 
requisitions from the appointing authorities and selection proposals were to be 
finalised by KPSC only after ascertaining the up to date vacancy position from 
appointing authorities. 
Scrutiny of recruitment files revealed instances of KPSC conducting 
recruitment process and preparing Ranked Lists without ensuring vacancy 
requisitions from appointing authorities which resulted in cancelling/lapsing of 
Ranked Lists without advising even a single candidate from the Ranked List as 
detailed below. 
Selection by KPSC without receiving vacancy reports from GOK 
 Recruitment of Higher Secondary School Teacher (Arabic) 
KPSC issued notification (2005) for selection of Higher Secondary 
School Teachers (HSST) Arabic in the Higher Secondary Education 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
17 
Department. We observed that , the KPSC received 924 applications 
for the anticipated vacancies of HSST Arabic and a Ranked List with 
13 candidates was finalised (April 2007) for the post. However, 
KPSC had to cancel ( October 2011) the Ranked List without 
advising even a single candidate since the Education Department did 
not report any vacancy of HSST Arabic to the KPSC. Scrutiny of 
relevant files indicated that , the KPSC issued the notification, 
conducted selection process and  prepared/published Ranked List  of 
HSST Arabic without ensuring avai lability of vacancy. 
Consequently, not even a single candidate from Ranked List could be 
offered appointment , rendering the entire selection exercise of the 
KPSC meaningless. 
KPSC stated (January 2017) that , as per the accepted procedure of 
KPSC since 1976, in the case of posts for which there is already a 
Ranked List and for which vacancies could be anticipated every year, 
notifications for the posts could be published if the Ranked List has 
completed a period of one year.  The reply was not acceptable as w e 
observed that , not even a single vacancy was reported for the post 
from 2005 to 2011, which indicated that no vacancies could be 
anticipated for the post. Thus, the action of KPSC to issue 
notification and complete the selection process without getting a ny 
vacancies reported by GOK was not in order. 
Additional Chief Secretary , GAD stated during the Exit Conference 
(December 2016) that, GOK had been issuing circulars demanding 
vacancy reports from the appointing authorities and that the 
procedure currently followed by KPSC was not correct. 
 Recruitment of Store Assistant, Handicrafts Development 
Corporation of Kerala Ltd. 
The Recruitment Rules of the Handicrafts Development Corporation 
of Kerala Ltd. (HDCK) provided for filling up of posts of Store 
Assistants by direct recruitment and  five per cent  of the vacancies 
were to be reserved for Last Grade employees (By Transfer 
appointment) of H DCK possessing qualification of SSLC 11 and two 
years of service. 
Two vacancies of Store Assistant were reported (February 2006) by 
HDCK for direct recruitment.  KPSC ordered to fill up these 
vacancies from the Ranked List of Accountant/Account s Assistant, 
etc., in various Companies/Boards /Corporations and to publish 
notification for ‘By Transfer’ recruitment. Accordingly, KPSC issued 
a separate notification (April 2008) for ‘By Transfer’ recruitment of 
Store Assistants from eligible Last Grade employees in HDCK.  
Subsequent to the notification, KPSC requested the Company (March 
2011) to report vacancies for ‘By Transfer’ recruitment. Though 
HDCK clarified (August 2011) that, it had never sought filling up of 
the posts ‘By Transfer’ and that there were no such vacancies 
earmarked for appointments then , it was seen that KPSC conducted 
                                                 
11 Secondary School Leaving Certificate 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
18 
interview and published (October 2011) a Ranked List  of five 
candidates. In the absence of vacancies, KPSC could not issue advice 
for appointment to any candidate from the Ranked List, which lapsed 
(April 2016) subsequently. 
Thus, failure of the KPSC to comply with directions of GOK to issue 
notification for appointment only after obtaining vacancy report from 
the appointing authority and its insistence to continue with the 
selection process despite clarification offered by HDCK about lack 
of vacancy resulted in lapsing of selection made after conducting 
interviews. 
Recommendation 4: KPSC may issue notification s for selections only after 
receipt of vacancy reports from appointing authorities. 
2.6.4 Deficiencies in issuing notifications 
2.6.4.1 Issue of n otifications without conforming to provisions of Kerala 
State and Subordinate Services Rules  
The Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules (KS&SSR) stipulate that, the 
educational or other qualifications, if any, required for a post, shall be as 
specified in the Special Rules applicable to the service in which that post is 
included or as specified in the Executive Orders of Government in cases where 
Special Rules have not been issued for the post. Thus, the KPSC, while issuing 
notifications for selection to posts was required to ensure that the notifications 
to the posts prescribed only the qualifications specified in the Special 
Rules/Executive Orders of Government for the post. We noticed that, in the 
following cases , the KPSC issued notifications without conforming to the 
above provision due to which ineligible candidates were also considered for 
selection. 
Recruitment of Assistant Surgeon, Health Services 
As per Special Rules for the post of Assistant Surgeon (Kerala Health Services 
(Medical Officers) Special Rules 2010), the qualifications prescribed were 
(i) Degree in Modern Medicine and (ii) Permanent Registration wit h 
Travancore Cochin Medical Council (TCMC) 12. However in the notification 
(November 2012) for the post, the KPSC permitted candidates possessing 
Registration with other State/Central Councils also to apply, with the 
condition that TCMC Registration has to b e produced at the time of joining 
duty. An erratum deleting the above clause was issued (December 2012) after 
the last date of application without extending the last date of receipt of 
application. Since the candidates who were disqualified consequent to issue of 
erratum obtained favourable orders from the Kerala Administrative Tribunal 
(KAT), GOK ordered (October 2014) to relax the rules in respect of 
candidates who had registration with other State/Central Medical Councils as 
on the last date of applicati on, and such persons if selected, advised and 
appointed, to grant extension of time to produce TCMC Registration upto 
joining of duty. A total of 45 candidates who were not fulfilling the prescribed 
criteria for selection were selected accordingly. Thus, the late reali sation by 
                                                 
12 As per section 38 of the Travancore -Cochin Medical Practitioners Act, 1953, no person other than a 
practitioner registered with TCMC shall practice in the State. 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
19 
KPSC that the notification issued by it was not in conformity with the Special 
Rules forced KPSC to issue e rratum, which led to the above mentioned  
candidates obtaining favourable orders from the KAT. 
KPSC stated (September 2016) that, the Notification was prepared in 
conformity with existing Special Rules issued by GOK and that the clause 
regarding the candidates possessing registration with other State/Central 
Medical Council was similar to previous notifications issued for the pos t. We, 
however, found that the reply was contrary to facts. We also observed that, the 
reason cited by KPSC of following precedence would not sustain since it was 
bound to issue notifications as provided in the Special Rules. 
Recruitment of Clerk Grade I, Kerala State Co-operative Bank 
The Special Rules of Kerala State Co -operative Bank (KSCB) provided for 
filling up of vacant posts of Clerk Grade I in the ratio of 1:1 between General 
and Society category 13. As 50 vacancies were reported (September 2009), th e 
KPSC issued notification (April 2010) for making selection under General 
category (25 numbers) and under Society category (25 numbers). As per the 
Special Rules, the employees of the member societies of the respective apex 
society only were eligible to apply for the post under the Society category. We 
noticed that, the notification issued by KPSC for recruitment under Society 
category had erroneously indicated the method of recruitment as from 
“permanent employees of affiliated Member Societies/Primary Co -operative 
Societies”, resulting in employees of Primary Co -operative Societies also 
applying for the post. The Managing Director, KSCB pointed out (May 2010) 
the error in the notification , based on which the KPSC rectified the error by 
issuing an erratum notification (August 2010). We observed that, certain 
employees of the Primary Co -operative Societies who participated in the 
selection process challenged the erratum order issued by the KPSC and 
obtained favourable orders from the High Court for consideri ng them in the 
General category. The KPSC thus included three employees of the Primary 
Co-operative Societies in the Ranked List for the General Category.  
We observed that, negligence on the part of KPSC  resulted in issue of 
defective notification, due  to which the employees of Primary Co -operative 
Societies who were otherwise ineligible to be considered for the post, obtained 
favourable orders from the Court and found place in the Ranked List in the 
General category. KPSC admitted (October 2016) its failure to detect the error 
in notification at various levels. 
Recommendation 5: KPSC may ensure that notifications are issued in 
conformity with the provisions of KS&SSR. 
2.6.5 Irregularities in acceptance of Equivalent qualification 
As per provisions contained in the KS&SSR, the educational or other 
qualifications required for a post were to be as specified in the Special Rules 
for the post, or in the Executive Orders of the Government, in cases where 
Special Rules were not framed f or the post. The qualifications recogni sed by 
Executive Orders/Standing Orders of Government as equivalent to a 
qualification specified for a post could also be considered. The KS&SSR also 
                                                 
13 Reservation to employees of the Member Societies of Kerala State Co-operative Bank 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
20 
stipulated that, where the relevant Special Rules provided for acce ptance of 
equivalent qualifications for a post, (without explicitly specifying such 
equivalent qualifications), the qualifications as found acceptable by KPSC 
would also be sufficient for the post. We observed that, in three instances the 
KPSC decided to accept qualifications as ‘ equivalent’, though  the Special 
Rules did not provide for acceptance of equivalent qualifications as shown in 
Table 2.2. It was also noticed that, Standing Orders of Government 
recognising qualifications as equivalent to the qualifications prescribed were 
also not issued in these cases.  
Table 2.2: Instances of acceptance of equivalent qualification in the absence of 
Executive Orders and without provision in Special Rules 
Name of Post Date of 
notification 
Qualification prescribed in 
notification 
Date of including 
equivalent 
qualification 
subsequently by 
KPSC 
Equivalent qualification 
considered after publication 
of notification 
Meter 
Reader-cum-
Spot Biller 
November 
2007 
National Trade Certificate (NTC)/ 
Kerala Government Technical 
Examination (KGTE) /MGTE in 
electrical trade etc. 
June 2010 
NTC Electronics and 
Mechanics, NTC Mechanic 
General Electronics, NTC 
Electrical and Electronic mode 
of specification Audio -Video 
Electronics, NTC Instrument 
Mechanic, NTC Industrial 
Electrician, KG CE Electronics 
and Communication 
Blacksmith 
Grade II in 
KSRTC 
December 
2009 
ITI Certificate in the trade of 
Blacksmith/Forger and Heat 
Treatment/Sheet metal /Fitter/ 
Diesel Mechanic/Mechanic Motor 
Vehicle and three years’ 
experience in body building/body 
repair workshop of vehicles 
October 2014 Certificate in Automobile 
Engineering14 
Block 
Development 
Officer 
February 
2007 
Graduation in Arts/ Science/ 
Commerce March 2011 B.Tech, BFSc, BCA, BBS  
(Source: Records of KPSC) 
KPSC replied that, in the case of the no tification regarding Blacksmith , the 
qualification as stated in the notification was based on the proposal made by 
the Academic Committee of KPSC. In respect of Meter Reader, KPSC stated 
that, the equivalent qualifications were accepted subject to Government Orders 
and decisions taken by Academic Sub-Committee of KPSC. The reply was not 
acceptable in view of the fact that, the KPSC was not competent to decide on 
equivalent qualifications in the abs ence of relevant provision in the Special 
Rules and there were no Standing Orders of GOK recognising the 
qualifications as equivalent in both cases. 
No reply was furnished by KPSC regarding  acceptance of equivalent 
qualification in respect of Block Development Officer. 
Recommendation 6: KPSC may accept equivalent qualifications as clearly 
specified in the Executive Orders/provisions in Special Rules. 
                                                 
14 The Director of Technical Education has confirmed (January 2017) that certificate course in 
Automobile Eng ineering cannot be considered as Equivalent qualification for the prescribed 
qualification. 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
21 
2.6.6 Annual recruitment of Sub Inspectors to the State Police Force 
As per instructions of GOK issued from time t o time as well as provisions in 
KPSC Manual, the appointing authorities were to report vacancies to KPSC 
for commencing selection process for recruitment. Further, the selection 
proposal was to be finali sed by KPSC only after ascertaining the up to date 
vacancy position from the appointing authorities. 
The KPSC, consequent to the concerns raised at a meeting of the Legislature 
Committee (February 2014) about the delay in recruitment to the posts of 
Police Constables and Drivers in the Police Department , constituted (April 
2014) a Uniformed Forces Recruitment Wing for conduct of annual 
recruitment to the Police Department and similar Uniformed Forces like Fire 
Force, Excise, Jails, etc. The KPSC decided (April 2014) to take up annual 
recruitment to the Un iformed Forces with the target of completing the annual 
selection process commencing from the month of June in a year and finali sing 
the Ranked List by the next June.  
We noticed that, KPSC did not obtain details of anticipated vacancies from the 
State Police Chief before issuing notifications for the posts of Sub Inspector 
(Kerala Civil Police) and Sub Inspector (Armed Police Battalion) in 2014 and 
2015 respectively. It was further noticed that, 855 out of 866 candidates who 
figured in the published Ranked  Lists (recruitment for 2014) were yet to 
receive advice for appointment from the KPSC. Meanwhile, the KPSC froze 
the selection process for the year 2015 owing to the request from the Home 
Department (February 2016) not to proceed with the selection proces s as there 
were already 255 candidates awaiting posting in respect of advices made by 
KPSC from the earlier Ranked List published in 2013. 
KPSC stated in reply (December 2016) that, since selection was to be made 
annually, vacancy position was not obtained  from Appointing Authorities and 
that considering the urgency in publishing Ranked Lists, the anticipated 
vacancies could not be estimated for each post and included in the notification. 
The reply was contradictory to its own instructions which required finalisation 
of selection process only after ascertaining the up to date vacancy position 
from the appointing authorities. 
2.6.7 Loss of Reservation turns 
2.6.7.1 Loss of posts to backward communities due to failure to amend 
KS&SSR despite advice by KPSC 
As per provisions in KS&SSR, if no suitable candidate from a community was 
available in a Ranked List for filling up a post, the turn was to be passed over 
to the next reservation community and if no candidate was available in any of 
the communities, the post could be fill ed from Open Competition (OC) 
candidates. The turn of a reservation community which was forfeited in this 
manner had to be filled at the earliest opportunity from the turn of the 
benefitted community other than OC. However, GOK while amending (March 
2006) the provisions of Rule 15 of KS&SSR relating to reservation rules for 
the backward communities, did not provide for restoration of the forfeited turn 
to the reserved community. 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
22 
We observed that, the amendment effected by GOK has resulted in permanent 
forfeiture of turns to the reserved communities. In one instance of the post of 
Full Time Junior Language Teacher (Arabic), we noticed that five Other 
Backward Castes ( OBC) turns and three Viswakarma turns were filled by 
candidates from the Muslim community. In  the absence of relevant provisions 
to restore the turns to the communities, the OBC and Viswakarma 
communities lost their turns permanently.  
We observed that, despite the KPSC rendering advice (June 2009) to GOK to 
suitably amend the rule to provide for restoration of the turns forfeited to a 
reserved community from the benefitted community, the amendment was yet 
to be issued by GOK. GOK replied (December 2016) that, KPSC had rendered 
(August 2015) new suggestions/recommendations on the draft notification s 
and that views of the Backward Class es Development Department on these 
modifications were yet to be received. GOK assured that, expeditious steps 
would be taken to amend the Rule. 
2.6.7.2 Loss of job opportunities due to failure to consider Not Joining 
Duty vacancies 
Rules 14 to 17 of KS&SSR prescribed the rotation 15, in a cycle of 100 turns to 
OC and various reservation categories, for making advice for appointment. 
If a candidate advised by KPSC against a turn fails to join duty, such vacancy 
was to be reported to KPSC as Not Joining Duty (NJD) vacancy.  The KPSC, 
based on a direction of the High Court (January 1981), adopted a procedure 
whereby the NJD vacancies would be filled up by advising the candidates 
belonging to the same group (community), if available. In line with the orders 
of High Court, the GOK also issued (1983) instructions to Administrative 
Departments for timely reporting of NJD vacancies to KPSC. 
KPSC conducted selection (2007) to  the posts of Assistant Grade II/L ower 
Division Clerk/Junior Clerk to various Companies/ Corporations from a 
common Ranked List. Subsequently in 2011, KPSC notified selection to the 
above p osts by grouping the Companies/ Corporations into two and separate 
Ranked Lists were published in September 2014 and September 2015.  
We noticed that, the appointing authorities of the above 
Companies/Corporations had reported a total number of 829 16 NJD vacancies 
upto April 2013 . However, KPSC erroneously considered the NJD turns 
reported by the companies pertaining to the previous selection 17 as fresh 
vacancies, while making advice from these Ranked Lists . The above 
procedure adopted by KPSC, though advantageous to certain 
communities/categories by way of excess number of 54 turns, caused 
permanent loss of as much turns to certain other communities/categories , 
including loss of 11 vacancies to Differently Abled candidates as shown in 
Appendix 2.5. 
                                                 
15 Separate Rotation Charts are prescribed for recruitment to posts in General Recruitment. The charts 
depict the turn of each reservation category as well as OC. In  a rotation cycle of 100 turns, 50 turns 
are earmarked for OC and 50 turns for reservation 
16 184 from the first group and 645 from the second group 
17 With reference to notifications issued upto 2007 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
23 
KPSC while agreeing (December 2016) that the entire NJD turns were treated 
as fresh vacancies stated that, if NJD vacancies were reported from both 
existing NJD rotation and fresh rotation with similar turns, it could disrupt the 
whole rotation process.  The reply was not tenable as the H igh Court order of 
1981 which was adopted by the KPSC has been violated and the principles of 
reservation compromised, leading to loss of turns to some communities.  
Besides, we observed that, had the KPSC inserted a prefix against the existing 
NJD turns to differentiate t hem from fresh rotation turns, the possibility of 
disruption of rotation process as stated by KPSC could have been avoided. 
Recommendation 7: KPSC may initiate action to restore the forfeited turns 
to communities and Differently Abled candidates. 
2.6.8 Reservation benefits to Differently Abled Persons 
The Parliament enacted the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, 
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (PwD Act) which came 
into force from 07 February 1996 to ensure equal partic ipation of the 
Differently Abled in public services. As per Section 33 of the Act, every 
appropriate Government shall appoint in every establishment such percentage 
of vacancies not less than three per cent for persons or class of persons with 
disability, of which one per cent each was to be reserved for (i) blindness or 
low vision, (ii) hearing impairment, (iii) Locomotor Disability or Cerebral 
Palsy. We observed that, the provisions of the PwD Act were  not complied 
with as discussed below. 
2.6.8.1 Recruitment of Persons with Disability in Government 
GOK introduced (July 1998) reservation of three per cent of posts to persons 
with disabilities for vacancies in Class III and IV, and later in August 2005 for 
vacancies in Class I and II. Since there was delay on the p art of the District 
Collectors18 in the recruitment of Differently Abled, GOK entrusted the 
selection to the KPSC with effect from 01 January 2004 . Since the modalities 
of appointment and the turn s of Differently Abled candidates were fixed only 
on 19 July 2008, the appointment of Differently Abled during 01 January 2004 
to 31 December 2007 to the three per cent earmarked vacancies could not be 
made. Government identified 1188 backlog vacancies in accordance with 
appointments made during this period in the Class II, III and IV posts in 71 
Departments for the Differently Abled and ordered (January 2011) to set apart 
these vacancies to conduct Special Recruitment by KPSC on urgent basis. No 
vacancies were identified for Cl ass I posts  since no candidates ha d been 
advised for Class I posts during the period.  
Scrutiny of records related to recruitment of the Differently Abled persons 
revealed that, as of December 2013 19, the process of selection to 965 out of 
1188 backlog vacancies in different Classes for the Differently Abled 
pertaining to the period 2004 to 2007 was in progress. Details of the present 
status of recruitment sought for from the KPSC/GOK were not produced to us 
                                                 
18 District Collector was the Chairman of the Selection Co mmittee as per the scheme for reservation of 
three per cent of vacancies 
19 Latest position from KPSC/GOK is awaited (December 2016) 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
24 
(November 2016). We noticed deficiencies in implementation of the PwD Act 
in selection to the following posts. 
Medical Officer (Ayurveda)  
As per Section 36 of PwD Act, any vacancy which could not be filled up in a 
recruitment year, due to non-availability of a suitable person with disability or 
any other sufficient reason, shall be carried forward to the succeeding 
recruitment year and if in the succeeding recruitment year also suitable person 
with disability was not available, it may be filled up first by interchange 
among the three categories of disabled, viz., blindness or low vision, hearing 
impairment, locomotor disability or cerebral palsy. The employer could fill up 
the vacancy by appointment of a person other than a person with disability , 
only if no disabled person was available for the post in that year. We observed 
violation of these guidelines by KPSC, resulting in three posts for the disabled 
being filled up from the General category. 
KPSC notified (April 2012) the post of Medical Offi cer (Ayurveda) (Special 
Recruitment for P hysically Handicapped (PH)  Backlog vacancies  - 
Orthopaedic-Lower Extremities 20) in the Department of Indian Systems of 
Medicine. Of the 16 candidates who applied for seven vacancies, five 
candidates were included in the Ranked List.  We noticed that, of the 11 
candidates rejected, there were three applicants with disability of Orthopaedic-
Upper Extremities . Four 21 Differently Abled vacancies were filled and three 
left unfilled. Meanwhile, KPSC issued (November 2014) ano ther Ranked List 
for General recruitment22 for the post of Medical Officer (Ayurveda) for 
which applicants with disability of Orthopaedic -Lower Extremities were 
eligible to apply.  As there were no eligible applicants with disability of 
Orthopaedic-Lower Extremities, KPSC decided (December 2014) to allot the 
three unfilled Differently Abled vacancies to General category candidates. 
No reply was furnished by KPSC regarding allotment of vacancies reserved 
for Differently Abled candidates to General category. 
Assistant Engineer in the Local Self Government Department (Special 
Recruitment for Differently Abled) 
As per GOK orders (October 2012) the post of Assistant Engineer was suitable 
for all the Differently Abled  categories of Locomotor disability/Cerebral 
Palsy, Hearing impairment and Low vision. 
The KPSC notified (May 2013) 20 backlog vacancies in the post of Assistant 
Engineer (Civil) pertaining to the period 2004  to 200 7 in the Local Self 
Government Department (LSGD) reserved for Differently Abled  candidates. 
However, KPSC issued notification reserving these posts exclusively for the 
category “Orthopaedic-Lower Extremities”, which was not in order. The Chief 
Engineer, LSGD had also informed (November 2013)  the fact of suitability of 
all categories of Differently Abled for the above post , which was not adhered 
to by KPSC. 
                                                 
20 “Lower Extremities” means the lower limb, including the hip, thigh, leg, ankle, and foot 
21 One selected candidate was subsequently relieved 
22 Notified in August 2011 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
25 
It was seen that out of the 48 Differently Abled candidates who applied, 18 
presented records to KPSC for verification, of which only nine candidates, 
including a “Hearing Impaired” candidate were found to possess the 
educational qualifications specified in the notification. Contrary to directions 
of GOK regarding the suitability of the post  to all Differently Abled  
categories, the candidatur e of five candidates, including that of the “Hearing 
Impaired” candidate was rejected and only four candidates were called for 
interview (October 2014). Based on the interview, only three candidates 
belonging to the category of “Orthopaedic -Lower Extremities” were selected, 
leaving 17 out of 20 backlog vacancies for Differently Abled  candidates 
remaining unfilled. 
The action of the KPSC in excluding candidates with Hearing Impairment, 
Low Vision and Locomotor disability/Cerebral Palsy and limiting selection  to 
candidates with disability of “Orthopaedic-Lower Extremities” had resulted in 
deprival of chances to prospective candidates of Differently Abled category. 
In the Exit Conference (December 2016), the Secretary, KPSC stated that, 
reply will be furnished after verification of records. However, no reply was 
furnished by KPSC (January 2017). 
Recommendation 8: KPSC may adhere to the eligibility criteria prescribed 
by the PwD Act while issuing notifications to posts. 
Special facilities to blind candidates 
Differently Abled candidates were entitled for special facilities in 
examinations conducted by KPSC. As per the decisions of the KPSC (June 
2011), while the visually challenged candidates with certified disability of 
75 per cent or more and candidates suffering from cerebral palsy were eligible 
to seek the assistance of scribes, the Orthopaedically handicapped candidates 
were entitled for extra time of 15 minutes per hour for descriptive type 
examinations. However , GOI issued gui delines (February 2013) for 
conducting written examinations for PwD, which stipulated that, the facility of 
Scribe/Reader/Lab Assistant was to be allowed to any person who has 
disability of 40 per cent or more if so desired by the person. GOK also decided 
(March 2014) to provide scribes for candidates having visual disability of 
40 per cent or more. The High Court of Kerala had also opined (May 2014) 
that, the KPSC should positively consider the recommendation of GOK to 
provide scribes to persons with visua l disability of 40 per cent since this was 
also in consonance with GOI norms.  However, the KPSC intimated 
(November 2014) its decision to continue with the practice of permitting 
scribes only to the candidates having 75 per cent visual disability. 
We notic ed that, there were visually impaired candidates with 40 per cent  
disability who used Braille 23 for learning at school which underscored the 
need for providing assistance of a scribe for KPSC examinations. It was also  
observed that, there were 5832 visually impaired candidates registered with 
the KPSC seeking employment opportunities, some of whom could have been 
denied the assistance of scribes on grounds of certified disability not being 
75 per cent.  
                                                 
23 A system of writing and printing for the blind in which arrangements of raised dots representing 
letters and numbers can be identified by touch. 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
26 
The Secretary, KPSC stated during the Exit Conference (December 2016) that, 
it was an age old dictum and a matter of policy. We, however feel that KPSC 
should review its decision keeping in view the observations of High Court and 
GOI Guidelines. 
Recommendation 9: KPSC may take steps to  provide scribes to candidates 
with visual disability of 40 per cent or more. 
2.6.9 Special Recruitment for SC/ST candidates 
As per Rule 14 (a) of the KS&SSR, eight per cent  of posts are reserved for 
Scheduled Castes (SC) while two per cent  is reserved for Scheduled 
Tribes (ST). Rule 17 A of the KS&SSR also enables the Government to 
reserve specified number of posts in any service, class, category or grade to be 
filled by direct recruitment exclusively from among the members of SC and 
ST. GOK also ordered (January 1994) that, in case of fresh selections, S pecial 
Recruitment exclusively for the STs shall be made in Departments to ensure 
the prescribed two per cent  representation to them in public service without 
exceeding the total limit.  
We analysed the details of S pecial Recruitment for SC/ST as on 31 March 
2016 and observed that selection was pending against at least 739 vacancies in 
respect of 136 posts. We conducted a detailed scrutiny of files relating to 
selections pending under Special Recruitment as on 31 March 2016 and found 
that the selections were pending upto 21 years due to various reasons like non-
receipt of clarification regarding qualification, absence of candidates with the 
required qualifica tion, delay in re -notification/re-categorisation, etc., as 
detailed in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Pendency in Special Recruitment for SC/ST 
Name of post and 
Department/ 
Institution 
No. of 
vacancy and 
category 
Date of 
reporting 
of vacancy 
Date of 
occurrence 
of vacancy 
Observations/Reasons for delay 
Part Time Junior 
Language Teacher 
(PTJLT) Arabic – 
Education 
Department – 
Thrissur district 
One - SC/ST 03.07.1995 01.1986 
KPSC notified the vacancy on 28.10.1997 and renotified on four occasions 
upto 02.07.2002. KPSC addressed (24.03.2006 to 0 3.06.2015) Government 
for re -categorisation, but no action was taken by Government so far. The 
vacancy remained unfilled for 30 years.  
KPSC stated that Government re-categorised (June 2016) the post as PTJLT 
Hindi and vacancy was reported in January 2017.  
Full Time Junior 
Language Teacher 
(FTJLT) Arabic –
Education 
Department – 
Kollam district 
Two - 
SC/ST 27.09.1995 01.1989 
The vacancy w as notified on 22.07.1997 and renotified on two occasions 
upto 08.06.1999. As no qualified candidates applied, the KPSC addressed 
(24.03.2006 to 03.06.2015) Government for re -categorisation, but no action 
was taken by Government. The vacancy remained unfilled for 27 years. 
KPSC stated that Government re-categorised (June 2016) the post as FTJLT 
Hindi and vacancy was reported in January 2017. 
Gardener - 
Department of 
Archaeology 
One – ST 08.12.1998 
05.08.1995 
(date of 
earmarking 
vacancy) 
The KPSC considered  (22.10.2011) the selection to the post based on a 
remark (11.11.2010) by the Government for not effecting the selection even 
after 15 years of earmarking the vacancy. KPSC addressed (22.10. 2011) 
Government to issue Executive Orders as no Special Rules we re available. 
But Government re -categorised (16.04.2015) the post as Night 
Watcher/Peon and the Department again reported the vacancy on 
02.05.2015. The KPSC is yet to take action for selection. The vacancy 
remained unfilled for 20 years. 
KPSC stated that decision was taken to fill up the vacancy from the Ranked 
List for Last Grade Servants.  

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
27 
Name of post and 
Department/ 
Institution 
No. of 
vacancy and 
category 
Date of 
reporting 
of vacancy 
Date of 
occurrence 
of vacancy 
Observations/Reasons for delay 
Printer Grade II (on 
modernisation of 
Presses new post of 
Offset Machine 
Operator Grade II) 
– Department of 
Printing 
Four – ST 
17.11.2003 
(reported 
for the 
vacancy of 
Printer). 
The new 
post 
reported in 
October 
2009 
11.08.2009 
(earmarked 
as per GO) 
The vacancy of Printer Grade II was reported on 17.11.2003, but KPSC 
took no action for selection. The Director of Printing later requested 
(18.06.2008) to stop selection to the post consequent on Modernisation of 
Presses. New post of Offset Machine Operator Grade II created was notified 
on 30.12.2010 and re -notified on 15.11.2012 and 29.12.2015. Though four 
posts were notified in Kottayam, Kollam, Pathanamthitta and 
Thiruvananthapuram, no qualified candidates applied except in 
Thiruvananthapuram. The selec tion proposal for Thiruvananthapuram was 
approved and the remaining posts were to be re -notified (August 2016). 
Thus, the vacancy remained unfilled for seven years.  
KPSC stated that interview date was to be fixed for selection in 
Thiruvananthapuram.  
Overseer Grade III 
-Irrigation 
Department 
Three - 
SC/ST 
reported as 
ST later 
(29.08.2014) 
14.08.2012 
Backlog 
(Vacancy 
reported by 
Chief 
Engineer 
referring 
Government 
letter dated 
02.03.2012) 
KPSC notified (15.02.2013) the vacancies for SC/ST and OMR test was 
conducted on 15.07.2014, but later the Chief Engineer reported that 
(29.08.2014) the vacancies were actually earmarked for ST (vide GO dated 
15.07.2014). As the Probability list had already been prepared the KPSC 
decided to prepare separate list for SC and  ST categories and to advise 
candidates from the list of STs. The defect occurred due to non -ensuring of 
issue of Government Order earmarking the vacancy.  
KPSC stated that the Ranked list was published in November 2016. 
Peon - Sainik 
Welfare 
Department 
One - ST 
Ex-
servicemen 
09.07.2012 01.01.2010 
The vacancy was notified on 15.10.2013 for both NCC and Sainik Welfare 
Departments with a clause to consider non -Ex-servicemen ST candidates in 
the absence of qualified Ex -servicemen ST candidates. OMR test was 
conducted on 13.08.2014. Later, KPSC found some mistakes in the 
selection that notification was made for NCC and Sainik Welfare 
Departments instead of Sainik Welfare Department alone and by 
incorporating the clause for considering non -Ex-servicemen in the absence 
of Ex-servicemen which was applicable only in NCC. The KPSC decided 
(01.03.2016) to re -notify the vacancy as there was no eligible (Ex -
servicemen ST) candidate. Thus, carelessness of KPSC delayed the 
selection process. 
KPSC stated that the post was again notified in December 2016. 
LDC - Sainik 
Welfare 
Department (Ex -
servicemen only) 
One - ST 
(Kollam) 
 
21.01.2010 01.06.2009 
Two vacancies 24 for LDC in Sainik  Welfare Department were notified 
(Category 416/2010 dated 30.12.2010) along with one post in NCC 
Department ( Kozhikode district) for selection from Ex -servicemen ST 
candidates and in the absence of Ex -servicemen, from Non-Ex-servicemen 
candidates. Since there were no Ex -servicemen candidates KPSC published 
Ranked List with non-Ex-servicemen candidates for Sainik Welfare 
Department and advised three candidates. The advice issued to Sainik 
Welfare Department was returned stating that posts in Sainik Welfare 
Department are exclusively reserved for Ex -servicemen. The matter was 
taken up with Government and Government clarified that n on-Ex-
servicemen will be considered only in NCC Department as ordered in GO 
dated 02.08.1986. The KPSC ordered to cancel the advic es made and to 
retain these candidates in the Ranked List to be considered when vacancies 
reported by NCC Department . Thus, the error in notification resulted in 
advising ineligible candidates and subsequent cancellation of advice and 
resultant non-filling up of vacancies for the last seven years.  
KPSC stated that in Kollam district, interview for the selection was over and 
Ranked List is to be published.  
One - ST 
(Thiruvanan-
thapuram) 
19.07.2010 01.06.2009 
One - ST 
(Kollam) 03.12.2012 17.11.2012 
Non-Vocational 
Teacher in Physics 
- Department of 
Vocational Higher 
Secondary 
Education 
One - ST 13.08. 2009 06.11.2008 
The vacancy was notified on 30.10.2010 (Category 319/10). Three eligible 
candidates did not turn up for the interview held on 27.10.2011 . KPSC re -
notified (30.11.2012) the vacancy, but the single applicant had no required 
qualification. KPSC decided (March 2013) to re -notify the vacancy after 
two months, i.e. after end of that academic year. However, further action in 
the selection was not taken. The vacancy remained unfilled for seven years.  
KPSC stated (October 2016) that the vacancy would be re -notified as and 
when orders relaxing qualifications were received from Government. 
                                                 
24  One vacancy was reported after date of notification on 03 December 2012 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
28 
Name of post and 
Department/ 
Institution 
No. of 
vacancy and 
category 
Date of 
reporting 
of vacancy 
Date of 
occurrence 
of vacancy 
Observations/Reasons for delay 
Assistant Grade II -
Kerala State Forest 
Development 
Corporation 
(KSFDC) 
One - ST 
31.01.2007 
(defect free 
on 
27.03.2007)  
12.01.2007 
The vacancy was notified only on 28.12.2011 along with the vacancy 
reported on 16.06.2011 pending clarification regarding the occurrence of 
vacancies. The probability list was  published on 15.05.2014. The KPSC 
made correspondence with Director of Technical Education regarding 
equivalency of qualification for 16 months (24.11.2014 to 07.04.2016) 
though the information had already been obtained on 06.05.2011 in the 
earlier selection. The Ranked List was not published and advice not issued 
even after a lapse of nine years/five years from the date of reporting of the 
vacancies as against one year and one month required.  
KPSC stated that the Ranked list was brought into force in Jul y 2016 and 
two candidates advised in October 2016. 
One - SC/ST 
26.11.2010 
(revised 
proforma on 
16.06.2011) 
03.11.2010 
Driver Grade II - 
Kerala State Drugs 
and 
Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. (KSDP)  
One - SC/ST 
04.06.2012 
(error free 
proforma on 
26.03.2013) 
02.08.2006 
The notification was issued only on 31.08.2013 after getting an error free 
requisition on 26.03.2013. OMR test was conducted on 02.09.2014 for 404 
applicants. The short list is yet to be prepared and practical test also to be 
conducted. There wa s delay in every stage of the process and the vacancy 
occurred on 02.08.2006 remained unfilled even after nine years.  
KPSC replied (June 2016) that the delay was owing to completion of the 
regular procedure for the selection. Short list was published in September 
2016. 
Quality Control 
Inspector - Kerala 
State Handloom 
Development 
Corporation 
(KSHDC) 
One - ST 04.05.2009 05.09.2008 
Notification was issued on 30.12.2009 and re -notified on 14.10.2011 and 
again on 31.07.2013 as requested by the Appointing Aut hority. As no 
candidate with the required qualification of Diploma in Handloom 
Technology/Textile Technology was available, the post was re -notified 
again on 11.04.2014. Three of the five applicants did not possess the 
required qualification. The remaining  two candidates produced certificates 
of other courses (B.Sc. Costume Design, etc.) . The KPSC addressed (May 
2015) Government to confirm the equivalency of the qualifications. But the 
matter is still pending with the Government even though the KPSC 
submitted (March 2016) the syllabus of the courses , etc., as sought for by 
Government. Thus, the vacancy remained unfilled even after seven years.  
KPSC stated that clarification regarding equivalency was to be received 
from Government.  
 (Source: Records of KPSC) 
On being asked, KPSC replied (December 2016) that, manpower in the KPSC 
should be increased to meet the workload. We observed that, KPSC cited 
shortage of manpower without conduct of a scientific work study, on which an 
audit comment has been incorporated under paragraph 2.8.2 of this Report. 
Recommendation 10: KPSC may take appropriate action to ensure filling up 
of posts reserved for SC/ST candidates. 
2.6.10 Selection process pending finalisation 
The examination process conducted by KPSC for selection to various services 
of the State inter alia involves various stages such as notification, application 
scrutiny, written test, certificate verification, short  listing, interview and 
finalisation of Ranked List. The statement of pendency in selection as on 
31 March 2016 showed that the selection was pending in respect of 94,98,574 
applications for 2919 posts relating to the years from 2009 to 2016 due to 
delay in clarifying issues related to equivalent qualifications, delay in re -
categorisation of post, non -existence of Special Rules , erroneous vacancy 
reporting, non-availability of qualified candidates, court cases, etc.  
Analysis of the data on pendency pertaining to the years 2010 to 201 5 showed 
that only 17 to 28 per cent of selections were completed in a year as shown in 
Table 2.4. 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
29 
Table 2.4: Analysis of the data on the selections relating to the years 
from 2010 to 2015 
Year of 
notification 
Selection Pending No. of posts for 
which selection 
pending as on 
31.03.2016 
Cases cleared Percentage of 
selections 
completed in 
each year 
As on No. of 
Posts 
No. of 
Posts 
Time 
taken in 
Years  
2010 31.03.2011 807 37 770 5 19 
2011 31.03.2012 773 80 693 4 22 
2012 31.03.2013 1295 498 797 3 21 
2013 31.03.2014 902 597 305 2 17 
2014 31.03.2015 1224 885 339 1 28 
2015 31.03.2016 755 755 Nil - - 
(Source: Records of KPSC) 
We reviewed 504 cases where the Ranked Lists were finali sed and published 
during 2011 to 2015. Against the target set by the KPSC, of publishing 
Ranked Lists within one year from the date of notification, it was noticed that 
the time taken for finalisation of Ranked Lists ranged from three to four years 
in 156 cases (31 per cent), four to five years in 94 cases (19 per cent) and five 
to six years in 33 cases ( seven per cent). Further, in seven cases, KPSC took 
more than six years and in two cases more than seven years to finalise the 
selection process. The details of time taken and reasons for delay in 
completing the selection process  in respect of the recruitment files verified by 
us are given in Appendix 2.6. 
KPSC admitted (November 2016) that there was delay in the selection 
process, which was attributed to delay at various stages of selection like 
application scrutiny, OMR test, pu blishing of short list, verification of 
certificates, conduct of interview s, receipt of clarifications regarding 
acceptance of equivalent qualifications as well as legal and other issues which 
could not be addressed through the computerised system.  
Recommendation 11: KPSC may ensure completion of selection process 
within the targeted period of one year. 
2.6.11 Application of Information Technology by KPSC 
2.6.11.1 Deficiencies in One Time Registration System 
One Time Registration (OTR) facility was introduced by KPSC from 
01 January 2012 , by which the candidate s have to create a profile by 
submitting their personal data and details of educational qualification s. The 
candidates can view all active notifications in their profile and can apply for 
posts by logging to th eir profile by clicking the “Apply Now” button shown 
against the post. The details entered in the profile will be subjected t o 
verification only after short  listing a candidate for a post (in cases where the 
number of applications for a post is 500 or less  the details are verified at the 
time of application itself). As on 30  September 2016 , the total number of 
registrations was 34.11 lakh. It was seen that, 1.65 lakh candidates in whose 
case, verification had been done, were issued Permanent Candidate Number 
(PCN), whereby such candidates need not report for verification in subsequent 
selections. However, we noticed certain deficiencies in the system, which 
were later confirmed by KPSC, whereby candidates could register a ny false 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
30 
information especially regarding qualifications and apply for any post even if 
they did not possess the required qualification. We came across an instance of 
a single candidate applying for as many as 270 posts ranging from Electrician, 
Plumber, e tc., to General Manager and Biom edical Engineer. The candidate 
had shown qualifications in ITI/ITC in  Electronics/General Mechanics/  
Mechanic Auto Electrical and Electronics/ Diploma/Polytechnic in Electronics 
Engineering/Medical Engineering/ Instrument Tech nology and Bio medical 
Engineering to his credit, all of which were stated as acquired in 2011 -2012, 
which lacked authenticity. 
We observed that, KPSC was allowing such bogus applicants/non-serious job 
seekers for screening t est. This has resulted in the nu mber of  candidates 
actually appearing in the examination being much less than the total 
applicants, with the absence in certain tests ranging up to 66 per cent as shown 
in Appendix 2.7.  
KPSC admitted (October 2016) that, the OTR system had flaws which allowed 
candidates to register false information and stated that corrective measures 
were being taken including linking of OTR profile with AADHAR, etc. 
2.6.11.2 Performance of online examination centres 
KPSC established four25 online examination centres in the State, with a view 
to accommodate maximum number of job seekers within a limited time and 
convert written examination into computer aided examination as part of 
innovative technology. KPSC’s Protocol for conduct of online examinations 
stipulated that, the final answer key of  online examinations had to be 
published within a maximum of 15 days from the date of conduct of 
examinations. We observed that, there  was delay of more than a year in 
generating the final Ranked List thereby defeating the objective of setting up 
the online centres. 
As of September 2016, 105 examinations were conducted for 379 posts, of 
which final Ranked Lists in respect of 114 posts had been published and that 
of 263 posts were to be published26. 
While explaining the reasons for the delay in publication of the final Ranked 
Lists, KPSC stated (October 2016) that Short Lists/Probab ility Lists for 
various posts could  be published by the Online Examination Wing only after 
the publi shing of final answer key by  the C ontroller of Examinations, the 
completion of scrutiny of applications and approval of selection orders. 
The reply of the KPSC was silent as to why the Controller of Examinations in 
the KPSC failed to publish the final answer key within a maximum of 15 days 
from the date of conduct of examinations.  Further, the delay could have been 
reduced by conducting scrutiny of applications before the examinations. 
2.6.11.3 Delay in computerisation of rotation process 
The third phase of computerisation in KPSC was implemented from 2007 
onwards, which included  One Time Registration of candidates, submission of 
                                                 
25 Thiruvananthapuram (August 2014), Pathanamthitta (September  2014), Ernakulam (December 2014) 
Kozhikode (August 2016) 
26 Two posts were cancelled 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
31 
applications, preparation of Ranked List, preparation of advice for 
appointment, etc. However, computerisation of the rotation process remains to 
be completed (December 2016). We observed that the work of developing the 
Rotation software was initially entrusted (October 2012) to C-DIT27. The work 
order was frozen and work later entrusted (October 20 13) to a faculty of the 
College of Engineering , Thiruvananthapuram (CET). Reason for cancellation 
of the initial work order was not furnished to us.  The KPSC stated that, 90 per 
cent of the Rotation software ha d been developed  with the source code 
entrusted to KPSC and that the students who passed out from the CET were 
unwilling to pursue the software development process.  Further KPSC 
informed (December 2016) that, the Technical wing of KPSC which was 
entrusted with the completion of software ha d put the wo rk on hold, due to 
lack of sufficient team members as they were tasked with other important 
projects. 
We observed that, the process of rotation  was one of the most critical 
components and culmination point of the entire recruitment process which also 
had a bearing on the reservation and was to be executed every time wit h 
precision and without errors. Thus, failure of KPSC to complete the work 
through C -DIT resulted in abandonment of  computerisation work by the 
faculty and resultant inability of KPSC to complete the computerisation of 
rotation process. 
2.7 Advisory Role of the KPSC 
Provisions of Article 320 (3) of the Constitution require d the State Public 
Service Commission to be consulted on all matters related to methods of 
recruitment to civil services and civil posts, all disciplinary matters affecting a 
Government servant, etc. The KPSC tendered advice to GOK on framing of 
Rules, amendment to Rules and recognition of qualifications. 
2.7.1 Advice for framing of Special Rules for Forest Range Officer 
Government of India (GOI) had published (July 2004) the Entrance and 
Training Rules (Revised 2004) (Rules) for Forest Range Officers, the 
applicability of which extended over the whole of India. As per the Rules, the 
selection of candidates to the posts of Forest Range Officers shall rest with the 
concerned Sponsoring Authority and the selection procedure adopted by the 
Sponsoring Authority must conform to the minimum standards laid down 
under the Rules.  
GOK, based on the advice of KPSC, framed  (October 2010) Special Rules for 
the Kerala Forest Service, adopt ing criteria different from that of the GOI 
rules with respect to the standards such as height/chest girth/physical test/ 
qualification/relaxation in height to ST candidates fixed for the po st of Forest 
Range Officer. 
We observed that while rendering advice on the draft Special Rules for the 
Forest State Service, the modifications advised (June 2010) by KPSC to the 
Rules related to this post were not in conformity with the GOI Rules which 
resulted in finalisation of defective Special Rules.  
                                                 
27 Centre for Development of Imaging Technology 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
32 
The Special Rules amended in September 2014 were also not in consonance 
with the GOI Rules in relation to chest measurement of male candidates, non-
fixing of standards for chest measurement of female candidates, difference in 
the qualification and relaxation in height to ST candidates.  
KPSC followed the selection process and selected 13 candidates from Ranked 
List. However, as brought out above , the criteria for selection was not in 
conformity with GOI Rules. Though the matter was pointed out to KPSC, 
reply was yet to be received (February 2017). 
2.7.2 Advice rendered in selection to the post of Sales Assistant in 
Handicrafts Development Corporation of Kerala Ltd. 
One v acancy for the post of Sales Assistant in Handicrafts Development 
Corporation of Kerala Ltd. (HDCK) was reported to KPSC on 03 June 2005. 
The qualifications prescribed for the post were Graduation and ability to speak 
and write English, Hindi and Malayalam . The consolidated salary for the post 
was `2000 per month for the first year and scale of pay from the next year. 
KPSC considered to make selection to the post from the Ranked List for the 
post of Assistant in various Companies/Corporations and advised the 
Company (May 2007) to inform its willing ness to amend the Special Rules by 
prescribing pay scale instead of consolidated salary. Based on the advice of 
the KPSC, the Board of Directors resolved (October 2007) to amend the 
Special Rules by prescribing pay scale and issued orders (December 2009) 
amending the Special Rules. KPSC, however, later decided (January 2010) 
that selection to the post could not be made from the Ranked List of Assistants 
to Companies/Corporations , as the qualifications prescribed for the  post of 
Assistants was any Graduat e from a recognised university, which was not 
sufficient for the post of Sales Assistant . KPSC therefore, decided to issue 
separate notification for the post and notification was issued on 31 December 
2011 for nine vacancies after six years from the date of reporting of the 
vacancy. However, the posts were yet to be filled up (February 2017).  
KPSC stated (December 2016) in reply that, the selection process was delayed 
on account of the delay on the part of HDCK in furnishing clarification sought 
for by KPSC with respect to amending Special Rules in favour of pay scale 
instead of consolidated salary. The reply was not tenable as KPSC was 
responsible for tendering wrong advice to the company, without verifying the 
qualifications and method of appointment of posts. Had KPSC given correct 
advice in the matter, the need to seek amendment of Special Rules by HDCK 
and resultant delay could have been avoided. 
2.7.3 Non-submission of Annual Reports of KPSC to the State 
Legislature 
As per Article 323(2) of the Constitution of India, the KPSC was to present an 
Annual Report on the work done by KPSC to the Governor of the State. The 
Governor, along with a memorandum explaining the reasons for non -
acceptance of/deviations from KPSC’s advice, was to facilitate tabling of the 
Report in the State Legislature. We observed that, though the KPSC presented 
its Annual Reports pertaining to the years 2010 -11 to 2015 -16 to the 
Governor, none of the Reports were presented to the Legislature till date. The 
delay in this regard was due to  failure of various Government Departments to 

 
 
Chapter II - Functioning of Kerala Public Service Commission 
33 
furnish reasons for non-acceptance of/deviation from the advice rendered by  
KPSC. It was further noticed that, out of 14 cases  of deviation, explanation in 
respect of five cases were yet to be furnished by the concerned Department.  
We observed that, the laxity of GOK in obtaining timely explanations from 
various Departments resulted in non -submission of KPSC’s Reports to the 
State Legislature  on time . G OK replied (December 2016) that, the Reports 
would be submitted to Legislature at the earliest. 
2.8 Financial and Human Resources Management in KPSC 
2.8.1 Financial Management 
As per Article 322 of the Constitution, the expenses of the KPSC including 
any salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the members 
or staff of KPSC, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State. 
During the years 2011 -12 to 2015 -16, KPSC incurred a total expenditure of 
`547.50 crore as shown below: 
Table 2.5: Details of Plan and Non-plan expenditure 
(` in crore)   
Financial Year Plan Non-Plan Total 
2011-12 1.00 76.65 77.65 
2012-13 1.24 96.60 97.84 
2013-14 1.99 104.58 106.57 
2014-15 7.50 125.46 132.96 
2015-16 2.49 129.99 132.48 
TOTAL 14.22 533.28 547.50 
 (Source: Details furnished by KPSC) 
Scrutiny of records relating to budget proposals and expenditure statements 
revealed the following deficiencies in budget control and expenditure. 
2.8.1.1 Utilisation of funds for the purposes not earmarked 
The allocation under ‘Office Expenses 04 -Other Items’ is earmarked for 
purchase of furniture, printing charges of question papers, forms and KPSC 
Bulletins, purchase of stationery articles, OMR answer sheets, etc.  We noticed 
a diversion of `9.24 crore from this head during the period 2013 -14 to 2015 -
16 on Capital expenditure like setting up of online exam centre and Civil 
Works, which was not permissible. 
No reply was furnished by KPSC. 
2.8.2 Human Resources Management in KPSC 
The total staff strength (March 2016) of the KPSC was 1644 (1623 permanent 
and 21 temporary posts). As per the Report of the Work Assessment 
Committee constituted (March 2013) for conducting a work assessment at the 
Headquarters, the work distribution among Assistants was unscientific 
resulting in 20 per cent of the Assistants without adequate work load and 
10 per cent even without nominal work . Also, in many of the sections in the 
KPSC, the ratio of Assistant to Section Officer was 1:2. The KPSC, while 
accepting (November 2013) the Work Assessment Committee Report directed 
that similar work study would be undertaken at the Regional and District 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
34 
Offices. We noticed that, the work study at the Regional and District Offices 
was yet to be done (October 2016).  
We noticed that, KPSC submitted (September 2015) a proposal to GOK for 
sanction of 307 additional posts citing extra works to be done on introduction 
of appointment verification, issue of one time verification certificate , etc. The 
proposal was awaiting approval from GOK (October 2016). We also observed 
that, besides failing to conduct detailed work assessment of Regional and 
District Offices, the KPSC did not conduct a fresh work assessment before 
seeking additional posts from GOK.  
2.9 Conclusion 
Special Rules in respect of 12 services were not framed by GOK, thereby 
failing in regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons 
appointed to posts which resulted in appointments being made through 
Executive Orders of Government  or being made by Companies/Societies 
direct by themselves. There was delay in reporting of fresh /NJD vacancies by 
various Departments to the KPSC. Instances of KPSC conducting recruitment 
process and preparing Ranked Lists without obtaining vacancy reports from 
Departments resulting in its failure to advi se even a single candidate for 
appointment from the Ranked List  were observed. The KPSC was yet to issue 
notifications in respect of at least  452 vacancies to be filled up against 128 
posts. Delay ranging from 11 to 77 months was also se en in publi shing of 
notifications by the KPSC and consequential delay in the selection process. 
Ineligible candidates got employment due to failure of KPSC to ensure that the 
qualifications stated in the notifications were in line with  the Special 
Rules/Executive Orders of Government for the post. Failure of KPSC to 
comply with the provisions of the PwD Act, 1995 resulted in denial of 
Government jobs to Differently Abled candidates who were eligible for 
selection. Analysis of data on pendency in selection p ertaining to the years 
2010 to 2015 revealed that only 17 to 28 per cent of selections were completed 
in a year, though all selections were to be finalised within one year as per 
KPSC’s own manual. 

 
 35 
CHAPTER III 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
Highlights 
Mahatma Gandhi University (MGU) is an educational institution that strives 
to fulfil the higher educational needs of the people of Central Kerala. It 
imparts education in the conventional disciplines of Science, Social Science as 
well as in professional disciplines of Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, 
Engineering, etc. The Performance Audit focussed on the academic activities 
and the financial management of MGU. 
MGU commenced a five year Integrated Interdisciplinary MS 
programme and Integrated Double Degree BA (Criminology) -LLB 
(Honours) which did not have the approval of University Grants 
Commission (UGC). 
(Paragraphs 3.6.1.1 and 3.6.1.2) 
The MGU failed to frame uniform syllabus as directed by UGC. The 
College Development C ouncil envisaged by UGC was ineffective due to 
non-appointment of full time Director. 
(Paragraphs 3.6.2 and 3.6.5.2) 
There was a delay ranging from one to nine months in declaring 
examination and revaluation results . Fifty nine  per cent  of degree 
certificates were issued after six months from the date of application. 
(Paragraphs 3.6.3.1 and 3.6.3.2) 
One hundred ninety seven  teachers iden tified as Research Guides by 
MGU did not possess the eligibility criteria as prescribed by UGC. 
(Paragraph 3.6.4.1) 
MGU failed to implement Syndicate decision, made dilution to 
contractual terms and failed to obtain UGC/G overnment of Kerala 
(GOK) assistance leading to loss of revenue of `3.98 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.7.1) 
The Syndicate of the MGU irregularly created 10 non -plan posts of 
Section Officers without the approval of GOK. 
(Paragraph 3.7.1.4) 
Irregular payment of House Rent Allowance against GOK directives  
resulted in undue benefit of `2.20 crore to the staff of MGU. 
(Paragraph 3.7.2.1) 
Payment of inadmissible remuneration of `13.97 crore to regular teachers 
towards valuation of answer scripts was observed. 
(Paragraph 3.7.2.2) 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
36 
Promotions made against the abolished posts in violation of orders of 
GOK resulted in excess payment of `13.36 lakh. 
(Paragraph 3.7.2.3) 
Failure of MGU to enrol employees into EPF Scheme from the date of 
entry into service resulted in avoidable expenditure of `2.20 crore and 
potential liability of `3.78 crore towards interest and damages. 
(Paragraph 3.7.4.1) 
There was no  internal audit wing in the MGU which resulted in lack of 
internal control mechanism. 
(Paragraph 3.7.4.2) 
3.1 Introduction 
Mahatma Gandhi University (MGU), Kottayam, was established in October 
1983 to provide higher education to the students belonging to the districts of 
Kottayam, Ernakulam, Idukki and parts of Pathanamthitta and Alappuzha. The 
MGU conducts Un der Graduate  (UG), Post Graduate  (PG), M. Phil and 
Doctoral level courses through 17 University departments, seven Inter-
University Centres, 10 Inter-School Centres, eight Self Financing Institut ions 
and 250 affiliated colleges (10  Government colleges, 63 aided colleges and 
177 unaided colleges). It imparts education in the conventional disciplines of 
Science, Social Science as well as in professional disciplines of Medicine,  
Nursing, Pharmacy, Engineering, etc. MGU is accredited by National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council28 at ‘B’ level.  
3.2 Organisational setup 
The Governor of Kerala is the Chancellor and Head of the University. The 
Vice Chancellor (VC) of the MGU is the principal academic and  executive 
officer and all officers of the University are un der his administrative control. 
The following personnel held the post of VC as detailed below: 
Table 3.1: Persons holding the post of Vice Chancellor 
Sl. No. Name of the VC Period 
1. Dr. Rajan Gurukkal November 2008 to October 2012 
2. Dr. K M Abraham November 2012 to December 2012 
3. Dr. A V George January 2013 to April 2014 
4. Dr. Sheena Shukkur May 2014 to August 2014 
5. Dr. Babu Sebastian September 2014 to till date 
The VC is assisted by  a Pro -Vice Chancellor, Registrar, Controller of 
Examinations and Finance Officer29. 
                                                 
28 National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) is an autonomous body established by the 
University Grants Commission (UGC) of India to assess and accredit institutions of higher education  
in the country. Institutions are graded for each key aspect under four categories viz. A, B, C and D 
denoting very good, good, satisfactory and unsatisfactory levels, respectively 
29 Abraham J Puthumana – October 2000 to till date 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
37 
3.3 Audit Objectives 
 The Performance Audit was conducted to assess whether 
 the academic activities were planned and executed efficiently and 
effectively; and 
 the financial management of the University was efficient and effective. 
3.4 Audit Criteria 
Audit criteria was derived from the following sources: 
 University Act and Statutes, University Grants Commission 
Regulations, Examination Manual and Orders issued by G overnment 
of Kerala (GOK) and various regulatory authorities30 
 Kerala Financial Code and Kerala Service Rules 
 Kerala Stores Purchase Manual  
 Special Rules for Self Financing Institutions 
3.5 Scope and Methodology of Audit 
The Performance Audit o f the ‘Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University ’ 
covering the period from 20 11-12 to 2015 -16 was conducted from March to 
October 2016 focussing on the academic and financial activities including 
management of Self Financing Institutions.  
We commenced the audit with an Entry Conference held on 17 March 2016 
with the Additional Chief Secretary (Finance and Higher Education), Principal 
Secretary (Finance-Expenditure and Higher Education), VC and Registrar of 
MGU wherein the audit objectives, audit criteria and audit methodology w ere 
discussed. The audit methodology included the scrutiny of documents and 
verification of records related to core academic activities, role of academic 
bodies in the pursuit of excellence, extent of application and adherence to 
University Grants Commission/Career Advancement Scheme norms, prudence 
in financial management , etc. An Exit Conference was conducted on 
05 December 2016 with the Principal Secretary, Higher Education Department 
and Finance Officer, MGU, during which the audit findings were discuss ed in 
detail. 
  
                                                 
30 All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), National Council of Teacher Education (NCTE) 
and Bar Council of India (BCI) 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
38 
Audit findings 
3.6 Academic activities 
3.6.1 Courses offered without fulfilling the norms laid down by 
Statutory Authorities 
3.6.1.1 Commencement of courses not approved by U niversity Grants 
Commission 
As per Section 22(3) of the University Grants Commission (UGC) Act 1956, 
‘degree’ means any such degree as specified on this behalf by the UGC by 
notification in the official Gazette. There were 163 degrees notified by UGC 
in the official Gazette as on 23 May 2009. UGC had informed VCs of all 
Universities in November 2009, to ensure that the nomenclature of the degrees 
offered should be as specified by the UGC. 
The VC accorded approval (October 2009) to the MS programme, which  
commenced during 2009 -10 with an intake of 10 students, by exercising the 
powers of the Syndicate as per Section 10 (17) of the MGU Act . The 
Syndicate of the MGU decided (February 2010) to launch the five year 
Integrated Interdisciplinary Master of Science programme through Institute for 
Integrated programmes and Research in Basic Science (IIRBS) and declared 
the programme as MS . The decision of the VC was subsequently ratified by 
the Academic Council in January 2015. 
Since the degrees notified by the UGC identified MS as Master of Surgery and 
the five year Integrated Interdisciplinary MS programme of the MGU was not 
in the approved list of UGC, the first batch of 10 students who had completed 
the course in 2014  were awarded M .Sc Degree. We also noticed that, nine 
students were awarded M.Sc Degree in Chemistry while one student was 
awarded M.Sc Degree in Physics. 
Subsequently, the Sub -Committee constituted by the Syndicate of MGU 
proposed (March 2015) that, specialisation in M. Sc. would be based on the 
project work /subjects studied from VII to X semesters (Master level 
semesters) and suggested that, IIRBS may propose the syllabus for 
specialisation in Physics. Accordingly, the VC issued orders (May 2015) for 
retrospective modifi cation of course and curriculum for the 2009 and 2011 
batches and re-designed the programme as Interdisciplinary Master of Science 
programme, declared as M.Sc. 
It is evident from above details that, Physics was not a part of the syllabus of 
2009 batch and giving retrospective effect of change of programme for the 
students who had already passed out in 2014 was not in order. 
On being asked , the VC , MGU replied (December 2016) that, in all 
regulations, the degree was shown as MS/M.Sc. and that different degrees 
including degree in Physics were awarded on the basis of curriculum structure 
approved by MGU in 2009. 
The reply was not tenable as it was found that , in all University Orders and 
Regulations issued upto 2015 except initial University Order issued in 2009, 
the name of the programme was shown as MS and there was no separate 
curriculum/specialisation envisaged for awarding different degrees. It was 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
39 
only after the recommendation of the Sub-Committee after March 2015, that a 
separate syllabus for Physics in VII to X semesters was introduced  in 2015, 
after the first batch had passed out. 
3.6.1.2 Commencement of course in Law violating UGC guidelines /Bar 
Council of India norms 
As per UGC instructions (November 2009 ), the  VCs of all Universities are 
required to ensure that the nomenclature of the degree s should be as specified 
by the UGC. The MGU commenced a five year Integrated Double Degree BA 
(Criminology)-LLB (Honours) course with effect from the a cademic year 
2011-12. Five Colleges 31 together admitted 970 students to the course during 
the years 2011 -12 to 2015 -16. While the Government Law College, 
Ernakulam and SN Law College, Poothotta  made admissions to the course 
from 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 onwards respectively, the other three colleges 
commenced the course only with effect from 2013-14.  
We observed that, the five year Integrated Double Degree BA (Criminology) -
LLB (Honours) course offered by the MGU was not part of the list of courses 
notified by the UGC. Therefore, it was not a recognised course. 
Even though the Regulations issued by the MGU specified that the course was 
in compliance to the Bar Council of India Rules of Legal Education  2008, it 
was silent on the fact that the course did not possess approval of the UGC 
which was essential for its recognition. Since the Advocates Act, 1961 also 
stipulated that, the State Bar Council shall enrol as Advocates only such 
candidates who have p assed law from a University/approved affiliated Centre 
of Legal Education/Departments of the MGU as recogni sed by Bar Council of 
India (BCI), we observed that, all the 970 students who we re enrolled in the 
five year Integrated Double Degree BA (Criminology )-LLB (Honours) course 
are ineligible to practice Law. The BCI also confirmed (February 2016) that, 
as the UGC has not recogni sed degree in BA (Criminology) -LLB (Honours) 
course, persons possessing the degree are not entitled to be enrolled as 
Advocates. Thus, the action of MGU in admitting students to the Integrated 
Double Degree BA (Criminology) -LLB (Hon ours) course without UGC 
approval violated Bar Council of India regulations also and this action has put 
the legal career of these students as Advocates at risk. 
The Joint Registrar  of MGU stated during the Exit Conference (December 
2016) that, the MGU has discontinued the course  from 2016-17 and BCI has 
agreed to regularise the course as a one -time measure for students already 
admitted, on payment of a fine of `10 lakh (Rupees two lakh per year for five 
years). We observed that the reply of the MGU was silent on the University 
offering such courses to the students, which were not recognised by the UGC. 
In the circumstances, we recommend that, responsibility needs to be fixed for 
the lapse on the part of MGU in offering a course which did not have UGC’s 
and BCI’s approval and for getting retrospective ratification by making  
payment of fine of `10 lakh, which is not a healthy precedence in the field  of 
education. 
                                                 
31 Government Law College, Ernakulam, S N Law College Poothotta, Al Azhar Law College, 
Thodupuzha, Bharata Mata School of Legal Studies, Angamaly and CSI Colle ge for Legal Studies, 
Kanakkary 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
40 
Recommendation 1: The VC should ensure that only courses recognised by 
the UGC are offered by MGU. 
3.6.1.3 Master of Business Administration courses through off -campus 
centres  
The All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE) is the statutory 
authority for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical 
and management education and maintenance of standards. With the approval 
of AICTE (July 1994), the School of Management and Business Studies of 
MGU offered two year  full time Master of Bu siness Administration ( MBA) 
course with 30 seats with effect from 1994. MGU accorded approval to five 
aided Arts and Science Colleges to conduct MBA programme after obtaining 
assurance that these colleges had obtained AICTE ’s approval. The School of 
Distance Education (SDE) of MGU also conducted a similar MBA programme 
through 72 off -campus centres 32 from 2001 -02 to 2014 -15 for which the 
approval of AICTE  was not obtained . Based on High Court judgement 
(February 2015), these off -campus centres were closed with effect from 
2015-16 as the MGU did not have powers to conduct off -campus centres 
outside its jurisdiction.  
We observed that , out of  6303 MBA degrees 33 awarded by MGU during 
2011-12 to 2015 -16, 4735 MBA degrees (75  per cent ) were awarded to the 
students who had undertaken the course through off -campus centres. MGU 
awarded same degree certificate s to the students who attended off -campus 
centres and the students who studied the course in University department and 
affiliated co lleges concealing the fact th at degrees obtained through 
off-campus centres were not recognised by AICTE.  
On being asked, MGU replied that, the University started the course as per its 
Syndicate resolution, since, as per the judgement of Supreme Court of India 
dated 24 September 2001 (Bharathidasan University case), Universities could 
start any new department/ course/programme in technical education without 
obtaining approval of AICTE.  
The reply was not tenable as the said judgement pertains to the courses 
directly run by the University. It is also significant to note that despite the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India clarifying (May 2014) that prior approval of 
the AICTE was compulsory and mandatory for conduct of a technical course 
including MBA/Management course for the academic year 2014 -15, MGU 
permitted the off -campus centres under its jurisdiction to admit students  to 
MBA courses in 2014-15 also without obtaining approval of AICTE.  
During the Exit Conference (December 2016) the Principal Secretary observed 
that, this was a serious lapse on the part of MGU and amounted to contempt of 
the Supreme Court of India. As such we recommend that, appropriate action 
may be taken for the lapses against the defaulting authorities/persons. 
                                                 
32 Off-campus centres are private educational entities run by institut ions/individuals/trusts within or 
outside the territorial jurisdiction of the University 
33 Include degrees offered by five aided colleges affiliated to MGU having AICTE approval 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
41 
3.6.2 Failure to revise syllabus and comply with UGC guidelines 
As part of the measures to enhance efficiency and excellence in the higher 
education system and to ensure seamless mobility of students across the higher 
educational institutions in the country and abroad, the UGC directed 
(November 2014) that, the Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) 34 proposed 
by it should be adopted by all the Universities from 2015 -16. The UGC also 
issued guidelines to Universities to frame uniform syllab i. As the MGU was 
following a Choice Based Course Credit and Semester System, it was resolved 
(August 2015) to implement the guidelines for the adoption of uniform CBCS 
from the Academic Year 2016 -17 onwards. Accordingly, Regulations for 
implementation of Revised Scheme and Syllabi fo r UG courses with effect 
from academic year 2016-17 were approved by MGU (February 2016) and the 
revised scheme and syllabi of 108 UG programmes were drafted and 
subsequently approved by MGU in May 2016.  
We observed that, even though MGU approved the Regulations, Revised 
Scheme and Syllabi for UG courses with effect from academic year 2016 -17, 
the newly constituted Syndicate, citing delay in ratification by the earlier 
Syndicate and complaints received from stakeholders, did not implement the 
Regulations. The syllabi for the UG courses were yet to be revised (September 
2016) which resulted in disadvantage to the students of MGU compared to 
students from other Universities which adopted the new syllabi.  
The VC , MGU stated (December 2016) that, new syllab i would be 
implemented with effect from the academic year 2017 -18 after detailed 
discussions with experts and other stakeholders.  The reply was not acceptable 
as the MGU has failed to comply with the UGC Regulations to frame uniform 
syllabi which hampered  seamless migration of students across Universities 
within the country and abroad. 
3.6.3 Conduct of examinations and publication of results 
3.6.3.1 Delay in publication of results and consequent hardships to 
students 
MGU publishes examination calendar for every  academic year which includes 
dates of examination and date s of publication of results of Under Graduate 
(UG) and Post Graduate (PG) courses. We observed delay of one to three 
months in publishing of results of final semester of UG/PG courses and delay 
between one to nine months in the case of other semesters. Failure of MGU to 
publish results on time leads to  course lagging  and deprival of timely 
admission of students to other institutions. 
As per t he Examination Manual of the MGU , candidates who have take n 
examinations conducted by MGU can apply to the Controller of Examinations 
for revaluation of their answer book. The results of revaluation are to be 
published within 60 days from the last date for receipt of applications. We 
noticed delay in publishing r esults of revaluation conducted by MGU. During 
2012-13 to 2015 -16, the results of revaluation could be declared within the 
stipulated time of 60 days  in 20 per cent of cases only. In 49 per cent cases, 
                                                 
34 Choice Based Credit System provides choice for students to select from the p rescribed courses (core, 
elective or minor or soft skill courses) 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
42 
results were declared after the last date of submitting application for the next 
examination and in another 10 per cent cases, results were announced after the 
completion of next examination causing hardship to the students. The delayed 
publishing of revaluation results forced students to reappear for the next 
examination without knowing their previous result. 
The VC , MGU, while accepting the audit observation (December 2016) 
attributed the delay in publishing results to the numerous diverse courses 
offered by MGU and shortage of teachers for valuation.  The reply was not 
tenable as it was the duty of MGU to ensure timely action in the interest of the 
students’ educational needs. Besides, it wa s MGU’s own decision to run so  
many courses. 
3.6.3.2 Delay in issuing degree certificates 
As per Examination Manual  of MGU, degree certificates would be issued 
within 10 days (later raised to 20 days (September 2013)) if applied along with 
additional fee of `900 (fast track). However, we noticed that, 37 per cent of 
degree certificates were issued after the stipulated time of 20 days. 
MGU has also not prescribed any time limit for the issue of degree certificates 
in the normal course. We noticed that, 59 per cent of certificates during the 
audit period were issued after six months from the date of application. 
The VC , MGU stated (December 2016) that, consequent to the audit 
observation, a proposal for fixing a timeframe for issue of certificates in 
normal course was under its consideration. 
3.6.3.3 Lack of action for improper valuation 
As per the provisions in the Examination Manual of the MGU, if the revalued 
marks vary from the original marks by 25  per cent or above, the fact shall be 
reported to the Standing Committee of Examinations. The examiner, if found 
guilty of improper valuation, shall be debarred from the examinership of MGU 
for a minimum period of three years. A fine of `500 shall also be imposed on 
the examiner . However, we observed that, MGU was not invoking the 
provisions of the Manual against teachers guilty of i mproper valuation. Of the 
433 cases under UG courses where marks on revaluation were found to be in 
excess of 25 per cent of the original marks, action was initiated only in seven 
cases by seeking explanation. Reasons for not initiating action in remaining 
426 cases w ere sought for (October 2016) from the MGU. But MGU did not 
give any reply (January 2017). 
As per the Examination Manual, a fine of `500 shall be imposed upon teachers 
found guilty of improper valuation/revaluation which was enhanced (February 
2014) upto a maximum of `10,000. During February 2014, all the 95 students 
who appeared for the Indian English Literature paper in MA I semester 
examination in six 35 affiliated colleges were given fail marks by the 
examiners. Based on the media report on the mass failure, an enquiry 
commission was formed (March 2015) and the subsequent revaluation 
revealed that, out of the 95 students, 82 students  were declared as passed . 
                                                 
35 Illahia College, Maharajas College, St. Dominic College, St. Alosius College, Al Azhar College and 
St. Berchmans College 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
43 
Considering the enquiry report, the MGU debarred two examiners responsible 
for this failure from future examination duties and reported (October 2015) the 
same to the Director of Collegiate Education for further action. 
Though the e nquiry commission had found two examiners guilty, action was 
yet to be initiated by the Director of Collegiate Education against the m 
(December 2016). Thus, MGU failed to  impose penalty upon the delinquent 
examiners, to avoid such instances in future.  
The VC, MGU stated (December 2016) that, based on audit observation , 
directions have been issued to authorities concerned for imposing fine on the 
errant examiners. 
Recommendation 2: MGU may ensure that examiners proved guilty of 
improper valuation are penalised to guard against such lapses in future. 
3.6.4 Research and Development Activities 
3.6.4.1 Research Supervisors without qualification as per UGC norms 
The Revised Regulations for PhD Registr ation and Award of Degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy , 2010 (PhD Regulations) of the MGU requires a 
research student to work under a recogni sed supervising teacher (Research 
Guide) who should invariably be permanently employed in the 
colleges/institutions to w hich the Research Centre is attached. While teachers 
of the University Department/schools of teaching and research in MGU do not 
require any formal recognition as Research Guide s in order to supervise 
research, teachers working in Government and aided coll eges affiliated to 
MGU and scientists in reputed research organisations run by Government need 
to possess a minimum of two years post doctoral research experience. Besides, 
these teachers must have at least three post doctoral publications in their 
subjects published in the referred journals of national/international standing.  
We observed that, 197 teachers working in Government and aided colleges 
affiliated to MGU were identified as Research Guides by the Syndicate despite 
their not fulfilling the eligibi lity criteria as prescribed in the Regulations viz., 
two years post doctoral research experience evidenced by research output of 
three post doctoral publications in their  subject published in the referr ed 
journals of national/international standing. It was observed that, 49 of the 197 
ineligible Research Guides were supervising 211 Research Scholars as on date 
(September 2016). It was also noticed that, a teacher in the School of 
Gandhian Studies with a PhD in Social Science was a Research Guide to a 
student pursuing PhD in Homoeopathy who was subsequently awarded the 
degree. The supervision of research scholars by Research Guide s with 
nil/inadequate post doctoral publications would seriously impact the quality of 
research output and credibility of MGU. 
The UGC had also clarified (September 2015) and reiterated in July 2016 that 
only regular faculty of the host University can be appointed as Supervisors and 
that circumventing the provisions of the UGC (Minimum Standards and 
Procedure for Award of M.Phil/Ph D) Regulations 2009 would not be 
permitted. Thus , the appointment of unqualified faculty as Research 
Supervisors was a serious lapse on the part of the MGU as it adversely impacts 
the quality of research. 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
44 
The VC, MGU replied (December 2016) that, it was due to dearth of qualified 
research supervisors  that teachers of aided colleges with PhD qualification 
were appointed as Research Supervisors and steps were being taken to close 
down Research Centre in aided colleges on the basis of audit observation. The 
reasons offered by the VC do not justify violation of UGC Regulations and 
resultant dilution of  research processes and output which calls for fixing of 
responsibility by GOK for blatant violations of the instructions of UGC  and 
playing with the career of students. 
Recommendation 3: MGU must ensure that only qualified teachers are 
appointed as Research Guides. 
3.6.5 Status of statutory bodies  
Statutory bodies under the MGU like the Academic Council and the College 
Development Council were rendered superfluous as brought out below.  
3.6.5.1 Functioning of Academic Council 
The Mahatma Gandhi University Act, 1985 defines the Academic Council as 
the academic body of MGU which, subject to the provisions of the Act and 
Statutes, control s, regulate s and is responsible for the maintenance of 
standards of instruction s, education and examinations within MGU and shall 
exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred 
or imposed upon it by the Statutes. The Academic Council, comprising  143 
members including VC, Registrar, Pro-Vice Chancellor, Deans, Members of 
Board of Studies, Syndicate Members, etc., was to ordinarily meet twice a 
year on dates fixed by the VC , as and when the occasion demanded and was 
required by the VC. Section 10 ( 17) of the MGU Act, 1985 also stipulated 
that, if at any time, except when the Syndicate or the Academic Council was in 
session, if the VC was satisfied that, an emergency has arisen requiring him to 
take immediate action involving the exercise of any powe r vested in the 
Syndicate or the Academic Council by or under this Act, he may take such 
action as he deems fit and shall, at the next session of the Syndicate or the 
Academic Council, as the case may be, report the  action taken by him to that 
authority for such action as it may consider necessary. 
We observed that , only two meetings of the Academic Council w ere 
conducted during 2011-12 to 2012-13 against four meetings to be held during 
the period. No meetings were conducted during 2013 -14. We further observed 
that, of the 1179 decisions taken by the Academic Council during 2011 -12 to 
2015-16, 799 decisions (68 per cent) were in fact taken unilaterally by the VC 
by invoking provisions under Section 10 (17) of the MGU Act  which were 
submitted before Academic Council for ratification. Thus, major decisions like 
Course and Curriculum structure of five year Integrated Interdisciplinary MS 
Programme and M.Phil (Physics) course-curriculum and syllabus for affiliated 
colleges am ong others were taken by the VC unilaterally, by invoking the 
provisions of Section 10 (17) of the MGU Act. In the instances cited, it was 
observed that, even though the decisions of the VC were taken in February 
2013 and September 2013, they were later ac cepted by the Academic Council, 
only in its meeting held in January 2015. We observed that, while the five year 
Integrated Interdisciplinary MS program me was approved by the VC on 
02 March 2013 and implemented from the Academic Year 2013 -14, the 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
45 
decision of the VC was ratified by the Academic Council only on 17 January 
2015. Similarly, though M.Phil (Physics) course-curriculum and syllabus for 
affiliated colleges was approved by the VC on 04 January 2013 and 
implemented with effect from the academic year 2013-14, the decision of the 
VC was ratified by the Academic Council only on 17 January 2015. The above 
unilateral decisions taken by the VC, treating them as of emergent nature were 
not justified. 
The Academic Council was thus rendered ineffective since the orders of the 
VC leading to commencement of courses, revision of syllabus , etc., were 
submitted to them for ratification long after commencement of the courses.  
Failure of the VC to convene the Academic Council enabled him to bypass the 
consultative mecha nism and take unilateral decisions by invoking the 
provisions of Rule 10 (17) of the MGU Act.  
The VC , MGU replied (December 2016) that, out of the five meetings 
scheduled during 2011 -12 to 2013 -14, only two could be held, two were 
dissolved due to lack of quorum and one was postponed. It was also stated 
that, all the decisions taken under Section 10 (17) were ratified by the 
Academic Council. The reply  was not acceptable in view of the fact that, the 
MGU Act had provided that the VC was to ordinarily convene the Academic 
Council twice a year on dates to be fixed by the VC and as and when occasion 
demanded. There was thus no bar on the VC to convene additional sessions of 
the Academic Council to di scuss and pass orders on significant academic 
matters. It is pertinent to mention  that the decisions taken by the VC under 
Section 10 (17) were ratified by the Academic Council long after they were 
implemented, indicating that there was no collective thoug ht behind the 
decisions taken by the VC. 
Recommendation 4: The practice of the VC taking major decisions without 
holding consultations with the Academic Council should be avoided. 
3.6.5.2 College Development Council 
The UGC envisaged setting up of College Developm ent Council (CDC) as an 
appropriate body at the University Headquarters for ensuring proper planning 
and integrated development of affiliated colleges and to provide the colleges 
with necessary help and guidance. The CDC in the MGU comprises Syndicate 
Members, Principals of certain Government and Aided colleges and Teachers 
of University Departments, Government and Aided colleges , besides Ex -
Officio members like the VC, Secretary to Government, Director of Collegiate 
Education, etc. The Director would be se lected by a committee consisting of 
the VC, a nominee of the UGC and a nominee of the Syndicate of the 
University and the salary would be reimbursed by UGC. It was envisaged that, 
the CDC shall meet at regular intervals at least twice in an academic year t o 
review the implementation of various programmes and activities. The Director 
was expected to visit the colleges at least twice a year and to hold meetings of 
Principals of Colleges to apprise them of the ways in which CDC could 
function effectively for the development of colleges. 
We observed that, CDC met only once (October 2011) during 2011 -12 to 
2015-16. The Director had not visited any of the 250 colleges during th is 
period. On being asked, i t was replied (October 2016) that, there was no full 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
46 
time Director appointed for CDC and a Professor, School of Computer 
Science was temporarily entrusted with the charge of the Director. 
Thus, it is evident from the reply that the part time appointment of the Director 
failed to serve as an interface (bridge) between the University departments and 
teachers in the affiliated colleges for the effective development of colleges. 
The failure of the MGU to appoint a full time Director to the CDC was 
inexplicable in view of the fact that the entire salary and allowances payable to 
the Director would have been reimbursed to the MGU by the UGC. 
The VC , MGU replied (December 2016) that the matter had been taken up 
with Kerala Public Service Commission for filling up the vacancy of Director, 
CDC. The reply fails to explain wh y action has not been taken as per UGC 
guidelines on CDC according to which appointment of the Director can be 
done by a selection committee consisting of the VC, a nominee of the UGC 
and a nominee of the Syndicate of the University. 
3.7 Financial management 
MGU is financed mainly by grants from GOK and the UGC. It also receives 
funds for sponsored research projects and for fellowship to students from 
various funding agencies. Besides, it generates its own receipts by way of fee 
from students, interest on inve stments, etc. Details of financial assistance 
received by MGU and utilisation thereof are given in the table shown below. 
Table 3.2: Receipt and utilisation of financial assistance 
(` in crore) 
Year 
GOK 
Grant 
(NP) 
GOK 
Grant 
(P) 
Other 
Grant from 
GOK 
(P) 
Plan 
Grant 
from 
UGC 
Examination 
Fees, 
General 
Receipts 
Fees from 
Self 
Financing 
Institutions 
Total 
Receipts 
Expenditure 
- Non-Plan 
Expenditure
-Plan 
Total 
Expenditure 
2011-12 37.18 10.00 2.44 6.28 44.14 40.83 140.87 129.57 25.56 155.13 
2012-13 45.28 14.00 5.00 2.17 49.99 40.26 156.70 151.78 25.76 177.54 
2013-14 39.90 16.00 2.50 3.53 66.46 42.09 170.48 164.90 19.84 184.74 
2014-15 74.77 21.50 1.00 0.00 71.92 42.19 211.38 180.56 29.94 210.50 
2015-16 86.18 22.00 1.00 0.00 69.45 36.02 214.65 198.19 28.31 226.50 
(Source: Figures provided by MGU) 
As evident from the table, the expenditure incurred by the MGU exceeded the 
grants received and internal revenue generated. MGU needs to manage its 
finances efficiently by increasing the internal receipts and reducing 
expenditure to the extent possible. Instances of MGU failing to tap potential 
resources and irregular expenditure noticed during the course of the review are 
brought out below. 
3.7.1 Failure to tap resources 
3.7.1.1 Failure to levy fee for extension of provisional affiliation of courses 
Consequent on the transfer of affiliation of all the Medical and Allied Colleges 
to the Kerala University of Health Sciences and the substantial loss of revenue 
incurred by MGU, the Syndicate of the MGU decided (October 2012) to 
collect fee for the extension of provisional affiliation of courses at the rate of 
`2000 per course. We noticed that, the decision of the Syndicate to collect the 
fee was not complied with while extending the provisional affiliation of 1965 
courses resulting in loss of revenue of `39.30 lakh during 2013-14 to 2015-16. 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
47 
The Joint Registrar admitted (July 2016) that, the lapse was noticed only when 
it was pointed out during audit and that notices would be issued to the colleges 
demanding payment of the fees.  
The VC, MGU replied (December 2016) that, an amount of `22.70 lakh has 
since been collected (December 2016) and all efforts were being made to 
recover the balance amount. The failure of the Registrar, MGU in 
implementing the decision of the Syndicate is in dicative of a systemic 
deficiency which needs to be corrected to avo id similar instances in future, 
and also calls for fixing of responsibility. 
3.7.1.2 Dilution of contractual terms by MGU and resultant loss 
The School of Distance Education was a statut ory department 36 of MGU 
which offered courses through off -campus centres within and outside the 
jurisdiction37 of MGU. There were 72 off -campus centres including seven 
overseas centres under the School of Distance Education of MGU. As per the 
terms of agreement (October 2001) MGU had with the respective centres, the 
centres should remit 50 per cent of the fee collected for each course every year 
by means of Demand Draft (DD) in favour of the Finance Officer of MGU.  
We observed that, MGU, on orders (May 2011)  from the Joint Registrar , 
accepted a cheque for `25 lakh in lieu of a DD from M/s. Universal Empire 
Institute of Technology, Dubai 38 (UEIT, Dubai), which was contrary to the 
conditions stipulated in the contract entered into between the two parties. 
Though th e cheque was dishonoured (May 2011)  by the Bank due to 
insufficient balance in the account, no action was initiated by MGU to recover 
its dues. 
The VC , MGU stated (December 2016)  that, the mark list s/certificates/ 
Transfer Certificates of the students who studied in UEIT, Dubai would be 
released only after collecting the requisite fees from the students. We observed 
that, the MGU, while not proceeding legally against UEIT, Dubai h as instead 
resorted to impose unjustified penalty on students who had already paid the 
fees to UEIT , Dubai . Further, responsibility needs to be fixed for accepting 
cheque instead of DD and not taking legal action in time. 
3.7.1.3 UGC/GOK assistance foregone by MGU 
Failure to avail Special Jubilee Grant of the UGC 
The UGC guidelines provided for release of a Special Jubilee Grant of `25 
lakh, `50 lakh, `60 lakh, `75 lakh and `100 lakh to Universities which 
completed 25, 50, 60, 75 and 100 years respec tively during the XI th plan 
period (2007-08 to 2011 -12), which was further extended upto March 2015 . 
We observed that, the MGU which had completed 25 years of service during 
2010 forwarded a proposal to the UGC (September 2015) only after the expiry 
of the XIth Plan. Failure of the MGU to submit the proposal in time resulted in 
MGU foregoing the eligible Silver Jubilee Grant of `25 lakh from the UGC.  
                                                 
36 Departments mentioned in Chapter 42 of the MG University statutes  are known as Statutory 
Departments 
37 Jurisdiction is the geographical area within which the University can operate 
38 An off-campus centre of the University 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
48 
The VC , MGU stated (December 2016) that, a special request (September 
2015) had been made to the UGC to con done the delay and release the fund s. 
We observed that, since the XIth plan period expired in March 2015 and as the 
UGC Guidelines clearly stipulated that no grants would be given 
retrospectively, the possibility of the University obtaining the Special Jub ilee 
Grant was remote. 
Failure to avail UGC assistance of `3.09 crore during XIth plan  
Based on the proposal of MGU, the UGC allotted an amount of `8.68 crore 
under General Development Assistance (GDA) and `5.19 crore for Merged 
Schemes39 during the XI th plan. The time limit for completing the projects 
under XIth plan was up to March 2012 , which was further extended by UGC 
upto March 2015. Each instalment was released on the condition that further 
assistance would be released on furnishing U tilisation Certificate (UC) for the 
assistance already received.  
We observed that, while in the case of GDA, the MGU utili sed `6.94 crore 
against the UGC allotment of `8.68 crore, in the case of Merged Schemes, the 
utilisation was `3.83 crore against the UGC allotment of `5.19 crore. 
However, the MGU failed to submit the UCs on time and consequently could 
not avail UGC assistance of `1.73 crore under GDA and `1.36 crore under 
Merged Schemes. 
The VC, MGU replied (December 2016) that, a special request has been made 
to the UGC to release this grant condoning the lapse on the part of the MGU. 
The reply was not tenable as the extended plan period to which the grant 
pertains had expired in March 2015 and hence the possibility of MGU getting 
the grant is remote. 
3.7.1.4 Irregular creation of non-plan posts 
The non -plan expenditure (establishment expenditure) of the MGU was met 
mainly from non -plan grant of GOK, released on monthly basis. Section 
23(ix) of Mahatma Gandhi University Act , 1985 empowers the Syndicate to 
create administ rative, ministerial and other necessary posts provided that no 
post shall be created by the Syndicate w ithout the approval of the 
Government, if the creation of such post involves expenditure in excess of 
budgetary provision. Contrary to the stipulation, M GU Syndicate in its 
meeting (August 201 3) created 5 6 posts under various categories without 
GOK’s approval. As its directions to cancel the irregular posts w ere not 
complied with, GOK withheld monthly non -plan assistance of `4.99 crore for 
four months from December 2013 to March 2014, amounting to `19.95 crore.  
We further observed that, 10 posts of Section Officers were created during the 
period 2002 -03 to 2011 -12 resulting in the MGU operating 263 posts of 
Section Officers against the sanctioned strength of 253.  
In the Exit Conference (December 2016), Principal Secretary, Higher 
Education Department stated that, the MGU was not given assistance of `4.99 
crore as they failed to adhere to the extant rules and regulations. 
                                                 
39 Merged Schemes under UGC assistance include various schemes like Faculty Improvement 
Programme (F IP) assistance, purchase of books, financial assistance to SC/ST students, various 
scholarships, travel grant, etc. 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
49 
Thus, the MGU created the above posts without the approval of GOK by 
exceeding its authority and put unavoidable burden on the MGU’s resources 
for which responsibility may be fixed by GOK. 
3.7.2 Lapses in incurring expenditure 
3.7.2.1 Irregular payment of H ouse Rent Allowance to staff against GOK 
directives 
The GOK had revised scales of pay and allowances of employees and teachers 
of the State from 01 July 2004.  The benefit of this revision was extended to 
employees of the Universities of the State in June 2006. Employees of Calicut, 
Kannur and MG Universities which are situated in unclassified places were 
paid House Rent Allowance (HRA) ranging from `250 to `1200 (applicable to 
those employees working in B/C class cities) against the admissible rate of 
`150. When this was pointed out in earlier audit, GOK directed (January 
2008) the Universities to pay HRA strictly as per Government rules and to 
recover HRA, if any, paid in excess. While the Calicut and Kannur 
Universities stopped payment of HRA at higher rate , the MGU failed to 
adhere to the directions of GOK.  
Irregular payment of HRA to the employees of three universities during the 
period March 2006 to March 2010 amounting to `2.70 crore including `1.45 
crore paid in MGU was commented upon in the Report of C&AG for the year 
ended 31 March 2011. The Public Accounts Committee ( PAC) in its 43 rd 
report while concluding that HRA permitted at higher  rate was not tenable 
under any circumstances had recommended (August 2012)  to the Higher 
Education Department that the amount paid in excess towards HRA to the 
employees of Calicut, Kannur and Mahatma Gandhi Universities should be 
ratified at the earliest , since the majority of  employees who enjoyed the 
benefit had either retired from service or were deceased.  
We observed that, despite recommendations of the PAC to issue ratification 
orders at the earliest, the High er Education Department issued  orders only in 
January 2015. Inspite of orders from Higher Education Department , the 
employees of the MGU continued to draw HRA at higher rates until the 
implementation of the X th Pay Commission in February 2016. Thus, t he 
delayed issue of Government Order and further delay on the part of the MGU  
to adhere to the Government Order  resulted in employees of the University 
obtaining undue benefit of `2.20 crore during April 2013 to February 2016. 
Recommendation 5: We recommend the MGU to recover the excess HRA 
paid to its staff. 
3.7.2.2 Unintended benefits given to teaching staff 
While issuing orders for the implementation of UGC Scheme 40 in December 
1999, GOK stipulated that, the examination work be reckoned as part of 
official duty. GOK also ordered (January 2001) that, in accordance with the 
recommendations of the UGC scheme, teachers shall value answer scripts of 
regular students as part of their duty and no separate remuneration shall be 
                                                 
40 The revision of pay scales, minimum qualification for appointment of teachers of Universities, 
colleges and other measures for maintenance of standards in higher education 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
50 
paid for the same. However , remuneration could be paid to serving as well as 
retired teachers in respect of valuation of answer sheets of private can didates. 
We observed that, during 2011-12 to 2014-1541, percentage of regular students 
in the MGU ranged from 27.74 per cent in 2011-12 to 43.14 per cent in 2014-
15. The MGU failed to segregate answer scripts of 516353 regular candidates 
during 2011-12 to 2 014-15 for which no payment was admissible for 
valuation, resulting in inadmissible payment of remuneration of `13.97 crore 
to regular teachers for four years from 2011 -12 to 2014 -15, which calls for 
fixing of responsibility.  
While the VC, MGU stated (December 2016) that, decision has been taken to 
stop payment of remuneration to teachers for valuation of answer scripts, the 
Principal Secretary, Higher Education Department stated during the Exit 
Conference (December 2016) that, the amount paid would be recovered from 
the fourth instalment of UGC pay revision arrears due to teachers. 
Recommendation 6: We recommend the MGU to implement the decision to 
stop payment of remuneration in respect of valuation of answer scripts of 
regular students and ensure recovery of over payment. 
3.7.2.3 Promotion against the abolished posts 
While accepting the Report of the Pay Revision Commission, GOK ordered 
(February 2011) abolition of posts of Pool Officer, Section Officer (FC&D) 
Higher Grade, Section Officer (FC &D), Conductor Higher Grade and 
Assistant Librarian Grade I ( non-UGC) of the MGU with effect from 
26 February 2011. It was also specified in the order that, only those existing 
incumbents holding the posts then could continue to hold the post s after 
implementation of pay revision order. However, it was observed that , even 
though the existing incumbents had retired, 29 promotions ( Appendix 3.1) 
were made subsequently in violation of the order which were invalid. This 
resulted in excess payment of `13.36 lakh upto March 2016 which calls for 
fixing of responsibility against approving authority for granting unwarranted 
promotions.  
The VC , MGU stated (December 2016) that, the promotions were made 
against these posts on the basis of interim Court orders and Syndic ate 
decision. The reply of the VC was factually incorrect as the C ourt orders 
referred to by the VC actually relates to the Kerala University and was not 
applicable to MGU. 
3.7.3 Non-compliance to UGC/Career Advancement Scheme norms for 
appointment and promotion  
3.7.3.1 Irregular Promotion to the post of Director, Physical Education  
The UGC issued (2010) regulations on minimum qualification for 
appointment of teachers and other academic staff in universities/colleges 
which required that the post of Director, School of Physical Education shall be 
filled through direct recruitment. Accordingly , MGU issued orders in 
September 2011 for the implementation of the regulation in MGU as 
recommended by the Academic Council. MGU also issued notification for 
                                                 
41 2015-16 not furnished 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
51 
recruitment of Director  stipulating qualifications as per UGC norms and 
prepared Ranked List for the selection. Consequent to a stay in respect of the 
above notification obtained by an Assistant Director 42, Physical Education of 
the MGU (January 2013) from the High Court of Keral a, MGU appointed the 
Assistant Director as Director, School of Physical Education with effect from 
06 December 2014. 
We observed that, while appointing the incumbent as Director, drawing 
remuneration in the pay scale notified by UGC, the MGU had diluted th e 
minimum qualifications stipulated by the UGC for the post of Director of 
Physical Education and Sports. It was noticed that, the incumbent was 
appointed as Director, even though he did not possess minimum 10 years 
experience as Deputy Director of Physical Education or 15 years experience as 
Assistant Director of Physical Education which were stipulated as necessary 
qualifications for appointment  by UGC . The appointment of the official as 
Director and payment of salary and allowances based on UGC scales was 
irregular. 
The VC, MGU replied (December 2016) that on the basis of audit observation, 
the matter was re-examined by the Syndicate and enquiry commission was 
constituted. Based on the enquiry report it was decided to issue show cause 
notice to the incumbent Director. 
3.7.3.2 Allowing promotion by counting inadmissible previous service 
The UGC Regulation, 2010 stipulated that, previous regular service, whether 
national or international, as Assistant Professor, Associate Professor or 
Professor or equivalent in a University, College, National Laboratories or 
other scientific/professional organisations such as the CSIR, ICAR, DRDO, 
UGC, ICSSR, ICHR, ICMR, DBT , etc., should be counted for promotion 
under Career Advancement Scheme (CAS). A scrutiny of service record s of 
teaching staff, given in Table 3.3, revealed that, promotions were given by 
counting inadmissible previous private service in four cases in violation of 
CAS.  
  
                                                 
42 Shri. Binu George Varghese 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
52 
Table 3.3: List of officials who were given CAS promotion in 
violation of UGC norms 
Name of the teacher 
Stage to which 
promotion was 
given 
Period and nature of ineligible service 
Excess payment 
made up to 
March 2016 
Dr. G Anilkumar 
Assistant Professor,  
School of Chemical Science 
Associate Professor Eight years 10 months of Post Doctoral 
Fellow in private firms `12.34 lakh + DA 
Dr. Harikumaran Nair,  
Assistant Professor, 
School of Bio Science 
Assistant Professor 
Stage II 
Contract service in School of Bio  Science for 
a period of two years and six months `1.06 lakh + DA 
Smt. Rincymol Mathew,  
Assistant Professor, 
School of Behavioral Science 
Associate Professor 12 years three months at School of Medical 
Education, Kottayam. Pay not fixed 
Dr. S Antony 
Assistant Professor, 
School of Pure and Applied 
Physics 
Assistant Professor 
Stage III 
Two years seven months at Sherubtse College, 
Kanglung, Bhutan (Contract)  
Nine months at Lourdes Matha College of 
Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram 
One year 11 months at PSG College of 
Technology, Coimbatore 
Pay not fixed 
(Source: Details collected from promotion files of respective individuals) 
The irregular promotions made by MGU resulted in excess payment of basic 
pay of at least `13.40 lakh in two cases while in the other two instances, the 
revised pay was yet to be fixed.  
The VC, MGU replied (December 2016) that, in respect of Dr. G. Anil Kumar, 
as per clause 10 (g) of UGC Regulation, 2010, no distinction should be made 
with reference  to the nature of the management of the institution where 
previous service rendered (private/local body/Government) was considered for 
counting past service.  
The reply was not tenable as the said clause is applicable only to the regular 
prior service and since clarified by GOK (May 2016) that prior service 
rendered in unaided/self financing colleges cannot be reckoned as Qualifying 
Service for placement under CAS.  
We were also informed that, while clarification has been sought for from the 
UGC on the grant of promotion to Dr.  Harikumaran Nair, in the case of 
Smt. Rincymol Mathew, no fixation of pay/hike in pay has been effected till 
date. Regarding Dr. S  Antony, it was info rmed that, the issuance of order for 
promotion to the post of Reader has been kept in abeyance. 
3.7.3.3 Irregular grant of advance increment 
Dr. Sibi Zacharias  was a faculty in School of Management and Business 
Studies (SMBS) which functions under AICTE regulations and his promotions 
were to be regulated under AICTE Regulations . Dr. Sibi Zacharias was 
appointed as Lecturer in SMBS with effect fro m 05 August 2008. Considering 
his past service in St. Berchmans College, he was promoted as Lecturer Senior 
Scale with effect from 11 July 2003 and Lecturer Selection Grade with effect 
from 11 July 2008. Under CAS, he was promoted as Associate Professor with 
effect from 11 July 2011 in the pay band `37400-67000 with Academic Grade 
Pay (AGP) of `9000. He was granted three compounded advance increments 
for acquiring PhD while in service i.e. on 29 November 2011 in the scale of 
`37400-67000. 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
53 
AICTE issued a clarification in January 2016 according to which three non -
compounded increments for those who acqui red PhD degree shall be granted 
only in P ay Band-3 ( `15600-39100) and no advance increment could be 
allowed in P ay Band-4 ( `37400-67000). We noticed that, GOK had also 
issued orders (May 2016) to recover the irregular payments made on this 
account. The irregular grant of advance increments resulted in excess payment 
of `2.32 lakh + DA which was yet to be recovered from him. 
The VC , MGU stated (December 2016) that, the matter would be placed 
before the Syndicate for a decision. 
Reply was not tenable as the M GU has to re vise the pay and recover the 
excess payment made to Dr.  Sibi Zacharias . GOK may ensure refixation of 
pay and recovery of excess payment. 
Recommendation 7: MGU must ensure that UGC rules/regulations 
regarding promotion/grant of additional increment are strictly adhered to. 
3.7.3.4 Provisional advances pending adjustment 
GOK ordered (July 2000) that failure to adjust temporary advances within 
time would entail recovery in lump sum along with penal interest at current 
bank rates. GOK, subsequently p rescribed (October 2011) a period of three 
months for presentation of final bills and the penal interest was fixed at 18 per 
cent per annum on the unutili sed portion of advance. We noticed that, 414 
numbers of provisional advances amounting to `6.10 crore given by MGU to 
staff of various Departments during April 2001 to March 2016 were yet to be 
adjusted (October 2016).  
We observed that, consequent to the failure of the Finance wing to ensure 
prompt settlement, the possibility of the temporary advances bei ng partially 
utilised/non-utilised and consequent retention of funds outside the University 
accounts cannot be ruled out.  
The VC, MGU replied (December 2016) that, the Deputy Registrars have been 
authorised to issue notices to employees who have not regul arised the 
provisional advances within the prescribed time limit, failing which their 
salary would be withheld. 
Recommendation 8: The outstanding advances should be recovered/adjusted 
and Finance Officer, MGU must ensure action as per relevant rules against 
officials who do not settle the advances availed. 
3.7.3.5 Improper contract management 
Article 51 of the Kerala Financial Code (KFC) Vol. I requires that, contracts 
for the supply of stores or execution of work should be made only after 
inviting and receiving tenders from all who wish to tender. The terms of the 
contract should also be definite and there should be no room for ambiguity or 
misconstruction of any of its provisions. Terms of contract once entered into 
should not be materially varied without the previous consent of Government 
or the authority competent to enter into the contract.  
The MGU invited (July 2008) quotations for printing and supplying  
customised text books for Bachelor of Computer Applications (BCA) and 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
54 
Master of Computer Applications (MCA). A contract was entered into 
(August 2008) between the Registrar of MGU and M/s. Vikas Publishing 
House Private Ltd. (printer) for printing and sup plying customised text books 
for BCA and MCA, which was valid for three years from the date of first print 
order with provision to extend the validity based on mutual consent. The 
contract provided for the printer to print and deliver books at the followin g 
rates.  
Table 3.4: Rates for printing and delivery of books 
Print Run  Rate per page 
500 39 paise/page 
1000 34 paise/page 
1500 33 paise/page 
 (Source: Agreement between MGU and M/s. Vikas Publishing 
House Pvt. Ltd) 
The contract also stipulated that, in case the print run exceeded 1500 copies, 
there would be a marginal decrease in the quoted price.  
We noticed that, MGU, after initially awarding the work to the printer in 2008, 
continued (2016) to award fresh printing jobs to the same printer without 
resorting to fresh tenders  as required in KFC . It was seen that, a renewed 
agreement with the printer (August 2011) stipulated printing charges of 37 
paise, 31 paise and 30  paise for 500 pages, 1000 pages and 1500 pages 
respectively. On the expiry of the p eriod of the agreement, the firm demanded 
an enhancement of rates by 10 paise per page. The Syndicate of MGU 
accepted the revised rates demanded by the printer and executed a fresh 
agreement (April 2015) and paid enhanced rate as shown in Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5: Amount paid in excess due to revision of rates 
Minimum 
Print 
Copies 
Original rate Revised rate 
Amount as 
per original 
rate  
(in `) 
Amount 
paid as per 
revised rate 
(in `) 
Excess 
amount paid 
(in `) 
500 37 paise per page 47 paise per page 27,13,728 34,47,168 7,33,440 
1500 30 paise per page 40 paise per page 47,44,080 63,25,440 15,81,360 
TOTAL 97,72,608 23,14,800 
(Source: Payment invoices of MGU) 
We observed that, the MGU, instead of resorting to open tender and seeking 
competitive rates, acceded to the demand of the printer for enhancement of 
cost which had resulted in excess payment of `23.15 lakh. 
Thus, the MGU’s action to increase the rates wit hout calling for fresh tender 
was irregular, which calls for fixing of responsibility. 
The VC, MGU stated (December 2016) that, the agreement for printing was 
renewed without fresh tender due to the urgency of printing new study 
materials. The reply was not acceptable as MGU was aware of the period of 
agreement and should have invited fresh tenders before the period of earlier 
agreement expired. 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
55 
3.7.3.6 Extra expenditure due to printing of bar coded answer books 
In order to avoid false numbering in the valuation where answer scripts are 
evaluated, the MGU introduced bar coded answer books from the academic 
year 2009-10. However, false numbering system was re -introduced in Choice 
Based Credit and Semester System ( CBCSS) UG examinations with effect 
from October/Novemb er 2015 due to problems relating to scanning of bar 
code, transmission of marks from the c entralised valuation camps, net work 
connectivity, difficulty in retrieval of answer book s, threat to the secrecy of 
bar code due to the availability of mobile application to read bar code, etc. 
As MGU had withdrawn the bar coded answer books, we noticed that, these 
answer books which were already printed were being used as ordinary answer 
books with manual false numbering being done, except in the case of 
supplementary examination of UG students admitted prior to 2013. However, 
even after finding the futility of bar coded system  and switching over to the 
manual false numbering system, orders were again placed (December 2015 
and July 2016) for printing 40 lakh bar coded answer books at the rate of 
`5.35 per book. We observed that, the action of MGU to print bar coded 
answer books which were not required, resulted in avoidable excess 
expenditure of `55 lakh, which calls for fixing of responsibility. 
The VC , MGU stated (December 2016) that, M/s. Kerala Books and 
Publishing Society, a GOK enterprise erroneously printed decoded value i n 
the four lakh number of answer books supplie d against supply order dated 
16 December 2015 and it was to utilise this quantity, that urgent decision was 
taken for reintroducing manual false numbering. The reply was not tenable as 
decision to reintroduce false numbering was taken in October 2015 for speedy 
declaration of results. 
3.7.4 Functioning of Self Financing Institutions 
3.7.4.1 Failure to comply with statutory provisions on time and resultant 
extra expenditure 
The Syndicate of the MGU, accepting (October 2011) the recommendations of 
an Expert Committee resolved to enrol all eligible employees of Self 
Financing Institutions (SFI) to Employees Provident Fund (EPF) Scheme with 
effect from 01 January 2012. However, consequent to the directions of the 
Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner , EPF that the employees were to be 
enrolled under the Scheme from the date of entry in service , the Syndicate 
resolved (21 July 2012) to admit eligible employees of four 43 SFIs to the EPF 
from the date of entry in service. However, the Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner (February 2013) directed MGU to remit arrears of both 
employer and employee contribution from the date of joining of each 
employee. Accordingly, arrears amounting to `4.35 crore (`2.15 crore as 
Employers contribution and `2.20 crore as Employees contribution) payable in 
respect of the employees of SFIs from the date of inception was paid to EPF 
during the period April 2013 to October 2013.  
                                                 
43 School of Medical Education, Kottayam,  University College of Engineering, Thodupuzha , School of 
Technology and Applied Science, Kottayam and School of Pedagogical Science, Kottayam 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
56 
We observed that, as per par agraph 32 of the EPF Scheme, no deduction can 
be made from any wages other than that which was paid in respect of the 
period or part of the period in respect of which the contribution was payable. 
As such, MGU cannot recover the arrear amount paid by it in  respect of the 
employee share.  
The failure of the MGU to enrol the employees under EPF from the date of 
their entry into service, forced MGU to pay the employee share also, resulting 
in an avoidable expenditure of `2.20 crore. Besides, MGU was also liable to 
pay interest and damages demanded by the EPF under the Employees 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 amounting to 
`3.78 crore. 
The VC , MGU while concurring with the audit observations, stated 
(December 2016) that, the employees contribution was to be recovered from 
the existing employees of the institutions. The reply was not acceptable as 
MGU has not recovered the amount from its employees even after a lapse of 
three years. Further, MGU needs to fix respon sibility for the failure to enrol 
the employees to EPF Scheme on time.  
3.7.4.2 Deficiencies in the internal control mechanism 
Internal control provides reasonable assurance to the Management about 
compliance of applicable rules and regulations. It was noticed that, the internal 
control in MGU was inadequate in view of the following: 
 There was no internal audit wing in MGU.  
 Demand Collection Balance statements were not being prepared and 
recovery of dues not watched effectively.  
 There was no cross checking of claims relating to the payment of 
remuneration for valuation of answer scripts with reference to the 
data available in the examination wing. 
 MGU had not maintained any Asset Register. Physical verification of 
assets has not been conducted during the period of review. 
 MGU had no independent Manual of Office Procedure and was 
adopting Secretariat Office Manual which was not suitable in a 
University set up. 
The VC, MGU while accepting the audit observations stated (December 2016) 
that, necessary action would be taken to strengthen the internal control 
mechanism. 
3.8 Conclusion 
The performance of the MGU, academically  and financially, was far from 
satisfactory. MGU offered courses which were not recogni sed by the UGC. It 
offered MBA courses through its off -campus centres which were not 
recognised by the AICTE. However, the degree certificates offered by MGU 
were similar to those awarded to students who were pursuing regular, full time 
MBA courses approved by the AICTE. A five year Integrated Double Degree 
BA (Criminology) -LLB (Honours) course offered by MGU was neither 

 
 
Chapter III – Functioning of Mahatma Gandhi University 
57 
recognised by the UGC nor complied with the norms l aid down by the BCI. 
The career of 970 students who ha d enrolled for the course is at risk since the 
BCI has made it clear that they  would not be eligible to enrol as Advocates 
and practice Law as a profession.  
The directions of the UGC to frame uniform s yllabus to ensure seamless 
mobility of students across the higher education al institutions in the country 
and abroad is yet to be complied with by MGU. There was delay in publishing 
of results of the UG/PG courses offered by MGU. Results of revaluation of 
answer books were released very late  and in some instances, after the 
completion of the next examination, thus causing hardship to the students.  
We noticed that, 197 of the 314 Research Guides appointed by MGU were 
ineligible to hold the post.  
Instances of MGU failing to tap potential revenue streams  and incurring 
irregular expenditure were seen. MGU had to forego UGC/GOK assistance 
due to its failure to comply with stipulated guidelines. The staff of MGU 
continues to be paid HRA at ineligible h igher rates despite directives from 
GOK to the contrary.  Excess payment on this account was `2.20 crore during 
2011-12 to 2015-16. Even though examination work was part of official duty, 
the teachers were irregularly paid remuneration of `13.97 crore during 2011-
12 to 2014-15. Failure of MGU to enrol employees into EPF Scheme from the 
date of entry into service resulted in avoidable expenditure of `2.20 crore and 
potential liability of `3.78 crore towards interest and damages. 
Irregular pro motions, grant of advance increments, defective contract 
management, avoidable expenditure, etc., were noticed. Besides, irregularities 
were noticed in the functioning of SFIs leading to loss to MGU. 
Major decisions were taken by the VC without holding con sultations with the 
Academic Council. This resulted in the MGU taking wrong decisions in 
various instances, which could have been avoided, had the Statutory Bodies 
like the Academic Council and CDC been truly functional. The CDC, tasked 
with the responsibi lity to review the implementation of various programmes 
and activities, met only once during 2011 -12 to 2015 -16. These statutory 
bodies were thus rendered defunct. 
There was no internal audit wing in the MGU which resulted in lack of 
internal control mechanism. 
 

 
 58 
CHAPTER IV 
HOME AND VIGILANCE DEPARTMENT 
Implementation of Government initiatives in Judicial system 
Highlights 
A Performance Audit of the Implementation of Government initiatives in 
Judicial system in Kerala was conducted focussing mainly on the award of 
Thirteenth Finance Commission  (ThFC) Grant to Kerala. The Performance 
Audit revealed under -utilisation of ThFC grant, foregoing of eligible share 
from Government of India, etc. 
Evening Courts  could not be set up as planned and establishment of  
Special Judicial First Class Magistrate Courts was delayed. 
(Paragraph 4.6.2.1) 
Failure on the part of G overnment of Kerala to issue orders to include 
direct recruitment also as one of the modes of appointment of Court 
Managers resulted in  delay in their appointment and restricted their 
services to the period 2014-15 to 2016-17. 
(Paragraph 4.6.2.2) 
Failure to set up adequate Alternate Dispute Resolution Centres had 
resulted in poor utili sation of funds leading to lapse of ThFC grant to the 
extent of `13.31 crore. 
(Paragraph 4.6.2.6) 
Clearance of cases filed in the Lok  Adalats was lower than the target set 
by the ThFC. 
(Paragraph 4.6.2.7) 
The request of the High Level Monitoring Committee to expand the base 
of beneficiaries among the marginali sed sections by suitably enhancing 
the income limit for availing legal aid was not c omplied with by Kerala 
State Legal Services Authority. 
(Paragraph 4.6.2.8) 
The State did not avail GOI assistance of `134.91 crore under the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of Infrastructure facilities 
for Judiciary. 
(Paragraph 4.6.3.3) 
4.1 Introduction 
The Justice Delivery Mechanism in the country compris es different types of 
courts, each with varying powers depending on the tier and jurisdiction 
bestowed upon them. They form a hierarchy with the Supreme Court of India 
at the top, followed by High Courts of respective States, District/Chief Judicial 
Magistrate Courts, Subordinate Courts and Munsiff/Judicial First Class 
Magistrate Courts at the bottom.  There were 1.67 lakh court cases pending in 

 
 
Chapter IV – Improvement in Justice Delivery Mechanism 
59 
the High Court and 1 4.83 lakh pending in the Subordinate Courts as on 
31 December 2016 in Kerala. 
To improve the Justice Delivery Mechanism , the Thirteenth Finance 
Commission (ThFC) allocated `140.05 crore (2010 -11 to 2014 -15) on nine 
initiatives as mentioned below: 
1. Operation of Morning/Evening Courts. 
2. Establishment of Alternate Dispute Resolution Centres and training 
of mediators/conciliators. 
3. Enhancing support to Lok Adalats 
4. Legal Aid to the marginalised people 
5. Training of Judicial Officers 
6. Setting up of State Judicial Academy 
7. Training of Public Prosecutors 
8. Creation of posts of Court Managers 
9. Maintenance of Heritage court buildings.  
Government of India (GOI) additionally released `26.68 crore  for 
development of infrastructure facilities and `6.41 crore under the e -Courts 
project to provide designated services to litigants, lawyers and the judiciary by 
computerisation of district and subordinate courts . Initiatives such as 
providing free legal aid to the poor, weak and marginali sed sections of the 
society, conduct ing Lok Adalats, etc., were implemented by Kerala State 
Legal Services Authority (KELSA). 
4.2 Organisational set up 
The Registrar General is the Chief Administrative Officer of the High Court. 
He occupies in the office of the High Court, a position analogous to that of 
Chief Secretary to Government in the State. The Law Department oversees the 
activities of the KELSA. The Director General of Prosecution (DGP), who 
reports to the Home Department, streamlines the conduct of prosecution work 
before the Magistrate Courts for and on behalf of the State and monitors the 
performance of the prosecution working in various Magi strate Courts. 
Besides, t here are 89 District/Additional District Courts, 18 Ch ief Judicial 
Magistrate Courts, 98 Munsiff Courts, 155 Judicial/Special Judicial First Class 
Magistrate Courts and 118  Special Courts44 whose judicial and administrative 
activities are monitored by the High Court.  
4.3 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted to see whether: 
 the initiatives funded by ThFC/GOI/GOK were  undertaken and 
implemented effectively; 
                                                 
44 Special Courts include Family Courts, Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (MACT), Sub Courts, Special 
Courts for SC/ST, Honorary Special Magistrate of Second Class Courts, Evening/Morning/ 
Temporary/Special Courts, etc. 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
60 
 the grants received from ThFC/GOI/GOK were fully utilised to 
improve judicial infrastructure; and 
 adequate infrastructure and manpower was made available to 
facilitate delivery of Justice.  
4.4 Audit Criteria 
The audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria derived from  the 
following: 
 Guidelines laid down by  the ThFC as well as by GOI and GOK 
including Perspective/Yearly Action plan of implementing agencies 
 Norms laid down by the Supreme Court of India and the National 
Legal Services Authority 
 GOK Orders, Circulars and proceedings of various Committees to 
review the progress of utilisation of the ThFC/GOI/GOK funds 
4.5 Scope and methodology of Audit 
We conducted  Performance Audit of the “Implementation of Government 
initiatives in Judicial system” in Kerala covering the period from 2010 -11 to 
2015-16 from May to August 2016 focussing mainly on the award of ThFC to 
Kerala for ‘Improving J ustice Delivery’. Besides, we assessed the 
effectiveness of utilisation of grants received from Government of India (GOI) 
for setting up of e-Courts and grants received from GOI/Government of 
Kerala (GOK) on development of Infrastructural facilities for the judiciary as 
these supplemented the objectives of the ThFC allocation. 
Four out of 14 districts in the S tate were selected for audit . While Ernakulam 
district was selected directly since the High Court and Headquarters of other 
implementing agencies like the KELSA  and DGP  were situated there, the 
districts of Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur and  Malappuram were selected by 
using Probability Proportionate to Size Without Replacement sampling 
method with numbe r of pending cases ( Appendix 4.1) in the district as on 
31 March 201645 as the criteria.  
Relevant records in the offices of the Registrar General of the High Court, 
KELSA, District Legal Services Authority (DLSA), DGP and lower courts in 
the test checked d istricts were scrutini sed during audit. Audit methodology 
included gathering of evidence by scrutiny of files/records, issue of Audit 
Enquiries/Questionnaires, physical verification to test check the accuracy of 
replies to questionnaires, etc. An Entry Conference was held on 20  May 2016 
with the Additional Chief Secretary  (Home and Vigilance Department), 
Registrar General of High Court and other officers from the Home and Law 
Departments. An Exit Conference was held on 14 December 2016 with the 
Additional Chief Secretary (Home and Vigilance Department), Registrar  
General of High Court  and other officers from the Home and Law 
Departments, during which the audit findings were discussed in detail  and 
responses were also recorded. 
                                                 
45 Details of pending cases obtained from the National Judicial Data Grid 
(*)  Includes Family Court, Motor Accident Claim Tribunal, Sub Courts, Special Courts for SC/ST etc.  
(**) Includes Honorary Special Judicial Magistrate of Second Class Courts  

 
 
Chapter IV – Improvement in Justice Delivery Mechanism 
61 
4.6 Audit findings 
Financial assistance of `140.05 crore allocated to the State by the ThFC for 
the period 2010-11 to 2014-15 was spread over three Offices viz. Office of the 
Registrar General of High Court, KELSA and DGP. 
The component wise release and utilisation of the ThFC assistance is given in 
the table below. Details of other assistance obtained from GOI/GOK which 
supplemented the grant received from the ThFC are exhibited in relevant 
paragraphs. 
Table 4.1: Component wise release/utilisation of ThFC grant 
during 2010-11 to 2015-16 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Component Implementing 
Agency 
ThFC 
allocation 
GOI 
Release Utilisation 
1.  Morning/Evening Courts 
High Court 
67.42 20.23 12.95 
2.  Training to Judicial Officers 6.74 2.69 6.24* 
3.  State Judicial Academy 15.00 4.50 14.55* 
4.  Court Managers 7.61 2.28 3.60* 
5.  Heritage Court Buildings 12.13 3.64 2.94 
6.  Alternate Dispute Resolution Centres 
KELSA 
19.02 5.71 7.21* 
7.  Lok Adalat 1.80 0.81 1.98* 
8.  Legal Aid 6.29 1.62 1.65* 
9.  Training to Public Prosecutors DGP 4.04 1.61 3.73* 
TOTAL 140.05 43.09 54.85 
* Excess fund utilised was met by GOK from its own funds 
(Source: ThFC recommendation, GOI Release orders and Utilisation Certificates)  
4.6.1 GOK could not avail ThFC assistance of `96.96 crore 
As seen from the table, GOK availed only `43.09 crore against an allocation 
of `140.05 crore by the ThFC on improvement in Justice Delivery 
Mechanism. The ThFC guidelines envisaged the release of `140.05 crore 
allocated to GOK, in five equal instalments in two tranches every year during 
2010-11 to 2014-15. The first instalment (2010-11) of `28.01 crore was fully 
released by GOI. In order to obtain the second instalment, ThFC guidelines 
required that, the State should formulate State Litigation Policy (SLP) 46 and 
utilise 50 per cent  of the first instalment. The SLP, which was to be 
formulated by March 2011, was formulated only in December 2011. Due to 
the delay of nine months in formulation of SLP and failure to utilise 50 per 
cent of the first instalment, first tranche of the second instalment amounting to 
`14.01 crore receivable in June 2011 was released in January 2012 . We 
noticed that, out of the second tranche of `14 crore due for 2011 -12, the State 
received only `1.07 crore belatedly in 2013 -14 for two components viz. 
Training of Judicial Officer s and Training of Public Prosecutors. Since the 
desired level of utilisation of the grants already released could not be achieved 
in time by the implementing agencies, GOI did not release further instalments. 
The State had to forego ThFC assistance of `96.96 crore as shown below. 
                                                 
46 The State Litigation Policy was intended to ensure the conduct of responsible litigation with a view to 
reduce Government litigation in courts , reduce average pendency time from 15 years to three years 
and to manage and conduct litigation in a cohesive, coordinated and time bound manner and ensure 
that good cases are won and bad cases are not needlessly persevered with. 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
62 
Table 4.2: ThFC - Allocation, Release and Utilisation  
(` in crore) 
Year GOI 
Allocation 
GOI 
release Utilisation Progressive 
Utilisation 
Non-released 
amount 
2010-11 28.01 28.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 
2011-12 28.01 14.01 2.11 2.11 14.00 
2012-13 28.01 0.00 6.32 8.43 28.01 
2013-14 28.01 1.07 13.81 22.24 26.94 
2014-15 28.01 0.00 16.35 38.59 28.01 
2015-16 0.00 0.00 16.26 54.85 0.00 
TOTAL 140.05 43.09 54.85   96.96 
(Source: Data from ThFC recommendations, GOI release order and implementing agencies) 
 GOK could not avail ThFC assistance of `96.96 crore against the 
allocation of `140.05 crore. 
 At the close of the ThFC period (March 2015), the utilisat ion was 
only `38.59 crore against `43.09 crore received. 
 Utilisation in the extend ed period of 2015 -16 was `16.26 crore 
including the unspent balance of `4.50 crore of ThFC release. 
 GOK additionally spent `11.76 crore from its own funds, which GOI 
confirmed (July 2015) as not eligible for reimbursement as the ThFC 
award period had expired (March 2015). 
We observed that, a High Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC) comprising 
the Secretaries of Finance, Home, Law, Public Works Department (PWD), 
DGP, Registrar General of High Court, Member Secretary of the State Legal 
Services Authority and th e Director of the State Judicial Academy was tasked 
with regular monitoring of the progress made in implementation of 
Perspective and Annual Plan. Though HLMC pointed out ( February, July and 
September 2012 ) the slow pace of  utilisation of funds and direct ed to 
accelerate the pace of utilisation , the same was  not adhered to by the 
implementing agencies. Consequently, GOK could not avail ThFC grant of 
`96.96 crore. 
4.6.2 Implementation of Thirteenth Finance Commission initiatives 
The audit observations on the quality of expenditure incurred on the various 
initiatives of the ThFC award vis-à-vis the objectives are given in the 
following paragraphs.  
4.6.2.1 Operation of Morning/Evening/Special Courts 
The ThFC provided for setting up Morning/Evening/Shift/Weekend/Mobile/ 
Special Magistrate Courts in order to clear the backlog of petty cases and to 
relieve pressure on Judicial system. This was envisaged as a temporary 
measure to be implemented with a clear target for disposal of cases. These 
courts were to utili se the services of regular judicial officers on payment of 
additional compensation or retired officers. The High Court of Kerala had also 
framed the “Evening Courts (Kerala) Rules, 2011” for the constitution and 
regulation of functioning of the Evening Courts  in the State. Against an 

 
 
Chapter IV – Improvement in Justice Delivery Mechanism 
63 
allocation of `67.42 crore by the ThFC for operation of Morning/Evening 
Courts during 2010-11 to 2015-16, GOK could avail only `20.23 crore, out of 
which only `12.95 crore was utilised.  
As per the revised Perspectiv e Plan 2010 -11 to 2014 -15 and Annual Action 
Plan of the High Court  2010-11 and 2011 -12, 116 Evening Courts were 
targeted to be set up in the State to dispose of 12,93,60047 cases during the 
ThFC award period. GOK initially sanctioned (February 2010) five48 out of 74 
proposed Evening Courts which functioned during 2011-12 to 2015 -16. Even 
though it accorded sanction (February 2012) for the creation of the remaining 
69 courts, these were not made functional since the High Court considered that 
the Evening Court s were not successful in the State. Consequent on GOI 
permitting State Governments (January 2012) to set up Temporary/Special 
Courts with the funds earmarked for setting up of Evening Courts with the 
objective of clearing the backlog of cases,  the HLMC recommended to GOK 
(September 2012) to accord sanction for the establishment of 27 49 Special 
Judicial First Class Magistrate (JFCM) c ourts for three years subject to the 
condition that all appointments we re temporary and building for the purpose 
should be taken on temporary basis. Accordingly, GOK accorded (November  
2012) Administrative Sanction (AS) for establishment of 2 7 Special JFCM 
Courts in the State on temporary basis utilising the funds under the component 
‘Evening Court’ . However, the 27 Special JFC M Courts  started functioning 
only during the last months of the ThFC award period (June 2014 to March 
2015).  
On seeking the reasons for the delay in setting up the Special JFCM Courts, 
the High Court stated (May 2016) that, GOK accorded AS ( November 2012) 
for establishing 27 Special JFCM Courts  in the State without specifying the 
locations of the courts or the staff pattern required. It was not possible to 
commence the courts on the basis of a Government Order alone till the 
locations and staff pattern for  the courts were specifically sanctioned by the 
Government. Based on the locations specified by the High Court (July 2013) 
along with the necessary staff pattern, GOK accorded sanction for establishing 
27 Special JFCM Courts in May 2014 only. 
The inability of GOK to utilise the grants already released by GOI resulted in 
the State foregoing ThFC assistance of `47.19 crore during 2010 -11 to 
2014-15.  
GOK stated (September 2016) that, the delay caused was not wilful and was 
due to administrative issu es. The reply was not tenable as better coordination 
would have enabled early setting up of these Courts facilitating more disposal 
of cases. 
Recommendation 1: GOK and High Court may consider setting up Evening 
Courts to the extent possible for disposal of petty cases. 
                                                 
47 As per the Perspective Plan of the High Court each Evening Court was to dispose of 280 cases in a 
month and 3360 cases annually. Thus, the total cases to be disposed of was calculated as 12,93,600. 
48 Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Ernakulam, Thrissur and Kozhikode 
49 Ernakulam (16), Kollam (5), Kozhikode (1), Thiruvananthapuram (4) and Thrissur (1) 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
64 
4.6.2.2 Creation of post of Court Managers 
The ThFC provided for appointment of Court Managers (CM) to assist judges 
for performing their administrative duties which would allow them more time 
for their judicial functions. The State was also allocate d `7.61 crore for 
appointment of a professionally qualified CM in each judicial district and two 
for the High Court. Against the allocation, GOK received `2.28 crore during 
2010-11 to 2011-12. GOK sanctioned (November 2011) 16 posts of CMs ( one 
in each of the 14 judicial districts and two in the High Court), subject to the  
condition that the posts would be filled by deployment from Government 
offices or on deputation.  This was contrary to clarification issued by GOI 
(March 2011) that the courts, besides resorting to direct recruitment could also 
fill up posts of CMs through deputation from employees of Government/  
PSUs/Government and semi -Government Autonomous Bodies /Government 
Law Universities and Government Colleges. Thus, GOK excluded direct 
recruitment as a mode of appointment to these posts.  
Consequent on its inability to make appointments to the posts of CMs on 
deputation basis, the High Court requested  (June 2012) GOK to issue revised 
orders providing for their appointment through dir ect recruitment a lso. GOK 
then issued fresh order (March 2013) incorporating ‘direct recruitment’ as the 
mode of appointment of CMs if suitable candidates were not available through 
deployment/deputation. 
Thus, posts of CMs w ere filled up through direct recruitment only in  August 
2014 though these posts were sanctioned by GOK as early as in 2011. Out of 
the 16 posts sanctioned,  only 11 persons joined duty (August  2014) (nine in 
Judicial d istricts50 and two in High Court ). Though the ThFC award period 
had expired (March 2015), GOK accorded sanction (January 2015) for the 
continuance of CM for a further period of one year limiting the expenditure to 
the already released ThFC amount.  GOK further extended (March 2016) the 
tenure of CMs till March 2017. 
We observed that, failure on the part of GOK to issue orders to consider direct 
recruitment also as one of the modes of appointment of CMs resulted in delay 
in their appointment and restricted their services to the period  2014-15 to 
2016-17. The delay in appointment of CMs also resulted in GOK foregoing 
ThFC assistance of `5.33 crore. 
Recommendation 2: GOK may consider appointment of C ourt Managers on 
permanent basis in all Judicial districts and High Court  to assist Judges to 
effectively perform their administrative duties. 
4.6.2.3 Conservation of Heritage Court Buildings  
The ThFC earmarked `12.13 crore to GOK for the restoration and 
conservation of Heritage Court Buildings  in the State . Ten pre-independence 
buildings identified by the  High Court  were approved (May  2011) by the 
HLMC for conservation and maintenance under the scheme. While the 
Directorate of Archaeology was engaged for the restoration and maintenance 
                                                 
50 Ernakulam, Kollam, Kottayam, Kozhikode, Manjeri (Malappuram), Palakkad, Pathanamthitta, 
Thiruvananthapuram and Thrissur 

 
 
Chapter IV – Improvement in Justice Delivery Mechanism 
65 
work of four court buildings ( March 201251 and September 201352) at an 
estimated cost of `5.89 crore, the HLMC decided (July 2013) to entrust six 53 
works to M/s. Hindustan Prefab Ltd., a GOI enterprise, under the guidance of 
the Directorate of Archaeology . This was done since Directorate of 
Archaeology intimated GOK (July 2013) that they could carry out the 
conservation work of four court buildings only, due to the large number of 
protected monuments under their care , combined with the limited number of 
technical staff in the structural conservation wing . Even though HLMC 
decided to entrust the remaining six works to M/s. Hindustan Prefab Ltd. in 
July 2013, GOK accorded AS only in September 2014 after obtaining 
proposals from the High Court in May 2014. Consequent to the request of the 
HLMC (December 2014) not to take up any work which could not be 
completed within the ThFC period 2010 -11 to 2014 -15, the High Court 
deferred (January 2015) the six works proposed to be entrusted to 
M/s. Hindustan Prefab Ltd. 
All the four conservation works entrusted to Directorate of Archaeology were 
under various stages of implementation (December 2016). On seeking reasons 
from the Directorate of Archaeology about the slow progress in completion of 
work, we were  informed (May 2016) that, the court buildings were never 
handed over to them completely for executing the work and  instead they were 
allowed to work for stipulated time only. It was further observed that, GOI did 
not release `8.49 crore to GOK out of `12.13 crore earmarked for the scheme, 
due to delay in execution of work and delayed submission of UC. The advance 
of `2.94 crore (50 per cent of the AS amount) released to the Directorate of 
Archaeology for taking up the work on four court buildings was fully utilised 
and the Directorate  of Archaeology  submitted a claim (March 2016 ) for 
release of the balance estimated am ount of `2.50 crore. As the period of the 
ThFC has already expired in March 2015, the possibility of obtaining further 
GOI assistance to meet the remaining 50 per cent of the payment (`2.50 crore) 
due to the Directorate of Archaeology was remote. 
Thus, even after lapse of mo re than four years from taking up  the work, the 
renovation work of four court buildings was yet to be completed and the work 
on remaining six court buildings was not taken up, which resulted in lapse of 
ThFC assistance of `8.49 crore.  
4.6.2.4 Training of Judicial Officers 
The ThFC identified capacity building as a critical need and recogni sed that 
induction training as well as in -service training of judicial officers needed to 
be accelerated. We observed that, during 2010 -11 to 2015 -16, 93 tr aining 
programmes were conducted in the State to train 3610 judicial officers at an 
expenditure of `6.24 crore. This included i nduction training offered to all 
the186 Munsiff Magistrates appointed during the period 2010-11 to 2015 -16 
apart from training 17 newly appointed District Judges.  
                                                 
51 Ram Mohan Palace, Ernakulam 
52 District Courts at Thiruvananthapuram and Alappuzha and the Chief Judicial Magistrate Court at  
Alappuzha 
53 District Court Ernakulam, Additional District Court North Paravur, Chief Judicial Magistrate Court 
Manjeri, Chief Judicial Magistrate Court Kozhikode, Additional District Court Thalassery and Chief 
Judicial Magistrate Court Thalassery 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
66 
Table 4.3: Training of Judicial Officers - Allocation, Receipt and Utilisation 
 (` in crore) 
Year  ThFC 
Allocation GOI Receipt Utilisation  
2010-11 1.348 1.35 0.00 
2011-12 1.348 0.67 1.16 
2012-13 1.348 0.00 0.77 
2013-14 1.348 0.67* 0.99 
2014-15 1.348 0.00 1.81 
2015-16 0.000 0.00 1.51 
 TOTAL 6.740 2.69 6.24 
* Second tranche of 2011-12 received in 2013-14 
(Source: ThFC recommendation, GOI release order and UCs) 
We observed that, GOK failed to obtain the third and subsequent instalments 
of `1.35 crore each, due for the period from  2012-13 to 2014 -15 from GOI 
despite the expenditure exceeding the stipulated 100 per cent  of the first 
instalment of 2010-11 and 60 per cent of the second instalment of 2011-12. It 
was also seen that, GOK additionally spent `3.55 crore on the component 
from its own funds during 201 1-12 to 2015 -16 which would not be 
reimbursable by GOI, as the ThFC award period had lapsed. 
4.6.2.5 Setting up of State Judicial Academy  
The State Judicial Academy is the principal training institution in the State 
which offers training to Judges. Based on the allocation of the ThFC, GOK 
provided `15 crore during 2010 -11 to 2014 -15 for the construction of a 
building to establish the State Judicial Academy.  
Land for the construction of the State Judicial Academy was handed over by 
GOK to the Director of the State Judicial Academy in September 2011. GOK 
accorded A dministrative Sanction (March 2012) for the c onstruction of the 
building and the work was awarded to M/s. Hindustan Prefab Ltd.  at a total 
cost of `15 crore for completion by July 2014. 
We noticed that, the ThFC had released only `4.50 crore during 2010 -11 to 
2011-12 with no further release of funds during 2012 -13 to 2014-15. It was 
observed that, expenditure was incurred on the component from 2012 -13 
onwards. GOK was required to spend at least `3.90 crore out of the total GOI 
release of `4.50 crore to become eligible for second tranche of second 
instalment for the year 2011-12. We noticed that, despite GOK spending `6.93 
crore (March 2014) and becoming eligible to obtain the grant , it failed to 
receive further instalments of grant from GOI. It was seen that, apart from 
seeking GOI assistance while forwardin g UC for the period April 2013 to 
September 2014  (November 2014)  and for the period April 2014 to March 
2015 (March 2015), it was only in June 2015 that GOK requested for release 
of further grant from GOI. The request of GOK was turned down by GOI 
citing that the UC for the year 2014 -2015 was belatedly submitted on 31 
March 2015  and the ThFC award period had lapsed by then. As of March 
2016, the expenditure was `14.55 crore. Due to belated submission of claims 
by GOK, the expenditure of `10.05 crore incurre d against the allocation of 
`15 crore could not be got reimbursed from GOI. 

 
 
Chapter IV – Improvement in Justice Delivery Mechanism 
67 
We further observed that, even though the newly completed building was 
inaugurated in January 2016 and taken over by the Kerala Judicial Academy 
as per the directions of the High C ourt in June 2016, failure to obtain 
sufficient staff and adequate infrastructure resulted in the building remaining 
idle (September 2016). 
The Kerala  Judicial Academy  stated (August 2016) that, shifting of the 
campus to the new building would be done  on getting sufficient staff and 
required infrastructure like furniture, data servers, smart classrooms, digital 
library, etc., and after obtaining orders from the Hon’ble High Court of Kerala. 
It was also informed that, request for providing staff wa s pending  with the 
Government. 
4.6.2.6 Establishment of Alternate Dispute Resolution Centres and training 
of Mediators/Conciliators 
In order to reduce the pressure on the court system, ThFC allocated `19.02 
crore for establishing Alternate Dispute Resolution (ADR) C entres a nd 
training of mediators/conciliators in the State. The responsibility for setting up 
of ADR Centres and training of mediators  was assigned ( March 2011) to 
KELSA by the GOI. Administrative Sanction was accorded (March 2011) by 
GOK for the establishment of ADR Centres during 2010-11 to 2014 -15 at a 
cost of `19.02 crore. Against  the ThFC release ( 2010-11 to 2014 -15) of 
`5.71 crore, the expenditure on construction of buildings for ADR Centres and 
training to mediators during the period 2010-11 to 2015-16 was `7.21 crore54. 
Even though KELSA decided to set up 17 55 ADR Centres in the State , only 
seven56 ADR Centres  were taken up for construction of which,  six were 
completed and one at Kottayam was progressing (May 2016). 
The Law Secretary, GOK  cited (December 2016)  reasons such as non -
availability of land, identified land not getting transferred from Government, 
abnormally high estimate amount and delayed receipt of sanction from 
Archaeological Survey of India, for not taking up the work on remaining 10 
ADR Centres. In the test checked districts, while one ADR Centre each was 
set up in Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam and Thrissur, there was no ADR 
Centre in Malappuram district. 
Thus the failure to set up ADR Centre s led to foregoing ThFC grant of `13.31 
crore (March 2015) besides failing in attaining the objective of reducing the 
pressure on the court system. 
Recommendation 3: GOK/High Court may set up adequate number of ADR 
Centres to reduce pressure on court system. 
  
                                                 
54 `6.48 crore on setting up of ADR Centres and `0.73 crore on training of mediators 
55 One ADR in each district (14), one additional ADR Centre each in Mavelikkara, North Paravur and 
KELSA Headquarters at Ernakulam 
56 Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, Alappuzha, Kannur, Mavelikkara, Thrissur and Kottayam 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
68 
4.6.2.7 Performance of Lok Adalats 
The disposal of legal disputes at pre -litigative stage by the Lok Adalats 57 
provides expense-free justice to the citizens of the country. It also saves courts 
from additional and avoidable burden of petty cases, enabling them to devote 
their court -time to m ore contentious and old cases. As per the Perspective 
Action Plan of KELSA for the implementation of ThFC recommendations, 62 
court centres in Kerala were to conduct 310 Lok Adalats per year (five Adalats 
in each court centre per year). These Lok Adalats  were to dispose of an 
average of at least 62000 cases every year at the rate of 200 cases58 per Adalat, 
per year. Thus, during the period 2010 -11 to 2014-15, 1550 Lok Adalats were 
to be held in the State to dispose 3.10 lakh cases. Besides, the Perspective Plan 
also provided for conduct of 10 Mega Adalats 59 per year at the High Court 
level. An amount of `0.81 crore was released by GOI for Lok Adalat, against 
which GOK budget provision of `1.98 crore was fully utili sed by the 
implementing agency. 
Year wise details of Mega Adalats/ Lok Adalats held in the State utili sing the 
ThFC grant during the years 2010-11 to 2015-16 are given in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Details of cases disposed through Mega/Lok Adalats 
Year 
Target set by 
KELSA for 
conducting 
Mega/Lok 
Adalats 
Actual no. of 
Mega/Lok 
Adalats held 
Target set for 
disposal of cases  
(derived from ThFC 
recommendation) 
Target set by 
KELSA for 
disposal of 
cases 
Actual no. 
of cases 
referred 
Actual no. 
of cases 
disposed 
Percentage of 
disposal with 
respect to 
cases referred 
Amount 
incurred 
(` in lakh) 
2010-11 320* Nil  62000 36000* Nil Nil Nil Nil 
2011-12 640 2324 62000 72000 74292 16856 22.69 24.87 
2012-13 320 2769 62000 36000 91253 19450 21.31 37.00 
2013-14 320 3554 62000 36000 148507 63150 42.52 58.89 
2014-15 630 3188 62000 49500 358620 150097 41.85 66.39 
2015-16 630 350 0 49500 41653 14561 34.96 10.53 
TOTAL 2540 12185 310000 243000 714325 264114 36.97 197.68 
* Not included in total figure as figures of 2011-12 include unachieved target of 2010-11 
(Source: Data obtained from KELSA) 
We observed that, against the target set by ThFC for disposal of 3.10 lakh 
cases by 1550 Lok Adalats , KELSA conducted 12185 Lok Adalats which 
could dispose only 2.64 lakh cases  against 7.14 lakh cases referred . The 
performance of these Lok Adalats was not satisfactory when seen against the 
fact that the percentage of disposal of cases referred to it was only 36.97 per 
cent as shown in the table. Thus, each Lok Adalat could dispose of an average 
of only 22 cases60 against the target of 200 cases recommended by the ThFC.  
GOK confirmed (December 2016) that, 264114 cases were successfully settled 
against the target of 243000 cases set by KELSA. The reply was not tenable in 
                                                 
57 Lok Adalat is a forum where disputes/cases pending in the court of law or at pre -litigation stage are 
settled/compromised amicably. It is one of the Alternative Dispute Resolution mechanisms and ha s 
been given statutory status under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987. 
58 The ThFC provided `100 crore for conducting Lok Adalats targeting an annual disposal of 15 lakh 
cases in India during 2010 -15. This allocation was for 1500 court locations all over India with five 
Adalats in each location per year. Thus , we calculated the number of cases to be disposed of per Lok  
Adalat as 200 cases per year . (i.e. 15 lakh cases / 1500 Court locations / 5 Adalats per Court Location 
per year = 200 cases per Adalat per year) 
59 In Mega Adalat large number of cases in di fferent categories are settled/ compromised amicably by 
constituting more number of Adalat benches when compared to ordinary Lok Adalat. 
60 Actual cases disposed/Adalats conducted i.e. 264114 / 12185 = 21.67 rounded to 22 cases per Adalat 

 
 
Chapter IV – Improvement in Justice Delivery Mechanism 
69 
view of the fact that, against the target of 200 cases set for disposal in each 
Lok Adalat by the ThFC, the target set by KELSA worked out to an average of 
only 96 cases per Lok Adalat. Even against the lower target of 96 cases set by 
KELSA, each Lok Adalat, on an average disposed only 22 cases. GOK also 
stated that, the lower target was fixed considering the manpower available in 
the District Legal Services Authorities and Taluk Legal Services Centres. 
Thus, the action plan set forth by KELSA was not designed to achieve the 
ThFC target of clearing 3.10 lakh cases. 
4.6.2.8 Legal Aid to weaker sections 
Parliament enacted the Legal Services Authorities Act , 1987 to enable 
establishment of Legal Services Authorities for providing free and competent 
legal services to weaker sections of the society to ensure that opportunities for 
securing justice were not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other 
disabilities. The National Legal Service s Authority and Kerala State Legal 
Services Authority have the responsibility to provide legal services to eligible 
persons. Provision of Legal Aid was an important measure provided under the 
ThFC to assist the marginalised sections to access the justice system  and also 
to reduce the number of undertrials in prisons. During 2010 -11 to 2015 -16, 
KELSA was allocated with an amount of `6.29 crore  by ThFC for this 
purpose. Legal assistance was provided to 59755 person s against the target of 
25000 set by KELSA during 2011-12 to 2015-16, including 12521 undertrials 
in the State at an expenditure of `1.65 crore from the ThFC grant. 
It was noticed that, the HLMC in its meeting (July 2012) requested KELSA to 
expand the base of beneficiaries 61 by suitably enhancing the income limit for 
availing legal aid and directed to send proposal to Law Department to enhance 
the income ceiling for availing legal aid. We  observed that, the request of the 
HLMC was not complied with by KELSA. 
KELSA admitted (November 2016) that, no proposals were sent to the Law 
Department to enhance the income limit. It was also stated that, income limit 
was `25,000 for 11 years which was increased in two short intervals i.e. to 
`50,000 in 2009 and then Rupees one lakh in 2011 and that legal aid was 
given to more than the targeted people even with the current income limit. The 
reply (December 2016) of KELSA was not tenable in view of the fa ct that the 
HLMC had desired to expand the base of beneficiaries by suitably enhancing 
the income limit and it was not for KELSA to override the suggestion of the 
HLMC. GOK stated (December 2016) that, a proposal to expand the base of 
beneficiaries by suitably enhancing the income limit for availing legal aid will 
be placed in the next meeting of KELSA. 
4.6.3 GOI grants other than ThFC grants 
4.6.3.1 Setting up of Gram Nyayalayas 
The Parliament enacted Gram Nyayalayas Act, 2008 to provide to the citizens 
access to justice at their doorsteps and to ensure that opportunities for securing 
justice were not denied to any citizen. It was envisaged that, a Judicial Officer 
                                                 
61 The income limit of Rupees one lakh fixed by KELSA determines the eligibility to obtain free legal 
aid. 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
70 
not less than the rank of a First Class Judicial Magistrate would be appointed 
as the Judge, who would trav el from place to place to provide speedy, 
affordable and substantial justice to the people of rural areas.  
Administrative Sanction was accorded (March 2011) for the establishment of 
Gram Nyayalayas in 30 Blocks in the State with the required staff pattern . 
GOK, in exercise of the powers conferred under the Act, notified (April 2012) 
the Gram Nyayalayas (Kerala) Rules, 2012. 
We noticed that, after five years of the sanction, only three62 out of 30 Gram 
Nyayalayas had been established as on 31 March 2016. 
The High Court attributed (September 2016) the delay in establishing Gram 
Nyayalayas to inability to identify suitable accommodation for their 
functioning. However, High Court stated (December 2016) that, 29 of the 30 
Gram Nyayalayas had since started functioning in the State. 
4.6.3.2 Uploading of data in e -Courts portal and National Judicial Data 
Grid (NJDG) 
As part of National e -Governance Plan (NeGP), e -Courts Project was 
implemented (July 2007)  to provide speedy, qualitative and cost -effective 
justice by meaningfu l and effective use of I nformation and Communication 
Technology (ICT). The action plan of e -Courts project provided for creating a 
National Judicial Data Grid  (NJDG) for warehousing all the critical data 
concerning the functioning of the Indian courts. It was envisaged that, web 
technology operating through intra net in a fully secured digital environment 
with authori sed user facilities  would facilitate  user connectivity between 
courts, Judges and court staff. The Data Centre would be used for feeding the 
pendencies, filings, s tages, disposals and nature and age of cases for devising 
policies pertinent for carrying out the delay reduction programs of the system. 
It was observed that, 45 courts (9.3 per cent) out of the 484 courts ( November 
2016) in the State  were not uploading any data into the e -Courts portal and 
NJDG due to absence of requisite hardware and software. Certain Magistrate 
Courts were not uploading pending case data on petty cases into e -Courts 
portal and NJDG , despite possessing e-Courts hardwa re, software and other  
requisite facilities. This had resulted in variation between e-Courts portal data 
and actual data available with the courts. The details of pending cases in courts 
in the four test checked districts vis-à-vis data available in NJDG a re given 
below: 
  
                                                 
62  Parassala (Thiruvananthapuram), Chadayamangalam (Kollam) and Nedumkandam (Idukki) 

 
 
Chapter IV – Improvement in Justice Delivery Mechanism 
71 
Table 4.5: Details of pending cases in test checked districts against 
data available in NJDG 
Name of District 
Total 
number of 
courts 
Number of pending 
cases as on 31.03.2016 
as per NJDG# 
Number of cases 
actually pending  in 
courts as on 
31.03.2016# 
Thiruvananthapuram 56 138573 220463 
Ernakulam 72 65608 256809 
Thrissur 36 85979 124364 
Malappuram 26 53811 53651 
TOTAL 190 343971 655287 
 # Excluding cases pending in Family Courts 
 (Source: Data obtained from NJDG, District Courts, CJM Courts and M otor Accident 
Claims Tribunal) 
The above table indicates the difference in figures between NJDG data and 
actual pending figures in selected districts. In Thiruvananthapuram district, a 
variation of 81890 cases was noticed while in E rnakulam and Thrissur 
districts, the difference was 191201 and 38385 respectively. However, in 
Malappuram district, the data uploaded to the NJDG portal was 53811 against 
the actual 53651.  The failure to populate the NJDG portal with accurate data 
and reco ncile the same would adversely affect the planning process and the 
interests of the various stakeholders. While agreeing with audit observations, 
the GOK stated (January 2017) that, delay in entries/omission occurred with 
respect to data entry of petty cas es and that deficiency of court staff in the 
Magistrate Courts affected the data entry of pending cases and caused 
replication of data on NJDG. 
4.6.3.3 Loss of GOI assistance on Development of Infrastructure Facilities 
for the Judiciary 
To address the inadequacy o f infrastructure in Subordinate Courts which was 
identified as an obstacle for speedy delivery of justice , the Department of 
Justice has been implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for 
‘Development of Infrastructure Facilities for the Judiciary’ since 1993 -94 with 
Central/State funding pattern of 50:50. A modified CSS was introduced by 
GOI (July 2011) , whereby it increased  its share of assistance to 75:25 from 
2011-12 onwards. During 2015-16, GOI reduced its share of funding to 60:40 
between the Centre and the State. 
Accordingly, construction of  35 court buildings and eight residential 
accommodations for judicial officers during 2011-12 to 2015-16 was proposed 
by GOK under this scheme at a projected cost of `215.45 crore (GOI - 
`161.59 crore, GOK - `53.86 crore).  
As of March 2016, works to the tune of  `88.24 crore were executed by GOK, 
for which it was e ligible for reimbursement of `61.53 crore from GOI. We 
observed that the GOK was able to obtain only `26.68 crore from GOI, 
thereby foregoing the balance eligible amount of `34.85 crore. 
We examined the reason for non -receipt of eligible balance fund from GOI. It 
was seen that, GOK had received `14.99 crore from GOI during the year 
2012-13 but a defective UC was submitted (June 2014) to GOI stating that 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
72 
`10.08 crore was utilised and the ba lance was ‘Nil’. GOI directed (August 
2014) GOK to provide UC for the unspent balance of `4.91 crore. Despite 
GOK requesting (September 2014 and March 2015) PWD to furnish UC for 
the balance amount of `4.91 crore, the UC was submitted to GOK only on 
21 March 2016 after a lapse of two years , which was forwarded to GOI on 
31 March 2016, even though the amount was spent in 2013 -14 itself. We 
observed that, the initial defective submission of the UC and delay in 
submission of rectified UC by PWD had resulted in  non-reimbursement of 
`34.85 crore from GOI. 
We further examined the physical status of works undertaken under the 
scheme. It was seen that, out of 35 court buildings and eight residential 
accommodations undertaken under this scheme , 21 court buildings rem ained 
incomplete (August 2016). In the test checked districts, out of 16 works 
undertaken, only four works were found to have been completed. 
Thus, l axity of PWD/GOK in timely submission of UC resulted in non -
reimbursement of `34.85 crore from GOI . Moreover, the opportunity of 
setting up infrastructure facilities for 21 courts was also lost, as only 14 courts 
were covered till now, which led to  foregoing of GOI assistance of 
`134.91 crore63. 
Recommendation 4: Government should ensure timely utilisatio n of grant 
released and submission of UCs to GOI to avoid lapse of Finance 
Commission awards and other central assistance. 
4.7 Conclusion 
GOK could not avail ThFC assistance of `96.96 crore from the grants released 
by GOI due to delay in utilisation of funds, submission of UCs to GOI, setting 
up of Evening/Special JFCM Courts, non -completion of civil works, etc. 
Clearance of cases filed in the Lok Adalats  was lower than the target 
recommended by the ThFC. The request of the High Level Monitoring 
Committee to expand the base of beneficiaries among the marginali sed 
sections by suitably enhancing the income limit for availing legal aid was not 
implemented by KELSA. Laxity of GOK in timely submission of valid UC s 
for grants obtained from GOI on ‘Developme nt of Infrastructure Facilities for 
the Judiciary’ had resulted in the State failing to obtain reimbursement of 
`34.85 crore from GOI, besides foregoing GOI assistance of `134.91 crore. 
 
                                                 
63 `161.59 crore - `26.68 crore = `134.91 crore 

 
 
  
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 

 
 

 
 73 
CHAPTER V 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
 
AUDIT OF SELECTED TOPICS 
 
HOME AND VIGILANCE DEPARTMENT 
 
5.1 Enforcement of fire safety provisions in  respect of buildings 
by the Kerala Fire and Rescue Services Department 
5.1.1 Introduction 
The Kerala Fire and Rescue Services Department (Fire and Rescue 
Department) with five Divisional Offices 64, 14 District Offices and 121 fire 
stations is entrusted with the responsibilities of fire fighting operations/  
salvaging or rescue of life and propert y during fire accidents/hazards. While a 
Motor Transport wing under the Fire and Rescue Department is responsible 
for the maintenance of the vehicles of the Department, the Kerala Fire and 
Rescue Services Academy caters to the training of personnel.  The Fi re and 
Rescue Department is governed by the Kerala Fire Force Act, 1962 (Fire 
Force Act). While the Home and Vigilance Department is in overall control of 
the Fire and Rescue Department at the Government level, the administrative 
powers are vested with the  Director General of Fire and Rescue, Home Guard 
and Civil Defence (DG).  
5.1.2 Scope and coverage of Audit 
We had conducted the Performance Audit of Prevention and Control of Fire 
which had appeared in the Audit Report of Comptroller and Auditor General 
of Indi a for the year ended March 2003. The Report was discussed by the 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of Kerala Legislature and 
recommendations were made (March 2008) to Government of Kerala (GOK). 
PAC discussed (December 2011) the Action Taken Report furnished  by GOK 
on these recommendations and called for additional details on some of the 
recommendations. The recommendations included establishment of adequate 
number of fire stations, framing of Rules pending from 1962, periodic 
inspection of high rise building s65, ensuring availability of vehicle s for fire 
fighting in high rise buildings, etc . During the present audit, we examined the 
compliance to the provisions of the Fire Force Act, Rules and Regulations 
issued by the Fire and Rescue Department and assessed h ow far these  
Rules/Regulations were able to fulfil the objectives of the Department.  
Audit methodology included scrutiny of records pertaining to the period 2011 -
12 to 2015 -16 at Government Secretariat (Home and Vigilance Department), 
Office of the DG and three Divisional 66 offices out of five and five District 
offices out of 14 viz., Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam, Kollam, Thrissur and 
                                                 
64 Ernakulam, Kottayam, Kozhikode, Palakkad and Thiruvananthapuram 
65 Buildings with four or more floors or with a height of 15 metres or more from ground level 
66 Thiruvananthapuram, Ernakulam and Kozhikode 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
74 
Kozhikode. Fifteen 67 fire stations located in the selected districts were also 
covered. Relevant records of one of the Local Self Government Institutions68 
(LSGI) coming under the jurisdiction of each selected fire station were also 
scrutinised as a part of audit. We conducted joint verification of 105 buildings 
in the selected districts along with officials of the Fire and Rescue Department 
to assess the status of fire fighting infrastructure in these buildings. Entry 
Conference was held on 16 June 2016  with the DG in charge of the Fire and 
Rescue Department, during which the audit objectives and audit criteria were 
explained to the Department. An Exit  conference was conducted on 
01 November 2016 with the Additional Chief Secretary, Home and Vigilance 
Department and Director General, Fire and Rescue Department, during which 
the audit findings were discussed in detail. 
Audit Observations 
5.1.3 Formulation of Act and Rules 
5.1.3.1 Failure to enact the Kerala Fire Force Act  
The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) established under the 
provisions of the Disaster Management Act 2005 , issued Guid elines (April 
2012), which recommended all States to enact Fire Force Act for providing 
fire safety norms in  respect of  all high rise buildings, residential clusters, 
colonies, business cent res, malls, etc . The Guidelines also required that the 
Fire Force Act should provide for legal and penal action against fire safety 
defaulters, if they fail to fulfil the fire safety requirements like proper fire 
safety equipment, escape/evacuation routes, parking locations, etc. All State 
Governments and local bodies we re required to comply with these Guidelines 
in a planned and focussed manner.  
In order to frame a central legislation on Fire safety in the country, 
Government of India (GOI) forwarded (July 2014) a draft Fire Safety Bill to 
GOK for getting its views. GOK advised (August 2014) Director General 
(DG) to submit a draft Fire Safety Bill by September 2014 incorporating the 
provisions of the draft Fire Safety Bill of GOI. The DG submitted (April 2015) 
the draft Kerala Fire Prevention and Life Safety Measures Bil l to GOK, which 
he later withdrew (December 2015) stating deficiencies in the draft Bill. 
Subsequently, a committee was constituted (April 2016) by the then DG which 
submitted (May 2016) both the Act and Rules to the DG which was yet to be 
submitted to GOK (December 2016).  
Non-enactment of  new Fire F orce Act in line with the NDMA Guidelines 
(April 2012) , lowered the operational efficiency of the Fire and Rescue 
Department in en suring adequacy of fire safety norms  in the high 
risk/vulnerable buildings as discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.  
                                                 
67 Thiruvananthapuram, Chacka, Chamakkada, Kadappakkada, Gandhi Nagar, Club Road, Thrikkakara, 
Eloor, Thrissur, Pudukkad, Guruvayur, Kozhikode Beach, Meenchantha, Vellimadukunnu and 
Mukkam 
68 Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, Kollam Corporation, Kochi Corporation, Thrikkakara 
Municipality, Thrissur Co rporation, Pudukkad  Grama Panchayath, Guruvayur Municipality, 
Kozhikode Corporation, Mukkam Municipality, Olavanna Grama Panchayath 

 
 75 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
5.1.3.2 Failure to frame Rules 
As per Section 35 of the Fire Force Act 1962, the Government may frame 
Rules for implementation of provisions of the Act. Non -framing of Rules for 
implementing the Act was pointed out in the Aud it Report of C&AG for the 
year ended March 2003. PAC while discussing the Report recommended 
(March 2008) that Rules under the Act should be framed without further 
delay. We noticed that though the Subject  Committee of the State Legislature 
had initially approved (03 January 2012) the Kerala Fire and Rescue Services 
Rules 2011, it was later decided (24 January 2012) by the Committee not to 
proceed with Rules approved by them, as they proposed to formulate a  new 
Fire Force Act in lieu of the Act of 1962. Thus, as of January 2017, the 
Department could not frame and approve Rules to supplement the Fire Force 
Act, 1962 which also required suitable amendment. In the absence of Rules, 
the activities of the Departm ent were regulated by Standing Orders issued by 
the DG which did not have statutory backing. We noticed instances of Orders 
issued by the DG being challenged in Courts as pointed out in succeeding 
paragraphs. Thus, absence of Rules has adversely impacted t he efficient 
functioning of the Fire and Rescue Department.  
5.1.3.3 Non-issue of notification by Government 
As part of preventive measures, Section 13 of the Fire Force Act  1962 
provided that GOK could, by issue of notification, require owner/occupiers of 
buildings to take such preventive measures as may be specified. Where such 
notifications were issued, the Fire Force Act empowered (Section 30) the DG 
to enter these places for the purpose of determining whether precautions 
against fire, required to be taken in s uch places had actually been taken care 
of.  
Officers of the Fire and Rescue Department could not inspect any premises for 
ensuring fire safety standards unless such premises were specifically notified 
by Government. We observed that GOK failed to issue no tifications and 
consequently the officers of the Fire and Rescue Department could not 
conduct inspections legally and discharge their duties effectively. We 
observed instances in which owners of two buildings in Kollam and 
Malappuram challenged inspections  conducted by Departmental officers. The 
owners of the buildings pointed out that guidelines issued by Fire and Rescue 
Department and directions to install fire safety mechanisms envisaged by 
National Building Code were not enforceable due to the absence o f 
Government Order or statutory backing. Thus, failure to provide legal backing 
to orders resulted in directions of Fire Force officers being challenged and 
sometimes not adhered to by owners of building premises. 
GOK stated (November 2016) that notifications would be issued at the earliest 
to enable the Department to proceed legally against violators.  
5.1.4 Maintenance of database and issue of No Objection Certificate 
To ensure compliance to standards of fire prevention and fire protection in 
buildings, the Kerala Municipal Building Rules, 1999 (KMBR) and the Kerala 
Panchayath Building Rules, 2011 (KPBR) required building permits to be 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
76 
issued to multi-storeyed buildings and special buildings69, only after obtaining 
a No Objection Certificate (NOC) on fire protection measures from the Fire 
and Rescue Department. The Fire and Rescue Department had issued Standing 
Orders (1997) for issue of NOC at two different stages viz., “Site for 
construction” after site inspection and scrutiny of plans by the Department and 
later, a final NOC for “Occupation of Building” after inspecting the building 
on completion of construction.  The authority to issue NOC was delegated 
(July 2009) to the Assistant Divisional Officers (ADO) (District level), 
Divisional Officers (DO) (Division level) and DG (State level) of the Fire and 
Rescue Department, based on the height70 of the buildings.  
The DG ordered (July 2009) that in order to facilitate monitoring of the 
compliance to fire safety standards, an NOC issue register in the prescribed 
form was to be maintained by the Fire and Rescue Department at the Station, 
ADO, DO and Headquarters level. S tanding Orders (August 2013) of the DG 
also required that the NOC Registers maintained by the fire stations were to 
contain details of all the buildings for which NOC was issued by the 
Department at different levels. 
Test check of the registers for the period 2011-12 to 2015-16 at 15 fire stations 
in the selected five districts revealed that contrary to the Standing Orders , 
details of 543 out of 805 final NOCs issued by higher authorities were not 
recorded in the registers at fire stations. The failure of t he Fire and Resc ue 
Department in maintaining a proper database and deficiencies in recording the 
details of NOCs in the registers at fire stations resulted in their inability to 
monitor and ensure continued compliance of buildings to fire safety standards.  
GOK in reply stated (January 2017) that necessary directions have been issued 
to officers of Fire and Rescue Department to maintain a comprehensive 
database in connection with the issue of NOC to various types of buildings 
according to their occupancy and height and that attempts to digitalise the data 
and online processing of NOCs were underway. 
5.1.5 Non-renewal of No Objection Certificates 
Government directed (April 2013) that NOCs issued for buildings were to be 
renewed every year for an annual fee of `2000/- to vouch the fire fighting 
preparedness of high rise buildings. Accordingly, the DG issued (August 
2013) Standing Orders prescribing the procedure for renewal of NOCs and 
also constituted Scrutiny Committees for inspection of buildings, according to 
the height of the building. The renewal of NOCs for buildings was to be 
approved by Station Officer (up to 24 metres of height), ADO (above 24 
metres up to 60 metres) and the DO (above 60 met res of height). We analysed 
the recordings made in the NOC Issue Reg isters/Renewal Registers 
                                                 
69 Educational, Medical or Hospital and Office or business occupancies exceeding three floors, assembly 
occupancy irrespective of their number of floors, Mercantile or commercial occupancy buildings other 
than parking buildings exceeding two floors from ground level, industrial occupancy buildings, 
irrespective of their num ber of floors, storage or ware housing occupancy building s irrespective of 
their number of floors and buildings under hazardous occupancy 
70 From July 2009  to August 2012 NOCs for single -storeyed buildings upto 10 metres, multi-storeyed 
buildings upto 15 metres and multi-storeyed buildings above 15 metres to be i ssued by ADO (District 
level), DO (Division level) and D G (State level) respectively. From September 2012, multi-storeyed 
buildings upto 24 metres and multi-storeyed buildings above 24 metres to be issued by DO  (Division 
level) and DG (State level) respectively. 

 
 77 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
maintained at 15 selected fire stations and observed that 11 to 92 per cent of 
NOCs issued during 2012 -13 to 2013-14 were not seen renewed during 2013-
14 to 2014-15 as shown in the following table. 
Table 5.1: Non-renewal of NOC  
Sl. 
No. Name of Fire Station 
Number 
of 
NOCs 
issued 
as per 
the 
register 
Number 
of 
NOCs 
renewed 
by Fire 
Station 
Number 
of NOCs 
renewed 
by ADO 
Number 
of NOCs 
renewed 
DO 
Number 
of NOCs 
not 
renewed 
Percentage 
of non -
renewal 
1 Chacka 37 6 0 0 31 84 
2 Thiruvananthapuram 203 7 11 0 185 91 
3 Kadappakkada, Kollam NOC register and Renewal register not maintained 
4 Chamakkada 70 14 2 0 54 77 
5 Eloor 29 7 2 0 20 69 
6 Gandhi Nagar 579 38 16 0 525 91 
7 Thrikkakara 288 25 21 1 241 84 
8 Club Road, Ernakulam 62 40 15 0 7 11 
9 Thrissur 473 51 3 -- 419 89 
10 Pudukkad 10* 7 0 -- 3 30 
11 Guruvayur 85 7 0 -- 78 92 
12 Kozhikode Beach 269 28 13 0 228 85 
13 Vellimadukunnu 65 4 1 0 60 92 
14 Meenchantha 65 12 11 0 42 65 
15 Mukkam 40 4 0 0 36 90 
* NOCs issued prior to formation of the station (January 2011) not recorded in the register 
(Source: Details collected from selected fire stations) 
As the NOCs were not renewed in the cases ranging from 11 to 92 per cent, 
the Department was not able to claim fire safety preparedness of the buildings. 
On being asked, GOK replied (January 2017) that the suggestion of DG to 
incorporate the provisions for annual renewal of fire safety approval of 
buildings in the KMBR/KPBR, and disconnection of essential services  like 
water, electricity, etc., in the event of non -renewal would be considered in 
consultation with L ocal Self Government Department. The fact, however, 
remains that in the absence of renewal of NOCs at regular intervals, the 
buildings in question were not free from fire hazards. 
5.1.6 Non-adoption of best practices in line with National Building 
Code 
The National Building Code of India, revised in 2005, is a comprehensive 
Building Code, providing guidelines for regulating the building construction 
activities across the country.  Part IV of the Code covers the requirements of 
fire prevention and life safety in respect of fire and fire protection of buildings. 
It specifies construction, occupancy and protection features that are necessary 
to minimise danger to life and property from fire. In Kerala, provisions of the 
KMBR govern the design and construction of buildings. It was seen that most 
of the provisions contained in the Code were not adopted in the KMBR. While 
all provisions regarding the fire protection activities me ntioned in the Code71 
were specifically adopted and included as Rule 44 in the KMBR, we observed 
                                                 
71 National Building Code 1983 and Amendment No. 3 under fire protection in Annexure II 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
78 
that detailed specifications laid down in the National Building Code regarding 
prevention and fire safety were not incorporated.  
Considering that there were several high rise buildings with height ranging 
between 60 and 100 metres in Kerala and the limited infrastructure capability 
(road width, traffic density, road gradient, reach of equipment , availability of 
sufficient water, etc.) of the State in Fire and Rescue operations, the DG 
ordered (June 2015) that more emphasis should be placed on preventive 
aspects and in situ capability development such as full compliance to National 
Building Code , adoption of best practices in assuring life safety in building 
design, etc. The members of the Building Approval Committee were directed 
to inspect the sites/buildings in the State with a view to ensure that all the 
provisions of the C ode like access to fire appliances/vehicles, wi dth of main 
and alternate staircases, location and size of fire lifts, vehicular parking spaces, 
refuge area, details of fire alarm system network, built in fire protection 
arrangements, static water storage tank and pump, etc., were complied with 
before issuing NOC.  
However, GOK modified (December 2015) the conditions for grant of 
approval adopted by the DG and ordered that provisions of N ational Building 
Code were applicable only if corresponding enabling provisions existed in the 
KMBR and stated that National Building Code was only a guideline. Further, 
Government also clarified (February 2016) that adherence to National 
Building Code was not mandatory except in so far as it was incorporated in the 
KMBR. In the case of rescue and fire safety, Government stated that the 
provisions contained in Rule 39 to 43 of KMBR in respect of staircases, 
ramps, corridor s, verandahs and passage ways, fire escape staircases, travel 
distance to emergency staircase, etc., shall apply and that the Code would not 
apply. As the provisions conta ined in the Code were more comprehensive and 
necessary to minimise casualty, GOK may initiate steps to strengthen the 
KMBR by addition of these provisions. 
GOK, during the Exit Conference (November 2016) agreed that the KMBR 
needed to be strengthened since it catered to single and two-storeyed buildings 
only and that with the increasing number of high rise buildings in the State, 
utmost importance was to be given to fire prevention activities. GOK stated in 
reply (January 2017) that the DG had recommended that it was very necessary 
to include more fire safety measures as per National Building Code  2005 in 
the existing KMBR/KPBR and that this aspect would be looked into in detail 
by GOK. 
5.1.7 Absence of minimum fire safety standards in buildings 
The DG had issued Minimum Fire Safety Guidelines for residential buildings, 
educational buildings, institutional/hospital buildings, business occupancies, 
mercantile buildings and storage buildings. These  Guidelines prescribed 
minimum fire safety standards, like adeq uate number of fire extinguishers, 
hydrant valves and delivery hoses, hose reel  hose and nozzle, manually 
operated fire alarm systems, sprinklers, fire detectors, fire pumps, water tanks, 
emergency lighting systems, suitable exits, width of access, open sp aces 
around the area of the building, etc., according to the occupancy and height of 
the buildings. 

 
 79 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
A joint verification (June -July 2016) of fire safety standards available in 105 
buildings72 with respect to checklists issued for its officers  by the Fire an d 
Rescue Department revealed that 32 of these buildings suffered from major 
deficiencies like ‘Nil’ fire extinguishers /fire pumps/alternate source of power, 
blockage of fire escape staircase, etc., as shown in Appendix 5.1. The Fire and 
Rescue Department f ailed in ensuring minimum fire safety standards 
prescribed, thereby exposing the buildings to grave threat of fire accidents. 
GOK stated (January 2017) that action would be taken to amend the Fire 
Force Act by introducing a new legislation  for ensuring the  installation of 
minimum fire safety standards in buildings. 
5.1.7.1 Inability of Fire and Rescue Department to enforce minimum fire 
safety standards  
The DG issued Orders (January 2016) to all DOs to verify minimum fire 
safety standards in buildings inhabited or visited by people in large numbers 
like theatres, marriage halls, hospitals, educational institutions, large public 
offices, large corporate offices, malls, multiplexes, etc. The NDMA guidelines 
required that the Fire Force Act should provide for legal and penal action 
against fire safety defaulters if they did not fulfil the fire safety requirements 
like proper fire safety equipment, escape/evacuation routes, parki ng locations, 
etc. The Fire and Rescue Department identified 1589 functional buildings of 
various occupancies 73 in the State without having minimum fire safety 
standards and issued notices (January -February 2016) to the owners of these 
buildings. With regard to the status of compliance to minimum fire safety 
standards in buildings as stipulated by the DG , GOK stated (January 2017) 
that though Departmental orders existed for ensuring fire safety standards in 
buildings, lack of support of law hindered enforcement of these standards. 
Joint verification (June -July 2016) of four of the 16 buildings in Ernakulam 
district74, in which, Fire Safety Audit was conducted (January -February 2016) 
by DO, revealed that none of the deficiencies identified earlier had been 
rectified. Thus, the buildings continued to operate without functional fire 
safety installations. Failure to amend the Fire Force Act in line with NDMA 
guidelines resulted in inability of the Fire and Rescue Department to initiate 
follow up action by enforcing  legal and penal provisions to ensure minimum 
safety standards in buildings. 
GOK replied (January 2017) that action was being taken to ensure support of 
law in enforcing minimum fire safety standards by amending the Fire Force 
Act. 
5.1.7.2 Licensing of agencies 
To prevent and protect people from fire accidents in buildings, engaging of 
qualified persons/agencies in ensuring installation of fire fighting equipment is 
a good practice as is insisted by the State of Maharashtra. The DG had 
                                                 
72 16 Hospital, 34 Residential, 23 Commercial, Nine Educational, Nine Assembly, 11 Office and Three 
Storage 
73 Residential, Educational, I nstitutional, Assembly, Business, Mercantile, Industrial, Storage, 
Hazardous 
74 No records in  support of conduct of Fire Safety Audit were available with DOs in  Kozhikode and 
Thiruvananthapuram 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
80 
requested (September 2014) GO K to implement categori sation of contractors 
based on their experience, competency and qualification in installation of fire 
fighting equipment in buildings for issue of NOC. But the proposal was not 
accepted by GOK citing absence of provision for licensing agencies in the Fire 
Force Act and opined that introduction of licensing system would lead to 
litigation by affected parties. As such, the present system did not ensure 
competency and qualification of the agencies/contractors installing fire 
fighting sys tem in the buildings. Thus , GOK failed in ensuring quality in 
installation of fire fighting equipment in buildings, thereby putting the life of 
people at risk. 
GOK replied (January 2017) that the aspect of making sufficient provision for 
licensing of agenc ies would be examined while formulating the new Fire 
Force Act. 
5.1.8 Status of manpower and equipment to effectively contain fire in 
buildings 
Adequacy of manpower and availability of adequate vehicles and equipment 
are a pre -requisite to effectively contain fi re occurring in buildings with 
minimal loss to life and property. We assessed the status of these components 
and the findings are brought out below. 
5.1.8.1 Adequacy of manpower 
A One-man Commission (Commission) appointed by GOK (March 2013) to 
study the modernisation of the Fire and Rescue Department identified lack of 
adequate staff in the Fire and Rescue Headquarters and officers at the level of 
DOs and ADOs as reasons for failure to ensure the adequacy of fire fighting 
arrangements in the high rise buildings, c inema houses, schools, hospitals, 
shopping complexes (malls) and small scale industrial units.  
We noticed that the recommendation of the Commission (January 2014) for 
the creation of posts of one DO, one ADO, one Station Officer, one Leading 
Fireman (LF) and two Fireman Driver cum Pump Operator (FDCPO) in the 
Fire and Rescue Headquarters in the fire prevention wing on priority basis was 
not implemented by GOK (June 2016). While admitting the shortage of 
manpower GOK stated (January 2017) that financial con straint was the major 
hindrance in addressing the shortfall in manpower. 
Further, as per recommendations of the Standing Fire Advisory 
Committee/Council (SFAC 75), ADO was to be responsible for command of 
two to three fire stations. Accordingly, at least 40 ADOs were required for the 
existing 121 fire stations in the state. However, there were only 15 sanctioned 
posts of ADOs which were all filled as of August 2016.  
We also noticed an overall shortage of 15 per cent  across all categories of 
operational staff with reference to the sanctioned strength (July 2016). There 
                                                 
75 Government of India in 1955 formed a Standing Fire Advisory Committee (SFAC) under the Ministry 
of Home Affairs (MHA). This committee was renamed as Standing Fire Advisory Council (SFAC) in 
1980. This committee/council has representation from each State/UT fire service, as well as 
representation from MHA, Ministry of Defence (MoD), Ministr y of Road Transport and High ways, 
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 

 
 81 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
was significant shortfall in posts of Assistant Station Officer, Fireman and 
FDCPO as shown below. 
Table 5.2: Shortfall in men in position as against sanctioned strength 
Name of post Sanctioned Strength Men in Position 
Station Officer 115 112 
Assistant Station Officer 136 102 
Fire Man 2728 2230 
Leading Fire Man 479 455 
FDCPO 891 770 
Driver Mechanic 123 113 
 (Source: Records furnished by Fire and Rescue Headquarters) 
GOK needs to address the shortfall in manpower and even revise the 
sanctioned strength on merits keeping in view the mushrooming of big 
buildings to enhance the effectiveness of the Department in fire safety and 
prevention. It was stated (January 2017) by GOK that action was being taken 
on priority basis to sanction more posts.  
5.1.8.2 Status of Vehicles and equipment  
One of the key components for combating fire incidents effectively is 
adequacy and preparedness of fire fighting equi pment. To assess the 
requirements of fire station s in the State, the DG appointed a Committee 
(December 2015) which submitted a report.  We examined the availability of 
vehicles and equipment in 15 fire stations (eight urban, six semi-urban and one 
rural) with that of the requirement assessed by the Committee. The audit 
findings on the availability of equipment and vehicles are given below. 
Adequacy of Vehicles 
We noticed shortfall across all nine categories 76 of vehicles in the urban/semi-
urban/rural fire stations as against the requirement assessed by the Committee, 
which is shown in Table 5.3: 
  
                                                 
76 Mini Emergency Vehicle, Water Tender, Mini Water Tender, Ambulance, Recovery Vehicles, Water 
Bowser, Water Mist Bike, Multi Utility Vehicle and Mini Bus 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
82 
Table 5.3: Shortage of vehicles 
Sl. 
No. Item Required Available Shortage Percentage of 
shortage 
(a) Urban/Semi-urban fire stations 
1 Mini Water Tender77 28 12 16 57 
2 Ambulance  14 7 7 50 
3 Recovery Vehicles 14 4 10 71 
4 Water Bowser78 14 0 14 100 
5 Water Mist Bike 22 8 14 64 
6 Multi Utility Vehicle 15 3 12 80 
7 Mini Bus 8 0 8 100 
8 Water Tender 16 15 1 6 
(b) Rural fire station 
1 Mini Emergency Vehicle 1 0 1 100 
2 Water Bowser 1 0 1 100 
3 Water Mist Bike 1 0 1 100 
(Source: Details furnished by test checked fire stations) 
Shortfall of vehicles in urban/semi-urban fire stations ranged from six per cent 
(Water Tenders) to 100 per cent  (mini bus/water bowser). The lone79 test 
checked rural fire station was not provided with water bowser, water mist bike 
and mini emergency vehicle though it was eligible for the same. 
GOK replied (January 2017) that Administrative Sanction has since been 
accorded for `38.56 crore in 2016 -17 for procurement of vehicles and 
equipment and that tender procedures for purchase of water bowser had 
already commenced. 
Over-aged vehicles 
The Fire and Rescue Department was saddled with fire tenders and other 
vehicles which had out lived their utility. A s per SFAC guide lines, the 
maximum life span of a fire fighting vehicle is 5000 hours of operation or 10 
years whichever is earlier. Out of 655 vehicles in the Department as of March 
2016, as many as 286 vehicles (43.66 per cent) were more than 10 years old, 
which included 122 Mobile Tank Units (MTU), 29 Mini MTU, 11 Emergency 
Tenders80, four Crash Tenders and 21 Water Lorries. Sixty one of these 286 
vehicles were more than 20 years old.  
GOK stated (January 2017) that condemnation proc ess of over -aged and 
inefficient vehicles was being done by the Fire and Rescue Department 
regularly. It was also informed that since the purchase procedure of vehicles 
takes too much time, condemnation of old vehicles by considering the age of 
the vehicle alone was not practical. The purchase procedure of vehicles may 
be expedited to ensure quick procurement of vehicles and resultant 
enhancement of operational efficiency of Fire and Rescue Department. 
                                                 
77 Mini Water Tenders are primary fire fighting vehicles which can easily ply through narrow roads and 
reach remote areas of the State. 
78 Vehicle fitted with a pump at the rear is capable of carrying up to 16000 litres of water and is  suitable 
for fighting large fires. 
79 Mukkom fire station 
80 Emergency tenders are used to attend rescue operations. It consists of diff erent types of rescue 
equipment like Hydraulic tools, Oxy acetylene cutters, small gears, generators, ladders, rubber 
dinghies without onboard engine, ropes, chain saws, air lifting bags, breathing apparatus sets, lighting 
system, etc. 

 
 83 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
Response time of vehicles   
We test checked 2362 fire r eports of 14 test checked urban/ semi-urban fire 
stations for the year 2015 -16. It was seen that while 1880 (80 per cent) calls 
were attended to within the stipulated seven minutes as fixed by the One -man 
Commission, 400 calls (17 per cent ) were attended to within eight to 15 
minutes of reporting of the incidence of fire. While the large percentage of 
calls were timely attended to by the Department, we observed that efficiency 
could be increased further, if the recommendation of RMSI 81 to increase the 
number of fire stations from 121 to 228, which was also accepted by the One -
man Commission, was implemented by GOK. GOK stated (January 2017) that 
it was necessary to increase the number of fire stations to decrease the 
response time and that action was being tak en to identify the location s in 
which new fire stations were to be set up on priority basis. 
Insufficient Safety equipment for fire fighters 
Equipment like breathing apparatus, fire fighting suits and walkie talkie are 
essential life-saving equipment for fire fighters. We test checked the status of 
availability of these equipment in 15 Fire Stations vis-à-vis the norms fixed by 
the Committee constituted by the DG, Fire and Rescue Department. 
Significant shortfall of these essential equipment was noticed in test checked 
fire stations. While in urban and semi -urban fire stations, breathing apparatus 
was short by 82 per cent , there was shortfall in respect of fire fighting suits 
and walkie talkie by 91 and 83 per cent respectively. In the rural fire station, 
the situation was still grave as there was 100 per cent shortfall of fire fighting 
suits and walkie talkie and 60 per cent  shortfall of breathing apparatus. 
Subsequent to a major fire that occurred in Joy Alukkas showroom 82 at 
Ernakulam in March 2011, the Fire and Rescue Department had admitted that 
loss could have been minimi sed if they were equipped with sky lift, sufficient 
number of modern breathing apparatus sets and sufficient fire jackets. The Fire 
and Rescue Departme nt continuing (August 2016) to function without 
adequate safety equipment exposed the fire fighters to risk to life and also 
impacted the effectiveness of fire fighting activities.  
Laxity of the Fire and Rescue Department in making good the shortfall in 
equipment is serious when viewed against the fact that out of `22.50 crore 
received (October 2010) as one time grant from GOI for purchase of fire 
fighting equipment, the Department had spent only `13.26 crore as of March 
2016. We observed that the under ut ilisation of funds by the Fire and Rescue 
Department was due to administrative delay in procurement/tender 
finalisation. GOK stated (January 2017) that a detailed proposal for 
procurement of safety equipment with a total project cost of `65 crore has 
been submitted by the Department and that action was being taken to allot 
Budget provision for the same in the current year itself. 
Inability to fight fires in high rise buildings  
The Fire and Rescue Department recogni sed in April 2010 that it did not 
possess the capability to gain access to fire and do fire fighting and rescue 
                                                 
81 Risk Management Solutions Inc. appointed by the Director General, National Disaster Response Force 
and Civil Defence (Fire), Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India 
82 Now occupied by ‘Athira Gold and Silks’ 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
84 
operations occurring above the fourth floor in high rise  buildings. It was, 
therefore, proposed to procure Sky Lifts (Aerial Platform Ladder) to ga in 
access to fires occurring in high rise buildings where conventional ladders 
were not able to reach. The RMSI had also reco mmended one Hydraulic 
Platform/Aerial Platform Ladder (APL)/Turn Table Ladder (TTL) per district 
depending upon the presence of high rise buildings (more than 15 metre high). 
We noticed that though Administrative Sanction (AS) was is sued by GOK in 
October 2010 and Rupees six crore released specifically for procurement of a 
Sky Lift, the DG could finali se the technical specifications a nd issue e -tender 
only after more than four years in December 2014. However, there was no 
response to the e-tender. In December 2015, the DG requested GOK to accord 
sanction to procure a TTL instead of an APL. Despite GOK according 
(January 2016) revised AS (`9.24 crore) to purchase a TTL, the DG was yet to 
initiate procurement procedure. Meanwhile, the DG submitted a fresh proposal 
(May 2016) to GOK for purchase of five TTL having height of 60 metres for 
five districts ( Ernakulam, Kollam, Kozhikode , Thiruvananthapuram and 
Thrissur) and two APL having height of 45 metres.  
Due to failure of the DG to make timely assessment of requirements and 
specifications, the Sky Lift/TTL was yet to be procured and the Fire and 
Rescue Department lacked equipment capable o f fighting fires in high rise 
buildings. We observed that Fire and Rescue Department recognised that the 
loss of material worth `60 crore stocked in a building 83 during a fire incident 
in 2011 could have been minimised, had it been equipped with Sky Lift. T hus, 
failure of the Fire and Rescue Department to procure the equipment despite 
availability of funds has adversely affected its capability to fight fires in high 
rise buildings.  
5.1.9 Monitoring and Inspection 
5.1.9.1 Short fall in periodical inspections 
Systematic an d periodical inspection of fire fighting systems in high rise 
buildings, educational institutions and assembly buildings is essential to 
ensure continued proper maintenance of fire safety installations and fire safety 
standards in the buildings as envisage d in National Building Code /KMBR/ 
KPBR. As per orders of DG (June 2012), the DO and the ADO should inspect 
four and six buildings respectively in a month (preferably commercial, 
educational and assembly buildings) and the Station Officers should inspect at 
least 10 buildings in a month and  advise the custodian of the building to get 
the defects rectified and report to Headquarters with a compliance report. 
In the absence of proper records connected with inspection in the test checked 
units, we issued enquiries to three DOs, five ADOs and 15  fire stations. The 
details furnished by the officers revealed that inspections as prescribed were 
not carried out at any level except by Station Officer, Thrissur for two months 
(August 2012 and September 2012) and by Station Officer, Chamakkada for 
three months (August, September and October 2012). We also noticed that no 
monitoring was done at the DG’s level in this regard. The short fall in 
                                                 
83 Joy Alukkas showroom in Ernakulam 

 
 85 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
conducting inspection was in the range of 93 per cent to 100 per cent in the 
test checked DOs/ADOs/Fire Stations.  
During joint physical verification in six buildings in which major fire 
accidents occurred during July 2010 to April 2016, we observed that there was 
no documentary evidence of periodical inspections carried out by the Fire and 
Rescue Department prior to such incidents. No reports/returns based on 
periodical inspections were found available  at 21 test checked  units84. The 
joint verification conducted by us revealed that fire fighting installations in 
buildings continued to be either absent or defective as d etailed in the  
Table 5.4.  
Table 5.4: Buildings affected by major fire - Defective fire fighting 
installations 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of building/ 
fire station 
Date of 
occurrence 
of fire 
Loss  
(` in crore) 
Major deficiencies noticed during joint 
verification 
1 
Joy Alukkas 
Showroom 
(Presently occupied 
by Athira Gold and 
Silks)/Club Road, 
Ernakulam 
26.03.2011 60.00 
 Fire Extinguishers were time expired 
 No water in the line pipe  
 Ducts and shafts not easily visible being fixed 
inside the ‘trial room’ and ‘toilets’  
 Electric connection to fire pumps disconnected 
and alternate source of power not connected to 
fire pumps 
 No electric connection for Control panel  
 Fire escape staircase ended at the first floor and 
was blocked by dumping old articles. Refuge area 
at the top floor was closed and used as dining hall 
by the staff 
2 KRS Godown/ 
Thiruvananthapuram 21.11.2011 1.45  Fixed or portable installations including  fire 
extinguishers were not available 
3 
Kotak Mahindra 
Bank, Althara/ 
Thiruvananthapuram 
23.04.2011 0.15  No provisions other than portable extinguishers 
were available 
4 
 
Big Bazaar/ 
Thiruvananthapuram 
 
13.11.2015 5.22 
 Fire lifts were not available 
 Emergency escape lightings were not available 
 Access to fire ducts and escape staircase blocked 
5 KRS Godown/ 
Thrissur 25.07.2010 3.35  No fixed or portable installations including fire 
extinguishers  
6 Lulu Gold/  
Kozhikode Beach 24.04.2016 1.68 
 Escape staircase was locked 
 Emergency lightings, smoke detector and fire 
alarm panel not installed 
(Source: Joint verification reports) 
In respect of three buildings , there were either no NOCs or NOCs were not 
renewed. Thus, even buildings in which major fire ac cidents occurred 
continued to function without proper fire safety installations. 
GOK replied (January 2017) that the absence of provision for periodic 
inspections in KMBR/KPBR, inadequacy of manpower in officer cadre and 
                                                 
84 21 out of 23 test checked, except Thrissur and Chamakkada Fire Stations 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
86 
absence of Fire Prevention wing in the Department had delayed 
implementation of instructions issued during inspections.  
5.1.10 Conclusion 
As the new Kerala Fire Force Act was not enacted as per NDMA guidelines, 
there were no enabling provisions empowering the Fire and Rescue 
Department to proceed legally and impose penalty on perpetrators of fire 
safety violations. In the absence of Rules, the activities of the Fire and Rescue 
Department were regulated by standing orders issued by the DG which did not 
possess statutory backing. 
GOK did not issue appropriate notifications resulting in inability of officers of 
the Fire and Rescue Department to conduct inspections legally , to discharge 
their duties effectively  and to ensure the availability of fire safety 
arrangements. Joint verification by us revealed deficiencies in compliance to 
fire safety standards, thereby exposing the buildings to grave threat of fire  
accidents. Failure of GOK to adopt good practices as prescribed in National 
Building Code led to non-inclusion of such provisions in the KMBR, to ensure 
safety of life and property of people. 
Fire fighters were also exposed to risk due to shortage of safety equipment like 
breathing apparatus, fire fighting suits and walkie talkies. In the absence of 
equipment like APL and TTL, the Fire and Rescue Department was not 
capable of conducting rescue operations beyond the fourth floor of high rise 
buildings in the State. 
The failure of GOK in ensuring the above aspects of fire protection and 
prevention has put the life and property of people at risk. 
FAILURE OF OVERSIGHT/ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROLS 
 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
 
5.2 Misappropriation of funds in Government TD Medical 
College, Alappuzha 
Failure of supervisory authorities to exercise stipulated checks and laxity 
of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer in complying with the codal 
provisions relating to maintenance of Cash Book resulted in 
misappropriation of `17.20 lakh in Government TD Medic al College, 
Alappuzha. 
Rule 92 (a) (ii) of Kerala Treasury Code (KTC) Volume I stipulates that 
all monetary transactions should be entered in the Cash Book as soon as 
they occur and attested by the Head of the Office in token of check. While 
Rule 92 (a) (iv) of the KTC requires the Head of the Office to verify the 
Cash Book at the end of each month and record a signed and dated 
certificate to that effect, Rule 131 (a) also stipulates that the contents of 
cash chest shall be counted by the Head of the Offic e or under his orders 
by the subordinate Gazetted Officer at the close of business on each 
working day and verified with book balance. A memorandum of 

 
 87 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
verification shall be signed and dated by the Government servant who 
counted the cash and abstracts of ca sh balances with denominations 
recorded. The Director of Medical Education (DME) being the Head of 
the Department, was bound to follow the directions (June 2005) issued by 
the Government of Kerala (GOK) for ensuring that the internal audit 
wing functioned systematically, effectively and promptly. 
In the Government Tirumala Devaswom Medical College, Alappuzha (TD 
Medical College), while the Principal was the Head of the Office, the 
Senior Administrative Officer was the Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
(DDO). B esides other responsibilities, the DDO was also entrusted with 
the responsibility to verify and attest the entries in the Cash Book, 
subsidiary registers, acquittance rolls, contingent registers, vouchers, etc., 
including verification of cash. 
During the course of audit (November 2015), it was noticed that the total 
of the entries in the payments side of the  Cash Book was overstated on 
10 June 2015 by `1000 and the cash balance was short accounted to that 
extent and carried forward. It was also noticed that  the Senior Clerk, 
Junior Superintendent and the DDO had certified in the Cash Book that 
the balance in the cash chest as on the day, agreed with the balance as per 
the Cash Book, leaving no excess cash. A detailed examination of the 
entries made in the Cash Book for the period April 2014 to October 2015, 
revealed the following lapses. 
 entries in the Cash Book were erased/scored off and rewritten 
entries were not attested by the DDO with dated initials; 
 entries were originally made and daily totals and cash  balance 
recorded and subsequently, entries were scored off thereby 
causing mismatch between recorded daily totals and actual 
totals;  
 cash balances were certified by the DDO without ensuring 
correctness of individual daily entries with supporting original  
vouchers, which resulted in failure to detect the 
misappropriation; 
 variations in receipt and payment totals ranging from `200 to 
`56,049 were noticed during the period from April 2014 to 
October 2015; 
 though individual transactions were entered correctly, the receipt 
and payment totals respectively were understated or overstated 
and the deficit amount was not available in the cash chest in 
order to tally with the incorrect cash balance as recorded in the 
cash book. While the total figures on the receipts side were 
understated on six occasions, expenditure totals were overstated 
on 16 occasions thereby reducing the progressive cash balance by 
`1.79 lakh (Appendix 5.2);  
 a joint physical verification of cash conducted on 23 November 
2015 confirmed no surplus cash in the cash chest, establishing the 
misappropriation of `1.79 lakh; 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
88 
 Internal Audit of DME conducted in May 2015 failed to notice 
the misappropriation. 
After the matter was pointed out during audit, the Principal of the TD 
Medical College suspended (November 2015) the Junior Superintendent 
and Senior Clerk dealing with cash. Besides, the DME ordered (December 
2015) a departmental inquiry into the alleged misappropriation of 
Government money. The inquiry, covering the period from March 2012 
to November 2015, revealed misappropriation of `17.20 lakh. We, 
however, observed that no action was initiated against the DDO despite 
his failure to discharge his mandated supervisory responsibilities. 
Thus, non -observance of codal provisions and supervisory lapses in 
ensuring periodical checks and controls resulted in misappropriation of 
`17.20 lakh in TD Medical College. Had the DDO ensured the correctness 
of individual entries by cross verifying them with the vouchers of daily 
receipts and payments and checked arithmetical accuracy of cash balance 
by totalling of daily entries, the misappropriation could have been 
avoided.  
GOK, while responding (November 2016) to the audit observations stated 
that it had directed DME to reassess the loss sustained by the Department 
on account of the misappropriation and that further action would be 
taken on receipt of the report of DME. GOK also informed that the 
suspended officers had  admitted to inadvertent omission in entering 
certain amounts in the cash book. 
The response of the GOK was not tenable as the misappropriation of 
Government funds has taken place due to systematic and intentional 
efforts of the officials at fault which cannot be termed as inadvertent. 
Moreover, the GOK’s reply has also failed to expl ain the delay of more 
than one year in taking appropriate action against the delinquent 
officials. As such, we recommend the GOK to take disciplinary action 
against all the defaulting officials including the DDO, as per relevant 
conduct rules governing the ir service, for their failure to perform their 
assigned duties. Further, the GOK may also ensure that the system and 
procedures are followed strictly to guard against the occurrence of such 
happenings in future.  
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
5.3 Fraudulent drawal of remuneration for valuation 
Violation of  prescribed procedure by the Finance Officer, Mahatma 
Gandhi University in payment of remuneration to examiners for  
valuation of answer scripts led to a fraudulent drawal of `11.26 lakh. 
Examiners of the Mahat ma Gandhi University ( MGU) were paid 
remuneration for valuation of answer scripts done by them. As per MGU 
Circular (July 2013), the Camp Officers of valuation camps had to submit 
claims of examiners along with their State Bank of Travancore (SBT) 

 
 89 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
account numbers for effecting direct payment of remuneration  to the 
examiners.  
We observed from the scrutiny of records that, t he Camp Officer of 
School of Technology and Applied Science (STAS), Pathanamthitta , 
requested (October 2015) the Finance Officer of the MGU to issue  him a 
cheque for payment of remuneration to the examiners, on the plea that 
most of the examiners did not have bank accounts with the SBT . The 
Finance Officer agreed (October 2015) to the request of the Camp Officer  
and issued cheque for `22.17 lakh in favour of the Camp Officer for 
further disbursement to the examiners. 
After disbursement, the Camp Officer submitted  Contingent bill s 
claiming that 1,54,323 answer scripts were examined at the camp and a 
payment of `22.17 lakh was made to the examiners.  
As a result of  cross check of the claim contained in the Contingent bills 
with the stock/bundle register85 maintained at the camp, we observed that 
only 1,01,974 answer scripts and  not 1,54,323 answer scripts were 
evaluated at the camp. 
We observed that the Camp Officer had inflated the number of answer 
scripts by 52,349 numbers in the Contingent bills submitted by him and 
made an additional claim of `11.26 lakh which was not disbursed to the 
examiners. 
Consequent to our audit finding (June 2016) , the MGU placed the Camp 
Officer and a Section Officer (currently Assistant Registrar (Exams)) 
under suspension (July 2016)  who were responsible for submission and 
passing of the claim respectively . The V ice Chancellor , MGU stated 
(December 2016) that in addition to the Departmental inquiry being 
conducted by MGU, the matter ha d been reported to the State Vigilance 
and Anti-Corruption Bureau which had registered a case in this regard. 
We, however, observed that no action had been initiated against the 
Finance Officer, who was primarily responsible for violating the orders of 
the MGU, by agreeing to the request of the Camp Officer for payment 
through cheque, which enabled the Camp Officer to defraud `11.26 lakh. 
  
                                                 
85 Bundle register is a register containing number of answer scripts in each answer book bundle with 
question paper code 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
90 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT 
 
5.4 Loss of rent due to defective lease agreement  
A portion of Travancore House in New Delhi was leased out to State Bank 
of Travancore on the basis of ‘carpet area’ instead of ‘plinth area’ 
resulting in loss of `3.68 crore to GOK.  
As per the instructions 86 issued by Public Works and Transport Department, 
Government of Kerala (GOK), the plinth area of a building is to be taken into 
account while calculating the rent.  
The Travancore House, New Delhi, is a property of GOK. GOK accorded 
sanction (August 1994) t o let out a portion of the Travancore House to the 
State Bank of Travancore (SBT) for setting up its Branch. Subsequently, in 
February 1995, GOK, through its Special Representative entered into an 
agreement with the SBT to let out an area of 3370 Sq.ft ‘ca rpet area 87’ for a 
period of three years from 01 September 1994 at a mutually agreed rate of `50 
per Sq.ft per month.  
We noticed that during the period between 1994 (first year of lease) and 2015 
(year of termination of lease), the Resident Commissioner, Kerala House, New 
Delhi (RC), who was in charge  of the Travancore House, had executed 
agreement with SBT only twice, in February 1995 (covering the period from 
01 September 1994 to 30 September 1997) and June 2008 (covering the period 
from 01 October 2005 t o 30 September 2011) specifying carpet area as the 
basis for calculation of rent. As there was no agreement in place during the 
intervening period, rates of rent 88 were fixed vide Government Orders on the 
basis of mutual consensus between GOK and SBT. There  were disputes 
between GOK and SBT on the extent of area actually occupied by SBT and 
the rate of rent to be levied. However , SBT continued to operate from the 
premises of Travancore House till its vacation on 31 October 2015, as 
negotiations with GOK were  going on for determining the extent of area 
occupied and rate of rent payable by them. 
With a view to confirm the area in actual possession of SBT, a joint 
measurement was conducted (August 2013) by a team comprising the 
technical staff of Kerala House, N ew Delhi and SBT which determined that 
the plinth area occupied by SBT was 4808.47 Sq.ft. Consequently GOK 
refixed (September 2014) the area occupied by SBT as 4808.47 Sq.ft and 
                                                 
86 GO (Ms) No. 16/95/PW&T dated 09 March 1995 
87 The lease agreement between GOK and SBT specified 'floor area' of 3370  Sq.ft as the basis for 
reckoning of rent which corresponded to ‘carpet area’ as per joint measurement undertaken 
(September 1994) by the Assistant Engineer, Kerala House and the Deputy Manager (Engineering), 
SBT 
88 Rent rates mutually agreed upon between GOK and SBT from time to time: `62.50 per Sq.ft from 
01/10/1997 to 30/09/2000; `75 per Sq.ft from 01/10/2000 to 30/09/2005; `93.75 per Sq.ft for 3562 
Sq.ft of carpet area from 01/10/2005 to 30/09/2008; `117.18 per Sq .ft for 4074.26 Sq.ft area from 
01/10/2008 to 30/09/2011; Rate of `150 per Sq.ft on plinth area of 4808.47 Sq.ft claimed by GOK 
from 1/10/2011 till date of vacation was not accepted by SBT 

 
 91 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
calculated rent on the basis of plinth area at the revised rate of `150 per Sq.ft89 
(`7,21,33090 per month) from 01 October 201191.  
It was further noticed that the GOK requested SBT (November 2015) to remit 
the short payment of rent on the basis of plinth area, for the entire period of 
occupation from 01  September 1994 till the date of vacation of the premises 
by the SBT i.e. upto 31 O ctober 2015. The SBT informed RC (April 2016) 
that payment of lease rent was made by the bank in compliance with the terms 
specified in the agreements executed with GOK and that it had already paid 
the entire rent in accordance with the agreements. Further , the SBT contested 
the Government Order (September 2014) which reckoned the plinth area as 
4808.47 Sq.ft instead of earlier carpet area for fixing of rent. The decision of 
GOK to fix the rent based on carpet area instead of plinth area resulted in a 
loss of `3.68 crore as shown in Table 5.5.  
Table 5.5: Loss of rent 
Period 
Carpet 
area 
reckoned 
for 
assessing 
rent 
(in Sq.ft) 
Rent 
calculated 
by 
reckoning 
carpet area 
(in `) 
Plinth area 
to be 
reckoned 
for 
assessing 
rent 
(in Sq.ft) 
Rent 
calculated 
by 
reckoning 
plinth area 
(in `) 
Amount of 
loss 
(in `) 
September 1994 to March 1995 3370.00 11,79,500 4808.47 16,82,964 5,03,464 
April 1995 to September 1997 3370.00 50,55,000 4808.47 72,12,705 21,57,705 
October 1997 to September 2000 3370.00 75,82,500 4808.47 1,08,19,057 32,36,557 
October 2000 to September 2005 3370.00 1,51,65,000 4808.47 2,16,38,115 64,73,115 
October 2005 to September 2008 3562.00 1,20,21,750 4808.47 1,62,28,586 42,06,836 
October 2008 to September 2011 4074.26 1,71,87,184 4808.47 2,02,84,435 30,97,251 
October 2011 to October 2015 4074.26 1,81,60,800 4808.47 3,53,42,254 1,71,81,454 
Loss to GOK 3,68,56,382 
(Source: Lease agreements/letters of correspondence between SBT and GOK) 
We observed as under from the scrutiny of records: 
 though the rent was to be fixed based on plinth area as per PWD 
instruction (March 1995) , the measurement was made based on the 
wrong advice of the Assistant Engineer, Kerala House to reckon 
‘carpet area’ during the first joint measurement (February 1994); 
 the General Administration Department (GAD), while referring the 
original draft agreement to the Law and Finance Departments, failed 
to seek the opinion of the Public Works Department (PWD) which 
was the authority to determine the plinth area and fix rent.  
Thus, GOK had sustained a loss of `3.68 crore due to faulty execution of the 
agreement with SBT on the basis of the carpet area instead of plinth area, in 
violation of stipulated PWD norms. 
                                                 
89 The then existing rate of New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) 
90 RC arrived at the figure by wrongly reckoning plinth area as 4808.87 Sq.ft instead of 4808.47 Sq.ft 
(4808.87 x 150 = 721330.50)  
91 Date from which a n ew lease period was to commence on  the expiry of  the earlier lease period on 
30 September 2011 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
92 
The GOK replied (December 2016) that a meeting was held with the SBT and 
RC on 21 December 2016, which failed to resolve the issue. We observed that 
wrong action taken at various levels had resulted in loss of `3.68 crore to 
GOK which needs fixing of responsibility. 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
5.5 Unfruitful expenditure on a recording theatre 
A recording theatre constructed and fully equipped at a cost of 
`1.48 crore remained idle since August 2011 due to failure of Government 
of Kerala to engage technical and administrative staff.  
The Government of Kerala (GOK), as a part of revamping of music colleges 
of Kerala, accorded Administrative Sanction (March 2009) for setting up of a 
recording theatre in Sri Swathi  Thirunal College of Music, 
Thiruvananthapuram (SSTMC) under the Directorate of Collegiate Education, 
at a cost of Rupees one crore which was revised to `1.31 crore (August 2009). 
It was envisaged that students of performing arts could learn the techniques of 
eminent artists and record the programmes for their future reference. The work 
was executed through the Public Works Department (PWD) and completed 
(August 2011) at a total cost of `1.48 crore. 
We observed that though the recording theatre was fully equipped with video -
audio recording facilities and e diting machines, the theatre could not be put to 
use due to failure of the Higher Education Department to engage skilled 
personnel like sound engineer, engineering assistant and cameraman besides 
office and administrative staff. We also noticed that even t hough the theatre 
work was completed in August 2011, proposal for manpower was submitted to 
GOK by the Principal, SSTMC only after a lapse of more than one year 
(December 2012). Though the Principal, SSTMC reminded (January  2015 and 
January 2016) the GOK to provide manpower, the GOK was yet to respond 
(January 2017). In the meantime, the warranty period of one year of the 
electronic equipment had expired and the Principal, SSTMC reported (January 
2016) to the Director, Collegiate Education that the costly electronic 
equipment was getting damaged in the absence of trained personnel to 
operate it.  
Thus, the failure of GOK to engage technical and administrative personnel led 
to the recording studio costing `1.48 crore remaining idle for a period of fou r 
years besides denial of facility to the students of the college. SSTMC also 
incurred an expenditure of `1.64 lakh on the non -functional studio towards 
minimum fixed electricity charges payable to the Kerala State Electricity 
Board during the period May 2015 to June 2016. 
While accepting audit observation, GOK stated (September 2016) that the 
proposal to create posts to manage the equipment was under its consideration. 
  

 
 93 
Chapter V – Compliance Audit 
WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT 
 
5.6 Unproductive expenditure on work due to non -availability 
of adequate land 
Contrary to the directions of K erala Water Authority, tenders were 
invited for a water supply scheme without ensuring physical possession of 
adequate land, resulting in unproductive expenditure of `4.18 crore, 
besides denial of potable water to the targeted population. 
The Kerala Water Authority (Powers of Employees) Regulations , 1999 
provided unlimited powers to the Superintending Engineer (SE) who is 
responsible for inviting tenders and execution of agreements. The Kerala 
Water Authority (KWA) directed its officers (July 2001 and reiterated in 
September 2008) not to tender any work unless the entire land required for 
completion of the scheme was in complete physical possession of KWA. Land 
for Water Supply Schemes was to be made available to KWA by the 
respective Grama Panchayaths (GP) free of cost. 
Government of Kerala (GOK) accorded Administrative Sanction  (December 
1995) for ‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply Scheme (ARWSS) to Veliyannoor 
and adjoining villages – Phase-II’ for `6.50 crore which was subsequently 
revised to `9.50 crore in April 2003. The project was intended to supply water 
to Njeezhoor, Kuravilangad and part s of Kaduthuruthy villag es. Package -I 
included laying of pipelines for supply of water to the Sump and connectivity 
from the Sump to Overhead Service Reservoir ( OHSR) at Oleekkamala while 
Package-II work included construction of 74,000 litre capacity Sump cum 
Pump house at Thottu va and construction of five lakh litre capacity OHSR at 
Oleekkamala. 
Tenders for Package -I and Package -II were invited by SE in January and 
March 2009 respectively. Package-I work was awarded (July 2009) for `4.06 
crore and the work was completed (except f or some gap bridging work) at a 
cost of `4.18 crore (April 2013). The work on Package -II was awarded (July 
2009) for `4.11 crore for completion within nine months from the date of 
work order.  
We, however, observed that the Package -II work was yet to be co mpleted due 
to failure of KWA to ensure physical possession of adequate suitable land as 
shown below: 
 Against a minimum 400 m 2 land required for construction of a five 
lakh litre capacity OHSR, the Kuravilangad GP handed over to KWA 
only 304 m2 of land atop a hill with no approach.  
 Land measuring 20 m2 handed over to the KWA by the Kuravilangad 
GP for construction of Sump cum Pump house at Thottuva , was 
occupied by its own pump house for another scheme which needed to 
be relocated. 
As the required land cou ld not be handed over to the contractor even after 33 
months of completion of pipe laying works, the SE ordered (March 2013) to 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
94 
terminate the contract exempting the contractor from carrying out construction 
of OHSR and Sump.  
The action of the SE in execut ing the work of laying pipelines at a cost of 
`4.18 crore under Package -I and his failure in not taking up work on the 
construction of the Sump and OHSR under Package -II due to inadequacy of 
land resulted in non-completion of the water supply scheme and depriving the 
beneficiaries of potable water. 
GOK confirmed (September 2016) that after taking pos session of 304 m 2 land 
for overhead tank, rubber plantation was grown in adjoining lands which 
resulted in lack of motorable access to the land. Also , an existing pump house 
in the 20 m 2 land handed over to KWA was not relocated by the GP resulting 
in inability to proceed with the construction of the sump. GOK further stated 
that based on the proposal of KWA, a project for undertaking the incomplete 
work has si nce been approved (February 2016) for `5.13 crore by the State 
Level Scheme Sanctioning Council. 
Reply of GOK was not acceptable in view of the fact that KWA, instead of 
learning from past mistakes, continued to seek and obtain approval from GOK 
and proposed work without ensuring physical possession of adequate suitable 
land. 
 (C. GOPINATHAN) 
Thiruvananthapuram, Principal Accountant General 
The (General and Social Sector Audit), Kerala 
Countersigned 
New Delhi, (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


 
 
  
APPENDICES 

 
 

 
 
Appendices 
95 
Appendix 1.1 
Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) as on 30 June 2016 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7.1; Page: 8) 
Year Up to 
2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 Total 
SCHEDULED CASTES DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
No. of IRs 42 40 91 131 136 440 
No. of paragraphs 117 65 230 393 641 1446 
No. of IRs for which initial reply 
has not been received (no. of 
paragraphs) 
12 (53) 5 (17) 17 (61) 40 (173) 97 (387) 171 
(691) 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
No. of IRs 133 22 83 87 91 416 
No. of paragraphs 414 39 236 323 363 1375 
No. of IRs for which initial reply 
has not been received (no. of 
paragraphs) 
17 (62) 2 (15) 19 (83) 30 (144) 69 (288) 137 
(592) 
LABOUR AND REHABILITATION DEPARTMENT 
No. of IRs 23 5 8 10 4 50 
No. of paragraphs 64 21 46 67 38 236 
No. of IRs for which initial reply 
has not been received (no. of 
paragraphs) 
- - - - - - 
PLANNING AND ECONOMIC AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT 
No. of IRs 5 - 1 1 - 7 
No. of paragraphs 14 - 6 9 - 29 
No. of IRs for which initial reply 
has not been received (no. of 
paragraphs) 
- - - - - - 
 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
96 
Appendix 1.2 
Details of Statements of Action Taken pending as of September 2016 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7.3; Page: 8) 
Sl. 
No. Department 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total 
1  General Education - - 1 1 2 
2  Health and Family Welfare - - 4 1 5 
3  Health and Family Welfare, 
Higher Education - - 1 - 1 
4  Higher Education - - - 2 2 
5  Home - 1 - - 1 
6  Housing - - 1 - 1 
7  Local Self Government - - - 1 1 
8  Scheduled Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes Development 1 - - 1 2 
9  Social Justice - - - 1 1 
10  Water Resources - 3 1 3 7 
 TOTAL 1 4 8 10 23 
 
  

 
 97 
Appendices 
Appendix 1.3 
Statement showing the details of paragraphs pending discussion by the Public 
Accounts Committee as of September 2016 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7.4; Page: 8) 
Sl. 
No. Department 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 Total 
1  Cultural Affairs - - 1 - 1 
2  General Education - 2 1 1 4 
3  Health and Family Welfare - - 5 1 6 
4  Higher Education - - - 2 2 
5  Home - 1 - - 1 
6  Housing - - 1 - 1 
7  Information Technology - - 1 - 1 
8  Labour and Rehabilitation - - 1 - 1 
9  Local Self Government - - - 1 1 
10  Revenue - 4 - 3 7 
11  Social Justice - - - 1 1 
12  Sports and Youth Affairs - 1 - - 1 
13  Scheduled Castes/Scheduled 
Tribes Development 1 - 1 1 3 
14  Water Resources - 4 1 3 8 
 TOTAL 1 12 12 13 38 
 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
98 
Appendix 2.1 
List of Corporations and Companies, Societies and Local Authorities in respect 
of which Recruitment Rules do not exist 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.1.2; Page: 13) 
1. Kerala Automobiles Limited 
2. Kerala Hi-Tech Industries Limited 
3. Kerala State Ex-servicemen Development and Rehabilitation Corporation 
(KEXCON) 
4. Kerala State Maritime Development Corporation 
5. Kerala State Pollution Control Board 
6. Kerala State Textiles Corporation Limited 
7. Kerala State Warehousing Corporation 
8. Kerala State Wood Industries Limited 
9. Kerala Transport Development Finance Corporation Limited (KTDFC) 
10. Sitaram Textiles Limited 
11. Travancore Cements Limited 
12. The Kerala State Co-operative Marketing Federation Limited 
13. The Kerala Co-operative Textile Federation 
14. The Kerala Kera Karshaka Sahakarana Federation Limited 
15. The Kerala State Federation of SC/ST Development Co-operative Society 
16. State Institute of Encyclopaedic Publications (Kerala) Society 
17. State Institute of Languages (Kerala) Society 
18. The Kerala State Cashew Workers Apex Industrial Co-operative Society 
Limited 
19. Kerala Fishermen Welfare Fund Board 
20. State Institute of Children’s Literature (Kerala) Society 
21. Kerala Clay and Ceramics Products Limited 
22. Kerala Feeds Limited 
23. Kerala State Bamboo Corporation Limited 
24. Kerala State Development Corporation for Christian Converts from SC and 
other recommended communities 
25. Meat Products of India Limited 
26. Metal Industries Limited 
27. Oil Palm India Limited 
28. The Kerala State Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank 
Limited 
29. The Kerala State Co-operative Coir Marketing Federation Limited 
30. Kerala State Poultry Development Corporation Limited 
31. Kerala State Backward Classes Development Corporation Limited 
32. Kerala State Co-operative Rubber Marketing Federation Limited 
33. Kerala Asbestos Cement Pipe Factory Limited 
34. Kerala School Teachers and Non-Teaching Staff Welfare Corporation 
Limited 
35. Kerala State Handicapped Persons Welfare Corporation Limited 
36. Kerala State Salicylates and Chemicals Limited 
37. Metropolitan Engineering Company Limited 
38. Sidkel Television Limited 
39. The Chalakudy Potteries Limited 
40. Kerala Coir Workers Welfare Fund Board 
41. Trivandrum Development Authority 
  

 
 99 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.2 
Status of framing of Recruitment Rules in selected Corporations and 
Companies, Co-operative Societies 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.1.2; Page: 13) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Institution  Administrative 
Department 
Date of  bringing 
under the purview 
of KPSC 
Details of advice by KPSC/status of framing of 
Recruitment Rules 
1 
Kerala State 
Warehousing 
Corporation  
Agriculture 
Department 
GO (MS) 129/71/PD 
dated 11.05.1971 
KPSC rendered advice for framing of rules as early 
as in November 1985. However , framing of Special 
Rules is pending with the Government.  
2 Kerala State Bamboo 
Corporation Ltd. 
Industries 
Department 
GO (MS) 13/93/ 
P&ARD dated 
03.02.1993 
The Institution sought advice of  KPSC for drafting 
of Recruitment Rules in January 1997. KPSC 
rendered advice in March 1997 to prepare and 
submit the draft rules. However , the matter is 
pending with the Administrative Department.  
31 vacancies were reported in February 2013, but 
the selection was not conducted due to non -framing 
of Special Rules. 
3 
Kerala State Co -
operative Coir 
Marketing 
Federation (Coirfed) 
Industries 
Department 
GO (P) 41/98/Co -op 
dated 09.03.1998 
The MD, Coirfed submitted the draft rules to KPSC 
for advice in December 1999.  KPSC agreed to the 
draft rules with some modifications in February 
2010. However, the Rules are yet to be finali sed by 
the Government. 
4 
Kerala Transport 
Development 
Finance Corporation 
Transport 
Department 
GO (MS)  13/2010/ 
P&ARD dated 
05.04.2010 
The KPSC addressed the Government (Transport 
Department) for framing of Special Rules in 
October 2012. KPSC issued reminder  to 
Government in April 2013 and  addressed the 
Company on 19 October 2015.  The Company 
informed (31 October 2015) KPSC that it had 
submitted the draft rules to the Government in 
March 2014. However, Government is yet to submit 
the draft Rules to KPSC.  
5 Oil Palm India Ltd.  Agriculture 
Department 
GO (MS) 13/93/ 
P&ARD dated 
03.02.1993 
KPSC rendered (March 1996) advice to the 
Company to submit the draft Rules and also to the 
Government in July 2000. KPSC suggested some 
modifications in March 2016 and advised to 
forward the Rules approved by the  Government. 
However, the Rules are y et to be finali sed by 
Government. 
6 
Kerala State Poultry 
Development 
Corporation  
Animal 
Husbandry 
Department 
GO (P) 43/2010/ 
P&ARD dated 
28.12.2010 
Government submitted the draft Rules in May 20 11 
to KPSC for advice. KPSC sought (March 2012) 
some clarifications and Government resubmitted the 
Rules. KPSC agreed to the Rules with some 
modifications in June 2014.  However, Government 
is yet to finalise the Special Rules.  
7 
Kerala State Cashew 
Workers Apex 
Industrial Co -
operative Society 
(CAPEX)  
Industries 
Department 
GO (P)  41/98/Co-op 
dated 09.03.1998 
KPSC rendered advice for framing of Rules for all 
categories in September 1998 to the MD  and 
addressed the Government in June 2004 regarding 
the status of the draft Rules.  KPSC again rendered 
advice in May 2010 to submit the draft Rules. 
Government in July 2014  constituted a committee 
for the purpose. However , Government is yet to 
submit the draft Rules/finalise the Rules. 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
100 
Sl. 
No. Name of Institution  Administrative 
Department 
Date of  bringing 
under the purview 
of KPSC 
Details of advice by KPSC/status of framing of 
Recruitment Rules 
8 
Kerala State Co -
operative Marketing 
Federation 
(MARKETFED)  
Co-operation 
Department 
GO (P) 41/98/Co-op 
dated 09.03.1998 
The KPSC rendered advice to MD,  for framing of 
Rules in May 1998 and to the Government in May 
2005. Government submitted the draft Rules to 
KPSC in March 2009.  The KPSC  agreed 
(November 2009) to the draft Rules with some 
modifications. However , Government is yet to 
finalise the Rules.  
9 
State Institute of 
Children’s Literature  
(Kerala) Society  
Cultural Affairs 
Department 
GO (P) 35/99/CAD 
dated 18.08.1999 
KPSC rendered advice to the Director in September 
2003 for framing of Recruitment Rules. However , 
Government is yet to submit the draft Rules/finalise 
the Rules. 
10 
State Institute of 
Encyclopaedic 
Publications (Kerala) 
Society  
Cultural Affairs 
Department 
GO (P) 35/99/CAD 
dated 18.08.1999 
The KPSC rendered advice to the Director in March 
2004 and to the Government in February 2006 for 
framing of Rules. Government informed (November 
2011) KPSC that the draft Special Rules submitted 
to the Subject Committee had  been returned for 
resubmission in the prescribed format and 
Government assured that the same would be 
forwarded to KPSC soon. However Government is  
yet to submit the approved draft Rules/finali se the 
Rules. 
11 
State Institute of 
Languages (Kerala) 
Society  
Cultural Affairs 
Department 
GO (P)  35/99/CAD 
dated 18.08.1999 
KPSC rendered advice to the Director for framing 
of Rules in June 2000 and also to the Government in 
January 2008. However , Government is yet to 
submit the draft Rules/finalise the Rules. 
 
  

 
 101 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.3 
Selected cases of delay in reporting of fresh vacancies by 
Government Departments and Companies 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.2.1; Page: 14) 
Sl. 
No. 
Department/ 
Institution Name of Post No. of 
vacancies 
Date of 
occurrence of 
vacancies 
Date of 
reporting of 
vacancies 
Time taken 
for 
reporting 
1 Director of Public 
Instruction 
Part Time Junior 
Language Teacher 
(Arabic) reserved 
for SC/ST 
1 01.1986  03.07.1995 > 9 years 
2 Director of Public 
Instruction 
Full Time Junior 
Language Teacher 
(Arabic) for SC/ST 
2 01.1989 27.09.1995 > 6 years 
3 
Kerala State Drugs 
and Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. 
Driver Grade II 1 02.08.2006  
04.06.2012/ 
06.11.2012 
(revised) 
> 5 years 
4 
Principal Chief 
Conservator of 
Forests and Chief 
Wildlife Warden 
Range Forest 
Officers reserved for 
SC/ST 
3 26.08.2011 (1) 
13.10.2011 (2) 13.03.2012 (3)   > 6 months 
5 months 
5 
Kerala State 
Handloom 
Development 
Corporation Ltd. 
Quality Control 
Inspector reserved 
for ST 
1 05.09.2008 04.05.2009 8 months 
6 
Education 
Department Wayanad 
District 
Lower Primary 
School Assistant 
6 
31.10.2011, 
11.11.2011 and 
09.11.2011 
10.2012 1 year 
10 01.2012 and 
09.2012 08.01.2013 Upto 1 year 
7. Agriculture 
Department 
Agriculture 
Assistant 
88 01.11.2008 to 
31.03.2009 29.09.2009 Upto 
11 months 
252 01.04.2010 to 
31.03.2011 31.05.2011 Upto 1 year 
122 01.02.2007 to 
31.07.2007 22.09.2012 > 5 years 
 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
102 
Appendix 2.4 
Details of delay in reporting of Not Joining Duty (NJD) vacancies 
in selected Departments 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.2.2; Page: 14) 
Sl. 
No. 
Department/ 
Institution Name of Post No. of 
vacancies Date of Advice 
Date of 
reporting of 
vacancies 
Time taken 
for reporting 
vacancies 
1. Education – 
Malappuram District 
Lower Primary 
School Assistant 
6 11.03.2014 19.08.2016 > 2 years 
1 31.12.2012 20.06.2016 > 3 years 
2 05.02.2013 20.06.2016 > 3 years 
1 26.03.2013 20.06.2016 > 3 years 
2. Education – 
Malappuram District 
Upper Primary 
School Assistant 
1 02.02.2013 20.06.2016 > 3 years 
1 07.02.2014 20.06.2016 > 2 years 
3. Education – Wayanad 
District 
Upper Primary 
School Assistant 
4 17.11.2012 17.05.2013 6 months 
1 31.01.2014 01.10.2014 8 months 
1 08.10.2014 28.06.2016 > 1 year 
1 15.05.2015 28.06.2016 > 1 year 
4. Education – Wayanad 
District 
Lower Primary 
School Assistant 
1 31.01.2014 12.09.2014 7 months 
2 15.11.2012 17.05.2013 6 months 
5 Agriculture 
Department 
Agricultural 
Assistant 
6 06.08.2012 23.08.2013 > 1 year 
7 10.12.2012 23.08.2013 8 months 
2 05.03.2013 30.10.2013 7 months 
1 05.03.2013 23.12.2013 9 months 
  

 
 103 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.5 
Loss of turns due to non-considering of pending NJD turns 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.7.2; Page: 22) 
Category 
Category No. 489/11 Category No. 490/11 
Net loss 
of turns 
Net 
gain of 
turns 
Pending 
NJD 
turns 
Turns filled 
up as fresh 
vacancy 
Pending 
NJD turns 
Turns filled 
up as fresh 
vacancy 
Open Competition (OC) 92 90 319 313 8 - 
Communal 
reservation 
turn 
Ezhava  19 25 80 87 - 13 
Muslim 28 21 76 75 8 - 
SC 8 15 30 51 - 28 
ST 4 3 8 12 - 3 
SIUC 3 2 6 6 1 - 
OX 3 2 3 6 - 2 
LC 5 7 34 26 6 - 
OBC 9 5 31 19 16 - 
Viswakarma 5 5 21 19 2 - 
Dheevara 3 2 7 6 2 - 
Hindu Nadar 0 2 0 6 - 8 
Total 87 89 296 313 - - 
Turns for Differently Abled 5 5 30 19 11 - 
TOTAL 184 184 645 645 54 54 
 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
104 
Appendix 2.6 
Details of delayed completion (from Notification to Ranked List) in 
respect of selected cases 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.10; Page: 29) 
Name of Post and 
Department 
Category Number 
Date of Notification 
Last date of application 
Date of finalisation of 
Ranked List 
Time taken for completion 
of the selection process 
(from Notification to 
publication of Ranked List ) 
Remarks/Reasons for delay  
Blacksmith Grade II 
– KSRTC 470/09 30.12.2009 03.02.2010 23.10.2014  4 years  
9 months 
OMR test was held only in April 2012. 
Reply of KPSC is silent about the reasons 
for delay in conducting examination and 
publication of result. 
Draftsman Gr ade II 
in KWA  384/10 15.12.2010 19.01.2011 30.03.2015  4 years  
3 months 
OMR test was held only in June 2012. 
KPSC replied that too much time was taken 
to conduct detailed scrutiny of applications 
and further processes were also delayed to a 
certain extent. 
Maintenance 
Engineer 
(Electrical) in 
Kerala State Film 
Development 
Corporation 
460/10 31.12.2010 16.02.2011 11.05.2015  4 years  
4 months 
OMR test was held only in July 2012. 
Interview held in March 2014 was cancelled 
by KPSC on realising that the candidates 
interviewed were not from main list 
(prepared on merit basis) but from 
supplementary list (prepared for communal 
reservation). Hence , revised shortlist was 
published with 10 candidates in the main list 
by reducing cut off marks and interview was 
again conducted in March 2015. KPSC 
stated that usually such mistakes would not 
occur during the selection process and delay 
occurred only in this post. Actions were 
taken against the concerned officers by 
KPSC. 
Assistant Engineer 
(Civil) in Kerala 
State Housing 
Board (KSHB) and 
KSRTC 
105/09 30.04.2009 03.06.2009 01.03.2013 3 years  
10 months 
OMR test was held in June 2010. Reply of 
KPSC is silent about the reasons for delay in 
conducting examination and publication  of 
result. 
Engineering 
Assistant Grade III 
in Kerala State 
Construction 
Corporation 
291/12 15.06.2012 19.07.2012 12.11.2015 3 years  
4 months 
OMR test was held in June 2013. KPSC 
stated that delay was owing to time taken 
for getting clarification regarding 
qualification from the company. 
Block Development 
Officer in Rural 
Development 
Department 
62/07 26.02.2007 28.03.2007 18.04.2011 4 years  
1 month OMR test was held in May 2008. 

 
 105 
Appendices 
Name of Post and 
Department 
Category Number 
Date of Notification 
Last date of application 
Date of finalisation of 
Ranked List 
Time taken for completion 
of the selection process 
(from Notification to 
publication of Ranked List ) 
Remarks/Reasons for delay  
Training Instructo r 
(Plumber) in SC 
Development 
Department 
57/10 31.03.2010 05.05.2010 17.03.2015 4 years  
11 months 
OMR test was conducted only in March 
2013 and interview in January 2015. KPSC 
stated that there were issues which 
computerisation could not resolve. 
Agriculture 
Assistant Grade II 57/09 31.03.2009 06.05.2009 18.05.2012 3 years  
1 month 
OMR test was held in October 2010. KPSC 
stated that there were legal issues which 
computerisation could not resolve. 
Electrician in KWA 236/10 31.08.2010 06.10.2010 31.12.2013 3 years  
4 months 
OMR test was conducted  in August 2011. 
KPSC stated that delay in publication of 
Ranked List was due to lack of clarity in 
regard to acceptability of qualification of 
candidates. 
Binder Gr ade II in 
Greater Cochin 
Development 
Authority 
321/08 10.09.2008 15.10.2008 10.10.2014 6 years 
OMR test was held in April 2012. Regional 
Officer, Ernakulam stated (October 2016) 
that each stage of selection process was 
carried out based on the orders of KPSC 
issued from time to time.  
Dredger Cleaner in 
Irrigation 
Department 
61/10 31.03.2010 05.05.2010 29.04.2014 4 years 
OMR test was held in July 2012. Regional 
Officer, Ernakulam stated (October 2016) 
that the process upto finalisation of Ranked 
List has been carried out at the Head Office. 
Draftsman Grade II 
(Architecture) in 
Public Works 
Department 
215/07 26.06.2007 01.08.2007 08.10.2012 5 years  
3 months 
OMR test held in November 2008. Regional 
Officer, Ernakulam stated (October 2016) 
that the processes upto finalisation of 
Ranked List were carried out based on the 
orders of KPSC. Litigation, if any, in the 
matter of recruitment impedes the schedule 
of selection process. 
 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
106 
Appendix 2.7 
Statement showing attendance of candidates in selected examinations 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6.11.1; Page: 30) 
Name of Post Category 
No. 
No. of 
candidates 
admitted 
No. of 
candidates 
appeared 
Percentage 
of absence 
Assistant/Auditor 436/12 379219 279510 26 
Assistant Surgeon in Health 
Services 192/10 3940 2145 46 
Catalog Assistant in Legislature 
Secretariat 311/08 1617 908 44 
Draftsman cum Surveyor in 
Mining and Geology 191/07 1993 1042 48 
Refrigeration Mechanic in 
Medical Education Department 55/09 1000 525 48 
Draftsman Grade II/Overseer 
Grade II (Electrical) in H igher 
Education Department 
284/07 1316 571 57 
Mortuary Technician Grade II 
Medical Education Department 372/08 1272 713 44 
Draftsman Grade II/Overseer 
Grade II (Civil) Harbo ur 
Engineering Department 
53/07 7699 3059 60 
Electrician in M edical 
Education Department 71/08 2409 1098 54 
Municipal Secretary Grade III 
(Urban Affairs Department) 102/09 3879 2293 41 
Typist Grade II Government 
Secretariat/KPSC/Local Fund 
Audit Department etc. 
349/08 14231 4888 66 
Security Guard Government 
Secretariat/KPSC 58/09 11405 6248 45 
Scientific Assistant (Chemistry) 
Police (Forensic Science Lab) 171/09 2227 1029 54 
Block Development Officer – 
Rural Development Department 62/07 217023 127582 41 
 
  

 
 107 
Appendices 
Appendix 3.1 
List of officials promoted in violation of Pay Revision Orders 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.7.2.3; Page: 50) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
posts Name of Employee Date of 
Promotion 
Hike in Basic pay  
(in `) Difference  
(in `) 
No. of 
months 
Amount 
(Difference x 
No. of months)  
(in `) From To 
1.  
Pool Officer 
Beevikunju O 31.03.2011 35320 37040 1720 60 103200 
2.  Molly M C 19.01.2013 36960 37940+900 1880 38 71440 
3.  Ananthasankaran K 01.11.2014 38600 37940+2380 1720 17 29240 
4.  Indira K K 01.06.2015 38600 37940+3200 2540 10 25400 
5.  
Section 
Officer (Fair 
Copy and 
Despatch) 
Higher Grade 
Saphiya Beevi K M 31.03.2011 32860 35320 2460 60 147600 
6.  Santhi C P 01.04.2011 32860 35320 2460 60 147600 
7.  Omana V P 19.01.2013 34500 36140+820 2460 38 93480 
8.  Murali K K 23.01.2013 34500 36140 1640 38 62320 
9.  Lalu P 23.01.2013 34500 36140 1640 38 62320 
10.  Priya V N 23.01.2013 33680 36140 2460 38 93480 
11.  Mohanan P M 01.11.2014 34500 36140+820 2460 17 41820 
12.  Rukkiya Beevi A 01.12.2014 35320 36140+820 1640 16 26240 
13.  Surendran S 01.05.2015 33680 35320 1640 11 18040 
14.  Madhumathy A S 01.06.2015 36140 36140+1640 1640 10 16400 
15.  
Section 
Officer (Fair 
Copy and 
Despatch) 
Purushothaman P S 31.03.2011 29860 30610 750 60 45000 
16.  Sailaja Devi N 01.04.2011 30610 31360 750 60 45000 
17.  Rajeena P A 19.01.2013 33680 34500 820 38 31160 
18.  Annamma V I 19.01.2013 30610 31360 750 38 28500 
19.  Chandramma P P 23.01.2013 30610 31360 750 38 28500 
20.  Annamma K 23.01.2013 30610 31360 750 38 28500 
21.  Sulochana V R 31.10.2014 31360 32110 750 17 12750 
22.  Geetha T U 01.12.2014 32110 32860 750 16 12000 
23.  Pradeep Kumar L G 01.05.2015 32110 32860 750 11 8250 
24.  Anzari M J 01.06.2015 32110 32860 750 10 7500 
25.  Geethamma K N 01.09.2015 32110 32860 750 7 5250 
26.  Conductor 
Higher Grade Tomy Varghese 20.01.2014 14980 16180 1200 26 31200 
27.  Pass 
Examiner P V Jacob 20.01.2014   1200 26 31200 
28.  Assistant 
Librarian 
G Geetha Bai 25.03.2013   1720 36 61920 
29.  Joy Joseph 19.03.2015   1720 12 20640 
 TOTAL 1335950 
 
  

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
108 
Appendix 4.1 
District wise pendency of cases as on 31 March 2016 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.5; Page: 60) 
Sl. No. Districts 
Total cases pending as on 
31 March 2016  
Civil Criminal Total 
1 Thiruvananthapuram 48876 89697 138573 
2 Kollam 23510 83432 106942 
3 Pathanamthitta 11576 40367 51943 
4 Kottayam 15683 35145 50828 
5 Alappuzha 26730 45480 72210 
6 Idukki 4937 7767 12704 
7 Ernakulam 30945 34663 65608 
8 Thrissur 57822 28157 85979 
9 Palakkad 19611 33090 52701 
10 Kozhikode 15571 32979 48550 
11 Malappuram 15294 38517 53811 
12 Kannur 17726 21466 39192 
13 Wayanad 3652 10900 14552 
14 Kasaragod 3980 13713 17693 
GRAND TOTAL 295913 515373 811286 
Note 1 
Ernakulam District was selected directly as the High Court and 
Headquarters of Kerala State Legal Services Authority and 
Director General of Prosecution is located. 
Note 2 
Other three districts viz. Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur and 
Malappuram were selected based on Probability Proportionate to 
Size Without Replacement sampling method. 
 
  

 
 109 
Appendices 
Appendix 5.1 
Absence of minimum fire safety standards in buildings 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.7; Page: 79) 
(X = Not available, = Available) 
 Sl. 
No. 
Name and address of 
building Name of Fire Station 
Adequate fire extinguishers 
Fire pumps 
Alternate source of power 
Width access to building 
Open space 
Emergency lighting 
Fire escape stair (Min 75 cm) 
Hindrance free access to fire 
escape stair 
Service duct and shaft 
Static water storage tank 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
1 District Co-operative Hospital, 
Thrissur Thrissur X X X X X X X X X X 
2 KMCT Medical College 
Hospital, Mukkam, Kozhikode Mukkam  X X   X   X X 
3 KMCT Dental College, 
Mukkam, Kozhikode Mukkam  X X   X   X X 
4 Super Speciality Block, 
Medical College, Kozhikode Vellimadukunnu X X X   X  X X X 
5 Asten Ortho Hospital, 
Kozhikode Meenchantha X X X   X  X X X 
6 Ahalya Hospital, Ulloor, 
Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram X    X X X   X 
7 Bishop Benzigar Hospital, 
Kollam Chamakkada  X X  X X  X  
8 ESIC Model and Super 
Speciality Hospital, Kollam Kadappakkada  X X   X   X X 
9 Sunrise Hospital, Kakkanad, 
Ernakulam Thrikkakara X X X  X X  X  
10 Sacred Heart CMI Public 
School, Ernakulam Club Road  X X   X X X X X 
11 
Central Excise and Customs, 
Assistant Commissioner’s 
Office 
Thrissur  X X   X X X X X 
12 Mini Civil Station, Chavakkad, 
Thrissur Guruvayur X X X   X X X X X 
13 Tax Complex, Kollam Kadappakkada  X X   X  X X X 
14 EPF Regional Office, 
Ernakulam Gandhi Nagar  X X   X X X X X 
15 
Office of Superintendent, 
Customs and Central Excise, 
Guruvayur 
Guruvayur X  X   X X  X 
16 Kowdiar Heaven, 
Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram X    X X X X  
17 Glendale Manor, Chalakkuzhy Thiruvananthapuram X X X   X X  X X 
18 Seven Seas Apartments, 
Ernakulam Club Road  X X  X X   X 
19 Athira Gold and Silks, 
Ernakulam Club Road X X X   X X X X 
20 I-Mall, Anchalumoodu, Kollam Chamakkada  X X   X   X X 

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
110 
(X = Not available, = Available) 
 Sl. 
No. 
Name and address of 
building Name of Fire Station 
Adequate fire extinguishers 
Fire pumps 
Alternate source of power 
Width access to building 
Open space 
Emergency lighting 
Fire escape stair (Min 75 cm) 
Hindrance free access to fire 
escape stair 
Service duct and shaft 
Static water storage tank 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
21 Stories Global Home Concepts, 
Kozhikode Kozhikode Beach X X  X  X X X X X 
22 Chirakkekkaran Glass House, 
Thrissur Thrissur X X X   X  X X X 
23 Centre Plaza, Vazhuthacaud, 
Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram X X X X X X X X X X 
24 Legrande Auditorium, Thrissur Thrissur X X X   X   X 
25 Sreekrishna Residency, 
Guruvayur Guruvayur X X X X X X X  X X 
26 Tagore Theatre, 
Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram X X X   X X   X 
27 C Kesavan Memorial Town 
Hall, Kollam Kadappakkada X X X   X X  X X 
28 A J Hall, Ernakulam Gandhi Nagar X X X   X X  X X 
29 Municipal Corporation Town 
Hall, Ernakulam Club Road X X X   X X  X X 
30 Intel Automotives, Thrissur Thrissur X X X X X X X X X X 
31 KRS Godown, Thrissur Thrissur X X X X X X X X X X 
32 KRS Godown, 
Thiruvananthapuram Thiruvananthapuram X X X X X X X X X X 
 
  

 
 111 
Appendices 
Appendix 5.2 
Details of understating and overstating of entries in cashbook 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2; Page: 87) 
(in `) 
Receipts Payments 
Date 
OB and 
Total 
Receipts 
Amount as 
per cash 
book 
Amount to 
be as per 
transactions 
Difference  Date 
Total 
Payments 
and CB 
Amount as 
per cash 
book 
Amount to be 
as per 
transactions 
Difference/ 
Shortage in 
cash 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
28.04.14 
OB 1267067     
28.04.14 
Payments 1027775 1022375  (5400) 
Receipt  936541     CB 1175833 1181233 5400 
Total 2203608     Total 2203608 2203608   
          
23.09.14 
OB 598252   
23.09.14 
Payments 633288 577239  (56049) 
Receipt  1322053   CB 1287017 1343066 56049 
Total 1920305   Total 1920305 1920305   
          
25.09.14 
OB 1013675   25.09.14 
  
Payments 2465211 2442211 (23000) 
Receipt  2332414   CB 880878 903878 23000 
Total 3346089   Total 3346089 3346089   
          
21.10.14 
OB 1447947   
21.10.14 
Payments 2943965 2942965  (1000) 
Receipt  3594073   CB 2098055 2099055 1000 
Total 5042020   Total 5042020 5042020   
          
30.10.14 
OB 1016619   
30.10.14 
Payments 314082 313882  (200) 
Receipt  91496   CB 794033 794233 200 
Total 1108115   Total 1108115 1108115   
          
31.10.14 
OB 794033     
31.10.14 
Payments 7462986 7461986 (1000) 
Receipt  8265483     CB 1596530 1597530 1000 
Total 9059516     Total 9059516 9059516  
          
11.11.14 
OB 1442493    
11.11.14 
Payments  7823709  7823709   
Receipt  12424595   CB  6028379  6043379  15000 
Total 13852088 13867088 15000 Total  13852088  13867088  (15000) 
          
12.11.14 
OB 6028379     
12.11.14 
Payments 1276297 1274297  (2000) 
Receipt  311390     CB 5063472 5065472 2000 
Total 6339769     Total 6339769 6339769   
          
24.12.14 
OB 1387652     
24.12.14 
Payments 2584181 2574181 (10000) 
Receipt  3101037     CB 1904508 1914508 10000 
Total 4488689     Total 4488689 4488689   
          
19.01.15 
OB 1710384    
19.01.15 
Payments 1487272 1487272   
Receipt  2468805   CB 2671917 2691917 20000 
Total 4159189 4179189 20000 Total 4159189 4179189 (20000) 
          
03.02.15 
OB 2504942     
03.02.15 
Payments 5748451 5746451 (2000) 
Receipt  5772470     CB 2528961 2530961 2000 
Total 8277412     Total 8277412 8277412   
          
19.02.15 
OB 2385246     
19.02.15 
Payments 3113909 3106671 (7238) 
Receipt  3343587     CB 2614924 2622162 7238 
Total 5728833     Total 5728833 5728833   
          
26.02.15 
OB 2017745     
26.02.15 
Payments 379447 378447 (1000) 
Receipt  148145     CB 1786443 1787443 1000 
Total 2165890     Total 2165890 2165890   
          

 
 
Audit Report (G&SSA) Kerala for the year ended 31 March 2016 
112 
Receipts Payments 
Date 
OB and 
Total 
Receipts 
Amount as 
per cash 
book 
Amount to 
be as per 
transactions 
Difference  Date 
Total 
Payments 
and CB 
Amount as 
per cash 
book 
Amount to be 
as per 
transactions 
Difference/ 
Shortage in 
cash 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
06.03.15 
OB 1544723     
06.03.15 
Payments 295916 294916 (1000) 
Receipt  486513     CB 1735320 1736320 1000 
Total 2031236     Total 2031236 2031236   
          
10.03.15 
OB 1539968     
10.03.15 
Payments 385852 384852  (1000) 
Receipt  4394372     CB 5548488 5549488 1000 
Total  5934340     Total  5934340 5934340   
          
10.06.15 
OB 4351177     
10.06.15 
Payments 1275088 1274088 (1000) 
Receipt  415726     CB 3491815 3492815 1000 
Total  4766903     Total  4766903 4766903   
          
15.06.15 
OB 2634903    
15.06.15 
Payments 972886 969886 (3000) 
Receipt  1619867   CB 3276884 3284884 8000 
Total  4249770 4254770 5000 Total  4249770 4254770 (5000) 
          
19.06.15 
OB 3213593     
19.06.15 
Payments 1261795 1260795 (1000) 
Receipt 23421     CB 1975219 1976219 1000 
Total 3237014     Total  3237014 3237014   
          
23.06.15 
OB 1507721     
23.06.15 
Payments 481365 480365 (1000) 
Receipt  681025     CB 1707381 1708381 1000 
Total  2188746     Total  2188746 2188746   
          
26.06.15 
OB 1170881    
26.06.15 
Payments 149812 149812   
Receipt  700211   CB 1720280 1721280 1000 
Total  1870092 1871092  1000 Total  1870092 1871092 (1000) 
          
15.07.15 
OB 3899911    
15.07.15 
Payments 2237819 2237819   
Receipt  4296859   CB 5957951 5958951 1000 
Total   8195770 8196770 1000 Total  8195770 8196770 (1000) 
          
29.07.15 
OB 2253393    
29.07.15 
Payments 1539419 1539419   
Receipt  1512192   CB 2206166 2226166 20000 
Total  3745585 3765585  20000 Total  3745585 3765585 (20000) 
 Total difference in totalling   62,000  Total difference in payments 1,16,887 
Total difference in totalling 62,000 
Total difference to be reflected in Cash balance 1,78,887 
 
 

  

 
 
