This Report for the year ended March 2009 has been prepared for submission
to the President under Article 151 of the Constitution.

This Audit Report contains findings emerging out of the compliance audit in
the Civil Ministries, the Department of Posts, Department of
Telecommunications and their field offices. The audit findings on the accounts
of the Union Government are included in Report No. | for the year 2008-09.
Matters arising from audit of the Scientific Departments and their units/entities
are included in separate Report.

The cases mentioned in this Report are among those, which came to notice in
the course of audit during 2008-09. For the sake of completeness, matters
which relale to earlier years bul nol covered in the previous Reports are also
included. Similarly, results of audit of transactions subsequent to March 2009
in a few cases have also been mentioned, wherever available and relevant.

vii


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

OVERVIEW

This report contains the audit findings of significant nature which arose from
the compliance audit in Civil Ministries of the Union Government,
Departments of Posts and Telecommunications and their field offices. The
report contains 18 chapters. Chapter I explains the audit methodology and
auditee profile. Chapter II to XVII present detailed findings/ observations
arising out of the compliance audit in these Ministries/Departments. Chapter
XVIII presents summarised position of the remedial/corrective Action Taken
Notes furnished by the Ministries.

A summary of some of the important findings included in this Report are as
under :

Ministry of Agriculture
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation

Infructuous expenditure on construction of Glass House and purchase of
X-Ray scanner by National Plant Quarantine Station, New Delhi

The National Plant Quarantine Station (NPQS), New Delhi, is responsible for
regulating import of plants and planting material with a view to keeping exotic
microbes, insects, pests, and weeds at bay. To conduct necessary “grow-out
tests” of the imported sowing and planting material, NPQS got a glass house
constructed in 2001 at a cost of Rs. 1.88 crore. However, the glass house had
not been put to its intended use, and the equipment had deteriorated due to
long disuse, making it unsuitable for future use and rendering the entire
expenditure infructuous.

To detect exotic pests and disease infestation of agricultural produce brought
in by arriving passengers, NPQS procured one X-Ray scanner in 2005-06 at a
cost of Rs, 35.26 lakh for use at the IGI Airport, New Delhi. However, the X-
Ray scanner had been lying in packed condition for the last three years, as no
space had been provided in the IGI Airport for its installation and use.

Paragraph 2.1
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying of Fisheries

Inordinate delay in modernisation/improvement of Slaughter Houses and
establishment of Carcass Utilisation Centres to minimise bird hits to IAF
aircraft

As indiscriminate disposal of garbage and insanitary conditions close to
airfields attract birds and pose serious hazards of air accidents due to bird hits,
the Ministry of Agriculture had launched a Centrally Sponsored Scheme in the



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

VIII Plan for providing assistance to States for modernisation/ improvement of
slaughter houses and establishment of Carcass Utilisation Centres (CUCs).
This scheme was aimed at minimizing air accidents due to bird hits at ten
selected high risk [AF airfield towns.

Audit observed that the scheme was not successful in modernisation of
slaughter houses and establishment of CUCs, due to poor project
implementation by the State Governments and their agencies, and lack of
etfective oversight by the Ministry. Eight out of ten projects at high risk [AF
airfield towns (Ambala, Sirsa, Gwalior, Tezpur, Dindigul, Adampur, Hindon
and Bareilly) could not commence or were not made fully operational, even
afier 18 years and expenditure of Rs 26.63 crore. The scheme was finally
closed in 2004-05, without achieving its objectives and, therefore, the [AF
airfields continued to remain exposed to high risk of air accidents due to bird
hits.

Paragraph 2.4
Ministry of Civil Aviation
Inefficient management of Haj Operations

The Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA) is the nodal agency, responsible for
handling the movement of Indian Haj pilgrims by air. Haj flights are
undertaken by Air India (AI) and Indian Airlines (IA) (since merged into
NACIL) in association with Saudi Arabian Airlines (SAA) (as per a bilateral
agreement between India and Saudi Arabia), and these operate currently from
17 embarkation points in India. Haj subsidy is the difference between the fare
paid by the pilgrims sponsored by the Haj Committee of India (HCOI) and the
fare charged by the airlines that are making transport arrangements. This
subsidy is paid to NACIL by MOCA out of its budget provisions. From 1994
onwards, the two-way airfare payable by Haj pilgrims remained static at the
level of Rs. 12,000 per pilgrim till Haj 2009, when it was raised to Rs. 16,000,
whereas the cost per pilgrim had increased to Rs. 51,610 during 2009.
Consequently, the expenditure on Haj subsidy increased from Rs. 10.57 crores
in 1994 to approximately Rs. 620 crore for Haj 2009.

Audit of Haj subsidy payments of Rs. 1398.91 crore from 2002 to 2006-IT
(subsidy payments for Haj 2007 to 2009 had not been finalised) disclosed the
following:

. Inadmissible payments amounting Rs. 51.34 crore were made to AI on
account of higher fares for Lucknow and Srinagar, claims for excess
number of passengers, royalty payment to SAA for shortfall in



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

passengers carried, additional payments for technical halt at Sharjah,
payment for travel of non-official pilgrims, and claims for own flights
at higher rates applicable for leased aircraft.

. Payments amounting to Rs. 125.77 crore were paid to AI, without
adequate justifications/ details available on record, over and above the
approved rates for Haj operations for items such as direct and indirect
tixed costs, other costs, miscellaneous charges, additional charges on
positioning of aircraft, excessive claims on account of hub and spoke
operations, and penalty for underutilisation of capacity on SAA flights.

. MOCA did not settle dues on account of Haj operations on a timely
basis, resulting in payment of Rs. 46.29 crore on account of interest to
AL

. The reimbursement of HAJ subsidy to AT is on cost/ claim basis. The

rates agreed with SAA (ranging between $ 710 and $ 847 per pilgrim)
were significantly lower than the overall rates ultimately claimed by AT
for Haj operations (ranging from $ 940 to $ 1235 per pilgrim), which
indicates that AI/ IA were not managing their HAJ operations
economically and efficiently.

° Gol had set up an Expert Group in 2007 for reviewing the policy for
future Haj operations. Most of the recommendations of the Expert
Group were accepted by a Group of Ministers, but have not been
implemented.

We recommend that the Ministry progressively move away from a cost
reimbursement approach for Haj subsidy to a well-defined competitive
tendering mechanism for Haj air travel to minimize the subsidy burden on the
Government exchequer and incentivize efficiency in operation. There is also a
need to strengthen internal audit of subsidy claims by the Ministry to minimize
inadmissible/ excess payments.

Paragraph 3.1

Non-commencement of projects for Civil Aviation Security Training
Academy and Office of Regional Deputy Commissioner of Security
(Mumbai)

Establishment of a Civil Aviation Security Training Academy (CASTA) under
the aegis of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) was recommended
by an Inter-Ministerial Group consituted in 1993 in the wake of four
hijackings of Indian Airlines flights. Subsequently, a proposal for setting up
such an academy, which would function as the apex aviation security

xi


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

institution in the country, was approved by the Planning Commission in 1996
with an allocation of Rs. 16.87 crore.

We observed that the Ministry and BCAS had not been able to finalise the
location of the academy over the last 13 years, and therefore the training
academy could not be set up. This highlights the apathetic attitude of the
authorities towards strengthening civil aviation security in the country despite
the increasing menace of global terrorism and repeated terrorist attacks in
India and elsewhere.

Similarly, a project for construction of an office building for the Regional
Deputy Commissioner of Security of BCAS at Mumbai, which was approved
in 2003, could not even commence after six years, due to non-finalisation of
its location. This, further, highlights the indecisiveness of the authorities in
dealing with civil aviation security related issues.

Paragraph 3.2

Infructuous expenditure of Rs. 6.10 crore on procurement and non-
utilisation of Hansa Trainer Aircraft

Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) procured 11 Hansa trainer aircraft
from National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL) at the cost of Rs. 6.10 crore for
allotment to various Government flying clubs. However, these aircraft were
not utilized by the flying clubs due to lack of trained instructors and perceived
technical constraints. The expenditure incurred on procurement of these
aircraft was, therefore, largely rendered infructuous.

Paragraph 3.3
Ministry of Commerce and Industry

Department of Commerce
Short levy of departmental charges by DGS&D

The Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals (DGS&D) is a central
purchase organisation of the Gol, which concludes rate contracts for common
user items required by the Central Government Departments, State
Governments, Union Territories, and quasi-public bodies like municipalities,
statutory corporations and government undertakings. It levies departmental
charges for the servies rendered for purchase and inspection of stores at rates
prescribed by the Government from time to time.

We found that DGS&D_ failed to implement increased rates of departmental
charges from December 2005, which resulted in short levy of Rs. 9.42 crore
for the period from December 2005 to March 2008.

Paragraph 4.1

xii


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion

Deficient implementation of projects under Industrial Infrastructure
Upgradation Scheme (ITUS)

In December 2003, the Department of Industiral Policy and Promotion (DIPP)
introduced the Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIUS) with a
provision of Rs.675 crore in the X Plan to enhance international
competitiveness of domestic industry by providing quality infrastructure
through Public Private Partnerships at industrial clusters/ locations with high
growth potential.

We found that out of 26 projects approved between December 2003 and
March 2005 under the scheme, only eight projects had been completed,
despite release by DIPP of 84 per cent (Rs 792.45 crore) of Government of
India’s (Gol) share of Rs. 945.27 crore. 17 projects were yet to be completed,
with time overruns ranging from 23 to 46 months and one project had been
cancelled (although the Gol grant of Rs. 13.63 crore with interest was yet to be
refunded). The main reasons for delay in completion were inadequate survey
and assessment of requirements (resulting in frequent changes in scope of the
projects), and ineffective monitoring by DIPP.

Thus, the scheme’s objective of providing quality infrastructure through
Public Private Partnership for enhancing international competitiveness of
domestic industry had not been achieved.

Paragraph 4.3

Non-recovery of renewal fee for patents amounting to Rs. 1.12 crore

Continued validity of a patent is conditional on its renewal, for whch renewal
fee is payable, and patents shall cease to have effect following non-payment of
renewal fee within the prescribed or extended period. Failure on the part of
Deputy Controller of Patents and Designs (DCPD), Kolkata to monitor the
status of outstanding renewal fee for patents and publicly notifying
cancellation of patents with outstanding renewal fee resulted in loss of revenue
of Rs. 1.12 crore from August 1992 to March 2008, besides allowing the
patentees to continue to enjoy business rights without paying the requisite
renewal fees.

Paragraph 4.4
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
Department of Posts
Irregular payment of commission to banks

In contravention of the codal provisions, five Head Post Offices in Bihar
Circle made irregular payment of commission of Rs. 81.32 lakh in obtaining
bank drafts from nationalised banks.

Paragraph 5.2

xiii


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Excess payment of haulage charges

Failure of CPMsG Gujarat, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh Circles to verify the
claim of haulage charges made by Railways resulted in excess payment of
Rs. 2.10 crore.

Paragraph 5.3
Ministry of External Affairs

Flawed purchase of property for Indian Chancery and unjustified
expenditure on its renovation

The Indian Mission in Prague incurred an expenditure of Rs. 20.12 crore on
the acquisition and extensive renovation of a 75 year old property for Indian
Chancery, between April 2004 and October 2008.

Audit examination disclosed that the property was purchased ignoring both
security and structural safety aspects in contravention of Ministry’s Security
guidelines of March 2001. Further, the property was purchased based on
erroneous assement made by the Property team of MEA. This resulted in
repeated revision/increase in the scope of work leading to time and cost
overruns with the cost of renovation work rising to 116 per cent (Rs. 11.39
crore) of the cost of acquisition against only 15 per cent (Rs. 1.31 crore)
anticipated at the time of approval of purchase.

Paragraph 6.1

Extra expenditure on purchase of full fare economy tickets from Air
India

The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) did not comply with instructions of
the Ministry of Finance to effect utmost economy in air travel. It did not frame
comprehensive arrangements for optimally utilising competitive fares and
incentive schemes being offered by airlines including Air India (AT). Instead,
it entered into an arrangement with AI for regulating air travel which was not
only limited in scope but was also flawed as it allowed payment of full
economy fares which were three to five times the concessional/cheap economy
class fares. As a result, the additional expenditure incurred by the MEA on
purchase of air tickets for home travel, emergency passages and temporary
duty for the 30 Missions test checked alone was amounted to approxmately
Rs. 20.76 crore for the period November 2006 to March 2009.

Paragraph 6.2

xiv


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Recovery at the instance of audit

Failure of the Missions/Posts abroad to correctly regulate payments of salaries
and allowances etc., to their employees resulted in overpayment of Rs. 52.28
lakh by 32 Missions/Posts in 64 cases, which was recovered at the instance of
audit during 2006-09.

Paragraph 6.5

Outsourcing of visa support services in Missions/ Posts abroad

The process of tender evaluation and selection of Service Provider (SP) for
outsourcing of visa support services in Consulate General of India, Milan was
flawed leading to selection of a vendor who was not the lowest bidder. In High
Commission of India, London an undue financial benefit of Rs. 3.63 crore was
extended to the SP due to non-consideration of rates linked with the number of
visa service centres operated. Besides, due to incorrect interpretation of the
provisions of the agreement, the SP was additionally benefited by Rs. 1.96
crore by way of levy of administrative fee from the visa applicants. In
Embassy of India, Washington DC the SP continued to collect a minimum rate
of USD 21 per application on account of mailing charges as against the
minimum prevailing FedEx rate of USD 18.95 per application, resulting in an
undue benefit of Rs. 1.16 crore to the SP. Exclusion of and deviation from the
important provisions of the model agreement diluted control of Missions/Posts
over the functioning and quality of services rendered by SPs. While CGI,
Frankfurt was yet to review its staff strength for consular services, EI, Paris
was holding excess consular staff.

Paragraph 6.6
External publicity through Missions

Despite assurance to the Public Accounts Committee, instances of release of
funds to Missions without receipt of Annual action plans, incorrect
classification of items of expenditure to publicity head and despatch of
publicity material to Missions without request which led to 58 to 74 percent of
publicity material remaining unutilized, were noticed in Audit.

Paragraph 6.7
Logistic management for offices and residences of diplomatic personnel

Despite assurance to the PAC, the pace of construction of projects on acquired
land by various Indian Missions/Posts abroad such as Embassy of India
Brasilia, Embassy of India Port of Spain, Embassy of India Paramaribo
(Suriname) and High Commission of India Abuja (Nigeria) continues to be a



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

cause of concern. The delay in construction in above Missions/Posts ranged
between 16 to 45 years resulting in both idling of funds and consequent
escalation in cost of construction. Further as per IFS (PLCA) tules, the
Ministry has to fix and intimate the Mission/Posts the rental ceiling fixed for
various categories of India based officials. But in many India Missions/Posts
abroad, the Ministry has not fixed the rental ceiling for the official
accommodation of various categories of officers which resulted in excess
payment or hiring of accommodation excess of the eligibility. Audit also
noticed expenditure on repair and maintenance of building being incurred by
the Missions in exces of the powers delegated to Head of Missions/Posts.

Paragraph 6.8

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Department of Health

Non-implementation of computerised management Information System
for Food Control Organisation

Failure of the Ministry to ensure migration of complete data from State Food
Testing Laboratories to the computerised system resulted in non-achievement
of objectives of establishing communication network between the Food
regulatory agencies and the laboratories even after three years of the scheduled
date of completion. The equipment worth Rs. 2.79 crore was lying idle at
NIC, New Delhi and in State laboratories at different locations.

Paragraph 7.1
National Aids Control Organisation
Recovery at the instance of Audit

At the instance of Audit, the Ministry recovered interest of Rs. 3.35 crore on
funds of Rs. 49.55 crore prematurely released in March/July 2006 to M/s
HSCC for procurement of Anti Retro Viral drugs.

Paragraph 7.2
National Institute of Communicable Diseases
Delayed supply of equipment

The Ministry as a measure of preparedness against Avian Influenza, decided in
January 2008, to procure 100 ventilators for National Institute of
Communicable Diseases (NICD) through Hospital Services Consusltancy
Corporation (HSCC) on limited tender basis. The Ministry, however, failed to
ensure timely supply of ventilators through HSCC despite this being an
emergency procurement. The intended objective of the procurement

xvi


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

therefore, remained unfulfilled. Further, the Ministry prematurely released
advance payment of Rs. 5.53 crore to HSCC even before an agreement was
entered into by the latter with the supplier. The advance paid was much in
excess of the value of goods procured. The unadjusted advance of Rs. 1.57
crore was yet to be recovered from HSCC.

Paragraph 7.3
Medical Stores Organisation
Supply of medicines on unlimited credit period

Supply of medicines on credit basis by the Government Medical Stores Depots
to various client departments and institutions resulted in accumulation of
outstanding dues of Rs. 88.34 crore covering the period from 1975 to 2009.

Paragraph 7.5
Ministry of Home Affairs
Central Reserve Police Force
IT audit of SELO system of Central Reserve Police Force

A computerization plan for CRPF was conceived in 1997 with the aim of
introducing Information Technology in the service in a comprehensive
manner. The Ministry, therefore, awarded the work of development of
integrated sofiware named ‘SELO’ (Service and Loyalty) to M/s NIIT in
March 2000 to be implemented in a phased manner. The SELO system
involved networking of 114 CRPF offices from the level of Director General
to the Group Centre offices under Dy. Inspectors General situated at 64
different locations. The SELO software covers finance, personnel, inventory,
operations and pay roll related functions/activities of CRPF.

Audit scrutiny disclosed that despite incurring an expenditure of Rs. 50.70
crore on the implementation of the SELO system of CRPF, end users are not
utilizing most of the applications. CRPF does not have an IT policy or IT
Steering Committee for implementation of the SELO system. Due to lack of
requisite application controls in the software, the database had been rendered
unreliable and incorrect. Inadequate logical access controls exposed the
system to the risk of unauthorized access.

Paragraph 8.1

xvii


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

National Crime Records Bureau

Non-establishment of Disaster Recovery site for computerised national
database of crime records at NIC

National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) is responsible for maintaining
secure, sharable, national database on crimes, criminals, property and also the
data pertaining to motor vehicles. NCRB did not establish disaster recovery
site to improve the accessibility and security of national database on crime
records despite incurring an expenditure of Rs. 54.34 lakh. Meanwhile, the
primary objective of maintaining business continuity in the event of break-
down of the active site remained unfulfilled.

Paragraph 8.2
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation

Non-commencement of Model Demonstration Slum Projects under
Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY)

The Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY) was launched as a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme in August 2001 to provide shelter or upgrade
existing shelters for people living below the poverty line in urban slums. In
order to demonstrate that better dwelling units could be constructed by using
cost-effective technology under VAMBAY, it was envisaged that in every
State there should at least be one model demonstration slum project to be
emulated by all other cities and towns in the State. Subsequently, model
demonstration slum projects were approved in 11 States for 1,165 units (with
per unit cost ranging from Rs. 40,000 to Rs. 60,000), based on proposals
received from the States, and funds of Rs. 5.52 crore released between March
2003 and April 2004. The projects were to be executed by the Building
Materials and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC), an autonomous body
under the Ministry.

We found that model demonstration slum projects in six States (Jammu &
Kashmir, Kerala, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan and Tripura) for construction of
600 dwelling units at an estimated cost of Rs.2.55 crore could not be
commenced due to delay in availability of sites, and higher construction costs
than the allowable limits. The Ministry did not take effective and timely action
to address these problems to make the projects successful, and hence the
objective of demonstrating the use of cost-effective technology for building
slum dwelling units could not be achieved.

Paragraph 9.2

xviii


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

Poor implementation of the Scheme of Integrated Infrastructure
Development for Small Scale Industries

The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises launched the Scheme
of Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID Scheme) for small scale
industries in rural/ backward areas in 1993-94 for setting up of ITD centres
with suitable infrastructural facilities to promote clusters of small scale and
tiny units. The scheme was subsumed in the Micro Small Enterprises-Cluster
Development Programme (MSE-CDP) from 2007-08. The Ministry released
an amount of Rs 124.59 crore upto 2007-08 to various implementing agencies
for 84 IID projects with an estimated cost of Rs 400 crore.

Audit reviewed the status of the implementation of the scheme and found that
42 out of 79 IID projects, which were due for completion by January 2008,
remained incomplete. Delays in completion of projects ranged between one
month and twelve years. Further, detailed field level audit of 10 centres in
Assam, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh revealed that
many infrastructural facilities at the centres were incomplete. Also, by creating
large plots and allocating plots to large units, the small scale and tiny units,
which formed the target group for the scheme, were deprived of its benefits.
There were also instances of deficient financial management and inadequate
monitoring.

Paragraph 10.1
Ministry of Shipping

Scheme for Inland Water Transport

Inland Water Transport (IWT) is an eco-friendly, economically viable and fuel
efficient mode of transportation, but has not been developed to its full
potential in India due to various constraints. Development of WT would have
numerous direct and indirect benefits, such as catalysing industrial growth and
economic activities in the hinterland along waterways, shift of cargo transport
from other modes of transport, and decongesting road and rail traffic.

An existing Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of Inland Water
Transport was, therefore, substantially revised in 2002 with provision of
financial assistance of 90 to 100 per cent grant-in-aid for various [WT
activities — surveys / studies, waterway development, navigation aids, terminal
facilities, procurement of vessels for development and regulation etc. During
2003-07, 35 projects were sanctioned in 15 States at a cost of Rs. 105.89 crore,

xix


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

against which funds of Rs. 52.84 crore were released. The scheme was finally
discontinued by the Planning Commission in February 2007.

We found that only 3 out of 35 projects were reported to have been
completed, while work had not even commenced in respect of 13 projects.
One project was foreclosed, while the remaining 18 projects were still
incomplete. Further, our field scrutiny of 16 projects in five States (Orissa,
Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal), revealed
that many projects had not achieved their intended objectives, resulting in
unfruitful expenditure.

As such, the objective of the scheme for development of [WT as an eco-
friendly, economically viable and fuel-efficient mode of transport remained
unachieved.

Paragraph 12.1
Ministry of Textiles

Non-establishment of Raw Material Bank for Silk Carpets in Jammu &
Kashmir

In September 2003, the Ministry of Textiles approved a project, under the
Prime Minister’s Special Employment Package for Jammu & Kashmir, for
setting up of a Raw Material Bank (RMB) for silk carpets at a cost of Rs. 2.50
crore for direct distribution of silk and other raw materials to artisans and
weavers, which would enable two lakh carpet weavers to come out of the
shadow of big yarn dealers and obtain full-time employment opportunities.

We found that even after five years of approval, the Ministry failed to ensure
completion of the project for setting up the raw material bank. Instead of
setting up a society for direct distribution of raw materials to artisans, the
implementing agency (J&K Small Industries Development Corporation)
identified two private firms in Kashmir, who were already enjoying a
monopoly, and one firm in Jammu, which used the entire material for its own
use. This defeated the objective of the scheme of enabling artisans and
weavers to come out of the shadow of big yarn dealers.

Paragraph 13.1

Non-establishment of National Centres for Design and Product
Development at Delhi and Moradabad

In October 1998, the Ministry approved a proposal for setting up two National
Centres for Design and Product Development (NCDPD) at Delhi and



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Moradabad at a cost of Rs. 5.37 crore, primarily for land & buildings and
other fixed assets. The objectives of establishing these centres were to assist in
development of new designs, improve the quality of handicraft items produced
by artisans, enrich and orient the industry to the finer aspects of design, and
ensure acceptability of exportable handicrafts in international markets. The
Ministry released Rs. 4.00 crore in installments between March 1999 and
March 2006.

We found that the land for the two centres had not been acquired, even after
10 years of approval. The centre at Delhi continued to function from a
temporary location, on the premises of another office of the Ministry, while
the Moradabad centre had become non-functional since 2004. Even though the
land for the centres had not been allotted, Rs. 2.45 crore had been utilized by
NCDPD at temporary locations on various items (setting up of temporary
infrastructure, acquiring fixed assets, setting up of office etc.), while Rs. 1.55
crore of Gol funds were lying unspent and had not been refunded, despite the
Ministry rejecting the proposal for carry forward of grant.

Paragraph 13.5

Non receipt of Utilisation Certificates

Lack of adequate and effective monitoring by the Development Commissioner
(Handicrafts) resulted in non-receipt of 1355 Utilisation Certificates (UCs) for
Rs. 70.44 crore of grant-in-aid released upto 2006-07 to 808 organizations,
which were to be submitted before March 2008. Further, in contravention of
the General Financial Rules, the DC (H) released more grants to 161
organisations, despite non-receipt of UCs for the previous years, resulting in
accumulation of outstanding UCs of Rs. 46.23 crore.

Paragraph 13.4

Deficiencies in setting up Common Facility Centres (CFCs) under
Babasaheb Ambedkar Hastashilp Vikas Yojana (BAHVY)

The Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) (DC(H)), under the Ministry of
Textiles, introduced the Babasaheb Ambedkar Hastashilp Vikas Yojana
(BAHVY) in 2001-02 for integrated development of potential clusters of
handicraft artisans, with the objectives of creating centres of excellence with
forward and backward linkages; upgrading artisans’ skills, and ensuring self-
sustained and self-managed clusters of artisans. One of the components of
BAHVY was the creation of Common Facility Centres (CFCs) at the cluster
level to enhance production quality and quantity by using modern tools,
equipment and techniques and increase economies of scale.

AXE


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

We found that out of the 95 CFCs sanctioned between 2001-02 and 2007-08,
61CFCs were yet to be completed, despite release of Rs. 21.15 crore, and
Rs. 8.18 crore was lying unspent were yet to be refunded. Out of the 61
incomplete CFCs, in 42 CFCs (where Rs. 7.75 crore had been released), the
NGOs/ Co-operative Societies executing the projects did not even seek grant
of the second and subsequent installments, while in 13 CFCs (where Rs. 3.49
crore had been released), the executing agencies did not seek grant of the third
and subsequent installments. 30 CFCs were reported as completed by the
DC(H); however, we found that these were treated as completed merely on the
basis of release of the last installment, without ensuring that the projects were
physically completed and CFCs were functional. Thus, the Ministry failed to
effectively implement this scheme.

Paragraph 13.2

Ministry of Tourism
Non-observance of Financial Propriety

Deliberate circumvention of canons of financial of propriety and the failure of
the Ministry to effectively monitor the expenditure incurred or committed
resulted in unsanctioned expenditure of Rs. 5.59 crore in Government of India
Tourism Office, New York. The propriety of the expenditure also becomes
suspect in the absence of adequate documentation and control.

Paragraph 14.1
Ministry of Urban Development

Non- recovery of rent in respect of premises alloted at market rates to
non-entitled categories

Audit scrutiny of recovery of rent by the Directorate of Estate (DoE) in respect
of office accommodation in Delhi allotted at market rates of licence fees to
persons and entities falling in the non-entitled categories revealed serious
mismanagement.

On being pointed out by audit, DoE recovered outstanding dues of revised
market rates of license fee amounting to Rs. 1.60 crore from 10 allottees but
Rs. 3.23 crore of outstanding dues in respect of 16 allottees was yet to be
recovered,

DoE recovered Rs. 0.83 crore of outstanding dues between May and
September 2008 from the Central Government Employees Welfare Housing
Organization (CGEWHO) which was allotted office accommodation purely on
temporary basis at market rates of license fee, subject to the approval of the
Cabinet Committee on Accommodation (CCA). The Government did not

xxii


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

agree to the allotment, but CGEWHO was yet to vacate the premises, and dues
on account of license fee from February 2008 onwards continued to
accumulate as of April 2009.

DoE did not follow up on its decision of November 2005 by initiating either
recovery of rent at market rates or eviction proceedings for vacation of
accommodation occupied by Kendriya Bhandar. Rent dues for the period from
November 2005 to March 2010 amounting to Rs. 4.53 crore, was yet to be
recovered as of March 2010.

Paragraph 15.2

xxiii


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER I : INTRODUCTION

LE About this Report

Compliance audit refers to examination of the transactions relating to
expenditure, receipts, assets and liabilities of the audited entities to ascertain
whether the provisions of the Constitution of India, applicable laws, rules,
regulations and various orders and instructions issued by the competent
authorities are being complied with. Compliance audit also includes an
examination of the rules, regulations, orders and instructions for their legality,
adequacy, Lransparency, propriety and prudence.

Audits are conducted on behalf of the Comptroller and Auditor General as per
the Auditing Slandards' approved by him. These standards prescribe the
norms which the auditors are expected to follow in conduct of audit, and
require reporting on individual cases of non-compliance and abusc, as well 88
on weaknesses that exist in systems of financial management and internal
control. The findings of audit are expected to enable the executive to take
corrective action as also to frame policies and directives that will lead to
improved financial management of the organizations, thus, contributing to
better governance.

This chapter provides a profile of some of the major auditee Ministries and
Departments, explains the planning and extent of audit, and also refers to
significant audit observations included in this report.

12. Auditee profile

There are 50 Ministries/independent Departments of the Union Government
excluding Ministries of Railways and Defence. The gross expenditure of these
50 Ministries and departments of the Government was Rs.31,59,074 crore
during 2008-09. This Report relates to the Civil Ministries/Departmenis
including Department of Post but excluding Scientific Ministries/Departments.
The significant audit findings relating to 15 Ministries have been included in
this Report in different chapters. A brief profile of the ministries/departments
of the Government of India covered in various chapters of this report is
detailed in Apendix-1.

1 www.cag.gov.in/himVauditing standards.hem



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

13. Authority for Audit

The authority for audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India(C&AG) and reporting to the Parliament is derived from Articles 149 and
151 of the Constitution of India respectively and the Comptroller and Auditor
General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. C&AG
conducts audit of expenditure of Ministries/Departments of the Government of
India under Sections 13? and 17 of the C&AG’s (DPC) Act*. CAG is the sole
auditor in respect of autonomous bodies under the Civil
Ministries/Departments which are audited under sections 192) and 20(1)° of
the C&AG’s (DPC) Act. In addition, C&AG also conducts supplementary/
superimposed audit of other autonomous bodies under sections 147 and 13° of
C&AG’s (DPC) Act, whose primary audit is conducted by Chartered
Accountants. The principles and methodologies for compliance audit are
prescribed in the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 issued by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

ee Planning and conduct of 8 adit

The audit effort can be classified under three distinct types of audits: Financial
Audit, Compliance Audit and Performance Audit.

Financial Audit is the review of financial statements of an entity that seeks to
obtain an assurance that the financial statements are free from material
misstatements and present a true and fair picture.

Compliance Audits scrutinise transactions relating to expenditure, receipts,
assets and liabilities of the audited entities to ascertain whether the provisions
of the Constitution of India, applicable laws, rules, regulations, and various
orders and instructions issued by the competent authorities are being complied
with.

? Audit of (i) all expenditure trom the Consolidated Fund of India, (ii) all transactions relating to
Contingency Funds and Public Accounts and (ii) all trading, manufacturing, profit & loss aecounts,
balance-sheets and ather subsidiary accounts.

3 Audit and report छा the accounts of stores and stock kept in any office or department of the Union or of
a State,

‘Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971,

5 Audit of the accounts of corporations (not being companies) established by or under law made by
Parliament in accordance with the provisions of the respective legislations.

© Audit of accounts of any body or authority on the request of the President, on such terms & conditions
as may be agreed upon between the CLAG and Government.

7 Audit of (i) all receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by grants or loans,
from the Consolidated Fund of India and Gi) all receipts and expenditure of any body ot authority where
the grant or loan to such body or authority from the Consolidated Fund of India in a financial years is not
Jess than rupees one erore.

® Andit of grants or loans given for any speeiffe purpose from the Consolidated Fund of India to any
authority or body, to serutinize the procedures by which the sanetioning authority satisfies itself as to the
ful llment of the conditions subjcet to which the grants or loans were given.



Report No. १ of 2010-11

Performance Audits are in-depth examinations of a program, function,
operation or the management system of an entity to assess whether the entity
is achieving economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the employment of
available resources.

The audit process starts with the assessment of risk of the
Ministry/Department Organization as a whole and each unit, based on
expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level of delegated
financial powers, and assessment of overall internal controls and concerns of
stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also considered in this exercise.
Based on this risk assessment, the frequency and extent of audit are decided.
An annual audit plan is formulated to conduct audit on the basis of such risk
assessment.

After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports containing audit
findings are issued to the head of the unit. The units are requested to furnish
replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection
Report. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled or
further action for compliance is advised. Important audit observations arising
out of these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the audit reports,
which are submitted to the President of India under Article 151 of the
Constitution of India.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER II : MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE ]

Department of Agriculture & Co-operation

21 Infructuous expenditure on construction of Glass House and
purchase of X-Ray Scanner by National Plant Quarantine Station,
New Delhi

The expenditure of Rs. 1.88 crore on the construction of a Glass House
and Rs. 0.35 crore on purchase of an X-Ray Scanner was rendered
infructuous, as the facilities could not be put to their intended use for
the last eight and three years respectively, after their
construction/acquisition

The National Plant Quarantine Station (NPQS), New Delhi is a subordinate
office of the Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage,
Faridabad under the Ministry of Agriculture. The prime objective of NPQS is
to regulate import of plants and planting material with a view to keeping
exotic microbes, insects — pests and weeds at bay. This is achieved by issuing
import permits for plants and planting material, reporting of non-compliances
regarding issue of phyto-sanitary certificates by exporting countries,
inspection and screening of plants and planting material imported from
abroad, and supervision of — phyto-sanitary = measures for
disinfection/disinfestations of plant materials. Two cases of infructuous
expenditure had come to the notice of Audit, which also impact the
achievement of its objectives by NPQS. These cases are discussed below:

A. Infructuous expenditure on construction of glass house

To conduct the necessary ‘grow-out-tests’ of the imported sowing and
planting materials, NPQS got a glass house constructed by the Central Public
Works Department in May 2001 at a cost of Rs. 1.88 crore, which was handed
over to NPQS in August 2001.

Audit scrutiny in March 2008, however, revealed that the glass house had not
been put to its intended use. Due to long disuse, the sprinklers, mist and
cooling system, and other equipment had got clogged, making it unsuitable for
use in the future.

In response, the NPQS stated (May/ December 2008) that:

. The glass house was constructed to conduct ‘grow-out-tests’ for seeds
and saplings imported through Delhi, as well as for the other
Quarantine Stations that had not got their own glass house. During the

4


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

initial period, the work was undertaken according to the plan.
However, the inflow of the planting materials did not increase, as was
anticipated.

Owing to a high level of hardness of the available water, the pumps,
nozzles, tanks, and supply lines of the cooling system of the glass
house got choked and corroded, resulting in disruption of activities.
This was because the area did not have any municipal water supply,
and NPQS had to rely solely on bore-well pump, with high
concentration of dissolved solutes ranging over 600ppm. However, an
action plan for operationalizing the glass house after making necessary
repair and maintenance had been finalized in a meeting of the
concerned Departments, and CPWD authorities had already taken
action to make the soft water plant operational.

With a view to utilizing the facility in a practicable manner, a number
of private plant growers as well as Government Research Institutes had
been contacted to use the glass house on a shared basis. A proposal
from one private party for potential leasing of the glass house had been
sent to the Ministry for necessary advice.

Besides the glass house, NPQS also had a growth chamber that
allowed germination under regulated conditions within the laboratory,
and most of the seed consignments were subjected to growth chamber
and blotter tests for quicker germination and inspection.

The response of NPQS is not tenable for the following reasons:

No effective efforts had been made for the past seven years to
operationalise the glass house. The hardness of the water should have
been assessed, before construction of the glass house, and appropriate
measures taken, keeping in view the quality of available water.

The glass house was constructed for conducting grow-out tests of
imported sowing and growing material. If the Department’s current
view that most of the seed consignments were subjected to testing in
the existing growth chamber of NPQS that allowed germination under
regulated conditions within the laboratory is accepted, then the
necessity of constructing a separated glass house at a cost of Rs. 1.88
crore is open to question,

Thus, the expenditure of Rs. 1.88 crore on the construction of a glass house at
NPQS was rendered infructuous, as the facility could not be put to its intended
use of conducting *grow out tests’ of imported sowing and planting materials.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

B. Infructuous expenditure on purchase of X-Ray Scanner

With a view to detecting exotic pests and diseases infestation of agricultural
produce being brought in by arriving passengers, NPQS in November 2005
decided to procure one X-Ray Baggage Scanner for use at the Indira Gandhi
International Airport, New Delhi (IGT Airport). The scanner was procured by
the Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage, Faridabad in
2005-2006 at a cost of Rs. 35.26 lakh.

In March 2006, NPQS informed the Directorate that the X-Ray Baggage
Scanner had been received, and was kept in their station premises in packed
condition, as the Airport Authority of India (AAT) had not allotted space for its
installation. AAT informed NPQS in May 2006 that since Delhi International
Airport (P) Limited (DIAL) had taken over the operation and maintenance of
IGI Airport, the matter should be taken up with them. Subsequently, the
Ministry of Agriculture took up the matter with the Ministry of Civil Aviation,
as well as DIAL, for getting space in the Arrival Hall at IGI Airport, New
Delhi. DIAL initially agreed to provide space in the new Terminal-3 at IGI;
however, since the installation required modifications to be made in the layout
plan of the Terminal already agreed between DIAL and the Customs
Department, DIAL sought concurrence from the Customs Department.
Although the Ministry stated (August/ December 2008) that all efforts were
being made to get space in the Arrival Hall of the International Airport for
installing the X-Ray Scanner, as of June 2009, no space had been provided to
NPQS, and the X-Ray scanner continued to remain in packed condition at
NPQS for last three years.

Thus, the expenditure of Rs. 35.26 lakh
incurred in 2005-06 on the purchase of
an X-Ray Baggage Scanner separately
for scanning agriculture produce
brought by incoming passengers was
rendered unproductive, as the machine
was still lying in packed condition. The
feasibility of installing the X-Ray
Scanner in IGI Airport and agreements
for earmarking of space should have been assessed before procuring the
scanner. Further, the Ministry was now proposing modern multi-imaging X-
Ray Scanners to take care of the needs of both the Customs Department and
bio-security, which would make this scanner redundant.

X-Ray Scanner lyit
condition at NPQS



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

2.2 Ministry failed to check the irregular release of funds by NABARD
after two years of closure of the “On Farm Water Management
Scheme”

The Central Sector Scheme “On Farm Water Management Scheme” was
discontinued by the Planning Commission with effect from 2006-07.
However, the Ministry failed to check the irregular release by NABARD
of the balance amount of unutilized subsidy of Rs. 0.90 crore in July-
August 2008 to cover applications which were purportedly sanctioned
assistance by banks before the closure date of 31 March 2006.

During 2001-02, the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of
Agriculture launched a Central Sector Scheme! ‘On Farm Water Management
for Increasing Crop Production in Eastern India’ for implementation in Assam,
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Manipur, Mizoram,
Orissa, Eastern Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The scheme envisaged
assistance to farmers for digging shallow tube wells, installation of electric /
diesel pump sets, community lift irrigation points, digging of wells etc., for
increasing the production and productivity of kharif and rabi / summer rice.

The scheme was implemented on a credit linked back-ended subsidy basis
through the National Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD)
in co-ordination with the State Governments. The funding norms under the
scheme stipulated 30 per cent assistance from the Government of India (Gol),
50 per cent loan from NABARD and the remaining 20 per cent as contribution
from the beneficiaries. The assistance of 30 per cent (subsidy) from the Gol
was towards the cost of construction of shallow tube wells with pumping sets,
low lift irrigation points, dug wells and electric/diesel operated pumping sets.
The financing bank would advance the project cost net of margin money to be
contributed by the beneficiary i.e. up to a maximum of 80 per cent. NABARD
would release the subsidy amount to the concerned financing bank branches,
depending upon their requirement. The release of subsidy by NABARD was to
be made only after a detailed state-wise and district-wise banking plan was
prepared by the Regional Office of NABARD in each State in consultation
with the financing banks and nodal departments of the State Governments.

The progress of implementation of the scheme was, however, not satisfactory
even after two years of launch with the main reasons identified for slow
progress being inadequate cost norms, inability of farmers to contribute their
share of 20 per cent, difficulties in obtaining land title documents, insistence

" The scheme was misclassified as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme. This came to light only in December 2004, in
response 10 the Department's suggestion 10 transfer this scheme 10 the Stale Sector; such transfer was nol possible for
a Central Sector Scheme



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

by banks for collateral, disinclination of banks in advancing loans to farmers
etc. In June 2004, while the Department proposed modifications like
increased cost norms, decreasing farmers’ contribution and providing for
publicity for improving the scheme’s performance, the Ministry of Finance
felt that the restructured scheme would not address all the limitations of the
earlier scheme and in line with the National Common Minimum Programme
(NCMP), each State should draw up its own scheme to suit local needs and
include it in its State Plan. Consequently, in July 2005, based on the
Department’s decision, the Planning Commission communicated the decision
to discontinue the scheme from 2006-07, and suggested to the State
Governments that they make provisions for the scheme’s components which
may suit their State under the State Plan.

As of April 2007, out of Rs. 115.00 crore released as Gol subsidy, NABARD
reported a provisional utilization of Rs. 101.26 crore by the banks, and had
refunded Rs. 11.44 crore between September 2006 and March 2007, thus
leaving an unutilized amount of subsidy of Rs. 2.30 crore with it. NABARD
further confirmed that the final statements of expenditure had been submitted
in respect of seven States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Manipur, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh), while in three States (Jharkhand,
Orissa and West Bengal), the figures were under reconciliation with the banks.

However, pursuant to the Ministry’s request in September 2008 for refund of
the unutilized amount, in response to the audit findings, NABARD indicated
in September 2008 that the amount of Rs. 2.30 crore hitherto reflected as
unutilized had been almost fully utilized as follows:

न NABARD reported an increase in expenditure of Rs. 1.40 crore, after
completion of reconciliation in all the States.

. Rs. 0.90 crore was released by NABARD to Chhattisgarh (Rs. 0.77
crore) and West Bengal (Rs. 0.13 crore) in July-August 2008 for
settling pending applications for which sanctions were purportedly
made by the implementing banks prior to the cutoff date of 31 March
2006, but funds could not be disbursed due to the utilization of
allocated subsidy for these States. NABARD required additional funds
of Rs. 0.78 crore to cover the claims from West Bengal in respect of
pending applications which had reportedly been sanctioned by the
implementing banks prior to 31 March 2006.

Despite provisions for getting physical and financial progress reports from
NABARD under the scheme, the Ministry did not ensure the timely
submission of these reports by NABARD. Also, the Ministry did not have
effective controls to cross check the correctness of the disbursement figures

8


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

made under the scheme, and continued to admit the figures of expenditure as
reported by NABARD without getting independent validation of the related
records and the list of purported pending applications.

In audit’s opinion, the Ministry’s failure to take action on release of Rs. 0.90
crore of funds by NABARD in July-August 2008 more than two years after
the closure date of the scheme of 31 March 2006, was irregular and improper,
especially when the intimation of the closure of the scheme on 31 March 2006
was given well in advance in July 2005, and there was no provision for carry
forward of funds beyond March 2006 to cover liabilities on account of
sanctions purportedly being given before March 2006. If such carry forward
was required, specific approval of the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance should have been obtained. This was clearly an attempt by NABARD
to avoid refund of the balance amount of Rs. 0.90 crore. Audit recommends
that this amount be forthwith recovered from NABARD.

The Ministry stated that they had been pursuing the matter with NABARD to
refund the unutilized amount. However, this amount was yet to be refunded as
of June 2009.

2.3. Drawal of funds in advance of requirement

Irregular drawal of funds in advance of requirement resulted in Rs, 5.25
crore remaining outside the Government Accounts, causing a loss of
interest of Rs, 23.46 lakh,

General Financial Rules (GFRs) provide that a Grant or Appropriation shall be
utilized to cover the charges (including the liabilities, if any, of the past year)
which are to be paid during the financial year and adjusted in the accounts of
the year for which Grant or Appropriation is sanctioned. Such charges can be
authorized by competent authority any time before, but not after the expiry of
the financial year. Further, Government of India’s (GOI) decision (4) below
Rule 258(2) lays down (as applicable prior to July 2005) that ordinarily,
payments for supply of stores should be made only after the supplies are made.
However, in cases where it becomes necessary to make advance payments as
demanded by the firms for supply of stores, the Departments of the Central
Government/Head of Departments may authorize the drawal of special
departmental advances.

Serutiny of records (June 2006 and April 2008) of the Directorate of Plant
Protection, Quarantine & Stores, Faridabad (Directorate) revealed that the
GOI, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation accorded (17 March 2005)



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

12 sanctions for Rs. 3.46 crore for purchase of equipments and allowed to
draw the amounts in advance on Abstract Contingent Bills (AC Bills) in
relaxation of para 2 (iii) under (70175 decision (4) below Rule 258 of GFRs,
with the condition that cheques/drafts would be handed over to the supplier
only after the satisfactory delivery/installation and performance report of the
equipments. However, as stated above, the relaxation invoked in these cases
was applicable only where advance payment was demanded by the supplier
for supply of store/equipment, etc. In these cases neither were any advance
payments demanded by the suppliers nor were any advance payments made to
them. Thus, the sanctions accorded by GOI were not in order and it is
apparent that the intention was to draw the money before the end of the
financial year to avoid lapsing of budget grant.

The Directorate withdrew (March 2005) Rs. 3.46 crore and kept it in the shape
of 12 banks drafts. The payments to the firms were actually made after a
period ranging between 112 days and 323 days from the date of issue of
demand drafis.

Four similar sanctions were again accorded by GOI in December 2005 and
March 2006 for Rs. 1.79 crore for the purchase of stores/equipments. The
Directorate withdrew (March 2006) the amount of Rs. 1.79 crore on A.C. Bills
through permission to draw the amount of Rs. 1.65 crore on A.C. bills was
accorded in three cases for making advance payment to the firms. The
amounts so drawn were again kept in the form of bank drafts and no advance
payments were made to the firms. The payments were made to the firms after
a period ranging between 76 days and 262 days on receipt of stores/
equipments.

Thus, irregular drawal of funds in advance of requirement on the basis of
infirm sanction orders, resulted in Rs. 5.25 crore remaining outside the
Government Accounts thereby causing a loss of interest of Rs. 23.46 lakh’.

The matter was referred to the Ministry of Agriculture in December 2008.
The Ministry stated (May 2009) that the permission of the competent authority
was obtained to draw the amount on A.C. bills and all out efforts were made to
utilize the budget allocation of each year to the extent possible. The reply is
not in conformity with the provision of the rules mentioned above.

All the average borrowing rate of interest of the Government of India at 7.89 per cent per annum during 2004-05

and at 7.75 per cent per annum during 2005-06.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries

2.4 Inordinate delay in modernisation/improvement of Slaughter
Houses and establishment of Carcass Utilisation Centres to
minimise bird hits to IAF aircraft

The objective of implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme on
“Assistance to States for Modernisation/ Improvement of Slaughter
Houses and Establishment of Carcass Utilisation Centres” to minimize air
accidents due to bird hits at ten selected high risk IAF airfield towns
could not be achieved even after 18 years, despite expenditure of Rs 26.63
crore, as only two out of 10 projects were fully operational

Bird hits have been a major cause of air accidents. Indiscriminate disposal of
garbage and stagnation of waste water in open drains close to airfields attract
birds, thereby posing serious hazards to aircraft operating at such airfields.
During the period from 1978-79 to 1987-88, the Indian Air Force (IAF)
suffered damages to 60 aircraft due to bird hits; of these, in 38 cases, the
aircraft was totally destroyed, and five pilots killed. Further, IAF was
incurring an expenditure of more than Rs. 50 crore annually on account of
damage to aircraft due to bird hits.

In order to prevent/ reduce air accidents due to bird hits, an Inter Ministerial
Joint Sub Committee (IMJSC) was constituted in February 1989 to formulate
action plans to sanitise a few selected airfields. In February 1990, IMJSC
recommended implementation of (a) garbage disposal and sewerage/ drainage
schemes, and (b) modernization of Slaughter Houses (SHs) and establishment
of Carcass Utilisation Centres (CUCs) in 10 selected high risk IAF airfields at
Gwalior (M.P.), Sirsa and Ambala (Haryana), Hindon and Bareilly (U.P.),
Adampur (Punjab), Tezpur (Assam), Pune (Maharashtra), Jodhpur
(Rajasthan), and Dindigul (A.P.).

Mention was made in the Report of the C&AG for the year ended 31 March
2007 (No. CA 1 of 2008, Paragraph 17.1) of the inordinate delay in
implementation of the solid waste management and sewerage schemes in these
10 high risk airfields. As regards the modernization of slaughter houses and
establishment of CUCs, the Ministry of Agriculture launched a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme “Assistance to States for Improvement/ Modernisation of
Slaughter Houses and Establishment of Carcass Utilisation Centres” in the
vicinity of the 10 selected high risk Indian Air Force air fields identified by the



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

IMJSC during the VIII Plan at a cost of Rs. 28.75 crore*, The scheme had two
components:

. Modernisation/ improvement of slaughter houses, with 50 per cent
funding by the Government of India (GOD and balance 50 per cent
funding to be provided by State Government/Meat Corporation/Urban
Local Bodies/Gram Panchayats jointly or exclusively.

. Establishment of CUCs, with 100 per cent Gol funding for capital
expenditure on building, plant, machinery and effluent treatment plant.

The State Governments could involve Co-operative Societies or Corporations
or Boards of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and voluntary organizations
of repute for arranging the State’s share. However, flow of Government of
India funds from the Centre were to be routed through the State Governments
only.

The scheme was continued through the TX Plan and the first two years of the
X Plan upto 2003-04, when it was closed due to poor performance of the
projects. However, in order to complete the on-going projects, the scheme was
continued for one more year upto 2004-05.

During 1990-2005, the Ministry released Rs. 28.11 crore for eight projects at
high risk airfields viz. Gwalior, Hindon, Bareilly, Adampur, Tezpur, Pune,
Jodhpur and Dindigul; no funds were released for projects at the remaining
two airfields (Ambala and Sirsa) as proposal had not been submitted by the
State Government. Audit examination disclosed the following:

. Five projects (Hindon, Bareilly, Adampur, Pune, and Jodhpur) were
completed. Out of these completed projects, only two projects at
Jodhpur and Pune were fully operational. Hindon and Bareilly were
reported as operational by the Ministry, although physical inspection
by the Audit team in July-August 2008 revealed deficiencies in
operation, and the project at Adampur was not operational since 2001.

. Three projects (Gwalior, Tezpur, and Dindigul) were yet to commence
operations as of August 2008.

* This was increased to Rs, 29.46 crore due to transfer of funds from another scheme.

12


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The detailed status of implementation of the projects in the 10 selected airfield

towns is as under:-

Table 1 : Status of Implementation of Projects as of August 2008

Sl. 9
No. Location
1 Pune
2 Jodhpur
3 Bareilly
4 Hindon
3 Adampur
6 Dindigul
7 Tezpur
8 Gwalior
9 Ambala
10 Sirsa

Unit

cuc

SH

cuc

SH

CUC

SH

CcUC

SH

cuC

vende Amount Total
release released (in expenditure Reported Status
lakh) (in lakh)
1997- 152.00 152.00 Completed and
2005 operational
1996-97 425.75 425.75 Completed and
operational; abbatoir in
use on regular basis
2000-05 258.75 258.75 Completed and
operational
1997-98 24.95 24.95 Completed and
operational
1994-95 215.88 215.88 Completed and
operational
1996-97 209.38 209.58 Completed, but ॥णा-
operational; closed
since 2001 due to
litigation
1990-91 1107.00 1107.00 Tneomplete and non-

operational; no staff for
running the plant

1993-94 83.00 83.00 Project yet to start ;
reasons = for_~—snon
commencement not
available on record.

1993-94 13.34 13.34 Incomplete and non-
operational; no status
report submitted by the
State Government

1994-95 148.00 Project abandoned due
to court’s stay,
disallowing Slaughter
House at the identified
site ; funds refunded in
2007 — 08

1995-96 172.86 172.86 Not commenced; land
allotted but work not
started due to litigation
in High Court over the
शाप

No proposal received
from State Government

No proposal received
from State Government



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Further, the Audit team conducted visits to four project sites at Hindon,
Bareilly, Adampur and Jodhpur during July and August 2008 to ascertain the
physical status of the projects, which revealed the following position.

While the CUC at Ghaziabad (near Hindon airfield) was reported as fully
operational in the Ministry’s records, the Audit team’s visit revealed that the
plant was not working to its full operational capacity due to the dilapidated
condition of the building and machinery, Huge garbage stacks had been piled
up in open spaces just outside the boundary of the airfield. Further, Ghaziabad
city neither had any authorized slaughter house, nor any authorized garbage

disposal center’.

Area surrounding Hindon airfield

* Makeshift arrangements for garbage disposal had been made at Sai Upvan, Vijay Nagar

14


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

In response (October 2008), the Ministry stated that as the plant was more than
nine years old, it was possible that the machinery might not be in very good
condition; however, running of a CUC to full capacity would depend upon the
availability of raw material for processing. The Ministry’s contention is not
acceptable because :

(i) clearly, the objective of funding the CUC had not been achieved due to
dilapidated condition of the building and machinery.

(ii) as regards utilization of CUC to its full capacity, this should have been
considered at the time of sanction of CUC and not at this stage

Although the slaughter house
at Bareilly was working
satisfactorily as per the
Ministry’s records, the site
visit by the Audit team
revealed that the plant was not
working to its full capacity.
2: ; Discussion with the employees

Slaughter House at Bareilly of the Nagar Nigam, Bareilly
manning the slaughter house revealed that the UP Pollution Control Board had
objected to the unauthorized running of the slaughter house without
installation of an effluent treatment plant; the export of meat had since been
stopped, scaling down utilization of plant capacity. The Audit team found the
drainage system of the slaughter house and the condition of the slaughter
house building was defective and unhygienic as depicted in the photograph
above:

7 The CUC at Adampur was

. closed after July 2001 due to

4 | litigation, and reportedly
handed over to the State

Department of Animal

Husbandry in 2004. During the

site visit, the Audit team found

the CUC closed, and also

noticed many garbage sites in

Closed CUC at Adampur open fields within 0.5 km to 4
km of the airfield.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

In response, the Ministry stated that the State Government had neither sought
its permission for closure of the CUC, nor intimated it about the closure.

Field visit by the Audit team to the CUC at Jodhpur revealed that the CUC
was fully operational and processing about 30-40 carcasses daily.

Meanwhile, during the period from 1990-91 to 2006-07, when these schemes
were being formulated and implemented, IAF had 13 accidents and 542
incidents on account of bird hits, which resulted in loss of 12 aircraft with a
financial effect of Rs. 181.33 crore. This would illustrate that the objectives of
the Scheme of creating hygienic conditions around the airfields so as to
minimize accidents, were not pursued to finality by the Ministry.

In response (October 2008), the Ministry stated that the desired success in
implementation of these projects could not be achieved, primarily due to lack
of matching response and funds from the States/ local bodies, low priority
accorded by the States/ local bodies and difficulties in locating suitable sites.
The Ministry also stated that they did not have the resources and manpower to
supervise the functioning of the established Slaughter Houses and CUC
projects which were spread throughout the length and breadth of the country.
Further, maintenance of sanitation and hygiene in and around slaughter houses
and prevention of clandestine slaughter was within the purview of the State
Government and local bodies, who should implement the provisions of the
Acts/ Rules already in place, and mere construction of slaughter houses and
establishment of CUCs alone would not help much in reducing the bird hit
menace, without effective monitoring and control.

In Audit’s opinion, the issues raised by the Ministry should have been
addressed at the time of conceptualization and approval of the scheme, as well
as during implementation, Further, the Ministry did not constitute a
Monitoring Committee to evaluate the progress of the scheme from time to
time, as required in terms of the recommendation of the Expert Group of the
Ministry.

Thus, due to the failure of the Ministry to effectively monitor and coordinate
with the State Governments and implementing agencies, the objective of
reducing bird hits to aircraft in selected high risk IAF airfields through
improvement/modernization of Slaughter Houses and establishment of
Carcass Utilization Centers was not achieved. Expenditure of Rs. 26.63 crore
remained largely unfruitful even after a delay of 18 years. Failure of the
scheme will continue to cause great loss to the Indian Air Force on account of
air accidents due to bird hits in these towns.

16


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

3.1 Inefficient management of Haj Operations

Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA) provides Haj subsidy on account of
the difference between the airfare paid by pilgrims sponsored by the Haj
Committee of India (HCOT) and the costs charged by the airlines making
transport arrangements — Air India, Indian Airlines, (since merged into
NACIL) and Saudi Arabian Airlines. However, examination of subsidy
payments for Haj operations from 2002 to 2006-II amounting to Rs.
1398.91 crore (subsidy payments for Haj 2007 to 2009 had not been
finalised) revealed inadmissible payments of Rs. 51.34 crore as well as
payments of Rs. 125.77 crore, for which adequate justification/ details
were not on record, over and above the approved rates for Haj
operations. The absence of detailed guidelines for determining admissible
elements of subsidy, enabled claims for numerous elements of cost,
irrespective of their reasonableness or admissibility, which was
compounded by lack of systematic procedures for independent
verification and scrutiny of Air India’s claims.

Audit is of the view that the current procedures do not incentivize
efficiency and economy of Haj operations by Air India/ India Airlines, as
the reimbursement is on cost basis, and recommends that the Ministry
consider a well-defined competitive tendering mechanism amongst
different airlines to ensure the lowest cost to Government of Haj subsidy.
If the Ministry intends to continue operations on negotiated discussions
with NACIL on cost basis, then detailed guidelines for admissible
expenses need to be framed, procedures for effective scrutiny of subsidy
claims need to be systematized, and strict timeframes for submission,
scrutiny and settlement of claims need to be laid down.

3.1.1 Haj Movements

The responsibility for making arrangements for Haj pilgrims from India is
shared by several Ministries/ agencies:

. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is the administrative Ministry
vested with the responsibility of making overall arrangement for Haj
affairs, and the Consulate General of India, Jeddah is the nodal agency
for arrangements for Haj pilgrims sponsored by the Haj Committee of
India (HCOD.

. The HCOI, commonly known as the Central Haj Committee (CHC), is
responsible, under the Haj Committee Act 2002, for making
arrangements for the pilgrimage of Muslims from India for Haj.

17



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

. The Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA) is the nodal agency,
responsible for handling the movement of Indian pilgrims by air'. Haj
flights are undertaken by Air India (AT) and Indian Airlines (IA) in
association with Saudi Arabian Airlines (as per a bilateral agreement
between India and Saudi Arabia), and these operate currently from 17
embarkation points* in India.

Air India handles Haj operations, partly using its own fleet of aircraft, and
partly by chartering aircraft on wet lease’ basis. It is also the nodal agency for
air chartering, and representatives of the 100, MEA, MOCA and DGCA’ are
associated for air charter negotiations.

Haj operations are handled in two phases — Phase I flights start from various
Indian embarkation points and land at Jeddah/ Madina, and Phase — II involves
return flights from Jeddah and Madina to Indian airports.

3.1.1.1 Haj Subsidy

Haj subsidy is the difference between the fare paid by HCOI pilgrims and the
fare charged by the agencies that are making transport arrangements i.e. Air
India, Indian Airlines, and Saudi Arabia Airlines. This subsidy is paid to AI by
MOCA out of its budget provisions. From 1994 onwards, the two-way airfare
payable by Haj pilgrims has remained static at the level of Rs. 12,000 per
pilgrim, whereas the cost per pilgrim had increased to Rs. 51,610 during 2009.
The expenditure on Haj subsidy, increased from Rs. 10.57 crores in 1994 to
approximately Rs. 620 crore for the Haj 2009°.

A profile of the total number of Haj pilgrims sponsored by HCOT and the
subsidy for the Haj Operations from 2002 to 2009 is depicted as follows:

"From 1995, travel for Haj by ship was discontinued, and Haj pilgrims from India travel only
by air.

>" Air India and Indian Airlines have been merged into the National Aviation Company of
India Ltd. (NACIL).

* Ahmedabad, Aurangabad, Bangalore, Calicut, Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati,Hyderabad, Indore,
Jaipur, Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Nagpur, Patna, Srinagar and Varanasi.

* The lease of an aireraft with flight crew is normally referred to as wet lease

* DGCA: Directorate General of Civil Aviation

# The final expenditure for the Haj 2007,2008 and 2009 has still not yet been arrived at.

18


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Chart | - Number of Haj Pilgrims sponsored by HCOI
160000
120000
80000
e oi =
40000 | | a रे ्य 8 a re a
wee ee | PS
See B | हैल
yaaa BBE yy थ।
ot
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006-1 2006-॥ 2007 2008 2009
Chart 2: Per- pilgrim subsidy (in Rs.)
60000
al 51,610
50000
3
€
= 40000
2
co न्ध ह,
2 30000 25,345 23,016 24556
&
= 20000
é
10000
07
2002 2003... 2004. 2005. 2006-1 2006-1 2007. 2008. 2009

Chart-3 : Total Haj Subsidy (Rs. in crore)

x
3
Ss

y
8
8

&
8
Ss

y
8
Ss

g
2
2
é
£
=
3 ३00
3
2
हि

8
डे

ना

2002. 2003. 2004... 2005. 2006-1 -2006-I1 2007. 2008. 2009

As regards subsidy payments for the 2007, 2008 and 2009 Haj operations, on
account payments had been made to Air India. Though the final subsidy
payment during 2007-09 could not be made available to audit, as per



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

information furnished by MOCA subsidy payments of Rs. 365 crore, Rs. 620
crore and Rs. 620 crore had been made for 2007, 2008 and 2009 respectively*.

The per-pilgrim air fare rates for Haj operations were as follows:

. From 2001, MOCA decided that the Haj traffic was to be taken care of
collectively on a 50:50 basis by AI/ TA, and Saudi Arabian Airlines
(SAA) at a fixed cost of US$ 700 per pilgrim plus US$ 10 as insurance
surcharge. For pilgrims travelling from distant stations like Kolkata
and Chennai, Al was permitted to charge 10 per cent extra, i.e. $ 780
(inclusive of insurance surcharge) per pilgrim.

. SAA accepted these fares of $ 710 and $ 780 up to Haj 2005.
However, for Haj 2006-I, they charged fares of $745 and $ 819, while
for Haj 2006-II, they charged $ 771 and $ 847 as regular fare and fare
for distant stations respectively.

As compared to the rates charged by SAA, the overall cost per pilgrim
ultimately claimed by Air India from MOCA ranged between US $ 940 to US
$1235 during Haj 2002 to 2006-II.

For each Haj operation, approval from the Cabinet is obtained on the basis of
estimated expenditure, and a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is also
signed between SAA and MOCA. Further, HCOI guarantees 99 per cent load
factor in respect of the total seats to be provided by SAA.

Payment of the cost for carrying pilgrims for Haj by SAA is made by Air India
on behalf of MOCA in the following manner:

. 30 per cent of the total amount is required to be paid two weeks before
departure of first Haj flight from India;

. 25 per cent of the total amount is required to be paid on the day of the
first Haj flight from India;
. 35 per cent of the total amount is required to be paid two weeks prior

to the start of Phase-2 return operations;

न 10 per cent of the total amount is required to be paid after completion
of Phase-2 operations on the basis of final figures of Phase-1 load. This
needs to be settled no later than two weeks after the completion of
Phase-2;

As regards payments to AI, ‘on account’ advance payments are made by
MOCA through its budget, subject to final adjustment after completion of Haj

* Source: Data furnished by MOCA on 13" April 2010

20


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

operations. No norms or guidelines have been stipulated for such on account
payments.

Detail of payments on account of Haj subsidy made for the last five Haj
operations (2002 to 2009) and the periods to which they pertain, are
summarized below:

Table 1
(Rs. in crore)

Financial yy Haj Haj Haj Haj Haj Haj* | Haj* | Haj*

Year aj 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006-1 2007 2008 2009
2001-02 14.96
2002-03 110.00 60.00
2003-04 45.95 93.00 55.65
2004-05 60.00 | 164.90
2005-06 2.72 18.03 0.92 250.00
2006-07 373.91
2007-08 4.54 10.39 49,02 33.48 40.21 11.23 365
2008-09 620,00
2009-10 620.00
Total 178.17 | 181.42 165.59 198.38 = 290.21 385.14 365. 620.00 620.00

*Haj subsidy paid by MOCA does not reflect final subsidy payments.
3.1.2 Audit Scope

An audit of payment of Haj subsidy claims for Haj operations from 2002 to
2006 (Haj - T and Haj-Il)’, covering policy and procedural aspects, was
conducted in the MOCA.

Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the MOCA
during the conduct of this audit.

3.1.3 Audit Findings
3.1.3.1 Lack of Policy and guidelines
In audit’s opinion, the current procedures for air charter negotiations for

leasing of aircraft do not incentivize efficiency and economy of Haj operations

7 Since subsidy payments for Haj 2007,2008 and 2009 had not been finalized by the MOCA
as of March 2010, these were not included in the scope of audit.

21


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

by AI/ IA, as the reimbursement is on cost basis. Audit examination revealed
that the rates agreed with SAA were significantly lower than the overall rates
ultimately claimed by Air India for Haj operations from 2002 to 2006 Haj-II.
The lower pilgrim cost of SAA vis-a-vis AI and JA, indicates that AI and LA
were not managing their Haj operations as efficiently and economically as
SAA. Such inefficiency is ultimately charged to MOCA’s account through
higher subsidy payments.

Audit scrutiny, further, revealed that the absence of detailed rules/ framework
for determining admissible subsidy payable to Al/ IA enabled these agencies
to claim all expenses irrespective of their reasonableness or admissibility; this
was compounded by lack of systematic procedures for independent
verification/ scrutiny of AI claims, as well as monitoring.

3.1.3.2 Inadmissible Payments

Audit scrutiny revealed that in addition to the rates approved by the Cabinet
for different Haj operations, inadmissible claims amounting to Rs. 51,34 crore
over the period 2002 to 2006 were allowed and paid to Al, as detailed below:

Table 2
(Rupees in crore)
Category Brief Details | oa, | Amount
Periods

Additional Payments | In terms of the Cabinet note of Haj 2005, IA was | 2002 to 12.34
for technical halt at | allowed reimbursement of parking, handling and | 2004
Sharjah landing charges (on cost basis) for a technical halt at

Sharjah, due to its inability to operate direct flights

to Jeddah with its aircraft. However, LA was allowed

additional payments over these charges, primarily on

account of aircraft fuel, pilgrim cost, and spares and

components.
Higher Fares for | The fare decided by the Cabinet in Haj 2005 was | 2002 to 9.15
Lucknow and | US$ 700 per pilgrim, with 10 per cent extra | 2006-IT
Srinagar chargeable for pilgrims travelling from farther

stations like Kolkata and Chennai. The higher rate of
US$ 819 was made applicable for Lucknow only
from Haj 2006 -{. The Ministry incorrectly allowed
claims from AT @ US$ 940 per pilgrim from
Lucknow upto Haj 2005, although this was not | Haj 2005 177
covered by the Cabinet’s approval.

Similarly, Al carried 5602 pilgrims from Srinagar
and claimed higher rate USS 780, instead of US $
710 which resulted in overpayment of Rs. 1.77 crore

Royalty to SAA While the MOUs signed between the Ministry with | 2002 to 2.40
SAA had no provision for payment of royalty, the | 2004
bilateral agreements between SAA and AT provided
for payment of royalty to SAA for shortfall in
passengers cartied vis-A-vis the allotted seats.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Payment for travel of | SAA and AT made additional claims for subsidy on
CHC officials transportation of 129 passengers (including 48 HCOI
officials), who were not selected as pilgrims through
the stipulated procedure of draw of lots by HCOT.
These were subsequently regularized by the Ministry
through post facto approval. These passengers were
in addition to the Haj goodwill delegations of the
Gol, which has been covered in Paragraph 5.9 of the
CAG’s Audit Report No. CA | of 2008.

Claims for excess | For Haj 2004, the number of pilgrims certified by | Haj 2004 4.40
number of passengers | the Chartered Accountant was lower than the | and Haj

number for which AT was allowed payment. 2006-1
Claims for own | AT was allowed payment for 14,320 pilgrims | Haj 20.84
flights at rates for | transported in its own aircraft at higher rates | 2006-1
leased aircraft corresponding to those paid for leased flights

(Rs. 47,672), instead of at the rates stipulated in the
Cabinet approval (Rs. 33,115). Instead of operating
on “cost basis”, AT was effectively obtaining profits
at Gol’s cost.

Total 51.34

3.1.3.3 Payments without adequate justification/details

The following payments amounting to Rs. 125,77 crore were also allowed and
paid to AI over and above the approved rates for Haj operations, for which
adequate justifications/details were not available on record:

Table 3
__ (Rupees in crore)
८ कर Haj Amount
‘ategory Brief Details Periods
Other Costs These charges were claimed by Al, in addition to other | 2002 to 18.46

charges like landing, handling, catering, navigation and | 2006 — T
other charges. However, details of these costs allowed | and II

by the Ministry were not available in its records. In the
absence of such details, the authenticity of such
expenditure, and their direct relation with Haj operations
could not be verified in audit

Direct and These charges were claimed by Al only for Haj 2006-I | 2006- 1 46.55
Indirect fixed and II, and were allowed by the Ministry without details, | and II
costs in the absence of which their authenticity and relevance

to Haj operations could not be verified.
Miscellaneous Tn addition to the approved items of cost, AT claimed | Haj 2002 10.15
Charges additional amounts on account of catering on ground | to 2006-

due to delays, publicity and give-aways, VSAT and | II
telephone expenses, purchases of computer equipment.
While expenses on ground catering due to delays should
have been avoided through efficient management of
operations, the direct relationship of other expenses with
Haj operations could not be vouchsafed in audit.

Additional Al claimed additional amounts for positioning of leased | Haj 2005 | 24.87
Charges on aircraft from stations to an operating station as “ferry | to Haj
positioning of cost”. Details of such costs, detailed justification for | 2006-11

aircraft incurring of such costs due to positioning of aircraft, and

efforts made by Al to minimize such costs through
efficient management were not available in the



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

ry’s records, in the absence of which the
admissibility of such expenses could not be verified in
audit.

Excessive claims
‘on account of hub
and spoke
operations

Hub and spoke operations were carried out by IA for
carrying pilgrims to connecting AI flights to Jeddah,
which were allowed by the Ministry at rates ranging
from Rs. 3 to Rs. 5 lakh per flying hour, in the absence

Haj 2003
to Haj
2006-IT

20.14

of any guidelines or norms. However, analysis revealed
that the number of passengers per flight claimed was far
less than the full capacity of 146 passengers for the A-
320 aircraft used for such operations. The load factor
was far less than the 99 per cent committed by HCOT for
SAA operations to Jeddah.

Penalty for under | HCOT could not provide the requisite number of | Haj 2003 5.60

utilization of pilgrims in different Haj operations, for adhering to the | 0. Haj
capacity load factor of 99 per cent stipulated in the MOU with | 2006-II

SAA. Resultantly, SAA claimed and was paid Rs. 5.60
crores for under utilization of capacity of aircrafts
during Haj 2003 to Haj 2006-II; this was, in turn,
charged by Al to MOCA

Total 125.77

3.1.3.4 Avoidable Payment of Interest Rs. 46.29 crore

For the Haj operations from 2002 to 2006-II, Air India claimed and was paid
interest of Rs. 46.29 crore, since the on-account payments by MOCA did not
cover the entire amount, and the residual amount had to be financed by Air
India through commercial borrowings from the market, This interest was
claimed, since dues on account of Haj operations were not settled promptly; in
fact, the final payment of Rs. 4.54 crore for Haj operations of 2002 was made
only in 2007-08. These interest payments could have been avoided, had claims
been submitted, scrutinized and settled in time.

3.1.4 Expert Group to Review Haj Operations

वा pursuance of a Cabinet decision relating to Haj 2006-11, an Expert Group
was set up in February 2007 to review the policy for future Haj operations.
The terms of reference relating to transport arrangement for this Expert Group
were:

. The transportation arrangements for the pilgrims to Saudi Arabia and
choice of the institution, to execute it, as well as the procedure for
leasing/arranging aircraft.

न The fixing of air fare of the pilgrims and the related issues of subsidy
and eligibility.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The recommendations of the Expert Group with regard to ‘Transport
Arrangements’ were briefly as under:

. The fare should, preferably, be increased from the present Rs. 12,000
to Rs. 30,000 over a four year period with increase of around Rs. 5,000
per year. This would make the HCOI fares in consonance with fares
paid by PTOpilgrims for Haj 2006 — I. The fares would, thereafter be
linked to the average annual level of increase in airfares;

. Every effort should be made to bring down the AT fare to the level
offered by SAA and to the PTOs in Haj 2006 —II, i.e around
Rs. 32,000;

. There should be greater transparency in the negotiations with SAA and
in the wet leasing of aircraft by Air India, and Air India operations in
general;

न There should be oversight of the air transport for Haj operations by a
committee constituted with the participation of the concerned
Ministries, Air India and HCOI;

. The existing rule about pilgrims not repeating the Haj before five years
to be implemented by HCOT should be strictly enforced; and

. The intimation of fare increase should be conveyed to the public as
part of a wider package for improving the Haj bandobast and providing
better facilities to Hajis at embarkation points in the country and at
Jeddah, Makkah and Mina.

The above recommendations of the Expert Group were discussed in a meeting
of a Group of Ministers (GOM) held in August 2007, and the following
decisions were taken:

. The recommendations of the Expert Group relating to air fare were
accepted in toto, except that the airfare should be increased from the
present Rs. 12,000 by Rs. 4,000 each year starting from the year 2007
over the next four years.

. MOCA would move a proposal to obtain the approval on the
recommendations concerning air transport management. It would also

® Private Tour Operator



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

consider and introduce measures to further decrease the actual cost of
air transport arrangements.

However, despite the recommendations of GOM, there was no change in the
airfare, which was retained at Rs. 12000 (i.e. the level in 1994) till May 2009,
when the airfare was raised to Rs. 16,000. This, coupled with inefficient
management of operations, resulted in huge amounts of subsidy.

3.1.5 Recommendations:

“ The Ministry needs to consider, without further delay, a well defined
competitive tendering mechanism, involving different airlines, to
ensure the lowest cost to Government of Haj subsidy after giving the
detailed estimates of pilgrims from different embarkation points. These
should not be left to negotiated discussions with NACIL on “cost
basis” as there is little incentive for them to increase efficiency.

&

Further, once competitively tendered rates are agreed, the concerned
airline(s) would then be wholly responsible for efficiently and
effectively managing their operations within the tendered rates.
Decisions as to leasing of aircraft or use of own fleet would be that of
the airlines, and not that of MOCA. Further, no additional payments
whatsoever on any ground beyond the competitively tendered rates
should be made.

%

> If MOCA intends to continue operations on negotiated basis through
NACIL on “cost basis”, detailed guidelines for admissible expenses
(along with cost limits) need to be framed. Further, procedures for
effective audit/ third party verification of claims of NACIL vis-a-vis
the guidelines need to be systematized, and strict timeframes for
submission, scrutiny and payment of claims need to be laid down, so as
to ensure accountability.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in September 2008; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Bureau of Civil Aviation Security

3.2... Non-commencement of projects for Civil Aviation Security
Training Academy and Office of Regional Deputy Commissioner
of Security (Mumbai)

Two important projects of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS)
for setting up a Civil Aviation Security Training Academy, and
construction of an office building for the Regional Deputy Commissioner
of Security at Mumbai, could not commence even after 13 years and six
years respectively of their approval by the Planning
Commission/Ministry, due to non-finalisation of their location, These
cases highlight the apathetic attitude of the authorities towards
strengthening Civil Aviation Security in the country despite the
increasing menace of global terrorism and repeated terrorist attacks in
India and elsewhere.

Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), an attached office of the Ministry
of Civil Aviation (MoCA), is the regulatory authority for civil aviation
security in India. It is responsible for laying down standards for pre-
embarkation security and anti-sabotage measures in civil flights, and ensuring
compliance with these standards through regular inspections and security
audits. It is headed by a Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation) and has
four regional offices at the international airports at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata
and Chennai, which are headed by Deputy Commissioners of Security.

Two important projects of the BCAS to safeguard aviation security could not
be completed even after 13 years and six years respectively of their approval
by the Planning Commission/Ministry despite release of Rs. 3.65 crore to the
implementing agencies. These cases highlight extreme slackness on the part of
authorities in executing projects related to civil aviation security in the
country. The details are discussed below:

Case-I : Establishment of a Civil Aviation Security Training Academy

Establishment of a Civil Aviation Security Training Academy (CASTA) under
the aegis of BCAS was recommended by an Inter-Ministerial Group
constituted (1993) in the wake of four hijackings of Indian Airlines flights.
Subsequently, a proposal for setting up such an Academy, which would
function as the apex aviation security institution in the country, was approved
by the Planning Commission in December 1996 with an allocation of
Rs. 16.87 crore during the IX Five Year Plan.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Initially, land for the Academy was identified near IGI Airport, Delhi, which
was, however, not made available by the Airports Authority of India (AAT).
Consequently, in February 2003, the Ministry decided to locate the Academy
at Netaji Nagar, New Delhi, and conveyed in-principle approval. While an
amount of Rs. 25 crore was earmarked for the Academy in the X Plan,
advance payment of Rs. 2.65 crore was released in two phases in March and
December 2003 to AAI towards consultancy charges and preliminary
activities. The proposal remained under consideration in MoCA till March
2005, and thereafter, search for other locations began without assigning any
reason.

Several options were explored between March 2005 and July 2008 as
discussed below:

. Locating the Academy at Gondia (Maharashtra) along with the
proposed National Flying Training Institute (March 2005). Gondia was
not preferred as BCAS wanted the Academy to be located close to an
international airport to attract foreign airport/airline security/staff,
preferably in Delhi, due to easy availability of subject matter
specialists from various security organizations which were all
headquartered in Delhi.

. Utilizing the existing facilities of the National Institute of Aviation
Management and Research, Delhi (September 2005);

. Locating the Academy at Safdarjung Airport (February 2006). This
was not found to be possible as AAI expressed its inability to provide
fand.

न Accommodating the Academy in the new BCAS Headquarters
Building at New Delhi (June 2008). This was also not possible, as it
was felt that adequate space for the academy was not available in the
new BCAS Headquarters.

. Locating the training academies of BCAS and DGCA’ adjacent to
each other (July 2008); and

e Exploring other locations at Janpath and Nangloi, Delhi (July/ August
2008).

3 DGCA: Director General of Civil Aviation



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Thus, despite lack of any other specialized institute in the country to impart
training on aviation security, a dedicated training academy for civil aviation
security could not be set up even after 16 years of recommendation of the Inter
Ministerial Group.

The delay of 13 years (since approval for the academy by the Planning
Commission) in locating even the site for the academy highlights the apathetic
attitude of the authorities towards strengthening civil aviation security in the
country despite the increasing menace of global terrorism and repeated
terrorist attacks in India and elsewhere.

Given the importance of this project in strengthening civil aviation security in
the country, the Ministry must set a definite timeline within which the
Academy would be set up to implement the recommendation of the Inter-
Ministerial Group of 1993.

This case also highlights that neither the Planning Commission nor any other
agency is effectively monitoring timely execution of projects relating to civil
aviation security.

Case-II: Construction of Regional Deputy Commissioner of Security
(RDCOS) office at Mumbai

Construction of the Office of the Regional Deputy Commissioner of Security
(RDCOS) at Mumbai, which was approved by the Ministry in December
2003, had not commenced as of January 2010, due to non-finalisation of the
location of the office. The details of the case are summarized below:

. Tn July 2003, the project was envisaged as a combined office complex
of the RDCOS, Regional Director - AAI, and the Airport Director at
Mumbai. The land earmarked for the project was found to have solid
rock. Consequently, the site was considered unsuitable for the project
as the basement for the project could not be constructed.

. A new location was identified by AAT in December 2004 and detailed
estimates submitted in February 2005. Meanwhile, due to restructuring
of Mumbai Airport through the Joint Venture route in May 2006 and
the consequent handing over of Mumbai Airport to the Joint Venture, a
combined office complex was no longer necessary, as the office of
Airport Director, AAT was no longer required.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

न A new location at the new Airport Colony was considered, but was not
found feasible in January 2007, due to the requirements of the new
airport operator, As of January 2010, the office continued to operate
from residential premise provided by Mumbai International Airport
Lid.

The Ministry had, in December 2003, advanced Rs. one crore to AAT for
undertaking preliminary activities relating to this project which remained
unrefunded,

Tn response, the Ministry stated (February/ August 2008) that:

. Despite best efforts, the construction work could not be started due to
circumstances beyond their control.

. In April 2008, AAI had been requested to allocate suitable land in the
vicinity of the airport for the proposed RDCOS office.

न The advance of Rs. one crore to AAI would be adjusted against the
cost of construction of the new office complex of BCAS Headquarters
at New Delhi.

The reply of the Ministry should be viewed in the context of the decision to
restructure Mumbai Airport through the JV route being taken by the
Government of India in September 2003 itself; the lack of necessity for a
combined office complex, including AAI offices at Mumbai, could have been
foreseen well in advance, and the final location decided much earlier.

Thus due to poor planning, lack of effective monitoring and indecisiveness of
the Ministry, both the projects having important bearing on the civil aviation
security got inordinately delayed and the construction is yet to commence
even after 13 years/six years of their approval by the competent authority.

3.3 Infructuous expenditure of Rs. 6.10 crore on procurement and
non- utilisation of Hansa Trainer Aircraft

DGCA procured eleven Hansa trainer aircraft from National Aerospace
Laboratories (NAL) at the cost of Rs. 6.10 crore for allotment to various
Government flying clubs. However, these aircraft were not utilized by the
flying clubs due to lack of trained instructors and perceived technical
constraints. The expenditure incurred on procurement of these aircraft
was, therefore, largely rendered infructuous.

30


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is the principal regulatory
body in India in the field of civil aviation and its functions include supervision
of training activities of flying/gliding clubs.

DGCA procured eleven Hansa-3 trainer aircraft from the National Aerospace
Laboratories (NAL), Bangalore’? at a cost of Rs. 6.10 crore for distribution to
various flying clubs. Eight aircraft were procured during the year 2001-2006
and three were procured during 2007-2009.

The decision for procurement originated from an initial request by NAL to
DGCA in November 1998 for a subsidy of Rs. 2 crore for producing five
Hansa-3 aircraft and delivering them to the Government flying clubs.
Subsequently, in August 2000, DGCA made a proposal to the Ministry of
Civil Aviation (MoCA) for purchase of the first three Hansa-3 aircraft from
NAL at a cost of Rs. 41.82 lakh each; the purchase was justified on the
grounds of meeting flying club requirements and encouraging indigenous
production of trainer aircraft. The purchase of one Hansa aircraft was
approved by the MoCA during 2000-01, followed by an in-principle approval
in December 2002 for further procurement of 10 Hansa-3 aircraft for
distribution to various Government controlled flying clubs during the X Plan
period (2002-07).

Audit scrutiny of the Hansa aircraft procured by DGCA and supplied to
various flying clubs revealed that these were either currently non functional or

information about their current use was not available with the DGCA, as
tabulated below:
Table-4
Aircraft Total
SILNo | Registra- Flying Club Aliotted | fying pom
since
tion No. hours
| 1. VT-HNT | Andhra Pradesh Aprit2o01 | Net Crashed in December 2004
Aviation Academy known
7 2
VT- HNU Maren 2002 | 82:35 Despite a om a
2 Kerala Aviation Center, (March 2002) one more
Thiruvananthapuram a व
aircraft was allotted in
March 2003
Kerala Aviation Center. Not
-HNW 7 2003 I
3. VT-HNW Thiruyananthapuram March 2003 known
1 vrunv_ | MP Training Centre, Maren 2002 | 3615 | Remained grounded due to
Indore technical system constraints
Mostly remained grounded
5. VT-HNX Haryana Institute of March 2004 11505 due to ~—_unsatisfactory
Aviation, Karnal performance (as reported by
the club). In February

10 A unit of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR).

31



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

2009, DGCA decided to
transfer it to the Amritsar
Aviation Club.

School was not operational
due to non availability of
flight instructors.

Govt. Flying Training Not

—aNy 1121
VT-ANY | school, Bangalura April 2006 own

Initially, this aircraft was
allotted to Andhra Pradesh
Aviation Academy in April
2006, and after — their
refusal, the aircraft was re-
allotted 10. this club.
However, the aircraft were
grounded because the Club
had not been able to get
qualitied Aireratt
Maintenance Engineers
(AME). which was a pre-
requisile for flying.

Madras Flying Club, Not

IT.
VT- HNZ Chennai January 2008 known

‘After refusal by Haryana
Institute of Civil Aviation,
Pinjore in November 2006
due to —_ unsatisfactory
performance, it was re-
allotted 10. this club.
However, the aircraft were
grounded because the Club
had not been able to get
qualified Aircraft
Maintenance Engineers
(AME). which was a pre-
requisite for flying.

Not
known

Madras Flying Club,

VT- HOC Chennai

January 2008

Sull lying with NAL as
AFC, Guwahati was unable
to arrange a pilot who could
ferry the Hansa aircraft.

Assam Flying Club,

VT- HOE Guwahati

July 2008 | Nil

Aireraft was awaiting snag
July 2008 | 76:30 | rectification by NAL since
December 2009.

ar Aviation Club,
ar

VT- HOF

ar Aviation Club,
tsar

VT- HOG March 2009 | 38:55 Serviceable.

This indicated that DGCA was not effectively monitoring utilization of
aircrafts provided to various Government Flying Clubs.

The main reasons indicated by the flying clubs and Aero Club of India for the
non-functional status of these aircraft were as follows:

. The flying range of the aircraft was less, making it unsuitable for
cross-country training;

. Due to restrictions imposed by the manufacturer on the engine and
airframe, it was very difficult for use for training purposes;



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

. The airframe of the aircraft was of composite type and was not fit to be
flown in high temperature and rainy conditions as per the
manufacturer;

. A qualified senior Chief Flying Instructor had been killed in a crash of

the Hansa aircraft in Andhra Pradesh.
. Lack of qualified pilots.

. M_P Flying Club in their feed back report suggested that after failure of
“Swati” and “Hansa” to qualify the category of an ideal trainer aircraft,
the Ministry should go for design and production of an aircraft having
all the characteristics of Cessna 152 or Cessna 172, instead of any
further experimenting on a new design, as the same were, by and large,
accepted as ideal trainer aircraft.

In response to an audit enquiry, the Ministry stated (April 2008) that to the
best of their knowledge, the Hansa aircraft was a good aircraft and the lower
utilization rate of Hansa was mainly due to non availability of trained pilots
and not due to the poor performance of the aircraft. As regards the crash of
one Hansa aircraft, DGCA’s report had concluded that wrong pilot handling
was the probable cause of the accident.

The reply is not acceptable as poor performance of aircraft was also an
important reason for under utilization in addition to shortage of pilots with the
flying clubs,

The Ministry, in November 2008, stated that eleven Hansa aircraft were
procured from the NAL to encourage indigenization and to support flying
activities in the country. The above reply of the Ministry has to be viewed in
the light of the facts stated in para 1.8.1 of the CAG’s Performance Audit
Report No, 2 of 2008 which highlighted that the objective of providing
indigenous two seater Hansa aircraft remained unachieved as NAL was yet to
develop its components indigenously and continued to depend on imported
components for its design and development. Also, NAL took up
manufacturing of Hansa without assessing its future commercial viability, as
result of which there were no further orders for the aircraft in the market.

The fact remains that the majority of eleven Hansa aircraft procured by DGCA
at a cost of Rs. 6.10 crore were not utilized by the flying clubs to which they

33


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

were allotted due to lack of qualified instructors and perceived technical
constraints.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER IV : MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY

Department of Commerce

4.1 Short levy of departmental charges by DGS&D

The Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals (DGS&D) failed to
implement the increased rate of departmental charges for the services
rendered for purchases and inspection of stores, which resulted in short
levy of Rs. 9.42 crore for the period December 2005 to March 2008.

The Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals (DGS&D) is a central
purchase organisation of the Government of India (Gol), which concludes rate
contracts for common user items required by the Central Government
Departments, State Governments, Union Territories, and quasi-public bodies
like municipalities, statutory corporations and government undertakings.
Central Government Departments/ Ministries authorized to act as direct
demanding officers operate the rate contracts by placing supply orders against
DGS&D.

DGS&D levies departmental charges for the services rendered for purchases
and inspection of stores at rates prescribed by the Government from time to
time. Prior to November 2005, departmental charges @ 0.5 per cent each of
the value of the contract or supply order placed against the DGS&D rate
contract were recoverable for services rendered for purchases and inspection
of stores separately. These rates were revised to 0.6 per cent from November
2005.

Audit scrutiny, of the records of Delhi and Mumbai offices of DGS&D
however, revealed that DGS&D continued to levy departmental charges at the
old rate of 0.5 per cent in respect of services for both purchases and inspection
of stores. Thus, short levy of departmental charges by 0.2 per cent’ on the
amount paid through various bills between December 2005 to March 2008
worked out to Rs. 9.42 crore (including Rs. 1.80 crore pertaining to the Office
of the Deputy Controller of Accounts (Supply) Mumbai, a subordinate office
of the DGS&D).

In reply (September 2008), the Ministry stated that instructions had been
issued to all the concerned sections in DGS&D to levy departmental charges
@ 0.6 per cent, and that efforts were being made to recover the residual
departmental charges from consignees/ Indentors.

1 0.1 per cent each for services tor purchases and inspection of stores

35



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

4.2 Recoveries at the instance of Audit

On being pointed out by Audit, Joint Director General Foreign Trade
(JDGFT), Ahmedabad recovered Rs. 59.06 lakh from a firm which had
received undue refund of Terminal Excise Duty (TED) of Rs. 160.97 lakh
and Department of Commerce recovered Rs. 4 lakh towards interest on
refund of unspent balance under Marketing Development Assistance
MDA) Scheme

Case I: Under the Foreign Trade Policy’, the benefits of deemed
export, including refund of Terminal Excise Duty are available for supply of
goods under International Competitive Bidding (ICB) for projects notified for
zero customs duty by Ministry of Finance. These benefits are also available
for supplies by sub contractor, provided that the names were indicated in the
contract, and payment certificate was issued by the project authority.

Audit scrutiny revealed that M/s Gujarat Apollo Equipment Ltd. had
irregularly received refund of Rs. 160.97 lakh under eight case files of Joint
Director General Foreign Trade (JDGFT), Ahmedabad for a project awarded
by National Highway Authority of India, despite not providing documentary
evidence of supplies under the ICB procedure and lack of payment certificate
from the project authority. On being pointed out by Audit, JDGFT,
Ahmedabad recovered an amount of Rs. 59.06 lakh in February and July 2008,
while the balance amount of Rs. 101.91 lakh was pending for recovery as of
December 2008. The Ministry stated (December 2008) that the matter was
pending in the High Court of Gujarat.

Case II: As per sanctions for release of grants-in-aid by the Department
of Commerce to various Export Promotion Councils (EPCs), the unspent
amount was to be surrendered to the Government. However, the condition
under Rule 209 (6)(xi) of GFR stipulating recovery of interest on the unspent
amount was not incorporated in the sanctions.

Audit scrutiny revealed that 17 EPCs had not paid interest amounting to
Rs. 57.74 lakh on the unspent balance amount. On being pointed out by audit,
the Department recovered interest of Rs. 4 lakh on unspent balance from 5
EPCs, while the recovery of the balance amount of Rs. 53.74 lakh was still
pending.

? Paragraphs 8.2(f) and 8.6.2(f)

36



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP)

43 Deficient implementation of projects under the Industrial
Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIUS)

Out of 26 projects approved between December 2003 and March 2005
under the Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (ITUS), only 8
projects had been completed, despite release by Department of Industrial
Policy and Promotion (DIPP) of 84 per cent (Rs 792.45 Crore) of 50175
share of Rs. 945.27 crore, of the approved project costs (Rs 1693.31
Crore). This adversely affected the scheme’s objective of providing
quality infrastructure through Public Private Partnership for enhancing
international competitiveness of domestic industry. The main reason for
the delay in completion of projects were inadequate survey, assessment of
roject requirements and monitoring.

43.1 Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (ITUS)

43.1.1 Overview

In December 2003, the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP)
introduced Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (ITUS) with a
provision of Rs.675 crore in the X Plan to enhance international
competitiveness of domestic industry by providing quality infrastructure
through Public Private Partnerships (PPP). Under the scheme, industrial
clusters/ locations with high growth potential were to be selected for strategic
interventions in the following areas:

. Physical Infrastructure — in the areas of transport, water supply, power,
fuel supply, effluent treatment and solid waste management;

. Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Infrastructure — by
providing broadband connectivity;

* R&D Infrastructure — in the areas of collaborative, product technology,
materials and market research;

. Quality Certification and Benchmarking Centre — through improvement
of soft skills in quality control and Total Quality Management (TQM);

. Common Facilities Centre;
. Information Dispersal/ International Marketing Infrastructure;

. Information and Communications Technology (ICT) induction, process
re-engineering and management consultancy service centre; and

. Other physical infrastructure.

37


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

4.3.1.2 | Approval Process

IIUS was a Central Sector Scheme, and initially 20 to 25 clusters were to be
taken up for development. The clusters/ industrial locations were to be
selected by an Apex Committee headed by Secretary, DIPP, and cluster
associations were to submit exhaustive proposals to the Committee for
approval. Projects were to be appraised by Financial Institutions contributing
to the cost of the project, failing which by independent agencies to be
appointed by the DIPP.

4.3.1.3 Funding Mechanism

Government of India (Gol) assistance was in the form of grant-in-aid,
restricted to 75 per cent of the project cost, with a ceiling of Rs. 50 crore. The
assistance was to be provided to Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) to be
formed by cluster associations for infrastructure development. Funds were to
be released in three equal installments, with the second installment to be
released on receipt of Utilisation Certificate for the first installment and
monitoring of actual physical progress.

4.3.1.4 Projects Approved

Between December 2003 and March 2005, DIPP approved 26 projects, which
were to be completed within 18 to 36 months from the date of sanction. These
projects involved a total project cost of Rs. 1693.31 crore, with a Central share
of Rs. 945.27 crore, against which Gol released Rs. 792.45 crore upto
September 2009.

4.3.2 Audit Methodology

A scrutiny of the records of DIPP in respect of the 26 projects approved during
2003-05 was conducted by audit during June-August 2008. In addition, five
field visits were conducted by audit to Textile Industrial Cluster, Panipat
(October 2008), Gems and Jewellery Cluster, Surat, Auto Cluster,
Vijayawada, Ispat Bhoomi, Raipur and Leather Cluster, Kanpur (January
2010).

The draft audit findings were issued to DIPP in October 2008. The responses
of the DIPP, received in January 2009 and November 2009, have been suitably
incorporated in this report.

38


43.3 Audit

Findings

43.3.1 Project Completion

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Check of the records of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
(DIPP) revealed that out of the 26 approved projects:

+ Eight projects were reportedly completed as of November 2009, with
delays ranging between 15 and 33 months. The status and details of these
projects are given in Table 1 below:

Table 1: Delayed Completion of ITUS Projects

Amount 5 Delay in
Ni. Name and address Cost released | Momthof Duration Of | -ompletion Status
0. 8 Sanction Project
(Rs. crore)
I. Pump, Motor& Project 008. 38.99 April 24 months; 23 months Completed
Foundry cluster, Rs.55.30 crore 2005 should have been
Coimbatore Tamil —jand Gol Grant completed by
Nadu Rs.39.39crore April ‘07
2. Chemical Cluster, [Project Cost of 48.50 November 24 months; 18 months Completed
Ankleshwar Gujarat |Rs.152.83 crore 2004 should have been
and Gol Grant completed by
Rs.30 crore November’06
3. Foundry Cluster, [Project Cost 18.02 [November 24 months; 33 months Completed
Belguam, Karnataka |Rs.24.78 crore [2004 should have been
and Gol Grant completed by
Rs.18.58 crore November’06
4. Machine Tools Project Cost 47.65 November 24 months; Date of Project
Cluster, Bangalore, [Rs.135.50 crore 2004 should have been|completion completion
Karnataka and Gol Grant completed by —_ {not available certificate
Rs.49.12 crore November’06 was not
submitted
5. Textile Cluster Project Cost 12.31 October 18 months; -do- -do-
Ludhiana Punjab ~—/RS.17.19 crore 2004 should have been
and Gol Grant completed by
IRs. 12.69 crore April’06
6. Chemical cluster, [Project cost 39.28 IMarch 2004 24 months; 27 months Completed
Vapi Gujarat. Rs.54.31 crore should have been
and Gol Grant completed by
Rs.40.49 crore March’06.
7. Textiles Cluster, ‘Project Cost Rs. 49.49 March 18 months; 30 months Completed
Tirupur Tamil {143.50 crore and 2004 should have been
Nadu Gol Grant completed by
‘Rs.50.00 crore September’05
8. Auto Cluster, Pune, |Project Cost Rs. 44.54 November 24 months; 15 months Completed
Maharashtra 59.99 crore and 2004 should have been

Gol Grant
IRs.44.99 crore

completed by
October 2006

+ Seventeen projects were yet to be completed as of November 2009, and
there were significant time overruns. The status of the incomplete projects
is given in Table 2 below.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Table 2: Incomplete ITUS Projects

(Rupees in crore)

lerant Rs, 9.75

lcrore

Iby Mareh?2007

mount Delay as of
Name and C released |Month of Duration of
. No. ‘ost हि हु November | Status
address (% |Sanction| Project aD
release)
I. |Auto Ancillary [Project Cost. |26.91 August |! months; 46 months Not
‘Cluster, Chennai Rs. 47.49 (97%) — [2004 should have completed.
jerore and GOT been completed
\Grant by January’06
ot __[Rs.27.74erore |

2. |Cereal, Pulses and {Project cost 29.07 |October_|18 months; 43 months [Not
Staples Cluster, _[Rs.39.96 (7%) 2004 completed,
Madurai, Tamil erore and GOI) should have
Nadu Grant ‘been completed

[Rs.29.97 crore by April’2006.

3. Metallurgical Project Cost 45.59. |November|36 months: 23 months [Not
‘Cluster, Jajpur_—_‘{Rs. 80.60 (97%) — 2004 should have completed.
Orissa. crore and GOI been completed

(Grant Rs 47.00} by
jerore (November? 2007

4. |Auto Cluster Project cost |45.81 (November|24 months; 35 months [Not
Pithampur, IRs.73.29 crore (92%) — 2004 should have completed.
Madhya Pradesh and GOI Grant been completed

jof Rs49.94 by
crore (November’2006

5, /Auto Cluster, Project Cost [22.31 |November|24 months; 35 months [Not
Vijayawada [Rs.30.67 crore (97%) [2004 should have completed.
‘Andhra Pradesh fand GOL been completed

(Grant Rs. by
i23.01crore jovember’ 2006

6. |Gems & Jewellery|Project Cost. 16.70 |November|24 months: 38 months [Not
cluster, Surat, Rs. 73.00. 33%)... [2004 -~—_—ishould have completed.
Gujarat lcrore and GOI been completed

|Grant by October’
[Rs.50.00 crore 2006

7. [Marble Cluster, | Project Cost [26.77 |November/24 months; 35 months — [Not
Kishangarh IRs.36.80 crore (97%) 2004 should have completed.
Rajasthan jand GOI Grant! been completed

IRs.27.60 crore by
‘November’ 2006

8. |Coir Cluster, Project Cost |28.40 — [December|24 months; 39 months Not

Alapuzha, Kerala |Rs. 56.80 (67%) — [2004 should have completed.
jerore and GOT been completed
Grant by November
Rs.42.60 crore 2006

9, |Leather Cluster, [Project Cost 650 March [24 months; 32 months [Not
Kanpur Uttar Rs. 16.46 (67%) [2005 should have completed.
Pradesh crore and GOL been completed

40


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(Rupees in crore)

Amount Delay as of
s. Name and released |Month of Duration of डर
S.No. Cost 2 " November | Status
address (% | Sanction Project 2009
release)
| Multi Industry Project Cost 34.89 March 24 months; 32 months lot
|Cluster, Haldia Rs.58.85 crore (97%) — 2005 should have completed,
West Bengal land GOI Grant been completed
Rs.35.97 crore by March’ 2007
11. [Foundry Park, Project Cost. 13.47 [March 24 months; [33 months Not
[Howrah, West —_|Rs. 126.74 (33%) [2005 should have completed.
[Bengal crore and GOL been completed.
(Grant by February
Rs.40.40 crore 2007
12. [Rubber Cluster, Project Cost 5.24 March 24 months; 33 months jot
|Howrah, West Rs. 29.74 (33%) [2005 should have completed.
[Bengal crore and GOL been completed
(Grant by February”
Rs.15.72 crore 2007
13. | Ispat Bhoomi Project cost. = 30.81 April 24 months; 31 months jot
(Cluster, Raipur Rs. 55.06 (97%) — 2005 should have completed.
|Chhatisgarh. crore and GOL been completed.
Grant Rs.31.76 by April ‘07
crore
14. [Chemical Cluster, [Project Cost 40.15 April 24 months; 31 months jot
|Vatva.Ahmedabad|Rs.71.35 crore (97%) — 2005 should have completed.
|Gujarat and GOI Grant been completed
Rs. 41.39 by April’2007
crore
15. |Textile Cluster Project cost 31.72 April 24 months; 31 months jot
lchalkaranji, IRs.65.07 crore (97%). [2005 should have completed.
[Maharashtra and GOI Grant been completed
jof Rs.32.70 by April’2007
‘crore.

16. {Leather Cluster, Project cost 42.62 (April 24 months; 31 months jot

[Chennai Tamil |Rs.67.34 crore (97%) — [2005 should have completed.
jadu and GOT grant been completed
IRs.43.94 crore by April’2007.
17. |Pharma Cluster, [Project Cost 33.08 May 2005 24 months; 30 months jot
[Hyderabad Rs.66.16 crore (67%) should have completed.
and GOT been completed
(Grant by May’2007
Rs.49.62 crore

« Ascan be seen, eleven projects sanctioned between August 2004 and April
2005 were not completed, although more than 90 per cent of the Gol
approved share of funds had already been released. Similarly, in three
projects sanctioned between December 2004 and May 2005, 67 per cent of
funds had already been released. In respect of the other three projects

4


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

sanctioned between November 2004 and March 2005, it was noticed that
33 per cent funding had been released.

« One project, the Textile Industry Cluster at Panipat, approved in December
2004 was cancelled in April 2007.

4.3.3.2 Cancelled Project

The Textile Industry Cluster at Panipat was approved by DIPP in December
2004 for completion within 24 months. The approved project cost was
Rs. 54.53 crore, with a Central share of Rs. 40.90 crore, of which Rs. 13.63
crore was released in December 2004. DIPP cancelled the project in April
2007 due to non-availability of land and the inability of the Panipat Textile
Industry Cluster Development Society (SPV) to levy user charges, and
directed the SPV to refund the central grant of Rs. 13.63 crore with interest.
However, the amount had not been refunded as of November 2009. Audit
scrutiny of records and field visit further revealed the following:

One of the project components was
the construction of an effluent
collection, treatment and disposal
treatment at a cost of Rs. 15.14
crore. Field audit, however,
revealed that a Common Effluent
Treatment Plant (CETP) had
already been constructed by
HUDA? in the same area, and its
capacity was reported to be
underutilised.

Functional CETP constructed by HUDA (Oct 2008)

The proposal for construction for
another effluent treatment plant was, thus, redundant, and indicated inadequate
survey and pre-approval evaluation and assessment.

3 HUDA: Haryana Urban Development Authority

42


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Main Panipat drain through industrial cluster (Oct 2008)

The closure and lining of the Main Panipat drain through the industrial cluster at
a cost of Rs. 16.24 crore had been included in the original project.

However, field audit revealed that no work had taken place on this
component, and the drain remained in open condition. Despite the
cancellation of the project in April 2007 and orders for refund of the Central
grant, an expenditure of Rs. 2.57 crore was incurred on the construction of
Effluent Conveyance Main Drain by the SPV.

In response, DIPP stated (November 2009) that the SPV had been reminded to
refund the entire Central grant with interest

4.3.3.3 Project with no significant work

The Rubber cluster at Howrah, West Bengal, which was to be completed
by March 2007, involved a total cost of Rs. 29.74 crore, with Central share
of Rs. 15.72 crore, of which Rs. 5.24 crore had been released in two parts -
Rs. 3.14 crore in March 2005 and Rs. 2.10 crore in February 2006.
However, the project was yet to commence, although expenditure of Rs. 2
crore had been booked. The delay was on account of non-acquisition of
part of the land, and requests to enhance the level of Gol grant.

Tn response, DIPP stated that the SPV had acquired 76 per cent of the land and
was in the process of acquiring the remaining land (November 2009).

4.3.3.4 Field visits to Incomplete Projects

Audit scrutiny and field visits (January 2010) revealed the following:

43


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(i) Gems & Jewellery Cluster, Surat

. The project, which was to be completed by November 2006, involved
a total cost of Rs. 73.00 crore, with Central share of Rs. 50 crore, of
which Rs. 16.70 crore had been released in November 2004. The
project was revised thrice, with deletion of important components like
hostel facility, design centre, training and HRD ete. In response, DIPP
stated (January 2009) that there had been delays due to litigation over
land, and the project was expected to be completed by end-2009.
Subsequently, in November 2009, DIPP stated that the execution of the
project had begun.

Field visit by audit in January 2010 revealed the following:

Convention-cum-display centre under construction

e Although the Convention-cum-display centre was in the final stages of
completion, the construction of other components viz. Auditorium-
cum-seminar hall and Marketing bourse was yet to take off.

Multi-level parking being operated by SMC

. The parking complexes that had been built at a total cost of Rs. 12
crore (Gol share Rs. 4.39 crore) envisaged an agreement (January

44


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

2007) whereby the land was to be provided by Surat Municipal
Corporation (SMC) and the entire construction cost was to be borne
by the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV).

न. Two of the parking complexes were functional and were being
operated by the SMC. It was provided in the agreement that the
surplus, if any, would be divided between the SPV and SMC as
mutually agreed upon, the deficit or loss was to be borne by the SPV.
Entering into such an agreement where the percentage of sharing
profits was not decided in advance and taking entire liability of losses
by the SPV was not a prudent decision.

(ii) Auto Cluster, Vijayawada (AP)

The project involved construction of an Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP),
Common Testing Centre (CTC), and a Trade Centre at a total cost of Rs. 6.04
crore (Gol share Rs. 4.53 crore). However, field visit by Audit (January 2010)
revealed that although the buildings for none of the three components above
were completed, the SPV had already purchased machinery and equipment
during the period March-August 2008, making advance payments of Rs. 2.91
crore. As a result, the machinery & equipments were lying packed and unused
in a private godown for the last 17 months.

Proposed CTC Building site at Auto

Proposed ETP site at Auto Cluster,
Cluster, Vijaywada Vijaywada

45


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

| te fb 4

CTC machinery lying packed & unused — ETP equipment lying packed in a godown
at Auto Cluster, Vijaywada at Auto Cluster, Vijaywada

(iii) — _Ispat Bhoomi, Raipur

The approved project had 10 components, namely, water supply, roads, quality
testing lab, street illumination work, toll plaza, administrative charges,
detailed design and work supervision costs, ETC charges and insurance and
contingency, which were reduced to only three components namely water
supply, roads, quality testing lab on a request by the SPV in March 2008. The
construction of building for the Testing Lab was yet to start, although the
laboratory was functional in a rented building.

Testing lab operational in a rented. Proposed site for the construction of
building at Ispat Bhoomi, Raipur Laboratory Ispat Bhoomi, Raipur

Further, a scrutiny of the Profit & Loss Account of the SPV during the visit
revealed that the SPV made profits of Rs. 1.50 crore and Rs. 2.30 crore for the
years 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively, and had distributed Rs. 1.59 crore as
dividend to its shareholders during 2008-09. However, the Scheme guidelines
contained no clause regarding the treatment of profits, once an SPV turned
profit making. This issue needs to be addressed by DIPP at the earliest.

46


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

{iv) Leather Cluster, Kanpur

« The total project cost was Rs. 27.34 crore (GOI share Rs. 9.75 crore)
which involved two components viz., Common Raw Hide Storage and
Management Centre, and Common Hazardous Waste Disposal Facility
(CHWDF). However, the former was dropped due to law and order
problems, and a new component viz., Common Effluent Treatment Plant
(CETP) added, with the total cost being revised to Rs. 17.65 crore with
Gol’s share of Rs. 9.75 crore.

However, field visit by Audit in January 2010 revealed that only one out of the
proposed three cells of the CHWDF was complete and functioning, while the
other two were at different stages of completion (only 41 per cent of the
project cost incurred). Further, work on the second component, i.e. CETP, was
yet to take off.

Funetional Cell no. 1 of CHWDF at Leather Development of site for Cell No.3 of CHWDF
Cluster, Kanpur at Leather Cluster, Kanpur

4.3.3.5 Change in Components/ Scope

Audit scrutiny further revealed that two projects with an approved cost of
Rs. 139.45 crore, involving Central share of Rs. 82.97 crore, out of which
Rs. 80.48 crore had been released, had not been completed due to change in
approved components, deletion of components and reduction in scope, as
summarized below:

47


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Table 3: Change in Components/ Scope of ITUS Projects

Project

Audit Findings (in brief)

Cluster, Haldia
(West Bengal)

Steel and
Metallurgy Cluster,
Jajpur (Orissa)

Bridge” was dropped, due to the State Government's decision not to
take up the Haldia Bridge project, and funds were re-allocated
(December 2006) to the water supply component.

In response, DIPP stated that the component was included on the
basis of the commitment given by the State Government (November
2009).

Inclusion of various components on the basis of anticipation and not
on the basis of detailed study/ survey was in violation of the
guidelines of the Scheme.

Two existing components approved (November 2004), relating to
strengthening and upgradation of old military road and development
of the Ghat road in the Daitar Mines area, were replaced by two new
components (January 2006), viz. construction of new road along the
old military road, and utility corridor.

In response, DIPP stated that the existing road was not able to bear
the increased traffic load, and it was not possible to close the road
for upgradation; hence, it was decided to replace the components
with construction of two new lanes along the existing roads
(November 2009).

This indicates that the original proposals were prepared without
adequate survey/ study.

43.3.6 Projects with other deficiencies

In four projects, involving a total cost of Rs. 373.35 crore with Central share
of Rs 172.61 crore, against which Rs. 128.80 crore was released, audit
scrutiny revealed the following deficiencies:

Table 4: ITUS Projects with other Deficiencies

—— ject

Audit findings (in brief)

Chemical cluster,
Vapi, (Gujarat)

.90 crore) 88
well as on SPV contribution (Rs. 9.50 crore) was not proportionately
adjusted by DIPP before release of the third installment.

In response, DIPP stated (November 2009) that no decision regarding
adjustment of grant had been taken, as the grant remained frozen at
the sanctioned level, while there had been considerable cost overrun
which was met by the SPV.

Tn audit’s view DIPP should have adjusted the interest earned before
the release of the third installment.

48


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

= Tools The project involved two components —Indian Machine Tool
Cluster, Bengaluru, | Manufacturer’s Association (IMTMA) Centre of Excellence, and
(Karnataka) Peenya Industries Association (PIA) infrastructure’, DIPP released

(March 2007) the third and final installment of Rs. 14.91 crore,
despite there being no progress on the PIA infrastructure component.

In response, DIPP (November 2009) stated the UCs had been
received, and the implementation of the project was over.

However, in the absence of the completion report, the claim of DIPP
(November 2009) that the implementation of the project was over
could not be verified.

Coir Cluster, The project, which was to be completed by December 2006, had a
Alappuzha (Kerala) | total cost of Rs. 56.80 crore, with Central share of Rs. 42.60 crore,
against which Rs. 28.40 crore had been released as of August 2009.
The first installment of Rs. 14.20 crore released in December 2004
could only be utilized in 2009, i.e. after a period of more than four
years.

In response, DIPP (November 2009) stated that the project was
expected to be completed by September 2010.

Foundry Park, The project, which was to be completed by March 2007, had a total
Howrah cost of Rs. 126.74 crore, with Central share of Rs. 40.40 crore, of
(West Bengal) which Rs. 13.47 crore had been released in two parts of Rs. 8.48

crore in March 2005 and Rs. 4.99 crore in February 2006. The delay
in completion was on account of non-availability of land and lack of
environmental clearance.

In response, DIPP stated (November 2009) that environmental
clearance had now been received and land acquired. The work had
started on the ground and a sum of Rs 12 crore had already been
spent. The reply of DIPP supports the audit comment that there had
been very slow progress in this project which had already been
delayed by 33 months.

4.3.3.7 Non-receipt of Utilisation Certificates

Audit scrutiny revealed that against releases of Rs. 792.45 crore upto
November 2009 for 26 projects in respect of which Utilisation Certificates
(UCs) were required to be received within 12 months, UCs in respect of 8
projects for Rs. 85.87 crore were yet to be received. Details are given in
Annex 1.

4.3.3.8 Conclusion

As can be seen from the above detailed findings,

. 17 projects out of 26, which were scheduled to be completed within 18
to 36 months from the date of sanction of the project, had not been
completed.

* This involved several sub-components - roads, solid waste management, common tool room facility, working
women’s hostel, common material testing laboratories etc.

49


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

. The main reasons for the delay in completion were inadequate survey
and assessment of project requirements by the implementing agencies
before submission of the project proposals. Further, the Gol approved
these projects, without ensuring fulfillment of pre-launch requirements
by the State Governments and implementing agencies.

e DIPP failed to exercise adequate and effective control over timely
utilization of funds, receipt of UCs, and completion of projects. It also
did not have adequate arrangements for verifying actual physical
progress of projects before release of the next installments,

4.4 Non-recovery of renewal fee for patents amounting to Rs 1.12 crore

Absence of monitoring system in respect of defaulting patentee resulted
in non recovery of renewal fee to the extent of Rs 1.12 crore from August
1992 to March 2008.

Tn May 2003, the Patents Act 1970 was amended to raise the validity term of
every patent granted from 14 years to 20 years.

The date of any granted patent is effective from the date of submission of the
patent application. Continued validity of a patent is conditioned on the renewal
of patents for which a renewal fee is payable from the second year onwards
which must be remitted to the Patent Office before the expiry of the
corresponding year. Such patent shall cease to have effect following non-
payment of renewal fee within the prescribed period or within an extended
period of six months, In case a patent is granted later than two years from the
date of filing, the cumulative renewal fees may be paid within a term of three
months from the date of the recording of the patent in the register or within an
extension of six months. Following cessation of patent right due to non-
payment of renewal fee, such patent shall not be entitled to any protection.
However the Act also provides that the patentee may make an application for
the restoration of the patent within 18 months from the date on which the
patent ceased to have effect.

A. Audit scrutiny revealed that the office of the Deputy Controller of
Patents and Designs, (DCPD) Kolkata neither intimated the patentees about
the outstanding renewal fee nor informed them about the cessation or
subsequent lapse of the patent on account of non-payment of the renewal fee.
As the fact of lapse of patent was neither recorded in the Register of Patents
nor intimated to the patentees or made public, patentees continued to enjoy
patent rights even after cancellation or cessation of their patents.

As there is no system in place to pursue or monitor the fact of recovery of the

50


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

renewal fee, the renewal fee is not recovered regularly. Scrutiny of three
Patent registers revealed that out of 17618 cases of patents registered during
2001-02 to 2006-2007, an amount of Rs. 1.12 crore was recoverable towards
renewal fee in respect of 215 number of patents for the period from August
1992 to March 2008.

Thus, failure on the part of DCPD to monitor the status of outstanding renewal
fee and notifying the public on cancellation of the patents resulted in loss of
revenue to the tune of Rs 1.12 crore, besides allowing the patentees to
continue to enjoy business rights without paying the requisite renewal fees.

B. In August 2007, the Head of India Patent Office, Kolkata directed
that all patent applications henceforth be examined through e-examination
module, developed by NIC. A pre - requisite for such examination was that the
entire application must be in digitized format. Audit scrutiny revealed that
while some application were being received in digitized form, most were
paper application in which case the Office was getting them digitized by CMC
Ltd. before examination. While the process of examination moved from
manual to electronic format, the Patent Office did not insist upon applicants to
submit electronic copies along with paper applications and spent its own
money to digitize a majority of those applications. It incurred an expenditure
of Rs 22 lakh on digitization of 6764 applications till March 2008 that was
clearly avoidable. Such practice is still continuing (July 2008).

The matter was reported to the Ministry in June 2008, their reply was awaited
as of September 2009.

41


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annex-I

(Referred to in paragraph No. 4.3.3.7)

Statement of pending UCs as on 31.12.09

SL. Name of the Cluster UC pending Month of release
No. ५, of the installment
(Rupees in crore)
1 | Ispat Bhoomi Cluster, Raipur, 9.74 September 2008
Chhatisgarh
2 Textile Cluster Ichalkaranji, 9.91 March 2008
Maharashtra
3 Chemical Cluster, Ahmedabad, 12.56 June 2008
Gujarat
4 Textile Industrial Cluster, Panipat, 13.63 December 2004
Haryana
5 Textile Cluster, Ludhiana, Punjab 3.89 March 2008
6 Foundry Cluster, Howrah, West 13.47 February 2006
Bengal
7 Metallurgical Cluster, Jajpur, Orissa 14.27 September 2008
[| Auto Ancillary Cluster, Chennai 8.40 October 2008
Total 85.87

52



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER ५

ISTRY OF COMM! ‘ATIONS AN
MATION TECHNOLOGY

Department of Posts
5.1 Organisational Set-Up and Financial Management
5.1.1 Functions of the Department

The postal system in India has a history of handling communications
infrastructure for the country for almost 150 years and currently has the largest
network in the world.

The primary services rendered by the Department of Posts (DoP) are as
follows:

. Communication services — Letters, Post Cards, ete.

. Transport services — Parcel, Logistics, etc.

न Financial services - Savings Bank, Money Order, Insurance, etc.

. Value added services — Speed Post Service, Business Post, Direct Post,
etc.

As part of its Universal Service Obligation, the postal system is expected to
ensure provision of efficient postal services at affordable prices to users all
across the country. Transmission and delivery of mail is the core traditional
business of the Postal Department. Over the years several value added services
like bulk mail, business post and speed post have been introduced by DoP.

The Post Office Savings Bank Scheme is an agency function performed by the
Department of Posts (DoP) on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, Government
of India for which the Ministry of Finance remunerates the DoP at rates fixed
from time-to-time. In discharge of its agency functions, DoP represents the
oldest and largest banking network in the country and plays a critical role in
mobilizing small savings, primarily in rural areas. DoP also assists people in
transfer of money from place to place through ‘money order’ and ‘postal
order’.

The Department of Posts also provides life insurance. Postal Life Insurance
(PLI) has been providing life insurance coverage since 1884 to Government
employees. Since 1995 PLI has been extended to the rural population of the
country under a new scheme Rural Postal Life Insurance. While PLI covers
employees of Central and State Governments, Central and State Public Sector

53


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Undertakings, Universities, Government-aided Educational institutions, staff
of the Defence Services and Para-Military forces, RPLI has a much larger
mandate of covering rural areas.

The net accretion to the PLI/RPLI fund will now be invested as per the IRDA
Investment guidelines. For this purpose an Investment Board chaired by
Member (PLI) has been set up at New Delhi. The DoP has signed an
agreement with the Fund Managers (UTI Asset Management Co Ltd and SBI
Fund Management Pvt. Ltd) for operationalization of Investment of accretion
to PLI/RPLI funds. For carrying out the day to day work of investment, an
Investment Division has also been set up at Mumbai headed by the Chief
Investment Officer.

DoP is also engaged in disbursement of pension and family pension to military
and railway pensioners, family pension to families of coal mine employees
and industries covered by the Employees Provident Fund Scheme.

During 2008-09 the DoP launched ‘Project Arrow’, an initiative to transform
India Post into a vibrant and responsive organization and make a visible and
positive difference in postal operations to benefit the customers. The
department identified 50 post offices in Phase | and 450 Post Offices in Phase
IL.

There is a Mail Business Development & operations wing in DoP which deals
with Wet Lease of Freighter Aircraft, Setting up of Mail Business Centres,
Setting of Automatic Mail Processing Centres, publicity for redesigned pin
code and National Address Data Base Management System. In order to
improve its mail delivery and transmission services in the North East,
Department of Posts decided to induct dedicated freighter aircraft for carriage
of mail, parcel and logistics to and from the North Eastern Region. Induction
of the freighter aircraft has provided the Department the necessary carrying
capacity for the mail bound for/from North East and has eliminated delays in
transmission.

5.1.2 Organisational set-up

The Department of Posts is part of the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology, Government of India. The Secretary, Department of
Posts, as the Chief Executive of the Department, is also the Chairperson of the
Postal Services Board and Director General, India Post. The Board has six
Members for the portfolios of Personnel, Operations, Technology, Postal Life

54


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Insurance & (Chairman Investment Board), Human Resource Development
and Planning.

The department has 22 Postal Circles that are divided into 37 Regional offices,
controlling 442 Postal Divisions and 46 Postal Stores Depots. There is also a
Base circle to cater to the postal communication needs of the Armed Forces.
The staff strength of the department as on 31 March 2009 was 4.83 lakh with
2.10 lakh departmental employees and 2.73 lakh Gramin Dak Sewaks'*.

The Board directs and supervises the management of postal services
throughout the country with the assistance of Chief Postmasters General in
Circles and Senior/Deputy Directors General in the Directorate General of
Posts. A Business Development Directorate (BDD) was set up in DoP in 1996
to ensure focused management of value added services viz., Speed Post, Speed
Post Passport Service, Business Post, Express Parcel Post, Media Post,
Meghdoot Post Card, Greetings Post, Data Post, E-Bill Post and E-Post. Postal
Life Insurance (PLI) and Rural Postal Life Insurance (RPLI) Schemes are
monitored by PLI Directorate headed by the Chief General Manager, PLI.

5.1.3 Postal traffic

The volume of traffic projected and actually handled by the DoP in respect of
unregistered and registered mail over the last 3 years from 2006-07 to 2008-09
is given in Annex-I.

Actual volume of unregistered mail in respect of post cards, printed post cards
and competition post cards, parcels and letter has shown a decreasing trend
during 2008-09 as compared to 2006-07. The revenue from mails relating to
inland letter cards, news papers, book packets, printed books, other periodicals
and acknowledgement however, has shown a positive trend. In the category of
registered postal services, volume under classical services like money orders,
insurance, and registered letters/parcels has declined. The exception to this
trend is the quantum of speed post, which has increased by almost 84% over
the period 2006-07 to 2008-09.

5.1.4 Financial Performance

The total revenue receipts during 2008-09 showed an increase of 6.68 per cent
over the previous year. The increase was, however, much less than the

5 छा the rural, remote corner of the country, Postal Services are rendered through Branch
Post Office, working for limited hours utilizing the services of rural based personnel called
“Gramin Dak Sevaks” (previously called Extra Departmental Agents) who work on a part
time basis.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

increase in the gross revenue expenditure which was 34.15 per cent more than
the preceding year as shown in the chart below.

12000

ad
10000

8000 7272.66

5862.33

6000

(Rs in Crore)

4000

2000

2007-08 2008-09

छा Revenue Receipts m Revenue Expenditure

The details of revenue receipts and revenue expenditure are given in Annex-IT.

There was a net loss of Rs 3593.08 crore on postal service's in 2008-09. The
comparative position for the period 2003-08 is as under:

Net losses on postal services
4200

= 3593.08
_ 3200
: 2700
नि 2200
2 1700 | 1381.84 1209.88 1249.52 जय

1200

“Hawi

200

2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08

Year

The Department’s net loss which was more than Rs 1380 crore in 2004-05 had
declined in subsequent years and was less than Rs 1250 crore in 2006-07.

Net loss was calculated as the difference between revenue receipts& recoveries and revenue

expenditure, 1.०., {(Rs 5862.33+Rs. 300.82)-Rs 9756.23}.

56


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

However, as at the end of 2008-09, the net loss had spurted past Rs 3500
crore, representing an increase of Rs.2081.64 crore (137.73 per cent) as
compared to the preceding year.

5.1.5 Role of Audit

During the audit of the DoP, Audit endeavoured to examine and assess
whether established systems were functioning effectively, stipulated
procedures were adhered to and whether financial propriety was observed.
Subjects for compliance audit were selected on the basis of an assessment of
the risk associated with various activities carried out by postal units.
Parameters for assessing risk included volume of transactions, materiality,
relative importance of the function/service, past audit results, etc. The audit of
postal units was conducted through 15 Branch Audit Offices located mainly in
State capitals.

The audit process helps the auditee to identify areas of financial and
managerial controls that need attention for efficient and effective management.
Audit has also proved to be an aid in effecting revenue recoveries.

Some of the persistent deficiencies that have appeared in the audit reports
relating to DoP in the last five years include:

(1) Irregular payment of interest on PPF / MIS”.

(2) Non - deduction of income tax at source from interest payments made
under Senior Citizens Savings Scheme.

(3) Excess payment of haulage charges.
(4) Short realization of postage charges from ineligible publications.

(5) Non-levy of Service Tax.

* PPF — Public Provident Fund: MIS - Monthly Income Scheme

37


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

5.2 Irregular payment of commission to banks

Irregular payment of commission of Rs. 81.32 lakh in obtaining bank
drafts from nationalised banks due to failure of five Post Offices in Bihar
Circle to follow codal provisions.

Departmental rules' stipulate that when remittances are to be made for
bonafide public purposes by a Government official, Government drafis
payable at par would be issued to him. Instructions to this effect were issued in
June 1998 by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to the Chief General Manager,
State Bank of India (SBI) and its Associated Banks and General Managers of
all Nationalised Banks. The same instructions were reiterated by the Ministry
of Finance and circulated to all Ministries/Departments including the
Department of Posts in September 1998. These instructions were further
reiterated by RBI authorities in a meeting in Patna on 10 November 2005 and
same were circulated by Postmaster General (PMG) Bihar Circle to all the
Senior Superintendents of Post Offices and Senior Postmasters under his
control.

Audit scrutiny of records (July-August 2009) of five Head Post Offices
(HPOsy’ in Bihar circle revealed that these HPOs, in contravention of the
instructions issued by the PMG, continued to make the payment of bank
charges in obtaining demand drafts from nationalised banks during December
2005 to March 2009. This omission on the part of the Postmasters resulted in
irregular and avoidable payment of Rs 81.32 lakh as shown below.

Table-1
Amount |
SI. No. Name of HPO. Period of payment of bank charges {Rupees in

ob | Chapra December 2005 to February 2009 ed
2. Gopalganj December 2005 to March 2009 3.84
3. Siwan December 2005 to October 2008 20.34
4. Bhagalpur January 2006 to February 2009 24.16
5. Motihari July 2006 to December 2007 5.04

Total 81.32

On this being pointed out by Audit, the Senior Postmasters of all five head
post offices while admitting the facts stated that no instructions had been
received by them regarding issue of demand drafts at par by the banks.

' Clause 1,2 and 4 (1) of appendix 21 of P&T Financial Handbook Vol. |
* Bhagalpur, Chapra, Gopalganj, Motihari and Siwan

58


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Thus, failure of the five head post offices in Bihar circle to scrupulously
follow the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance led to irregular payment
of commission of Rs 81.32 lakh towards purchase of demand drafts for
bonafide public purposes.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in August 2009; their reply was
awaited as of December 2009.

5.3 Excess payment of haulage charges

Failure of CPMsG Gujarat, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh Circles to verify
the claim of haulage charges made by Railways resulted in excess
payment of Rs. 2.10 crore.

Department rules provide that bills for haulage charges shall be received in the
office of the Head of the Circle concerned and he should verify the same
before accepting them. Department of posts (DoP) decided to pay for the
haulage charges to the Railways by seat displacement method with effect from
1 October 2002. DoP instructed all Heads of Circles in January 2005 that in
case of re-designation of any Mail carrying train to a different Railway Zone
due to re-organisation of Railways, the details of ad-hoc payment already
made may be intimated to the concerned circles to prevent excess payment to
Railways. Departmental instructions further stipulated that there should be
monthly meeting with Zonal Railway authorities and concerned CPMG to sort
out the difficulties in operational issues and billing and payment of dues.

The Chief Postmasters General (CPMsG), Haryana and Orissa Circles were
designated as the nodal officer for Northern Railway and South Eastern
Railway respectively against whom the bills relating to haulage charges were
to be preferred by the Railways.

Audit scrutiny of records (January 2009) of CPMG Uttar Pradesh Circle,
Lucknow revealed that the CPMG made a payment of haulage charges for six
trains belonging to Northern Railway for the period from April 2003 to
November 2007. Thus, CPMG, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow’s failure to take into
cognizance of the fact that CPMG, Haryana Circle, Ambala was the nodal
officer for Northern Railway resulted in irregular payment of haulage charges
to the extent of Rs. 1.37 crore

Similarly, CPMG Orissa Circle, Bhubaneswar did not take into account re-
designation of Mail carrying train nos. 2809/2910 from Maharashtra Postal
Circle to Orissa Postal Circle in March 2005 and paid an amount of Rs. 48.89

59



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

lakh for the period April 2004 to September 2004 in March 2005 which had
already been paid by Maharashtra Postal Circle in December 2004.

Audit scrutiny of records (June 2009) in CPMG Gujarat Circle revealed that
though Section ID 29 (Indore-Nagda) working in the train No, 287/288 of
‘Western Railway was closed in January 2007, Gujarat Postal Circle continued
to make payment for haulage charges till March 2009 without ascertaining the
factual position of closure of a division. This lapse on the part of Gujarat
Postal Circle resulted in irregular payment of haulage charges of Rs. 24.16
lakh.

On this being pointed out by Audit, the CPMG Lucknow stated (May 2009)
that Rs. 1.37 crore was adjusted from the amount admissible for payment to
North Central Railway. CPMG Orissa while accepting the facts stated
(February 2009) that excess paid amount of Rs. 48.89 lakh was adjusted in
July 2007. CPMG Ahmedabad while accepting the fact (August 2009) stated
that the entire amount pointed out by Audit was recovered in full from the
approved bill of Western Railway from the month of April 2009.

Thus, failure of the concerned CPMsG to scrupulously follow the
departmental instructions and codal provisions resulted in excess payment of
haulage charges to the extent of Rs. 2.10 crore, which were adjusted by
CPMGs on being pointed out by audit. The system of payment of haulage
charges needs to be stream lined and monitored to avoid such irregular
payments.

60


Annex-T

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(Referred to in paragraph No. 5.1.3)

(A) Unregistered mail
_ _ ee (Numbers in lakhs
[sr No | ४४ | 2006-2007 2007-2008 2008-09
Projected Actual | Projected | Actual Projected Actual
1. | Post cards 2109.87 1913.02 2189.04 17952 | | _1792.72
2. | Printed Post cards & 931.43 765.88 915.24 650.78 581.82 727.52
Competition Post Cards
3. | Letter cards (Inland) 2472.46 2224.74 2620.20 2164.62 2084.80 2249.49
4. | News Papers
Single 1026.24 917.63 1087.56 972.57 976.06 998.77
Bundle 172.48 163.53 182.79 151.65 146.48 169.92
5. | Parcels 420.67 410.94 445.81 421.91 434.90 416.24
6. | Letters 7521.87 7144.51 7971.33 6633.44 6416.97 6738.62
7. | Book packets 927.17 817.15 982.57 893.22 905.19 915.66
| 8. | Printed books 497.15 487.42 526.86 52731 559.08 596.91
| 9. | Other periodicals 394.50 422.68 418.07 428.18 459.89 489.97
10.| Acknowledgement 780.99 663.00 803.03 669.71 646.89 1691.43
(B) _ Registered mail and others
(Numbers in lakty
SL | = | 2006-2007 2007-2008 2008-09
No Projected ‘Actual | Projected Actual_| Projected ‘Actual
11. | Money Orders (MOs) 1229.31 987.93 1193.47 989.45 908.14 890.08,
12. | Insured letter and parcel 91.80 88.01 97.28 84.84 83.98 84.18
13. Nae Payable Teters and 85.22 85.56 90.31 78.18 77.30 74.69
M लि आए 1953.90 1947.47) 2070.66 1796.36 1776.90 1779.29
15. | Speed Post 1150.53 1286.00 1219.28 1725.50, 2179.24 214.17

61



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(Referred to in paragraph No. 5.1.4)

Annex-II

(A) Revenue Realisation
(Rs in crore,
Percentage
Name of the service 2007-08 2008-09 increase/decrease over
previous year
Sale of stamps 566.82 605.76 6.9
Postage in cash 1964.81 2036.45 3.6
Commission on MOs/IPOs 2886.74 3171.94 | 9» |
Other receipts 120.77 174.79 44.7
Net receipts from other postal 44.24 -126.61 -186.2
administrations
Gross Revenue 5494.90 5862.33 6.7
(B) Revenue expenditure
{Rs in crore}
Percentage
Category 2007-08 2008-09 increase/decrease over
previous year
(3) Pay and allowances, 5114.10 6819.72 33.4
contingencies, Bonus,
Dearness allowances, etc.
(b) Pensionary charges 1608.84 2274.30 41.4
(C) Stamps, Post Cards ete. 26.06 27.34 49
(d) Stationery and Forms 53.13 55.17 3.8
printing ete.
(e) Conveyance of Mails 261.74 271.59 3.8
(payments to Railways and Air
mail carriers)
(f) Other expenditure 208.79 308.11 47.6
Total 7272.66 9756.23 34.1

62



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER VI : MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS ]

6.1 Flawed purchase of property for Indian Chancery and unjustified
expenditure on its renovation

The Indian Mission in Prague incurred an expenditure of Rs. 20.12 crore
on the acquisition and extensive renovation of a 75 year old property for
Indian Chancery, between April 2004 and October 2008. The property
was purchased ignoring both security and structural safety aspects the
most serious being its proximity to a major tunneling project.
Construction of a large underground parking lot and a new multipurpose
hall at a cost of Rs. 3.55 crore was unnecessary as adequate overground
parking space and a ready to move in hall already existed. Repeated
revision in the scope of work led to time and cost overruns with the cost of
renovation work rising to 116 per cent of the cost of acquisition against 15
per cent anticipated earlier.

In April 2004, the Ministry approved purchase of a 75 year old property’ at
Prague for the Indian Chancery at a cost of CZK 49.5 million (Rs. 8.73 crore)”
along with additional expenditure limited to 15 per cent of the property cost,
ie, CZK 7.43 million (Rs. 1.31 crore)’ for renovation of the property. The
Mission commenced renovation works at a cost of CZK 58.21 million
(Rs. 11.57 crore)’ in August 2007 which were finally completed in October
2008 at a final cost of CZK 57.30 million (Rs. 11.39 crore)’. The renovated
chancery became operational soon after in November 2008.

Audit scrutiny of records relating to the selection, purchase and renovation of
the property disclosed the following:

I Flawed selection of site
(a) Security aspect

The selected property had serious flaws from the point of view of security as it
was located in a commercial area, next to a metro looping station with its main
entrance opening onto the main arterial road. This contravened Ministry’s
security guidelines of March 20017, The Ministry, however, contended
(September 2009) that the property was located in a secure area in the vicinity

1 60/93, Milady Horakove, Prague-7

°Rs. |= CZK 0.567

3 Rs. | = CZK 0.503 (exchange rate as adopted by the Ministry in January 2008 has been
applied throughout to maintain uniformity)

4 Embassy property should not be an area which is directly affected by commercial activity
and the building should be in the centre of the land area so that maximum depth can be kept
between the boundary wall and the main infrastructure.

63


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

of two other embassies and that the security guidelines applied only to fresh
construction projects. The position taken by the Ministry is not correct as the
other two embassies open onto a side road and are also located within secured
campuses. Further, the security guidelines of the Ministry equally apply to
such cases of purchase of properties.

(b) Structural safety aspect

The property also faces several disadvantages on account of its close
proximity to the site of a major tunneling project for underground movement
of vehicles and trams. Plans for the tunneling project though in the public
domain, were neither considered by the Mission nor brought to the notice of
the property team. The property team also failed to ascertain local conditions
that could have an impact on the property. The Ministry (September 2009)
refuted that the project was in the public domain. However, this is not valid as
a building ban order had been in force in the area where the property was
purchased, since 1997 on account of the high-priority tunnel project.

As a result of its proximity to the tunneling project, which involves digging up
to a depth of 18 metres within half a metre from the compound wall of the
Chancery building, the renovated Chancery building remains exposed to the
risk of impairment and damage. Further, till the tunneling project is completed
in 2011, the sole access road to the Mission will remain closed for a period of
over two years from November 2008 to 2011, with adverse repercussions on
its normal representational functions. The position of the main entrance to the
building is shown in the photograph below:

Thus, deep digging in close proximity of the building posed serious access and
safety related problems.

64


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The Ministry accepted (September 2009) that the ongoing tunneling works had
placed constraints on free access to the Mission and stated that these would be
overcome with the completion of the tunneling project.

I Inadequacies in consultancy contract
(a) Selection of Consultant was not transparent

Based on the Mission’s recommendation, the Ministry approved the
appointment (September 2004) of M/s Atelier Vsehrdova as consultant for the
renovation project from amongst three short listed parties i.e. M/s Gleeds
Ceska republika, M/s Atelier Vsehrdova and M/s Atelier HRRA. The selection
of the consultant was improper as the bid of the selected party (M/s Atelier
Vsehrdova) was not the lowest and the appointment was based solely on its
being the most experienced and proficient in English. The Ministry, however,
contended that the bid of M/s Atelier Vsehrdova was the lowest at 8 per cent
of the total project cost as against 8.17 per cent of M/s Atelier HRRA. This,
however, overlooked the fact that the bid of M/s Atelier HRRA comprised
both a fixed cost (CZK 0.23 million) component and a variable cost (5.895 per
cent of the cost of construction) component. Together, these were CZK 0.95
million i.e. 7.76 per cent of the estimated cost of construction of CZK 12,20
million> which was not only lower than CZK 0.98 million i.e. the 8 per cent of
the then estimated cost quoted by the selected consultant but offered the
prospect of savings in consultant’s fee, were the project costs to escalate, as
was finally the case. Further selection should have solely been based on
financial bids as parties had already been short-listed based on company
profile, work experience and reputation. Making the ability to communicate
in English a key selection criteria without any evidence of this being specified
as a pre-qualification, also lacked propriety.

(b) Deficiencies in services of the consultant

Audit scrutiny also revealed deficiencies in contract performance by the
consultant. The consultant failed to factor the impact of the tunneling project
in his design work even though definite information on the project and its
proximity to the chancery property was available before the award of the
contract. Later, a large number of cracks developed in the newly renovated
building as soon as the tunneling work commenced (November 2008) and
progressed. In addition, the tender document drawn up by the consultant,
neither included the work of leveling of uneven floors in several rooms nor
did it address the problem of water seepage in the east boundary wall.

5 The cost of construction estimated by the selected bidder (M/s Atelier Vsehrdova) was CZK.
12.20 million. This has been adopted as a base figure for like-to-like comparison.

65


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The Ministry accepted that it was the consultant’s responsibility to include the
problem of uneven floors and water seepage in the scope of renovation
contract.

Ti Deficient project management
(a) Frequent and unjustified changes in project scope

The purchase of Chancery building was proposed by the property team
(December 2003) as it was in “fairly good condition of maintenance” and had
a “ready to move in large multipurpose hall facility” and open areas that could
serve as a “parking lot sufficient for about 20 cars”. As such renovation works
were initially envisaged to be limited in scope. The scope of the works was,
however, significantly revised by the Mission first in June 2005 and again in
December 2006 when, several new elements including construction of a new
multipurpose hall and an underground parking lot were added, citing
functional requirements and local regulations.

As the scope of the project continued to evolve over a long period of time,
frequent references to the Ministry for approvals became necessary which
caused delays in the award and commencement of work. Besides the
construction of a new multipurpose hall and an underground parking lot
lacked adequate justification and was totally contrary to the earlier assessment
of the property team.

The Ministry stated (September 2009) that the availability of 20 parking slots
as assessed by the property team was erroneous. The Ministry’s dismissal of
the assessment of the property team is not acceptable. The requirement of a
new multi purpose hall and an underground parking lot had evidently not been
critically assessed by the Ministry as availability of a multi purpose hall and
adequate parking space were the two features of the property which played a
critical role in its selection. If the selection of the property was based on an
erroneous assessment made by the MEA team, it is a serious matter which
requires investigation for fixing responsibility.

(b) Failure to factor impact of tunneling project

The Mission ignored the critical aspect of the impact of the planned tunneling
project on the new chancery building and failed to take any action to
independently assess and manage the impact as part of the renovation and
reconstruction works. As discussed earlier, it relied instead on the assurance
of the local authorities to monitor impact and rectify damages. This was ill
advised as several cracks have appeared in the renovated building soon after
digging work for the tunnel! commenced. The Ministry belatedly permitted the

66


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Mission (March 2009) to hire a company® for an independent assessment of
the impact of tunneling project on the Chancery building — a requirement
which should have been anticipated earlier so as to safeguard the acquired
property.

(c) Rising costs and time overruns

The Ministry had initially approved a sum of CZK 7.43 million (Rs. 1.31
crore) for renovation of the Chancery building based on the recommendations
of the property team (December 2003). The renovation works were, however,
completed at a total cost of CZK 57.30 million (Rs. 11.39 crore) which was
more than eight times the original approved cost and 116 per cent of the
acquisition cost as against 15 per cent initially contemplated by the property
team. The Ministry justified the increase in the costs on the basis of changes in
the scope of the work in order to cover a number of essential aspects which
could not be foreseen earlier. However, the decision to provide a new
multipurpose hall and an underground parking lot which added CZK 17.87
million to the costs and constituted over 30 per cent of the total costs, lacked
justification.

An analysis of the time-lines revealed that the renovation project took more
than four years to complete from the date of acquisition of the property in
April 2004. Delays were noticed in finalizing the terms of engagement of the
consultant; firming up the scope of work; obtaining local body approvals ;
obtaining approvals from the Ministry and in the award of work. The extended
time-lines added to the rental liability of the Mission which had to pay USD
24,000 per month’ for each month’s additional stay in the hired premises. The
Ministry justified the delays as being inevitable in view of the range of tasks
associated with any project and the need for adopting local practices.

Tn conclusion, it is evident that the selection of the property was injudicious as
it ignored security considerations and carried with it several location
disadvantages. The engagement of Consultant lacked transparency. The
project management itself was deficient as it failed to factor in a major
tunneling project being undertaken in close proximity to the property.
Frequent changes were also made in the scope of the work some of which
lacked adequate justification, which pushed up project costs and extended the
time lines for project completion.

5 Mis Statika
7 The Mission was paying a rent of USD 24,000 per month for the old Chancery building from
April 1997 till November 2008 when it was vacated.

67


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

6.2 Extra expenditure on purchase of full fare economy tickets from
Air India

The Ministry of External Affairs (Ministry) did not comply with
instructions of the istry of Finance to effect utmost economy in air
travel. It did not frame comprehensive arrangements for optimally
utilising competitive fares and incentive schemes being offered by
airlines including Air India (AI). Instead, it entered into an arrangement
with AI for regulating air travel which was not only limited in scope but
was flawed in so far that it allowed payment of full fares which were
three to five times higher than market fares, for home travel, emergency
passages and temporary duty in exchange for concessions to which
officials were ordinarily not entitled. As a result, the Ministry incurred
considerable additional expenditure on purchase of air tickets for home
travel, emergency passages and temporary duty which for the 30
Missions covered by the review, alone estimated to Rs. 20.76 crore for
the period November 2006 to March 2009.

The IFS (PLCA) Rules entitle officers and staff posted in Missions and Posts
abroad to air travel while on transfer/ posting, on home leave, temporary duty
and during emergency passages. On account of this extensive facility for air
travel, the Ministry incurs substantial expenditure on foreign travel. The
expenditure on this account in the years 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 was
Rs. 152.83 crore, Rs. 148.55 crore and Rs. 154.40 crore respectively.

These rules also lay down the entitlements for air travel for different levels of
officials and for different types of travel. While officers at the level of Joint
Secretary and above are entitled to higher classes of travel in case of on
transfer, temporary duty and home leave, all other officers and staff are
entitled to travel by full fare economy. In the case of emergency passage,
travel is permitted only in economy class irrespective of level. Further all
travel is required to be made using routes approved by the Ministry which also
specifies the mode and carriers to be used on these routes. The Ministry has in
all cases prescribed travel by Al on routes/segments covered by Al directly or
through code share flights.

In November 2005, the Department of Expenditure as a part of economy
measures, permitted both domestic and overseas air travel by airlines other
than Al/Indian Airlines (LA) provided alternative airlines are selected based on
better and more competitive prices being offered by them. It was also
stipulated that various incentive schemes and concessional fares offered by
AIIA be fully utilised to ensure utmost economy in air travel. These orders
were made applicable to officials posted abroad as well and the Ministry was

68


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

specifically required to “make consequential changes in Rules”. In addition
DoPT and Department of Expenditure were asked to accordingly modify the
general guidelines for domestic and overseas travel. Since then, each year the
Department of Expenditure has consistently stressed on the need to effect
economy in foreign travel.

An audit review was conducted with the objective of assessing the viability
and adequacy of arrangements, if any, put in place by the Ministry for
effecting economy in air travel as stipulated by the Department of
Expenditure, and for leveraging discounts and concessional air fares being
provided by airlines. The review also aimed at assessing the financial
implications of arrangements made by the Ministry for regulating air travel.
The review covers an examination of expenditure incurred on foreign travel
and of related documents in 30 Missions across Europe, CIS and the Americas
during November 2006 to March 2009. However, data only with respect to
home leave passage, emergency passage and temporary duty has been
analysed as complete details of travel on transfer from one Mission/Post to
another could not be obtained. The review also focuses on travel by economy
class as travel by this class accounts for the bulk of foreign travel.

6.2.1 Failure to frame comprehensive arrangement to regulate air travel

In pursuance of the Department of Expenditure’s instructions of November
2005, the Ministry did not effect changes in its travel rules either to allow use
of air lines other than AI/IA or for availing incentive schemes and
concessional fares offered by AI/IA. Nor were comprehensive guidelines
framed for regulating overseas air travel so that competitive prices being
offered by various airlines could be utilised and economy in travel effected.

Instead the Ministry only signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
with AI in November 2006 which largely envisaged provision of certain
facilities to passengers travelling on full fare tickets on transfer and on home
leave along with a discount of 10 per cent on full fares limited to Air India
sectors and the facility of making payment in Indian Rupees. The facilities
provided to passengers were (i) 80 kg additional free baggage allowance® per
passenger subject to a maximum of 350 kg per family and wherever the piece
concept was applicable, provision of one extra piece per passenger subject to a
maximum of four pieces per family; and (ii) up-gradation of class of travel.

3 In addition to 20 kg allowed by the airlines

69


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The arrangement worked out by the Ministry was both inadequate and flawed.
The arrangement had no provision for availing of competitive fares being
provided by airlines other than AI/IA nor did it cater to segments of approved
routes for overseas travel not covered by AI or its code share flights. The
inadequacy of the arrangement worked out by the Ministry, is evident from the
fact that only three’ of the 30 Missions/Posts covered by this review were
connected by direct AI flights from Delhi. The benefits accruing to the
Government was limited only to a 10 per cent discount on the vastly high full
fare rates and that too was restricted to sectors covered by AI. Similarly, the
facility of additional baggage allowance of 80 Kgs though of benefit in the
case of transfer passages, had limited applicability as it could be availed of
only in case of transfers and postings between stations covered fully by Air
India flights. It was seen during audit that in the case of 27 out of the 30
Missions covered in this review, Al did not have its own flights to these
destinations. As such in the case of officials on transfer/posting to and from
these Missions, charges for additional baggage of 80 kgs would need to be
separately paid for despite full fares being paid to AI. The arrangement was
especially flawed when it came to home leave and emergency passages as it
involved continued payment of full fares in exchange for class upgrades and
additional free baggage allowance which did not provide any savings to the
Government. These concessions only irregularly conferred benefits to officials
to which they were ordinarily not entitled during home leave and emergency
passages.

6.2.2 Adverse financial implications of the MOU with AI

The failure of the Ministry to draft a proper and comprehensive system for
regulating air fares despite the air travel market having become very
competitive resulted in the Ministry foregoing substantial savings in air travel
expenditure. Information obtained from Missions/Posts covered by the review
shows that during the period covered by the review, they incurred an
expenditure of Rs. 26.97 crore towards purchase of full fare economy tickets
for their officials and family members during home leave (Rs. 22.40 crore),
emergency passage (Rs. 3.16 crore) and temporary duty (Rs. 1.41 crore).
Audit analysis revealed that the expenditure so incurred on purchase of full
fare economy tickets from Air India was three to five times the estimated
expenditure that would have been incurred on purchase of concessional /cheap
economy class tickets and thus entailed an estimated avoidable expenditure of
Rs. 20.76 crore i.e. 77 per cent of the full fare expenditure. The details of extra

° London, Frankfurt, Paris

70


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

expenditure incurred by these 30 Missions/Posts on purchase of full fare
economy tickets for their officials and family members during home leave,
emergency passage and temporary duty are indicated in the Annex-I.

The Ministry in its reply (October 2009) stated that it was continuing with its
policy of buying full fare tickets from AI in compliance with instructions of
Department of Expenditure of July 2009 which makes it mandatory to
undertake air travel by AI to destinations served by it. It also cited several
practical difficulties in the implementation of flexi fare/market fare scheme.
The position taken by the MEA is not acceptable as the austerity guidelines
issued by the Department of Expenditure for purchase of cheapest fare tickets
are applicable to all the Departments including MEA. Directions of the
Department of Expenditure prescribing air travel only by AI do not preclude
the Ministry from seeking more economical fare options from AI in view of
the Department of Expenditure’s instructions of October 2008 for devising
internal processes “ to leverage the discounts being provided by the Airlines”.
With regard to the practical difficulties cited by the Ministry it needs to be
noted that the provision of additional baggage allowance is justified only in
the case of transfer passages and that even now this benefit is not available on
routes where AT is not the sole carrier, The statement that AT does not issue
flexi fare tickets if more than one destination is involved is factually incorrect
for routes on which AI or its code share flights operate.

Further, though the Ministry informed Audit in October 2009 that it was
continuing with the system of purchasing full fare tickets from AI, later in the
same month, it instructed its Missions to buy flexi fare/market fare from AI for
all types of journeys. This was however, with a rider that where AI certifies
that such tickets are not available full fare tickets must be purchased. Soon
after in early November 2009, it withdrew its revised instructions and instead
advised Missions to purchase tickets for which payment could be made to AT
in Indian Rupees. Given the fact that Al issued flexi fare tickets only in local
currency, the instructions of the Ministry in practice allowed continuance of
purchase of full fare tickets from AI for all types of journeys undertaken in
Missions. Additionally, as the MoU between AI and MEA had already expired
on 31 March 2009, AI had not been consistently allowing concessions such as
upgrades and additional baggage allowance for home leave and emergency
passages thereby completely removing the justification for purchase of full
fare tickets for these passages.

In February 2010, the Ministry informed all the Missions/Posts that it had
worked out another arrangement with AI which laid down a scale of discounts

7


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

on various types of fares and also extended concessions available’ under the
previous MoU besides improving upon others. These concessions were,
however, to be allowed only on travel involving IATA/full fares. The new
arrangement save for negotiating higher discounts perpetuated the existing
arrangement of paying exorbitantly high fares in exchange for concessions
which did not afford significant saving in expenditure to the Government. The
new instructions while listing out various fare types did not indicate as to
which fare type should be used for different types of travel.

Tn conclusion, the Ministry lagged in complying with repeated instructions of
the Ministry of Finance to effect utmost economy in air travel. The Ministry
did not frame comprehensive arrangements for optimally utilising competitive
fares and incentive schemes being offered by airlines including Air India.
Instead, it entered into an arrangement with AI for regulating air travel which
was not only limited in scope but was flawed in so far that it allowed payment
of full fares which were three to five times higher than market fares, for home
travel, emergency passages and temporary duty in exchange for concessions to
which officials were ordinarily not entitled. As a result, the Ministry incurred
considerable additional expenditure on purchase of air tickets for home travel,
emergency passages and temporary duty. Thus there is a need for an urgent
review of existing arrangements and formulating a more comprehensive
system of regulating air travel which balances the costs of air travel with the
benefits accruing to the Government and officials.

6.3 Poor maintenance of Government property and avoidable
payment of rental charges

Sa HCI, London incurred an unfruitful expenditure of Rs. 82.19 lakh on
a project for conversion of eight small residential flats into four large
apartments to accommodate Representational Grade officers. The project
was initiated without prior approval of local authorities and the process
of selection of contractors was not competitive. There was inadequate
technical appreciation of work and the scope of the work was limited and
skewed. Despite the conversion, while one apartment remained
permanently uninhabitable due to severe leakage and dampness, the
remaining three converted apartments were beset with condensation and
fungus problems. Private property was hired to accommodate one RG

10 (i) 80 kg excess baggage allowance per adult and 30 kg per child subject to a maximum of
350 kg per family for economy class

(ii) Wherever the piece concept is applicable, provision of one extra piece per passenger
subject to a maximum of four pieces per family

(iii) Firm upgrade to diplomatic passport holders and upgrade on seat availability basis to
official passport holders

72


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Fee re emo a resulting in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 70.61 lakh on lease
rentals. Besides, one unconverted flat also remained vacant for significant
period leading to further avoidable expenditure of Rs. 32 lakh on lease
rentals.

High Commission of India (HCI), London owns 113 houses/flats at 12
different locations in London for accommodating its India-based officers and
staff members. Besides, eight properties have been hired to cater to
requirements of Representational Grade (RG) officers. The annual rental outgo
in respect of these eight properties is £ 209,796 (Rs. 1.72 crore)'!.

The Secretary (Expenditure), Government of India during his visit to London
(January 2003) pressed the HCI to address the issue of leasing of
accommodation for officers considering that some of the Government-owned
properties were lying vacant. In its fifty-first Report (147 Lok Sabha), the
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in August 2007 also expressed concern
over rising rental expenditure being incurred by the Missions/Posts abroad and
inter alia, recommended that the Ministry should take corrective steps to make
the property management process more organised and systematic with a view
to effecting significant reduction in the rental outgo.

The HCI proposed (July 2003) to convert 12 flats located (serial number | to
12) at East Lane, Wembley into six large apartments for accommodating RG
officers. The Ministry accorded (December 2003) ‘in-principle’ approval to
the HCI’s proposal. In the first phase, HCI decided to convert two flats (Flat
No.7 and 8) into one as a pilot project. On completion of the pilot project
(August 2003), Ministry approved in two stages (May 2004 and May 2006)
the conversion of another six flats into three apartments.

Accordingly, eight of the 12 flats were converted into four large apartments in
a phased manner between August 2003 and August 2006 at a cost of £
102,546 (Rs. 82.19 lakh). The details of conversion of flats including their
dates of completion, expenditure incurred and the status of occupation are
indicated in Table-1.

7 ६ 17,483 * 12 = £ 209,796 or Rs. 1.72 crore (Converted at the average rate of exchange bebween
March 2004 and March 2008 i.e. £1=Rs. 82.11)

73


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Table-1
Expenditure
Ne FlatNo. | Contractor incurred oe Status of occupation
- {in GBP/INR) P
7and 8 Being used as regular
1... (Pilot Mis M&B 26,000/19.96 August 2003. | accommodation since
: Builders lakh
project) 2006.
Intermittently used as a
25,600/21.55 transit accommodation
Takh for 80 days in a period of
plus 950/0.80 September 19 months from August
2 | Gand 10 | Mis H. Harar hay 2004 2007 to February 2009,
(supervision From February 2009, it is
charges) being used as a regular
accommodation.
Més Bains 24,998/19.94 2 Vacant due to
3. Vand2 | Constructions lakh May 2006 uninhabitable conditions.
. Being used as regular
5 2
a 3and4 | M/s Bains 24,998/19.94 August 2006 | accommodation since
Constructions lakh 2006
£102,546/
Total Rs. 82.19 lakh

Audit scrutiny of the project for conversion of flats into residential units at
East Lane revealed the following inadequacies:

@)

6)

Professional technical advice was not taken

The East Lane property was originally constructed in 1945 and
acquired by the HCT in March 1980. At the time of initiation of the
pilot project in 2003, the property was more than 58 years old. Given
the age of the property and the fact that conversion involved major
structural changes and huge expenditure, the HCI should have
formulated a detailed scope of work and cost estimates in consultation
with a professional surveyor for approval of the Ministry. Audit
scrutiny, however, revealed that the HCI obtained (04 July 2003) only
a casual technical opinion from a Chartered Structural Engineer, which
was merely an observation made by him based on his preliminary visit
to the site, without any estimate of costs and awarded the pilot project
on 17 July 2003 even before receipt of Ministry’s approval.

Local authority permission not obtained

The HCI did not seek the mandatory planning permission from the
local authority before carrying out alterations in the East Lane
property, which had health and safety implications and involved the

4



(iii)

(iv)

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

issues of merging of gas, electricity and water meters. The converted
apartments still have separate meters for gas, electricity and water, The
electricity and gas safety certifications have not yet been obtained.
This was despite the fact that the terms and conditions of award of
work to each of the contractor required them to take any permission, if
required, from the local councils in undertaking the job. This was a
flagrant omission/lapse on the part of the contractors/Mission.

Lack of competitive bidding and poor quality of work executed

The process of award of work was not competitive and contravened the
provisions of GFR” as offers were not invited through open tender.
The HCI invited limited offers from three/five building contractors
from its existing panel of contractors for undertaking routine repair and
maintenance work for the pilot project (flat 7-8) and conversion of flats
(9-10) respectively and the contracts were awarded to the lowest bidder
in each case. It is pertinent to mention that two contractors (M/s M&B
Builders and M/s H. Harar) were not VAT registered, implying that
these were small contractors whose annual turnover did not exceed
£55,000 per annum. The bidding process followed prior to the
selection of the third contractor (M/s Bains Constructions) was also not
on record. The quality of work executed was far from satisfactory as is
evident from the fact that perennial problem of seepage and dampness
could never be resolved in converted flats 1-2 despite damp proofing
of the walls being a part of the scope of work, as indicated in Annex-
IL The HCI also admitted (February 2006) that the conversion work
initially carried out on flat 7-8 and 9-10 lacked quality.

Sub-optimal utilisation of flats and avoidable rental liability

The property in East Lane could not be put to optimal use since the
conversions were carried out. Out of the four converted flats, only two
(converted flats 3-4 and 7-8) could be put to their original intended use
i.e. allotment to RG officers. Converted flats 1-2 and 9-10 could not be
regularly allotted to RG officers as these were unfit for representational
purpose, While converted flat 1-2 could not be occupied at all since its
conversion in May 2006 till November 2009 (43 months) due to
multiple leaks and severe dampness problem on the walls, converted
flat 9-10 was intermittently used as transit accommodation for 80 days
during the period August 2007 to February 2009. These flats (3-4, 7-8

” General Financial Rules

75


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

and 9-10), though occupied by RG officers as transit or regular
accommodation, were besieged with dampness problem that occurred
over a period of time subsequent to their conversions as indicated in
Annex-II.

The HCI did not undertake the conversion of the remaining four flats
ostensibly due to the problems initially encountered by it in the
conversion of eight flats. Of the four unconverted flats, two flats (5 and
6) were used as transit accommodation, Flat 11 was a regular
accommodation from February 2002 to December 2008 and thereafter,
it was being used as transit accommodation. The unconverted flat 12
was used as a regular accommodation between September 2002 and
July 2006. Thereafter, it was used as a transit accommodation as and
when required.

Despite incurring an expenditure of £102,546 (Rs. 82.19 lakh) on
conversion of eight flats into four large apartments, the HCI continued
to hire residential premises for the RG officers at a monthly rental of
£ 2,000 to £ 2,600 as two of the four converted apartments (1-2 and
9-10) were admittedly not fit for representational purposes.

The Ministry stated (October 2009) that while converting the flats initially
during 2003-06, the HCI got only the interiors of the relevant flats refurbished
and the exteriors of the building were never renovated since the purchase of
property in March 1980. The Ministry further clarified that the surveyor who
inspected the property and submitted his report (November 2008) had
recommended repairs to exterior walls, gutters, underground drains and
improvement of insulation of roofs and cavity walls. The surveyor also opined
that the flats in East lane were in a dilapidated state, especially from the
exterior, as no works had been undertaken since its acquisition which is
causing serious problems of condensation and fungus in various rooms of both
unconverted and converted flats. To bring the flats in habitable condition, the
HCI has sent (August 2009) a comprehensive proposal (drawn up by a
Chartered Surveyor) to the Projects Division of the Ministry to carry out
inescapable essential works at a total projected cost of £ 202,000. The HCI
would also be seeking permission from the local authorities retrospectively for
the alterations carried out in the flats.

Regarding utilisation of flats, the Ministry stated that except for the converted
flat 1-2, the other three converted units were being utilised by the HCI as
regular accommodations and once the essential works are undertaken, all the

76


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

converted flats would be allotted to the entitled RG officers. The unconverted
flats were stated to be suitable for allotment up to the rank of Attaché only
whose strength in the HCI had come down over a period of time,
Consequently, the four unconverted flats were used by the HCI as transit
accommodation as and when necessary.

The Ministry’s reply confirms that the HCI did not properly plan the project
ab initio. The renovation project was initially undertaken in an ad-hoc and
hurried manner without following the due diligence process. Given the fact
that an additional £ 0.202 million (Rs. 1.55 crore) is proposed to be spent on
the property to bring it back to habitable condition confirms that the planning
for conversion of flats was ab initio faulty.

The Ministry’s argument for non-allotment of unconverted flats to the entitled
officials on the basis of reduction of their strength also does not hold ground.
The HCI could have explored the possibility of allotting at least one
unconverted vacant flat (12) to an India based non-RG official of Government
of India Tourist Office (GOITO) at London which would not only have
resulted in savings of £ 39,000 (Rs. 32 lakh) '? in 40 months on rentals but also
resulted in judicious utilisation of vacant accommodation held by the HCT.
Similarly, had the conversion project been appropriately planned and executed
the converted flat 1-2 could have been allotted to one RG officer and led to a
minimum savings of £ 86,000 (Rs 70.61 lakh) '* in 43 months on lease rentals.

To sum up, the HCI embarked on an important project for conversion of small
residential units into large apartments at a cost of Rs. 82.19 lakh without
obtaining the prior approval of the Ministry and ensuring adequate technical
feasibility of the work. No prior permission of the local authorities was
obtained before carrying out the alterations and the process of award of work
was not competitive. While one apartment was rendered permanently
uninhabitable immediately after conversion due to severe leakage and
dampness, the remaining three apartments were also beset with rampant
condensation and fungus problems. Consequently, persistent significant
expenditure on hiring of accommodation for the RG officers is being incurred
and thus, the concerns of the PAC and Ministry of Finance remain largely
unaddressed.

‘5 A monthly rent of £ 975 is being paid by GOITO, London in respect of Assistant Director
(non-RG official). £975 * 40 months = £ 39,000 or Rs. 3,202,290 (August 2006 to
November 2009; £1= Rs. 82.11).

'* A monthly rent of £ 2,000 is being paid by the HCI in respect of Military/Air/Naval Adviser
(RG officer). £ 2,000 * 43 months = £ 86,000 or Rs. 7,061,460 (May 2006 to November
2009; £1= Rs. 82.11).

77


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

6.4 Non enforcement of personal recoveries

Deficient financial controls in Missions/Posts and the Ministry in
enforcing recovery of payments in excess of entitlements either due to
infringement or non application of rules resulted in accumulation of an
amount of Rs. 40.35 lakh which was yet to be recovered from the officials
concerned,

As per rules’, all payments should be drawn and disbursed to Government
officials as per entitlement and after recovery of the legitimate deductions,
Scrutiny of the records revealed several instances of the Indian Missions/Posts
abroad making payments to its officials on various accounts which were either
irregular or in excess of their entitlements due to infringement or incorrect
application of rules. Scrutiny also revealed that the Missions/Posts and the
Ministry did not initiate prompt action to enforce recovery despite such
irregularities were pointed out by Audit in various Audit Reports. During
2004-05 to 2009-10, irregular/excess payment of Rs. 45.31 lakh relating to
personal claims was pointed out by Audit in respect of 25 Missions/Posts. Of
this, recoveries were actually effected only by 10 Missions/Posts involving an
amount of Rs. 4.86 lakh and the balance amount of Rs. 40.35 lakh was yet to
be recovered. The amounts pending recovery related to unauthorized payment
of Electricity, Water and Fuel (EWF) charges (Rs. 7.95 lakh), excess payment
of Travelling Allowance (TA), Daily Allowance (DA) and related claims
(Rs. 10.50 lakh), over payment of Pay, Foreign Allowance (FA),
Representational Grant (RG) etc (Rs. 4.74 lakh), excess payment of Children
Education Allowance (CEA) (Rs. 1.09 lakh), non settlement of advances
(Rs. 10.11 lakh) and other miscellaneous excess payments (Rs. 5.96 lakhs) as
detailed in Annex-III.

In reply to the audit observations, the Ministry accepted (September 2009) that
overpayments to officials on account of deliberate misapplication of rules,
must be recovered. The Ministry further stated that the recoveries often
involved officials who were no longer serving at the stations where
overpayments were made. It was also added that at any given time, there
would always remain some outstanding paragraphs where recoveries have
been recommended by Audit, but which are being examined in the Ministry or
where concerned officials have questioned the proposed recoveries advancing
another interpretation of the rules requiring further examination.

1 Receipts and Payment rules and IFS (PLCA) Rules 1961

78



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable in view of the fact that the
recoveries pointed out from the year 2004-05 are still pending and it indicates
the lack of proper follow up action by the Missions/Posts and the Ministry in
effecting the recoveries and also the lack of internal control mechanism to
ensure the recovery of the dues once the officials are transferred from the
Mission/Post.

Thus, laxity on the part of the Missions/Posts and the Ministry regulating
payments as per rules and thereafter in recovering the amount resulted in
accumulation of Government dues amounting to Rs. 40.35 lakh and
corresponding undue benefit to the concerned Government servants.

6.5 Recovery at the instance of Audit

Failure of the Missions/Posts abroad to correctly regulate payments of
salaries and allowances etc. to their employees resulted in overpayment of|
Rs. 52.28 lakh by 32 Missions/Posts in 64 cases, which was recovered at
the instance of audit during 2006-09.

Previous audit reports'S had highlighted recovery of overpaid pay and
allowances in the Missions/Posts abroad. The Ministry in January 2009 in
their Action Taken Note on Paragraph 7.9 of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India’s Report No.2 of 2007 stated that Missions/Posts had been
instructed to strictly observe the prescribed rules and procedures in financial
matters and to avoid overpayments to their officials.

Audit examination of the records of various Indian Missions/Posts abroad
revealed that a large number of Missions/Posts continued to deviate from the
prescribed rules and procedures resulting in overpayment of salaries and
allowances and other miscellaneous payments to their employees. At the
instance of audit, 32 Missions/Posts recovered the overpayment of Rs. 52.28
lakh, in 64 cases during 2006-09, as detailed in the Annex-IV. The
occurrence of this persistent irregularity despite assurance to the Public
Accounts Committee of Parliament to avoid such overpayments indicates that
scrutiny of the claims by the Missions is inadequate and the action taken by
the Ministry to stop such irregularities is also ineffective.

The Ministry should take effective steps to ensure strict observance of the
prescribed rules and procedures by all the Missions/Posts to guard against
recurrence of such overpayments by strengthening internal controls and taking
action against such officials who claim or allow such irregular payments.

16 Paragraph 7.9 of Report No. 2 of 2007 and paragraph 3.3.3 of Report No. CA 14 of 2008-09

79


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The matter was referred to the Ministry in September 2009; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

6.6 Outsourcing of visa support services in Missions/Posts abroad

The process of tender evaluation and selection of Service Provider (SP) for
outsourcing of visa support services in CGI, Milan was flawed leading to
selection of a vendor who was not the lowest bidder. In HCI, London an
undue financial benefit of Rs. 3.63 crore was extended to the SP due to
non-consideration of rates linked with the number of visa service centres
operated. Besides, due to incorrect interpretation of the provisions of the
agreement, the SP was additionally benefited by Rs. 1.96 crore by way of
levy of administrative fee from the visa applicants. In EI, Washington DC
the SP continued to collect a minimum rate of USD 21 per application on
account of mailing charges vis-a-vis the minimum mailing charges of USD
18.95 per application, resulting in an undue benefit of Rs. 1.16 crore to the
SP. Exclusion of and deviation from the important provisions of the model
agreement diluted the control of the Missions/Posts over the functioning
and quality of the services rendered by the SPs. While CGI, Frankfurt was
yet to review its staff strength for consular services, EI, Paris was holding
excess consular staff.

Receipts from consular services through Missions and Posts abroad and Passport
Offices in India constitute an important source of Non-Tax revenue of the Union.
A review of the Union Finance Accounts over the last four years revealed that
there has been a significant increase in receipts of the Union Government by way
of its consular functions. For the Financial Year 2007-08, the total receipts of the
Union Government from the Passport and Visa fees alone were Rs 1,667 crore.

In November 2006, Ministry of External Affairs (Ministry) decided to outsource

Visa support services of selected Missions/ Posts. Simultaneously, the Ministry

laid down broad guidelines for the selection of Service Providers (SP) for

outsourcing of visa support services in the Missions/Posts abroad in a

competitive manner. The visa support services broadly envisaged the following

services to be provided by the service providers:

(i) Distribution of blank application forms.

(ii) Collection and scrutiny of visa applications with supporting documents and
prescribed visa fee.

(iii) Depositing of applications with Missions/Posts and daily visa fee in the
designated bank account.

(iv) Capture the visa application data in electronic format and transfer the same
to Mission/Post; and

80


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(v) Collection of passports with visa from Missions/Posts and despatch/hand
over the same to the applicants.

The Ministry also circulated (April 2007) a model contract to the Missions/Posts

laying down the essential terms and conditions to be incorporated in the
outsourcing contract.

A review of outsourcing of consular works in five!” Missions/Posts abroad was
conducted between October 2007 and March 2009. The position of issue of visas
by the Missions/Posts abroad and total fee/commission collected by the service
providers during the year 2008-09 is detailed below:

Table-2
Fees charged| No. of visas Tt we
Name of the Commencement of by SP per sare (efammmicsion fee/commission
Mission/Post operation splicati वि collected by SP in collected by SP
application | during 2008-09 ‘
local currency (Rupees in crore)

HCI, London May 2008 GBP 6.90 4,57,211'% GBP 31,54,756 22.12
EI, Paris February 2008 Euro 12 158,413 EURO 19,00,956 11.98
CGI, Milan May 2007 Euro 15) 51,244 EURO 7,68,660 4.84
CGI, Frankfurt August 2007 Euro 13.50 50,031 EURO 6,75,419 4.26
Be Washington October 2007 USD 13 553,511 USD 71,95,643 35.35
Total 7855 |

The review revealed a number of deficiencies in the process of evaluation of
tenders, selection of SP, terms and conditions negotiated and contracted with
the SP and execution of the contract. These are discussed below:

6.6.1 Infirmities in selection of SP at CGI, Milan

The tender evaluation process in CGI, Milan was done without keeping in view
the guidelines circulated by the Ministry in November 2006 and the relevant
provisions of the General Financial Rules (GFR). Consequently, while the
selection of SP was seriously flawed, the rates finally accepted were not fair and
competitive.

6.6.1.1 Selection of SP not based on lowest quotes

CGI, Milan received 14 bids for the outsourcing project. Two bids were rejected
and of the 12 remaining bids, the Post short-listed four firms and segregated them

॥ CGI, Milan; CGI, Frankturt; EI, Paris, HCI, London and EI, Washington DC

18 Figures include the number of visas issued in CGI, Edinburgh and CGI, Birmingham. Period covered is
trom May 2008 to March 2009.

Figures include the number of visas issued in CGTs at Houston, New York, San Francisco and
Chicago. The figures are for the period from October 2007 to March 2009

81


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

into two categories ‘A’ and ‘B’ comprising of two firms in each category, based
on their ability to meet the desirable benchmarks, The offer of Euro 15 made by
M/s K&S (one of the two firms in category ‘A’) was finally accepted by the Post
and an agreement was signed with the firm in February 2007. On the contrary, it
was observed that the two firms included in category ‘B’ had quoted a much
lower rate of Euro 10 and Euro 12 vis-a-vis Euro 20 initially quoted by M/s
K&S, which was finally negotiated down to Euro 15. The fact that the Post
entered into negotiations and that too with a bidder who was not LI was
unwarranted and in contravention of guidelines of Central Vigilance Commission
(CVC) in force at that point of time. Moreover, the selected vendor (M/s K&S)
included in category ‘A’ did not have any previous work experience in this field,
while the vendor quoting Euro 12 per application and put in category B (M/s
Project Export Services) had the previous experience of outsourcing for the
Australian and British Governments and the vendor at that point of time was
doing the outsourcing work for the Nigerian Embassy in Rome.

Thus, by not accepting the offer of the vendor who quoted Euro 12 and had the
requisite experience in category १37, the Post extended undue financial benefit to
M/s K&S to the extent of Rs. 96.87 lakh during 2008-09 alone, being the
differential in service charge of Euro 3 on 51,244 visa application issued during
the year.

6.6.1.2 Deviation from two stage bid system

Standard operating procedure envisages a two stage bid system in the
Government departments for procurement of high value goods and services i.e.
evaluation of technical bids followed by evaluation of financial bids of the
technically qualified bidders. However, the two stage bid system was not
observed in CGI, Milan and the technical and financial bids of all the bidders
were opened simultaneously in contravention of Ministry’s guidelines of
November 2006 and Rule 178 of the GFR.

6.6.1.3 Absence of criteria for evaluation of bids

The GFR” requires, inter alia, that the bid evaluation criteria and the selection
process should be stated in the Request for Proposal. In CGI, Milan no
benchmarks for evaluation of bids were specified at the time of invitation of bids.
This introduced arbitrariness in the selection process.

* Rule 171 of the GFR

82


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

6.6.1.4 Absence of inclusion of experience as benchmark

For the purpose of evaluating bids, the tender evaluation committee formulated
12 criteria. As per Ministry’s guidelines of November 2006, ‘experience profile’
was to be obtained from bidders and considered while evaluating the bids.
Further, Rule 180 of GFR also stipulate that the eligibility and qualification
criteria (which would also include the past experience) to be met by the
contractors should invariably be included in the tender enquiry. It was observed
that while criteria like waiting area, basic facilities such as bathroom, soft and hot
drinks vending machine etc. were considered, past ‘experience’ as a criteria was
neither sought for nor considered while arriving at a decision for short listing the
bidders. No specific quantification of the criteria was done e.g., area required,
number of counter/staff required and working hours. Consequently, neither did
the bidders have any indication of the desired facilities to be provided nor could
the evaluation process be fair and objective.

The Ministry stated in October 2009 that CGI, Milan was being asked to provide
full details of the process followed in the selection of M/s K&S as service
provider to enable them to take necessary action.

6.6.2 Deficiencies in the terms and conditions negotiated and contracted in
the outsourcing contracts

6.6.2.1 Acceptance of higher rate by HCI, London

HCT, London signed an agreement (January 2008) to provide visa support service
with M/s VFS Global Ltd for a period five years from the date of operation. As
per Para 4.1 of Schedule 1 of the agreement, the charges to clients were not to
exceed the cost of the appropriate prescribed visa fee plus a service provider
service charge for each passport not exceeding £6.90 per visa application. As per
schedule I, clause 1.1 of the agreement, the service provider would maintain
eight visa service centres”.

Audit scrutiny of the records revealed the following:

(i) In the initial tender for inviting bids for pre-qualification of agencies, the
Mission indicated that the application/passport collection centres would be
required at Central London, Birmingham and Edinburgh with the provision
of additional centres in London (Finchley and Southall) and other parts of
UK (Manchester, Glasgow, Liverpool, etc.).

2! London (Central and Southall), Edinburgh, Birmingham with provision for additional centres in
London (Finchley and thereabouts) and other parts of UK (Manchester, Glasgow and Cardiff)

83


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(ii) VFS offered three options to the Mission. It quoted a minimum rate of
£5.65, £6.40 and £6.90 per application (excluding VAT) for operation of
visa support centres in five, seven and eight locations respectively. Further,
VFS was also open to suggestions/ negotiations on their quoted prices.

(iii) The Mission awarded the contract to VFS at the rate of £6.90 per
application quoted for eight centres, which was incidentally highest
amongst the three options offered by VFS.

(iv) VFS operated only five centres” till February 2009 for a period ranging
from five to nine months.

Since the rates offered by VFS varied with the number of centres operated and it
was also open to suggestions/negotiations, the Mission should have availed of the
benefits of the variable rates quoted by VFS for different centres. Consequently,
on account of application of higher rate, the SP was granted an undue benefit of
£0,517 million (Rs. 3.63 crore) during May 2008 to February 2009.
Correspondingly, visa applicants also bore an avoidable financial burden. The
details are indicated in the table below.

Table-3
(Amount in GBP)
No.of Visas Service Charge | Service charge | Difference
Mission/Post oy collected @ GBP 6.90 | @ GBP 5.65 per
Ms per application | application
(op corsab ALD) 10 lakh) 10 19191] 10 lakh)
HCI, London 2,91,087 20.09 16.45 3.64
CGI, Edinburg! L418 0.79 0.65 0.14
CGI, Birmingham 1.11.465 7.69 630 139
Total 4,13,970 28.57 23.40 317

The Ministry stated (October 2009) that the bidders were required to quote the
rates on per application basis and not according to the number of centres in UK

as per the cond

[1015 laid down in the RFP. It further added that the decision to

stagger the opening of centres was only an operational one and the rates quoted
by VFS for eight centres was the lowest and as such no undue benefit was
extended to VFS.

The reply of the Ministry shows that it had not planned the operationalisation of
visa centres well in advance. The decision to open the visa application centres in

a staggered/phased manner was taken in April 2008 (ie. after signing of

agreement in January 2008) on operational grounds in order to ensure seamless
transition of work to the service provider. In fact, such a crucial decision should

GBP 1 =RS. 70.13; Official rate of exchange of March 2009

toria, Goswell and Hayes (all in London), Birmingham and Edinburgh,

84



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

have been taken during finalisation of tender and the application of variable rates
(for five, seven and eight centres), depending upon the opening of centres, should
have been negotiated and translated into contract in the larger interest of the visa
applicants. Further, the private service provider cannot charge the Mission for the
service (at three locations) that it had not actually rendered till February 2009.

6.6.2.2 Deviations from the model agreement

A review of the agreement signed by the Missions/Posts revealed that there was
absence/deviation from the clauses of the model agreement circulated by the
Ministry.

(A) Non-inclusion of clauses of model agreement in the agreement
executed with SP

The model agreement circulated by the Ministry included specific clauses to be
incorporated in the final agreement with the SPs. These clauses were to ensure
that the selected SPs offer the services to applicants in a speedy manner, in
comfortable conditions and in minimum time with the help of state-of-the-art
technology and were specific to each of the functions that SP provider was
expected to provide and also set criteria for judging the SP’s performance.

It was noticed that the agreement signed by the CGI, Frankfurt did not contain
all clauses specifically mentioned in the Model agreement. Some of the
important clauses not included in the agreement were the time limit of two days
for replying to postal letters, process to train and recruit staff, networked IT
system for centrally based appointment system and requirement of SP to notify
any fraud or any allegation of fraud to Missions/Posts.

Non-inclusion of these clauses in the contract diluted the regulatory capacity of
the Post over the functioning and quality of services rendered by the SP.

(B) Deficiencies in the agreements executed

The model agreement and the agreements signed with Service Provider by the El,
Paris, CGI, Frankfurt, HCL, London and CGI, Milan were silent on the following
aspects:

(i) Penalty for delays in remittance of fees: In the agreement signed with
SPs by Mission/Posts in Paris, Milan and Frankfurt, there was no clause
to levy penalty on the SP in the event of delays in remitting visa fees
collected to Government account. Due to absence of clause to this effect,
the Missions/Posts have no remedy in the event of delays in remittances
as discussed in para 6.6.3.3.

85


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

ii)

(iii)

Clauses to provide quality assurance: Clause |.2, sub-clauses (a) to (८)
of the model agreement circulated by Ministry emphasized the need for
the SP to maintain staff and IT systems equipped to deliver efficient and
effective visa application collection service. Further, the Clause |2 of the
Schedule I of the model agreement provides that the SP will conduct
quality assurance checks and the Mission/Post will also conduct quality
assurance and audit checks of the SP. However, no independent
mechanism for obtaining such assurance was envisaged or agreed upon.

It was noticed that SPs use IT systems for performing the services
outsourced to them. The Missions/Posts which have outsourced had
not evolved any mechanism to ascertain or monitor the quality and
reliability of the IT systems of the SP. One way to ensure the adoption
of an integrated process approach to effectively deliver managed
services to meet the business and customer requirements is to rely on
the international certification for IT Service Management. This
independent certification process will enable organizations to
benchmark their capability in delivering managed services, measure
service levels and assess performance against globally recognized
Information Technology Service Management Standards.

While such Independent international authorities of repute are
available to provide certification, neither did the Mission/Posts
prescribe holding such certification as a pre requisite for participation
in the bidding process nor did it give any time frame to the SP to
obtain such certification once it was selected. In the absence of such
certification, there exists no assurance to Missions/Post on the quality
of the services and the IT systems of the SP.

Business Continuity Plan: Issue of visa is an important and sensitive
service provided by the Missions/ Posts abroad and it is essential to
have a Business Continuity Plan (BCP) for the Missions/ Posts as well
as for the SP so that in the event of any breakdown / deficiency in
service on the part of the service provider, the restoration of service is
made in the shortest possible time. It was, however, noticed that there
was no provision for BCP in the agreement executed with the SP.
Further it was also noticed that the Missions/Posts have also not
formulated any BCP to deal with such eventualities. Besides, the
Ministry is yet to formulate any policy on how the visa services will be
continued on expiry of the contract with the SPs.

86


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The Ministry stated (October 2009) that a penalty clause was proposed to be
added to the outsourcing contracts already in operation. The clause would
entail a penalty of 0.5 per cent per working/banking day for non-payment of
cash fee in full or part by the SP in the Mission/Post’s account. The
Mission/Post would also have the right to terminate the contract immediately
and forfeit the existing bank guarantee and take possession of all properties,
should the SP fail to deposit the cash fee in Mission/Post’s account
continuously for three working/banking days, which would also be deemed as
intentional lapse on the part of the SP. The Ministry further stated that NIC
was being consulted to evolve a mechanism for conducting quality assurance
checks and monitoring the quality and reliability of the IT systems of the SP.
On BCP, the Ministry clarified that suitable clause was proposed to be added
requiring the SP to put in place an adequate contingency plan (computerised
and physical) to maintain an acceptable level of service within a reasonable
time frame of not more than six hours if the operation of any/all visa
application services were interrupted for any reason.

Ministry’s reply confirms the Audit contention that there are serious
deficiencies in the agreements already concluded. Remedial measures now
proposed by the Ministry should have been considered at the time of
negotiations of terms and conditions with the SP to safeguard the interests of
the Government.

6.6.3 Deficiencies in implementation of the agreements with SPs
6.6.3.1 Irregular levy of additional administrative fee by SP

HCI, London outsourced the visa support services to M/s VFS Global
through a contract concluded in January 2008. Clause 1.2 (iii) of the
agreement provided for payment of visa fee by bank order, postal order, debit
card or cash. Any other mode of payment used in the UK including credit card
and personal cheques could be accepted only at the sole risk of VFS.
However, bank/ agency charges levied on such transactions were to be borne
by the applicants.

In April 2008, VFS requested for a written confirmation from HCI, London to
charge an administration fee to visa applicants to cover the cost of bank
charges under the clause 1.2 (iii) in addition to the visa service charge of
£6.90. HCI permitted VFS to charge an average rate of £0.80 plus VAT as an
administrative fee to cover the cost of bank charges/agency charges.
Accordingly, VFS is charging £0.80 plus VAT as an administrative fee

87


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

uniformly from all applicants irrespective of the mode of payment of visa fee
which was irregular as it was contrary to the provisions of the contract.

As no bank or agency charges are applicable for payment of visa fee by cash,
postal order and debit card, the collection of additional administrative fee on
such transactions was a source of profit to the WFS and an unwarranted
burden on applicants not paying through credit cards or cheques. Details of
visas issued and the mode of payment during the period May 2008 to March
2009 were as under:

Table-4
No. of Visas not | Undue benefit
eligible for to VES @ 0.80
No. of In percentage additional levy | per application
Mission/Post visas (cash, PO/DO,
issued debit cards) (in GBP)
Cash | Postal Debit | Credit | Cheques/
ash | Order/DO | Card | Card | drafts
HCI, London | 3,20,828 | 35.81 6.29 | 34.80 | 14.42 8.68 2,46,7164 1,97,372
cal, 12,350 | 45.00 8.00 | 25.85 | 21.15 9,737 7,789
Edinburgh
06, 2 नि 5
Birmingham 1,24,033 | 30.00 10.00 | 35.00 | 25.00 93,024 4,419
Total | 457,211 279,580

Analysis of the data on the mode of payment revealed that administrative fee
charged on 75 to 76.90 per cent of the visa applications was irregular as no
bank charges were to be levied on such transactions. Thus, undue benefit
accruing to VFS on account of levy of administrative fee amounted to £0.280
million (Rs. 1.96 crore) during May 2008 to March 2009 alone.

The Ministry accepted (October 2009) that levy of £0.80 plus VAT as
administration fee was irregular and resulted in undue benefit to VFS and the
Mission is being advised to direct the SP to discontinue levying administration
fee on cash, debit card and postal order transactions with immediate effect.
The Ministry also stated that the existing administration fee on cheque/DD
and credit card transactions (£0.80 plus VAT) is proposed to be reduced to
£0.50 plus VAT till the expiry of the present contract.

24 35.81+ 6.29+34.80= 76.90% of 320828 = 246716
# 454+8+25.85, 85% of 12350 =9737
# 30410435 = 75% of 124033 = 93024

88



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

6.6.3.2 Undue benefit to SP

The visa services in the Indian Mission and Posts in the United States of
America were outsourced to M/s Travisa with effect from October 2007. A
service fee of USD 13 is being charged by the SP for each visa application.
Audit scrutiny of the documents revealed that while there was no provision in
the contract for any mailing charges to be paid to the SP by the visa applicants
for mailing their passports (affixed with visa), the SP was collecting mailing
charges varying from USD 21 to USD 87 per applicant through its delivery
agency (M/s FedEx), in addition to charging the regular service fee of USD 13
for processing the visa application.

Of the total number of 5,53,511 visas issued during October 2007 to March
2009, 1,24,719 applicants (22 per cent) used the Travisa’s FedEx account for
mailing their documents for which FedEx rates varied from USD 18.95 to
USD 51.55 per applicant depending on the size of the packet, distance and the
zone in which the address falls. On the other hand, the SP was collecting
mailing charges ranging from USD 21 to USD 87 per application. Taking the
mailing charges collected and paid at the minimum of the scale mentioned
above, undue benefit accruing to the SP amounted to USD 0.256 million?
(२5. 1.16 crore).

While the SP declined (January 2010) the request of EI, Washington DC to
furnish the financial data of actual mailing charges collected and paid by it for
the period October 2007 to March 2009, the Mission replied that the fee of
USD 13 is charged by the SP for processing application and related
documents and that it did not include charges for shipment of passports.

The reply of the Mission does not explain the rationale for retention of
additional benefit by the SP on account of mailing charges. Since mailing of
visa affixed passports to applicants is an important function of the SP, the
Mission must examine and ensure that the SP does not unduly overcharge the
distant applicants for mailing of their passports.

6.6.3.3 Delayed realisation of Government money

(A) _ Delays in remittance of visa fees into Government account by SP were
noticed in CGI, Frankfurt in the following instances as discussed below:

(i) Afier the consular services were outsourced, four consular camps were
held in Essen and six in Cologne by the CGI, Frankfurt with the

» (USD 21- USD 18.95) * 124719 = USD 255,674

89


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

support of the SP. The consular service was rendered at the camp on
the same day itself. It was noticed that the SP accepted money through
cash and bank transfer from the applicants but the cheque for the
consular fee was deposited in the consular wing after delays ranging
from one to five days.

(ii) Seven cheques valuing Euro 25,771 were returned unrealised due to
insufficient funds, which were later credited to the Post’s account after
obtaining a new cheque. This resulted in delays in credit to
Government account ranging from 20 to 26 days.

The Ministry stated (October 2009) that with regard to consular fees received
during camps, the Post was being advised to ensure deposit of consular fee
with the SBI, Frankfurt the next working day.

The fact, however, remains that huge delay in the past in remittance of visa
fee coupled with absence of a penalty clause to this effect worked in favour of
the SP.

(B) Embassy of India, Paris outsourced the visa support services to
M/s VFS vide an agreement signed in October 2007. As per amendment to the
agreement, M/s VFS was required to transfer the visa fee to the account of the
Mission in Bank of India on the same day. It was, however, observed that
though VFS has been intimating its banker to transfer the visa fee to the
Mission’s account on the same day, yet Bank of India was affording credit to
the Mission after a delay ranging from one to seven days. In three instances, it
was further observed that credit of Euro 159,260 was afforded to the Mission
after a delay of more than four months leading to undue benefit of Euro
6,905.21 (Rs. 4.35 1801) to Bank of India. The possibility of the Mission
issuing visas without actually receiving requisite visa fees into the
Government account also cannot be ruled out.

The Ministry stated (October 2009) that the delay was on the part of Bank of
India, Paris and the Mission was being advised to take up the matter with the
bank to ascertain the reasons for delay in affording credit to Government
account.

6.6.4 Need for rationalisation of manpower in consular wings

Consequent to the outsourcing of visa application collection services, there
was a need for rationalization of manpower in the consular Wings

3 Buro I= Rs. 63.03; Official rate of exchange of March 2009

90


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

commensurate with revised work norms to ensure right-sizing. Review of the
manpower requirement in the consular wings of three Missions/Posts based on
the revised norms fixed by the Ministry in August 2008 for various items of
works in the consular wings taking into account the improvements in the visa
processing and computerization systems and outsourcing of consular services
revealed the following:

(i) In Embassy of India, Paris, against the actual requirement of 14 staff
members, the Mission has deployed 19 personnel in passport and
consular wing.

(ii) का CGI, Frankfurt, though the outsourcing of visa support services
commenced from August 2007, the Post has not reviewed its staff
strength in consultation with the Ministry in the light of outsourcing of
work load of the passport and consular wing.

Tn view of outsourcing of visa and related services, it is imperative that the
Ministry take up the issue of revised staff norms for consular services on an
urgent basis, so that expenditure currently incurred on redundant/excess
personnel can be reduced.

The Ministry stated that the suggestion of Audit for rationalizing staff strength
has been noted. A circular was being sent to the Missions/Posts, where
outsourcing has been implemented, to assess the staff requirement in consular
wings.

6.6.5 Recommendations:

The Ministry may:

“ review the outsourcing contracts concluded by the Missions/Posts and
issue comprehensive guidelines for re-negotiating the unfavourable
terms with SPs, in line with the model agreement;

“ investigate the process of selection of SP by CGI, Milan and fix
responsibility for non-adherence to the instructions of the Ministry
circulated in November 2006 as also guidelines of CVC/GFR;

* effect recovery from the SP in HCI, London towards irregular levy
administrative fee of £0.80; and

ensure that the pre-qualification bid for the prospective SPs include the
international certification for IT service management. The model
agreement may also be modified requiring the successful bidder to
obtain such certification within a prescribed time frame and ensure its
validity for the duration of the contract.

91


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

6.7 External publicity through Missions

Despite assurance to the Public Accounts Committee, instances of release
of funds to Missions without receipt of Annual action plans, incorrect
classification of items of expenditure to publicity head and despatch of|
publicity material to Missions without request leading to 58 to 74 per cent
of publicity material remaining unutilized, were noticed in Audit.

The Ministry utilizes a variety of channels, including distribution of print and
audio-visual publicity material to foreign audiences for projecting India’s
position on various international issues, developments in India, highlighting of
different aspects of Indian life, art and culture as well as for countering
distorted and malicious propaganda against India etc. Ministry incurs publicity
expenditure through its External Publicity (XP) and Public Diplomacy (PD)
divisions in India and various Missions/Posts abroad. Expenditure at these two
levels is budgeted separately. Missions, in addition to incurring publicity
expenditure from their own budget, are also responsible for end use of
publicity material supplied by the Ministry. The annual expenditure incurred
by the Ministry/Missions under the head publicity ranged from Rs. 31.70 crore
to Rs. 45.44 crore during the period 2004-05 to 2008-09.

To ensure greater oversight and monitoring of expenditure on publicity in
Missions/Posts abroad, the External Publicity division of the Ministry, while
reiterating instructions to all Missions/Posts abroad in September 2005 laid
down the following conditions to be strictly followed by the
Missions/Ministry:
> The release of funds for publicity budget from the year 2006-07
onwards would be subject to Missions sending detailed Annual Action
plans on publicity.

> While classifying the nature of expenditure, it must be ensured that the
expenditure under the head publicity was intended for furthering the
image of India either directly or indirectly but should not be of such
nature which forms a part of the representational obligations of the
concerned officers of the Missions/Posts.

> Provisioning of publicity material for the Missions would only be in
response to their request, to avoid unnecessary expenditure on
publicity.

92


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The Ministry in its Action Taken Note on an earlier audit paragraph’’ had
assured the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of compliance with these
instructions of the Ministry issued in September 2005.

However, examination of records pertaining to publicity expenditure of PD
and XP divisions in the Ministry and test check of records of 44
Missions/Posts”* for the period 2005-06 to 2008-09 disclosed many deviations
as discussed below:

6.7.1 Release of funds to Missions without receipt of annual action plans

Scrutiny of records revealed that funds were released to 11 Missions”? in
2006-07, 10 Missions®’ in 2007-08 and 09 Missions*! in 2008-09, and
expenditure of Rs. 4.04 crore incurred on publicity, even though the Missions
had not prepared any Annual Action plan on publicity.

Ministry replied in February 2010 that the Audit’s observations had been
carefully noted and it had again reminded the Missions to scrupulously follow
the instructions.

6.7.2 Misclassification of items of expenditure not pertaining to publicity
under the head ‘publicity’

An analysis of publicity expenditure booked by 42 Missions during the last
five” years disclosed that out of total expenditure of Rs. 18.73 crore booked
under the publicity head, expenditure amounting to Rs. 6.19 crore (33 per
cent) did not pertain to publicity. Missions routinely charged items of ‘office
expenses’ such as purchase of local newspapers, foreign magazines for
chancery and officers’ residence, cable connection charge for embassy
residence, purchase of furniture, taxi chares, advertisement for recruitment,
payment to contingent staff, hotel accommodation ete. and other unauthorized
expenditure to the publicity budget allotted to them. The inadmissible
expenditure in the Missions/Posts ranged up to 90 per cent of total expenditure
booked under the head “Publicity”. Expenditure related to national day
celebrations, for which a separate budget was sanctioned by the Ministry was
also booked by Missions under the head ‘publicity’.

Audit Report no, 2 of 2006
8 in Asia, Africa and Oceania region, which fall under the audit jurisdiction of DGA
(CE) office, were covered in audit.

> Beijing, Canberra, Damascus, Dubai, Mahe, Male, Melbourne, Nairobi, Port Louis, Seoul, Sydney,

30 Canberra, Damascus, Kuwait, Mahe, Male, Melbourne, Nairobi, Port Louis, Sydney, Zanzibar,

31 Canberra, Damascus, Kuwait, Mahe, Male, Melbourne, Nairobi, Port Louis, Sydney,

” There were cases, where Missions did not provide information for last five years, Expenditure figures
from these Missions were considered for the years, for which information was provided by the Missions.

93


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The Missions at Port Louis and Kathmandu accepted the audit findings.
Missions at Johannesburg, Melbourne, Canberra, Dubai, Istanbul, Birgunj and
Mahe stated that the audit observations had been noted for future compliance.
Missions at Pretoria, Khartoum, Thimpu, Riyadh, Bangkok, Jeddah and
Antananarivo accepted the audit findings except in relation to treating
expenditure on purchase of local newspapers, national day celebrations and
their advertisements, stationery items etc., as publicity expenditure. Missions
at Zanzibar, Beijing, Colombo, Seoul, Lagos, Abuja and Nairobi classified
expenditure on purchase of diesel, local newspapers and magazines, cable TV,
national day celebration, postal charges, taxi charges, mobile phone charges,
Diwali celebration, clearing of incoming bags ete., as publicity expenditure
and did not accept the audit observation.

The replies of the various Missions to a common audit observation indicated
lack of co-ordination between the Ministry and the Missions/Posts abroad
purportedly due to ambiguity in the Ministry’s instructions, which led to
varying interpretations on classification of expenditure under the head
publicity.

Ministry replied in February 2010 that the incorrect booking of expenditure
was most likely attributed to oversight by the Chanceries and in order to
obviate the recurrence of incorrect classification, relevant instructions had
been reiterated to all the Missions.

6.7.3. Publicity material lying unutilized in the Missions

The Ministry, despite its own instructions of September 2005, continued to

send publicity material to Missions without specific requests from the

Missions, leading to publicity material remaining unutilized with the

Missions/Ministry.

oe Based on the analysis of the information supplied by the Missions for
the last five years, it was found that 56 per cent of the books and 60
per cent of the documentaries supplied by the Ministry to Missions for
distribution/presentation to targeted foreign audiences during last five
years were lying unutilized in the Missions. Out of this, 58 per cent of
books and 74 per cent of documentaries were sent to the Missions
without specific request resulting in unfruitful expenditure on their
purchase and supply to Missions, as detailed below:

94


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Table-5
Number of] Copies | Copies | Pereenta | Copies | Percentage
Missions/P aa i. db remaini | geofun- | supplied | material lying
ostswhich | “UPFC” | ngun- | utilized | without | un-utilized
material supplied ne utilized | material | request from the un-
. ‘| Ministry to | "
informatio | “Visions in the requested
n to audit Missions material
Books for 26 33,804 19,059 56 11,395 58
distribution
Documentaries 31 3,074 1,839 60 1,783 74
दूर ‘India Perspectives’ a flagship magazine of the Ministry was used as

part of the publicity efforts by Missions/Posts abroad to reach as wide
an audience as possible. 58,215 copies of ‘India Perspectives’ were

sent to 16 Missions without any request from them during the period
2006-09.

eo The Missions had mostly issued library publicity material to their staff

members instead of the targeted foreign audience, which did not serve
the intended purpose. Details of publicity material in the library and its
utilization by the target foreign audience are as follows:

Table-6
Closin; Material | Number of | Number of
Rimaiherofi Balance as on} i8Sued to | Missions] Missions
Winged jabance ason) ‘target | that didnot | that did
Addition | 31-03-2009 | audience issue any not issue
lici Posts कि हि 5 हि
Publicity which Opening | s during during material any
material supplied Balance last five 2008-09 during material
meee tio years 2008-09 to | during last
हर target five years
n to audit .
audience to target
audience
Books 27 1,36,144 23,556 1,59,700 5,344 13 ue
CD/DVDs 26 8,474 3,706 12,180 430 Bu [| us |

Out of 27 Missions for which information on utilization of books was made
available to audit, 11 Missions with a stock of 57,538 books at the end of year
2008-09 did not issue any book to the target audience during the last five
years. Similarly, 11 Missions with a stock of 6,307 CDs/DVDs at the end of
year 2008-09 did not issue even a single CD/DVD to the target audience
during the last five years.

37 Abuja, Cairo, Canberra, Chittagong, Dubai, Islamabad, Jeddah, Mahe, Pretoria, Port Louis, Seoul,
Tehran, Zanzibar.
अ Abuja, Cairo, Canberra, Chittagong, Islamabad, Jeddah, Mahe, Port Louis, Seoul, Tehran, Zanzibar.

+ Birgunj, Cairo, Canberra, Colombo, Damascus, Dubai, Islamabad, Jeddah, Johannesburg, Male, Seoul,
Tehran, Zanzibar
ऊ Birgunj, Cairo, Canberra, Colombo, Dubai, Islamabad, Jeddah, Johannesburg, Male, Seoul, Zanzibar,

95



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

These findings show that the basic purpose underlying the dispatch of
publicity material to the Missions was not being achieved. The considerable
amount of publicity material not being utilized by the Missions also calls into
question the usefulness of publicity material being purchased/ prepared by the
Ministry.

Ministry replied in February 2010 that in view of the Audit’s observations, a
more streamlined procedure in regard to dispatch and utilization of
documentaries and other publicity material would be devised.

6.8 Logistic management for offices and residences of diplomatic
personnel

Despite assurance to the PAC, the pace of construction of projects on
acquired land by various Indian Missions/Posts abroad such as Embassy
of India Brasilia, Embassy of India Port of Spain, Embassy of India
Paramaribo (Suriname) and High Commission of India Abuja (Nigeria)
continues to be a cause of concern. The delay in construction in above
Missions/Posts ranged between 16 to 45 years resulting in both idling of
funds and consequent escalation in cost of construction. Further as per
IFS (PLCA) rules, the Ministry has to fix and intimate the
Missions/Posts the rental ceiling fixed for various categories of India
based officials. But in many India Missions/Posts abroad, the Ministry
has not fixed the rental ceiling for the official accommodation of various
categories of officers which resulted in excess payment or hiring of
accommodation in excess of the eligibility. Audit also noticed
expenditure on repair and maintenance of building being incurred by
the Missions in excess of the powers delegated to Head of Missions/Posts.

6.8.1 Introduction

6.8.1.1 Expenditure on office and residential accommodations forms a
significant portion of expenditure of Missions and Posts abroad. When serving
outside India, an officer shall be entitled, subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed by the Government, free of charge, to furnished residential
accommodation in accordance with the provisions of IFS (PLCA) Rules. The
related financial powers are prescribed in the Financial Powers of Government
of India’s Representatives Abroad (FPGOIRA).

6.8.1.2 The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in their 51" (2007-08) and 750
(2008-09) Reports- Fourteenth Lok Sabha, had expressed their concern over
the delay in construction of properties abroad. The Committee stressed the
need to expedite the projects within the targeted time-frame through a specific
monitoring plan for each project.

96


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

6.8.2 Audit objectives

6.8.2.1 Audit examined the records relating to construction of projects on
acquired land, maintenance and repairs of built up properties, hiring of
residential accommodations, furniture etc., with a view to assessing the
efficiency, economy and effectiveness of logistic management for offices and
residences of diplomatic personnel. The results of the study are discussed in
the following paragraphs:

6.8.3 Inordinate delay in construction on acquired land
6.8.3.1 Brasilia (Brazil)

Government of Brazil gifted a plot of 25,000 square meters land in 1965 to the
Indian Embassy in Brasilia for the construction of an Embassy Complex.
Earlier Reports*® of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG)
had highlighted the idling of the plot and continued payment of rent for hired
accommodation. While submitting Action Taken Note (ATN) on the
recommendations of the PAC, Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) stated
(September 2006 and February 2008) that the contract for construction of this
project was expected to be awarded in the coming months.

Subsequent scrutiny revealed that the CNE*’ had sanctioned Rs. 37.50 crore
for the project in August 2006. In terms of CNE approval, pre-construction
activities were scheduled to be completed by May 2007 and construction by
May 2009. However, the Mission floated tenders only in February 2008 and
that too before project specifications and drawings were accepted by MEA.
Contract was yet to be awarded as of February 2010. The Ministry stated
(February 2010) that as the financial bids submitted by the bidders were
exorbitant, a modified tender was being issued to the shortlisted firms. The
modified tender was held up due to environment issues and legal requirements
of escalation costs in the tender. The Ministry further stated that it expected to
award the work in another three to four months.

Thus, despite having spent an amount of Rs. 1.08 crore on the project up to
March 2009, assurances given to PAC and protracted correspondence between
Ministry and Mission, there is yet no clarity or finality about the scope of
work. Inordinate delay, changes in scope and design, consequent cost
escalations leading to re-tendering indicated improper planning, lack of

3 Paragraphs 26.8.6 (report No. 13 of 1990), 8.2 (Report No. 2 of 2001) and 5.5.3 (Report No.
17 of 2005)
उ1 Committee on Non-plan Expenditure

o7


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

coordination and indecisiveness on the part of Mission and MEA. This had
resulted in continued idling of the plot for nearly 45 years and avoidable
annual expenditure of Rs. 1.78 crore towards hiring of residential/official
accommodations.

6.8.3.2 Port of Spain (Trinidad & Tobago)

The Government of Trinidad & Tobago donated five acre plot of land to India
in 1994 on 99 years’ lease, for setting up the India Cultural Centre. Delay in
construction and continued payment of rental charges of the leased premises
was commented upon in paragraph 5.5.12 of the Report of the CAG (Report
No.17 of 2005). While furnishing the ATN (September 2006 and February
2008), the MEA stated that the project was under different stages of pre-
construction activities and every possible effort was being made to bring the
project to tender/construction stage at the earliest.

Subsequent audit scrutiny revealed that, the project was yet to commence as of
July 2009 despite incurring expenditure of Rs. 36.10 lakh on consultancy fee
up to March 2009 and lapse of 15 years since allotment of the plot in 1994.
During this period (February 2004), part of the land was encroached by a
company, which could not be removed as of July 2009, resulting in further
delay to the project. Resultantly, the estimated cost of construction of the
project had gone up from TT$15.48 million (Rs. 11.14 दर) in October
2003 to TT$25.34 million (Rs. 18.23 crore) in November 2006. This is
likely to escalate further. The Mission also continued to incur annual
expenditure of Rs. 16.76 lakh towards rent for residential accommodation.

6.8.3.3 Paramaribo (Suriname)

The Government of Suriname donated a plot of land in Paramaribo (1992) for
construction of the Indian Cultural Centre. As the plot of land was lying
vacant, the Government of Suriname took it back in May 1997 and allotted
another plot measuring one hectare in July 1998. Mention was made in
paragraph 5.5.5 of CAG’s Report No.17 of 2005 about delay in construction
of Indian Cultural Centre at Paramaribo. While submitting the ATN
(September 2006 and February 2008), MEA stated that every possible effort
was being made to bring the project to tender/construction stage at the earliest.

35 Worked out at the exchange rate of December 2006

98


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Subsequent audit scrutiny revealed that the scope of the work of construction
had been expanded to include additional classrooms, residences and for
augmenting the capacity of the Auditorium. Fresh designs from the Architect
were awaited as of July 2009. The Mission, meanwhile, continued to incur
annual expenditure of Rs. 29.18 lakh towards rental payment for the Centre
and residential accommodation.

6.8.3.4 Abuja (Nigeria)

The PAC in their 108” report (1987-88) and 51% report (2007-08) and
Standing Committee of Parliament on Ministry of External Affairs in its report
of June 1998, emphasised the need for gradual replacement of rental
expenditure with sound investment in suitable properties and emphasised
construction on available plots to avoid imprudent expenditure on rentals.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry purchased two plots for the
construction of Residence of High Commission of India, Abuja and chancery-
cum-residence building in the year 1990 and 1991, respectively, with lease
period of 45 years. It was noticed during audit that despite payment of
consultancy fee of Rs. 25.82 lakh up to May 2009 and ground rent of Rs. 7.20
lakh up to December 2008 and protracted correspondence between the
Ministry and Mission, the Ministry could not decide the scope and design of
the construction work even after lapse of a significant period of 18/19 years
out of the leased period of 45 years.

The following reasons led to the delay:

(i) No action for construction on the plots was taken by the Mission/
Ministry till June 2001.

(ii) Even after initiating the process of construction of the project in June
2001, Ministry took two and a half years, for reasons not on record, to appoint
a consultant (January 2004) for preparation of the plan, drawings, construction
and for management services at a consultation fee of five per cent of the
tendered cost/estimated cost of construction.

(iii) | Ministry/Mission neither prescribed any time limit for the consultant to
submit the designs nor included a penalty clause for unreasonable delays. The
consultant submitted the designs after more than two years in March 2006.

99


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(iv) The bids were obtained in December 2006 and a time line was drawn
in April 2007 according to which, the project was to commence in July 2007
and completed by July 2008. However, due to non finalisation of the scope of
work, the bids expired in April 2008. There has not been any progress
towards construction of chancery building and residential accommodations on
the plots since April 2008. As of February 2010, the proposal of construction
of HOM’s residence and other residences was under the consideration of the
CNE.

Lack of planning, focus and indecisiveness on the part of the Ministry resulted
in continued idling of the plots and avoidable annual expenditure of Rs. 1.22
crore towards rentals of chancery building and residence of High
Commissioner. Further, inordinate delay in the projects may cause heavy
escalations of costs and even revocation of allotment by the local Government.

6.8.3.5 Damascus (Syria)

A building having a floor area of 368.25 sq. metre was purchased for chancery
of Damascus in 1978 for Rs 50.26 lakh. The Chancery was shifted to a new
building in June 2003. The idling of old building since then was pointed out
in Comptroller and Auditor General’s Performance Audit Report no. 17 of
2005 on Property Management by MEA.

The Ministry, in September 2006 submitted to the PAC that they were
exploring the feasibility of using this building as a Cultural Centre as the
building was not found to be suitable for residential purpose in view of its
location in the commercial area. The PAC in their 51“ Report (2007-08) -14"
Lok Sabha, recommended that the Ministry should list out all the properties
lying vacant for long periods and prioritise the same for prompt disposal.

In the ATN on the report of the PAC, the Ministry stated (February 2008) that
the plot would now be used for construction of residences of officers. The
PAC subsequently recommended in their 750 Report (2008-09)- 14" Lok
Sabha that MEA should not further dither in the matter and should formulate
an action plan forthwith for timely disposal of vacant properties.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry had approved a panel of seven
architect firms in May 2008 with the time schedule of July 2008 for
submission of final proposal for architectural/ design plans. However, the
Ministry had not selected any architect for the work as of January 2010.
Further, no time frame had been drawn to utilise this building as
recommended by the PAC. Resultantly, the property had been lying idle since

100


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

June 2003 and the Mission had been continuing to pay rentals for the
residences of the officers/officials.

Recommendation:

Ministry needs to frame time bound plans for completion of the projects to
avoid inordinate delay.

6.8.4 Avoidable extra expenditure due to poor contract management

6.8.4.1 Embassy of India (EI), Washington DC, invited quotations
(January 2006) for renovation/repair of ceiling of the Chancery-I building. The
Mission received three bids (US$ 163,770, 155,614 and 70,350) between
January and March 2006. The Mission while expressing confidence over the
capability of the first lowest agency, sought Ministry’s approval. The Ministry
approved the lowest offer on 17 May 2006.

Though the contract was signed on 18 May 2006, the contractor expressed (25
May 2006) his inability to execute the work due to delay in accepting the
tender, invoking clause 6 of the contract. Clause 6 of the contract provided
that either party with written notice could terminate the agreement should the
other party fail substantially to perform in accordance with the terms of the
agreement through no fault of the party initiating the termination. The Mission
conveyed (31 May 2006) the above facts to the Ministry with recommendation
to accept the second lowest offer and the Ministry approved (14 June 2006)
the same. The work was completed on 22 September 2006.

Audit scrutiny revealed the following flaws in contract management:

(i) The contract did not contain any provisions regarding the validity
period of the rates, security deposit by the contractor and penalty to be
imposed in case of breach of contract. As a result, the lowest contractor
could freely opt out of the contract on the grounds of unworkable rates
due to delay, after signing the agreement.

(ii) Since there was substantial difference in the rate of first and second
lowest bidder, the Mission should have properly determined the
reasonability of rates before acceptance of LI offer and also should
have explored the possibility of re-tendering to get more competitive
rates before awarding the work to L2 bidder.

101


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Failure of the Mission to incorporate suitable safeguards in the contract
resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of US$ 85,264 (Rs, 39.41 lakh*®), The
case also highlights that the Mission has no system for determining
reasonability of rates before award of contract.

The Mission replied (February 2008) that the matter was being reviewed.
Further reply was awaited (July 2009).

Recommendations:

“+ Missions should incorporate suitable safeguards and penal provisions
in the agreement with contractors.

“+ The Mission should put in place a proper system of determining
reasonability of rates to avoid acceptance of unworkable rates and also
the rates that are too exorbitant.

6.8.5 Non-fixation of rental ceiling for hiring of residential
accommodation

Para 4(2) of Annexure-X to the Rules stipulates that the Mission/Post should
hire accommodation within the rental ceiling prescribed by the Ministry for
various categories of its officers/staff. As per item No. 20 (III) (3) of the
FPGOIRA, in case where the rental ceiling has not been fixed, HOM/HOP has
full powers to hire accommodation initially subject to the rent not exceeding
USD 1426 per month. Further, Para 4 (18) (ii) of Annexure-X provides that
the Missions for which rental ceilings have not been prescribed should
invariably forward all proposals with complete details in the prescribed pro-
forma showing rental of the proposed accommodation and the reason why it is
in excess of the existing operative ceiling.

6) Scrutiny of records revealed that the Ministry has not fixed rental
ceiling in 13*° Missions/Posts. In the absence of rental ceiling, the Missions
continued to hire accommodation on the basis of rent initially sanctioned by
the Ministry for a similar ranking officer. This practice cannot be deemed to
substitute the provisions for fixation of rental ceiling as the Ministry's decision
of sanctioning rent is case-specific, depending upon circumstances prevailing
at that point of time, which may not be appropriate or hold good for future
reference. Given the fact that the substantial expenditure is being incurred on
hiring of accommodation, there is a need for instituting controls by fixing the

39 worked out at the exchange rate of September 2006 (US$ | =Rs.46.22)
40 Helsinki, The Hague, Lisbon, Vienna, Dublin, Bee, Geneva, Ottawa, Toronto, San
Francisco, Chicago, Brasilia and Peru

102


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

rental ceilings for the leased accommodation in respect of various categories
of officers/statf,

(ii) था Helsinki(April 2006), The Hague(March 2004) and
Vienna(April 2003) had taken up the matter for fixing ceiling limit with
the Ministry. The Ministry's approval was awaited in all these cases. EI
Berlin(June 2008) had taken up the matter with the Ministry for regularisation
of excess expenditure incurred in excess of the ceiling limit fixed by the
Ministry. EI Lisbon stated that it was not possible to fix the rental ceiling as
the rent was increased as per the increase in coefficient published by the local
Government, which would necessitate revision of ceiling every year and the
sanction of the Ministry thereof. Replies of the El Dublin and PMI Geneva were
awaited.

(iii) का absence of rental ceiling fixed by the Ministry, the Missions/Posts at
Ottawa, Toronto, San Francisco, Brasilia and Peru hired accommodations
beyond the delegated powers of HOM in 32"! out of 47 cases.

HCI, Ottawa and the Posts at San Francisco replied that they have taken up the
Matter with the Ministry for fixing rental ceilings. Replies from Toronto, Peru
and Brasilia are awaited.

(iv) In PMI Geneva, it was observed that rent for the hired accommodation
exceeded prescribed financial powers of the HOM (USD 1426 per month) in 39
out of 42 hired accommodations (93 per cent). However, PMI, Geneva had not
obtained approval of the Ministry in respect of 36 accommodations as
required by Para 4 (18) (ii) of Annexure X to the Rules.

Recommendation:

Ministry may fix Mission-wise rental ceiling for all categories of the officers.
6.8.6 Excess payment of agent's commission

6.8.6.1 As per item 20(1)(5) of Schedule I of FPGOIRA,
HOM/HOP was empowered to incur expenditure towards payment of agent's
commission up to one month's rent subject to a ceiling of 2.5 per cent of the
total rent payable during the period of lease. Further, the expenditure on
agent's commission should be shared equally between the Mission/Post and
the landlord as per normal practice.

*! Ottawa (4/6), Toronto (4/4), San Francisco (14/14), Chicago (5/10), Peru (2/6), Brasilia
G7)

103


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

6.8.6.2 Audit scrutiny revealed that EI Vienna and Berlin (April
2007 to December 2007) incurred unauthorised expenditure of Euro
11949” (Rs. 7.53 lakh) beyond the delegated powers of HOM/HOP
towards payment of agent’s commission.

El Vienna stated (April 2009) that it has noted the audit observation. EI
Berlin stated (July 2008) that it has sought approval of the Ministry for
regularisation of the excess agency commission.

6.8.7 Non-refund of security deposit

68.7.1 As per item 20(III(7) of FPGOIRA, HOM/HOP have been
empowered to make payment of refundable security deposit equivalent to
two month's rent. The instructions, of March 2004 inter-alia, provided that
either the payment for the last month/quarter should not be made in
advance or payments be made in such a way so that the security deposit is
duly adjusted after giving notice of termination of the lease.

6.8.7.2 In four Missions, it was observed that they failed to
obtain the refund of the security deposit of Rs. 10.57% lakh paid to the
landlords despite dehiring these accommodations between September 2005
and February 2008.

EI, The Hague stated that recovery of Rs. 1.13 lakh has been effected. EI
Bucharest, Dublin and Paris stated that matter of refund of security deposit has
been taken up with the landlord/agency.

Recommendations:
The Missions may

ह vigorously pursue with the landlords to get refund of security
deposits; and

% explore the possibility of inserting a clause in the contract wherein
the security deposits are adjusted against the rent payable during the
notice period.

“ET Vienna (Euro 4774) EI Berlin (Euro 7175)

* worked out at the official exchange rate of March 2009(Euro 1=Rs.63.01)

“ Bucharest, Hague, Dublin, Paris and Rome

* Rs.in lakh at the official exchange rate of March 2009 —Bucharest (1.97), Dublin (1.29),
Paris (5.80) and Rome (1.51)

104


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Conclusion

Despite assurances to the PAC, the pace of construction of projects on
acquired land by various Missions abroad continues to be a cause of concern.
There were substantial delays in construction in the case of five Missions
ranging between 16 to 45 years, resulting in both idling of funds and
consequent cost escalation. The Missions continue to incur avoidable rental
expenditure towards hiring of residential/official accommodation.

Audit also noticed expenditure on repair and maintenance of buildings being
incurred by the Missions in excess of the powers delegated to them. Instances
of non-fixation of rental ceilings and non-adherence to norms for hiring of
buildings point to the need for the Ministry to address the issue by enforcing
the rules and orders issued in this regard.

105


901

OqueUreIed/ [Od PMENO/[OD Uleds JO WOg/OH anosueA/[ND OINMAA/OA UVOISNOH/ND ण्गछणतजातठत
‘elueurd/[O” “Oped OVS /[O ज्याफ़ souoNg/[O 'णाऊण्प्चत10प “WOTOg/[Og ण्णाव 193 ‘qudez ‘gq ‘uadeyuado| ‘fq “yooysoarpel ५ व "णा[वात “gq 'गाण्जैग्प्त
“1a “umnquipy 199 “PUIS}aH व “Unpyuesy 190 Asaveyong [व ‘o[sg ‘Tq ‘Mesue Ay “Ty “suaypy ‘[q ‘auiag ‘[q Ssedepng पत्र ‘sued “Tq “UOPUOT [OH *४००४०॥४ [3 ५,

144 FT9INGSSLOT CESTESSTD LIDOILE9T ZzOL aauai9yg1G pus dangpusdxy [8,0
sp 121 8221 4 6द८18६ 999ाफा 19 Teo -Ayng Aresodway,
os 0685६& LSTL8OT Lpogzrs €1 uoyauryse yy “Wdd-Ag Areroduray,
id E8TS6E9 TLO6TOT 801६698 8b vopuoT “yad-Aing Areroduay,
Of TSTGSSET O7LZE08 ६८81691£ 671 [e}0,,-o8usseg Aduad.19wg
ve 1051 ट8[1 6s sper 09999091 6b UoPsULYsE AN “WCd-aFesseg Aouassowrg
ina ISOLELIL L9SERLE ६1252551 08 प्रणएप०- 'एतक->ीए5४छव Aouediowg
vr 9६८89 ८६८1 COEEELOS 6६02८00 ८८ ues 1e}0]-98esseq २१ए० १ ग्ए्णा
6६ ट28६6६६69 1#66709६82८ 9/८६10६6 £97 uo Ruryse Ay Cd-aFesseg 940००] WOH
vr PSEHTHEOL 6068S0LT ६928860६1 69५ प्र०एप०-] ‘WCd-aaesseg save] WOH,
(sy ut) (गगा
Aurouoga arey

(sowy yo soquinu) o1ey (sy ण) गण पाप) 180. g/UOISsIPY, Buypoaesy

ysadeayp 71a aanyrpuadxa (sy a) ysadeaya uo ayy q pred azey | Aqueysqetagyo Aguamol Jo ad.

गाए पाप Jo uostwdwo | sangipuadxy vuxg | paseq oavjary | ary so junoury JOON

Agnp Are10dura, pue azessed Asuadsau *३५ए४ज >जा०्प
Suyunp ssaquiaw Apuey pue अणजा।० 4194} जण $394 91 AWOUOIA aaey [[NJ Jo 95एपएज्जात UO sysog/SUdISSIA ,,0¢ Aq PIsanduy aany;puadxa एज]5३ 1० sPLe}IG,

(779 ON Ydeasesred ur 0} passzayoy)

[-xouuy

11-0102 f0 6 “ON woday



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annex-I

paragraph No. 6.3

&iv))

SL No.

Apartment

Date of
completion

Major problems

Converted flat 7-8
Pilot Project)

August 2003

Converted flat 9-10

September 2004

Water leakage from the roof in dining area from the
upstairs apartment (converted flat 9-10), water
dripping from the electrical bulb point, thereby
severely impairing the living conditions and safety
of occupants.

w

Converted flat 1-2

May 2006

Severe damp problem; successive water leaks from
upstairs apartment (converted flat 3-4); multiple
leaks in the water pipes under the floor that damaged
the shoes, paintings and other personal belongings
stored in the apartment; water dripping next to the
gas and electricity meters; wet walls and wiring;
rusted radiator pipes; bloated flooring etc. The
apartment is uninhabitable and lying vacant.

Converted flat 3-4

‘August 2006

Major leakage from unconverted flat 5 and 6, severe
damp in the walls and fungus problem. The problem
of damp from converted flat 1-2 spilled over into flat
3-4.

107



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annex-IlI
(Referred to in paragraph No. 6.4)
Details of excess payments pending recovery
2004-05 to 2009-10

_ (Rupees in lakh
ized it of ame Excess Other pon
rize ayment 0: aymen
SI. No. Me Pag = Year payment » गा DA if ow Pay, | payment Excess settlement
of EWF | andrelated | FARG | of CEA | payments d
charges claims ete aevances
{| | . Moscow 2004-05 2.76
2. Dar-es-Salaam 5.20
3. Port Lious 1.09
4, Argentina 1.85
2005-06
5. Rome 0.29
[6 | Sana 0.16
7. Tunis 0.21
[8 | Antananarivo 0.38
[ 9 | Mahe | _ 6.1 | |
2006-07
| _lo. | Athens 0.16
11. Madrid 1.53
12. Durban 0.10
13. Mombassa 0.22
14. Kandhar 0.14
15. Canberra 0.17
2007-08
[16 | Hague 0.76
17. | Ulaanbaatar 0.38
[| _18. | Hongkong 2.15
2008-09
19. Vladivostok 0.31
20. Frankfurt 0.57
21. Dar-es-Salaam 0.33
22. New York 0.46
23 Brasilia 0.13
24, Washington 0.39
2009-10
25 Sydney | 1.9 |
26. Antananarivo 8.85
27. Canberra 3.46
28. | Ottawa 1.00
Total 7.95 10.5 4.74 [1.09 | [5.96 | [10.11 | 1
Grand Total 40.35

108



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annex-IV

(Referred to in paragrapsh No. 6.5)

Recoveries effected in respect of Missions/Posts at the instance of audit

a Name orine No.of Amount (Rs.) Nature of recovery
2006-07

| EOT’, Belgrade 4 293668 One per cent of Tuition fee, irregular reimbursement of taxi
fare, excess payment of daily allowance and non-recovery of
electricity, water and fuel charges.

2 | HCI, London 3 172619 Overpayment during preparation time, excess payment of
representational Grant and irregular payment of maintenance
allowance.

3. | EOL, Astana 1 20984 Irregular refund of income tax deducted at source.

4_| EOI, Moscow | 37757 Recovery of one percent of the tuition fee.

5 | EOI, Madrid 2 63214 Recovery of excess payment of salary to locally recruited staff
and recovery of gas charges during Heating period.

6 | BOT, Helsinki 1 28712 Recovery of one percent of the tuition fee.

7 | CGI, Edinburgh 2 84275 Recovery of transfer passage(air fare) and recovery of excess
reimbursement of baby sitting charges.

|e EOI, Yerevan 2 35859 Recovery of irregular payment of pro-rata bonus to local
employees and recovery of one percent of the tuition fee.

[9 | EOL, Berlin 1 35450 Recovery of water charges.

Total 17 772538
2007-08

1 | BOL Rome 3 210931 Recovery of excess telephone call charges, recovery of one
percent of the tuition fee and recovery of irregular expenditure
incurred by the Mission towards visit of the Ambassador of
Berne to Rome.

2 | PMI, Geneva 1 उ875 Recovery towards excess reimbursement of additional cost of
car insurance.

3__| EOI, Bucharest (1 | 18610 Excess payment of Representational Grant.

Total [s | 288256
2008-09

1 | HCL, London 2 2425771 Non-availing of discount on Air India tickets and refund of
excess payment of daily allowances.

2 | EOL, Zagreb 2 57345 Recovery of excess payment to the gardener and recovery of
inadmissible gas charges for non-heating season.

3 | BOI, Prague 2 36619 Recovery of excess payment of daily allowance and incorrect
computation of Income Tax and Additional Foreign Allowance

4 | EOI, Berne tt 76815 Recovery of one per cent of Tuition Fee.

5 06, Frankfurt 1 21228 Excess payment of Foreign Allowance.

6 | EOI,Dushanbe [| 1 |[_ 22928 Wrong payment of bonus to the local employees.

7 | EOL Belgrade 3 89599 Recoveries on account of excess reimbursement of additional
cost of car insurance, towards heating charges at Embassy
residence and excess telephone calls from residence.

| EOI, Moscow 1 11442 Recovery of unauthorized expenditure on residential
telephones.

|] EOI, Kiev 1 11642 Inadmissible payment of various allowances to defence
personnel.

10_| EOL, Astana 1 72679 Refund of TDS by the Mission.

11 | EOL The Hague 2 46500 Excess payment of pay and allowances during Home Leave,
recovery of excess residential telephone call charges.

* EOI - Embassy of India

109



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Sl.

Name of the

No. of

N af Amount (Rs.) Nature of recovery
0. Mission cases

12_| BOT, Baku 1 53409 Recovery of excess payment of packing charges.

13 | BOT, Athens | 1 | 35135 Non-availing of discount on Air India tickets.

14 | EOL, Berlin S 125472 Recovery of damages of leased residence, recovery of excess
expenditure towards purchase of air tickets, erroneous slab
deduction, Recovery of Electricity and Water charges,
Recovery of EWF charges.

15_| EOT, Helsinki | 1 | 77185 Recovery of Tuition Fee.

| 6 HCI, Pretoria 3 81558 Recovery of foreign allowance in lieu of transportation
charges.

17 | BOL, Doha 2 21366 Recovery of excess reimbursement of additional cost of car
insurance.

[18 | EOT, Tokyo [464161 Recovery of excess collection of commission/charges.

19 | EOT, Bogota 1 31666 Overpayment of foreign allowance.

20 | CGI, Toronto | 1 | 17790 Excess payment of additional cost of car insurance.

21 | EOL Washington 1 43245 Recovery towards overpaid cable charges.

22 | PMI, New York 1 14885 Inadmissible payment of medical expenses.

23 | EOL, Panama 2 22809 Inadmissible payment on account of transfer TA and
incidentals during home leave.

24 | CGI, Houston 3 43675 Overpayment of daily allowances, non-receipt of refimd from
Air India.

25_| EOI, Brasilia 1 75189 Refund of demurrage charges.

26 | HCL, Port of Spain 1 187568 Refund of unused portion of Air Ticket.

Total 42 4167681
Grand total 64 5228475
| s2.281akh | lakh

110



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER शा : MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE

Department of Health

TA Non-implementation of computerised Management Information
System for Food Control Organisations

Failure of the Ministry to ensure migration of complete data from State
Food Testing Laboratories to the computerised system has resulted in
non-achievement of objectives of establishing communication network
between the Food regulatory agencies and the laboratories even after
three years of the scheduled date of completion. The equipment worth
Rs. 2.79 crore is lying idle at NIC, New Delhi and in State laboratories at
different locations,

Under the World Bank assisted Food and Drugs Capacity Building Project, the
Ministry entered into a contract with M/s HCL Info Systems in July 2006 for
establishment of a computerized Management Information System at a cost of
Rs. 3.45 crore. The system was intended to enhance information flows and
coordination between the Central and State regulatory agencies. The data
collected across the testing laboratories and State Food Control Organistions
was to be centrally stored, collated, analyzed and presented in an appropriate
form to different authorities in the Food Control Organization on a need to
know basis.

The project envisaged networking of 105 locations’ across the country. In
terms of the agreement, HCL was to provide application software, hardware
for server, input/output devices and computers. It was also responsible for
maintenance of the system hardware and software. The main data centre for
operation of the project was located at NIC’, in Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi,
while the Prevention of Food Adulteration (PFA) Headquarters at Nirman
Bhawan was designated as the administrator for operation of the system. In
terms of the agreement, the project was to be completed within six months of
its commencement i.e., by December 2006.5

The implementation of the project depended on the successful migration of
data maintained manually by various food laboratories and its regular updation

' Prevention of Food Adulteration (PFA) Headquarters, Nirman Bhawan, State PFA,
Central/State Food Labs, Primary Health Or: ations, National Institute of Nutrition,
Hyderabad and Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore

* National Informatics Centre

३ The period has been reckoned from the date of signing the agreement in July 2006

111


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

on to the computerized system for the benefit of the users. Audit examination
disclosed that, as of December 2009, out of an estimated volume of 2,40,000
test reports pertaining to Central/State food laboratories, only 80,000 reports
(33 per cent) had been migrated. The reasons for non-migration of the entire
data were attributed to non-furnishing of the data by the state food
laboratories. The Ministry however was not aware of the reasons for the State
laboratories not furnishing data to the computerised MIS Centre. This
indicated lack of adequate monitoring by the Ministry to ensure timely
implementation of the project. Due to non-migration of data in respect of
large number of laboratories, the system could not be fully operationalised
even after more than three years of the launch of the project. Meanwhile, the
server which had earlier been installed at NIC, Nirman Bhawan, was shifted to
another location due to shortage of accommodation. The Central Server and
the hardware installed in the State Food Laboratories were lying idle as of
August 2009.

Audit further found that the agreement with M/s HCL provided for payment of
15 per cent of the Iump sum amount of Rs. 3.45 crore evenly over the
maintenance period of three years which was to commence after final user
acceptance. The Ministry, however, released payment of Rs. 20.10 lakh on
pro-rata basis towards maintenance charges without ensuring fulfillment of the
terms of the agreement. The failure of the Ministry to include warranty clause
in the agreement was also detrimental to safeguarding its interests and also
violated Clause (xvii) of Rule 204 of General Financial Rules, 2005.

The Ministry admitted in December 2009 that only about one third of the
requisite data had been migrated. It also stated that the question of
reinstallation/reconfiguration of the system with restored database and the
authority that was to operate the system was under active consideration of the
Ministry in consultation with the Food Safety and Standards Authority, which
was now in-charge of all food safety matters.

The reply underscores the need for the Ministry to immediately resolve the
issues and review the modalities involved in convergence with the state
laboratories, HCL and NIC so that the project that has been stalled and badly
delayed could be revived. Delay in completing the project also poses a risk of
the existing equipment involving an investment of Rs. 2.79 crore becoming
obsolete/phased out with a possibility of the Ministry having to incur extra
expenditure on its replacement and reinstallation.

112


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

National Aids Control Organisation

7.2... Recovery at the instance of Audit

At the instance of Audit, the Ministry recovered interest of Rs. 3.35 crore
on funds of Rs. 49.55 crore prematurely released in March/July 2006 to
M/s HSCC for procurement of ARV drugs.

The Ministry entered into an agreement with M/s HSCC*, a Government of
India undertaking, in January 2005 for procurement of ARV? drugs for World
Bank aided HIV/AIDS® control programme. In terms of the agreement, the
Ministry was to release 100 per cent estimated cost of drugs to HSCC on
finalisation of orders with the suppliers. The cost of drugs was to be adjusted
in the final bill/rendering of accounts after completion of indented supplies.

Examination of records disclosed that the Ministry released advance payments
of Rs. 21.45 crore in March 2006 and Rs. 28.10 crore in May 2006 to HSCC
for procurement of ARV drugs. As on 31 August 2009, HSCC had submitted
the Statement of Expenditure (SOE) for Rs. 48.86 crore and SOE for the
balance amount of Rs. 0.69 crore was awaited as of December 2009.

Release of 100 per cent estimated cost of the drugs as interest free advance
had resulted in idling of unutilized funds ranging from Rs. 49.55 crore to
Rs. 0.69 crore during the period from April 2006 to August 2009. HSCC
earned an interest of Rs. 3.35 crore on the unutilized balances up to March
2009,

The Central Vigilance Commission’s guidelines issued in January 2002 for
improvement in the procurement system stipulate that the advance payment
made to the contractor should be interest bearing so that the contractor does
not draw undue benefit from the advance payment. However, the agreement
with HSCC did not provide for payment of interest on the advance amounts
placed with them.

Further, as per the terms of payment under the General Conditions of Contract
between HSCC and the supplier, advance payment of only 10 per cent was to
be provided to the supplier by HSCC. Thus the action of the Ministry to
include a clause for 100 per cent interest free advance to HSCC in its bidding
document was in contravention of CVC guidelines and also not in conformity
with the standard terms of agreement between HSCC and supplier.

* Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
+ Anti Retro Viral
“Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

113


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The Ministry in its reply in October 2009 stated that the contract agreement
did not include any clause with regard to interest earned on the advances
transferred to HSCC. This clause has, however, been included in all PSA
contracts entered into subsequently. However, on it being pointed out by
Audit, interest of Rs. 3.35 crore earned by HSCC on the advance amount of
Rs. 49.55 crore up to March 2009, was refunded by HSCC to the Ministry in
January and October 2009.

National Institute of Communicable Diseases

13 Delayed supply of equipment

Failure of the Ministry to ensure timely supply of ventilators through
HSCC which was of emergent nature resulted in intended objectives
remaining unfulfilled. Further, the Ministry prematurely released
advance payment of Rs. 5.53 crore te HSCC even before an agreement
was entered into by the latter with the supplier. The advance paid was
much in excess of the value of goods procured. The unadjusted
advance of Rs. 1.57 crore is yet to be recovered from HSCC.

The Ministry, as a measure of preparedness against Avian Influenza, decided
in January 2008 to procure 100 ventilators for NICD’ through HSCC* on
limited tender basis. HSCC completed the technical and preliminary
commercial bid evaluation process in March 2008 and requested the Ministry
for an advance payment of Rs. 5.53 crore, determined on the basis of a similar
procurement made in the year 2006. This included the consultancy fee of
Rs. 18.62 lakh charged by HSCC @ 3.5 per cent.

Audit found that the Ministry made an advance payment of the entire
estimated cost of equipment of Rs 5.53 crore, including consultant’s fee in
March 2008 even though the procurement order had not been placed by HSCC
with the supplier. HSCC placed orders with supplier in June 2008, with the
stipulated date of delivery as September 2008.

Audit noticed that the Ministry did not ensure timely delivery of the
equipment despite this being an emergency procurement. The equipment was
delivered in May 2009 more than eight months after the scheduled date of
delivery. While 10 ventilators had not been installed as of August 2009, the
remaining had been installed between May 2009 and August 2009.

* National Institute of Communicable Diseases
* Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (A GOI enterprise under the aegis of Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare)

114


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Audit examination further disclosed that the price bids of three techno-
commercially qualified bidders were opened in May 2008 and the price quoted
by the lowest bidder was Rs. 3.96 crore ie. Rs. 1.57 crore less than the
advance payment made.

Further, according to the notification of award of contract by HSCC to the
supplier in June 2008, 80 per cent of the invoice value was to be paid within
30 days of documentary proof of receipt of invoiced goods. The balance 20
per cent was to be released within 30 days of receipt of a report on the
satisfactory installation and commissioning of the equipment from the
consignee’.

The decision of the Ministry to release advance payment in excess of the
actual amount and well before the award of work by HSCC to the supplier
resulted in idling of funds of Rs. 5.34 crore (Rs. 5.53 crore- Rs. 0.19!° crore)
with consequent interest impact of Rs. 46 lakh’! during the period from April
2008 to April 2009.

The Ministry must recover the excess advance of Rs. 1.57 crore lying
unutilized with HSCC along with interest of Rs. 21.98 lakh earned by it on
unspent balance. Ministry must also ensure that its procurement policy and
procedures are consistent with General Financial Rules in the matter of
tendering and payment of advance to the contractors. The rate of commission
paid to HSCC in such cases should also be reviewed and revised downwards.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in September 2009; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010,

Safdarjung Hospital

7.4 Incorrect payment of service tax

the statutory provisions of the Finance Act by Safdarjung Hospital led to
irregular payment of service tax and education cess aggregating Rs. 22.63
lakh during the period from November 2006 to June 2009 for cleaning
services received from M/s BVG India Ltd.

° NICD in this case.

10 Consultancy fee @ 3.5% of HSCC

" Worked out at the borrowing rate of 8% of Government of India (Source: Economic
Survey)

115



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Safdarjung Hospital entered into an agreement with M/s BVG" India Limited
in September 2006 for providing conservancy/ housekeeping services in its
two wards’? including pest control services for a consolidated amount of
Rs. 5.96 lakh plus taxes per month.

As per the statutory provisions of the Finance Act, 2005 cleaning services
were included for levy of service tax on ‘cleaning activity’ from 16 June 2005.
However, pest control services and cleaning services in relation to non-
commercial buildings were specifically excluded from the ambit of service
tax.

Examination of records disclosed that the contractor M/s BVG India Limited
had been charging service tax and cess thereon at the prescribed rates on the
cleaning and pest control services from Safdarjung Hospital. The Hospital
being a non-commercial building was not liable to pay service tax on cleaning
services received by it.

Thus, failure of the Hospital authorities to correctly apply the provisions of the
Finance Act, 2005 resulted in unnecessary payment of service tax and
education cess of Rs. 22.63 lakh to M/s BVG India Ltd. during the period
November 2006 to June 2009.

The Hospital may take immediate steps to recover the service tax already paid
and stop further payment of service tax to the contractor.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in September 2009; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

Medical Stores Organisation

15 Supply of medicines on unlimited credit period

Supply of medicines on credit basis by the Government Medical Stores
Depots to various client departments and institutions resulted in
accumulation of outstanding dues of Rs. 88.34 crore covering the period
from 1975 to 2009.

The Government Medical Stores Depots (GMSDs), at Chennai, Guwahati,
Hyderabad, Karnal, Kolkata and New Delhi, working under the control of
Medical Stores Organisation (MSO), New Delhi are engaged in procurement
and supply of medicines and medical stores required by hospitals/dispensaries

17 Bharat Vikas Group Company
'S Burns, Plastic Surgery & Maxillofacial Deptt. and Casualty ward

116



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

run by the Central and State Government departments and local bodies.
GMSDs run on ‘no profit no loss basis’ and charge actual cost of procurement
plus 10 per cent departmental charges.

Mention was made in Paragraph No. 5.1 Report No. 14 of 2008-09 of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India on the unrestricted supply of
medicines on credit basis by GMSD, Mumbai to various client departments,
resulting in accumulation of unrealized dues of Rs. 19.73 crore over a period
of 18 years from 1990 to 2008. No Action Taken Note (ATN) has been
submitted by the Ministry indicating remedial measures taken for recovery of
these outstanding dues from the defaulting hospitals and institutions.

Subsequent audit scrutiny of the records of the MSO, New Delhi in September
2009 disclosed that supplies to Central and State Government hospitals &
dispensaries and non-government departments were made on credit basis. The
client departments were to make payments within the financial year of
purchase. As on 31 March 2009, Rs. 88.34 crore remained to be recovered
from various organizations that had received supplies on credit basis during
the period 1975 to 2009. The GMSDs wise position of outstanding dues is
given below.

Table-1
Total Amount Amount outstanding
Name of GMSD. number of | defaulting outstanding for more than five
indenters indenters (Rupees in lakh) years
(Rupees in lakh)
Chennai 324 55 1032.44 544.51
Guwahati 237 210 218.95 98.46
Hyderabad 41 [is 1982.28 1111.44
Karnal 340 | its 251.10 5.17
Kolkata 224 58 2201.56 429,84
New Delhi 59 55 3147.81 2762.19
Total 1225 507 8834.14 [4951.61 |

This indicates that nearly 41 per cent of the indenters were defaulters and
56.05 per cent of the arrears were outstanding for more than five years.
Further breakup of the outstanding dues pertaining to various types of
indenters is given in Table-2.

117



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Table-2
Outstanding dues against various types of indenters
(Rupees in lakh)
Type of indenter
G Central State Non-
BLD Government | Government | Dispensaries iv onal Government
Hospital hospital omes | institutions

Chennai 37 412.36 431.00 152.08 [- | | |
Guwahati 30.17 151.40 17.38 ee |,
Hyderabad | 48.42 478.42 1411.03 [= [44.40
Karnal 96.72 [- | 144.86 [- (9.51
Kolkata 36.36 949,30 1215.90 Sr |
New Delhi 1172.50 785.72 1189.59 ee |

Total 1441.17 2777.2 4409.76 152.08 53.91
outstanding
Per cent* 16.31 31.44 49,92 1.72 0.61

“Figures indicate percentage amount outstanding against the indenter types

The major defaulters with outstanding dues exceeding Rs. | crore are detailed
in Annex-I.

As per the MSO Manual, for supplies to non-government institutions and local
bodies, the payment has to be received in advance in the form of pre-deposits
to adequately meet the cost of stores plus appropriate freight charges. The fact
that outstanding dues of an amount of Rs. 2.06 crore pertained to the non-
government institutions and local bodies, indicated weak safeguards to ensure
interest of the concerned GMSDs.

Audit observed that MSO Manual does not specify the terms of payment
applicable in case of medical stores supplied by GMSD to state government
hospitals and dispensaries. In October 2008, however, MSO issued an order
stating that from the year 2009-2010, requests of indenters not under the
control of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare would not be entertained
if their outstanding dues were not cleared before the placement of the indents.
Effective action needs to be taken by GMSD and the Ministry to ensure that
outstanding dues are cleared promptly by the state governments, local bodies
and private institutions.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in December 2009; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

118



Annex-I
(Referred to in paragraph No. 7.5)

List of major defaulters

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

SL. No. Name of Indentor Rae rae
‘Andaman & Nicobar Admn. Port Blair 346
| | . Chennai Corporation of Chennai 111
CGHS, Tamil Nadu 354
2. Guwahati ‘Assam Govt. 145
CGHS Hyderabad 576
3. Hyderabad CGHS Nagpur 284
हा Kamal P&T Dispensary 144
CGHS Kolkata 890
DHS, Port Blair 643
रु Kolkata DHS, Bihar 115
DHS, Orissa 153
CGHS, Jaipur 104
CGHS, Allahabad 201
CGHS, Lucknow ne ]|
. DHS, Bhuwaneshwar 211
6. New Delhi DHS, Bihar 320
CGHS, Gole Market, New Delhi 826
Safdarjung Hospital 642
NICD, New Delhi 199

119



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER VIII: MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS ]

Central Reserve Police Force
8.1 IT audit of SELO system of Central Reserve Police Force
Highlights

> Despite incurring an expenditure of Rs. 50.70 crore on the
implementation of the SELO system of CRPF, end users are not
utilizing most of the applications.

> CRPF does not have an IT policy or IT Steering Committee for
implementation of the SELO system.

> Due to lack of requisite application controls in the software, the
database had been rendered unreliable and incorrect.

> Inadequate logical access controls exposed the system to the risk of
unauthorized access.

8.1.1 SELO system

Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) is a Paramilitary force of the Union of
India with the basic role of striking reserve to assist the states/union territories
in police operations to maintain law and order and contain insurgency. CRPF
came into existence as Crown Representative’s Police in 1939 and became
Central Reserve Police Force on the enactment of CRPF Act in 1949. The
Electronic Data Processing (EDP) Cell of CRPF was created in 1972 to
computerize the payroll system of Non-Gazetted Officers (NGOs) of 20
battalions. Later in 1985, pay rolls of Gazetted Officers (GOs) and GPF
accounts of both GOs and NGOs were also computerized.

Tn 1997, computerization plan of CRPF was conceived with the aim of
introducing information technology in a comprehensive manner. Under the
computerization plan, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) awarded the
development of integrated software named SELO (Service and Loyalty) to
M/s NIIT at a cost of Rs. 1.39 crore in March 2000 to be implemented in a
phased manner. The first phase of SELO was implemented by networking of
114 CRPF offices from the level of office of the Director General to the Group
Centre (GC) offices under Deputy Inspectors General situated at 64 different
locations over WAN through leased line connectivity in five stages. MHA!

' MHA-Ministry of Home Affairs



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

awarded the implementation work of Stage 1 to 19५ of SELO at 84 offices
situated at 54 different locations, to M/s NIIT in July 2003 at a cost of
Rs. 39.07 crore on turn-key basis which was completed in November 2005
with warranty support of 3 years. In stage V, MHA further sanctioned
implementation of the SELO project in 30 newly created offices of CRPF at
an estimated cost of Rs. 10.24 crore in March 2007. Work at all sites was
completed in October 2007 except GC, Bilaspur, which was under progress
(July 2009). A detailed plan for the second phase of implementation of SELO
in executive battalions was yet to be worked out.

Operational framework of Intranet__ ० । 21 ५ 0 अब
DIRECTORATE GENERAL
SECTOR HQ (078 )
1G OFFICE
, a HQ(ADM )
1G OFFICE
RANGE HQ (075
oN OFFICE

RANGE HQ (ADM )
DIG OFFICE

aie

“\ GROUP CENTRES

GROUP ९1
EXECUTIVE BNiyet to be EXECUTIVE BN(vetto be
connected) connected. )

The objective of the SELO CRPF system was to develop an integrated system
with latest art of technology. Key features of the system are:

. It covers all functionalities at DG, Sector headquarters, range
headquarters, GCs and executive battalions.

न The developed software has web based environment and was menu
driven.
. The application contained a Mail and messaging system which act as

internal e-mail system in the CRPF.

. A Decision support system (DSS) was also developed as per the
requirements of users.

8.1.2 Intended benefits of SELO

e Savings by way of reduction in manpower to the extent of Rs. 8.62
crore per annum as envisaged in the proposal of computerization of
CRPF.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

e Savings due to efficiencies arising in procurement and inventory
management envisaged at four per cent of the budgetary expenditure
and optimal utilization of transport holding

8.1.3 Application modules of the SELO system
The software covers the following modules:

e Finance: Budget, finance, audit, TA/DA calculation, LTC, bill
preparation, PAO, pension, advances, welfare schemes, funds, library etc.

e Personnel: Information relating to recruitments, transfers and deputation
of CRPF employees, maintenance of ACRs (Administrative Confidential
Records) and Service Books and disciplinary and departmental enquiry
cases.

« Inventory: Preparation, consolidation and approval of demand and tender,
sanction and supply order, receipt/issue and maintenance of stock,
condemnation and auction process.

© Operations: Masters for various types of code maintenance, movement
and deployment and training of personnel, reporting of incidents and
intelligence.

« Payroll: Monthly salary slips, GPF accounts and income tax calculations.

Each module has mainly four functionalities i.e. master, transaction, reports
and decision support system (DSS).

An IT audit of the SELO system revealed the following:
8.1.4 IT Policy

Planning involves the determination of objectives and results, selection of best
possible courses of action for achieving the desired result, the time sequence
of objectives and the resources required to perform the activities. The absence
of a well defined and properly implemented IT policy increases the risk of
project failure. Despite incurring an expenditure of Rs. 50.70 crore on
computerization, CRPF is yet to formulate and document a formal IT policy
and a long term / medium term IT strategy incorporating the time frame, key
performance indicators and cost-benefit analysis for effective implementation
of the SELO. Further, the lack of a planning/steering committee with clear
roles and responsibilities to systematically monitor the implementation of



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

SELO for each functional area has resulted in non utilisation of the
implemented project and also hindered the achievement of objectives for
which SELO was implemented. CRPF in its reply (October 2009) stated that a
concrete IT policy including all road maps was being prepared.

8.1.5 Achievement of objectives

Phase-I of the SELO system was completed by NIIT across the country at a
cost of Rs. 50.70 crore” in October 2007. Despite commissioning of the
system in October 2007, major activities of CRPF were still carried out
manually and end-users were not utilizing the applications available. CRPF, in
reply (October 2009) stated that most of the work originates from the battalion
levels which were not yet connected to the SELO. Audit, however, observed
that CRPF was yet to utilize the SELO in the offices already connected under
Phase-I. It was also noticed that the master data in each module were yet to be
updated by the EDP cell at DG, CRPF. Due to non utilization of the
applications, CRPF is yet to achieve the projected benefits of savings due to
manpower reduction and efficient procurement and inventory management.
CRPF further stated that steps were being taken to sort out the issues hindering
the non usage of the modules.

8.1.6 Post implementation review

Post Implementation Review (PIR) of an existing system is required to ensure
that the system met the user requirement specifications and achieved the
intended benefits. Despite SELO being in operation for the last four years,
post implementation review has not been carried out by CRPF. CRPF in its
reply (October 2009) stated that PIR would be undertaken.

8.1.7 Change control mechanism

Tn order to achieve the desired output, all modifications made to the existing
system should be properly authorized, tested, documented and operated as
planned. However, audit scrutiny of change request (CR) forms revealed that
CR forms for only 319 out of the 786 changes made in the system were
available and in 24 out of the 50 CR forms test checked, the name and
signature of the person requesting /proposing the changes were not available.
Inadequate documentation increases the risk of unauthorized working
practices. CRPF in its reply stated that proper documentation would be done
as suggested by audit.

is Stage I to IV(84 offices):Rs. 39.07 crore + Stage V(30 offices): Rs. 10.24 crore +Software:
Rs. 1.39 crore = Rs. 50.70 crore



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

8.1.8 Validation controls

Data analysis of SELO and testing of applications in the training server of
CRPF showed that the system lacked proper input and validation checks in
different modules. The appointment, nomination and leave records in the
personnel module of SELO contained incorrect and unverified data, The
personne! data of employees contained multiple duplicate entries for family
members and incorrect and blank records for details like name, address,
height, weight, basic pay and leave. The details like ‘class of city’, ‘items’,
‘district’, ‘police station’ and location in the finance, inventory and operations
modules which were critical to processing and reporting of financial and
operation data were incomplete and incorrect and contained duplicate entries
as well. Further, data used for testing purposes were also allowed to remain in
the live database. Timely deletion of test data would ensure the reliability of the
database. Thus, due to lack of requisite validation and input controls in the
software, the database had been rendered unreliable and incorrect. CRPF in its
reply (October 2009) stated that validations checks would be incorporated and
that after complete verification of personnel data, the data related
abnormalities would be eliminated.

8.1.9 IS Security

8.1.9.1 Logical Access controls

Logical access controls protect the programme and data files from
unauthorized, modifications, copy and deletions. Though SELO has features
of domain controller active directory system to authenticate a user before
logging in the system using login TD and password, it had the following
deficiencies:

i, The password security policy as per agreement with गा was not
being implemented, which is vital for the SELO being national
integrated application software for all functional areas.

ii, The change of default common password was not mandated by the
system after first login and the users continued to access the system
using the default passwords.

iii, Normal password control procedures like restriction on unsuccessful
login attempts by the users or automatic lapse of passwords after a pre-
defined period and periodical change of passwords after certain period
were not in existence.

124


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

iv. The application system did not have any feature for ensuring password
strength in terms of length of password.

CRPF in its reply (October 2009) stated that new password security policy was
being formulated for implementation.

8.1.9.2 Segregation of duties

Segregation of duties is essential to ensure transactions are properly
authorized, recorded and that assets are safeguarded. The jobs of database
administration and system design/support should be separated. It was noticed
that the privileges of Database Administrator (DBA) who is the custodian of an
organization’s data and is responsible for the administration and management of
the database systems were also been granted to employees of NIIT helpdesk.
Further, the CRPF personnel appointed as DBA is also in charge of support for
personnel module. Inadequate segregation of duties increases the risk of error and
fraud. CRPF in its reply (October 2009) stated that new policy and guidelines
were being formulated for assigning responsibility and access in each module.

8.1.9.3 Firewall and intrusion detection

The major components of security of the datacentre are the firewall and
intrusion detection system (IDS). The firewall system secures the network by
allowing access to mission control applications on the network to authorized
users and keeping unauthorized users out. IDS automatically detects attack
patterns from the network traffic, views and monitors intrusion reports on the
network. The firewall and IDS of the SELO system were dysfunctional since
March 2009 due to lack of support from the manufacturer, exposing the SELO
network to unauthorized access. CRPF in its reply (October 2009) stated that
proposal was being taken up for adoption of a concrete level of security by
enhancing both hardware as well as software based firewall and IDS.

8.1.10 Conclusion

CRPF, one of the prime agencies for the maintenance of internal security of
the country developed the SELO system with the objective of computerizing
all its functions. It was envisaged that with the implementation of the SELO
system savings would be achieved in personnel, inventory and other
administrative costs and would help in improving operational efficiency.
CRPF had also decided to computerize all areas of its functioning in an
integrated manner so that savings would have multiplier effect. However,
despite incurring an expenditure of Rs. 50.70 crore on the implementation of
the SELO and four years of the launch of the system, most of the activities of



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CRPF are still carried out manually. Deficient input controls and validation
checks made the available data incomplete, incorrect and unreliable.
Inadequate logical access controls, poor segregation of duties combined with
dysfunctional firewall and intrusion detection system made the system
insecure. Thus, SELO system with unreliable data and security vulnerabilities
had the risk of exposing the management of internal security by CRPF to
associated threats and shortcomings, even after incurring an expenditure of
Rs. 50.70 crore.

Recommendations:

& CRPF should ensure full utilization of all the SELO applications and
move completely from manual to computerized system, as practical,
for achieving intended benefits of manpower reduction, efficient
procurement utilization and management of inventory and stores.

oo

%

CRPF should have the IT policy and IT steering committee for
implementation of the SELO system.

eo CRPF should ensure adequate logical access controls so that security
of the data is not compromised. The firewall and intrusion detection
system should be made functional to ensure network security.

Adequate validation checks should be embedded in the software systems to
avoid erroneous data input and processing.

National Crime Records Bureau

8.2 Non-establishment of Disaster Recovery site for computerised
national database of crime records at NIC

NCRB did not establish disaster recovery site to improve the accessibility
and security of national database on crime records despite incurring an
expenditure of Rs. 54.34 lakh. Meanwhile, the primary objective of
maintaining business continuity in the event of break-down of the active
site remained unfulfilled.

One of the objectives of the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) is to
create and maintain secure, sharable, national databases on crimes, criminals,
property and also the data pertaining to Motor Vehicles, Firearms and
organized crime gangs for law enforcement agencies. The bureau has
developed Crime Criminal Information System (CCIS) for collection and
dissemination of data which is operational at all the State Crime Records
Bureau. The threshold data from all the states is maintained at the NCRB

126



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

national server. Government of India in September 2005 declared the data on
CCIS as a National Database.

With a view to securing the Database from any disaster, NCRB in January
2006 approached National Informatics Centre (NIC) to co-locate Bureau’s
data server and application server at the secured data centre of NIC. In
response to NCRB’s proposal, NIC suggested that NIC data centre would be
used as an Active Site for various NCRB applications while NCRB site would
be used as a Disaster Recovery (DR) site and furnished an estimate of
Rs. 46.75 lakh for procurement of necessary hardware/sofiware. Accordingly
NCRB deposited a sum of Rs. 46.75 lakh with NIC in April 2006 for
activation of Data centre at NIC and DR site at NCRB. In addition to it,
NCRB also purchased equipment worth Rs. 7.59 lakh for operationalisation of
the DR site at its own location.

Audit examination disclosed that though NIC had procured necessary
hardware and installed it at NIC in April 2007, the Active Site at NIC could
not be established, as NIC failed to perceive that the software acquired for
replicating data’ at the data centre was not compatible with the server installed
at NIC. Despite advance payment of Rs. 46.75 lakh and_ protracted
correspondence made by NCRB with DG, NIC, the Active Site at NIC and DR
Site at NCRB could not be activated/operationalised by NIC as of May 2009.
Failure to activate Active/DR Sites even after two years of procurement and
installation of hardware highlighted inefficiency of NIC in handling such
important projects.

On being pointed out by Audit regarding considerable delay in activation of
site, NCRB again approached NIC demi-officially (May 2009) to complete the
task on priority but NIC failed to take appropriate action to activate the Site in
its premises.

With a view to resolving the site readiness related issues and also the task of
Replication Software installation, NCRB in consultation with NIC decided in
June 2009 to reverse the earlier decision and decided to create the Active Site
at NCRB and the DR Site at NIC and outsource the task to a vendor.

NCRB stated (August 2009) that the active site at NCRB was fully functional
but due to non-functioning of the disaster recovery site, backup of data was
being kept on tapes. It further added that if the active site went down, users

3 Replication software replicates the data maintained and updated at a primary site to any
alternative site.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

from remote locations would not be able to query the database or generate
various crime-related reports and efforts were being made to connect the two
sites at the earliest. The Ministry also accepted the delay (November 2009)
and stated that the action to establish the active site at NCRB and DR site at
NIC was being taken by NCRB through an outsourced agency on the advice of
NIC and thereafter, needful changes in NCRB network would be taken up on
priority as per the advice of NIC. NCRB stated in January 2010 that M/s
Wipro had been engaged as Network consultant and LAN configuration
settings would be done in consultation with NIC to meet connectivity
requirements.

The fact remains that due to lack of appropriate action on the part of NIC, non-
setting up the DR site at NIC and storing backup data on tapes exposed NCRB
to the risk of not being able to maintain business continuity in the event of
breakdown of its active site besides rendering the entire expenditure of
Rs. 54.34 lakh idle.

128


Report No.9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER IX : MINISTRY OF HOUS!
POVERTY ALLEVIATION

91 Unfruitful expenditure on conduct of two evaluation studies of
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY)

The Ministry conducted two evaluation studies of Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana - one initiated in March 2004 covering all States
and UTs at a cost of Rs. 49.80 lakh, and another in November 2006
covering nine States at a cost of Rs. 25 lakh — resulting in avoidable
duplication of effort and resources and wasteful expenditure of Rs. 42.30
lakh on the first study, which was never finalized.

Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) was launched as a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme in December 1997 with the objective of providing gainful
employment to the urban unemployed or underemployed, by encouraging the
setting up of self-employment ventures or provision of wage employment.

The Report on Mid-Term Appraisal of the TX Five Year Plan (1997-2002)
prepared in October 2000 indicated that the performance in the
implementation of SJSRY was not very encouraging, and the scheme required
an evaluation study to assess the strengths and weaknesses before drawing
conclusions about the relevance of its components, especially to suit the local
needs of States/ UTs. However, no action was initiated for undertaking the
evaluation of SJSRY till a meeting held in December 2003, under the aegis of
the Planning Commission, for finalizing the 2004-05 Annual Plan of the
Ministry’; where it was suggested that an evaluation of SJSRY be carried out
to ascertain its impact and effectiveness. Consequently, the Ministry entrusted
in March 2004 the evaluation of SJSRY in all States and UTs at a cost of
Rs. 49.80 lakh to the Human Settlement Management Institute (HSMI), an
institution set up by HUDCO’. While the study was to be completed within
nine months in several phases — preliminary work, data collection and
documentation, machine analysis of data, and report writing — the entire
amount of Rs. 49.80 lakh was released to HSMI in advance on the last day of
March 2004 to avoid lapse of budget provision.

In December 2005, HSMI submitted a draft national report on evaluation of
SJSRY to the Ministry, having already submitted four Zonal Reports and 34
State Level Reports earlier. In response, while acknowledging that the report

' Erstwhile Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation
? HUDCO: Housing and Urban Development Corporation, a PSU under the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA).

129


Report No.9 of 2010-11

was comprehensive in nature and covered the whole gamut of the scheme, the
Ministry requested HSMI in March 2006 to “ponder upon” certain issues in
the final report of the evaluation study e.g. preparing a uniform format for the
Urban BPL survey, involvement of community based organizations, voluntary
organizations, and NGOs in the identification of beneficiaries and community
empowerment; propagation and documentation of the best practices;
strengthening the monitoring mechanism for SJSRY etc. However, the final
report of the evaluation study was not received in the Ministry even as of
October 2008, and an unspent balance of Rs. 10.96 lakh (Rs. 7.50 lakh
adjusted subsequently and Rs 3.46 lakh was lying with HSMI), out of the
advance of Rs. 49.80 lakh, was reported by HSMI as of October 2006.

In the meanwhile, in December 2005, the Union Cabinet decided to continue
SJSRY without modification of the guidelines during the remaining period of
the X Plan, but directed that an evaluation of the scheme be carried out for the
XI Plan. Subsequently, in November 2006, the Ministry awarded a fresh
contract through HSMI to Access Development Services of CARE India for a
concurrent evaluation of SJSRY in nine States at a cost of Rs. 25 lakh, of
which Rs. 17.50 lakh was released to HSMI and Rs. 7.50 lakh was adjusted
from the unspent balance with HSMI from the first study. The final report of
this concurrent study was received by the Ministry in May 2007.

The matter was reported to the Ministry in August 2008. In response, the
Ministry stated (October 2008) that:

न The feedback received from the evaluation study of HSMI State-wise
was available at various stages of the evaluation exercise, and this
became the major source of the modifications proposed by the Ministry
in its Cabinet proposal in November 2005. Only the formal report (in
the form of a bound booklet) was yet to be received from HSMI;, this
was because the focus shifted to the independent evaluation by Access
Development Services.

. The EFC in a meeting in August 2005 had recommended an in-depth
independent evaluation of the scheme, and the Union Cabinet had also
recommended a fresh evaluation of the scheme. It appeared that the
evaluation by HSMI was considered as an in-house exercise.

The Ministry’s response is not tenable for the following reasons:

. In the EFC meeting of August 2005, it was decided that an in-depth
evaluation of SJSRY should be undertaken. As stated in the records of

130


Report No.9 of 2010-11

Ministry’s own files, the minutes of the meeting did not indicate that
independent consultants should be invited for the evaluation work,

. In March 2006, the Ministry decided to undertake concurrent
evaluation by independent agencies by taking at least one
representative State from each zone, where no such concurrent
evaluation had been carried out by the Ministry earlier. However, the
earlier study by HSMI covered all States, and hence, the nine States
covered under the concurrent evaluation by Access Development
Services had already been evaluated, thus resulting in avoidable
duplication and infructuous expenditure.

Thus, the conduct of two evaluation studies for SISRY - one by HSMI
initiated in March 2004 covering all States and UTs at a cost of Rs. 49.80 lakh,
and another by Access Development Services of CARE India initiated in
November 2006 covering nine States at a cost of Rs. 25 lakh — resulted in
avoidable duplication of effort and resources and wasteful expenditure of
Rs. 42.30 lakh on the HSMI study, which was never finalized.

9.2 Non-commencement of Model Demonstration Slum Projects under
Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY)

eee demonstration slum projects in six States for construction of 600
dwelling units under the Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY)
could not be commenced due to delay in availability of sites, and higher
construction costs than the allowable limits. Further, the Ministry had not
taken effective action to address these problems to make the projects
successful.To avoid recurrence of such eventualities, the Ministry should
have an effective mechanism to monitor the programme both at the
planning and implementation stage.

The Valmiki Ambedkar Awas Yojana (VAMBAY) was launched as a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme by the Ministry? with the Prime Minister's
announcement in August 2001 to provide shelter or upgrade the existing
shelter for people living below the poverty line in urban slums.

In order to demonstrate that better dwelling units could be constructed by
using cost-effective technology under VAMBAY, it was envisaged that in
every State, there should at least be one model demonstration slum project to
be emulated by all other cities and towns in the State. 100 per cent central
subsidy was to be provided for setting up such a project with the ceiling limits
(Rs. 60,000 per dwelling unit for mega cities, Rs. 50,000 for metro cities, and

3 Erstwhile Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation

131


Report No.9 of 2010-11

Rs. 40,000 for other cities). The States were required to provide land and
other infrastructure development facilities for such projects. Although the
entire construction cost of the demonstration project was initially borne by the
Central Government, the houses built under the demonstration projects were
not to be given free of cost to the beneficiaries.

In July 2003, the Ministry requested the State Governments to submit
proposals for one model demonstration project in each State for construction
of not more than 100 dwelling units by adopting cost-effective building
technologies through Central Agencies. Based on proposals received, the
Ministry approved the construction of 1,165 units at a total cost of Rs. 5.52
crore (with per unit cost ranging between Rs. 40,000 and Rs. 60,000) in 11
States (Chattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra,
Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, and Uttarakhand). The
Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC), an
autonomous body under the Ministry, was selected as the Central agency for
carrying out this work, and funds of Rs. 5.52 crore were released in three
phases between March 2003 and April 2004 through HUDCO* in favour of
BMTPC as grants-in-aid. The sanction orders stipulated that the funds were to
be utilized for implementation of VAMBAY, and in case the grants were not
utilized for the purposes for which these were sanctioned, they were liable to
be refunded with interest at the rate prescribed in the General Financial Rules.

However, out of the 1165 units, BMTPC could not undertake the construction
of 600 units with an estimated cost of Rs. 2.55 crore in six States, namely,
Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan and Tripura, for the
following reasons:

Table-1
Brief Unspent
State Particulars Reasons for not starting the work Amount in
of Project Rs. crore
Jammu & | 100unitsata | Actual cost of construction worked out to 0.45
Kashmir per unit cost around 60-70 per cent higher than the .
of Rs. 45,000 permissable limits.
¢ 906 to scattered location of the 100 units
(40 units in Srinagar, 40 units in Jammu,
and 20 units in Leh), overall economics in
planning and design could not be
achieved.
Manipur 100 units ata | e Actual cost of construction in the region
. . ites 0.45
per unit cost was higher than the allowable cost limits,
of Rs. 45,000

* Honsing and Urban Development Corporation

132


State

Brief
Particulars
of Project

Report No.9 of 2010-11

Reasons for not starting the work

Unspent
Amount in
Rs. crore

BMTPC pursued the allotment of a single
site with the State Government. However,
due to identification of four separate sites
by the State Government for construction
of 100 dwelling units, overall economics
in terms of planning and design could not
be achieved.

Orissa

Tripura

100 units at a
per unit cost
of Rs. 40,000

100 units at a
per unit cost.
of Rs. 45,000

Initially, the Government had identified
four separate sites for construction of 100
units, as a result of which overall
economics in terms of planning and
design could not be achieved.

After persuasion by BMTPC, the State
Government agreed to allot a single site.
However, the site could not be finalized,
as it was low-lying/ filled up area, and
due to this, the cost of construction
worked out to be higher than the
allowable cost.

The State Government had been
persuaded to identify an appropriate site.
However, the site was 20 feet lower than
the road level, which entailed filling up of
the site and involved extremely high cost
of construction of the foundation.
Consequently, the construction cost was
higher than the allowable limit.

0.40

Kerala

Rajasthan

100 units at a
per unit cost
of Rs. 40,000

100 units at a
per unit cost
of Rs. 40,000

Initially, the project was sanctioned for
Punnulur Municipality, which was
subsequently shifted by the State
Government to Trivandrum Municipal
Corporation.

The actual cost of construction was higher
than the allowable cost limit

The site identified by the State
Government was a low lying area with
black cotton soil. Hence, the foundation
cost. was much higher than the
conventional foundation cost.

Due to steep escalation in the cost of raw
materials, the project could not be taken

up.

0.40

Total

600 units

2.55

Further, in Tamil Nadu, the State Government could not make available land
at Chennai, and instead provided land at Trichy, where the per unit cost was to



Report No.9 of 2010-11

be restricted to Rs. 40,000 and out of Rs. 0.60 crore released, a sum of
Rs. 0.20 crore was refunded in June, 2008.

Thus, BMTPC undertook the construction of only 565 out of the proposed
1165 units at a cost of Rs. 2.77 crore in five States (Uttarakhand, Chattisgarh,
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu). In Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka and Uttarakhand, the projects had been completed and handed over
to the State Government agencies, and partially to beneficiaries, while in
Chattisgarh, the work was under completion as of July 2009.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in August 2008 and in reply (June,
2009), the Ministry confirmed that the projects in six states could not be
undertaken due to delay in making available suitable sites, higher costs than
allowable limit etc.

Thus, the scheme of setting up model demonstration slum projects under
VAMBAY with 1,165 dwelling units in 11 States to be emulated by other
cities and towns was only partially successful, as the projects in six States
involving 600 dwelling units could not be commenced even after six years due
to delay in availability of suitable sites, and higher costs of construction than
the allowable limits. Thus, the Ministry failed to take effective action to
review the scheme and address these bottlenecks to ensure that the scheme
meant for people below poverty line in urban slums succeeded in achieving its
objectives.

134


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER X : MINISTRY OF MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM
ENTERPRISES

10.1. Poor implementation of the Scheme of Integrated Infrastructure
Development for Small Scale Industries.

The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises launched the
Scheme of Integrated Infrastructural Development (IID Scheme) for
small scale industries in rural/ backward areas in 1993-94 for setting up
of IID centres with suitable infrastructural facilities to promote clusters of
small scale and tiny units. The scheme was subsumed in the Micro Small
Enterprises-Cluster Development Programme (MSE-CDP) from 2007-08.
The Ministry released an amount of Rs 124.59 crore upto 2007-08 to
various implementing agencies for 84 ITD projects with an estimated cost
of Rs 400 crore.

Audit reviewed the status of the implementation of the scheme and found
that 42 out of 79 IED projects, which were due for completion by January
2008, remained incomplete. Delays in completion of projects ranged
between one month and twelve years. Further, detailed field level audit of
10 centres in Assam, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Uttar
Pradesh revealed that many infrastructural facilities at the centres were
incomplete. Also, by creating large plots and allocating plots to large
units, the small scale and tiny units, which formed the target group for
the scheme, were deprived of its benefits. There were also instances of
deficient financial management and inadequate monitoring.

10.1.1 IID Scheme — An Overview

The Scheme of Integrated Infrastructure Development for small scale
industries in rural/ backward areas (IID Scheme) was launched in March 1994
by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)!. The IID
Scheme envisaged setting up of IID centres in backward districts and rural
areas’, with creation/ upgradation of infrastructural facilities like power, water

supply, communication etc. and provision of common service facilities and
technological back-up services. The scheme was intended to promote clusters
of small scale and tiny units, with a view to creating employment
opportunities and developing exports, and also promote stronger linkages
between agriculture and industry.

The salient features of the IID Scheme were as follows:

1 The erstwhile Ministry of Small Scale Industries (SSI)
? Excluding districts covered under the Scheme of Growth Centres.

135



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

. The scheme envisaged that in an area of 15-20 hectares for establishing
an IID Centre, about 450 plots of 200 to 300 sq. metre sizes would be
allocated to individual units.

. The IID Centres were to be selected by a comprehensive industrial
potential survey of the area. The location of the centres was to be close
to district/ block/ taluka headquarters or other developing centres, with
access to basic infrastructural facilities. Land was to be made available
by the State / UT Governments for the centres.

. The ITD Scheme was a Central Sector Scheme, and the Government of
India (Gol) and the Small Industries Development Bank of India
(SIDBI) were to contribute a maximum amount of Rs. five crore in the
ratio of 2:37 10 each Centre, with costs exceeding Rs. five crore to be
borne by the State/ UT Governments.

. Funding would be available for specified activities and work items.
SIDBI would advance funds to the extent of Rs 5 crore to the
implementing agencies in installments and claim simultaneously 40
per cent thereof, subject to a maximum of Rs 2 crores, from the
Development Commissioner (DC-MSME)’ as grant.

. The State/ UT Governments were to prepare bankable projects and
send them to SIDBT, who would conduct techno-economic appraisals
of the projects and send the appraised projects to the DC(MSME), who
was responsible for co-ordinating and overseeing progress of projects.
The projects were to be approved by a High Powered Committee
(HPC) before release of funds by SIDBL.

न. The projects were to be implemented by the State Governments
through appropriate agencies having good track record. Such agencies
could be a public sector corporation or a corporate body or a good
NGO having a sound financial position.

. A State Level Committee headed by the Secretary (Industries), and
including representatives of DC (MSME), SIDBI and the lead bank,
was to closely supervise and monitor the project.

° 4:1 for the North Eastern Region
* Erstwhile Development Commissioner (SSI)

136


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

. In the new centres, SC/ ST/ women entrepreneurs were to be
encouraged. Where necessary, an Entrepreneurship Development
Programme would be conducted to ensure sound and viable units.

Upto 2006-07, 87 projects were sanctioned by the Government of India, out of
which three projects were cancelled in 2008. The remaining 84 IID centres
involved a total cost of Rs. 400.18 crore. From 2007-08, the IID Scheme was
subsumed in the Micro Small Enterprises Cluster Development Programme
(MSE-CDP).

Till January 2008, funds amounting to Rs. 124.59 crore were released for the

TID centres, as summarized below:

Table 1: Funds Released for IID Centres

(Rupees in crore

Period No. of 1D Centres | Total Cost Tn ay
Upto 2000-01 0 203.62 63.65
2001-02 to 2005-06 38 177.34 36.00
2006-07 and 2007-08 6 19.32 4.94
Total 84 400.18 124.59

According to DC (MSME) the Implementing agencies incurred an expenditure
of Rs 330.12 crore on these projects till January 2008.

10.1.2 Audit Objectives and Methodology
The objectives of the audit of the IID Scheme were to assess whether:

° The proposed IID centres had been completed with necessary
infrastructural facilities, and were being utilized effectively by small
scale and tiny units;

. Funds provided for the Centres were utilized economically and
effectively; and

. The guidelines of the I[D scheme were being complied with.

The records of the Ministry of MSME relating to the IID Scheme were
scrutinized in audit. In addition, out of the 84 IID centres, a sample of 10
centres in the States of Assam (Rangia, Malinibeel and Dalgaon), Madhya
Pradesh (Lamtara, Nadantola, and Nimrani), Orissa (Somnathpur and Khurda),
Haryana (Barhi) and Uttar Pradesh (Ramnagar) were selected for detailed field
level audit and inspection.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

10.1.3 Audit Findings

10.1.3.1 | Overall Status of Completion of Projects
Audit scrutiny revealed that out of 79 projects" sanctioned by Gol, which were
due for completion on or before January 2008:

. 37 projects were completed as of January 2008; and

न 42 projects, which were required to be completed by December 2007
were still incomplete, out of which no funds had been released for two projects
at Sandiya, Neemuch (MP) and Somnathpur, Balasore (Orissa).

An analysis of the delays in respect of the 42 incomplete projects is given
below:

Table 2: Profile of Delay in Completion of ITD Projects.

Period of delay in No. of projects Funds released
completion 7 ‘in Rs. crore)
More than 10 years 1 0.92
510 10 years 7 10.16
2 to 5 years 21 27.23
Upto 2 years 13 18.76
Total 42 57.07

The Ministry (October 2009) stated that 50 IID projects had been completed,
and they attributed financial crunch, disturbed conditions, law and order
problems, market conditions, overall industrial scenario, natural calamities
like floods, tsunami, earthquake etc. in different states as the main reasons for
delay in completion of the projects. The fact, however, remains that the
Ministry failed to ensure completion of ITD Centres, consequently, adversely
affecting the scheme’s objective of promoting clusters of small scale and tiny
units through development of IID Centres.

10.1.3.2 Status of Implementation of Test-checked Projects
(i) Allotment to SSI and tiny units

The ITD Scheme was intended to promote clusters of 551 and tiny units, and
plot sizes of 200 to 300 sq. metres, appropriate for SSI and tiny units, were
envisaged in the scheme guidelines. However, field audit scrutiny revealed
that in 6 out of 10 test checked centres, 551 and tiny units were deprived of the

* OF the 87 projects sanctioned upto 2006-07, five projects were due for completion after
January 2008, and three projects were cancelled; hence, these projects have been excluded
from the analysis.

138


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

intended benefits, as the plots allotted were much larger in size. The details are
discussed below:

. In Rangia and Dalgaon centres in Assam, against the plot sizes of 616
and 401 sq. metre proposed in the Draft Project Reports, much larger
plots of sizes ranging from 800 to 13,378 sq. metre were allotted and
no allotments were made to tiny units. According to the implementing
agency, this was because of non-receipt of any applications from tiny
units,

. In Barhi centre in Haryana, plots of larger sizes of 450 to 4,050 sq.
metre had already been carved out before approval of the centre under
the ITD Scheme. Consequently, no plot was available for allotment to
SST units. The Ministry / Implementing agency in its reply of October
2009 stated that only 17 plots were allotted to tiny units and 78 to
small scale units. This shows that the focus of the scheme was not
retained on the small and tiny units.

. In Ramnagar centre in Uttar Pradesh, against the original 150 plots of
200 sq.metre size and 239 plots of 300 sq. metre size envisaged in the
DPR, 279 plots of sizes ranging from 450 to 1,800 sq. metre were
actually developed. In response to an audit enquiry, the implementing
agency stated that it was decided to develop the plot sizes as per actual
requirements, to minimize long term development and maintenance
costs and optimize better use of land; further, demand for small plots
was negligible. The reply is not tenable, as no allotments had been
made as of October 2009 and hence the benefits of the scheme could
not be passed on to small entrepreneurs.

. In Khurda centre in Orissa, 15 acres of developed land was irregularly
allotted to two educational institutions. The implementing agency
stated that allotment to technical institutions for developing skilled
manpower was permitted under the State’s industry policy resolutions;
however, this was violative of the ITD Scheme guidelines. Further, in
two IID centres in Khurda and Somnathpur, two plots totaling 58.15
acres of land were irregularly allotted to major industrial units.

Thus, by creating large plots and allocating them to large units, the SSI and
tiny units which formed the target group for the IID Scheme, were deprived of
the benefits of the scheme.

139


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(ii) Status of completion of test checked projects

Out of 10 test checked projects which were sanctioned during June 1996 to
October 2006, no projects were completed as of July to November 2008.
However, the Ministry’s status report of March 2009 indicated that three
projects (Rangia and Dalgaon in Assam and Lamtara in Madhya Pradesh) had
been completed.

Table 3 : Extent of delay in completion of 10 test checked projects
(Status as of January 2008)

‘Amount Date of
si. , Project cost eleased Start/ Due date of
Project sin release of Delay
No. (Rs. in ‘ completion
Lakh) an funds by
akh) GOL
. 1 year
1, | TID-Rangia, Assam 493.61 380.00 | 05/2003 05/2006
7 " _ an 8 months
3 years
2. | IID-Malinibeel, Assam 510.00 344.00 | 06/2002 10/2004
3 months
3. | IID-Dalgaon, Assam 418.00 334.40 | 04/2000 04/2002 5 years
9 months
4. | IID-Lamtara, MP 186.25 35.39 | 07/2003 07/2005 2 years
6 months
5. | ID-Nadantola, MP 502.96 133.11 | 05/1997 06/1999 B years
7? months
- 3 years
6. | IID-Nimrani, MP 511.00 40.90 | 09/2000 12/2004 1 0
7. | 11D-Somnathpur, Orissa 436.53, =| 10/2006 02008 [- |
| 10- Khurda, Orissa 493.40 98.68 | 06/1996 06/1998 9 years
7 months
hi 2 years
8 | ID- Barhi, Haryana 460.86 173.27 | 11/2003 11/2005
2 months
10. | IID- Ramnagar, UP 567.15 100.00 | 06/2001 12/2003 4 years
1 month

[ID Centre at Khurda, Orissa
Sanctioned at a cost of Rs 4.93 crore in June 1996

140


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

ILD Centre at Barhi, Haryana
Sanctioned at a cost of Rs 4.61 crore in November 2003

IID Centre at Nimrani, Madhya Pradesh
Sanctioned at a cost of Rs 5.11 crore in September 2000

OD Centre at Rangia, Assam
Sanctioned at a cost of Rs 4.94 crore in May 2003

141


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Audit scrutiny revealed that:

In Assam, the delay in completion of projects was due to delay of 4 to
80 months in release of central and state share in all three projects. The
Ministry, in its reply of October 2009, stated that Assam and other
North Eastern States were facing shortage of funds, and that the
working season was very short in the case of Assam.

In Haryana, the IID centre was still incomplete even after a lapse of
more than five years since its commencement.

In Orissa, the delay in completion of three ITD centres ranged from
three months to ten years. Further, Rs. 1.06 crore was spent on an ITD
centre at Pitamahal, Rayagada till December 2005, after which
investment was stopped due to low potential and lack of demand by the
entrepreneurs. Development of another IID centre planned at Paradip,
Jagatsinghpur district could not commence due to a land dispute and
resulting court case. The unspent balance of Rs. 1.58 crore on account
of these two centres was transferred to the IID centre at Somnathpur,
which also remained incomplete.

This indicated improper selection of centres and lack of effective monitoring
at the Ministry level, due to which the objectives of the scheme could not be
achieved.

(iii)

Status of completion of infrastructural facilities

The status of completion of different infrastructural facilities at the 10 selected
IID centres is summarized below (as of October 2009):

Table-4
Facilities Facilities पणियाओएणा Total
Completed incomplete | MOLAVAHlable | oicets
with audit .

Development of 06 01 03 10
land
Construction of 07 - 0B 10
roads
Water supply / 08 2 - 10
drainage/ Effluent
treatment
Internal Power 07 02 ol 10
Distribution
Telecom Facilities 07 03 : 10
Common facilities 03 07 |_ | 10
& amenities (Bank,
Post office)
Raw material depot a 4 05 10

142


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Further, audit scrutiny revealed that:

The Administrative Building at ITD centre at Malinibeel (Assam) was
not constructed, even after a lapse of more than four years after the
scheduled completion date. The Ministry stated that construction of
administrative building for this centre was under progress since the
financial year 2008-09.

Unauthorised expenditure of Rs. 3.17 crore was incurred on the three
centres in Assam on inadmissible components — construction of
boundary wall, pre-operative expenditure and contingencies, greenery
and beautification ete. — at the expense of other activities like effluent
treatment and disposal system, raw material depot and marketing
outlets, common services centre (including technological backup
services), and first aid centre.

Despite incurring expenditure upto 89 per cent of approved project
cost, the infrastructural facilities were yet to be completed by the
implementing agency in Uttar Pradesh in respect of IID Centre
Ramnagar.

10.1.3.3. Financial Management

Audit scrutiny revealed the following cases of deficient/ irregular financial
management in Assam:

Short release of Central and State share

As against the Central share of Rs 8.03 crore due for the IID centres at
Rangia and Malinibeel, only Rs 7.24 crore were released, resulting in short
release of Rs 0.79 crore as of March 2008. The State Government also
released Rs 0.94 crore less against the due amount of Rs 2.01 crore. Thus,
there was a total short release of Rs 1.73 crore. Also, although the State
Government sanctioned Rs 0.58 crore in November-December 2007 as its
matching share for IID centres at Rangia and Malinibeel, the Director of
Industries released the funds to the implementing agency in March 2008
and the units received the amount only in September 2008, with a delay of
almost 9-10 months.

Short accountal of lease money/ development charges of Rs. 1.19 crore
by Rangia and Malinibeel centres

The sanction letters for funds issued by the Government of India stipulated
that the implementing agencies would operate a separate account for each
IID centre. Audit scrutiny revealed that the implementing agency received

143


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Rs 2.69 crore as development charges from 19 entrepreneurs against
developed land for the IID centre at Rangia, but only Rs 1.91 crore was
accounted for in the cash book of the centre, and the balance amount of Rs
0.78 crore was irregularly retained in the General Fund of the
implementing agency, outside the IID centre’s account. Similarly, the
implementing agency received Rs 0.41 crore as lease / development
charges from nine entrepreneurs against the allotment of developed land at
the IID centre at Malinibeel. This amount was not accounted for in the
cash book of the centre.

¢ Diversion of funds

The GOT had specially instructed that no administrative expenditure be
incurred out of the funds allocated for the projects. However, Rs 9 lakh
was irregularly incurred on administrative expenditure by the
implementing agencies in the Dalgaon and Malinibeel centres. The
Ministry stated that the amount of Rs 9 lakh would be transferred from
these two IIDs to AIDC Ltd.

e Unadjusted advance

The approved project cost of the IID centre at Rangia included provision
of Rs 0.97 crore for power arrangement / electrification. The implementing
agency incurred an expenditure of Rs 0.68 crore which included an
advance payment of Rs 0.48 crore to Lower Assam Electricity Distribution
Company Ltd. in June 2007 for electrification purpose. The payment was
made to the company without entering into any contract agreement /
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). The company failed to start the
work and the amount of advance paid to the company remained
unadjusted.

« Non-payment of cost of land to State Government

As per the guidelines of the scheme, the land for the IID centres was to be
made available by the State Government and the cost of the same was to
be paid by the implementing agencies. The State Government allotted and
handed over land to the implementing agency for setting up of the ITD
centres at Rangia, Dalgaon and Malinibeel. However, no payment was
made to the State Government, though an amount of Rs. 3.69 crore was
realized as lease money by the implementing agency from the
entrepreneurs.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

10.1.3.4 Entrepreneurship Development Programme

In 6 out of 10 centres (Malinibeel and Dalgaon in Assam; Khurda and
Somnathpur in Orissa; Nadantola in MP; Ramnagar in UP), there was no
evidence of encouragement of participation of SC/ ST/ women entrepreneurs.

10.1.3.5 Monitoring and Evaluation

State Level Committees (SLCs) were to be constituted for supervising and
monitoring the project. However, in 9 out of 10 projects, SLCs were either not
constituted or not functional, or no records of their functioning were made
available to Audit. In the case of the tenth centre (Khurda, Orissa), the SLC,
which was constituted in June 1994, did not convene any meeting after June
2000.

As evident from the delay in completion of centres, the status of progress/
completion of different centres was also not effectively monitored in the
Ministry.

145


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Department of Rural Development

11.1 Idling of funds

The Ministry had failed to obtain refund of Rs. 93.32 lakh lying with the
District Rural Development Agency, Daman for want of applicants
eligible for subsidy under the Centrally sponsored Swarnjayanti Gram
Swarozgar Yojana launched in April 1999 to assist families below poverty
line.

With the objective of helping the Below Poverty Line (BPL) families to cross
the poverty line, Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) was launched
in April 1999 as a Centrally sponsored scheme by restructuring the Integrated
Rural Development Programme (IRDP) and several other schemes. SGSY
envisaged organizing the rural poor into Self Help Groups (SHG) through a
process of social mobilization, training and capacity building and provision of
income generating assets through a mix of bank credit and Government
subsidy disbursed through the District Rural Development Agencies (DRDA),.

Serutiny of records of DRDA, Daman revealed (November 2007/October
2008) that it had kept Rs. 93.32 lakh unutilized as of 31 March 2008 under this
programme. This include the balance of Rs. 64.61 lakh brought forward from
2000-01 and interest of Rs. 34.37 lakh earned of which only Rs. 5.66 lakh had
been spent.

DRDA had informed the Ministry (September 2000) that there were very few
eligible families and due to heavy demand in industrial sector, most of them
got employment easily in industries, and as such they did not prefer to work as
labourers or to take loan for self-employment. Thereafter, the Ministry had not
sanctioned any grants. Through DRDA had requested (September 2000) for
review and upward revision of criteria for classification of families as BPL
from Rs. 266.97 to Rs. 600 so as to cover more rural households, it did not
pursue the matter with the Ministry. Nevertheless, it had retained the grant of
Rs. 93.32 lakh unutilized.

DRDA stated (October 2008) that the Scheme has since been implemented in
full swing during 2008-09 as evident from 14 applications received. This
would not justify the retention of grants unused for over eight years.

The matter was brought to the notice of the Ministry in June 2008; their reply
was awaited as of September 2009.

146


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

12.1 Scheme for Inland Water Transport

A Centrally Sponsored Scheme for Development of Inland Water
Transport ([WT), was substantially revised in 2002 with provision of
financial assistance of 90 to 100 per cent grant-in-aid for various [WT
activities — surveys / studies, waterway development, navigation aids,
terminal facilities, procurement of vessels for development and regulation
etc. During 2003-07, 35 projects were sanctioned in 15 States at a cost of
Rs. 105.89 crore, against which funds of Rs. 52.84 crore were released.
The scheme was discontinued by the Planning Commission in February
2007. As such, the objective of development of IWT as an eco-friendly,
economically viable and fuel-efficient mode of transport remained
unachieved.

Audit scrutiny of the records of the Ministry of Shipping revealed that
only 3 out of 35 projects were reported to have been completed, while
work had not even commenced in respect of 13 projects. Further, field
audit of 16 projects in 5 States (Orissa, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal), revealed that many projects
were lying incomplete and had not achieved their intended objectives
resulting in unfruitful expenditure. In Madhya Pradesh, inland water
transport had not been operationalised at Bansagar reservoir project
despite construction of jetties and waiting hall whereas at Rani Awanti
Bai Sagar reservoir, fewer jetties than sanctioned were constructed, and
one jetty was submerged in water. In the third project at Gandhi Sagar
reservoir, the jetty and waiting hall were far from the waterline and
therefore, could not be used. In Maharashtra, in one project at Godawari
river near Vishnupuri, jetties were only partially completed and not in
usable shape, and the major portion of expenditure had been diverted and
incurred at a religious tourist destination for construction of bathing
ghats. Three projects at Isapur Reservoir, Karanja and Janjira Fort were
yet to commence, whereas in three projects at Agardanda, Dighi and
Rajpuri, there were redundant provisions for existing jetties and
approach roads. In another project at Mandwa, funds were used
primarily for creation of high class amenities way beyond the
requirements of normal passengers, while navigational components were
not carried out. In Himachal Pradesh, construction of the two major
jetties in the project at Gobind Sagar Lake were yet to commence, while
the State Government wrongly reported completion of all the smaller
jetties. Further, the passenger sheds were constructed far from the
waterline. In West Bengal, in one project in Sunderbans Area, the
constructed jetties were unusable, while in another project, there was
clear requirement for passenger facilities, which could not be fulfilled due
to the closure of the scheme. In Orissa, funds for extending an existing
waiting hall at Balugaon were diverted for constructing a new waiting
hall with office building.

147



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Scheme for Inland Water Transport
12.1.1 Introduction

Inland Water Transport (IWT) is an eco-friendly, economically viable and fuel
efficient mode of transportation. While India has 14,500 km of navigable
waters, IWT in India has not developed to its full potential due to several
constraints like insufficient water depth of major rivers, non-availability of
adequate navigational aids, inadequate terminal facilities ete.

Development of IWT would have numerous direct and indirect benefits such
as catalysing industrial growth and economic activities in the hinterland along
waterways, shift of cargo transport from other modes of transport, and
decongesting road and rail traffic.

Responsibility for development of inland water transport is divided between
the Centre and the States, with the Central Government developing national
waterways through the Inland Waterways Authority of India (9५9), while
the State Governments are responsible for development of other waterways.

A Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the Government of India in IWT Sector,
which had been in existence since the First Five Year Plan, was modified in
November 2002 for providing 100 per cent grant-in-aid for projects in the
North Eastern States (including Sikkim), and 90 per cent grant-in-aid to other
States. The Ministry of Shipping (MoS) was the nodal Ministry for
administering the scheme.

In February 2007, the Planning Commission discontinued the scheme as a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme but retained it as a Central Sector Scheme only
for the North-Eastern States.

12.1.2 Financial Outlays and Expenditure
Under the scheme, 35 projects in respect of 15 States were sanctioned during

2003-07 at a cost of Rs. 105,89 crore and funds of Rs. 52.84 crore released; a
complete list of the projects is indicated in Annex-I.

148


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

12.1.3 Audit Scope and Coverage

Audit of the WT Scheme, covering the projects sanctioned after the revision
in November 2002, was conducted to verify achievement of the stated
objectives of the scheme, utilization of funds and compliance with the scheme
guidelines.

Records in the Department of Shipping were scrutinized between May and
August 2008. In addition, audit also conducted field visits to Orissa, Himachal
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal between August
2008 and January 2009 to examine the records of State-level agencies and
verify field level implementation of 19 projects costing Rs. 80.61 crore (76 per
cent of total sanctioned cost) sanctioned during 2003-07.

Audit gratefully acknowledges the assistance and co-operation of the
Ministry of Shipping, Gol as well as the State Governments during the
conduct of the audit.

12.1.4 Audit Findings
12.1.4.1 Project Execution

State wise sanction of projects alongwith expenditure thereof is summarized in
the table below:
Table-1 : IWT Projects sanctioned

ee Rupees in lakh
s. Nu r of Sanctioned Cel State Total
Ni. — Projects in | S@nctio Share | Share | Expenditure
the State released | released reported
T_| Assam 4 1482.56 | 1085.81 0.00 840.20
2 | Andhra 1 75.00 67.50 3.75 52.50
3._| Bihar 4 113.00 21.00 11.50 11.50
4. Goa 1 109.00, 59.18 0.00 0.00
5. | Himachal 1 117.40 105.66 14 43.07
Pradesh
6._| Karnataka 1 36.70 31.03 3.67 36.70
7._| Kerala 1 362.22 65.30 0.00 0.00
[8 | Maharashtra | 8 | 2983.48 | 1037.81 | 1945.68 368.01
I | Madhya 3 86.74 | 213.49] 626.52 804.69
adesh
16. Manipur i 280.33 178.15 | 0.00 | 0.00
11. Nagaland 1 75.60 15.12) 000 | 15.12
12.) Orissa 2 214.70 50.07 5.11 31.10
13. Tripura [1 46.60 932 0.00 0.00
13: 1 Utlar Pradesh 1 10.00 2.00 0.00 0.00
15. | West Bengal 5 3798.51 | 2322.20) 255.42 2372.79
Total 35 10588.84 | 5283.64 | 2865.39 4815.68

149



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Of the 35 projects sanctioned during 2003-07, one project was foreclosed and
the status of remaining 34 projects was as follows:

ry The full central share of sanctioned amount was released by MoS in
respect of only seven projects. Out of these seven projects, only three
projects were reported to have been completed as of May 2008.

. 13 projects (37.14 per cent) in seven States, in respect of which
Rs. 7.41 crore (14 per cent) of funds had been released between March
2004 and March 2007, had not even commenced (March 2009);

. The remaining 18 projects, for which Rs 41.81 crore had been released
between March 2004 and March 2007, were still incomplete;

Project-wise details are given in Annex-II.

12.1.4.2 Physical progress of works

Audit observed that the physical achievements against the targets, as shown in
Annex II-B, were way behind schedule in all the projects, and MoS did not
take effective action to get the work on the projects expedited. All the 35
projects sanctioned were targeted to be completed by March 2008. Physical
progress in respect of these projects was as under:

Table-2
Number of projects to be completed by 2007-08 35
Projects with physical progress less than 25 percent 14
Projects with physical progress between 25 to 50 percent 06
Projects with physical progress between 50 to 75 percent 03
Projects with physical progress between 75 to 100 percent 05
Projects where progress not reported or percentage progress not available 07
12.1.4.3 Projects not achieving intended objectives

Field visits by audit team to Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Himachal
Pradesh, West Bengal and Orissa revealed that many projects had not achieved
their intended objectives and there were several cases of unfruitful
expenditure, as described below.

150


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

() Madhya Pradesh

Three projects on development of IWT in Indira Sagar and Rani Awanti Bai
Sagar reservoirs, Bansagar reservoir, and Gandhi Sagar reservoir were
sanctioned at a total cost of Rs. 8.62 crore. Against the Central share of
Rs. 7.76 crore, Rs. 2.13 crore of funds was released between March 2005 and
October 2006. All the three projects were covered in field audit, and the
findings are as follows:

Development of IWT in Sone River at Bansagar Reservoir

The project was sanctioned in March 2006 for infrastructure development and
facilitation for passengers and cargo. It was envisaged that over 36 lakh
passengers would use TWT annually. The project had a sanctioned cost of
Rs. 4.15 crore (Central share - Rs. 3.74 crore) and was to be completed by
March 2007.

Field visit by audit revealed that the planned Jetty, Booking Office and
Waiting Hall at New Sapta had been constructed. However, IWT had not been
operationalised, as the agency responsible for regulation of the transportation
system had not been decided in the absence of guidelines from the Central and
State Government. The expenditure of Rs. 3.67 crore (including Central share
of Rs. 0.83 crore released in March 2006) incurred on the project and the
facilities created remained unproductive as of November 2008.

Waiting Hall at New Sapta not yet operational Jetty at Sariya (nearest to Bansagar Dam)

tourism potential awaiting arrival of
boats

Development of intra reservoir transport in Rani Awanti Bai Sagar and

Indira Sagar reservoirs

e Against the sanctioned eight jetties, only six jetties were constructed.
Jetties were not constructed at Bargi and Payalee. In response to an audit

151


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

query, the implementing agency Narmada Valley Development Authority
(NVDA) intimated that more funds were required for taking up the
remaining work,

e Two jetties (Rs. 10.80 lakh) as well as components relating to on
hydrographic, construction and traffic surveys, navigational aids, signaling
system, GPS, computers (Rs. 9.00 lakh) had not been taken up by the State
Government. However, the central share of funding of Rs. 19.80 lakh in
respect of these works was not refunded to the centre.

Jetty at Papri Kalan submerged in water

One jetty at Papri Kalan, which had a sanctioned cost of Rs. 6.00 lakh but was
awarded at Rs. 7.59 lakh, had been constructed in 2006-07 was found
completely submerged in water during the audit team’s field visit in
November 2008. This indicated lack of proper planning, study and survey
before selection of the site and deciding the level and design of the jetty.

In response (September 2009), the implementing agency (Narmada Valley
Development Authority, Government of Madhya Pradesh) stated that due to
escalation in prices as well as inadequacy of funds, Rs. 19.80 lakh was utilized
in the construction of six jetties taken up. They also stated that due to
unavoidable reasons some part of jetty would always be under submergence.
However, the reply is not tenable since as per the sanction of MoS, escalation
was to be borne by the State Government from its own resources. Further, the
jetties were completely submerged, and were not in usable condition.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Development of IWT in Chambal River at Gandhi Sagar Reservoir

The jetty constructed at Rampura, which had a sanctioned cost of Rs. 0.21
crore, was not serving any purpose, as there was no water within a range of
two kilometres from the jetty. The waiting hall and booking office constructed

pee

Rampura Jetty far way from water Deserted Waiting Hall and Booking

Office at Rampura
in March 2008, were also deserted, as the actual boarding point was far away.
Audit further observed (November 2008) that commuters were using a
temporary shed of dried leaves as the waiting hall. There was no maintenance
of the assets created at Rampura — notably the approach road, the booking
office and the waiting hall.

(ii) Maharashtra

In Maharashtra, eight projects were sanctioned with a cost of Rs. 29.83 crore
(Central share Rs. 26.85 crore) against which Central funds of Rs. 10.38 crore
were released during March 2004 to March 2006. Audit findings in respect of
these eight projects are discussed below:

Development of IWT in Godavari River near Vishnupuri

The project, which had a sanctioned cost of Rs. 2.72 crore, was intended to
provide basic infrastructure facilities at various sites near the Vishnupuri Lift
Irrigation Project in Nanded. As of October 2008, expenditure of Rs. 3.25
crore (including Central share release of Rs. 2.07 crore) had been incurred.
However, field audit revealed that:

e While six jetties had been completed by November 2008 and the
remaining four sanctioned jetties were nearing completion, the boats and
ferries had not been made operational. In response, the executing agency



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

stated (December 2008) that the use of the jetties would be commenced
soon.

Even the completed jetties were not in usable shape, as finishing work was
still to be done, and the approach road/ path had not been constructed/
strengthened. In response to an audit query, the Executive Engineer,
Nanded Irrigation Division, Nanded, replied that the above work was not
executed because of the instructions from IWAI, the Maharashtra
Maritime Board (MMB), and the Executive Committee for
Implementation of TWT. However, audit scrutiny revealed that this
correspondence predated the sanction of the project, and the scope of the
project included strengthening of approach roads for jetties at ten
locations.

operation

ws Le

Z ab जब 7 हे oh a
No approach road for jetty at Markand Jetty at Markand stated to be completed, but

needing finishing, rai

ig and steps

None of the jetties, except at Kaleshwar, was completed in all respects.
Further, the major portion of the expenditure had been incurred at
Kaleshwar (a religious tourist destination) for construction of a complex of
bathing ghats etc., which did not relate to [WT scheme.

154


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Proposed Jetty at Rahati— work started and stated © Complex of bathing ghats at Kaleshwar — diversion
to be nearing completion, but evidently not in of IWT scheme funds
progress

e Sanctioned components relating to strengthening of approach roads,
navigational aids, street lighting, fencing of facilities and various studies
and investigations were apparently not intended to be taken up, as these
were not included in the composite tender for works.

Development of [WT in Penganga River at Isapur Reservoir, Taluka
Pusad

An amount of Rs. 78.00 lakh had been released as Central share in March
2006. However, Government of Maharashtra released Rs. 3.90 crore to the
nodal agency, MMB, between January and March 2008, which was lying
unutilized as of November 2008, although the executing agency! was ready to
carry out the execution of the work. Field audit revealed that, in contrast to the
situation at Vishnupuri, boats and ferries were operational, but no jetties or
waiting halls had been constructed.

Boats operational at Warkhed without a jetty

' Executive Engineer, Upper Penganga Project Division No. 1, Nanded

155


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Development of [WT at Agardanda, Dighi and Rajpuri

Three projects for construction of new jetties at Agardanda, Dighi and Rajpuri
in Raigarh District were sanctioned by MoS during 2003-05 at a cost of
Rs. 3.62 crore. However, field audit revealed that:

e Jetties already existed at all three sites; construction at Agardanda and
Dighi had not commenced, while construction at Rajpuri was rescinded
after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 0.31 crore till November 2008.

e Approach roads existed at Agardanda and Dighi, which were re-sanctioned
in March 2006 and March 2005 respectively. While the work at Agardanda
was not taken up, expenditure of Rs. 0.67 crore (against the sanctioned
cost of Rs. 0.53 crore) had been incurred on the new approach road at
Dighi, which was still incomplete as of December 2008 though the project
was stipulated to be completed by March 2007.

e While the existing waiting shed at Rajpuri had been dismantled, the work
on construction of the new waiting shed was rescinded.

Existing jetty at Rajpuri Construction of new jetty at Rajpuri, since
rescinded



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

New approach road at Dighi — still in progress Existing Waiting Shed at Rajpuri dismandled

Development of शा at Karanja and Janjira Fort

Two projects had been sanctioned at Karanja and Janjira Fort in March 2004
at a cost of Rs. 6.06 crore, and Central funds of Rs. 2.27 crore were released
between March 2004 and March 2005. However, the projects had not been
taken up as of December 2008.

Development of [WT from South Mumbai to Mandwa

In March 2004, MoS sanctioned a project for development of [WT from South
Mumbai to Mandwa for Rs. 4.11 crore, involving Central share of Rs. 3.70
crore. The project covered several components - provision of passenger
amenities; external water supply pipeline; dredging; break water of 150
meters; firefighting and life saving appliances; hydrographic survey; and
studies/ investigations.

Subsequently, MoS released Rs. 2.04 crore between March 2004 and March
2005 to the State Government. The nodal agency, MMB, drew the full
sanctioned amount of Rs. 4.11 crore in phases by October 2007. Field audit,
however, revealed that:

® Out of the total sanctioned cost of Rs.4.11 crore, MMB_ incurred
expenditure of Rs. 1.64 crore (including consultancy charges of Rs. 0.32
crore) covering only two components — provision of passenger amenities,
and external water supply pipeline. The other components had not been
taken up.

* Ministry sanctioned Rs. 0.27 crore, for passenger amenities (passenger
shed, cafeteria, ticket counter, toilet, water supply) and external water

157


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

supply pipeline. As against this, MMB incurred an expenditure of Rs. 1.32
crore which included construction of unusually high class amenities (first
class and VIP waiting area after booking, open to sky sit out, restaurant
with kitchen and service to kitchen road in place of cafeteria). Further, an
office for MMB was also constructed, which is outside the scope of IWT
scheme.

= es
Office for MMB in Mandwa Terminus Building First Class and VIP Waiting Hall at Mandwa
constructed out of [WT funds

Thus funds provided were used primarily for creation of amenities way
beyond the requirement of the normal [WT passengers. Further, unusually
high consultancy charges of Rs. 32.00 lakh, even more than the MoS sanction
of Rs. 27.00 lakh for passenger amenities, were incurred for consultancy
charges. On the other hand, navigational components like dredging, break
water, hydrographic survey, studies and investigations were not carried out.
Thus as against the sanctioned amount of Rs. 0.27 crore for creation of
passenger amenities and external water supply pipeline, Rs. 1.64 crore
(including consultancy charges) had been reportedly incurred as of December
2008. The balance amount of Rs. 1.77 crore needed to be refunded to Gol.

Diversion of funds for consultancy

The IWT scheme provides for grants-in-aid to the State Government for
supervision and consultancy. The consultancy component was not included in
any of the eight projects sanctioned for Maharashtra. Nevertheless, the nodal
agency, MMB, unauthorizedly paid Rs. 1.12 crore for the consultancy
component for these eight projects.

158


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(iii) Himachal Pradesh

One project for development of IWT for transit facilities at Gobind Sagar Lake
was sanctioned in March 2005 at a cost of Rs. 1.17 crore, with central share of
Rs. 1.06 crore which was released by February 2006. Under the project, two
jetties at Luhnu and Jeoripattan, and nine small jetties and passenger sheds
were to be constructed.

Field audit revealed that:

e The construction of the jetties at the two most important sites at Luhnu and
Jeoripattan had not commenced as of October 2008, though the foundation
stone for the Jeoripattan jetty had been laid in September 2005.

—ew

Jetty at Luhnu not constructed Jetty at Jeoripattan not constructed

e In response to an audit query by the Pr. Accountant General (Audit),
Himachal Pradesh, in August 2007, regarding non-completion of project,
the State Government intimated (January 2008) that all nine small jetties
had been completed. However, field visit in October 2008 to Nakranaghat
and Challelaghat confirmed that jetties at these two sites had not been
constructed. In the same context, the State Government reported
expenditure of Rs. 0.67 crore as of January 2008 on the project, while the
expenditure verified during field audit in October 2008 was only Rs. 0.43
crore”, Such incorrect reporting by officials of the State Government must
be investigated.

? Inclusive of Rs. 9.77 lakh drawn by the Directorate of Transport for consultancy charges and
contingencies

159


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

e While passenger sheds at both Nakranaghat and Challelaghat had been
constructed, terminal approaches from the passenger sheds had not been
constructed. As such, the waiting sheds were, in effect, not usable.

€

mall jetty at Nakranaghat not constructed

oe x

Terminal approach at Challelaghat not constructed Approach to Passenger Shed at Nakranaghat
not constructed

(iv) West Bengal

Five projects were sanctioned for West Bengal at a total cost of Rs. 38.83
crore, with Central share of Rs. 34.19 crore; Central funds of Rs. 23.22 crore
were released in phases upto March 2007. Out of five, two projects were
covered in field audit.

Construction of 22 RCC Jetties in Sunderban Area

In March 2006, MoS sanctioned a project for construction of 22 RCC jetties in
the Sunderbans area at a total cost of Rs. 4.07 crore, with Central share of
Rs. 3.66 crore, and released Rs. 0.81 crore as the first installment. The
Government of West Bengal took up construction of only 18 jetties, as two
jetties had already been completed under other programmes, and two other

160


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

jetties could not be taken up due to unsuitable site conditions. MoS did not,
however, readjust the sanctioned cost in the light of this reduction.

While Audit was informed (January
2009) that 10 out of 18 jetties had
been completed, field audit revealed
that the approach roads and
protective work were yet to be
constructed, rendering the jetties
effectively unusable. According to
the State Government, construction
of approach roads could not be
taken up due to non-availability of
Central funds.

Jetty at Satjelia without approach road.

Jetty at Hogalduri without approach road Commuters at Hogalduri not using the newly
constructed jetty

Construction of jetties between Tribeni and Farakka

In 2003-04, MoS sanctioned a project for construction of 57 jetties on River
Hooghly - Bhagirathi between Tribeni and Farakka at a cost of Rs. 22.62
crore with a Central share of Rs. 20.35 crore. The project was to be completed
by August 2008. Upto March 2007 (when the scheme was closed), MoS had
released Rs. 14.68 crore for the project as Central share.

As of January 2009, of the 57 jetties sanctioned, only 11 jetties were stated to
have been completed, while in respect of 13 jetties, gangway and pontoon
work was complete but link platforms were yet to be constructed.

161


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(v) Orissa

Two projects on ‘Development of [WT Sector for upgradation of existing
facilities’ and ‘Preparation of DPR on waterways and IWT development’ were
sanctioned for Orissa, with a total sanctioned cost of Rs. 2.15 crore and release
of Gol funds of Rs. 0.50 crore.

Development of [WT Sector for Upgradation of Existing Facilities

The project on ‘Development of IWT Sector for upgradation of existing
facilities’, for which Gol funds of Rs. 0.41 crore were released, was foreclosed
after work on only one out of 15 components was undertaken, as the State
Government found it difficult to execute the project at the sanctioned cost.
Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that WAI, while recommending the project
for sanction, did not comment on the reliability or firmness of the cost
estimates.

One component of the project at Balugaon was the extension of waiting hall
for which Rs. 4.20 lakh were sanctioned. Field audit revealed that instead of
extending the existing waiting hall, a new office building (with rooms for
officers, staff and stores and a very small portion as waiting hall) was
irregularly constructed at a cost of Rs. 28.00 lakh. The Director, Ports and
Inland Water Transport, Bhubaneswar in his reply of August 2009 stated that
the construction of the waiting hall was made within the scope of work
sanctioned by the State Government. The reply is not acceptable, as the
construction office building was outside the scope of the project sanctioned by
MoS.

12.1.4.4 Financial Management
(0) Releases

As per the Scheme guidelines, funds were to be released in the manner:

e An advance upto a maximum of 20 per cent of the project could be given
to the State Government by Gol. The first installment would be released
only on submission of a detailed action programme by the State
Government.

« Release of remaining funds would be decided on a case-to-case-basis,
based on the Detailed Project Report (DPR), proposed phasing of
expenditure, satisfactory progress reports for the preceding quarter/ period
etc.

162


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

However, audit scrutiny revealed several instances of release of excess funds
by MoS, without properly considering earlier releases of funds and State
Government proposals for further expenditure, state-wise details of excess
releases noticed in audit are given below.

Table-3

(Rs. in crore)

State Month & Year of Release | Amount of Excess Release
Andhra Pradesh February 2007 0.20
Maharashtra March 2005 4.73
Assam March 2007 0.85
Manipur March 2007 1.22
Himachal Pradesh February 2006 0.86

Case-wise details of the excess releases are discussed in Annex-III.
Audit scrutiny further revealed that:

e Rs. 6.22 crore of Central share released by MoS were lying unutilized with
State Governments and their implementing agencies for periods ranging
from 10 to 51 months (Bihar - 51 months, Kerala - 39 months, Uttar
Pradesh - 28 months, Assam - 28 months, Tripura - 27 months, etc.).
There were delays in release of the Central Share by the State
Governments to the implementing agencies.

¢ There was a shortfall in contribution of the share of State Governments of
Rs. 1.32 crore (West Bengal - Rs. 63.34 lakh (16.31 per cent), Kerala
Rs. 36.22 lakh (100 per cent), Orissa Rs. 16.36 lakh (80.04 per cent), Goa
Rs. 10.90 lakh (100 per cent), etc.).

e Contrary to the provisions of the GFR for avoiding release of funds
towards the end of the year, the sanctions issued by MoS in the month of
March of Rs. 37.89 crore constituted 72 per cent of the total released
amount of Rs. 52.84 crore during 2003-04 to 2006-07.

Project-wise details are discussed in Annex-IV.

(ii) Non-Receipt of UCs and SOEs

Audit scrutiny revealed that against the amount of Rs. 52.84 crore released
upto March 2007, Utilisation Certificates (UCs) for only Rs. 30.24 crore had
been received by MoS as of May 2008, as detailed in Annex-II.

163


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Further, while the project sanctions stipulated submission of audited
Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) along with the UCs, such SOEs were not
received for any project.

(iii) Cases of Deficient Financial Management
Audit scrutiny revealed the following cases of deficient financial management:

© The Government of West Bengal had not refunded excess release of
Central share of Rs. 0.41 crore on account of reduction in the scope of a
project for construction of five jetties between Haldia and Triveni.

e There were no instructions from MoS relating to utilization of interest
earned on unspent balances of Central release funds parked in various
accounts.

Case-wise details are given in Annex-V.

(iv) Spillover Liabilities

Consequent on the discontinuation of the scheme in March 2007, the total
spillover liabilities on account of unreleased Central share for already
sanctioned projects amounted to Rs. 44.35 crore. The modalities for meeting
these balance liabilities had not been finally worked out by MoS in
conjunction with the Ministry of Finance.

12.1.4.5 Lack of Monitoring and Review

The State Governments were to send detailed Quarterly Progress Reports
(QPRs) to the MoS in a prescribed format, indicating the item-wise financial
and physical targets and achievements during the year. Audit scrutiny revealed
that against the stipulated 454 QPRs in respect of 35 projects for the period
April 2004 to June 2008 required to be received, only 62 QPRs were actually
received.

As per the guidelines, WAI was to assist MoS in monitoring progress and
would recommend to Gol when the releases of the next installment should be
made to State Government. However, TWAT did not fulfill its assigned role
properly and merely forwarded requests of the State Governments to Gol
without proper scrutiny. In the case of Assam, the MoS had already released
Rs. 3.25 crore (March 2007) out of total central share of Rs. 3.52 crore, and
the maximum central share remaining to be released was Rs. 0.27 crore, WAI
forwarded the request of the Government of Assam for further release of
Rs. 1.12 crore, for consideration.

164


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The matter was referred to the Ministry in March 2009; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010,

12.2 Unfruitful expenditure on computerization in the Chartering Wing

Based on the report of the Expenditure Reforms Commission
computerization of the operations of the Chartering Wing, with the
objective of full automation of work processes and consequent reduction
in staff strength, was approved in March 2003. However, despite
expenditure of Rs. 20.00 lakh, the envisaged benefits in terms of full
automation of the Chartering Wing could not be achieved. Further,
savings of Rs. 62.25 lakh for the period from June 2005 to May 2009 on
account of reduction in staff strength could also not be achieved.

The Chartering Wing (CW) of the Ministry of Shipping (MoS) is responsible
for making arrangements for the transportation of cargo owned/ controlled by
the government/ government-owned entities as per the policy of buying FOB/
FAS and selling CAT/ CIF*,

In its ninth report, the Expenditure Reforms Commission observed in
September 2001 that there was considerable scope for the computerisation of
the operations of the wing, and this could result in a reduction in the staff
strength as this exercise was to be carried out in six months. These
recommendations were accepted by the Ministry and in July 2002, the Indian
Port Association (IPA), a Society of Major Port Trusts, was asked to
commence a detailed study for computerization of CW. Subsequently in
March 2003, a proposal of the IPA for computerization of CW at a cost of
Rs. 47.90 lakh was approved, and an advance of Rs. 20.00 lakh was paid to
TPA. The objective of the project was to fully automate work processes at CW
for both bulk and liner cargo, including capturing of letters of indent,
capturing of enquiry details and preparation of enquiry registers, and preparing
of fixture registers and vessel monitoring. However, voyage estimation,
laytime calculation, etc was required to be done using separate application
software to be purchased by MoS. As decided in May 2003, the project was
envisaged to be completed within 15 months — 3 months for pre-operative/
preparatory work and 12 months for installation/ implementation.

Since IPA lacked in-house capability for software development, a contract for
software development at a cost of Rs. 26.85 lakh was awarded to M/s Birlasoft
Ltd. in February 2004. The hardware and system software for the project was

3 FOB: Free on Board; FAS: Free Along Side; CAF: Cost and Freight; CIF: Cost Insured
Freight

165


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

procured by IPA between February 2005 and May 20085 at a cost of Rs. 10.21
lakh.

Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that the computerization project had not
been implemented as of May 2009. The hardware procured by the Ministry
was lying idle and unused, and the software developed by Birlasoft had not
been utilized, for the following reasons:

. Birlasoft supplied a detailed Software Requirement Specifications
(SRS) and a prototype Software Architecture and Design Document in
July 2004, While MoS accepted these documents, subject to some
additions/ alterations, in August 2004, it stated that since none of the
officers of CW had any formal training in computers, some of the
screens might require slight modifications to meet specific/ unique
requirements, and the requisite flexibility for incorporation of minor
changes/ additions.

e Based on the accepted SRS and prototype, the software application
was developed by Birlasoft, and the Preliminary Acceptance Test and
User Acceptance Test conducted during January 2005. The hardware
for the project was delivered and installed by NICSI* in May 2005.
Training to all users of CW was completed by June 2005, while certain
modifications and additions requested by CW in June 2005 were also
carried out. By September 2005, Birlasoft informed IPA that they had
completed all activities, and had also installed the application on the
production server. Accordingly, IPA requested CW in October,
December 2005 and May 2006 to issue a ‘Final Acceptance Test’
certificate; however, there was no recorded confirmation as to whether
the same was ever issued.

ry While facilitation support was provided by Birlasoft from August 2005
to January 2006 at a cost of Rs. 3.00 lakh, Birlasoft insisted that the
SRS was the base accepted document, and any major changes/ new
requirements could not be accepted at this stage; however, changes/
suggestions in the screens could be taken up during the warranty
period of three years. The MoS continued to try to get amendments to
the software, and also held/ attempted to hold meetings with IPA and
the contractor between November 2007 and May 2008, which were,
however, not successful.

* NICSE: National Informatics Centre Services Inc — a Section 25 Company set up under NIC
(National Informatics Centre) for providing IT solutions to Government organizations.

166


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

As of May 2009, despite an expenditure of Rs. 20.00 lakh (hardware and
system software, software development by Birlasoft, facilitation support by
Birlasoft, etc.), the computerization project had not been successfully
implemented, and the envisaged benefits of full automation of CW could not
be achieved. In addition, the MoS (through IPA) would also be responsible for
balance liability to the contractor for software development. Further, the
envisaged savings of Rs. 62.25 lakh for the period from June 2005 to May
2009 though abolition of posts could also not be achieved.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in November 2008; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

167


891

0८09८ 0६99 TIE TV.LOL-€as
OL 097 0g's9 0096६ WIE (90-s00z) eqesay | ५
>[एप९० § 1 JO YOIANIS WE|AOY-1]9A 10 [RALADY "|
000 2015५ 0८99५ 19.101/>पघ15
000 पड OTs Los = (h0-E00Z) ByeIUIE weeney,
पा LAL JO Juaudolanap soy 69015 /Apmyg Ayriqiseay s1uioudss-ouys9 1 *|
000 99५ OP LIT TVLOL-908
900 99901 99501 Ow LIT + (SO-POOT) ग्जण eas wsptsd |
PULAODH Je SATU[LOBJ [sue] उठ odsues) 48७ एपशुणु 10 10०010]9096 *| ष्प्ज्ष्पण्णा
६685 8165 00601 19.101-815
६68६ 81765 0186 00601 (90-s00z) sear Jes pur erodey> “esndeyy wy] >
Je BON Jo SKemuaeM एएण० ay) UL AdAing siydesFospA}{ Ysa4y SuNINpUoZ *|
09८8 001८ 00911 वज्य01-म15
00 ट< 00५ 9062 000६ G0-€00TYSUOS JOAL Ur 5्यावण्द LAA JO JuoUMdojaAcp
जग Ydq Jo uonesedaid pue yep peatojoydsowospAy 1० पणा०्य[ु०0 “py
0015 00.9 9042 000६ (0-€00Z) ISO J9AL UF 59 ey LANL Jo quauidojaasp
JO} चतत Jo wonesedoid pue eyep jeo1Fojoydsowospay Fo VoNsITI079 “¢
00° 00's 06८ 000६ (0-00) ePUBH IAAL UE SANTI | A\[ JO Juauidojaaap
JO} Add Jo voresedaid pue vyep yeorsoyoydsourospAy Jo ए्णा०्गाण) ६ अषण्पाप्त €
OS LI 00'S OS'CZ 005५८ (0-80टो wisENO}
२४०१ 1./01 10 ए>प्पाए vujeg ye 109परतणु२७ण WO 3941 JO} Add 1
000 0569 00५८ 19.101/815 है
000 0969 9569 00५८ + (90-S007) पडणणव्‌ EIGPUY ण छणण््गणक् ysopuld z
purjuy jo jusuidojaaap soy Apnys Ayyigiseay a1woUosa ouysay pue (90115 *] eaypuy
9८96६ 18'5801 9५ 78FL 19.1001-815
LOOIE 10°06 80°0SP 80°0SP (40-9007) esndeurqesg Jal
uo yeys Jofew 0210 [एणएाण SuNLoy Tuo] ए / | 10 ‘sou QZ Jo uoNANSUOD "Pp
0001 OF OLF or 0zr or ocr (so-poozy eamdeurqerg uessy |
3901 UO syuRg Jeys sofew ye same Suneoy | | Jo juaudojaaag *६ 1
000 ७४09८ 9709८ 09८ + #0-६00टो eANdewuErg FAL Jo अुण्ण्व YON 1४ भगाए च्च॒ [एप] “Z
8992 00978 8915६ 891५६ &0-६00ट'णाव०णपुषप्रु 720 Jo YuRG YIMOg Te ब्गापाउणु [PULLS प्‌
छ-9> ८ 9 9 r £ z L
Sma LOEOTE (S9}84S 49430 नगर %06 4809 “ON,
उ०*णाएत६ oy ता एरएजज् | छन्‍्यण्य5 AN 40) %001) pauoyaueg qoafoig Jo 3ueN ares पाल
[puny pepo जहा] १३०१) [BUD

Cpe uy sandy)
10-9007 % 90-S007 ‘S0-PO0z *F0-£007 हिणुजाए auayas LAAT 4apUN pauoyoues s}aaford ayy ysurede ATIQUTT 33५णा[क ayy Surmoys ॥ए०ए०४)६

(Z‘VTZLCON Ydeaseaed ur ण pasiajay)

J-xouuy

11-0102 f0 6 ON Hoday


691

[sve ext9 099 1910.1-815
BCLE w6 O99 07 9F (0-S0OT Iam IsyeM ToquINp UT SatAIas Anuj Jo प्छण्वगछत “| vandyay | प्य
OVErL L0°0S OL PIT TVLOL-0S
900 LT6 Lv6 0६01 x 170-500 2) ESS 1० गण )प UL 30095 IM] JO
qusuidojaaap ampiny pue qaurdoyaaap skemsoyem Uo Yqq Jo voywsedarg *Z
OVerl 0807 6 CRT OV POT (ho-E00zYsantioyy AuNsIxa एक | दा
Jo vorEperddn soy एशण0 Jo गण oy] UT 7०००5 LAI Jo णणव्णु०५०्त “|
87709 cst 099८ 19५101.-8185
8709 cVst 099५0 09५0 (Zo-9007)open sewed -opuy गण्प्प्रगव oy NZI], rT पु
2907 ut pms ४ : K (संजय Pasian | वा
ए पा Apryg Appiqiseay auIovsg-ouyaa | pue (907 oryderdompAy |
हाद0ा 18४८1 ६६०४८ 19.1001-8[15
हाट 18८1 ६६०४८ ६082 (20-9007) Hafoud prodsuesy ग्य०्७ एण्शण Dye] अध्जण्त Jo [esodorg प्‌ andwey | “01
८0295 6"धघाट 1८198 TVLOL-d0as
LSILE ६८9८ OF She 0058६ (90-:5002) HOAsA821
उएतिए३ परएएएछ je Jaau [एवणएप० पा Wodsuesy, Joye Ay एएशुणु Jo juauidojaaaqy "६
05062 ones OS'ELE 0051 (90-SoOT)HOAIASAL TeAESURG Te IAL १५०३ UF 16110 1०७१० ०्त॒ ६ sopra
000 9८६५ 96६५ PL os ($0-P00Z) ysoperd BAYPURYA, UF SIOLAJAsaL 1ए/ए5 1eq eAUpeyAl 6
Tuemy tury pur ees enpuy ut yodsuey NoArasal छाए Jo 109000३७०6 *]
TELFOT ISLeor 87६86: TVLOL-€0S
PL Pee LO'L9 1810६ PESEE (90-soozyepuepseay ye 43910
undley U1 12७० pepuryy /e[seyjAl Ul semsoqe Ay एणशण Jo 109००१०२७०6 *g
OO ELT 008८ 90 TSE 0006६ (90-soozy pesnd
+ एजञा[ए] Noarosos des] 10 19417 eFuvBuag पा LAI Jo wourdopaasg */
८9५96 ६8६8 Storr 6£ 667 छ0+ऋ000फात Fe Gyan
undfey) sary pepueyy /णश्ण्पाव्‌ णु ४६ए७४थ९०/७ putzuy Jo juatudojaaeq “9
8109 9615५ वादा 09कटा (फ0-६002 ध्यपः्णण्पणुद्
पा yoy ध्यापिए 3697 (जज) प्रावहिच्च)॥]्कात pepuey/e[sey A
प्‌ skemrae Ay एण्शणु Jo yaurdoyaaap 10g esodoxd yoalorg “¢
195८ 00141 cae 9769 फ़०-छ0ट्ीएगुछ्च्च ए Caer Lindley) 1A
pepury\l /e[seyJA] Ul sAvaioye MA एए[णु JO JUsUdo]aaep UO [esodosd 10907 त कफ
TP'S9l SPOT 9869६ छ््ह्0ाफ (pO-E00zy empuey te vsi8A 95 के ear TUM EAT EGUY) |e use reyeyy,
PMpURIA, OF IGeUMIA YINOS WoY | AAI JO 109010|9099 ७० jesodoid 10906 *¢
99° 8ST eL’pLt Oc cer PS 18h (r0-€007) efaerey Je एड OoTA 2p ऋणत TeeULTEYC] /TOALT
equy ० iqetun YINOS Woy 16110 JUaudojanap uO jesodoud Joslo1g “7
CTE LL'907 6617८ [ह्च्ध (0-६00ट “HNdnuysi A,
InaU 13017 HeMEPOD UT 1 A\[ 10 JWaurdoyeaap soy [esodosg 1290 *]
LUEOTE (soyuys 1990 105 %06
e 50, iy
aa 03 वा paseaja | 2p 5थष्य5 AN 105 %/, 001) poverisu tg yoaforg ३० awe थष्प5 हल
puny [uO] a1BYS १७०१) [BUD

L-0107 £9 6 ON Oday



08८1

पत्रण 79६87 “SA - ८0६0६ ण dn pasuajas spuny

SOW Aq pastajas उनएपुड [३३० ज्यप्ए परमूषक्ष गण 52 ण्य्व x

WIELPS'SSSOT ‘Sa — शजगभ[णात pauoyaues Jo 10:39] - sapeys Jo “ON

eS'rerr PO ESTS PS'88SOT TVLOL GNVYD
9F'960T OC'TZET TS'86L¢ TVLOL-408
PO'SLT 9८89 08 छः 0028६ (७0-900दणएग्वापरत्र
pur quod poomiepy 1९ Anof uooquod wm AvMBueF omy Jo uoNSNASUOD ५
06+%8८ Oris 0६99६ 0050 (90-soozy eae ueqrapung ur sama! JOY ZZ JO WOHINASUOD फ
0001 00% 00%ाक 000% (0+%00ट्रो ueqiepung UF एण्पनवापुएठ FOAL WO पफाएतु
pue yeyyNGeN J sajar uoojuog wng Aeasueyn Zz Jo uoryonsjsuog “¢
Of Te 1500६ प्हष्द 1088८ + WEL 10882 “SU OF peonpar yO 4509 yoafoud ayy
os WeIsIpuEN 1० Anal JQ 1४70० ayy paddosp १५४०७ aig yy] 78 2/ ६ ‘Sy sew
1509 pouonoues [४०/३10(50+#002) HAUL PuE eIPIEH UODAIEG WEIBIPUEN |. हज कर्क | +
pue (vay) Andysoyues “mdurenueyy “qnyeroays “Teaysaulysyeq a st
ye Anal QO | pue somal 9161 uoojuog Aemduey # Jo uononsuoy टू
eS Los es Lol ५६५६0८ 0919<< फ०छ00टण्जणण्व pur एग्वण, veemjaq [-\\N UO sou $ - Spal Kemdys 3
“OU pur ‘sou ६५ saimal Bugera 5146] uooyuog AemBuey Jo uoransysuoy "|
00% 00८ 0001 19५1.01-8115
00५ 00८ 906 0001 छ0-9006 कार
जएहएए प्रषए्णण) Oo} परण्रण Fuidtung yySneg woy Ayo Mouyon’] UL HWOH, ysoperg जया] | +1
JBAL UO LAAT JO VoKSNpoyUT Joy yoday joaforg papieyaq Jo uowyeredarg “|
LUEOTE (soyuys 1990 जय %06
Amnaen 380 “ON
aoromdg | © du paseajar | 2p $अथष्य5 AN 105 % 001) pauonautg qaaforg Jo WEN, ans te
puny [uo], जाए “YAO [BUI

11-0102 f0 6 ON «Oday



16६1

pouonuaut ॥ाएगप्र9375 उप 1daoxe 800 ८ ARI TIN SMURIS ५
upny ० Aouase डैपग10008 / Supuauratduyy “WouuaadyH aig Aq poptAoid voneuoyu! pue So Jo sprodas oy} Wo |भूवपर०0 xouuy (

(po-€00z) yepuey saat UE

EN 005 - N 00६ 90/0 005 | #0'8061 | SaMmaR LAXTJo TaMdopaaap 10) सवत Jo WoEARdard | 4.9

0008 Pue ejep [एगजैणण्पुव०प्रणयए5ए Jo ona} “|

seus

SUSI oszs 09८9 005८ रण

“R007 Tad
Jose Surpuad एफ woday yeup हि

Jo worsstugns pur लिए[ए0णु् हि 7 हि (so/r0 od) . scar हि जए 22) dad

‘uonoaford snout a “pajstumy suet | 0:60 ष्र्ट्झ oezs ८0६0 0509 | 90६09 | णपएएए ur skemmeay एपणण Jo वण्ग्पवण॒क्णए |... ५

‘ou auuiot Sanwa 00°SL | soy Aprys Ayjiqiseay s1WoUoDS ouysar pur उत्पाद "|

uy ssarord [४-54 प्त॒

ysapuig eaqpuy

1९08६ z's 18°S801 9S'78tI oy
(Zo-snozyenndeunyerg
ssoufiord ON, 10°06 - IN WN 80/0 1006 | Looz'go'9z | HA HO eYF वर्णएण हट RU |g
80:05# | uo Fuo, w ZT Jo “sow gz Jo woHANNsHOD'p
तु है (६000 9d) , seg: (s0-p00z) eandeusyesg 39517 ४० 0|प्ण्प
ssaufoud UL 320, 07002 | 900z/0T 0001८ OL'FRE L0/€0 oF Olt sone 0 te yey rofem ye samier Zuyeag 1] Fo wandorsaag "६ €
— हे (zz ord) हि हि (#0-६005)'थ्गा00णपृथ्षच्त 7
pajajdisos aq ण payers ylang 06+ | 90110६ 0555८ 0555८ 90/६0 OF 097 00% £061 JA Jo Yweq YON ye soltfiogy jeuTunay, -z z
z
हि - हि (p0-€00z) eandeuyery
ssasBoud uy ज7०॥॥ 0058 00फट 00फट 90/६0 008८६ | +00८६06 | soa Jo yueq परा॥०६ Je soNtfiogy शा, "| I
8915६
wessy
adq | qunowy HATIO Tp asnayaa |. monoues
qaaford ays Jo snyerg JeatsAy ED oe 4 pen aseys | Jo गण pur uonaues Jo read pur yaaforg aig Jo oureny ON
paatagas 531 हे एगणण्गाड [equa yunoury is

Cyr] aS)
98007 4ण९ Jo sv sjaaford ay) 1० आए

(Ve VTL ON ydessesed uy oy passayay)
- oury

LI-O107J0 6 “ON Oday


tL

पत्रण COTS Sx JO ऋष्गभ [eu oy} SUITE PaAtodar पत्रण 0:95 “SA IOS ,

vou peor कक icone हु iN 80/1 coco! ४9०८ |. 70806 (0-8002) tundnaysig 1090 7900 wesnepon | 4p
“oT Jo no payaqduroa धार 9 coset or ITC | HE LMT Jo juoudoyrap soy pesodosg yaforg “|
eayyserE EL
0६४9 000 0६५9 WUE TOL,
६5: मु - पु SOO IE (50+#002)
ssau80rd ut ज7०/ 0६59 uN 90/60 08६५9 Zz | गष्प०० 51. Jo yoans uproy-yaa jo peasy | | EL
eyes
0८99 ६015 0८95 [OL
. ea" है है . #0:50:61 (po-coog) छण्पाण्त्र ण 115] Jo wourdopoaap
Paratduros aq ण pores raforg IN | 90%0'08 LIS 0६95 Soro ६0715 0095 | se} aang /xpmg Aupiqyseay “axutousss-ouysay = | Cl
eyeyeusey
99501 0 क्त 99901 OFLU [exo
“ssaitoud ur Spoys
safluassed pug samaf jews ६01६
Jo aay ‘anne 3990120) fo se 99801 पर 0 90/६0 9990 शक (५0+00ट 79] AeBeg puraoy ye गाए | TT
प्ले tou Sanyal om 12 0M, ysumn soy wodsunn, s9}2m puxyuy jo audopaaaq *T
ysoprad ।एप३७एणीा
81765 000 8176५ 00:601 OL
५00८01[कट (90-5002) 9099
pantooas jou जगत) ssarBorg हा 65 - IN VN 10६0 816s ZOU | tes puw eiodeyy ‘esndeyy ye voy jo skearaeyy | QL
00601 | puppy om ut Koamng orydexfospApy ysary Funonpuo;
ष्ण्छ
001८ OSH 001८ 00५1 TeHOL
हि - तर है #0:8061 Cra-e00z) wsEMO %०१ LANL
EN 005 se 90/€0 005 005८ | ae ए००ए७ छगण्त ye waudojaaap 100. 4940 10 Yaa के. |. *0
“LOOZ/EI IIH pues 1०0 69" (ro-£007) 2H0$ 494f1 UE
suo plalp yng गण payoayjoa 005 - IN oor 90/६0 005 | 70806] | उगगाण्य्य ray Jo पपण्ातणुक 205 yaC jo wonemedad | 4g
ARI] ० PaIeIS FHEITNSVOD JT, 9008 | जाए erep JearTojoydrowompxy Jo प्णाज्या०0.. ६
69" (h0-£002) ISO 1941) UL
IN 009 - IN 00६ 90/६0 009 | 0६067 | sannroes sat Jo waudojsnap गण सेव) wonerederd | yf
000६ | nue eyep feafofoydiouospéy Jo uoNDATIOD 5
ada | qunowy Hafod 39 | seajar | uonoues
yafoud ay) 1० smpeyg yearsiud ता ee qa auvys | 1० गए pur uopaues so sad pur yaaforg ayy yo omen oN
paalagay so 4 porgndys | Mu | qunoury Is

11-0107 42 6 ON Moday



६८

GOD
“(1 pauonoues) का waxes oq
oy peuueyd [| Jo mo para[duioa
2g, ण payeas sear [एप Bunrem, है 7 हि seg | 9002६060 (90-500ट्रोएएकघख 7
wing 9110 Su1y00q | ‘sym 00६8 पर 9699६ 0६0 00's O0'SIp | sedesueg ye Jays auog uy LANL Jo wamdojaraq -z | ६८
उपाए aus idaaxa arajduioa 9q,
ण pares arom Yorym pauorsurs:
६ fo mo dn uayey samo! LL
(8001) ५002801६ (S0-p00Z)"ysapedd एडपएए७)५
pauonours says g 79 no TIN | £00z/60 OL Es BLEL LO/EO OL es 7.2. | UL SIOIAIesay aeBes ieq Huemy Tey pue redes @
paraydaroa pue dn uae} sans 9 1६765 | कफ ur podsuey sroarasas mNUL Jo qwouudoponocy प्‌
ysapeag exypeyy
18801 10895 TR'LE0T SF E867 TROL,
नजर "ला" (90
jose paves a WON 1049 - EN *0IN 80६0 ६0% गा -sooz)epumpmeay ye yaar umdfey ut seats pepuwyy | x TZ
Jo se panes ) ! ६६ | eiscy, ul skeauareyy purjuy Jo ioudojsnagq *g
800८ Jaquiaron, है . . 80/11 हि 20 | १00८६0६0 (90-sogz) pesnd - ष्जपाथा, HoAreser
JO se pours ou yO, १08८ IN TN 80/0 008: 00068 | andes] ye soAu एठप्रथ्तएण्त॒ UI LMI Jo wowdosrog ५. | *OC
OTD) score ys 7"
dn uayer 100 syiom sayno pue ce . : 80/11 carey | S00Z EOE (s0-pong) RIC 1९ (ज००.) Lindley) Jeary pepueyA,
‘at meee dos uy yoo peog घ्छ UN #99 ८0७ ६858 6६667 | ।णड्ण्पाए. एु skemiorem pucpuy Jo rusudoparaq 9 | OT
(30/11) s85uFOrT canny
UL SOM peas pur parajduics . 80/TT oe हि (PO-C00Z) VMpURYAT We BSIOA DOTA २ जुरुय)
Surpymg jeurway “dn uayey jou Sv'p0z - LN owzel 90/60 spp0z |... #0'६06ट |. srrewueYyC jane cau) apuey ० [वाई Ines 8I
मं हि ५601 Woy | MI JO 103000[75३ UO [esodoud 1००० "५
A2yeavfraug pur som BuaRparq
हि score (70-500 2) eNYseIETEY UT Hog efter usu
ose रेशम rN 9615 - TEN son 90/60 9615५ हद (9249 Lundfey)oatL popueeiseyW UL sxeassre mM | fT
3 HOA 1: purjuy go yuowdojaaap soy yesodosd ३0जणत कफ
-eooc)undiey 1०
apurosarqng paeis oD 00161 - IN sol 90/60 00161 | +00८8&09८ | (३० Hnd[ey) Jaary pepueyy, nent yokes OL
Popufeser ind PaiTals om AOL o'er क्रा6कऋ | puepuy Jo yuaurdojaaap uo yesodord joalorg “¢
है (0-६002) शिष्यएज्न 18 esI9A 01%
"800८ Jaquuaroy £067 y
jose he हिला ० _ eLpet - IN an 90/60 घ्ध्क्धा ee 3 Ya) yeu] आप equry o iqeumyy yMog | yST
है 6 पाग्य LMT Jo jwaurdoparap uo jesodosd yoalorg “7
pafoad jo
हि Buypuessjno | OMA वाणए |. ayiodau | uopajduroa | Posters | woHoues “ON
ypaford जप 1० snyerg rearsdyd al enymmtta || poco asvys | 1० गएए pur uonsuts so उए३ढ pur yaaforg dy) Jo जाए! हित
11111 18 ३1 | हे PENS एष्पण्ग्) yunoury

LI-O107J0 6 “ON Oday



ell

ysapesg sey)
76 000 ze 09% TROL
. . . A ag | 9007'€0'ET (90-$00z) vase
ssououd ON «6 BN ON ८080 6 09% | soem sagumg प्‌ क्र Azsey [० qwowudopoaac “7 | *5C
89°97 0115 ८00५ 0८काट 101,
(90/६0 गा #00८' ६05८ (h0-c00z) e810,
“payaydwos aq गण एगण51०जणत IN | 9002/20 176 Of 01 popusyxs) Lv6 "SC | yo seis ayp प्‌ 1ण775 | MI Jo wawudojsaap जाया pue | QZ
so/eo 0&01 | Suaudojanap sKemrajem ए० YgC Jo uoneredag “Z
‘SOW Aq pationsues (0760 गगा coe हर | 2, हि ene.
jou yoaford pastaar paw 8992 | 9007/z0 टाका 090 |... papuarxa) 080 | FOOT LOOT ६080025%0॥७0 unsixo Jo vonepessdn sey |.) 7
का ussper jou aloud pouoraueg soveo OP'pOT | BSSHIO Jo गण ०7 UT JOJoAS J AAT JO JatUdooaagy प्‌
रजत
दाजा दाका 09५ HO
खत se, | L002"€0°97 (.0-9007)apen sewUEs
Payajdusoa 3109 uso sad 06 2007/60 csi asi 80/६0 zsl 095८ | -कण sowoid ० nay saan ur जीजा Aupiqseay | ८
omuouoog-ouyoy pe aang —arydexSoxpApy
pueden
SV8Lt 000 18.8 eeosz roy,
ssommord oN ST SLT - IN TN 80/६0 शाह रच (/0-900ट2)17णुणप | ST
5 yrodsuray बज एएशण गए्य जण्जण्य Jo [ए४०१०णव “1
जाताए्णु५
६८68 69+%08 orelz PLT98 01
so) भा
ए्रस्ञण 107 ०० sple peuOHTLACN
“sayfs SUIOS Je paranaysuos . - (8000) io, | 9002६0६0 |... (90-S0Z):HOAIOSaz TeFeg TypuRD Je sOALT [एपप्पश्प्‌)
S¥90]q 12/19) pur aaqyo Furyoaq, ६८9६ TN 5689६ 080 ६७१६ 0028६ | uF Hodsuery, soregy एएशणु Jo woudojaraq ६ | PC
बाण Sune ‘parajduroa
34 01 pares samel ZI [LV
| मिलता प0 astajaa | uoyoues
हि Buspueysjino | CMA | 100७ | छ्ान्‍त | एगागवण० | P2¥?l ip “ON
ypaford जप 1० snyerg rearsdyd , aanypuods’ © ujuow aanys | 1० गएए pure uonsuts so उए३ढ pur yaaforg ay) Jo जाए. ४
on aarme1990 wpusdsg | gounaot | ejuay | yunouy 18

11-0107 42 6 ON Mody



Sil

WEL OO POP SY JO asvojar छ्ण०् उप #णुए३४ poalsoal पत्रण 000% “SAL SON ,
WE] CS LOFT ‘SY JO aseajay [enuad oy uTESe paaroras HE] 00851 SAO SON ५

| £5°961 6LTLET प्च्प्च्ध्द 1986:६ TIO,
है . 39 | 9002'L0°6I (co-990z)euAQnYDeyy pur wrod ए0001णल
uN 9८89 EN EN 60:20 9389 00 ट88 | 1० Anef woowod wna KemBuw# oat Jo uononusuoy ६. | *S&
पद) ssaumoud ut उप
0} SOILS SIYS 8 1IYLO Iv ज००/७ come .
“fy हि . . . 9007'€0°9T (90-sooz) Rae
A]uo says ०७) 10 auOp 340m 900 | L0'60'0E Fels 606 0६ ors : ५ ग :
oarinajord pam prog ypnozddt 00८0७ ueqiopung पर sonal Joe ZZ JO ए्रणाणपराध्यण) कफ | pE
ing paayduioa samal 00स OL
‘Poramfinet aq EN | 80067 |. _,00°09r 0009 9060 |... oorror | 7 | uy पष्पतरवापणछ उसपर uo spr poe TeaeN €€
9% pares tag 9१०प somal ब्पा, . 000% | se samar uoojuog wing emduRN Z Jo uoHONNSUAL “¢
(50+#00८)' “WAFL 1088ट ‘SA ण
porns 9a paoupas 108 1800 12 ayp os usesdypuEN 1 Anal 40
; | Isuos ayp paddoup 15०७ गण5'फाण ZeZLE “SY SUM
jou sey Temsaurysyep 18 Anal uz one . . sage | 5002६00६ 3
हि ILLZT | 08018 | O8'ZLT I8'ShZ 90/६0 1800६ vege | 1800 Patonaues [EUTFIO 150]. एफ शज़ण्प ए०७७॥०५ | 2६
(Jo UoRONSUOD “pouOTss}WOD 108४८ हि
Wweitipuey pue (yyy) Indysowes ‘ndwesuepy
somal p Jo In कि :
गराप्षष्पण्णप& “emysouysq 1९ Anal उउधे 1 pue
saijel 316, uaqueg KemBueg p Jo uononysuoy 2
(80/21) par|duroa aq oF
वर्ण wuoyed yur ing parsjdwoo जा (#0-६00ट एजजएणणच एएए एएग्वण[ uaamyaq |
ज 10% 00100 pure #ए१४शएड EN | 80206 | oortrst 6s'eLs1 soso | escort | 00: 0 है | ayy uo soup - Ayal ०७१18 Joy pue ‘sou ६६ somal] —[
Kuo sous ६1 Ty ‘parajduios OF 1927 | suneoy adéi uoojtiog AeMmueH Jo uoNoMAsUOD *]
ag ० payers 51 [[
TeBuag 959.
00८ 000 00८ 0001 TeOL
(o-soozyaFeneg
. . . पे .- | 50028080 | REN प्रष्णण गण LORS विणुवाणाब पण्पन्नाण्) WH
ssoufoud oN. wre TN rN 90/60 9% 0001 | hyo mouyan7 Ur HWE JAIL ०० LANL Jo एण्प्रणाएग्गणु | *OE
40 uodoy 19ofo1g parting Jo uonvundaig “|
| wafoad 9 | aseayaa |. एगाउतछ
- Buspueysjno | CMA | 1०0७ | छत | एगागवण्० | P2¥?l ip “ON
yafoad ayy 1० snynyg [earscya i aunaypuody 0 पा आहपृ5.._| yo गएए pu uonaues jo 3836 छाए yaaforg 3१) Jo २एएछ ९ है
oT paalasay so EES boven dys | MuueD | junoury 18

LI-O107J0 6 “ON Oday


9L1

ssooud [eloueuy 97047 snojaad Jaye पाए०्ण ay} || TWaUISAATYoR 59गए०फ़ण JaxoeIG ण LOY -,
पाएगा ayp [ए payodas juauaaaryoe soyeopUT Jaye UL UO,
जगपणाए५४ JU3y.M UIyR] प००१ aAvy 5्यण5५ Aq एगण्प्णाण sods} 311 (5०6 Aq paxy 107 घर्हाण PeoIsAYd asim Ja 95ए० UT |
upnry ण Aouame Suynsaxa / SuuoMs|dwU] GuaUTUaA0H गण Aq papirodd UOHeULIOFUT pue 5०0 Jo sps0daz 94} Woy pafiduioo aunxauUyY 4,

30-L00Z 0
0001 40-9002 ६ 90-5006 हि
. cone है "त्तह | 1002)जणाएए0 3०७7 UF ध्गगाण्ण LAAT JO
00's 90-$002 TIN os S0-vo0z 90/60 POE! | suowudojsaop 30} ya Jo wonesdard जाए | 9
008 $0-r00z a P0-€00Z 000६ | sep peoiFofoydious oxpAy Jo पणाग्णा०0 प्‌
#0-६002
गा
Os Ze - 80-002 गवाह 08 10-9002 छ0-500ट yseperd मएण्ए Ur SXEAIDTEAL
0st 00°09 20-9002 | 107 aBequaorad uy है ८0६0 908६091 | एएशण jo 1ए०्रवण#ण soy Aprys
UN 0081 | 90-500: uN 8 | 20500: 00:56 | Suqiseay o1moudss ouyoa) pur Kaaang “|
Ysaperg erypuy
oer ae 7 (20-9007) EINEM
N Boer | शा: uN cores | एड soo |. Looz'so'9z wo yey sofeur gz ye jeuruuay Suneoyy |“
Ob LOZ 40-9007 80% &0-9005 8009 | कण ur (1 Jo “sou gz Jo एणाणणज्ञा०)फ
(LO/EO) OL FET = 80-L00Z गाज - 7 तट:
(L0/50) 00091 oroiz| — 49-9902 st Os} £0°9007 cang-eo" (002) घयपवएएप्र्
(६061) 0005 00091 90-<002 0६ 8६ 90-0002 Loco | ४00ट8016 | sau uo syueq yey? sofeur €
०" " 1४ samar ठैपाएण [0 yuatdopaaag *:
IN 000६ 60-00: TIN zl 50+%002 oF Oz mar Funeoy [1 Jo y TART ६
(0/01) OS 8L : 10-9002 ~ 7
(६0८) 00 ६८1 तल |. 20-500८ ofequooiad ह। 90६0 | +00८६06। (po-goozyeandeunyerg sant
(50/10) 00 ८5 0025 ६0+002 | us arquyreae Jon, 0 to-e00z 07092 | 4० WPT प्रणव 38 soniory yeuraua, पट
UN 0-€00Z TIN हि .
(ZO/1T) 00°OLT - 80-L00Z
VN - 40-9002 arqepeae ze 90-$00z .
(F0-€007) Bndeuyeag Jatt
(90/01) IN. 891] 90-S00Z | 1०7 amequadIad uy &F 50+#002 90/60 coy हि 1
1a [0 nos [ए 5शागण्एशु [एपाए्ा३
(so/to)on'0L 00051 ६0+002 पर 0z #0-६00८ 700: 0 0 FO Heed AOS हर SOUTSEH 1 hl
WIN 000६ #0-६002
wessy
foud yo
uaa Jad ur quaa aod ur Je! uonsues
zy uouTaAaTy pawl deal JusurdAayay qa8aey Tea wona[duroa jo a16p uoyoues: ‘ON
Ww ‘Jo yjuow Jo aad pur yoafoig ayy Jo _एाए हि
Ssain01g [शुआएए[्‌ प्‌ जज एगूछपत एगणागाड ue 1एा1०ए७

“(ipyoy uy soadany)

jsujeZvasay) syuawararyoy pur sja8uvy, pepueury pue peoisdyg asia pafoag

(THIET ON Udeasesed ul ण passayay)
oD) TT - Xoury:

UL-O107 f0 6 “ON Hoday



Lil

£0-900

91

40-9007

. हि . हि cos (0-६0 2)
— 20 5006 8 20 5002 soveo 170६0 6] | undnuysiA eau JOA WeMePOD ULLAL | “bl
Iwezz $0-P00z TIN zw $0-700z IZZZ | 1 yuoudoteasp उग्र Tesodorg joolorg “|
00'6r #0-६002 TIN 81 0-€00Z :
BALYSeAB Ye,
= 9S EST 90-S00Z TN OL 90-007 90/६0 SOCOTE Go-vooeyreses |
UN 99801 $0-P00Z हि 0६ ६0+%002 ZTE | SLIO YORANS wRAD HOA Jo [ए४७०श "|
Bey
हि "८005 गवण[एकह 80-2007
(90/90) 99+%६ 80 2017 " तल
(0८110 2 ही 10-9002 you sseidord | sg euaaiad 0-900 #0:६0:61 (70:02 एेणएफएज |
N 9€'Sb 90-$00Z OSIM 109) |... ए95, 90-007 so/eo voc | UL LAT JO quaurdojaaap roy Aaaing | पा
-. [मु ON ‘ 0८95५ | ६ Kk हि
Pell ५0+#002 (#0/टा) OF ५0+1002 “Apnys Anjigiseay o1wowosa-ouysay, “|
70-€002 uN #0-8002
छत्रशएणश्अ्र
- 60-8002
80/01 ody - 80°L00Z adequooiad ही त्फ्त्त- (50-2002) गण
ores -| ८0-9002 ur asia 08 | 90-S00e 90/80 5080 15 | seFeg purron 1९ sansa usuen soy) “Ty
- Z6°S6 90-6007 | 7०७ papirosd jon कट 50700: 07611 | ॥ग्वड्राष्ा] 199७ एफशण Jo jusudojaac *]
UN Bb'ee $0-ro0z
UN
Yysopesg ष्परण्णा[प्त
"दर 7 हे - (छ0-900टह125 [eS pur छठ्कपू>
एग्ाण्पंज yon. श्ट्छ्ट £0°900¢ poodes jon, ण 60900: Logo |. SPPTONFT | cesndepy ye eon Jo skvauoye Ay एप्शण ou | “OT
SOL 90-$00Z T paxyy JON, 90-$002 00601 | व्‌ goamg orydertompAyy ysayy Sunonpro,
ष्ग्छ
asz 80-2007
UN 0001 20-9002 OF 90-$007 +0°¢0°6| (y0-€007)
UN 0001 90-S00z UN oF S0-700z 90/60 00६८ “uislino} aseq [.A\[ Ie एउप्पाए एवण्त 6
IN 005 ५0+#00< 0z 0-€007 “| ye joaurdojaaap wow Jatt soy स्वत के
70-£002
80-L00Z हि
. (y0-<00z)'au0g
000 50900: 1 fe 20202 #0६061 | FOAM UT ब्यगाग्यु [MT Jo वए्णातणुकक |
0051 90-5002 TIN 0s $0-700z 90/€0 1006 | सतत ३० ORvedad pue wep) 8
00's $0-700e al v0" £002 JeaFojoydrow ospéy Jo ण्गाग्गा०0. ६
0-007 हे ः
80-007 हु
. oon? 7 (p0-£002) 180%
9001 &09002 7 et 90500: 170६061 | AU था SompoRY LAAT JO quawdojaasp, .
na 200 TIN a 10 1002 90/& 000६ | 1y Yaa Jo uonvaedad pue vep) &
HIN 40-002 Jendopoydiow ospky yo uonsayog ८

11-0107 $2 6 “ON Hoday



821

pry oy 8590 SunuoWS|TuN ayy Aq powiodar se 410M pes Jo yadsor UL ssoidoud pearsAyT oseyUIOI9g ,

woHafduos YAO. Jua9 4ad QO] 10y Jad1e} एक 7०५३ Jou PIP 5०6 ६

upny 0} Kouade Suyjuawaduy ayy Aq payodar se sro1saqul pue YOM pvos Jo yoadsas ul ssasdoud [earskyd advyusoad ,
upny ण॒ Souase Sujuawaydur ayy Aq 90491 se Surpping jeurwusay yo yoadsas प्‌ ssardoud jearskyd akeyuadiag ,

UN 0082 80-L00Z UN] $eyuaoiad 80-007 900८६0६0 हि (90
IN 00+%६ट 40-9002 EN | ut paxy ion, 40-9007 80/60 00066 | 2002) शव - HIMTEL Tosresar andesy ye
IN 0086 90-5002 JIN हे 90-5002 JOA eSueSuad UL 1./01 JO woUdojanag ५
EST - 60-8007 a
6६561 20-9002 me - 80-007 sco: (so-pooz) 81a.
Ror nea 00८ |... 90-so0z Ss ast! 40-9002 70७8 | SOOCENTE | ae Cypa49 unde sory pepueny feseUTy | “61
00+%8 $0+00८ ॥ oF 90-007 ” | ur sdeaurereay puepuy Jo weurdojaaag, 9
UN LI S0-700z
£8 - 60-8007
- £0-9007 20? - 80-007 (0-€00Z) eMpUR|AL 10 ESIOA
so/1 1 ada 5616 90-5002 Ot - 20-9002 90/0 #0६062 | 0 PSO sereuueyG AaaL equIy) | oT
00च्श 00:६८ $0-P00Z UN zz 90-007 ६६010 | PAPUA, OF KqeuINYAL YNOS WO LANL
00८8 10-६002 IN 8S S0-700z ३० quaudojersp uo jesodosd yoolord 5
HIN 0z 0£007
TIN - 60-8002
UN - £0-9002 uN - 80-L00Z (ro-€007) eayseseyeyy
IN STE 90-S00Z TIN - 40-9002 90/0 POET | ण॒ Ho values rou जुल्म: Ldfey)raart
UN STLL $0-r00z uN st 90-007 09+%टा | PEPULAAISEYN UT SkeMuaTEA एफशण
IN Oz 91 p0-£00Z TIN zw S0-P00Z Jo qusudojsasp soy esodord yoaforg “p
UN el #0-६00८
- 60-8007
- 40-9002 ss - 80-007 amet ‘ ey) (bo
11852) 90-002 TIN - 40-9007 "८0-97 | £007) mdf 1४ (Jeary Tmdfry) oar | #॥#]
sont oda 00116 |... so-Fo0z uN se] 90-so0z 90/0 700: peur ese ul sKemuoeAy एफ |.
है a - # | yo yuowdopsnap uo qesodord yoaforg °
oo 00:६6 p0-£00Z TIN sp $0-700Z jor २१०७० uo | soaforg “¢
TIN 0८ +0-६002
[IN - 60-8007
HIN - &0-9002 IN - 80-L00Z (ro-o0z) efuese y
IN S991 90-S007 TIN - 40-90% s0/co PO'EO'ST | 10 एध9॥ 008 | अन्‍्य> IHHPUMIEY |
UN 00617 $0-P00z 1५ st 90-00% #918# | AOL equiy OF IqeLUNA YMOS WO LANL
IN 00°96 p0-£007 TIN sp 50+#002 Jo waudojarap uo [४०१०6 yaforg 'ट
11५ 4 170-६002
36101 - 60-8007 ol - 60-8007
9018 हि 80-L00Z SI : 80-2007

UL-O107 f0 6 “ON Hoday



6८1

Tey 3णएक wind उ5प़्ुठ SULYOOY JO UoLoNASUO,, |

AW ५
£78 - 90-500८ peyodas (90/६0 adn "८0" हि &o
. . हि jou ऋगतीठाव | *¥iuaqied S0-P007 | apuayxay | 7007 €O'ST | ~€OOZ) SSG Jo गण४ oy UE 401998 LANL | ८
0% ves 50+#002 पा छा JON +0-€00Z हे 08001 | Jo woudopsasp amyny एए jwowdojoasp a
|| ट |-६( ASTM 109, हि VCO ©
IN 90°C ०७४ A $0 skemiayem ud Ydq Jo uonvedag टू
39°97 10-9007 .
¢ (90/60 ordn sco: (po-coozysen ory
OEE | मेक dws 90-5002 | sgeraorad ur jon, | लिपरगार $0006 | “Fapuayxo) | 70028091 | Saystxa yo uopeperédn roy एड Jo
(so/€) 06% | POXEION $0-P00Z है प्रफम्पु 10५ 170-8002 so/eo 0770८ | reqs ayy ur ण०05 LAT Jo 10०ए6०.०१० त
HIN #0-६002 : हि
11001 ॥ ।
का]
(40/60) ट' ५1 0्ट्ट 80-L007 (20/60) OF | a8viuaaiad 80-L007 80६0 | L00e £09 | -900ट2)गएध्य sRUUEA -opul moLOId OF) 7८
पर हि 10-9002 TIN | UT Pex ON 40-9007 0958 | NZIL Fear ur Apmys Appiqrsea.y ज॒णणा०ग्प्त *
0085 -ouysay, puke - #90ग8_ गपुपधग]जी।'[
pueesen
N 8T'Z0T 80-L00Z IN SPE 80-L007 8050 || Looe soar (20-9007) elon odsues | न
51861 40-9002 ५9६9 40-9002 ६६0४८ | 3थ०/ह 7पशण 2427 जणज० Jo [४४०१० ०१ "| | *
andrueyy,
S688 - 60-8007 ST = 60-8007 री (90-so0z)s10Ar9seu 100g
66° 12% oo 80-4002 ss - 80-L00Z (0६0 | ?00०८६0 £0 \ypuey ye sau yequieys ur uodsuex. | “pz
Toes 0960६ <0-9005 or 08 40-9007 00288 | rem एपणण jo waudojoaoq ६
IN 0666 90-५002 LIN 4 90-00%
0८9६ - 6078007 ASL / BL - 60-3007
9L1Z - 80-L00Z aS/ol - 80-L00Z zoicg |. 9007 0°60 (90-soogioaseses weSesueg |
HIN ooze £0-900Z TIN 08 10-9002 005 [# | 7B 4940] 30०5 UF LAX] JO JUaUTdojraag 'ट |
00६8 90-S00z LIN 0z 90-S00z
-। 80100 ral - | 80-:00८ ह (50+#00ट) पश्कष्पव
६88६ 10-9002 8६ $9 40-9007 20६0 | SOOTEO LE | MXypuRA, UE stolArosax wes एप |
98°01 968 50-400८ St SI 90-S00z PL'6S | 000४७ jueYy pur setts aan uy podsursy
; 1 - HOATSoI eu [0 yuawidoyoaoq *
TX soll ६0-00: TIN 0z $0-00Z 1 Ts NAOT *]
ysopead एछोपएणुए
TIN Pre 80-2007 TIN OF 80-L007 900250 ६८ छ0-700टोफण्णए्ज
IN PlPel L0-9002 TIN OF L0-900 80/60 ही ५६६ | 2 जेरथार प्रापण्त ur seats pepuey /एश्ण्पाश
HIN Loto 90-S00 IIN 0z 90-S00z ur ४#ए%1)४/॥ ए00|७॥ Jo juoudojosag '8

11-0107 $0 6 ON Hoday



081

“dn Uaye} 177 ¥.10M peor yoRoiddy औएठ Saijal jo yiom हा |

है -+ a (Lo-900z7)eHaqnysey
IN 99% 80-L00Z IN 0६ 80-1005 zoo | 9074061 | nue quod poomueyy 1० spat wooed “6g
HIN Op L9z 40-9002 TIN OL 40-9002 00 ८8६ | tuna AemBueF omy Jo uoysnysuog डर
506 - 80-L002 8 - 80-L00¢ sey ;
sor है 9002६091 (90-s00z) vase ueqapung
res 09६८६ £0°900Z rat 08 40-9007 LO/€0 हि हि al.
UN ors 90-007 TIN 0z 90-S00z 0000 | ० SHA DIA zz Jo wonanusMeD “y | #६
(30/2) OO 9TT 008६ 80-000:2 ajquyreae 0६ 80-:002 (so
(90/01) 0:%9८ 00:0६ ८ 10-9002 | jou afequaaiad u 40-9007 $007 EO LE | ~POOT)UeqepuNS UE YeYAqIYLS JOALI ७० |
- हि z aad Uy 0s 90/60 हि ६६
(50/ट) 0५6/ 0026 90-S00z TIN 02 90-007 0009 | प्रणणण्तु एप TeIPpINGON J soMer एण्णपण्व
UN $0-F00Z : ५0+#002 um (ए७व७७) टू 10 _voronnsuo) ६
एछ0+#00टफाण 10887 5्च्व ग poonpar
303 1509 yoafoid ayy os wesFipuen ye Anat
_. Jo uorongsuo9 ayy paddosp quouruzs00¢)
(20/60) £6 1b - 80200: aiquyreae . 80°L007 sens AIS “YL ve (६ बच stm ‘S08 pauoyoues
(90/L0) 8८091 7 60-9002 | 101 afimuaauad up - £0-900Z goco | S007 £0°0E | reutuguaauy pus viper, usaruoq | "(६
(50/ट) 01% 0009८ 90-5007 TIN OL 90-S00z 10882 | creiaipuen poe (yyy) mdysoyes
IN व्श्दा 0700: १६ 0100८ “undureaueyy “1ynyesoayg, “emysourysxeq
ye Ayal OY ॥ pue samaf aday
uoojuog AeMBuen # Jo uoysnnsuog *Z
69६ 60-8002 5 60-8007
000कक paxy 80-L00Z 01 stat 20-L00Z (po-so0z) eRIeY एप४
90°98? | 107 soa 10-9002 0८ | wauoduros 40-9002 80180 | POO ZO'LT | Magu weoaeq T-A\N WO som p = AHL) "6
SLOT | oun sv0 4 90-S00z 0 Due oseyd 90-s00z os 19zz | Aemdys Joy pue ‘sou ६६ somal Suyeoy
ST PET | 50+#002 OT | एग्शु घण्कीएएु, 50+002 3441 ए०णए०त्‌ AvMBueH Jo एणा॥7]800.)']
IN 0-€007 TIN $0-€00%
Teduag 159A,
(90
$007'30'0 -SQOZ) AFeueg seFeN yewWoyH ण uoNes
ooo! 90-S00Z IN 001 90-9005 90/80 | 7 rom Surdumg wysneg woy Ayo mouyany | 06
UL IWOH) FOAL UO LAAT JO UOTSUpoUT उगु
odsy yaforg pareja yo uoneredarg “|
yseprad Jen
IN 8TLE 10-9002 TIN 08 40-9007 ८06 |. 200e EO" (90-s007) eae seven soquang: |
UN zw 90-500: TIN 0z 90-5006 09% | UL 390138 Atay 10 yuaudojaraq “|

mandi,

UL-O107 6 “ON Hoday



181

uate BunMooxe yy quadsun Suid] 249M TRL 88१01 “SY JO URYS गण puR YR] 00:02 ‘SA JO axBYs [एध७०० paseojas
Apeese pue ‘peuado aq 01 payewmur you 99७ srepuay गपू+ ०७३ arya spuTy ayy paseajas Sopy ayp ‘Yans sy 9002 euME Aq UOTTe|dur0D
JO 198k] YIM 9002 LueNuEP ५| ७० URIS Pino 0७ JLAID pue 9907 शाप 6 UO pauado aq pjnoA\ ssopuay ayy YA ५002 JaquaAON | USePE [एप Ss
Ur एथण्णप्रण pey Ysoperg [eYSeUNTTT Jo jaLUIAAGD YsnoM "9002 40०१०, UT प्रण 9958 “Sz JO >००्शण्प eon up pasvajas SOP ग्पा,

3809 oaford om Jo 1099 196 $9 01 ॥0 paxom
YOIYA “YAR ६६0४८ “SY गण pouonoues 10900 ayy suresie ‘pre-ul-lueIF adueape se 4 002 YURI 9] UO पत्रण SPSL SY Paseayas 58०0 AYL, andiuey) r

"पजण 0058 “Se 40 Spuny yuodsun yA Ya] ५२०५ २७०५ PIO 10901५12400 अण5 २५1 ‘9007
Joquiasag णप्ा# amppuadxa paysadxa ayy Jaye aaa Ysnoyl */ 005 YURI 67 VO पत्रण 00.58 “SY pasvajar A[wnFaun Soy oy payadxa
JOYLMY 5ए७ YAEL 00:58 “Se JO uNIpuada 9002 उतपृष्ष०००61 पापा] PUk 900 4OqLUBAON Aq Powtnaul usag pey YR] O'OL SA “AJaryoodsau wessy ६
SOOT UIP TE PUL HOOT YUEN GI UO ‘ALXoUUY Jo | “ON *g Ie उ7र्गण्पए oy उग्र ए%एगण >०७ पत्रण 00011 “SU एण्ए YA 000/ “SU

“sjoaford aary ००१ 7ग ५002 Ya 1६ UO TPL] TLZLp “Sy pasvoar ApreqnBaxn “Tayymy “Sopy ayy,
“URL 98५61 “SY JO AHYS OFeIS PUB YR] 619६६ “SY JO aswajar perjUad jsuIeTe ५002 yore) Aq pasipyN oq 01 ०१७ YR] 08911 “SY ‘yons
SV "5002 Fore Aq toMed soy passodord Burg ०० YP] OS LT “Se JOJ गाव pur ‘cogz Arensqag pn siolord ary oy) wo wads t99q
PLY YL] 0६66 “SY IYI Paris JUSWIIAAOH गण5 ayy ‘areys जणुद 1190 sad 0] puv SOW ग्परा Aq paseajar puny ayy Jsneyxa yssly ण DOAPe EAIYSBABYE IAL a
(SOW 01 asuodsar uy %ऋ0-६002 BuEMp pasuayor asoID 9६६ “sy JO 11० FOOT ZT-TE जमा पत्रण 18:68 “Sy ATWO व्याफ pinos enyseseqeyy
JO JuAWUIDAOD “BaYsesBYyRIA, JO} #0-६00ट Suunp soy ayy Aq paaosdde usaq pey (AT-xaUUY JO 8] ण का ‘ON 5) si9afoud oALy

“LOOT Arenaqoy UE YAR] 05६ 2५ “SAFO
qiNoUIE 3णाएुएव गण्पू७ ayy pasesjar A[IEMBaL ye 'प्रण 0061 “SY paseayos Apeayye Fuysnlpe ioye प्राण $7 ८६ “Sy ATWO esvayas oy parmnbar
SEM SOP YSNOYL 'पत्रण SZ" Lp “SY SEM areYs [BQUEd ०१ YOIYM 1० INO "/0-900८ 1एण४ ayy TuLNp quads aq ० ApayI] 4AM IAL] 0५ ट6 “SY pue ysaptig esypuy I
90-$00Z Suunp pounour sear aunppuadxa ON “LOOT पञणुद UL payaydwios ११ ० 17/[०१ ay 4ण 990Z'EO'9] UO Pashapas 30७ YB] 005] “SY

“ON

astapad ssaaxa Jo s[iejaq ayes Ts

SOI Aq spung ssaaxa Jo aseajas Jo sasua Supmoys ३४०० 5
(Fr TTI ON Ydessvied ul 0} passajay)
Ti - xoury

L017 f0 6 “ON Hoday


ZI

CN) aiquorddy 10N ब्यभ$ Waisey YWON Jo joadsar Ul अप गश5 |
yoafoad ay} Joy saseajad वए JO [णण SI pjog ण॒ yuNoWY ,
upny 0 Aouase Funnooxa / Tuowa|duy १0०00०७०७ ayerg Aq papraoid uoyeULOsU! pue GOYA Jo घए7००० ay} Wor] payldwos एफ ||

कट TOL,
(£0-900z) eandenryerg
JOALI UO TeYs Jofew OZ
ye pourra; विणाएण[ Suoy पा fT
sypuow § 10°06 VN WN : EN | ८/0६092|_ 1006 VN 8009 800फ | Jo'sougzJoucnnysuoy'y | _#
2007 IT 10 OL PPE OF Olr
ody 40'20'80 | (700८ (so-pooz)eamdeuryerg 190K
90'70'L1 | 00091 uo syueq jeya Jofeu ye samor
sypuoU 9[ 0५159 VN YN 90६01६ | 0009 VN Ov 0th Over | गैणाएणा [| Jo Woudopaaag '६ ६
9007 TOE OS'SSZ 0४09८
ody 90°20 LI ores (#0-800टो eandeuyerg
soeole | 005टा JoALI Jo yueq
SUOU BZ 06+# VN VN #0.६061 | 00८6 VN 07092 | WON Fe somipoR [एप ७7०] "Z| #ट
2007 110) 000८ 005८६
ody Lo'€0'6z | 0058 (#0-६00ट)'शगा0ंश्पाएशघ्त
soot | 00001 उक्त Jo yureq
syuow 51 00:58 VN VN #0'६5061 | 000& WN 8915६ 8916६ | पा1०8 1४ sanipouy [एपए०३,।, “| 1
wessy
(sag
on oy) 1 (sexe) faye
juadsun प्रण्पाएा३०0 uonnqijuod red Junoury Buipnjoxa) 284 %06
sus गण5 qES अए्पड 1S, aed Junowy ae P Saqels 1809 p wonoues Jo “ON,
sr qunowre Tee ut [rauoug 2q 0} AN 40} % suojoues | seat pur yosforg ayy 10 SRN | 15
roy pout quedsuy) paseajar 3एप५ [एप >एप5 गण5५ ae
° aig Aq aseajay paseaja. spun, yJequad.
Opp] 4S)

SJUIWULIAES गष्प॒द YK Juadsun SULA] spuny pue
AILYS 3015 JO AsvaTaT VOU ५5]एजएए434005) 3०७३५ Aq ares [७1००० Jo aseayar UT Apap SuTMOYs JUATTAYLIS

(PTTL ON ydeasesed uy oy passayay)

pAL> xouty

11-0107 F0 6 “ON Hoday



६81

"गण5 ग्पा Aq >प्प०१ 34 OF 9136 YoIyM a[qeAed soxey Jo 1०958 UO pred पत्रण CFO “Sy JO ०एपड गणश5 (एणगाएफ |

wan

001८

1०1,

ब्पएण्णा Ts 00५

TIN

0५८

TIN

70६061 009

0052८

(ro
-€00Z) Wis] aseq LAT IE
poue eujeg 1४ juswidojanap

JOY JOA JO} YdC के

syjuow [५ 00५

UN

00६

IN

10'६0:61 00's

00६

॥॥ 824

000६

कठ्छहदक्ण्ठठ TAT UT
0 LAT $0 Juowdayaaap

JO} Ad JO uonesedasd
pur vyep jeatZojoydiowoapAy,
Jo प्रणाग्णभाण) ६

sar

sypuOUT [५ 009

TIN

00६

TIN.

70६06] 009

00६

00८2

000६

(0-६00८"8०अ्र 7०७ UL
ध्याग्शु LMT Jo jwaudoyanap
जग Ad Jo voywsedard

pure eyep [eorsojoydowoapAy
Jo प्रणाग्णाण्) "7

501५० | ५ 00५

EIN

00६

1४

70६0 6|

00६

0002

000६

फ़0-802जफकण्ए Fears uF
SOHNE] LAI JO iowdojaaap:
JO} Ydq Jo uonesedaid

pur eyep [eodojoydiowompsy
३० प्रण7०णञा०0 1

Ae

syUoU 9] SL'st

SLE

SLE
TIN.

LOOVEL
90°80°0E

SL'8h
SUee
0091

09५9
0526
0081

LOTTO
90६09]

0५८9

00५८

(90-500टी एकरणव

छापएप्ए पा sSXemsaye A,

एप्णुणु Jo jrourdopaaap

soy Apnys Apypiqiseay जुषप्रणप009
ouysay एएए £aamns *T

#S

ysopeig Blypuy

(800८
oun Jo sy)
juadsun
Burs]
st junowe
qoryan
उणु EATER

1
uawuaron,
ares
YA एज
yemuao
quedsup]

प्रणग्रापणुप्०9
ores
ur [reoys

एप गण5

aed

aunoury

paseajar aseys jesus,

seq | junowy

ayeig Aq aseajay

paseojad spuny

(saxty
Suipnjoxa)
paseojar
aq oy
areys a18}S

(Corry
rayjo
405 %06
WF sayeys,
FIN 10 %
001) »एप51
uawuienon,
[ए1५०७

4809p
auonoues

प्रणाणाएश JO
dead pur yoaforg ayy Jo eueN

“oN

11-0107 0 6 ON Haday



14:11

(0
-¢QOZYelteIey ye ४७30 991A
2 Yoo svywuey OAL
ELL equiy ०. Iqeum Nog
50 ६01६ ६८8८ woy LAT Jo jusuidojaaap
2 [५ UN 1890६ | 900८६0६। ६८7८1 | 70६062 0096 1.1 8:14 6e cer #91$ | wo jesodosd  yoaforg ‘Z| ST
po-c00z) “ndnuyst A,
८८90८ Jeou 33111 [1ए७४ए००१)
50 ६01६ | SLZst UT 1/011०17०ण१ग॒ण्ध्ण
हा [५ 17759 | 900T EDEL &&90ट | 70'६061 6687 COLT 66° PT 11424 4oy esodosd y9afO4d “| Fl
eayysereqeyy
0६9५9 TRO],
(so-r00z)
*yeues 51 Jo yans
SYJUOU 6६ 0६99 CIE TIN - TIN | SOEOTE 0६99 TIE 009८६ WIE TWURADY-TPA JO [RATASY व cal
शाष्णग्ज्
(0-६00ट EEE Y
9007 POOF ६015५ ६019 UL व/011०10०प्र7ण#ण
ody, SO'EOTE 696६ Joy Aaams, /Apryg Aypiqiseay
a" TEN UN L9°S 70'६061 Pell (95५ ६015५ 0695५ Sywouoss-ouyraL '[ | #1
wyRyeurEyy
($0-P007) गण
90° S081 995६ 99901 FeFeg PuLAgy ye sanyssey
980 90 COLE 000५६ | 90ट001 99५8 qysuen roy odsuesy Jayea
~ TIN UN 8801 ५06006 000८ | $0६01६ 0002 bli 99५01] Orci puejuy so wuaudojarag “1 | #[1
ysopeig (eqseU
(90-007) SISAL
[eg pur eiodeys ‘esndeyy
81765 ye ROD JO SABMIAB AA एणश्‌णु
powoder | £0°0'L0 8६56६ ay) ur Agamng s1ydeasospAy_
: : 06°01 TIN : JON | 90°€0'L0 0812 0601 0186 00601] ysoug हैप10190०3 “| 01
(saris
amp गज) , (Goma ५ १0
guadsun | 07009 | (तवावाजु०७ वि sed वरणा0पए Supnjoxo) |. 1206 है
आदी Shuts गण अप गण5 aid Sey | TESTED sag 18०0 p प्रणाणाएश JO ‘ON
stqunowre ne ul qeyHous aq 01 a ean suonoues | sead pure ieforg ayy go eueN | “IS
yoy. quadsuy] pasegjas aseyg [ews >एपड 9181S uatwusen05
705 POUR ayeig Aq aseajay paseajay spun yeauag

11-0107 J0 6 “ON Hoday



५81

£0°9007 96 क | MOOT TE 96क छाएणु UT wodsuex IoaTesar
- TIN SL'ST SO-P00T 0801 | SOO TE 0801 865५ 9८६५ 17६65 | ण्यणु... 1० उपरणएावण०१०6 “| | 477
ysapeag edypely
UN [EOL
(90-s00z)epuepredy 18४ ya2I9
undiey ur Joa pepueyy
PRISeUIA, uw SAUMIAIL AL
: TIN TIN 87897 | 8007 10TT “0८9 | 90६0 ६८ 0८9 ६9६६ 1810६ #६५६६ | ?ण्शुण jo wourdopossg 8 <4
(90-S002)
pesng = एजा[ए[. HOALoSoU
indesy 18. 330... eBurfuag
: TEIN TIN OOTIE | 3007 INCE 008८ | 90६0 ६0 008/ 00 6६ 001५६ 0006६ | UF LAL JO 1प०प्पतण२७२6 “1 0c
0-PooTy TIC CRED
undiey) उ०त्त.. pepuel
/e[SeuTAL ul sdemsaye My,
हा EN 11५ gossip | 900६0 ६1 ६8६8४ | ५0६01६ ६8६8 17667 ५7677 6६66# | 00०० Jo juaudojaraq 9 61
Go-co0zyempoey
je USIOA AIA BY Yay
apyeuueyq] = #ग्धा.. equiy)
शत ए॥कप|॥॥ OF IqeWnY \yINos
SOEOTE SPI woy LMT Jo jweudolasap
= TIN 0५590: | 9002८६0 ६। POT | 70६062 00 ८8 60 [#? 9869६ 5601# | uO [ए5040616. yoafosg—*S 8
कठ्छा0टो ण्गपः्णए्पणफ़
ur प्रठ्य एगपिणए seau (901g,
undfeyioaLt pepury/e[sey
96°1S ul SABMIAIC AL
50'६01६& 9५६ एण्शूण._ 1०. yuoudoyaaap
- EN EN $9TL | _9007'E0'EI 9615 | #0501६|_ 0८91 WEL fama orci | 20} pesodord yafong “pb | ८
(r0- E007) matey re Oper)
undiey) — saary pepe
001८1 RISeU UL SABE
SOO TE 00°8L purjuy = Jo. jwowdojaaap
: TIN, TIN, 57862 | 9007'€0"ET OOTLT | 70६092 008६6 id [पट्का क#6% | uo [छ७०व०व॒ =paforg ६ oT
(800८ FES
HID | eran ONS | say 9506
juadsun uorngijuoa came red वरणा0पए Surpnjoxa) 4 %06 .
Banh aris aa areys 11g ad Samay | “eee op SAIS 4s05 p ; wopauts jo ‘ON
हि 100 8ड5एशूख JOLY euonoues | sed pur joaforg ay yo eure] 1s
st junowe uo. ul [eyHoug aq oy aD siege neues Pp rod SUIS 1९ | 15
yor el Paseajas aseys [ए्गए३:.) डएपः गण$ | vouuseadn
उणु ETE ञ्ञ ज्ञ
गश३ Aq 7६४४००त 09889| spun yesquad

11-0107 fo 6 ON Hoday



981

TN

TeyoL

TIN.

TIN

col
100

90 ८091
/#1011790

Lv6
Ik
907

Lv6
90'100६ 16
70६0 52 90%

(r0-E00z)ess1IO.
jo aes जया UW Joyas
ALA Jo qoudojaaap omny
pue juauidojarsp skemsayen
wo Add jo uoyemdorg “7

#8T

TIN.

9६91

Ove
8६1

#06062
ody,

08 ४

70६0 91 08४

br oz

96६81

Or P07

Cro-coney sonypse
Sunsixo Jo uonepessdn जग
RSS JO अण$ aI UT 30998
LAL 30०0 youdojaasq 7

x4

एच्शुजत

vN

VN

0/60
adn

cst

LOEO'9T erst

VN

095५६

095६

(६0-900द्वकृष्य
reues— >णाणु._ गरण्प्रागात
oO} onziy, उक्त पा. Apnig
Anqigisto,y orarouoag-ouyooy
pue faving aiydesfoupAy"

9%

pureden

918८1

[ए1०॥,

SyUOW ¢ |

५1881

vN

VN

TIN

LOE! SUSE

VN

६६0४८

६६08ट

दछ0-900ट%्रगुग्व
podsutzy, sae एपण॒णु

जय OT JO [wsodosg "|

<4

andjavyq,

IN

1४1०.

TIN

UN

LTOIE

90°80 10

६८9८६

90६0 ६८ ६८१८

0८8६

0६8६

00/8६

(90-s00z)sFOArTasar
aeseg rypueg eA
Jequray9 ur wodsuery उथए/७
purjuy yo juaudojaaag ६

घट

TN.

TIN.

0५062

9090 92८

00६8

90६0 60 00 ६8

os Th

OS ELE

00 4177

(90-S0OTHIOAIESAT
dedesueg ye J9ALL 9905

ए 1.01 Jo wouwdojaaag “7

&

9८६५

9८६9

छकक00दफकृर्त
एहपुएएशु्‌ ul हणृ्वऊऊा ees
1९७१ Huemy tury pur iets

(800८
oun Jo sy)
juadsun
Burs]
st junowe
qoryan
उणु ETE

1
ualuusaron,
ayes
पाक aseayar
yemuao
qwedsup]

wornqiju0a
oes
uy [reoys

एप गण5

aed

aunoury

paseajar ageys jesus,

seq | junowy

ayeig Aq aseajay

paseojas spuny

(saxty
Suipnjoxo)
paseojar
aq oy
areYys 2181S

(Sarg
rayjo
405 %06
WF says
IN 10 %
001) ores 3
uawuienon,
[ए1५००0

4809p
auonoues

प्रणाणाएश JO
qead pur joaforg ay Jo eueN

“oN

11-0107 F0 6 “ON Hoday



281

Sylow Q] 10६1

UN

080६
pete
9८

80-L00Z
£0-900E
SOT IE

08:82
6787
16
01८9

90 ८081
90'६00६

1900६
फ़्घध्ध्ट
01८9

हट ८६

[2652

10882

TOSsz Sa OF peonpar jor
1809 Jaafoud ayy 05 wesdipuen
ye Ayal Jo ‘Isti0s ay paddosp
1000 ARIS UL] 7S"TLESU
sea 1809 pauonsurs
pours waar, pue
RIPE uaanyeq weskpuen
pue (V¥MV)  indysoyeg
“andwesuey, ‘“yngesoays
creaysourysseg 1० Anal JW
| pue samof od uoojuog
ABMBULD p JO VOHINISUOD 'ट

#eE

- TIN.

TIN

छा
THLE
5962
८9 का
TOS

LOLO%O
90710
SO LNT
POSIT

eS Lord
६98६६
00992
00 [1#
00 esb

LOEOTE
90°€0°L0
50 ६01६
70६01६
POCO LT

ES LOFT
६५8६६
0099८
0011#
90 8८
00002

हफ्टट

५5५६0८

0७19टट

(0-६002) प्ञजष्ाण्थ
pue qwoquy, woamjaq
I-MN uo sou ¢ - Ayal
Aewdis QOy pue ‘sou ¢¢
samjof Suwoyy 9111 uoowog
Aeaduey Jo vononnsuog "|

1६

TwSuag 35944

00८

1ए०1,

SYIUOW पट 002

001

TEN

90'2080

00%

001

006

00°01

(90
-SQ0T) aBe.ueg seAenN 100०७
०] ए्रणाण8 Fudung ywysneg
woy Ayo Aouyany] ul WOH,
JOAL UO 1७ JO VoHONponUt
Joy yoday paloig
एगाणजत jo uoneedag ‘|

0६

ysopeig जष्प्रा1

14५1

1४३०1.

ध्पणण्प /ट 14301

VN

VN

TIN.

9080 82

ट६6

VN

09%

099

(90-007)
age Joye saquing ul aatAsas

Away jo yuourdofsaeq “T

6c

wanda],

(800८
oun Jo sy)
juadsun
Burs]
st junowe
qoryan
उणु ETE

1
ualuusaron,
ayes
पाक aseayar
yemuao
qwedsup]

wornqiju0a
oes
uy [reoys

एप गण5

aed

aunoury

paseajar ageys jesus,

ad

unowy

ayeig Aq aseajay

paseojas spuny

(saxey
Suipnjoxa)
paseojar
aq oy
एप 2181S

(Corry
Tayo
405 %06
WF says
FIN 10 %
001) »एप51
uawuienon,
[ए1५००

4809p
auonoues

प्रणाणाएश JO
qead pur joaforg ay Jo eueN

“oN

11-0107 fo 6 ON Hoday



881

LL 18 बाण,
(८0-900टोएए०पापृछत्र
pue quod poommpy ye
Ayal uoaquod wna AemBued
syyuow LT 9089 9५0६ 790 > TIN | ८0106] 90८89 0ट8६ 08 Eve 00८8६ | OM} 3०0 प्रण्परणाग्रछप्ुए0 ५ SE
(90-sogz) ease
ueqiopuns ur ब्गार्ण
~ TIN 991६ 706 0६066 18 | 90'६091 ७18 0८0 0६99६ 0000 | >>)वत टट JO YOHOMSUOD फऋ 7६
00कक (So-poozyueqrepuns
00117 | LOTO9I OC IP ur 1ण्पापापर5 JA
&0690६ 0८16 | 90900< 000५ vo ग्रणशाह pues ग्रष्पजावभर
909001 000६८ | 90081 000६2 ye ध्गप्रणभ = uoojuog wn
: TIN raat 88#7 SOTTTE 08 28 | SOEOTE 08 28 00% 00+#[#? 000% | AemBuey ट Jo UoHINsUOD '६ ६६
(so-po0z) “Wel
Gareig
ne 1 (saxty somo
quadsun | 17073१०9 | onngnsquoa sed वरणा0पए हतएा[09) | 3 %06
snk aes ~ 5 _ जअएपड गण ad Jjunowy BARA) eli W SIPS 1500 p TWOTSURS JO “ON:
ST 11S postal "le
uamiam || ESEEERIRE || op, Ireyuoyg व्पण पररणणु % | auoyoueg | svat pue qoaforg गए so atu, IS
हे 1005] हे 001) »ण51
yor, Tena paseajas sey [esuad aTEYS VIS | rouse, ws)
उग्र pound गण Aq aseajay poseajas spun yequag

11-0107 F0 6 “ON Hoday



Report No. 9 of 2010-11
Annex —V

(Referred to in paragraph No. 12.1.4.4)

Details of ‘Parking of Funds’ in the States visited alongwith interest earned / accrued on unspent balances

and its utilization

Details of Parking of Funds and interest earned

As of November 2008, an interest of Rs. 10.48 lakh had been reported to be earned
by the executing agency i.e. Executive Engineer, Nanded irrigation Division, on the
funds deposited in Joint Saving Account of ‘Executive Engineer, Nanded irrigation
Division, Nanded and Collector Nanded’. However, the agency did not intimate
about its utilisation,

MMB, which had drawn Rs. 29.83 crore against which an expenditure of Rs. 6.63
crore was stated to have been incurred, parked unspent funds in Bank on which
MMB was getting interest. However, it did not intimate the quantum of interest so
earned and the utilisation thereof.

The unspent funds were deposited in the Banks in Saving / Current / FDR Accounts
of West Bengal Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited
(WBTIDC) — executing the project (Construction of Gangway Pontoon type
floating jetties 53 nos and RCC slipway jetty — 4 nos on NW-1 between Tribeni and
Farakka) depending on the payment requirements to the contractors and pending
bills. The executing agency further pointed out that no directions on the interest
earned on unspent balances had been provided.

Si.

No. State
- : Maharashtra
2. West Bengal
3 Himachal

. Pradesh

Directorate of Transport, Himachal Pradesh, which had drawn Rs. 117.40 lakh and
released Rs. 80.88 lakh to the Nodal Officer / executing agency and Rs. 6.25 lakh
for consultancy services, parked rest of the funds in FDR on which an amount of
Rs. 1.30 lakh was reported to be accrued as interest. The Directorate could not
intimate about the utilisation of the interest.

189



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

13.1 Non-establishment of Raw Material Bank for Silk Carpets in
Jammu & Kashmir

Boece after five years of approval, the Ministry failed to ensure completion
of a project for setting up a raw material bank for silk carpets in Jammu
& Kashmir for direct distribution of silk and other raw materials to
artisans and weavers, which would have enabled them to come out of the
shadow of big yarn dealers and obtain full-time employment
opportunities. Instead of setting up a society for direct distribution of raw
materials to artisans, the implementing agency in Jammu & Kashmir
identified two private firms in Kashmir, who were already enjoying a
monopoly, and one firm in Jammu, which used the entire material for its
own use which defeated the objectives of the scheme.

In September 2003, the Ministry of Textiles approved a project, under the
Prime Minister’s Special Employment Package for Jammu & Kashmir, for
setting up of a Raw Material Bank (RMB) by a state level society to be opened
by the State Government, at a cost of Rs 2.50 crore, to provide raw material
(silk) of the required quality to artisans and weavers at their doorstep, to
enable them to produce silk carpets for the international markets at
competitive cost and quality. It was the Ministry’s expectation that the project
would enable about two lakh carpet weavers to carn better returns through
full-time employment and escape exploitation by big yarn dealers. The project
had envisaged that while undertaking distribution of good quality raw material
directly to the artisans, the society would run the RMB on commercial lines
and would generate operational funds from user artisans and weavers on
account of interest, administrative, overhead charges as also from other
sources such as banks/financial institutions. The Ministry released Rs. 1.00
crore as seed money in January 2004 to the J&K Small Industries
Development Corporation (STCOP) in anticipation of setting up the proposed
society, with the expectation that the project would be completed by January
2006 (which was later extended to January 2007.

However, the State Government did not set up any society for the RMB.
Instead, SICOP selected three private firms for distributing raw material
procured under Raw Material Bank Scheme. In Kashmir, two private firms
viz., M/S Lotus Textiles and M/S Silk Enterprises, owned by the same family
played the role of distributors. They procured the raw material from SICOP
and further supplied the material down to other producers/manufacturers
associated with them, who in turn, passed it on to various artisans/weavers for

190


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

getting the carpets manufactured. In Jammu region, the entire raw material
was supplied by SICOP to a single party, viz. Shalimar Carpet Industries, who
used the material for captive consumption in manufacture of carpets in their
own factory. An evaluation study commissioned at the instance of the
Ministry in March 2006 had brought out these facts. The evaluation study
report had also pointed out three major deficiencies in the operation of the
scheme viz. (i) over dependence on the three private parties for distribution of
raw material (ii) lack of awareness among user groups, and (iii) lack of direct
benefits to the artisans. Further, utilisation certificates, audited statement of
expenditure, details of sales, procurement and accountal of raw material,
generation of funds for the project, and identity of the artisans, etc., who
received the raw material could not be obtained from 51007 by the Ministry
against the central grant of Rs. I crore, as of April 2008. The Ministry did not
release the remaining installment of Rs 1.50 crore to SICOP. The Office of
the Development Commissioner, in response to an audit enquiry, stated
(October 2008/ January 2009) that disturbed conditions in the Kashmir Valley
had delayed the implementation of the scheme and that they had asked SICOP
to take appropriate corrective action. The reply of the office of the
Development Commissioner is not acceptable as the State Government did not
set up the society for Raw Material Bank, as envisaged under the scheme. No
action was taken to address the deficiencies pointed out in the evaluation study
report. The scheme was being run by the monopolistic dealers from whose
clutches the scheme had intended to extricate the poor weavers and artisans.
Further, the argument of disturbed conditions in the Kashmir valley cannot be
applied to misutilisation in the Jammu region.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 2008; their response was
awaited as of March 2010.

13.2. Deficiencies in setting up Common Facility Centres (CFCs) under
Babasaheb Ambedkar Hastashilp Vikas Yojana (BAHVY)

There were serious deficiencies in setting up CFCs under the BAHVY.
Out of the 95 CFCs sanctioned between 2001-02 and 2007-08, 61CFCs
were yet to be completed despite release of Rs. 21.15 crore, and Rs. 8.18
crore lying unspent was yet to be refunded. There were also serious
systemic deficiencies in the processes for control and monitoring of
working of these CFCs.

13.2.1 Introduction

The Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), under the Ministry of
Textiles, introduced the Babasaheb Ambedkar Hastashilp Vikas Yojana

191


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(BAHVY) in 2001-02 for integrated development of potential clusters of
handicraft artisans, with the objectives of creating centres of excellence with
forward and backward linkages; upgrading artisans’ skills, and ensuring self-
sustained and self-managed clusters of artisans. The package of support for
artisan clusters included social, technological, marketing, and financial and
infrastructure interventions.

One of the components of BAHVY was the creation of Common Facility
Centres (CFCs) at the cluster level to enhance production quality and quantity
by using modern tools, equipment and techniques and increase economies of
scale. Each CFC was estimated to cost Rs. 60 lakh, to be fully funded by the
Government of India. The funds were to be released in three installments,
namely 50 per cent in advance as the first installment, 40 per cent as the
second installment on receipt of audited expenditure statement for the first
installment and satisfactory progress report, and the remaining 10 per cent to
be released as reimbursement on receipt of audited expenditure statement for
the entire project alongwith performance and inspection report, duly vetted by
the State agency, within one month of setting up of the CFC.

The BAHVY projects were required to be implemented through reputed
NGOs, Apex Co-operative Societies, DRDAs, Central/ State Handloom and
Handicraft Development Corporations and other Government agencies.

The Regional Screening Committee (RSC) headed by the concerned Regional
Director of DC (H) was to scrutinize and forward only viable projects to the
DC (H) for clearance, after reckoning their viability, and release of funds.

The progress of implementation of the Scheme and its components was to be
monitored periodically by designated Committees at the national, state, and
district levels.

13.2.2 Funds flow fer setting up of CFC and physical progress.

Between 2001-02 and 2007-08, the DC (H) sanctioned setting up of 95 CFCs
under BAHVY ata cost of Rs. 35.27 crore as under:

192


No. of

Table 1 : Status of Projects as of October 2009

Status of sanctioned projects ending October 2009

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(Rs, in crore)

Meet Amount No. of Noor Proiects
Year of pte sanctione फ्फा Ane closed
Sanction ME |G for the cami | 0०णाफॉशर..._वत्फबछा
balance a y
the projects | Amount | Amount | Amount ee ari a CFCs CFCs mare
mo lying with recas
year released utilized | refunded | iin
implemen
agencies
2001-02 17 8.44 4.38 3.88 0.21 0.29 5 IL 1 recast
2002-03. Nil : - : - - : : .
2003-04 27 154 5.38 3.60 - 1.79 14 13 -
2004-05 17 6.45 431 2.26 0.50 1.55 7 7 3
2005-06 10 2.49 152 0.88 - 0.63 2 8 :
2006-07 4 1.65 1.01 0.37 - 0.64 1 3 -
2007-08 20 8.70 4.55 1.27 - 3.28 1 19 -
Total 95 35.27 21.15 12.26 0.71 8.18 30 61 4
13.2.3 Audit findings

13.2.3.1 Status of CFC projects.

The status of 95 CFC projects as of October 2009 was as under:-

0)

Completed CFCs

Thirty CFCs involving sanctioned assistance of Rs. 7.83 crore were reported
as completed. Out of Rs. 7.41 crore released, Rs. 7.35 crore was reported as
utilized and Rs. 0.06 crore was refunded. During test check, it was observed
that the DC (H) had not obtained the details of artisans trained and the benefits
derived by the artisans/clusters in any of the 30 completed CFCs. The DC (H)
prematurely treated those CFCs as completed, merely on the basis of release
of last installment, without ensuring that the projects were physically
completed and were functional. Further, it was seen during audit that:

For two projects, sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 0.75 crore, the first
installment of Rs. 0.37 crore was released. The projects were shown as

completed after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 0.31 crore. Evidently,

the project requirements were either inflated, or the projects were not

fully completed.

193


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

न In respect of three CFCs being implemented by the Export Promotion
Council for Handicrafts (EPCH), New Delhi; Artisan Self Help
Society, Tamil Nadu; and Nagaland Handloom and Handicrafts,
Nagaland, for which Rs. 1.84 crore were sanctioned and released and
reported as fully utilized, the last installment of Rs. 0.34 crore was
released without obtaining the completion certificate and final
performance-cum-achievement report from the Regional Office of the
DC (H). In response, the DC (H) stated that the balance amount had
been released after verifying all documents and obtaining
clarifications. However, necessary documents in support of this claim
were not provided to Audit.

(ii) CFCs not taken up

Three CFCs project were not taken up, and Rs. 0.50 crore was refunded by
the two Implementing Agencies after lapse of more than three years from the
date of release; refund from one closed CFC amounting to Rs. 0.05 crore was
awaited.

(iii) Recast CFC

One CFC project sanctioned at a cost 1.79 crore had been recast with a revised
budget of Rs. 0.72 crore, suggesting over estimation of the cost of the project.
(iv) Incomplete CFCs

For 61 CFCs, sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 24.10 crore, an amount of Rs. 13.05
crore was released, Rs. 4.87 crore was reported as utilized, and Rs. 0.04 crore
refunded. The balance of Rs. 8.14 crore was lying unspent with various
Implementing Agencies. These CFCs remained incomplete even after lapse of
periods ranging from one year to seven years against the sanctioned time
schedule of three to six months required for completion of the CFCs. The
setting up of the CFCs comprised mainly construction of buildings, water
tanks for the sites and purchase of tools, machines and equipment, etc. While
the completion period of three to six months prescribed under the sanction
order appeared too restrictive, the delays ranging from one to seven years were
excessive. Further, test- check revealed that:

. For the 42 incomplete CFCs, Rs. 7.75 crore was released. The
NGOs/Cooperative Societies executing the projects had not come up
for grant of subsequent installments after obtaining the first
installment. In nine CFCs, the DC (H) had released funds between
Rs. 0.05 crore and Rs. 0.10 crore, against the sanctioned amount
ranging between Rs. 0.15 crore and Rs. 0.53 crore. The funds released
were, prima facie, too insignificant to complete any project. The DC

194


(vy)

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(H) had also not obtained the status of utilization of released funds and
physical progress reports and audited accounts in respect of these
CFCs.

The Implementing Agencies of 13 CFCs, to whom Rs. 3.49 crore was
released through first and second installments, did not request for the
third installment alongwith the completion — report/audited
accounts/performance cum achievement reports, indicating failure of
DC (BH) to follow up/monitor the project.

In the remaining six CFCs, to whom Rs 1.77 crore was released, three
CFCs were not released further grant after release of first installments
and three CFCs were not provided with grant after receipt of second
installments, despite obtaining the requisite reports, indicating
lackadaisical approach and arbitrariness in release of grants by the
DC(A).

Other Audit findings

In three CFCs (Chhattisgarh Khadi Gramdyog Board, Raipur; Chamba,
Chattisgarh; Khadi Gramdyog Board, Jagadalpur, Chattisgarh and M/s
Khadi and Gramdyog Board, Ektal, Chhatisgarh), the unspent amount
of Rs 0.10 crore was irregularly transferred/diverted to another
institution (Chhattisgarh Hastshilp Vikas Board) by these three
Implementing Agencies, without the formal approval of DC (H).

In six CFC projects, Rs. 0.32 crore (for two CFCs), Rs. 0.34 crore,
Rs. 0.22 crore ,Rs. 0.22 crore and Rs. 0.23 crore were released to four
Delhi based NGOs for setting up of CFCs in Mahakalpar and Lunukua
(Orissa), Jaisalmer (Rajasthan), Kulu (H.P.), Konkan (Maharashtra)
and Kotwa (U.P.), instead of to the local Societies in the concerned
CFC area, thereby rendering monitoring of the sanctioned CFCs by
these NGOs difficult.

A CFC at Amingaon, Kamrup district was sanctioned in January 2005
at a cost of Rs. 41.80 lakh, to be set up by July 2005. The first
installment of Rs. 20.90 lakh was released to the implementing agency,
Assam Silk Development Centre, Guwahati, Assam. Audit scrutiny
revealed that despite the Regional Director (NER) reporting in October
2006 that there was no space for installation of the machinery and no
activity had been undertaken by the NGO, no action for blacklisting of
the NGO and/or legal action was taken by DC (H) for recovery of the
outstanding amount of Rs. 20.90 lakh

195


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

न Incidentally, the same NGO had been sanctioned Rs. 15.43 lakh
(March 2004 and January 2005) for various activities viz. survey, skill
up gradation training, design and craft bazaar, against which Rs. 9.14
lakh had been released. Only one activity i.e. survey had been
reportedly completed at a cost of Rs. 2.85 lakh, and the balance of
Rs. 6.29 lakh had not been refunded.

. In November 2007, the Superintendent of Police, Bureau of
Investigation (Economic Offences), Assam, had requested the
Regional Director (NER) to stop further payments to the NGO, as it
was found issuing false bills/ vouchers/ documents in respect of a grant
of Rs. 15.02 lakh for organizing craft bazaars/ seminars in another
case.

. In response, the DC (H) in May 2009 stated that the organization had
not refunded the amount. FIR was lodged during March 2009 with the
Hatigaon Police Station, Guwahati. Further, Regional Director (NER)
was requested to file a civil suit against the organization. However the
recovery had not been made.

. A CFC at Karimganj District was sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 49.80 lakh
in 2003-04. Rs. 24.90 lakh was released during 2003-05 to the North
Eastern Federation of International Trade, Shillong, Meghalaya, which
was reportedly fully utilized. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that
the development of clusters of artisans/ craftsmen was not included as
one of the objectives, in the Memorandum of Association of the NGO.
Further, the NGO submitted the audit report and utilization certificate
directly to the DC (H), without inspection by the Regional Office.
While the DC (H) had directed the Regional Office in Guwahati to
submit the relevant documents after inspection, these were awaited as
of October 2008. The expenditure of Rs. 24.90 lakh was, thus,
doubtful.

In response, the DC (H) in May 2009 stated that the machinery had
been procured. The organization had expressed its inability to run the
CFC and suggested transferring the CFC to Cane and Bamboo
Technology Centre, Guwahati to manage its day-to-day functioning.
The request of the organization was being examined by the DC (H),
failing which recovery proceedings would be initiated. Further
progress was still awaited (October 2009)

Details of the above are indicated in Annex-I.

196


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

13.2.3.2 Monitoring of the Implementation of the Scheme

Financial management and control over the execution of the Scheme was
inadequate and lax, as brought out above. The contemplated periodical
monitoring through inspection was not carried out. Test- check revealed that in
35 incomplete CFCs, field inspections had not been conducted and in seven
incomplete CFCs, only one or two inspections were conducted, although the
inspections were required to be invariably conducted before release of further
installments. Further, in three incomplete CFCs, even when the inspection
reports indicated that these were not working, funds were still released to the
implementing agencies. The contemplated National and State Level
Committees for monitoring of CFC projects had not been constituted. In
response, the DC(H) stated that monitoring was done by the regional and field
offices and overall monitoring at the Headquarters. However, details of the
monitoring purportedly being conducted were not provided to audit.

The main thrust of the DC (H) was preponderantly on releases of funds under
the Scheme rather than on ensuring achievement of the end objectives of
qualitative production and enhancing the technical skill of the artisans to
generate adequate income to make them self sufficient and outcomes from the
investments being made under the Scheme. The DC (H) continued to release
funds for setting up of new CFCs without reckoning the experience gained
from earlier sanctioned CFC projects.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in April 2009; their reply was awaited
as of March 2010.

13.3. Non-recovery of Grant under Scheme for Setting up of Handloom
Development Centres (HDCs) and Quality Dyeing Units (QDUs)

जे Scheme for setting up 3000 HDCs and 500 QDUs was initiated in
1993-94 and Rs. 95.70 crore was released to 20 States up to 2001-02.
The Scheme was discontinued in 1997-98, but committed liabilities up
to 2001-02 were accepted. No information regarding Year-wise/State-
wise physical progress/outcomes of the scheme was on record. The
office had received UCs of Rs. 73.74 crore and recovered Rs. 10.75
crore and the balance of Rs. 11.22 crore, besides penal interest of
Rs. 13.39 crore, was to be recovered (October 2009). Audit scrutiny
also revealed numerous deficiencies and defects in UCs, affecting their
reliability for validation of expenditure incurred out of central
releases.

13.3.1 Introduction

The Development Commissioner (Handlooms) (DC (H)), implemented a
Central Sector Plan Scheme from 1993-94 for setting up 3000 Handloom

197


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Development Centres (HDCs) and 500 Quality Dyeing Units (QDUs) in areas
identified by the concerned State Governments through Primary Handloom
Weavers Co-operative Societies having good track record of performance and
infrastructure in terms of building, administrative and technical staff, transport
facilities, ete. Each HDC was to cover about 250 looms and 1000 weavers,
and each QDU was required to cater to the dyeing requirements of about 1000
weavers. The scheme was intended to ensure timely supply of yarn of the
requisite quality and counts, essential inputs such as dyes, chemicals to the
weavers covered by the HDCs, marketing of the cloth produced by the
members of HDCs in the domestic and export markets and adequate provision
of working capital to sustain long term production, system for design
development and their dissemination to primary societies and weavers,
facilities for quality dyeing and training in improved dyeing practices, etc.

The scheme also contemplated providing of training to the weavers in
improved/latest dyeing practices and also new designs and additional
employment to the handloom weavers, etc.

The Scheme envisaged central assistance of Rs. 27 lakh per HDC (Rs. 17 lakh
as grant and Rs. 10 lakh as loan from NABARD/ banks). Each QDU was
entitled to central assistance of Rs. 7.83 lakh (Rs. 4.265 lakh as grant, and
Rs. 3.565 lakh as loan). The total cost of 3000 HDCs and 500 QDUs was
estimated at Rs. 849.15 crore, with Rs. 321.33 crore through grant and
Rs. 527.82 crore as loan. The State Governments were to provide the
guarantee for availing credit from NABARD and make budget provisions for
the interest subsidy. The DC (H) was to accord approval to the projects on the
basis of information provided by the State Government.

The State Government and the DC (H) were responsible for effective
periodical monitoring of performances of HDCs/QDUs by setting up of a High
Level Monitoring Committee.

The Scheme was implemented originally up to 1996-97 and was extended to
1997-98; thereafter the Scheme was discontinued but the committed liabilities
were entertained up to 2001-02. Between 1993-94 and 1997-98, 1848 HDCs
and 391 QDUs were sanctioned in 20 States/ one UT and grants of Rs. 95.70
crore were released during 1993-94 to 2001-02. State wise/year-wise break up
is given in Annex-II.

198


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

13.3.2 Audit findings

Audit findings are based on the perusal of the records relating to the Scheme
and information furnished by DC (H) as well as test check of records in
Assam, Tamil Nadu, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. The main findings are detailed
as under:

. As per the records in the O/o the DC(H) and information furnished to
audit (January 2007), none of the State Governments had completed any
project under the Scheme. The physical targets of completion of the
projects were not monitored as of October 2009. However, test- check of
records at the field disclosed that in Tamil Nadu out of 324 HDCs
sanctioned, 218 HDCs were reported functioning and 106 were non-
functioning and were under liquidation as of March 2010. Out of 36
QDUs sanctioned in Tamil Nadu, 10 QDUs were functional and 26 QDUs
were non- functioning mainly due to non- grant of permission by Pollution
Control Board. In Orissa out of 83 HDCs sanctioned, 65 were functioning
and 18 were under liquidation as of January 2010. This evidently
suggests that sanctions were granted without taking adequate care and
verification. This also reveals that there was lack of information in the
office about the actual implementation of projects.

. As revealed from the records of the DC(H), the Scheme did not
function satisfactorily and most of the sanctioned projects were left
incomplete by the implementing agencies reportedly due to in-
adequate follow up and interest taken by the State Government for
acconiplishment of the fixed targets, dispersal of projects in far flung
areas, inadequate flow of credits through cooperative banks and most
of the Primary Weavers Cooperative Societies having less loom-age
than prescribed under the Scheme.

न Due to the failure of the State Governments to implement the projects
sanctioned under the Scheme, the DC (H) directed the State
Government (January 2003) to refund the entire Central assistance
released, along with penal interest thereon. However, out of the total
release of Rs. 95.70 crore, only Rs. 10.75 crore was recovered (Annex-
गा), Of this, Rs. 8.53 crore pertaining to Manipur was recovered
through adjustment at source by the Ministry of Finance against the
Normal Central Assistance due to Manipur (August 1999 installment).
Adequate attempts were evidently not made to ensure refund of the
central assistance in the remaining cases. Out of the balance amount of

199


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Rs. 84.95 crore, Utilization Certificates (UCs) for Rs. 73.74 crore were
submitted by the States by 2001-02, leaving Rs. 11.22 crore unutilized
by them (Annex-ITI). The DC (H) intimated (October 2009) that penal
interest of Rs. 13.39 crore was also recoverable for the period from 1
January 2002 to 31 March 2008 from the States. A scrutiny of UCs
amounting to Rs. 73.74 crore submitted by the States, revealed the
following:

>» UCs amounting to Rs, 8.02 crore from Tamil Nadu were omnibus
UCs, which did not give details of how and where the amount was
actually utilized. Even the names of Weavers’ Cooperative
Societies, which were assisted by the grants, were not mentioned.
Only the number of such Societies was given.

v

UCs for Rs. 4.92 crore from the States of Assam, Tamil Nadu,
Orissa and Uttar Pradesh were received beyond the cut off year
(2001-2002).

> UCs for Rs. 34.80 crore from Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Nagaland, Orissa and West Bengal were un-dated.

> UCs amounting to Rs. 0.10 crore from Tripura were not even
signed in token of correctness of the same.

> It was noticed in audit that the DC (H) continued to release funds
without ensuring receipt of proper UCs/expenditure account duly
certified and audited. The main thrust was on release of funds
rather than ensuring proper utilization thereof. There was no
mechanism evolved for watching the proper utilization of funds
released.

e In Assam against Rs. 6.74 crore released by the Government of India
(GOD, the State Government released Rs. 5.29 crore to the Director
Handloom and Textiles, Assam, and the balance of Rs. 1.45 crore had
been retained for more than 12 years. Though the Scheme was credit
linked (Loan: Rs. 17 lakh and Grant: Rs. 10 lakh), surprisingly, none of
the selected implementing agencies had taken loans from banks, The
absence of loan component may have contributed to projects becoming
unviable and consequently not getting completed. Details of raw
materials procured by the HDCs for supply to weavers and cloth

200


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

produced therefrom were required to be shown to the Directorate
office, Assam but the same had not yet been collected.

. In Orissa, Assistant Director of Textiles, Berhampur was not in a
position to utilize or refund the outstanding amount of Rs. 2.31 lakh as
the said amount had been debited by the Berhampur Central Co-
operative Bank from the account of the Weavers’ Co-operative Society
(Kanteikoli) in adjustment of another cash credit (loan) outstanding
against the Society.

13.3.3 Monitoring of the scheme

In Audit’s view, despite release of Rs. 95.70 crore for setting up 3000 HDCs
and 500 QDUs, no watch had been exercised to ensure that the funds were
utilized for completion of the HDCs/QDUs. The actual physical progress of
completion had not been monitored. The recovery of Gol’s grants along with
interest thereon had not been enforced. In April 2002 and January 2003, the
DC(H) had directed all the State Governments to refund the entire amount of
Central assistance with interest, in all such cases where the sanctioned projects
had not been completed by March 2002, but had failed to follow up on this
directive. Logically, therefore no UCs should have been accepted in such
cases, where the HDCs/QDUs had not been completed by March 2002.

The DC (A), referred (October 2008) the cases to all the State Governments
directing them to furnish copies of UCs, duly attested, by the end of October
2008, failing which the entire amount of Central share would be recovered
from the allocation made by the Planning Commission with the concurrence of
the Ministry of Finance. The DC (H) again reminded (September, 2009) the
State Governments for refunding the assistance by 30 October 2009, instead of
effecting recovery from the defaulting States from the annual plan allocations
(as indicated earlier).

13.3.4 Evaluation of the Impact of implementation of Scheme

Evaluation of the impact of implementation of the scheme was got conducted
(November 2000) only in one State (Uttar Pradesh) out of 20 States through
Development Consultancy Services (DCS), New Delhi. The DCS had
observed that the marketing of products continued to be a problem and the
weavers were facing a lot of problems because of pendency of payment by the
state owned handloom agencies. No evaluation in other States was got
conducted,



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The DC (H) stated (October 2009) that no records relating to monitoring were
available and traceable due to time gap, and it also did not have the
wherewithal to implement and monitor the project(s) at regional level. The
extent of monitoring and technical guidance, assessment of the performance of
the sanctioned project, details of raw materials procured by the HDCs for
supply to weavers and the cloth produced there from, details of handloom
weavers assisted was also not ascertainable. The lack of adequate follow up
and interest taken by the State Government, besides inadequate flow of credit
through cooperative bank, resulted in non accomplishment of the targets under
the scheme.

The shortcomings/weaknesses as pointed out above evidently suggest that the
scheme was implemented in a lackadaisical manner and the main thrust of the
implementation of the Scheme was found to be oriented towards incurring of
expenditure/releases of funds, rather than on outcomes/results from the
investments being made. Thus, Rs. 11.22 crore released by the DC (H) to the
State Governments along with penal interest of Rs. 13.39 crore, still remained
blocked with them since 1993-94,

The matter was referred to the Ministry in September 2008; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

13.4 Non-receipt of Utilisation Certificates

व of adequate and effective monitoring by the Development
Commissioner (Handicrafts) resulted in non-receipt of 1355 Utilisation
Certificates (UCs) for Rs. 70.44 crore of grant-in-aid released upto 2006-
07 to 808 organizations, which were to be submitted before March 2008.
Further, in contravention of the General Financial Rules, the DC (H)
released more grants to 161 organisations, despite non-receipt of UCs for
the previous years, resulting in accumulation of outstanding UCs of
Rs. 46.23 crore.

The General Financial Rules! stipulate that for any non-recurring grant
released to an institution or organization, a Utilization Certificate (UC) is
required to be obtained, to ensure that the grant was utilized only for the
purpose for which it was sanctioned. The UC is to be submitted within 12
months of the closure of the financial year; receipt of the UC is to be watched
by the Ministry/ Department, and in case of non-receipt of UCs, the Ministry/
Department can blacklist the institution or organization for sanction of future
grants. Further, the Ministry/ Department is required to release sanctioned

Rule 212(1) of GFR, 2005 and Rule 151(1) of GFR, 1963

202


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

amounts for future financial years only after receipt of provisional UCs for the
previous financial year.

Audit scrutiny of the records of the Development Commissioner (Handicrafts)
(D.C (H)) and analysis of electronic data supplied by his office revealed that
1355 UCs for Rs. 70.44 crore of grant-in-aid released before 2006-07 were
pending. The Utilization Certificate for these grants were required to be
submitted before March 2008. An age wise analysis of pendency of UCs is
given below:

Table-2
Pendeney Period | No. of Pending UCs | G™#ntin-aid involved
(Rupees in crore
20 ७ 29 years 24 0.1
10 to 19 years 125 3.86
5 to 9 years 17 3.90
210 4 years 567 32.22
Less than 2 years 522 29.75
Total 1355 70.44

Further, detailed analysis of the outstanding UCs revealed that out of the total
outstanding UCs amounting to Rs. 70.44 crore, 25 UCs amounting to
Rs. 11.55 crore for the years 2004-05 to 2006-07 pertained to just three
organizations—-the Indian Institute of Carpet Technology, Bhadoi; J&K
Handicrafts (S&E) Corporation Ltd., Srinagar; and National Building
Construction Corporation Ltd., New Delhi.

A classification of outstanding UCs by the nature of the grantee organizations
where the amount was Rs. 20 lakh or more reveals the following position:

Table-3
a of
Nature of organization No. of organisations Outstanding UCs
Rupees in crore)
Government organizations 51 38.18
NGOs 16 4.75
Unidentified 3 1.03

Further, audit scrutiny revealed that despite non-receipt of UCs for previous
financial years, the D.C (H) released further grants to 161 organisations/
institutions for succeeding years. This resulted in accumulation of outstanding
UCs amounting to Rs. 46.23 crore, of which Rs. 35.35 crore pertained to 45
Government organizations and Rs. 10.88 crore pertained to 116 NGOs.

The matter regarding non-receipt of UCs was pointed out in earlier Annual
audits for 2004-05 and 2005-06. The D.C (H), therefore, directed (October



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

2006) its Regional Directors to take suitable action on this issue. However, no
concrete steps were taken, resulting in the amount of outstanding UCs
increasing steeply from Rs. 26.33 crore in June 2005 to Rs. 70.44 crore in July
2008. On being pointed out yet again in audit, the D.C (H) directed the
Regional Directors in June 2008 to take immediate action and furnish a
consolidated report by July 2008, failing which no further grants would be
released to the organizations. As a result of repeated pursuance by Audit, the
outstanding UCs for the period 1978-2007 got reduced to Rs. 38.30 crore.
However, as on September 2009, 1527 UCs for the period upto 2007-08,
(which were due for submission before March 2009) amounting to Rs. 72.25
crore were pending as per records of the Development Commissioner
(Handicrafts).

A test check of outstanding UCs was also got conducted by Audit in
December 2009 in the state of Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi and
Assam. The State- wise findings are detailed below:-

Jammu & Kashmir

In a test check of sanctions issued for Rs. 8.02 crore during 2003-08, it was
noticed that:

e UCs for an amount of Rs. 2.17 crore (Rs. 0.15 crore for the year 2005-
06, Rs. 2.02 crore for 2007-08) had not been submitted till October
2009, although the expenditure had been incurred. Besides, Audit also
noticed diversion of funds of Rs. 0.35 crore, besides extra/irregular/
unfruitful expenditure of Rs. 0.23 crore by two grantees.

e Rs. 1.25 crore was lying unspent with the grantee for releases made
during 2007-08, which revealed that the funds were released in excess
of requirements.

Uttar Pradesh

In a test check of sanctions issued for Rs. 7.52 crore from 2005-06 to 2007-08,
out of which Rs. 1.34 crore pertained to the period upto 2006-07, it was
noticed that:

e An amount of Rs. 2.02 crore (Rs. 1.83 crore for 2007-08 and Rs. 0.19
crore for 2006-07) was lying unspent and it was reported in UCs that
the same would be adjusted towards grant in aid payable during the
next year. It was indicative of the fact that funds were released in
excess of requirements,

204


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

e UCs for Rs. 4.00 crore pertaining to 2007-08 had not been submitted
by the Moradabad Development Authority and the authority stated
that the UCs would be submitted after completion of the work. This
was in contravention of GFRs, as the same was to be submitted within
12 months of release and balances refunded.

Delhi

For grants released of Rs. 0.85 crore 10 Delhi Tourism and Transport
Development Corporation, New Delhi for the years 2005-06 to 2007-08, it
was seen that the agency had already submitted UCs for grants of Rs. 0.70
crore and for the balance of Rs. 0.15 crore (June 2005), records were not
available with the agency.

Assam

A test check of sanction issued for Rs. 4.70 crore from 2005-06 to 2007-08,
out of which Rs. 1.45 crore pertained to the period upto 2006-07, it was
noticed that:

*® UCs for Rs. 1.41 crore (Rs. 0.10 crore for 2007-08 and Rs. 1.31 crore
prior to 2007-08) had been submitted, whereas UCs for Rs. 0.62 crore
(Rs. 0.02 crore for 2006-07 and Rs. 0.60 crore for 2007-08) had not
been submitted.

® Unspent balances worth Rs. 0.37 crore were lying with the grantees
(Rs. 0.04 crore; 2005-06; Rs. 0.02 crore; 2006-07; Rs. 0.31 crore;
2007-08) who had also refunded an amount of Rs. 0.22 crore for
sanctions issued in 2007-08. Evidently, excess release of funds was
made without assessing requirement.

e No grant had been stated to be received by the agency in respect of
sanctions issued for Rs. 0.08 crore in 2007-08,

e As per the records of agencies, UCs were reported for an amount of
Rs. 0.25 crore, out of which Rs. 0.24 crore pertained to 2007-08.
However, in the absence of forwarding letters, their actual receipt by
the sanctioning authority could not be confirmed.

© UCs for Rs. 29 lakh were being exhibited as outstanding by DC(H).
However, audit examination of agency records revealed that UCs for
the same had already been submitted; this also included UC for an
amount of Rs. 22.36 lakh in respect of sanctions issued to Desh
Bandhu Club, Cachar in 2004-05 for which the UC was submitted in
September 2006.

205


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

The above field scrutiny revealed that the records were not updated on an
ongoing basis in respect of UCs submitted, so as to ascertain the correct status
of outstanding UCs.

In response to an audit enquiry, the D.C (H) stated in October 2008 and again
in December 2008 that the regional offices had earlier been instructed to
initiate criminal/ civil cases against the defaulting organizations, and that the
action regarding blacklisting of organizations / units for future grants would be
undertaken after receipt of reports from the original offices. Audit, however,
observed that such instructions were issued by D.C (H) in October 2006,
followed by instructions issued by Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure forwarded in December 2007 and June 2008. The fact remains
that despite issue of these instructions, utilisaton certificates for Rs. 72.25
crore for the funds released upto 2007-08, which were required to be furnished
before March 2009 were still pending.

This was also indicative of the fact that either the DC(H) was not having
complete / confirmed data about the correctness of the outstanding UCs, or it
was not able to ensure compliance with the requirements as per the GFRs and
other instructions after the funds were released. It was also noticed that there
was lack of monitoring and control mechanism to ensure that the grants
released were utilized fully and correctly by the grantee units / organizations
for achievement of financial and physical targets. Cases of excess releases,
non receipt of grant shown as released and absence of necessary action in
respect of defaulters were also noticed. In many cases, the UCs had been
furnished by the grantees to whom the money was released but the amounts
still continue to be outstanding as per the records of D.C (H).

Recommendations:

The matter may be reviewed departmentally and a detailed cross verification
carried out to arrive at the exact position of the releases made for which
outstanding UCs were not received and action taken to recover the outstanding
dues. In the absence of timely receipt of UCs, there was a strong possibility of
misuse of these Gol grants. Further, with the passage of time, the chances of
tecovery or adjustment of the grant-in-aid may become remote.

It also needs to be ensured that DC(H) and its regional offices should take
immediate action on:

e Ascertaining the exact status of defaulting organization / NGOs and to
ensure that none of the grantee units were closed down. For such units,

206


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

the requisite action for filing of criminal / civil cases needed to be
taken, besides fixing responsibility for release of funds to such units.

« The system regarding sanction, release and utilization of funds need to
be rationalized so that the funds are spent as per rules and in time and
balances got refunded.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in September 2008; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

13.5. Non-establishment of National Centres for Design and Product
Development at Delhi and Moradabad

A project for setting up two National Centres for Design and Product
Development at Delhi and Moradabad at an originally estimated cost of
Rs. 5.37 crore was nowhere near commencement even after 10 years of
approval. Despite even the land for the centres not having been allotted,
Rs. 2.45 crore had been utilized at temporary locations, without ensuring
delivery of the intended benefits to artisans and industry, while Rs. 1.55
crore of Gol funds were lying unspent.

In October 1998, the Ministry of Textiles approved a proposal for setting up
two National Centres for Design and Product Development (NCDPD) at Delhi
and Moradabad at a cost of Rs. 5.37 crore. The objective of establishment of
these centres was to assist in development of new designs, improve the quality
of handicraft items produced by artisans, enrich and orient the industry to the
finer aspects of design, and ensure acceptability of exportable handicrafts in
international markets. While the Moradabad centre would essentially be
servicing craftsmen, manufacturers and exporters of Moradabad and adjoining
areas, the Delhi centre was to work like a “hub-and-spoke” arrangement by
constantly disseminating design related inputs all over the country.

During the period from March 1999 to March 2006, an amount of Rs 4.00
crore, out of a sanctioned amount of Rs. 5.37 crore, was released as grant-in-
aid to NCDPD, which had been registered in November 1999.

Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that the two centres at Delhi and Moradabad
had been set up on a temporary basis on the premises of other offices of the
Ministry - RDTDC’, Okhla and MHSC’, Moradabad - in February 2001 and
July 2000 respectively, but had not yet been established on a permanent basis.
No progress towards allotment of land, let alone construction of buildings, was
made till January 2005, when the Ministry approached the Delhi Development

2 RDTDC: Regional Design and Technical Development Centre
3 MHSC: Metal Handicraft Service Centre

207


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Authority (DDA) for allotment of one acre of land in Delhi. As of February
2009, however, no land had been allotted for either the Delhi or Moradabad
centres,

Releases of funds were made in several installments between March 1999 and
March 2006 without proper need assessment and ensuring availability of land
for the two centres. In fact, when NCDPD requested the Ministry in May 2005
to approve carry forward of unspent funds of Rs. 0.88 crore to 2005-06, they
were directed to refund the amount with interest. However, without ensuring
such refund, another installment of Rs. 1.43 crore was released on 31 March
2006, evidently to avoid lapse of funds. The Ministry rejected the proposal of
NCDPD for carry-forward of unutilized grants of Rs. 1.55 crore for 2004-05
and 2006-07; however, the amounts had not been refunded.

Out of the total funds released of Rs. 4 crore, NCDPD had reportedly incurred
expenditure of Rs. 2.45 crore on various items — setting up of temporary
infrastructure, acquiring fixed assets, setting up of office ete. — without
establishment of permanent centres. Instead, in February 2008, NCDPD
submitted a revised proposal for infrastructure development at an estimated
cost of Rs. 10 crore, which had not been approved as of February 2009.

Field visit by audit to the temporary locations of the NCDPD centres at Okhla,
Delhi and Moradabad revealed the following:

¢ In Okhla, Delhi, some computers meant for trainees and office equipment

were lying unutilized due to lack of space at the temporary location.

Office equipment and computers lying unutilized at NCDPD Okhla Centre

e The Moradabad centre was non-functional since 2004, and the furniture
and fixtures were lying dumped in a store.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Thus, despite release of Rs. 4 crore for setting up two NCDPD centres at Delhi
and Moradabad for solving the design problems of artisans and industry,
construction of these centres had not even started after ten years of sanction.

Further, Rs. 2.45 crore had been spent on various items without ensuring
permanent infrastructure, and the balance Rs. 1.55 crore was lying unspent.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in October 2008; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

13.6 Delay in Construction of Office Building at Srinagar

The Ministry approved construction of office building for Development
Commissioner (Handicrafts) at Srinagar at a total cost of Rs. 2.60 crore
and released Rs. 1.69 crore in March 2006. Due to the abnormal delay in
taking possession of the land after making advance payment, the cost of
the project has already risen to Rs. 8.16 crore.

In March 2006, the Ministry of Textiles approved construction of office
building at Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir for the Field Administrative Cell and
the Marketing/ Service Extension Centre of the Development Commissioner
(Handicrafts), which were hitherto housed in rented buildings. Huge rental
payments and security risk with the rented buildings at Srinagar were the two
reasons cited for justifying construction of the office building. The total
approved cost of the project was Rs. 2.60 crore consisting of Rs. 1.20 crore for
purchase of land (four kanals*) and Rs. 1.40 crore for construction of the
building. The Ministry made advance payment of Rs. 1.20 crore in March
2006 to Srinagar Development Authority for purchase of the land and Rs. 0.49
crore between June 2007 and May 2008 to the Central Public Works
Department (CPWD) for land development, site demarcation and construction
of boundary wall.

4 One kanal is equal to 506 square metres.



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Audit in March 2007 observed that no significant progress had taken place
toward construction of the office building and in the meantime the project cost
had also increased enormously. The details of the case are discussed below:

a. The Ministry could not take possession of the land even after four
years of making full advance payment in March 2006. The revised cost
of project as approved by the Department has also escalated to Rs. 8.16
crore. Of this, the cost of the construction of the building increased
from Rs. 1.40 core to Rs, 5.97 crore.

b. Government of Jammu & Kashmir (GoJK) did sanction allotment of
land on lease hold basis in August 2007, initially for a period of forty
years with effect from 29 August 2007 which was extendable for a
further period of not more than forty years. However, the lease deed on
record was undated and there was no record of the registration of the
same (February 2010).

c. The Ministry released Rs.0.49 crore to Central Public Works
Department between June 2007 and May 2008, although the land had
not been demarcated.

d. The work of boundary wall and approach road was reported to be
nearing completion, but the construction work of the building was yet
to start as of September 2009.

e. Due to delay in construction of office building, the Field
Administrative Cell and the Marketing Service Extension Centre
continued to incur avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.28 lakh per annum
towards rental charges for their office buildings.

Thus, the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry in acquiring the land for
construction of office building for Field Administrative Cell and Marketing/
Service Extension Centre at Srinagar resulted in abnormal time and cost
overrun. The cost of project increased by more than 200 per cent from
Rs. 2.60 crore to Rs. 8.16 crore. Besides, the objective of housing these
offices in their own building, avoiding security risks involved in rented
building had not been achieved.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 2008; their reply was awaited
as of March 2010.

210


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

13.7 Recovery at the instance of Audit

६ 7 777:0:7 77720 amount of Rs. 27.75 lakh was recovered at the instance of Audit out of
Rs. 160.27 lakh including penal interest released under Development of
Exportable Products and Marketing (DEPM)/ Handloom Export Scheme
(HES).

The Office of the Development Commissioner (Handlooms) (DC(H)) has been
implementing the “Development of Exportable Products and their Marketing”
(DEPM) Scheme since 1996-97. This scheme was aimed at giving assistance
to the handloom agencies for building and marketing of export worthy
handloom. The scheme continued during the X plan with a modified
nomenclature “Handloom Export Scheme (HES)”.

Audit scrutiny of the scheme revealed that the DC (Handlooms) had
sanctioned 86 projects at a cost of Rs. 19.29 crore during the IX plan period
(1997-2002), against which Rs. 19.29 crore was released to the implementing
agencies. However, only 67 projects had been completed as of December
2008, and 19 projects involving central funds of Rs. 165.95 lakh had either
been terminated or closed.

As per a clause of sanctions to release of Central Assistance, it was envisaged
that in the event of non fulfillment of any one or more of the terms and
conditions of the Scheme, the implementing agency would be liable to refund
the assistance along with interest thereon as per the rates prescribed under the
provisions of the GFR. However, it was seen in audit that out of the 19
terminated/ closed projects, in 10 projects, Rs. 160.27 lakh, including penal
interest, was yet to be recovered.

This was repeatedly pointed out in audit during the period from 2001-02 to
May 2008, and an amount of Rs. 27.75 lakh was recovered by DC(H) during
2005-07. The defaulting agencies had also been debarred from further grants,
till refund of the principal amount along with penal interest. However, the
balance amount of Rs. 132.52 lakh was still pending recovery (June 2009).



cara

sow gored
{ayajdwoauy) juawaynas [euy Joy paataaas Loday bros proc 90 br pure akg ¥ aL “Funuya yo]g, 1-६002 [पाग्द man “गापपष्पृ७ WVAVISVC L
| (a) edoyg,
pomnag 00581 00:51 0051 ० Buyasea 90ण६ +0-६006 एव फण्क ५ त००७01एप्रेण्य “CW | 81
जज SSC लफल्फाजत yuaudojaaap
s00z Ao Jaye apeus aouapuodsausos ou ‘arajduiosuy ~ vz 90721 zz tuepuad बाण weyureye yy Z0-1007 S| ut
‘TW भग्वाप TW UpERE
9002 Ae aye apear antiapuadsanioa ot ‘ajajdatoouy 7 _ 801६ sete 8Sb ऋणत ४पफ़प आए एफ००/४ ८0-00: anus एणण्पुप5 एण्जणाध प्यार | भर
नाण्पाब्शुश्यू उठ्णछ्न॒ण
agidwoouy = = ५5८६६ SLee 098६ “Araprorquis’dupases >एण5 20-1002 {PC ON ‘HOWLNI | ST
Temespegg i Syeso BHSEEMEY UNGEpURY,) IONISIC,
*007 190 Jaye spew sauapuodsauses 00 "3])]वपा००णु _ ~ SL SL M's sojures99 pur eyoaeusa] Joy 20-1007 “qemerpeyg yaueg exepoweg | की
yurfspeyy seseg
sayseg, 3गगशत weoAepuCY exedrequy
S007 ing Jaye apear socapuodsaureo on *गुजुपपा००्पा _ _ 00's 00'S os “uordepttoy 1९ “siyera [eI Tog 20-1002 “tomistes 0५०8 एड mpeg | हा
“9007 “BSSIIQ)
uns Jaye apeur eauapuadsassas ou ‘ajayduieauy — | _ 661६ 661६ pSse qua ooquieg pue Gayog 70-1002 पाग्द MANS TVILA | ZL
“suo |
8 8७36 ¢ कण उणु suadsum नैणवी uno ‘aja}dwoaut ——_Qa's _ 005 000 न andiey{ ‘syes9 ooquieg 20-1002 indaen ‘VHA | ता
cmdeung ‘aydazarqy andeuncy par एगश०्वाण)
“SO0Z/ZT ए० एयशुवंपा०० umoys हि शा Tb'6b Ire 086 Je yess oogueg छू २०४.) Zo-L00Z | ग्रष्णणएप्णप ? wooTpUEHT puEEBEN | OT
“sipuOW | TSE TES
Z sivaé 9 ase] 20g yuadsum SuL4] juNoUre ‘ayaydwoouT svt ead 00'S 0966 ‘uoeSepuoy 1४ प्र) [eI9w [19g 20-1007 spreog Sospureig क pEI S/N | 6
पाप | andqepemep) फण्केफाण्पपूठ prog,
¢ smad ६ छण 10g Juadsum Sur] JuNou 'गजुवंपण्णा 009 इ0फक 8001 086? sajseg ‘ndepefes ye yer poo, Foxpuy mpeyy yessyyeyYy 8
| TiPEN
3002/21 wo payajduoa unoyg - जा acd acd sez N’Landumyja ‘sys gin huey Kyaroos diay yjag एफ | 5५
| “ossnreey gy,
“siquow andieg‘edwey.> Sndiey edwey. undiey ‘paeog
01 S1¥9X ६ 150 405 yuadsim Sur] junowre ‘ajajdwioouy r6'L 908 0001 0002 'उज्ागत गत ‘asnoy वैध वत2/0 ८0-100: Fospuwig फण्पञ्र ysLAsuLYyD | 9
हा] | “aM 'पाजएगण
Z stead + कण Jog wadsun SuyAy nou 'गगुपणणण.__ ६1 raed 66°68 कक जआप्प० 1onposd ooquieg, z0-1007 ieyoy ‘vyfues UeMN | ६
‘PAUTEIQO Jou Sem uONA!duIdD jo ALUN गा "En anduereys
qe juaumnaop pasinhas 90020] ०] parduroa unoys, _ 001 00111 00111 जप amjayg pur णण्पृत॒ <८0-1002 पाग्त *गर ‘Hoda | #
TWAUITTEISUE |
sayy a4 एपा!॥ (005/६ ५१ एज [५७७०० ७१४० जा का का os! 0962 NU जआ0७/०20ज0५। TV 20-1002 wendy vara | ¢
WaUTyTES | jedoyg “indpurag pair
Asay ay) LINEA POOT/Z/E UO Parajdwoy ७१४० का 669 19 ast 00% “आए pooay 29 ooquieg 2०७७ 20-1007 wedin seYA duysiseH dW |Z
*S0-FOOT WL salon omy गण] 1 IST UM गुप्त ५ CH PUE
§ pue smeas 7 Jaye #002/8 Yo papunjas spun | 0001 005 0051 9F'6LT ‘yadrea ‘Terayy 'प्रष्प० ooqureg, 20-1002 pow vad | 1
आई wodst | pspunjany posesjor | pouoyoues — Aouady ‘ow
qumory Thou, PBZ | yumeury | yunoury परगना गए) yo गाए quoumsarey /OONapsoouny | Ts
|

(6007 2940190 Jo sv एण$०व)
80-2007 1 2007-1007 WO KAHVA Japun pauorjsues ०१०० Aye ए०पएा० Jo spread
(2°67 ydvsSving ui 0} pass2foy)
p-xouuy

TI-0102 f0 6 “ON Hoday


Ele

unday, जबणतए

(arajdwoauy payeare yoday ost aN sa oors yrousay vy 10 (०० OOquIg FO-€00Z _“yosvasay put [०००६ soy 20००० SW | Ze
TESTE uNpEIAg “PILOg,

(a1aduoauy payee yoday 06‘! TIN 06'¢1 £867 yes augud 3 ooquieg, 0-002 “AST गवाज २ OOquIEA Fe4sUEINA | [#

(iaduoauy parewe joday sve TIN 06% फ्ह्क्र tndepuoy 1 343 YES VIAN, 0-007, Texeln peqepewsyy VAIS | Ob
~eqeyseueg anu Jen EIUEYSEUER “UsSV

(ai9jduioauy ]श[एक jiodoy 06% UN o6'bz 086 APO ९ geal “Avopyposquisy 10-६002.._ ०७०२६ RYO VAIMA ए५एज5एएणध | 6६
“En एण्पष्पणाए

panes, : 6६फ्र 6&फ् काका eso ooquieg, +0-£007. ‘Foxpouunmsg epyew vsreseyg | 8६
eno फनृष्मण्णाज पतात-3

panes - Lvs Lrst LI'ST poo “euyedeuuayy /az0ssayy, PO-COOZ — “ABC SYBIOIPUDH] गण5 YECUIEY | ६६

panes - 56६ Soe rep SSeTIIA PAIOC| 18 छाए], 0-002 eqewurey ‘U0sky VAVAAIN | 9¢

pares : Ist] Is+T 051. punfouy ye yer जप jee #0-8002 ब्जथण्णए्ञ्र ISM], EPULYSTH जया. | 5६
dys uressy * andyon

(aajduroonr) 1womapyas (एप soy paarsoar yoday : ata $117 FET 1७ पृष्ठ oogureg 7 गा) +#0-६005.__ हा, गवणाएवंष) ए्ण्णग्ष quing | be
eSEfEya
fuey Suorys apen uoneuy

(a}3jdumoaM) payee poday : 06#< 06#< 0867 WHEY Yeo ooguieg 7% उप.) #0-६006 uo wonerapay uraisey ON | ६६
ऋषउ०5 ए eID Ty USS Y TRIE

(ग्रगुवाए०50) wawaTHas [ए०पु Foy pastaoes yoday : zs6z zor zwze |W गष्व os ooquing 7p aux) #0-६002 Swezeg ध्य्पग्ध पाए) एपएण्ण्यफण्त | 2६
FV BON

panes : 085 085 08५ iq saddnd sayyeoy +0-६002._ ीशएणटठ amyram Mose wAUEEYD | 1६
"EV बणागर

9१925 0६८ 0६८ 0६५ ened mpIeN “Sugured उपपपृष्च +0-६002.._ 4००५ aeyTam 1५०४ ४४एप९५७ | OF
“av AORN

panes, : ५६01 ५801 ५६01 एजणणी “ALAIN UEP AL +0-६002._ 02908 auylam lose एहएणाए५७ | 6८
जस्कणप अगागर

: sve se S76 | णाष्थपश्थजप०१ “yess seay wird 1#0-6002.. 429०8 ayaa mide eAUENEYD | SZ

: 169 169 169 १०६ ea ease +0-&02 “EV फ़ष्पण्कात 'उतताावर | Lz

- LV'se LVS 515६ एणपृष्ठा700प प्रष्ठ) HINA 0-007 “dV peqesspaH “OCMHAY | 9८
av

poms, : ores ores 065 "बाप ‘ndeserey प्र) 2087 +#0-६002._ 'फ्ात प्ष#ष्णण्छ VA NONTAA | sz
- व “URMpINg Samog pur ०-०७

(गरगुवाएण्ण्पा) portese wodoy खपत पाप कर rise जगाए॥ SITE EEAONCT क#0-६005.. ह हण्णणाण) poseg amy umpmg | कट
sajstys wertueAypEP A बण्णाण्न्र
ssid uapjon ‘ooquieq eipuy wajseg Jo snavasdanjug

(araydtuoont) pareme woday Lete IN LS'bz bl ér 28 poy ‘ang “yed jeug PO-CO0Z —_SYRIDIPULF pur ayny Jo uayEIaossy | घट

उपाण्त 9,

बह areya ण्गाणुलगाए AuaA0g छ ywaurdoranacy

(s)9]dwoaup) payeae poday, os'te IN ose 00°SP VALLOM yess ooquieg PO-SOO ——-AIGHUISNs Jog ग्यण०3 “NVHLLA | Ce

ir

(CHV) wen Yseg sol Sojouypa, ue

(qajduroouy) पण्णणाष्फण |, 109 parEre yoday STZ IN PST 60° uEyuoY Je YEO ooqutEg #0-६006 somosey ooquieg एण्कण aqua) | 1Z
mea
MON YSeg{ 70[ SBoouysay, pue

(ay9]duro9uT) 10०ण[करण ,,Z 10] pameME Yodo, rar TIN rata 60'er (गा) nny yes oOquIEg +#0-६005 aamosoy ००पणाष्ध्च एश्फणु suaQ |. Oz

quadsuyy pastajar — pauonsurs Aouatiy “ow

RS junoury: गाए pam | junowy = junowy uorEs0]/ypus9 ay) Jo OMEN, CARRY JUOUTUIAC! /ODN AN JoauEN | 1S

11-0102 f0 6 ON Oday



ble

pames : 1016 101: 101: *7गएणवण्३ puey pue soz] oye 90-S00Z quauudojaraql artrouos arog | 29
फथग्गाब व्यक्त
(गगुण0०००) एय[९१४ Lodoy श्र TUN Ost 00% 1[#्टए 2 yelp prog $0-P00z ‘sousty quaudojarcq ooqueg | 19
TORIOZIA PAUZEY
{araqduioou) एज[एकए odo ost TIN ost ours Imezty 18 पा ooquieg 50+002 douasy wowdoranaq ooqueg |_ 09
(ars|duioouy) एग[एकए poday, sFol IN Srol 06 ६ एप्ण५ “ooqureg, SO-POOT CH IpUEN Vaud | 6६
TeqaueNe
(A9,duioauy) poyeane as0doy 0016 चाप 001क ह्ह्झ feaeys ००००७ $0-r00z "83001 Ayuieg ०४/३०(७९/ | 8६
“pace
Ins 98°F उच्च #थशणु (एव (G0/z)SHeaK ६ way) ALOU बात ‘peqezontg ‘Aasnpuy
soye iunoure ay papunyes (H.C Aq paso(9 reford : o6rz : 06कट 086 1] $0+002 ऋणुए uawdojaaeg soy anuaa | is
Ef CpION JususseuEyy pur
(Majduosuy) 10009॥1% jwuy soy Payreare yoday - stor. svor [44 ५४4 प्रण्द॒ णुप्ण्व SO-PO0Z _ SPaMosay [०४1०५ Jo आया एफण० | १६
“EIEIO
<penunyc.siC'PrT Aainog
papas : sore sore sore eso ooquieg, s0-r002___do-03 ॥एथ० ap jeLnsnpuy vaAIW | ss
wtssy “woETEN Juaundojaaacy
Jean pur woneayddy “@ojouyoay
panes : 0001 0001 09001 wouten पा “yes ang so-rooz Joy ava warsty YON | ys
“URS HEYEMND)
एथ[एकए 1i0day 0602 - 06°07 081# uressy ‘duuwey (४००३७/७:७ so-ro0z —_‘amuag wvawidojaanq ang uressy | ६६
HeqeRng
surequiy ‘uopesapay “doo
papies : orsr काका कक एवाणु३ *००१०ए०घ 2p १०७७ 50-1700८. 8एएथज्ञ २९ 819000/0 xody wiessy | zg
AY USICL एणणाजुण्जए<एण्णावा[तघ्त
paynas, - 6901 6901 6901 yrs थाए 50+002 ogni yng | 1s
eer HSICT
एज - L631 16°31 Lest yes) oUt 50+002. WTO *Aouosy "पता pes EpITY | gs
seseieg,
sseiQ 7p Suyjaweug ‘ooqueg misc
pops - 06 क्श्क्क फ्छ्क्क wp १०४७ “Hod!eILD,|, 'जणदा३) $0+002. 0णर SEG ण्णफ्ण्प्रप प्राडावा15 | ७
Siuavayy
We 8 oogureg “gr my ndeupryy azodeupry *Ayat0g
paqies, : 00'Lz 00'LZ rez “orang 79 cagaql Bueqes 50+002 IEF एण००5 ३ जाप) SAW | कक
एजएकार
TINS पत्रण 619 "SA छशशप [णाउत (600 द/द 7ए्छ्ड ६ ण्ज्पा पध0 गण्जाण्त्र 09व एणाष्यप्रत्ा0
your say papungar ynoum (पीठ 41 pasora roaford - डक चाप ad OL yer wo 50+00८ podxg एफ़ण jo uonnopag | gp
Mad 7णपा॥ एस्तएएड med
३४ (00104 3p OM oquIEg, man ॥पाज्द BEND easHEg emag
{o19]dmo9) pareme Body avd IN erez 58%... "० peag Aroproaqurg pure S0-P00Z —-—RARPOUED FaKpoares ynouysig | op
“aT 'फ़ण्ण्पा “aac,
“porter pungar ३0:96 ए० CEI Aq pasoro 199Fosg $ - TN ong aI'ss a W wesResey, “yer ooqueg 50400: Temy गण Tose एफ जगण्णप्ण, | sh
पायण्ट्॒‌ ‘pavery “udio3 “aq
panos - 0001 000 000 पशछडाज ye yer ooquieg, #0-800८. प्ष्णणएण्णा कर एाण्णएण्णा एष्ठण्णात््‌ | py
sapesd
Panos : 266 86 36 yes ooquieg “ay ‘0117 +#0-6005 1एपृ०णए७ ‘vonepunoy wlegruen | eb
quadsuyy pasvajar — pauonsurs Aouay
आपण&5 junowry PopunPa | para | junowy junowy uoLEs0]/)J849 गप Jo BUEN एग्ज्ग्व JWOUTUIOAGT) /ODN 24) Jo जाए
junowry mm है [3/0:- 4

TT-0107 J0 6 “ON uoday



Sle

हछछावफण्व्ग् ज्ञाष््फ़फप छएउ FW
(शज[त10000]) payese 11000 मन 4IN 151 ase Supuyed pue jay wed 30-400Z Jo waudojanap soy aimnsuy जण8 | ६8
IQ “EpINyy “Saduo
syesaipueyy ‘ainyng क एफ
9991 aN 9991 16६६ eayignpuay ‘yea भाजि[वव 80-2002 Jowaudojarap 1ण शाप ares | 78
eyeeUey
auadayoodey “ouoje3ueg “pry dove.) waudojaasq,
01४८ UN, ॥ 1824 0द$# ye youd खाएश्द्ाएाएु uapoo Ay 80-L00Z SAUISMPUT [PLUG 3०5 एजणएकएच्र 8
BETES
ayadayaamay |, “ougyedung “pry dao juauidojanaqy
ores TUN or'ee 0e'sb Je हुए Uapoom 19410, 30-4002 जाए ॥०७४४ ALBIS EeIEMNEY | 08
dnnwey 1 ooguieg wuessy “daruiey,
Ls'vz IN Ls'bt slop 3p auto 29 Sapa SEY 80-/002._ एप्पशाएत vmasyor] mpuEID छछिए४8 | GE
wedeN messy एत्छणए “A}OIIOg USA
Cer dwoou) payene pioday - 18: 18५ री] 18 [eo ए्या[पए्काएए 2p SSPE 80-2002 ax ypaddepia 01 [1०७|०४ | 8६
Teuenegy CY किए,
(o19]dwo9M) pore odoy 099 978 का Isl og 28 आए soKpeD| SuSE 80-1007 “USS अक्षा३७ suNSIBE syeIopUEH] | (६
Ipnodyramams, NCL Teuwey ‘anmsoy
(ora[émoamn) pawrenvs yoda, LS L601 कहा ard ae yeaa Goprosqurg एप 80-1007 suamidojaaap vautoyy porsiawy | 9६
पद्म TIN 1T9T te ung Je yeso Sura] suoys 40-9007 esstiQ “emysaueqnyg “CIA | SL
a randuereyes
PIT anus Eees wepedr
pans : 509६ 509६ 519६ व] induweyrg 1९ Fars 90018 Lo-9002 __#HoApNY 83008: poo ULE SAN | be
NEL गगाग| ग्रभ००5 फण aFeHO;
(गग॒वए००0) एथाएक्षए प्०वंज् +800 IN #807 8958 0 ames, 10-9007 40:00 siryom aueg yodelerey | ६६
Pa “TIN ६6४ 9867 [एतीएण्ड्ज “yess Arsprosqura wez L0-9007 Nu ‘wemdryouey “youd | Ze
TUE
(aa[duoouy) payee poday TIN 005 598६ “aedeurepung Yesd 1oyyea] बन spur “vad | (६
(ञगुगज्ण payeme yoday TIN PTOI क्क्त्ट eID alghy 1esig WEEUEY ‘aopemueg “Swaal | OL
छाण्छ “Heyes
(or dwoou) payeare 10009 : 066 066 Loves ero eiow seg २ ॥7६ 90-s00z neziweBIQ wyIoed 7००५-0७ | 69
cy rong
{arajduzoouy) payeare rode डक 008 seze ६०9६. yuo Tuyasva ए00॥ 29 एणजएणएण्ज 90-9005 18एप्रथष्णाएह ‘wisanistug wey | 39
[Rady Juaudo|aAaq
{arajdwoauy 930१४ 1104 9e'8 8९9 rst sVel yess ooquitg, 90-5007 Jeng soy 627०७ w ig
aay MGUY
aqua, “do-03 जाफाव
a odo sob ere ५691 (31.1 पाप auld MALS, 90-500 _ AKIO IRIDOS [HLOWAWY feLBYBMUG | 99
FBO जाएगा.
re 110d sre bell 6802 इश्ट्ट प्रष)णभश्ाश्ध् 90-s00z “WNIT एणाण्ज्त [ए००5 woyaauET |. 59
yews oogureg pur [eI WIM IPUBATL
panos - rer ar6T aver eoeung “toys wed Jeo] We 90-8002 “urolemeg Prey उ०00एएए७ | $9
Nuwar
Aja10g jonpory एगाए aoquing
(शगृवणए०्ता) जाए poday रहा OFT we 16 उष्णाएव “yes Jeary we, 90:9002. श०पछ) Joo] WYRE uoMIOA TONG | ६9
yer NUL Heunyecueyy ‘wonetoossy
quadsuyy pastajar — pauonsurs Aouatiy sow
STIRS, popunyay, फ़्ण्ज्ग्व
junowy: wmoumy, | P27 junowry = junoury: warED0[JeA9 ayy Jo गाए JUSUTULOAOT {ODN ग्पा Jo गएणव 1s

11-0107 f0 6 ON HOday



NE

9६88 ६90८ #9टटा | 8ध७ाट ८89८5६ eyo
WSL) ERM SATO
SYRUaIpUEH गाए) I UV

{arajduioom) parrene poday 6८61 TIN 6z'61 ७५भावाए००्ञ्र पणग seg 80-६002.___ 3०10ग6ण३७भ7ण गाय areas | ६6
SLO) UpAMy>y ब्शुव्ा०5
syeusipuepy ‘ainyng ay Hy

(a1ajdwwoow) payeave yroday, 8612 IN 8612 Lech eayiqnpuay “enoeua go quauidojaaep soy aimynsuy ais | b6
jeqauemy,

(ardwoou) payeae 17053 gut चाप Seuz 0155 हा] 30-2002 sueysueg ueyowes eanueya | ६6
RTA sept

(a1ajduroauy) paarsoas woday : ५66८ 966८ 0665 00410 uuury ‘yess ooquieg 80-2007 eyseuruy ‘Kaye Sueqiq ‘yard | 76
AMA, yseptad

(@jajduroauy) paaredar jaoday - ५5662 S667 066५ Suoqia ty “yes ooquieg, 80-2002 jeyseunsy ‘Sayjea Fueqia “yO 6
जजाए॥ ysopend

(a19jduroauy) paareoas 17009 - S667 $667 0665 ज0०१6 “uuu “yess ००१७ 80-0005 [eyseunsy ‘yea Fueqia “vara | 06
dn प्रशप्त

{arajduoouy) pasgeave srodoy, 0008 HIN 000६ 0009 pata yea Joye" 80-000८ ‘sma, गपथा[।ण१) !पए७०७ aif | 68
mdracyy
poyies speydi uig “modu “wos

- 0001 000 00'0T 30-1002 2 ssatamMy Jog npg ajdoag | 88
andrueyy,
yeydury we sqeydury ‘uoreradso3 juaurdojaaagy

(शगृवणए०त]) एगा[एकए ody 0005६ TIN 000६ 0009. प्रष्म 00परणणएप्‌ के UNE IP AUD 80:/002._ #प््णणाएएण् क ए्०णएण्णत गाताएण॒द | /8
WES
“yordueg “uonezodsoo justudoya.aq

(21a]dmoout) payeme yodayy uaz IN SUS? Osis आज “BurAse9 poy, 80-2002 SYRIPURET-y woofpuEET WEES | 98

wa

“yorueg ‘uopesodsos juauido|aAaqy

(गर्भुगपाकतत] payee podoy SL8z “UN SL8T WPPHS HON ‘coqureg, 7 ae} 80-/002. SYOIPUREA 7y wooppueyy पा $8
stig “vpmipy ‘sayduroz)
syerapuny omyng Uy

(जरग्प्राण्पा) payeme yoday, 6T61 TIN 6T6T 658 napignpusy, Suramoquays 30-2007 Jo qourdopanp sop गण AS | ps
BsIIQ “epINYyy ‘sopduros)

quadsuy) pastajos — pauoyjouns जज ‘ou

SnyETS, papunyay, pouad
junowy: snowy, | Pt junowry = junoury: warED0[Fe419 ayy Jo गाए JUSUTULOAT /ODN ग्पा Jo गएणव 1s

11-0107 f0 6 ON Hoday



Lie

TWOLSG TOE | कड़ा | LET EBIIT | RTOGE ESRI | BL | OI [LOSFET | LL [06६ [PERTLT [ 9E OTE OFRTOF [FEI [S09 00000 | 99 एफ TROT,
0५8 $ 0581 s Ausyoipuod, 02
iesil के | 861 999 ८ छा [zi 5 [कऋरड़ा [8 8६ $99छ६& [दा [9 ह6टदाग्र [8 के [एकउच्च ४50 61
sped
86:55 erzl 606 | y | 8% z__| evor | 8 L 68+%0 | th | 9L ena | 87
659 01 3821 losr_ | 0 € vindith | LI
Fro06T 9€ | FZE 30067 LOOTT | F 8€ | OZ FIT | 8 | Trérr | s 66. exsos [ZT [GIT «sebzr] 9) 0६ | फणणाणण, oT
SOL 1 | at aa yore ueipsefey | ST
O68IL tb काट we [Zz 9. कक [६ is | pss | 1 Ss 8TBLZ | 8 का. OE BLT 9. 8६ BSSHIO | FI
LLEOL =o | Ul vss | ori erste | 9 08 [1668८ | 1 09 | 008 z purpezen | हा
Leese 6 | eed O0'ZEI ६6६09 | ६ 9. # हा lp andiuew |Z
iss € [0८ sroz हु eees 1 rr 009. || 1. enyseaeqe) 11
ysaperd
bo'eel 8% ८81६ रा ८0८8 |9 टा. 0002 $ exypeA | OT
1६15 a 0091. 90% ] soos |b 6 [soon | ५ 8 0019८ [६ 9६. (६6८ 8 जज | 6
कफ 9६ Ist 5. [0:9८ z 69% [६ छा कण [i 9 ByERUIEN | 8
snuysesy
द16 ६ roe 1 809 z ap numwey 6
Wopery
७06. ६ uN ars कट ore [८ 1 [0८96 |t 5 9६0६ br 00८ I reypeunyy
006 1 005५ 00% 1 एपएहफ्त्‌
7887 z STO T | srs TFOz 9 गा]
98602 6 [६६ L691 [६ ६. | 00% 1 Ibi | > 5६. कक: tl ULE
ELeLo £01 05% हद | Z 8£ 00001 sr ares
ysapvig
Srzsoz IST | ८6६ 68lZ | 670. PEON | Z| TTT ८०1४१ | Gr | @sT | दश्टाट | ६ ly छीकाए | ET [0६ 569#ट | HZ 08६ erypuy
junowy aad) 2 |, fue swe | Aue junowy| add| SaH|qwnowy) Aad| SaH|sunowy| aad उतार sunowy| Aad|oaH 1०००७ | pad DaH
ता |aauejeg soucjeg| saueteg ann oS
z0 TO | 0007 हि
Teo ame aime || een 86-L661 16-9661 96-5661 SO-P661 ¥6-£661

(yynj uy sanding)

(10-0002 OL P6-£661 WOU GAS VATA SANNA AO SALVLS) AIWAHOS LINN ONIAAG ALITY NO/TALNAD LNANdO TAA WOO TINY
(VEST 4कम्क्राफ़व ut 0} passafay)

11-0102 [0 6 ON कर्म

Ti-xouuy


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annex-II
(Referred to in paragraph 13.3.2)
State-wise details of outstanding UCs

___(Rupeesinlakh) _
suo |... Name of the No.of Amount | Amount | mount | Amount
State HDC/QDU | Released रे Refunded | pending
Received
HDC = QDU
1. Andhra Prandesh 397 151 | 2052.45) 1981.12 70.60 0.73
2. Assam 103 673.73 171.90 -| 501.83
3. Bihar 53 19 | 209.86 26.44) = | 183.42
4. Gujarat 7 28.82 14.53 10.03 4.27
5. Haryana ||... eff
6. Himachal Pradesh 11 3 90.49 63; | 27.49
7. Jammu & 3 9.12 - 158 7.54
Kashmir

8 Kamataka 30 4 141.40 53.38 42.08 46.93
9. Kerala 72 12) 51341 448.03 05 64.88
10 Madhya Pradesh 28 6 133.94 6.034 3.86 | 124.04
11. Maharashtra 20 3 85.87 76.79 - 9.08
12. Manipur* 137 7) 95327) | 853.27, -|
13. Nagaland 142 7) 703.7 60158 = | 102.19
14. | Orissa | 214 42| 718.96 661,95 39.69 17.32
15. Rajasthan [oi qos| || 7.08

16. Tamil Nadu 324 36 | 1900.14 | 190014] |
17. Tripura 13 10 65.89 6.89 -  - |

[18 | Uttar Pradesh 89 51] 579.28 | 526.39- 52.89
19. West Bengal 198 40 |. 778.27 758.15 - 17.11
20. Pondicherry 5 18.50 18.50 - -
Total 1848 391 | 9570.19 | 7373.82 | 1074.50 | 1121.88

*entire amount of central assistance released to Govt. of Manipur has been adjusted from the state
budget 1999 by the Ministry of Finance.

218



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER XIV ‘RY OF TOURISM

14.1 Non-observance of Financial Propriety

Deliberate circumvention of canons of financial propriety and the failure
of MOT to effectively monitor the expenditure incurred or committed
resulted in unsanctioned expenditure of Rs. 5.59 crore in GOITO New
York. The propriety of the expenditure also becomes suspect in the
absence of adequate documentation and control.

The Civil Accounts Manual stipulates that no payment should be made in
excess of budget allotment unless an advance from the Contingency Fund
covers it. Further all Payments made should be based on sanction orders
signed by competent authorities. As per General Financial Rules control over
expenditure shall be exercised through the Heads of Departments and other
Controlling Officers, if any, and Disbursing Officers subordinate to them.

The Government of India, Tourism Office (GOITO), New York headed by a
Regional Director (RD) is entrusted with the task of promoting diverse Indian
tourism products through marketing and campaigns in the region of North
America (primary market), South America and Caribbean Islands along with
the GOITOs headed by Assistant Directors (AD) at Los Angeles and Toronto.
The RD has delegated financial powers ranging between US$ 7,000 and
US$20,000 (Rs. 3.80 lakh to Rs. 8.80 lakh) per item for advertisements,
Brochure supports etc. and full powers for participation in exhibitions etc.
subject to prior approval of yearly schedule by the Ministry.

The Fund allotment of the GOITO is categorized into non Plan (pay and
allowance and office expenditure ete.) and Plan (expenditure on tourism
promotional activities). The Plan expenditure is governed by the Annual
Action Plan (AAP) drawn by GOITO and approved by the Ministry of
Tourism (MOT). As far as the Plan expenditure is concerned the Assistant
Director (AD) is the drawing and disbursing authority in the system while RD
acts as the Head of Office and the sanctioning authority to the extent of his
financial powers. The details of expenditure and supporting vouchers are to be
sent to Pay and Accounts Office, Ministry of Tourism for audit and
accounting. Thus GOITO together with MOT was responsible for the control
over expenditure.

The total allotment of funds for plan expenditure was Rs. 11 crore out of
which Rs. 5.00 crore was intended for advertising and the balance on various
other promotional activities in accordance with the AAP. The AAP contained

219


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

a general description of various activities proposed to be carried out, but did
not contain the specific details and party/agency/item wise break up of
expenditure envisaged except in respect of exhibitions. The post of Regional
Director at New York was vacant from April 2004 to October 2006 during
which time the Assistant Director held charge and the financial powers of RD
were delegated to him

A review in audit of the expenditure of 2006-2007 revealed the following
irregularities:

i) The office incurred a liability of Rs. 5.59 crore (51 per cent) over and
above the budget allotment of Rs. 11 crore sanctioned by the Ministry of
Tourism (MOT) for the year 2006-2007 in contravention of the provisions of
the Civil Accounts Manual which stipulates that no payment should be made
in excess of budget allotment and that all payments should be sanctioned by
the competent authority. The excess over the budget had no covering
sanctions. Out of this liability, Rs. 4.71 crore was paid in 2007-2008 by
GOITO, out of the budget allotted for 2007-2008, while a liability of Rs. 0.88
crore is yet to be discharged (May 2008).

ii) The details of expenditure incurred by GOITO were to be sent every
month to the MOT. However, no such details were either sent by the office or
called for by MOT during the period April 2006 to October 2006. There was
no evidence of internal audit either. This is indicative of poor controls. Had
the expenditure pattern been monitored effectively various irregularities as
detailed in succeeding paragraphs could have been avoided.

iii) Though as per the AAP the budget earmarked for exhibitions/trade
shows was Rs. 0.90 crore, the actual expenditure booked was Rs. 2.31 crore.
The excess over budget was committed without sanction of MOT.

iv) RD had been delegated financial powers for various tourism
promoting activities that ranged from US$ 7,000 to US$20,000 (Rs. 3.80 lakh
to Rs. 8.80 lakh) depending on the item of promotion. For expenditures
beyond the delegated powers, prior approval of the MOT was required. The
AD, functioning as RD sanctioned expenditure and entered into agreements
with agencies beyond RD's delegated powers. Test check further revealed that
in several cases, invoices were split, in contravention of rules, to bring them
within the ambit of the delegated powers of the RD (Annex-I).

v) Payments to the extent of US$ 21,570 (Rs. 9.50 lakh) were made to
agencies without vouchers/supporting records or justification and even the

220


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

original invoices from the concerned firms were not available on record. Thus
the basis of payments was not verifiable. Of these, US$14,225 (Rs. 6.26 lakh)
was paid to 8 firm for acquisition of a domain name
“www.incredibleindiarewards.org'. However, there was no evidence of such a
registration or link to the domain having been created.

vi) DENTSU America, Inc was the agency specifically engaged by
GOITO with the approval of MOT for planning, recommending, creating and
arranging advertisements on behalf of GOITO, NY. However, US$753,860.13
(Rs. 3.32 crore) were paid for advertisements placed directly with various
other agencies without utilizing the services of DENTSU during the period
2006-2007. Publicity orders amounting to US$483,258.45 (Rs. 2.13 crore)
were also given to vendors not approved by MOT in the AAP (Annex-II). No
justification for deviating from the AAP or the details of these vendors i.e.
their circulation/reach was available on record to justify orders (Annex-III).
In some cases the advertisement insertion orders were issued verbally and
there was no record available with the office.

vii) No review of bills preferred for payment was made before clearing
them. A Corporate Credit Card was issued by American Express Bank to the
AD for official payments. An amount of US$432,064.20 (Rs. 1.90 crore) was
incurred against the credit card payments during the year 2006-07. There was
no separate sanction or justification for the items charged to the credit card
and all the items were booked against “exhibitions". A scrutiny of the items of
the credit card bills for which payments were made revealed that these
included several items normally intended for personal use such as groceries,
toys and footwear worth at least US$3,083.49 (Rs1.36 lakhs). Items such as
webcam procured against the credit card and paid from the office were not
found in the inventory. No clarification has been provided by GOITO so far
(June 2008).

Thus, the deliberate flouting of financial rules by the AD and the failure of
MOT to effectively monitor the expenditure incurred or committed has
resulted in unsanctioned expenditure of Rs. 5.59 crore. The absence of
documentation in support of some of the expenditure coupled with nature of
documentation that were in fact available for scrutiny indicate a clear risk of
financial mismanagement and misuse of public funds. Ministry must
immediately investigate all serious financial irregularities committed by
GOITO in incurring of expenditure of Rs.5.59 crore and should fix
responsibility of officials found involved in financial mismanagement/misuse
of public funds.

221


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annev-I
(Referred to in paragraph No. 14.1)

Few examples of Vouchers split to bring the value under the
ambit of delegation of power

Value Value of
S.No | VrNodate Party Details party bill Remarks
in USS
USS
Ves 5 Bridal Guide No Noie justification
' Dtl5.05.2006 13000 | Magazinc Adverrisement 26000 and /work ordec.
V ; Bridal Guide No Note justification
2 19:15.05.2006 13000 | Magazine Advertisement 26000 and /work order
Ves soo | Innes , 5 No Noie justification
2
| de05.09.2006 | 7700. Communication Inc Advertisement | 25000 and /work order.
Ve. No.94 a ‘eat ' No Note justification
4 09०09. | 12550. | AARP Publication Advertisements | 36550 Ne Nate dst
Ve.N0.93 sath : No Note /justitication
5 eee oo? 12000 | AARP Publication Advertisements | 36550 No Nore dhe
Vr. ४०.92 . . << No Note justification
6. Dt22.01.2007 12000 AARP Publication Advertisements 36550 and /work order.
Vr. 62 Curio Robb हि No Note justification
हा 0019.06.2006 | 2500... Media, LLC Advertisements | 25000 and (work order.
Vr. 61 कि Curteo Robb हि No Note justification
| De19.06.2006 12500 | Media,LLC Advertisements 25000 and Avork order.
Vi.22 का हि No Note justification
9. 82006. 12333 (| Elephant Advertising Advertisements | 24728 Ne Nore use
VEN क्या oe हि हि हि
10. Tego? | 13418 | DCA Advertising Inc Advertisement 43418 National Geographic
है 00 = . हा
see co? | 5000. | DCA Advertising Inc Advortisoment 43418 -do-
VrNo.5? Sc . 8
ee eo7 | 15000. | DCA Advertising Ine Advertisement 4341 -do-
13... 21306... 18000. | DCA Advertising Inc Advertisement 18810 “American Photo
VeNosl
14. 012 102006.. | 3810. | DCA Advertising Inc Advertisement 18810 ‘Ameican Photo
Advertisement
=| Vr. Nods « c , made in the New
15... TEN cas | 18000. | DCA Advertising Ine ace inthe h 60000 The New Yorker.
24.04.2006
Advertisement
Ve. Nos6 वि . made in the New
16... Te 10206... 15000. | DCA Advertising nc एप्प 60000 The New Yorker.
24.04.2006
Advertisement,
‘Vr. No4? 7 made in the New
17. Dt12.10.2006 15000 DCA Advertising Inc Yorker dated 60000 The New Yorker.
24.04.2006
Advertisement
Vr. No48 5 CA Advert made in the New The New
18. Dt12.10.2006 15000 फ Advertising Inc Yorker dated 60000 The New Yorker.
24.04.2006

222



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annex-IL
(Referred to in paragraph No. 14.1)

Examples for advertisement given to agencies not mentioned in AAP and without
routing through the Advertisement Agency

Print Media Mentioned in 30एश-पंइलाला प्रात
AAP
Name of Media Date of Amount in USS
payment
Weta 10 —April 7800
News India Times Telegu Times Media | 10-April 680
Business Times. Performance Media 10-April 3332
Group
NRI Today The New York Times | 13-April 2500
South Asian Insider New Gate Travel 19-April 1666
Media Group
India Post Curtco Robb Media 01-03: 18000
India Today(International Bharatiya Vidhya 02- May 2000
Edition) Bhavan
Virtuo card 15- May 2000
Trade Magazines Performance Media | 15-May 3332
Grp
Imagine Asian 15-May 670
Entertainment
Travel Agent Bridal Guide 1S-May 26000
Magazine
Travel World News New Media Travel 18-May 1960
Group
Travel weekly Punjab Dunia 09- June 420
Travel Age West Little India Ine 09-June 3315
Luxury Travel Advisor Travel Overseas 09-June 6751.55
Travel Trade 09-June 4000
Consumer Magazines TMS Inc 09-June 4200
Desi Match.Com 09-June 595
Condenast Traveler (Special Telegu Times Media | 09-June 680
Supplement) Inc
National Geographic Adventure | Performance Media| 14-June 3332
Group
Natural History(Special Hit Corp USA Inc 15-June 9600
Supplement)
Smithsonian Curtco Robb Media 19-June 25000
LLC
The New Yorker Bharatiya Vidya 26-June 750
Bhavan
Travel Holidays Imagine Asian 05-09 1238.40
Entertainment
American Photo Travel Trade 0S-Jul: 3500
Budget Travelers IMS Inc 05-July 4200
Outside Traveler The Indian Express 06-July 1500
Out Door Photography Nu Media Inc 10-July 5000
Magazine
Show Zone 10-July 3200
News Paper(Consumer) Hit Corp USA Ine 17-July 10000.
Atman Press 31-July 2100

223


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Print Media Mentioned in.
AAP
Maimi Herald “Sunday Travel
Section”
Chicago Tribune “Sunday
Travel Section”
Robb Report

Advertisement made

Travel Trade 31-July 4000
IMS Inc 31-July 4200x5=21,000
New Gate Travel 31-July 1372
Media Group

Elephant Advertising | 11-August 12333
Telegu Media Inc L1-August 680
Global traveler (1-August 8000
Magazine

Vedanta Cultural 14-August 2351.50
Found

Poter Media Ltd 17-August 6000
Hit Corp USA Inc [8-August 10,000
Werner Publishing | 30-August. 11375
Corp

Nu Media Inc 30-August 3740
Innes 05- 25500
Communication Inc September
Performance Media 05-Sept 3332
Group Inc

Tmagin Asian 05-Sept 1135.20
Ent.Ino

Point Point World 18-Sept 1295
wide

Telgu Times 18-Sept 680
CFI Capital 18-Sept 1500
Indus Business 18-Sept 1500
Journal Inc

Imagin Asian Ent Inc | 18-Sept 1444.80
Hit Corp 18-Sept 10000
Performance Media 18-Sept 7652
Group Ine

New Media inc 25-Sept 935
Werner Publishing 25 -Sep 8710
Corp

Telgu Times 25-Sept 680
Skyline 25-Sept 1200
Esemble Travel 06-Oct 18500
Group

Tango 06-Oct 10,000
Nu Media Inc 06-Oct 4675
Imagine Asian 19-Oct 1290
Entertainment

Vituoso Ltd 23-Oct 7020
The Indian Express 31-Oct 1500
Hum Sub.Inc 07-Nov 600
Ladevi Ediciones 24-Nov 9000
News Week Business | 27-Nov 13636
Tvl

Nu Media Inc 27-Nov 3740
Jax Fax 07-Dec 3500
X Media Grp.Incuest | 21-Dece 1818



Print Media Mentioned in.

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Advertisement made

AAP ee _
Desi Match 09-Jan 595
Bharatiya Vidya 09-Jan 750
Bhavan
Kerala day 09-Jan 2000.00
Kartagener Assocoate | 22-Jan 14225
Inc
AARP Publication 22-jan 36550
Int Travel 23-jan 10000
Communication
Highland Adventures | 23-jan 2150
A&S Travels Inc 05-Feb 1250
CMP Media LLC 01-March 2150
Hatchetta Filipachi 30-March 15000
Media
Editoria Abril S/A 30-March 4500
Editoria Peixes S/A. | 30-March 4870+4870
Perormance Media 30- March 3332
Gry

Total 483,258.45,

Rs. 2,12,82,702.14 (1USS=Rs.44.04)

225


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Annex-Il

(Referred to in paragraph No. 14.1)

Examples of Vouchers passed without office note /sanction order/
justification/work order

S.No Vr No date wes Party Details Remarks
No Note
vrs Bridal Guide Austification
| Dr.15.05.2006 13000 Magazine Advertisement and Avork
order.
lan: No Note
2 Vea? 13090 Bridal Guide Advertisement | ustifieation
D1.15.05.2006 Magazine
and Avork order
Tone No Note
Ve.05 < . . . fustification
2 ८
3 (05.09 2006 12500 Conimnicaton Advertisement निगल
order.
No Note
Vr. No.94 es ‘cath . justification
4 07220, 2007 12550 AARP Publication Advertisements | SNAG
order,
Vr. No.93 हि ation
5 10122 0 2007 12000. AARP Publication Advertisements | पक
order.
No Noie
Vz. No.92 a ‘ertisemems | nstifieation
6 7220 2007 12000. AARP Publication Advertisement गए
order.
No Note
Vr. 62 Curteo Robb ts | fistifieation
7 DL.19.06.2006 12500 Media. LLC Advertisement and Avork
order.
No Note
Vr. 61 वि Curteo Robb . fustification
2
8 Dt19.06.2006 12500 Media,LLC Advertisements and Avork
order.
No Note
Vr.22 Elephant . justification
x
9 19011.08.2006 12333 Advertising Advertisements | aod Avork
order.
No sanction,
वि Curtco Robb justification
2 9 वि a
10 | VR.O5 01.05.2006 | 9000.00 oe tie Advertisement work ender
note
No sanction,
Ve No.10 justification,
11. 60517 3006 3500 Jax Fax Advertisement Merk ender,
note
No sanetion,
VR No. 64 Werner Publishing . justification,
375 है s ”
12 | ae30/08.2006 1137 Corporation Advertisement ‘work order,
note
No sanetion,
13 29dt 19.04.2006 15000 Newsweek Budget 4 svestisement Justification,
Travel work order,
note
No sanetion,
Curteo Robb . justification,
2 (९ .
14 | VR.8601.05.2006 | 990000 जलवा. Advertisement ere पा
note

226


Value in

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

S.No |. Vr'Nodate aa Party Details Remarks
No sanction,
VeNo.73 dt रे
15... 31 08 200५ 3740 Nu Media Ine Advertisement | गाए
note
No sanction,
Ve.No.07 , Performance Medi 4, tigcme justification,
16 | 4.05.09.2006 3332 group Advertisement work order,
note
No sanction,
VeNo.78 dated , is justification,
177... 2310 2008 7020 Vitruoso LTD Advertisement work orden
note
No sanction,
VeNo.27dt Global Traveler cements | iustifivation,,
18 11.08.2006 8000 Magazine Advertisement work order,
note
No sanction,
Vc.48 7 हि justification,
19 व 1406.2006 15000 Budget Travel Advertisement | See
note
No sanetion,
VrNo.29 Newsweek Budget is justification,
20 | Di.19.04.2006 15000 Travel Advertisement | work order,
note
No sanction,
Vir No.S4 dt . justification,
ete 4200 IMs Advertise me work ander

note

227


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER XV : M TRY OF URBAN DEVELO!

15.1 Recovery at the instance of Audit

On being pointed out in audit, the Ministry recovered outstanding
interest of Rs. 67.14 crore from National Building Construction
Corporation Limited, a Public Sector Undertaking.

National Building Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC), a Public Sector
Undertaking under the administrative control of the Ministry of Urban
Development, had been continuously incurring losses from 1986-87 onwards.
As of March 1997, NBCC had accumulated losses of Rs. 136.66 crore and the
net worth was (-) Rs. 116.71 crore.

In November 1998, the Government approved a financial restructuring
proposal and turnaround strategy to convert NBCC into a profit making
undertaking. One component of this strategy, which also involved conversion
of Government of India loans into equity and preference shares, enhancement
of authorised capital, partial waiver of interest etc.; was that outstanding
interest of Rs. 67.14 crore as on 31 March 1997 on Government on India loans
was to be frozen and repaid in equal installments over a period of five years,
after an initial moratorium of three years.

Audit scrutiny revealed that though the initial moratorium for repayment of
the outstanding interest expired in March 2000, no repayment was made by
NBCC as of August 2007, and that the Ministry also did not take action at an
appropriate level for recovery. Further, NBCC had generated profit (after
interest and tax) of Rs. 172.04 crore during the period from 1998-99 to 2006-
07, and had accumulated reserves of Rs. 34.55 crore as on 31 March 2007.

On being pointed out in audit, the Ministry asked (October 2007) NBCC to
pay the outstanding interest on loans from the Government. NBCC paid an
amount of Rs. 60.14 crore in November 2007.

Tn their reply (November 2008), the Ministry stated that although NBCC
generated profits during the period 1998-99 to 2006-07, it had to discharge
pending liabilities to contractors/ vendors in India and abroad. Further, there
was no wilful default on the part of NBCC, which paid the amount of
Rs. 60.14 crore as soon as sufficient funds were available. In January 2009
audit again pointed out to the Ministry the matter of non-recovery of balance
amount of Rs. 7.00 crores from NBCC. Subsequently, in November 2009,
NBCC made the balance payment of Rs. 7.00 crore in full and final settlement

228



Report No. 9of 2010-11
of the outstanding amount. The fact, thus, remains that NBCC made the
payment only after this was pointed out by audit.

Directorate of Estates

15.2 Non-recovery of rent in respect of premises allotted at market
rates to non-entitled categories

Audit scrutiny of recovery of rent by the Directorate of Estate (DoE) in
respect of office accommodation in Delhi allotted at market rates of
licence fees to persons and entities falling in the non-entitled categories
revealed serious mismanagement.

On being pointed out by audit, DoE recovered outstanding dues of
revised market rates of license fee amounting to Rs. 1.60 crore from 10
allottees but Rs. 3.23 crore of outstanding dues in respect of 16 allottees
was yet to be recovered.

DoE recovered Rs. 0.83 crore of outstanding dues between May and
September 2008 from the Central Government Employees Welfare
Housing Organization (CGEWHO) which was allotted office
accommodation purely on temporary basis at market rates of license
fee, subject to the approval of the Cabinet Committee on
Accommodation (CCA). The Government did not agree to the
allotment, but CGEWHO was yet to vacate the premises, and dues on
account of license fee from February 2008 onwards continued to
accumulate as of April 2009.

DoE did not follow up on its decision of November 2005 by initiating
either recovery of rent at market rates or eviction proceedings for
vacation of accommodation occupied by Kendriya Bhandar. Rent dues
for the period from November 2005 to March 2010 amounting to
Rs. 4.53 crore, was yet to be recovered as of March 2010.

15.2.1 Introduction

The Directorate of Estates (DoE), an attached office of the Ministry of Urban
Development, is responsible for administration of Government
residential/office accommodation in Delhi. It has been also allotting office
accommodation to certain private persons, organizations, and non-entitled
entities by charging rent (licence fees) at market rates. The allottees must pay
license fee in advance every month, failing which DoE can initiate recovery
process including securing vacation of the rented premises. In view of the
acute shortage of General Pool Office Accommodation, in March 1999, the
Ministry considered that it may not be desirable to make any further
allotments of office accommodation to non-entitled categories, and revised the
market rate of license fee payable by the existing allottees to Rs. 25 - Rs. 63

229



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

per sq. fi. per month. Further revisions were to be made every three years
thereafter. However, it was noticed that rent revision was made only in respect
of Bank and Post offices.

Audit scrutiny of cases of allotment of office accommodation on market rent
to non-entitled categories in Delhi revealed mismanagement in rent recovery
in several cases by not issuing timely notices for non- payment and taking
punitive action, against the defaulters. The audit findings are detailed below:

15.2.2 Outstanding dues of revised market rates of license fee

Between March 1999 and March 2008, there was accumulation of outstanding
rent of Rs. 4.83 crore, plus interest of Rs. 0.39 crore in 21! cases out of 70
cases in the Central, South and other zones. DoE did not issue timely notices
to the allottees for non-payment of revised rent. The notices were issued with
delays ranging from 6 to 22 months. Only eight parties paid rent at the revised
market rates. Further, DoE did not take any action as per provisions of the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 (PPE Act)
for eviction of the defaulters.

After being pointed out by Audit, DoE recovered an amount of Rs. 1.60 crore,
from 10 allottees between April and November 2008. It also initiated recovery
proceedings under the PPE Act against one allottee, and had issued reminders/
final reminders to 15 allottees prior to initiation of recovery proceedings.
However, the balance amount of Rs. 3.23 crore against 16 allottees was yet to
be recovered as of December 2008.

15.2.3 Recovery of market rates of license fee from CGEWHO

DoE had allotted 1755 sq. feet of office accommodation to the Central
Government Employees Welfare Housing Organisation (CGEWHO) in
Janpath Bhawan between October 1990 and July 1991 purely on temporary
basis at market rates of license fee, subject to the approval of the Cabinet
Committee on Accommodation (CCA). The Government did not agree to
allotment of accommodation to CGEWHO, and DoE asked CGEWHO to
vacate the allotted accommodation by June 1992.

CGEWHO, however, continued to occupy the accommodation, and had also
not paid rent as revised from time-to-time, despite DoE’s raising demand bills
at regular intervals. The total outstanding rent dues from CGEWHO as of
January 2008 was Rs 0.83 crore.

17 Banks, 8 PSUs, 2 Post Offices, 4 NGOs

230


Report No. 9of 2010-11

On being pointed out in Audit, DoE initiated recovery proceedings against
CGEWHO in February 2008, and recovered an amount of Rs. 0.83 crore
(representing outstanding dues upto January 2008) between May and
September 2008. However, CGEWHO had still not vacated the premises, and
dues on account of license fee from February 2008 onwards continued to
accumulate. In reply, the DOE stated (April 2009) that the matter was being
pursued by them with the CGEWHO.

15.2.4 Recovery of market rates of license fee from Kendriya Bhandar

DoE allotted 24,490 sq. ft of office accommodation, 39 residential units at
Delhi and other places, and 11 shops in various markets of Government
colonies to the Central Government Employees Consumer Co-operative
Society Limited (Kendriya Bhandar) at a nominal rate of Re. 1 per month.

In November 2004, the Ministry reviewed allotment of general pool
accommodation to Kendriya Bhandar and the matter of levy of market rent as
revised from time to time and noted that it had since become a dividend
paying commercial organization and had stopped selling commodities under
the public distribution system, and that its activities had gone beyond selling
of grocery and consumer items in the Government housing colonies.
Consequently, in November 2005, DoE decided that no fresh allotments would
be made to the Kendriya Bhandar and similar organizations, existing
accommodation would be got vacated in a phased manner over a period of
three years from November 2005, and market rates of license fee would be
charged from November 2005 onwards till the date of vacation of office /
residential accommodation. DoE, however, did not follow up on its decision
by initiating either recovering rent at market rates or initiating eviction
proceedings for vacation of accommodation. The rent dues for the period from
November 2005 to March 2010 amounted to Rs. 4.53 crore.

On being pointed out in Audit, the DoE/ Ministry stated (April-May 2009) that
recovery proceedings had already been initiated against the Kendriya Bhandar,
and the damages bills were being issued.

Thus, due to inaction on the part of DoE, substantial amount of rent arrears
could not be recovered from the non-entitled persons, organizations and
entities. DoE also did not take effective action to initiate eviction proceedings
against such defaulting persons/organizations despite acute shortage of
accommodation in the General pool.

231


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Central Public Works Department

15.3 Failure to get Ready Mixed Concrete Batching Plant operational

Despite the Ministry’s assurance in March 2004, the CPWD took no
action to operationalise an idle ready mixed concrete batching plant, and
there is practically no likelihood of the plant becoming functional.
Further, the CPWD’s indecisiveness resulted in 7.38 acres of prime land
in Delhi remaining unutilized since 1995,

Paragraph 12.2 of the C&AG’s Audit Report No. 2 of 2003 (Union
Government — Transaction Audit Observations) highlighted infructuous
expenditure of Rs. 3.14 crore by the Central Public Works Department
(CPWD) on a ready mixed concrete batching plant at Ghitorni” without
ensuring the feasibility of its erection and rectifying other deficiencies. In their
Action Taken Report of March 2004, the Ministry stated that the CPWD was
trying to get the plant operational at the earliest.

Audit scrutiny in July 2008, however, revealed that the CPWD had taken no
concrete steps to operationalise the plant. In June 2007, CPWD had organized
a meeting with four contractors to explore the viability of the plant, wherein it
was emphasized that the plant was obsolete, and not commercially viable. The
temporary permission granted by the Delhi Development Authority for
operationalisation of the plant on the earmarked land expired in May 2008.

Tn May 2008, the CPWD proposed to dispose off the plant through auction to
realize its salvage value and minimize the loss to Government; however, no
concrete steps had been taken, as of April 2009, to dispose off the plant, which
occupies 7.38 acres of area with a market value of Rs. 53.31 crore’.

Field visit by audit in July 2008 revealed that the plant was in a state of
complete disrepair, and surrounded by dense weeds.

In audit’s opinion, there is practically no likelihood of the plant becoming
operational; further, indecisiveness of the CPWD resulted in prime land of
7.38 acres in New Delhi remaining unutilized since 1995.

* To the south of Vasant Kunj, Delhi
3 As per the current schedule of rates of the Land & Development Office.

232


Report No. 9of 2010-11

CPWD’s Ready Mixed Concrete Plant at Ghitorni in a state of disrepair (July 2008)

The matter was referred to the Ministry in August 2008; their reply was
awaited as of March 2010.

15.4 Avoidable expenditure due to delay in acceptance of tender

Delay in finalization to tender by the Central Public Works Development
resulted in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 1.07 crore.

Rules provide that the time schedule prescribed in the CPWD Works Manual
for acceptance of tenders should be observed in order to minimize chances of
delay. Accordingly, the time available for dealing with tenders is 5 days for
the Executive Engineer, 20 days for the Chief Engineer, and 20 days for
approval by the Central Works Approval Board at New Delhi.

The Ministry of Home Affairs accorded (September 2004) administrative
approval and expenditure sanction for Rs. 17.64 crore for construction of 359
residential quarters (Type I to IV) at Group Centre, Central Reserve Police
Force (CRPF), Talegaon, Pune.

Scrutiny of records of the Central Division-ITT (PCD-ITI) Pune (merged with
PCD-II, Pune in April 2007) revealed (June 2007) that tenders for construction
of 255 (Type ID of these quarters were called on 15 October 2005 and were
opened on 29 November 2005. According to the tender conditions, the validity
period of the offers was 60 days from the date of its opening i.e., up to 28
January 2006. Against the estimated cost of Rs. 8.42 crore, the lowest offer
was for Rs. 11.25 crore. The tender documents were forwarded to the Chief
Engineer at Nagpur on 3 December 2005 (within five days) for approval. The
Chief Engineer sought extension of validity period from the lowest tenderer
initially up to 27 February 2006 and later up to 27 March 2006. Though the
contractor agreed for the initial request up to 25 February 2006
unconditionally, the second extension of time was subject to overall increase
in cost by 8.1 per cent. The Board rejected (8 March 2006) the tender as being

233



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

conditional and also expressed their displeasure at the abnormal delay in
forwarding the tender documents for approval. Subsequently, as directed by
the Chief Engineer, fresh tenders were called for on 29 April 2006 with the
last date for receipt being 5 June 2006 and validity up to 03 August 2006
incurring expenditure of Rs. 3.24 lakh on advertisement, and the work
awarded on 1 August 2006 to another contractor at the negotiated cost of
Rs. 12.29 crore. Thus, due to delay in finalization of tenders in the first
instance, the Department had to incur additional expenditure of Rs. 1.07 crore
including Rs. 3.24 lakh on re-advertisement.

The Department has not replied to the audit observation so far (August 2009).

The matter was referred to the Ministry in May 2008; their reply was awaited
as of August 2009.

Government of India Press

15.5. Delay in recovery of printing charges

The Government of India Press, Nashik has accumulated dues of
Rs. 23.91 crore at the end of March 2008 from 247 clients in 38
Ministries/Departments.

The Government of India Press (Press), Nashik undertakes printing jobs such
as administrative reports, acts, departmental codes, manuals, gazettes, staff
lists and forms indented by various Central Government
Ministries/Departments. Although the Press had not entered into individual
agreements with indenters, they were required to make the payments on
getting full supplies against their indents. There was no system of charging
penal interest in case of delay in payment.

Audit scrutiny of records of the Press revealed (June 2007/2008) that as at the
end of March 2008, Rs. 23.91 crore was yet to be recovered from 247 clients
in 38 Ministries/Departments. Age-wise analysis is given below:-

Table-1
y Amount outstanding
ear a
(Rupees in crore)

Over 10 years 7.07
5-10 years 5.07
3-5 years 2.63
2-3 years 0.37
1-2 years 0.41
0-1 year 8.36

Total 23.91

234


Report No. 9of 2010-11

The General Manager stated (June 2008) that the matter was being pursued
with the client departments by issue of reminders and also with the
Directorate. However, an analysis indicates that more than 60 per cent of the
pending dues is over three years old and if the current year’s dues were not
taken into account, they account for nearly 95 per cent of the receivables.

Thus, it is evident that the present follow up procedure has failed to produce
timely results. The Press, which is run on commercial principles, needs to
pursue the matter more effectively at appropriate level to ensure prompt
collection of dues.

The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 2008; their reply was awaited
September 2009.

235


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Andaman and Nicobar Administration

Directorate of Education

16.1 Double Payment of FCI

The Directorate of Education made double payment to FCI of Rs. 48.76
lakh as economic cost of rice for the Extended Mid Day Meal Scheme.
The amount is yet to be recovered from FCI.

Department of Food and Public Distribution, Government of India allocated
428.164 MT and 340.756 MT of rice in February 2005 and March 2006 to the
Andaman and Nicobar Administration (Administration) for providing
prepared/cooked mid day meal to the students of class VI to VIII during the
academic year 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively.

Administration paid an amount of Rs. 60.88 lakh to the Food Corporation of
India (FCD in November 05/January 06 towards the economic cost of 428.164
MT of rice for use in academic year 2005-06 but did not lift any rice. Thus,
the amount paid remained in deposit with FCI. Out of the said deposit, FCI
adjusted, in February 2007, a sum of Rs. 54.42 lakh towards the economic cost
of 340.756 MT of rice for the academic year 2006-07 and intimated the same
to the Directorate of Education, Andaman and Nicobar Administration. FCI
adjusted a further sum of Rs. 3.20 lakh in April 2007 towards transportation
cost. Directorate of Education, Andaman and Nicobar Administration,
however, in April 2007 made another payment of Rs. 48.46 lakh towards
economic cost for 340.756 MT of rice for the year 2006-07. Thus the
Administration paid twice for the same quantity of rice.

On being pointed out in audit, the Directorate of Education requested FCI to
refund a sum of Rs. $1.72 lakh’ including the balance amount of Rs. 3.26 lakh
from the previous deposit. However FCI has so far (May 2009) not returned
the amount despite issue of reminders in June 2008 and November 2008.

The matter was reported to the Ministry in June 2009, their reply was awaited
as of February 2010.

“Rs, 48.46 lakh + Rs. 3.26 lakh

236


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Union Territory of Lakshadweep

16.2 1.088 of interest of Rs. 29.75 lakh due to retention of funds outside
Government account

Retention of Rs. 135.50 lakh outside Government account for over 2
years, by the Director of Fisheries, resulted in loss of interest amount of
Rs. 29.75 lakh.

Receipt and payment Rules provides that no money shall be withdrawn from
Government account unless it is required for immediate requirement.

Based on an assessment of Fish Aggregation Devices (FAD) deployed by
National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) in the fishing grounds of the
island of Lakshadweep in February 2006, the Director of Fisheries, Kavaratti
accorded sanction (March 2007) for payment of Rs. 1.36 crore to the Director,
national Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Chennai towards deployment
(including repairs, maintenance design and fabrication) of eight numbers of
new FADs besides redeployment of seven numbers of detached ones. The
amount was drawn in March 2007 and kept in form of demand drafts
favouring the Director, NIOT Chennai. These drafts were continued to be
retained till October 2009 in the Directorate of Fisheries as NIOT did not
agree with some of the provisions of Memorandum of Understanding
proposed by DOF Kavaratti. This has resulted in the blocking up of
Government money besides loss of Rs. 29.75 lakh towards interest for the
period from the April 2007 to October 2009.

On this being pointed out, the Ministry stated (November 2009) that, as the
finalization of MoU with NIOT was delayed, the amount drawn in favour of
NIOT, Chennai for redeployment of FADs was deposited to Government
account in October 2009.

Thus by withdrawing an amount of Rs. 1.36 crore much in advance of actual
requirement before finalization of agreement/settlement of the terms and
conditions with the NIOT and retaining in the form of demand drafts for more
than two and half years, the DOF Kavaratti caused a loss of interest amounting
to Rs. 29.75 lakh.

237


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

STRY OF WATER RESOUR

Farakka Barrage Project

17.1 Non-recovery of license fee

The General Manager, Farakka Barrage Project, disregarded the
Ministry’s directive while fixing the license fee at flat rates and
allowed deduction at lower rates from occupants of Project quarters
resulting in non recovery of Rs 2.61 crore

Executive Engineer, Township Division, Farakka Barrage Project (Project) is
responsible for collecting license fee from occupants of quarters. The rates of
license fee fixed are lower than those prescribed for CPWD quarters for the
same type of accommodation. In August 1987 the Ministry of Urban
Development introduced flat rate of license fee for government
accommodation throughout the country. The rates were applicable for the
residential accommodation in general pool and also under various
Ministry/Departments of Government of India across the country, except in
respect of substandard /unclassified accommodation of Ministry of Defense,
accommodation for service personnel /offices of Ministry of Defense and
accommodation under the control of the Ministry of Railways.

Audit scrutiny conducted in August 2007 revealed that despite receiving
Ministry of Water Resources’ order in March 1988 along with copy of the
Ministry of Urban Development’s (Directorate of Estates) instruction, the
General Manager, Project did not revise the license fee at flat rate for Project
accommodation. Further, the General Manager, Project decided in July 2004
to close the issue of revision of license fee at flat rate in the Project, citing
special position of Project particularly due to temporary quarters and their bad
condition. However, the Director of Estates in March 1999 issued an order
requiring charging of 75 per cent of the flat rate of license fee for
substandard/unclassified accommodation. It also stated that old permanent
structures constructed prior to 1930 and old temporary structures constructed
before 1960, which were lacking in most of the basic facilities might be
classified as sub-standard/unclassified accommodation. Thus the quarters of
FBP colony did not fall under this category of sub- standard/ unclassified
accommodation. Audit also noticed that during the last 12 years the Project
incurred an expenditure of Rs 28.33 crore towards special repair and ordinary
repair and maintenance of the residential quarters in the said FBP colony.

238


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Thus, despite having clear directive from the Ministry, non implementation of
license fee at flat rate for Project accommodation had resulted in non recovery
of license fee at revised rates since July 1987, amounting to Rs 2.61 crore
leading to potential loss to government.

The matter was reported to the Ministry in July 2009; their reply is awaited as
of March 2010.

17.2 Loss due to non-deduction of surcharge and education cess

Failure on the part of the General Manager, Farakka Barrage
Project to issue instruction, as per the provision of the Finance Act,
resulted in non-deduction of surcharge and education cess on the
income tax realized from contractors’ bills with consequent loss of
Rs 31.71 lakh,

Finance Act 2005 ‘envisaged that in the case of every firm and domestic
company, surcharge at the rate of 10 per cent would have to be deducted on
income tax. The above provision was amended from the assessment year
commencing on 17 April 2008 when deduction of surcharge was to be made
subject to the condition that deduction of income tax exceeds Rs one crore.
Moreover, the amount of income tax, as increased by the surcharge, shall be
further increased by an additional surcharge at the rate of two per cent to be
called the education cess on income tax.

1

Audit scrutiny of contractors’ bills paid by the Farakka Barrage Project
(Project), since April 2005, revealed that the Project had deducted Rs 2.54
crore towards income tax from the executing contractors during the period
from April 2005 to March 2009. However, neither the surcharge nor the
education cess amounting to Rs 25.44 lakh and Rs 6.27 lakh was deducted on
the amount of such income tax so realized from the individual contractors, for
reasons not on record. The General Manger of the Project also did not issue
any instruction in this regard to the units of the Project. Non-deduction of
surcharge and education cess on such income tax realized is a failure on the
part of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer to comply with the provision of
the Finance Act and caused a loss of Rs 31.71 lakh during the said period.

In reply to a query issued in April 2009, the Senior Accounts Officer in-
charge of the Pay and Accounts Office of the Project confirmed deduction of
income tax only but not the surcharge and education cess.

The case was reported to the Ministry in June 2009; their reply was awaited as
of March 2010.

Section 2.6(b) of Finance Act 2005

239


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

CHAPTER XVII: GENERAL

18.1. Follow up on Audit Reports — Summarised Position

Despite repeated instructions/recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee, various Ministries/Departments did not submit
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on 81 audit paragraphs even
after the lapse of time limit prescribed by the Public Accounts Committee.

To ensure accountability of the executive in respect of the matters brought out
in various Audit Reports, the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) decided in
1982 that the Ministries/Departments should furnish remedial/corrective
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on all paragraphs contained in these Reports.

The PAC took a serious view of the inordinate delays and persistent failures
on the part of a large number of Ministries/Departments in furnishing the
ATNs within the prescribed time limit. In their Ninth Report (Eleventh Lok
Sabha) presented to the Parliament on 22 April 1997, the PAC desired that
submission of pending ATNs pertaining to the Audit Reports for the years
ended March 1994 and 1995 be completed within a period of three months and
recommended that ATNs on all paragraphs pertaining to the Audit Reports for
the year ended March 1996 onwards be submitted to them, duly vetted by
Audit within four months from the laying of the Reports in Parliament.

Review of outstanding ATNs on paragraphs included in the Reports of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Union Government (Civil) as of
October 2009 disclosed that the Ministries/Departments had not submitted
remedial ATNs on 81 paragraphs. Besides, there were 109 paras on which
final ATNs were awaited out of which one pertained to the Audit Reports for
the year ended March 1994 as indicated in Appendix-IT.

Though the Audit Reports for the years ended March 1996 to March 2008
were presented to Parliament each year between May 1997 and July 2009 and
the prescribed time limit of four months had elapsed in each case, the
Ministries/Departments were yet to submit final ATNs on 108 paragraphs as
of October 2009 (Appendix-I1).

240


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

18.2. Responses of the Ministries/Departments to Draft paragraphs

Despite directions of Ministry of Finance issued at the instance of Public
Accounts Committee, Secretaries of Ministries/ Departments did not send
response to 23 of 51 draft paragraphs included in this Report.

On the recommendation of the PAC, the Ministry of Finance issued directions
to all ministries in June 1960 to send their response to the draft paragraphs
proposed for inclusion in the Report of the C&AG within six weeks. The draft
paragraphs are forwarded by the respective audit offices to the Secretaries of
the concerned Ministries/ Departments drawing their attention to the audit
findings and requesting them to send their response within six weeks. The fact
of non-receipt of replies from the Ministries is invariably indicated at the end
of each such paragraph included in the Audit Report.

In 23 out of the 51 paragraphs included in this Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2009, replies from the
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments were awaited, as detailed in
Appendis-IV.

Nret-—

New Delhi (AK. P. (AIK)
Dated: 3 May, 2010 Director General of Audit
Central Expenditure

Countersigned.
New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated: 4 May, 2010 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

241



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

APPENDIX-I
(Referred to in Paragraph No. 1.2)

Auditee Profile
1 Ministry of Agriculture

11 Department of Agriculture & Cooperation

The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) is responsible for
formulating and implementing national policies and programmes for achieving
rapid agricultural growth and development through optimum utilization of the
country’s land, water, soil and plant resources, undertaking developmental
planning, agricultural census, assist States in undertaking scarcity relief
measures and in management of natural calamities, formulating cooperative
policy relating to cooperation and cooperative organisations, cooperative
training and education, bringing about integrated development of marketing of
agricultural produce, safeguards the economic interests of the farming
community in general, and formulating policies for improving agricultural
extension services by adopting new institutional arrangements through the
involvement of NGOs, farmers’ organizations and agricultural universities.

1.2 Department of Agricultural Research and Education

The Department of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE) provides
linkage for the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) for its
effective working by providing administrative services and support. The
Director General of ICAR is concurrently Secretary to the DARE within
overall framework of Government. The ICAR is vested with full authority to
determine basic strategies, formulate operational policies, develop necessary
programmes, and to ensure their implementation on sound technical and
economic principles.

13 Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries

The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries (DADF) is
responsible for matters relating to livestock production, preservation,
protection and improvement of stocks, dairy development, and also for matters
relating to the Delhi Milk Scheme and the National Dairy Development Board.
It also looks after all matters pertaining to fishing and the Fisheries
Development Board. The Department advises State Governments/ Union

243


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Territories in the formulation of policies and programmes in the field of
animal husbandry, dairy development and fisheries.

2 Ministry of Civil Aviation

The Ministry of Civil Aviation is responsible for the formulation of national
policies and programmes for development and regulation of civil aviation, and
for devising and implementing schemes for orderly growth and expansion of
civil air transport. Its functions also extend to overseeing the provision of
airport facilities, air traffic services, carriage of passengers and goods by air,
safeguarding civil aviation operations, regulation of air transport services, and
licensing of aerodromes, air carriers, pilots and aircraft maintenance engineers.
The Ministry also administratively controls the institution of Commission of
Railway Safety, which is responsible for safety in rail travel and operations in
terms of the provisions of the Railways Act.

3 Ministry of Commerce and Industry
3.1 Department of Commerce

The mandate of the Department of Commerce (DOC) is regulation,
development and promotion of India’s international trade and commerce
through formulation and implementation of appropriate international trade &
commercial policies. The basic role of the Department is to facilitate the
creation of an enabling environment and infrastructure for accelerated growth
of international trade. The Department formulates implements, reviews and
monitors the Foreign Trade Policy, which provides the basic framework of
policy and strategy to be followed for promoting exports and trade. Besides,
the Department is also entrusted with responsibilities relating to multilateral
and bilateral commercial relations, Special Economic Zones, state trading,
export promotion & trade facilitation, and development and regulation of
certain export oriented industries and commodities.

3.2 Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion

The Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP) is responsible for
formulation and implementation of promotional and developmental measures
for growth of the industrial sector, keeping in view national priorities and
socio-economic objectives. While individual administrative ministries look
after the production, distribution, development and planning aspects of
specific industries allocated to them, the Department of Industrial Policy &
Promotion is responsible for the overall industrial policy.

244


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

4 Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
41 Department of Posts (DoP)

Brief profile of DoP is given in paragraph 5.1 of Chapter 5 of this Report.
4.2 Department of Telecommunication (DoT)

DoT is primarily responsible for policy formulation and grant of licences to
operators for providing basic and value added services. The DoT also
administers the Universal Service Obligation (USO) Fund, which was
constituted in April 2002. The USO Fund is to be used primarily to provide
subsidies for expansion of telecommunication facilities in rural/remote areas
of the country.

Further, the Department allocates frequency and manages radio
communications in close coordination with the International bodies through its
Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) wing. The WPC is the nodal
agency to plan, authorise, and regulate use of spectrum within the country. It
deals with the policy of spectrum management, wireless licensing, frequency
assignments, international coordination for spectrum management and
administration of Indian Telegraph Act 1885, for radio communication
systems. The WPC is also responsible for enforcing wireless regulatory
measures and monitoring the wireless transmission of all users in the country.

The responsibility for assessing and collecting licence fee and spectrum
charges rests with the Controllers of Communications Accounts (CCAs) in
each of the 26 Telecom Circles.

43 Department of Information Technology
This Department is covered in CAG’s Report on Scientific Departments.

5 Ministry of External Affairs

Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is responsible for conducting relations
with foreign and commonwealth countries. The main functions of the MEA
include conducting all matters affecting foreign, diplomatic and consular
offices and its specialist agencies in India, entering into political treaties,
agreements and conventions with foreign and commonwealth countries,
providing passport, visa and all consular services, carrying out external
publicity, providing economic and technical assistance to neighbouring
countries etc. The activities of the MEA are carried out through its various

245


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

organisations such as Indian Council of World Affairs, Foreign Service
Institute, Indian Council of Cultural Relations etc. The representatives of the
Ministry in the Missions/Posts abroad assist the Ministry in carrying out its
mandated functions.

6 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
6.1 Department of Health and Family Welfare

Department of Health and Family Welfare is responsible for implementation
of various programmes on a national scale in the areas of health & family
welfare, prevention and control of major communicable diseases and
promotion of traditional and indigenous systems of medicines. The department
also assists states in preventing and controlling the spread of seasonal disease
outbreaks and epidemics through technical assistance. The department
functions through its attached offices of Director General of Health Services
and various subordinate offices, by way of grants-in-aid to the autonomous
bodies, Non Government Organisations etc. Various world bank assisted
programmes for control of AIDS, Malaria, Leprosy and Tuberculosis are also
implemented by the department.

6.2 Department of AYUSH

The Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH) was established with a view to providing focused
attention to development of Education & Research in Ayurveda, Yoga &
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy systems. The objectives of the
department include upgradation of the educational standards in the Indian
Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy colleges in the country,
strengthening existing research institutions, to draw up schemes for
promotion, cultivation and regeneration of medicinal plants used in these
systems, to evolve Pharmacopoeial standards for Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homoeopathy drugs.

7 M

istry of Home Affairs

The main responsibilities of the Ministry of Home Affairs are internal
security, management of para-military forces (Border Security Force, Central
Reserve Police Force, Indo Tibetan Border Police Force etc.) Centre-State
relations, disaster management, etc. The Ministry also extends manpower and
financial support, guidance and expertise to the State Governments for
maintenance of security, peace and harmony.

246


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

8 Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation

The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation is responsible for
formulation of housing policy and programmes (except rural housing which is
assigned to the Department of Rural Development), review of the
implementation of Plan Schemes, collection and dissemination of data on
housing, building materials and techniques, and general measures for
reduction of building costs, as well as nodal responsibility for the National
Housing Policy.

9 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises

The role of the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) is
mainly to assist the States in their efforts in promoting growth and
development of micro, small and medium enterprises, for enhancing their
competitiveness in an increasingly market-led economy and for enabling them
to generate additional employment opportunities. Besides, the Ministry also
attempts to address common concerns of these enterprises and undertakes
policy advocacy on behalf of the sector on issues critically affecting their
sustenance and growth.

10 Ministry of Rural Development
10.1 Department of Rural Development

The Department of Rural Development implements schemes for generation of
self employment and wage employment, provision of housing and minor
irrigation assets to the rural poor, social assistance to the destitute, and rural
roads. Apart from this, the Department provides support services and other
quality inputs such as assistance for strengthening of District Rural
Development Agency (DRDA) administration and Panchayati Raj Institutions,
training & research, human resource development, development of voluntary
action etc. for the proper implementation of programmes. The major
programmes of the Department are Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY), Swaranjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) and
implementation of National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA).

10.2 Department of Land resources

The Department of Land Resources implements schemes to increase the bio-
mass production by developing wastelands in the country and also provides
support services and other quality inputs such as land reforms, betterment of
revenue system and land records. It also undertakes development of desert

247


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

areas and drought prone areas in the country. The major programmes of the
Department are the Drought Prone Area Programmes (DPAP), the Desert
Development Programme (DDP), and the Integrated Wasteland Development
Programme (TWD). These aim at increasing soil and moisture conservation
and productivity of the degraded lands, thereby increasing the income of the
people.

10.3 Department of Drinking Water Supply

The provision of drinking water supply and extension of sanitation facilities to
the rural poor are the main components of the activities of the Department of
Drinking Water Supply. The major programmes of the Department are the
Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP) and the Total
Sanitation Programme (TSP).

i Ministry of Shipping

The Ministry of Shipping encompasses within its fold the shipping and ports
sectors, which include ship-building and ship-repair, major ports, national
waterways, and inland water transport. The Ministry has been entrusted with
the responsibility of formulating policies and programmes on these subjects
and their implementation.

12 Ministry of Textiles

The Ministry of Textiles is responsible for policy formulation, planning,
development, export promotion and trade regulation in respect of the textile
sector. This includes all natural and manmade cellulosic fibers that go into
the making of textiles, clothing and handicrafts. The developmental activities
of the Ministry are oriented towards making adequate quantities of raw
material available to all sectors of the textile industry and augmenting the
production of fabrics at reasonable prices from the organized and

decentralized sectors of the industry.

13 Ministry of Tourism

The Ministry of Tourism is the nodal agency for the formulation and
implementation of national policies and programmes and for the co-ordination
of activities of various Central Government Agencies, State Governments/
UTs and the private sector for the development and promotion of tourism in
the country. The functions of the Ministry in this regard, inter alia, mainly
consist of planning; in respect of all policy matters; co-ordination with other

248


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

ministries, departments, State/UT Governments; Regulation of standards and
guidelines; and infrastructure & product Development.

14 Ministry of Urban Development

The Ministry of Urban Development has the responsibility of broad policy
formulation and monitoring of programmes in the areas of urban development,
urban water supply and sanitation, These are essentially State subjects but the
Government of India plays a co-ordinating and monitoring role and also
supports these programmes through Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The
Ministry addresses various issues of urban sector through policy guidelines,
legislative guidance and sectoral programmes.

15 Ministry of Water Resources

The Ministry of Water Resources is responsible for laying down policy
guidelines and programmes for the development and regulation of country’s
water resources. The main activities of the Ministry include overall planning,
policy formulation, coordination and guidance in water sector; technical
guidance, scrutiny, clearance and monitoring of the irrigation, flood control
and multipurpose projects (major and medium) of the States/UTs;
infrastructure, technical and research support for sectoral development at the
state level; providing special central financial assistance and help in obtaining
external financing from the World Bank and other agencies etc.; overall
resources planning, establishment of utilizable resources and the formulation
of policies for exploitation of ground water, overseeing of support to state
level activities in ground water development; formulation of national water
development perspective and determination of water balance of different
basins and sub-basins for exploring the possibilities of inter-basis transfer; and
coordination and facilitation in regard to the resolution of differences or
disputes relating to inter-state rivers and overseeing of the implementation of
the inter-state projects.

249


Report No. 9 of 2010-11

APPENDIX-II

(Referred to in Paragraph No. 18.1)

Summarised position of the Action Taken Notes awaited from various
Ministries/Departments up to the year ended March 1994 as of October 2009

Report for Civil
2 Name of the Ministry/ | the year
No. Department ended | एक | Not received Under
March at all correspondence
|| . | Finance 1994 |! | |_-_| | |
[tom | ‘otal | 1 | | _- | | _1। |

250



APPENDIX-III

Report No. 9 of 2010-11

(Referred to in Paragraph No. 18.1)

Summarised position of the Action Taken Notes awaited from various
Ministries/Departments up to the year ended March 2008 as of October 2009

Sil.

Name of the Ministry/
Department

Report for
the year
ended
March

Civil

Not
received at
all

Under
correspondence

Agriculture

2007

Commerce

2004

2005

i

2007

Culture

2003

2004

2006

2007

Department of Posts

2003

2005

w

2006

2007

2008

Ninia

Department of
Telecommunication

1997

1999

2000

2003

2004

2007

Corporate Affairs

2005

2006

External Affairs

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

251



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

sl.

No.

Name of the Ministry/
Department

Report for
the year
ended
March

Civil

Not
received at
all

Under
correspondence

2007

5

4

2008

5

3

Finance

1998

1999

2000

2002

2003

2006

2007

2008

Food Processing
Industries

2007

Health & Family
Welfare

1997

2000

2001

2002

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Home Affairs

2007

2008

Home Affairs

(Union Territories)

2002

2007

2008

wl

Human Resource
Development

1999

2003

2004

2006

252



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Report for Civil
Sl. Name of the Ministry/ the year Not
No. Department ended — e received at Under
Mareh all correspondence
2007 2 | | | fo
2008 2 2 | - |
13. | Information and 2000 [1 | | - | | _1 |
Broadcasting
2004 Fo | | - | |_1 |
2005 bo | | - | po
2007 [1 | [| _- | |_1 |
2008 Po | 1 | |_- ||
[| 4. Labour 2006 L | - | |_1 |
15. Law & Justice 2003 1 1 | - |
16. Mines 2006 1 | 1 | |_- |
17. Overseas Indian Affairs 2007 [1 | | 1 | | - |
| | Road Transport and pate | | | | | - |
Highways
19. Rural Development 2002 Po | - | po |
2007 3 2 po |
20. Social Justice and 1996 1 | - | po |
Empowerment
2003 | 1 | | - | | 1 |
2006 1 | _- | po |
2007 po | |_- | | _1। |
21. Statistics and 1997 |_1 | |_- | |_1 |
Programme
Implementation 2000 |_1 | | - | |_1 |
22. Textiles 2003 [1 | Po | - |
2007 3 3 | _- ||
23. Tourism 2005 2 1 |_1 |
2006 2 2 | - |
2007 4 2 2
24. Tribal Affairs 1998 1 | - | |_1 |
2004 Po || | | ||
2008 1 | 1 | | _- ||

253



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

Report for Civil
Sl. Name of the Ministry/ the year Not
No. Department ended — 6 received at Under
Mareh all correspondence
25. Urban Development 2004 | 1 | [| - | po
2005 [1 | | - | fo |
2006 1 | - | | _1 |
2007 2 Fo |_1 |
26. Housing and Urban a
Poverty Alleviation cn | | | - | | |
27. Water Resources 2007 bo | | | | | ||
28. Women and Child 1999 [1 | | - | | _1 |
Development
2003 1 1 | - |
2008 Po | || | | - |
29. Youth Affairs and Sports 2007 1 | - | |_1 |
TOTAL 189 | 8 | | 108 |

254



Report No. 9 of 2010-11

APPENDIX - IV

(Referred to in Paragraph No. 18.2)

Response of the Ministries/Departments to draft paragraphs

No. of Paragraphs to

Reference to

Name of the Ministry/ Total No. of A
S.No. which reply not Paragraphs of the
Department Paragraphs meer eatin esi

|. | Agriculture 4 | ९ | |: |
2. Civil Aviation 3 | _ | 3.1
3. Commerce and Industry 4 1 44

Communication & Information
4. 2 1 5.1

. Technology

5. External Affairs S| | _ | 65
| «| Health & Family Welfare 5 3 4.3, 7.4, 7.5
7. Home Affairs 2 0 [४ |

Housing & Urban Poverty
ps | ai 2 | ९ | |

हु Alleviation

Micro Small & Medium. 4 | _' |
9. Enterprises
| 0. | Rural Development | | | fi | 1.1
11. Shipping 2 2 12.1, 12.2

13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 13.4
12. Textiles 7 | ६ | 1335, 13.6
3.5, 13.
13, Tourism | _ [| 1 14.1
14, Urban Development 5 3 15.3, 15.4, 15.5
15. Union Territory 2 | | 16.1
16. Water Resources 2 2 17.1, 17.2
Total [| | 23

255