 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
 
on 
 
 
 
 
 
Catering Services in Indian Railways 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
No.13 of 2017 

Preface 
 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President of India 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.   
This Report of the Comptroller and Aud itor General of India contains the 
results of performance audit of Catering Services in Indian Railways.  The 
instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to the notice in 
the course of test a udit for the period 2013-14 to 2015-16 as well as 
those which came to the notice in earlier years, but could not be reported 
in the previous Audit Reports.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
Contents 
 
 
Particulars Para no. Page 
Abbreviation   i 
Executive Summary  ii 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Organizational Structure 1.1 1 
Audit Objectives and scope 1.2 2 
Audit methodology and sample 1.3 2 
Audit Criteria 1.4 4 
Acknowledgement  1.5 4 
Chapter 2: Catering Policy and Planning 
Policy formulation and planning 2.1 5 
Policy uncertainty and its implications 2.2 6 
Planning for provision of adequate catering facilities 2.3 7 
Policy on pantry cars 2.4 8 
Chapter 3: Adequacy and availability of Catering Services 
Availability of catering services at various stations and 
trains 
3.1 11 
Setting up of Base Kitchens by Zonal Railways 3.2 13 
Managing static catering units 3.3 17 
Managing mobile catering units 3.4 19 
Catering through Specified Catering Units managed by 
IRCTC 
3.5 21 
Train Side Vending (TSV) 3.6 22 
Availability of Janta Meals/Jan Aahar 3.7 24 
Financial performance of departmental catering units 3.8 25 
Unauthorized catering vendors/sellers 3.9 27 
Chapter 4: Management of Catering Contracts 
Comparison of reserve price fixed and license fee 
offered 
4.1 29 
Ceiling limits on holding of catering licenses 4.2 30 
Loss due to irregular licensing for vending at Jhansi 
Station 
4.3 33 
Non-recovery of various charges and penalties from the 
catering unit licensee operators 
4.4 34 

 
Chapter 5: Provision of good quality and hygienic food 
Hygiene and cleanliness 5.1 38 
Unfair practices being followed in catering services 5.2 41 
Quality of food and checks and controls for quality 
assurance 
5.3 44 
Passenger satisfaction surveys conducted by Zonal 
Railways 
5.4 48 
Complaint Redressal system 5.5 49 
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Recommendations 
Conclusion 6.1 51 
Recommendations 6.2 53 
Appendix  55 
Annexure  59 
 
 

i iii 
 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full form
AHO Assistant Health Officer
AVM Automatic Vending Machine
CCM Chief Commercial Manager
CHI Chief Health Inspector
CR Central Railway
ECoR East Coast Railway
ER Eastern Railway
FC Food Court
FFU Fast Food Unit
FP Food Plaza
FSO Food Safety Officer
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
ICF Integral Coach Factory
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation
ISO International Organization for Standardization
LOA Letter of Acceptance
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
MRP Maximum Retail Price
NCR North Central Railway
NEFR North East Frontier Railway
NER North Eastern Railway
NR Northern Railway
NWR North Western Railway
PAD Proprietary Article Depot 
PDW Packaged Drinking Water
RDSO Research, Designs and Standards Organisation
SBD Standard Bidding Documents
SCR South Central Railway
SCU Specified Catering Unit
SECR South East Central Railway
SER South Eastern Railway
SR Southern Railway
SWR South Western Railway
TSV Train Side Vending
WCR West Central Railway
WR Western Railway
 
 

iiiv
Executive Summary 
Indian Railways (IR) carries about 22.21  million passengers per day. Passenger 
traffic of this magnitude needs the services of a well-managed catering and 
vending system for supply of healthy and wholesome food at reasonable prices. The 
catering services are provided by IR departmentally, through Indian Railway 
Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) and by engaging outside agencies at 
stations and in trains. 
Audit was carried out to assess the adequa cy and availability of good quality and 
hygienic food to railway passengers at affordable rates. Audit also assessed the 
management of contracts awarded for providing catering services at stations and in 
trains for ensuring good quality catering services. The audit examination covered 
the period from 2013-14 to 2015-16. 
Frequent change in catering policy and consequent transfer of responsibility to 
manage catering units from railways to IRCTC and back, have created a state of 
uncertainty in management of catering services provided to the passengers over 
the years. As the quality of catering services was not enhanced as expected, 
Railway Board has formulated a new Catering Policy 2017, which has been issued 
on 27 February 2017. As per the new policy, a number of catering activities which 
were assigned to IRCTC in 2005 policy and then transferred to Zonal Railways in 
2010 policy, have now been assigned back to IRCTC. However, the concerns of 
quality, hygiene, affordability and availability of food to passengers as identified in 
this Report are needed to be adequately addressed. 
The policy of progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power equipment 
in pantry cars was not followed while manufacturing the pantry cars in Integral 
Coach Factory, Perambur.  
Requirement of catering facilities on st ations and trains were not assessed 
comprehensively for each station in the form of Master Plans (Blue Prints) by all 
Zonal Railways. A large number of base ki tchens were located outside the railway 
premises, not subjected to quality checks  and thus, did not provide an assurance 
for quality, hygiene and cleanliness. In the new Catering Policy 2017, the 
responsibility of setting up and operation of base kitchens has been given to IRCTC. 
Though a time frame has been fixed for th e whole process of setting up of base 
kitchens and responsibility of Zonal Railways and IRCTC has been defined, penalty 
has been prescribed only for delay on part of IRCTC after handing over of site by 
the Zonal Railways to IRCTC. As such, accountability of Zonal Railways to carry 
forward the new Catering Policy of 2017 needed to be clearly demarcated. 

iiiv
Zonal Railways did not ensure provision  of pantry cars in a number of long distance 
trains. Alternative services through train side vending and/or base kitchens were 
also not provi ded in some of the trains checked in audit. Audit observed that the 
availability of Janta meals on stations was also not adequate.As the new Catering 
Policy has transferred the responsibility of management of Jan Ahaars to IRCTC, 
R a i l w a y s  n e e d  t o  e n s u r e  t ha t  a d e q u a t e  n u m b e r  o f  l o w  c o s t  J a n t a  M e a l s  a r e  
provided by IRCTC to passengers. 
Continued presence of hawkers and sale of unauthorized food on trains also 
indicated that the catering services provided on trains were not adequate. Audit 
inspected units including static and mobile units managed both by Zonal Railways 
as well as by IRCTC – departmentally or through licensees ,at selected stations and 
trains jointly with railway personnel. It was seen that h ygiene and cleanliness in 
respect of the food serve d was not ensured by the railways on stations and in 
trains.Unfair practices were being followed in execution of catering services at 
stations and trains. These deficiencies indicated that the contractors compromised 
on value for money in respect of food it ems served to passengers and action taken 
by Railway Administration for the deviation from the quality standards was not 
effective. 
Important Audit findings 
 Due to frequent policy changes, IR could not take effective steps to bridge the
gap to provide necessary infrastructure in terms of base kitchens, Static
Catering Units, Trains Side Vending arrangements and Automatic Vending
Machines etc.        (Para 2.2)
 Zonal Railways were required to prepare a Master Plan (Blue Print) of catering
services to be provided at each station and onboard trains. Blue Print for
provision of catering services was not prepared in seven Zonal Railways  (ECR,
ER, NFR, NWR, SER, SWR and ECOR).     (Para 2.3)
 Gas burners were to be progressively  switched over to electric power
equipmentin pantry cars in trains as per policy. However, ICF manufactured 103
pantry cars during April 2011 to March 2016 with provision for centralized LPG
cylinders, which were distributed to Zonal Railways.           (Para 2.4.1)
 Zonal Railways did not ensure provision  o f  p a n t r y  c a r s  i n  a  n u m b e r  o f  l o n g
distance trains. During joint inspection, it was seen that in ninetrains having a
run of more than 24 hours, no pantry car was provided. No Train Side Vending
Services were provided by NCR, SECR and SR for the trains which run for more
than 12 hours during the day time.             (Paras 3.1 and 3.6)

ivvi 
x Base kitchens were to be set up in ra ilway premises to monitor and control the 
quality and hygiene of food served in trains. However, only 16 base kitchens 
were located in railway premises. 115 base kitchens were located outside the 
railway premises and were not subjected to quality check. In respect of 128 
trains of seven Zonal Railways, meals were picked up from outside base 
kitchens.          (Para 3.2) 
x Railway Board instructed (January 2012) Zonal Railways to make efforts to 
improve the sale/availability of Janta me als so as to provide good quality food 
at affordable price to railway passenge rs. However, out of 74 stations where 
joint inspections were conducted by Audit, Jan Aahar units were not provided 
on 46 stations. Share of Janta meals sold to the overall meals sold in six Zonal 
Railways was declining in the last three years.     (Para 3.7) 
x During joint inspections of selected trains, audit observed a number of 
unauthorized vendors on platforms an d trains. During 2013-14 to 2015-16, 
2,39,096 cases were prosecuted by Rail way Protection Force and fine imposed 
in eight Zonal Railways.       (Para 3.9) 
x Audit checked 124 contracts awarded by eight Zonal Railways and observed 
that a major portion of contract value wa s paid as license fee to Zonal Railways, 
leaving a small margin of the contract value for the licensee for providing 
catering services. It may not be workable for the licensees to cater to the needs 
of passengers within the available marg in and may result in compromising the 
quality, quantity and prices etc.      (Para 4.1) 
x During the joint inspection  of selected 74 stations and 80 trains over Zonal 
Railways, Audit noticed that 
o Cleanliness and hygiene were not being maintained at catering units at
stations and in trains. Unpurified water straight from tap was used in
preparation of beverages, waste bins were not found covered, not empt
ied
regularly
 and not washed, food stuff were not covered to protect t hem
f
rom flies, insects and dust, rats and cockroaches were found in trains etc.
o Unfa
ir practices were being followed in  execution of cate ring services at
stations and trains. Bills were not given for the food items served in mobil e
un
its in trains. Printed menu cards with tariff for the list of food items sold
in the mobile units were not availabl e with waiters and Catering Managers
in trains. Food stuff served was less than the prescribed scheduled quantity,
unapproved packaged drinking water was sold, Proprietary Article Depot
(PAD) 
items were sold at the railway stations at maximum retail price (MRP)

vvii 
with weight and prices different from the open market and per unit price of 
food articles sold in railway premises is significantly higher. 
o Deficiencies in respect of quality of food served were noticed. Articles
unsuitable for human consumption, contaminated foodstuff, recycled
foodstuff, shelf life expired packaged and bottled items, unauthorized
brands of water bottles, etc., were offered for sale on stations
.
(Paras
 5.1 to 5.3) 
x Audit observed that though a complaint redressal system has been put in place, 
there is no reduction in the number of complaints over the years. It was also 
seen that the major share of complaints pertained to overcharging and quality 
i s s u e s .          (Para 5.5) 
Recommendations 
1. ICF may be directed to keep in view the policy of switch over from gas burners
to electric power equipment in pantry cars, while manufacturing pantry cars
.
2. Provis
ion of pantry cars may be considered in case of long distance trains as
per policy.
3. Railways may facilitate smooth transfer of catering units including base
kitchens to IRCTC by ensuring that the obligations on part of the Zonal
Railways are fulfilled and accountability of Zonal Railways to carry forwar d
the 
new Catering Policy of 2017 is clearly demarcated.
4. IRCTC may be obligated to provide low cost Janta meals on stations and these
s
hould be effectively advertised amongst the passengers.
5. The prescribed monitoring mechanism may be effectively exercised to ens ure
hyg
iene, cleanliness and quality of the catering services by IRCTC/licensees.
6. R
ailway Board may frame guidelines for assessing the workability of rates in
catering contracts so that the quality of the services is not compromised.
7. R
ailways may ensure effective checks and controls to stop unfair practices
such as, overcharging, serving food stuff less than the prescribed quanti ty,
s
elling non-authorised food items on stations and in trains, non-exhibition of
price card and not issuing receipts for the food stuff sold, by catering se rvice
provi
ders.

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 1
1
Chapter 1 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)
1
Chapter 1 - Introduction 
Indian Railway (IR) with approximately 66,687 route kilometers carries about 22.21 
million passengers per day served through 7,216 stations 1.  Passenger traffic of this 
magnitude needs the services of a well-managed catering and vending system for 
supply of tasty and wholesome food at reasonable prices to travelling passengers. 
Departmental catering was introduced in IR in 1955-56 on a ‘No Profit, No Loss’ 
basis at selected important stations and in certain train services, so as to set the 
standard and service as a model.  Due to recurring losses, Railway Board (RB) 
decided (May 1968) to adopt economy measures, which, inter alia, included 
handing over the units running with recu rring losses to contractors and run the 
departmental units on a nominal profit of three to four per cent, which was to be 
ploughed back for effecting improvement in the services.  
As per the Catering Policy of 2005, catering business of IR was progressively hived 
off to Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC).  In 2010, the policy 
was revised again and IR decided to take back the management of all catering units 
except Food Plaza
2, Food Courts 3 and Fast Food units 4 from IRCTC and manage 
them departmentally.  
As the quality of catering services was not enhanced as expected, Railway Board 
has formulated a new Catering Policy 2017, which has been issued on 27 February 
2017. 
1.1 Organizational Structure 
Directorate of Catering and Tourism under the direction and control of Member/ 
Traffic is responsible for policy formulation relating to catering services in IR. At 
Zonal level, the departmental catering is under the administrative control of the 
Chief Commercial Managers (CCMs).  In Zonal Railways where the control of the 
catering units is decentralized, the executive control in the matters referred to 
above rests with the Divisional Commercial Managers. 
In IRCTC, the responsibility of managing static catering units assigned to them lies 
with their respective Regional Offices. The work of awarding and managing 
contracts for mobile catering units, however, is the responsibility of the Corporate 
Office of IRCTC.  
1
 Indian Railway Year Book 2015-16 
2
 Food plaza is a Multi cuisine plaza in a variety of choice for eating.  The quality and rates for items are market driven. 
3
 Food court is a cluster of stalls at a nominated place where branded products/eatables are provided. 
4
 Fast food outlet is synonymous to snack bar where fast food items are sold through self-service counter. 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
2
Chapter 1 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
2 
1.2 Audit Objectives and scope 
The review covered examination of records relating to working and operations of 
departmental catering units, contract catering units and IRCTC catering units during 
the period from 2013-14 to 2015-16.  The audit objectives were to assess 
1. Whether there was proper policy and planning with regard to the catering 
services in Indian Railways? 
2. Whether the Indian Railways ensured availability of adequate catering 
services on stations and in trains and whether they were properly 
managed? 
3. Whether management of catering contracts for various static and mobile 
units ensured provision of good quality catering services?  
4. Whether the available catering units provided good quality and hygienic 
food at affordable rates to different classes of rail users?  
1.3 Audit methodology and sample 
E ntry  confe rences  were  he ld i n a ll Z ona l Ra ilwa ys a nd the au dit obje ctive s , sc ope 
and methodology were discussed with respective Zonal Railway Administrations.  
Field audit was undertaken at Railway Board, Zonal Railways and IRCTC during July 
2016 to October 2016 . Records were examined at Z onal Railway Headquarters, 
IRCTC and field locations (mobile catering units and static catering units). Joint 
inspections of departmental catering units, contract catering units  and IRCTC 
managed units, of selected stations, base kitchen s5, pantry cars of selected trains 
and trains without pantry cars were conducted along with Railway officials. A 
survey of passengers was also conducted to record the user perception of catering 
services provided by IR. 
Exit Conferences were held in various Zonal Railways, wherein Audit findings were 
discussed with Railway Administrations of respective Zonal Railways by  Audit. An 
Exit Conference was also held at Railway Board level on 16 February 2017 to 
discuss the audit findin gs and recommendations and reply from Railway Board was 
also received. The response of the Zonal Railways and Railway Board have been 
duly incorporated in this Report.  
There are various kinds of catering units, which provide services at stations and 
trains .  A s  o n 3 1 M a r c h 2 0 1 6,  t h e r e  we r e  79 5 7 s t a t ic  c at e r i ng  u n i t s  on  a l l  r a i l w a y  
stations of IR including 131 base kitchens, 164 departmental refreshment rooms, 
86 Food Plazas and 69 Fast Food Units. In addition, there were 358 mobile catering 
                                                        
5
 Base kitchen is a large cooking and packing f acility set up in the vicinity of railway premises from where food is distributed in 
mobile/static units. 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 1
3
Chapter 1 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
3 
units in trains for providing food and refreshments to travelling passengers in 
trains.  
For the present study, sample of various stations and trains and related issues were 
selected from various Zonal Railways on the basis of criteria given below: 
Table 1.1 – Criteria for sample selection and sample selected 
S. no Sample 
description 
Total 
population 
Criteria for selection Sample size 
selected 
1. Stations 7216 
stations 
1. One from category A1 station  
2. One from category A station 
3. One from other category viz. B to F 
category stations 
Joint inspection of three stations with 
Railway official was conducted. 
A1 - 28 
A - 26 
B to F - 20 
 
Total    74 
2. Trains 
 
 
2558 
Trains  
1. Trains served by licensee 
2. Trains served by departmental 
catering units 
Joint inspection of two trains having 
pantry cars was  conducted along with 
Railway Officials 
Joint inspection of selected trains was 
conducted along with Railway Officials 
80 
3. Tenders 
finalized for 
procurement of 
raw materials 
during 2015-16 
89 1. 50 per cent  of tenders awarded 
subject to a maximum of five  
2. In case of procurement of raw 
materials from the sale proceeds, 
without tender proces s, the 
procedure followed was checked for 
the selected static/mobile units  
46 
4. (i) Licensee 
agreement of 
Zonal 
Railways 
(ii) IRCTC   
agreements 
with licensee 
851   
 
 
204 
Three agreements of static units, and  
Two agreements of mobile units 
43 
5. Passenger 
satisfaction 
survey 
25 passengers at each selected station 
25 passengers on each train checked 
1800 
passengers 
at stations 
and 1975 
passengers 
in trains 
The details of the stations and trains selected in the samples are given in Appendix 
1 and 2 respectively. 
 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
4
Chapter 1 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
4 
1.4 Audit Criteria 
The provisions and instructions contained in the following documents were used as 
audit criteria for the study: 
1. Indian Railway Codes and  Manuals 
2. Catering Policy 2010 of IR  
3. Railway Board instructions regarding catering services 
4. Memorandum of Understanding between IR and IRCTC 
1.5 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the Railway Board and the Zonal 
Railway Administrations during the field audit as well as joint inspections 
conducted.  

5
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 2
Chapter 2 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
5 
Chapter 2: Catering Policy and Planning 
Audit Objective 1: Whether there was prop er policy and planning with regard to 
the catering services in Indian Railways? 
2.1 Policy formulation and planning 
Catering Policy in Indian Railways has seen frequent changes over the years in 
principles and guidelines governing it. Pr ior to 2000, the catering services were 
managed through departmental operations and through licensing of catering 
services. During 1999, IRCTC was set up un der the Companies Act and from 2002 
onwards, catering services were given to IRCTC. As per the Catering Policy 2005, 
IRCTC took over management of departmental caterings units of IR with a 
commitment to bring down the losses of departmental catering units to zero and to 
improve the quality. As IRCTC was not able to turn around these catering units and 
there were many complaints regarding catering services, Railway Board decided to 
take back catering services from IRCTC and formulated a Catering Policy 2010, with 
the objective of providing hygienic, good quality affordable fo od to the travelling 
public. As the quality of catering services  was not enhanced as expected, Railway 
Board has formulated a new Catering Policy 2017. The salient features of the new 
Catering Policy are as follows: 
x The new Catering Policy provides for transfer of catering services through 
mobile catering units, base kitchens, cell kitchens, refreshment rooms at A1 and 
A Category of stations, Food Plazas, Food Courts, Train Side Vending, Jan Ahaars 
to IRCTC. All other catering units like Refreshment rooms at B and below 
category stations, Automatic Vending Machines, Milk Stalls, Trolleys shall 
remain with Zonal Railways. 
x Food preparation and food distribution has been delinked. Food will be cooked 
by kitchens operated and maintained by IRCTC. IRCTC is permitted to engage 
service providers from hospitality industry for serving food in trains. 
x IRCTC will develop/refurbish new or exis ting kitchen units. These kitchens are 
expected to be modern, mechanized and quality ensured through a valid ISO 
Certification. IRCTC shall retain the ownership and shall be fully accountable for 
all the issues pertaining to setting up and operation of the base kitchens and 
quality of food. 
x The old catering stalls will be replaced gradually with the compact modular 
stalls of superior quality material. The me nu and tariff of catering units (other 
than Food plazas etc.) will be fixed by  IRCTC in consultation with the Zonal 
Railways/ Railway Board. Rates for meals in  the trains served by the IRCTC will 
be fixed by the Railway Board.  

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
6
 6 
 Officials of Railway Board, Zonal Railways and Division shall be authorized to 
inspect the kitchen units/ mobile catering units and taking penal action for the 
deficiencies noticed in catering services.  
 Criteria for license fee has been retained at 12 per cent of turnover. The fixation 
of license fee has to be done by Zonal Railways. The formula for fixing the 
license fee is to be devised by each Zonal Railway.  Revised criteria for ceiling of 
catering units allotted to private contracts has also been prescribed. 
2.2 Policy uncertainty and its implications 
As Indian Railways changed the catering policy a number of times, the 
responsibility of managing catering units on stations as well as in trains was 
shuttled between IRCTC and Zonal Railways. On account of new Catering Policy 
2010, catering units were to be transferred from IRCTC to Zonal Railways. However, 
difficulties were experienced in handing over units from IRCTC to Zonal Railways as 
contracts awarded by IRCTC were still in operation. Though IR has been aiming to 
run the catering units departmentally,  till such time, they were able to take over 
them and run departmentally, they operated some of the units through licensee 
contractors and were to provide/hire qualified supervisory staff for monitoring the 
work of licensees. As only a very small percentag e of units were being run 
departmentally, majority of units were still being run through licensees, but 
qualified supervisory personnel has not been hired to monitor the work of 
licensees. Managing these licensees and ensuring quality, hygiene, prices of t he 
food served has also been an area of concern for the railways.  
Staff issues such as re -deployment of staff from IRCTC to Railway and back, have 
also affected the catering services.  It was seen that t hough four Zonal Railways 
(ECoR, ER, NCR and SWR) ass essed the requirement of staff for conversion of 
contract unit to departmental unit, these were not provided. In SR, 1172 Group C 
&D staff were on deputation to IRCTC in April 2010 and 832 were repatriated when 
the catering units were to be taken over by the Zonal Railways. In SCR, as against 
the sanctioned strength of 295 posts, the actual strength operated was only 100. In 
ECoR, requirement of six  Group B, 499 Gr oup C and 2605 other category staff was 
assessed, but these were  not provided . In SWR , 36 Grou p C and 56 other posts  
were cleared by Finance department of SWR against the proposed requirement of 
278 posts by Commercial department. 
Subsequent to policy change in 2010, handing/taking over and reconciliation of 
accounts were not done properly and dues  between IRCTC and Zonal Railways  

7
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 2
Chapter 2 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
7 
remained u n s e t t l e d  f o r  a  l o n g  t i m e .   Audit observed that 52646 static units and 
2367 m o b i l e  c a t e r i n g  u n i t s  w e r e  t a k e n  o v e r  b y  Z o n a l  R a i l w a y s  f r o m  I R C T C  prior 
to/during 2011-12. 156 static units and 31 mob ile units were yet to be taken over 
from IRCTC. It was seen that due to  non-reconciliation of accounts between IR and 
I R C T C ,  a n  a m o u n t  o f  ` 25.56 crore due to be paid by IRCTC to IR could not be 
realized by 1 48 Zonal Railways. The un -realized amount was out standing on 
account of expired business share on catering units, stores and equipment of 
departmental catering unit at the time of handing over to IRCTC, security deposit 
on expired business and current business share etc. 
Frequent change s in catering poli cy and consequent transfer of responsibility to 
manage catering units from railways to IRCTC and back, have created a state of 
uncertainty in management of catering services provided to the passenger over 
the years. On account of these policy changes, rail ways have not taken effective 
steps to bridge the gap to provide necessary infrastructure in terms of base 
kitchens, Static Catering Units, Train  Side Vending arrangements and Automatic 
Vending Machines etc. Frequent changes also led to coordination issues between 
the railways and IRCTC and legal disputes with contractors (as discussed in Para 
3.3). 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (February 2017) that as the condition of 
catering services over IR did not improve, as recommended by two committees 
namely, Debroy Committee and Shreedharan Committee, Railways are formulating 
a new catering policy, where catering services are proposed to be handed over to 
IRCTC in a phased manner.  During Exit Conference, Railway Board stated (February 
2017) that the new policy  will unbundle services, wherein works related to cooking 
of food items and supply to passengers would be managed and supervised 
separately. 
In the new Catering Policy 2017, a number of catering activities which were 
assigned to IRCTC in 2005 policy and th en transferred to Zonal Railways in 2010 
policy, have now been assigned back to IRCTC.  However, the concerns of quality, 
h y g i e n e ,  a f f o r d a b i l i t y  a n d  a v a i l a b i l i t y  o f  f o o d  t o  p a s s e n g ers as identified in this 
Report are needed to be adequately addressed. 
2.3 Planning for provision of adequate catering facilities 
As per instructions 9, Zonal Railways were required to prepare a Master Plan (Blue 
Print) of cate ring  s ervices to be  provided at e ach stati on a nd on b oa rd tra ins. The 
'Blue Print' was to be treated as a ‘Vision document’ to plan and ensure provision 
                                                        
6
 CR 363, ECoR  128, ECR 808, ER 203, NCR 396, NER 331, NFR 294, NR 586, NWR 520, SCR 133, SER 238, SR 698, SWR 191, 
WCR 375 
7
 CR 28, ECoR 27, ER 16, NFR 24, NR 34, NWR 6, SCR 11, SER 25, SR 45, SWR 20  
8
ECoR, ECR, ER, NCR, NER, NFR, NR, NWR, SCR, SER, SECR, SR, SWR & WCR  
Chapter 2 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
8 
of adequate catering services for the tr avelling public. Railway Board emphasized 
(February 2014) the need for a comprehensive Master Plan and regular updation of 
this plan by Zonal Railways. 
The status of preparation of Master Plan (Blue Print) by various Zonal Railways 
during the period of review was checked in audit. It was seen that   
x Blue Print for provision of catering se rvices was not prepared in seven Zonal 
Railways (ECR, ER, NFR, NWR, SER, SWR and ECoR). 
x Blue prints were prepared in nine Zonal Railways (SR, WR, SCR, NCR, NR, SECR, 
CR, NER and WCR). Blue Print of SR and NR was not approved by Railway Board. 
x Only six Zonal Railways (CR, NER, NR, SCR, WR and WCR) reviewed and 
periodically updated the Master Plan. Other Zonal Railways had not reviewed 
and updated the plan. 
Thus, requirement of catering facilities on  stations and trains were not assessed 
comprehensively for each station in the form of Master Plans (Blue Prints). 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (Feb ruary 2017) that after preparation of the 
blue print, setting up/provision catering units at stations and platforms is 
continuous exercise. However, there is a need to prepare blue print by all Zonal 
Railways, review and update the same periodic ally, so that services are provided as 
planned.  
As per the new Catering Policy 2017, Zonal Railways, in coordination with Divisions 
and IRCTC will be required to prepare afresh, a comprehensive blue print for 
catering units at each station. Zonal Railw ays are required to ensure that adequate 
facilities are available on stations for prov iding catering services to passengers. As 
such, the responsibility of preparing a co mprehensive plan continues to be with 
Zonal Railways, which they have to fulfill in coordination with IRCTC. The 
instructions of 2010 policy have been retained without addressing the non-
compliance of this aspect by the Zonal Railway since 2010. 
 
2.4 Policy on pantry cars  
2.4.1 Manufacturing of pantry cars with provision for LPG cylinders 
As per the Catering Policy 2010, the mobile catering services shall be provided with 
suitable designed pantry cars and equipment of state-of-art technology.  There 
should be progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power equipment. 
As far as static units are concerned, ther e should be no cooking on platforms at 
sub-urban stations.  
                                                                                                                                                                       
9
Clause 5.1 of Catering Policy 2010 and Railway Board instructions of November 2010 
Chapter 2 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
8 
of adequate catering services for the tr avelling public. Railway Board emphasized 
(February 2014) the need for a comprehensive Master Plan and regular updation of 
this plan by Zonal Railways. 
The status of preparation of Master Plan (Blue Print) by various Zonal Railways 
during the period of review was checked in audit. It was seen that   
x Blue Print for provision of catering se rvices was not prepared in seven Zonal 
Railways (ECR, ER, NFR, NWR, SER, SWR and ECoR). 
x Blue prints were prepared in nine Zonal Railways (SR, WR, SCR, NCR, NR, SECR, 
CR, NER and WCR). Blue Print of SR and NR was not approved by Railway Board. 
x Only six Zonal Railways (CR, NER, NR, SCR, WR and WCR) reviewed and 
periodically updated the Master Plan. Other Zonal Railways had not reviewed 
and updated the plan. 
Thus, requirement of catering facilities on  stations and trains were not assessed 
comprehensively for each station in the form of Master Plans (Blue Prints). 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (Feb ruary 2017) that after preparation of the 
blue print, setting up/provision catering units at stations and platforms is 
continuous exercise. However, there is a need to prepare blue print by all Zonal 
Railways, review and update the same periodic ally, so that services are provided as 
planned.  
As per the new Catering Policy 2017, Zonal Railways, in coordination with Divisions 
and IRCTC will be required to prepare afresh, a comprehensive blue print for 
catering units at each station. Zonal Railw ays are required to ensure that adequate 
facilities are available on stations for prov iding catering services to passengers. As 
such, the responsibility of preparing a co mprehensive plan continues to be with 
Zonal Railways, which they have to fulfill in coordination with IRCTC. The 
instructions of 2010 policy have been retained without addressing the non-
compliance of this aspect by the Zonal Railway since 2010. 
 
2.4 Policy on pantry cars  
2.4.1 Manufacturing of pantry cars with provision for LPG cylinders 
As per the Catering Policy 2010, the mobile catering services shall be provided with 
suitable designed pantry cars and equipment of state-of-art technology.  There 
should be progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power equipment. 
As far as static units are concerned, ther e should be no cooking on platforms at 
sub-urban stations.  
                                                                                                                                                                       
9
Clause 5.1 of Catering Policy 2010 and Railway Board instructions of November 2010 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
8
Chapter 2 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
8 
of adequate catering services for the tr avelling public. Railway Board emphasized 
(February 2014) the need for a comprehensive Master Plan and regular updation of 
this plan by Zonal Railways. 
The status of preparation of Master Plan (Blue Print) by various Zonal Railways 
during the period of review was checked in audit. It was seen that   
x Blue Print for provision of catering se rvices was not prepared in seven Zonal 
Railways (ECR, ER, NFR, NWR, SER, SWR and ECoR). 
x Blue prints were prepared in nine Zonal Railways (SR, WR, SCR, NCR, NR, SECR, 
CR, NER and WCR). Blue Print of SR and NR was not approved by Railway Board. 
x Only six Zonal Railways (CR, NER, NR, SCR, WR and WCR) reviewed and 
periodically updated the Master Plan. Other Zonal Railways had not reviewed 
and updated the plan. 
Thus, requirement of catering facilities on  stations and trains were not assessed 
comprehensively for each station in the form of Master Plans (Blue Prints). 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (Feb ruary 2017) that after preparation of the 
blue print, setting up/provision catering units at stations and platforms is 
continuous exercise. However, there is a need to prepare blue print by all Zonal 
Railways, review and update the same periodic ally, so that services are provided as 
planned.  
As per the new Catering Policy 2017, Zonal Railways, in coordination with Divisions 
and IRCTC will be required to prepare afresh, a comprehensive blue print for 
catering units at each station. Zonal Railw ays are required to ensure that adequate 
facilities are available on stations for prov iding catering services to passengers. As 
such, the responsibility of preparing a co mprehensive plan continues to be with 
Zonal Railways, which they have to fulfill in coordination with IRCTC. The 
instructions of 2010 policy have been retained without addressing the non-
compliance of this aspect by the Zonal Railway since 2010. 
 
2.4 Policy on pantry cars  
2.4.1 Manufacturing of pantry cars with provision for LPG cylinders 
As per the Catering Policy 2010, the mobile catering services shall be provided with 
suitable designed pantry cars and equipment of state-of-art technology.  There 
should be progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power equipment. 
As far as static units are concerned, ther e should be no cooking on platforms at 
sub-urban stations.  
                                                                                                                                                                       
9
Clause 5.1 of Catering Policy 2010 and Railway Board instructions of November 2010 

9
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 2
Chapter 2 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
9 
 
 
Fig. 1: Use of open flame gas burner in Train No. 12955 
Mumbai Central - Jaipur Superfast Express (07.10.2016) 
 
Fig. 2: Use of open flame gas burner in Train No. 12925  
Paschim Express (29.10.2016) 
 
 
Fig 3: Use of gas burner in the pantry car of Train No. 
12541 (22.10.2016) 
Additional Member (Tourism and Catering) while commenting on setting up of base 
kitchens on priority stated (March 2011) that no cooking in the pantry cars and also 
no picking up food from kitchens located outside station premises should be 
encouraged.  High level committee (2012) enquiring into fire accidents in trains had 
recommended strict enforcement of 
instructions prohibiting cooking in pantry 
cars and recommended for cancelling the 
license of violating contractors and for 
imposing severe penalty, if found cooking 
in the pantry car.  
During review of records of 
manufacturing of pantry cars in Integral 
Coach Factory (ICF), Perambur, 
pertaining to the review period, audit 
noticed that  
x ICF manufactured 103 pantry cars 
during April 2011 to March 2016 at a 
total cost of ` 111.94 crore. In the 
newly built pantry cars, provision was 
made for centralized LPG cylinders 
with open flames instead of providing 
electric power equipment panels, 
counters etc. as specified in Catering 
Policy 2010. The newly build pantry 
cars were distributed to all the Zonal 
Railways
10. 
x In SR, repairs and replacement of the 
centralized LPG gas pipe lines in 50 
pantry cars were done at a cost of ` 
0.13 crore (2013-14) in contravention 
of the above policy.  
x During the joint inspection of mobile units during July 2016 to October 2016, in 
18 trains
11, it was seen that LPG gas cylinders were stacked and used for 
cooking.  
                                                            
10
SR-10, ECoR-10, WCR-1, ECR-8, SECR-4, CR-13, SWR-4, SER-7, NFR-10, NWR-3, NER-1, NR-9, WR-8, KRC-2, SCR-10, ER-3 
11
Habibganj Express -12153, Nandan Kanan Express-12815, Ajme r Puri Express-18422, Patna Kota Express-13239, Ziyarat 
Express-12395, Kamrup Express-15959/60, Kamakhya Ranchi Expr ess-15662, Lohit Express-15651, Poorvotar Sampark Kranti-
12501, Swaraj Express-12472, Bikaner Coimbatore Superfast Express-22475, Chhatisgarh Express-18238, Howrah Ahmedabad 
Express-12834, Howrah Yesvantpur Expr ess-12863, Yesvantpur Sampark Kranti -12629, Goa Express- 12780, Karnataka 
Express-12628, Jabalpur Katra Express-11449/50 
Fig. 1: Use of open flame gas burner in Train No. 12955 
Mumbai Central-Jaipur Superfast Express (07.10.2016)
Fig. 2: Use of open flame gas burner in Train No. 12925 
Paschim Express (29.10.2016)
Fig 3: Use of gas burner in the pantry car of Train No. 
12541 (22.10.2016)

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
10
Chapter 2 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
10 
x During 2011-12 to 2014-15, RCF, Kapurthala manufactured 73 pantry cars, all of 
which had provision of electrical cooking equipment.  
The instructions regarding no cookin g on platfoms at suburban stations, 
progressively reduced cooking on stall and trolleys on platforms etc. have been 
retained in the new Catering Policy 2017. 
2.4.2 Non-utilisation of pantry area in Jan Shatabdi 
There are 38 pairs of Jan Shatabdi trains running in IR. The rake formation consists 
of 13 Second Class and three AC Chair Car coaches.  All coaches have a mini pantry 
car which has electrically operated heating provision. Audit observed during joint 
inspection that these facilities have not been utilized and were dismantled. The 
mini pantry area was not utilized for the purpose of supplying hot and fresh food to 
passengers. This pantry facility was created in the coaches by reducing four seats in 
Second Class coaches and two seats in AC Chair Car. The revenue earning potential 
for these seats of 38 Jan Shatabdi trains over IR was `13.74 crore per year. 
The policy of progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power 
equipment in pantry cars was not followed while manufacturing the pantry cars 
in ICF. Pantry facility created in Jan Shatabdi coaches by reducing four seats in 
Second Class coaches and two seats in AC Chair Car, was also not being used for 
purpose of supplying hot food to the passengers. 
In their reply, Railway Board stated  (February 2017) that in respect of 
Rajdhani/Duranto trains, facility for el ectric burner/induction based cooking is 
being provided. However, for other Mail/Express trains, Research, Design and 
Standards Organisation (RDSO) has been advised to undertake feasibility study 
regarding additions/modifications in the pantry car so that complete ban on 
cooking on flame is enforced. 

11
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
11 
Chapter 3: Adequacy and availability of Catering Services  
Audit Objective 2: Whether the Indian Ra ilways ensured availability of adequate 
catering services on stations and in trains and whether they were properly 
managed? 
3.1 Availability of catering services at various stations and trains 
Clause 9.4 of the Catering Policy 2010, stipulated that pantry cars should be 
attached to Duronto, Rajdhani, long dist ance premier trains, superfast trains and 
Mail/Express trains with more than 24 ho urs journey time either way. The policy 
stipulated that pantry cars should be attached to more and more 
Premium/Superfast and Mail/Express trains. Priority for allotment of pantry cars 
for various Zonal Railways would be as under: 
¾ First priority to Duronto and Rajdhani Express trains. 
¾ Second priority to long distance premium, superfast trains. 
¾ Third priority to Mail/Express trains with more than 24 hours journey time 
either way. 
¾ Fourth priority, the remaining trains , preference to those trains where 
vestibules are provided. 
The policy provided for prioritization for attachment of pantry cars to long distance 
premium, superfast trains and Mail/Express  trains with journey for more than 24 
hours. Audit, however, observed that out of 718 Mail/Express trains with running 
time more than 24 hours, pantry car was not available in 291 trains. 
Audit undertook joint inspections of 80 select ed trains during July 2016 to October 
2016 and observed that 
x In respect of nine trains having a run of more than 24 hours, no pantry car was 
provided. In seven
12 out of these nine trains, neither services of train side 
vending were provided nor any base kitchen were nominated for providing 
food. 
x Similarly, in respect of ten trains having a run of more than 12 hours, but less 
than 24 hours, no pantry car was provided. In eight 13 out of these ten trains, 
neither services of train side vending were provided nor any base kitchen was 
nominated for providing food. 
x No Catering / e-catering services have been found in the Train No. 12403/12404 
which is running for 16 hours continuously (NCR). During passenger survey from 
                                                            
12
 22847 - Vishakhapatnam –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Express, 11123/24-Gwalior -Baroni Mail, 15018 - Gorakhpur –
Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Express, 22815 - Bilaspur – Ernakula m Superfast Express, 11466 - Ja balpur - Somnath Express and 
19019/20 - Bandra Terminus - Dehradun Express and 15661/16552 Kamakhya-Ranchi Express 
13
13141-  Sealdah–Haldibari Teesta Express, 12333 - Vibhuti Express Howrah - Allahabad City, 12403/04 Allahabad -Jaipur 
Express, 12555 - Gorakhpur - Hisar Express, 12849 - Bilaspur  - Pune Superfast Express and 22181 - Jabalpur - Nizamuddin 
Express, 19005/06 Saurashtra Mail and 13247/13248 Guwahati-Rajendranagar Capital Express 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
12
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
12 
55 passengers (27 up side and 28 down side) by Audit, passengers also 
expressed a need for catering services in this train. 
x Gorakhpur–Lokmanya  Tilak Terminus Expr ess (15018) of NER running for more 
than 36 hours (2 days and 1 night) covering a distance of 1710 km did not have 
a pantry car. Similarly, in Gorakhdham Superfast Express (12555), which is 
running for more than 12 hours has no pa ntry car. Passengers are compelled to 
take services of unauthorized vendors throughout the journey. During the joint 
inspection (July 2016 to October 2016) of Train No.13248 Guwahati-
Rajendranagar Capital Express and Train No.15662 Kamakhya-Ranchi Express, it 
was observed that these trains were operating without pantry cars. It was also 
noticed that 25-30 unauthorised ve ndors were selling un-approved/un-
branded/banned/local made items like br ead omelet, roti-sabji, Biryani, China 
made electronic items, tobacco, Cigarette, Jhalmuri etc. in these trains. In the 
feedback to railways, passengers emphasized the need of pantry car in these 
trains. 
As such, the extent of services provided in trains needed significant augmentation.     
During joint inspections of static catering units during July 2016 to October 2016 on 
the 74 selected stations it was seen that   
x The facility of a Food Plaza/Food Cour t/Fast food unit/Refreshment rooms was 
not available on six category A and A1 stations including Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus, Rajendra Nagar, Guwahati, Kamakhya, Rourkela, Kanyakumari and 
Chennai Central.  
x In four of these stations (Lokmanya T ilak Terminus, Rajendra Nagar, Guwahati, 
and Kamakhya) Automatic Vending Machines (AVMs)
14 were also not available. 
x Out of 74 stations where joint inspection s were conducted in audit, AVMs were 
not provided on 5515 stations. 
x All 20 Automatic Vending Machine taken over from IRCTC were closed on 30 
April 2016 in NCR. 
Annexure 1 a and 1 b 
Zonal Railways did not ensure provisions of pantry cars in a number of long 
distance trains. Alternative services through train side vending and/or base 
kitchens were also not provided in some of the trains checked in audit.  
                                                            
14
 For dispensing hygienically packaged catering items i.e. PAD items, PWD, eatable, tea, coffee, cold drinks etc., AVMs are 
used 
15
Mumbai CST, Pune, Bhusaval, Lokmanya Tilak Terminus, Wadi , Titlagarh, Patna, Rajendra Nagar, Sheikapura, Howrah, 
Asansol, Bolpur, Allahabad, Agra Fort, Gwalior, Gorakhpur, Kathgodam, LucknowJn., Manduadih, Salempur, Kamakhya, 
TinsukiaJn, New Bongaigaon, Rangapara North Jn., New Delhi,  Pathankot, Ludhiana, H Nizamuddin, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Abu 
Road, Modran, Secunderadad, Mahbubnagar, Kazhipet, Renigunta, Gondia, Nadikudi, Raipur, Anuppur, Raigarh, Bilaspur, 
Adra ,Tata & Bokaro Steel City, Kanniyakumari, ErnakulamJn, KSR Bengaluru, Bengaluru Cantt, Gadag, Guna, Damoh, Mumbai 
Central, Jam Nagar, Nandurbar, Mumbai Churchgate 

13
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
13 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (Feb ruary 2017) that e-catering services has 
been introduced on all major stations, which will ensure provision of catering 
services in almost all important trains.  
As per the new Catering Policy 2017, it has been decided to transfer base kitchens, 
and mobile catering to IRCTC from the Zo nal Railways. These activities were taken 
over by Zonal Railways after Catering Policy 2010 came into force. 
3.2 Setting up of base kitchens by Zonal Railways 
Para 6.1 of the Catering Policy 2010 stipulated setting up of a grid of modern mega, 
medium and small base kitchens to ensure  that all mobile catering are serviced 
through these base kitchens to improve quality, hygiene, cleanliness and use of 
standard ingredients for food served on trains. All mobile units would pick up meals 
from the nominated base kitchens. The base kitchen would be set up on railway 
premises so as to reduce the distance for transfer of meals from such base kitchens 
to trains. Para 6.3 of the Policy stated  that Zonal Railways would manage base 
kitchen departmentally and during the intervening period, they would engage 
reputed professionals for creating state-of-art base kitchens.  
As on 31 March 2016, 131 base kitchens were  functioning over IR. It was observed 
that 
x Out of 131 base kitchens in IR, only four base kitchens (three per cent) (Mumbai 
CST, Ballarshah, Nagpur and Mumbai Ce ntral) were managed departmentally. 
Balance 127 base kitchens were set up by licensees of Zonal Railways during the 
review period. Six years after laying do wn the intent of creation of base 
kitchens departmentally, Zonal Rail ways have not created a grid of 
mega/medium base kitchens as checked during the period of review.  
x Clause 6.2 of the Catering Policy 2010 stipulated that base kitchen should be set 
up in Railway premises only. It was s een that only 16 base kitchens were 
located in railway premises and 115 base  kitchens were outside the railway 
premises. 
x As the available base kitchens were not adequate to cater to the needs of the 
trains, food was being procured by licensee from outside instead of being 
prepared in the base kitchens. It was seen that meals were picked up from 
outside base kitchens in respect of 128 trains of seven Zonal Railways (ECoR-24, 
ECR-15, SR-38, NER-9, NFR-1, NCR-1 and NR-40).  
x The Zonal Railways are responsible for ensuring the quality and quantity of food 
as well as cleanliness and hygiene of the base kitchens so as to conform to the 
standards laid down by Railway Board. In 16 base kitchens located on railway 
premises, quality checks by Zonal Railways  were done by railway officials. In 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
14
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
14 
 
 
 
Fig 4: Base kitchen at Gorakhpur, NER  
(18 October 2016) 
 
Fig.5: Material/Equipment dumped in one of the store room 
of base kitchen at Mumbai Central causing cluttering of the 
premises and adversely effect ing hygiene, WR  
(21 July 2016) 
respect of 115 base kitchens (88 per cent) which were located outside Railway 
premises, audit teams during joint ins pections (July 2016 to October 2016 ) did 
not find any documentary evidence to show 
that quality checks were conducted by 
Zonal Railways. 
 NER Administration records did not show 
any base kitchen existing over NER.  During 
joint inspection, audit team noticed a  base 
kitchen at Gorakhpur. However, no packed 
food was supplied to running trains by this 
kitchen, and it was primarily used for VIP 
duties. 
 In SER, two base kitchens were constructed 
and due to non -receipt of Standard Bid 
Document ( SBD) from Railway Boar d, the 
kitchens could not be put to use and ` 1.51 
crore spent on creation of two kitchens 
remain idle.  
 In ECR, one base kitchen is located at Rajendranagar which only serves the 
catering needs of two Rajdhani Trains. Category A1 station s like Patna and 
Darbhanga from where a large number of trains originate, have not been 
provided with a base kitchen. 
 In NCR, no base kitchens were planned and in WCR and SCR, though base 
kitchens were planned as per the blue print, no base kitchens was set up during 
the period of review. 
 The base kitchen at Mumbai Central 
(BCT) was augmented and 
modernized at a cost of ` 1.96 
crore. This augmentation was based 
on assessment by Railway 
Administration about the number of 
trains which could be dealt by the 
base kitchen and num ber of meals 
which could be supplied. Review of 
records revealed that the base 
kitchen at BCT was supplying meals 
for two trains prior and after 

15
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
15 
 
Fig 6: Cooking using LPG cylinders on 
platform at Chhapra Station, NER 
(04.10.2016) 
augmentation. The augmented capacity  of this base kitchen remained 
unutilized due to non-increase in number of trains to be catered to by this base 
kitchen. During joint inspection of base kitchen/BCT, audit observed that Plant 
and Machineries such as Battery operated motor trolleys purchased for 
transportation of food/meals from base kitchen to pantry cars, induction stove 
and Bhatti, Case Roll Packet Roller with belt, Motor, starter, induction stove, 
etc. worth ` 0.23 crore were lying idle, either  for want of maintenance or due 
to non-utilization of the same. During the discussion in exit conference WR 
Administration stated that under utilisation and idling of equipment were on 
account of less requirement.  
x As per Railway Board's instructions (November 
2010) refreshment rooms/major static 
catering units should preferably be converted 
to Cell kitchen or Jan Ahaar on need basis.  
Though major static units were available over 
various stations, no action was taken to 
convert them to cell kitchens/Jan Ahaar by the 
Zonal Railways. 
x No base kitchen/cell kitchen was available for 
Chhapra Station (NER). Catering personnel of 
stalls prepared tea/coffee and cooking food on 
the platforms using LPG cylinders, which is in 
contravention of instructions of not using 
flame for cooking on platforms.   
Only three per cent base kitchens were functioning departmentally and remaining 
were managed through licensees. A large number of base kitchens were located 
outside the railway premises and were not subjected to quality checks. Thus, 
there was no assurance that, the objective of servicing mobile catering units 
through base kitchens to improve quality, hygiene, cleanliness and use of 
standard ingredients for food served on trains, was achieved. 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (Febru ary 2017) that initially the infrastructure 
of the base kitchen was proposed to be set up by Zonal Railways and licensees of 
the mobile units were supposed to take supply of food from the base kitchen at 
transfer rate. In view of non-availability of  adequate trained staff, it was decided to 
operate base kitchens and mobile units through professional (licensees) and 
departmental supervision. They further stat ed that as per Para 1.2.2 of the SBD, 
licensee shall set up modern mechanised base kitchen on railway premises in case 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
16
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
16 
o f  a v a i l a b i l i t y  o f  s p a c e  o r  o n  t h e  railway approved areas in case space is not 
available.  However, as per the Catering Policy 2010, the base kitchens were to be 
set up on railway premises for which the existing base kitchens/cell kitchens 
a v a i l a b l e  o n  p l a t f o r m s  w e r e  t o  b e  d e v e l o p e d  a n d  i n  c a s e  o f  n o n-availability of 
existing base kitchens/cell kitchens, Zonal Railways were required t o take steps for 
construction of the base kitchens. No efforts were taken by Zonal Railways to set 
up adequate base kitchens at railway premises. The objective  laid down in the 
Catering Policy 2010, tha t the base kitchens would be railway specified, supervi sed 
and controlled to ensure quality of the food served on train could not be p ursued 
as most of the base kitchens remained outside the railway premises.  
In the new Catering Policy 2017 , the responsibility of setting up and operation of 
base kitchens has bee n g iv en to I RCT C. T he y wo ul d s ubm it a b usi ness plan w it hi n 
3 0  d a y s  o f  i s s u e  o f  t h e  p o l i c y  f o r  a p p r o v a l  o f  R a i l w a y  B o a r d  i n  a n o t h e r  3 0  d a y s .  
IRCTC will be responsible for maintaining quality of the food served. IRCTC shall not 
outrightly outsource or iss ue licenses for provision of catering services to private 
licensees. The kitchen set up would be modern, mechanised and shall acquire valid 
ISO certification within a specified time period. The policy further states that Zonal 
Railways and IRCTC shall final ize and submit to Railway Board an action plan within 
30 days of issuance of this policy, wherein the list of units along with the status and 
timeframe in which it shall be handed over/ taken over shall be stated.  
A time frame of five to eight months has been fixed for setting up of base kitchens 
starting from identification of site, preparation and approval of GAD plan, handing 
over of site, signing of agreement to setting up of kitchens. Official s  o f  Z o n a l  
Railway Headquarters,  D i v i s i o n  a n d  I R C T C  s h a r e  the responsibility of these 
functions. In the timelines prescribed, the activities to be undertaken in the initial 
7 2 d a y s  a r e  t o  be  do n e  p r im a r i l y  b y  Z o n a l  Ra i l w a y s a lo n g  w i t h  I R C T C . A f t e r  t ha t , 
I R C T C  w o u l d  s e t  u p  b a s e  k i t c h e n s  i n  a  f i x e d  t i m e  f r a m e  o f  t h ree to six months 
depending on whether the basic structure has been provided by the Zonal Railways 
or only vacant land has been provided by the Zonal Railways. Thereafter, there is a  
clause of penalty of ` one lakh per month per unit on IRCTC in case there is delay in 
setting up of base kitchen beyond the timeline of three to six months. The penalty, 
thus, is applicable on IRCTC for delays, only after handing over of site by the Zonal 
Railways to IRCTC. N o mechanism for fixing of responsibility has been  fixed if the 
d e l a y  i s  o n  p a r t  o f  Z o na l R a i l w a y s in the initial 72 days of the timeline fixed. The 
default in large number of assignments i s attributable to officials of Zonal Railways 
as well and unless they are made accountable to meet their responsibili ties within 
prescribed deadlines, the objective of timely completion of activities cannot be 
achieved. The Catering Policy of 2010 regarding setting up of base kitchen was 

17
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 17 
dependent on f ulfilment of its obligations by the Zonal Railways, which could not 
be achieved on account of deficient implementation by the m. Setting up of base 
kitchen was the most important component of the Catering Policy 2010 for 
ensuring quality, hygiene of the food to be made available to the passengers at 
affordable prices. Th us, accountability of Zonal Railways  to carry forward the new 
Catering Policy of 2017 needs to be clearly demarcated. 
3.3 Managing static catering units 
As per Para 4.1 of the Catering Pol icy 2010, Standard Bidding Document (SBD) for 
processing the contracts of static catering units by Railways were to be prepared by 
Railway Board by engaging suitable professional agency. Bid evaluation criteria and 
eligibility criteria were to be defined clearly in the SBD.  
It was observed that t he SBD was prepared and circulated to all Zonal Railways in 
September 2012, two years after the issue of the policy circular. The time taken was 
attributed to carefully drafting the SBD with the endorsement of legal , finance 
accounts and concerned executive department. Audit observed that on account of 
the delay in finalizing SBD, there were legal disputes 16 between the railways and 
the licensees in catering units due to discrepancies in the agreement, passenger 
complaints on over charging, temporary extension of license period, violation of 
ceiling limit conditions etc. 
The delay impacted the operation of major static catering units such as Fast Food 
Units, Food Plaza, Food Courts at all category of stations, Refreshment Rooms at A1 
& A category stations, Jan Ahaar, Mobile catering units etc., which were taken back 
by Zonal Railways  from IRCTC as per the Catering Policy 2010. As on 31 March 
2016, 5264units had been handed over to Zonal Railways by IRCTC. It was observed 
that 
 After taking over of 4210 catering units from IRCTC, Zonal Railways  could not 
take up the operations of catering units further for want of SBD. Hence, the 
existing IRCTC contracts were extended.  
 Though 30 catering units were taken over by SR  from IRCTC during 2010 -11, SR 
could not award contracts till March 2013 due to non -finalisation of SBD by 
Railway Board. After receipt of SBD from Railway Board , contracts were 
awarded by SR during 2013 -14. As on 31 st March 2016, only for 23 major static 
units contracts were awarded by SR. For the remaining seven units, Letter of 
Acceptance ( LOA) were issued for five catering units during 2015 -16 and the 
contractors were yet to commence their operation. In case of other two units 
for which contracts  were awarded during 2013 -14, the license agreements of 
                                                           
16  SR - 7 mobile and 70 static ( Chennai Central-8, Tiruchirapalli-12, Madurai-17 and Salem-43) 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
18
 18 
Fig 7: Refreshment Room Titlagarh at island platform no 2&3 
(21 September 2016) 
M/s Arenco catering at vegetarian refreshment room/Egmore (VRR/MS) and 
NVRR/MS was terminated during 2015-16 due to frequent complaints.  
 On account of delay in finalizing SBDs, the existing contracts were e xtended. 
There were legal disputes between SR and licensees in seven mobile and 70 
static catering units (Chennai – 8, Tiruchchirappalli Jn– 12, Madurai – 17, Salem 
– 43) due to temporary  extension of license period based on 2005 Policy , 
subsequent switch over to 2010 policy and violation of ceiling limit conditions 
as per 2010 policy. 
 In NCR, out of 63 major static units taken back from IRCTC during 2010 -11, 
fresh contracts could not be awarded due to the delay in receipt of SBD from 
Railway Board. NCR awarded only one fresh catering contract for refreshment 
room at Agra Fort during April 2016. Other static units were run by extending 
the validity period under the old contracts. At Jhansi Division , old contracts for 
20 Automatic Vending M achines expired during April 2016 and no fresh 
contracts were awarded.  
 During Joint inspection of Titlagarh station in ECoR , it was noticed that in the 
refreshment room of the Station, 
no meal was served. The licensee 
stated that passengers never 
visited the refreshment room and 
so very few meals were 
prepared. The same was 
packaged and sold in the trains 
only. Besides, some s nacks were 
prepared and sold to passengers 
in the trains, for which the 
licensee was not authorized. It was noticed that though maximum number of 
trains halt on Platform No.1, the Refreshment Room is located at the fag end of 
island platform no . 2 &  3. To reach the refreshment room, the passengers 
necessarily have to go through foot over-bridge from Platform No.1. This aspect 
was not taken into consideration by Railway Administration while allotting the 
space to the licensee. No corrective action was taken for rectify the same. 
From the above, it is seen that there was delay in finalization of SBD and Railways 
could not start the catering services departmentally even after taking over the 
charge from IRCTC. Services of 22 units (NCR -20 and SR -2) over two Railways 
could not be started leading to inconvenience to rail users in respective stations.  

19
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
19 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (F ebruary 2017) that the SBD was drafted by 
engaging RITES as professional agency, who drafted SBD for mobile units, major 
static units and general minor units. The SBDs were further examined at Railway 
Board by a committee of Executive Director s and were issued to Zonal Railways 
between July 2011 and July 2013. However,  the whole process took a lot of time 
and issue of SBDs to Zonal Railways were delayed.  
As per the new Catering Policy 2017, certai n static units in A1 and A category 
stations viz. Refreshment rooms, Jan Ahaar, Cell Kitchens shall be handed over to 
IRCTC on ‘as is where is’ basis including in frastructure and equipment. Besides, Fast 
Food Units, Food Plazas and Food Courts  continue to be managed by IRCTC. The 
contracts awarded by Zonal Railways for ca tering units to be transferred shall be 
re-assigned to IRCTC on the same terms and conditions. Tenure of all major units 
being handed over to IRCTC will be governed as per the Policy of 2010 till the expiry 
of the contracts. The policy further requires IRCTC and CCM of the concerned Zonal 
Railways to enter into an agreement with respect of each unit to be handed over to 
IRCTC. Railway Board shall issue a draft model agreement for the same. This 
agreement shall be executed before handin g over the units to IRCTC. Timely issue 
of draft model agreement would be thus, necessary to facilitate smooth handing 
over of units to IRCTC. In respect of other Static Catering Units at A1 and A category 
stations (other than those required to be managed by IRCTC) and all static catering 
units at other category stations, the responsibility has been retained with the Zonal 
Railways. The responsibility of fixing license fee has been assigned to Zonal 
Railways and they are required to arrive at  a fresh formula for fixing of license fee 
based on prescribed parameters. The eligibility conditions for these licensees 
continues to be based on minimum license fee of 12 per cent of the annual sales 
turnover of the static units. Fresh ceilin gs have been specified. Fresh norms for 
reservation applicable have been specified. The entire process remains the same 
with identification of requirement throug h preparation of blue print, fixing of 
license fee by the Zonal Railway, eligibility criteria based on turnover and 
experience, application of reservations for catering units, etc. However, all existing 
tenders under process have been cancelled. The entire process of allotment of 
units have been deferred on account of the changes proposed in the new policy. 
3.4 Managing mobile catering units 
Para 3.1 of the Catering Policy 2010 stipulated that the Railways shall progressively 
take over management of all mobile cateri ng services including base kitchens and 
mobile catering through departmental ca tering in a phased manner. Para 3.3.2 
further stipulated that for avoiding disrupt ion of catering services, Zonal Railways 
should engage reputed professionals for supervision of these services till such time, 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
20
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
20 
they were in a position to manage them departmentally. During the period of non-
availability of departmental staff, Rail ways may award service contracts to be 
supervised by departmental supervisor s for service of meals picked up from 
nominated base kitchens. 
Audit observed that prior to 2011-12, 267 mo bile catering units were operated by 
IRCTC. After the revision of policy, IRCTC handed over 236 units to Zonal Railways. 
The balance 31 units were managed by IRCTC due to contractual obligations based 
on specific request by Zonal Railways. It was observed that 
x As of March 2016, 358 mobile catering units were available in IR. Of these, 
Zonal Railways managed 279 mobile units. Balance 79 mobile units were still 
managed by IRCTC. Out of 279 mobile catering units, only four units (1.4 per 
cent) were managed departmentally by Zonal Railways. 
x As per the policy, for managing the mobile units Zonal Railways could engage 
suitable professional agency. Audit notice d that during the period of review, 
none of the Zonal Railways engaged reputed professional for supervision of 
mobile catering services.  Instead, 275 mobile units were managed through 
licensees. 
x None of the Zonal Railways have awarded service contracts to be supervised by 
departmental supervisors for service of  meals picked up from nominated base 
kitchens as stipulated in the catering policy. 
x SR and NFR requested IRCTC for managing 17 mobile units (SR-12 and NFR-5) as 
they did not have adequate manpower to run the same and currency of the 
contracts was still continuing. 
Annexure 2 
Thus, the objective of managing units departmentally, was not achieved as a 
large number of units were being manage d either by IRCTC or through licensees. 
Railways also did not engage reputed professionals for supervision of mobile 
catering services operated departmentally or through licensees.  
In their reply, Railway Board stated (February 2017) that professional catering 
contractors including IRCTC with prescribed experience in the field were given 
licenses to manage catering and mobile catering units. However, for supervision of 
the services provided by these contractors, Railways did not engage reputed 
professionals.  
In the new Catering Policy 2017, all pantry  car service contracts awarded by Zonal 
Railways have been re-assigned to IRCTC on the same terms and conditions as per 
the plan to be decided mutually by IRCTC and Railways. Tenure of all major units 

21
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
21 
being handed over to IRCTC will be governed as per the Policy of 2010 till the expiry 
of the contracts. IRCTC is permitted to engage service providers from hospitality 
industry for serving food in trains. The policy retains the same set of parameters for 
operation except for changing operator from Zonal Railways to IRCTC.  
3.5 Catering through Specified Catering Units managed by IRCTC  
As per decision taken in meeting of CCMs  (July 2010), additional 160 Food Plaza 
(FP)/Food Courts (FC)/Fast Food Units (FFU) were to be opened in various Zonal 
Railways to ensure appropri ate catering services to tr avelling public. During the 
review period, 141 Static Specified Catering Units (SCUs) 17 were opened and 33 
SCUs were closed. Review of commencement of services of the SCUs managed by 
IRCTC during the period of review showed that  
x 126 SCUs commenced their catering services after a delay of three to 45 
months from the date of LOA. Reason s for the delay in commencement were 
delay in finalisation of plans, drawing, non-handing over of site etc. by the 
respective Zonal Railway Administrations. Due to delayed commencement in all 
Zonal Railways
18, rail users were not provided catering services during this 
period and Zonal Railways missed the opportunity of getting 40 per cent share 
of License fee from IRCTC to the extent of ` 8.23 crore, as assessed by Audit.  
x In 20 stations 19 over ten 20 Zonal Railways, delay in commencement of SCUs 
ranged between 20 and 30 months. In 13 stations 21 over ten Railways (CR, SCR, 
ER, ECR, SWR, NER, NR, WR, NFR, WCR), delay in commencement of SCUs was 
more than 30 months. 
x Some of the important stations where commencement of services by these 
SCUs were delayed included Vijaywada,  Kanpur, Gwalior, Jaipur, Agra Fort, 
Indore, Jodhpur, Bikaner, Aligarh, Bhagalpur, Kohlapur, Patna, Chennai Central, 
Dimapur, Raigarh, Belgam, Ujjain, Palanpur, Mysore, etc.   
x In addition to the 141 SCUs created, Zonal Railways had requested IRCTC for 
creation of more SCUs. Based on the requisition, IRCTC proposed for setting up 
of 33 FPs and 53 FFUs in 15 Zonal Railways
22. However, due to delay in 
finalization of site, approval of plan and drawings, change in site etc. on part of 
                                                            
17
 SCUs are specified for Food Plaza, Food Court and Fast Food Units 
18
 CR-6,ECoR-5,ECR-17,ER-11,NCR-7,NER-6,NFR-3,NR-5,NWR-6,SCR-23,SECR-6,SER-2,SR-3,SWR-10,WCR-3 and WR-12 
19
Nalgonda, Nizamabad, Naded, Belgaum, Raxaul, Behrampur, A sansol, Maninagar, LalKuan, Necklace Road, Khurda Road, 
Gorakhpur, Damoh, Kengri, Pali Marwar,  Betiah, Yeshwantpur, Sangli, Arsikere and Abu Road 
20
 SCR, ECR, SWR, ECoR, ER, WR, NWR, NER, WCR, CR 
21
Gudur, Bhagalpur, Darbhanga, Bengaluru, Chhapra, Ferozepur cantt, Jamnagar, Kishanganj, Bakhtiarpur, Saugor, Indore, 
Katni, Surat 
22
 CR-6,ECoR-1,ECR-4,ER-4,NCR-4,NER-13,NFR-6,NR-21,NWR-4,SCR-5, SECR-3, SER-1, SR-8, SWR-6 and WR-5 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
22
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
22 
Zonal Railways, site were not handed over to IRCTC. As a result, SCUs could not 
start functioning till date. The delay ranged up to 48 months.  
x Audit further observed that due to delay in commissioning of 90 SCUs, Zonal 
Railways could not ensure availability of  catering services to the rail users at 
many important stations including Ro urkela, Muzaffarpur, Ajmer, Ambala, 
Ghaziabad, Sambalpur, Chhapra, Bongaigaon, Burdwan, Varanasi, Nizamuddin, 
Haridwar, Chennai Central, Mathura, Raichur, Guwahati, Gorakhpur, 
Yeshvantpur, Pune, Lucknow etc.  Be sides, Zonal Railways also lost the 
opportunity of getting `12.85 crore towards 40 per cent share of license fee 
from the licensees of IRCTC, calculated  on the minimum license fee payable to 
Zonal Railways by IRCTC during this period. 
Audit test checked cases at Chhapra, Chennai Central, Ambala Cantt., Agra during 
the period of review, where SCUs could not be commenced and/or commenced 
with significant delays due to failure on a ccount of Zonal Railways in finalization of 
plan and site, approval of drawings, change in site location etc. Further, five cases 
were noticed where railways had withdraw n the space awarded by the IRCTC to 
the licensees after issue of Letter of Award, as a result of which catering units could 
not be started. These included Fast food  unit and Food plaza at Jaunpur station 
(NR), Food plaza at Nadiad station (WR), Sealdah Station (ER) and Fast Food Units 
and Food Plaza at Lonawala and Chalisgaon stations (CR). 
Annexure 3 and 4 
Thus, Zonal Railways did not ensure provision of appropriate catering services to 
rail users by opening food plazas as per the plan. Further, due to delay in 
commencement of catering services in these locations, provision of this important 
passenger amenity to the rail users at these stations was affected. 
There is no change in the management of SCUs in the new Catering Policy 2017. 
3.6 Train Side Vending (TSV) 
Since provision of pantry car in each an d every train was not achievable and not 
economically viable, Railway Board decide d to provide Train Side Vending (TSV) 23. 
As per Para 10 of the Cate ring Policy 2010, Train Side Vending (TSV) would be 
provided from a suitable unit of nominated station/stations en route  as all trains 
were not provided with pantry cars. For this purpose, arrangements would be 
made through static units by either segmentation of run or on end to end basis, as 
practicable. During the period of review, it was observed that 
                                                            
23
 A large number of trains do not have pantry cars or mini pantries attached to them. From the static units of important 
stations, food is supplied to the train during meal time through vendors, who travel on the trains and take orders.  

23
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
23 
x No TSVs were provided by NCR, SECR and SR for the trains which run for more 
than 12 hours during the day time. SR did not continue contracts for TSV as 
IRCTC had taken up e-catering for these trains. However, response for e-
catering was not encouraging. As such, by not continuing TSVs, unauthorised 
vendors were given opportunity to provid e catering services. In NCR, during 
joint inspection (27 October 2016 to 29 October 2016) of train no. 11124/11123 
(Gwalior-Barauni-Gwalior express) and 12403/12404 (Allahabad-Jaipur-
Allahabad express) it was seen that no TSV services were provided and 
unauthorised vendors were seen in these trains. 
x In SCR, sectional TSV services were provided by dividing SCR into 12 sections 
and covering all non-pantry car trains over SCR jurisdiction. Of these only five 
sectional TSVs were operational as on 31 March 2016. SCR also reported to 
Railway Board during August 2015 that there was poor response to TSV tenders 
after introduction of e-catering and TSV contracts could not be finalised.  
x WCR advised (July 2015) Railway Board th at e-catering should be discouraged 
where TSVs contracts had already been aw arded, as e-catering was taking over 
the business of TSVs.   
x In ECR, TSV services were available only in one train i.e. 12569-70 – Jaynagar 
Anand Vihar Garibrath (served from Patna station).  
x In SER, out of 38 Mail/Express trains wi th more than 24 hours of journey time, 
20 trains were neither provided with pa ntry car facility nor with TSV facility 
(March 2016). 
x In NFR, 13 trains with journey time of more than 24 hours were running 
without pantry car and were also not provided with TSV facility. TSV facility of 
train No.12518/12517 (Kolkata-Guwahati Garibrath Express) was discontinued 
with effect from 27 April 2012 after being taken over from IRCTC. 
x End to end TSV contract for 11 pairs of trains run by NR, was awarded (29 
November 2014) to M/s Doon Caterers for a period of five years at an 
approximate cost of ` 11 crore. Award of TSV contracts to one contractor for 
supply of food services in 11 trains was indicative of monopoly.  
x TSV has not been provided for 30 Mail/Express train in WR with journey time 
exceeding 24 hours though not having pantry cars. 
Arrangements for providing train side vending for trains with no pantry cars were 
thus, inadequate. 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
24
 24 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (February 2017) that e -catering services have 
been introduced on trains that were running without pantry cars and w here TSV 
services were not provided. 
In the new Catering Policy 2017, provis ion of TSV will be the responsibility of IRCTC 
instead of Zonal Railways.  
3.7 Availability of Janta Meals/Jan Ahaar 
Railway Board expressed (January 2012) concern over poor sale/availability of Janta 
meals and reiterated that efforts should be taken by Zonal Railways to improve the 
sale/availability of Janta meals so as to provide good quality food at affordable 
price to railway passengers. Railway Board revised the tariff (December 2012) and 
circulated the revised tariff for Janta meal/economy meal/Jantakhana at the rate of 
` 15/- in static unit and ` 20/- in mobile units (seven poories of 175 gms to be 
packed in quality disposable card board boxes). During the check ,Audit observed 
that 
 In fou r Zonal Railways (NCR, NR, SCR & SECR) , the Jan Ahaarunits planned as 
per blue print have not been fully implemented. 
 Out of 7 4 stations where joint inspections were conducted by Audit, Jan Ahaar 
units were not provided on 4624 stations. (Annexure 1a) 
 In NR, out of five stations inspected, Jan Ahaar units were not provided on 
three stations.  
 NoJanta Meals were found in four stalls out of seven stalls jointly inspected and 
no JantaKhana was available at all five trolleys and food plaza inspected at Agra  
Fort Station of Agra Division of NCR.One Jan Ahaarunit at Agra Cantt. Station as 
per blue print was to be operated for picking up meals for the train p assing 
through (8 daily, 4 tri -weekly, 2bi-weekly and 20 weekly trains). No action was 
initiated by NCR Administration for the same. 
 During joint inspection, it was noticed that Janta meals were not available in 
two trains (ECR).  
 In SWR, no Janta Meals were found available on Train no.12780 and 12628 
during joint inspections.  
The details of Janta Meals and other meals sold in  six Zonal Railways  (CR, ECoR, 
NCR, SR, SCR and WCR) are given in Table 3.1. 
                                                           
24Wadi, Cuttack, Titlagarh, Rajendra Nagar, SamastipurJn, BarauniJn, Sheikapura, Allahabad, Agra Fort, Gwalior, Kathgodam, 
LucknowJn, Manduadih, Salempur, Kamakhya, New Bongaigaon, Rangapara North Jn, LucknowJn, Pathankot, H Nizamuddin, 
Jodhpur, Abu Road, Modran, Mahbubnagar, Kazhipet, Renigunta , Nadikudi, Raipur, Gondia, Anuppur, Raigarh, Bilaspur, 
Rourkela, Adra, Tata &Bhokra Steel City, Coimbatore, Tiruchchirappalli, ErnakulamJn, Bengaluru Cantt,, Gadag, Guna, Damoh, 
Jam Nagar, Nandurbar, Mumbai Churchgate, Somnath 

25
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
25 
Table 3.1 - Share of Janta Meals served  
Year Number of meals sold Percentage of Janta meals to 
other cuisines Janta meals Other  meals 
2013-14 3953147 8031931 49.22 
2014-15 4634126 15344651 30.20 
2015-16 4038424 17651868 22.88 
In response to the passenger survey conducted by Audit during July 2016 to 
October 2016, 22 per cent of passengers expressed that low cost combo food, Jan 
Ahaar/regional cuisine, food/a-la-carte items were not available. 
Janta meals were introduced with the intention of quality food at low cost to all. 
It was seen that share of Janta meals to the overall meals sold in six Zonal 
Railways was declining in the last three years. The availability of Janta meals on 
stations was also not adequate. 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (Febru ary 2017) that instructions were issued 
for setting up of Jan Ahaar outlets and ensu ring sale of Janta meals to passengers. 
They further stated that there can be ma ny factors including purchasing power of 
passengers which affect sale of Janta meals. The rate fixed for selling standard food 
was also reasonable and that different types of catering services are provided to 
passengers enabling them to exercise their choice of food.  
The new Catering Policy 2017 has transferre d the responsibility of management of 
Jan Ahaars to IRCTC. As such, Railways need to ensure that IRCTC provides 
adequate number of low cost Janta Meal  to passengers and these should be 
effectively advertised amongst the passengers.  
3.8 Financial performance of departmental catering units  
Railway Board expressed concern (Ja nuary 2002 and July 2013) about the 
increasing loss, manifold increase in expenditure on staff, purchase of raw 
material/ingredients and cost of other inputs, but the loss of departmental catering 
units continued to be on increasing trend. 
There were 85 out of 7790 static units of Zonal Railways and 4 out of 279 mobile 
units managed departmentally. The balance units were managed through 
licensees. For providing catering services through these departmental units, 11
25 
Zonal Railways incurred a total expenditure of ` 757.91 crore during 2011-12 to 
2015-16. As against the sales turnover of ` 550.30 crore, the departmental catering 
units suffered a loss of `207.62 crore during 2011-12 to 2015-16. The loss suffered 
also showed an increasing trend. The main reasons for losses were poor volume of 
                                                            
25
 CR, ECR, ER, NER, NFR, NR, SCR, SER, SR, SWR and WR 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
26
 26 
sales and increasing staff cost. These departmental units were not able to compete 
with other catering stalls of IRCTC and FF/FC/FP. 
Annexure 2 and 5 
As per instructions 26, utilization of sale proceeds of a departmental catering unit 
should be resorted to in very rare cases. Utilization of sale proceeds for 
procurement of raw materials should be resorted to only in cases of units, where 
no cash imprest has been sanctioned or when the imprest on hand is insufficient to 
meet the requirements. If the imprest is found to be insufficient, arrangements 
were to be made to enhance the imprest  to avoid drawing from the daily sale 
proceeds. Audit examined the procedure for procurement by 36 departmental 
catering units of IR during the period of review and noticed that: 
 Contrary to the above instructions, sale proceeds were being utilized for 
procurement of ingredients and vegetables by nine27 Zonal Railways without 
resorting to tender procurement even though value of ingredients procured per 
annum ranged up to ` 10.78 crore in NR during 2015 -16. 29 per cent  to 
87.87per cent of the sale proceeds we re utilised for purchase of ingredients in 
these nine Zonal Railways.               Annexure 6 
 Only in SR and SCR, imprest amount of ` 20,000 and ` 15,000 respectively were 
sanctioned. However, more than 50 per cent  of sale proceeds of th ese 
departmental catering units were utilized for daily cash purchases during 2015 -
16. No cash imprest had been sanctioned in the remaining 87 departmental 
catering units.  
 Consequently, five departmental Jan Ahaar units at Vis hakhapatnam (EC oR), 
New Jalpaigu ri (NFR) , Annuppur (SECR), Guntur and Rajamund ary (SCR) were 
closed during the period of review. 
 In Agra Division of NCR, it was seen that 23 staff members including six catering 
inspector, two cooks and 15 waiters were deployed for supervision of catering 
activities as well as running and maintenance of one stall and three trolleys 
selling PAD (Propriety Article Depot)items and PDW (Packaged Drinking Water). 
However, duty location of only six catering inspectors and 13 waiters could be 
ascertained from the records of Agra Division as well as four departmental 
catering units run and managed at Agra Div ision.  The deployment of two 
waiters and two cooks remained unexplained whose salaries  
                                                           
26  Para 2845 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual 
27 CR,ECR,SCR,ER,SR,SER,NFR,NCR and NR 

27
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 3
Chapter 3 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
27 
@ ` 3.20 lakh per annum per person on an average were charged in the Profit 
and Loss Account of departmental catering units. In Jhansi Division of NCR, out 
of 59 catering staff, two cooks and four  bearers were deployed for activities 
other than catering. The deployment of these six catering staff remained 
unexplained, whose salaries @ `2.28 lakh (approx.) per annum per person on 
an average are being charged in the Profit and Loss Account of departmental 
catering unit. 
Departmental units thus, were managed inefficiently and continued to incur 
losses. Sale proceeds were utilized for daily cash purchases. It was attributed to 
non-sanction/insufficiency of imprest.  
The new Catering Policy 2017, does not specify the road map for the staff and 
personnel working in the departmental units  of IR, which would be transferred to 
IRCTC. 
3.9 Unauthorized catering vendors/sellers  
Railway Board instructed (August 2011) Zonal Railways to undertake checks of 
mobile licensees against unauthorized hawking and sale of adulterated, unhygienic 
food products in Mail/Express trains. Railway Board also stated that hawking in 
trains and at stations are rampant in IR a nd that in trains in which a pantry car is 
attached, the unauthorized hawkers do not allow service from pantry car in other 
than AC coaches. 
From the analysis of data for the period 2013-14 to 2015-16 and during joint 
inspections of 80 selected trains during July to October 2016, audit observed that: 
x There were many unauthorized vendors in platforms and trains. 2,39,096 cases 
were prosecuted by RPF and fine impo sed in eight Zonal Railways (ER - 11763 
cases, ECR - 4811,  ECoR - 39686, NCR - 16134, NFR - 7861, SR - 19982 and WCR 
- 43333 cases).  
x During the joint inspection/survey conducted by Audit in selected trains 
without pantry cars of three Zonal Railways, unauthorized vendors (73 cases- 
SR-12, NCR-6 and NFR-55) selling unapproved brand of packaged drinking water 
at a higher price (`20/-) and selling  packaged meals were noticed. 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
28
Chapter
 
x In NF
(Kam
bottl
Shata
Unau
sellin
Bottl
the t
x Durin
in tr
notic
(ER, 
requi
beve
the 
On a
that 
units
beve
Unautho
unhygien
passenge
between
services 
of haw k
food o n
catering 
were not
During 
Administ
tighten 
Commer
r 3 
FR, at least 1
makhya-Yeshw
e. Eight ite
abdi Expre s
uthorised v e
ng articles lik
e, Pan, Cha
rain. 
ng passeng e
ains witho u
ced that in 
ECoR, NE R
irement o
rages were 
help of un
all the stop p
the vendo r
 were sel l
rages on tra
orized cate r
nic and a d
ers are not 
n authorize d
on trains. 
kers and s a
n trains a
services p
t adequate. 
Exit 
tration sta t
the monit o
cial departm
10-20 unaut
wantpur AC 
ms not ap p
ss (Train N o
endors we r
ke-unapprov
na, Jhal-m u
er survey c o
ut pantry c a
five Zonal 
R, NFR an
of foodst u
fulfilled pu
authorized 
pages, it w a
rs of static 
ling foodst u
in.   
ring items 
dulterated a
able to diff e
d and una u
Continued p
ale of una u
also indic a
provided o
Conference
ted that t
oring mech a
ment and RP
Report No.
thorised ven
Express) wi
proved by R
o.12041). 
re found 
ved water 
uri etc. in 
onducted 
ar, Audit 
Railways 
d SECR) 
uff and 
rely with 
vendors.  
as found 
catering 
uffs and 
may be 
and also 
erentiate 
uthorized 
presence 
uthorized 
ated the 
on trains 
e, SR 
hey will 
anism by 
F to control 
. 13 of 2017 (
Fig.8: Unauth
Fig. 9:Unautho
Fig. 10: Unap
ndors were f
th pantry ca
RB were al s
unauthorize
(Railways) 
 
horized vending-Ch
No.16853, SR
21 October 20
orised vendors on T
21 October 20
pproved water bott
15018, NER
22 October 20
found in th e
ar, selling un
so served t o
ed vending. 
 
holanExpress Train
R 
016 
 
Train No. 15018, N
016 
tle sold in Train No
 
016 
e train no. 1 2
napproved w
o passenge
28 
n 
NER  
o. 
2552 
water 
rs in 

29
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 4
Chapter 4 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
29 
Chapter 4: Management of Catering Contr acts  
Audit Objective 3: Whether management of catering contracts for various static 
and mobile units ensured provision of good quality catering services? 
Catering Policy 2010 laid down detailed guidelines for management of licensees 
who were awarded the work of mobile and/or static catering units.  
4.1 Comparison of reserve price fixed and license fee offered  
Para 18.1 of the Catering Policy 2010 stipulated that license fee should be fixed 
realistically, equitably in order to have a fair, just and equitab le fixation of license 
fees without adversely affecting the quality of service. Subsequently, Railway Board 
reduced (2012) the percentage of license fee from 12 to 10 per cent  of sales 
turnover, so as to ensure that the quality of catering services was not  adversely 
a f f e c t e d .  S a l e  i n  t h e  p a n t r y  c a r s  o f  Mail/Express trains and Superfast trains 
comprises of three components viz. (a) a -la-carte sale 28 (b) sale of breakfast, 
lunch/dinner and (c) PAD 29 sales. As per Clause 26 of the Catering Policy 2010, the 
sale turnover of mobile catering unit was required to be considered for purpose of 
making assessment of volume of business and for fixing of minimum of reserve 
price. Based on the joint sales assessment report per trip submitted by the 
representatives of Commercial and Accounts departments, annual sales turnover 
was to be calculated. 
Audit checked the 124 contracts awarded by eight Zonal Railways ( SER-12, SECR-5, 
SCR-14, SR-37, ER-10, ECoR-24 and NFR-20, WCR-2) and observed as follows:  
 As against the prescribed  percentage of 10 per cent, the percentage of license 
fee to sales turn ove r for one year was more than 10 per cent in all the trains 
checked, except Train no.22805/06 Bhubaneswar New Delhi Express (ECoR) 
where it was 10 per cent. The percentage ranged fro m 10.12 per cent to 20 per 
cent in respect of 29 trains and 21 per cent to 50 per cent in respect of 69 trains. 
In the remaining 25 trains, the percentage was more than 50 per cent  and 
ranged up to 90 per cent (NFR- Train no. 15653/54- Amarnath Express).  
 In the Annexure A/5 of SBD, Railway Board had prescribed (January 2013) that 
‘Tender Committee w o ul d  m a k e e f f or t s t h a t  o n l y  w o r k a b l e  b id s  a r e  a c ce pt e d 
i.e. too high bids which seem unworkable need to be deliberated by the Tender 
Committee’. In this regard,  CCM, SER communicated (May 2013) to Railway 
Board that complaints would arise if the higher bids are by -passed. While 
deliberating
30 on the issue of workability, the committee recognised that 
                                                        
28
 These are diversified popular food i tems served through static units and decided by market/customer, the rates for which 
are fixed by Zonal Railways. 
29
Propriety Article Depot Items - All packaged and branded items being sold on railway premises  
30
Railway Board had appointed (October 2015) a C ommittee to consider the recommendation of Dr. Sreedharan Committee 
Report to examine the feasibility of transfer of catering services to IRCTC  

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
30
Chapter 4 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
30 
private operators bid unusually high amount as license fees in order to get 
contracts. As they have invested such high amounts, they try to recover the 
same from the railway passengers by charging higher prices, as evident from 
the high number of complaints on overcharging. However, Railway Board was 
yet to prescribe a methodology to review and not accept unworkable tenders. 
Thus, it was observed that a major po rtion is paid  as license fee to Zonal 
Railways, leaving a small margin of the contract value for the licensee for 
providing catering services. It may not be workable for the licensees to cater to 
the needs of passengers within the available margin and may result in 
compromising the quality, quantity and prices etc.  
Annexure 7  
During Exit Conference ,  S R  a n d  S E C R  A d m i n i s t r a t i o n s  s t a t e d  t h a t  s i n c e  2 0 1 2  t h e 
tariff rates of food items h a v e  n o t  b e e n  r e v i s e d  w h i c h  i s  t o  b e  d o n e  a t  R a i l w a y  
Board level. They stated that t his was one of main reasons that contractors 
compromised on quality and quantity and were overcharging the passengers.  
During, Exit Conference, Railway Board stated (February 2017) that  criteria are 
being developed for assessing the workabili ty of rate quoted in catering tenders. 
Audit suggested that the entire process of licensing needs to be revisited and 
reasonability of the quoted rates may be assessed and fixed within a reasonable 
range. Any rates much below or m uch above this range may n ot be considered as 
reasonable and workable.  For tariff revision, Railway Board informed that they are 
going to form a committee to work on the issues related to tariff revision.  
In the new Catering Pol icy 2017, the technical eligibility criteria for licensees has 
been prescribed in terms of turnover and experience. Criteria for license fee has 
been retained at 12 per cent of annual sales turnover o f  t he  u n i t. The fixation of 
license fee has to be done by Zonal Railway. The formula for fixing the license fee is 
to be devise d by e ach Zona l Ra il wa y.  Till the a bove  activities a re stream lined, a ll 
tenders for allotment where Letter of Acceptance has not been issued have been 
directed to be cancelled. However , railways need to frame guidelines for assessing 
the workability of rates in catering contracts so that the quality of the services is 
not compromised.  
4.2 Ceiling limits on holding of catering licenses 
In the Catering Policy 2010, Railway Board prescribed ceiling limits for holding of 
catering licenses to be awarded to private contractors as follows:  
 
 

31
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 4
Chapter 4 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
31 
Table 4.1 - Ceiling limits for holding catering licenses 
Minor 
Units 
An individual/firm/company would be allowed to hold maximum two minor 
catering units at a station and a maximum of ten units per Zonal Railways. In 
case of suburban section, ceiling limit of two units per division would be 
applicable. 
Major 
Units 
a) Food Plaza, Food Courts and Fast Food Units : An individual/firm/company 
would be allowed to hold maximum two units per division and a maximum 
10 per cent of all the units over IR. 
b) Refreshment Rooms : An individual/firm/company would be allowed to 
hold maximum two units per division and a maximum 10 per cent of all the 
units over IR. 
c) Mobile Units: An individual/firm/company would be allowed to hold 
maximum 10 per cent of similar category units over IR. 
As per Para 19.1 of the Catering Policy, Zonal Railways shall maintain a data base of 
the various catering establishments to ensure that the prescribed ceilings on 
holding of catering licenses were complied with. Railway Board reviewed the 
position of holding of license by contractors beyond the ceiling limit in 2013 and at 
various levels i.e. Zonal, Station and Di visional levels and found that 2530 units 31 
were held by licensees beyond prescribed ceiling limits. Railway Board opined that 
the above position reflected heavy monopolization of units by a few people.  
Audit test checked the present status of a dherence to ceiling limits for award of 
static and mobile catering units and observed that 
x At the end of December 2015 32, mobile catering contracts were awarded for 
254 trains. Out of these 254 mobile units, 33 contracts (i.e. more than 25 
contracts -10 per cent of 254) were awarded to M/s R.K Associates and M/s 
Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd over Zonal Railways. M/s Brandavan Food Products has also 
been awarded 25 contracts across Zonal Railways. 
x In ECoR, five contractors were awarded more than two minor units in a station 
as detailed below: 
o M/s A.S. Sales Corporation-3 units at Cuttack, 4 in Bhubaneswar and 4 in 
Puri. 
o Sri. M. V. Appa Rao-3 units at Vishakhapatnam 
o M/s GCMMFL- 3 units at Cuttack, 3 units at Khurda Road, 
o M/s Vishakha Dairy 4 units at Vishakhapatnam 
o Sri B.M.Singh-3 units at Vishakhapatnam, 3 units at Vizianagaram 
                                                            
31
 Zonal - 368, Station – 2066 and Division - 96 
32
 As per RB’s letter No.2010/TG-lIl/645/13/Pt. dated: 11/12/2015 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
32
Chapter 4 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
32 
x In NCR, eight contractors were awarded more than two minor units in a station 
as detailed below: 
o M/s. R.K. Associates at Agra Cantt -16 units 
o M/s Chaturvedi and sons at Agra Cantt -5 units 
o M/s Pranveer Singh at Agra Fort -3 units 
o M/s H.D. and sons at Mathura Jn.-10 units 
o M/s Rajkumar at Mathura Jn.- 05 units 
o M/s Tirupati Associates at Allahabad-03 
o M/s Kanchan Restaurant & Caterers at Allahabad-05 units 
o M/s R.D. Sharma at Gwalior-17 units 
x In SWR, M/s Relish Caterers 33 was allotted contracts for 10 Catering Stalls in 
Bangalore City Station and two stalls in Yeshwantpur Station. Further, even 
after taking over the units from IRCTC by SWR, the same Licensee continued 
services and the irregularity was not rectified till date. 
Railway Board prescribed maintaining a database of catering establishments, 
updating the same regularly and upload the same on websites of the Zonal 
Railways, so as to restrict the award of contracts within the prescribed ceiling 
limits. However, the mechanism was not used effectively and only a clause on 
holding of maximum units was included in the SBD. 
Railway Board reviewed the position of holding of licenses for catering units and 
observed (2013) that a large number of unit s were being held by a few contractors, 
which reflected heavy monopo lization of units by few people. Audit review also 
showed that a small number of licensees hold a large number of contracts across 
Zonal Railways. Some of these licensees were also awarded contracts for various 
units by IRCTC. The list of contractors/lic ensees holding large number of static and 
mobile catering units during the period of review is given below: 
Table 4.2 – Licensees who were awarded a large number of contracts by Zonal Railways and IRCTC 
Name of the contractor Number of 
contracts 
awarded for static 
units by ZR 
Number of 
contracts awarded 
for mobile units by 
ZR 
Number of 
contracts 
awarded by 
IRCTC  
Express Food Services 25 11 14
Tirupati Associates 15 - 12
Brindavan Food Products 14 25 11
Arenco Catering 29 15 7
R.K. Associates & Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 21 33 6
A S Sales Corporation 11 6 4
Doon Caterers 8 22 0
Satyam caterers 12 25 4
                                                            
33
C.79/Catg Stall/SBC/Bangalore City (SBC-9)/Relish/11 

33
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 4
Chapter 4 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 33 
During Exit Conference, NCR Administration stated that though ceiling limit was 
being ensured at the time of award of contract, it was not done in case of renewal 
of old licenses since old licenses were for multiple vending units with a 
consolidated license fees.  
By not following the ceiling limit prescribed for award of contracts to contractors, 
Railways promoted monopolization by few firms. Monopolization leads to 
compromise in quality and services being provided to the passengers. 
In their reply, Railway Board stat ed (February 2017) that  a transparent contract 
awarding and management system has been defined in the Catering Policy 2010 
and SBDs have been prepared with stringent eligibility criteria, financial 
capabilities, penalty clause and effective monitoring mech anism. Regarding 
awarding contract beyond the ceiling limits, Railway  Board during Exit Conference 
stated (February 2017) that there is a flaw in their tendering conditions which 
needs to be corrected. They stated that the tender conditions require experience of 
the tenderer in ‘railway catering’, which restricts the competition. They stated that 
instead of experience in railway catering, experience in catering should be 
sufficient for assessing the eligibility of railway catering tenders.  It was seen in 
Audit that Railways could not enforce the ceiling limit of holding share of catering 
contracts due to limited number of vendors with experience in railway catering.   
Revised criteria for ceiling limit on holding of catering licenses  by private 
contractors has also been prescribed  in the new Catering Policy 2017 . The 
instructions regarding maintaining of database of various catering establishment 
also remain the same. As such, there is a need to devi se a mechanism to enforce 
the above mentioned ceiling limits.  
4.3 Loss due to irregular licensing for vending at Jhansi Station 
IRCTC had assigned (July 2012) license for running of Food Plaza to a vendor at 
Jhansi station at a license fee of ` 54 lakh per annum. In addition, to the Food 
Plaza, Jhansi Division pe rmitted, on a nomination basis, the same vendor for 
vending at all platforms of Jhansi station (August 2012) involving eight personnel at 
every platform at a provisional license fee of ` 6.48 lakh subject to an undertaking 
from the vendor that actual amoun t of license fee as subsequently assessed by the 
Railway Administration would be deposited by the vendor on demand. It was seen 
that the contractor M/s Sunshine Caterers was allotted 25 catering units in Jhansi 
Division. Subsequently, the revised license f ee was assessed by the Jhansi Division 
at ` 10.65 lakh per annum, but this was not approved by the competent authority, 
and the license fee remains to be assessed for the vendor. The license for platform 
vending to the vendor was withdrawn in October 2013.  It was further seen that the 
basis of fixation of license fees at ` 6.48 lakh was not reasonable. Also, during 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
34
 34 
inspection of Jhansi Division by railway officials (March 2013 and May 2013) 
vendors in excess of permitted eight vendors were seen deployed by the licensee. 
No action was taken by railways for the same. 
Thus, the vending permission was not granted in a transparent manner, the license 
fee was not determined by the competent authority, the license fee was 
unreasonably lower and the licensee exceede d the scope of authorization available 
to him, but no action for exceeding the authorization was found to have been 
taken by the NCR Administration. For a similar unit in Agra Fort, where license was 
allotted through tender, the license fee was ` 15 lakh per annum.  The licensee at 
Jhansi station was permitted for 24 vendors at three pair of platform, which equals 
to 24 vending units i.e. a corresponding annual license fee of ` 360 lakh. 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (February 2017) that in structions were issued 
to NCR that division did not have power to grant permission to Food Plaza for 
platform vending. Also, the case was being dealt with by the vigilance department.  
4.4 Non-recovery of various charges and penalties from the catering uni t 
licensee operators 
4.4.1 License fee 
As per Clause 4.3 of License Agreement, any delay in payment of license fee by the 
defaulting contractors attracts interest at the rate of 14 per cent  per annum 
calculated for the number of days of default. Audit found that license fee of ` 11.60 
crore was due to be recovered from the licensees of IR during the year 2013 -14 to 
2015-16. Interest of 14 per cent per annum was also not calculated and recovered.  
As per Para 4.2 (b) of License agreement, the license fee for the entire duration of 
the license is payable by the licensee on 2+2+1 yearly basis in advance.  The first 
instalment shall be payable 15 days in advance of commencement of License. 
Thereafter, second instalment  is payable within 15 days after completion of 2
nd 
year and third instalment within 15 days after completion of 4 th year. Further, Para 
4.3 prescribes levy of interest @14 per cent per annum for any delayed payments. 
Review of record s in WR revealed that an amount of ` 7.74 crore on account of 
license fee along with interest as prescribed  is outstanding from seven pantry car 
licensees as on 10 October 2016 due to non -receipt of license fee in advance as 
prescribed. The delay in recei pt of payment ranged between 3 to12 months.  
Against these contracts, Security Deposit of only ` 4.10 crore was available with 
Railway Administration. 
4.4.2 Water and electricity charges 
As per Para 18.4 of the catering policy, water charges and electricity charges should 
be recovered from the licensees based on actual consumption. The position of 

35
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 4
Chapter 4 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 35 
recovery of water charges was checked at 74selected stations during the period of 
review and the following was observed: 
 Water Bill Register was not maintained in proper manner with complete details 
and there was no periodical updating in the details of contracts of catering 
licensee. 
 The Commercial department officials had no proper records or information as 
to the payment or otherwise of the water charges by the parties. 
 Arrears of water charges due to be recovered from licensees of four Zonal 
Railways (ECoR, SCR, SR and WCR) was ` 0.66 crore. 
 Arrears of water charges due to be recovered from licensees of IRCTC in respect 
of two Zonal Railways (SCR and WCR) was ` 0.01 crore.  
 Revision of water charges recoverable was not done periodically. 
 Arrears of electrical energy charges due to be recovered from licensees of eight 
Zonal Railways (EC oR, NCR,  NFR, NR, NWR, SCR, SER and WCR) was ` 1.20 
crore. 
 Arrears of Electrical Energy charges due to be recovered from licensees of 
IRCTC in respect of five Zonal Railways (EC oR, NCR, NFR, NR and NWR) was  
` 0.11 crore. 
Thus, monitoring for correct billing, acco unting and watching recovery of license 
fee as well as water and electricity charges payable by licensees in Zonal Railways 
needed strengthening. 
4.4.3 Fines imposed against catering contractors 
A test check of 43 license agreements during the period of review showed that the 
penalty amount was not recovered fully from the defaulting contractors in 12
34 
Zonal Railways as given below: 
 Fines of ` 10.01 crore were imposed by all 16 Zonal Railways during 2011 -12 to 
2015-16 on the defaulting licensees of which ` 7.29 crore was recovered and ` 
2.72 crore was outstanding. Of this ` 54 lakh was outstanding in SR against M/s 
Arenco. In ECoR, an amount of ` 1.65 lakh was outstanding against M/s R K 
Associates and an amount of `6.45 lakh was outstanding against M/s Sunshine 
Caterers at the end of September 2016. 
 Similarly, IRCTC imposed a fine of ` 1.44 crore on the defaulting licensees 
during 2011-12 to 2015-16 of which `1.25 crore was recovered and ` 0.17 crore 
was outstanding. 
 Despite a clause in the agreement stati ng that contracts of defaulting licensees 
should be terminated, the defaulting contractors, were awarded new/fresh 
                                                           
34CR,ECoR,ECR,ER,NCR,NFR,NWR,SCR,SR,SWR,WCR and WR 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
36
 36 
contracts by Zonal Railways, not taking into account their previous failures. In 
SR, M/s Arenco caterer was fined` 0.62 crore for bad service s of which ` 0.54 
crore was yet to paid by them. However, the firm was awarded 11 contracts 
over SR and seven contracts by IRCTC over CR (3) and SR (4).        
4.4.4 Payments for testing of food samples  
As per the Clause 7.3 (a) of the agreement of the catering license executed by Zonal 
Railways, Railway reserve the right to get the food samples/raw materials collected 
and tested at approved laboratories at the cost of the licensee.  
Audit noticed that Zonal Railway and IRCTC collect edfood samples from various 
licensees and paid for their testing, instead of recovering the same from the 
licensees. An amount of ` 1.53 crore (ECoR, NFR, SCR, SR and WCR) towards testing 
charges recoverable from licensees were  yet to be recovered during 2013 -14 to 
2015-16. 
Thus, monitoring for correct billing, accounting and watching recovery of license 
fee, water and electricity charges and penalty payable by license es in Zonal 
Railways needed strengthening.  A significant amount of license fee was 
outstanding against the contractors and Zonal Railways did not levy interest of 14 
per cent on late payments as required under the provisions. Payment towards 
testing of food samples was also not recovered from the licensees in five Z onal 
Railways. 
In their reply, Railway Board stated (February 2017) that Zonal Railways have been 
advised to take corrective action on the issue immediately. 
 

37
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 5
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 37 
Chapter 5: Provision of Good Quality and Hygienic Food  
Audit Objective 4: Whether the available catering units provided good quality and 
hygienic food at affordable rates to different classes of rail users?  
One of the main objectives of Catering Policy 2010 was to provide hygienic, good 
quality affordable food to the travelling public by adopting the best trade and 
hospitality industry practices. Ensuring hygiene, establishing sufficient number of 
catering un its to ensure availability of food at the required time, nature of Menu 
and tariff, availability of sufficient quantity of wholesome and tasty food, standards 
of kitchen and cooking, quality of service rendered by catering personnel 
employed, observing best trade practices such as e -catering services are some of 
the factors which determine the standard of quality of catering services rendered.  
In order to ensure provision of hygienic and quality food to travelling passengers 
and improve the on board and static catering services, the Catering Policy 2010 also 
laid down a monitoring and controlling mechanism. A similar monitoring 
mechanism has also been prescribed in the new Catering Policy 2017, wherein 
officials of Railway Board, Zonal Railway and Division have been authorized to 
inspect kitchen units/mobile catering units and taking penal action for the 
deficiencies noticed in catering services. 
Audit selected 74 stations and 80 trains over all Zonal Railways for reviewing the 
aspects of quality, hygiene an d affordability with respect to all types of catering 
units on the selected trains and stations. On the selected stations, all static catering 
units including refreshment rooms, food plazas, food stalls, restaurants etc. were 
jointly inspected with railway  officials to review the service provided to the 
customers on the stations. Mobile catering units  of selected trains , were visited 
along with railway officials to capture the quality, hygiene and other aspects of 
catering services provided.  The unit s jointly inspected by Audit along with the 
Railway officials included static units managed both by Zonal Railways as well as by 
IRCTC. Similarly, the mobile catering units inspected included pantry cars managed 
both by Zonal Railways as well as by IRCTC. As such , the issues relating to quality, 
hygiene and unfair practices have been found in catering units managed both by 
Zonal Railways as well as IRCTC. 
In addition , 1800 passengers on 74 selected stations and 1975 passengers on 80 
selected trains were administered survey questionnaire by the audit teams to 
collect their views on the aspects of quality, hygiene, affordability and availability 
of catering services as perceived/experienced by them. Information on passenger 
complaints w ere also reviewed to assess the effectiveness of the complaint 
redressal mechanism. 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 5
38
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
38 
 
Fig. 11: Catering Personnel not wearing hand 
gloves while handling food items in Cell 
Kitchen/SBC, SWR (05.10.2016) 
 
Fig 12: Purified water not used for Pantry 
Services in Goa Express, SWR (18.10.2016) 
 
Fig 13: Food items kept at floor at the 
Chhapra, NER (04.10.2016) 
 
Fig 14: Bucket of Drinking water and beverages kept 
in the vestibule near toilet area in Pashchim Express, 
WR (29.10.2016) 
Audit findings on the above aspects are discussed 
below: 
5.1 Hygiene and cleanliness 
Joint inspections were undertaken by audit teams 
along with railway officials at 74 stations and 80 
trains, during July to October 2016. The following 
deficiencies related to hygiene and cleanliness in 
catering units were noticed: 
x Purified water was not available on 21 stations
35 
in 11 Zonal Railways (September to October 
2016). 
x Instead of available water purifiers, unpurified 
water straight from tap was used in preparation 
of beverages – coffee, tea and soups in 22 
trains36.  
x The base kitchen of licensee of Zonal Railway for 
catering on board servic es in train no.12033-34 
(Kanpur – New Delhi – Kanpur) of NCR, 
operation at Kanpur were using general railway 
water supply instead of separate or additional 
cleaning of water for cooking purpose.  
x Waste-bins of prescribed specification in 
adequate numbers were not available on 28 
stations of 11 Zonal Railways, which included 
Bhubaneswar, Cuttack, Titlagarh (ECoR), 
Samastipur (ECR), Sheikhpura, Howrah (ER), 
Agra Fort, Allahabad, Gwalior (NCR), Jodhpur 
(NWR), Kharagpur, Rourkela, Bokaro, Tata 
Nagar, Adra (SER), Gadag (SWR), Jaipur, Jodhpur 
(NWR), Chennai, Coimbatore, Kanyakumari (SR), 
Guwahati, New Tinsukia, New BongaigaonJn, 
Rangapara North Jn. (NFR) and Ludhiana, 
Lucknow (NR).  
                                                            
35Karjat (CR), Rajendranagar (ECR), Agra Fort and Allahabad (NCR), Kharagpur, Rourkela, Bokaro Steel City, Tata Nagar, Adra 
(SER), Gadag (SWR), Jaipur (NWR), Chennai, Coimbatore (SR), KamakhyaJn, New TinsukiaJn, New Bongaingaon Jn(NFR), 
Kazhipet (SCR), Ludhiana, Pathankot (NR), base kitchens and Jan Ahaar in Mumbai Central and Churchgate (WR).  
36
Sealdah Rajdhani Exp.-12313, Howrah-Ranchi Shatabdi Expr ess- 12019, Kanpur-New Delhi-Kanpur Express - 12033/12034, 
Swaraj Exp.-12472, Yeshwantpur Nizamuddin Sampark Kranti Exp.- 12629,Nizamuddin-Goa Express-12780, Yashvantpur-
Jabalpur Express-12193/94, Howrah New Jalpaiguri Shatabdi  Exp-12041/12042, Bikaner-Coimbatore Express-22475, Ajmer 
Sealdah Express-12988, Ajmer-Puri Express-18422, Upasana Express-12327, Kolkata Rajdhani Express-12301, SealdahDuronto 
Exp.-12260, Porvotar Sampark Kranti Exp.-12501,Kamakhya Yesvantpur Exp.-12552, Nizamuddin Madgaon Rajdhani-22414, 
Chennai Coimbatore shatabdi express- 12243, Chennai Duranto express-12269, Tamilnadu Exp-12622, 12925 – Paschim 
Express, 12955—Jaipur Superfast Express 

39
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 5
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 39 
 In three trains (12834, 12629, 12193/94), no refuse bins were provided with 
plastic bags to collect the waste. 
 Wastages arising out of static and mobile catering units were not collected in 
different coloured bins (Green , Black and White) and  were disposed of along 
with other wastages of nominated stations in 13 stations of five Zonal Railways 
including Rourkela, Tata Nagar, Adra (SER), Chennai (SR), Jodhpur, Jaipur 
(NWR), Nizamud din, New Delhi, Lucknow (NR) , Mumbai Centr al, Churchgate, 
Jamnagar, Nandurbar (WR). 
 Waste bins were not found covered, not emptied regularly and not washed, 
which led to accumulation of garbage in bins in 23 stations in 10Zonal Railways 
which include Guwahati, New Tinsukia  Jn. New Bongaigaon Jn., Rangapara 
North Jn.  (NFR), Karjat (CR), Bhubaneswar, Cuttack, Titlagarh (EC oR),  
Samastipur, Sheikpura, Rajendranagar (ECR), Agra Fort, Allahabad, (NCR), 
Gondia (SECR), Kharagpur, Ro urkela, Bokaro Steel City, Tata Nagar, Adra (SER), 
Gadag, Bangalore (SWR),  Jaipur (NWR), Kanyakumari (SR), Ludhiana, Lucknow 
(NR), Nandurbar, Mumbai Central, Vadodara (WR). 
 Hand gloves and/or tower caps were not being used by catering personnel 
handling the food stuff in various catering units on 32stations of 13 Zonal 
Railways, viz. Ch hapra, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Kathgodam, Basti, Salempur 
(NER), Karjat (CR), Titlagarh (EC oR), Samasthipur (ECR), Agra Fort, All ahabad, 
Gwalior (NCR), G ondia (SECR) ,Kharagpur, R ourkela, Bokaro Steel city, Tata 
Nagar, Adra (SER), Gadag,  Bangalore Cantt, Bangalore (SWR), Jaipur (NWR), 
Kanniyakumari (SR), Mehboobnagar, Kazhipet, Secunderabad (SCR), Guwahati , 
New Tinsukia Jn., Kamakhya Jn. , New Bongaigaon Jn. , Rangapara North Jn. 
(NFR), Mumbai Central (WR)  stations. Catering personnel were also not found 
using gloves on 15 trains
37 during joint inspection. 
 Food stuff were not covered to protect them from flies, insects and dust in 
three stations (Titlagarh -ECoR, Agra Fort -NCR and Pathankot -NR) and in four 
trains (Yeshvantpur  Nizamuddin Sampark Kranti Exp.- 12629, Nizamuddin Goa 
Express-12780, Bikaner Coimbatore Express -22475, Ajmer  Sealdah Express -
12988). Food stuffs were kept on the floor and near toilet area, vestibule in 
three trains (Mumbai Central Jaipur Express -12955, Paschim Express -12925, 
Visaka Express-17015). 
                                                           
37Yeshvantpur Nizamuddin Sampark Kranti (12629), Nizamuddin Goa Express(12780), Jabalpur -Katra-Jabalpur (11449/50), 
Bikaner Coimbatore Express (22475), Chhattisgarh Exp (18238), Gondia  Raigarh Jan Shatabdi  (12070), Kanlinur  Trivendrum 
Janshatabdi Express (12081), Calicut Trivendr um Janshatabdi Express (12075), Ajmer -Puri Exp (18422), Upasana Express 
(12327), Kamakhya  Yeshvantpur AC Exp. (12552), Chennai Coimbatore Shatabdi (12243), Chennai Duranto (12269), 
Tamilnadu Exp (12622)  

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 5
40
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
40 
x Valid medical fitness certificate in re spect of catering personnel were not 
available on some of the catering units checked on stations including Lokmanya 
Tilak Terminal, Karzat, (CR), Samastipur , Barauni (ECR), Agra Fort, Gwalior, 
(NCR), Gondia (SECR), Gadag (SWR), Chennai (SR), Lucknow (NR), Secunderabad 
(SCR) and in two trains (12081 Kannur-Trivendrum Jan Shatabdi Express and 
12313 Sealdah Rajdhani Express).  
x In base kitchen, static units and mobile  units, cleaning schedule to be followed 
was not available at many locations test checked. No separate sink for washing 
and proper cleaning of the cooked vessels have been kept in the licensee base 
kitchen of NCR for catering on boar d service in Train No. 12033-34 (Kanpur-
New Delhi-Kanpur Shatabdi). 
x In 10 trains (18422 – Ajmer Puri Express, 12565 – Bihar Sampark Kranti, 12553 
Vaishali Express, 12395 – Rajendernagar Patna to Ajmer, 12501 – Porvotar 
Sampark Kranti express, 15651/52- Lohit Express12472, 12834, 12863, 12081), 
no proper storage arrangements for raw 
materials, packed items and other 
ingredients at pantry car of trains was seen.  
x During joint inspection of Train No. 12583 
Lucknow – Anand Vihar Terminal Double 
Decker (NER), it was seen that a passenger 
who had ordered a cutlet, noticed an iron 
nail, while consuming it as shown in the 
photograph. 
x As per the Complaint book available at on-
board catering service in Train No . 12033-34 (Kanpur-New Delhi-Kanpur 
Shatabdi) of NCR, a complaint of iron nail in the breakfast was made. But the 
final remedial action on this complaint was not found recorded in course of 
joint inspection. 
x Cockroaches and rats were seen in Pantry Car in Train No.12260 (Duronto 
Express-ER) and 12269 (Duronto Express-SR). 
Hygiene and cleanliness in respect of the food stuff served was not ensured by the 
railways on stations and in trains as observed in the joint inspections undertaken 
by Audit. 
During the passenger satisfaction survey conducted by Audit, 75 per cent  
passengers opined hygiene and cleanliness of catering services as average or poor. 
 
 
Fig. 15: Nail in cutlet served to the 
passenger in Train no. 12583 Lucknow – 
Anand Vihar Terminal Double Decker 
(16 October 2016) 

41
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 5
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
41 
5.2 Unfair practices being fo llowed in catering services 
During joint inspections audit checked the position on selected stations and trains, 
the following was observed:  
x Bills were not given for the food items serv ed in mobile units in all the selected 
80 trains. Printed menu cards with tariff for the list of food items sold in the 
mobile units were not available with waiters and Catering Managers, in all 
trains jointly inspected except trains of SER. Non-availability of menu cards 
enhances the chances of overcharging by the catering staff. 
x In SER, however, due to adoption of differ ent criteria for fixation of tariff in the 
menu, the passengers found it difficult to distinguish between standard items 
and a-la-carte items leading to overcharging. Out of 462 complaints brought to 
notice of CCM office, during 2015- 16, 246 complaints pertained to 
overcharging. During the passenger satisfaction survey conducted in five 
stations and in five trains by Audit, 152 out of 250 passengers felt that there 
was an overcharging/forced sale by waiters, bearers and commission vendors. 
At Agra and Jhansi (NCR), unapproved brands such as Badri Tasty Nut 
(Namkeen) weighing 36 gram not having FSSAI license was kept for supply to 
passengers.  
x During the passenger satisfaction survey conducted by Audit, 36 per cent 
passengers felt that they were being overcharged for the food served and 21 
per cent felt that the rates were not reasonable. 
x As per Para 2806 Indian Railway Commercial Manual, the quantity of cooked 
rice, chappatis, vegetables etc. served  should be according to the standard 
measurement prescribed by Railway Board/Zonal Railways. Normally, the price 
list schedule indicates the measurement (gram for solid food stuff and ml for 
beverages like coffee, tea and soup) per unit. During joint inspections 
conducted by Audit during July 2016 to Oc tober 2016, it was seen that food 
stuff served was less than the prescribed scheduled quantity: 
o Weight of one piece paneer was found to be 3 grams against the prescribed 
standard of 5 grams in licensee base kitchen for catering on board service in 
Train no. 12033-34 Kanpur - New Delhi Shatabdi (NCR). 
o In the Food Plaza of Gwalior station (NCR), against the scheduled weight of 
175 grams, the actual weight of Poori was only 130 grams.  
o Weights of vegetable sandwich were checked and shortage of 25 gm was 
noticed invariably at all six stalls of licensee at Agra Fort (NCR). 
o Deficiency/shortage in weight of 10 grams each item i.e. dhokla and bread 
pakoda was found at Gwalior station (NCR).  

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 5
42
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
42 
o Quantity of ice cream (Vadilal ) served was 90 ml instead of contractual 
quantity of 100 ml. Likewise, quantity of Curd ( Nova) was also 90 gms 
instead of 100 gms. Sachet of 10 gm Tomato Ketchup was served instead of 
15 gms. The quantity of Nutty Grietty branded almond served was 17 gms 
instead of 20 gms in Train no. 12313 Sealdah Rajdhani Express (ER). 
o Paratha weighing 95 gms was served instead of 100 gms and 90 gms Dal 
instead of 100 gms in Train no.12019 Howrah-Ranchi Shatabdi Express (ER). 
o During the passenger satisfaction survey conducted by Audit, 39 per cent  
passengers stated that they felt that the quantity of food served was less 
than prescribed. 20 per cent  passengers found the quantity to be 
inadequate.  
x ECoR allowed four popular pan-India brands, viz., Aquafina, Kinley, Bisleri and 
Bailey to be sold by the catering units in case of non-availability of RailNeer. 
However, sale of unapproved brand of water such as Fress, Sanjeevani, Amust, 
X-Liant, FAM Life  and overcharging of Packaged Drinking Water (PDW) were 
prevalent in ECoR. Unapproved Packaged drinking water 'Gallons' was sold by 
Food Plaza catering unit of IRCTC contractor at Agra Fort Station (NCR). 
x The loss due to unauthorised operation of  license of platform vending to the 
Food Plaza on account of deficient fixi ng of license fee and awarding license 
without bidding process at Jhansi station (NCR) was ` 4.14 crore, as assessed 
by Audit. 
x In New Jalpaiguri Jn. (NFR), out of 56 catering units, 51 were un-authorized 
units, of which 14 units were yet to be evicted despite cases been decided in 
favour of NFR and 19 IRCTC licensees were not paying license fees. 
x At Agra Fort station, in all the seven licensee stalls and five trolleys it was 
observed that only petha, pera, dalmuth and gazak PAD items were available as 
against notified PAD items. 
x The PAD articles to be sold at Departmental Units require fixing of rate contract 
with authorized seller of the PAD articl es. The PAD articles would be procured 
for Departmental Catering Units at rate contract and sold at the MRP with the 
difference being the margin. It was seen that no rate contract for procurement 
of the PAD items existed over NCR for th e period 22 March 2015 to 15 October 
2016. Thus, no PAD items were officially sold at the Departmental Catering 
Units of NCR during this period. However, these were sold unofficially. 
x Para 2807 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual provides that articles to be 
sold and price of each such commodity will be prescribed by Railway 
Administration such that articles are being sold at prescribed rates and 

43
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 5
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
43 
passengers are not being overcharged. Th ese articles include biscuits, packed 
products, sweets, etc. are categorized as Proprietary Article Depot (PAD) items 
which are sold at licensee units as well as departmental catering units. It was 
seen that in NCR, shortlisting is done for specific brand by the Zonal Railways, 
but price of the product is not specifie d. The authorised owners of the brand 
are permitted to sell the product at Ma ximum Retail Price (MRP) subject to the 
condition that MRP is not more than th e MRP of the same product sold in the 
open market. In NCR, it was seen that the PAD articles were sold in the railway 
stations with MRP with weight and prices different from the open market, 
wherein per unit cost sale price in railwa y premises is significantly higher. For 
example, during joint inspection in Allahabad station, it was found that Chips of 
the brand ‘Lays’ weighing 29.5 grams was being sold at Neelam Food Plaza at 
the price of ` 18. Identical product outside railway premises weighing 30 grams 
costs only ` 10. Also Haldiram chips were being sold
38on railway premises, in 
packets of 35 grams at ` 10.00 and 42.5 gram at ` 15.00. Similarly, in NFR, it 
was found that packed items of ‘lays chips’ , ‘Vadilal ice-cream’ at a higher rate, 
marked as 'specially packed for selected channel only' were being sold in trains 
and static units. The weight of ‘lays chips’ was 29.5 grams and MRP was printed 
as ` 18, whereas, a packet of 30 grams of Lays Chips of same flavour is available 
in the market at ` 10 only. During exit conference NCR Administration stated 
that they have issued a major penalty charge sheet in the case pointed by 
Audit. However, the issue has not been controlled as the unauthorized vending 
operation were going on with the connivance of illegal criminal elements. They 
further stated that all efforts will be made to control the same.  
x It was further seen that in NCR because of sale of PAD items of some companies 
at a price higher than the MRP the sale of PAD items was banned from 1 May 
2015 (Kurkure, Lays Chips, Namkeen Laher, Laher Moong Dal, Butter Bite 
Biscuits Priyagold, Priyagold CNC Biscuit, Biscuit Elaychi Cremica, Biscuit Orange 
Cremica, Good Day Biscuit Britania, Taka Tak Chatpata Masala Haldiram, Chips 
Haldiram and Frooti) for products of M/ s Pepsico India Holding Pvt. Ltd., M/s 
Surya Food & Agro Ltd., M/s Bector’s Food Specialities Ltd., M/s Britannia 
Industries Ltd. and M/s Haldiram Pvt.Ltd.  However, on request of M/s Britannia 
Industries Ltd. the ban was withdrawn for all companies and without recovering 
the penalty of `25,000 levied on each of the five entities. During exit 
conference, NCR Administration agreed that despite the levy of penalty, 
instances of overcharging and exploitation of passengers continued.  
                                                            
38
 On packet, mentioned as ‘Sale for INST’ 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 5
44
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
44 
x Valid police clearance certificate in re spect of catering personnel were not 
available on 26 stations on 1239 Zonal Railways and in eight40 trains. 
The above deficiencies indicated that the contractors compromised on value for 
money in respect of food items served to passengers and action taken by Railway 
Administration for the deviation from the quality standards was not effective. As 
a result, the contractors continue to sell unhygienic and low quality food at 
stations. 
5.3 Quality of food and checks and controls for quality assurance 
Joint inspections were undertaken by Audit teams along with railway officials at 74 
stations and 80 trains between July 2016 and October 2016. The following 
deficiencies in respect of quality of food served were noticed: 
x In 14 trains (12293, 12153, 18422, 12434, 12472, 22475, 12629, 12780, 
11449/50, 15959/60, 12041/42, 15651/52, 12501/02, 12551/52), no periodical 
checks was done for the foodstuff supplied to the passengers. 
x Articles found unsuitable for human consumption, contaminated foodstuffs, 
recycled foodstuffs, shelf life expired packaged and bottled items, unauthorized 
brands of water bottles, etc., were offered for sale in station premises/trains on 
Titlagarh, (ECoR), Samastipur (ECR), Howrah (ER), Agra Fort, Allahabad, Gwalior 
(NCR), Jodhpur (NWR), Gondia (SECR), New Delhi (IR), New Delhi (IRCTC), 
Pathankot (NR), Gorakhpur, Rourkela, Boka ro Steel City, Tata Nagar, Adra (SER) 
Chhapra, Gorakhpur, Lucknow, Basti, Salempur, Manduadih (NER), Gadag 
(SWR), Guwahati, Kamakhya Jn., New tinsukia Jn. and New Bongaigaon Jn., 
Rangapara North Jn. (NFR). 
x In NFR, local made biscuits, cakes without any shelf life and date of 
manufacture were found to be sold in the station premises. 
x Some items of cell kitchen i.e. Atta, Besan, Refined soya oil, Red chilly powder 
was collected for sample and sent to approved laboratory at Allahabad (NCR) 
during April 2016. Atta was found to be s ubstandard and NCR imposed a fine of 
` 2000/- against the licensee, but recovery of the same was not made.  
                                                            
39
Wadi, Karjat(CR)  Cuttack, Titlagarh (ECoR), Asansol, Howrah (ER), Agra Fort, Allahabad, Gwalior (NCR), Chhapra, Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, Kathgodam, Basti, Salempur (NER), Gadag (SWR), Kanyakumari (SR), Pathankot (NR), Kazipet (SCR), Guwahati, 
Kamakya Jn. New Tinsukia Jn. New Bongaigaon Jn. Rangapara North Jn.(NFR) station, Nandurbar and Somnath (WR) 
40
Train No.18422 (ECoR) and 15959/60, 12041/42, 15651/52, 12501/02, 12551/52 (NFR), TSV unit of Train No. 12195/12196 
(Agra Fort- Ajmer Inter City SF Express) run and managed by NW R and Licensee base kitchen of NCR for catering in Train No. 
12033-34 (Kanpur – New Delhi- Kanpur Shatabdi), operating at Kanpur 

45
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 5
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 45 
 At Bokaro  Steel City station, SER, the shelf 
life of the flavored milk sold had expired , as 
seen during joint inspection. 
 At Agra, c atering units were run and 
managed by IRCTC Licens ee. In the se 
catering units sample for test checks of 
quality of Petha  was collected by NCR 
Administration during May 2016 and sent to 
approved laboratory, Allahabad and 
unsatisfactory result (i.e. fungal growth 
around the petha pieces) of test check was received. Chief Medical 
Superintendent/Agra Cantt.  has intimated D ivisional Commercial Manager / 
Agra Cantt.  to take action against licensee towards unsatisfactory result, but 
action was yet to be taken. 
 In WR , deficiencies in quality of malaipaneer, dressed broiler chicken, and 
refined oil were pointed out by the designated c ommercial staff during 
inspections. However, Railway Administration had not initiated any action 
against the contractors for these lapses.  
 Unsold Parathas around 100 pieces were found in the base kitchen of Zonal 
Railway for catering in train no.12033-34 (Kanpur – New Delhi – Kanpur) of NCR 
which can be reused/recycled as the staff could not explain the justification for 
its further use. Moreover, there is no mechanism to ensure that unsold/waste 
foods are not recycled.  
 Contaminated oil was found in an op en state in the inspected base kitchen of 
train no.12033-34 (Kanpur - New Delhi –Kanpur) of NCR. Accordingly, the 
chances of its re -use after compromising healthy and hygienic parameters of 
license contract cannot be ruled out.  
 As on date of join t inspection by audit , FSSAI -2006 certification No. 
20011909000698 in favour M/s Classic Caterers obtained for TSV unit of Train 
No. 12195/12196 (Agra Fort - Ajmer Inter City SF Express) , run and managed by 
NWR, was found valid only up to 16 December 2015 an d no renewal was done 
thereafter. 
 FSSAI – 2006 certificate for operation of this base kitchen run by M/s Brandavan 
Food Products of NCR for catering in Train No. 12033 -34 (Kanpur – New Delhi- 
Kanpur Shatabdi) had not been obtained as seen during joint inspection. 
 During the passenger satisfaction survey conducted by Audit, 53 per cent  
passengers felt that the quality, taste and condition of food supplied needed 
improvement and 21 per cent felt the same to be poor. 
 
Fig. 16: One item of flavored milk was not 
within the shelf life at Licensed Catering 
unit of Bokaro station, SER  
(20 October 2016) 


Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 5
46
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
46 
Clause 20.1.2 of Catering Policy 2010 prescribes that the quality of catering services 
should be monitored through inspections and quality checks.  Railway Board issued 
instructions (October 2013 and December 2013) for inspection of on-board 
catering services by officers with a view to ensure perceptible improvement in 
catering services rendered.  The system of food quality checks at departmental and 
contract catering units of Zonal Railways and IRCTC was checked and the following 
was noticed: 
5.3.1 Checks carried out by Chief Health Inspectors and Assistant Health 
Inspectors 
Rules41 prescribe checks to be conducted for ensuring quality control of foodstuff 
sold by the catering units. During 2013-14 to 2015-16 for static and mobile catering 
units, shortfalls were noticed in collection  of sample by Chief Health Inspectors 
(CHI) and Assistant Health Officers (AHO), who are also designated as Food Safety 
Officers (FSO).  
Audit reviewed the position of checks co nducted by CHI and FSO of Zonal Railways 
during the period 2013-14 to 2015-16 and noticed that 
x Against the total 38489 food samples du e to be collected for checks, 41896 
food samples were collected.  
x Though total number of samples collected was more than the samples due, in 
ten Zonal Railways (NCR, SCR, SECR, NR, NFR, NWR, ECR, SR, SER and WR) 
shortfalls in collection of food sa mples were noticed ranging between 11 
samples (SER) and 1233 samples (NR). On these ten Zonal Railways, total 
shortfall in collection of samples was 4224. 
x Out of the total 41896 food samples co llected for checking, 1353 samples failed 
during the test.  
x In five Zonal Railways (NR, NWR, SR, WR and NER) action taken against the 
concerned agencies where samples had failed, were not significant.  
x In five Zonal Railways, action were ta ken against the agencies on failure of 
samples during the test. However, in tw o Railways (NFR and ECR), no action 
was taken against the agency where food samples failed during the test. 
Annexure 8 
Thus, checks and controls prescribed for check of quality were not used 
effectively. 
 
 
                                                            
41
Para 1010-B (General Instructions) of Indian Railway Medical Manual (Volume II) 

47
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 5
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
47 
During the inspections of the static and mobile catering units conducted by the 
commercial officers 2337 observations mainly on hygiene, quantity of food served, 
Menu & Tariff, cooking  & kitchen, e -catering service and service by the catering 
personnel were observed during 2013-14 to 2015-16: 
Table 5.1 – Observations made by Commercial Inspectors  
Category Departmental IRCTC 
Hygiene 354 33 
Quantity of food served 217 8 
Menu & Tariff 376 42 
Cooking & Kitchen 318 76 
E-catering service 10 0 
Catering personnel service 903 0 
Total  2178 159 
Based on these observations, concerned licensees were warned/advised and in 
respect of IRCTC licensees, Zonal Railways sent these Reports to IRCT C for further 
action.  
During inspection carried out by Railway Officials on 10 October 2014, for the train 
no. 12625/26 (Kerala Express - Satyam Caterers) overcharging for food served by 
the catering service provider was noticed. During inspection by the Railway Officials 
on 17 June 2015 for the Train No. 12621/22 (Tamilnadu Express - Satyam Caterers) 
overpricing of food items, sale of unapproved water bottles, supply of lesser 
quantity of food, improper disposal of garbage etc. were noticed. S atyam Caterers 
were holding 41 contracts for static/mobile catering units over Zonal railways as 
well as IRCTC. Similar aspects were noticed in respect of IRCTC contractors for Train 
No. 12625/26 (Kerala Express - K  M  Mu s t h a f a ) .   S h o w  c a u s e  no t i c e s  w er e  is s ue d 
and fines were imposed.   
5.3.3 ISO Certification for catering units 
It is envisaged in the Catering Policy 2010 that Zonal Railways should develop the 
state-of-art technology for rendering catering services to travelling passengers and 
take steps to get ISO 2200042 certification for all major catering units including base 
kitchens. The ISO certifications should be checked frequently to ensure that those 
are not outdated. Clause  4 of the Catering Policy 2010 required all major catering 
units to obtain ISO 22000 cer tification. Audit observed that only 1.07 per cent of 
major units managed by Zonal Railways and 70 per cent of units managed by IRCTC 
were ISO 22000 certified as on 31 March 2016. In 42 IRCTC units , the ISO 
certification was not updated. 
Annexure 9 a and b 
                                                        
42
ISO 22000 sets out the requirements for a food safety management system and can be certified to. It maps out what an 
organization needs t o do to demonstrate its ability to control food safety hazards in order to ensure that food is safe. It can 
be used by any organization regardless of its size or position in the food chain.  

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 5
48
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
48 
As per Para 1.2.6 of SBD, ‘Licensee sh all acquire and hold a valid ISO 22000 
certification within 6 months from th e date of functioning of kitchen and 
subsequently for the entire duration of the License’. Review of contract agreement 
and case files in WR revealed that license es of 17 pantry cars out of 18 had not 
complied with the condition of setting up of base kitchen even 25 to 35 months 
after the date of award of contract. No ne of the contractors had obtained and 
submitted ISO 22000 certificates till August 2016 despite three years having 
elapsed since award of contract.   
During Exit Conference, Railway Board st ated (February 2017) that in Rajdhani, 
Shatabdi and Duronto trains, passengers ha ve no option but to accept the food 
supplied. They stated that trial for option al catering services was started in June 
2016 in two trains for 45 days where five per cent passengers opted out. The issue 
of further implementation of optional ca tering was under examination. They felt 
that this would improve the performance of the contractors for supply of quality 
food items. Passengers would also get an option to book catering through e-
catering facility or any other catering services.  
5.4 Passenger satisfaction surveys conducted by Zonal Railways 
The Catering Policy 2010 envisaged conducting of passenger satisfaction surveys by 
the Zonal Railways. Accordingly, Railway Bo ard instructed (July 2011) to bring in 
place a system of obtaining feedback fr om travelling passengers and rate the 
services provided.  Railway Board also instructed that the feedback from the 
passengers of Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi should be taken once in a month 
and from the passengers of Mail/Express once in three months.  
The feedback given by the passengers duri ng the surveys conducted by the Zonal 
Railways revealed that out of 37376 passengers, 11 per cent graded the service as 
‘average’ or ‘poor’ and 44 per cent graded the services as ‘good’. However, as 
discussed in Para 5.5, a large number of  complaints were lodged by travelling 
passengers during the past three years, ma inly due to overcharging, bad quality 
food, misbehavior by catering staff etc. 
It was observed that in ECoR, no survey was conducted by Zonal Railways during 
the period from April 2015 to June 2015. Fu rther, in 17 trains no survey was 
conducted and out of 52 trains there was shortfall in survey in case of 46 trains in 
the year 2015-16. In SECR, no regular schedule was followed and random surveys 
were conducted. 
Annexure 10 
As per the new Catering Policy 2017, IR CTC will conduct passenger satisfaction 
survey by means of third party audit instead of Zonal Railways.  

49
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 5
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
49 
5.5 Complaint Redressal system 
As per Clause 20.5 of the Catering Policy 2010, a system for complaint redressal for 
catering services (static and on-board services) should be brought to provide 
proactive and effective complaint redressa l system. The position of complaints 
relating to catering service over IR for the period from 1 March 2013 to 30 
September 2016 was as under: 
Table 5.2 – Complaints lodged by passengers regarding catering services during the past four years 
Reason Year wise number of complaints related to catering services 
over IR 
Jan to Dec 
2013 
Jan to Dec 
2014 
Jan to Dec 
2015 
Jan to Sep 
2016 
Over Charging 955 1162 2333 1686 
Quality 2724 2986 1957 1125 
Quantity 524 381 218 106 
Misbehaviour 148 202 181 80 
Hygiene 113 107 106 93 
Miscellaneous 1387 1469 1360 994 
Total 5851 6307 6155 4084 
Fined 1976 2480 3028 1922
Warned 2194 2190 1445 1068
Termination 1 3 2 0
Suitably Advised 528 579 777 302
Not Substantiated 680 405 445 221
Disciplinary action against Railway 
staff 58 107 26 17 
Any Other (Such as withdrawn, not 
verifiable etc.) 414 543 432 554 
Audit check revealed that  
x During check of complaints over Allahabad division for the period 2015-16, it 
was noticed that out of 69 complaints  lodged, 59 complaints were towards 
overcharging.  
x During the course of joint inspection carri ed out for 9 stalls and 14 trolleys at 
Gwalior Station, it was observed that the bills to the travelling public have not 
been issued by the vendors of those stalls and trolleys. Thus, under/ 
overcharging from Travelling Passengers  in case of above stalls/trolleys 
remained un- verified. 
x In ER, complaints were lodged in Complaint Books kept in Mobile Units of the 
trains which included issues such as providing stale and rotten food, iron wire 
found in omelet etc. 
x In CR, out of these 572 complaints, nine  complaints related to hygiene, two 
complaints were with respect to quantity of food served, 49 complaints were 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 5
50
Chapter 5 Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
50 
regarding quality, taste, condition etc. of food and 512 cases pertained to 
catering personnel service. 
x In NER, 311 complaints received thro ugh various sources during 2015-16 were 
brought to the notice of CCM/NER Office . Out of these complaints, 70, 22, 20, 
32 and 167 complaints pertained to hygiene, quality of food, quantity of food, 
cooking and kitchens and behaviour of catering personnel respectively. No 
complaint was pending for redressal as on 31 March 2016 on NER. 
x In SECR, during 2015-16, 34 complaints re ceived through Toll free numbers of 
CSMC (Centralized Catering Services Mo nitoring Cell), two complaints were 
received through all India help line numbers and one complaint received 
through twitter account.  Required action was taken for all the complaints and 
no complaint was pending as on 31 March 2016.  Out of these 37 complaints, 
29 related to overcharging.  
x In SWR, out of the 724 complaints brought to the notice of CCM Office of SWR 
during 2015-16, 36, 30, 435, 13 and 210 complaints pertain to hygiene, quantity 
of food, quality of food, cooking and kitchens and behaviour of catering 
personnel respectively and only one complaint was pending for redressal as on 
31 March 2016 on SWR. 
Audit observed that though a complaint redressal system has been put in place, 
there is no reduction in the number of complaints over the years. It was also seen 
that the major share of complains pertained to overcharging and quality issues.  
The new Catering Policy 2017 states that the present complaint redressal 
mechanism shall be strengthened.  
 

51
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 6
Appendix Report No. __ of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
51 
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Recommendations 
6.1 Conclusion 
Frequent change in catering policy and consequent transfer of responsibility to 
manage catering units from railways to IRCTC and back, have created a state of 
uncertainty in management of catering se rvices provided to the passenger over 
the years. On account of these policy ch anges, railways have not taken effective 
steps to bridge the gap to provide nece ssary infrastructure in terms of base 
kitchens, Static Catering Units, Specified Catering Units (such as Food Plaza, Food 
Courts and Fast Food units), Train Side Vending arrangements and Automatic 
Vending Machines etc. Frequent changes also led to legal disputes with contractors 
and coordination issues between the railways and IRCTC.  
The new Catering Policy 2017 once agai n transferred the responsibility of 
managing important catering units such as Base Kitchens, Cell Kitchens, 
Refreshment rooms at A-1 and A category stations, Train Siding Vending and Jan 
Ahaar to IRCTC. However, the concerns of quality, hygiene, affordability and 
availability of food to passengers as highlighted by Audit are needed to be 
adequately addressed. 
The policy of progressive switch over from gas burners to electric power 
equipment in pantry cars was not followed while manufacturing the pantry cars in 
ICF. Pantry facility created in Jan Shatabdi coaches by reducing four seats in Second 
Class coaches and two seats in AC Chair Car coaches, was also not being used for 
purpose of supplying hot food to the passengers. 
Requirement of catering facilities on stations and trains were not assessed 
comprehensively for each station in the fo rm of Master Plans (Blue Prints) by all 
Zonal Railways. Zonal Railways did not ensure provisions of pantry cars in a 
number of long distance trains. Alternative services through train side vending 
and/or base kitchens were also not provided in some of the trains checked in 
audit. Only three per cent base kitchens were functioning departmentally and 
remaining were managed through licensees. A large number of base kitchens were 
located outside the railway premises and were not subjected to quality checks. 
Thus, there was no assurance that, the obje ctive of servicing mobile catering units 
through base kitchens to improve quality, hygiene, cleanliness and use of standard 
ingredients for food served on trains, was achieved. 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 6
52
Appendix Report No. __ of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
52 
In the new Catering Policy 2017, the responsibility of setting up and operation of 
base kitchens has been given to IRCTC. Though a timeframe has been fixed for the 
whole process of setting up of base kitc hens and responsibility of Zonal Railways 
and IRCTC has been defined, penalty has been prescribed only for delay on part of 
IRCTC after handing over of site by the Zonal Railways to IRCTC. As such, 
accountability of Zonal Railways to carry forward the new Catering Policy of 2017 
needed to be clearly demarcated.
 
There was delay in finalization of Standa rd Bid Document and Railways could not 
start the catering services departmentally even after taking over the charge from 
IRCTC. As per the new Catering Policy 2017, certain static units in A1 and A 
category stations viz. Refreshment room s, Jan Ahaar, Cell Kitchens have been 
handed over to IRCTC on ‘as is where is’ basis. IRCTC and Chief Commercial 
Manager of the concerned Zonal Railways are required to enter into an agreement 
with respect of each unit to be handed ov er to IRCTC. Railway Board shall issue a 
draft model agreement for the same, which shall be executed before handing over 
the units to IRCTC. Timely issue of draf t model agreement would be necessary to 
facilitate smooth handing over of units to IRCTC. 
Zonal Railways did not ensure provision of appropriate catering services to rail 
users by opening Specified Catering Units as per the plan. Further, there were 
delays in commencement of services of Sp ecified Catering Units in these locations. 
Continued presence of hawkers and sale of unauthorized food in trains also 
indicated that the catering services provided in trains were not adequate. 
Janta meals were introduced with the intentio n of quality food at low cost to all. It 
was seen that share of Janta meals sold to the overall meals sold in six Zonal 
Railways was declining in the last three years. The availability of Janta meals on 
stations was also not adequate. As the new Catering Policy has transferred the 
responsibility of management of Jan Ahaars to IRCTC, Railways need to ensure that 
adequate number of low cost Janta Meals are provided by IRCTC to passengers. 
Railways accepted high and unworkable ra tes of license fee for awarding contracts 
to catering contractors. A major portion is  paid as license fee to Zonal Railways, 
leaving a small margin of the contract value for the licensee for providing catering 
services. It may not be workable for th e licensees to cater to the needs of 
passengers within the available margin and may result in compromising the 
quality, quantity and prices etc. By not following the ceiling limit prescribed for 
award of contracts to contractors, Railw ays promoted monopolization by a few 

53
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Chapter 6
Appendix Report No. __ of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
53 
firms. Monopolization leads to compromise in quality and services being provided 
to the passengers. 
Monitoring for correct billing, accounting  and watching recovery of license fee, 
water and electricity charges and penalty payable by licensees in Zonal Railways 
also needed strengthening. 
Hygiene and cleanliness in respect of the food stuff served was not ensured by the 
railways on stations and in trains as observed in the joint inspections undertaken 
by Audit along with railways. Unfair practices were being followed in execution of 
catering services at stations and trains. Bills were not given for the food items sold, 
menu cards were not displayed for the benefit of passengers, food stuff served 
was less than the prescribed quantity and Proprietary Article Depot (PAD) items 
were sold at the railway stations at significantly higher prices than market. These 
units included static and mobile units ma naged both by Zonal Railways as well as 
by IRCTC – departmentally or through licensees. The deficiencies indicated that the 
contractors compromised on value for money in respect of food items served to 
passengers and action taken by Railway Administration for the deviation from the 
quality standards was not effective. As a result, the contractors continue to sell 
unhygienic and low quality food at stations. Checks and controls prescribed for 
check of quality were not used effectively. Though a complaint redressal system 
has been put in place, there is no reduction in the number of complaints over the 
years. It was also seen that the major share of complaints pertained to 
overcharging and quality issues.  
6.2 Recommendations 
1. I C F  m a y  b e  d i r e c t e d  t o  k e e p  i n  v i e w  t h e  p o l i c y  o f  s w i t c h  o v e r  f r o m  g a s  
burners to electric power equipment in pantry cars, while manufacturing 
pantry cars. 
2. Provision of pantry cars may be considered in case of long distance trains as 
per policy. 
3. Railways may facilitate smooth transfer of catering units including base 
kitchens to IRCTC by ensuring that the obligations on part of the Zonal 
Railways are fulfilled and accountability of Zonal Railways to carry forward 
the new Catering Policy of 2017 is clearly demarcated. 
4. IRCTC may be obligated to provide low cost Janta meals on stations and 
these should be effectively advertised amongst the passengers. 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 6
54
 54 
5. The prescribed monitoring mechanism may be effectively exercised to 
ensure h ygiene, cleanliness and quality of the catering services by 
IRCTC/licensees. 
6. Railway Board may frame guidelines for assessing the workability of rates in 
catering contracts so that the quality of the services is not compromised.  
7. Railways may ensure effective checks and controls to stop unfair practices 
such as, overcharging, serving food stuff less than the prescribed quantity, 
selling non-authorised food items on stations and in trains, non-exhibition of 
price card and not issuing receipts for the food stuff sold, by catering service 
providers. 
 
 
 
   
New Delhi                  (Nand Kishore) 
Dated:     Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
      
New Delhi              (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
Dated:     Comptroller and Auditor General of India 











    
` LQFURUH












    
3HUFHQWDJH
Report No. 37 of 2016        Page 69 
 
 
 
 
  (NAND KISHORE) 
 
 
 
 (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)  
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)37
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
       
 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
Application controls provide assurance to the Administration that transactions are 
properly authorised, complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their 
maintenance and other types of data input controls are in place. As seen from the 
data and live operations checked during field audit ICMS lacked adequate input 
controls during data entry into the syst em which led to incorrect/invalid data 
being entered and also had deficient manual supervisory controls. Due to 
deficiencies in such controls data accuracy, consistency and completeness could 
not be ensured. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may 
be introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy, completeness and validity of 
various types of data input and output.   
The IT Security was deficient and physical and logical access controls needed 
strengthening. Change Management was not documented and no system/ 
procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes made in 
the ICMS was found in place. Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully 
implemented. 
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes 
may be laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented 
so as to ensure that business critical  information and assets are protected 
from loss, damage and abuse. 
 
 
 
         (Nand Kishore) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Date: 28 November 2016 
 
    Countersigned 
      
 
 
     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
New Delhi            Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Date: 28 November 2016
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)37
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
       
 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
Application controls provide assurance to the Administration that transactions are 
properly authorised, complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their 
maintenance and other types of data input controls are in place. As seen from the 
data and live operations checked during field audit ICMS lacked adequate input 
controls during data entry into the syst em which led to incorrect/invalid data 
being entered and also had deficient manual supervisory controls. Due to 
deficiencies in such controls data accuracy, consistency and completeness could 
not be ensured. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may 
be introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy, completeness and validity of 
various types of data input and output.   
The IT Security was deficient and physical and logical access controls needed 
strengthening. Change Management was not documented and no system/ 
procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes made in 
the ICMS was found in place. Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully 
implemented. 
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes 
may be laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented 
so as to ensure that business critical  information and assets are protected 
from loss, damage and abuse. 
 
 
 
         (Nand Kishore) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Date: 28 November 2016 
 
    Countersigned 
      
 
 
     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
New Delhi            Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Date: 28 November 2016











    
` LQFURUH












    
3HUFHQWDJH
Report No. 37 of 2016        Page 69 
 
 
 
 
  (NAND KISHORE) 
 
 
 
 (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)  
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)37
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
       
 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
Application controls provide assurance to the Administration that transactions are 
properly authorised, complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their 
maintenance and other types of data input controls are in place. As seen from the 
data and live operations checked during field audit ICMS lacked adequate input 
controls during data entry into the syst em which led to incorrect/invalid data 
being entered and also had deficient manual supervisory controls. Due to 
deficiencies in such controls data accuracy, consistency and completeness could 
not be ensured. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may 
be introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy, completeness and validity of 
various types of data input and output.   
The IT Security was deficient and physical and logical access controls needed 
strengthening. Change Management was not documented and no system/ 
procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes made in 
the ICMS was found in place. Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully 
implemented. 
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes 
may be laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented 
so as to ensure that business critical  information and assets are protected 
from loss, damage and abuse. 
 
 
 
         (Nand Kishore) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Date: 28 November 2016 
 
    Countersigned 
      
 
 
     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
New Delhi            Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Date: 28 November 2016
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)37
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
       
 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
Application controls provide assurance to the Administration that transactions are 
properly authorised, complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their 
maintenance and other types of data input controls are in place. As seen from the 
data and live operations checked during field audit ICMS lacked adequate input 
controls during data entry into the syst em which led to incorrect/invalid data 
being entered and also had deficient manual supervisory controls. Due to 
deficiencies in such controls data accuracy, consistency and completeness could 
not be ensured. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may 
be introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy, completeness and validity of 
various types of data input and output.   
The IT Security was deficient and physical and logical access controls needed 
strengthening. Change Management was not documented and no system/ 
procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes made in 
the ICMS was found in place. Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully 
implemented. 
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes 
may be laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented 
so as to ensure that business critical  information and assets are protected 
from loss, damage and abuse. 
 
 
 
         (Nand Kishore) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Date: 28 November 2016 
 
    Countersigned 
      
 
 
     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
New Delhi            Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Date: 28 November 2016
29 March 2017
29 March 2017

55
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Appendix
Appendix Report No. __ of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 55 
Appendix 1 
List of stations selected 
Zonal Railways Number of stations 
selected 
Names of the stations selected 
CR 6 Mumbai CST 
Pune  
Bhusaval 
LokmaniyaTilak Terminus 
Wadi 
Karjat 
ECoR 4 Bhubaneswar 
Cuttack 
Titlagarh 
Visakapatnam 
ECR 5 Patna 
Rajendra Nagar 
SamastipurJn 
BarauniJn 
Sheikpura 
ER 4 Howrah 
Asansol 
Bolpur 
Kolkata 
NCR 3 Allahabad  
Agra Fort 
Gwalior 
(One selected unit of Jhansi and Mathura were also 
checked) 
NER 4 Gorakhpur 
Kathgodam 
Manduadih 
Lucknow 
NFR 6 Guwahati 
Salempur 
KamakhyaJn 
New TinsukiaJn 
New Bongaigaon 
Rangapara North Jn 
NR 5 New Delhi 
Pathankot 
Ludhiana 
HazratNizamuddin 
Lucknow 
NWR 4 Jaipur 
Jodhpur 
Abu Road 
Modran 
SCR 5 Secunderadad 
Mahbubnagar 
Kazhipet 
Renugunta 
Nadikudi 
SECR 5 Raipur 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
56
Appendix Report No. __ of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
56 
Zonal Railways Number of stations 
selected 
Name of the stations selected 
Gondia
Anuppur 
Raigarh 
Bilaspur 
SER 5 Kharagpur
Rourkela 
Adra 
Tatanagar 
Bokaro Steel City 
SR 5 Chennai Central 
Coimbatore 
Kanyakumari 
Tiruchirappalli 
ErnakulamJn 
SWR 3 Bengaluru 
Bengaluru Cantt 
Gadag 
WCR 4 Jabalpur
Katni 
Guna 
Damoh 
WR 6 Mumbai Central
Vadodara 
Jam Nagar 
Nandurbar 
Mumbai Churchgate 
Somnath 
Total 74 
 
 
 
  

57
Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Appendix
Appendix Report No. __ of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
57 
Appendix 2 
List of trains selected 
 
Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
trains 
selected 
Name of the trains selected 
CR 5 22109 –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - Nizamuddin Express 
12153 –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - Habibganj Express 
12293 –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - Allahabad Express  
11085 –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - Madgaon Express  
12071- Dadar - Aurangabad Janshatabdi 
ECoR 7 22811 - Bhubneswar - New Delhi Rajdhani 
12815 - Puri - New Delhi Express 
22847 - Vishakhapatnam –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Express 
17015 - Bhubneswar - Secunderabad Express 
12278 - Puri–Howarh Shatabdi 
12281 - Bhubanewar New Delhi Duronto Express 
18422 - Ajmer Puri Express 
ECR 5 12309 - Rajendranagar - New Delhi Rajdhani 
12565 - Bihar Sampark Kranti Darbhanga – New Delhi Express 
12395 - Rajendranagar Patna - Ajmer Jiyarat Express  
12553 - Barauni - New Delhi Vaishali Express  
13239 - Patna - Kota Express 
ER 5 13141-  Sealdah–Haldibari Teesta Express  
12333 - Vibhuti Express Howrah - Allahabad City 
12301-  Howrah - New Delhi Rajdhani 
12260 - New Delhi –Sealdah Duronto Express 
12327 - Howrah - Dehradun Upasna Express 
NCR 4 12195/96 Agra Fort-Ajmer-Agra Fort Intercity Express 
11124/25 - Gwalior - Barauni Mail 
12403/04 - Allahabad - Jaipur Express 
12033/34 - Kanpur - New Delhi Shatabdi 
NER 5 12591/92 - Gorakhpur - Yeshwantpur Express 
12541/42 - Gorakhpur –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Express 
12583/84 - Lucknow–Anand Vihar Terminal Double Decker 
15018 - Gorakhpur –Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Express 
12555 - Gorakhpur - Hisar Express 
NFR 5 12041/42 - New Jalpaiguri - Howrah Shatabdi Express 
15959 - Howrah –Dibrugarh Kamrup Express 
15651/52 - Gauwahati - Jammu Tawi Lohit Express 
12501/02 - Guwahati - New Delhi Poorvottar Sampark Kranti Express 
12551/52 - Kamakhya–Yesvantpur AC Superfast Express 
NR 5 12434 - Nizamudddin - Chennai Central Express 
12472 - Katra - Bandra Terminus Express 
22414 - Nizamuddin–Madgaon Rajdhani 
12047 - New Delhi –Firozepur Shatabdi 
22461 - New Delhi to Katra Express 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
58
Appendix Report No. __ of 2017 (Railways) 
 
 
58 
Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
trains 
selected 
Name of the trains selected 
NWR  4 22475 -  Bikaner - Coimbatore Express 
12988 - Ajmer -  Sealdah Superfast Express 
14707/8 - Bikaner - Bandtra Terminus Express 
12467/68 – Jaisalmer - Jaipur Leelan Superfast Express 
SCR 5 17230 - Hyderabad –Trivendrum Sabari Express 
12791 - Secunderanad - Danapur Express 
17206 - Kakinada Port –Sainagar Shirdi Express  
17016 - Secunderabad - Bhubaneswar Express 
12437 - Secunderabad–Nizamuddin Rajdhani 
SECR 4 18237/38 – Bilaspur - Amritsar Chattisgarh Express 
12070 - Gondia–Raigarh Janshtabdi Express 
22815 - Bilaspur - Ernakulam Superfast Express 
12849 - Bilaspur - Pune Superfast Express  
SER 5 12863/64 Howrah – Yeshwantpur Express 
12834/33 Howrah – Ahmedabad Express  
12261/62 Chhtrapati Shivaji Terminus – Howrah Express 
12857/58 Howrah – Digha Express 
12821/22 Howrah – Puri Express 
SR 5 12081/82 - Trivendrum - Kannur Jan Shatabdi 
12075/76 - Kozhikode - Trivendrum Jan Shatabdi 
12269/70 - Chennai Central –Nizamuddin Duronto 
12622/21 – New Delhi - Chennai Tamilnadu Express 
12243/44 - Chennai Central - Coimbatore Shatabdi 
SWR 5 12780 –Hazrat Nizamuddin - Vasco De Gama Goa Express 
12628 - Yeshwantpur–Hazrat Nizamuddin Karnataka Sampark Kranti 
12213 - Yeshwantpur - Delhi Sarai Rohilla Duronto Express 
22693 - Bengaluru –Nizamuddin Rajdhani 
12628 - New Delhi - Bengaluru Karnataka Express 
WCR 4 11449/50 Jabalpur - Mata Vaishno Devi Katra Express 
22181 - Jabalpur - Nizamuddin Express 
11466 - Jabalpur - Somnath Express 
12193/94 Jabalpur – Yashwantpur Express 
WR 7 12925/26 - Bandra Terminus - Amritsar Pashchim Express 
12955/56 - Mumbai Central - Jaipur Superfast Express 
12009/10 - Mumbai Central - Ahmedabad Shatabdi 
19019/20 - Bandra Terminus - Dehradun Express 
19005/06 - Mumbai Central - Ahmedabad Saurashtra Mail 
12951/52 - Mumbai Rajdhani Express 
12953/54 - August Kranti Rajdhani Express 
Total 80  
 

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
59
Zonal 
Railway
Name of station Category Av no. of 
trains 
handled
Number of 
platforms
Food 
Plazas
Food 
courts
Fast food 
units
Refreshment 
Rooms
AVMs Food Stalls/ 
Snack Bars
Jan Ahaar 
Units
Cell 
Kitchen 
Base Kithcen
CR Mumbai CST(CSTM) A1 108 18 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 1
CR Pune (PUNE) A 120 6 2 0 0 0 0 2 1 1 0
CR Bhusaval(BSL) A 140 7 1 0 0 0 0 5 1 1 0
CR Lokmanya Tilak Terminus(LTT) A 108 5 0 0 0 0 0 5 1 0 0
CR Wadi(WADI) B 34 4 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 0
CR Karjat (KJT) C 44 4 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0
ECoR Bhubaneswar(BBS) A1 219 6 1 0 0 0 8 15 1 0 0
ECoR Cuttack(CTC) A 181 5 1 0 0 0 3 10 0 0 0
ECoR Titlagarh(TIG) B 35 3 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 0
ECoR Visakhapatnam(VSKP) A 179 8 1 0 0 0 5 26 1 0 0
ECR Patna(PNBE) A1 54 10 2 0 0 0 0 5 2 0 0
ECR Rajendra Nagar(RJQ) A 12 4 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 1
ECR Samastipur Jn(SPJ) A 190 7 0 0 0 1 8 0 0 0 0
ECR Barauni Jn(BJU) A 102 8 0 0 0 1 7 1 0 0 0
ECR Sheikapura(SHK) D 15 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
ER Kolkata A 72 5 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0
ER Howrah(HWH) A1 278 14 2 0 0 1 0 57 2 0 1
ER Asansol(ASN) A 156 7 1 0 1 1 0 8 1 0 0
ER Bolpur(BHP) B 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
NCR Allahabad (ALD) A1 420 10 1 0 0 1 0 26 0 0 0
NCR Agra Fort(AF) A 32 5 1 0 0 1 0 14 0 0 0
NCR Gwalior(GWL) A1 84 5 1 0 0 1 0 23 0 0 0
NER Gorakhpur (GKP) A1 170 10 1 0 0 0 0 11 1 0 0
NER Kathgodam(KGM) A 22 3 1 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 0
NER Lucknow Jn (LKO) A1 96 6 0 0 0 1 0 10 0 0 0
NER Manduadih(MUV) D 56 3 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0
NFR Guwahati (GHY) A1 62 4 0 0 0 0 0 23 1 0 1
NFR Salempur(SRU) B 42 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0
NFR Kamakhya (KYQ) A 54 3 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0
Annexure 1a (Para 3.1)
Availability of catering units on stations selected in sample
 61

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
60
Zonal 
Railway
Name of station Category Av no. of 
trains 
handled
Number of 
platforms
Food 
Plazas
Food 
courts
Fast food 
units
Refreshment 
Rooms
AVMs Food Stalls/ 
Snack Bars
Jan Ahaar 
Units
Cell 
Kitchen 
Base Kithcen
Annexure 1a (Para 3.1)
Availability of catering units on stations selected in sample
NFR Tinsukia Jn(NTSK) B 22 2 0 0 1 0 0 12 1 1 0
NFR New Bongaigaon(NBQ) B 35 3 0 0 0 1 0 20 0 0 0
NFR Rangapara North Jn(RPAN) D 24 3 0 0 0 1 0 14 0 0 0
NR New Delhi(NDLS) A1 353 16 0 0 0 1 0 58 1 0 1
NR Lucknow Jn (LKO) A1 290 9 1 0 1 0 6 23 0 0 0
NR Pathankot(PTK) A 33 4 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 0
NR Ludhiana(LDH) A1 275 7 0 0 1 1 0 39 1 0 0
NR H Nizamuddin(NZM) A1 172 7 1 0 0 0 0 29 0 1 0
NWR Jaipur(JP) A1 86 6 1 0 1 1 0 48 1 0 1
NWR Jodhpur(JU) A1 67 5 0 0 1 1 0 32 0 0 0
NWR Abu Road(ABR) A 42 3 1 0 0 1 0 48 0 0 0
NWR Modran(MON) E 6 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0
SCR Secunderadad(SC) A1 114 10 1 0 0 0 0 17 2 0 Mini kitchen 
for Jhan 
Aahar
SCR Mahbubnagar(MBNR) B 66 3 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0
SCR Kazhipet (KZJ) A 124 3 0 0 1 1 0 3 0 0 1
SCR Renigunta (RU) A 74 5 0 0 2 0 0 14 0 1 0
SCR Nadikudi (NDKD) B 30 3 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
SECR Raipur(R) A1 56 5 0 0 0 1 0 5 0 0 0
SECR Gondia (G) A 71 5 0 0 1 1 0 5 0 0 0
SECR Anuppur(APR) B 41 3 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
SECR Raigarh (RIG) A 69 2 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0
SECR Bilaspur(BSP) A1 90 5 0 0 5 1 0 2 0 0 0
SER Kharagpur (KGP) A1 202 9 1 0 0 0 3 51 1 0 0
SER Rourkela(ROU) A 98 5 0 0 0 0 4 14 0 1 0
SER Adra(ADRA) B 95 4 0 0 0 1 0 18 0 0 0
SER Bokaro Steel City(BKSC) A 35 3 1 0 0 1 0 8 0 0 0
SER Tata Nagar A1 130 5 1 0 0 0 8 18 1 0 0
SR Chennai Central (MAS) A1 304 11 0 0 0 0 3 13 1 0 1-(2 Contract)
SR Coimbatore(CBE) A1 154 7 1 0 0 1 7 15 0 0 0
SR Kanniyakumari(CAPE) A 18 3 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0
SR Tiruchchirappalli (TPJ) A 206 7 1 0 0 0 2 11 0 1 0
 61

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
61
Zonal 
Railway
Name of station Category Av no. of 
trains 
handled
Number of 
platforms
Food 
Plazas
Food 
courts
Fast food 
units
Refreshment 
Rooms
AVMs Food Stalls/ 
Snack Bars
Jan Ahaar 
Units
Cell 
Kitchen 
Base Kithcen
Annexure 1a (Para 3.1)
Availability of catering units on stations selected in sample
SR Ernakulam Jn(ERS) A1 170 6 1 0 0 1 0 12 0 0 0
SWR KSR Bengaluru (SBC) A1 106 10 1 0 4 0 0 9 3 1 3
SWR Bengaluru Cantt (BNC) A 60 2 1 0 1 0 0 4 0 0 0
SWR GADAG(GDG) B 43 3 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0
WCR Jabalpur(JBP) A1 76 4 1 0 0 0 7 3 1 0 0
WCR Katni(KTE) A 88 3 1 0 0 0 4 3 1 0 0
WCR Guna(GUNA) B 28 2 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0
WCR DAMOH(DMO) A 32 2 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0
WR Mumbai Central(BCT) A1 23 5 1 1 0 0 0 6 1 0 1
WR Vadodara(BRC) A1 190 7 1 0 0 1 8 14 1 0 0
WR Jam Nagar(JAM) A 27 3 1 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 0
WR Nandurbar(NDB) B 22 3 0 0 0 1 0 13 0 0 0
WR Mumbai Churchgate(CCG) C 458 4 1 0 0 0 0 11 0 0 0
WR Somnath (SMNH) D 14 2 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0
Total 74
 61

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
62
Zonal 
Railway
Number of 
trains 
selected
Name of the trains selected Distance between 
origin and 
destination (kms)
Time of run 
(hours)
Whether panty 
car available
If not, whether 
TSV provided
Nominated station for 
Train Side Vending
If TSV not there, whether 
food picked up from 
base kitchen
If yes, name of the 
base kitchen
Base kitchen run by 
IR/IRCTC
CR 5 22109 - Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - 
Nizamuddin Express
1521 21 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP NAP
12153 - Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - 
Habibganj Express
821 13 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP NAP
12293 - Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - 
Allahabad Express 
1348 20 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP NAP
11085 - Lokmanya Tilak Terminus - 
Madgaon Express 
750 12 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP NAP
12071- Dadar - Aurangabad 
Janshatabdi
428 8 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP NAP
ECoR 7 22811 - Bhubneswar - New Delhi 
Rajdhani
1723 23 Yes NAP NAP Yes M/s R.K Associates 
and Hotelier Pvt. 
Ltd at 
Bhubaneswar
Run by contractor
12815 - Puri - New Delhi Express 1804 29 Yes NAP NAP No NAP NAP
22847 - Vishakhapatnam - Lokmanya 
Tilak Terminus Express
1649 28.5 No No NAP NAP NAP NAP
17015 - Bhubneswar - Secunderabad 
Express
1134 23 No Yes BBS,KUR,BAM,PSA, 
CHE,VZM,VSKP
NAP NAP NAP
12278 - Puri - Howarh Shatabdi 499 8 Yes NAP NAP Yes Doon's Caterers at 
Balasore
Run by contractor.
12281-Bhubaneswar-New Delhi 
Duranto Express 1727 22h 15 m
Yes NAP NAP Yes Doon's Caterers at 
Balasore
Run by contractor.
18422-Ajmer - Puri Express 2474 49 h 5 m Yes NAP NAP No Not applicable NAP
ECR 5 12309 - Rajendranagar - New Delhi 
Rajdhani
1001 18:00 Yes No NAP Yes Rajendranagar Dept. manageg by 
IRCTC
12565 - Bihar Sampark Kranti 
Darbhanga – New Delhi Express
1174 21 Yes No NAP No NAP NAP
12395 - Rajendranagar Patna - Ajmer 
Jiyarat Express 
1305 20 Yes No NAP No NAP NAP
12553 - Barauni - New Delhi Vaishali 
Express 
1187 21.25 Yes No NAP No NAP NAP
13239 - Patna - Kota Express 1222 25 Yes No NAP No NAP NAP
ER 5 13141-  Sealdah - Haldibari Teesta 
Express 
626 17.5 No NA NA NA NA NA
Annexure 1b (Para 3.1)
Availability of Pantry cars/TSV services/base kitchen services on trains selected in sample
 66

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
63
Zonal 
Railway
Number of 
trains 
selected
Name of the trains selected Distance between 
origin and 
destination (kms)
Time of run 
(hours)
Whether panty 
car available
If not, whether 
TSV provided
Nominated station for 
Train Side Vending
If TSV not there, whether 
food picked up from 
base kitchen
If yes, name of the 
base kitchen
Base kitchen run by 
IR/IRCTC
Annexure 1b (Para 3.1)
Availability of Pantry cars/TSV services/base kitchen services on trains selected in sample
12333 - Vibhuti Express Howrah - 
Allahabad City
885 16 No NA NA NA NA NA
12301-  Howrah - New Delhi Rajdhani 1441 17 Yes No No Yes Howrah IRCTC
12260 - New Delhi - Sealdah Duranto 
Express
1449 17 Yes No No Yes New Delhi IRCTC
12327 - Howrah - Dehradun Upasna 
Express
1608 29 Yes No No NA NAS NA
NCR 4 12195/96-Agra Fort-Ajmer-Agra Fort 
Intercity
375.48 6.75 NO YES, BY NWR NWR NAP NAP NAP
11123/24-Gwalior -Baroni mail 1056.18 25.50 NO NO NAP NO NAP NAP
12403/04 Allahabad -Jaipur Express 781.03 13.25 NO NO NAP NO NAP NAP
12033/34 Kanpur-New Delhi Shatabdi 447.44 5.00 NO NO NAP Yes M/s Brandavan 
Food Product 
Zonal Railways
NER 5 12591/92 - Gorakhpur - Yeshwantpur 
Express
2525 45.45 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP Nil
12541/42 - Gorakhpur - Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus Express
1682 31.10 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP Nil
12583/84 - Lucknow - Anand Vihar 
Terminal Double Decker
480 8.00 Yes,Partial 
Catering
NAP NAP NAP NAP Nil
15018 - Gorakhpur - Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus Express
1749 36.35 No No NAP No NAP Nil
12555 - Gorakhpur - Hisar Express 964 17.25 No No NAP No NAP Nil
NFR 5 12041/42 - New Jalpaiguri - Howrah, 
Shatabdi Express
560 8.05 yes NA NA No NA NA
15959 - Howrah - Dibrugarh, Kamrup 
Express
1529 36.20 yes NA NA No NA NA
15651/52 - Gauwahati - Jammu Tawi, 
Lohit Express
2346 47.25 yes NA NA No NA NA
12501/02 - Guwahati - New Delhi, 
Porvotar Sampark Kranti Express
1934 30.45 yes NA NA No NA NA
12551/52 - Kamakhya - Yesvantpur, AC 
Express
3033 52.25 yes NA NA No NA NA
 66

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
64
Zonal 
Railway
Number of 
trains 
selected
Name of the trains selected Distance between 
origin and 
destination (kms)
Time of run 
(hours)
Whether panty 
car available
If not, whether 
TSV provided
Nominated station for 
Train Side Vending
If TSV not there, whether 
food picked up from 
base kitchen
If yes, name of the 
base kitchen
Base kitchen run by 
IR/IRCTC
Annexure 1b (Para 3.1)
Availability of Pantry cars/TSV services/base kitchen services on trains selected in sample
NR 5 12434 - Nizamudddin - Chennai Central 
Express
2175 28 Yes NAP NAP Note 1 below NAP NAP
12472 - Katra - Bandra Terminus 
Express
2028 33.00 Yes NAP NAP NAP NAP NAP
22414 - Nizamuddin - Madgaon 
Rajdhani 
2094 26 Yes NAP NAP Note 2 below NDLS IRCTC
12047 - New Delhi - Firozepur Shatabdi 299 4.75 No No No NDLS NDLS IRCTC IRCTC
22461 - New Delhi to Katra Express 655 11 Yes NAP NAP No pick up point NAP NAP
NWR 4 22475 -  Bikaner - Coimbatore Express 2781 44.50 Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
12988 - Ajmer -  Sealdah Superfast 
Express
1642 27.25 Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
14707/8 - Bikaner - Bandtra Terminus 
Express
1212 24.25 No Yes Jodhpur Jn, Luni Jn,  
Pali Marwar,  
Marwar Jn, Somesar,  
N/A N/A N/A
12467/68 – Jaisalmer - Jaipur Leelan 
Superfast Express
701 12.75 No Yes Phulera Jn ,  Asalpur 
Jobner and Jaipur
N/A N/A N/A
SCR 5 17230 - Hyderabad - Trivendrum Sabari 
Express 1568 31.05 Yes N.A N.A N.A
Base kitchen not 
yet created N.A
12791 - Secunderanad - Danapur 
Express 1830 32.55 Yes N.A N.A N.A
Base kitchen not 
yet created N.A
17206 - Kakinada Port - Sainagar Shirdi 
Express 1340 27.15 No Yes COA-BZA KZJ-SC N.A RJY-SC Run by licencee
17016 - Secunderabad - Bhubaneswar 
Express 1135 22.5 No Yes SC-BZA      BZA-VSKP N.A SC-NDKD-RJY Run by licencee
12437 - Secunderabad - Nizamuddin 
Rajdhani 1659 21.4 Yes N.A N.A N.A SC-BPQ Run by licencee
SECR 4 18237/38 – Bilaspur - Amritsar 
Chattisgarh Express 2011 42 Yes .. .. .. .. ..
12070 - Gondia - Raigarh Janshtabdi 
Express 411 7 Yes .. .. .. .. ..
22815 - Bilaspur - Ernakulam Superfast 
Express 2139 37 No No .. No .. ..
12849 - Bilaspur - Pune Superfast 
Express 1300 22 No No .. No .. ..
 66

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
65
Zonal 
Railway
Number of 
trains 
selected
Name of the trains selected Distance between 
origin and 
destination (kms)
Time of run 
(hours)
Whether panty 
car available
If not, whether 
TSV provided
Nominated station for 
Train Side Vending
If TSV not there, whether 
food picked up from 
base kitchen
If yes, name of the 
base kitchen
Base kitchen run by 
IR/IRCTC
Annexure 1b (Para 3.1)
Availability of Pantry cars/TSV services/base kitchen services on trains selected in sample
SER 5 12863/64 Howrah – Yeshwantpur 
Express
1963 34.75 Yes NAP NAP No NAP NAP
12834/33 Howrah – Ahmeddabad 
Express 
2087 37.50 Yes NAP NAP No NAP NAP
12261/62 Chtrapati Shivaji Terminus – 
Howrah Express
1968 26.5 Yes NAP NAP Yes Howrah IRCTC
12857/58 Howrah – Digha Express 186 3.20 Yes NAP NAP Yes Howrah IRCTC
12821/22 Howrah – Puri Express 502 8.20 Yes NAP NAP No NAP NAP
SR 5 12081/82 - Trivendrum - Kannur Jan 
Shatabdi
503 9.05 Yes NAP NAP Yes - Out Side base 
Kichen operated 
by Licensee12075/76 - Kozhikode - Trivendrum Jan 
Shatabdi
398 7.15 Yes NAP NAP Yes - Out Side base 
Kichen operated 
by Licensee 12269/70 - Chennai Central - 
Noizamuddin Duranto
2166 27.55 Yes NAP NAP Yes Break Fast - 
M/s.P.K.Shefi, 
Kilpak Gardan, 
Chennai, Lunch-
M/s.P.K.Shefi, 
BZA,AP, Dinner - 
Railway Supply 
(Departmental 
Catering unit), 
BPQ 2nd day 
Break Fast - 
M/s.Glats Hotal, 
JHS.
Out Side base 
Kichen operated 
by Licensee and 
Railway 
Departmental 
catering unit.
12622/21 – New Delhi - Chennai 
Tamilnadu Express
2172 32.4 Yes NAP NAP Yes Break Fast - 
M/s.Exports Food, 
BPL and Dinner - 
Out Side base 
Kichen operated 
by Licensee 12243/44 - Chennai Central - 
Coimbatore Shatabdi
502 7.00 Yes NAP NAP Yes M/s. Musthafa 
(MAS-ED-CBE-ED)-
(Break Fast, Lunch, 
Out Side base 
Kichen operated 
by Licensee SWR 5 12780 - Hazrat Nizamuddin - Vasco De 
Gama Goa Express
2202 39.1 Yes -- -- No NA --
12628 - Yeshwantpur - Hazrat 
Nizamuddin Karnataka Sampark Kranti
2610 38.35 Yes -- -- Yes Satyam caterers IR
12213 - Yeshwantpur - Delhi Sarai 
Rohilla Duranto Express
2367 31.20 Yes -- -- Yes IRCTC Base kitchen IRCTC
22693 - Bengaluru - Nizamuddin 
Rajdhani 
2294 33.50 Yes -- -- Yes Satyam caterers IR
 66

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
66
Zonal 
Railway
Number of 
trains 
selected
Name of the trains selected Distance between 
origin and 
destination (kms)
Time of run 
(hours)
Whether panty 
car available
If not, whether 
TSV provided
Nominated station for 
Train Side Vending
If TSV not there, whether 
food picked up from 
base kitchen
If yes, name of the 
base kitchen
Base kitchen run by 
IR/IRCTC
Annexure 1b (Para 3.1)
Availability of Pantry cars/TSV services/base kitchen services on trains selected in sample
12628 - New Delhi - Bengaluru 
Karnataka Express
2406 38.5 Yes -- -- Yes IRCTC Base kitchen IRCTC
WCR 4 11449/50 Jabalpur - Mata Vaishno Devi 
Katra Express
1582 32.75 Yes No NA No NA NA
22181 - Jabalpur - Nizamuddin Express 904 14.25 No No NA No NA NA
11466 - Jabalpur - Somnath Express 1574 32 No No NA No NA NA
12193/94 Jabalpur – Yashwantpur 
Express
1753 30.75 Yes No NA No NA NA
WR 7 12925/26 - Bandra Terminus - Amritsar 
Pashchim Express 1821 31.30 YES NA NA NA NA NA
12955/56 - Mumbai Central - Jaipur 
Superfast Express 1159 17.75 YES NA NA NA NA NA
12009/10 - Mumbai Central - 
Ahmedabad Shatabdi 491 6.30
Kitchen 
Managed by 
Contractor
NA NA NA NA NA
19019/20 - Bandra Terminus - 
Dehradun Express 1682 41.50 No No NA No NA NA
19005/06 - Mumbai Central - 
Ahmedabad Saurashtra Mail 990 18.00 No No NA No NA NA
12951/52 - Mumbai Rajdhani Express 1384 15.35 Yes NA NA Yes Mumbai Central W. Railway
12953/54 - August Kranti Rajdhani 
Express
1384 17.15 Yes NA NA Yes Mumbai Central W. Railway
Total 80
NAP Not Applicable
NA Not Available
 66

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
67
Depart-
ment
Contract 
(units 
licensed by 
ZR)
IRCTC Depart-
ment
contract (units 
licensed by ZR)
 IRCTC
CR 33 485 23 3 26 7 All the base kitchens are manged departmentally whereas
due to lack of manpower the mobile units were not taken
over and as per Boards guidelines they were tendered.
Reasons would be like court cases,manpower sanction
issues,manpower recruitment,non-compliance to
instructions, absence of road map, corruption issues,
diversion of staff, any other issues.
ECoR 0 226 7 0 26 3 1.Loss sufferred by the only departmental catering unit at
VSKP Staion.( 13.51 Lakh in 2011-12 and 26.31 lakh in 2012-
13). 2. Non availabilty of departmental staff. 3. Fixed
Earnings through License fee (e.g.Rs.17 Cr. in 2015-16).
Reasons would be like court cases,manpower sanction
issues,manpower recruitment,non-compliance to
instructions, absence of road map, corruption issues,
diversion of staff, any other issues.
ECR 9 687 19 0 15 15 When units were handed over to IRCTC, employees were
deployed to anywhere else but after taking over of units
from IRCTC redeployment did not processed and resulted
in shortage of employees
Information will be provided after getting details from all
division
ER 5 1 11 0 12 8  lincense w.e.f 1st July 2015
12 pairs of Trains
8 Pairs of Trains
NCR 0 413 10 0 1 0 Absence of Plan in ALD and JHS Division, non compliance
of instructions, Manpower was not avaliable as per
requirement as assessed in Blue Print 2010-11
NER 1 642 5 0 9 1 Due to shortage of catering staff All contract units including Refreshment
rooms,Stalls,Trollys & Khomchas etc. Note: No
departmental catering was working during the period
of review.
NFR 9 719 8 0 20 5 (1) 3 Nos of jan Ahaars along with one extention counter
were not handed over to Rly due to non-initiative of Rly.
admn to take over the units. 
(2) 5 No. of trains viz Lohit exp., PSK exp., Jan Shatabdi
exp., KYQ-YPR AC Exp. and KYQ-LTT AC Exp. were handed
over to IRCTC for temporary period due to non
finalisation of tender by the Commercial Department since
2014.
Remarks
Annexure 2 (Para 3.4 and 3.8)
Statement showing position of departmental catering, contract catering and IRCTC catering as on 31st March 2016 
Zonal 
Railway
Static unit Mobile unit Brief reasons for delay / non-taking over of catering units from 
licensees to departmental working*
 68

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
68
Depart-
ment
Contract 
(units 
licensed by 
ZR)
IRCTC Depart-
ment
contract (units 
licensed by ZR)
 IRCTC
Remarks
Annexure 2 (Para 3.4 and 3.8)
Statement showing position of departmental catering, contract catering and IRCTC catering as on 31st March 2016 
Zonal 
Railway
Static unit Mobile unit Brief reasons for delay / non-taking over of catering units from 
licensees to departmental working*
NR 7 1439 1 0 40 6 (1) Shortage of staff and (2) To avoid loss being incurred by
departmental units.
NWR 0 699 7 0 12 0 Non-compliance to instructions
SCR 4 528 28 0 14 2 *Reasons would be like court cases,manpower sanction
issues,manpower recruitment,non-compliance to
instructions, absence of road map, corruption issues,
diversion of staff, any other issues.
SECR 0 285 15 0 5 0 To run the units departmentally, staff is required. As
Railway have not sufficient staff, the catering units could
not be taken over from licensee.
contract catering does not includes managed or
licensed by IRCTC
SER 1 274 0 0 19 6 Non availability of adequate trained staff
SR 3 689 22 1 37 13
SWR 10 171 28 0 19 4 Due to shortage of staff  2 Mobile Units are run departmentally by IRCTC
WR 3 NMA 16 0 18 9
WCR 0 447 10 0 2 0 Shortage of manpower.
Total 85 7705 210 4 275 79
Grand total 3588000
 68

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
69
S.no Zonal 
Railway
Name of Station Type of Unit Licensee Date of LOA License fee per 
annum (in `)
Railway 
Share @40% 
(in `)
No. of months 
delay in 
finalisation (Upto 
March 2016)
Loss due delay in 
Commencement of 
SCUs
1 CR CSTM FP M/s lite Bite Foods Pvt. Ltd 18.01.2016 30,000,000 12000000 2 2000000
2 SER Rourkela FP M/s Arenco Catering 12.06.2012 1,210,000 484000 46 1866089
3 ECR Muzaffarpur FP M/s Ganga Dairy Limited 12.06.2012 387,400 154960 46 597457
4 SWR Bangalore Garden FP/FR M/s Hallimane 10.08.2012 4,014,000 1605600 44 5927340
5 WR Bhavnagar FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 25.07.2012 551,000 220400 45 823439
6 WR Ankleshwar FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 25.07.2012 551,000 220400 45 823439
7 NWR Ajmer FP/FR M/s Deepak & Co. 27.09.2012 1,718,000 687200 43 2445287
8 NR Ambala Cantt FP/FR M/s KTG Hotel & Resorts P. Ltd 28.09.2012 1,651,000 660400 43 2348089
9 NR Faizabad FP/FR M/s Deepak & Co. 27.09.2012 254,000 101600 43 361527
10 NR Ghaziabad FP/FR M/s Vrindawan Enterprises 28.09.2012 751,000 300400 43 1068089
11 NR Meerut Cantt FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 27.09.2012 211,000 84400 43 300323
12 ECoR Sambalpur FP M/s Brandavan Food Products 25.10.2012 150,000 60000 42 208833
13 NER Chhapra FFU/FR M/s Express Food Services 26.11.2012 281,787 112715 41 382291
14 NCR Banda FFU M/s Krishna Enterprises 17.12.2012 151,000 60400 40 201333
15 CR Chalisgaon FFU M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 27.12.2012 459,999 184000 40 608221
16 ER Rampurhat FFU/FR M/s Alok Kumar Ghose 27.12.2012 310,615 124246 40 410702
17 NR Muzaffarnagar FP M/s Tirupati Associates 30.04.2013 350,124 140050 36 414702
18 NFR Bongaigaon FP M/s Tirupati Associates 24.04.2015 1,651,000 660400 11 605367
19 ER Burdwan FFU/FR M/s Express Food Services 06.05.2013 511,787 204715 35 602771
20 WR Veraval FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 16.05.2013 30,124 12050 35 35145
21 NR Varanasi (PF 8/9) FFU M/s A.S. Sales Corp. 23.05.2013 2,421,000 968400 35 2805670
22 NCR Lalitpur FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 24.05.2013 51,124 20450 35 59190
23 NR Meerut City FFU M/s Srinathji Caterers 24.05.2013 361,000 144400 35 417958
24 NR Barabanki FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 24.05.2013 51,124 20450 35 59190
25 NR Patiala FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 24.05.2013 51,124 20450 35 59190
26 CR Matheran FP M/s Srinathji Caterers 28.05.2013 911,000 364400 35 1050687
27 WR Gandhigram FP M/s S.M. Corporation 28.05.2013 290,000 116000 35 334467
28 NR Jaunpur FP M/s Golden Caterers 28.06.2013 851,786 340714 34 953054
29 NR Shahganj FFU M/s Golden Caterers 28.06.2013 151,786 60714 34 169832
30 SECR Raigarh FP M/s Brandavan Food Products 17.12.2013 351,000 140400 28 325650
31 NR Delhi Cantt FP M/s Brandavan Food Products 17.12.2013 6,211,000 2484400 28 5762428
32 NFR Rangiya FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 08.01.2014 75,124 30050 27 67862
33 ECR Mokama FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 08.01.2014 100,124 40050 27 90445
34 ER New Farakka FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 08.01.2014 75,124 30050 27 67862
35 ECR Buxar FP M/s Tirupati Associates 08.01.2014 391,124 156450 27 353315
36 CR Gulbarga-2 FP M/s Tirupati Associates 08.01.2014 295,124 118050 27 266595
37 NER Siwan-2 FFU M/s R.C. Goel 03.02.2014 207,000 82800 26 181010
38 WR Junagadh FFU M/s Murti Devi 12.02.2014 105,000 42000 26 90767
Annexure 3 (Para 3.5)
Statement showing deatils of food plazas/Fast food Units  not commenced their services during the review period over IR
 71

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
70
S.no Zonal 
Railway
Name of Station Type of Unit Licensee Date of LOA License fee per 
annum (in `)
Railway 
Share @40% 
(in `)
No. of months 
delay in 
finalisation (Upto 
March 2016)
Loss due delay in 
Commencement of 
SCUs
Annexure 3 (Para 3.5)
Statement showing deatils of food plazas/Fast food Units  not commenced their services during the review period over IR
39 NFR New Alipurduar FFU M/s Alok Kumar Ghose Catering Pvt. 
Ltd.
13.03.2014 108,360 43344 25 90180
40 NFR New Coochbehar FFU M/s Alok Kumar Ghose Catering Pvt. 
Ltd.
13.03.2014 180,360 72144 25 150100
41 NR Hazrat Nizamuddin FFU M/s Brandavan Food Products 21.03.2014 6,400,000 2560000 25 5269333
42 NR Varanasi (PF 4/5) FFU M/s Satyam Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 02.04.2014 3,100,000 1240000 24 2511000
43 NR Deoband FFU M/s Murti Devi 14.11.2014 126,000 50400 17 70420
44 NR Unnao FFU M/s Murti Devi 20.11.2014 103,000 41200 17 56879
45 NR Ayodhya FFU M/s Murti Devi 20.11.2014 53,000 21200 17 29268
46 NER Bhatni FFU M/s Murti Devi 20.11.2014 61,000 24400 17 33686
47 NER Farrukhabad FFU M/s Murti Devi 20.11.2014 101,000 40400 17 55774
48 NER Badshahnagar FFU M/s Murti Devi 20.11.2014 103,000 41200 17 56879
49 NER Haldwani FFU M/s Murti Devi 20.11.2014 103,000 41200 17 56879
50 NR Haridwar FP M/s Ninth Dimension Hotels and 
Resorts Pvt. Ltd.
10.12.2014 5,130,000 2052000 16 2718900
51 SR Tambaram (East & West 
2nd Entry)
FP M/s J.S. Catters 24.12.2014 35,457,000 14182800 15 18240657
52 SR Chennai Central FP M/s Ratna Cafe 06.01.2015 81,000,000 32400000 15 40500000
53 NCR Mathura Jn. FP M/s Roop Caterers 14.01.2015 6,100,000 2440000 15 2995778
54 NR Panipat FFU M/s Ninth Dimension Hotels and 
Resorts Pvt. Ltd.
17.03.2015 729,009 291604 13 307804
55 SWR Bangarpet FFU M/s Arenco Catering 19.03.2015 1,910,000 764000 13 802200
56 SCR Raichur FP M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises 
(Prop. CH Sai Krishna)
19.03.2015 1,124,000 449600 13 472080
57 NER Deoria Sadar FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises 
(Prop. CH Sai Krishna)
19.03.2015 421,211 168484 13 176909
58 NWR Hanumangarh FP M/s Tirupati Associates 24.03.2015 473,786 189514 12 196358
59 NWR Sriganganagar-2 FP M/s Tirupati Associates 24.03.2015 786,786 314714 12 326079
60 NFR Guwahati FP M/s Tirupati Associates 25.03.2015 3,411,000 1364400 12 1409880
61 NER Gorakhpur-1 (Circulating 
area)
FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises 
(Prop. CH Sai Krishna)
25.03.2015 421,111 168444 12 174059
62 NCR Mirzapur FP M/s Satkar Caterers 26.03.2015 751,000 300400 12 309579
63 ER Madhupur FFU M/s P.R. Kumar 26.03.2015 115,551 46220 12 47633
 71

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
71
S.no Zonal 
Railway
Name of Station Type of Unit Licensee Date of LOA License fee per 
annum (in `)
Railway 
Share @40% 
(in `)
No. of months 
delay in 
finalisation (Upto 
March 2016)
Loss due delay in 
Commencement of 
SCUs
Annexure 3 (Para 3.5)
Statement showing deatils of food plazas/Fast food Units  not commenced their services during the review period over IR
64 NER Siwan-1 FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises 
(Prop. CH Sai Krishna)
26.03.2015 421,211 168484 12 173633
65 SECR Raipur FP M/s Deepak & Co. 27.03.2015 7,677,000 3070800 12 3156100
66 SR Tiruppur FP M/s J.S. Catters 24.04.2015 2,557,000 1022800 11 971660
67 NFR Kamakhya FP M/s Tirupati Associates 24.04.2015 1,651,000 660400 11 627380
68 SWR Yeshwantpur FFU M/s Arenco Catering 27.04.2015 2,760,000 1104000 11 1039600
69 SR Thalassery FP M/s J.S. Catters 27.04.2015 1,107,000 442800 11 416970
70 SR Chennai Egmore (2nd 
Entry)
FFU M/s J.S. Catters 30.04.2015 7,357,000 2942800 11 2746613
71 NER Gorakhpur-II (PF-1 LKO 
end)
FFU M/s Ganga Dairy Limited 30.04.2015 716,162 286465 11 267367
72 NER Gonda FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises 
(Prop. CH Sai Krishna)
11.05.2015 511,211 204484 11 184604
73 NER Gorakhpur-III (behind 
Apoorva complex.)
FFU M/s Vrindawan Enterprises 27.05.2015 551,000 220400 10 189177
74 CR Devlali FFU M/s M.Y. & Sons 26.06.2015 254,999 102000 9 79050
75 CR Pune FP M/s Travel Food Services Pvt. Ltd. 21.07.2015 15,620,000 6248000 8 4408311
76 ECR Muzaffarpur FFU M/s Golden Caterers 21.07.2015 1,871,786 748714 8 528260
77 SR Kumbakonam FFU M/s K.M. Musthafa 12.08.2015 207,000 82800 8 53360
78 SECR Bilaspur FP M/s Satyam Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 18.08.2015 5,100,000 2040000 8 1280667
79 NR Kurukeshtra FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises 
(Prop. CH Sai Krishna)
01.09.2015 412,211 164884 7 97099
80 NWR Sirsa FFU M/s Murti Devi 03.09.2015 360,000 144000 7 84000
81 NR Sultanpur FP M/s Goel & Goel 23.09.2015 500,555 200222 6 105673
82 SR Salem FP M/s J.S. Enterprises 14.10.2015 2,377,000 950800 6 446348
83 NER Lucknow Jn.-1 FFU M/s Goel & Goel 14.10.2015 1,510,008 604003 6 283546
84 SCR Giddaluru FFU M/s P. Bharat 20.11.2015 111,111 44444 4 16296
85 SCR Rappale FFU M/s Sunil Kumar Agarwal 20.11.2015 108,000 43200 4 15840
86 SCR Dharmavaram FFU M/s P. Bharat 20.11.2015 425,000 170000 4 62333
87 SCR Sitaphalamandi FFU M/s Daffodil Caterers 20.11.2015 211,786 84714 4 31062
88 SWR Tumkur FFU M/s K.M. Musthafa 20.01.2016 1,257,000 502800 2 99163
89 SWR Chikbanvar FFU M/s Ayyappa Caterers 20.01.2016 152,786 61114 2 12053
90 SWR Hosur FFU M/s Ayyappa Caterers 20.01.2016 275,786 110314 2 21756
129601851
 71

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
72
S.no Zonal 
Railway
Name of Station Type of 
Unit
Licensee Date of LOA Date of 
Comm
Time taken from 
LOA to 
commissioning in 
months (Upto 
March 2016)
License fee per 
annum (in `)
Railway Share 
@40% (in `)
Loss due delay in 
Commencement 
of SCUs
1 CR Jalgaon FP/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 28.02.2012 24.4.2013 14 1,201,000 480,400 561801
2 SCR Gudur FP M/s Fine Caterers & Suppliers 19.05.2012 06.02.2015 32 666,666 266,666 713333
3 SCR Vijayawada (Enquiry office & 
escalator)
FP M/s P. Siva Prasad 19.05.2012 11.04.2013 10 13,779,999 5,512,000 4547400
4 SCR Nalgonda FP M/s Fine Caterers & Suppliers 19.05.2012 25.02.2014 21 96,399 38,560 66087
5 SCR Nizamabad FP M/s Fine Caterers & Suppliers 19.05.2012 17.12.2013 21 414,999 166,000 284505
6 SCR Nanded FP M/s Fine Caterers & Suppliers 22.05.2012 27.02.2014 21 459,999 184,000 314844
7 CR Solapur FP/FR M/s R&K Associates 28.02.2012 11.01.2015 34 251,786 100,714 284798
8 CR Kopargaon FP/FR M/s Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 28.02.2012 18.06.2012 3 791,000 316,400 71190
9 NFR Dimapur FP M/s Alok Kumar Ghose Catering Pvt. Ltd. 20.06.2012 02.12.2013 17 403,325 161,330 227655
10 ECR Luckeesarai FP M/s Dream Hotel 12.06.2012 09.04.2013 9 172,501 69,000 51942
11 ER Bhagalpur FP M/s Express Food Services 12.06.2012 17.02.2015 32 171,787 68,715 181331
12 ECR Patna FP M/s Express Food Services 12.06.2012 20.03.2013 8 1,511,787 604,715 421621
13 ECR Darbhanga FP M/s Express Food Services 12.06.2012 03.02.2015 31 511,787 204,715 532258
14 ECR Raxaul FP M/s Ganga Dairy Limited 12.06.2012 17.10.2014 28 102,800 41,120 94462
15 ECR Hajipur FP M/s Ganga Dairy Limited 12.06.2012 12.12.2013 17 261,750 104,700 150652
16 SWR Bangalore City (PF 5/6 & 7/8) FFU/FR M/s Hotel Sandharsini 10.08.2012 25.07.2015 35 4,260,000 1,704,000 4965267
17 SR Chennai Central FFU/FR M/s Ratna Cafe 10.08.2012 20.02.2013 5 8,100,000 3,240,000 1476000
18 SECR Raigarh (HWH End) FFU M/s S.L. Kachhwaha & Sons 28.9.2011 20.01.2013 7 453,087 181,235 107231
19 SR Trivandrum FP/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food & Beverages (I) Pvt Ltd 10.08.2012 14.03.2013 14 6,336,999 2,534,800 2858691
20 SWR Bangalore Cantontment FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 10.08.2012 14.07.2013 10 639,999 256,000 219022
21 SWR Belgaum FP/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food & Beverages (I) Pvt Ltd 10.08.2012 20.11.2014 27 729,999 292,000 650510
22 ECoR Berhampur FP M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises (Prop. CH 
Sai Krishna)
12.06.2012 11.12.2014 23 211,789 84,716 162372
23 SER Bokaro Streel City FP M/s Tirupati Associates 12.06.2012 06.11.2013 16 151,000 60,400 80869
24 ER Asansol FP M/s Tirupati Associates 12.06.2012 30.06.2014 24 411,000 164,400 327887
25 ER Malda Town FP M/s Tirupati Associates 12.06.2012 17.05.2013 10 151,000 60,400 51843
26 WR Palanpur FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 25.07.2012 15.06.2015 34 551,000 220,400 627528
27 WR Nagda FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 25.07.2012 23.08.2013 12 851,000 340,400 344182
28 WR Ujjain FP/FR M/s Express Food Services 25.07.2012 04.06.2013 9 1,241,787 496,715 391853
29 WR Maninagar FP/FR M/s S M Corporation 25.07.2012 02.05.2014 21 513,126 205,250 351206
30 NWR Abu Road FP/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 27.09.2012 15.06.2014 20 951,786 380,714 630294
31 NR Chandigarh FP/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 27.09.2012 05.08.2013 9 1,551,000 620,400 485980
32 NER Chhapra FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 27.09.2012 28.08.2015 35 411,000 164,400 472650
33 NR Firozpur Cantt FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 27.09.2012 29.06.2016 45 400,000 160,000 596000
Annexure 4 (Para 3.5)
Statement showing details of Food Plazas/Fast food Units  commencing their services belatedly over IR
 75

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
73
S.no Zonal 
Railway
Name of Station Type of 
Unit
Licensee Date of LOA Date of 
Comm
Time taken from 
LOA to 
commissioning in 
months (Upto 
March 2016)
License fee per 
annum (in `)
Railway Share 
@40% (in `)
Loss due delay in 
Commencement 
of SCUs
Annexure 4 (Para 3.5)
Statement showing details of Food Plazas/Fast food Units  commencing their services belatedly over IR
34 NER Kathgodam FP/FR M/s Vrindawan Enterprises 27.09.2012 07.12.2013 14 121,501 48,600 54810
35 SCR Aurangabad FP/FR M/s Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 20.09.2012 07.11.2013 13 1,411,000 564,400 600459
36 WR Jamnagar FP M/s Boon Catering 25.10.2012 10.12.2015 37 300,786 120,314 371304
37 NFR Kishanganj FP M/s Krishna Enterprises 26.11.2012 01.06.2016 40 40,000 16,000 53467
38 WR Mehsana FP M/s Express Food Services 06.11.2012 19.02.2014 15 311,787 124,715 152429
39 ECR Mughal Sarai FP/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 06.11.2012 02.04.2013 4 433,000 173,200 56290
40 ECR Saharsa FFU/FR M/s Express Food Services 06.11.2012 14.03.2014 15 171,787 68,715 88375
41 NR Janghai FFU/FR M/s Express Food Services 06.11.2012 31.03.2014 16 81,787 32,715 43620
42 NER Lalkuan FFU/FR M/s Deepak & Co. 31.10.2012 14.01.2015 26 16,200 6,480 13950
43 WR Surendernagar FFU M/s Express Food Services 26.11.2012 19.02.2014 14 171,787 68,715 80167
44 NR Pratapgarh FFU/FR M/s Express Food Services 26.11.2012 14.03.2014 15 151,787 60,715 74713
45 ER Durgapur FP/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 06.12.2012 10.10.2013 9 51,224 20,490 15823
46 ECR Narkatiaganj FFU/FR M/s B.M. Singh 24.12.2012 01.04.2014 14 40,000 16,000 19244
47 ECR Bakhtiyarpur FFU/FR M/s B.M. Singh 24.12.2012 05.08.2015 31 40,000 16,000 41067
48 ECR Koderma FFU/FR M/s B.M. Singh 24.12.2012 14.05.2014 16 71,000 28,400 37551
49 WCR Katni FP M/s Deepak & Co. 24.12.2012 18.01.2016 36 1,911,000 764,400 2314433
50 ECR Gaya FP/FR M/s Express Food Services 24.12.2012 13.09.2013 8 1,311,787 524,715 339607
51 SCR Tuni FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food & Beverages (I) Pvt Ltd 19.12.2012 05.01.2014 12 459,999 184,000 179911
52 SCR Tadepalligudem FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 19.12.2012 07.12.2013 11 279,999 112,000 100489
53 SCR Renigunta (Near sleeper waiting 
hall)
FFU/FR M/s B. Abbas 19.12.2012 03.06.2013 5 912,500 365,000 137889
54 SCR Necklace Road FP/FR M/s Radha Krishna Associates 19.12.2012 13.03.2015 26 1,260,000 504,000 1097600
55 SCR Lingampalli FFU/FR M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises (Prop. CH 
Sai Krishna)
19.12.2012 28.11.2013 10 311,202 124,481 108575
56 SCR Kazipet FFU/FR M/s Radha Krishna Associates 19.12.2012 03.07.2013 6 630,000 252,000 116200
57 SCR Vijayawada FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food & Beverages (I) Pvt Ltd 19.12.2012 12.09.2013 8 7,579,999 3,032,000 1996066
58 SCR Begumpet (PF-2) FFU/FR M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises (Prop. CH 
Sai Krishna)
19.12.2012 27.11.2013 10 411,111 164,444 142975
59 SCR Anantapur FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 19.12.2012 22.06.2014 17 279,999 112,000 161777
60 SECR Rajnandgaon FFU/FR M/s Shubham Awasthi Caterers 27.12.2012 20.02.2014 13 40,000 16,000 17333
61 SER Hatia FFU/FR M/s B.M. Singh 27.12.2012 02.06.2014 16 700,100 280,040 382721
62 ER Jamalpur FFU/FR M/s Express Food Services 27.12.2012 31.03.2014 14 211,787 84,715 100952
63 ECR Dhanbad FFU/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 27.12.2012 23.12.2013 11 313,000 125,200 115114
64 ER Asansol FFU/FR M/s Griham Food & Hotel Pvt. Ltd. 27.12.2012 30.03.2014 14 915,000 366,000 435133
65 ER Kolkata Terminal FFU/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 03.01.2013 17.05.2013 3 2,100,000 840,000 242667
66 ECoR Khurda Road FFU/FR M/s Tirupati Associates 03.11.2013 11.12.2014 8 911,000 364,400 242933
 75

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
74
S.no Zonal 
Railway
Name of Station Type of 
Unit
Licensee Date of LOA Date of 
Comm
Time taken from 
LOA to 
commissioning in 
months (Upto 
March 2016)
License fee per 
annum (in `)
Railway Share 
@40% (in `)
Loss due delay in 
Commencement 
of SCUs
Annexure 4 (Para 3.5)
Statement showing details of Food Plazas/Fast food Units  commencing their services belatedly over IR
67 NER Gorakhpur FP/FR M/s Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 27.12.2012 14.07.2015 30 2,893,000 1,157,200 2889786
68 ER Sahibganj FFU/FR M/s Amazing India Contractors (P) Ltd. 27.12.2012 30.03.2014 14 37,000 14,800 17596
69 ER Sultanganj FFU/FR M/s Amazing India Contractors (P) Ltd. 27.12.2012 19.02.2014 13 6,000 2,400 2593
70 NFR Lumding FFU M/s Alok Kumar Ghose Catering Pvt. Ltd. 27.12.2012 28.03.2014 14 9,501 3,800 4508
71 ECR Madhubani FFU/FR M/s Golden Caterers 27.12.2012 15.02.2014 13 1,786 714 764
72 WR Mumbai Central FP M/s Brandavan Food Products 21.01.2013 11.11.2013 9 6,700,000 2,680,000 1965333
73 WR Andheri FFU M/s Express Food Services 19.03.2013 07.09.2014 17 3,110,787 1,244,315 1752410
74 SECR Bilaspur (PF-6/7 & 1A) FFU/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 01.04.2013 07.07.2013 2 2,200,000 880,000 163778
75 SECR Bilaspur (PF-1 & 2/3) FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 01.04.2013 13.09.2013 5 4,599,999 1,840,000 690000
76 WCR Damoh FFU/FR M/s Express Food Services 30.04.2013 08.07.2015 26 171,787 68,715 146782
77 SWR Mysore FP M/s Srinathji Caterers 30.04.2013 15.10.2013 5 5,963,000 2,385,200 914327
78 SWR Davangere FP M/s Srinathji Caterers 30.04.2013 06.12.2013 6 1,051,000 420,400 221878
79 SWR Kengri FFU M/s J.S. Catters 16.05.2013 16.10.2015 28 1,107,000 442,800 1049190
80 NWR Palimarwar-1 (Towards MJ Side) FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 16.05.2013 11.04.2015 22 45,786 18,314 33831
81 WCR Saugor FP M/s Tirupati Associates 16.05.2013 25.12.2015 31 351,124 140,450 360097
82 NR Lucknow FFU M/s Srinathji Caterers 23.05.2013 25.04.2014 10 2,100,000 840,000 716333
83 ECR Betiah FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 24.05.2013 29.07.2015 26 30,124 12,050 25639
84 ECR Motihari FFU M/s Tirupati Associates 24.05.2013 30.03.2016 34 30,124 12,050 33839
85 NCR Aligarh FP/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 24.05.2013 26.08.2014 14 1,363,000 545,200 649697
86 WR Dwarka FP M/s Srinathji Caterers 28.05.2013 04.07.2014 12 711,000 284,400 293880
87 NCR Chitrakoot FFU M/s Murti Devi 28.05.2013 08.12.2014 18 101,000 40,400 59366
88 NCR Babina FFU M/s Murti Devi 28.05.2013 06.09.2014 15 101,000 40,400 48929
89 NWR Bikaner FP/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 03.06.2013 23.05.2014 11 1,863,000 745,200 670680
90 NWR Jaipur FFU/FR M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 14.06.2013 01.05.2014 10 333,999 133,600 107993
91 NWR Jodhpur FFU/FR M/s Srinathji Caterers 14.06.2013 26.11.2014 17 2,063,000 825,200 1146111
92 NWR Alwar FP/FR M/s Goel & Goel 17.06.2013 05.07.2014 12 401,008 160,403 157284
93 WR Indore-2 FP M/s Brandavan Food Products 18.06.2013 08.04.2016 33 4,000,000 1,600,000 4422222
94 ECR Dhanbad FP/FR M/s Brandavan Food Products 18.06.2013 04.07.2014 12 1,863,000 745,200 726570
95 SWR Bangaluru City FFU M/s Srinathji Caterers 02.07.2013 30.04.2014 9 4,163,000 1,665,200 1258151
96 SWR Yeshwantpur FFU M/s Sunil Catering Services 15.07.2013 28.01.2016 30 3,651,000 1,460,400 3638830
97 SCR Chirala FP M/s P. Siva Prasad 17.12.2013 03.05.2015 16 414,999 166,000 217644
98 SCR Khairatabad FFU M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 02.01.2014 05.06.2014 4 549,999 220,000 75778
99 CR Gulbarga FP/FR M/s Fine Caterers and suppliers 28.2.12 22.02.14 24 888888 355555.2 711110
100 CR Satara FFU M/s Murti Devi 12.02.2014 16.10.2014 7 105,000 42,000 25200
101 SCR Guntakal FFU M/s Sai Balaji Food Corporation 05.03.2014 05.11.2014 7 2,799,999 1,120,000 668889
102 NCR Kanpur Central FP M/s Satyam Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 21.03.2014 01.10.2015 18 6,300,000 2,520,000 3703000
 75

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
75
S.no Zonal 
Railway
Name of Station Type of 
Unit
Licensee Date of LOA Date of 
Comm
Time taken from 
LOA to 
commissioning in 
months (Upto 
March 2016)
License fee per 
annum (in `)
Railway Share 
@40% (in `)
Loss due delay in 
Commencement 
of SCUs
Annexure 4 (Para 3.5)
Statement showing details of Food Plazas/Fast food Units  commencing their services belatedly over IR
103 NCR Gwalior FP M/s R.K.Associates & Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 01.04.2014 01.04.2015 11 4,141,000 1,656,400 1541372
104 SWR Arsikere FP M/s A.K. Nazeer Moosa 02.09.2014 07.06.2016 20 2,079,522 831,809 1418696
105 SWR Hassan FFU M/s Haribabu 02.09.2014 31.03.2016 18 1,004,000 401,600 609093
106 SR Kochuveli FFU M/s Harshad N 02.09.2014 18.03.2016 18 345,678 138,271 204718
107 NCR Agra Fort FP M/s Satkar Caterers 05.01.2015 02.04.2016 14 3,200,000 1,280,000 1504000
108 CR CSTM Main Line FP M/s A.S. Sales Corp. 06.01.2015 09.09.2015 7 20,500,000 8,200,000 4920000
109 SCR Gooty FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises (Prop. CH 
Sai Krishna)
21.02.2015 18.03.2016 12 515,212 206,085 206657
110 NER Lucknow Jn.-2 FP M/s Satyam Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 25.03.2015 27.04.2016 12 2,351,000 940,400 963910
111 NER Basti FFU M/s Krishna Enterprises 26.03.2015 14.10.2015 6 251,000 100,400 47969
112 NCR Orai FFU M/s Madan Petha Store 13.04.2015 09.12.2015 7 677,007 270,803 157968
113 ECoR Visakhapatnam FP M/s Travel Food Services Pvt. Ltd. 16.04.2015 18.03.2016 5 12,200,000 4,880,000 2033333
114 ER Jasidih FFU M/s Golden Caterers 24.04.2015 25.05.2016 12 1,368,786 547,514 558161
115 SECR Shahdol (KTE End) FFU M/s Sunil Enterprises 24.04.2015 16.02.2016 9 551,786 220,714 164310
116 SECR Bhatapara FFU M/s S.L. Kachhwaha & Sons 24.04.2015 12.10.2015 5 503,000 201,200 78803
117 ECR Patna (GF) FP M/s Express Food Services 21.07.2015 16.02.2016 6 11,315,000 4,526,000 2263000
118 ER Howrah FP M/s Satyam Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 18.08.2015 05.12.02015 3 13,600,000 5,440,000 1360000
119 SCR Renigunta (Present AM office) FFU M/s J.S. Enterprises 23.09.2015 23.03.2016 5 1,827,000 730,800 308560
120 ECoR Jajpur Keonjhar Road FFU M/s Boon N Zeal Enterprises 29.09.2015 15.05.2016 6 80,101 32,040 16020
121 ECoR Bhadrak FFU M/s Hotel Rajasthan 07.10.2015 31.03.2016 5 292,000 116,800 47369
122 WR Ahmedabad FP M/s Riya Fast Food 18.11.2015 10.03.2016 3 9,198,989 3,679,596 848351
123 SCR Srikalahasti FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises (Prop. CH 
Sai Narayana)
20.11.2015 24.03.2016 3 151,111 60,444 15951
124 SCR Pakala FFU M/s Sree Venkateswara Enterprises (Prop. CH 
Sai Narayana)
20.11.2015 24.03.2016 3 151,111 60,444 15951
125 SCR Mantralayam FFU M/s Sunil Kumar Agarwal 20.11.2015 11.07.2016 4 1,278,000 511200 170400
126 ER Madhupur FFU M/s P.R. Kumar 26.03.2015 01.08.2016 12 115,551 46220 47633
 75

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
76
Zonal 
Railway
Opening 
Stock
Purchase of raw 
materials and 
ingredients for 
conversion of  food 
stuff and manufactured 
articles sold during the 
year
Closing Stock 
of Raw 
materials 
and 
ingredients
Value of raw 
materials and 
ingredients 
consumed
Freight, handling 
charges,Taxes , 
duties and 
commission 
Wastag
e of 
consum
ables
Wastage 
of Raw 
material
s
Cost of 
fuel
Salaries 
including 
allowanc
es and 
PF
Other 
charges  
Total cost of Catering Sales 
Figures 
in Crore 
of 
Rupees
Sundry other 
Receipts-
Figures in 
Crore of 
Rupees
Total 
Receipts- 
Figures in 
Crore of 
Rupees
Profit(+)/Los
s(-)
1 2 3 4 5=2+3-4 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 = Add (Col 5 to 11) 13 14 15 = 13+14 16 =15-12
CR 1.32 49.45 1.68 49.08 0.03 0.10 0.00 3.70 72.12 3.38 128.41 72.36 0.82 73.18 -55.24
ECoR 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.46 0.00 0.59 0.19 0.00 0.19 -0.40
ECR 0.50 12.56 0.69 12.37 0.95 0.00 0.00 0.77 7.17 0.25 21.51 16.69 0.13 16.82 -4.69
ER 1.21 7.23 1.31 7.14 0.00 0.00 0.02 1.12 58.33 0.44 67.04 9.24 0.27 9.52 -57.53
NCR 2.27 25.55 1.30 26.52 1.81 0.00 0.00 1.29 20.84 0.60 51.06 40.18 0.12 40.30 -10.77
NER 0.32 10.23 0.36 10.18 1.18 0.00 0.00 0.27 5.33 0.03 16.99 14.45 0.60 15.05 -1.93
NFR 0.14 3.94 0.25 3.83 0.31 0.00 0.00 0.09 0.86 0.00 5.08 4.64 0.13 4.76 -0.32
NR 2.91 137.85 3.40 137.35 24.38 1.36 0.00 4.45 106.18 2.64 276.36 175.07 77.83 252.89 -23.47
NWR 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
SCR 0.21 6.12 0.13 6.20 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.13 0.02 13.35 9.34 0.00 9.34 -4.01
SECR 0.00 0.24 0.00 0.24 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.34 0.01 0.03 0.63 0.32 0.00 0.32 -0.31
SER 0.00 0.42 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.44 0.06 0.07 1.62 0.63 0.05 0.68 -0.94
SR 0.19 11.07 0.24 11.02 0.29 0.09 0.00 0.89 36.53 0.45 49.27 19.86 2.13 21.99 -27.28
SWR 0.14 10.21 0.18 10.17 0.41 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.95 0.00 16.53 14.26 0.00 14.26 -2.27
WR 2.51 74.59 2.83 74.27 1.28 3.31 0.00 2.24 28.29 0.06 109.46 90.54 0.47 91.01 -18.45
WCR 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
IR 11.73 349.58 12.37 348.56 30.63 4.86 0.02 16.59 349.27 7.96 757.91 467.75 82.56 550.30 -207.62
Annexure 5  (Para 3.8)        
 Statement showing consolidated financial Results of Departmental Catering Units of  Indian Railways from 2011-12 to 2015-16
76

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
77
Zonal Railway Value of total 
purchases made 
during 2015-16 
Total sale 
proceeds during 
2015-16
Value of sale proceeds 
utilised for daily cash 
purchases made during 
2015-16
Percentage of sale proceeds utilized 
for procuring the raw materials 
instead of resorting to procurement 
through purchase orders
CR 5286942 10071461 2923234 29.02
ECR 34110 40334 34110 84.57
SCR 5473202 9878802 5473202 55.40
ER 18017441 25248309 16603109 65.76
SR 25941122 38247527 13123763 34.31
NFR 10366079 11797207 10366079 87.87
SER 928000 1482000 928000 62.62
NCR 19912219 26730595 18597721 69.57
NR 107,797,575 169,640,604 107,797,575 63.54
TOTAL 193756690 293136839 175846793 59.99
Annexure 6 (Para 3.8)
Sale Proceeds during 2015-16
 77

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
78
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Train No Train Name Name of the Licensee Minimum reserve 
price fixed by ZRs 
for 5 years
License fee for 5 
years
Sales turn over 
for one year
License fee for one 
year
Percentage 
of license 
fee to sales 
turn over 
for one 
year
Difference 
between 
reserve price 
and license fee 
for five years
1 SECR 12851-52 Bilaspur-Chennai Central 
Express
TGB Banquets & Hotels Ltd/ADI 991,525 3,500,786 1,983,055 700,157 35.31 2,509,261
2 SECR 18237-38 Chattisgarh Express Roop Caterers/NDLS 18,539,870 55,500,000 37,079,742 11,100,000 29.94 36,960,130
3 SECR 12549-50 Durg -Jammu Tawi 
Superfast Express
Doon Caterers/NDLS 3,918,115 7,810,000 7,836,227 1,562,000 19.93 3,891,885
4 SECR 12823-24 Sampark Kranti Express TGB Banquets & Hotels Ltd/ADI 8,060,080 22,100,786 16,120,156 4,420,157 27.42 14,040,706
5 SECR 12069-70 Janshatabdi Express A S Sales Corpn, Itarsi 1,961,545 5,811,000 3,923,088 1,162,200 29.62 3,849,455
6 SR 12625-26 Kerala express Satyam Caterers 62,500,000 271,700,000 123,582,065 54,340,000 43.97 209,200,000
7 SR 12615-16 Grand Trunk express Satyam Caterers 26,000,000 96,300,000 49,103,815 19,260,000 39.22 70,300,000
8 SR 12621-22 Tamilnadu Express Satyam Caterers 50,250,000 147,300,000 100,352,370 29,460,000 29.36 97,050,000
9 SR 12677-78 Enakulam Express M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 16,000,000 27,600,000 31,672,328 5,520,000 17.43 11,600,000
10 SR 12007-08  Shatabdi Express -Chennai 
Central to Mysuru Jn -
M/s Sathiyam Catereers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 24,000,000 50,300,000 47,829,951 10,060,000 21.03 26,300,000
11 SR 22625-26 Chennai Central Bangalurur 
AC Double Decker Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 12,250,000 27,600,000 22,870,170 5,520,000 24.14 15,350,000
12 SR 12663-64 Howrah - Tiruchchirappalli 
Express
M/s Sathiyam Catereers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 7,000,000 26,100,000 13,925,184 5,220,000 37.49 19,100,000
13 SR 12675-76 Chennai Central - 
Coimbatore  Kovai Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 18,500,000 37,100,000 30,272,188 7,420,000 24.51 18,600,000
14 SR 12651-52 Madurai - Hazrat 
Nizamuddin - Sampark 
Kranti Express
M/s A.S.sales corporation Ltd 7,500,000 26,890,000 12,435,072 5,378,000 43.25 19,390,000
15 SR 12655-56 Ahmedabad -Chennai 
Central - Navajeevan 
Express
M/s Sathiyam Catereers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 26,000,000 101,100,000 36,544,165 20,220,000 55.33 75,100,000
16 SR 16733-34 Rameshwaram - Okha 
Express
M/s Express Food Services, Itarsi 4,650,000 5,711,787 9,162,296 1,142,358 12.47 1,061,787
17 SR 22643-44 Ernakulam - Patna Jn  
Express
Shri P. Shivaprasad, Hyderabad 8,025,000 40,005,999 16,035,812 8,001,200 49.90 31,980,999
18 SR 16687-88 Mangalore Central - Katra  
Navyug Express
Shri P. Shivaprasad, Hyderabad 7,000,000 14,679,999 11,383,840 2,936,000 25.79 7,679,999
Annexure7 (Para 4.1)
Statement showing license fee of 124 trains over Indian Railways (in `)

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
79
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Train No Train Name Name of the Licensee Minimum reserve 
price fixed by ZRs 
for 5 years
License fee for 5 
years
Sales turn over 
for one year
License fee for one 
year
Percentage 
of license 
fee to sales 
turn over 
for one 
year
Difference 
between 
reserve price 
and license fee 
for five years
Annexure7 (Para 4.1)
Statement showing license fee of 124 trains over Indian Railways (in `)
19 SR 16339-40 Mumbai CST - Nagarcoil Jn  
Express
Shri P. Shivaprasad, Hyderabad 18,500,000 53,469,999 30,623,840 10,694,000 34.92 34,969,999
20 SR 22641-42 Thiruvananthapuram 
Central - Shalimar - Shalimar 
Express
M/s Coons Catereers New Delhi 15,000,000 33,820,000 29,648,736 6,764,000 22.81 18,820,000
21 SR 16345-46 Lokmanyatilak Terminus -  
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central - Netravati Express
M/s Sathiyam Catereers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 29,000,000 153,500,000 47,780,325 30,700,000 64.25 124,500,000
22 SR 12665-66 Howrah - Kanniyakumari  
Express
M/s Doons Catereers Pvt Ltd New Delhi 7,000,000 16,900,000 11,655,384 3,350,000 28.74 9,900,000
23 SR 12617-18 Eranakulam - Hazrat 
Nizamuddin - Mangala 
Ldweep Express
M/s Sathiyam Catereers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 50,500,000 155,300,000 84,049,463 31,060,000 36.95 104,800,000
24 SR 12643-44 Thiruvananthapuram 
Central - Hazrat Nizamuddin   
Exporess
Shri P. Shivaprasad, Hyderabad 4,675,000 11,226,699 7,958,860 2,245,340 28.21 6,551,699
25 SR 22645-46 Indore Jn- 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central - Ahil Yanagari 
Express
M/s Sathiyam Catereers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 5,615,000 8,000,000 11,225,474 1,600,000 14.25 2,385,000
26 SR 22647-48 Kobra to 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central Express
Shri P. Shivaprasad, Hyderabad 7,785,000 20,000,799 15,568,800 4,000,160 25.69 12,215,799
27 SR 16311-12 Bikaner - Kochuveli Express Shri P. Shivaprasad, Hyderabad 6,500,000 9,750,000 12,506,988 1,950,000 15.59 3,250,000
28 SR 16333-34 Veraval -  
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 6,700,000 11,600,000 13,381,810 2,320,000 17.34 4,900,000
29 SR 12669-70 Chennai Central - Chappara 
Jn -G K Express
M/s Singh Catereers &Vendors, Patna 9,050,000 22,929,279 17,380,168 4,585,856 26.39 13,879,279
30 SR 12679-80 Chennai Central - Coibatore 
Jn - Intercity Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 18,750,000 47,600,000 31,961,955 9,520,000 29.79 28,850,000

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
80
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Train No Train Name Name of the Licensee Minimum reserve 
price fixed by ZRs 
for 5 years
License fee for 5 
years
Sales turn over 
for one year
License fee for one 
year
Percentage 
of license 
fee to sales 
turn over 
for one 
year
Difference 
between 
reserve price 
and license fee 
for five years
Annexure7 (Para 4.1)
Statement showing license fee of 124 trains over Indian Railways (in `)
31 SR 12083-84 Mayiladuturai - Coimbatore 
Jn Jan Shatabdi Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 6,500,000 11,100,000 9,673,975 2,222,000 22.97 4,600,000
32 SR 12075-76 Kozhikkode (Calicut) - 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central Jan Shatabdi Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 8,050,000 18,600,000 12,932,315 3,720,000 28.77 10,550,000
33 SR 12077-78 Chennai Central - 
Vijayawada Jn Jan Shatabdi 
Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 9,000,000 13,100,000 11,383,008 2,620,000 23.02 4,100,000
34 SR 12687-88 Mudurai Jn - Dehradun 
Express
M/s Deepak & Co Delhi 3,000,000 11,100,000 3,926,988 2,220,000 56.53 8,100,000
35 SR 16335-36 Gandhidham Jn- Nagarcoil 
Jn Express
Shri P. Shivaprasad, Hyderabad 7,000,000 13,500,000 13,952,822 2,700,000 19.35 6,500,000
36 SR 16331-32 Mumbai CST - 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 3,000,000 12,100,000 4,744,272 2,420,000 51.01 9,100,000
37 SR 16359-60 Ernakulam - Patna Express M/s Deepak & Co Delhi 16,550,000 20,100,000 33,094,100 4,020,000 12.15 3,550,000
38 SR 12641-42 Kanniyakumari- Hazrat 
Nizamuddin Thirukkural 
Express
M/s Deepak & Co Delhi 9,050,000 37,656,000 15,531,360 7,531,200 48.49 28,606,000
39 SR 16649-50 Mangalore Central- 
Nagarcoil Paasuram Express
M/s Arenco Catering Calicut 11,150,000 37,100,000 20,353,495 7,420,000 36.46 25,950,000
40 SR 16337-38 Okha - Ernakulam Jn Express M/s M. Musthafa, Erode 7,000,000 32,700,000 11,636,352 6,540,000 56.20 25,700,000
41 SR 16381-82 Mumbai CST - 
Kanniyakumari Express
M/s Roop Catereers New Delhi 29,000,000 132,100,000 52,076,740 26,420,000 50.73 103,100,000
42 SR 16351-52 Mumbai CST - Nagarcoil Jn - 
Nagarcoil Express
M/s Sathiyam Catereers Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 9,000,000 21,300,000 17,987,736 4,260,000 23.68 12,300,000
43 SCR 17609/10 Patna - Purna Express M/s Fine Caterers & Suppliers, Secunderabad 2,372,325 2,400,000 4,744,650 480,000 10.12 27,675
44 SCR 12723/24 Hyderabad Decan- New 
Delhi A P Express
M/s Hoter & Real Esate (P) Ltd., Varanasi 44,825,000 140,194,000 89,650,000 28,038,800 31.28 95,369,000

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
81
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Train No Train Name Name of the Licensee Minimum reserve 
price fixed by ZRs 
for 5 years
License fee for 5 
years
Sales turn over 
for one year
License fee for one 
year
Percentage 
of license 
fee to sales 
turn over 
for one 
year
Difference 
between 
reserve price 
and license fee 
for five years
Annexure7 (Para 4.1)
Statement showing license fee of 124 trains over Indian Railways (in `)
45 SCR 12704/03 Falaknuma Express M/s Hoter & Real Esate (P) Ltd., Varanasi 23,391,500 82,900,000 46,783,000 16,580,000 35.44 59,508,500
46 SCR 12707/08 AP Sampark Kranti Express M/s Hoter & Real Esate (P) Ltd., Varanasi 36,117,860 60,139,000 72,235,720 12,027,800 16.65 24,021,140
47 SCR 17230/29 Hyderabad Decan - 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central Sabri Express
M/s Brandavan Food Products, New Delhi 45,292,500 55,300,000 90,585,000 11,060,000 12.21 10,007,500
48 SCR 12791/92 Secunderabad - Patna 
Express
M/s Brandavan Food Products, New Delhi 19,219,625 101,300,000 38,439,250 20,260,000 52.71 82,080,375
49 SCR 12733/34 Narayandri Express M/s. Doon's Caterers, New Delhi 15,681,895 18,140,000 31,363,790 3,628,000 11.57 2,458,105
50 SCR 17037/38 Secunderabad -Bikaner 
Express
M/s. Doon's Caterers, New Delhi 12,220,800 20,640,000 24,441,600 4,128,000 16.89 8,419,200
51 SCR 12711/12 Pinakini Express M/s. Doon's Caterers, New Delhi 11,031,240 31,190,000 22,062,480 6,238,000 28.27 20,158,760
52 SCR 12713/14 Satavahana Express M/s. Doon's Caterers, New Delhi 6,066,450 21,182,000 12,132,900 4,236,400 34.92 15,115,550
53 SCR 12717/18 Ratnachal Express M/s. Doon's Caterers, New Delhi 11,442,990 29,500,000 22,885,980 5,900,000 25.78 18,057,010
54 SCR 12721/22 Dakshin Express M/s. Doon's Caterers, New Delhi 23,377,030 63,873,000 46,754,060 12,774,600 27.32 40,495,970
55 SCR 12715/16 Sachkund Express M/s Sunshine Caterers, Mumbai 28,182,000 61,700,000 56,364,000 12,340,000 21.89 33,518,000
56 SCR 17617/18 Tapovan Express M/s Sunshine Caterers, Mumbai 3,619,110 16,000,000 7,238,220 3,200,000 44.21 12,380,890
57 SER 12869-70 Mumbai CST - Howrah Jn 
Express
M/s Express food services 7,892,500 9,111,787 15,785,000 1,822,357 11.54 1,219,287
58 SER 12021-22 Howrah - Barabil 
Janshatabdi Express
M/s Food World 6,130,000 12,740,000 12,260,000 2,548,000 20.78 6,610,000
59 SER 12863-64 Howrah - Yesvantpur 
Express
M/s AS Sales Corporation 49,320,415 131,400,000 98,640,830 26,280,000 26.64 82,079,585
60 SER 12839-40 Chennai Central - Howrah 
Express
M/s Satyam Caterers Pvt Ltd. 20,000,000 81,300,000 40,000,000 16,260,000 40.65 61,300,000
61 SER 18101-02 & 
18109-10
 Rourkela to Jammu Tawi 
Muri Express
M/s Satyam Caterers Pvt Ltd. 24,067,500 83,300,000 48,135,000 16,660,000 34.61 59,232,500
62 SER 12811-12  Hatia - Lokmanyatilak 
Terminus Express
M/s Griham Food and Hotel P Ltd 4,950,595 15,100,951 9,901,190 3,020,190 30.50 10,150,356
63 SER 12871-72 Howrah - Titlagarh Ispat 
Express
M/s JK Ghosh 9,875,250 25,250,155 19,750,500 5,050,031 25.57 15,374,905
64 SER 12810-09 Howrah - Mumbai CST 
Express
M/s AS Sales Corporation 61,050,000 102,200,000 122,100,000 20,440,000 16.74 41,150,000
65 SER 12835-36 Hatia - Yesvantpur Express M/s Griham Food and Hotels Private Ltd. 6,266,440 45,500,000 12,532,880 9,100,000 72.61 39,233,560

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
82
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Train No Train Name Name of the Licensee Minimum reserve 
price fixed by ZRs 
for 5 years
License fee for 5 
years
Sales turn over 
for one year
License fee for one 
year
Percentage 
of license 
fee to sales 
turn over 
for one 
year
Difference 
between 
reserve price 
and license fee 
for five years
Annexure7 (Para 4.1)
Statement showing license fee of 124 trains over Indian Railways (in `)
66 SER 12867-68 Howrah-Puducherry Express M/s Golden Caterers 6,585,000 15,188,786 13,170,000 3,037,757 23.07 8,603,786
67 SER 12817-18 & 
12873-74
Hatia - Anand Vihar 
Terminal  Jarkhand 
Swarnajayanthi express
M/s Roop Caterers 24,842,355 51,300,000 49,684,710 10,260,000 20.65 26,457,645
68 SER 12841-42 Howrah - Chennai Central 
Express
M/s Arenco Catering 77,550,000 142,100,000 155,100,000 28,420,000 18.32 64,550,000
69 NFR 15653/15654 Amarnath Express Alok Kr. Ghosh Catering Pvt.Ltd.            2,678,800.00          24,109,200.00 5357600           4,821,840.00           90.00 21,430,400
70 NFR 12507/12508 Guwahati-Ernakulam 
Express
Roop Caterers (Cluster trains)          39,778,025.00        155,200,000.00 79556050         31,040,000.00           39.02 115,421,975
71 NFR 12509/12510 Guwahati - Bangaluri 
Express
Roop Caterers (Cluster trains)
72 NFR 12515/12516 Guwahati 
Thiruvananthpuram central 
Express
Roop Caterers (Cluster trains)
73 NFR 15629/15630 Guwahati Chennai Egmore 
Express
Roop Caterers (Cluster trains)
74 NFR 15631/15632 Guwahati Barmar Express Deepak & Co            5,637,840.00          27,100,000.00        11,275,680.00           5,420,000.00           48.07 21,462,160
75 NFR 12513/12514 Guwahati Secunderabad 
Express
Alok Kr. Ghosh Catering Pvt.Ltd.            6,303,865.00          25,200,000.00 12607730           5,040,000.00           39.98 18,896,135
76 NFR 15933/15934 Dibrugarh Amritsar Express Alok Kr. Ghosh Catering Pvt.Ltd.            5,021,610.00          20,320,625.00 10043220           4,064,125.00           40.47 15,299,015
77 NFR 15959/15960 Kamrup Express A.S. Sales Corporation          18,677,598.00        115,200,000.00        37,355,195.00         23,040,000.00           61.68 96,522,402
78 NFR 12505/12506 North East Express Griham Food & Hotels Pvt Ltd          45,282,630.00        216,262,951.00 90565260         43,252,590.00           47.76 170,980,321
79 NFR 15929/15930 Dibrugarh Chennai Egmore 
Express
Alok Kr. Ghosh Catering Pvt.Ltd.            6,926,010.00          34,600,000.00 13852020           6,920,000.00           49.96 27,673,990
80 NFR 15901/15902 Dibrugarh Yeshwantpur 
Express
Alok Kr. Ghosh Catering Pvt.Ltd.            8,787,575.00          42,050,000.00 17575150           8,410,000.00           47.85 33,262,425
81 NFR 15667/15668 Kamakhya Gandhidham 
Express
Deepak & Co            6,950,975.00          13,250,000.00 13901950           2,650,000.00           19.06 6,299,025
82 NFR 15635/15636 Guwahati Okha Express Deepak & Co            7,083,110.00          13,250,000.00 14166220           2,650,000.00           18.71 6,166,890
83 NFR 15483/15484 Mahananda Express Roop Caterers          24,713,300.00          33,625,000.00 49426600           6,725,000.00           13.61 8,911,700

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
83
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Train No Train Name Name of the Licensee Minimum reserve 
price fixed by ZRs 
for 5 years
License fee for 5 
years
Sales turn over 
for one year
License fee for one 
year
Percentage 
of license 
fee to sales 
turn over 
for one 
year
Difference 
between 
reserve price 
and license fee 
for five years
Annexure7 (Para 4.1)
Statement showing license fee of 124 trains over Indian Railways (in `)
84 NFR 15647/15648 Guwahati Lokmanya 
Terminus Express
Griham Food & Hotels Pvt Ltd            6,895,745.00          29,100,951.00 13791490           5,820,190.00           42.20 22,205,206
85 NFR 15905/15906 Vivek Express Roop Caterers            8,338,860.00          40,300,000.00 16677720           8,060,000.00           48.33 31,961,140
86 NFR 15909/15910 Abadh Assam Express Express Food Services          27,157,000.00        124,100,007.00 54314000         24,820,002.00           45.70 96,943,007
87 NFR 12041/12042 Howrah New Jalpaiguri 
Shatabdi Express
R.K. Associates & Hoteliers Pvt Ltd          22,383,448.00          26,300,000.00        44,766,898.00           5,260,000.00           11.75 3,916,552
88 NFR 15645/15646 Guwahati Lokmanya 
Terminus Express
Griham Food & Hotels Pvt Ltd          16,222,170.00          32,860,400.00        32,444,336.00           6,572,080.00           20.26 16,638,230
89 ER 12321-22 Howrah-Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Terminal Express
R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 18689790 93700000 37379580 18740000 50.13 75,010,210
90 ER 12367-68 Vikramshila Express R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 13588355 66700000 27176710 13340000 49.09 53,111,645
91 ER 12381-
82/12303-04
Purva Express R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 25199860 112700000 50399720 22540000 44.72 87,500,140
92 ER 12307-08 Howrah Jodhpur Express R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 16833235 91700000 33666470 18340000 54.48 74,866,765
93 ER 13005-06 Howrah-Amritsar express R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 24514450 73700000 49028900 14740000 30.06 49,185,550
94 ER 12345-
46/12331-32
Saraighat Express/Himgiri 
Express
R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 21614875 78700000 43229750 15740000 36.41 57,085,125
95 ER 12313-14 Sealdah New Delhi Rajdhani 
Express
R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 91076625 101700000 182153250 20340000 11.17 10,623,375
96 ER 12019-20 Howrah Ranchi Shatabdi 
Express
R.K. Associates and Hoteliers Pvt.LTD. 33058280 38700000 66116560 7740000 11.71 5,641,720
97 ER 13151-52 Kolkata-Jammutawai 
Express
M/S Sunshine Caterer Pvt. Ltd. 14743715 41321000 29487430 8264200 28.03 26,577,285
98 ER 12329-
30/12379-80
Sampark kranti 
Express/Jalianwa Bag. 
Express
M/S Sunshine Caterer Pvt. Ltd.            5,925,850.00 15991000 11851700 3,198,200 26.99 10,065,150
99 WCR 11449-50 Jabalpur Jammu Tawi  
Express
M/s A.S.Sales Corporation, Itarsi 6612710 8151000 13225420 1,630,200 12.33 1,538,290
100 WCR 12193-94 Jabalpur Yeshwantpur 
Express
M/s Express Food Services, Itarsi 11733750 18300007 23467500 3,660,001 15.60 6,566,257

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
84
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Train No Train Name Name of the Licensee Minimum reserve 
price fixed by ZRs 
for 5 years
License fee for 5 
years
Sales turn over 
for one year
License fee for one 
year
Percentage 
of license 
fee to sales 
turn over 
for one 
year
Difference 
between 
reserve price 
and license fee 
for five years
Annexure7 (Para 4.1)
Statement showing license fee of 124 trains over Indian Railways (in `)
101 ECoR 22811/12 Bhubaneshwar New Delhi 
Rajdhani Express
R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 179804000 191700000 359607933 38340000 10.66 11,896,000
102 ECoR 22823/24 Bhubaneshwar New Delhi 
Rajdhani Express
R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 0
103 ECoR 18463/64 Prasanti Express R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 28230500 91100000 31207500 18220000 42.31 62,869,500
104 ECoR 12819/20 Bhubaneshwar New Delhi 
SamparkKranti
R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 11856000 0
105 ECoR 18496/95 BBS Rameshwaram Express Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 11302000 15300000 5733000 3060000 27.53 3,998,000
106 ECoR 12897/98 Bhubaneshwar Pondicherri  
Express
Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 5382000 0
107 ECoR 12829/30 Bhubaneshwar Chennai 
Express
Ms. P.K. Shefi 7169000 15600000 4524000 3120000 30.77 8,431,000
108 ECoR 12845/46 Bhubaneshwar Yeshwantpur 
Express
Ms. P.K. Shefi 5616000 0
109 ECoR 12073/74 Howrah Bhubaneshwar 
Janashatabdi Express
HamkiChand D & Sons 3542500 9700000 3286500 1940000 59.03 6,157,500
110 ECoR 22805/06 Bhubaneshwar New Delhi 
Express
Deepak & Co. 18000000 18000500 36000000 3600100 10.00 500
111 ECoR 18401/02 Puri Okha Express R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 36376000 60300000 35392500 12060000 34.08 23,924,000
112 ECoR 12843/44 Puri Ahemanad  Express R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 0
113 ECoR 18405/06 Puri Ahemdabad  via 
Sambalpur Express
Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 7777000 11331000 5089500 2266200 44.53 3,554,000
114 ECoR 12815/16 Puri New Delhi 
Nandankanan Express
Ambuj Hotels & Real Estate (P) Ltd. 40089500 71451000 46644000 14290200 30.64 31,361,500
115 ECoR 12875/76 Puri New Delhi Nilachal 
Express
Ambuj Hotels & Real Estate (P) Ltd. 0
116 ECoR 18477/78 Kalinga Utkal Express Roop Caterers 17456125 75100000 28743750 15020000 52.25 57,643,875
117 ECoR 18473/74 Puri Jodhpur Express HamkiChand D & Sons 4999500 5500000 6786000 1100000 16.21 500,500
118 ECoR 22866/65 Puri Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus Express
Express Food Services 4752000 7111787 6474000 1422357 21.97 2,359,787
119 ECoR 18407/08 Puri Sainagar Sirdi Express Poorvanchal Caterers 16810000 17563261 4769596 3512652 73.65 753,261
120 ECoR 12807/08 Samata Express Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 31874500 64175000 36660000 12835000 25.01 32,300,500
121 ECoR 12803/04 Swarnajayanti Express Sunshine Caterers Pvt. Ltd. 14664000 0
122 ECoR 18507/08 Hirakud Express R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 26147000 31739865 20358000 6347973 24.55 5,592,865
123 ECoR 18509/10 Visakhpatnam Nanded  
Express
R.K Associates and Hoteliers Pvt. Ltd. 5499000 0
124 ECoR 18309/10 Nagavali Express Sree Venkateswara Enterprises 3802500 7184174 4092000 1436835 35.11 3,381,674

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
85
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
NCR 2013-14 181 12 114 6 67 6 2 1 Fine imposed (Rs.15000) Fine imposed 
(Rs.1000)
NCR 2014-15 170 12 129 6 41 6 2 0 In one case fine imposed 
(Rs.1000) and in other 
case warning issued
Nil
NCR 2015-16 242 12 142 11 100 1 3 1 In one case fine imposed 
(Rs.25000) and another 
case is in Court. Action 
was not taken in one 
case. 
Case is in Court
SWR 2013-14 536 108 536 108 0 0 0 0 NA NA
SWR 2014-15 536 108 536 108 0 0 0 0 NA NA
SWR 2015-16 536 108 536 108 0 0 0 0 NA NA
WCR 2013-14 130 248 0 0 0 Nil
WCR 2014-15 172 294 0 0 0 Nil 
WCR 2015-16 144 292 0 0 1 In one case fine of 
Rs.2500 was imposed and 
recovered.
SCR 2013-14 972 40 910 95 62 0 25 13 25 13
SCR 2014-15 1354 398 1471 206 0 192 29 5 29 5
SCR 2015-16 1541 428 1653 239 0 189 67 9 67 9
SECR 2013-14 288 48 36 0 252 48 5 NA 5 NA
SECR 2014-15 288 48 349 0 0 48 17 NA 17 NA
SECR 2015-16 288 48 327 0 0 48 27 NA 26 NA
NR 2013-14 588 48 176 31 412 17 3 3 0 0
NR 2014-15 580 48 199 37 381 11 3 4 2 cases - fine amounting 
to Rs. 40000 imposed
0
NR 2015-16 588 48 183 41 405 7 3 7 1 case fine amounting to 
Rs. 10000 imposed
0
ECoR 2013-14 632 87 0 0 0 0 0 0
ECoR 2014-15 850 188 0 0 15 0 15 0
ECoR 2015-16 877 152 0 0 5 0 5 0
NFR 2013-14 - -
NFR 2014-15 - -
NFR 2015-16 - -
NWR 2013-14 912 60 881 53 31 7 37 63 6 0
NWR 2014-15 936 72 953 95 0 0 20 6 5 2
NWR 2015-16 936 72 976 72 0 0 49 11 5 2
ECR 2013-14 43 18 14 2 - -
ECR 2014-15 184 98 15 9 - -
Annexure 8 (Para 5.3.1)
Zonal 
Railway
227 3
312 83 229 5
504
504
504
312 85
120
312 64 248
59
120 0
6
Statement Showing te the checks of food samples conducted by Chief Health Inspector and Food Saftey Officers of Zonal Railways
RemarksNumber of food 
sample/s due to be 
collected by CHIs 
and FSOs
Number of food 
sample/s actually 
collected
Shortfall in number 
of food samples 
collected
Food samples failed 
during tests in food 
analytical laboratories
Number of cases in which action was 
taken against concerned agency*
Year

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
86
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Annexure 8 (Para 5.3.1)
Zonal 
Railway
Statement Showing te the checks of food samples conducted by Chief Health Inspector and Food Saftey Officers of Zonal Railways
RemarksNumber of food 
sample/s due to be 
collected by CHIs 
and FSOs
Number of food 
sample/s actually 
collected
Shortfall in number 
of food samples 
collected
Food samples failed 
during tests in food 
analytical laboratories
Number of cases in which action was 
taken against concerned agency*
Year
ECR 2015-16 338 98 26 5 - -
SR 2013-14 13 271500 One case fined and other cases under trial in court.
SR 2014-15 137 308500 Two cases fined and other cases under trial in court
SR 2015-16 142 320500 One case under Investigation and other two cases under trial 
in court
SER 2013-14 634 108 789 97 0 11 17 2 17 2
SER 2014-15 666 108 1043 173 0 0 24 6 24 6
SER 2015-16 630 108 922 147 0 0 18 4 18 4
WR 2013-14 1627 246 1584 227 43 19 55 19 6 4 In 10 cases  fine amounting to  Rs. 27000/-  was imposed.
WR 2014-15 1425 256 1372 241 53 15 37 19 57 5 (i) In 59 cases fine amounting to Rs. 185000/- was imposed. 
(ii) Taral Beverages P. Ltd. - registration for supply of PWD 
delisted.  (iii) In 2 cases warning letter was issued.
WR 2015-16 1558 335 1546 315 12 20 30 14 15 2 (i)  In 15 cases  fine amounting to Rs. 13000/-  was imposed. 
(ii) In 1  case stall closed for 7 days. (iii) In 1 case warning 
letter was issued.
NER 2013-14 24 5 359 76 0 0 27 12 14 9
NER 2014-15 24 5 390 67 0 0 10 7 4 4
NER 2015-16 24 5 428 76 0 0 9 6 6 3
CR 2013-14 2528 157 3341 231 0 0 3 0 3 0 In seven cases, fines were imposed ranging between Rs.1000 
and Rs.5000CR 2014-15 3301 262 4390 325 0 0 3 0 3 0
CR 2015-16 3295 369 4085 450 0 0 6 0 6 0
ER 2013-14
ER 2014-15
ER 2015-16
Total 135338489 41896 4224
165
240 0
1308 1109 199 156
1451 1047 404
354
Information not made available to Audit
183
1466 1112

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
87
Static Mobile Stati c Mobile Stati c Mobile Stati c Mobile Stati c Mobile Stati c Mobile Stati c Mobile Stati c Mobile
CR 33 3 485 26 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 33 3 485 26 Not recorded
ECoR 0 0 226 26 NA NA 0 0 NA NA NA NA NA NA 226 26 Not mentioned in records.
ECR 9 0 687 15 0 0 0 0 NA NA NA NA 9 0 606 15 Not recorded
ER 5 0 1 12 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 5 NA 0 NA Not recorded
NCR 0 0 413 1 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 32 0 373 1 Not recorded
NER 1 0 642 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 642 9 Small Contractors
NFR 9 0 719 20 Nil Nil Nil 20 0 0 0 0 9 0 719 Nil NFR Administration has not taken any step to obtain ISO 
22000 certification for its 09 (nine) Departmental catering 
units. Licencees of static catering units were not 
communicated in this regard, resulting in non-certification 
of ISO 22000 for its 719 static catering units licenced by 
NFR.
NR 7 0 1439 40 0 0 14 8 0 0 0 0 7 0 1425 32 No clear directives have been received to obtain ISO 
certification for departmental units/licensee units.  
However, for IRCTC units it has been obtained.
NWR 0 0 699 12 0 0 06 11 0 0 01 02 0 0 07 01 Non compliance of Railway Board instructions.
SCR 4 0 528 14 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 4 0 528 14 3 RRs having ISO 9008-2005 are under proessof upgrading 
to ISO 22000.
SECR 0 0 285 5 0 0 6 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 279 0 Not recorded
SER 1 0 274 19 1 0 274 19 Not recorded
SR 3 1 689 37 - - - - - - - - 3 1 689 37 Not recorded
SWR 10 0 171 19 0 NA 2 0 0 NA 0 NA 10 NA 169 19 Reasons not recorded
WR 3 0 0 18 Not recorded
WCR 0 0 447 2 NA NA NIL NIL NA NA NA NA NA NA 447 2 As per Dy.CCM/HQ  letter,there are no directives for 
obtaining ISO certificate for private licensee of  Railways 
IR 85 4 7705 275 0 0 43 44 0 0 0 0 114 4 6862 200
Departmental Licensed by ZR
Annexure 9a (Para 5.3.3)
Statement showing details of catering units of Zonal Railways having ISO certification
Zonal 
Railway
Total Number of Catering Unis as on 
31st March 2016
Number of units which have 
obtained ISO 22000 certification as 
on 31st March 2016
Out of the units mentioned in Col 6 
to 9, number of units not having 
updated ISO certification 
Number of catering units which 
have not obtained ISO certifcation 
as on 31st March 2016
Brief reasons for not having obtained / updated the ISO 
22000 certification
Departmental Licensed by ZR
0 DOES NOT ARISE
Departmental Licensed by ZR Departmental Licensed by ZR

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
88
Static Mobile Static Mobile Static Mobile Static Mobile
CR 19 5 11 0 8 0 8 0
ECoR 0 2 NA 3 NA 0 NA 0 One year yet to be completed since operation of the units.
ECR 2 1 0 0 NA NA 2 5 Letter have been regularly issued to the Units by RO Patna.
ER 11 10 10 0 1 nil Obtaining of ISO certification is under process
NCR 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
NER 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0
NFR 5 5 1 Nil Nil NAP 4 5 1) The process of ISO certification for 4 static and 5 mobile units 
were not started up to 31.03.2016.  2) The process for obtaining ISO 
certification in respect of 5 mobile units was not  started due to 
temporary permission from the Railway Administration to run the 
train.
NR 2 NMA 2 NMA NIL NMA NIL NMA No remarks
NWR Nil 0 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil No reasons available for not updation
SCR 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 As per tender condiitons, the recently commisisoned units shall get 
the units ISO certified within one year of operation of the unit.
SECR NIL 0 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL
SER 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 2 Due to uncertainity prevailing regarding handing over these 
Departmental units to SER as per extant Catring policy
SR 0 13 0 13 0 21 - - -
SWR 10 2 10 0 0 0 0 4 Reasons not recorded
WR 1 6 0 3 0 0 1 3 The parties have applied for ISO certification and is under process.
WCR 1 0 Nil Nil Nil Nil 1 Nil
IR Total 53 55 34 20 8 21 19 14
Annexure 9b (Para 5.3.3)
Statement showing details of IRCTC catering units having ISO certification
 Zonal 
Railway
Total Number of Catering Units as on 
31st March 2016
Number of units which have 
obtained ISO 22000 certification as 
on 31st March 2016
Out of the units mentioned in Col 5 to 7, 
number of units not having updated ISO 
certification
Number of catering units which have 
not obtained ISO certifcation as on 
31st March 2016
Licensed by IRCT
C Licensed by IRCTC Licensed by IRCTC Licensed by IRCTCIRCTC Specified 
Catering units
IRCTC Specified 
Catering units
IRCTC Specified 
Catering units
IRCTC Specified 
Catering units
Brief reasons for not having obtained / updated the ISO 22000 
certification
0 0 0 0
7 5 0 2
17 0 NA 17
9 4 3 5
5 5 0 0
4 4 Nil Nil
12 12 NIL NIL
7 7 1 Nil
28 23 4 4
15 15 NIL NIL
6 6 0 0
-
18 18 0 0
22 21 -
174 142 8 30
15 13 0 2
9 9 Nil Nil

Report No. 13 of 2017 (Railways) Annexure
89
No. of 
passenger
Excellent Very Good Good Average Poor No. of 
passenger
Excellent Very Good Good Average Poor
CR 285 64 100 99 23 9 367 62 95 123 67 20
ECoR 1113 303 390 330 85 20 2778 818 0 1660 356 40
ECR 204 83 54 63 21 0 1134 330 645 65 0 4
ER 0 0 0 0 0 0 621 98 215 201 86 31
NCR 966 0 838 0 128 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
NER 5362 28 156 4444 667 50 0 0 0 0 0 0
NFR 165 14 28 83 27 6 58 19 20 14 4 1
NR 1064 0 964 0 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
NWR 460 100 108 128 62 28 0 0 0 0 0 0
SCR 14444 1997 4739 5927 1662 119 0 0 0 0 0 0
SECR 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SER 5865 550 1956 2269 45 16 958 112 254 314 128 42
SR 789 218 282 245 70 9 827 103 198 362 126 38
SWR 1952 36 151 173 66 23 0 0 0 0 0 0
WR 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
WCR 569 0 560 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
IR 33238 3393 10326 13761 2965 280 6743 1542 1427 2739 767 176
Passenger 
responde
37376 %
Excellent 4935 13
Very Good 11753 31
Good 16500 44
Average 3732 10
Poor 456 1
Passenger satisfaction surveys conducted by ZRs and IRCTC
Departmental IRCTC
Annexure 10 (Para 5.4)
Zonal 
Railway
 90