Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Performance Audit of 
Disaster Management in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
for the year ended 31 March 2016
Government of Jammu and Kashmir
Report No. 4 of 2016

Executive Summary
(i)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Contents
Reference to
Paragraph Page No.
PREFACE iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY v
Chapter 1 – Introduction and Scope and Methodology of Audit
Disaster Profile of the State 1.1 1
Disaster Management Framework 1.2 2
Audit Objectives 1.3 2
Scope and Methodology of Audit 1.4 3
Chapter 2 – Pre-Disaster Preparedness and Management 
Institutional Set-up 2.1 5
Disaster Response Force - Training and Deployment 2.1.1 6
Disaster Risk Assessment 2.1.2 7
Prevention and Mitigation Measures 2.1.3 7
Regaining/ Restoring Wetland/ Water Bodies/ Flood Channels 2.1.4 7
Incorporation of Earthquake Resistant Designs in Building Codes 2.1.5 9
Early Warning 2.1.6 9
Emergency Operation Centres 2.1.7 9
Capacity Building and Public Awareness for Managing Disasters 2.1.8 10
Chapter 3 – Post-Disaster Activities and Management - Financial Arrangements 
Introduction 3.1 11
Utilization of State Disaster Response Fund 3.1.1 11
Allotment, Expenditure and Reporting of Post-Disaster Financing 3.1.2 12
Chapter 4 – Post-Disaster Activities and Management - Drought of Kharif 2009 and 
Leh Cloudburst 2010
Drought of Kharif 2009 4.1 15
Assistance for Crop Loss 4.1.1 15

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
(ii)
Contents
Reference to
Paragraph Page No.
Supply of Emergency Drinking Water 4.1.2 16
Cloudburst in Leh (August 2010) 4.2 16
Chapter 5 – Post-Disaster Activities and Management - Floods of September 2014
Introduction 5.1 19
Damage and Loss Assessment 5.1.1 19
Relief, Rehabilitation and Provision of Basic Services 5.1.2 21
Administration, Management and Distribution of Relief 5.1.3 23
Procurement, Hiring and Purchases 5.1.4 28
Transportation, Storage and Distribution of relief material 5.1.5 30
Restoration of essential public utilities/ facilities and infrastructure 5.1.6 32
Expenditure from SDRF by Ineligible Sectors 5.1.7 34
Reconstruction Activities under Special Plan Assistance 5.1.8 35
Chapter 6 – Conclusion and Recommendations  
Conclusion 6.1 39
Recommendations 6.2 39
Glossary of Abbreviations 41

Executive Summary
(iii)
PREFACE
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared 
for submission to His Excellency the Governor, State of Jammu and Kashmir, for 
submission to the State Legislature under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of 
India.
The Report contains the results of performance audit of disaster management 
activities of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir covering the period from 
2010-11 to 2014-15 including the drought of 2009, the cloudburst in Leh of 2010 
and the floods of September 2014. The Report covers the disaster management 
activities of the Government and its designated agencies and their performance 
with regard to pre-disaster preparedness and activities, emergency response in the 
wake of disasters and post-disaster activities and management. 
The instances mentioned/cited in the Report are those that came to the notice of 
the audit in the course of instant performance audit in the test-checked sampled 
districts. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Executive Summary

Executive Summary
(v)
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The State of Jammu & Kashmir has witnessed several natural disasters in the 
recent past such as the Drought of Kharif 2009, the Cloudburst of Leh 2010 and 
the Floods of 2014 in several parts of the State. The performance audit of disaster 
management in the State focused on assessing the State Government’s  pre-disaster 
preparedness and management, emergency response and relief, restoration of 
public utilities and infrastructure and their reconstruction/rebuilding. The audit 
was conducted between July 2015 and February 2016 and covered the districts of 
Anantnag, Budgam, Jammu, Leh, Poonch, Srinagar and Udhampur as test-check 
samples.
Pre-Disaster Preparedness and Management
The Disaster Management Act, 2005, provides for a disaster management 
framework that envisages a continuous and integrated process of planning, 
organizing, coordinating and implementing measures for prevention of 
disasters, mitigation or reduction of their risk and severity, capacity building  
and preparedness to deal with any disaster, prompt response to disaster and 
undertaking evacuation, rescue, relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
Audit identified gaps in establishment and functioning of institutional mechanisms 
and implementation of policies that inhibited the ability of the administrative 
machinery to prepare and implement cohesive disaster management plans that 
would have enabled rapid response to disasters and mitigate their impact on loss 
of lives and property. These included the following:
•	 The State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA), though established 
in April 2007, was not fully constituted as its full time members were 
yet to be appointed as of July 2016. Further, as against the stipulation of 
holding at least one meeting in a year, the SDMA had met only once in 
2012 in the last six years. 
•	 The State Advisory Committee (SAC) responsible for making 
recommendations on issues relating to disaster management had not been 
constituted. 
•	 The State Disaster Management Policy, approved in February 2012, had 
not been fully implemented.
•	 No Disaster Management Authority had been constituted at the divisional 
level (Jammu and Kashmir). 
•	 While Disaster Management Authorities had been constituted at the 
district level, they were non-functional. District Disaster Management 
Plans had not been formulated except in Leh district. Even the Leh district 
plan that had been approved in May 2011 had neither been implemented 
nor reviewed.

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
(vi)
The risk of inadequate disaster preparedness due to weak institutional structures 
was aggravated by shortcomings in the Government’s pre-disaster preparedness 
and management activities as below: 
•	 The State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) was not only short of 
its sanctioned strength by 28 per cent  but 69 per cent  of its available 
manpower was deployed for duties not connected to disaster relief or 
response. Further, the bulk of the Force had not undergone the mandatory 
orientation and specialized training courses necessary for them to 
effectively carry out their functions in the event of a disaster. 
•	 Government had not conducted assessment of hazards, vulnerabilities 
and risks in the State and did not prepare risk maps for 13 multi-hazard 
districts despite `20 lakh having been released by Government of India in 
June 2014 under the Capacity Building grants for this purpose. 
•	 Scheme for Improvements to Flood Spill channel by way of construction 
of central cunnette (2008-09) was taken up to deal with the reduced 
carrying capacity of the Jhelum River due to accumulation of sediments 
from various nallahs. This was subsumed in the “Flood Threat to River 
Jhelum Scheme” (2010-11). Under the first scheme only about 81 per cent 
and under the second scheme only 68 per cent of the total targeted flood 
spill channels were treated.  Further, `1.98 crore under the first scheme and 
`9.20 crore under the second scheme were utilized for the purposes not 
related to the scheme objectives. Had the two schemes been progressed 
and implemented as per their Detailed Project Reports, the impact of the 
floods of September 2014 would have been mitigated.
•	 The State Disaster Management Policy envisaged that the National 
Buildings Code and other codes prescribed by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards for seismic zones IV and V would be followed by all 
departments. However, earthquake resistant seismic designs had not 
been made mandatory for private buildings and disaster resistant designs 
and retrofitting techniques were not ensured in re-construction of houses 
damaged during the floods of September 2014. Hence, the constructions 
remained vulnerable to earthquakes despite being in a seismic sensitive 
zone.
•	 Disaster forecasting and early warning and alert systems were not 
established despite release of `20 lakh for early warning systems. The 
amount was surrendered.
•	 Emergency Operation Centres were not established though `2 crore was 
earmarked by the State Executive Committee (2013-14) for the purpose. 
•	 State Government had not undertaken capacity building activities 
including public awareness and preparedness as envisaged in the 
Disaster Management Act and `10.21 crore out of `12 crore released 

Executive Summary
(vii)
by Government of India remained unutilized. Further, `25.24 lakh was 
utilized for procurement of vehicles during 2014-15 instead of capacity 
building.
Post-Disaster Activities and Management - Financial Arrangements 
The State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) was the primary source of funding 
disaster related activities.  An amount of `1,571.35 crore1 was available with the 
State in the SDRF during 2010-15. Of this, `1,369.16 crore was spent on disaster 
related activities during the same period.  Additionally, `1,000 crore was received 
as Special Plan Assistance (SPA) during October 2014 from the Government of 
India for restoration/re-building damaged infrastructure. Furthermore, `833.44 
crore was received from the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund (PMNRF) 
and `88.29 crore from Chief Minister’s Relief Fund (CMRF). 
Audit observed the following: 
•	 `26.52 crore was released from the SDRF during 2010-14 for relief and 
restoration without declaration of disaster in terms of the State Disaster 
Management Policy. 
•	 As per the guidelines for management of the SDRF, the balance in the 
Calamity Relief Fund (CRF) as on 31st March 2010 was to be transferred 
to the SDRF. However, the balance of `47.88 crore in the CRF was lying 
under Reserve Funds not bearing interest. This resulted in loss of interest 
of `55.49 crore during 2010-15. 
•	 The guidelines also envisage investment of SDRF funds in Central 
Government securities, treasury bills and interest bearing deposits 
and certificates with scheduled commercial banks. However, no such 
investment was done and opportunity to augment resources that  
could be devoted for disaster preparedness and relief was forgone. 
Government stated that the funds were utilized for normal operations of 
the Government. 
•	 `37.08 crore was lying (August 2015) in the bank accounts of seven 
District Commissioners (DCs) of the test-checked districts. `1.02 crore 
was not accounted for in the cash book of DC Leh raising the risk of  
mis-utilization of funds.
•	 `5 crore released to the State Government from the Prime Minister’s 
National Relief Fund for procurement of one lakh blankets for distribution 
among flood affected families remained unutilized.
Hence, there remained scope for more efficient management and utilization 
of SDRF to both augment available resources and ensure effective relief and 
rehabilitation.
1 Opening balance as on 1 st April 2010: `438.21 crore; GoI: `857.65 crore; State Government:  
`95.29 crore; Interest: `180.20 crore

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
(viii)
Drought of Kharif 2009
A review of the post-drought management and administration of relief in the 
wake of the drought of Kharif 2009 brought out mismanagement and delay in 
disbursement of assistance and utilization of assistance for purposes other than 
relief to actual beneficiaries as below:  
•	 Against a total of `26.55 crore released by the Government to the test-
checked districts, `18.77 crore (71 per cent) was released by the districts 
to the 15 affected tehsils. The tehsils could utilize only `12.19 crore  
(65 per cent) with `5.58 crore remaining unspent (August 2015).  
•	 `16.50 lakh was released from the SDRF to PHE Divisions in Srinagar, 
Ganderbal and Shopian which were not declared affected by drought and 
were hence ineligible for such funds. 
•	 Out of `2.14 crore received by Tehsil Udhampur (District Udhampur), 
only `10.39 lakh was distributed to affected people indicating either 
unrealistic assessment of losses or denial of assistance to the affected 
people. 
•	 In Tehsil Surankote (District Poonch), the tehsildar released `1.11 crore to 
Naib Tehsildars, Patwaris, and Girdawars for distribution among drought 
affected people during December 2011 to October 2012 instead of 
distributing financial assistance directly to the drought affected persons. 
However, no records were maintained as to the actual distribution of relief 
to the victims. 
•	 Against an assessment of `2.18 crore for damage caused to crops in 
Tehsil Akhnoor (District Jammu), the DC Jammu released (January 2011) 
`2.66 crore. The excess amount of `48 lakh remained in the bank account 
(August 2015) and was not refunded to the SDRF.
•	 Against the norms of relief to be provided within 90 days, relief was 
distributed to the affected farmers as late as in February 2011 and  
January 2015 i.e. after a lapse of 13 to 60 months.
•	 Emergency drinking water was not provided to the drought affected areas 
as five PHE divisions of Jammu District spent `1.12 crore on repairs and 
maintenance of existing water supply schemes, purchase of POL, repair 
of vehicles, etc.
Leh Cloudburst of August 2010 
Audit review of post-disaster assessment of damage/loss and distribution of relief 
and assistance to affected persons brought out deviation from norms as well as 
delay in disbursement of assistance. There was no assurance that the damage 
need was assessed and assistance was equitably distributed to all eligible affected 
persons while `8.10 crore of SDRF funds was utilized for purposes not covered 
under the Fund guidelines. Audit highlighted the following:

Executive Summary
(ix)
•	 Assessment of damages was deficient as it was done by local authorities 
and not by any technical authority as envisaged under norms approved 
by Government of India and the assessment was not cross-checked by 
the district administration with census reports or records of ownership of 
property. There was consequently a risk that damage and loss assessment 
might not have accurately brought out the list of eligible damaged houses. 
•	 Test-check of 127 families showed that more than one member of a family 
was selected for disbursement of relief for fully and partially damaged 
houses. The amount involved in such disbursements was `2.41 crore.
•	 Timely relief for next of kin was provided in only 123 out of 216 cases. 
The delay in making disbursement in the remaining 93 cases ranged 
between one and 17 months.
•	 Relief under PMNRF at the rate of `50,000 was not provided to 96 
seriously injured persons as the District Administration failed to forward 
the cases to the Prime Minister’s Office.
•	 Ex-gratia relief was not provided to 36, 55 and 70 deceased persons under 
the SDRF, the CMRF and the PMNRF respectively. 
•	 The District Administration Leh had paid `2.27 crore in 201 cases  
against an originally assessed damage relief of `1.14 crore which was 
indicative of either excess payment of `1.13 crore or wrong original 
assessment or distribution of relief to ineligible persons. 
•	 Payment of `1.60 crore for 118 houses was made under PMNRF  
to persons who did not figure in the list approved by the district 
administration. 
Floods of September 2014
Audit observed that relief and evacuation were not provided to the victims of 
floods in a timely and effective manner due to the absence of adequate damage  
and need assessment, lack of effective coordination and monitoring by any  
nodal agency for procurement, transportation and distribution of relief materials,  
diversion of funds and irregular spending or spending on ineligible items 
in contravention of SDRF’s guidelines. Inadequate and inaccurate damage 
assessment coupled with inefficient management of projects and diversion of  
funds also hampered restoration and re-building of public utilities and infrastructure 
damaged by the floods. Audit highlighted the following:
•	 Assessment of damages was completed in only three out of the six test-
checked districts while need assessment had not been conducted in any of 
the six districts resulting in partial or inaccurate damage assessment. The 
initial and subsequent assessments varied from 11 per cent to 137 per cent 
leading to delays in arranging materials and procurement of supplies that 
adversely impacted provision of timely assistance to the affected persons.

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
(x)
•	 There was no evacuation plan and relief centres/ camps had not been 
identified in any of the test-checked districts resulting in rescue,  
evacuation and relief being managed in an ad hoc manner. 
•	 Assistance amounting to `12.60 crore due to affected families remained 
undisbursed while material (tents, blankets) valuing `3.30 crore remained 
unutilized or in excess of requirement. Further, gratuitous relief of `1.42 
crore was disbursed to ineligible families and families not affected by 
floods. In addition, expenditure of `1.30 crore incurred by PWD on lifting 
of garbage, clearance of drains, etc. in Srinagar city could not be verified 
by audit as the same work was also reported to have been done by the 
Srinagar Municipal Corporation. 
•	 In the six test-checked districts, there were delays of three to six months in 
payment of gratuitous relief to 22,808 cases and of more than six months 
in 8,452 cases.
•	 Though Government announced free ration for six months (September 
2014 to February 2015) to the affected families, several thousand families 
received the ration after six months and many even after nine months. 
Further, ration was not provided as per the criteria to both ration card-
holding and non-holding families. In the test-checked districts, 1,99,482 
quintals of ration was provided less to 4,53,629 ration card holding 
families while 87,189 quintals of ration was provided less to 1,20,033 
non-card holding families for the six months’ period.
•	 There was delay in disbursement of gratuitous relief ranging up to more 
than six months which defeated the very purpose of providing immediate 
relief. Funds amounting to `0.94 crore was disbursed without sanction 
of the competent authority and additional assistance of `8.80 crore 
was provided as a result of change in status of damages to houses after  
re-assessment of damages.
•	 While no assessment of livestock losses and damage to agricultural 
land and crops had been done in any of the test-checked districts of 
Kashmir division, `4.20 crore of assistance for farmers for input subsidy/
compensation for losses of Poonch district was not paid to the affected 
persons as of August 2015. 
•	 `8.90 crore was spent on purchase of ineligible items/equipment which 
were not related to the floods. There was no record of disbursement/
utilization of items valuing `14.38 lakh procured for flood related  
activities and useful life of bio-manure valuing `15.44 lakh expired in 
September 2015.
•	 Relief materials valuing `4.88 crore procured and dispatched by 
government agencies as well as 18 trucks of relief material received from 
other States/agencies from outside was not accounted for in the records 

Executive Summary
(xi)
of the Central Store (Entrepreneurship Development Institute, Pampore, 
Srinagar) and DC Jammu. 
•	 Divisional Commissioner Kashmir sanctioned `2.51 crore out of SDRF 
for purchase of 75,000 kgs of whole milk and 5,000 kgs of skimmed 
milk from M/s Mother Dairy and Vegetables Private Limited, New 
Delhi through the J&K Milk Producer Co-operative Limited, Milk 
Plant, Srinagar, for distribution amongst the flood affected people.  
The Co-operative received the full quantity of whole milk and skimmed  
milk in September 2014. However, only 7,000 kgs of whole milk was 
distributed amongst the affected people. While 2,600 kgs of milk was 
damaged, the balance valued at `1.99 crore was either used by the 
Cooperative as part of its business or was not traceable. 
•	 Out of the 53,298 bags (26,500 quintals) of rice received from  
Chhattisgarh Government, 5,375 bags (2,675 quintals) were damaged at 
waterlogged open space at Udhampur Railway Station due to delay in 
lifting. A further 26,920 bags (13,396 quintals) which were transported 
to Kashmir for distribution was also damaged/became sub-standard  
(June 2015) due to delay in distribution by the Consumer Affairs and 
Public Distribution (CAPD) Department. This resulted in `42.74 lakh 
spent on transportation of the rice being rendered infructuous. 
•	 As required under the Standard Operating Procedures for restoration of 
public utilities and infrastructure, sanction for expenditure from SDRF 
above `30 lakh was to be obtained from the SEC, up to `30 lakh from 
Financial Commissioner, Revenue, up to `20 lakh from Divisional 
Commissioners and up to `10 lakh from Deputy Commissioners. In 
contravention of these instructions, works implementing agencies did not 
obtain sanction from any of the aforesaid competent authorities for any of 
the restoration works.
•	 Further, a total of `27.36 crore of SDRF was spent irregularly or diverted 
as follows:
o `12.25 crore was utilized on 1,208 works which had been started/ 
were under execution or had been completed before the occurrence 
of the flood.
o `10.21 crore was utilized on normal repair and maintenance works 
and ineligible items/works not included in the damage report. 
o `4.90 crore was utilized on ineligible works actually ongoing 
under other schemes/projects and not handed over to the  
concerned department.
•	 Due to incorrect projection of span for a bailey bridge in Poonch district, 
excess material costing `4.39 crore was procured which could have been 
avoided. Further, due to incorrect application of rates by the Irrigation 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
(xii)
and Flood Control Division, Srinagar for earthwork in banking in layers 
and for supply of earth, extra expenditure of `2.36 crore from SDRF was 
incurred. 
•	 6,369 metres of pipes were issued (January-February 2015) from the store 
of the Water Works Division Srinagar for 25 restoration works costing 
`23.54 lakh. However, the said works had already been shown completed 
(October-December 2014), raising doubt as to the actual execution of the 
work. 
•	 As per the Manual for Administration of SDRF, eligible sectors for 
which assistance are to be provided are specifically named/categorized. 
However, `31.44 crore was released from SDRF to seven departments/
agencies which were not eligible. Out of the said amount, `14.97 crore 
was spent by Estates Department, Tourism Department (including Sher-
e-Kashmir International Conference Centre, SKICC) and State Motor 
Garages on items such as furniture, furnishing, electronic and electrical 
gadgets and items, renovation of government quarters, which in any case 
were not associated with flood damage.
•	 Government of India released `1,000 crore as Special Plan Assistance 
(SPA) for re-building of damaged infrastructure. Audit observed that 
`42.24 crore of SPA funds were utilized on works/items not covered 
under the SPA guidelines as follows: 
o Expenditure from SPA was subject to the condition, inter alia,   
that SPA should be utilized only for re-building damaged 
infrastructure. However, 79 works which were not damaged due  
to the floods were taken up by three departments at a cost of  
`30.48 crore out of which expenditure of `23.12 crore had been 
incurred as of March 2016. 
o Similarly, in contravention of the condition that only such  
schemes/projects to be taken up which had not been funded under 
SDRF/State Plan/CSS flexi fund or others, nine lift irrigation 
schemes started during previous years (2007-08 to 2011-12) and 
which were funded under CSS-AIBP and State Plan-District Sector 
Schemes were taken up under the SPA at a cost of `2.06 crore 
and expenditure of `1.05 crore has been incurred (March 2016). 
Similarly, 24 works where `1.22 crore had already been spent 
from SDRF were also taken up under the SPA and an expenditure 
of `3.61 crore was incurred.
o Further, an amount of `14.46 crore was spent for purposes not 
related to re-building the damaged infrastructure such as removal 
of silt from nallahs, purchase of POL, payment of wages to office 
casual staff or on construction of works not sanctioned under the 
SPA. 

Executive Summary
(xiii)
Recommendations
Based on the audit findings, it is recommended that the State Government should:
•	 Establish and operationalize the institutional structures and disaster 
related policies envisaged in the Disaster Management Act, 2005, for 
efficient and effective management of pre-and post-disaster activities. 
•	 Conduct vulnerability, hazard and risks assessment especially in the 
13 multi-hazard districts and prepare risk maps that would enable 
formulation of informed strategies and prioritization of resources for 
disaster preparedness including an early warning system. 
•	 Ensure that personnel of the State Disaster Response Force undergo the 
mandatory trainings in a time bound manner and that they are thereafter 
used solely for the intended purpose.
•	 Formulate and implement a time bound plan for capacity building 
including promotion of general awareness and community training 
and building capacity to combat disasters as an important pre-disaster 
activity.
•	 Strengthen the mechanisms for pre-release scrutiny and post-release 
monitoring of SDRF funds to ensure that funds are released and utilized 
only for the purpose of providing relief to persons affected by disasters 
and are not diverted for other purposes. 
•	 Strengthen mechanisms for monitoring movement and distribution of 
financial assistance and relief materials to ensure that they reach the 
intended duly identified beneficiaries. Procedures should also be in place 
for accountability of administrative officials for any unjustified diversions 
or avoidable losses. 

Chapter - 1
Introduction and Scope and  
Methodology of Audit

Chapter - 1 : Introduction and Scope and Methodology of Audit
1
 Chapter-1: Introduction and Scope and Methodology of Audit
1.1 Disaster Profile of the State
The Disaster Mana gement Act, 2005 was enacted by Government of India 
(GoI) to provide for the effective management of disasters. It defines disaster 
as a “catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence in any area, arising 
from natural or man-made causes, or by accident or negligence which results 
in substantial loss of life or human suffering or damage to and destruction of, 
property, or damage to, or degradation of, environment, and is of such a nature or 
magnitude as to be beyond the coping capacity of the community of the affected 
area.” 
The Act provides for a disaster management framework that envisages a 
continuous and integrated process of planning, organizing, coordinating and 
implementing measures for prevention of disasters, mitigation or reduction of  
their risk and severity, capacity building and preparedness to deal with any  
disaster, prompt response to disaster, assessing the severity of a disaster and 
undertaking evacuation, rescue, relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
Vulnerability to and impact of disasters can be mitigated by risk assessment, 
pre-disaster warning, hazard mapping and adequate preparedness through 
adequate and effective policies, institutional mechanisms and adequate financial 
resources. These pre-disaster activities complement post-disaster activities of 
emergency response, recovery and relief as well as restoration, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction. 
The State of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) is a multi-hazard State falling in  
Seismic Zone-V 1 and in Seismic Zone-IV 2. Low lying areas of Kashmir and 
parts of Jammu are flood prone and upper catchments of all the tributaries of the 
Jhelum, Indus, Chenab and Tawi rivers are prone to flash floods. Areas in high 
reaches including Leh and Kargil are prone to avalanches and the hilly areas to 
cloudburst; areas alongside highways are prone to landslides and most parts of 
Jammu are prone to drought. In the last ten years, the State has witnessed several 
disasters as in table-1.1 below:
Table-1.1: Major Disasters in the State during 2005-14
Month/Year Disaster Impact/Loss of Life 
February 2005 Snow blizzard at Waltengu Nad 
(Kulgam District)
175 deaths and 128 families affected
October 2005 Earthquake at Baramulla and Poonch 953 deaths and 418 injured
September 2009 Drought 2009 (Kharif) 18 districts affected 
August 2010 Cloudburst at Leh 257 deaths and 424 injured
September 2014 Floods in Kashmir and Jammu 304 deaths and 24 seriously injured
(Source: State Disaster Management Policy, Annual Report to GoI, Data of Relief and Rehabilitation Department) 
1 Districts of Srinagar, Ganderbal, Baramulla, Kupwara, Bandipora, Budgam, Anantnag, Pulwama, Doda, 
Ramban and Kishtwar
2  Rest of State including whole of Ladakh region and Jammu Division

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
2
1.2 Disaster Management Framework
The Disaster Management Act, 2005, lays down the institutional framework  
for disaster management including Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) at various 
levels and envisages drawing up of State and district plans for disaster  
management, requiring departments to fulfill disaster management  
responsibilities including integrating measures for disaster prevention and 
mitigation in their development plans and making necessary budgetary  
provisions. The Act provides for setting up of a State Disaster Management 
Authority (SDMA) under the chairpersonship of the Chief Minister, a State 
Executive Committee under the chairpersonship of the Chief Secretary  
and District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs) headed by  
Deputy Commissioners. 
The Act also provides for the creation of funds for response (State Disaster 
Response Fund/District Disaster Response Fund) and mitigation (State Disaster 
Mitigation Fund/ District Disaster Mitigation Fund). 
In 2009, GoI formulated a National Disaster Management Policy (NDMP) and 
subsequently the State Government formulated its State Disaster Management 
Policy (SDMP) in February 2012.
Earlier, the Revenue Department of the State Government was responsible for 
management of disaster in the State. Though a separate Department of Relief 
and Rehabilitation was created in March 2015, the same had not been created 
at districts level and the implementation of disaster related activities continued 
to be under the Revenue Department. The disaster management is funded 
from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) which includes funds received 
from GoI and the State Government. Funds are also made available from the  
Chief Minister’s Relief Fund (CMRF) and the Prime Minister’s National Relief 
Fund (PMNRF) as well as through special packages/assistance from the GoI. 
1.3 Audit Objectives
The performance audit was conducted to assess whether:
•	 disaster manag ement structures, institutional arrangements and policies 
were in place and were working effectively;
•	 financial resources were available and were adequate and financial 
management was efficient and effective for prevention, mitigation, 
reduction of risk and impact of disaster and intended results were achieved;
•	 comprehensive risk assessment was conducted to identify the nature, 
location, intensity and likelihood of major hazards and preparedness to deal 
with disasters in the future was undertaken;
•	 relief assistance for construction/repair of damaged houses, rental 
support and gratuitous relief to next of kin were provided in timely and 
efficient manner and on the basis of damage need assessment and correct 
identification of beneficiaries;

Chapter - 1 : Introduction and Scope and Methodology of Audit
3
•	 procurement, receipt, transportation, storage and distribution of relief/aid 
material and financial assistance to victims were undertaken in an efficient 
and effective manner; 
•	 post-disaster activities with regard to restoration of basic public facilities 
and utilities were managed and monitored effectively; and 
•	 an adequate internal control structure was in place.
1.4 Scope and Methodology of Audit
The performance audit was conducted as per the Performance Auditing  
Guidelines of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India between 
July 2015 and February 2016 by test-check of records of the two Commissioner 
Secretaries3, two Divisional Commissioners (Kashmir and Jammu), seven 4 
Deputy Commissioners (DCs) and other line 5 departments of the districts 
covering the period between 2010-11 and 2014-15. An amount of `1,000 crore 
provided (October 2014) by the GoI under the Special Plan Assistance (SPA) for 
re-building damaged infrastructure was also covered (upto March 2016) under 
audit. Though the PMNRF and CMRF do not fall within the audit purview of 
the CAG, the utilization of financial assistance released from these Funds by the 
implementing agencies were covered in the performance audit so as to present a 
holistic picture of post-disaster activities.
Before commencing the performance audit, the scope and coverage of audit, 
the audit objectives, criteria and methodology were discussed (July 2015) 
with the Commissioner Secretary, Relief and Rehabilitation Department in an 
Entry Conference. The audit findings were discussed with the Commissioner 
Secretary, Relief and Rehabilitation Department in an Exit Conference held on  
22 June 2016 and replies of the Government, wherever received, have been 
suitably incorporated in the report.
3  Revenue Department, Relief and Rehabilitation Department
4  Srinagar, Anantnag, Budgam, Jammu, Poonch, Udhampur and Leh
5  Roads and Bridges, Irrigation and Flood Control, Public Health Engineering, Power Development and 
other Government offices/ agencies involved in temporary restoration works

Chapter - 2
Pre-Disaster Preparedness 
and 
Management

Chapter - 2 : Pre-Disaster Preparedness and Management
5
 Chapter-2: Pre-Disaster Preparedness and Management
2.1 Institutional Set-up
The Disaster Management Act, 2005, envisages establishment of designated 
agencies and dedicated structures with defined role and responsibilities for 
management of disasters at the State and district levels. Audit found gaps in the 
establishment and functioning of the institutional mechanisms as summarized in 
table-2.1 below:
Table-2.1: Institutional Set-up for disaster management
Authority Mandate/ Activities Audit findings
State Disaster 
Management 
Authority (SDMA)
The SDMA was to be administratively 
functional by appointing full time 
members supported by core secretariat 
to lay down policies and plans for 
disaster management in the State. 
The SDMA should also meet at least 
once in a year.
The SDMA, though established in 
April 2007, was not fully constituted 
as its full time members were yet to 
be appointed (July 2016). 
The SDMA met only once  
(February 2012) during 2010-15 
when State Disaster Management 
Policy (SDMP) was approved.
The SDMP though approved 
(February 2012) by the SDMA, had 
not been implemented fully. 
State Advisory 
Committee (SAC)
The SAC to be constituted 
consisting of experts in the field 
of disaster management to make 
recommendations on various aspects.
The SAC had not been constituted 
as of October 2015.
State Executive 
Committee (SEC)
To implement the National Plan, 
State Plan, lay down guidelines for 
preparation of disaster management 
plan by the departments and to act as a 
coordinating and monitoring body for 
management of disaster in the State.
National Plan and State Plan had not 
been implemented. Guidelines for 
preparation of disaster management 
plan by departments were also not 
laid down.
Divisional Disaster 
Management 
Authorities
(DDMA)
Divisional Disaster Management 
Authorities to be created to act 
as the planning, coordinating and 
implementing body for disaster 
risk reduction and management at 
the divisional level and to provide 
guidance for the purpose of disaster 
management to the DDMAs. 
Divisional Disaster Management 
Authorities had not been established 
as of April 2016.
District Disaster 
Management 
Authorities 
(DDMAs)
To prepare the District Disaster 
Management Plan and to coordinate 
and monitor the implementation of 
the National/State Policy and the 
National/State/District Plan, DDMAs 
will ensure that the guidelines for 
prevention, mitigation, preparedness 
and response measures laid down 
by the NDMA and the SDMA are 
followed by all departments at the 
district level.
DDMAs though constituted, were 
non-functional.
District Disaster Management Plans 
had not been formulated in the six 
test-checked districts. 
District Disaster Management 
Plan of Leh District approved  
(May 2011) had neither been 
implemented nor reviewed.

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
6
The above institutional gaps inhibited the ability of the State Government to 
prepare cohesive disaster management plans that would enable rapid response to 
disasters as they occurred and mitigate their impact in terms of loss of lives and 
property. 
In the exit conference, the Commissioner Secretary, Relief and Rehabilitation 
Department stated that institutional set up for management of disasters had not 
been functional on the ground. 
2.1.1 Disaster Response Force - Training and Deployment
The State Government established (February 2012) the State Disaster Response 
Force out of existing two battalions of Auxiliary Police. The mandate of the Force 
was deployment in disaster-like situations, search/ rescue operation in actual 
disasters and assistance to civil administration in relief and rehabilitation process. 
Audit observed the following:
(a) No Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) had been prescribed for 
deployment of Force personnel. Against a sanctioned strength of 1,588, 
the actual strength of the Force was 1,142 of which only 358 personnel  
(31 per cent) were actually deployed in its units. The balance 69 per cent 
of its personnel were utilized for purposes such as parade/quarter guard 
duties (243), attachment with Home Guard/Civil Defence units (76), 
various offices (244), attached to political leaders and serving/retired 
police officers as PSOs/orderlies (86) and with trade 6 duties (36). The 
balance (99) were on leave/training.
(b) It was mandatory for Force personnel to undergo a basic re-orientation  
course followed by specialized courses. Only 399 personnel were  
imparted training on orientation course, 465 personnel were imparted 
training on disaster management courses and 237 on specialized7 courses 
during 2010-11 to 2014-15.
(c) Specialists such as engineers, technicians, electricians, dog squads and 
medical/ paramedics were not available with the Force. 
Thus, not only was the State Disaster Response Force significantly short of its 
sanctioned strength by 28 per cent , the bulk of the available manpower was 
neither fully trained nor deployed for disaster relief and rehabilitation thereby 
defeating the objective of creation of the Force.
6  Gardener, Carpenter, Plumber, Painter, Barber, Electrician, Washer man, Tailor and Mason
7  Avalanche rescue course (87), Water ship course (30), Biological incident course (16), Advance search 
and rescue operation (11), Auxiliary Firefighting (09), Flood/ cyclone disaster response (13), Earthquake 
Disaster Response and Management course (19), Emergency response rail transport accident course 
(04), Life support basic course (12), Life support advance course (12), Collapse structure search and 
location course (06), Incident command management system (03), EOC Management (01), Chemical 
Disaster first responder course (05), Unexploded bombs and explosive safety (04) and Radiological and 
Nuclear Emergency (05)

Chapter - 2 : Pre-Disaster Preparedness and Management
7
In response to the audit observations, the Commandant General Home Guards/
Civil Defence issued (June 2016) instructions for reversion of all personnel of the 
Force posted in home guard/civil defence district units to Disaster Response Force 
components and utilization of Force personnel exclusively for rescue duties.
2.1.2 Disaster Risk Assessment
The SDMP (February 2012) emphasizes conducting assessment of hazards, 
vulnerabilities and risks prevailing in the State and preparation of risk maps on 
the basis of outcome of the assessment. Accordingly, the State Government was 
to undertake risk assessment in 13 districts identified as multi-hazard districts.
Audit observed that no hazard and disaster risk map of the State had been prepared 
though `20 lakh had been released (June 2014) under ‘Capacity Building’ for this 
purpose. Data relating to nature, location, intensity and likelihood of possible 
major hazards and population and assets at risk were not available with the State 
Government. Consequently, realistic and informed strategies and action plans for 
disaster risk reduction could not be formulated.
In the exit conference, the Commissioner Secretary, Relief and Rehabilitation 
Department stated that risk maps would be prepared in respect of each district.
2.1.3 Prevention and Mitigation Measures
The Disaster Management Act, 2005, requires that the State Government 
should establish a State Disaster Mitigation Fund (SDMF) and District Disaster 
Mitigation Fund (DDMF) for prevention and mitigation of disasters and for 
planning, training, capacity building, procurement of equipment, etc. as part of 
disaster management. 
Audit noticed that the Disaster Mitigation Fund had not been established in the 
State as the SDMP did not stipulate earmarking of funds. In the exit conference, 
the Commissioner Secretary, Relief and Rehabilitation Department accepted that 
pre-disaster activities such as mitigation and preparedness were not undertaken in 
the State and the Department is now focusing on such activities.
2.1.4 Regaining/ Restoring Wetland/ Water Bodies/ Flood Channels
In the floods of September 2014, Srinagar and adjoining districts were the most 
affected areas. The heavy rainfall resulted in huge water discharge in the Jhelum 
river exceeding the carrying capacity of the river and its flood channels. This 
combined with blocked flood channels and inadequate flood control measures 
triggered floods with devastating effect. 
The flood spill channels with original carrying capacity of 17,000 cusecs of 
water had been reduced to a carrying capacity of 4,000 cusecs of water due 
to accumulation of sediment load from various nallahs which merge with the  
channel at various points. To address this issue, a scheme for improvement to  

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
8
flood spill channel by way of construction of central cunnette 8 was taken up  
(2008-09) by the Irrigation and Flood Control (I&FC) Department at an  
estimated cost of `14.93 crore. Subsequently, this was subsumed (2010-11)  
under the ‘Flood Threat to River Jhelum Scheme’ at an estimated cost of  
`50.68 crore. Audit examination of records of the two schemes revealed the 
following:
(i) Improvement to Flood Spill Channel by Construction of Central Cunnette
(a) Against 23,501 metres and 6,61,478 cubic metres of flood spill channel 
required to be treated and excavated respectively as per the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) of the scheme, only 19,075.09 metres (81 per cent) 
and 5,53,511.81 cubic metres (84 per cent) were treated and excavated 
respectively. 
(b) An amount of `1.98 crore was utilized for purposes not related to the 
flood spill channel such as survey and investigation, contingency charges, 
procurement of cement, Reinforced Cement Concrete pipes, steel, laptops, 
cameras, gensets, payments necessitated by Court awards, construction of 
footbridge, drainage, chain link fencing, providing of gates, maintenance 
and repairs and construction of restoration wall. The Flood Spill Channel 
Division Narbal stated (March 2015) that project funds were utilized on 
such items due to non-providing of adequate funds for these items.
(ii) Flood Threat to River Jhelum
(a) Similarly, against 11,947 metres and 11,78,331 cubic metres of flood spill 
channel required to be treated and excavated respectively as per the DPR  
of the scheme, only 8,087 metres (68 per cent) and 5,05,995.13 cubic metres 
(43 per cent) were treated and excavated respectively. Inadequate treatment 
of the channel resulted in blocking of free flow of water in the area. 
(b) `9.20 crore was utilized on construction of structures at Wullar lake and 
miscellaneous items which were not approved in the DPR. The Flood 
Spill Channel Division Narbal stated (March 2015) that works were 
shifted to Wullar lake on the direction of the administrative department. 
No approval was obtained from GoI for diversion of the funds.
(c) No Objection Certificate (NOC) was required to be obtained from wetland 
authorities for execution of construction works in wetland areas falling 
under the area of implementation of the scheme. The requisite NOC was  
not obtained prior to start of the work. Consequently, construction 
of drainage channel covering 1,641 metres, allotted (July 2011) to a 
contractor for an amount of `1.44 crore could not be completed due to 
objection raised against the construction by the wetland authorities. As 
a result, 2,07,172 cubic metres of earth could not be excavated from the 
wetland area and the wetland continued to remain filled with silt despite 
8  A channel of small cross section dug in the bottom of a much larger channel or conduit to concentrate 
the flow at lower water stages

Chapter - 2 : Pre-Disaster Preparedness and Management
9
an expenditure of `27.97 lakh incurred on the project. The Flood Spill 
Channel Division Narbal stated (March 2015) that application is now 
being processed for grant of permission.
Had the two schemes been progressed and implemented as per the approved 
DPRs, the impact of the floods of September 2014 may have been mitigated.
2.1.5 Incorporation of Earthquake Resistant Designs in Building Codes
The SDMP approved in February 2012 envisaged that the National Buildings  
Code and other codes prescribed by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for  
seismic zones IV and V should be followed by the concerned departments. 
Following a series of low magnitude earthquakes which took place in the  
Kishtwar-Doda-Bhaderwah belt in May 2013, the Hon’ble Governor wrote 
(December 2013) to the Government, suggesting inter-alia, the need for  
retrofitting the existing buildings and mandatory incorporation of earthquake 
resistant design features for new constructions. 
Audit noticed that while earthquake-resistant designs had been adopted for 
construction of office buildings, bridges, etc. these had not been made mandatory 
for private buildings. Further, disaster resistant designs and retrofitting techniques 
had not been ensured in re-construction of houses which were fully or severely 
damaged during the floods of September 2014 and for which relief was provided 
by the Government. Hence, the constructions remained vulnerable to earthquakes 
in a seismic sensitive zone.
2.1.6 Early Warning
The SDMP envisages that a mechanism should be in place to receive forecasting 
and early warning from agencies such as the Indian Meteorological Department 
(IMD) and the Snow and Avalanches Study Establishment. Modern equipment 
such as Doppler Radars and satellite based information were to form the basis of 
accurate forecasting, advance warning and alerts for floods, cloudbursts, snow-
storms, etc. 
Despite release (June 2014) of `20 lakh, the mechanism for early warning systems 
had not been established and funds were surrendered. In the exit conference, the 
Commissioner Secretary, Relief and Rehabilitation Department stated that an 
early warning system would be established very soon. 
2.1.7 Emergency Operation Centres
The SDMP envisages establishment of Emergency Operation Centres (EOCs) in 
each district for quick response and effective decision-making during emergencies. 
Audit observed that though the State Executive Committee (SEC) earmarked  
(2013-14) `2 crore for establishment of four EOCs in the Districts of Jammu, 
Srinagar, Leh and Kargil in the first phase, they had not been established. 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
10
In the exit conference, the Commissioner Secretary, Relief and Rehabilitation 
Department stated that establishment of EOCs is underway and would be 
established very soon.
2.1.8 Capacity Building and Public Awareness for Managing Disasters
The Disaster Management Act, 2005, envisages promoting general education, 
awareness and community training about disasters and building capacity to 
combat disasters as an important pre-disaster activity. Further, the Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) prescribed by GoI envisaged mock drills by search 
and rescue teams at State level to test their preparedness.
Audit noticed the following:
(a) GoI allocated `20 crore for the purpose of building capacity such as 
procurement of equipment for rescue and relief, establishment of early 
warning system in the district headquarters, creation of public awareness 
for pre-disaster preparedness and for imparting training to various 
stakeholders. Of this, `12 crore was released by GoI. However, the State 
Government could utilize only `1.79 crore. Consequently, balance funds 
of `8 crore were not released by the GoI.
(b) Out of `6.02 crore released (June 2014) to the Revenue Department for  
pre-disaster management activities, `29 lakh was utilized as of  
March 2015 and balance amount of `5.73 crore was surrendered. 
Similarly, `32 lakh released through sanction to the Technical Education 
Department for skill upgradation of workers had not been utilized.
(c) `25.24 lakh provided by GoI for ‘capacity building’ for disaster 
management was spent by the Revenue, Relief and Rehabilitation 
Department on procurement of vehicles during 2014-15 not covered 
under ‘capacity building’.
(d) While chapter on disaster management had been included in the academic 
curriculum by the State Board of School Education and certain initiatives 
had been taken such as conducting training programs on various aspects 
of disaster management and training of sarpanches, divisional level 
officers, engineers and volunteers, no steps were taken to increase public 
awareness about risk mitigation strategies; and 
(e) Mock drills were not organized for any type of calamity/disaster to 
sensitize the relief machinery as preparedness measures were not reflected 
in the Annual Reports submitted to the GoI.
Thus, the State Government had not undertaken capacity building activities  
including public awareness and preparedness as envisaged in the Disaster 
Management Act and `10.21 crore out of `12 crore released by GoI remained 
unutilized. Further,  `25.24 lakh was utilized for procurement of vehicles during 
2014-15 instead of capacity building.

Chapter - 3
Post-Disaster Activities 
and Management-Financial 
Arrangements

Chapter - 3 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Financial Arrangements
11
 Chapter-3: Post-Disaster Activities and Management–
 Financial Arrangements
3.1 Introduction
Post-disaster activities comprise emergency and non-emergency response to a 
disaster. The emergency response includes (a) recovery, relief and rescue, and  
(b) financial, material and medical aids during and in the immediate aftermath 
of the disaster while non-emergency response includes medium to long term 
restoration, rehabilitation and reconstruction.
3.1.1 Utilization of State Disaster Response Fund
The Disaster Management Ac t, 2005, and the guidelines issued thereunder do 
not specify measurable or quantifiable criteria for deciding severity of a calamity 
or declaring a calamity as a disaster. GoI considers 9 nature of a calamity on a 
case to case basis taking into account, inter alia, the intensity and magnitude of 
the calamity, degree of relief/assistance required, coping capacity of the State 
Government to tackle the problem and the alternatives and flexibility available to 
provide succor and relief to the affected people. 
According to the SDMP, the Divisional Commissioner on the recommendation of 
DCs can declare a natural event as a disaster. Audit noticed that neither the DCs 
of the test-checked districts nor the Divisional Commissioners had declared any 
event a disaster during 2010-11 to 2014-15. 
Assistance totaling `26.52 crore was released from the SDRF during 2010-14 for 
relief and restoration in the following instances without a declaration of disaster 
in terms of SDMP:
(a) ` 1.97 crore were distributed from SDRF as gratuitous relief in individual 
cases such as burning of houses, animal losses due to lightning, damages 
to houses and shops due to riots, compensation to Next of Kin (NoK) of 
persons killed in fire incident in a local hotel, etc.
(b) ` 3.11 crore was provided for works executed prior to the date of floods, 
for normal repairs and maintenance works which were not reflected in 
the damage reports prepared by these departments and for items such as 
Petrol, Oil, Lubricant (POL) and wages of casual labourers not related to 
any damages. 
(c) ` 21.44 crore sanctioned (2010-12) out of the SDRF was spent on purposes 
such as restoration of public utilities of 17 districts not affected by any 
disasters.
Further, `31.44 crore was released to sectors10 that were not eligible for assistance 
as discussed in para 5.1.7 below.
9  Manual on Administration of SDRF
10 Estates Department: `16.25 crore; Hospitality and Protocol Department: `2 crore; Tourism Department: 
`2.01 crore; State Motor Garages: `1 crore; Accounts and Treasuries: `0.08 crore; Advocate General’s 
Office: `0.10 crore and Construction of pre-fabricated huts: `10 crore

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
12
Thus, funds from the SDRF were utilized for purposes that were not in consonance 
with the objectives and procedure stipulated in the Fund guidelines.
3.1.2 Allotment, Expenditure and Reporting of Post-Disaster Financing
The position of funds received from the GoI and the State Government, interest 
earned and expenditure incurred under SDRF during the period 2010-11 to  
2014-15 is given in table-3.1 below:
Table-3.1: Funds received from GoI and State Government, interest earned and 
expenditure incurred under SDRF
(` in crore)
Year
State Disaster Response Fund 
Opening 
balance
Funds received Total 
availability Expenditure Closing 
balanceGoI State Interest
2010-11 438.21 77.61 17.25 Nil 533.07 106.36 426.71
2011-12 426.71 Nil 18.11 67.73 512.55 42.24 470.31
2012-13 470.31 77.61 Nil 4.94 552.86 27.34 525.52
2013-14 525.52 423.93 28.99 37.74 1,016.18 134.05 882.13
2014-15 882.13 278.50 30.94 69.79 1,261.36 1,059.17 202.19
Total 857.65 95.29 180.20 1,369.16
In addition, `833.44 crore was received from PMNRF, `88.29 crore from CMRF 
and `12 crore under ‘Capacity Building’ during 2010-11 to 2014-15.
Audit scrutiny of the utilization of SDRF funds revealed the following: 
(a) The guidelines on constitution and administration of SDRF required 
that balance in the Calamity Relief Fund (CRF) as on 31 st March 2010 
should be transferred to the SDRF. Audit noticed that `47.88 crore 11  
under CRF was lying (March 2015) under Reserve Funds 12 not bearing 
interest resulting in interest loss of `55.49 crore13 during 2010-15.
(b) Guidelines envisage investment of SDRF in Central Government 
securities, Treasury Bills and interest bearing deposits and certificates of 
deposits with scheduled commercial banks. The State Government had 
not made investment in any of these instruments. The Finance Department 
stated (May 2015) that the SDRF was not physically available as it was 
being utilized on normal activities of the Government. 
(c) Guidelines envisage that the State Government should pay interest to the 
SDRF for amounts borrowed from it at rates applicable to overdraft. Audit 
noticed that the Government had not paid any interest for the borrowed 
amounts resulting in interest loss of `221.02 crore to the SDRF during  
2010-15 (September 2014).
11 M.H. 8223 Famine Relief Fund: `8.67 crore; M.H. 8235 Calamity Relief Fund: `28.35 crore and 
Calamity Relief Fund-Investment Account: `10.86 crore
12 Reflected in the Reports of the CAG of India on Finance Accounts (Government of Jammu and Kashmir) 
for the years 2009-15
13 Calculated at the rate of 16 per cent per annum

Chapter - 3 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Financial Arrangements
13
(d) As per the guidelines for expenditure for items, in case the State 
Government exceeds the prescribed amount on each approved item of 
expenditure, the excess expenditure should not be debited to the SDRF 
or NDRF but should be provided for by the State Government. Against 
`57 crore for distribution of free ration to flood affected families for two 
months under the SDRF, the State Government announced free ration for 
six months and released `172 crore to the Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution (CAPD) Department resulting in an excess expenditure of 
`115 crore from the SDRF. 
(e) `37.08 crore 14 released to seven DCs for providing relief to affected 
families was lying unutilized (August 2015) in the bank accounts of the 
DCs/tehsildars.
(f) ` 9.75 crore received by DC Leh (August 2010 to March 2013) and  
`1.02 crore returned to him by the Assistant Commissioner/Tehsildar Leh 
was not accounted for in the cash book. The DC Leh stated (November 
2015) that there was no requirement for maintenance of cash book. 
The reply was not tenable as non-maintenance of cash book was in 
contravention of the financial rules and regulations. 
Thus, the SDRF suffered an interest loss of `55.49 crore due to not transferring 
the balance from CRF to SDRF and investing as per SDRF guidelines, while 
an amount of `336.02 crore was due to be remitted by the State Government to 
the SDRF. Further, `37.08 crore remained unutilized and `1.02 crore was not 
accounted for in the cash book raising the risk of mis-utilization of funds. 
In addition,  ` 5 crore released to the State Government from PMNRF for 
procurement of one lakh blankets for distribution among flood affected families 
had been kept unutilized in the CMRF Fund.
It was evident that there remained a scope for efficient management of the SDRF 
and better utilization of funds meant for disaster relief and management to ensure 
effective relief and rehabilitation.
14  Earthquake 2005: `7.40 crore; Drought Kharif 2009: `5.58 crore; Hailstorm 2011: `1.18 crore; 
Windstorm 2012: `0.02 crore; Flood 2014: `22.90 crore

Chapter - 4
Post-Disaster Activities and 
Management- Drought of Kharif 
2009 and Leh Cloudburst 2010

Chapter - 4 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management- Drought of Kharif 2009 and Leh Cloudburst 2010
15
 Chapter-4: Post-Disaster Activities and Management–
 Drought of Kharif 2009 and Leh Cloudburst 2010
4.1 Drought of Kharif 2009 
4.1.1 Assistance for Crop Loss
As per norms approved by GoI, input subsidy may be provided where crop loss 
due to disasters is 50 per cent  and above, subject to a ceiling of one hectare 
(ha) per farmer and upto two ha per farmer in case of successive calamities  
irrespective of the size of holding being large.
Funds released from SDRF for crop losses and their utilization in six test-checked 
districts is given in table-4.1 below: 
Table-4.1: Release and Utilization of funds for crop losses
     (` in crore)
 District Funds 
released
Tehsils 
affected
Funds released 
to Tehsils
Funds utilized 
by Tehsils
Unspent funds with 
Tehsils (31st August 2015)
Anantnag 0.44 3 0.44 0.41 0.03
Budgam 1.11 2 1.11 1.11 Nil 
Jammu 14.00 2 6.22 3.35 2.8715
Udhampur 6.00 4 6.00 3.12 2.88
Poonch 5.00 4 5.00 4.20 0.80
Total 26.55 15 18.77 12.19 6.58
Audit observed the following:
(a) A total amount of `18.77 crore was released (January 2011 to April 2011) 
to tehsils by the DCs who utilized only `12.19 crore. The balance of  
`5.58 crore was lying unutilized with the DCs/ tehsildars (August 2015)15. 
(b) Out of `2.14 crore received by Tehsil Udhampur (District Udhampur), 
only `10.39 lakh was distributed to the affected people indicating either 
unrealistic assessment of losses or denial of assistance to the affected 
people.
(c) As per norms approved by the GoI, relief was required to be provided 
within a time limit of 90 days from the declaration of disaster. However, 
relief was distributed to the affected farmers after a lapse of 13 to 60 
months from the occurrence of the drought.
(d) Unlike in other tehsils of the State, instead of distributing financial 
assistance directly to the victims, the Tehsildar Surankote (District 
Poonch) released `1.11 crore to Naib Tehsildars, Patwaris and Girdawars 
for distribution among drought affected people during December 2011 
to October 2012. However, no records were maintained as to the actual 
distribution of relief to the victims. 
15 ` One crore deposited in treasury during September 2014

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
16
(e) Against assessment of `2.18 crore for damage caused to crops in Tehsil 
Akhnoor of District Jammu, the DC Jammu released (January 2011)  
`2.66 crore to the Tehsildar Akhnoor. The excess amount of `48 lakh 
released was lying in official bank account as of August 2015 instead of 
being refunded to the SDRF.
(f) `5.37 lakh intended for drought affected families of Tehsil Akhnoor 
(District Jammu) was provided to 90 persons who had suffered losses 
due to flash floods, to next of kin of the persons killed in house collapse 
or injured/killed in road accidents and to victims of firing from across the 
border.
Thus, funds amounting to `5.37 lakh was utilized for purposes other than to 
compensate for crop losses while `5.58 crore remained unutilized. There was no 
record of disbursement of compensation of `1.11 crore to actual affected people. 
This coupled with delay in disbursement of financial assistance undermined 
the objective of providing immediate financial relief to the persons affected by 
drought. 
4.1.2 Supply of Emergency Drinking Water
SDRF norms provide for supply of drinking water to drought affected areas. 
Audit observed that Public Health Engineering (PHE) Department released  
(July to November 2011) `2 crore under the SDRF to two Chief Engineers 
(Kashmir: `0.70 crore; Jammu: `1.30 crore) for providing emergency drinking 
water in rural and urban areas of the drought affected districts of the State. Out 
of this, `16.50 lakh was released to PHE Divisions of Srinagar, Ganderbal and 
Shopian, which were not declared affected by drought. 
It was further noticed that out of the allotted amount of `1.14 crore, five PHE 
divisions of Jammu District spent `1.12 crore on repair and maintenance of 
existing water supply schemes,  POL, repair of vehicles, insurance of vehicles, etc. 
during the period March 2010 to March 2012 instead of providing drinking water 
to the drought affected areas during the period July/September 2009. The PHE 
Mechanical Division North Jammu and South Jammu stated in December 2015 
and April 2016 respectively that the funds were required for repair of equipment 
to supply drinking water to the affected areas. The reply was not tenable as all 
the repair works were executed during 2010-12 whereas drinking water was to be 
supplied during July to September 2009. This in fact confirms that funds were not 
required in these districts for drought relief.
Hence, SDRF funds of `1.28 crore was utilized for purposes other than direct 
relief to persons affected by drought.
4.2 Cloudburst in Leh (August 2010)
A series of cloudbursts and heavy rainfall occurred in Leh town and adjacent 
areas between 4 th and 6 th August 2010. Seventy one villages with population of 

Chapter - 4 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management- Drought of Kharif 2009 and Leh Cloudburst 2010
17
9,000 were affected. Two hundred and fifty seven people lost their lives and 424 
were injured. Audit observed the following:
(a) As per norms approved by GoI, a technical authority authorized by the 
State Government was to certify the extent of damage to residential houses 
by the natural calamity. Audit noticed that assessment of damages was not 
conducted by any technical authority. Instead houses were categorized as 
fully/partially damaged on the basis of reports of patwaris, girdawars, naib 
tehsildars and tehsildars. There was consequently a risk that damage and 
loss assessment might not have accurately brought out the list of eligible 
damaged houses. 
(b) Procedure adopted by the revenue authorities for identification of affected 
persons was deficient insofar as the assessments made were not cross-
checked by the district administration with census reports or records 
of ownership of property in order to verify the genuineness of the 
beneficiaries.
(c) More than one member of the family was selected for disbursement of 
relief for fully and partially damaged houses. Test-check of 127 families 
showed that sons and daughters of the same family were selected for 
assistance. The amount involved in such disbursements was `2.41 crore.
(d) Additional relief was announced from the Prime Minister’s National 
Relief Fund for damaged houses. Out of 669 fully damaged and 998 
partially damaged houses, only 658 (fully damaged) and 763 (partially 
damaged) cases were processed. This resulted in denial of relief to  
11 owners of fully damaged houses and to 235 owners of partially damaged 
houses.
(e) Norms approved by GoI envisages payment of assistance to next of kin of 
the deceased within 15 days of occurrence of disaster. Audit noticed that 
timely relief was provided in only 123 out of 216 cases (57 per cent). The 
delay in making disbursement in the 93 cases ranged between one and  
17 months.
(f) No relief was provided to 36, 55 and 70 deceased persons under SDRF, 
CMRF and PMNRF respectively. Similarly, relief at the rate of `50,000 
had not been provided under PMNRF to 96 seriously injured persons 
as the District Administration had not forwarded these cases to the  
Prime Minister’s Office. 
(g) Against originally assessed damage relief of `1.14 crore, an amount 
of `2.27 crore was paid in 201 cases thereby exceeding the original 
assessment by `1.13 crore. This was indicative of either excess payment 
or inaccurate assessment or distribution of relief to ineligible persons. 
Further, District Administration had made double payment of `11.44 lakh 
in case of three fully and five partially damaged houses. 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
18
(h) Payment of `1.60 crore for 118 houses was made under PMNRF. 
However, these persons did not figure in the list approved by the district 
administration. 
(i) ` 8.10 crore meant for immediate restoration of public utilities in Leh 
was utilized for purposes16 not covered under SDRF. The Chief Planning 
Officer Leh stated (November 2015) that there was no alternative funding 
to meet such expenditure. The reply was not tenable as there was no 
provision for such expenditure from the SDRF.
As evident from above, there was not only delay in disbursement of assistance 
to those affected by the cloudburst and flooding, there was no assurance that the 
damage need was assessed and assistance was equitably distributed to all eligible 
affected persons. Further, `8.10 crore of SDRF funds was utilized for purposes 
not covered under the Fund guidelines. 
16 Execution of works not provided in the damage reports: `2 crore; Execution of new works and on 
normal repairs: `3.16 crore; Clearance of liabilities: `0.28 crore; Repair of office buildings, construction 
of sheds, fuel charges, office expenses, survey charges, procurement of water tankers: `1.75 crore and 
providing gas and central heating systems to newly constructed block of SNM hospital Leh: `0.91 crore

Chapter - 5
Post-Disaster Activities and 
Management-Floods of 
September 2014

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
19
 Chapter-5: Post-Disaster Activities and Management– Floods 
 of September 2014
5.1 Introduction
Heavy rainfall between 28 th August and 10 th September 2014 caused floods in 
Srinagar and various districts of Jammu Division. The flood caused death of 
304 persons (Jammu: 217; Kashmir: 87), damage of 2,40,004 houses and loss of 
26,461 livestock as well as losses to standing crop in about 4,91,967 hectares of 
land.
5.1.1 Damage and Loss Assessment
(i) Emergency Response, Damage and Need assessments
The damage and need assessment carried out by the district administration in the 
test-checked districts is given in table-5.1 below:1718
Table-5.1: Assessment of Damages and Need Assessment in Six Test-checked Districts
District
Assessment 
of 
damages17
Need 
assessment18 Status of disbursement of relief
Extent of difference 
between initial and 
final assessment
(In percentage)
Srinagar
Inaccurate 
assessment 
of casualties 
and 
damaged 
houses.
Non-
assessment 
of losses to 
livestock, 
crops and 
agricultural 
land
Not conducted 40 deaths declared and relief sanctioned. 20 
death cases pending finalization.
50
Initial assessment (October 2014) of 
damage to 40,678 houses was increased 
(January 2015) to 76,045 houses which was 
further increased (March 2015) to 92,289 
and 96,579 (October 2015).
137
Assessment of damage still under 
process-3,089 (pending applications)
-
Anantnag Not conducted Initial assessment (October 2014) of 
damage to 11,874 houses which was 
increased (March 2015) to 16,933 and 
further increased (November 2015) to 
21,053 houses.
77
Assessment of damage still under 
process-236 (pending applications)
-
Budgam Not conducted Initial assessment (October 2014) of damage 
to 16,651 houses which was increased 
(December 2014) to 18,439 and further 
increased (October 2015) to 18,545.
11
Assessment of damage still under 
process-2,937 (pending applications)
-
Jammu Conducted Not conducted - -
Poonch Conducted Not conducted - -
Udhampur Conducted Not conducted - -
17 Assessment of casualties, damaged houses, losses to livestock, losses to crops and losses to agricul -
tural  land due to accumulation of debris/ land erosion
18 Assessment of number of affected families and need of shelter, emergency food and water and  
donations or financial support to the victims

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
20
As evident from above, assessment of damages was completed in only three out 
of the six test-checked districts while need assessment had not been conducted in 
any of the six districts. This resulted in partial or inaccurate damage assessment as 
well as consequential delays in arranging materials and procurement of supplies 
that adversely impacted provision of timely assistance to the affected persons. 
(ii) Evacuation Plan and Relief Camps/ Centres
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 and the SDMP require preparation of 
an evacuation plan and identification of relief centres/camps by the district 
authorities. Audit noticed that none of the test-checked districts had formulated 
evacuation plans in case of any disaster. No evacuation/relief centres/camps had 
been identified in any of the test-checked districts. In the absence of a response 
and evacuation plan, rescue, evacuation and relief was managed in an ad hoc 
manner and without even a minimum of controls.
(iii)	 Assistance	to	Boatmen	affected	by	floods
The District Administration, Srinagar, had hired 504 boats for evacuation of 
affected people from the flood affected areas at a cost of `1.77 crore during 
3rd September 2014 to 10 th October 2014. While it may be difficult to ensure 
strict compliance with all procedural formalities in an emergency situation, it is 
nevertheless necessary that minimum controls are exercised to ensure reaching 
of assistance to the affected persons as well as prevent misuse of funds meant 
for relief and rehabilitation. The Disaster Management Act stipulates the 
requirement of authorization by the authority (State/District) for procurements 
and certificate of utilization by the authorized controlling office. Audit noticed 
that no record was maintained of decisions taken for hiring of boats, nomination 
of nodal officers and constitution of committee of officials to monitor the rescue 
operations. Further, details of rescue operations viz. area/location where the boats 
were deployed, number of flood affected people rescued, details of areas/camps 
where these rescued people were sent, details of arrangement of food and lodging 
in these areas/ camps were not on record.
Audit also noted that `1.77 crore was paid (October 2015) to the President of 
the All J&K Shikara Owners’ Association. As per the sanctions, payments were 
to be made in the range of `38,000 to `10,000. Scrutiny of the bank statements 
of payments made to the boatmen by DC Srinagar revealed less payment of  
`30.16 lakh as shown in table-5.2 below:

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
21
Table-5.2: Statement showing less payment to boatmen against the sanctioned amount
Cases 
sanctioned
(in number)
Amount 
sanctioned by DC
Amount disbursed by 
Association
Less 
disbursement
Total less payment 
made
Amount in `
22 38,000 30,400 7,600 1,67,200
97 37,000 29,600 7,400 7,17,800
103 36,000 28,800 7,200 7,41,600
72 35,000 28,000 7,000 5,04,000
122 34,000 27,200 6,800 8,29,600
01 32,000 25,600 6,400 6,400
01 27,000 21,600 5,400 5,400
02 26,000 20,800 5,200 10,400
01 24,000 19,200 4,800 4,800
02 20,000 16,000 4,000 8,000
01 17,000 13,600 3,400 3,400
01 16,000 12,800 3,200 3,200
07 10,000 8,000 2,000 14,000
432 30,15,800
In addition, 58 boatmen to whom hire charges of `20.02 lakh were sanctioned by 
the DC Srinagar were not reflected in the bank statement.
Audit check of bank statements of the Shikara Owner’s Association showed that 
`41.68 lakh was paid to persons who were not reflected in the lists of boatmen 
prepared by DC Srinagar. It was also noticed that `9.50 lakh was drawn by 
the President of the Association on self cheques for disbursement to boatmen. 
However, no records were available to verify whether such payments were 
actually made. 
Thus, assessment of damages was completed only in three test-checked districts 
while in other three districts difference between initial and final assessment was 
in the range of 11 to 137 per cent. Need assessment was not conducted in any of 
the districts which adversely impacted the provision of immediate assistance to 
affected people. Rescue, evacuation and relief were managed in an ad hoc manner 
in absence of response and evacuation plan. Further, the procedure adopted by the 
DC Srinagar for making payments to boatmen provided no assurance that the 
funds disbursed actually reached the individual boatmen.
 5.1.2 Relief, Rehabilitation and Provision of Basic Services
The National Policy on Disaster Management (NPDM) stipulates that all State 
Governments, district authorities and line departments should prepare SOPs in 
consonance with the National and State Disaster Management Plans. The SOPs 
was adopted by SEC in March 2014. 
The SOPs envisaged that the DCs of Kashmir and Jammu would be responsible 
for arrangement of relief material such as tents, blankets, ration, boats, etc. 
whenever required. The State Government designated Jammu and Kashmir 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
22
Entrepreneurship Development Institute (JKEDI), Srinagar, as centre for storage 
of relief material received from Jammu and other parts of the country. Relief 
material was issued to the affected districts from this store. 
(i) Temporary Shelters 
The State Government authorized (September 2014) the Jammu and Kashmir 
Industries Limited (JKI) for procurement of tents for providing temporary shelters 
to families whose houses were fully damaged. JKI procured 20,345 tents at a cost 
of `13.26 crore. 
Audit observed that 4,467 tents valuing `2.84 crore were lying unutilized and 
536 tents valuing `34.04 lakh had gone missing during transit from Srinagar to 
Anantnag and Budgam. Hence, nearly 25 per cent of the tents procured valued at 
`3.18 crore could not be used for the intended purpose.
(ii) Blankets
The State Government also authorized (September 2014) JKI to procure blankets 
for flood victims. JKI procured 50,000 blankets of approved specification at a rate 
of `290 per blanket from two firms. Of these, 36,000 blankets were issued to the 
Additional DC Srinagar during September 2014 and 14,000 blankets were issued 
to five19 other districts during October 2014. 
Audit noticed that an additional 19,105 blankets valuing `0.50 crore were also 
procured by DCs Jammu, Udhampur, Srinagar, Anantnag, Senior Superintendent 
of Police Kathua as well as the Divisional Commissioner Jammu. Out of this, 
5,540 blankets (29 per cent) were procured at rates between `350 and `700 per 
blanket. The additional cost from SDRF of 5,540 blankets procured at higher 
rates worked out to `12.29 lakh. The Assistant Commissioner (Central) Jammu 
stated (May 2015) that the senior officers of different districts procured blankets 
from different sources and at varying prices in absence of any communication/ 
direction with regard to quantity and medium of purchase. 
(iii) Clothing and Household goods
Guidelines for operation of SDRF envisages payment of gratuitous relief of 
`1,300 per family for loss of clothing and `1,400 for loss of utensils/household 
goods to families whose houses were either washed away/ inundated for more 
than a week or fully damaged.
Audit noticed that relief amounting to `12.60 crore was not provided to 46,680 
eligible households. On the other hand, gratuitous relief of `1.42 crore was 
provided to ineligible families ( `0.91 crore) and to families not affected by  
flood (`0.51 crore).
(iv) Cleanliness and Hygiene in Srinagar City
The Government provided (October/November 2014 and September 2015)  
`2.14 crore under the SDRF to the Srinagar Municipal Corporation (SMC) 
19 Rajouri, Poonch, Udhampur, Reasi and Jammu

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
23
for collection of garbage and its disposal at the land fill site located at Acchan 
(District Srinagar) and for disposal of carcasses after the floods of September 
2014. The Corporation incurred an expenditure of `1.37 crore on collection of  
73,435 Metric Tonne (MT) of garbage and its disposal at landfill site during  
17th September 2014 to 15th November 2014.
Audit observed the following:
(a) Records showed that number of tipper trucks and JCBs shown utilized 
by the SMC for garbage clearance in Srinagar City was at variance with 
the number verified by the Ward Officers (Sanitary Inspectors). Payment 
for 441 days, 119 nights in respect of tipper trucks and 102 days and 22 
nights in respect of JCBs was made in excess of payments verified by 
Ward Officers. The amount involved was `31.26 lakh. 
(b) While the entire garbage ( mulba) accumulated due to floods in Srinagar 
was shown as collected and disposed of by the SMC, `1.30 crore provided 
to four PWD (R&B) divisions 20 of Srinagar District from the SDRF for 
restoration of washed out/damaged roads was also shown spent on lifting 
of garbage, clearance of drain, etc. in Srinagar City between October 2014 
and November 2014. The details of vehicles utilized by the Divisions 
for disposal of garbage/mulba, including the details of agencies from 
whom they were hired, were not on record. While the PWD claimed that 
the sanitation work done by them supplemented the work done by the 
Municipal Corporation, the Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer 
SMC stated (June 2016) that the entire city had been cleared and no area 
under SMC was left out or ignored during cleanliness drive. Hence the 
expenditure of `1.30 crore included in the works bills for restoration of 
roads could not be verified by audit.
Thus, assistance amounting to `12.60 crore due to affected families remained 
undisbursed while material (tents, blankets) valuing `3.30 crore remained 
unutilized or in excess of requirement. Further, gratuitous relief of `1.42 crore was 
disbursed to ineligible families and families not affected by floods. In addition, 
expenditure of `1.30 crore incurred by PWD on lifting of garbage, clearance of 
drains, etc. in Srinagar city could not be verified by audit.
5.1.3 Administration, Management and Distribution of Relief
(i) Gratuitous Assistance
(a) According to the standing instructions of GoI, the gratuitous relief was 
to be provided within 15 days from the occurrence of a natural calamity. 
Audit noticed delay ranging up to more than six months in providing 
gratuitous relief in the test-checked districts which defeated the very 
purpose of providing immediate relief, as in table-5.3 below:
20 PWD (R&B) Construction Division-I&II, City Roads Division Srinagar, Right River Circular Road 
Division Srinagar

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
24
Table-5.3: Delay in providing Gratuitous Relief
District Total 
cases
Within 
prescribed 
period of 15 
days
Period of payment
15-30 days one to three 
months
three to six 
months
More than 
six months
Srinagar 96,622 Nil Nil 76,083 16,246 4,293
Anantnag 21,053 Nil 190 12,678 4,065 4,120
Budgam 18,554 Nil 4 18,440 110 Nil
Jammu 27,123 3,513 7,829 14,647 1,134 -
Udhampur 8,182 1 1,865 5,491 786 39
Poonch 8,516 Nil 2,317 5,732 467 -
(b) Instances were noticed in Poonch District where gratuitous relief in 
respect of five damaged houses was paid to a single person and relief on 
account of other four damaged houses was paid to another single person. 
Audit also found that signatures of victims in token of receipt of relief 
material did not match with the signatures obtained in respect of payment 
of gratuitous relief to affected families in test-checked 45 cases of Poonch 
District making it doubtful.
(ii) Distribution of Free Ration to Flood Affected Families
The State Government sanctioned (September 2014) free ration for six months to 
families who had suffered loss of life, property, livestock, crops, etc. due to the 
floods at the rate of 35 kgs per family per month. 
Audit of distribution of ration in the six test-checked districts revealed the 
following:
(a) The Revenue Department based on information from DCs approved 
4,26,640 flood affected families in the six test-checked districts.  
However, the District Administration subsequently communicated 
7,21,275 families to CAPD Department for free ration as detailed in 
table-5.4 below: 
Table-5.4: Distribution of Ration in Six Test-checked Districts
District Number of families 
approved by Revenue 
Department based on 
information from DCs
Number of families 
communicated 
by District 
Administration to 
CAPD
Excess families provided 
free ration by CAPD over 
the number of families 
approved by the Revenue 
Department
Srinagar 2,52,097 2,52,097 Nil
Anantnag 28,204 1,64,912 1,36,708
Budgam 91,414 1,57,538 66,124
Jammu 33,763 79,562 45,799
Poonch 11,504 50,339 38,835
Udhampur 9,658 16,827 7,169
Total 4,26,640 7,21,275 2,94,635

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
25
The additional cost invol ved for the increased number of families was  
`86.62 crore. Such large variation (69 per cent) casts doubt as to the efficacy  
of the mechanism adopted by the Administration for determining the actual 
number of families affected due to the floods. 
(b) Going by the above-mentioned rate, 1,99,482 quintals of ration was 
provided less to 4,53,629 ration card holding families for six months  
from September 2014 to February 2015. Similarly, 87,189 quintals 
of ration was provided less to 1,20,033 non-card holding families for  
the same period of six months. 
(c) A total of 1.82 lakh quintals of ration valued at `25.53 crore had been 
released to CAPD for distribution to the non-ration card holding families 
affected by the floods. However, CAPD had not conducted any assessment/ 
survey for identification of such non-ration card holding flood affected 
families. Details of non-ration card holding flood affected families (name 
of family head, residential address and number of family members) 
were not available in the test-checked districts. As such, Audit could not 
ascertain the authenticity of 1,51,217 non-ration card families selected for 
free ration.
(d) Ration was not provided to the flood affected people during the months 
of September and October 2014 when it was required most and the major 
part was provided after three months of occurrence of the floods as in 
table-5.5 below:
Table-5.5: Delay in providing ration
(In quintals)
District Total 
ration 
provided
Provided within 
three months
Provided 
within six 
months
Provided 
within nine 
months
Ration 
provided after 
nine months
Srinagar 4,00,529 1,70,455 2,02,737 27,337 Nil
Anantnag 3,14,567 1,27,784 1,37,346 49,437 Nil
Budgam 2,97,867 1,14,662 1,41,844 41,361 Nil
Jammu 79,190 42,798 32,380 2,667 1,345
Poonch 72,932 17,020 29,082 26,830 Nil
Udhampur 18,200 2,238 3,349 8,714 3,899
(iii) Assessment and Relief for Damages to Houses
According to the SOPs for disaster management, claims in respect of damage 
to private property (immovable) need to be assessed by a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Additional District Development Commissioner (ADDC) along 
with the Assistant Commissioner (Revenue), concerned Tehsildar and Executive 
Engineer, PWD (R&B) as members.
Audit noticed that case files relating to fully, severely  and partially damaged houses 
containing application of the victims, recommendations of the sarpanch, reports 
of the patwari, girdawar, naib-tehsildar and tehsildar, copies of First Information 
Report filed, and photographs of damaged houses were prepared only in Poonch 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
26
and Udhampur districts. In ot her four districts of Jammu, Srinagar, Anantnag 
and Budgam districts, cases were finalized on the basis of lists prepared by the  
Revenue Department and no detailed information were kept on record. Audit  
noticed that even residential address of houses shown as damaged within the  
limits of Jammu Municipal Corporation was not indicated.
Further, SOPs were not in place for categorization of damage caused to houses 
due to floods as fully, severely and partially damaged. Extent of damage caused to 
houses was categorized by the department without any benchmarks. Assessment 
of damage was not conducted by any engineer of the PWD (R&B). Non-
formulation of SOPs for categorization of fully, severely and partially damaged 
houses resulted in irregularities in assessment of damages to houses as discussed 
below:
(a) Change of status of damaged houses
After finalization of cases of damaged houses by the District Administration 
and after making payment of assistance to the affected families, the cases were  
re-assessed. District authorities of three test-checked districts (Srinagar, Anantnag 
and Budgam) changed the status of damage in respect of 4,114 houses21 between 
December 2014 and October 2015 after lapse of periods ranging from four  
months to one year after the occurrence of the floods. The status of 50 fully 
damaged kutcha houses was changed to fully damaged pacca houses while  
10 partially damaged pacca houses was changed to fully damaged kutcha  
houses. This involved an extra expenditure of `8.80 crore from the SDRF.  
Either the original assessment carried out by the Committee under the 
Chairmanship of ADDC was not correct or change in the status of damaged 
houses was unjustified. 
(b) Assistance paid in unapproved cases
In Srinagar and Budgam districts, payment of assistance was made in respect 
of damage to residential units which was not sanctioned by the District  
Administration. Tehsildars of Srinagar and Budgam districts provided assistance 
for 1,107 and 490 damaged residential huts respectively against a sanction of  
only 423 and 140 huts respectively. In Budgam district, assistance was also 
provided for 2,022 damaged cattle sheds against a sanction of 1,879 sheds. 
Details of these huts/cattle sheds were not on records. Thus, assistance of  
`33.16 lakh was provided by tehsildars of these districts without sanction of  
the District Administration. 
It was also observed that SDRF norms do not have category of ‘other huts’/
residential sheds. However, 2,638 huts w ere sanctioned under the category  
21  Severely damaged Pacca to Fully Pacca: 703; Fully Kutcha to Fully Pacca: 50; Partially Pacca to 
Severely Pacca: 3060; Partially Pacca to Fully Pacca: 191; Huts to Partially Pacca: 76; Severely Pacca to 
Fully Kutcha: 05; Severely Kutcha to Fully Kutcha: 03; Partially Kutcha to Severely Pacca: 01; Partially 
Pacca to Fully Kutcha: 10; Partially Kutcha to Severely Kutcha: 01; Non-Residential to Severely 
Residential: 01; Non-Residential to Fully Residential: 01; Fully Kitchen Sheds to Fully Damaged 
House: 03; Severely Damaged Kitchen shed to severely damaged residential house: 05; Fully Damaged 
Shed to Fully Damaged Kutcha House: 03 and Residential Shed to Fully Damaged Pacca House: 01

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
27
‘other huts’ and assistance of `0.61 crore at the rate of `2,300 per hut were 
provided under SDRF. 
Thus, assistance of `0.94 crore was disbursed from the SDRF for damages to 
houses without requisite sanction of the competent authority.
(iv)  Relief for Livestock and Assistance to Farmers
(a) Relief for losses of livestock
The DCs were empowered to sanction claims for replacement of milch/draught 
animals subject to authentication of losses by the committee headed by the ADDC 
with Chief Animal Husbandry Officer (CAHO), District Sheep Husbandry Officer 
(DSHO) and the concerned Tehsildar as members. Audit observed that `0.84 crore 
was paid for loss of 730 animals in Jammu district without verification of death 
of these livestock by the concerned Tehsildar/CAHO/DSHO. Further, assessment 
of livestock losses had not been conducted in any of the test-checked districts of 
Kashmir division resulting in denial of assistance under SDRF to those who had 
suffered livestock losses.
(b) Assistance to farmers
SDRF norms envisages payment of input subsidy to small and marginal farmers 
who had suffered crop loss of 50 per cent  and above and cash assistance for 
damage to agricultural land. It was seen in audit that:
(i) Damage to agricultural land and loss of standing crops due to floods in the 
most affected districts of Srinagar, Anantnag and Budgam had not been 
assessed even after 18 months since occurrence of floods.
(ii) In Poonch district, `1.83 crore released in March 2015 to five tehsildars 
for payment of assistance to the affected farmers was not paid to them 
even after lapse of five months as of August 2015. The amount was lying 
unutilized in the official bank accounts of the tehsildars. 
(iii) Assistance of `2.37 crore assessed for land owners of the Tehsil Haveli 
could not be provided due to non-availability of funds.
Thus, free ration as per the stipulated norms was not provided to ration card 
as well as non-ration card holding families. The huge variation of 69 per cent 
between numbers of families eligible for free ration approved by the Revenue 
Department and that communicated to the CAPD Department by district 
administration indicated weak mechanism of identification of affected families. 
This was accentuated by delay in disbursement of ration to the flood affected 
people ranging from three months to more than nine months.
In addition, there was delay in disbursement of gratuitous relief ranging up to 
more than six months which defeated the very purpose of providing immediate 
relief. Funds amounting to `0.94 crore was disbursed without sanction of the 
competent authority and additional assistance of `8.80 crore was provided as a 
result of change in status of damages to houses after re-assessment of damages. 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
28
While assessment of livestock losses and damage to agricultural land and crops 
had not been conducted in any of the test-checked districts of Kashmir division 
even after lapse of 18 months from the occurrence of the floods, `4.20 crore 
assessed for land damage in Poonch District was not provided to affected persons 
as of August 2015. Funds amounting to `0.84 crore were paid for loss of livestock 
in Jammu District without verification of death of livestock by the Competent 
Authority. 
5.1.4 Procurement, Hiring and Purchases
The Disaster Management Act, 2005, provides that emergency procurement and 
purchases of relief items and hiring of vehicles or means of rescue and relief 
transportation may bypass standard procedures of inviting tenders and other 
ex-ante controls due to the emergency nature. However, they need to maintain 
essential records of authorization, payments and those as required by the SOPs. 
Audit noticed the following irregularities and inefficiencies.
(i) Procurement of material/ hiring vehicles
Details of distribution of items procured/hired at a cost of `14.38 lakh by the 
Additional Superintendent of Police Srinagar were not on record as below: 
(a) 235 tents ( `1,000 per day), 125 boats ( `1,700 per day) and 125 tipper 
trucks (`2,000 per day) were shown as hired for only one day incurring an 
expenditure of `6.98 lakh. However, deployment of vehicles and boats, 
details of erection of tents and details of vehicles were not on record; and
(b) Distribution of 10,000 water bottles (Cost: `1.20 lakh) to flood affected 
people and utilization of 2,500 litres of phenyl (Cost: `1.50 lakh), 
polythene (Cost: `1.00 lakh), thermocool (Cost: `1.20 lakh) and masks 
(Cost: `2.50 lakh) were not on record.
(ii) Procurement of Bio-manure
As per SDRF norms, need of bio-manure for 30 days should be assessed 
and approval of SEC should be obtained. Audit noticed that the Resident  
Commissioner J&K, New Delhi, procured (September/October 2014) 90,000 kgs 
of bio-manure (sanitreat) at a cost of `0.62 crore for disinfection of garbage in  
the flood affected areas. Out of this, 21,620 kgs valued at `15.44 lakh was in  
stock as at the end of September 2015. The stipulated date of expiry of  
bio-manure is one year from the date of manufacture which expired in  
September 2015. The useful life of 21,620 kgs thus expired in September 2015. 
(iii) Diversion of relief fund for procurement of ineligible items
Approved norms for assistance under SDRF stipulate the items and purposes for 
which the funds can be utilized such as provision of temporary accommodation, 
food, clothing, medical care, etc. to people affected, evacuated and sheltered in 
relief camps. Audit noticed the following:

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
29
(a) Bio-manure (Madhyam) is a culture of micro-organisms developed for 
accelerated aerobic composting of organic waste used for improvement of 
soil fertility. There is no provision under SDRF norms for procurement of 
manure for soil fertility. The Resident Commissioner, however, procured 
44,995 kgs of bio-manure (Madhyam) at a cost of `33.27 lakh which was 
used for agricultural purpose and not for sanitation/disinfection purposes. 
(b) Audit noticed that `2.18 crore meant for relief and rehabilitation of 
the flood affected people were utilized on procurement of materials 
such as transformer oil (12,810 litres), Mobil oil (1,260 litres), Engine 
oil (3,150 litres), DG Sets (five in number), 12 volt batteries (180 in 
number), stationery items, 30 KV A Automatic V oltage Stabilizer for 
Sainik Bhawan Srinagar; transformer for office of the Chief Canning and 
Processing Instructor; office automation for office of the Deputy Director 
Employment; cameras and on repairs and hiring of vehicles, POL, wages 
of hired computer data operators, lunch/tea, snacks, etc. The Additional 
DC Srinagar stated (January 2016) that the procured items were essentially 
required for rescue and relief operations related to floods. The reply was 
not acceptable as norms did not provide for incurring such expenditure on 
ineligible items. 
(c) In pursuance of a decision taken by the SEC in December 2014, the DC 
Kashmir sanctioned `2.51 crore out of SDRF for purchase of 75,000 kgs 
of whole milk and 5,000 kgs of skimmed milk from M/s Mother Dairy and 
Vegetables Private Limited, New Delhi through the J&K Milk Producer 
Co-operative Limited, Milk Plant, Cheshmashahi Srinagar for distribution 
amongst the flood affected people. The Co-operative received the full 
quantity of whole milk and skimmed milk in September 2014. However, 
only 7,000 kgs of whole milk was distributed amongst the affected people 
while 2,600 kgs of whole milk was damaged. The quantity of 38,725 kgs 
of whole milk and the entire quantity (5,000 kgs) of skimmed milk was 
sold by the Co-operative as part of its business instead of distributing  
it as relief for flood affected persons. The utilization of the balance,  
26,675 kgs of whole milk was not on record. Thus, relief material in the 
form of milk/skimmed milk valued at `1.99 crore was diverted from the 
intended purpose. 
In sum, a total of `2.51 crore of funds from the SDRF was used for ineligible 
items while relief material valued at `1.99 crore was not distributed to the flood 
affected persons but utilized by the J&K Milk Producer Co-operative Limited for 
its normal business.
(iv) Medical equipment and other items
The District Disaster Management Authority, Srinagar authorized (September 
2014) purchase of 24 items of machinery and equipment at a cost of `8.96 crore 
to make the Government Medical College Srinagar and associated hospitals 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
30
functional. It was seen in audit that 32 items 22 valuing `3.66 crore which were 
not damaged in floods and not approved by the District Management Authority 
were also procured (September 2014 to March 2015) by the Health and Medical 
Education Department. 
Further, without obtaining the sanction of the Disaster Management Authority, 
as required under the Disaster Management Act, the Director Health Services 
(DHS) Kashmir submitted (October 2014) a list of 17 items of machinery and 
equipment as damaged in floods to the Commissioner Secretary, Health and 
Medical Education Department. Audit noticed that seven items procured by the 
Department valuing `0.74 crore23 were not included in the list submitted to the 
Commissioner Secretary of the Department which indicated that these items were 
not damaged due to floods.
Thus, funds amounting to `8.90 crore was spent on purchase of ineligible items/
medical equipment which were not related to flood. There was no record of 
disbursement/utilization of items valuing `14.38 lakh procured for flood related 
activities and useful life of bio-manure valuing `15.44 lakh was expired in  
September 2015.
5.1.5 Transportation, Storage and Distribution of relief material
(i) Transportation of Relief Materials
Audit noticed that effective control mechanism and monitoring system for safe 
transportation of relief materials from Jammu to Srinagar and other districts of 
the State were not put in place. Establishment of checkpoints at various places 
of the National Highway to monitor transportation of relief materials could have 
proved effective in plugging leakages/diversion of relief material in transit. Audit 
noticed the following:
(a) Relief materials valuing `4.88 crore dispatched by various agencies was 
not accounted for in the records of the Central Store established by the 
State Government at JKEDI Srinagar for receipt and distribution of relief 
materials. It indicated that either these goods were not dispatched to 
Srinagar or were diverted in transit. 
(b) Relief material dispatched from Jammu to Srinagar in 17 trucks for 
distribution among flood victims was not accounted for in the receipt 
register of the Central Store. Audit found that freight of `4.86 lakh was 
paid for the carriage of these 17 trucks by the Special Relief Commissioner 
Jammu to the State Road Transport Corporation (SRTC). In addition 
one truck loaded with relief material 24 dispatched to DC Jammu was not 
accounted for in records. 
22  Microscopes, binoculars, Gel cards, micro-debriodar, plasma thawing bath, elisa plate reader, etc.
23  Includes `29.69 lakh on HD Camera control units procured (July 2014) before occurrence of floods
24  Sanitary pads: 10 boxes; Complan refill: 22 cases; Glucon-D: 100 cases; Ghee: 20 cases and  
Aam panna: 24 cases 

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
31
(c) Relief materials dispatched for flood victims of districts of Anantnag25 and 
Budgam26 was not accounted for in the books of District Administration 
of the two districts. 
(d) In Jammu, relief materials (dry milk powder, clothes, solar lamps, 
blankets and medicines) dispatched by the DC Jammu to Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate (SDM) R.S Pura Jammu were not accounted for in the records.
(ii) Distribution of Relief Material
A review of distribution of relief materials to the affected people in the test-
checked districts revealed the following:
(a) Stock registers of receipt of relief materials from both government  
and non-government sources and issue of material to the flood  
victims/register depicting acknowledgment of receipt of relief material  
by the recipients was not maintained by the DC/SDMs/tehsildars of 
Srinagar, Jammu and Udhampur districts. 
(b) Relief materials were distributed to the victims as late as 26th October 2014 
to 24th July 2015 and 17 th November 2014 to 16 th July 2015 in Poonch 
and Udhampur districts respectively after a lapse of period ranging from  
46 days to 10 months from occurrence of floods in September 2014. 
(c) Food aid was provided to the affected people of only Tehsil Haveli and 
588 families of five Tehsils27 of Poonch district whose houses were fully 
damaged in the flood did not get food aid from the Government despite 
food aid being available with the district administration. Tents, blankets 
and mattresses were also not provided to 82 flood affected families of 
Tehsils of Balakote and Mankote whose houses were fully damaged.
(d) In Udhampur district, there were 72 cases where relief material was signed 
for by the same individual. In addition, there were 20 instances where 
relief material was provided to ineligible persons. 
(e) The Chhattisgarh Government sent 53,298 bags containing 26,500 
quintals of rice for distribution among flood affected families of the State. 
The consignment was received at the Udhampur Railway Station on  
16/17 September 2014. Lifting of rice bags commenced after nine days 
(26 September 2014) and was completed on 3 October 2014. Due to non-
provision of required number of trucks by SRTC, the bags remained in 
open space resulting in rotting of 5,375 bags (2,675 quintals) due to water 
logging.
 Of the remaining 47,923 bags, 26,920 bags of rice (13,396 quintals)  
were transported to the Central Store of Lethapora Kashmir between  
25  Rice: 05 bags; flour: 05 bags; water: 670 cases; ration kits: 305 kits and 56 bags; tents: 236; Maggi: 15  
boxes; Noodles: 50 boxes; edible oil: one box; biscuits: 145 boxes; cloth: 18 bundles; rusk: 05 boxes 
and  sanitary pads: 154 boxes
26  Tent: 300; blankets:600; ration kits: 1140 and glucose: 532 boxes
27  Surankot, Mendhar, Mandi, Balakote and Mankote

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
32
30th September 2014 and 25 th October 2014 for distribution among the 
flood affected people. Based on chemical analysis of samples of rice, 
the Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology 
(SKUAST) Kashmir intimated (October 2014) that about 90 per cent of the 
stacked rice at Lethapora godowns can be distributed among the people. 
However, Director CAPD Kashmir failed to distribute the rice among the 
flood affected people of Kashmir Division till May 2015 despite lapse of 
eight months. Chemical analysis (June 2015) of rice revealed that the rice 
had become sub-standard. As such, expenditure of `42.74 lakh incurred 
on transportation of rice from Udhampur in 116 trucks had also become 
wasteful.
Thus, relief material valuing `4.88 crore and relief material dispatched in 
18 trucks were not accounted for in records while expenditure of `42.74 lakh 
incurred on transportation of the rice for the flood affected persons turned out to 
be infructuous as the rice could not be distributed. 
5.1.6 Restoration of essential public utilities/ facilities and infrastructure
The Manual for Administration of SDRF envisaged payment of financial 
assistance for repair/restoration of specific infrastructure of immediate nature 
under the item ‘damage to infrastructure’. Such expenditure is normally incurred 
within a period of 30/45 days in plain areas and 45/60 days in hilly areas from the 
occurrence of disaster. 
Audit noticed that 2,035 restoration works involving an expenditure of  
`15.96 crore were commenced after a gap of two to four months after occurrence 
of the floods despite release of funds in time. Audit analyzed the procedure for 
sanctioning restoration works, actual execution of works and time taken by various 
agencies to restore public infrastructure. The results of audit are discussed below:
(i) Standing Operating Procedures (SOPs), Assessment of Damages and 
Sanction of restoration works
According to the SOPs, powers to sanction restoration works are vested with 
Deputy Commissioners up to `10 lakh, the Divisional Commissioners up to  
`20 lakh and the Financial Commissioner Revenue up to `30 lakh. For  
execution of restoration works above `30 lakh, the sanction of the SEC was to 
be obtained. SOPs also required the claims to be considered by the competent 
authority only after they are authenticated by a team of officers headed by the 
Additional District Development Commissioner (ADDC) with concerned 
Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer and Tehsildar as other members.
Divisional authorities prepared reports of damaged infrastructure of various 
sectors28. It was seen in audit that the ADDC and the concerned Tehsildar were 
not involved in conducting assessment of damage caused to the infrastructure. 
The damage reports were authenticated by Junior Engineers, Assistant Engineers, 
28  Public Health Engineering (PHE), Public Works (Roads & Bridges), Power Development (Electric  
Maintenance and Rural Electrification) and Irrigation and Flood Control departments

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
33
Assistant Executive Engineers and Executive Engineers and sanction of the 
competent authority was not obtained before carrying out restoration works. 
(ii)	 Works	executed	prior	to	floods
(a) An amount of `11.96 crore was utilized for 1,206 works in 38 divisions 
that were actually started/ executed prior to occurrence of the floods. 
Further, date of start and date of completion was not recorded on payment 
bills of 706 works involving expenditure of `4.46 crore. 
(b) `29.20 lakh was incurred out of SDRF on two works, namely, repair and 
maintenance of GB Pant Hospital Srinagar and repair/ renovation of rooms 
of Dental College Srinagar which were started before occurrence of floods. 
Thus, funds amounting to `12.25 crore were utilized on 1,208 works actually 
started/ executed prior to occurrence of floods.
(iii) Expenditure on Repair and Maintenance Works and Ineligible Items
(a) Sixteen divisions spent `6.11 crore from SDRF on restoration of 382 
works that were not depicted in the damage reports prepared by the 
divisions. Expenditure incurred on routine repair and maintenance works 
was incurred from the SDRF. 
(b) Expenditure of `77.67 lakh was incurred during September to  
November 2014 out of SDRF on 12 works such as creation of new 
sub-stations, remodeling/ renovation of rooms, construction of forensic 
laboratory and digging of well, etc. which were not allowed as per norms 
of SDRF. 
(c) ` 26.50 lakh was spent on execution of works such as conversion of hall 
into auditorium and restoration of gutted OPD block which were not 
included in the damage assessment report prepared by the Principal, 
Government Medical College Srinagar. 
(d) Thirty two divisions incurred an expenditure of `3.06 crore on procurement 
of POL, hiring of vehicles, payment of monthly wages to casual labourers, 
etc. which were normal activities of these departments and were not 
related to floods of September 2014.
Thus, funds amounting to `10.21 crore were utilized for purposes not covered 
under the Fund guidelines.
(iv) Ongoing Works
As per conditions stipulated for the release of SDRF funds, restoration of 
those works may be taken up which had been completed and taken over by the 
Department before floods. Records of five 29 divisions showed that `4.90 crore 
released under SDRF was utilized on 105 works which were actually ongoing 
works of other schemes at the time of the occurrence of floods.
29  Executive Engineers PHE Udhampur, PHE Poonch, Irrigation Division Akhnoor, PMGSY Udhampur 
and Right River Circular Road Division Srinagar

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
34
(v) Restoration of Damages
(a) Damage report prepared by the PWD (R&B) Division Poonch projected 
incorrect requirement of 1,049.60 feet span of bailey bridges against the 
actual requirement of 530 feet. Incorrect projection of span of bailey 
bridges in the damage report resulted in procurement of 970 feet span of 
bailey bridges which was 440 feet in excess of requirement resulting in 
avoidable expenditure of `4.39 crore. 
(b) 25 restoration works of water supply schemes were started by the Water 
Works Division Srinagar between 8th September and 24th December 2014 
and were completed at a cost of `23.54 lakh between 10 th October and  
30th December 2014. Audit noticed that necessary construction material 
such as 6,369 metres pipes and allied materials in respect of these works 
was issued and had passed the gates of store between 8 th January and  
3rd February 2015. This indicated that works were not executed on ground 
till at least February 2015 as the works could not have been completed in 
the absence of these materials though payment had been released. 
(c) Without framing detailed estimates, the Irrigation and Flood Control 
Division Srinagar executed 215 temporary restoration works at a cost 
of `29.40 crore. Audit found that rates ranging from `650 to `850  
per cubic metre were applied against sanctioned scheduled rates of `375 
per cubic metre for earthwork in banking in layers and `500 were applied 
against sanctioned scheduled rates of `350 per cubic metre for supply of 
earth. Application of rates in the range of 43 to 127 per cent higher than 
sanctioned schedule of rates resulted in extra expenditure of `2.36 crore.
Thus, works implementing agencies did not obtain sanction from any of the 
competent authorities for any of the restoration works in contravention of SOPs . 
Funds amounting to `27.36 crore of SDRF were utilized on ineligible works and 
normal repair and maintenance works. Due to incorrect projection of material and 
inputs for bridge construction and incorrect application of rates for earthwork, an 
excess amount of `6.75 crore was spent on these items which could have been 
avoided. There was also doubt on actual execution of works by Water Works 
Division Srinagar, as there were discrepancies in the date of completion of the 
work and issuance of material, which was later than the completion date.
5.1.7 Expenditure from SDRF by Ineligible Sectors
The Manual for Administration of State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and 
National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) provided for payment of assistance 
under SDRF to sectors such as roads and bridges, drinking water, irrigation, 
power, primary education, primary health centres, community assets owned by 
panchayats. Audit observed that `31.44 crore was released to seven departments 
that were not eligible for assistance under SDRF. A further analysis revealed that 
these ineligible departments incurred expenditure of `14.97 crore on items which 

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
35
were not associated with flood damage as depicted in table-5.6 below: 
Table-5.6: Items/works not covered under SDRF norms
Department Why ineligible Expenditure
(` in crore)
Estates 
Department
Procurement of furniture for replacing damaged furniture items of 
Civil Secretariat and New Assembly/ Council Complex. 
7.33
121 works/items for providing/fixing wooden paneling, construction 
of wardrobes/almirahs, construction of rooms/ boundary walls, brick/
wood work, procurement of air conditioners, invertors, batteries, LEDs, 
refrigerators, heat pillars/ convectors not provided in SDRF guidelines.
6.09
Seven works of repair/renovation for six residential quarters and 
construction of building for housing stores, which were not damaged 
due to floods as these buildings were not reflected in the damage 
reports. 
0.39
Tourism 
Department
Procurement of DG sets, photocopiers, computers, furniture, wood 
work, painting and other allied works of houseboat, construction of 
DG shed at the Tourist Reception Centre.
0.43
Eight Works not depicted in the damage reports of Sher-e-Kashmir 
International Conference Centre (SKICC).
0.32
Distempering/painting, re-electrification/ re-illumination of office 
rooms, staff entry corridors in the basement, painting/polishing of air 
conditioning control room during March 2015 to May 2015 indicating 
that these works were not of immediate nature.
0.13
State Motor 
Garages
Purchase of items not related to restoration works such as photocopier, 
furniture/furnishing items, UPSs, computers and lathe machine, 
bedding, etc.
0.28
Total 14.97 
 5.1.8 Reconstruction Activities under Special Plan Assistance (SPA)
Under the Prime Minister’s package for floods, GoI released `1,000 crore for  
re-building damaged infrastructure in the State subject to the following conditions:
(i) To begin with, only such projects/schemes will be taken up for restoration 
as are costing `10 lakh and above;
(ii) Execution of work shall be carried out after completing all codal 
procedures;
(iii) All the works shall be executed within the proposed amount and there 
shall be no cost escalation; and
(iv) Only such schemes/projects will be taken up as have not been funded 
under the SDRF/State Plan/CSS flexi fund or any other source. 
Audit noticed that works were taken up under SPA in contravention of the 
conditions stipulated in the sanction as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
(i) Irrigation and Flood Control
(a) 57 works sanctioned under SPA in four divisions 30 at an estimated cost 
of `14.04 crore were not depicted in the damage reports prepared by the 
30  Irrigation Division-II Jammu, Flood Control Divisions Jammu, Anantnag and Srinagar

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
36
Department. An expenditure of `10.31 crore was incurred on these works 
as on March 2016. 
(b) Nine Lift Irrigation Schemes (estimated cost: `2.06 crore) of Akhnoor 
were sanctioned under SPA despite the fact that these schemes had 
started during 2007-08 to 2011-12 and were under implementation 
under Centrally Sponsored Scheme (AIBP)/District Sector Schemes 
at the time of the floods. An expenditure of `1.05 crore was incurred  
(March 2016) on these schemes and none of the schemes were completed 
as on March 2016. 
(c) Funds of `1.20 crore meant for re-building damaged infrastructure were 
utilized on mulba clearance, POL, payment of wages to casual labourers, 
construction of pre-existing schemes and payment of consultancy charges. 
The Executive Engineer, Irrigation Division Akhnoor stated (March 2016) 
that provision of contingency five per cent  was made in the Detailed 
Project Report and such expenditure was incurred out of this contingency. 
The reply was not tenable as wages of labour and watch and ward, transfer 
of amount/ material to other schemes was not covered under provision of 
contingency. 
Thus, expenditure of `12.56 crore was incurred from SPA on works/items not 
covered under its conditions.
(ii) Roads and Bridges
(a) Against cost of `9.54 crore of seven projects shown in the damage  
report prepared by the Department, `12.38 crore was projected by 
the department resulting in approval of extra cost of `2.84 crore. An  
expenditure of `12.38 crore was incurred on these projects and five  
projects completed as on March 2016. The Executive Engineer, R&B 
Division Poonch stated (June 2016) that project cost reflected in the 
Damage Report was tentative and increased in the Detailed Project Report. 
(b) Audit noticed that payment of `2.08 crore which pertained to the 
expenditure incurred on the construction of a bridge before floods was 
debited to SPA.
(c) Out of funds of `1.27 crore sanctioned for five bridges in two divisions 
(Executive Engineer, Left River Circular Road (LRCR) Division Srinagar 
and City Roads Division Srinagar), `0.67 crore were diverted and incurred 
on 20 works such as construction of drains, road surface, footpaths, 
fencing of graveyard, etc. which were not related to construction of these 
bridges. 
(d) The work of restoration/ reconstruction of three bridges was 
sanctioned at a cost of `0.69 crore. The work was completed at a 
cost of `35.61 lakh. While `15.62 lakh remained unspent as well as  
un-surrendered, the balance amount of `17.60 lakh was used for projects/ 

Chapter - 5 : Post-Disaster Activities and Management-Floods of September 2014
37
miscellaneous items which were not related to the floods or were 
commenced prior to the floods which was ineligible under SPA.
(e) ` 0.83 crore meant for re-building damaged infrastructure was diverted 
and utilized on purchase of bitumen, POL, hiring of vehicles, preparation 
for VVIP visit, Elections 2014, Republic Day 2015, wages of casual 
labourers, carriage charges of trucks pertaining to period prior to floods 
and on construction of roads by the test-checked four divisions31. 
(f) ` 49.03 lakh were utilized by the Executive Engineer R&B Division 
Budgam on seven works before floods of September 2014. The Executive 
Engineer (R&B) Division Budgam stated (March 2016) that these works 
were ongoing works under various programmes/schemes and were also 
damaged due to floods. The reply was not acceptable as payments were 
made for such works which were started prior to floods.
Thus, funds amounting to `4.25 crore were utilized on works/items not covered 
under conditions of SPA.
(iii) Public Health Engineering Department
Eight works which were not mentioned in the damage reports prepared by the 
Divisions32 were sanctioned for Jammu district under SPA at an estimated cost 
of `11.49 crore. An expenditure of `7.86 crore were incurred on these works and 
six works were completed as on March 2016. Audit noticed that the Executive 
Engineer PHE City-I Division Jammu spent `14.73 lakh received under SPA on 
repair works not related to permanent restoration works approved under SPA, 
temporary restoration works, on works executed before floods and construction 
of compound wall of chowkidar quarters. 
(iv) Power
Out of `1,000 crore released to the State under SPA for re-building damaged 
infrastructure, the State Government sanctioned (June 2015) `178.42 crore for  
re-building of infrastructure in the Power Sector for permanent restoration of 
flood damaged infrastructure in Jammu and Kashmir. This sanction was subject 
to the stipulation that (a) the funds would be utilized as per DPR/Project Reports 
approved by the competent authority, (b) that there would be no diversion of 
funds from one scheme/component to another, (c) that the works are carried out 
after having photographs of site before and after execution and (d) that the works/
projects are not funded from any other funds/source.
A scrutiny of the works included in the sanction order revealed that expenditure 
of `9.01 crore included items such as power transformers, hydraulic cranes, 
excavators, renovation of distribution transformers, repair of workshops/buildings 
and normal repairs and maintenance works which were not directly attributable 
31  Executive Engineer PWD (R&B) Division Poonch, Udhampur, City Roads Division Srinagar and 
LRCR Division Srinagar
32  Executive Engineers PHE City-I Division Jammu, PHE City-II Division Jammu and PHE Rural Jammu

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
38
to the floods in Jammu region. Audit noted that funds of SPA were being utilized 
to augment resources and infrastructure rather than on re-building infrastructure 
directly damaged by the floods which were the objectives of SPA. These works 
were undertaken without there being any Project Reports/Photographs in support 
of the sanctioned expenditure. 
(v) Estates Department
(a) Expenditure of `4.95 crore was incurred (March 2016) on 14 works of 
renovation of government residential quarters at Jammu and civil works 
at Civil Secretariat Jammu which were not necessitated by floods. 
(b) In deviation from government instructions which stipulated that only those 
schemes be taken up under SPA which have not been funded from SDRF/
State Plan/CSS Flexi fund/any other source, expenditure of `3.61 crore 
was incurred (September 2014 to March 2015) out of SPA on restoration/
renovation of 24 residential quarters in Srinagar despite the fact that 
expenditure of `1.22 crore and `0.45 crore had been incurred out of  
SDRF and State Plan respectively on restoration/renovation of these 
residential quarters. The Executive Engineer Estates Division Srinagar  
stated (June 2016) that restoration of these quarters were taken up 
under SDRF/State Plan but could not be completed due to providing of 
insufficient funds. As such, pending works of these quarters were taken 
up under SPA. 
Thus, funds of `42.24 crore meant for re-building damaged infrastructure were 
utilized on works/items not covered under the conditions of SPA. 

Chapter - 6
Conclusion 
and 
Recommendations

Chapter - 6 : Conclusion & Recommendations
39
 Chapter-6: Conclusion and Recommendations
6.1 Conclusion
Despite multi-hazardous risks and occurrence of several disasters in recent past, 
the steps taken by the State Government to prepare for and mitigate the impact 
of disasters were not commensurate with the task at hand. There were gaps and 
deficiencies in institutional arrangements, policy and plan formulation as well 
as implementation of pre-disaster measures. There was considerable scope for 
improvement in the management of SDRF funds so as to both augment available 
resources as well as to ensure its utilization for the intended objectives of disaster 
preparedness and relief. 
The lack of preparedness as well as inadequate institutional mechanisms and 
processes including internal control and monitoring mechanisms necessary to 
ensure efficient and timely relief and rehabilitation on the occurrence of a disaster 
were self-evident in the disaster relief activities following the drought of 2009, the 
Leh cloudburst of 2010 and floods of 2014. There were deficiencies and delays 
in damage and need assessments, diversion of relief funds and delay in reaching 
relief and assistance to the affected persons/families.
A total of `1,369.16 crore had been spent between 2010-11 and 2014-15 from the 
SDRF. An amount of `122.72 crore was diverted from sanctioned works/projects 
towards or spent on ineligible items/works, `62.88 crore remained unutilized, 
extra expenditure of `214.46 crore was incurred on account of excess payment/
procurement at higher rate and there was wasteful and unfruitful expenditure of 
`0.86 crore and avoidable expenditure of `4.39 crore. Under the Special Plan 
Assistance, `1,000 crore was provided for re-building damaged infrastructure 
in October 2014. However, `4.66 crore was spent in contravention of the SPA 
conditions and `37.58 crore was spent for purposes not related to re-building 
the damaged infrastructure. Overall, there was a lack of assurance that relief 
and assistance were provided to the actual beneficiaries in a timely and efficient 
manner despite availability of financial resources.
6.2 Recommendations
Based on the audit findings, it is recommended that the State Government should:
•	 Establish and operationalize the institutional structures and disaster related 
policies envisaged in the Disaster Management Act, 2005, for efficient and 
effective management of pre-and post-disaster activities. 
•	 Conduct vulnerability, hazard and risks assessment especially in the 13 
multi-hazard districts and prepare risk maps that would enable formulation 
of informed strategies and prioritization of resources for disaster 
preparedness including an early warning system. 
•	 Ensure that personnel of the State Disaster Response Force undergo the 

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
40
mandatory trainings in a time bound manner and that they are thereafter 
used solely for the intended purpose.
•	 Formulate and implement a time bound plan for capacity building  
including promotion of general awareness and community training 
and building capacity to combat disasters as an important pre-disaster  
activity.
•	 Strengthen the mechanisms for pre-release scrutiny and post-release 
monitoring of SDRF funds to ensure that funds are released and utilized 
only for the purpose of providing relief to persons affected by disasters and 
are not diverted for other purposes. 
•	 Strengthen mechanisms for monitoring movement and distribution of 
financial assistance and relief materials to ensure that they reach the 
intended duly identified beneficiaries. Procedures should also be in place 
for accountability of administrative officials for any unjustified diversions 
or avoidable losses. 
The audit findings were referred to the Government in May 2016. The response 
of the Government was awaited (July 2016). 
Srinagar/Jammu (Hoveyda Abbas)
The  31st August 2016 Accountant General (Audit)
 Jammu and Kashmir
Countersigned
New Delhi (Shashi Kant Sharma)
The  31st August 2016  Comptroller and Auditor General of India


Glossary of Abbreviations

Glossary of Abbreviations
41
Glossary of Abbreviations
Glossary Expanded form
ADDC Additional District Development Commissioner
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India
CAHO Chief Animal Husbandry Officer
CAPD Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution
CMRF Chief Minister’s Relief Fund
CRF Calamity Relief Fund
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme
DC Deputy Commissioner
DDMAs District Disaster Management Authorities
DDMF District Disaster Mitigation Fund
DG Diesel Generator
DHS Director Health Services
DPR Detailed Project Report
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
DSHO District Sheep Husbandry Officer
EE Executive Engineer
EOC Emergency Operation Centre
GMC Government Medical College
GoI Government of India
I&FC Irrigation and Flood Control
IMD Indian Meteorological Department
JKEDI Jammu and Kashmir Entrepreneurship Development Institute
JKI Jammu and Kashmir Industries
K VA Kilo V olt Ampere

Performance Audit Report on Disaster Management for the year ended 31 March 2016
42
Glossary Expanded form
LED Light Emitting Diode
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority
NDMP National Disaster Management Policy
NDRF National Disaster Response Fund
NOC No Objection Certificate
NoK Next of Kin
OPD Out Patient Department
PHE Public Health Engineering
PMNRF Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund
PSO Personal Security Officer
PWD Public Works Department
R&B Roads and Bridges
SAC State Advisory Committee
SDM Sub-District Magistrate
SDMA State Disaster Management Authority
SDMF State Disaster Mitigation Fund
SDMP State Disaster Management Policy
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund
SDRF State Disaster Response Force
SEC State Executive Committee
SKUAST Sher-e-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and 
Technology
SMC Srinagar Municipal Corporation
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures
SPA Special Plan Assistance
SRTC State Road Transport Corporation
UPSs Un-interrupted Power Supply Systems
 