 
www.agker.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE                                           
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR                            
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
on 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 6 of the year 2017 
 

.

  (i) 
CONTENTS 
Description 
Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
PREFACE  v 
CHAPTER – I   
INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 1.2 1 
Authority for audit 1.3 2 
Organisational structure of the Office of the Principal 
Accountant General (E&RSA), Kerala 
1.4 3 
Planning and conduct of audit 1.5 3 
Significant audit observations 1.6 4 
Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 1.7 8 
CHAPTER – II   
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
INDUSTRIES DEPARTMENT 
Licensing and monitoring of quarrying of minor minerals 2 11 
CHAPTER – III   
COMPLIANCE AUDIT OF SELECTED TOPICS 
FISHERIES AND PORTS DEPARTMENT 
Regulation of Houseboats 3.1 37 
INDUSTRIES DEPARTMENT 
Allotment and utilisation of industrial plots 3.2 56 
CHAPTER – IV   
COMPLIANCE AUDIT – OTHER TOPICS 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT & FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
Unfruitful expenditure of ` 88.92 lakh on installation of 
internet touch screen kiosks 
4.1 69 
Idle expenditure incurred on Pokkali Paddy Harvester 4.2 70 
FISHERIES AND PORTS DEPARTMENT 
Irregularities in the construction of buildings, installation of 
solar power systems and other purchases made by the 
Directorate of Ports 
4.3 72 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
  (ii) 
Description 
Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
Excess payment to contractors due to non -recovery of cost 
index on the cost of bitumen reimbursed at market rate 
4.4 78 
Extra expenditure of ` 86.26 lakh in five works entrusted to 
M/s Kerala State Construction Corporation Limited 
4.5 79 
 

Contents 
 
 (iii) 
 
APPENDICES 
Appendix 
No. 
Description Page 
1.1 Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) 
as on 30 June 2016 
81 
2.1 Instances of NOC granted for quarrying in Government 
land without auction 
82 
2.2 Details of violations of KMMC Rules identified during 
joint site verification of quarries 
83 
2.3 Instances showing necessity of accurate me asurement for 
assessing the quantity quarried 
85 
2.4 Instances of public complaints on quarrying affecting 
availability of water 
86 
2.5 Instances of public complaints on quarrying causing 
vibrations/damages to residential buildings 
87 
2.6 Examples of repeat offenders 88 
3.1.1 Details of 42 Houseboats subjected to joint verification 89 
3.1.2 Position of survey, registration and distinguishing mark 
noticed during joint verification of 42 Houseboats 
90 
3.1.3 Details of survey fees forgone by the department 92 
3.1.4 Details of Houseboats pending dry dock inspection 93 
3.1.5 Details of dry dock fees forgone by the department 94 
3.1.6 Details of Houseboats not having with sufficient and 
competent crew out of the 42 jointly verified Houseboats 
95 
3.1.7 Details of Houseboats not having sufficient life saving 
appliances out of the 42 jointly verified Houseboats 
97 
3.1.8 Details of Houseboats not provided with sufficient 
firefighting equipment and valid ICO out of the 42 jointly 
verified Houseboats 
99 
3.1.9 Details of surprise inspections conducted by Ports/Police 
departments during 2010-16  
101 
3.2.1 Transfers of industrial plots and related issues 102 
3.2.2 List of industrial plots transferred/ changes made in the 
constitution of Board of Directors without departmental 
permission  
103 
3.2.3 List of idling un-resumed industrial land 105 
3.2.4 Details showing delay in resumption of land 107 
3.2.5 Mortgage/auction and related cases 108 
4.3.1 Purchases made for the new building of the Directorate 109 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
  (iv) 
Appendix 
No. 
Description Page 
4.3.2 Status of solar power systems installed in Port Offices 110 
4.4 Excess payment to contractors due to non -recovery of cost-
index on the cost of bitumen reimbursed at market rate 
111 
4.5 Details of extra expenditure due to allowing of additional 
five per cent Overhead charges in estimate data 
114 
 

 
 
(v) 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2016 has been prepared for submission 
to the Governor of Kerala under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the De partments of Government of Kerala under the 
Economic Services including Departments of Agriculture Development and 
Farmers’ Welfare, Fisheries and Ports, Industries and Public Works.   
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice i n the 
course of test audit of records during the year 201 5-16 as well as those which 
came to notice in earlier years but could not be reported in previous Audit 
Reports; instances relating to the period subsequent to 201 5-16 have also been 
included wherever necessary. 
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 1 
 
CHAPTER-I   
 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates to 
matters arising from performance audit of selected programmes and activities and 
compliance audit of Government departments and a utonomous bodies under 
Economic Sector. 
Compliance audit refers to the examination of transaction s relating to expenditure 
of the audited entities to ascertain whether the provisions of the Constitution of 
India, applicable laws, rules, regulations and var ious orders and instructions 
issued by the competent authorities are being complied with. On the other hand, 
performance audit, in addition to compliance audit, also includes examination of 
whether the objectives of the programme/activity/department are ac hieved 
economically, efficiently and effectively. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State 
Legislature, the important results of audit. Auditing Standards require that the 
materiality level for reporting should be commensura te with the nature, volume 
and magnitude of transactions. The findings of audit are expected to enable the 
Executive to take corrective actions as also to frame policies and directives that 
will lead to improved financial management of the organisations, t hus 
contributing to better governance. 
This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and extent of audit, provides a 
synopsis of the significant deficiencies and achievements in implementation of 
selected schemes, significant audit observations made  during compliance audit 
and follow-up on previous Audit Reports.  
1.2 Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 
The Principal Accountant General (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit) , Kerala 
conducts audit of the expenditure under Economic Services incurred  by 18 
departments at the Secretariat level and also the field offices. The audit 
jurisdiction also extends to 41 autonomous bodies, 98 public sector undertakings, 
four statutory corporations, two departmental commercial undertakings and one 
regulatory com mission. The departments are headed by Additional Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries, who are assisted by Directors/ 
Commissioners/Chief Engineers and subordinate officers under them. 
The comparative position of expenditure incurred by the  Government during the 
year 2015-16, with that of the preceding year is given in Table 1.1. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 2 
Table 1.1 
Comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government 
    
Disbursements 2014-15 2015-16 Percentage 
(+) Excess 
(-) Deficit 
Plan Non-plan Total Plan Non-plan Total 
Revenue Expenditure 
General Services 133.76 31,298.99 31,432.75 116.98 35,967.70 36,084.68 (+) 14.80 
Social Services 5,893.10 17,825.01 23,718.11 7,591.56 20,011.73 27,603.29 (+) 16.38 
Economic 
Services 
4,255.73 5,941.84 10,197.57 4,369.95 6,728.47 11,098.42 (+) 08.83 
Grants-in-aid and 
Contributions 
--- 6,398.00 6,398.00 --- 3,903.08 3,903.08 (-) 40.00 
Total 10,282.59 61,463.84 71,746.43 12,078.49 66,610.98 78,689.47 (+) 9.68 
Capital Expenditure 
Capital outlay 3,880.54 374.05 4,254.59 6,518.48 981.56 7,500.04 (+) 76.28 
Loans and 
advances 
disbursed 
--- --- 743.09 407.61 434.64 842.25 (+) 13.34 
Repayment of 
public debt  
--- --- 5,842.77 --- --- 6,060.73 (+) 03.73 
Contingency Fund -- -- -- -- -- --- --- 
Public Account 
disbursements 
-- -- 1,36,242.59 -- -- 1,62,824.67 (+) 19.51 
Total 3,880.54 374.05 1,47,083.04 6,926.09 1,416.20 1,77,227.69 (+) 20.49 
Grand Total 14,163.13 61,837.89 2,18,829.47 19,004.58 68,027.18 2,55,917.16 (+) 16.95 
 
1.3 Authority for audit  
C&AG’s authority for audit is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the 
Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Serv ice) Act, 1971[C&AG’s (DPC) Act ]. C&AG conducts the 
audit of expenditure of the departments of the Government of Kerala under 
Section 13
1 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. The C&AG is the sole auditor in respect 
of two autonomous bodies in the Economic Sector which are audited under 
Sections 19(3)
2 and 20(1) 3 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. Besides, C&AG also 
conducts audit of 41  autonomous bodies in the Economic Sector under Section 
                                                
1  Audit of (i) all transactions from t he Consolidated Fund of the State  (ii) all transactions 
relating to the Contingency Fund and Public Accounts and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, 
profit & loss accounts, balance sheets and other subsidiary accounts. 
2  Audit of the accounts of Corporations established by law made by the State Legislature on the 
request of the Governor. 
3  Audit of accounts of any body or authority on the request of the Governor, on such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the C&AG and the Government. 

Chapter : I - Introduction 
 
 3 
144 & 15  of C&AG's (DPC) Act which are substantially funded by the 
Government.  Principles and methodologies for various audits are prescribed in 
the Auditing Standards and the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 issued 
by the C&AG. 
1.4 Organisational structure of the Office of the Principal Accountant 
General (E&RSA), Kerala 
Under the directions of the C &AG, the Principal Accounta nt General (E&RSA), 
Kerala conducts the audit of Government Departm ents/Offices/Autonomous 
Bodies/Institutions under Economic and Revenue Sector, which are spread all 
over the State. The Principal Accountant General (E&RSA) is assisted by three 
Group Officers.  
1.5 Planning and conduct of audit  
The audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments 
of Government based on exp enditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, 
level of delegated financial powers, assessment o f overall internal controls and 
concerns of stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also considered in this 
exercise. Based on this risk assessment, the frequency and extent of audit are 
decided.  
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Report s (IRs) containing audit 
findings are issued to the heads of the offices. The departments are requested to 
furnish replies to the audit findings within four weeks from the date of receipt of 
the IRs. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either  settled or further 
action for compliance is advised. The important audit observations arising out of 
these IRs are processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to 
the Governor of State under Article 151 of the Constitution of India fo r being 
presented to the State Legislature.  
During 2015-16, 11,162  party-days were utilised to carry out audit of 929 units 
(Performance Audit and Compliance Audit) of the various departments/ 
organisations which fall in the audit jurisdiction of the Prin cipal Accountant 
General (E&RSA), Kerala.  The audit plan covered those units/entities which 
were vulnerable to significant risks as per our assessment.  
                                                
4  Audit of all (i) receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by grants or 
loans from the Consolidated Fund of the State and (ii) all receipts and expenditure of any body 
or authority where the grants or loans to such body or authority from the Consolidated Fund of 
the State in a financial year is not less than ` one crore. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 4 
1.6 Significant audit observations  
In the last few years, Audit has reported on several significant d eficiencies in 
implementation of various programmes/activities through performance audits as 
well as on the quality of internal controls in selected departments which impact 
the success of programmes and functioning of the departments. Similarly, the 
deficiencies noticed during compliance audit of the Government departments/  
organisations have also been reported upon.  
The present report contains findings of one performance audit and sev en 
compliance audit paragraphs. The significant audit observations are discussed 
below: 
1.6.1 Performance audit of programme/department 
1.6.1.1 Licensing and monitoring of quarrying of minor minerals 
The performance audit was conducted to assess the regularity in issuance of 
licenses for quarrying of minor minerals and effect iveness of monitoring by 
departments/agencies concerned after issue of licenses.  
Issuance of unlimited passes for quarrying area of between 40 to 50 Are in 
accordance with Consolidated Royalty Payment System under the Kerala Minor 
Minerals Concession Rule s, 2015 and introduction of the system of Registered 
Metal Crusher Unit paved the way for indiscriminate quarrying. Though 
Government of Kerala (GoK) ordered (December 2010) that the right to quarrying 
on government land be auctioned so as to have transpar ency in the allotment, the 
same was not put into practice. Similarly, the directions of Government of India 
(GoI) (May 2011) and the Hono urable Supreme Court (February 2012) regarding 
preparation of mining plan and environment management plan were not 
implemented in respect of Granite Building Stone (GBS) permit holders till the 
period covered in Audit. Further, no government agency was entrusted with the 
monitoring and enforcement of  the Kerala Environment Policy, 2009 approved 
(December 2009) by Governmen t. Lack of awareness by Department of Mining 
and Geology (DMG) of the boundary/area of forest s and assigned forest land led 
to issuance of quarrying permits in prohibited areas like forest  and assigned forest 
land. The Kerala State Pollution Control Board and State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority did not have a system for periodical monitoring to ensure 
compliance with the conditions specified in their consents.  The monitoring of 
compliance of Kerala Mineral Concession Rules by DMG was not effective  as 
evidenced by the violations noticed by Audit in 21 out of the 27 quarries verified 
in joint inspection. The poor performance by Regional Mineral squads of DMG 
made the effort to curb illegal quarrying ineffective.  
The collection of royalty on minor mi nerals extracted is linked to mineral transit 
passes.  We detected misuse of transit passes, movement of minerals without 
transit passes or by using forged transit passes. The prevailing system to regulate 

Chapter : I - Introduction 
 
 5 
illegal extraction and transportation of minor minerals was not effective. The staff 
of DMG lacked expertise in taking measurements of quarried area. So they were 
unable to assess the quantity excavated illegally/in excess. Quarries operating 
close to residential areas posed threat to properties and residential buildings. 
 (Chapter II) 
1.6.2 Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
Audit of selected topics 
1.6.2.1 Regulation of Houseboats 
The operation of   (HBs) is regulated under the Kerala Inland Vessels 
Rules, 2010, (amended in 2015) which were framed under the Inland Vessel  Act, 
1917. The procedure mandated for safe operation of HBs in backwaters consisted 
of survey, registration and dry dock inspection. More than 90 per cent of the HBs 
in Kerala are registered under Port Registry, Alappuzha of which about 53 per 
cent did not conduct the mandatory annual survey. Similarly, about 44.41 per cent 
of the registered HBs had not renewed their Registration Certificates on due dates. 
Further, about 64.85 per cent of the registered HBs did not conduct the mandatory 
dry dock inspections once in three years. All these pointed to the ineffective 
monitoring by the surveyor, causing threat to the safety and security of passengers 
on board. The Survey and Registration Certificates were issued to HBs 
conditionally, but the Surveyor did not ensure compliance of those conditions. 
The Directorate of Ports has not constituted an enforcement wing. Consequently, 
illegal and unauthorised operations of HBs were on the increase. Further, a large 
number of HBs were operated by unqualified crew, without lifesaving appliances 
and firefighting equipment. These violations were not monitored by the surveyor 
and action taken against the defaulters . About 53.88 per cent  of HBs in the 
Vembanad lake operated without valid Integrated Consent to Operate from Kerala 
State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), polluting the environment. KSPCB did 
not have adequate monitoring mechanism for identifying the defaulters. 
Moreover, most of the HBs did not utilise the Common Sewage Treatment Plant 
and instead, discharged their sewage into the lake.   
(Paragraph 3.1) 
1.6.2.2 Allotment and utilisation of industrial plots 
The Department of Industries (Department) acts as a facilitator for industrial 
promotion and sustainability of Micro, Small and Medium Enterpri ses and 
traditional industries. The  Department, under its land allotment scheme  provided 
Development Areas (DAs) and Development Plots (DPs) for industrial use to 
prospective entrepreneurs either on hire purchase or on lease basis.  
Even though since 10 June 2013, industrial land in DA/DP is to be allotted to 
prospective entrepreneurs on lease basis only, several violations of the rules were 
 
s
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 6 
noticed. The Department has not fixed fair value of industrial land allotted on 
lease, due to which revenue due to Government could not be collected. The land 
allotment rules prohibited transfer or alienation of such land without the prior 
written consent of the Government/Director of Industries. But the allottees of 
industrial land had transferred the same to others without the consent, by adopting 
methods like change in the constitution of ownership by bringing in new 
irector (s), sub-leasing or by proposing transfer of ownership on the grounds of 
loan default, etc. Even though the Kerala Land Conservancy Act, 1957 states that, 
land which is the property of Government is not to be occupied by anyone without 
permission, instances of encroachment of industrial land were noticed in DP 
Koppam, in Palakkad district, DA Edayar in Ernakulam district, etc.  Due to 
inordinate delay in completion of development works of multi-storied industrial 
parks (Gala) in Ernakulam, Palakkad and Thrissur districts, intended to tide over 
land scarcity in the State, the envisaged objective remained unachieved despite 
spending ` 28.43 crore. Test-check of records and joint verification of DA/DP by 
Audit with Departmental officials found 11 instances of idling industrial land. It 
was noticed that even though the allottees deviated from their envisaged purposes, 
the General Managers (GM) of the DICs concerned did not resume the land. The 
GMs with the permission of the Director of Industries allowed the allottees to 
mortgage industrial land, though the allotment rules did not authorise it. There 
were also issues such as idling, misuse and transfer of allotted land. We noticed 
that periodical checks to detect violation of allotment conditions were not 
conducted by the GMs. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
Audit of other topics 
 Internet touch screen kiosks installed at a cost of ` 88.92 lakh in 76 Krishi 
Bhavans/offices of Assistant Directors of Agriculture for dissemination of 
information to farmers became unfruitful as the requisite software was not 
installed and most of the farmers were not aware of their installation or 
purpose. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 
 Failure to rectify the defects noticed during field trials, before accepting the 
supply of the Pokkali Paddy Harvester by the Kerala Agricultural 
University, resulted in idling of the harvester procured at a cost of ` 51.48 
lakh. 
(Paragraph 4.2) 
   
 
                 
 
 
d

Chapter : I - Introduction 
 
 7 
building for the Directorate of Ports was constructed without obtaining 
mandatory building permit, the Department became liable (November 2015) 
to pay an annual tax o f ` 2.4 lakh which was three times the normal rate. 
The building was located within 30 meters of the High Tide Line on the sea 
shore subjected to heavy winds and saline atmosphere. Consequently, the 
roof constructed using powder coated sheets over truss work became 
severely corroded and parts of roof blown away. The salinity damaged the 
computers, accessories and other office equipment  resulting in unfruitful 
expenditure of ` 1.46 crore. The landscaping and gardening done in front of 
the new building at a cost of ` 6.73 lakh perished for want of nurturing. The 
building constructed for the Directorate along with allied works at a cost of 
` 2.00 crore was doubtful of its continued use, as the Director requested the 
Government to shift the Directorate away from Valiyathura due to the 
unsuitability of its location and the health problems faced by the staff.   
The Director diverted ` 57.97 lakh sanctioned for renovation of the Signal 
Station at Kodungallur for constructing a Conference Hall and misled the 
Government through misrepresentation of facts. Two Solar Power Systems 
installed at the Directorate through SIDCO
 at a cost of ` 47 lakh without 
sanction became  unfruitful  as  the  same  were  defunct.  Similarly,  out of the 
11 solar power systems costing `
 82 lakh installed by KELTRON at 11  port 
offices without tendering were not functional, defeating the very purpose of 
their installation. The Director of Ports failed to levy liquidated damages of           
` 47 lakh from the supplier of the Container Handling Crane for delay in 
commissioning the equipment.   
(Paragraph 4.3) 
 Inadmissible inclusion of cost index on the cost of bitumen in the estimate 
of nine works and failure of the Executive Engineers of PWD in recovering 
the same from the work bills resulted in excess payment of  
` 3.67 crore to contractors. 
 (Paragraph 4.4) 
 Unnecessary inclusion of five per cent overhead charges in addition to the 
ten per cent  overhead charges allowed in the estimate prepared as per 
MORTH data resulted in extra expenditure of `
 86.26 lakh. 
 (Paragraph 4.5) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 8 
1.7 Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit  
1.7.1 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit Objections/  
Inspection Reports issued by the State Government in 2010 provides for  prompt 
response by the Executive to the IRs issued by the Accountant General (AG) to 
ensure action for rectification in compliance with the prescribed rules and 
procedures and accountability for the deficiencies, lapses etc. noticed during the 
inspection.  The Heads of Offices and next higher authorities are required to 
comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and 
omissions and promptly report their compliance to the AG within four weeks of 
receipt of the IRs.  Half -yearly rep orts of pending IRs are being sent to the 
Secretaries of the Departments concerned to facilitate monitoring of audit 
observations. 
As of 30 June 2016, 626 IRs containing 2,470 paragraphs were outstanding 
against Public Works (Roads and Bridges), Water Reso urces (Irrigation), 
Agriculture Development and Farmers’ Welfare and Forest & Wildlife 
Departments.  Year-wise details of IRs and paragraphs outstanding are detailed in 
Appendix - 1.1. 
A review of the IRs pending due to non -receipt of replies, in respect o f these four 
departments revealed that the Heads of offices had not sent even the initial replies 
in respect of 48 IRs containing 290 paragraphs. 
1.7.2 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
During the year 2015 -16, five Audit Committee Meetings were held w herein 132 
out of 1 ,423 IR paragraphs pertaining to the period between 2008 -09 to 2014 -15 
relating to departments of Fisheries, Irrigation (Projects), Ports and Public Works 
(Roads and Bridges) were settled. 
1.7.3 Response of departments to the draft paragraphs 
Draft Paragraphs and Reviews were forwarded demi -officially to the Additional 
Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of the departments concerned 
between November 2016 and March 2017 with a request to send their responses 
within two week s. The departmental replies were not received in respect of four 
out of the seven compliance audit draft paragraphs featured in this Report.  The 
replies received have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
1.7.4    Follow-up action on Audit Reports  
The Finance department issued (January 2001) instructions to all administrative 
departments of the Government that they should submit Statements of Action 
Taken Notes (ATN) on audit paras included in the Audit Reports directly to the 

Chapter : I - Introduction 
 
 9 
Legislature Secretariat with copies thereof to the Audit Office within two months 
of their being laid on the Table of the Legislature. 
The administrative departments did not comply with the instructions and eight 
departments had not submitted Statements of Action Taken for 22 par agraphs for 
the period 2012-13 and 2014-15 respectively even as of February 2017. ATN s on 
Audit Paragraphs were due from the departments of Public Works (nine 
numbers), Agriculture Development and Farmers’ Welfare (five numbers), Water 
Resources (four numb ers), Tourism, Co -operation, Forest & Wildlife, Transport 
and Coastal Shipping & Inland Navigation (one each).  
1.7.5 Paragraphs to be discussed by the Public Accounts Committee 
There were 31 paragraphs relating to 10 departments pertaining to the period 
2012-13 and 2014-15 pending discussion by the Public Accounts Committee as of 
February 2017. Pending audit paragraphs include one each from Co -operation, 
Fisheries & Ports (Harbour Engineering), Forest & Wildlife, Transport and 
Coastal Shipping & Inland Nav igation; two paragraphs each from Information 
Technology and Tourism; five paragraphs from Water Resources, seven 
paragraphs from Agriculture Development and Farmers’ Welfare and eleven from 
Public Works Departments. 

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
Performance Audit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 11 
CHAPTER-II 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
INDUSTRIES DEPARTMENT 
2. Licensing and monitoring of quarrying of minor minerals  
2.1    Introduction 
The Industries Department through Department of Mining and Geology (DMG) 
issues permits 1 and  leases2 for quarrying of mino r minerals 3 which include 
building stones, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than sand used for 
prescribed purposes and  any other mineral declared by Central Government as 
minor mineral.  
In addition, the DMG issues movement permits and dealer‟s l icence for stocking  
and selling of minor minerals. 
The role of the DMG also includes inspection of mines and quarries and 
implementation of rules and regulations by virtue of the powers vested with it 
under the Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation)  Act, 1957, the 
Minerals Concession Rules, 1960 , the Kerala Minor Mineral Concession 
(KMMC) Rules, 1967 and 2015, and collection of revenue on both major as well 
as minor minerals. DMG is also responsible, through the Kerala Minerals 
(Prevention of Illegal  Mining, Storage and Transportation) Rules, 2015 for 
curbing illegal mining and clandestine movement of minerals. 
Forest/Environmental Clearances (EC)/No Objection Certificates (NOC) required 
for issuing quarrying permits/leases include:-  
 EC from the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF)/ State level 
Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA), wherever 
applicable.  
 NOC from the District Collector based on the recommendation of the 
District Expert Committee constituted by Government in this regard,  for 
extraction of ordinary clay and ordinary sand. 
                                                
1  Quarrying Permit is a short term permit not exceeding one year at a time limited to a maximum 
 further period of two years.  It is given at district level. 
2  Quarrying Lease is a mining lease for minor minerals gran ted for a minimum period of five 
 years and maximum of twelve years. It is given at Directorate level for which a lease deed is to 
 be executed. 
3  Building stones, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than sand used for prescribed 
 purposes and any other mineral declared by Central Government as minor mineral.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 12 
 NOC from revenue authorities if the quarrying area is „ poramboke‟4  
land/revenue land.   
 NOC from Forest Department if the quarrying area is forest land.  
 Consent from the Kerala State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) to 
operate quarries in the case of granite building stone (GBS). 
Role of the Revenue Department includes issuance of survey map of the area, 
issuance of certificate of demarcation of boundaries, issue of certificate to the 
effect that the land has not been assigned for any other purpose, issue of 
possession and enjoyment certificate, issue of NOC in respect of quarrying in 
Government poramboke land and rendering of assistance in the implementation of 
KMMC Rules. 
In addition to the above, quarry operators should have valid licence from Local 
Self Government Institutions (LSGI) as per Section 232 of The Kerala Panchayat 
Raj Act, 1994 and valid explosive licence. 
2.2 Audit Objectives  
To examine whether  
 icences   were issued in accordance with rules and regulations; 
 onitoring of compliance with the  terms and conditions of licence 
including environmental aspects was conducted at all levels; 
 xisting system was adequate and effective in curbing illegal quarrying 
operations. 
2.3  Audit criteria 
Audit criteria are derived from  
 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and 
rules framed there under; 
 Kerala Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1967 and 2015; 
 Kerala Minerals (Prevention of illegal mining, storage and  transportation) 
Rules, 2015; 
 Kerala Environment Policy, 2009; 
 Various circulars and g overnment orders issued in connection with 
quarrying and related activities; 
                                                
4  „Poramboke‟ means unassessed lands which are the property of the Government. 
and

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 13 
 Directions issued by KSPCB in their consent to operate based on Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981;   
 Directions issued by SEIAA/ MoEF based on Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) notifications and Environment Protection Act, 1986; 
 Courts orders; and 
 EIA notifications.  
2.4 Audit scope and methodology  
The Performance Audit covering the period from 2011-12 to 2015-16 was 
conducted during February to July 2016 to evaluate adherence to rules and 
regulations in issuance of permits/leases in respect of quarrying/mining operations 
of minor minerals other than river sand 5 in the State and its monitoring, with 
emphasis on environmental aspects.  
Out of the 14 districts in the State, five 6 were selected for audit using IDEA 
package, in addition to which, three Regional Mineral Squads 7
                                                
5  Revenue Department issues permits for mining of river sand which is governed by The Kerala 
 Protection of River Banks and Regulations of Removal of Sand Act, 2001 and Rules made 
 there under and hence not covered under this performance audit.  A Compliance Audit on 
 “Receipts and utilisation of River Management Fund” concerning sand mining issues has 
 appeared in the Audit Report (para 4.3) on General & Social Sector for the year ended March 
2015.   
6  Pathanamthitta, Ernakulam, Thrissur, Kozhikode and Wayanad. 
7  Kerala Mineral Squads are located at Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur and Kozhikode under the 
 control of Deputy Director, Directorate of Mining and Geology.   
The audit objectives, audit criteria and audit scope and methodology were discussed 
with the representatives of the above mentioned Departments and agencies during the 
Entry  Conference   held   on   21  April  2016.  Files  and  records  relating  to  quarrying 
 were also selected 
for audit.  All lease orders issued in the test checked districts during the period of 
audit were covered. Ten per cent  of the permit files in the five districts were 
selected based on systematic sampling method and five per cent  of the illegal 
mining and transportation cases through random sampling.   
In addition to the selected units, audit also covered the offices of Industries, 
Environment, Revenue and Local Self Government Departments in the 
Secretariat, KSPCB at Thiruvananthapuram and its district level offices (field 
offices) in the selected five districts, State evel Environment Impact Assessment 
Authority (SEIAA), Thiruvananthapuram and Department of Environment and 
Climate Change (DoECC), Thiruvananthapuram, Collectorates in the selected five 
districts, Commercial Tax es check posts in the districts of Thrissur, Kozhikode 
and Wayanad, M/s Kochi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. and Project 
Implementation Unit of NHAI at  Palakkad. 
l

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 14 
permits/leases and Registered Metal Crusher Units (RMCU) issued in the selected 
five districts and in the Directorate of Mining and Geology, Thiruvananthapuram 
were verified.  Joint physical verification of sites with departmental officials was 
conducted in selected sites/cases for checking compliance of conditions 
mentioned in quarrying permits/leases/licences and the effectiveness of 
monitoring by various agencies such as Department of Mining and Geology 
(DMG), Revenue Department, LSGIs, KSPCB, SEIAA and Forest Department. 
Audit findings were discussed with representatives of Industries, Environment, 
Forest, Revenue and Local Self Government Departments, SEIAA and KSPCB in 
an exit conference conducted on 7 March 2017 and their replies have been 
appropriately incorporated in the Audit Report. 
Details of quarrying permits/ leases granted and illegal cases detected during the 
period from 2011-12 to 2015-16 are furnished in Table 2.1.  
Table 2.1  
Quarrying permits/ leases granted and illegal cases detected  
Category 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 Total 
Number of quarrying 
permits granted  
2,401  2,331  1,797  1,538  2,992 11,059 
Number of quarrying 
leases granted  for 
granite building stone 
including granite 
dimension stone   
75  18 6  21 9 129 
Illegal cases detected by 
DMG 
3,870  4,569  4,458  4,191  3,733 20,821 
(Source: Department of Mining and Geology) 
Illegal cases detected include illegal quarrying, illegal transportation and illegal 
storage of minor minerals. It has no correlation with the number of quarrying 
permits/leases. 
Audit findings  
2.5    Non-imposition of restrictions on quarrying ordinary earth  
As per  the  Office  Memorandum  (June  2013)  of  MoEF,  the  concerned State  
Environment Impact Assessment Authorities (SEIAA) were directed to prohibit 
excavation activity in respect of ordinary earth deeper than two metres from 
ground level and within 15 m of any civil structure.  
However, we observed that the provision was not included in KMMC Rules 
which regulates quarrying activities in the State . So, a person could extract 
ordinary earth from his own land for construction of buildings. Only removal of 
earth from the site required transit passes from DMG. We noticed following 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 15 
instances where unscientific quarrying of earth caused loss of property and life 
which shows the necessity of making provisions for regulating quarrying of 
ordinary earth:  
 Unscientific excavation of hill (February 2015)  for construction of a 
building for Hill Top Public School, situated at Thiruthammalthazham in 
Kozhikode district led to land slide and death of two people. 
 Land slide occurred (June 2015) during heavy rain at a site, close to MC 
Road at Karamala near Muvattupuzha town in Ernakulam district where 
earth was excavated from five to six months back and led to loss of 
property. 
2.6  Non-identification of sensitive areas  to be excluded while granting 
quarrying permits 
The Principal Secretary, LSGD requested the Centre for Earth Science Studies 
(CESS)
8 to formulate an opinion based on a rapid environment impact assessment 
study on the functioning of Athani rd rock quarry in Padinjarathara Grama 
Panchayath in Wayanad district. The study report recommended (February 2008) 
that in view of the landslide proneness of the region, Grama Panchayath should 
dissuade operation of quarries at higher elevation, disallow more than one quarry 
within an area of two squar e kilometre and ensure that the distance between two 
operational quarries is not less than one kilometre . As per the report, terrain 
disfigurements influenced the weather pattern and distribution of species locally. 
The report suggested identification of a few quarry sites by the district 
administration after proper studies for extensive mining, instead of allowing 
quarries in ecologically fragile highlands. 
We noticed that the Government failed to implement the recommendation of the 
study. Quarrying, especially GBS was possible anywhere in the State except in 
forest land, if a private party was in possession of either a private land or an  NOC 
from Revenue Department for quarrying in poramboke land. Further, DMG/ 
Government did not identify the areas that had become sensitive as a result of 
excessive exploitation of GBS or where quarrying posed a threat to the 
environment or was near the sites of archaeological/tourism importance as 
evidenced from the following:  
 At the time of site visit to Ambalavayal Panchayath in Wayanad district, we 
noticed that a hill had been extensively quarried. We also observed that, 17 
quarries were functioning in addition to abandoned quarries nearby. Thus, 
more than one quarry lease/permit had been granted within two square 
kilometre.  
 
                                                
8 Now known as National Centre for Earth Science Studies under Ministry of Earth Sciences, 
 GoI 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 16 
 
 District revenue authorities of 
Wayanad issued NOC for 
quarrying in Government land 
subject to the condition that no 
quarrying was to be carried out in 
such a way that it adversely 
affected Phantom Rock, a noted 
tourism spot . However, we 
observed that DMG had issued no 
such orders in respect of private 
lands and had  issued quarrying 
permits in areas close to Phantom 
Rock as there were no specific provisions in KMMC Rules prohibiting 
quarrying near such sites of importance.  
 In Thrissur district, Honourable High Court of  Kerala prohibited (June 
2015) quarrying operations close to Muniyattukunnu, a place noted for  
dolmens9,  in Mupliyam village. Accordingly, 12 q uarries had to be closed 
(June 2015).  
We observed that the Environmental Clearance (EC) conditions issued by SEIAA 
Tamilnadu, a neighbouring state which shares Western Ghats with Kerala, have 
placed restrictions on quarrying in Western Ghats in that the total extent of nearby 
quarries (existing, abandoned and proposed) located within 500 m radius from the 
periphery of a quarry shall not exceed 25 ha within the mining lease period of an 
application. The DMG , Government of Kerala (GoK) had
 not adopted similar 
restrictive measures.  
In the exit conference, the Additional Chief Secretary (ACS), Industries 
Department accepted the audit observation and assured that identification of 
ecologically fragile high lands and sites of archaeological  importance 
would be done in future. 
2.7  Absence of a streamlined system for issuing quarrying permits   
Government of India (GoI), Honourable Supreme Court and the GoK had issued 
guidelines/stipulations to be followed as prerequisites for granting of permits. But 
these guidelines/stipulations were not followed while granting quarrying permits 
as detailed below:- 
 
                                                
9  Prehistoric megalithic tombs consisting of a capstone supported by two or more upright stones 
 to form a barrow 
Quarries  operated close to 
Phantom Rock   dated 25.05.2016 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 17 
 Non-auctioning of Government land for quarrying  
Government ordered10 (December 2010) that in order to bring in transparency in 
the allotment of Government sites for quarrying operations, right to quarry could 
be auctioned and, medium or  long term leases would  be given by Revenue 
Department for quarrying in poramboke lands through a simplified auction 
system. Further, Additional Chief Secretary (Revenue) would examine all aspects.  
We observed that Government did not issue concrete orders in this regard and the 
DMG issued permit/lease to private parties who produced an NOC from Revenue 
Department, without conducting auction. The non-auctioning of Government land 
prevented the possibility of getting more revenue for the Government through 
auctioning, in addition to seigniorage 11 charge. We noticed instances where 
leases/permits were given for quarrying in government land without auction based 
on NOCs issued by Revenue department which are detailed in Appendix –
 2.1. 
Government replied (March 2017) that the Revenue department has entrusted the 
Centre for Management Development for conducting a study in this matter and 
that a decision would be taken on receipt of the study report. 
 Extension of exemption to existing quarrying permit holders  
A Mining Plan shall incorporate comprehensive details such as plan of the precise 
area showing the nature and extent of minor minerals body, spots and extent for 
excavation, detailed cross section, detailed plan for excavation, details of geology 
and lithology
12 of the precise area, precise area showing natural water courses, 
forest limits, assessment of impact of mining on forest and environment including 
air and water pollution, details of restoration by afforestation, land reclamation 
and other  measures under Mine Closure Plan and EC for cluster of minor mineral 
leases. As per directions (May 2011) of Ministry of Mines, GoI, mining plan 
submitted by an applicant and duly approved by State Government is a pre-
requisite for commencement of quarrying.   Honourable Supreme Court in its 
judgement
13 (February 2012) recommended provision for preparation of approved 
Mining Plan in the rules governing mining of minor minerals by States and also 
stressed on the necessity of EC for all quarry operations irrespective of area or 
period of lease/permit. Further, Clause 13.1 of Kerala State Environment Policy, 
2009 stipulated EIA by competent agencies prior to the allocation of sites for 
mining and quarrying activities.   
 
                                                
10  G.O.(Ms) 239/2010/ID dtd. 1.12.2010 
11  Compensation for destruction , removal or appropriation from Government land earth, sand, 
 metal, laterite, lime shell and other notified articles. 
12  General physical characteristics of rocks in a particular area 
13   IA in SLPC No.19628-19629 of 2009. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 18 
We noticed that  
 GoK did not frame or modify rules in consonance with the GoI directions or 
the Honourable Supreme Court judgement making approved mining plan a pre-
requisite for granting quarrying permits. Further, quarrying leases and permits 
were issued without submission of a mining plan. The new rules were framed 
only in February 2015, wherein mining plan was included as a prerequisite for 
granting lease.  
 As per the revised KMMC Rules and orders issued by GoK, existing quarrying 
permit holders of GBS were exempted from submitting mining plan and EC. 
This was against the spirit of the Honou
rable Supreme Court order and Kerala 
State Environment Policy. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that at present the department was insisting upon 
mining plan and EC for grant of any type of concession14 for mining of minerals.  
We presume that the GoK started insisting upon obtaining EC only after the 
Honourable Supreme Court upheld (December 2016) its earlier direction 
(February 2012) requiring EC for all quarrying activities.  
 Non-adherence to Kerala Environment Policy, 2009 while issuing 
quarrying permits 
GoK approved (December 2009) the Kerala Environment Policy, 2009 which 
provides a framework in which conservation and development can be achieved 
simultaneously. Section 13 of the policy inter alia provides for restoration of the 
mined and abandoned areas by those responsible for their damage, ensuring 
compulsory land filling and tree planting in the mined area, prevention of mining 
and quarrying of hills, etc. 
 As per Section 13.3 of the policy, restoration of the mined and abandoned 
areas are to be done by those 
responsible for their damage and as 
per Section 13.4 compulsory land 
filling and tree planting in the mined 
areas are to be  ensured. We noticed 
that DMG which issued quarrying 
permits did not convey the conditions 
to the permit holders at the time of 
granting permit. Neither the DMG nor 
KSPCB   maintained data regarding the number of trees planted after expiry of 
the permit period as against those cut and removed prior to quarrying. During 
site visits we noticed seven 15 abandoned quarries which were not restored by 
land filling/plantation of trees.  
                                                
14  Land granted by an authority for some specific purpose. 
15  Arackapady village  in Ernakulam district, Kakkattoor in  Ernakulam district, Padimon in 
 Pathanamthitta district, Koodal village in Pathanamthitta d istrict, Ambalavayal panchayath in 
 Wayanad district, Mupliyam in Thrissur district and Poolakkode village in Kozhikode district. 
Date 26.10.2016 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 19 
 Section 13.8  of the policy intends to 
prevent mining and quarrying of hills. 
No restriction was imposed by DMG 
on quarrying in hills. During joint site 
verification of locations  in 
Pathanamthitta, Ernakulam and 
Wayanad districts we noticed 
quarrying of hills.   
GoK replied (March 2017) that the staff of the DMG neither ha d the competence 
to monitor the compliance nor powers to enforce environmental laws and hence 
DMG had no role in enforcing policy related matters. G oK also stated that it was 
to be monitored by the KSPCB and SEIAA. But in the exit conference the 
representatives of both SEIAA and KSPCB stated that they were not monitoring 
post quarrying activities which indicate d lack of co -ordination among various 
agencies in quarrying and post quarrying activities. 
Recommendation No.  1: Government may strengthen its agencies and 
improve co -ordination among the agencies to ensure compliance with the 
Kerala Environment Policy, 2009. 
 Absence of provision requiring Environment Management Plan for 
quarrying in cluster situation 
Mining Plan includes Environment Managemen t Plan16  which is also a part of 
EC. Honourable Supreme Court in its judgement 17 (February 2012) observed the 
necessity of cluster 18 approach in mining so that State Government or mine 
owners‟ associations may facilitate implementation of Environment Management 
Plan (EMP) in such cluster of mines. In Kerala there are quarries operating close 
to each other or to abandoned quarries.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that EIA notification, 2006 ha s prescribed procedure 
for issue of EC for quarrying of minor minerals including cluster situation when 
the distance from the periphery of one lease is less than 500 m from the periphery 
of ano ther lease and insists preparation of EMP for grant of EC in cluster 
situation.  
                                                
16  An environment management plan (EMP), is a site -specific plan developed to ensure that all 
 necessary measures are identifi ed and implemented in order to protect the  environment and 
 comply with environmental legislation. It is also referred to as an impact management plan and 
 is usually prepared as part of EIA reporting. It translates recommended mitigation and 
 monitoring measures into specific actions that will be carried out by the proponent. 
17   IA in SLPC No.19628-19629 of 2009. 
18   As per Ministry  of Mines Guidelines (May 2011) , where large numbers of small mines are 
 situated and worked out in clusters,  at such places the provisions of quarrying of minor 
 minerals should be done in a s ystematic and scientific manner. The programme of restoration 
 and reclamation of the mined out area  and rehabilitation must be made jointly in phased 
 manner in the abandoned areas in an entire cluster of the minor mineral. 
Date 17.06.2016 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 20 
However, we noticed that GoK did not frame any rule or issue guidelines making 
EMP and EC mandatory in respect of cluster mining before granting of quarrying 
permits. 
2.8 Consolidated Royalty Payment System led to reduction in royalty 
and indiscriminate quarrying  
As per Rule 4(1) of the KMMC Rule, 1967 quarrying permit is a short term 
permit to extract and remove minor minerals not exceeding 10,000 MT in 
quantity under one permit. But as per Rule 3 of KMMC Rules, 2015 no limit was 
prescribed on the quantity that can be quarried under one quarrying permit. The 
permit holder has the option to pay royalty based on the area of quarrying and 
number of passes used for transportation.   
We noticed that the system paved the 
way for unscientific quarrying as noted below: 
2.8.1 Lack of restriction on the number of mineral transit passes that can 
be issued for quarrying areas between 40 to 50  Are  
As per Schedule V of KMMC Rules, 1967 there was a limit on issuance of 
mineral transit passes with respect to area of excavation under Consolidated 
Royalty Payment System (CRPS) 19 for laterite building stones (LBS) and granite 
building stones (GBS) . We noticed that during revision of the rules in 2015, 
though the limit for quarrying permit under CRPS (for LBS and GBS) was 
restricted to a maximum of 5,000 mineral transit passes up to an area of 40 Are 20 
at the rate ` 100 per mineral transit pass, there was no such restriction prescribed 
with respect to area between 40 50 Are.   Due to this, permit holders under this 
category could obtain unlimited number of passes on payment of a consolidated 
royalty of rupees  seven  lakh  without restriction on the quantity extracted, which 
led to short realisation of revenue. Out of 13 cases verified in the five test checked 
districts, we noticed that;  
 In Thrissur district, 9,000 passes were issued to one Sri P. V. Mathai for 
quarrying 40.47 Are of land in Mulayam village on payment of a 
consolidated royalty of rupees  seven  lakh  which resulted in loss of royalty 
of rupees two lakh
21.  
 In Pathanamthitta district, 11,000 mineral transit passes were issued to Sri. 
S. Sunilkumar, M/s SKG Granites, Kavungal for quarrying 47.02 Are of 
                                                
19  As per KMMC Rules,  2015 CRPS is a mode of advance payment of consolidated royalty 
 depending upon the extent of quarrying land limiting the number of passes according to the 
 extent of land  to a maximum of 50 Are. 
20  1 Are = 100sqm 
21  Royalty on 9,000 passes at the rate of  ` 100 per pass worked out to ` 9 lakh. Royalty paid as 
 per CRPS was ` 7 lakh. Therefore the difference was ` 2 lakh.   

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 21 
land in Aruvappulam village on payment of a consolidated royalty of 
rupees
 seven
 lakh  which  resulted in loss of royalty of rupees  four  lakh22.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that Government has decided to amend the KMMC 
rules restricting issue of mineral transit passes to 7,000 numbers for areas between 
40 to 50 Are. 
2.8.2  Reduction in revenue due to collection of royalty based on 
Consolidated Royalty Payment System 
As per KMMC Rules, 2015, every applicant for a quarrying permit shall pay 
royalty in advance to Government at the rates specified in Schedule I or I V,
23 as 
the case may be. In the case of payment of royalty under CRPS for GBS and LBS, 
the competent authority may permit an applicant to opt for this system. Under the 
CRPS, the royalty is paid on slab rate based on the quarry area and number of 
passes, irrespective of the carrying capacity of the vehicle.  
Audit examination revealed that different types of vehicles with varying 
capacities were used for moving GBS depending on the accessibility to location 
and machinery used for loading GBS.  
The royalty received under CRPS per load was ` 100 which was equal to the 
royalty of 4.167 MT 24 of GBS. But trucks carrying more than 5 MT (and even 15 
MT) were being used for transportation of GBS. DMG could easily assess the 
royalty based on the cumulative quantity despatched. If so, the royalty received  
would  be  commensurate with the quantity despatched. 
GoK in reply (March 2017) accepted the views of Audit and stated  that with the 
introduction of mining plan, the quantity of mineral that could be extracted would 
be regulated. 
2.8.3  Quarrying without bench cutting in violation of KMMC Rules 
As per Rule 10 of KMMC Rules, 2015 in the case of quarries of GBS, where the 
depth of pit exceeds six metres, the sides of open workings shall be sloped, 
stepped or benched 25 or secured by the permit holder in such a manner so as to 
prevent slope failure.  During joint physical verification of four sites we noticed 
that as the quarrying area under CRPS was small, the permit holders were 
quarrying the area without bench cutting in violation of the KMMC Rules, 2015 
as evidenced from the following photographs. 
                                                
22  Royalty on 11000 passes at the rate of  ` 100 per pass worked out to ` 11 lakh. Royalty paid as 
 per CRPS was ` 7 lakh .Therefore the difference was ` 4 lakh.   
23  As per Schedule I royalty is paid against quantity mined and as per Schedule IV royalty is paid 
 based on area and number of passes.  
24 ` 100 per pass works out  to 4.167 MT with royalty at the rate of  ` 24 per MT. 
25  Sloped, stepped and benched quarrying are various methods adopted in open quarries to 
 ensure safety during operation depending upon the stability of the slope of the quarries. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 22 
2.8.4 Excessive extraction from lease areas registered as R egistered Metal 
Crusher Unit  and  resultant short collection of royalty 
The Director of Mining and Geology grants quarrying lease for GBS for a 
particular year limiting the quantity to be quarried as per KMMC Rules.  As per 
an insertion made (March 2002) in KMMC Rules , 1967 and subsequently 
included in the KMMC Rules, 2015, lease holders have the option to pay 
consolidated royalty based on jaw size or power of crusher installed, irrespective 
of the quantity quarried.  
A test check of 79 cases that had opted for consolidated payment of royalty based 
on RMCU showed that the quantity extracted was more than the annual 
permissible limit specified by DMG and the royalty paid with respect to quantity 
was short by ` 12.21 crore26 comparing to the consolidated royalty paid as per 
Schedule I27 of KMMC Rules, 1967/2015. We observed that lack of restrictions in 
extraction of GBS u nder RMCU resulted in indiscriminate extraction of GBS  
from lease areas. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that Government was forced to opt for consolidated 
upfront royalty payment system as it was difficult to monitor and enforce quantity 
based payments with the existing manpower and the ensuing implementation of 
electronic mineral transit pass gives it an opportunity to revisit the issue. 
                                                
26  For the year 2013-14, Consolidated Royalty collected as per RMCU for a quantity of 4805894 
 MT was  ` 1.96 crore  whereas the royalty as per Schedule I worked out  to ` 7.69 crore at the 
 rate of  ` 16 per MT  ; For the year 2015-16, Consolidated Royalty collected as per RMCU for 
 a quantity of 5168080  MT was `  5.92 crore whereas the royalty as per Schedule I came to            
 ` 12.40 crore at the rate of ` 24 per MT.    
27  ` 16 per MT as per KMMC Rules, 1967 and  ` 24 per MT as per KMMC Rules, 2015. 
 
 
Quarry of Sri P U Antony, Ernakulam 
District dated 11.11.2016 
Quarry of Sri T K Raju, Pathanamthitta  
District dated  09.11.2016 
Quarry of Sri V R Parameswaran, 
Thrissur District dated 23.5.2016 
Quarry of Sri V K Janardanan,   
Ernakulam  District  dated  26.10.2016 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 23 
The reply was silent on the excessive extraction of GBS which was far more than 
the prescribed limit sanctioned by the Director of Mining and Geology and may 
cause damage to the environment. 
2.9  Issuance of permits in violation of KMMC Rules  
2.9.1  Issuance of permits for more than the prescribed period  
As per Rule 8 of KMMC Rules, 1967 and Rule 13 of 2015, no person shall be 
eligible for a permit on a particular area of contiguous land owned and possessed 
by him if he has availed permits for quarrying up to a maximum period of three 
years in different spells on the same land.  
We noticed that that this provision was violated by four quarries each in 
Pathanamthitta and Thrissur districts and five quarries in Ernakulam district , 
where the quarries were given permits for periods exceeding three years. The 
Department did not have a data base to check the number of times the permit of 
each quarry was renewed. Thus, DMG was unaware of the period for which a 
quarry was working.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that with the implementation of e-governance project,  
such details would be computerised. 
2.9
.2   Granting of quarrying permits under CRPS violating KMMC Rules, 
 2015  
As per Schedule IV of the KMMC Rules, 2015, payment of royalty under CRPS 
is limited to an area of 50 Are If the area is above 50 Are, as per Schedule I 
royalty is leviable based on the quantity quarried. The Geologist, District office of 
Mining and Geology, Wayanad issued quarrying permits violating the condition 
in seven cases 28 where the area exceeded 50 Are, by  payment of a lump sum 
royalty of  rupees seven lakh, instead of the royalty based on quantity.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that Director, Mining and Geology has been directed 
to take disciplinary action in this matter. 
 
2.10   Quarrying in forest/ assigned forest land  
 Quarrying in forest land 
As per Rule 5 of KMMC Rules, 1967 quarrying in forest land is not permissible 
without the consent of the Forest Department. In Thrissur district, a granite quarry 
was functioning in forest land for the last 20 years, in Peechi village. The Forest 
                                                
28   Thomas O  D , M  P Kuriakose,  Eliyas  T  V , David P  V ,  Ren jith  K ,  
Babu K
 
 P  and  Sudheesh A T 
Shri. Shri. Shri.
Shri. Shri.
Shri. Shri.

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 24 
Department failed to identify the quarry and issued a stop memo  only in 
December 2015 when public complaints were received in this regard.  
 Functioning of quarry in assigned forest land  
As per Rule 3 of the Kerala Land Assignment (Regulation of Occupation of 
Forest Lands Prior to 01 January 1977) Special Rules 1993, assigned forest land 
could be used only for cultivation, house sites or shop sites.  Two quarries and 
three crusher units were functioning in assigned forest land in Mulayam village of 
Thrissur district from 2012-13 onwards. The Forest department failed to identify 
the same in time and issued a stop memo only in May 2016.  
In the exit conference , the Assistant Conservator of Forest stated that the forest 
land/ assigned forest land could not be identified as the forest land was scattered.   
The statement was not acceptable as the Forest department failed to monitor 
violation of the KMMC Rules.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that if a map of the forest/assigned forest land with 
buffer zone (non-mining zone) was issued by Forest department, it would help the 
Department of Mining and G eology to avoid issue of mineral concession in such 
areas.  
Recommendation No. 2: Responsibility may be fixed for allowing quarrying 
activities in forest/assigned forest land.  
2.11   Non-observance of MoEF directions  
2.11.1 Granting of leases to mine areas exceeding five hectare  
As per item 1(a) of the schedule appended to the EIA notification, 2006, mine 
lease area exceeding five hectare requires Environmental Clearance from SEIAA.  
Audit examination revealed that, 
 Five quarrying leases, each having an a rea of less than five hectare, were 
sanctioned to M/s Inchappara Sand & Granites Pvt. Ltd. in Pathanamthitta 
district by DMG during 2011-12 without EC, circumventing the stipulations 
even though the total quarrying lease area exceeded five hectare. 
 M/s K. J. Vasudevan Nair Granites of Thrissur district and M/s Poabs 
Granites Pvt. Ltd. of Kozhikode district obtained EC only for the area newly 
added to the existing lease and not for the original leased land which 
exceeded five hectare in area in each case. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that the department failed to notice the area mentioned 
in the lease application s and on detecting the mistakes, DMG instructed the lease 
holders to submit EC.  No record of any such instructions issued to the lease 
holders was, however, furnished to Audit.  

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 25 
2.12  Extraction of GBS from Government poramboke land using forged 
NOC 
Quarrying in Government poramboke land requires NOC from Revenue 
Department.  We noticed that DMG sanctioned (February 2011) lease 29 to extract 
GBS over an area of 0.3440 ha of Government poramboke land in Vengoor West 
Village, Kunnathunadu Taluk in Ernakulam District for 12 years, based on an 
NOC bearing No.K.Dis-12559/2006 dated 03.0 7.2007 signed by the Tahasildar, 
Kunnathunad.  Revenue Department later (March 2012) detected that the NOC 
produced was fake and so DMG issued a stop memo. The lease was cancelled 
(September 2013) by the Director of Mining and Geology and based on the 
directions of District Collector a case was registered by Vigilance and Anti 
Corruption Bureau, Ernakulam which was in progress. 
We observed that there was no mechanism in DMG to verify the genuineness of 
NOCs.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that in order to avoid forgery of NOC, DMG would 
cross check with Revenue department in future.  
2.13 Quarrying in land assigned for agricultur al purposes 
As per Kerala Land Assignment Rules, 1964 read with Government order 30 
(August 2010), land assigned for agricultur al purpose cannot be utilised for 
quarrying purpose. Audit scrutiny revealed that in Ernakulam district, eight 
permits for quarrying GBS were issued during 2014-15 by the District office of 
Mining and Geology violating the above condition. We observed that Revenue 
authorities issued certificates to holders of such assigned land for obtaining 
quarrying permits though quarrying of GBS was not permissible in these lands. 
Industries Department replied (March 2017) that Revenue Department was 
finalising their stand in that matter. 
Recommendation No.3
: Responsibility may be fixed in granting quarrying 
permits in assigned agricultural land.  
2.14  Ineffective monitoring  
Quarry operators are required to obtain consent from KSPCB, EC from SEIAA 
and quarrying permit/lease from DMG before commencing their operation. These 
consents/clearances require observance of certain conditions stipulated under 
various Acts/Rules/circulars/conveyed conditions. As per GoK instructions 
(March 2014) the authority empowered to give clearance, licence, permit, 
consents has to ensure that no violation thereof is involved. This requires physical 
                                                
29  To  Thomas N.A., Njattumkala House, Valamboor, Pattimattam Village, Ernakulam 
 District . 
30  GO No.1222/2010/ID dt 21.08.2010. 
Shri.

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 26 
verification by the agencies concerned. An analysis of the verifications conducted 
on adherence to conditions is narrated below:  
 Monitoring compliance of conditions mentioned in the consent of 
KSPCB and SEIAA 
While issuing consent to operate, KSPCB conveys certain conditions to the quarry 
operators based on Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Environment  Protection Act  
1986.  Further, lease holders with a minimum area of five hectare for quarrying 
GBS require EC from SEIAA. The EC contains certain conditions to be followed 
by the lease holders.   
We observed that KSPCB which issued 1,358 numbers of consents and SEIAA 
which issued 71 numbers of ECs in the selected five districts did not have a 
system for periodical monitoring of compliance with the conditions specified in 
the consent.   
  Non-monitoring of adherence to KMMC Rules by DMG  
DMG issues quarrying permits/leases and the permit/lease holders have to adhere 
to various conditions specified in the permits/leases . We conducted joint site 
inspection at 27 quarries and found violation of Rules in 21 of them. The 
violations included non-observance of safety measures, operation after expiry of 
permit, operating without explosive licence, non-demarcation of quarry area etc.  
(Appendix – 2.2).  
We observed that the DMG did not conduct periodical inspection of quarry sites 
to monitor implementation of KMMC Rules.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that strict directions have been issued to district 
officers to ensure compliance with Mining Plan. 
2.15  Lack of expertise in taking measurements of uneven terrains  
Engineering departments in Kerala adopts level measurement 31 rather than tape 
measurement to arrive at the actual volume. Similarly, modern equipment  like 
total station are also used for more accurate measurement. Audit scrutiny of 
relevant records revealed that, in the  field DMG adopted tape measurement rather 
than level measurement, which made measurement of excess quantity mined 
beyond permitted area or limit in uneven terrain unascertainable. 
                                                
31 Level measurement is a process whereby the difference in height between two or more points 
 can be determined.  The aim of level measurement  is to determine the relative heights of 
 different objects on or below the surface of the earth and to determine the undulation of the 
 ground surface. This is used for, among other things, providing data on volumes. 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 27 
During joint physical verification in Thrissur district we identified working of 
three quarries after the expiry of permit period. The quantity of minor mineral 
removed from the site could not be calculated by the DMG officials in two 
instances and in one instance the quantity was assessed tentatively as the final 
level was not taken immediately after the permit period.  
We observed that absence of data on initial levels had led to incorrect assessment 
of the quantity after taking the final levels. Necessity for accurate measurements 
for assessing the quantity quarried is evidenced from the instances mentioned in 
Appendix – 2.3.     
GoK replied (March 2017) that as per the new KMMC Rules, 2015 mining plans 
were insisted upon for issue of concessions. These plans contained the 
topographic map of the area mined prepared using total stations, cross sections, 
total resources, minable resources etc. and that the lessee had to submit a scheme 
of mining every five years, recording the total volume excavated.      
The reply is not acceptable as it does not address the audit observation. Moreover, 
the reply suggests that DMG would rely on information furnished by the lease 
holder and it was silent about permit holders. 
2.16   Failure to address issues of ground water level  
Major part of the State of Kerala is covered by laterites which act as a good 
aquifer system. Large scale removal of laterite hillocks may result in depletion in 
ground water table. We noticed that while issuing EC, SEIAA of the neighbouring 
State of Tamil Nadu conveyed the ground water level to the lease/ permit holder 
along with the requirement of its monitoring. 
However, we observed that DMG, which issues quarrying permits in Kerala, did 
not convey the ground water level of any of the quarrying sites where q
uarrying 
permits were granted. The Director, Ground Water Department stated that 
quarrying might lead to depletion of water table; but no specific studies have been 
conducted by the department with respect to quarrying affecting availability of 
water.  
We further observed that there were complaints regarding decrease in the storage 
capacity of wells due to quarrying, as given in Appendix –
 2.4. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that the impact of quarrying on ground water was 
studied while mining plans were prepared and possible mitigation measures were 
suggested. It was further stated that such study was conducted while granting EC. 
The reply is not acceptable because no record regarding such study was furnished 
to audit. Further, mining plan and EC were made mandatory to all quarry 
operators from December 2016 only.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 28 
2.17  Waiver of the stipulation to maintain distance from residential 
buildings to GBS quarries 
As per Section 164 of The Metalliferous Mines Regulations,  1961 area  within 500  m
 from  the  place  of  blasting is danger zone. As per conditions of SEIAA, 
Tamilnadu, quarrying activity of GBS is not permissible within 500 m of 
habitation. As per para 7 of the study report of CESS (February 2008), area within 
250 m is prone to vibration. Honourable High Court of Kerala had prohibited 
quarrying within 500 m of Ambedkar Harijan Colony which led to stoppage of 
quarries in nearby Pettamala located in Kunnathunad taluk  in Ernakulam district. 
We noticed that as per Rule 29/40 of the KMMC Rules, 1967/ 2015 the minimum 
distance stipulated from a quarry to nearby residential building was 50/100 m. 
During the joint site verification of quarries near Valakkavu in Thrissur district, 
the public complained of damages caused to their houses due to  blasting. Local 
verification showed 14 houses located more than 100 m away from the quarries 
damaged with cracks on floors/walls, reportedly due to blasting.  Other instances 
of public complaints regard ing damages caused by blasting are illustrated in 
Appendix –
 2.5.  
The Assistant Geologist who accompanied us for the joint verification stated that 
many geological factors affect ed the buildings such as waves occurring during 
blasting, terrain of blasting site and intensity of tremors while b asting.  
  
  
Cracks to buildings noticed on 25.10.2016 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 29 
DMG and KSPCB stated that they did not have the capacity to measure the 
impact of vibrations due to blasts. We observed that the fixation of 100 m 
distance may require rethinking as functioning of quarries even at a distance of 
beyond 100 m caused damage to properties and created fear among the public. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that in the revised KMMC Rules the use of explosives 
and ground vibrations were dealt with in mining plans and EC. 
2.18  System to curb illegal quarrying  
Illegal quarrying not only leads to loss of revenue but also involves indiscriminate 
quarrying practices.  Revenue, Mining & Geology and Police Departments are 
engaged in detection of illegal quarrying and transportation.  There are 14 District 
offices and three regional mineral squads under the DMG to detect illegal 
quarrying, transportation and storage of minerals. The District offices are engaged 
both in the issue of permits and detection of illegal cases.  The main function of 
the regional mineral squads is detection of illegal activities relating to quarrying. 
2.18.1  Working of squads /committees 
2.18.1.1  Performance of Regional Mineral Squads in detection of illegal 
cases  
Regional Mineral Squads were constituted for effective implementation of the 
Kerala Minerals (Prevention of Illegal Mining, Storage and Transportation) Rules, 
2015. There are three regional mineral squads functioning under DMG based at 
Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur and Kozhikode. These squads are engaged in 
detection of illegal transportation,  quarrying and storage of minor minerals. A test 
check of the Compounding Registers of the three mineral squads for three 
months
32  revealed that;  
 Though the jurisdiction of each squad was four to five districts they did 
not cover all the districts in a month. Pathanamthitta, Alappuzha, 
Ernakulam, Kottayam, Idukki, Wayanad and Kasaragod districts which 
constituted
 half the number of districts were not covered in these months.  
 The squads functioned only during day time as available staff sufficed 
only for one shift.  
Since all the 14 districts were not covered  regularly, there was the risk of illegal 
quarrying, transportation and storage of minor mineral going undetected. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that the area of jurisdiction was very large. It was also 
stated that as there were only three squads it was not possible to reach all sites of 
illegal quarrying or storage and detect all cases of illegal transportation.  
                                                
32  October 2012, January 2014 and March 2015. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 30 
2.18.1.2  Non-functioning of committees constituted to prevent illegal 
 quarrying 
Government ordered (August 2011) formation of district level 33 and divisional 
level committees34 to strengthen the surveillance and enforcement mechanism for 
preventing illegal quarrying. While the District level committees were to monitor 
the action taken to redress complaints raised by the public about illegal quarrying, 
the divisional level committees were to formulate an inspection schedule for 
visiting all working quarries and redress public complaints on illegal quarrying 
without delay. 
In the selected five districts, though the committees were formed they were not 
functional, as meetings were not convened regularly. In Thrissur district no 
meetings were convened after  the first meeting held in September 2011 while in 
Wayanad district no meetings were held after February 2015 and in Ernakulam  
district the last meeting was held in August 2013. 
In Thrissur district we during the joint physical verification with the officials of 
DMG and with the aid of local public and Google maps identified five illegal 
quarrying sites in a single day. One was operating without quarrying permit and 
the other four were continuing their operations even after the expiry of permit 
period. DMG issued stop memos to all the five quarry operators and realised 
(February 2017) an amount of ` 3.71 lakh  towards royalty, price and fine from 
one quarry operator.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that shortage of staff in various departments was one 
of the reasons for non-functioning of the committees. 
Recommendation No. 4  : Government may adequately staff the Mineral 
Squads and put in place suitable mechanism to monitor the working of the 
district and divisional committees to control illegal quarrying. 
                                                
33  The district level vigilance and monitoring committee members include District Collector  
 (Chairman), District officer of Mining and Geology (convener), District Police Chief,  District 
 officer of State Pollution Control Board, Deputy Director of Panchayaths  and Joint Director of 
 Urban affairs. 
34  The divisional level vigilance and monitoring committee members include Revenue Divisional 
 Officer (Chairman),  Deputy Superintendent of Police,  Representative of State Pollution 
 Control Board, Representative of Mining and Geology Department and Deputy/Assistant 
 Director of Panchayath . 
    
,
 
    
,
 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 31 
2.18.2  Non-maintenance of computerised database to identify repeat 
offenders 
      
         
          
      
We observed that DMG at the district level and in squad offices, did not maintain 
a database of offenders t o identify the repeat offenders  in illegal mining or 
transportation. Hence, repeat offenders went unnoticed without imposition of 
additional fine as shown in the Appendix – 2.6. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that with the implementation of e -governance project 
the details of the offenders would be computerised. 
2.18.3  Issues related to transit passes  
Every person who carries a minor mineral from one place to another is required to 
have a valid mineral transit pass so as to ensure that royalty is collected before 
issuing passes. The transit passes in the prescribed form are printed in duplicate 
by the permit holder/dealer and got stamped at concerned district office of Mining 
and Geology. While transporting minor minerals, the original of the pass is to 
accompany the material and the carbon copy (duplicate) is to be retained by the 
permit holder/dealer. 
In order to evolve a holistic plan using modern technology to curb illegal mining,  
Ministry of Mines 35, Government of India, requested State Governments to 
prepare an action plan with effect from September 2009 which would include bar 
coding, use of holograms, end user reporting etc. as a means of tracing 
unauthorised sale. But these measures were not implemented. We observed that 
absence of such mechanism paved the way for misuse of transit passes as detailed 
below
:   
                                                
35  Annual Report 2009-10 of Ministry of Mines, Government of India. 
As per Rules 60A/111 of KMMC Rules 1967/2015 and Rule 32 of Kerala minerals 
(Prevention of Illegal Mining, Storage and Transportation) Rules, 2015 there is 
provision for compounding of offences. As per Rule 58/108 of KMMC Rules, 
1967/2015 whoever contravenes any provision of these rules shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with a fine which 
may extend to five lakh rupees or with both and in the case of continuing 
contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to `50,000 for every day 
during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention. 
     

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 32 
 Defective system followed in issuance of mineral transit passes 
allowed misuse /forgery  
While transporting minor minerals through the Commercial Taxes check p ost, 
Muthanga36, Wayanad copies of the mineral transit pass es along with sales bills 
are submitted at the Check post. We collected copies of the mineral transit passes 
from the check post and cross verified them with the passes retained by the dealer, 
through the District office of Mining and Geology, Kozhikode and observed that:  
 Six mineral transit passes 37 did not match the duplicate carbon copies 
obtained from the dealers concerned through the District office of Mining and 
Geology, Kozhikode. In reply to an audit query, Senior Geologist , District Office 
of Mining and Geology, Kozhikode stated that the passes were forged. 
 Though we could collect copies  of 15   mineral transit passes of book No. 
2 in the name of    K.T. Jafar bearing serial numbers 84,85,86,87,89,90,91, 
95,96,97,98  and two copies each of 88  and 94 from the check post, it was  
discovered that transit passes bearing the same serial numbers remained unused 
with the dealer (11 January 2017). The Assistant Geologist, District office of 
Mining and Geology, Malappuram confirmed that the transit passes bearing serial 
numbers from 84 onwards issued to the dealer,  K  T Jafar,  were unused. This 
indicated that the 15 mineral transit passes obtained from the check post were not 
bonafide. Further, in respect of another 2 4 mineral transit passes of the same 
dealer, the entries made therein did not match the entries in their duplicate copies.  
 We collected (January 2017)16 mineral transit passes issued in the name 
of  P.  Abbas  for  movement  of  extracted GBS. The Assistant Geologist, District 
Office of Mining and Geology, Malappuram quoted the  declaration  of   Abbas 
which stated that passes bearing serial numbers 651 to 700 (50 passes) were lost 
six months back. We found that 16 passes bearing serial numbers 659, 660, 673, 
674, 675, 676, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681, 682, 683, 685, 686 and 688 were used 
during October-November, 2016 for movement of minerals through the check 
post. Out of these, four passes were used with  sale bills of weathered sand of  
M/s M.P.S. Rock Products, Irivetty P.O, Malappuram district (3 nos.) and  M/s 
Ernad Sand Manufacturing Unit, Karaparamba P.O, Malappuram district (1 no.). 
Weathered sand was not an item covered under these passes. 
The above instances indicate large scale misuse of mineral transit passes and 
reveals that the prevailing system was not effective in regulating illegal extraction 
and transportation of minor minerals. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that the department had initiated e-pass project under 
its e-governance programme and said that the project was ready to be launched. It 
was also stated that in the e-pass project a number of security features like 2D bar 
code, unique serial number, SMS based e-pass checking etc. were to be 
                                                
36  Check post at Kerala -Karnataka border 
37  Four in respect of  Muhammed Firoz  and  two  in  respect  of  C P Basheer.  Shri. Shri.
Shri.
Shri.
Shri.
Shri.
    
,
 

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 33 
implemented and the issue would be resolved once e-pass project was launched. 
The reply was silent on the action to be taken against offences pointed out by 
audit. 
 Misuse of mineral transit passes  
Every movement of mineral was to be supported by mineral transit passes and in 
cases of sale, to be accompanied by sales bill of the seller. 
Audit scrutiny of 70 mineral transit passes with corresponding sales bills  in the 
Sales Tax check post, Muthanga  for the month of October and November 2016 
revealed the following:-  
 Sales bills of Shri Ahammed Adangumpuravan, Kavannoor, P.O, 
Malappuram district (  32100437215)  were used by five different 
transit pass holders
38  in Kozhikode district in seven instances.  
 Three separate sales bills showing Sl. No. 80 were used thrice 39 along with 
three different mineral transit passes. 
 Three mineral transit passes in  the  name  of   C P Basheer, Unnikulam 
P O,   Kozhikode district  were used with the sales bills  of  M/s M.P.S 
Rock products, Malappuram, once and  M/s Ernad Sand Manufacturing 
Unit, Malappuram, twice. 
 Mineral transit passes in the name  of   Sukumaran  E,  Managing Partner, 
M/s Power Stone Products, Kozhikode district were used with the sales 
bills of M/s M.P.S Rock Products, Malappuram district, twice.  
 Mineral transit pass in the  name  of   Dinesh Wayanad was used by 
M/s Power Stone Products, Kozhikode district.  
 Mineral transit pass nos.79, 83 and 94 in the  name  of   K T  Jafar  was 
used twice on different dates for movement of minor minerals. 
These instances indicate widespread misuse of mineral transit passes.  
GoK replied (March 2017) that the problem would be mitigated on 
implementation of KOMPAS 40. The reply was silent on appropriate action to be 
taken in instances pointed out by audit. 
                                                
38
 
 
 
39  
 
 
40  KOMPAS or Kerala Online Mining Permit Awarding Services is the e -pass project in which 
 security features like 2D barc ode, unique serial number , SMS based e -pass checking etc is 
 envisaged. 
Shri.
Shri.
Shri.
Shri. Muhammed Firoz, (Three nos) Kallayi P O, Kozhikode district, Shri. Muhammed Basheer, 
Mavoor P.O, Kozhikode District, Shri. C. P. Basheer, Unnikulam P O, Kozhikode District, Shri. 
Sukumaran E., Managing Partner, Power stone Products, Eranhimavu, Pannikode, Kozhikode 
District,  Shri. Abdul Rasak, Palam P O, Kozhikode district.
On 16.10.2016 (Purchaser Shri. Nizar, vehicle No KA-01/AB-1358), 18.10.2016 (Purchaser Shri. 
Lalu vehicle No. KA- 01 /AC -475) and again on 18.10.2016 (Purchaser Shri. Nizar, vehicle No.KL-
33/D-6253). 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 34 
 Non-establishment of check posts to verify mineral transit passes at 
points having high traffic of minor minerals  
Check posts can ensure that a vehicle carrying minor minerals has a valid mineral 
transit pass, i.e.  royalty has been paid, only one pass is issued to a vehicle and 
that the pass is not reused.    
With the aid of Commercial Taxes officials at the four 41 commercial taxes check 
posts in three districts, we verified 55 vehicles carrying minor minerals and found 
that seven vehicles did not possess mineral transit passes. We also noticed 
irregularities such as absence of entries of date/time of transport or both, scored 
off / overwritten entries etc. in 16 mineral transit passes.   
We observed that copies of mineral transit passes were not collected at the above 
check posts. Had  the service of these check posts been utilised for recording and 
verification of minor mineral transit passes, such irregularities could have been 
reduced. 
GoK replied (March 2017) that establishment of check posts involved  creation of 
posts. It was also stated that the offenders were usually smart and would use 
alternate routes to bye-pass check post. The reply indicates an attitude of 
helplessness of Government. 
Recommendation No. 5  : Government may consider utilising the services of 
police aid posts or commercial taxes check posts to verify transit passes. 
Incorporating in the KMMC Rules, provisions similar to that of the Kerala 
Forest Produce Transit Rules, 1975 which specifies the route to be followed 
in the way permit, may reduce illegal transportation and misuse of passes.   
 Non-inclusion of directions for end user reporting  
Ministry of Mines requested State Governments to prepare an action plan which 
includes end user 42 reporting as a means of tracing unauthorised sale of minor 
minerals. We noticed that no such provisions were included in the KMMC Rules, 
2015. Following instances showed the necessity of end user reporting: 
 M/s Mc Nath Bharath Engineering Co. Ltd., a sub contractor of  M/s Delhi 
Metro Rail Corporation Limited (DMRC Ltd) for Kochi Metro Rail  Project 
purchased 18,797.300 MT of minor mineral from one Shri Shahul Hameed 
who used 15 mineral transit passes instead of using 759 separate mineral 
transit passes for each vehicle load of minor mineral transported. 
 M/s URC onstruction (P) Ltd., a sub contractor of M/s DMRC Ltd 
purchased 93,321 cft of minor mineral from one Shri Abu K.K. of Kochi.  
                                                
41  Vettilappara in Thrissur district, Kunhippally in Kozhikode district, Boys Town and Lakkidi in 
 Wayanad district. 
42  End user means the ultimate user of a product.  
  
C
        
         

Chapter : II – Performance Audit  
 35 
Audit scrutiny at the district office of Mining and Geology, Ernakulam 
revealed that Shri Abu K K did not have registration with the office of 
Mining and Geology to trade in minor mineral. 
 During February-December 2016, M/s Five Star Metals Private Limited, 
Pallavoor, Palakkad district supplied 12,830 MT of manufactured sand to  
M/s KMC Ltd., the  agency engaged in  the construction of six laning of 
Vadakkanchery - Thrissur  section of  NH  47 under  NHDP    With  the 
assistance of officials of District office of Mining and Geology, Palakkad 
we verified duplicate copies of mineral transit passes retained by M/s Five 
Star Metals Private Limited which revealed that only 1,475 MT of GBS 
products were supported by mineral transit passes.  
In the exit conference, the Additional Chief Secretary to Government opined that 
Mineral Squads would do better by detecting such cases and thus get more 
revenue for the State.  
Recommendation No. 6
 :  Government may make provisions for end user 
reporting especially in respect of major projects to ensure realisation of 
royalty due. 
2.19 Conclusion  
Government did not identify areas from where GBS could be extracted with 
minimal impact on environment/tourism/ archaeological importance. 
Absence of a streamlined procedure for granting quarrying permits resulted in 
allotting government land for quarrying without auction. The existing system of 
consolidated royalty payment paved the way for indiscriminate extraction of GBS 
and reduction in realisation of royalty. Department of Mining and Geology issued 
quarrying permits/leases violating KMMC Rules and disregarding MoEF 
directions. Licence issuing authorities like KSPCB, SEIAA  and DMG failed to 
effectively monitor the compliance of licence conditions by quarry operators. The 
mechanism to detect illegal cases was not effective. The present system of 
issuance and use of mineral transit passes was not effective in preventing misuse, 
multiple use and use of forged mineral transit passes. 
2.20 Recommendation 
GoK may take punitive and legal action against all cases of illegal quarrying, 
forgeries and other offences in cases pointed out through this performance audit, 
besides taking suitable action to ensure that such instances do not exist in other 
than the test checked districts in the State. 

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Compliance Audit of  
Selected Topics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 37 
CHAPTER-III 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT OF SELECTED TOPICS 
 
FISHERIES AND PORTS DEPARTMENT 
3.1    Regulation of Houseboats  
3.1.1    Introduction 
Alappuzha, the ‘Venice of the East’, is an important backwater destination in 
Kerala attracting tourists every year. The Vembanad lake, a Ramsar site 1 is spread 
over 36,500 hectare covering the districts of Alappuzha, Ernakulam and 
Kottayam. This lake is connected to a network of rivers, canals and drains and is 
famous for Houseboat (HB) tourism. With the increased arrival of tourists, the HB 
industry began to grow and developed into a huge source of revenue for the 
people of the area.   
All inland vessels, including HBs, are regulated by the Inland Vessel  Act,  1917 
(IVA), a Central Act, which came into force in the State of Kerala with effect 
from 01 December 1987. Subsequently, Government of Kerala (Coastal Shipping 
and Inland Navigation Department) notified (April 2010) the Kerala  Inland Vessel  
Rules, 2010, under IVA, to regulate and control the operation of mechanically 
p
ropelled vessels. Later, the Kerala Inland Vessel  Rules,  2010, were amended by 
incorporating provisions for safety and security, pollution control and quality 
service with a view to foster backwater tourism without compromising on safety, 
efficiency and pollution aspects and notified the amended rules in April 2015. 
(The Kerala Inland Vessels Rules, 2010 and their amendment in 2015 are together 
defined as ‘KIVR’ hereinafter). 
For a vessel to ply in the backwaters, three procedures are mandatory according to 
KIVR, viz., initial survey/annual survey 2, registration 3 and dry dock inspection 4. 
KIVR also mandates adoption of measures to prevent and mitigate water 
pollution. 
                                                
1  The convention on wetland called the Ramsar convention, is an intergovernmental treaty that 
 provides the framework for national action and international co -operation for the conservation 
 and wide use of wetland and other resources. 
2  Initial Survey/Annual survey: Complete examination of hull, machinery, arrangements, safety 
 and security, pollution aspects and quality of service as required under IVA by the Surveyor 
 under the Directorate of Ports. Initial survey is done before the HB is put in service, whereas 
 the annual survey is done periodically once in 12 months in respect of HBs which are in 
 operation. 
3  Registration: The Chief Registering Authority under the Directorate of Po rts issues 
 Registration Certificates to HBs on completion of initial survey. It is a process of 
 documentation and also a proof of ownership of the vessel. 
4  Dry dock inspection: The Surveyor conducts detailed examination of vessels in slip way or dry 
 dock in day light, once in three years, to ensure that all the portions of the hull external are 
 intact. 
 
s
  
 
s
  
 
s
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 38 
3.1.1.1  Organisational set up 
Director of Ports (DoP), under the Government (Fisheries and  Ports Department) 
regulates inland vessels, including HBs, by virtue of implementing KIVR. Six 5 
ports in Kerala are designated (September 2010) as Port Registries, which are 
places of survey of Inland Vessels. The DoP exercises his powers under KIVR, 
through multiple officials, such as the Chief Registering Authority, Chief 
Examiner, Chief Surveyor, Surveyor (Two) and Conservators of the six Port 
Registries. The functions of these officials with regard to inland vessels include 
conducting initial/annual su rvey, issuing Registration Certificates, issuing 
Competency Certificate to crew, and conducting periodical surprise inspection.  
Since the HB industry is closely related to backwater tourism, Directorate of 
Tourism (DoT), under Government (Tourism Departme nt), executes its tourism 
promotion activities in this industry through the District Tourism Promotion 
Council (DTPC). Activities of DTPC with regard to HBs includes fixing tariffs in 
consultation with HB owners ’ associations, establishing and operating Co mmon 
Sewage Treatment Plant (CSTP) for discharging the effluents generated from the 
bio-tank of HBs etc. 
Another stakeholder in the HB industry is the Kerala State Pollution Control 
Board (KSPCB), which functions under the administrative control of the 
Government (Environment Department). The main functions of KSPCB with 
regard to HB industry include issue of Integrated Consent to Operate (ICO) to 
HBs which is mandatory according to provisions contained in the Water Act, 
1974, and the Environment Protection  Act, 1986, and periodical inspections to 
check whether the prescribed parameters of sewage/effluents discharged from the 
CSTP/bio-tank of HBs are within the limits mentioned in the ICO conditions. 
The Local Self Government Institutions (LSGI) are another stakeholder from the 
Government side in the HB industry. LSGIs are mainly responsible for collection, 
segregation, and disposal of solid waste generated by HBs in terms of the Solid 
Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000. 
3.1.2  Audit objectives and scope 
The objectives of the Compliance Audit were to assess whether:  
 the registration and operation of HBs were in accordance with the above 
Rules and the concerned environmental laws;  
 Rules and regulations were in place to standardise the facilities prov ided, 
regulate the fees/tariff charged from tourists and regulate the number of 
people that can be carried in HBs; and  
                                                
5  Alappuzha, Azhikkal, Beypore, Kollam (Thangassery), Munambam (Kodungallur) and 
 Vizhinjam. 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 39 
 mechanisms existed for effective monitoring of adherence to these rules. 
As of April 2016, out of a total of 926 tourist inland vessels registered with the six 
Port Registries of Kerala, 847 were registered with the Port Registry , Alappuzha.  
Hence, compliance audit was limited to the activities under the Port Registry at 
Alappuzha. 
Audit scrutiny covered the records of the Directorate of Ports, Directorate of  
Tourism and KSPCB, their Administrative departments 6 and relevant subordinate 
offices with special focus on survey, registration, safety of passengers and 
environmental aspects relating to HBs covering the period from 2010 -11 to 2015-
16. Audit also examined the records of KSPCB and DTPC in Alappuzha and 
Kottayam districts and that of Alappuzha Municipality , interacted with various 
stakeholders and raised audit queries . In addition , the audit team along with 
departmental officers jointly verified 42 HBs, which operated in Vembanad lake. 
(Detailed in Appendix – 3.1.1) 
An Entry Meeting with the departmental officials concerned was held on 20 July 
2016 and an exit meeting at the close of audit was conducted on 30 December 
2016 to share and discuss the audit findings. 
3.1.3  Audit findings 
3.1.3.1  Registration of Houseboats  
i) Houseboats operating without valid registration 
  Rule 5(1) of KIVR requires all HB owners to intimate the Chief Surveyor 
regarding construction of new vessels. After th e Surveyor completes the stage 
inspection, KSPCB verifies the HBs and issues the ICO.  On receipt of ICO, the 
vessel is registered with the Port Registry concerned.  Initially the registration had 
to be renewed annually. Subsequently, the validity period o f registration was 
increased (March 2013) to five years. Further, in terms of Rule 31(2) (c) of KIVR, 
the Surveyor is duty-bound to conduct surprise inspection of vessels to ensure that 
they comply with mandated requirements. On detecting violations, the S urveyor 
recommends suspension/cancellation of the Registration Certificate (RC) /Survey 
Certificate of the vessel to the DoP and serves detention order to defaulting HB 
owners. 
We observed that, as of 31 March 2016, 326 (44.41 per cent) out of the 734 HBs 
registered under Port Registry, Alappuzha, had not renewed their registration as 
detailed in Table 3.1. 
 
                                                
6 Department of Fisheries and Ports, Department of Tourism and Environment Department. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 40 
Table 3.1  
Details of HBs which had not renewed registration 
Sl. 
No. 
Year from which renewal of 
registration  pending  
Number of HBs pending 
renewal of registration 
1 2011-12 238 
2 2012-13 70 
3 2013-147 18 
          Total 326 
(Source: Records of Port Office Alappuzha) 
A joint verification of 42 HBs revealed that 23 of them were plying in Vembanad 
lake without registration (Appendix – 3.1.2). Of the 42 HBs subjected to physical 
verification, we found that seven out of the eight HBs operated by M/s Kerala 
Backwaters were unregistered . Further, as per the DoTs estimation, there were 
1,500 HBs operating in Alappuzha. However, we observed t hat only 734 (48.93 
per cent) HBs were registered with the Port Registry Alappuzha, as on 31 March 
2016. 
Detection of a substantial proportion of unregistered boats pointed to ineffective 
monitoring by the Surveyor causing threat to the safety and security  of the 
passengers on board.  
ii)  Rule 14 (2) of KIVR stipulates that RC issued to a vessel shall be valid for a 
maximum period of five years, but the registering authority may issue RC for 
a shorter period considering the ecological parameters of each water body.  
We observed that the Registering authority under DoP issued RC subject to 
fulfillment of certain conditions regarding certificate of survey (including 
stability), third party insurance, competency certificate of crew, pollution 
control aspect, p rovision of fire fighting equipment and life -saving 
appliances etc. These conditions were to be satisfied by the HBs within 
30/60/90 days of the issue.  The Port Registry, after the issue of RC did not 
verify compliance of those conditions by the HB owners even though many 
of these conditions related to safety of passengers.  During joint verification 
it was found that  HBs operating with conditional RCs had not fulfilled the 
prescribed conditions and hence were not safe for operation. Further, absence 
of thi rd party insurance could deprive passengers of compensation and 
protection under law in the event of an accident.  
Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied that prior to implementation of KIVR 
(September 2010), HBs were registered under Canals and Public Ferries Act, 
1890. On implementation of KIVR, the existing HBs were issued registration 
certificates conditionally. The reply of the Port Officer, Alappuzha, was 
                                                
7  Since 2014-15, registration is issued for five years; hence audit observation is up to 2013-14. 
 
was

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 41 
silent about the HBs operating without fullfilling the RC conditions and the 
consequent risk to the safety of passengers.  
iii)  According to Section 19 C of IVA, a book containing all particulars of the 
RC  shall be kept by the Registering Authority after due authentication by the 
authority. Further, a true copy of the book should be sent to the  State 
government within a month, together with the number of every RC granted.   
We observed that registration details were not completely recorded in the 
Registration book and not duly authenticated by the Registering Authority, as 
prescribed. Moreover, the copy of  the Registration book was not sent to 
Government every month as mandated. Hence, veracity of the registrations 
recorded in the book could also not be assured by Audit.  
iv)  In terms of Section 71 of IVA, all fees payable may be recovered as fines. 
Schedules I and II of KIVR prescribes the rate of fees payable by HB owners 
for the registration, survey etc. According to Rule 26 of KIVR, registration 
fee was to be collected by the registering authority at the rate of ` 50 per ton 
of vessel weight, subject to a minimum of ` 3,000.  
A scrutiny of the records revealed that as on 31 March 2016, registration fees 
amounting to `
 11.26 lakh was pending from 326 HB owners who had not 
renewed their registration as detailed in Table 3.2.  
Table 3.2 
 Details of unrealised registration fee 
Sl. 
No. 
Year from which 
registration  pending  
Number of HBs 
pending renewal of 
registration 
Amount pending 
realisation (in `) 
1 2011-12 238 8,19,250 
2 2012-13 70 2,45,250 
3 2013-148 18 61,100 
Total 326 11,25,600 
 (Source: Records of Port Office Alappuzha) 
The Port Officer, Alappuzha, stated in this regard, that due to non-receipt of 
application from HB owners for renewal of registration, it could not realise the fee 
from them.  
The above reply was not acceptable, as the main reason for non-realisation of 
registration fee was the lack of a monitoring system whereby the Port Officer 
would be alerted of the due dates of RC renewal without waiting for the HB  
owners to submit applications. Also, had the Surveyor carried out surprise 
                                                
8  Since 2014-15, registration is issued for five years; hence audit observation is up to 2013-14. 
 
was

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 42 
inspections as mandated in KIVR, a substantial number of HB owners could not 
have escaped from renewing their registration. 
v)  Issue of Registration Certificates without considering the carrying 
 capacity of Vembanad lake  
The G overnment (Fisheries and Ports Department) accorded (June 2012) 
administrative sanction for conducting ‘Environmental Study of Vemabanad 
lake’, considering the large number of HBs operating in the lake and resultant 
pollution. Accordingly, the DoP entruste d (September 2012) the Centre for Water 
Resources Development and Management (CWRDM), Kozhikode to identify the 
carrying capacity of the lake for each category of vessels. CWRDM reported 
(November 2013) that the recreational carrying capacity of the lake w as 262 HBs. 
Subsequently, DoP directed (June 2014) the Port officials that only those 
applicants who had submitted their application for survey on or before 31 
December 2013 but had not presented their vessels for survey on or before 31 
March 2014 could be  permitted to present their vessel till 30 June 2014. Further, 
according to note below rule 54 of KIVR, new RC shall be issued only against 
deregistration and condemnation of existing vessels. 
But, as reported (December 2013) by DoP, registrations were iss ued to 588 HBs, 
which was nearly double the carrying capacity of the lake, thus threatening the 
environmental stability of the lake.  
The Port Officer, Alappuzha replied that registration was given only to those HBs 
who had submitted their application prior to 31 December 2013. The reply was 
factually incorrect, as the department had issued fresh RCs to  86 HBs which were 
presented for survey even after the cut-off date of 30 June 2014. 
Further, the directions (June 2014) of the DoP were violated by the registering 
authority as it had issued RC to 22 HBs during 2014-15, 55 during 2015-16 and nine 
during 2016-17 respectively, even though the owners of these vessels had not 
presented their vessels for survey on or before 30 June 2014. Further, the new RCs 
issued were not against deregistration or condemnation of existing HBs. Also, this 
direction of the DoP issued in June 2014 was irregular because the CWRDM had 
reported to the DoP in December 2013 itself that the carrying capacity of the lake 
was only 262 HBs as against 588 in operation. Hence, permission granted by the 
DoP for conducting further survey to enable registration of new HBs without 
ensuring decommissioning of old HBs was in total disregard to the 
recommendations of CWRDM for the environmental sustainability of the lake and 
actually enabled increasing the number of HBs in the lake. 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 43 
3.1.3.2  Survey of houseboats  
i) Failure to conduct surveys, enforce compliance with certificate 
conditions and recover survey fees 
 In terms of Rules 3 (1)(ii) and 3(3) of KIVR, every vessel shall be subjected to 
survey before it is put in service.  The Surveyors in the Port Registry conduct 
survey before the vessel is put in service, annual survey once in 12 months, 
additional survey as occasion demands and dry dock inspe ction once in 36 
months in a dry dock or slip way in day light to ensure that the external hull is 
undamaged. 
The initial survey include s inspection of hull, machinery  and equipment to 
ensure that they are in satisfactory condition and fit for service for which the 
vessel is intended. Further, the HB owners shall make an application for survey 
to the Surveyor, who fixes the  date, time and place of survey  and intimates the 
same to the applicant.  
Though conduct of annual survey for HBs was mandated under KIV R to 
ensure their operational worthiness, we observed that as of 31 March 2016, out 
of 734 registered HBs under the jurisdiction of Port Registry, Alappuzha, 304 
HBs (41.42 per cent) did not renew their periodical annual certificate and 85 
had not been sub jected to annual survey. During joint verification of 42 HBs, 
we observed that, 27 HBs had not presented themselves for even a single 
survey (Appendix – 3.1.2) and five HBs had not got their survey certificate 
renewed (January 2013 -March 2016). This scale of non -compliance existed 
even though Surveyors were empowered to conduct surprise inspections 
onboard the HBs. 
We further observed that in order to fully automate implementation of KIVR, a 
Computerised Management Information System (CMIS) was introduced i n the 
Port Registries.  But due to ineffectiveness of CMIS, expiry of validity of these 
mandatory certificates could not be monitored as the system did not alert the 
Port Registry of such expiry in advance for it to take necessary action. 
On this being poi nted out , Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied that due to non -
receipt of application for renewal from the HB owners in time and absence of 
CMIS, the port authorities could not conduct the survey periodically. The reply 
was not acceptable as KIVR mandated that  Surveyors should conduct these 
surveys annually.  By not doing so , port authorities were being indifferent to 
the safety of passengers onboard. 
 We also observed that the survey certificates issued by the Surveyor were 
provisional, subject to certain condi tions such as valid crew certificate, 
insurance certificate, approved stability booklet etc. , to be complied with 
within stipulated period. Many of these conditions were related to the safety of 
passengers. There was nothing on record to establish that the  boat owners had 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 44 
fulfilled the prescribed conditions. Further, Surveyor did not take any steps to 
ensure that the HBs fulfilled the conditions within the stipulated time.  
Port Officer, Alappuzha replied that due to heavy work load, shortage of staff 
and absence of CMIS in Port Department, follow-up action in respect of 
conditional survey certificate could not be carried out within the stipulated 
time.  
 DoP fixed the fees for annual survey based on the gross tonnage of vessel. As 
on 31 March 2016, the total fees forgone by the DoP due to non-renewal of 
annual survey certificates in respect of 389 HBs for the period from 2010-11 to 
2015
-16  worked out to ` 44.46 lakh (Appendix – 3.1.3).   
Port Officer, Alappuzha, stated that, if annual survey application was not 
received within the stipulated time, double the rate was imposed even for a 
lapse of one day. The reply was silent about the department ’s failure in 
collection of annual survey fees due from the HB owners. This also enabled 
the HB owners to ply without displaying the mandatory distinguishing mark as 
required under Rule 18 of KIVR.  Of the 42 HBs jointly verified, only one had 
the distinguishing mark. 
ii) Non-conduct ing of dry dock inspection  

 In terms of Rule 3(4) of KIVR, all vessels shall be inspected  once in every 36 
months by the Surveyor in a dry dock during the hours of day light. The 
Surveyor shall go on board any vessel and inspect it or any part thereof or any 
machinery or article thereon relevant to the purpose of the Act.  
We observed that as on 31 March 2016, 476 HBs were pending to be inspected 
in dry dock, of which 251 had not undergone even a single dry dock inspection 
since the vessel was put to use ( Appendix –
 3.1.4). This compromised the 
safety of passengers.  
Port Officer, Alappuzha, re plied that Surveyor could not conduct the dry dock 
inspection unless the vessel was dry docked. B
esides, due to non -availability 
of sufficient dry dock ya
rds, all vessels could not be dry doc
ked in time. The 
reply is not tenable, as KIVR required the Surve yor to conduct surprise 
inspection to ensure that the HBs plying in the backwaters were dry docked in 
time. 
 According to Schedule I of KIVR, the fee  for dry docking was ` 3,000 per 
vessel which was enhanced (October 2014) to  ` 3,750 with effect from             
01 October 2014.  We observed that as on 31 March 2016, the Department had 
forgone  revenue  of ₹ 17.66 lakh due to non -enforcement of mandatory dry
do
ck inspection (Appendix – 3.1.5).  

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 45 
Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied that the operators evaded dry docking due to 
personal interest and lack of awareness and that lack of CMIS prevented 
effective monitoring by them. The reply is not acceptable as the Surveyor 
failed to ensure mandatory dry docking survey, leaving the safety of the 
passengers to the mercy of the HB owners. 
3.1.3.3  Deployment of crew in the houseboats  
In terms of Section 21 of IVA and Rule 33 of KIVR,  when the mechanically 
propelled vessel proceeds on any voyage, the crew shall possess Competency 
Certificate (CC) and that every vessel shall have a minimum of one Serang, 
Driver and a Lascar 9 possessing CC on board. Further, according to Section 59 of 
IVA, any crew proceeding on any voyage without possessing a CC shall be 
punishable with fine extending to five hundred rupees.    
Of the 42 HBs ( Appendix –
 3.1.6) jointly verified, in 29 HBs the Serang did not 
possess CC, in 31 HBs the Drivers did not possess CC and in 27 HBs, the Lascars 
did not possess CC.   In six HBs, validity of CC of all the crew had expired. In 13 
HBs sufficient number of competent crew were not in place and in four HBs the 
cook, helper or lascar operated the HB.  Port officer stated that during peak season 
sufficient competent crew were not available which resulted in operation of HBs 
by unauthorised persons. The reply of the Port Officer is not acceptable since the 
operation of HBs by unauthorised persons affects the safety of passengers . 
Further, increasing number of HBs by granting RCs to new HBs without 
considering the directions of DoP regarding the carrying capacity of HBs in lake 
also contributes to the shortage of sufficient crew members. Out of the 42 HBs 
jointly verified, 36
 HBs did not have competent crew.  No action  was taken by 
Surveyor even against the HBs mentioned in the joint verification report. 
We also observed that of the 17 surprise inspections conducted by Port/Police 
departments during the period 201 1-12 to 2015 -16, fine was imposed in the case 
of 38 HBs which did not have crew with valid CC. 
Lack of monitoring and failure to enforce rules by Port/Police Departments 
facilitated the owners to operate their HBs in violation of  the rules, which 
endangered the safety of the passengers.
 
3.1.3.4  Safety and security of houseboats  
i) Insufficient life saving appliances and fire  fighting equipment in 
houseboats 
 Rule 103 of KIVR stipulates that each vessel shall be provided with one life 
jacket for each passenger and crew onboard plus 10 per cent  extra and one 
                                                
9  Serang is the person who controls the wheel of the HB while the vessel is on voyage  and acts 
 as the master of the vessel. Driver is the person in charge of the engine (operation  and 
 maintenance) of the HB. Lascar is the person who assists the Serang during embarking and 
 disembarking of the vessel. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 46 
lifebuoy for two persons onboard and these should be kept in position for quick 
deployment in case of emergency.  
A joint verification of 42 HBs (Appendix -3.1.7) revealed that, 23 HBs did not 
have adequate number of life jackets and lifebuoys. Further, 11 HBs were 
plying without any life jackets and 10 HBs were plying without any lifebuoys. 
We observed that life-saving appliances were kept on the upper deck of the 
HBs, which is not easily accessible by passengers in an emergency. The 
Surveyor did not ensure that HBs were provided with adequate number of life-
saving appliances through periodical surveys as required under Rule 31 (2) (c) 
of KIVR. 
Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied that they ensured that the required number and 
type of life-saving appliances were available on board at the time of survey. 
But, later the owners of HBs remove some of these items, which would only 
come to the notice of the team which conducts surprise inspections to ensure 
compliance. The reply was not tenable because, Surveyors were responsible 
for conducting periodical surprise inspections in terms of KIVR. Large scale 
non-compliance to KIVR mandating provision of lifesaving appliances, as 
found out during joint verification by Audit, revealed lapse on the part of the 
authorities concerned in ensuring safety and security of passengers onboard. 

 According to Rule 109 of KIVR, all inland vessels shall be provided with the 
approved type of firefighting equipment on board. Fire alarm and smoke 
alarm should be located in gallery and engine room, fire pump should be 
capable of being switched on from main deck and LPG used onboard should 
have gas fuse/spark arrester fitted.  
A joint verification in 42 HBs (Appendix – 3.1.8) revealed that fire and smoke 
alarm was not provided in 38 HBs and fire pump in 33 HBs.  Besides, none of 
the HBs had gas fuse /spark arrester for LPG cylinder and 19 HBs  did not 
have sufficient number of fire extinguishers. During joint inspection the Audit 
team witnessed a fire incident in HB bearing KIV No. 1149/13. This HB did 
not have any firefighting equipment and the fire was suppressed using 
firefighting equipment from adjacent HBs.  Even though the Surveyor issued 
survey certificate after conducting detailed survey of HBs, including 
firefighting equipment, the Surveyor did not conduct frequent surprise 
inspections to ascertain the presence of the equipment on board the HBs, as 
mandated by KIVR.          
Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied that it ensured compliance with the 
requirements at the time of survey and it was the responsibility of HB 
operators to maintain sufficient number of lifesaving appliances on board 
during operation. However, the Surveyor had conducted annual survey in only 
345 cases out of 734 HBs registered with Port Registry, Alappuzha, as referred 
in Para 3.1.3.2(i). Absence of continued monitoring enabled non-compliance to 
safety measures.  

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 47 
ii) Lack of data on passengers on board and schedule of journey 
According to Rule 148 of KIVR, owner of the v essel has to maintain a passenger 
register in its on-shore office and it is the responsibility of the DoP to ensure that 
these requirements are adhered to by the HB owners. Further, as per sub Rule 6(h) 
of Rule 136, schedule of journey shall be made available at the off-shore office.   
We observed that the 42 jointly verified HBs had neither maintained the 
passenger register nor the schedule of journey. Consequently, in the event of an 
accident, it would not be possible to identify the persons on board. By virtue of 
being the competent authority under KIVR, the DoP was responsible to ensure 
that HB owners maintained passenger lists and schedules of journey, as mandated 
by KIVR. 
The Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied (March 2017) that all HBs which had 
applied for survey had been given instructions and further a circular was 
displayed at various offices to instruct HBs in this regard. The reply was 
unacceptable because by virtue of being the implementing authority for KIVR, the 
DoP was responsible to ensure comp liance to pr ovisions in this regard in KIVR  
and moreover displaying a circular at various offices did not ensure compliance to 
provisions in this regard. We suggest compulsory display of mandatory conditions 
in all HBs at a prominent place where passengers can read them.  
iii) Non-establishment of enforcement wing 
Rule 143 of KIV R made it  mandatory for the DoP to establish an enforcement 
wing with three division s, one each  at Alappuzha, Ernakulam and Kottayam for 
periodical inspection of the operation of the HBs. The wing was to be constituted 
under a Deputy Superintendent of Police assisted by a Sub-Inspector in each 
division.  The main objective of this was to carry out patrolling in inland waters to 
ensure the safety of the passengers on board including at night halt centres. 
 However, the DoP had not constituted the enforcement wing as of November 
2016. The Department did not contest the audit observation.  
iv) Non-conduct of annual safety audit of inland vessels jetties 
Rule 140 (1) of KIVR stipulates th at as a precaution against accidents during 
embarking and disembarking of passengers , overcrowding of vessels at jetties 
should be avoided and each jetty shall have safe boarding arrangements.  With 
this end in view, KIVR mandates that jetties have to be i dentified and selected as 
approved jetty for vessels and that safety audit be conducted every year. The 
safety measures prescribed by Port officials for approving jetties included road 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 48 
connectivity, depth of pile, materials used, present condition, draft 10 available, 
hand rails and their strength, handling capacity etc. 
We observed that though there were 78 jetties in Alappuzha, none had been 
approved as a safe jetty. Further, as safety audit was pending (March 2017) in all 
cases, it could not be ensured whe ther these jetties had the requisite safety 
measures to prevent accidents during embarking and disembarking of passengers. 
The Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied (March 2017) that a Safe Jetty Inspection 
Committee had been formed for this purpose and safety auditing is pending. Thus, 
on the one hand there were 734 HBs as against the recreational carrying capacity 
of the lake being 262 HBs, unsafe jetties further added to the risk to safety of 
passengers. 
3.1.3.5  Operation of houseboats without third party insurance 
Section 54  C of IVA  mandates that every mechanically propelled vessel shall 
take insurance against third party risks and further in terms of  section 62 B of 
IVA non-compliance in this regard is punishable with a fine extending to ` 1,000. 
In addit ion, Rule 15 (2) (d) of KIVR stipulates that copy of such insurance 
certificate shall be submitted along with the application for registration to the Port 
Registry. 
We observed that out of 734 registered HBs  (against recreational carrying 
capacity of only 262 HBs), only 225 had valid insurance certificate against third 
party risks. The remaining 509 HBs (69.35 per cent) were operating without valid 
third party insurance. It was also noticed that 196 HBs (26.70 per cent) had never 
taken a policy. Further, during joint verification of 42 HBs, we noticed that 23 did 
not have third party insurance.  
We also observed that during the 17 surprise inspections conducted by Port/Police 
departments during the period 2011 -12 to 2015 -16, fine was imposed on 49 HBs 
which did not have valid third party insurance. Absence of valid insurance could 
deprive the passenger and the crew of legal benefits and compensation in the 
event of any mishap. 
The Port Officer, Alappuzh a, replied (November 2016) that  the survey certificate 
was issued only on production of valid insurance certificat e. The reply was not 
acceptable as conditional survey certificates were issued by the Surveyor directing 
the HB owners to produce third party insurance certificate within the period 
prescribed in the  certificate. But, it was clear that HBs did not comply with this 
condition, as was seen from the fact that 69.35 per cent of HBs operated without 
valid third party insurance. Laxity in monitoring was the reason behind non -
compliance of conditions relating to third party insurance. 
                                                
10  The draft of a ship or boat is the distance between the surface of the water and lowest point of 
 vessel. 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 49 
3.1.3.6  Non-conduct of surprise inspections by the Port Registering 
Authority 
According to Section 19 (O) (2) of IVA, the registering authority can either 
suspend or cancel the registration if the vessel is found unfit for servi ce during 
inspection. Further, in terms of Rule 31(2) (c) of KIVR, the Surveyor shall 
conduct surprise inspection on board vessels and verify all the mandatory 
requirements. In case of default, he shall detain the vessel and make necessary 
recommendations for suspension/cancellation of the RC/ survey certificate, to the 
registering authority. Further, according to Sections 55 to 64 of IVA and Rule 139 
of KIVR penalties can be imposed on HBs for non -compliance to various 
Sections/Rules in the Act/Rules. Further, the DoP had instructed (April 2011) that 
inspection of vessels under KIVR shall be carried out based on a quarterly 
inspection plan to be prepared by egistering uthority/Chief urveyor/Chief 
xaminer and approved by the DoP. 
We observed that out of t he 237 HBs  inspected, though provisional detention 
order was issued to 170 HB s, none was detained due to non -availability of safe 
place for keeping the detained vessels. Further, 117 HBs were penalised, of which 
31 HBs only remitted the fine to Government (Appendix – 3.1.9).  In the 
remaining 86 cases, no further action was initiated by the Port Officer, 
Alappuzha, to recover unpaid fines. No monitoring was done by the DoP to 
ensure that HBs had rectified the shortfalls noticed during inspection.  Further, the 
egistering uthority/ Chief urveyor/Chief xaminer  had never prepared and 
presented the quarterly inspection plan as directed by DoP for his approval.  
Port Officer, Alappuzha, replied that Government had not constituted a separate 
inspection team and  the department did not have sufficient space for keeping 
seized vessels in safe custody.  The Port Officer also added that service of more 
personnel were required for the safe custody of confiscated vessels which were 
not presently available with the department.  
The reply was silent about the department’s failure to prepare inspection plan, 
recover unpaid fines, and follow up on rectification of shortfalls by HB owners or 
suspend registration of violators.
 
3.1.3.7  Inadequate manpower to monitor compliance of KIVR 
In terms of Rule 31 and 32 of KIVR, the duties and powers of surveyor includes 
conducting of initial/annual survey, dry
dock inspection and surprise inspection of 
all inland vessels such as HBs, passenger boats, motor boats, speed boats and 
barges. The sanctioned strength of surveyors in DoP was one Chief Surveyor and 
two surveyors (contract basis) for   all  the  six  port registries in Kerala.  
The shortfall in renewal of registration and conduct of annual/periodical surveys 
and dry dock inspections noticed were as detailed in Table 3.3.   
 
   
R
       
A
 
S
         
E
          
 
         
E
   
R
       
 
         
          
 
         
          
A
 
         
          
 
         
          
 
S
         
          
 
         
   
,
       

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 50 
Table 3.3 
Shortfall in renewal of registration and conduct of annual/periodical surveys and dry dock 
inspections 
Year Number of HBs where 
egistration not 
renewed 
nitial/annual survey 
not conducted 
eriodical dry dock 
inspection  not conducted 
2010-11 0 206 239 
2011-12 238 48 60 
2012-13 70 18 29 
2013-14 18 63 58 
2014-15 0 21 34 
2015-16 0 33 56 
Total 326 389 476 
 
We observed that inadequate monitoring by the surveyors and deficiency in 
detection of violations resulted in non-compliance of several provisions in KIVR. 
Moreover, joint verification of 42 HBs conducted by Audit revealed that HBs 
were operating in the backwaters without sufficient/competent crew, lifesaving 
appliance and fire  fighting equipment which was an indication of insufficient 
monitoring which in turn compromised safety of passengers. Further, ineffective 
monitoring also resulted in non-realisation of revenue due to Government. 
In the exit meeting, the Registering Authority, DoP replied that due to shortage of 
surveyors in the department, the above functions could not be carried out by them. 
3.1.3.8  Non-fixation of maximum tariff rate for houseboats 
Section 54 A of IVA stipulates that the State Government may fix the maximum 
rate per kilometer for passengers of any class travelling on inland mechanically 
propelled vessels.  
We observed that neither the DoP nor the DoT had fixed the tariff rate. Though 
IVA empowers the State Government to make rules for tariff rates of vessels, the 
State Government/DoP/DoT did not take any action for incorporating the 
stipulation either during framing of KIVR or during its amendment in 2015. DoP 
replied that it was issuing only the RC for the HBs after conduct ing necessary 
survey and as the Tourism department was controlling the HB industry and 
facilitation of tourists, the authority to fix the maximum rate rested with DoT. 
However, the DoT replied that, at present, DTPC had no role in fixing the tariff 
rate for HBs in Kerala. Further, the DoT had no control over the operation of HBs 
as DoT was only implementing the classification scheme for HBs having RC from 
registering authority. As a result the passengers were left to the mercy of HB 
operators. 
i
 
p
  
     
s
 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 51 
3.1.3.9  Impact on environment 
i) Operation of HBs without renewal of Integrated Consent to Operate  
Section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974  (Water 
Act), stipulates that previous consent of KSPCB is necessary to establish any 
industry or any treatment or disposal system, which is likely to discharge sewage 
or trade effluents into a stream or on land. For this purpose KSPCB issues ICO to 
industries.  Further, in terms of KIVR, the Surveyor issues the certificate of 
annual survey based on the ICO issued by KSPCB.  
We observed that, even though ICO was mandatory for obtaining the certificate of 
survey/RC, the Surveyor issued conditional survey certificate directing the HB 
owners to produce ICO within the prescribed time limit.  The Surveyor a lso did 
not ensure that the HB owners fulfilled the condition within the stipulated time, as 
discussed below.   
We observed that out of 811 HBs that had applied (2010-11 to 2015-16) for ICO 
to the Environmental Engineer (EE), KSPCB, Alappuzha, validity of ICO had 
expired in respect of 324 HBs (39.95 per cent) and 113 HBs (13.93 per cent) were 
operating without ICO as on 31 March 2016.   
It was also notice d that, though  811 HBs applied for ICO , only 734 HBs were 
registered with Port Registry Alappuzha. We ob served that initial survey of HB 
was compulsory for obtaining ICO while registration was not. Hence, many of the 
HBs which underwent initial survey obtained ICO but failed to apply for 
registration.  This resulted in discrepancy between the number of HBs t hat were 
registered and those which obtained ICO.  This discrepancy occurred due to lack 
of coordination between the Port Registry, Alappuzha and KSPCB, Alappuzha. 
The results of joint verification conducted by Audit to ascertain the compliance of 
HBs to mandatory requirement of ICO are given in the Table 3.4
. 
Table  3.4  
Details of HBs operating without ICO 
Particulars  Number of Houseboats 
subjected to 
JV by Audit 
which never 
obtained an ICO 
where validity of 
ICOs had 
expired 
Kerala Backwaters Pvt. Ltd. 8 7 0 
Kerala Tours Backwaters 2 1 0 
Other individual HBs 32 14 3 
Total 42 22 3 
(Source: Joint verification reports) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 52 
Joint verification of 42 HBs revealed that ICO had expired in the case of three 11 
HBs, whereas 22 HBs (Appendix – 3.1.8) never obtained an ICO. Of the 22 non-
compliant HBs, M/s Kerala Backwaters Pvt. Ltd. owned the maximum number.   
Audit analysis further revealed that, out of 22 HBs, seven (owned by M/s Kerala 
Backwaters Pvt . Ltd.) were unr egistered since 2010 and seven had not been 
surveyed since 2010. KSPCB had not taken any punitive action against these 
HBs, as stipulated in the Act/Rules.  
ii)  Non-conduct of periodical inspection and water analysis 
In terms of Rules 118(1) and 115(5) of KIVR, every HB should be fitted with bio-
tank for collecting the sewage from the toilets and all exhaust pipeline of bio-tank 
should be fitted above the water line mark of HB.  Further, according to Ministry 
of Environment and Forest , Government  of  India  notification (December 1999), 
KSPCB should inspect and analyse water samples from the final outlet pipe of 
each HB once in six months and ensure  that the prescribed parameters of 
discharged water were within the acceptable limit (BOD
12- 30 mg/l). Further in 
terms of section 21(1) of Water Act, 1974, KSPCB had to take samples.   
We found that in all the 42 HBs jointly verified, the final outlet pipes from the 
bio-tank of HBs were fitted below the water line mark of HBs. This meant that 
sewage from the bio -tank was discharged through the final outlet pipe below the 
water surface. Consequently, collection of mandated water samples from the final 
outlet pipes of HBs, which was inside water, for periodical analysis was 
impossible due to its incorrect position. Mo reover, had the Surveyor in the Port 
Registry ensured that the final outlet pipe of bio -tank of HBs was fitted above the 
water line mark, during initial/annual survey of HBs, KSPCB could have 
monitored the quality of discharged water with respect to the pr escribed 
parameters. 
We also observed that 811
13 HBs had applied (2010-11 to 2015 -16) for ICO. 
Further, as inspection and analysis of water samples from the final outlet pipe of 
each HB was mandated twice annually, the stipulated inspection of HBs by 
KSPCB for the purpose would come to 1 ,622 annually14.  However, KSPCB had 
not inspected and collected water samples in any of the HBs up to March 2016. 
KSPCB, Alappuzha replied that  it was practically difficult to collect effluent 
samples from the final outlet of  bio tank with the existing facilities and hence 
samples could not be taken for analysis. Due to non -availability of speed boat and 
shortage of man power, the Board could not conduct frequent inspection in HBs.  
                                                
11  Regn Nos  KIV/ALP/HB/919/11; (2) KIV/ALP/HB/1149/13; and  CIB 872 . 
12  Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) is the am ount of dissolved oxygen needed by aerobic 
 biological organisms in a body of water to break down organic material present in a given 
 water sample at a certain temperature over a specific time period. 
13  HBs registered in KSPCB, Alappuzha for obtaining ICO. 
14  811 HBs x 2 mandatory sample analysis to be done annually = 1,622 targeted inspections. 
  
s
  
   

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 53 
iii) Under-utilisation/functioning of CSTP  
The Common Sewage Treatment Plant (CSTP), operated by District Tourism 
Promotion Council (DTPC), Alappuzha, started functioning from March 2014. 
The sewage from HBs was discharged into the CSTP for effluent treatment. 
According to specific condition 3.12 of ICO issued by EE of KSPCB, not less 
than four discharges per year shall be made by each HB into the CSTP. Further, in 
terms of condition 3.2 of ICO, samples of effluent should be collected from all 
outlets and analysed in any laboratory approved by the board at least  once in six 
months15.  
The status report of CSTP usage by the HBs  indicates large scale non-compliance 
in this regard, as shown in the Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5  
Details of discharges made by HBs into CSTP 
Year Number of discharges  Total usage 
4 times 3 times 2 times One time 
2014 Nil 1 13 240 269 
2015 Nil 1 33 298 367 
2016 Nil Nil 15 202 232 
Total Nil 2 61 740 868 
(Source: Records of District Tourism Promotion Council, Alappuzha) 
Though 811 HBs had applied for ICO to KSPCB, Alappuzha, in different years, 
only an average of 290 HBs (35.75  per cent ) had discharged sewage during the 
years 2014 to 2016, which pointed to unauthorised methods employed for sewage 
discharge by HBs.  
We further observed that  District Office, KSPCB, Alappuzha, did n ot conduct 
periodical water analysis /inspection of the CSTP since its commissioning in 
March, 2014. During joint verification, water samples from the final outlet of the 
CSTP were collected  and analysed and found that BOD level and suspended 
solids were 1 18 mg/l and 116 mg/l respectively, which was beyond the limit 
prescribed (30 mg/l and 100mg/l).   
In reply to an audit query DTPC, Alappuzha, stated that the under utilisation of 
CSTP by HBs was due to lack of strict monitoring on the part of KSPCB.  
However, District Office, KSPCB, Alappuzha, stated that due to shortage of staff 
and lack of infrastructure, they could not ensure compliance with the conditions. 
The reply was unacceptable as the condition of the water samples, as discussed 
above, warranted urgent action on the part of KSPCB to put in place the 
prescribed monitoring mechanisms. 
                                                
15  As per the requirement of Ministry of Environment and Forests notification, 1999. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 54 
iv) Defective management in collection, segregation and disposal of solid 
waste and hazardous waste 
According to specific condition 3.11 of ICO issued by EE of KSPCB, solid waste 
shall be disposed as per Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 2000.  
Further, schedule II of the said rules stipulates that solid waste shall be segregated 
and disposed of scientifically by LSGIs. Further, Rule 146 of KIVR requires vessel 
owners to provide separate bins to dispose solid waste scientifically. Similarly, as 
per Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989, waste engine oil 
shall be disposed through collection agents authorised by KSPCB.  
We observed that none of the 42 HBs subjected to joint verification were 
provided with separate bins for segregation of wastes.  Plastic and paper wastes 
were being collected in a single container and disposed of by burning in private 
lands or on the banks of the backwaters where the HBs were anchored. Waste oil 
was disposed of by the HB owners on the land or by applying it on the interior 
part of the hull. None of the owners of HBs disposed it through collection agents 
authorised by KSPCB.  
We observed that the LSGI did not provide facilities for collection of 
solid/hazardous wastes from these HBs in the land area for scientific disposal as 
required under the rules.  
  
 
Solid waste floating in water body/heaped and burne  on the land and waste oil inside the hull 
KSPCB replied that LSGI, Alappuzha did not follow a routine system for 
collection, segregation and disposal of solid wastes from HBs while the LSGI 16 
stated that, it was the responsibility of HB owners to dispose of the solid wastes at 
the source itself. However, Schedule II of the Solid Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2000, stipulates that it is the responsibility of the LSGI to 
manage the solid waste.  
                                                
16  Alappuzha Municipality. 
Date 7.09.2016 
 Date 07.09.2016 Date 07.09.2016 Date 07.09.2016 
                  
t
  

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 55 
Environment Department replied that the disposal of solid waste was the 
responsibility of the LSGI and that the Port Authority was directed to ensure that 
no waste was dumped into the lake. It was also stated that the HB owners were 
informed that they had to provide own facilities to dispose of organic wastes and 
also to give plastic wastes only to recyclers. The reply also stated that the 
possibility of providing a mobile unit was also under consideration. 
3.1.4 Conclusion  
About 44.41 per cent of HBs registered under Port Registry, Alappuzha, had not 
renewed their registration. Further, a bout 53 per cent of the HBs did not conduct 
the mandatory a nnual survey require d under KIVR . This pointed to ineffective 
monitoring by the Surveyor causing threat to the safety and secur ity of the 
passengers on board. Though the recreational carrying capacity of Vemabanad 
lake was only 262 HBs as found out by CWRDM in the Env ironment study of 
Vembanad lake, DoP issued registration to 734 HBs as of March 2016 which is 
approximately three times the carrying capacity of the lake. This action of the 
Ports department posed a serious thre at to the environmental stability of the lake.  
Ineffective monitoring by the surveyor s of DoP  also resulted in non-conduct of 
dry dock inspection (64.85 per cent) once in three years. While compromising the 
safety of passengers onboard , this also resulted in revenue loss of ` 17.66 lakh to 
the Government.  
Even though the  survey certificate/registration were issued to HBs conditionally,  
DoP did not ensure that the HBs operating in the backwater s complied with the 
conditions. Inadequate monitoring mechanism increased the number of 
unauthorised HBs operating in the back waters . Further, non -constitution of an 
enforcement wing by DoP emboldened them to operate illegally.  Meagre 
penalties for employing unqualified crew and insufficient surprise inspections by 
the surveyors failed to deter the HB owners fro m repeating the same offence.  
Surveyors of DoP also failed to ensure the provision of life saving appl iances and 
fire fighting equipment  in HBs . Non-fixing of tariff rate by the Government/  
Department paved the way for charging high rates from the tourists.   
KSPCB did not have  adequate monitoring mechanis m for identifying the 
offenders. Most HBs did not utilise the CSTP and could be discharging their 
sewage into the lake, thus polluting the environment. 
During exit meeting (December 2016), details of all paras mentioned above were 
discussed with the department . The department did not contest the audit 
observations. 
The matter was referred (December 2016) to Government and reply  is awaited 
(March 2017). 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 56 
INDUSTRIES DEPARTMENT 
3.2 Allotment and utilisation of industrial plots 
3.2.1 Introduction 
The Department of Industries (Department) acts as a facilitator for industrial 
promotion and sustainability of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
and traditional i ndustries sector. The Department, under its land allotment 
scheme, provides Development Areas17 (DAs) and Development Plots18 (DPs) for 
industrial use to prospective entrepreneurs either on hire purchase or on lease 
basis.  Assignment of government land for industrial purposes is governed by the 
‘Rules of assignment of government land for industrial purposes, 1964’. Other 
than assignment, allotment and utilisation of DA/DP are governed by ‘Rules for 
the allotment of land in DA/DP on hire purchase basis’ (1969  and 1970) and 
‘Rules for lease of land in industrial DA/DP for industrial purposes’ and orders 
issued under them from time to time. Since June 2013, the Department provides 
land for industrial purposes on lease basis only. The Department had promoted 38 
DAs/DPs up to March 2016 having a total acquired area of 2,443.72 acres, of 
which 2,049.506 acres 19 were allotted to 2,583 industrial units in these DAs/DPs 
as on 30 September 2016. 
The Department is headed by the Additional Chief Secretary to Government of 
Kerala (Industries), assisted by the Director of Industries & Commerce (Director), 
who in turn is assisted by the General Managers (GMs) in 14 District Industries 
Centres (DICs). 
3.2.2 Audit objectives and scope 
The compliance audit was conducted to ascert ain whether , the allotments were 
transparent and in compliance with the rules framed for the purpose; there was a 
prescribed methodology for fixing the price of industrial plots; and appropriate 
and effective mechanism existed for ensuring and enforcing th e utilisation of land 
for the intended purpose. 
We examined the records at the Government Secretariat/Directorate/field units, 
interacted with the personnel at the audited entities, raised audit queries, and 
discussed the audit findings with the management . Records of 385 land allotment 
cases were examined in the DAs/DPs of five sampled districts, viz . Ernakulam, 
Kannur, Kozhikode, Palakkad and Thrissur which were selected using Probability 
Proportionate to Size without Replacement method. Joint physical ve rification 
was also conducted along with the departmental officials in some DAs/DPs. The 
audit was conducted from June to September 2016. 
                                                
17  DA is land acquired by Government for the purpose of the industrial development of an area 
18  DP is area divided into convenient small plots of land 
19  The balance includes area for common facilities, internal roads and about 38 acres under 
 development 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 57 
Audit Findings 
3.2.3 Non-updating of land value in line with fair value and consequent 
non-collection of revenue 
As per the Rules for lease of land in industrial development area and development 
plot for industrial purposes – 2016 (lease rules), which came in to effect from 10 
June 2013, the lease premium 20 realisable from the entrepreneur is the fair value 
of land fixed by Government from time to time or the cost of acquisition inclusive 
of all administrative overheads plus development charges (acquisition either by 
LA Act, 1894 or outright pur chase or transfer by Government /Local Self 
Government Institution), whichever is higher.  Government has not fixed the cost 
of industrial land so far.  Hence, the Department has not been able to derive 
financial benefit of lease premium. Government replied that the Revenue 
Department had not fixed fair value of industrial land and tha t the Department 
would review its land pricing policy. 
3.2.4 Allotment of land in violation of lease rules  
The land in DA/DP is to be allotted to prospective entrepreneurs only on lease 
basis since 10 June 2013. According to the lease rules, the land is a llotted only for 
industrial purposes for a term not exceeding 30 years. This term can be extended 
for another 30 years subject to leaseholders satisfying the terms and conditions of 
the earlier lease.  
We observed that allotments were made in violation of the lease rules in the cases 
illustrated below, which resulted in loss of lease premium and rent to the 
Department while giving a right to the allottee to possess the land without time 
restriction, subject to allotment conditions. 
 The GM, DIC, Thrissur tra nsferred (June 2016) land (52 cents) allotted to 
a defunct unit 21 (plot number 13) situated in DP Velakkode to another 
firm22 in terms of Hire Purchase (HP) rules instead of the lease rules. The 
GM replied (March 2017) that the allotment was made on the dire ctions 
(May 2016) of the Director.   
 The Revenue Department assigned (December 2015) industrial land 
measuring 2.50 acres in DA Edayar resumed from M/s Cochin Leathers 
Pvt. Ltd. to M/s Cochin Minerals and Rutiles Ltd. The Government stated 
(March 2017) tha t the transfer was done at the instance of DIC by 
Revenue Department as it was assigned land. The reply is not acceptable 
as the assigned land was resumed by the Department and hence the new 
lease rules should have been applied on re-allotment. 
                                                
20  The lease premium is a lump sum compensation payable by the licensee in consideration of the 
 lease of land. 
21 M/s Speed ubes.
22 M/s NCI Paints. 
L
         

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 58 
3.2.5 Transfer of land in violation of allotment rules 
According to rules for allotment of land for industrial purposes, transfer or 
alienation of such land is not permissible without the prior written consent of the 
Government/Director. Any entrepreneur who desires to cease operation should 
intimate his intention to the Government/Director, who will resume the land and 
re-allot it to applicants from the priority list.  The Director also instructed 
(December 2015) the GMs to ensure that industrial land was not allowed  to be 
used as a means to make private gains by engaging in real estate deals.  
We observed that the allottees of industrial land transferred the same to others in 
contravention of the rules by adopting methods like changing the constitution of 
ownership o f the firm by bringing in new irector(s) or sub -leasing or by 
proposing transfer of ownership on the grounds of loan default, etc. Details of 
such instances are given in Appendix – 3.2.1. An example is detailed below: 
 Industrial land measuring 23.22 acres  was allotted (August 2004) to M/s 
Dhaan Ispat Pvt. Ltd. in the New Industrial Development Area (NIDA), 
Kanjikode, Palakkad. The original allottee was Shri. G.R. Elangovan who 
was also the Managing Director of the industrial unit.  As the land was kept 
idle, the GM, DIC Palakkad held (October 2006) a personal hearing of the 
allottee. But instead of the original allottee, the meeting was attended by 
Shri. C.K. Ismail Haji and Shri. Abdul Rahiman, who were irectors of M/s 
Dhaan Ispat Pvt. Ltd.  Subsequently,  Shri. Sushil Vijoy Arora also was 
inducted (December 2015) as a irector and the new list of directors 
furnished by the firm to the GM, DIC Palakkad did not contain the name of 
the original allottee. The change of irectors was in effect transfer of 
ownership and hence a land deal. The firm had not undertaken any 
industrial activity on the allotted land other than possessing it and 
transferring it through change of irectors. The Government reply (March 
2017) was silent on the audit observation. 
 A joint in spection conducted (September 2016) by the audit party with 
departmental officials at DP Ayyankunnu, Thrissur revealed transfer of land 
without the knowledge of the DIC, Thrissur.  The land (25 cents) allotted 
(May 2010) to M/s Promise Industries was found  to be used by  
M/s Envirogreen Carrybags India Pvt. Ltd. without the approval of DIC.  
The Government stated (March 2017) that the transfer has been regularised 
by the Director. 
Further, in a survey conducted (November 2016) by DIC, Ernakulam, 72 cases of  
violations relating to unauthorised transfers of land/ change of constitution were 
identified and show cause notices issued which reiterates the audit observation 
(Appendix – 3.2.2). 
We observed that the Department did not have an exit policy to enable 
entrepreneurs who wanted to discontinue their ongoing profitable industry for 
           
d
 
           
d
 
           
d
 
           
d
 
           
d
 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 59 
personal or other reasons.  If they surrendered their industry to the Department as 
prescribed by rules they stood to lose most of their investment by way of 
resumption interest pa yable to Government. This prompted them to transfer the 
land to others without departmental consent. Government in reply (March 2017) 
accepted the audit observation.  
3.2.6 Issues relating to utilisation of land  
3.2.6.1  Encroachment of industrial land  
Section 5 [8] (1) of the Kerala Land Conservancy Act, 1957, stipulates that the 
land which is the property of Government is not to be occupied by anyone without 
Government’s permission.  If any person occupies any land unauthorisedly, he is 
liable to pay a fine and may be summarily evicted by the Collector. Moreover, 
any crop or other product raised on the land will be forfeited and any building or 
structure erected or anything deposited thereon will also, if not removed by him 
even after receipt of written notice from the Collector, be forfeited.   
Audit examination revealed that: 
 Revenue Department had acquired 9.53 acres of land (1965) in Koppam 
village of Palakkad district  and handed over (July1967) the same to 
Industries Department. Out of 9.53 acres, th ree acres were allotted to an 
entrepreneur in July 1965 itself. The land was declared as DP in 1987. The 
balance 6.53 acres of land was kept idle without allotting to prospective 
entrepreneurs and proper monitoring. Consequently, over the years it was 
encroached upon by 54 families. The encroachment was first reported 
(1992) to Revenue Department for eviction.  
We observed that t he GMs of DIC, Palakkad had failed to detect  the 
encroachments in time and report the same to Revenue Department for 
eviction since 1967. We also observed that none of the encroachers have 
been evicted so far (March 2017). 
Government accepted (March 2017) the audit observation and replied that it has 
been proposed to give alternate land to the encroachers under zero landless 
scheme23 of Revenue Department.  
                                                
23  A scheme by Kerala Govt. to provide land to land less (citizen) in the State. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 60 
 
 A survey (1998) of the 1.50 Acres of land allotted to M/s Cochin Petro 
Mine (P) Ltd. in DA Edayar, Ernakulam district found that 10 cents of land 
had been encroached upon. The Government accepted the fact and stated 
(March 2017) that the Tahsildar, Paravur Taluk has been asked to resurvey 
the land. It was further stated that appropriate action would be taken against 
encroachers. 
 An extent of 90.96 acres of excess land in the possession of M/s 
Instrumentation Ltd, Palakkad was res umed and transferred (July 1994) to 
Industries Department for setting up a DA/DP in Pudussery, Palakkad. The 
land has been kept idle till date without allotment, though applicants have 
been waiting for allotment.  During joint verification (March 2017) it was 
found that around 30 cents of land was encroached by a few families but not 
yet evicted. In reply (March 2017) Government stated that the land was 
never under DIC, Palakkad. The reply is not acceptable as the land was 
transferred (July 1994) to Industr ies Department and the GM, DIC, 
Palakkad took over the land on 22 July 1997.    
3.2.6.2 Failure to obtain land in lieu of land handed over to KSEB  
The Revenue Department allotted (December 1988 and July 1992) free of cost an 
extent of 115.097 acres of ind ustrial land at Kanjikode under DIC Palakkad to 
Kerala State Electricity Board (KSEB) on the condition that KSEB would acquire 
and hand over an equal extent of similar land nearby to Industries Department 
forthwith. The industrial land was required by KSEB  for installing 220 KV 
Substation and for setting up of a wind farm in NIDA, Kanjikode.  
But neither KSEB handed over the agreed land nor did the Industries Department 
take steps to obtain the same. The Government stated (March 2017) that the issue 
had been taken up with KSEB and they had assured to handover an equal extent 
of land in return.  
 
Industrial land encroached at Development Plot, 
Koppam, Palakkad district dated 20.05.2014. 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 61 
3.2.6.3 Inordinate delay in completion of development works 
The Department proposed setting up of multi -storied industrial parks (Gala) in 
Ernakulam, Palakkad and Th rissur districts to tide over land scarcity in the State.  
The implementation of the project at Ernakulam was entrusted (March 2010) to 
M/s Kerala Police Housing Construction Corporation Ltd. with a completion 
period of eighteen months and those at Palakka d and Thrissur to Kerala Small 
Industries Development Corporation  Limited (SIDCO) in February 2013 and July 
2013 respectively with a completion period of 24 months. In Ernakulam and 
Thrissur districts, civil works costing ` 16.93 crore were completed (Aug ust 
2016) but the structures were not provided with electrical and water connections. 
In Palakkad, the Industries Department deposited ` 7.5 crore with SIDCO, but the 
work had not yet started.  Instances of idling were also observed in the two DPs, 
one each at Kattipara in Kozhikode district and at Varavoor in Thrissur district, 
which were under development at a cost of rupees four crore. In respect of DP at 
Kattipara, the DIC could not provide (September 2016) hindrance free land. The 
development works at these two locations acquired in October 2003 and October 
2010 respectively were still in progress . Thus, despite spending ` 28.43 crore 24 
the department could not achieve the desired objective.  
The Government replied (March 2017) that Gala at Ernakulam was  fully 
operational and allotments were done. In Thrissur, the delay in execution was due 
to the managerial problems of the implementing agency, SIDCO which had been 
sorted out. In the case of Palakkad the work was resumed from SIDCO and 
reassigned to another implementing agency. The development works in Varavoor 
and Kattipara would be completed in six months and ten months respectively.   
3.2.6.4  Non-resumption of idling industrial land  
All Government orders regulating the allotment of industrial land ins ist that land 
should be used only for the purpose for which it is allotted, within the period 
stipulated. As per the lease rules, if the lessee is unable to commence industrial 
activity  within the stipulated time, it can be extended for six-monthly periods, 
subject to a maximum of  four times, after remitting 5, 10, 20, and 25 per cent of 
lease value respectively as penalty. The land allotted under assignment, hire 
purchase or lease was not to be alienated (in the form of gift, mortgage, transfer, 
etc.) without the written permission of Government/Director.  On violation of any 
or all of the agreement conditions, the Department shall resume the allotted 
industrial land. The responsibility to resume the unutilised land vested with the 
GM. 
(a) Test-check of re cords and joint verification of DA s/DPs by Audit with 
departmental officials found 11 instances of industrial land kept idling. The 
instances detected showed that in one case the land was idling since its allotment 
ten years back, while in another case it was idling for more than 30 years. In two 
                                                
24  ` 16.93crore + ` 7.5 crore + ` 4 crore  =  ` 28.43 crore 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 62 
other cases, the industries which functioned on the allotted lands had shut down 
nearly 10 years back after defaulting on electricity and sales tax dues. Details of 
the cases detected are given in Appendix – 3.2.3. 
 (b) We also observed that there was delay in resumption of land even after the 
department noticed the violations. The resumption clause was to be invoked in 
case of violation of allotment conditions, but the GM  did not take any action. 
Delay in resumption ranged from two-and-a-half years to ten years ( Appendix -
3.2.4). The Government stated (March 2017) that estate managers had since been 
appointed in all the DA/DPs so as to closely monitor utilisation of industrial land 
in future.  
3.2.6.5  Mortgage of industrial land   
According to the delegation of powers 25, the GMs are authorised to accord 
permission to mortgage the superstructure put up by the allottee in the allotted 
land to avail institutional finance. But the then Director decided (December 1995) 
to allow mortgaging of the land also and authorised the GMs to issue such 
permission under intimation to the Director.  The Director observed (June 2016) 
that entrepreneurs got land at a low price, while on mortgaging they got 70  per 
cent of the market value.  Revenue Department issued (June 2011) a circular 
stating that the ownership of any Government land was vested with them and any 
orders relating to Government land should be issued with the concurrence of the 
Revenue Department.  The Principal Secretary to Government (Revenue) objected 
(April 2013) to the mortgaging of industrial land.  
The Government stated (March 2017) that the procedure followed for issuing 
mortgage permission by GM was not wrong as the Director would ratify such 
cases and the ultimate responsibility continued to reside with the Director. The 
reply is not acceptable since the land allotment rules do not authorise mortgaging 
of industrial land without prior permission of the Government/Director.  
We observed that as a result of the irregular decision of the Director, the GM 
permitted the allottees to mortgage industrial land in addition to the 
superstructure.  On non-repayment of loan, the financial institutions which held 
the first charge on the land, auctioned it to recover their dues.   We noticed that in 
the following cases, the land auctioned was not being used for industrial purpose 
due to mortgage and subsequent auction: 
 Department allotted (December 1970) 8.29 acres of land to M/s Trio 
Packaging Company in DA Angamaly, under DIC, Ernakulam, for 
industrial purpose on hire purchase basis and issued the title on remitting 
the full value of land. The Department allowed (February 1975) the 
Managing Partner of the unit to mortgage the land to State Bank of India for 
a loan.  Due to default on repayment of the loan, the Bank filed a case in the 
                                                
25 Vide order No. G.O.M.S 15/79/P&ARD dated 02.07 .1979. 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 63 
court of law. On obtaining a favo urable decree the land was sold (1988) in 
auction to Shri Kuruvila who neither utilised the land for industrial purpose 
nor approached the Department with any proposa l for starting industry. It 
was seen from the file that the land was subsequently sold to several other 
parties in parts and the purchasers did not get the transactions regularised by 
the DIC. As the land was lying idle, it should have been resumed in terms of 
HP rules. However, DIC did not resume the idling industrial land. 
The Government accepted (March 2017) that the land has been transferred several 
times to several users and that GM, DIC has been directed to initiate resumption 
proceedings in respect of transferees who have not started industrial activity. 
 In another case, 8.66 acres of land allotted to M/s Kerala Acids and 
Chemicals Ltd. in DA Edayar, Ernakulam, was auctioned by the official 
liquidator as per the directions (August 2004) of the Honourable High 
Court. In the permission granted by the Court, it was specifically mentioned 
that the sealed tenders for sale were to be invited on the condition that the 
property notified for sale was an industrial area.  In the sale deed signed 
(July 2005) by t he official liquidator, however, a clause was inserted 
permitting the purchaser to use the land without any reservation.   
As this was an assigned industrial land, it was bound by the Assignment 
Rules, 1964 which required that the land shall be used only f or the purpose 
for which it was assigned. As the sale deed permitted use of the assigned 
industrial land for any purpose without reservation, it was diverted for non -
industrial activities like container parking, godown, training centre etc. We 
came across several such instances (Appendix – 3.2.5). 
In reply (March 2017) Government stated that the transferees of the plots were 
using 1.07 acres for manufacturing of ready -mix concrete , 2.23 acres for the 
manufacture of PVC pipes and the remaining 5.36 acres for  service sector 
activities such as container parking, godown, training centre etc. A very narrow 
definition of industry cannot be taken especially when a major port such as 
Cochin Port is in the vicinity and offers opportunities in logistics. The reply is not 
acceptable as the activities of those entrepreneurs have not been regularised by 
DIC, Ernakulam.  
In terms of the new lease rules, leasehold right alone is allowed to be mortgaged 
after entering into a tripartite agreement among the Department, the ent repreneur 
and the financial institution which is a good practice.  
3.2.6.6 Misuse of industrial land  
The Department decided (February 2014) to allot land not exceeding five per cent 
of total land area of DA/DPs to service sector industries such as logisti cs, 
godown, food court etc. being supporting infrastructure for industries operating in 
them.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 64 
We observed that the land thus allotted were misused in most of the cases and 
their activities did not support the industries operating in the DA/DP at all. It w as 
also seen that some entrepreneurs protested against the unauthorised activities of 
these units. Moreover, according to the details provided by GM, DIC, Ernakulam, 
the land allotted to service industries in DA Edayar in Ernakulam district was 
more than the permissible five per cent. We observed that the GM allotted land to 
the service sector in excess of the prescribed limit on directions from the Director, 
which was irregular. The following examples illustrate misuse of industrial land:  
 An extent of 12.21 acres of land located in Cheruvannur village, Kozhikode 
Taluk, was allotted (May 1964) to M/s West India Steel Company for teel 
re-rolling mill, foundry and workshop activity. The company was non-
functional since the year 1997. During joint physical verification with 
departmental officials we observed that the land was being used by M/s 
Indus Motors ( uthorised Maruti dealer) as vehicle showroom, which was a 
violation of the land allotment conditions. Thus, the land allotted for 
industrial activity was not being used for the intended purpose and the GM, 
DIC, Kozhikode failed to ensure its proper utilisation.  
The Government stated (March 2017) that this allotment predated issue of the 
rules for DA/DP in 1969/1970. Therefore, it was not fair to apply the same 
yardsticks as in the other cases to this case. The reply is not acceptable as the unit 
violated agreement condition No 4 (b) stipulating that the land should be used 
only for the purpose of establishing a steel re-rolling mill, foundry and workshop. 
 
 
 In another case, an extent of 1.01 acres of land in DP Kalamassery assigned 
(March 1987) to M/s Anand Wire and Allied Industries Pvt. Ltd., was 
transferred (March 2006) to M/s Kerala Cars Pvt. Ltd. to set up an 
automobile body building unit. The allottee did not utilise the land for the 
intended purpose till April 2009 after which, the land was being used as a 
Ford service station, which was not an industrial activity. This was a lapse 
of GM, DIC, Ernakulam.  
Showroom for Maruti Cars                 
(Dated 05.09.2016) 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 65 
 
The Government replied (March 2017) that  the land was being utilised for 
manufacturing automobile body which was the sanctioned activity. The reply is 
not tenable since during joint physical verification (August 2016) with DIC staff, 
we observed that a Ford service station functioned on the land.  
A few more cases of similar violation are shown in the Table 3.6.   
Table 3.6  
Details of service sector industries not supporting the activities of the industries in the 
DAs/DPs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
DIC / DA 
Name of Unit Extent of land 
allotted in cents 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4 5 
1 Ernakulam/ 
DA Edayar 
M/s Kerala acids 
and chemicals 
Pvt. Ltd. 
866.00  The land is used for container 
parking and training centre 
which is not regularised by the 
DIC and not required by other 
entrepreneurs.   
2 Ernakulam/ 
DA Edayar 
M/s Goldstar 
Rubber Products 
60.50 Used as cement godown, though 
the entrepreneurs in the DA did 
not require it. 
3 Ernakulam/ 
DA Edayar 
M/s New 
Generation 
Minerals and 
Warehousing Pvt. 
Ltd. 
310.00 The proposed activity is 
warehousing, but used as cement 
godown which is not required by 
the entrepreneurs in the DA. 
4 Palakkad/   
DA Kanjikode 
M/s Dhaan Ispat 
Pvt. Ltd. 
1,432.00  Few containers are dumped on 
the land against the approved 
activity of cold storage & 
logistics park. 
   2,668.50  
(Source: Data furnished by the Directorate of Industries and Commerce) 
The GMs concerned were responsible for permitting the unauthorised activities as 
timely action was not taken to resume such land.  
Ford service station at DP Kalamassery 
(Dated 23.08.2016) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 66 
The Government replied (March 2017) that as the DA was in the vicinity of 
Cochin Port, the allotment in excess of permissible five per cent and utilisation of 
land for container parking, godown etc. was not a misuse of industrial land.  The 
reply is not tenable as the Government had ordered (February 2014) that n ot more 
than five per cent of land area in DA/DPs be allotted for service sector industries. 
In the case of DIC, Ernakulam, the industrial land allotted for service sector 
activities are more than the permissible five per cent. 
3.2.7 Departmental lethargy in vacating stay on resumption granted by  
Government 
3.2.8 Lack of monitoring 
As per Rule 22 of Assignment Rules, 1964, the Tahsildar and the District 
Industries Officer (GM) shall conduct peri odical check to ensure that the 
conditions of assignment are not violated and shall immediately bring to notice of 
the Collector and Director of Industries & Commerce in case of contravention of 
the provisions of the rules or orders.  
We noticed that perio dical checks to detect violations of allotment conditions 
were not conducted by the GM  as  envisaged. Though there were serious issues 
such as idling of land, misuse, transfer etc. departmental inaction varied from 
months to years. Some of the cases of idli ng or transfers were detected by the 
department only after several years of their occurrence. A few examples in this 
category are given below: 
 During the joint inspection conducted (August 2016) by Audit with the 
departmental officials in DP, Andoor, under DIC, Kannur, the official who 
accompanied the team was unable to identify many of the units. This 
indicated inadequacy in monitoring.  
 In DPs at Ayyankunnu, Athani and Velakkode under DIC, Thrissur, the 
official who accompanied the audit team discovered i llegal transfers and 
unauthorised activities in the DPs during the joint physical verification 
only. 
In DP Koppam, out of three acres of industrial land held by one Smt. Valsala Paulson, 
2.5 acres were resumed (July 2010) by GM, DIC, Palakkad as the land was not being 
utilised for industrial purpose. But on the basis of a representation submitted by one 
Shri. K.P. Abdul Naser to the Minister of Industries, the Additional Chief Secretary 
stayed (October 2011) the resumption until disposal of the petition. The stay has not 
been vacated till now even after the lapse of five years. The Government stated (March 
2017) that the case had been taken up for immediate disposal. 
     
s
 

Chapter : III – Compliance Audit of Selected Topics  
 
 67 
 The Women Apparel Park in DP Kalamassery, functioned without an 
agreement.  Though the lease period expired in the year 2011, the unit 
continues to function and the rent was yet to be fixed.  
The Government stated (March 2017) that the department had conducted a 
detailed survey to identify cases of unauthorised activity, illegal transfers, etc. in 
November 2016. 
3.2.9 Conclusion  
Non-fixation of fair value o f industrial land resulted in non -collection of revenue 
due to Government. Even though the new lease rules came into force from 10 
June 2013, allotments were made violating them. The Department did not take 
any action to evict the encroachments on industri al land. It also failed to get 115 
acres of land from KSEB in lieu of an equal extent of industrial land given to 
KSEB. The Department did not take timely action to resume unutilised/ 
underutilised industrial lands. Erroneous decision to permit entrepreneu rs to 
mortgage industrial land in contravention of the orders issued by Revenue 
Department resulted in loss of land. The General Managers concerned were 
unaware of the violation of allotment conditions by industrial units in the DA/ 
DPs, due to ineffective  monitoring of the units and failed to take timely remedial 
action. 

.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Compliance Audit – Other Topics 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 69 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT - OTHER TOPICS 
 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT & FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT  
 
4.1 Unfruitful expenditure of ` 88.92 lakh on installation of 
internet touch screen kiosks 
Internet touch screen kiosks installed at a cost of ` 88.92 lakh in 76 Krishi 
Bhavans/offices of Assistant Directors of Agriculture for dissemination of 
information to farmers became unfruitful as the requisite software was not 
installed and most farmers were not aware of their installation or purpose. 
Government of In dia, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation) (MoA) approved implementation of the National e-Governance Plan 
– Agriculture (NeGPA) in the Centre and in seven States, including Kerala, in 
Phase-I at an approved project cost of ` 227.79 crore. The project cost was to be 
shared in the ratio of 90:10 by Central and State Governments. The project 
envisaged delivery of services to various stakeholders through multiple modes 
including Government offices, internet touch screen kiosks, Kris hi Vigyan 
Kendras, Kisan Call Centres, agri -clinics, Common Service Centres and mobile 
phones. MoA and Government of Kerala (GoK) released ` 3.57 crore  and           
` 30.88 lakh respectively to SAMETI 1, a Kerala State agency,  for meeting the 
expenditure on different components such as site preparation, training cent res, 
computer purchase and connectivity, manpower, etc. for implementing the project  
during 2010-11 to 2012-13. 
One of the components of the project was installation of internet touch screen 
kiosks (kiosks) which would act as an extension tool for dissemination of a wide 
variety of up to date information to the farmers covering various aspects relating 
to cultivation, marketing, weather forecast, drought relief & management, 
training, import &  export of agriculture produce, monitoring of schemes , etc. by 
connecting them to the ‘Farmers Portal’ through internet, at various offices, as 
suggested by the Principal Agricultural Officers of the districts. Accordingly, 
kiosks were installed in 76 Kris hi Bhavans/ offices of Assistant Directors of 
Agriculture (ADAs). MoA entrusted the work of supply and installation of the 
kiosks to M/s Hewlett Packard (HP) and the work of developing and installing the 
software required for the kiosks to National Informatics Centre (NIC). NIC was to 
develop the Solution design and System requirement specifications, solution 
implementation, support etc. in respect of 12 clusters of service which included 
information on seeds, pesticides, fertilizers, farm machinery, traini ng, weather, 
prices, marketing, dr ought relief and management, electronic certification for 
                                                
1  State Agricultural Management and Extension Training Institute. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 70 
exports and imports, etc. HP on its part installed the 76 kiosks during the period 
June to December 2013, each costing ` 1.17 lakh. However, the software could 
not be made ready by NIC at the time of installation of these kiosks. As NIC did 
not install the required software, the Agriculture Department installed standalone 
software developed by the Kerala Agricultural University (KAU) in the kiosks, at 
a cost of ` 25 lakh. The software supplied by KAU, however, provided only static 
information on major crops, cultivation practices, pests and diseases, plant 
protection, etc. in respect of 12 crops. 
Audit examination of records relating to 41 kiosks, including 18 kiosks subjected 
to joint physical verification with departmental officials, found that 2 1 of them 
were not functioning due to non-functioning of UPS, improper/non-installation of 
software, etc. 
Even though the farmers visited Krishi Bhavans for agriculture related 
requirements, the kiosks were installed mainly in the office of ADAs
2 at Block 
level, where there was only limited (only during normal office hours and 
excluding Sundays and holidays) access to farmers. A Survey conducted 
(November 2016 to January 2017) by Audit in the presence of departmental 
officials at 10 places found that, more than half the farmers were not aware of the 
installation of the kiosks or their purpose. 
Thus, the installation of 76 kiosks under the NeGPA at a total cost of` 
` 88.92 lakh 3 did not serve the intended purpose as it failed in enhancing the 
agricultural knowledge of the farmer community by keeping them abreast with 
the latest information and developments in the field of agriculture. Besides,  most 
of the farmers were not aware of the installation and purpose of the kiosks. 
The matter was referred (December 2016) to Government who accepted the audit 
findings and stated that the matter would be taken up with Government of India to 
relocate the kiosks to make them more beneficial to the farmers and that NIC 
would be liaised with to make available the Malayalam version of their software. 
4.2 Idle expenditure incurred on Pokkali Paddy Harvester  
Failure to rectify the defects noticed during field trials before accepting the 
supply of the Pokkali Paddy Harvester by the Kerala Agricultural 
University, resulted in idling of the harvester procured at a cost of ` 51.48 
lakh. 
Government of Kerala (Agriculture Department) accorded (February 2009) 
Administrative Sanction for implementing the pr oject ‘Development of 
Innovative Farms Mechanisation’ (DIFM) at an estimated cost of 
rupees
 three  crore
,  based on  a project submitted by the Kerala Agricultural University (KAU). 
                                                
2  Out of  76 kiosks, 60 were installed at ADAs and 16 at Krishi Bhavans. 
3 ` 1.17 lakh x 76 (kiosks). 

Chapter : IV – Compliance Audit – Other Topics  
 
 71 
‘Development, testing and commissioning of Pokkali4 Paddy Harvester’ was a 
component of the scheme. The Pokkali paddy harvester was envisaged to be an 
amphibian type harvester for harvesting paddy in water -logged agricultural lands. 
The objective of developing the harvester was to overcome the labour shortage 
and high cost of farmi ng in marshy paddy fields in Pokkali areas which was 
facing drastic reduction in paddy cultivation. KAU invited (September 2011) 
open tender and awarded the work of developing, testing and commissioning the 
equipment to the lowest bidder 5 (supplier) at a c ost of ` 51.48 lakh. The supplier 
commissioned the harvester (November 2013) and KAU made the final payment 
(December 2013). 
We observed that during the field trials, the Technical Advisory Committee 
formed for the guidance of the project implementation, h ad pointed out (August 
2013) certain technical faults in the cutting units of the harvester and instructed 
KAU to ensure corrective measures by the supplier . But the supplier 
commissioned the harvester (November 2013) without taking corrective measures 
and KAU made the final payment (December 2013). The Chairman of the Project 
Advisory Committee constituted for the implementation of the scheme also 
expressed (January 2014) his concern over the bigger size of the harvester and the 
difficulties in maneuverability in working in Pokkali area.  
We also observed that , as per condition 7(b) of the agreement  the University had 
the power and authority to recover from the contracting party any loss or damage 
caused to the University by such breach as may be determined  by the University. 
But KAU did not exercise the option and made full payment.  
Thus, the Pokkali Paddy Harvester procured at a cost of ` 51.48 lakh failed to 
meet the envisaged objective and was lying idle for the past three years (March 
2017). 
Government replied (March 2017) that the harvester was developed based on a 
conceptual design taking in to consideration various aspects but admitted that 
practical difficulties were observed during the operation of the machine due to its 
large size. It was also sta ted that a Post Graduate Project had been initiated by 
KAU to improve the quality of the machine. 
                                                
4  Saline, water-logged farmlands where rice and prawns are grown alternately. 
5  M/s Kelachandra Precision Engineers, Kottayam. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 72 
 
FISHERIES AND PORTS DEPARTMENT  
4.3  Irregularities in the construction of buildings, installation of 
solar power systems and other purchases made by the 
Directorate of Ports 
4.3.1  Construction of Directorate building and allied works at Valiyathura  
The Fisheries and Ports (D) Department (Department) accorded (August 2010) 
Administrative Sanction (AS) for construction of an office building for the 
Directorate of Ports (Directorate) in the departmental land at Valiyathura at a cost 
of ` 75 lakh, in order to provide better facilities and modern working environment 
to the staff and to save money on monthly rent. The Department entrusted the 
work to Kerala Police Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd. ( KPHCC) in 
terms of the guidelines issued (September 2007) by Finance (IND & PW -B) 
Department for regulating execution of civil works of Government through 
agencies other than Public Works Department (PWD). The D epartment revised 
the AS (February 2011) to ` 1.05 crore and further an amount of ` 84 lakh was 
also sanctioned (March 2012) for carrying out additional civil and electrical 
works. KPHCC completed (August 2012) the work at a cost of ` 1.93 crore and 
the Di rectorate paid ` 1.89 crore. The excess expenditure of ` 4.26 lakh  was 
adjusted by KPHCC from an advance given by the Directorate for another work.  
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
 Rule 4 (2) of Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 1999 (KMBR), among  
other things, stipulates that for construction of a new building or altering 
an existing one prior permit should be obtained from the Secretary of the 
Local Self Government Institution.  
We observed that before constructing the building the Director did n ot 
obtain the mandatory building permit from the Secretary, 
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation. Consequently, the Department became 
liable (November 2015) to pay an annual tax of ` 2.4 lakh which was 
three times the normal rate. The Department had not remitted  the amount 
(March 2017). 
 According to the Kerala PWD Manual 6, the site selected for a building 
should be most advantageous for the intended purpose and have a 
suitable neighborhood for the purpose for which the building is to be 
constructed. Kerala PWD Ma nual7 also states that, while selecting a site 
it should be ensured that the building is not exposed to heavy winds 
without protection.  
                                                
6  Clauses 6.1.1 and 6.1.3 (a). 
7  Clause 6.1.3 (h). 

Chapter : IV – Compliance Audit – Other Topics  
 
 73 
We found that the building was constructed within 30 metres of the High 
Tide Line (HTL) on the sea shore and subjected to heavy winds and 
saline atmosphere. Consequently, the roof of the building (constructed 
with powder-coated sheets over iron truss work), furniture and fixture s, 
etc. became severely corroded and damaged and parts of roof blown 
away. The above facts were confirmed in a joint physical verification 
(June 2016) of the site by Audit with the Deputy Director of Ports.  The 
staff of the directorate complained of inadequate public conveyance 
facilities and remoteness of the directorate from the Government 
Secretariat and other connected offices.  They had also raised issues like 
the presence of anti-social elements in the area, the proneness of the area 
to contagious diseases and the constant sea breeze which caused health 
problems.   The  above  issues had prompted the Director to seek 
(November 2014) Government permission to shift the Directorate from 
Valiyathura.  
Thus, the selection of site for constructing the Directorate building was 
done without conducting proper feasibility study. As a result, the 
Directorate building constructed at a cost of ` 1.93 crore was in a 
deteriorating condition and its continued use was doubtful. During the 
exit meeting (November 2016) the Department accepted the audit 
observations. 
 
  
 The Director awarded (August 2012) the work of Landscaping and 
Gardening  in front of the new building to KPHCC at 
a cost of ` 8.3 0 lakh and paid (December 2012) the full amount in 
advance. KPHCC executed (September 2013) the work at a cost of ` 6.73 
lakh. 
We observed that, the Dire ctor did not make any arrangement for the 
maintenance and nurturing of the plants even though the KPHCC had 
advised (August 2012) the Director to make such arrangement.  
Consequently, the   had perished.   
Part of roof blown away  
(as of 02.06.2016) 
False ceiling blown away  
(as of 02.06.2016) 
)( Nakshatra vanam
Nakshatra vanam

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 74 
Thus, ` 6.73 lakh spent on the construction of   became 
infructuous. Further, the Director did not recover (October 2016) the 
balance amount of ` 1.57 lakh from KPHCC.  
 The Department issued (June 2012) AS for constructing ramps on either 
side of the pier at Valiyathura at a cost of `
 32 lakh with the intention of 
providing road connectivity over the pier to the public who were using 
the port compound for road connectivity. The Director awarded the work 
to Harbour Engineering Department (HED) and paid the full amount 
(June 2012) to HED in advance.  
We observed that, HED did not execute the work due to protest of local fishermen 
who demanded to construct Valiyathura Fishing Harbour first . Hence, a closure 
agreement was executed (February 2014) with the contractor. But the advance 
was yet to be recovered (January 2017) from HED.  
During the exit meeting the Department accepted the audit observations and 
agreed to look into the refunds due from KPHCC and HED. 
4.3.2  Renovation of Signal Station at Kodungallur Port  
Kerala PWD Manual 8 states that any development or extension work found 
necessary during progress of work but not covered by earlier sanction, must be 
covered by a supplementary estimate. This supplementary estimate is to be treated 
as an original estimate and AS should be obtained for it from the same authority 
which sanctioned the original estimate, even if the cost can be met from savings in 
the original estimate.  
The Government accorded (October 2011) AS for ` 56.21 lakh for renovating the 
Signal Station of Kodungallur in which the Port Office functioned, with a view to 
address space constraints and to solve the problem of flooding of the premises 
during high tides. The work was entrusted to KITCO 9 and the Director executed 
agreement (February 2012) with them.  
We observed that after receiving the sanction, on the instructions of the Director 
the scope of the work was changed from ‘Renovation of Signal Station’ to 
‘Construction of Conference Hall’ . Further, instead of renovating the Signal 
Station, KITCO constructed a Conference Hall in the same premises. The Director 
did not obtain Government sanction for the new work; instead, obtained a revised 
AS (June 2014) for `
 57.97 lakh from Government presenting the work as 
‘Renovation of Signal Station’. Thus, the Director misled the Government through 
misrepresentation of facts and executed an unauthorised work diverting the fund 
sanctioned for another work.  
                                                
8  Clause 10.1.7.1 .  
9  Kerala Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisation Ltd. 
Nakshatra vanam

Chapter : IV – Compliance Audit – Other Topics  
 
 75 
A joint site verification conducted (May 2016) by Audit with departmental 
officials found that the roof of the conference hall was in a deteriorated condition 
with damaged false ceiling and other fixtures. During the exit meeting the 
Department accepted the audit observation. 
4.3.3  Procurement of furnishings/equipment violating financial principles    
Financial principles in the Kerala Financial Code require every government 
servant to be watchful constantly to see that the best possible value is obtained for 
all public funds spent by him or under his control and to guard scrupulously 
against every kind of wasteful expenditure from public funds.  
We observed that, disregarding the saline atmosphere of the locality, the Director 
had procured steel furniture instead of wooden furniture which was most suited to 
the atmosphere. Consequently the furniture became corroded due to salinity. 
Further, the computers and other electronic equipment purchased were also not 
functioning or functioning partially as detailed in Appendix – 4.3.1. 
During the exit meeting, the Department accepted the audit observation. 
4.3.4  Installation of solar power system at the Directorate and Port Offices  
4.3.4.1 Diversion of fund  
The department accorded AS (March 2013) for ` 35 lakh for installation of solar 
power systems at four port offices viz., Valiyathura, Vizhinjam, Azhikkal and 
Beypore. 
We observed th at, instead of executing the work as specified in the AS, the 
Director of Ports utilised the fund for installing an off-grid solar power system of 
20 Kilo Watt (KW) capacity at the Directorate through Kerala Small Industries 
Development Corporation Ltd. (SIDCO) for which no sanction was obtained from 
the Department. This amounted to unauthorised expenditure and diversion of 
fund. In addition to this, a 10 KW off-grid solar power system was also installed 
at the Directorate at a cost of ` 12.12 lakh. 
It was also observed that condition No.12 of the terms and conditions contained in 
the work order issued to SIDCO (March 2013) stipulated that the final payment 
was to be effected only after submitting a certificate from ANERT 10. But the 
Directorate made payment to SIDCO without obtaining the requisite certification 
from ANERT whereby the quality of the equipment  supplied could not be 
ensured.  
During the exit meeting the Department accepted the audit observations. 
                                                
10   Agency for Non-conventional Energy and Rural Technology. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 76 
4.3.4.2   Non-achievement of projected benefits of solar power systems  
The solar power systems were installed at the Directorate on the recommendation 
of the Chief Mechanical Engineer (CME) who informed the Director that the 
average cost of power consumed by the Directorate per month amounting to              
` 30,000 could be saved by installing them and that it did not involve recurring 
expenses.  The CME also stated that power connection from KSEB 11 required 
installation of a transformer at a cost of ` 30 lakh.  
We observed that, as per the estimate prepared (February 2014) by KSEB, the 
actual expenditure for supplying 78 KW power to the Directorate of Ports, 
including installation of a 100 KVA transformer worked out to ` 11.63 lakh only.  
Further, the highest saving of monthly electricity charges achieved during the 
period in which the solar power systems were functional was ` 11,36812 only as 
against ` 30,000 projected by the CME.  
Thus, the CME projected inflated benefits of the solar power systems and 
suppressed the fact on the cost of installing the KSEB transformer. This resulted 
in avoidable expenditure of ` 47.1213 lakh on the installation of two solar power 
systems which ultimately became unfruitful due to damage as detailed in Table 4.1.                                                                                                         
Table 4.1  
Electricity charges before installation of solar power systems, after their installation and after 
they stopped functioning 
Month & Year Electricity charges in ` Month & Year Electricity charges in ` 
December 2013 26,821 March 2015 11,511 
March 2014 14,93514 April 2015 10,670 
May 2014 34715 May 2015 10,274 
June 2014 1,774 June 2015 5,175 
July 2014 2,087 July 2015 3,824 
August 2014 1,722 August 2015 8,452 
September 2014 1,317 September 2015 6,403 
October 2014 143 October 2015 7,076 
November 2014 1,006 November 2015 7,225 
December 2014 2,029 December 2015 7,522 
January 2015 10,13516 January 2016 8,235 
February 2015 8,047 February 2016 8,027 
(Source: Data furnished by Directorate) 
                                                
11   Kerala State Electricity Board. 
12  Difference between the highest electricity charges after solar power system stopped 
 functioning and during the period when it was fully functional  ` 11,511 (March 2015) - ` 143 
 (October 2014). 
13   ` 35 lakh + ` 12.12 lakh. 
14  10KW off-grid solar power system installed in February 2014 stopped functioning in  March 
 2014. 
15  20KW solar power system installed in April 2014. 
16  20KW solar power system stopped functioning in November 2014. 
..

Chapter : IV – Compliance Audit – Other Topics  
 
 77 
During the exit meeting the Department accepted the audit observations. 
4.3.4.3   Installation of solar power panels in Port Offices 
The Department gave (November 2013) AS for ` 1.64 crore to install solar power 
panels in 14 Port Offices 17. The work was awarded to KELTRON without tender 
and the Directorate paid (March 2014) an advance of ` 68 lakh to KELTRON, 
being 50 per cent of the cost relating to 12 ports.  In addition to the above, battery 
backup essential for online activities was also provided to three ports at a cost of           
` 14 lakh. Details of the 14 solar power systems are given in Appendix – 4.3.2. 
We observed that, even after two years of awarding the work and spending of               
` 82 lakh, nine  out  of  the  11  systems  installed at  the 11 Port Offices were 
not functioning for want of net meters, inspection by Electrical Inspectorate, etc.  
During the exit meeting the Department accepted the audit observation. 
4.3.5 Non-recovery of liquidated damages  
The Department sanctioned (June 2012) purchase of a 40 feet Container Handling 
Crane for use at Kollam Port from M/s. Liebherr (Supplier) at a cost of ` 12.08 
crore. The crane was to be delivered and commissioned at Kollam port. The 
amended supply order required the Supplier to commission the crane within five 
months from the date of opening of Letter of Credit (LC). Since the LC was 
opened on 11 June 2013, the supplier should have commissioned the crane by 
November 2013. But, it was commissioned only on 29 April 2014.  
We observed that, the reasons for delay in commissioning the crane were two 
amendments made in the LC by the Director on the request of the Supplier.  There 
was one amendment (January 2014) made by the Director on the request of the 
supplier on account of non-availability of vessel for shipment of the crane until 28 
March 2014. Hence on that amendment the supplier was liable to pay liquidated 
damages in terms of clause 5b of the agreement. However, the Director did not 
levy liquidated damages of ` 47 lakh ( ` 11,69,64,135
18 x 0.5 per cent  x 8 
weeks19) which amounted to extension of undue benefit to the Supplier. 
During the exit meeting the Department accepted the audit observation and agreed 
to look into the matter. 
                                                
17  Installed only in 11 port offices. 
18  Cost of crane = 12,07,89,754 - 38,25,619 (AMC  charges). 
19  Out of total 16 weeks ( 01.01.2014 to 29.04.2014) delay attributable to the Supplier, less eight 
 weeks for transportation, erection and commission. 
` `

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 78 
 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT  
4.4  Excess payment to contractors due to non -recovery of cost 
index on the cost of bitumen reimbursed at market rate 
Failure to recover  cost index added on the cost of bitumen in the estimate of 
nine works by the Executive Engineers from work bills resulted in excess 
payment of ` 3.67 crore to contractors.  
Public Works Department (PWD) ordered (February 2004) that the contractors 
should purchase bitumen themselves for road works costing above ` 15 lakh and 
the actual cost would be reimbursed to the contractor s. Government ordered 
(April 2013) adoption of  Delhi Schedule of Rates (DSR) in PWD with effect 
from 01 October 2013.  
Scrutiny of records relating to 30 works executed during 2014-15 in connection 
with the 35 th National Games conducted (January-February 2015) in Kerala 
revealed that in nine works arranged by two PWD Roads divisions 20in two 
districts, the technical sanctioning authorities 21 allowed cost index 22 on the cost 
of bitumen while preparing estimates. Even though the actual cost of bitumen 
was reimbursed to the contractors, at the time of passing the contractors’ work 
bills, the Executive Engineers of the Divisions concerned deducted the cost of 
bitumen only from the bills but did not recover the element of cost index applied 
thereon. This resulted in excess payment of ` 3.67 crore to contractors 
(Appendix – 4.4).  
The matter was referred (February 2017) to Government.  In the exit meeting 
(February 2017) the Department accepted the audit observations and assured to 
recover the entire excess payments within a month. 
                                                
20 PWD Roads Divisions, Thiruvananthapuram  and Alappuzha. 
21  Chief Engineer (Roads & Bridges) - four works and Supe rintending Engineer ( Roads & 
Bridges), South Circle, Thiruvananthapuram  - five works. 
22  This is to equali se the c ost of materials to the prevailing rates, as DSR would be of earlier     
 period. 

Chapter : IV – Compliance Audit – Other Topics  
 
 79 
4.5  Extra expenditure of ` 86.26 lakh in five works entrusted to 
M/s Kerala State Construction Corporation Limited  
Inclusion of five per cent OH charges in addition to the ten per cent included 
in the estimates prepared as per MORTH data resulted in extra expenditure   
of ` 86.26 lakh for five works. 
According to the Standar d Data Book of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways (MORTH), the data for items of works includes overhead (OH) charges 
of 10 per cent  so as to cover elements of office furniture,  site accommodation, 
sales/turnover tax, etc. The standard data book of state Public Works Department 
(PWD) did not contain such provision for OH charges. Considering the liability of 
contractors towards taxes and duties, Government of Kerala (GoK) approved 
(May & December 2010) OH charges  of five per cent,  to be included in the 
estimate data of works as per PWD specifications.   
According to the guidelines (September 2007) issued by GoK for execution of 
works through agencies other than PWD, the estimate for the construction should 
be based on latest PWD Schedule of Rates and Technical Sanction for civil works 
can be issued by the executing agency, provided the cost of work does not exceed 
the Administrative Sanction amount by more than 15 per cent . Government 
subsequently (February 2012) o rdered that, data based on Indian Roads Congress 
standards and MORTH specifications along with PWD schedule of rates would be 
used for preparing estimates for PWD projects.  
GoK accorded (October 2012) sanction for five road works at a cost of ` 35.35 
crore in order to improve the riding quality of the connected roads to 
Chamravattam Regulator Cum Bridge, which were under the jurisdiction of PWD 
Roads Division Manjeri and decided to entrust these works to M/S Kerala State 
Construction Corporation Limited (KSCC).  
Scrutiny of the estimate records relating to these road works entrusted with KSCC 
revealed that , the Managing Director, KSCC accorded technical sanctions 
(January 2013 to April 2013) to these five works based on MORTH 
specifications, allowing additi onal OH charges of five per cent  in the estimate 
data. As MORTH data already included OH charges, inclusion of OH charges as 
per state PWD specifications was unnecessary. It was observed that the data relied 
upon for the issue of Administ rative Sanction fo r these works  also included 
additional OH charges of five per cent. 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 80 
The unnecessary inclusion of five per cent OH charges over and above the ten per 
cent OH in the estimates prepared as per MORTH data resulted in extra financial 
commitment of ` 1.22 crore in respect of these works. Upto date extra 
expenditure (September 2016) on this account worked out to ` 86.26  lakh 
(Appendix – 4.5) resulting in extra benefit to the contractor. 
The matter was referred to Government in March 2017 and the reply is awaited. 
Thiruvananthapuram,                       (AMAR PATNAIK) 
The                          Principal Accountant General  
                           (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit) 
                     Kerala 
Countersigned 
New Delhi,               (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
The                  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
             
to
      
- -

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 

 81 
Appendix – 1.1 
Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) as on 30 June 2016 
(Reference : Paragraph 1.7.1 - Page : 8) 
Year Up to  
2011-12 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 Total 
PUBLIC WORKS (ROADS AND BRIDGES) DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 44 13 15 20 10 102 
Number of paragraphs 205 99 98 233 130 765 
Number of IRs for which initial 
reply has not been received (number 
of paragraphs) 
NIL NIL NIL 2 (17) 7 (91) 9 (108) 
WATER RESOURCES (IRRIGATION) DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 41 24 28 67 38 198 
Number of paragraphs 122 48 70 260 195 695 
Number of IRs for which initial 
reply has not been received (number 
of paragraphs) 
NIL NIL NIL 4 (16) 10 (41) 14 (57) 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND FARMERS’ WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 19 NIL 13 101 75 208 
Number of paragraphs 36 NIL 26 279 218 559 
Number of IRs for which initial 
reply has not been received (number 
of paragraphs) 
NIL NIL NIL 3 (16) NIL 3 (16) 
FOREST AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT 
Number  of IRs 19 3 20 50 26 118 
Number of paragraphs 40 4 57 238 112 451 
Number of IRs for which initial 
reply has not been received (number 
of paragraphs) 
1 (1) NIL 4 (7) 16 (100) 1 (1) 22 (109) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 82 
Appendix – 2.1 
Instances of NOC granted for quarrying in Government land without auction 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7 - Page : 17) 
 
 
Sl 
No 
Name of NOC Holder NOC issuing 
authority 
Month 
and year 
of issue 
of NOC 
Extent of 
land 
Period 
(in 
years) 
1 Shri. K.N.  Madhusoodanan 
Managing Director, 
M/s Mavanal Granites Pvt . 
Ltd., Kalanjoor 
District Collector, 
Pathanamthitta 
August 
2013 
4.0469 ha 10 
2 Shri. K.N.Madhusoodanan, 
Managing Partner, 
M/s Vajra Rock Mining 
Industries, Kalanjoor 
District Collector, 
Pathanamthitta 
February 
2014 
4.6785 ha 12 
3 Seven NOCs- 
Three to Sh ri Reji 
Kuriakose,  
Two to Smt. Jeeva Reji and  
One each  to Smt. Kumari 
Joy and  
Smt. Rema Rajiv 
Tahasildar, 
Kothamangalam 
2011-13 6.7291Acre 12 
4 Shri. Sathyan, Kalathingal 
veedu, Kumbaleri P O 
District Collector, 
Wayanad 
July 2015 0.0808 ha 1 
5 Shri George K. 
Vallamattom, Managing 
Director, Vallamattom 
Stone Aggregates, 
Arakuzha village 
Additional 
Tahasildar, 
Muvattupuzha 
February 
2015 
1.25 Acre 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 83 
Appendix – 2.2  
 Details of violations of KMMC Rules identified during joint site verification of quarries 
(Reference : Paragraph 2.14 - Page : 26 ) 
Sl. 
No. 
Quarry owned by Violations of  rules identified 
1.  Shri. Thomas Mathai,  
Konnithazham Village, 
Pathanamthitta District 
 
2.  Shri.Baby Kutty  Jacob, 
Konnithazham Village, 
Pathanamthitta District 
No display board containing details of quarrying 
permit, no fencing around the quarry, demarcation was 
not properly done, access road not tarred, and no safety 
measures to labourers. 
3.  Smt. Susamma John, 
M/s.Johnson Rocks Payyanamon, 
Konni, Pathanamthitta District. 
 
4.  Shri. Jobin Varghese, M/s. 
Pyramid Granites (P), 
Pathanamthitta District 
No demarcation of area, no fencing and no display 
board. The entire quarrying area was part of a hill. 
5.  Shri. Sudheer Sukumaran,MD., 
M/s.Aswathy Granites, Koodal 
Village, Pathanamthitta 
 
6.  Abandoned quarry, Murinjakal, 
Pathanamthitta 
No proper fencing and demarcation. 
7.  Shri. PaulVarghese,M/s. Cement 
Bricks & Allied  
Choorakode, Vellangu (PO), 
Ernakulam District. 
 
No bench cutting and no safety measures to the 
labourers. Number of trees cut and removed from the 
quarrying site was not available 
8.  Shri. P.V.Santhosh, Ernakulam 
District. 
Number of trees cut and removed from the qu arrying 
site was not available.  Explosive licence specifying 
quarrying areas at survey Nos.410/10 and 301/2 -2 was 
not available.  But licence to keep magazine at survey 
No.409/9 was produced. 
9.  M/s.Cochin Granites, Pulickal 
Associates, North Mazh vannoor,  
Ernakulam District. 
 
Explosive licence for keeping explosive magazine at 
survey No.282/3-2 was available.  However explosive 
licence specifying quarrying areas with survey Nos. 
was not available. In t he consent of KSPCB 
(No/PCB/DO-EKM/IQR-204/08 dt. 6. 2. 16)  survey 
No.284/1-3 was not specified. 
Bench cutting was not done, approach road to quarry 
was in damaged condition and display board was not 
available. 
10.  Shri. V R  Parameswaran,   
VRP Rock Sand, Mupliyam, 
Varandarappilly Village, Thrissur 
District 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 84 
Sl. 
No. 
Quarry owned by Violations of  rules identified 
11.  Shri. T.T. Michael, Mupliyam, 
Varandarappilly Village, Thrissur 
District 
Details of quarrying permit not shown in the display 
board, validity period of the permit had already 
expired; details of D&O licence and consent of KSPCB 
were not shown in the display board.  Though validity 
of the permit expired the blasted markings on the rocks 
were very clear and prominent which indicated  that the 
quarry was illegally operated. No benching in the 
quarried area and there was no demarcation to identify 
the area of permit.  
12.  Shri. Haridasan A V,  Mupliyam, 
Varandarappilly Village, Thrissur 
District  
13.  M/s. Victory Granites and Metal 
quarry, Mupliyam, Thrissur 
District 
Abandoned quarry, located very close to forest area, 
approach road to quarry was in between forest area and 
‘junda’1 and the road was not tarred. 
Fencing was not provided around the quarry especially 
the water logged portion and the quarry was part of a 
hillock. 
14.  Shri. Augustine Jose 
(Kalapurakkal 
Jose)Varandrappilly Village, 
Chalakudy Taluk, Thrissur Dist. 
There was no statutory display board, no demarcation 
to identify the area of extraction   and no bench cutting 
in the quarrying portion.  
15.  M/s. Poabs Rock Products Pvt. 
Ltd., Nellikaparambil, Kozhikode 
Lease areas (3 Nos. of leases) were not segregated 
though two leases were not registered under RMCU.  
16.  Shri. AbdulRahman, Director, 
Marva Granites, Kodiyathur 
Village, Kozhikode 
Approach road to quarrying area was not tarred. The 
dealer’s licence of the attached crusher unit had 
expired and the transit passes of the expired licence 
was used to move granite aggregates. 
17.  Shri.  Muhammed,  Kodiyathur 
Village, Kozhikode 
No separate demarcation.   
18.  Quarries in revenue land granted 
to 17 persons, Wayand District 
The quarries were not fenced.  
19.  M/s.CBM Enterprises, 
Kolagappara, Wayanad District. 
Fencing was not provi ded around quarrying area and 
no demarcation. Approach road to quarry was not 
tarred.  
 
20.  Shri. M.P. Kuriakose, Krishnagiri 
Village, Wayanad District. 
Demarcation and fencing were not done; approach road 
to quarry was not tarred. 
21.  Quarry of Shri. Renjith K. in 
Wayanad district. 
Fencing was not provided. No separate water tank to 
keep the contaminated water. No mechanism to control 
dust, no bench cutting and no display board. 
 
 
                                                
1 ‘junda’ is a permanent conical structure of stones constructed to demarcate forest boundary. 

Appendices 
 
 85 
Appendix – 2.3 
Instances showing necessity of accurate measurement for assessing the quantity quarried 
(Reference : Paragraph 2.15 - Page : 27) 
 
Sl 
No  
Details of quarry  Particulars  showing the necessity for accurate measurement  
1 Quarry owned by Shri. 
N. D. Joseph, 
Muvattupuzha taluk in 
Ernakulam district 
The Geologist in Ernaku lam district assessed the seigniorage payable for 
quarrying a quantity of 4 ,87,500 MT of GBS, based on which the 
Tahasildar, Muvattupuzha taluk in Ernakulam district directed (June 2014) 
the NOC holder to pay seigniorage for the quantity. However, on a req uest 
(August 2014)  of the lease holder the quantity was re -assessed and the 
quantity on which seigniorage was payable was reduced (September 2014) 
to 2,02,608 MT only, citing the reasons that there were differences in the 
fixing of boundary of NOC land an d the data regarding the period of 
quarrying of adjacent land was not available. 
 
2 M/s United Metals, 
Palakuzha in 
Ernakulam district 
The quarrying lease holder, quarried beyond their permitted area from the 
government land surrounded by their lease land    which was detected          
(August 2015) by Revenue department.  Consequent to the submission of 
mine plan, the Geologist, Ernakulam visited the quarry and found (August 
2016) that the area was encroached up on and mined illegally beyond the 
permitted area, and ordered (September 2016) to remit an amount of          
₹ 34.80 lakh towards royalty for 31 ,737 MT and fine for the violation.  As 
per the report  (November 2016) of Tahasildar, Muvattupuzha the assessed  
quantity would be more than what was arriv ed at so far and in order to 
arrive at the actual quantity, service of surveyors equipped  with total 
station was sought for from the District Collector.  
 
3 M/s Luxury Sand 
Kerala Private Limited,  
Elanji village, 
Ernakulam district 
DMG found (June 2016) that the lease holder illegally quarried from the 
non lease government land surrounded by their quarrying lease land.  As 
the Geologist could not ascertain the actual quantity extracted, the service 
of taluk surveyor of Muvattupuzha taluk was obtained for the purpose. As 
the surveyor’s calculation was felt to be wrong, the Geologist, Ernakulam 
requested (November 2016) the District collector for revision of 
measurements with the observations that the surveyor excluded some 
portions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 86 
Annexure – 2.4 
Instances of public complaints on quarrying affecting availability of water 
(Reference : Paragraph 2.16 - Page : 27) 
Sl No Details about complainant Nature  of complaint 
1 Inhabitants near to a laterite quarry located 
in Payanithadam Hill, Thalappill y taluk, 
Thrissur 
Quarrying affected their drinking water 
sources adversely 
2 Shri. K R Remanan, an inhabitant of 
Kannimangalam, Naduvattam PO, 
Ernakulam district 
Working of a GBS quarry and crusher unit 
close to his residence reduced the water 
level in his well 
3 Public complained  Vengoor Panchayath  
authorities in Ernakulam Disrict 
Scarcity of water due to operation of quarry 
located at  Munippara, Kombanad area 
4 Priyadarsini Cultural Forum, Wayanad 
District Committee   
Operating more than one GBS qu arry 
located at Manimalakunnu  in 
Thrikkaippatta village, caused reduction of 
spring water 
5 Public in Kozhukkalloor village in 
Kozhikode district   
Quarrying of laterite from nearby hill caused 
depletion of  water level in their wells  and 
they had to  d epend on far away sources for 
drinking water. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
s
 
s
 

Appendices 
 
 87 
 
Appendix – 2.5 
 
Instances of public complaints on quarrying causing vibrations/damages to residential 
buildings 
(Reference : Paragraph 2.17 - Page : 28) 
 
Sl No Details of complainants  Nature of complaints and further action 
1 Inhabitants of Ayyampuzha village in 
Ernakulam district. 
Public complaints against a quarry which caused damages to 
their houses due to blasting. 
2 Complaints of inhabitants residing close to a 
quarry owned by M/s K. J. Vasudevan Nair, 
Thrissur district  
Complaints were made regarding cracks to walls, roof tiles 
sliding down and vibration to house buildings due to the 
blasting in the quarry  
KSPCB was of the view that consent was given based on the 
distance criteria of 100 m from residential buildings and that 
cracks on buildings and vibrations did not come under their 
purview.   
3 Public complaints against quarries which 
used heavy explosives (Arakkuzha, 
Ernakulam District) 
Vibrations of the bl ast in the qua rry were felt and  flying 
pieces of rock caused damages to buildings and property   
and fear to the residents. As reported by the Revenue 
Divisional Officer, Muvattupuzha in Ernakulam district, 
residential buildings, store shed and cattle sheds located 
even 400 m away from two quarries  (M/s St. Mary’s 
quarries and a quarry owned by S hri. Babu Varkey at 
Arakkuzha) were found damaged. 
4 Public complained against the functioning of 
a quarry located at Kabanigiri in Padichira 
village, in Wayanad district 
Complaints were that blasting in the quarry caused 
vibrations and damages to the roof of residential buildings. 
5 Public in Kodassery Village in Thrissur 
district complained about the functioning of 
a quarry 
The quarry was causing nuisances such as dust, sound and 
vibration and damage to houses. The Additional Tahasildar, 
Mukundapuram  reported  that cracks were detected on the 
walls of residential buildings situated more than 200 m away 
from the quarry owned by M/s Edathadan Granites, 
Kodassery. 
6 Shri. Viswanathan K ,  Choorakkodumala, 
Adoor Taluk 
Quarry activity caused damage to a residential building. The 
District Geologist, Pathanamthitta stopped the operation of a 
GBS quarry owned by S hri. G. Rajeevan of Erathu village 
based on complaints from various corners. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 88 
Appendix – 2.6 
 Examples of repeat offenders 
(Reference : Paragraph 2.18.2 - Page : 31) 
 
Sl No Name of repeat 
offender 
Data collected from Nature of offence Number of times 
offence 
committed 
1 Shri. T.T. Michael District office of 
Mining an d Geology, 
Thrissur 
Illegal quarrying 2 
2 Shri. Sojan. C.J   District office of 
Mining and Geology, 
Thrissur 
Illegal transportation 3 
3 Shri. Sunil District office of 
Mining and Geology, 
Thrissur 
Illegal transportation 2 
4 Shri. M.P. Kuriakose District office of 
Mining and Geology, 
Wayanad 
Illegal quarrying 2 
5 Shri. Binoj. K. Baby District office of 
Mining and Geology, 
Wayanad 
Illegal quarrying 2 
 

Appendices 
 
 89 
Appendix – 3.1.1 
Details of 42 Houseboats subjected to joint verification 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.1.2 - Page : 39) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
Boat 
Identification 
number2 
Sl. No Name of Boat Identification 
number 
Sl. No Name of Boat Identification 
number 
1 Syndicate Nil3 15 Anthem of Lake Nil 29 Princess Nil 
2 Bhasura 1059 16 No name 1149/13 30 Nandhanam 0471/13 
3 Holiday 
Home 
Nil 17 Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, 
holiday 
0033/10 31 Lakes and 
Lagoons N 9  
532 
4 ABC 0088/10 18 Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
Nil 32 Vinayaka Tours Nil 
5 Venice 
Tour 
Nil 19 Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.2 
Nil 33 Gloria Nil 
6 Maddonna Nil 20 Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.4 
Nil 34 Thejas Nil 
7 Venice Nil 21 Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.6 
Nil 35 Sreepadmam Nil 
8 Gouri 0090/10 22 Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.7 
0892/11 36 Bamboo green 1306 
9 Kerala 
Backwaters 
Nil 23 Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.8 
Nil 37 Ursala 1080/13 
10 No name 0919/11 24 Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.9 
Nil 38 Mayooram Nil 
11 Blue Jelly Nil 25 Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.10 
Nil 39 Sabhwereeshan Nil 
12 Ever Green 
Tours 
99 26 No name CIB 872 40 Golden Mist 366 
13 No name KIV 299 27 Maidhili 223/11 41 Summer breeze 543 
14 Spice 
Coast-5 
0174/10 28 No name KIV 1105  42 Freedia waters Nil 
(Source: Joint Verification Report) 
                                                
2  KIV No. issued by Port authorities. 
3  ‘Nil’ mentioned in the table refers to unregistered HBs. 
o

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 90 
Appendix – 3.1.2 
Position of survey, registration and distinguishing mark noticed during joint verification of 
42 Houseboats 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.1.3.1(i) / 3.1.3.2.(i) – Page : 40/43 ) 
Unregistered 
HBs 
Dry dock 
inspection not 
conducted so far 
Not applied for 
dry dock 
inspection 
periodically 
(36 months) 
Annual survey 
not conducted 
so far 
Not applied 
for renewal of 
annual survey 
certificate 
HBs without 
distinguishing 
mark 
Syndicate Syndicate   Syndicate   Syndicate 
 Bhasura     Bhasura Bhasura 
Holiday Home Holiday Home         
         ABC 
Venice Tour Venice Tour   Venice Tour   Venice Tour 
Maddonna Maddonna   Maddonna   Maddonna 
Venice Venice   Venice   Venice 
 Gouri       Gouri 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
Kerala 
Backwaters   Kerala 
Backwaters   Kerala 
Backwaters 
   No name/KIV 
919 
No name/KIV 
919   No name/KIV 
919 
Blue Jelly Blue Jelly   Blue Jelly   Blue Jelly 
         Ever Green Tours 
   No name/KIV 
299   No name/KIV 
299 
No name/KIV 
299 
 Spice Coast-5   Spice Coast-5   Spice Coast-5 
Anthem of Lake Anthem of Lake   Anthem of Lake   Anthem of Lake 
       No name/KIV 
1149/13 
No name/KIV 
1149/13 
         
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, 
holiday 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2   Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2   Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.2 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.2   Kerala 
Backwaters No.2   Kerala 
Backwaters No.2 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.4 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.4   Kerala 
Backwaters No.4   Kerala 
Backwaters No.4 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.6 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.6   Kerala 
Backwaters No.6   Kerala 
Backwaters No.6 
   
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.7 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.7 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.7 

Appendices 
 
 91 
Unregistered 
HBs 
Dry dock 
inspection not 
conducted so far 
Not applied for 
dry dock 
inspection 
periodically 
(36 months) 
Annual survey 
not conducted 
so far 
Not applied 
for renewal of 
annual survey 
certificate 
HBs without 
distinguishing 
mark 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.8 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.8   Kerala 
Backwaters No.8   Kerala 
Backwaters No.8 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.9 
Kerala 
Backwaters No.9   Kerala 
Backwaters No.9   Kerala 
Backwaters No.9 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.10 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.10 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.10 
  Kerala 
Backwaters No.10 
CIB 872 CIB 872   CIB 872   CIB 872 
 Maidhili     Maidhili Maidhili 
        No name/KIV 
1105 
Princess Princess   Princess   Princess 
   Nandhanam     Nandhanam 
   Lakes and 
Lagoons No.9     Lakes and 
Lagoons No.9 
Vinayaka Tours Vinayaka Tours   Vinayaka Tours   Vinayaka Tours 
 Gloria   Gloria   Gloria 
Thejas Thejas   Thejas   Thejas 
Sreepadmam Sreepadmam   Sreepadmam   Sreepadmam 
 Bamboo green       Bamboo green 
 Ursala       Ursala 
Mayooram Mayooram   Mayooram   Mayooram 
Sabhwereeshan Sabhwereeshan   Sabhwereeshan   Sabhwereeshan 
 Golden Mist   Golden Mist   Golden Mist 
     Summer breeze   Summer breeze 
Freedia waters Freedia waters   Freedia waters   Freedia waters 
23 numbers 31 numbers 5 numbers 27 numbers 5 numbers 41 numbers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 92 
Appendix – 3.1.3 
Details of survey fees forgone by the department 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.1.3.2(i) – Page : 44) 
 
Year Total number 
of HBs 
registered  each 
year 
HBs not 
applied for 
renewal of 
annual 
survey as on 
31. 3. 2016 
Annual 
survey not 
conducted 
so far 
Total Survey fees including 
fine  due to be 
collected as on 
31.03.2016   
(in `) 
2010-11 400 164 42 206 27,90,250 
2011-12 81 31 17 48 5,83,250 
2012-13 25 13 5 18 1,78,750 
2013-14 123 55 8 63 5,69,500 
2014-15 40 14 7 21 1,47,000 
2015-16 65 27 6 33 1,76,750 
Total 734 304 85 389 44,45,500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 93 
Appendix – 3.1.4  
Details of Houseboats pending dry dock inspection 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.1.3.2(ii) - Page : 44) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Year  of 
registration 
No.  of HBs 
registered 
No. of HBs not 
applied for 
renewal of dry 
dock inspection 
 No. of HBs  not 
applied for dry 
docking so far  
Total  
2010-11 400 161 78 239 
2011-12 81 48 12 60 
2012-13 25 16 13 29 
2013-14 123 0 58 58 
2014-15 40 0 34 34 
2015-16 65 0 56 56 
Total 734 225 251 476 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 94 
Appendix – 3.1.5  
Details of dry dock fees forgone by the department 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.1.3.2(ii) - Page: 44) 
 
  Year  of 
registration 
No.  of HBs 
registered 
No. of HBs not 
applied for 
renewal of dry 
dock inspection 
Fees 
pending 
due to non- 
renewal 
( ` ) 
 No. of HBs  
not applied 
for dry 
docking so 
far  
Amount of 
fees pending 
(`)  
Total 
amount due 
to 
Government 
(`) 
2010-11 400 161 6,00,000 78 2,85,000 8,85,000 
2011-12 81 48 1,80,000 12 45,000 2,25,000 
2012-13 25 16 60,000 13 48,750 1,08,750 
2013-14 123 0 0 58 2,10,000 2,10,000 
2014-15 40 0 0 34 1,27,500 1,27,500 
2015-16 65 0 0 56 2,10,000 2,10,000 
Total 734 225 8,40,000 251 9,26,250 17,66,250 

Appendices 
 
 95 
Appendix – 3.1.6 
Details of Houseboats not having with sufficient and competent crew out of the 42 jointly 
verified Houseboats 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.1.3.3 - Page : 45) 
Serang not  
holding valid 
licence 
Driver not 
holding valid  
licence 
Lascar not 
holding valid 
license 
HBs 
operated 
by cook/ 
helper 
Validity of 
Competency 
Certificate  
expired 
Sufficient 
numbers of 
crew not 
available 
Syndicate Syndicate Syndicate       
  Bhasura Bhasura       
  Holiday Home Holiday Home       
  ABC ABC       
Venice Tour Venice Tour Venice Tour       
Maddonna Maddonna Maddonna       
Venice Venice Venice       
  Gouri Gouri       
Kerala 
Backwaters 
Kerala   
Backwaters 
Kerala 
Backwaters       
No name/KIV 
919 
No name/KIV    
919 
No name/KIV 
919       
Blue Jelly Blue Jelly Blue Jelly       
  Ever Green    
Tours 
Ever Green 
Tours       
No name/KIV 
299         
 Spice Coast-5  Spice Coast-5  Spice Coast-5       
Anthem of Lake Anthem of Lake Anthem of Lake       
No name/KIV 
1149/13 
No name/KIV 
1149/13 
No name/KIV 
1149/13       
 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, 
Holiday 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, 
Holiday 
   
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2       
Kerala 
Backwaters   
No.2 
Kerala   
Backwaters      
No.2 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.2 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.2 
  
Kerala          
Backwaters  
No.4 
Kerala   
Backwaters      
No.4 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.4 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.4 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters  
No.6 
Kerala   
Backwaters      
No.6 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.6 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.6 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 96 
Serang not  
holding valid 
licence 
Driver not 
holding valid  
licence 
Lascar not 
holding valid 
license 
HBs 
operated 
by cook/ 
helper 
Validity of 
Competency 
Certificate  
expired 
Sufficient 
numbers of 
crew not 
available 
Kerala 
Backwaters  
No.8 
Kerala    
Backwaters      
No.8 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.8 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.8 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters  
No.9 
Kerala   
Backwaters      
No.9 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.9 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.9 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.10 
Kerala    
Backwaters    
No.10 
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.10 
  
Kerala 
Backwaters 
No.10 
  
CIB 872 CIB 872 CIB 872       
Maidhili Maidhili Maidhili       
  No name/KIV 
1105 
No name/KIV 
1105       
Princess         Princess 
          Nandhanam 
          Lakes and 
Lagoons No.9 
Vinayaka     
Tours 
Vinayaka       
Tours   Vinayaka 
Tours   Vinayaka   
Tours 
Gloria Gloria       Gloria 
      Thejas   Thejas 
Sreepadmam Sreepadmam       Sreepadmam 
Bamboo green         Bamboo green 
Ursala Ursala Ursala       
      Mayooram   Mayooram 
Sabhwereeshan         Sabhwereeshan 
Golden Mist         Golden Mist 
      Summer 
breeze   Summer    
breeze 
Freedia waters Freedia waters       Freedia waters 
29 numbers 31 numbers 27 numbers 4 numbers 6 numbers 13 numbers 
 

Appendices 
 
 97 
Appendix – 3.1.7 
Details of Houseboats not having sufficient life saving appliances out of the 42 jointly 
verified Houseboats 
 (Reference : Paragraph 3.1.3.4(i) – Page : 46) 
 
HBs without adequate  
lifebuoys 
HBs without any 
lifebuoys 
HBs  without any life 
jackets 
HBs without adequate  
life jackets 
      Syndicate 
Bhasura     Bhasura 
Holiday Home     Holiday Home 
ABC     ABC 
Venice Tour   Venice Tour   
Maddonna   Maddonna   
Venice     Venice 
Gouri     Gouri 
Kerala Backwaters     Kerala Backwaters 
No name/KIV 299     No name/KIV 299 
  No name/KIV 1149/13 No name/KIV 1149/13   
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, Holiday     Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, Holiday 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2     Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
  Kerala Backwaters No.2   Kerala Backwaters No.2 
Kerala Backwaters No.4       
Kerala Backwaters No.6     Kerala Backwaters No.6 
  Kerala Backwaters No.7 Kerala Backwaters No.7   
Kerala Backwaters No.8     Kerala Backwaters No.8 
Kerala Backwaters No.9     Kerala Backwaters No.9 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.10     Kerala Backwaters 
No.10 
  CIB 872 CIB 872   
    Maidhili   
No name/KIV 1105     No name/KIV 1105 
Princess     Princess 
  Nandhanam Nandhanam   
      Lakes and Lagoons 
No.9 
Vinayaka Tours     Vinayaka Tours 
  Gloria Gloria   
  Thejas Thejas   

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 98 
HBs without adequate  
lifebuoys 
HBs without any 
lifebuoys 
HBs  without any life 
jackets 
HBs without adequate  
life jackets 
  Sreepadmam Sreepadmam   
Bamboo green     Bamboo green 
      Ursala 
  Mayooram Mayooram   
Sabhwereeshan     Sabhwereeshan 
Golden Mist     Golden Mist 
Summer breeze       
  Freedia waters     
23 numbers 10 numbers 11 numbers 23 numbers 
 

Appendices 
 
 99 
Appendix – 3.1.8 
Details of Houseboats not provided with sufficient firefighting equipment and valid ICO out 
of the 42 jointly verified Houseboats 
(Reference : Paragraph  3.1.3.4.(i)/3.1.3.9(i) – Page : 46/52) 
HBs not provided 
with  fire 
extinguishers 
HBs not fitted 
with fire and 
smoke alarm 
HBs not fitted 
with fire pump 
ICO not obtained 
so far 
ICO not renewed 
Syndicate Syndicate Syndicate Syndicate   
  Bhasura Bhasura Bhasura   
  Holiday Home       
  ABC ABC     
Venice Tour  Venice Tour Venice Tour   
Maddonna Maddonna Maddonna     
Venice Venice Venice     
  Kerala Backwaters   Kerala Backwaters   
  No name/KIV 919     No name/KIV 919 
  Blue Jelly   Blue Jelly   
  Ever Green Tours Ever Green Tours     
  No name/KIV 299 No name/KIV 299     
No name/KIV 
1149/13 
No name/KIV 
1149/13 
No name/KIV 
1149/13   No name/KIV 
1149/13 
  
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, 
holiday 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters, 
holiday 
    
  Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2 
Kerala Tours 
Backwaters -2   
  Kerala Back 
waters No.2 
Kerala Back 
waters No.2 
Kerala Back 
waters No.2   
Kerala Backwaters 
No.4 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.4 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.4 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.4   
  Kerala Backwaters 
No.6 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.6 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.6   
  Kerala Backwaters 
No.7   Kerala Backwaters 
No.7   
Kerala Backwaters 
No.8 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.8 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.8 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.8   
Kerala Backwaters 
No.9 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.9 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.9 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.9   
Kerala Backwaters 
No.10 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.10 
Kerala Backwaters 
No.10     
CIB 872 CIB 872 CIB 872 CIB 872 CIB 872 
  Maidhili Maidhili     

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 100 
HBs not provided 
with  fire 
extinguishers 
HBs not fitted 
with fire and 
smoke alarm 
HBs not fitted 
with fire pump 
ICO not obtained 
so far 
ICO not renewed 
  No name/KIV 
1105       
Princess Princess Princess     
Nandhanam Nandhanam Nandhanam     
Lakes and 
Lagoons No.9 
Lakes and 
Lagoons No.9 
Lakes and 
Lagoons No.9     
  Vinayaka Tours Vinayaka Tours Vinayaka Tours   
Gloria Gloria Gloria Gloria   
Thejas Thejas Thejas Thejas   
Sreepadmam Sreepadmam Sreepadmam Sreepadmam   
  Bamboo green Bamboo green     
  Ursala Ursala     
Mayooram Mayooram Mayooram Mayooram   
Sabhwereeshan Sabhwereeshan Sabhwereeshan Sabhwereeshan   
  Golden Mist Golden Mist Golden Mist   
  Summer breeze Summer breeze Summer breeze   
Freedia waters Freedia waters Freedia waters Freedia waters   
19 numbers 38 numbers 33 numbers 22 numbers 3 numbers 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 101 
Appendix – 3.1.9 
Details of surprise inspections conducted by Ports/Police departments during 2010-16 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.1.3.6 – Page : 49) 
Sl 
No 
Date Number 
of HBs 
inspected 
Number 
of HBs 
penalised 
Number 
of HBs 
which 
remitted 
the 
penalty 
Number of 
HBs for 
which 
provisional 
detention 
order 
issued 
Number of 
HBs not 
marked 
 
number 
Number of 
HBs  with no 
valid survey 
certificate/no 
survey 
certificate 
Number of 
HBs   with   no
 r  
certificate 
on board 
Number 
of HBs  
with no 
valid 
insurance 
Number of 
HBs  with 
no valid 
crew 
license 
Number of 
HBs  with 
insufficient 
crew 
Number of 
unregistered 
HBs 
1 06.12.2013 8 0 0 8 4 8 0 1 0 0 4 
2 20.12.2013 12 6 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
3 16.01.2014 9 2 0 7 0 7 0 7 7 0 7 
4 19.08.2014 22 22 7 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 18 
5 03.09.2014 46 13 11 46 0 0 0 0 0 0 46 
6 03.09.2014 37 10 10 37 0 0 0 0 0 0 37 
7 29.10.2014 6 0 0 6 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 
8 26.12.2014 8 2 0 6 2 1 0 1 1 0 0 
9 20.05.2015 12 1 0 11 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 
10 06.08.2015 8 1 0 7 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 
11 01.09.2015 7 2 0 6 2 2 1 0 0 0 2 
12 02.09.2015 5 4 0 0 1 4 0 3 1 0 0 
13 14.10.2015 5 5 0 2 2 2 0 1 1 0 2 
14 29.12.2015 16 16 0 0 9 13 5 10 6 4 0 
15 12.03.2016 7 7 0 7 6 6 1 6 3 1 0 
16 07.04.2016 12 12 0 0 8 11 0 10 11 0 0 
17 23.04.2016 17 14 3 4 13 5 9 7 7 0 3 
 
Total 237 117 31 170 49 61 16 49 38 6 120 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 102 
Appendix – 3.2.1 
Transfers of industrial plots and related issues  
(Reference : Paragraph 3.2.5 – Page : 58) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
DIC 
Name of Unit, DA 
/ DP 
Extent of 
land 
allotted 
Date of 
allotment 
Transfer details Remarks 
1 DIC, 
Palakkad 
M/s Dhaan Ispat 
Pvt. Ltd./ 
DA Pudusserry 
cents 18.08.2004 On 22.12.2015 change of 
board of directors intimated 
to DIC. 
 In December 2015 a new irector was appointed. Change in the 
constitution of ownership is transfer.  
2 DIC, 
Ernakulam 
M/s Nenmani Agro 
Mills / DA Aluva 
150 cents 07.10.1996  Sub-lease of plant and 
machinery sanctioned on 
23.12.2015 by Director. 
Requested for sub-lease to M/s Elite retail ventures India LLP. This 
was approved by the Director in contravention to existing rules. 
3 DIC, 
Ernakulam 
M/s Penta Milk 
Products Pvt. Ltd / 
DP Aluva 
 
100 cents 11.11.1997 Change of name to M/s 
Rhema Dairy Products India 
(P) Ltd was approved by 
Director on 26. 8.2015. 
Change in constitution of ownership is not allowed within five years 
of a previous change. Though change was approved on 26.08.2015, 
the Chairman resigned and his son was introduc ed in the Board of 
Directors on 09.05.2016, thus violating the conditions.  
4 DIC, 
Thrissur 
M/s Speed Lubes /  
DP Velakode 
52 cents 03.03.2011 Transferred the land to M/s 
NCI Paints on 4. 6.2016 
The transfer was not as per the new lease rules. As the Gover nment 
has enacted lease rule to overcome the defects of existing rules, 
transfers shall be done as per the lease rules. 
5 DIC, 
Thrissur 
M/s Promise 
Industries / DP 
Ayyankunnu 
 
25 cents 13.05.2010 Party proposed to transfer 
the land to M/s Envirogreen 
Carrybags (India) Pvt. Ltd 
The party mortgaged the land and defaulted on loan repayment. To 
overcome the financial problem, transfer was proposed. On joint 
verification it was found that the unit was being run by M/s 
Envirogreen Carry bags  (India) Pvt. Ltd. wi thout the permission of 
DIC. 
      
d
   
 
D
   
 
N
  
23.22
  

Appendices 
 
 103 
 
Appendix – 3.2.2 
List of industrial plots transferred/changes made in the constitution of Board of 
Directors without departmental permission  
(Reference : Paragraph 3.2.5 - Page : 58) 
Sl. No. Name of unit Name of DA/DP District 
1 L&J Rubber Reclaims Pvt. Ltd. DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
2 Chakkiath Engineering works DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
3 Babu Chand Controls DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
4 DV Deo Industries DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
5 Leetha Industries DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
6 Glitter Paints and Chemicals DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
7 Athullya Foods Pvt. Ltd. DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
8 United FRP Industries DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
9 Plants India Agro Machineries Pvt. Ltd. DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
10 Vadakedath Tools DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
11 OKAY Nitrous Pvt. Ltd. DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
12 T-Gaurden DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
13 Int-Decs DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
14 Yes Vees Metal Finishers DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
15 Polo cast DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
16 RK Industries DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
17 Bright Cartons DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
18 Master Crafts Man India Pvt. Ltd. DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
19 Cochin Nitrides DP Kalamasserry Ernakulam 
20 Nino Brothers DP Angamaly Ernakulam 
21 Neroth Agro foods DP Angamaly Ernakulam 
22 Kodandaram Roller Flour Mills Pvt. 
Ltd. 
DP Angamaly Ernakulam 
23 A-one Industries DP Angamaly Ernakulam 
24 Sea Line Polymers Pvt. Ltd. DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
25 Anaha Timber Industries DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
26 Silpi Agro Tech DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
27 Vajra Plastics DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
28 Safa Polymers DA Aluva Ernakulam 
29 Mideast Exports DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
30 High-Tech Thermo coatings DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
31 Intrans Electro Components DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
32 Derry Foams DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
33 Intimate Multi Plast DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
34 Sree sastha Plywoods DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
35 J&J Bio-Tech DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 104 
Sl. No. Name of unit Name of DA/DP District 
36 Prima Beverages DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
37 Thripura fertilisers Pvt. Ltd. DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
38 Green valley Specified Rubbers Pvt. 
Ltd. 
DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
39 Falcon Elastormers Pvt. Ltd. DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
40 Malabar Polymers DA Vazhakulam Ernakulam 
41 AAK Fibers Pvt. Ltd. DA Angamaly Ernakulam 
42 Elixir Exotic Foods and Allied 
Products Pvt. Ltd. 
DA Angamaly Ernakulam 
43 Accellar Steels Pvt. Ltd. DA Angamaly Ernakulam 
44 Three  Star  Engineering Company DA Angamaly Ernakulam 
45 Kancor Flavors and Extracts Ltd. DA Angamaly Ernakulam 
46 Sayeg paints DA Angamaly Ernakulam 
47 Jayemjay Techno Foams DA Angamaly Ernakulam 
48 Euro Polymers DA Edayar Ernakulam 
49 Panagattu Polymers DA Edayar Ernakulam 
50 Millennium Poly pack  DA Edayar Ernakulam 
51 Southern Composites Pvt. Ltd. DA Edayar Ernakulam 
52 Marksmen Marine products DA Edayar Ernakulam 
53 Ultra Tech Ready Mix DA Edayar Ernakulam 
54 Nexa Condiments DA Edayar Ernakulam 
55 Hi-Tech Engineering and Eco 
Solutions 
DA Edayar Ernakulam 
56 Five star Industries DA Edayar Ernakulam 
57 Madassery Industries DA Edayar Ernakulam 
58 JBS Intermix & Rubber Products DA Edayar Ernakulam 
59 Sunrise TSR Factory DA Edayar Ernakulam 
60 Sherine Hi-Fabs DA Edayar Ernakulam 
61 Vinayaka Industries  DA Edayar Ernakulam 
62 Ramand Elecro Coats DA Edayar Ernakulam 
63 Five Star Industries DA Edayar Ernakulam 
64 ETA Technologies DA Edayar Ernakulam 
65 South Indian Fertilizers Pvt. Ltd. DA Edayar Ernakulam 
66 Ellickal Enterprises DA Edayar Ernakulam 
67 MKH Industries DA Edayar Ernakulam 
68 Techno flex Cables Pvt. Ltd. DA Edayar Ernakulam 
69 Koshy Chemiclas  DA Edayar Ernakulam 
70 KSOV Corporation DA Edayar Ernakulam 
71 Deepak Glasses DA Edayar Ernakulam 
72 K.J. Polymers DA Edayar Ernakulam 
 

Appendices 
 
 105 
 
Appendix – 3.2.3 
List of idling un-resumed industrial land 
 (Reference : Paragraph 3.2.6.4 (a) - Page : 62) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of DIC Name of Unit/DA,DP Extent of land 
allotted 
Date of 
allotment 
Reason for 
resumption 
Remarks 
1 DIC, Palakkad M/s Dhaan Ispat Pvt. Ltd./ 
DA Pudusserry 
1432 cents 18.08.2004 Idling since 
allotment 
Industrial land not utilised within the specified 
period shall be resumed and re -allotted to 
prospective entrepreneurs. 
2 DIC, Palakkad M/s Vira Constructions / 
DP Kàppur 
41 cents 05.01.2006 Idling since 
allotment 
Land kept idle, not resumed so far 
3 DIC, Palakkad M/s Kalpaka Biotech / DP 
Kappur 
123 cents 12.05.2010 Idling since 
allotment 
Land kept idle, not resumed so far 
4 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Asiatic Products / DA 
Edayar 
15 cents 28.01.1997 Idling since 
allotment 
Land kept idle, not resumed so far 
5 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Geeyes Concrete 
Block / DA Edayar 
75 cents 09.03.2010 Idling since 
allotment 
Land kept idle, not resumed so far 
6 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Nelpurayil Rubbers 
Pvt. Ltd./  
DP Kalamassery 
36.5 cents 02.05.1970 Idling after 
1983 
Land kept idle even after transfer to legal heirs.  
7 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Malayalam hemicals  
Ltd /DA Edayar 
50 cents 18.05.2002 Idling after 
2005 
Electricity charge dues to KSEB                          
` 1,79,67,846 not paid, hence disconnected 
electricity supply and the firm became defunct 
since October 2005. 
8 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Cliff India 
Corporation / DP 
Angamaly 
(10 + 7.5)  27.5 
cents 
21.02.1986 & 
20.04.1988 
Idling Land kept idle, not resumed so far 
         
(
     

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 106 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of DIC Name of Unit/DA,DP Extent of land 
allotted 
Date of 
allotment 
Reason for 
resumption 
Remarks 
9 DIC, Thrissur M/s Tera Tile Consortium 
Pvt. Ltd./DP Velakode 
400 cents 04.07.2005 Idling Land idling due to lack of clay  (raw material) 
10 DIC, Thrissur Diamond omplex &  
Training Institute/  
DP Velakode 
100 cents 07.12.2005 Idling since 
allotment 
Land is not utilised for the purpose for which it 
is allotted. 
11 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Bhagavathy 
Beverages Pvt. Ltd./  
DA Angamaly 
330 cents 06.02.1986 Idling since 
2004 
Proposal for ‘Logistic Park’ was rejected by 
Director. But, Government (Industries 
Department) directed to grant permission on 
06.06.2015.  
 

Appendices 
 
 107 
Appendix – 3.2.4 
Details showing delay in resumption of land  
(Reference : Paragraph 3.2.6.4 (b) - Page : 62) 
Sl. 
No.
   
Name of 
DIC 
Name of 
Unit/DA,DP 
Extent of 
land allotted 
in cents 
Reason for 
resumption 
Year  from which the 
unit became 
defunct/idling 
When Resumed Delay in years 
1 DIC, 
Palakkad 
M/s Palakkad 
Industries/  
DA Pudussery 
930 Idling 2002 August 2010 8 
2 DIC, 
Palakkad 
M/s Sky Like/  
NIDA Kanjikode 
40 idling 2011 June 2014 2.5 
3 DIC, 
Ernakulam 
M/s Jinnees 
Enviochem /  
DA Edayar 
177 idling 2000 2007 7 
4 DIC, 
Ernakulam 
M/s West Coast 
oncrete Products/ 
DA Angamaly 
566 idling  September 2006 November 2014 8 
5 DIC, 
Kozhikode 
M/s Poyilakada 
Fisheries/  
DP West hill 
129 idling 2004 August 2014 10 
6 DIC, 
Palakkad 
M/s Walayar 
Cements/ NIDA 
Kanjikode 
200 idling September 2011 March 2015 3.5 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 108 
Appendix – 3.2.5 
Mortgage/auction and related cases  
(Reference : Paragraph 3.2.6.5 - Page : 63) 
Sl 
No 
Name of DIC Name of Unit/DA,DP Extent of 
land 
allotted in 
cents 
Date of 
allotment 
Mortgage Permission granted 
or not 
Remarks 
1 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Oasis 
Environmental/ 
DA Edayar 
177  
 
Land mortgaged to KFC without 
permission and defaulted the loan 
M/s Jinnees Enviochem purchased on 05.06.2000 
through auction from Kerala Financial Corporation 
and the land is idling since then. 
2 DIC, Ernakulam M/s JJ Roller Flour 
Mills/  
DA Vazhakulam 
75  19.03.1997& 
assigned on 
15.09.2006 
 
Mortgage permission granted by 
GM, DIC on 20.01.1998 instead 
of Government (Industries 
Department). 
Government has to accord sanctio n for mortgage 
permission to assigned land, instead of Director’s 
ratification prior permission from Government is 
needed. 
3 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Kodandram Roller 
flour Mills  (P) Ltd/  
DA Angamaly 
247  02.03.1987 & 
assigned on 
11.12.1991 
Mortgage permissio n granted by 
GM, DIC on 23.06.1997 instead 
of Government (Industries 
Department) 
Government has to accord sanction for mortgage 
permission to assigned land.  Instead of Director’s 
ratification ( 02.12.1997) prior permission from 
Government is needed. 
4 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Ponolil Modern 
Rice Mills/  
DA Aluva 
125  16.02.1996 Mortgage permission granted by 
GM, DIC on 03.02.1998. 
Land attached by Revenue Recovery as ` 3.22 crore 
loan due. Land auctioned on 09.10.2007. 
5 DIC, Thrissur M/s Promise Industries/ 
DP Ayyankunnu 
 
25  13.05.2010 Mortgage permission granted by 
GM, DIC on 25.03.2011 
Party mortgaged the land and defaulted on loan 
repayment. To clear the dues, land transfer is 
proposed by the party. 
6 DIC, Ernakulam M/s Kerala Acids & 
Chemicals Ltd/ 
DA Edayar 
866  16.12.2004 Court ordered to windup the 
company by official liquidator as 
industrial land.   
The successful auctioneer is using the land for 
godown and training centre which is not regularised 
by DIC. 

Appendices 
 
 109 
Appendix – 4.3.1 
Purchases made for the new building of the Directorate 
(Reference : Paragraph 4.3.3 - Page : 75) 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Item 
purchased 
Cost Present 
condition 
Remarks 
1 Furnishings  53.94 Steel furniture 
in r usted 
condition 
AS for ` 53.94 lakh was given (March 2012) for purchase of 
furniture from Forest Industries Travancore Ltd. (FIT) - a 
manufacturer of wooden furniture. But, on specific request 
from Port Directorate FIT procured and supplied proprietary 
steel items from M/s Godrej and Boyce  which were not suited 
to the local climate . The Director had paid FIT only ` 43.15 
lakh.   The Director had also violated the provision of the 
Stores Purchase Manual regarding purchase of proprietary 
items; since such purchases could be made only where no 
alternative or substitute existed. 
2 Computers 
and 
Accessories 
53.28 Many non -
functional 
A joint physical verification found the c omputers and 
accessories damaged due to salinity dumped in a room. 
3 Audio 
Visual 
system 
25.82 Partially 
functioning 
Not fully functional due to corrosive atmosphere and deposit of 
salt in the electronic gadgets. 
4 Security 
Surveillance 
System 
12.95 Malfunctioning Malfunctioning attributed to saline environmental conditions of 
the coastal area. 
Total 145.99   
(Source: Records of Directorate) 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 110 
 
Appendix – 4.3.2 
Status of solar power systems installed in Port Offices 
(Reference : Paragraph 4.3.4.3 - Page : 77) 
Sl. 
No. 
Administrative sanction Advance paid 
(`) 
Sanctioned  
amount  for 
battery back up 
(`) 
Up to date 
expenditure 
(`) 
Status of the work 
Name of Port Amount 
(` In lakh) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (4)  +  (5)  
1 Kasargode 11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 Non-functional for want of net 
meter & inspection by 
Electrical Inspectorate 
2 Azhikkal 11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 --do-- 
3 Kannur 11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 --do-- 
4 Thalassery 11.00 * -- -- * Shifted to Alappuzha port, 
hence not considered 
5 Badakara 11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 Not considered for installation 
6 Beypore 11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 Non-functional for want of net 
meter & inspection by 
Electrical Inspectorate 
7 SPC Office 
Beypore 
11.00 5,23,540 * 3,51,222 8,74,762 Functional  
* Shifted from MEW 
Neendakara, Kollam.  
8 MEW 
Beypore 
11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 Non-functional for want of net 
meter & inspection by 
Electrical Inspectorate 
9 Ponnani 11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 Non-functional- damaged 
10 Kodungallur 11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 Non-functional for want of net 
meter & inspection by 
Electrical Inspectorate 
11 Alappuzha 11.00 5,23,540 * 3,51,222 8,74,762  
* Shifted from Thalassery.  
12 MEW 
Kollam 
11.00 * -- -- * Shifted to SPC office Beypore  
13 Kollam 
Thangassery 
21.00 10,18,990 7,02,444 17,21,434 Non-functional. Require 
change of installation from 
godown to electrical control 
room 
14 Kollam 
Asramam 
office 
11.00 5,23,540 -- 5,23,540 Non-functional for want of net 
meter & inspection by 
Electrical Inspectorate 
Total 164.00 67,77,930 14,04,888      81,82,818  
(Source: Data furnished by Directorate) 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 111 
 
Appendix – 4.4 
Excess payment to contractors due to non-recovery of cost-index on the cost of bitumen reimbursed at market rate 
(Reference : Paragraph 4.4 – Page : 78) 
Sl.     
No 
Name of Work, Agreement No. & 
Contractor 
Division Tender 
variation 
Technical 
Sanction 
Authority 
Type of 
bitumen 
Rate of 
bitumen 
(including cost 
index) provided 
in  the Estimate 
(for 1MT)  
(₹) 
Rate of 
bitumen 
recovered 
from the 
work bills 
(for 1MT) 
(₹) 
Balance 
to be 
recover
ed  
(₹) 
Quantity of 
bitumen  
used     (in 
MT) 
Excess 
payment    
(₹) 
Total       
(₹) 
Excess payment 
after reckoning 
tender variation 
(₹) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9=(7-8) 10 11=(9 x10) 12 13={12 + (12x4)} 
1 Improvement to twelve roads leading 
to Games village and Karyavattom 
Stadium  (108/SESC/2014 -15 
dt.12.01.  Sreedhanya 
Construction Company 
Thiruvana
nthapuram 
10% 
above 
Chief 
Engineer 
(R&B) 
VG 10 72,282 50,600 21,682 493.315 1,06,96,056     
VG 30 75,349 52,747 22,602 475.19 1,07,40,244     
Emulsion 55,769 39,040 16,729 81.216 13,58,662     
Total          2,27,94,962 2,50,74,458 
2 Improvements to Thiruvallam 
Junction-Pachalloor-Vazhamuttom 
road ch 0/000-04/050 and Pachalloor-
Poonkulam road from ch 0/000 to 
2/200- Poonkulam Junction to 
Agricultural college Vellayani road 
from ch 0/000 to 01/200 and 
Agricultural college internal road 
upto Stadium at Vellayani                             
(88/SESC/2014-15 dt.26.11. ,                                              
Kerala State Construction 
Corporation Ltd 
-do- 0.05 % 
below 
-do- VG 10 71,852 50,600 21,252 144.104 30,62,498     
VG 30 71,852 52,747 19,105 230.73 44,08,097     
Emulsion 55,437 39,040 16,397 21.668 3,55,290    
Total           78,25,885 78,21,972 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 112 
Sl.     
No 
Name of Work, Agreement No. & 
Contractor 
Division Tender 
variation 
Technical 
Sanction 
Authority 
Type of 
bitumen 
Rate of 
bitumen 
(including cost 
index) provided 
in  the Estimate 
(for 1MT)  
(₹) 
Rate of 
bitumen 
recovered 
from the 
work bills 
(for 1MT) 
(₹) 
Balance 
to be 
recover
ed  
(₹) 
Quantity of 
bitumen  
used     (in 
MT) 
Excess 
payment    
(₹) 
Total       
(₹) 
Excess payment 
after reckoning 
tender variation 
(₹) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9=(7-8) 10 11=(9 x10) 12 13={12 + (12x4)} 
3 Maintenance of Fly -over including 
repairs of hand rail and Maintenance 
of Ring road from CSN Stadium 
Squash Court (91/SESC/2014 -15 
dated 27.11. 2014),  A.Thajudeen,   
Thoppil Constructions 
-do- 7 % 
below 
-do- VG 10 72,282 50,600 21,682 36.19 7,84,672     
VG 30 75,349 52,747 22,602 31.727 7,17,094     
Emulsion 55,769 39,040 16,729 3.999 66,899     
Total           15,68,665 14,58,858 
4 Improvements to Jawahar 
Balabhavan Junction- Swimming 
Pool and Vellayambalam road from  
ch 0/000 to 0/675 and Manaveeyam 
road from 0/000 to 0/325                    
(92/SESC/2014-15dated 27.11.2014),         
A Thajudeen, Thoppil Constructions 
-do- 3.3% 
below 
-do- VG 10 57,132 50,600 6,532 40.802 2,66,519     
VG 30 56,580 52,747 3,833 33.628 1,28,896     
Emulsion 41,400 39,040 2,360 6.216 14,670     
Total           4,10,085 3,96,552 
5 Improvements to the approach road 
to Shooting range in the CPT ground 
Vattiyoorkavu providing BM and BC 
to the leading road Sasthamangalam,  
Maruthankuzhy Vattiyoorkavu CPT 
road  (86/SESC/2014-15 dated 
22.11.2014), Revive Construction 
Company (India) Private Ltd 
-do- 6.11% 
below 
Superinte
nding 
Engineer 
R&B 
South 
Circle 
VG 10 62,100 50,600 11,500 44.697 5,14,016     
VG 30 60,000 52,747 7,253 41.363 3,00,006     
Emulsion 45,000 39,040 5,960 4.682 27,905     
Total           8,41,927 7,90,485 

Appendices 
 
 113 
Sl.     
No 
Name of Work, Agreement No. & 
Contractor 
Division Tender 
variation 
Technical 
Sanction 
Authority 
Type of 
bitumen 
Rate of 
bitumen 
(including cost 
index) provided 
in  the Estimate 
(for 1MT)  
(₹) 
Rate of 
bitumen 
recovered 
from the 
work bills 
(for 1MT) 
(₹) 
Balance 
to be 
recover
ed  
(₹) 
Quantity of 
bitumen  
used     (in 
MT) 
Excess 
payment    
(₹) 
Total       
(₹) 
Excess payment 
after reckoning 
tender variation 
(₹) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9=(7-8) 10 11=(9 x10) 12 13={12 + (12x4)} 
6 Improvements to the approach road 
to Shooting range in the CPT ground 
Vattiyoorkavu  urgent maintenance to 
the balance portion to the  leading 
road Sasthamangalam 
Maruthankuzhy Vattiyoorkavu CPT 
ch 0/000 to 2/500. (118/SESC/2014 -
15 dated 26. 02.2015),                         
AR Nasarudeen, Revive Construction 
Company (India) Private Ltd 
-do- Estimate 
rate 
-do- VG 10 62,100 50,600 11,500 22.28 2,56,220     
VG 30 61,500 50,600 10,900 38.006 4,14,265     
Emulsion 45,000 45,000 0 3.271 0     
Total           6,70,485 6,70,485 
7 Improvements to Koppam -Plakeezhu 
road to swimming pool – 
Pirappancode.       (93/SESC/2014-15 
dated 27.11. 2014),   A Thajudeen, 
Thoppil Constructions 
-do- 3.3% 
below 
-do- VG 30 60,000 50,600 9,400 18.644 1,75,254    
Total          1,75,254 1,69,471 
8 Improvements to Poomthoppu 
Vembanad Kayal road                                
(87/SESC/2014-15dated  26.11.2014)                     
N  Kalesan 
Alappuzha 2.33% 
below 
-do- VG 30 55,200 40,000 15,200 8.603 1,30,766    
Emulsion 41,400 0 41,400 2.36584 97,946    
Total           2,28,712 2,23,383 
9 Improvements to Charamparambu 
Kshethram Kayaltheeram ro ad             
(90/SESC/2014-15 dated 
27.11.2014), Sebastian J Pooney 
-do- 0.77 % 
below 
-do- VG 30 55,200 48,400 6,800 9.501 64,607     
Emulsion 41,400 36,300 5,100 2.648 13,505   
Total           78,112 77,511 
  Total                   3,45,94,087 3,66,83,175 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2016 
 
 114 
 
Appendix – 4.5 
Details of extra expenditure due to allowing of additional five per cent Overhead 
charges in estimate data 
(Reference : Paragraph 4.5 – Page : 80) 
Sl 
No 
Name of Work and details of 
Techical Sanction 
Agreed 
Probable 
Amount of 
Contract   
(₹ in lakh) 
Extra commitment  
due to inclusion of 
additional five  per 
cent  OH charges 
(₹ in lakh) 
Upto date 
expenditure     
(₹ in lakh) 
Extra expenditure  due 
to inclusion of              
additional five  per cent  
OH charges 
(₹ in lakh) 
1 Widening Carriage way and 
providing BM & BC to Tirur-
Kadalundy Road Km 18/000 to 
27/000 (TS 
No.CC/GM(E)/CLT-
501/013/7885(A) dated 
15.02.2013 for ₹ 7,57,45,000) 
713.01 33.95 373.91 17.60 
2 Widening  Carriage way and 
Providing BM & BC surfacing 
to Tanalur-Puthenathanni  Road 
Km 0/000 to 13/000 (TS 
No.CC/GM(E)/CLT-
501/013/7883(A) dated 
15.02.2013 for ₹ 10,22,56,000) 
965.55 45.98 606.10 28.34 
3 Improvements of various 
junction to Chamravattom-
Tirur-Kadalundy  Road- 
Improvements of 
Parappanangady-ROB Junction 
in Tirur-Kadalundy Road Part I 
(TS No.CC/GM(E)/TCR-
516/013/95(A) dated 
22.04.2013 for ₹ 40,20,000) 
38.62 1.84 38.62 1.81 
4 Widening and providing BM & 
BC surfacing  to Tirur-
Chamravattom Road Km 3/200 
to 11/500 (TS No.CC/GM/W-
474/012/7762(A) dated 
07.01.2013 for ₹ 6,05,96,000) 
605.18 23.36 605.18 23.40 
5 Improvements to Nariparambu-
Pothannur-Perumparambu-
Edappal Road by providing 
BM & BC from km 0/000 to 
km 6/950 (TS No.CC/GM/W-
474/012/7760(A) dated 
07.01.2013 for ₹ 4,12,21,000) 
411.68 16.67 402.62 15.11 
  Total   121.80   86.26 
 
 
 