 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Performance Audit of 
Implementation of 
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Civil) 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Report No. 37 of 2017 
(Performance Audit) 
 
 
 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 i 
 
Contents 
 
 Description  Page No. 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v 
Chapter-I Introduction 1 
Chapter-II Regulatory and Administrative Framework 6 
Chapter-III Licensing, Registration, Inspection and Sampling 39 
Chapter-IV Analysis of Food and Prosecution 56 
Chapter-V Human Resources 71 
 Annexures 79 - 84 
 List of Abbreviations 85 - 86 
 

   Report No. 37 of 2017  
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 iii 
 
Preface 
The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 was enacted  to consolidate multiple 
laws in the country relating to food safety, to est ablish a single point reference 
system, and to establish the Food Safety and Standa rds Authority of India 
(FSSAI) for formulating science based standards for  food and to regulate their 
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import , to ensure availability of 
safe and wholesome food for human consumption.  
The performance audit attempts to examine the effic acy of the regulatory and 
administrative mechanisms for implementation of the  Act, the food testing 
laboratory infrastructure and human resources frame work, adherence to 
Licensing and Registration procedures in terms of t he Act, systems for 
inspection, sampling and prosecution procedures, re gulation of import of food 
articles, mechanisms for grievance redressal, and I EC (information, education 
and communication) activities of FSSAI. 
The audit revealed systemic inefficiencies, includi ng delays and deficiencies 
in the framing of various regulations and standards . Audit also observed 
amendments to regulations in violation of the Act a nd specific directions of 
the Supreme Court. Most of the state foods laborato ries entrusted with food 
testing and certification functions, were not only ill equipped but also did not 
possess accreditation of the National Accreditation  Board for Testing and 
Calibration Laboratories (NABL).  Further, enforcem ent activities relating to 
licensing, registration, inspection, sampling and p rosecution were inadequate. 
FSSAI has failed to finalise the recruitment regula tions. Irregularities were 
also observed in the appointment of contractual employees. 
While the performance audit primarily covers the pe riod from 2011-2012 to 
2015-2016, matters relating to subsequent periods h ave also been included, 
wherever necessary. 
The report of the Comptroller and Auditor General o f India containing the 
results of audit of Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 has 
been prepared for submission to the President under  Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. The audit has been conducted  in conformity with the 
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 v 
 
Executive Summary 
Food safety covers the entire food chain, and inclu des the stages of 
manufacturing/preparation, handling, transportation  and storage of food in 
ways that prevent contamination and food borne dise ases. Any relaxation of 
food safety standards and their enforcement may lea d to proliferation of 
illegal, dishonest manufacturers and suppliers, whi ch is detrimental to public 
health. Good understanding among governments, produ cers and consumers 
may contribute towards ensuring food safety along w ith efficient and effective 
enforcement. 
After Independence, the Prevention of Food Adultera tion Act (PFA), 1954 
was the primary law governing foods safety, along w ith other laws/orders 
specifically targeting the food sector. Proliferati ng laws over the years with 
varying standards and enforcement agencies spread a cross various Ministries 
and departments in the Central and state government s led to confusion among 
consumers, traders, investors and manufacturers. In adequate manpower, food 
laboratories and other resources under various auth orities administering these 
laws, affected the effective fixing of science base d food standards and their 
enforcement. Parliament enacted the Food Safety and  Standards Act, 2006 to 
overcome the difficulties and to consolidate and su bsume the existing Acts 
and Orders and establish a single point reference s ystem in the country and to 
establish the Food Safety and Standards Authority ( Food Authority) for laying 
down science based standards and regulating the man ufacture, storage, 
distribution, sale and import of food products to e nsure availability of safe and 
wholesome food for human consumption. The Act does not apply to any 
farmer or fisherman or farming operations or crops or livestock or aquaculture 
or supplies used or produced in farming or products  of crops produced by a 
farmer/fisherman at initial production level. 
This performance audit on food safety was taken up with a view to assess the 
performance of the Ministry of Health and Family We lfare (the Ministry), 
Food Authority, and the food authorities in ten selected states. 
The important findings of the performance audit are given below: 
Regulatory and Administrative Framework 
/head2right Even after more than a decade of the enactment of t he Act, the 
Ministry and Food Authority are yet to frame regula tions governing 
various procedures, guidelines and mechanisms enunc iated in different 
sections of the Act. 
(Para 2.2) 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
vi Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
/head2right Food Authority failed to devise action plans to ide ntify areas on which 
standards are to be formulated/revised within specified time frames and 
the manner of selection of food products for formul ation of standards. 
FSSAI has, for some food categories, entrusted the task of suggesting 
revision of standards to representatives of the foo d business operators 
(FBO), whose opinions cannot be considered unbiased . FSSAI notified 
regulations and standards without considering the c omments of 
stakeholders. Primarily because of the absence of policy guidelines and 
standard operating procedures (SOP), Food Authority  took between 
one year and three years to notify amendments. 
(Para 2.5, 2.6 & 2.7) 
/head2right Possibility that unsafe/declared unsafe food articl es continued to be 
manufactured and sold is not ruled out due to failu re of the Authority 
to monitor and cancel licenses issued under the pro duct approval 
system declared unlawful by the Supreme Court. 
(Para 2.8) 
/head2right FSSAI continues to issue directions without following the procedure of 
previous approval of the Central Government, previous publication and 
notification (as contained in section 92 of the Act ), the placing of such 
regulations and rules before Parliament (as contain ed in section 93 of 
the Act), despite the Supreme Court declaring such procedure as 
mandatory. Audit noticed many instances where FSSAI  issued 
directions and notified regulations without the req uisite approval of 
Food Authority and the Ministry. 
(Para 2.9, 2.10 & 2.11) 
/head2right Despite recommendation of the Central Advisory Comm ittee (CAC) 
that at least 75 per cent of the food license fee collections should be 
used for Information, Education and Communication ( IEC) activities, 
most states had not allocated any budgets for these activities. 
(Para 2.16) 
Licensing, Registration, Inspection and Sampling 
/head2right FSSAI and state food safety authorities did not con duct survey for 
enforcement and administration of the Act and of th e FBOs under their 
jurisdiction, though required to do so under the Act.  
(Para 3.1.1) 
/head2right Licenses were issued on the basis of incomplete doc uments in more 
than 50 per cent of cases test checked in Audit.  
(Para 3.1.5) 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 vii 
 
/head2right Neither FSSAI nor the state food authorities have d ocumented policies 
and procedures on risk based inspections, and the FSSAI does not have 
any database on food business. 
(Para 3.2) 
/head2right FSSAI has failed to ensure that the Customs authori ties follow up the 
Non-Conformance Reports issued by the FSSAI, and ta ke appropriate 
action to ensure that unsafe foods do not enter the country. 
(Para 3.6.3) 
Analysis of Food and Prosecution 
/head2right 65 out of the 72 State food laboratories to which F SSAI and state food 
safety authorities sent food samples for testing do  not possess National 
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Lab oratories (NABL) 
accreditation. Consequently, the quality of testing by these laboratories 
cannot be assured. 
(Para 4.3) 
/head2right Though the Act stipulates gazette notification of e mpanelled food 
laboratories, FSSAI empanelled, between September 2 011 and March 
2014, 67 food laboratories through office orders.  
(Para 4.4.1) 
/head2right FSSAI has no data on public analysts declared eligi ble under the 
erstwhile Prevention of Food Adulteration Act who c ontinue to 
function under the FSS Act. FSSAI also has no data on whether all the 
notified empanelled food laboratories have qualifie d food analysts. 
Audit test check found that 15 out of the 16 test c hecked food 
laboratories did not have qualified food analysts. 
(Para 4.6.1) 
/head2right Shortage of qualified manpower and functional food testing equipment 
in state food laboratories and referral laboratorie s resulted in deficient 
testing of food samples. 
(Para 4.7.1 & 4.7.2) 
/head2right There were significant delays in finalization of ca ses by Adjudicating 
Officers. Further, a significant portion of the pen alty imposed 
remained uncollected. 
(Para 4.9.1) 
  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
viii Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Human Resources 
/head2right Failure of the Ministry and the FSSAI to frame the recruitment 
regulations even after a decade of the enactment of  the Act, resulted in 
acute shortages of regular staff at various levels.  
(Para 5.2 & 5.3) 
/head2right Acute shortage of licensing and enforcement officer s (Designated 
Officers and Food Safety Officers) in the states se verely affected food 
safety measures in the states. 
(Para 5.9) 
Recommendations: 
Based on the audit findings, some of the recommenda tions are provided 
below: 
/head2right Ministry/FSSAI may expedite the notification of reg ulations on areas 
that have been specified in the Act, but are yet uncovered. 
/head2right FSSAI may frame standard operating procedures on th e formulation 
and review of standards, and ensure that these are adhered to. 
/head2right FSSAI may ensure that all licenses issued under the erstwhile system of 
product approvals are reviewed, and licenses cancel led and reissued 
as warranted under the present procedure. 
/head2right FSSAI may review all directions issued under sectio n 16(5) of the Act 
in the light of directions of the Hon’ble Bombay Hi gh Court and 
Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
/head2right FSSAI and state food authorities may conduct survey s of food business 
activity under their jurisdiction to ensure a comprehensive and reliable 
database of FBOs and to ensure better enforcement and administration 
of the FSS Act. 
/head2right FSSAI may frame and notify policy guidelines and pr ocedures on risk 
based inspections, including the periodicity of ins pections. All states 
may be persuaded to specify the periodicity of insp ections and ensure 
that the periodicity is adhered to. 
/head2right Ministry is required to ensure accreditation of all  state food 
laboratories, and ensure that state food laboratori es and referral 
laboratories are fully equipped and functional. 
/head2right The Ministry/FSSAI may take steps to expeditiously notify the 
recruitment regulations and fill up vacancies. 
 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 1 
 
Chapter-I : Introduction 
1.1 Overview 
Access to sufficient amounts of safe and nutritious  food is key to sustaining life 
and promoting good health. Unsafe food containing h armful bacteria, viruses, 
parasites or chemical substances, causes more than 200 diseases – ranging from 
diarrhoea to cancers. An estimated 60 crore – almos t 1 in 10 people globally– fall 
ill after eating contaminated food and 4.20 lakh di e every year. Children under 
five years of age carry 40 per cent of the food borne disease burden, with 1.25 
lakh deaths every year. Food safety, nutrition and food security are inextricably 
linked. Unsafe food creates a vicious cycle of dise ase and malnutrition, 
particularly affecting infants, young children, elderly and the sick.1 
Due to its geographic, economic and demographic div ersity, the challenges to 
ensure safety of food in India are immense. The Pre vention of Food Adulteration 
Act (PFA), 1954 marked the initial step in this dir ection, followed by other 
Acts/Orders specifically governing the food sector,  such as the Fruit Products 
Order, 1955; the Meat Food Products Order, 1973; th e Vegetable Oil Products 
(Control) Order, 1947; the Edible Oils Packaging (R egulation) Order, 1998; the 
Solvent Extracted Oil, De-oiled Meal, and Edible Flour (Control) Order, 1967; the 
Milk and Milk Products Order, 1992; and other Order s issued under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955). Proliferating l aws over the years with 
varying standards and different enforcement agencie s spread across various 
Ministries/Departments led to confusion among consu mers, investors, 
manufacturers and traders. Inadequate manpower, foo d laboratories and other 
resources of various authorities administering thes e laws, contributed to 
ineffective formulation of science based food standards and their enforcement. 
The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (the Act) w as enacted to address these 
issues, subsuming all the earlier Acts and Orders. The said Act was to consolidate 
the laws relating to food and to establish the Food  Safety and Standards Authority 
of India (FSSAI) for formulating science based stan dards for articles of food and 
to regulate their manufacture, storage, distributio n, sale and import, to ensure 
availability of safe and wholesome food for human c onsumption and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act,  however, does not apply to 
any farmer or fisherman or farming operations or cr ops or livestock or 
                                                                    
1 World Health Organisation’s Fact Sheet on Food Saf ety (December 2015). 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
2 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
aquaculture or supplies used or produced in farming  or products of crops 
produced by a farmer/fisherman at initial production level. 
1.2 Duties and responsibilities of the Food Authori ty 
The Government of India notified (September 2008) t he Food Authority, a body 
corporate comprising Chairperson and 22 Members (Annexure-1.1), which, under 
the Central Government (i.e., the Ministry of Healt h and Family Welfare), was 
empowered to determine and issue directions on tech nical and administrative 
matters relating to food safety and standards in th e country. These directions were 
to be implemented by FSSAI 2, headed by the Chairperson and Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO)3 FSSAI. FSSAI has five regional offices (Chennai, D elhi, Kolkata, 
Guwahati and Mumbai) and two sub-regional offices ( Chandigarh and 
Lucknow)4. 
Under the Act, the Food Authority is mandated to re gulate and monitor the 
manufacture, processing, distribution, sale and imp ort of food and by regulations 
specify the standards, guidelines etc. in relation to articles of food. 
1.3 Enforcement Structure  
The Food Authority and the state 5 food safety authorities are responsible for 
enforcement of the Act and Rules and Regulations no tified by FSSAI (details of 
various Rules and Regulations notified by FSSAI as of December 2016 are 
provided in  Annexure-1.2 ). These authorities are empowered to monitor and 
verify the relevant requirements to be fulfilled by FBOs (food business operators), 
maintain a system of control, public communication on food safety and risk, food 
safety surveillance and other monitoring activities  covering all stages of food 
business. CEO, FSSAI acts as the Central Food Safet y Commissioner and 
appoints a Designated Officer (DO) as the Central L icensing Authority (CLA) for 
enforcement of the Act. Similarly, the respective S tate Food Commissioner 
                                                                    
2 Throughout the report, the term ‘Food Authority’ r efers to the body corporate comprising the 
Chairperson and Members created under the Act; the term ‘FSSAI’ refers to the executive 
wing of the Food Authority, comprising the Chairperson, CEO and Divisions thereunder. 
3 Like the Chairperson and Members, CEO, FSSAI is ap pointed by the Central Government. 
CEO is Member-Secretary of the FSSAI but without power to vote. 
4 In April 2016, FSSAI closed the sub-regional office s at Chandigarh and Lucknow, transferring 
their work to Regional Office Delhi. 
5 Throughout this report, the term ‘states’ includes  Union Territories. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 3 
 
appoints a DO as the State Licensing Authority (SLA ).  DOs are assisted by Food 
Safety Officers (FSO). 
1.4 Audit Approach 
1.4.1 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the performance audit were to ascertain whether: 
i) regulatory and administrative mechanisms for implem entation of the 
Act exist; 
ii) licensing registration, inspections, and sampling w ere conducted as 
envisaged in the Act;  
iii) food testing laboratory infrastructure and prosecution procedures exist; 
and 
iv) appointment and deployment of human resources were as per the 
extant instructions/rules. 
1.4.2 Scope of Audit  
The audit covered the period from August 2011 to Ma rch 2016.  Records in the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, FSSAI along with its regional and sub-
regional offices and the corresponding department/o ffices in the nine selected 
states and one union territory (UT) (Annexure-1.3) were examined. 
1.4.3 Sampling Methodology 
In the selected states, 20 per cent of districts, subject to a minimum of two and 
maximum of ten, were selected by using PPSWOR 6 with size measure as the total 
number of licenses/registrations certificates issue d. In each sampled district, 40 
licenses and 10 registration certificates per year were selected based on usage of 
food articles by general populace, economically wea ker sections and 
children/infants. Using the same criteria, 25 licen ses per year were selected in 
each Central Licensing Authority (CLA), regional of fice and sub- regional office. 
In each sampled district, 25 food samples per year were selected, being a mix of 
samples which were found to be conforming and non-conforming. 
                                                                    
6 Probability Proportional to Size Without Replaceme nt. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
4 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Further, in each selected state, 30 per cent of the state laboratories were selected 
subject to a minimum of one. Two ports under the re spective jurisdiction of each 
Regional office of Food Authority at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai, where 
the number of cases of imports/samples was highest were selected. Thereafter, 50 
cases per year per port were selected through random selection. 
Thus, 53 districts and 20 state laboratories in nin e states and one Union Territory 
and eight ports were selected. Details of sample se lected states/UT and selection 
are provided in Annexure-1.3. 
1.5 Audit Methodology and Response of the Ministry and Food Authority 
The performance audit commenced with an Entry Confe rence with the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare and FSSAI officials on  03 May 2016 where the 
audit objectives, scope and methodology were explai ned. Entry conferences were 
also held at the state level. 
The audit teams scrutinised the records relating to  implementation of the Food 
Safety and Standards Act, 2006 at the Ministry of H ealth and Family Welfare; 
FSSAI HQ; regional offices/sub-regional offices of FSSAI; Commissioners of 
Food Safety; and districts and laboratories in the selected states and UT. 
The draft audit report was first issued to the Ministry on 3 November 2016. Based 
on replies received and further examination of docu ments, the draft audit report 
was revised, and re-issued on 16 May 2017. Exit Con ference with the Ministry 
was held on 29 June 2017 wherein major audit findin gs and other issues were 
discussed. Replies received from the Ministry (Janu ary 2017, March 2017 and 
June 2017) and state food authorities and deliberat ions during the exit conference 
have been considered and suitably incorporated. 
1.6 Audit Criteria 
The criteria for this performance audit were derived from the following sources: 
i) Cabinet Notes. 
ii) Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
iii) Food Safety and Standards Rules and Food Safety and  Standards 
Regulations, 2011. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 5 
 
iv) Guidelines and Manuals notified/issued by the Minis try and FSSAI from 
time to time. 
v) Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nat ions (FAO) document: 
‘Strengthening national food control systems - Guid elines to assess capacity 
building needs’ of 2006. 
vi) General Financial Rules, 2005 and other Government of India instructions 
issued from time to time. 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the  Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, FSSAI, and food authorities of the state governments for the 
conduct of this audit. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
6 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Chapter-II : Regulatory and Administrative 
Framework 
2.1 Introduction 
The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (F SSAI), under the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare in the Government of Indi a, is responsible for 
regulating and monitoring food safety in the countr y, in terms of the Food Safety 
and Standards Act, 2006, the Food Safety and Standa rds Rules, 2011 and various 
regulations on food notified (and amended) since 2011. 
2.2 Regulations yet to be framed 
Till March 2017, i.e., more than a decade after the  enactment of the FSS Act, 
FSSAI was yet to frame regulations governing variou s procedures, guidelines and 
mechanisms on areas covered in different sections of the Act, as below: 
• Accreditation of food testing laboratories (Section 16(2)(e)). 
• Conducting surveys for enforcement and administrati on of the Act (Section 
16(2)(g)). 
• Risk analysis/assessment/communication and manageme nt (Section 
16(2)(i)). 
• Accreditation of food certification bodies engaged in certification of food 
safety management systems for food businesses (Section 16(2)(c)). 
• Organic foods (Section 22) 
• Restriction of advertisement and prohibition of unf air trade practices 
(Section 24). 
• Financial Regulations (Section 92(2)(t)). 
The Ministry stated (June 2017) that it was not obl igatory for FSSAI to make 
regulations in all cases and it had framed regulati ons where these were needed the 
most. The fact remains that FSSAI failed to examine  the requirement to frame 
regulations in respect of aforesaid areas even afte r a decade of enactment of the 
Act.  This has been discussed in detail in the relevant chapters of this report. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 7 
 
2.3 Failure of FSSAI to regulate Organic Foods 
In 2015-16 alone, India produced around 1.35 millio n metric tonnes (MT) of 
certified organic products which includes all varie ties of food products, and 
exported organic foods valued at around USD 298 mil lion1. Testing centres 
accredited by the Agricultural and Processed Food P roducts Export Development 
Authority (APEDA) certify organic foods manufacture d in India. Audit observed 
that though section 22 of FSS Act stipulates that m anufacture, distribution, sale, 
or import of organic foods is covered under the Act , FSSAI has not framed any 
regulations regarding organic foods. 
The FSSAI and the Ministry accepted the facts (May and June 2017 respectively), 
but informed that it has now been decided to incorp orate the existing National 
Programme for Organic Production of the Ministry of  Commerce and Industry, 
and the Participatory Guarantee System (PGS) adopte d by the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, and accordingly d raft regulations have been 
framed. The fact, however, remains that no regulati ons have been notified in 
respect of organic foods even a decade after the enactment of the Act. 
2.4 Deficiencies in the adoption of BIS/AGMARK cert ifications for 
specified food products 
The Directorate of Marketing and Inspection (DMI) u nder the Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation, Government of India a nd the Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) under the Ministry of Consumer Affa irs, Food and Public 
Distribution, Government of India certify agriculture and non-agriculture products 
respectively2. AGMARK and BIS certifications are optional. In te rms of FSS 
regulations3, AGMARK and BIS certifications are mandatory for 8  and 14 food 
products respectively.  
Audit noted that the FSS regulations have imported all the 22 mandatory 
certification categories from the erstwhile Prevent ion of Food Adulteration (PFA) 
Act, 1954, and the last category under PFA Act was included in June 2009.  Audit 
observed that though perceptions, ingredients, prod ucts and processes relating to 
food safety are continually evolving, and this woul d necessitate modifications/ 
                                                           
1 Source: Website of Agricultural and Processed Food  Products Export Development Authority 
(APEDA) 
2 In terms of the Agricultural Produce Grading and M arking (AGMARK) Act, 1937, and the 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) Act, 1986 respectively. 
3 FSS (Prohibition and Restriction on Sales) Regulat ions, 2011 and FSS (Packaging and 
Labelling) Regulations, 2011. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
8 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
deletions/additions to the certification standards identified under the erstwhile 
PFA Act, FSSAI has made no efforts to review, for t he purpose of possible 
addition/deletion, the list of mandatory AGMARK and  BIS certifications under 
PFA Act at the time of framing FSS regulations in 2 011, or thereafter. Such 
exercise would also cover areas where the existing BIS/AGMARK certifications 
are deficient or insufficient. 
FSSAI in its reply (May 2017) stated that the indus try or consumers have not 
requested for discontinuation of mandatory certific ation provisions except the 
category of blended edible vegetable oils which is mandatorily required to be 
certified under AGMARK. The Ministry in its reply ( June 2017) endorsed the 
views of FSSAI. 
The stand of the Ministry and FSSAI is unacceptable , since the FSSAI is required 
to independently review mandatory certifications fo r the purpose of 
addition/deletion. 
2.5 Deficiencies in the formulation of standards 
FSSAI formulates standards for various food article s (including their constituents 
and additives) and processes of manufacture, storag e, transportation, sale etc., to 
ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption. Audit 
noticed that though FSSAI has framed standards thro ugh regulations, such 
standards were framed at different periods of time from 2011 onwards, and there 
is no clarity on the reasons underlying the identif ication of food products that 
were standardised, identified ahead of others, and some food products like organic 
foods (discussed in paragraph 2.3 above) remain to be standardised. Though 
FSSAI has framed regulations on the working of Scie ntific Panels and Scientific 
Committee4, the areas on which the Panels/Committee deliberat e and offer 
opinion are determined by the executive of FSSAI, a nd are not based on any 
defined operating procedure (SOP).  There is no cla rity on why such areas (and 
not others) are selected by FSSAI. Further, in some  areas, like the framing of 
regulations on proprietary foods (mentioned in para graph 2.10(2) below), FSSAI 
did not involve the Scientific Panels/Committee and  the rationale for such 
exclusions is not clear. FSSAI has also not formulated internal time frames for the 
processing of standards (apart from the time frames  relating to the issue of draft 
notification and final notification etc.), as a res ult of which, there were inordinate 
delays (for instance, the final notification regard ing potassium bromate as food 
                                                           
4 FSSAI (Transaction of Business and Procedure of Sc ientific Committee and Scientific Panels) 
Regulations, 2010 (amended in 2016). 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 9 
 
additive referred to in the case study below paragr aph 2.7.2 was issued five years 
after identification of risks, mainly because of ab sence of internal time lines). 
Ultimately, FSSAI failed to devise action plans to identify areas on which 
standards are to be formulated/ revisited for revis ion, if necessary, within 
specified time frames5. 
The Ministry informed (March 2017) that the identif ication of areas for 
examination by the Scientific Panels/Committee and for framing standards is 
based on scientific evidence. Further, in response to the audit observation, while 
Ministry had forwarded a statement delineating the process/steps involved in 
framing regulations, Audit observed that there is n o clarity on the first step itself 
(involving identification of food products on which standards are to be developed/ 
reviewed), since there is no information on the pro cess through which such 
identification takes place. 
Following the initial audit observation, FSSAI set up eight standards review 
groups (SRG) in December 2016 to review existing st andards applicable to 
different food categories, and to propose broad new  standards; the report of the 
SRGs would be placed before the concerned Scientifi c Panels for review and 
necessary action. However, there is no such provisi on in the Act to entrust this 
work to other groups comprised of representatives o f FBOs only.  This also gives 
additional credence to the audit observation that i dentification of areas of 
examination was not based on scientific process, si nce there is no evidence on 
why only eight areas were chosen in the first insta nce for review of standards.  It 
is also observed that no time frame has been given to the groups for this exercise. 
Therefore, their opinions/recommendations cannot be  considered to be unbiased 
and beneficial to the interest of food safety affecting the common man. 
FSSAI in its reply (May 2017) stated that in the co ntext of revision of 
standards/formulation of new standards, the Food Au thority generally followed a 
prioritisation approach to address the issues of fo od safety first. FSSAI further 
stated that the SRGs are tasked to only suggest are as of new work.  Ministry in its 
reply (June 2017) endorsed the views of FSSAI and s tated that this is an internal 
arrangement for facilitating work and setting up su ch groups is perfectly in order 
and desirable in many cases. 
The replies are not tenable. There is no evidence t o support the FSSAI’s 
contention that it followed a prioritisation approa ch. The orders on formation of 
                                                           
5 For instance, the Bureau of Indian Standards has a  protocol for revision of standards every five 
years. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
10 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
SRGs clearly stated that they were formed for revie w of existing standards and to 
propose new standards.  Therefore, the concerns of audit on the risks of primarily 
relying on industry representatives for review of s tandards, which is the mandate 
of FSSAI, remain unaddressed. 
2.6 Notification without awaiting recommendation of  the Scientific Panel/ 
Committee and without considering stakeholders’ comments 
Sections 13 and 14 of the Act state that the Scient ific Committee assisted by the 
Scientific Panels provide scientific opinion to the  Food Authority. As per section 
18(2)(d) of the Act, the FSSAI is required to ensur e open and transparent public 
consultation during the preparation and revision of  regulations/standards. 
Therefore, involvement of the Scientific Panels/Com mittee and transparent public 
consultation is inherent to the process of notifica tion of regulations on standards. 
However, during test check, Audit found a case (dis cussed below) pertaining to 
amendment to regulations 6, where the FSSAI bypassed the Scientific 
Panel/Committee and did not consider the comments o f stakeholders before final 
notification. 
Case Study 
Stakeholders’ comments on the draft notification (F ebruary 2015) to include 
Steviol Glycoside 7 in various food products were placed before the Sc ientific 
Panel in its 23rd meeting on 15 October 2015, which directed one of its members 
to review them for further discussion by the Panel.  Without considering the 
stakeholders’ comments or awaiting the review there on and recommendations of 
the Scientific Panel, FSSAI notified the final regu lation (13 November 2015), 
without the previous approval of the Ministry as re quired under section 92 of the 
Act8. Audit further observed that the detailed stakehol ders’ comments pointed 
out, inter-alia, an error in the draft notification, which did not  specify ash 
content. However, this remained uncorrected in the final notification. 
FSSAI/ Ministry in reply (May/June 2017), stated th at most of the comments 
related to inclusion of more food categories in the  regulation for use of steviol 
glycoside. Hence, it was decided to notify the said  standards as such without any 
further delay and that the stakeholders’ proposals in respect of addition of more 
food categories would be covered in the subsequent harmonisation process in 
                                                           
6 FSS (Food Product Standards and Food Additives) Re gulations, 2011. 
7 Chemical compounds responsible for the sweet taste  of the leaves of the South American plant 
Stevia Rebaudiana (Asteraceae), and the main ingred ients (or precursors) of many sweeteners 
marketed under the generic name ‘Stevia’ and several trade names. 
8 Ministry accorded ex-post facto approval on 25 Nov ember 2015. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 11 
 
respect of food additives provisions, which has als o been completed since then. 
Further, the omission of changes in the draft stand ards was not deliberate but an 
editorial error. 
The replies are not acceptable as there was no reco rd to substantiate that the 
FSSAI had decided to include more food categories s eparately. In any event, the 
notification of regulations without awaiting the op inion of scientific panel was 
incorrect. 
2.7 Delays in notifying amendments to Regulations 
Between February 2013 and December 2016, FSSAI noti fied 43 amendments to 
three regulations on food standards 9. During test check of eleven amendments 
notified up to June 2016 (out of 25 amendment notif ications), Audit observed 
delays in notifying these amendments, which are pri marily attributable to lack of 
policy guidelines and standard operating procedures  (SOP). It was noticed that 
after approval by the Scientific Panels, FSSAI took  between 14 to 24 months to 
notify six amendments, and between 28 to 39 months to notify five amendments. 
Details are given below: 
2.7.1 Delays and deficiencies in referring draft no tification to Ministry 
Audit observed delays in the following six cases in volving amendment to the 
Food Safety and Standards (Food Product Standards a nd Food Additives) 
Regulations, as recounted below: 
Case Study 1 
After the approval of Food Authority (September 2012) to include ‘pullulan’10 as 
food additive, the Regulation Division of FSSAI ret ained the file for 19 months 
without action, and thereafter referred the file to  the Scientific Panel and 
Scientific Committee for clarifications. The action  of the Division to seek 
clarification on the matter after approval by the F ood Authority was 
inappropriate and inordinately delayed the notifica tion process which was 
concluded in October 2014. 
  
                                                           
9 FSS (Food Product Standards and Food Additives) Re gulations, 2011; FSS (Contaminants, 
Toxins and Residues) Regulations, 2011; and FSS (Pa ckaging and Labelling) Regulations, 
2011. 
10 An edible, mostly tasteless polymer, mainly used i n various breath freshener or oral hygiene 
products and as food additive. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
12 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Case Study 2 
The Scientific Panel recommended (January 2014) fiv e issues to be included in 
the amendment to the FSS (FPS and FA) Regulation, 2 011 for ‘salted fish/ dried 
salted fish’. The Food Authority, however, decided to include only four issues in 
the amendment, leaving the fifth issue to be covere d in a future amendment. At 
the time of sending the draft notification (August 2014) to Ministry for approval, 
FSSAI failed to intimate the reason for exclusion o f the fifth issue, leading the 
Ministry to seek clarification (September 2014). Th ough the decision to exclude 
the fifth issue had been taken by the Food Authorit y and not the Scientific Panel 
(SP) or Scientific Committee (SC), the Regulation D ivision needlessly referred 
the matter to the SP and SC (though the decision of  the Food Authority was 
available on the file with the Regulation Division), resulting in five months delay 
in sending clarification to the Ministry. The draft  regulations were notified (June 
2015), 17 months after the recommendation of the Scientific Panel. 
Case Study 3 
FSSAI took more than 19 months, after the recommend ations of the Panel (July 
2012), to send the file to the Ministry (March 2014 ) for approval of the draft 
notification to change the standards for use of different enzymes in bread.  
Case Study 4 
For amendment to the regulation on revision of stan dards for blended edible 
vegetable oil regarding unsaponifiable matter 11 and relaxation or harmonisation 
of iodine value in imported cotton seed oil with Co dex Standards12’ FSSAI took 
24 months, after the recommendations (May 2013) of the Expert Group13, and 19 
months after the approval of the Food Authority (Ja nuary 2014), to send the file 
to the Ministry for approval of the draft notificat ion. Detailed Audit scrutiny 
revealed that after approval by the Food Authority (January 2014) certain queries 
were raised by CEO, FSSAI (May 2014) and it was pro posed to discuss these in 
the Expert Group. However, the matter was not discu ssed either in the Expert 
Group or the Scientific Panel which replaced it. It  was only after a reminder was 
received from an FBO (August 2015), did FSSAI reali se that the file was 
unnecessarily pending with them, and sent it to the  Ministry (November 2015), 
without addressing the queries raised by CEO. 
                                                           
11 Components of an oily (oil, fat, wax) mixture that  fail to form soaps when blended with 
sodium hydroxide (lye) or potassium hydroxide. 
12 A collection of internationally recognised standar ds, codes of practice, guidelines, and other 
recommendations relating to foods, food production, and food safety. 
13 Expert Groups on specific matters were replaced by  the creation of appropriate Scientific 
Panels. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 13 
 
Case Study 5 
FSSAI took more than 17 months after the recommenda tions of the Scientific 
Panel (July 2012), to send the file to the Ministry  for approval of the draft 
notification (January 2014) for amendment to the re gulation relating to ‘edible 
common salt’.  
Case Study 6 
After the Ministry had approved the final regulatio n (July 2013) on Maximum 
Residual Limits (MRLs) of antibiotics in honey, FSS AI belatedly realised that 
prior reference to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) was required, which had 
not been done. The regulation was finally notified in December 2014, one and a 
half years after the Ministry’s approval.  
Though the FSSAI accepted the facts in respect of case studies 1, 3, 5 and 6, it did 
not respond to the audit observations contained in case studies 2 and 4. 
2.7.2 Undue delays in notification of final regulat ions 
The Lok Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislations  had, inter-alia, stipulated 
(December 2011) that the final notification be issu ed within three months of the 
last date of receipt of comments/suggestions from s takeholders on the draft 
notification, if no/less number of comments were re ceived from stakeholders 14. 
Audit observed that though only one to two comments  of minor nature were 
received on the draft notifications in four cases, FSSAI took five to ten months for 
final notification.  
The Ministry in their reply (June 2017) endorsed th e FSSAI’s response (May 
2017) that framing regulations is a time consuming process which requires careful 
assessment of the aspects by different bodies. The replies are not tenable as the 
committee had limited the period to six months only  where many comments were 
received, which was not the case here. Also, the re plies did not address the 
specific cases pointed out by Audit, where the delays were avoidable. 
In the exit conference (June 2017), FSSAI accepted the delays and attributed the 
delays to the scientific, technical and administrat ive aspects involved in the 
process. FSSAI further added that efforts will be m ade to meet the 
recommendations of the Lok Sabha Committee on Subor dinate Legislation and 
extensions will be sought wherever required. 
                                                           
14 Details on the stipulations by the Committee are g iven in paragraph 2.9 below. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
14 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Case Study 
Delay in banning Potassium Bromate as Food Additive 
FSSAI took nearly five years to ban (June 2016) the  use of Potassium Bromate 
in bread and bakery products after the Scientific Panel recommended (July 2011) 
its ban on the ground that it was carcinogenic. Aud it scrutiny revealed that, for 
reasons not on record, FSSAI first delayed issuing the draft notification (April 
2013) after the belated approval (June 2012) of the  Food Authority. Thereafter, 
for reasons not on record, FSSAI, without informing  the Ministry, failed to act 
on the stakeholders’ comments on the draft notifica tion, violating the limit of six 
months stipulated by the Lok Sabha Committee. Howev er, Potassium Bromate 
was removed from the list of permitted additives in  the regulations 15notified in 
September 2016. 
Accepting the facts, the Ministry replied (March 20 17) that the issue of 
Potassium Bromate was linked to the work on harmoni sation of all the additive 
provisions with Codex General Standard for Food Add itives16. The reply is not 
tenable. There was no evidence on record to support  the Ministry’s contention 
that the ban on Potassium Bromate was linked to the  harmonisation of the codex 
(incidentally, the codex had declared Potassium Bro mate as a banned item in 
2012). It was also observed, that even while the ha rmonisation exercise was in 
progress, FSSAI notified other amendments (e.g., th e inclusion of pullulan as a 
food additive). Therefore the notification of stand ards (including the banning of 
certain items) is an exercise independent of harmon isation. Finally, and in any 
case, regulations on the banning of a carcinogenic substance as additive in daily 
foods should not have been kept pending for five years. 
2.8 Product Approval 
Between January 2012 and May 2013, the FSSAI issued , without the approval of 
the Ministry, a series of advisories covering the c ategory of proprietary foods, 
which have been defined in section 22 of the Act as  articles of food for which 
standards have not been specified but are not unsafe, provided that such food does 
not contain any of the foods and ingredients prohib ited under the Act and 
regulations made thereunder. These advisories permi tted the FSSAI to issue 
                                                           
15 FSS (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) A mendment Regulations, 2015. 
16 Part of the “Codex Alimentarius” (Food Code), a co llection of standards, guidelines and codes 
of practice adopted by the Codex Alimentarius Commi ssion, which is central part of the Joint 
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) /World Heal th Organisation (WHO) Food Standards 
Programme and was established to protect consumer health and promote fair practices in food. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 15 
 
product approvals to individual FBOs for products w hich were not covered under 
existing standards. 
Audit observed, however, that though the initial ad visories required the issue of 
product approvals to be based on the recommendation s of the Scientific Panels, 
the FSSAI, through subsequent advisories, adopted t he issuance of No Objection 
Certificates (NOC) by the Product Approval division of the FSSAI, for a period of 
one year, pending recommendation of the Scientific Panels. Such issuance of 
provisional approvals is not contemplated in the Ac t, and further, the decision on 
whether a food product is safe or unsafe (as stipul ated in section 22 of the Act) 
can only be determined by way of scientific opinion , which, only Scientific 
Panels/ Committee can provide under sections 13 and 14 of the Act.  
The last advisory of May 2013 was struck down by th e Hon’ble Bombay High 
Court17 on 01 August 2014 (and the Hon’ble Supreme Court d ismissed the appeal 
on 19 August 2015) on the ground that the advisorie s issued by FSSAI without 
following the procedure laid down under sections 92  (requiring prior approval of 
the Ministry and previous publication by notification) and 93 of the Act (requiring 
placing the notified regulations before Parliament)  have no force of law. Audit 
observed, however, that though the FSSAI discontinu ed the product approval 
system, it did not take steps to withdraw the licen ses issued under the now invalid 
system, and ensure product recalls. Some of these l icenses merited cancellation 
even under the redundant system, after the FSSAI it self withdrew the NOCs but 
failed to ensure the cancellation of licenses at th at time. Consequently, the 
possibility that unsafe foods continued to be impor ted/ produced/ distributed/ sold 
based on the now invalid licenses cannot be ruled out. Details are given below. 
2.8.1 Continuation of licenses issued in terms of f lawed NOC procedure 
As given in the case studies in the succeeding sub- paragraphs, Audit observed 
occasions where the NOC issued earlier by the Produ ct Approval division had to 
be withdrawn because the application for product ap proval for a similar or 
identical product was denied by the Scientific Comm ittee/Scientific Panels.  It is 
therefore evident that FSSAI permitted possibly uns afe foods (and foods 
subsequently determined by the Scientific Panels to  be not safe) to be 
manufactured, distributed, sold or imported in the country. Audit further observed 
that though the NOCs were valid only for a maximum period of one year, FSSAI 
did not ensure that the licenses issued on the basi s of these NOCs were 
                                                           
17 Writ Petition No. 2746 of 2013 dated 1 August 2013  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
16 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
accordingly valid for the period of the NOC. Furthe r, after withdrawing the 
NOCs, FSSAI did not ensure that the Central Licensi ng Authorities (CLA) also 
cancelled the licenses that had been issued on the basis of the now withdrawn 
NOCs and also that the FBOs had stopped the manufac ture, distribution and sale 
of such products. 
2.8.2 Continuance/renewal of licenses in violation of Supreme Court orders 
In terms of the advisory, the NOCs were valid for a  maximum period of one year, 
Audit, however, observed that after the judgement o f the Bombay High Court 
(01 August 2014) declaring the process of advisorie s as invalid, FSSAI issued 
blanket instructions (29 September 2014) to the Cen tral Licensing Authorities 
(CLA) and directed them to renew/ continue, as requ ired, all existing licenses 
issued on the basis of NOCs. Consequently, FSSAI pe rmitted the indefinite 
manufacture, distribution, sale or import of possib ly unsafe foods. FSSAI did not 
take any action after the final orders of the Supre me Court (19 August 2015) to 
withdraw these blanket instructions. Further, FSSAI  failed to withdraw the 
blanket instructions even after the notification of  the amended regulations in 
respect of proprietary foods (October 2016). 
2.8.3 Unauthorised issue of product approvals for p roprietary foods by 
state food authorities 
Under the advisory system, only FSSAI had the autho rity to issue product 
approvals for proprietary foods on the recommendati on of the Scientific Panels. 
Audit, however, observed that FSSAI did not have an y mechanism to ensure that 
state food authorities did not issue licenses/produ ct approvals on proprietary 
foods. Test check in Audit revealed that the design ated officers in Solan and 
Sirmaur districts in Himachal Pradesh granted produ ct approvals for a total of 20 
proprietary food products during 2014-15, without authority.  
2.8.4 Withdrawal of wrongly issued NOCs 
2.8.4.1 Issue of NOCs based on recommendations of PA&SC 
Under sections 13 and 14 of the Act, only the Scien tific Committee/Scientific 
Panels have been entrusted with the responsibility of providing scientific advice 
to the Food Authority. Under the product approval s ystem, proposals for product 
approvals required examination by the Scientific Co mmittee/Scientific Panels. 
FSSAI constituted a Product Approval and Screening Committee (PA&SC) 
headed by the Director, Product Approval division t o screen the proposals based 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 17 
 
on preliminary risk assessment. Audit observed howe ver, that bypassing the 
requirement for examination by the Scientific Commi ttee/Scientific Panels, the 
Product Approval division acted on the recommendati on of PA&SC and issued 
NOCs. Moreover, FSSAI had neither framed any Standa rd Operating Procedures 
(SOP) to determine the authority competent to appro ve food products, nor did it 
delegate such powers to the Product Approval division. 
Moreover, the NOCs should have been issued only on the receipt of complete 
information required for product approval. Audit ob served, however, instances 
where FSSAI issued NOCs even when the product infor mation received was 
incomplete. In 20 cases (9 per cent  of the 212 NOCs issued), FSSAI had 
withdrawn the NOCs issued earlier for reasons inclu ding non-furnishing of the 
complete information by the FBOs. Audit also observ ed that FSSAI had no 
mechanism to call for the missing information promp tly, and to ensure prompt 
receipt of wanting information.  Illustrative cases are given below: 
Case Study 1 
FSSAI issued NOC (October 2012) to M/s Art Life Wel lness Products for 
fortified candies (sweets), based on PA&SC recommen dation. Thereafter, FSSAI 
withdrew the NOC (February 2015), due to failure of FBO to furnish the complete 
details required for submission to the Scientific P anel. Thus, failure of FSSAI to 
ensure complete documentation before issue of NOC r esulted in manufacture and 
sale of possibly unsafe foods for 28 months between  October 2012 and February 
2015.  
Case Study 2 
FSSAI issued NOC (August 2013) to M/s Pushpam Foods  and Beverages for four 
types of energy drinks based on recommendation of PA&SC. However, NOC was 
withdrawn (November 2014) on the ground that the Sc ientific Panel had observed 
(March 2014) in another similar case that the produ ct had an irrational 
combination of caffeine and ginseng 18, which have opposing effect on the human 
body. Audit further observed that FSSAI delayed iss uing the letter for product 
recall till May 2015, thereby allowing the FBO a fu rther six months’ time to 
manufacture and sell a product for which NOC had be en withdrawn. Overall, the 
Product Approval division delayed the product recal l by 15 months from the date 
of observation of the Scientific Panel. This result ed in manufacture and sale of 
                                                           
18 Import of Monster Energy Drink by M/s Narang Danon e Access Pvt. Ltd., referred to in 
paragraph 2.8.4.2 below. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
18 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
unsafe food products (energy drinks) for 21 months between August 2013 and 
May 2015. 
Case Study 3 
Similar to the above case, on recommendation of PA& SC, FSSAI issued NOC 
(December 2013) to the above FBO (M/s Pushpam Foods  and Beverages) for 
another energy drink, which was withdrawn (June 201 5), on the same ground as 
in the earlier case. Thus, issue of NOC by FSSAI wi thout risk assessment by the 
Scientific Panel resulted in manufacture and sale o f an unsafe food product 
(energy drink) between December 2013 and June 2015.  Audit scrutiny of the 
website of FBO revealed (April 2017) that the produ ct (Restless caffeinated 
beverage containing ginseng) continued to be market ed despite the withdrawal of 
NOC by FSSAI in June 2015. 
Case Study 4 
FSSAI issued four NOCs (May 2012) to M/s Jagdale In dustries for four products 
(drops, powder, syrup and capsules) sold under the trade name ‘Mulmin’. 
However, the four NOCs were withdrawn (June 2015) a fter the Scientific Panel 
did not recommend approval of the products (April 2 015). Audit further observed 
that though the Product Approval division had recei ved all wanting information 
from the FBO in January 2014, it took 15 months to place the matter before the 
Scientific Panel, for reasons not on record. Thus, issue of NOC by FSSAI without 
risk assessment by the Scientific Panel resulted in  manufacture and sale of unsafe 
food products between May 2012 and June 2015. Audit  scrutiny of the website of 
FBO revealed (April 2017) that the unsafe products (drops, powder, syrup and 
capsules) sold under the trade name ‘Mulmin’ contin ued to be marketed despite 
the withdrawal of NOC by FSSAI in June 2015. 
2.8.4.2 Unauthorised and wrong issue of NOC for energy drinks 
The FBO, M/s Narang Danone Access Private Limited, applied (December 2012) 
for product approval for two variations of an energ y drink marketed under the 
trade name “Monster Energy” and intimated that the application for the license 
would be submitted soon. However, without waiting f or FSSAI’s product 
approval, the FBO imported the consignment and inti mated (March 2013) FSSAI 
that 50,632 cases 19 of the product (475 ml. cans) were held up at Nhav a Sheva 
Port, and requested a one-time clearance. The can s ize exceeded FSSAI’s draft 
                                                           
19 Number of cans per case in this consignment is not  known. However canned beverages are 
normally sold in cases of 24 cans (though, it can range between 12 to 36 cans per case). 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 19 
 
standards for caffeinated beverages (250 ml.) 20, which were in the notice of the 
FBO and were at the final stages of notification (D raft regulations notified on 18 
April 2013), and the product (by its nature) could not be repacked in smaller cans 
even after import. However, for reasons not on reco rd, FSSAI issued permission 
(April 2013) to transport the product from the whar f area to the FBO’s godown. 
Thereafter, the matter was referred to three differ ent Scientific Panels 21 for 
examination of various aspects relating to the concerned energy drink. Even while 
the matter remained under examination with these Scientific Panels, FSSAI issued 
NOC (October 2013) on the recommendation of the PA& SC. Such issue of NOC 
on the basis of PA&SC recommendation violated even the FSSAI advisories that 
did not provide for the PA&SC to review any applica tion that was under 
examination by the Scientific Panels. Further, FSSA I had no authority to issue 
NOC on a product that did not meet packaging standa rds (475 ml. can instead of 
250 ml. can). Ultimately, the Scientific Panel on F unctional Foods etc., rejected 
(March 2014) the product, on the ground that it con tained irrational combination 
of caffeine and ginseng, which have opposing effect  on the human body. FSSAI 
withdrew the NOC (September 2014), but the Bombay H igh Court stayed the 
matter till May 2015, after which FSSAI once again withdrew the NOC and 
issued product recall. Audit observed, however, tha t FSSAI took no steps to 
ensure that follow up action had been taken on product recall. 
2.8.4.3 Non cancellation of licenses of foods decla red not safe by Scientific 
 Panel 
Audit observed that even after the withdrawal of NO Cs, there was no mechanism 
to ensure that the licenses issued on the basis of the withdrawn NOCs were 
cancelled. The four cases recounted below relate to  withdrawal of NOCs after the 
Scientific Panels refused product approval. Consequ ently, unsafe foods continued 
to be manufactured, distributed, sold and imported despite their rejection by the 
Scientific Panel, as detailed below: 
Case Study 1 
FSSAI issued NOC (August 2013) to M/s Surya Herbal Ltd. for Sunova Spirulina 
Tablets. However, the FBO failed to submit applicat ion as required for 
examination by the Scientific Panel, and NOC was wi thdrawn (August 2014).  
                                                           
20 The final notification of 2 December 2016 deleted the reference to per can size limit and only 
specified that the daily consumption should not exc eed 500 ml. per day. Reasons for the 
deletion by FSSAI are not known. 
21 The Scientific Panel on Food Additives, Flavouring s, Processing Aids and Materials; the 
Scientific Panel on Labelling and Claims/ Advertise ments; and the Scientific Panel on 
Functional Foods, Nutraceuticals, Dietetic Products and Other Similar Products. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
20 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Audit observed however, that the license of the FBO  was not modified/ cancelled 
accordingly. The Central Licensing Authority (Delhi ) informed (August 2016) 
that they had not received any notice of rejection of the product and the licence 
issued on the basis of NOC (which has been cancelle d) is valid up to December 
2017. 
Case Study 2 
FSSAI issued NOC (July 2012) to M/s. S.K. Industries for two products, based on 
recommendation of PA&SC. Subsequently, PA&SC review ed its earlier decision, 
and FSSAI withdrew the NOC (September 2014). Though  the Central Licensing 
Authority (Delhi) informed that the license of the product had been cancelled, the 
website of FSSAI continued to show that the license  was valid till 01.07.2019.  
Consequent to the Audit observation in August 2016,  FSSAI removed this 
depiction from its website. Thus, FSSAI took almost  two years to remove the 
food article from the FBO’s license after withdrawal of NOC. 
Case Study 3 
FSSAI issued product approval (January 2013) to M/s . BioCon Ltd. for S-
Adenosyl Methionine Tablets. However, in August 201 3, product approval was 
denied to M/s Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. fo r the same product. FSSAI 
failed to resolve this contradiction for more than a year, till it withdrew product 
approval in the case of BioCon in October 2014. Fur ther, despite withdrawing the 
product approval to BioCon, FSSAI failed to cancel the corresponding license to 
BioCon, which continues to be valid upto May 2020.  
Case Study 4 
FSSAI issued a composite NOC in September 2012 to M /s Hector Beverages for 
three types of energy drinks. Though FSSAI withdrew  the NOC (April 2015) and 
issued directions for product recall for all three categories (May 2015), the license 
has not been cancelled till December 2016. The Cent ral Licensing Authority 
(Delhi) stated (August 2016) that the license was f or caffeinated beverages and 
not for the proprietary products for which NOC had been withdrawn. The reply is 
not relevant.  One specific ground for withdrawal o f NOC was the finding of the 
Scientific Panel that products containing combinations of caffeine and ginseng (as 
was the case in the three energy drinks under consi deration) should not be 
allowed. Consequently, inaction of FSSAI to cancel the product license resulted 
in continued sale of an unsafe product more than a year after cancellation of 
NOC. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 21 
 
2.8.5 Non withdrawal of NOCs 
2.8.5.1 Non withdrawal of NOCs despite rejection by Scientific Panel 
Test check in Audit of 50 cases (24 per cent of the 212 cases where NOCs had 
been granted by FSSAI) revealed that in four cases,  though the Scientific Panel 
had rejected the food articles, NOCs had not been w ithdrawn even 31 to 47 
months after rejection by the Scientific Panel, res ulting in continued 
manufacture/import and sale of possibly harmful foo d products. These have been 
described below. 
Case Study 1 
FSSAI issued NOC (December 2013) to M/s Pushpam Foo ds and Beverages for 
an energy drink which contained caffeine-ginseng co mbination. Following the 
vacation of stay by the Bombay High Court (01 May 2 015) in the case of another 
FBO whose product had similar combination of caffei ne-ginseng which had been 
rejected by FSSAI 22, the Chairperson ordered (July 2015) issue of show  cause 
notice to M/s Pushpam also. However, FSSAI failed t o issue the show cause 
notice to the FBO, as a result of which NOC was not  withdrawn. (Incidentally, it 
is observed that FSSAI withdrew NOCs in six other c ases based on the same 
recommendation of the Scientific Panel, without issue of show-cause notice).  
Case Study 2 
FSSAI issued NOC (August 2012) to M/s Chemical Inte rnational for a mushroom 
based nutraceutical. Though the Scientific Panel th ereafter rejected (September 
2012) the application on the ground of absence of c linical data on immunity 
benefit claimed by FBO, FSSAI failed to cancel the NOC. 
Case Study 3 
FSSAI issued NOC (July 2012) to M/s Apex Laboratori es for three products 
(syrup and tablets) with the brand name “Zincovit”.  Audit observed that though 
the technical officer in the Product Approval divis ion informed (April 2012) that 
the syrup contained various ingredients that are no t permitted in nutraceuticals, 
the PA&SC recommended issue of NOC without addressi ng the concerns on 
safety and ineligibility of the ingredients used in  the syrup. Thereafter, even the 
Scientific Panel recommended (December 2013) reject ion of the products. FSSAI 
has, however, not cancelled the NOC. 
                                                           
22 Import of Monster Energy Drink by M/s Narang Danon e Access, referred to in paragraph 
2.8.4.2 above. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
22 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Case Study 4 
FSSAI issued NOC (July 2012) to M/s Alkem Laborator ies for multivitamin 
tablets with the brand name “A to Z NS tablets”. Th ough thereafter, the Scientific 
Panel recommended rejection (December 2013) of the products, FSSAI did not 
cancel the NOC. 
2.8.5.2 No action taken despite failures of FBOs 
Audit observed that in the following seven cases (1 4 per cent  of the 50 cases 
referred to above), FSSAI issued NOCs despite failu re of FBOs to furnish 
complete information at the application stage; ther eafter, FSSAI delayed in 
calling the required information; and finally, thou gh the FBOs failed to furnish 
the information, FSSAI did not take any action agai nst them. Consequently, 
possibly harmful food products continued to be manu factured/ imported and sold 
from as early as June 2012. The following case studies illustrate this.  
Case Study 1 
FSSAI issued seven NOC (April 2013) to M/s Jeevanse va Enterprises for 
products containing liquid chlorophyll, guarana (a plant containing caffeine), 
ganoderma (a genus of mushroom), goat's milk candy and ginseng. FSSAI 
however, wrote to the FBO (September 2014) seventee n months after the issue of 
NOC, seeking further information from the FBO for s ubmission to the Scientific 
Panel. Immediately thereafter, the FBO informed (October 2014) FSSAI about the 
change of its name, but did not furnish any other i nformation. Though the change 
in name itself warranted immediate change in the st atus and validity of the NOCs, 
FSSAI failed to take any action, and there was no c hange in the status of the 
seven NOCs. 
Case Study 2 
FSSAI issued NOC (June 2012) to M/s Sonerge Pharma for New Zealand Royal 
Jelly (chewable tablets). FSSAI however, took 26 mo nths to process the case for 
submission to the Scientific Panel, and wrote to th e FBO (August 2014) seeking 
additional information, which has not been provided . FSSAI, however, has failed 
to take any action against the FBO. 
Case Study 3 
FSSAI issued NOC (January 2013) to M/s Genext Labs for an energy drink. 
FSSAI however, took eighteen months to process the case for submission to the 
Scientific Panel, and wrote to the FBO (July 2015) seeking additional 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 23 
 
information. However, despite failure of the FBO to  furnish information, FSSAI 
has failed to take any action against the FBO. 
Case Study 4 
FSSAI issued NOC (September 2014) to M/s ABN Enterp rises for a caffeinated 
energy drink. Though the FBO failed to furnish info rmation sought by FSSAI in 
September 2014 and July 2015, FSSAI has failed to t ake any action against the 
FBO.  
Case Study 5 
FSSAI issued NOC (January 2013) to M/s Sundyota Num andis Probioceuticals, 
but took twenty months to process the case for subm ission to the Scientific Panel, 
for which purpose, FSSAI wrote to the FBO (Septembe r 2014), seeking certain 
information. However, despite failure of the FBO to  furnish information, no 
action was taken against the FBO. 
Case Study 6 
FSSAI issued NOC (February 2013) to M/s Red Bull In dia for the “Red Bull” 
brand energy drink, but took twenty nine months to process the case for 
submission to the Scientific Panel, for which purpo se FSSAI wrote to the FBO 
(July 2015) seeking clarifications on certain defec ts in the application. However, 
despite failure of the FBO to furnish information, FSSAI failed to take any action 
against the FBO.  
Case Study 7 
FSSAI issued NOC (June 2013) to M/s Power Horse Ind ia for an energy drink, 
but failed to submit the case to the concerned Scie ntific Panel at any time. In the 
meantime, FSSAI itself found certain deficiencies i n the application and sought 
clarifications from the FBO (July 2015). However, d espite failure of the FBO to 
furnish information, no action was taken against the FBO. 
The Ministry replied (March 2017) that FSSAI had de cided not to issue product 
approvals and NOCs in 2,094 cases where information /documents were not 
furnished by FBOs. The reply is not relevant, since it does not address the issue of 
delay by FSSAI (for more than one year and for almo st three years) to process the 
applications for examination by the Scientific Pane l, and FSSAI’s further failure 
to take action against the FBOs who had failed to furnish information. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
24 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
2.8.6 NOC cases not submitted to Scientific Panels despite specific PA&SC 
recommendation 
Though the PA&SC issued 212 NOCs, FSSAI failed to c onfirm to Audit on the 
number of cases out of these 212 cases which were r eferred to Scientific Panel. 
Audit observed, however, that though, in 27 out of 50 cases test checked  
(54 per cent), the PA&SC had recommended referring the cases to  the Scientific 
Panels for examination and appropriate decision, FS SAI failed to do so, and 
without recording any reasons, issued NOCs (October  2012 to January 2015) in 
all these cases. 
In response to the Audit observations contained in paragraph 2.8 (and sub-
paragraphs thereunder), the Ministry reiterated (June 2017) the reply of the FSSAI 
(May 2017) that the issue pertaining to the erstwhi le product approval system 
appeared to be redundant in view of its withdrawal upon the directions of the 
Hon’ble Bombay High Court and Supreme Court. The Mi nistry/ FSSAI further 
stated that the Food Authority has approved new reg ulations concerning approval 
of non-specified foods and ingredients in May 2017 and all old cases could be 
resolved once these are notified.  
The replies are not acceptable, since they have not  addressed the primary audit 
concern that the FSSAI had failed to ensure the can cellation of the licenses issued 
under the product approval system declared unlawful  by the Supreme Court, and 
order product recalls, resulting in possibly unsafe  food continuing to be imported/ 
manufactured/distributed/sold in the country.  The response that the issue was 
now redundant cannot be used to brush away the seri ous defects in the 
functioning of the product approval system, which r eflects poorly on the systemic 
functioning of the FSSAI itself. 
2.9 Wrongful operationalisation of Regulations unde r Section 16(5) 
In terms of the judgements of the Bombay High Court  and the Supreme Court 
(referred to in paragraph 2.8 above), the powers ex ercised by Food Authority 
under sections 16(1) and 16(5) 23, the general principles of food safety enshrined 
in section 18, and the specific provisions relating  to proprietary foods etc., in 
section 22, shall be subject to the overarching pro visions of sections 92 and 93 of 
                                                           
23 Section 16(1) states the duties of the Food Author ity. Section 16(5) empowers the Food 
Authority to give binding directions to the Commiss ioners of Food Safety ( viz., the CEO, 
FSSAI in respect of the Centre, and the Commissione r nominated by the concerned State 
government). 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 25 
 
the Act. Section 92 stipulates, inter-alia, that the Food Authority may (a) with the 
previous approval of the Central Government and (b)  after previous publication, 
(c) by notification, make regulations under the Act . Section 93 requires all rules 
and regulations to be laid, after they are made, be fore each house of Parliament. 
The report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislat ion24 has stipulated that, 
before complying with the requirement of ‘previous publication’ under an Act, the 
following procedure was to be followed, viz., the framing of draft rules in 
consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice, thei r publication in the official 
gazette inviting objections and suggestions within thirty days, obtaining 
suggestions from interested groups, considering the  objections/views, finally 
notifying the rules (in consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice) within six 
months of last date of receipt of comments (if numb er of responses are large) and 
within three months (if number of responses are small or nil). 
Audit noticed many instances where, contrary to the  above requirements, FSSAI 
issued directions under section 16(5) without adher ing to the requirements of 
sections 92 and 93 of the Act. FSSAI, by these dire ctions, wrongly 
operationalised the codex standards for various com modities, prescribed the 
permissible limits of iron filings in tea, removed zinc from the list of 
contaminants, and introduced a new category for unp rocessed whole raw pulses 
with reduced standards. Details are given below. 
2.9.1 Directions issued by-passing open and transpa rent public consultation 
Case Study 
FSSAI operationalised (April 2016) Codex Standards for various commodities 
by exercising its powers under section 16(5), by-pa ssing the process of open and 
transparent public consultation (mandated under sec tion 18(2)(d) of the Act), 
without the prior approval of the Central Governmen t and previous publication 
by notification (mandated under section 92 of the Act) or the Food Authority.  
2.9.2 Directions issued without progressing beyond stage of issue of draft 
 notification 
Case Study 1 
FSSAI had issued three advisories (May 2014, Novemb er 2014, and May 2015) 
prescribing the permissible limit of iron filings i n tea. Though these advisories 
became invalid from 19 August 2015 (the date of the Supreme Court judgement), 
                                                           
24 15 th Lok Sabha (2011-12) dated 16 December 2011. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
26 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
FSSAI, contrary to the judgement, allowed the third  advisory to continue till 21 
November 2015, its normal expiry date. Thereafter, FSSAI issued a draft 
notification on 04 December 2015, followed by a rev ised draft notification of  
17 May 2016. On 22 April 2016 (i.e., prior to the i ssue of the second draft 
notification), FSSAI, without the approval of the Food Authority or the Ministry, 
issued directions under section 16(5) of the Act im plementing the draft standard 
that prescribed the limit of not more than 150 mg/ kg of iron filings in tea. The 
regulation was finally notified on 29 December 2016 , eight months after the 
unauthorised operationalisation. The operationalisa tion of standards under 
section 16(5) without completing the procedure deli neated under section 92 and 
93 amounted to violation of the Act. 
Case Study 2 
FSSAI issued the draft notification for 11,000 food additives on 04 August 2015. 
On 20 June 2016, without issuing the final notifica tion, and without the approval 
of the Food Authority or the Ministry, and violatin g the Supreme Court 
judgement, FSSAI issued directions under section 16 (5), and operationalised the 
standards. The regulations were finally notified on 05 September 2016. 
Case Study 3 
FSSAI issued the draft notification (April 2016) fo r removal of zinc from the list 
of contaminants. However, FSSAI issued directions u nder section 16(5) of the 
Act, and implemented the regulation with effect fro m 02 May 2016 before 
notifying the final regulations. Such use of sectio n 16(5) without following the 
provisions of section 92 violated the Act. The regu lations were finally notified 
on 10 October 2016.  
Case Study 4 
FSSAI issued draft notification (28 April 2016) to create a new category: 
“unprocessed whole raw pulses (not for direct human  consumption)” containing 
reduced standards on permissible limit of foreign ( extraneous) matter otherwise 
applicable to the general raw pulses category. The final regulation was notified 
on 14 September 2016. Audit observed that, even pri or to the issue of the draft 
notification, FSSAI issued directions (13 April 201 6) under section 16(5) 
implementing the proposed regulation with immediate  effect in violation of the 
Act. 
  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 27 
 
2.9.3 Extension of date of implementation of regula tions without 
amendment notification  
In the following two cases, without following the p rocess mandated under section 
92 of the Act, and in violation of the Supreme Cour t judgement, FSSAI wrongly 
exercised section 16(5) to extend the date of imple mentation specified in the 
gazette notification. 
Case Study 1 
The gazette notification (May 2016) amending the re gulations on labelling of 
pre-packaged foods in the category of edible vegeta ble oil/ fat, stipulated that the 
amendment came into effect on 25 May 2016. FSSAI, however, on 30 July 2016, 
invoked section 16(5) and extended the date of effe ct to 02 December 2016, 
bypassing the requirement of amendment to the earlier regulation through gazette 
notification. 
Case Study 2 
The gazette notification dated 04 August 2016 amend ing the regulations on 
margarine and fat spreads was to become effective f rom 27 August 2016. On 
10 August 2016, FSSAI wrongly exercised section 16( 5) of the Act, and 
extended the date of effect to 27 February 2017, by passing the requirement of 
amendment through gazette notification. 
The Ministry accepted (June 2017) the Audit content ion that the date of 
implementation of a regulation notified in the offi cial gazette with the approval of 
the Central Government should not be modified excep t by way of amendment in 
the said regulation through a gazette notification with the approval of the Central 
Government. 
As recounted in the seven case studies above, FSSAI  violated the Act and also 
Supreme Court judgement by taking recourse to secti on 16(5) of the Act to 
operationalise regulations without completing the p rocedure stipulated in section 
92 of the Act. 
Replying to the Audit observations, the Ministry st ated (January 2017 and March 
2017) that the judicial pronouncement was only with reference to a particular case 
relating to nutraceuticals and had no bearing on th e powers conferred on FSSAI 
under section 16(5) of the Act to issue binding dir ections to the Commissioners. 
The Ministry also stated that these directions were  issued to operationalise the 
standards on interim basis so that FBOs can use the  standards, and based on their 
feedback, the standards can be revised at the time of final notification. The 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
28 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Ministry further stated that the exercise of sectio n 16(5) was legitimate and 
became inevitable after the product approval system  was discontinued and earlier 
approved products could not be regulated and new pr oposals could not be 
entertained.  
The replies of the Ministry are not acceptable. Though the writ petition in the case 
was initially heard by a two member Bench of the Bo mbay High Court on a 
limited issue, due to a difference of opinion betwe en the two learned judges, they 
referred the matter to the Chief Justice of the Hig h Court to frame the matter on 
the fundamental issue of whether FSSAI is empowered  to apply other provisions 
of the Act, including section 16(5), without follow ing the procedures contained in 
sections 92 and 93 of the Act. In these circumstanc es, once the three member 
bench of the High Court constituted by the Chief Ju stice decided (on which the 
Supreme Court also refused to intervene) that all t he other sections are 
subordinate to sections 92 and 93 of the Act, the c ontentions of the Ministry 
regarding the interim instructions issued under sec tion 16(5) are also untenable. 
The Ministry should have sought the opinion of the Ministry of Law, rather than 
attempting an interpretation of the scope of the or ders of the Bombay High Court 
and the Supreme Court judgement. 
FSSAI in its further reply (May 2017), stated that if the Ministry agrees, opinion 
of the Law Ministry will be sought. 
2.10 Deficiencies in the amendment to regulations r elating to proprietary 
foods 
In the aftermath of Hon’ble Bombay High Court and H on’ble Supreme Court 
judgements in August 2014 and August 2015 respectiv ely, FSSAI discontinued 
the product approval system in August 2015. Thereaf ter FSSAI initiated the 
process for notifying regulations to regulate propr ietary foods. The process began 
with notification of interim regulations on proprie tary foods on 12 January 2016 
and culminated on 10 October 2016 with notification  of Food Safety and 
Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additiv es) Amendment 
Regulations, 2016 for proprietary foods. 
Audit noted the following deficiencies in the proce ss underlying the final 
notification for proprietary foods: 
(1) To ensure open and transparent public consultation in terms of the 
procedure delineated under section 92 of the Act an d by the Lok Sabha 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 29 
 
Committee on Subordinate Legislations, all regulati ons are required to follow a 
detailed consultative process with stakeholders. Ho wever, section 18(2)(d) of the 
Act contains an exception, permitting the Food Auth ority to dispense with such 
consultation in the making or amendment of regulations, where it is of the opinion 
that there is an urgency concerning food safety or public health. Such exception 
is, however, subject to the condition that such regulations shall remain in force for 
not more than six months. Audit noted that on 11 De cember 2015, the Ministry 
issued directions under section 85 of the Act (empo wering the Ministry to, inter-
alia, issue directions to FSSAI) stating that to cover the time required to frame 
regulations in place of the existing advisories, FS SAI may operate the urgency 
clause, i.e. section 18(2)(d), and issue regulation s without public consultation, for 
a period not exceeding three months. Though the int erim regulations on 
proprietary foods were accordingly notified on 12 J anuary 2016, FSSAI failed to 
notify the final regulations within the time stipul ated by the Ministry, and 
therefore, the interim regulations ceased to be in force after 11 April 2016. To 
overcome this failure to notify the final regulatio ns in time, FSSAI wrongly 
exercised (22 August 2016) the provisions of sectio n 16(5) to operationalise draft 
regulations issued on 19 April 2016. In the absence  of underlying regulations 
under section 92, operationalisation of the regulat ions under section 16(5) was a 
violation of the Act, which gets further substantia ted in the light of the orders of 
the Bombay High Court and the Supreme Court. Audit observed that between 
11 April 2016 (date of cessation of interim regulat ions) and 21 August 2016 (date 
of invoking of section 16(5)), FSSAI had issued 118  licenses and between 
22 August 2016 and 10 October 2016 (date of notific ation of final regulations), 
FSSAI had issued 20 licenses. 
The Ministry replied (March 2017) that consequent t o the orders of the Supreme 
Court it was no longer possible to continue the pro cess of product approvals and 
issuing of advisories. Hence, several food products , both domestic and imported, 
for which product approval was sought from FSSAI be fore the Supreme Court’s 
orders were left in limbo. Further, no new proposal s from the industry could be 
entertained any more. Therefore, it was necessary t o implement these standards 
with immediate effect to address the issues of food  safety and to regulate the non-
standardised food products, which constitute a majo r portion of product 
approvals. 
The reply is unacceptable as FSSAI and Ministry inv oked the urgency provisions 
of 18(2)(d) on 12 January 2016, i.e., more than fou r months after the Supreme 
Court orders. Further FSSAI/ Ministry took nine mon ths after the invoking of 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
30 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
section 18(2)(d) and more than thirteen months afte r the Supreme Court orders to 
notify the final regulations on 10 October 2016. The reasons for FSSAI’s inability 
to adhere to these time lines have also not been explained by the Ministry. 
(2) In terms of the framework (stated by FSSAI to be fo llowed by them), all 
matters regarding standards are required to be firs t referred to the Scientific 
Panels and the Scientific Committee. Audit observed , however, that the 
regulations on proprietary foods notified on 10 Oct ober 2016 were not referred to 
the Scientific Panels and Scientific Committee at any stage.  
The Ministry replied (March 2017) that the original  regulations of 2011 had 
defined proprietary foods. In view of the generalit y of this definition, which 
provides an explanation about the ingredients inclu ding food additives that can be 
used in proprietary foods and various other require ments pertaining to 
microbiological quality, labelling, etc., no techni cal inputs from the Scientific 
Panels and Scientific Committee were required. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Ministry’s reply  does not include any evidence 
that a conscious decision was taken by the competen t authority to dispense with 
referral to Scientific Panel and Scientific Committ ee in this case. Further, as 
explained in the sub-paragraph below, the final reg ulation of 2016 has deviated 
from the definition of propriety foods and novel fo ods as defined in the Act and 
contained in the original regulations of 2011. For this reason at least, the 
regulations should have been referred to the Scient ific Panels and Scientific 
Committee. 
(3) Section 22 of the Act defines proprietary foods  and novel foods similarly 
(treating them same), as articles of food for which  standards have not been 
specified but are not unsafe or contain any of the foods and ingredients prohibited 
under the Act and regulations made thereunder. This  definition was followed in 
the original (amendment) regulations of 2011. Audit  observed, however, that the 
amended regulation of 2016 defined proprietary foods as excluding novel foods. 
Admitting the difference in the definition between the Act and the regulations of 
2016, Ministry replied (March 2017) that this was m ainly done for facilitating 
innovations by the industry and for protection of c onsumer’s interest. Though the 
Act provides for the same definition for the propri etary food and novel food, 
technically, novel foods are those foods which cont ain ingredients and additives 
which do not have any history of use in the particu lar region/country; or the foods 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 31 
 
which are manufactured using a new technology other  than conventional 
technology.   
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable. No reg ulation can contain a definition 
different from the underlying Act. The Ministry was  therefore required to either 
amend the definition in the regulations so that it was in consonance with the Act 
or take measures to amend the Act itself. 
(4) Audit also observed that the amended regulations me rely state that 
individual ingredients should conform to the standards prescribed by FSSAI (or in 
the case of micronutrients, i.e., vitamins and mine rals, the limits of recommended 
daily average) 25, without mentioning which combinations of ingredie nts (though 
individually meeting the standards), would violate the overall stipulation of food 
safety. For instance, the Scientific Panel had reje cted (in January 2014 and March 
2014) caffeine-ginseng combinations in energy drink s on the ground that it may 
have opposing effect on the human body (discussed i n case studies 2 and 3 below 
paragraph 2.8.4.1, paragraph 2.8.4.2, case study 4 below paragraph 2.8.4.3 and 
case study 1 below paragraph 2.8.5.1). 
FSSAI stated (May 2017) that it would holistically look into the issue of 
combinatorial effect of ingredients including that of caffeine and ginseng in the 
near future based on the international best practices.  
The Ministry (June 2017) agreed with Audit that the  Ministry’s approval should 
be taken before operationalising/notifying any regulations. 
2.11 Deficiencies in operationalisation of Import R egulations 
FSSAI notified the draft Food Safety and Standards (Food Import) Regulation on 
17 May 2013, but failed to finalise it. In the inte rim, FSSAI issued various 
advisories on imports, which became invalid in ligh t of the Supreme Court 
decision of 19 August 2015. Despite this, decisions  continued to be taken on the 
basis of the invalid advisories.  
On 14 January 2016, citing the urgency clause contained in section 18(2)(d) of the 
Act, FSSAI operationalised a revised draft regulati on and placed it on its website. 
This action of FSSAI violated the Act as Section 92 (2)(g) of the Act stipulates 
that the exercise of section 18(2)(d) requires the previous approval of the Central 
                                                           
25 Though the Scientific Committee/Scientific Panels of FSSAI cite the RDA limits for 
 micronutrients prescribed by the Indian Council of  Medical Research (ICMR), this authority 
 has not been mentioned by FSSAI in the regulations . 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
32 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Government. In this case, since the earlier draft n otification was superseded by 
the revised draft notification which was approved b y the Ministry only on 15 July 
201626, the condition of previous approval of the Central  Government were not 
met. Despite this, the Ministry accorded ex-post facto approval (15 July 2016) for 
invoking section 18(2)(d). 
In keeping with the time limit of six months stipul ated in section 18(2)(d) of the 
Act relating to the urgency clause, the Ministry exercised its powers under section 
85 of the Act, and limited the period to three mont hs27. Therefore, even had the 
regulations of 14 January 2016 been valid, they rem ained in force only till 
13 April 2016. Since FSSAI did not notify the final  regulations before this date, 
the invalid regulations also lapsed within three mo nths of issue. FSSAI finally 
issued fresh directions on 02 September 2016 and op erationalised the draft 
revised regulations invoking section 18(2)(d) read with section 16(5) of the Act. 
Since FSSAI was under the mistaken impression that the earlier operationalisation 
remained in force for six months, it retrospectively operationalised the regulations 
from 15 July 2016. The second operationalisation su ffered from the same defects 
as the first operationalisation, in that, it was is sued without previous approval of 
the Central Government. In addition, the simultaneo us exercise of sections 16(5) 
and 18(2)(d) is contradictory, since the former sec tion relates to the exclusive 
powers of FSSAI to ensure furtherance of the Act, R egulations and Rules, and the 
latter section relates to the exclusive power of th e Ministry to give previous 
approval. In any case, FSSAI had no authority to invoke section 16(5) in this case, 
since the situation of FSSAI necessitating the issu e of regulations to replace the 
earlier advisories arose only after the Bombay High Court and Supreme Court had 
decided that the powers of FSSAI under section 16(5 ) could not override the 
provisions of sections 92 and 93 of the Act. Furthe r, neither FSSAI nor the 
Ministry have the power to extend the maximum perio d of six months provided 
under the exception clause in section 18(2)(d) of t he Act. In any case, FSSAI did 
not refer the second operationalisation to the Mini stry for approval at any stage. 
And finally, the Act does not provide for any retrospective effect to regulations. 
As in the case of the first operationalisation, FSS AI was under the mistaken 
impression that the second operationalisation remai ned in force till 14 January 
2017. Accordingly, and since the revised draft noti fication (issued on 25 October 
2016) was still under process for being notified as  regulations, FSSAI, in 
                                                           
26 The revised draft regulation was notified on 25 October 2016. 
27 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Directions N o. P15025/250/2015 (1)-DFQC dated 
11 December 2015. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 33 
 
continuance of its earlier unauthorised and incorre ct actions, operationalised the 
regulation for the third time, with effect from 14 January 2017. The final 
regulations were notified on 09 March 2017. 
In their reply (March 2017), the Ministry has tried  to justify the use of section 
18(2)(d) by stating that this was inevitable once the existing advisories on imports 
became redundant following the Supreme Court decisi on. The reply is not 
acceptable, since, the Ministry was not even aware of the fact that FSSAI had 
exercised the exception clause under section 18(2)( d) on the second and third 
occasion. Further, the exercise of the exception cl ause under section 18(2)(d) 
without the previous approval of the Ministry on al l three occasions cannot be 
justified, as also, the extensions beyond 14 July 2 016 (the maximum period of six 
months) contrary to the Act.  
FSSAI stated (May 2017) that it was not under a mis taken impression that the 
operationalisation remained in force for six months , since this is specifically 
mentioned in the Act. FSSAI has also contended that  section 18(2)(d) does not 
mention that the urgency clause should be invoked only once for a regulation. The 
Ministry, however, stated (June 2017) that the appr oval of the Ministry should be 
taken before operationalising any regulations. The Ministry’s views conform to 
the Audit contention.  
2.12 Food borne diseases 
Section 35 of the Act states that the Food Authorit y may, by notification, require 
registered medical practitioners carrying on their profession in any local area 
specified in the notification, to report all occurrences of food poisoning coming to 
their notice to such officer as may be specified. A udit, however, noted that no 
such notification was ever issued/ published by the Food Authority. 
The Ministry, while accepting the Audit observation , replied (March 2017) that 
the Food Authority was in the process of issuing the notification. 
2.13 Non-preparation of General Plan for Crisis Man agement 
Sub-section (3)(d) of Section 16 of the Act states that the Food Authority shall 
provide scientific and technical advice and assista nce to the Central Government 
and the State Governments in implementation of cris is management procedures 
with regard to food safety and to draw up a general  plan for crisis management 
and work in close co-operation with the crisis unit  set up by the Central 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
34 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Government in this regard. Audit noted that FSSAI h as initiated no mechanism to 
provide technical advice to the Central and State Governments. 
The Ministry in its reply (June 2017) accepted the facts. 
2.14 State/District Advisory Committees 
As per Section 2.1.15 of Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration 
of Food Business) Regulations, 2011 and directives (July 2012) of the Central 
Advisory Committee of FSSAI, a State Level Steering  Committee (SLSC) or 
State Advisory committee (SAC), with Chief Secretar y as its Chairperson, and 
District Level Steering Committee (DLSC) or Distric t Advisory Committee 
(DAC) with District Collector as its Chairperson be  constituted to assist, aid or 
advise on any matter concerning food safety in the State. Decisions taken at the 
monthly meetings of these committees are to be forw arded to appropriate 
authority for action. 
Audit test check in ten States revealed that SACs h ad not been constituted in 
Odisha and West Bengal. In Delhi, Haryana, Himachal  Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, 
the SACs did not hold any meetings. In Assam, Gujar at, Uttar Pradesh, the SACs 
met only once during the entire audit period and in Maharashtra it met twice. 
No DACs had been constituted in the test checked di stricts in Odisha, Delhi and 
Haryana. Only one of the six districts test checked  in Maharashtra, three of the 
five districts test checked in Tamil Nadu, seven of  the ten districts test checked in 
Uttar Pradesh, and one of five districts test check ed in West Bengal had DACs. 
Even after the Central Advisory Committee issued di rectives (July 2012) to hold 
regular meetings, till date (March 2016), in the fi ve test checked districts of 
Assam, no meetings were held in four districts and only two meetings were held 
in one district; in Maharashtra, out of six test ch ecked districts, five districts did 
not have committees and in the sixth district, five  meetings were held; in Tamil 
Nadu, out of six test checked districts, the committees did not hold any meeting in 
two districts, two meetings were held in one distri ct and one meeting each in the 
remaining three districts; in Uttar Pradesh, out of  ten test checked districts, no 
committees have been constituted in three districts ; out of the remaining seven 
districts, the committees did not hold any meeting in five districts, ten meetings 
were held in one district and only one meeting in t he last district; in West Bengal, 
out of five test checked districts, no committees h ave been formed in four district 
and in one district, three meetings have been held;  in Gujarat and Himachal 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 35 
 
Pradesh, no meetings were held during the entire au dit period by any of the test 
checked DACs. 
While accepting the Audit observation, the Ministry  replied (January and March 
2017) that the issue of holding regular meetings of  SAC and DAC had been the 
point of discussion in various meetings of the CAC and instructions had been 
reiterated to Food Safety Commissioners to ensure t his. The fact, however, 
remains that the requirements regarding the constit ution/regular meetings of SAC 
and DAC are yet to be fully complied with. 
2.15 Management of internally generated funds 
2.15.1 Funds lying unutilized 
As per rule 209(6)(xiv) of the GFR, 2005, the grant  sanctioning authorities should 
take into account the internally generated resource s while regulating award of 
grants. 
Audit observed that FSSAI had collected ` 100.73 crore by way of license fee, 
testing and laboratory fee etc., since 2008 onwards , which remained unutilised. 
FSSAI did not frame regulations for utilisation of these funds. 
FSSAI in its reply (March 2017) stated that financi al regulations/ guidelines in 
this regard are being formulated. 
2.15.2 Non refund of product approval fee 
Audit observed that though 1,876 applications for p roduct approval were pending 
with FSSAI after the Supreme Court judgement (19 Au gust 2015), FSSAI has not 
refunded ` 4.69 crore (at ` 25,000 per application) to the applicants. In their reply 
(January, March and May 2017), FSSAI/Ministry state d that FSSAI had decided 
that where tangible action had been taken on applic ations, fees need not be 
refunded and all pending applications would be proc essed based on existing 
regulations and new regulations as and when notifie d. Ministry has defined 
“tangible action” as the process of screening, exam ining, processing, segregation 
and recommending for issue of license in accordance  with new regulations. It 
contended that the application fee may not be consi dered for the purpose of 
issuing NOC/product approval alone but also for tak ing action on the application. 
The reply is not tenable. In the aftermath of the S upreme Court decision, FSSAI 
has no authority to issue any more NOC/product appr ovals and therefore has no 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
36 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
reason for considering such applications. Ministry may consider approaching 
Ministry of Finance for clarity on the issue. 
In the exit conference (June 2017), FSSAI/Ministry stated that the fee cannot be 
refunded, however, under the new regulations being framed in-lieu-of product 
approval system, no fees will be charged from such applicants. 
2.16 Insufficient Information, Education and Commun ication (IEC) 
activities by States 
The Central Advisory Committee (CAC) in its 8 th meeting (July 2012) advised 
that at least 75 per cent of the food license fee collections ( ` 302.85 crore during 
the audit period) be used for IEC activities. Test check in the ten selected states 
revealed that this was not done. Further, none of t he state governments had 
framed any policy for IEC activities. Only two stat es (Assam and Tamil Nadu) 
had allocated budget for IEC activities, while the other states (Odisha, Himachal 
Pradesh, Gujarat, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Harya na and Delhi 28) did not 
allocate any budget for IEC activities. 
The Ministry (March and June 2017) stated that it h ad been repeatedly reminding 
the State Governments to take necessary measures fo r implementation of the 
above cited advisory of CAC. The fact remains that the advisory of the CAC is 
yet to be complied with. 
2.17 Use of advertising by FBO on FSSAI publication s 
FSSAI published two booklets 29 for the elucidation of safe food practices to the 
general public. Audit, however, observed that two leading FBOs advertised on the 
back page of the publications. Such practices would lead the public to believe that 
the FBOs had the official sanction of the FSSAI in its capacity of food regulator, 
which is not desirable, and adversely impacts the F SSAI’s role as an independent 
regulator. 
FSSAI in its reply (May 2017) stated that, these ac tivities were carried out by 
FBOs under CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) in  public interest as these 
documents have been made available as open source i nputs in the public domain 
through the FSSAI website and other portals. For gr eater clarity, a policy on use 
of CSR and other voluntary initiatives to be taken up in public interest has now 
                                                           
28 Information regarding Maharashtra is not available . 
29 (i) DART- Detect adulteration with Rapid Test and (ii) The Pink Book- Your guide for safe and 
nutritious food at home. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 37 
 
been approved by the Food Authority in its meeting held on 25 May 2017. The 
Ministry (June 2017) reiterated the stance of FSSAI. The reply, however, does not 
address the specific concerns of Audit. The Ministr y is required to frame 
guidelines to ensure that the role of FSSAI as an i ndependent regulator is not 
compromised. 
2.18 Defects and deficiencies in grievance redressa l 
FSSAI primarily handles complaints received through  the Centralised Public 
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) o f Department of 
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG ), letters from 
complainants, various Ministries, faxes and its own  web portal. FSSAI, however, 
has not framed any standard operating procedure (SO P) on handling, redressal, 
and disposal of complaints. Audit scrutiny also rev ealed that there was no 
mechanism to redress the grievance and respond to the complainant. 
Audit further observed that out of the 163 complain t cases received at the FSSAI 
during August 2011 to March 2016 pertaining to eigh t states (Delhi, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tam il Nadu and Uttar 
Pradesh), 11 cases were not forwarded to the respec tive State Food 
Commissioners, while in the remaining cases the Sta te Food Safety 
Commissioners had not responded.  The state food au thority, Delhi could furnish 
Audit with documentary proof of redressal only in r espect of ten out of the 58 
cases referred to it by the FSSAI. Three states (Od isha, Himachal Pradesh, and 
Tamil Nadu) did not have a Grievance Redressal Mech anism. In five States 
(Assam, Delhi, Haryana, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh), the system was not effective. 
The FSSAI/Ministry (May/June 2017) accepted the audit observation.  
Conclusion: 
Even after more than a decade of the enactment of t he Act, FSSAI is yet to frame 
regulations governing various procedures, guideline s and mechanisms enunciated 
in different sections of the Act. FSSAI failed to d evise action plans to identify 
areas on which standards are to be formulated/revis ited for revision within 
specified time frames, and the manner of selection of food products for 
formulation of standards. FSSAI did not involve the  Scientific Panels/Scientific 
Committee in the formulation of standards of certai n foods. FSSAI notified 
regulations and standards without considering the c omments of stakeholders. In 
absence of standard operating procedures (SOP), FSS AI took between one year 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
38 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
and three years to notify amendments. Possibility o f unsafe/declared unsafe foods 
continued to be manufactured and sold could not be ruled out due to failure of 
FSSAI to monitor and cancel licenses issued under f lawed procedure for NOC, 
even subsequent to the Supreme Court declaring the entire procedure of issuing 
advisories on NOC and product approvals as unlawful . FSSAI continues to issue 
directions under section 16(5) of the Act without f ollowing the procedure 
underlying sections 92 and 93 of the Act, despite t he orders of the Supreme Court 
that such orders do not have the force of law. FSSA I has not yet issued 
notifications requiring registered medical practitioners to report all occurrences of 
food poisoning in their jurisdiction. FSSAI has not  drawn up a general plan for 
food crisis management and introduced a mechanism t o ensure its 
implementation. FSSAI has not ensured that all stat es have constituted State and 
District Advisory Committees, and that these are fu nctioning effectively. FSSAI 
did not frame regulations for utilisation of funds of ` 100.73 crore it had collected 
since 2008 by way of license fee, testing and labor atory fee etc., which remained 
unutilised. Despite recommendation of the Central A dvisory Committee (CAC) 
that at least 75 per cent  of the food license fee collections are used for 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) acti vities, most states had not 
allocated any budgets for these activities. 
Recommendations: 
• Ministry/FSSAI may expedite the notification of reg ulations on areas that 
have been specified in the Act, but are yet uncovered.  
• FSSAI may frame standard operating procedures on th e formulation and 
review of standards and ensure that these are adhered to. 
• FSSAI may ensure that all licenses issued under the  erstwhile system of 
product approvals are reviewed, and licenses cancel led and reissued as 
warranted under the present procedure. 
• FSSAI may review all directions issued under sectio n 16(5) of the Act in the 
light of directions of the Hon’ble Bombay High Cour t and Hon’ble Supreme 
Court. 
• FSSAI may expedite the notification of financial re gulations for utilisation of 
funds collected by way of license fee, testing and laboratory fee etc., collected 
since 2008 onwards. 
 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 39 
 
Chapter III : Licensing, Registration, Inspection 
and Sampling 
3.1 Licensing and Registration 1 
Section 31 of the Act stipulates that, other than p etty manufacturers or petty 
retailers who shall register themselves with the fo od authority, no person shall 
commence or carry on any food business except under a license. Separate licenses 
shall be issued for one or more articles of food ma nufactured/sold in the same or 
different establishments/premises in the same area.  Registering Authority means 
Designated Officers (DO) appointed by State Food Sa fety Commissioners 
(SFSC), Food Safety Officers (FSO) or any officer o f the Panchayat, Municipal 
Corporation or any other local body of the area, no tified as such by the Food 
Safety Commissioners 2. Licensing Authority means either the Central Lice nsing 
Authority (CLA) i.e., DO appointed by CEO of FSSAI in his capacity of Food 
Safety Commissioner; or the State Licensing Authori ty (SLA) i.e., DO appointed 
by the SFSC 3. Section 63 of the Act contains punitive provision s relating to the 
carrying out of food business without license.  
As on 31 March 2016, FSSAI and the state government s had issued 27.65 lakh 
registrations and 7.09 lakh licenses.4 
Procedure for obtaining licenses 
Central licenses are issued by FSSAI through its re gional offices (CLA), whereas 
state licenses are issued by the state offices (SLA ). The procedure for obtaining 
license is depicted below: 
                                                           
1 Covered under the Food Safety and Standards (Licen sing and Registration of Food Business) 
 Regulations, 2011. 
2 In terms of paragraph 1.2.1 (5) of the Regulations  of 2011. 
3 As defined in paragraphs 1.2.1 (1) and (6) respect ively of the Regulations of 2011. 
4 As per information furnished to Audit by FSSAI.  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
40 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
 
Figure 3.1: Flow chart explaining licensing procedure 
3.1.1 No survey for identification of FBOs  
Sub-section 16(2)(g) of the Act stipulates that it shall be the duty of FSSAI to 
conduct survey for enforcement and administration o f the Act. Similarly, sub-
section 30(2)(b) stipulates that the SFSC shall car ry out survey of industrial units 
engaged in the manufacture or processing of food in  the state. Further, sub-clause 
2.1.3(4)(iii)(f) of FSS Rules, 2011 states that it is the duty of FSO to maintain a 
database of all the food business within the area a ssigned to him. Audit found 
however, that neither FSSAI nor the Food Safety Com missioners of the 10 states 
selected for audit had conducted or got conducted any such survey. In the absence 
of such data, Audit noticed that FSSAI gave differe nt figures 5  on different 
occasions, based on which important decisions were taken by the Government and 
the Food Authority. 
The Ministry replied (January 2017) that the proces s of licensing and registration 
is an ongoing activity.  The figures referred to in  the audit report for total number 
of FBOs was a guess-estimate at that time. Commissi oners of food safety of 
states/UTs have been requested to conduct an intens ive survey for coverage of 
                                                           
5 Figure of 550 lakh FBOs as on 05 June 2013 to Expe nditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 
03 January 2014 and of 103.11 lakh FBOs in October 2016 in reply to an Audit query. 
Filing of completed 
application Form B with 
Documents and Fee. 
Acknowledge application and 
grant unique application 
number. 
Scrutiny within 15 days, 
notice on any additional 
information required or 
incomplete application, if any. 
FBO files additional required 
information within 30 days. 
Inspection of premises and 
issue of inspection report/  
improvement notice. 
Grant /reject the license 
within 60 days of receipt of 
completed application or 
within 30 days of inspection 
whichever is earlier. 
FBO may 
start the 
business 
after 60 
Days 
Licensee to carry out the 
improvements within 30 
days and intimate LA 
In case no inspection 
If no response 
after that from 
Licensing 
Authority (LA) 
If no response 
from LA 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 41 
 
FBOs in Food Licensing and Registration System (FLR S).  FSSAI further stated 
(May 2017) that the variance in the data shared by FSSAI on different occasions 
was not deliberate. 
The reply is not acceptable, since it does not answ er why no steps were taken to 
carry out survey as stipulated in the Act and Regul ations. Also, neither the central 
and state governments nor FSSAI had reliable data t o help decision making.  
Further, neither the Ministry nor the Food Authorit y was informed at the time of 
decision making that the figures supplied to them were inaccurate. 
3.1.2 Unnecessary extensions of time for conversion  of licenses 
Sub-section 97(3) of the Act stipulates that, licen ses issued under the erstwhile 
Acts/Orders would continue to be in force till the date of their expiry. Clause 
2.1.2 (1) of the Regulations 6 permitted such FBOs having licenses issued under 
the erstwhile Acts/Orders to convert their licenses  to licenses/registrations under 
the Act within a period of one year.  
On request of various stakeholders, including state  governments, Members of 
Parliament and trade bodies, Ministry invoking sect ion 85 of the Act, issued 
directions to FSSAI to extend the period of convers ion of existing licenses from 
time to time (up to 4 August 2016). 
Audit examination revealed that neither the Ministr y nor FSSAI had any 
information regarding the number of FBOs whose lice nses issued under the 
erstwhile Acts/Orders continued to be valid even af ter the enactment of the Act. 
The directions of Ministry to frequently extend the  date of conversion of licenses 
resulted in a situation where even FBOs whose licen ses had expired, continued 
with the food business. The same was pointed out fr om time to time by FSSAI 
and various SFSCs who complained that FBOs were not  willing to renew their 
registrations and licenses due to such continued ex tensions. Thus the repetitive 
extensions of time for conversion till 04 August 20 16 on the directions of the 
Ministry were not only contrary to the Act, they we re also unnecessary, and 
resulted in FBOs whose licenses had expired, to con tinue food business without 
licenses (as discussed in paragraph 3.1.4(i) & (ii)), adversely affecting food safety 
measures, and thus endangering public health in the country. 
                                                           
6 FSS (Licensing and Registration of Food Business) Regulations, 2011 effective from 
05 August 2011. Unless specified otherwise, Regulat ions would refer to these regulations only 
in this chapter. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
42 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Ministry in its reply (June 2017) stated that, oper ational matters are dealt with by 
FSSAI at its own level and Ministry was not require d to maintain such details. 
Further, the extensions were considered necessary f or ensuring smooth transition 
and the decision was accordingly taken. 
The reply is not acceptable as FSSAI and the state authorities accepted on record 
that there was confusion among FBOs on obtaining license from FSSAI due to the 
repeated extensions. Further, the Ministry cannot a bsolve itself of the 
responsibility as it had exercised its power under section 85 of the Act and 
directed FSSAI to issue necessary orders for extensions. 
3.1.3 Dilution of standards for exporting FBOs 
Sub-section 3(1)(n) of the Act defines food busines s as including, inter-alia, 
manufacture, processing, packaging, storage and tra nsportation of food. Sub-
section 16(1) stipulates that it shall be the duty of the Food Authority to regulate 
and monitor the manufacture, processing, distributi on, sale and import of food. 
Further, item VI of schedule 1 of the Regulations s pecifies ‘100 per cent Export 
Oriented Units’ (EOU)7 in the list of food businesses falling under the p urview of 
CLA. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that earlier, lice nses were issued under the 
erstwhile Prevention of Food Adulteration Act to al l FBOs engaged in food 
business, including FBOs who did not opt for the 10 0 per cent EOU scheme, but 
who exported their production entirely outside the scheme (designated as ‘only 
export FBOs’). FSSAI, to facilitate trade, issued a n order dated 21 January 2015, 
permitting the issue of licenses to such ‘only expo rting FBOs’ by creating a 
distinct category of “Exporting FBOs”.  As on 30 Se ptember 2016, 731 licenses 
were issued under this category. 
In this connection, Audit observed as follows: 
i) The orders of 21 January 2015 were issued by invoki ng section 16(5) of 
the Act, which require that any directions thereund er are to be issued by 
the Food Authority. However, FSSAI issued the order s with the approval 
of the Chairperson, and not with the approval of the Food Authority. 
                                                           
7 Subject to certain requirements and restrictions, ‘100 per cent  EOUs’ receive central excise 
duty, customs duty and central sales tax relief amo ng other benefits and can also access 
domestic market up to specific limits.  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 43 
 
ii) The orders stipulate grant of license for “only exp orting FBOs” subject to 
their products meeting the standards and specificat ions applicable to the 
importing country without there being any mechanism to verify the same. 
iii) The orders also permitted such FBOs to sell the pro ducts within the 
country subject to the condition of their submittin g a certificate that the 
food products conform to the Indian standards. Such  permission to these 
FBOs to sell their products domestically adversely discriminates against 
other FBOs who are required to adhere to more rigor ous standards and 
checks at the time of securing licenses. 
The Ministry (June 2017) stated that, there was no violation of the Act since 
FSSAI was empowered to issue licenses through an ad visory in respect of ‘only 
export’ FBOs also, and this has been agreed to by t he Food Authority in its 
meeting of 25 May 2017. The reply cannot be accepte d as there is no mandate 
under the Act for the Food Authority to regulate fo od business except through 
Regulations specifying the standards. In the exit c onference (June 2017), FSSAI 
agreed to review this issue. 
3.1.4 Deficiencies in process of issue of licenses 
Clauses 2.1.7(1) to (5) of the Regulations stipulat e that a registration or license 
shall be valid for a period of 1 to 5 years as chosen by FBO, from the date of issue 
of registration or license. Further, any applicatio n for the renewal of such 
registration or license shall be filed not later th an 30 days prior to the expiry date 
indicated in the registration/license; or if filed later, but before the expiry of the 
license, on payment of late fee for each day of del ay. Registration or license for 
which renewal has not been applied for within the a bove period shall expire and 
FBO shall stop all business activities at the premi ses, and apply for fresh 
registration or license if it wants to restart the business. Sub-clause 2.1.3(4)(iii)(f) 
of FSS Rules states that it shall be the duty of FS O to maintain a database of all 
food business within the area assigned to him. 
Audit test check revealed the following: 
i) In 49 cases pertaining to CLA, Kolkata and Guwahati , FBOs applied for 
renewal of licenses (2011-14) issued under the erst while Acts/Orders after 
their expiry. Despite the fact that the licenses ha d already expired at the time 
of application, and instead of issuing fresh licens es as stipulated in clause 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
44 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
2.1.7 of the Regulations, CLAs renewed the licenses . In further violation of 
the Regulations, CLAs renewed the licenses retrospe ctively even for the 
period when the erstwhile Acts/Orders were in opera tion (the gap between the 
expiry of the licenses and their irregular renewal ranged from one year to five 
and a half years in eight cases).  CLAs thus, irreg ularly legitimised the gap 
period of food business during which FBOs, operated without valid licenses in 
violation of section 31 of the Act. Also, CLAs did not maintain a database of 
all food businesses within their area as required under FSS Rules. 
ii) In nine states 8 and six central 9 offices of FSSAI, Audit observed instances 
where licenses/registrations issued under the Act h ad expired. Out of 7,056 
licenses test checked in SLAs, 2,616 (37.07 per cent ), and out of 2,863 
licenses test checked in CLAs, 626 (21.87 per cent ) licenses were found to 
have expired. Out of 2,299 registrations test check ed in states, 698 (30.36 per 
cent) registrations were found to have expired. The SLA s confirmed that they 
could not ensure whether such FBOs had stopped all food business activity 
after expiry of their licenses/registrations. Furth er, during joint physical 
inspection by a team comprising officials of Audit and FSOs in Odisha, 15 out 
of 40 test checked FBOs were found operational desp ite expiry of their 
licenses. Another test check at FSSAI RO, Mumbai re vealed that six FBOs 
continued with their business even though they had not even applied for the 
renewal of their earlier licenses, and conducted fo od business valued at 
` 252.64 crore during the period without license. 
In the exit conference (June 2017) FSSAI/Ministry a ccepted the audit observation 
and CEO, FSSAI informed that the matter will be tak en up with state food 
authorities. 
3.1.5 Licenses issued on the basis of incomplete do cuments 
Regulation 2.1.3 stipulates that the application fo r grant of license shall be 
accompanied by a self-attested declaration in the p rescribed format along with 
copies of documents, viz., layout plan, list of directors with full address and 
contact details, name and list of equipment and mac hinery, identity and address 
proof of FBO etc. Test check by Audit of five SLAs and three CLAs, revealed 
that in 3,119 (52.73 per cent ) out of the 5,915 test checked cases licenses had 
been issued to FBOs on the basis of incomplete documents.  
                                                           
8 Assam, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, and 
West Bengal. 
9 Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Lucknow, and Mumbai. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 45 
 
FSSAI during the exit conference (June 2017) stated that necessary actions will be 
taken by way of systemic improvements in the online  FLRS (Food Licensing and 
Registration System). 
Case Study 
License renewed without verification of documentary evidence  
When applying for new license (9 May 2014), M/s Om Sai Ram Industries, 
Odisha, a manufacturer of packaged drinking water, carbonated water etc., 
stated the qualification of the technical in-charge  of operations as ‘10 th pass’. 
Since Annexure-3 of Schedule 2 of the FSS (Licensin g & Registration of Food 
Business) Regulations, relating to ‘Conditions of L icense’ stipulates that FBO 
should employ at least one technical person to supe rvise the production process 
who shall possess at least a degree in science, CLA , Kolkata returned the 
application to FBO who then furnished a revised app lication (29 May 2014) 
after changing the qualification of the same person  to ‘B.Sc. Chemistry (Hons.)’ 
without providing any proof of educational qualific ation. Without further 
verification, CLA, Kolkata issued (November 2014) t he license and later 
renewed it (October 2015) in violation of the stipu lation mentioned in 
Annexure-2 of Schedule 2 of the Regulations that th e document of qualification 
needs to be verified during renewal of license. 
Thus, CLA, Kolkata failed to verify the supporting document at the stage of 
renewal of license. 
3.2 Food Inspections 
The procedures for collection, analysis and reporti ng have been defined and 
prescribed in Rules, Regulations 10, and sub-section 16(2)(i) of the Act stipulating 
that it shall be the duty of FSSAI to specify throu gh Regulations the manner and 
the procedure subject to which risk assessment, ris k analysis, risk communication 
and risk management shall be undertaken. Audit howe ver, observed that FSSAI 
has not notified any Regulations in this regard.  
  
                                                           
10 Sections 46 (2) and 47 of the Act, paragraph 2.1.3 .4 of FSS Rules, 2011, Chapter 2 of FSS 
(Licensing and Registration) Regulations, 2011 and FSS (Laboratory and Sample Analysis) 
Regulations, 2011. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
46 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Neither FSSAI nor states had any documented policy or procedures for risk-based 
inspection (including sampling) of domestically-pro duced food.  In August 2016, 
risk based sampling for only imported food was oper ationalised. Also, FSSAI 
does not have any database on records of food premises and food inspections. 
Audit noted that though the Regulations provide for inspection of registered FBOs 
at least once in a year, no such periodicity is pre scribed in respect of licensed 
FBOs11. Instead, the Regulations leave it to the discreti on of DO to decide the 
periodicity of inspections. The reasons for such discrimination are not clear. Audit 
noted that out of the ten selected states, only Himachal Pradesh had prescribed the 
periodicity, but even these instructions were not f ollowed and periodicity of 
inspections was low or even zero. Scrutiny of recor ds relating to 6,02,677 FBOs 
in 52 districts in the 10 selected states revealed that in 15 districts 12  having 
1,02,595 FBOs (17 per cent), no inspection was conducted at all during 2011-1 6. 
In Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh, DOs of the test ch ecked districts did not have 
any records to substantiate their claims of high nu mber of inspections 
conducted 13 , and therefore the claims made by these two states  cannot be 
accepted. Audit observed that the deployment of FSO s was extremely low in 
comparison to the sanctioned strength or strength r ecommended by the Central 
Advisory Committee of FSSAI (for details refer para  5.9 of chapter 5 in this 
report). 
FSSAI (May 2017) stated that necessary amendments will be proposed. 
3.3 Lifting of Samples 
As per Section 38(1) of the Act, FSO may take a sam ple of any food, or any 
substance, which appears to him to be intended for sale, or to have been sold for 
human consumption, or of any article of food or sub stance which is found by him 
on or in any such premises, which he has reason to believe may be required as 
evidence in proceedings under any of the provisions  of the Act or of the 
Regulations or Orders made thereunder. 
                                                           
11 In terms of section 31 of the Act, registration pr ocedure is applicable to petty manufacturers. 
12 Delhi (South Delhi); Gujarat (Junagarh, Rajkot mun icipal corporation and Surat municipal 
corporation); Haryana (Ambala, Faridabad, Gurgaon a nd Sonepat); Himachal Pradesh 
(Kangra); Odisha (Balasore, Deogarh, Kendrapada and  Mayurbhanj); Uttar Pradesh (Kanpur 
Nagar); and West Bengal (Paschim Medinipur). 
13 For example, the Designated Officers in three of t he six selected districts claimed 100 per cent 
inspections. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 47 
 
3.3.1 Samples lifted not commensurate with number o f licenses and 
 registrations issued 
In 53 selected districts of ten selected states for  the period 2011-2016, Audit 
noticed that food authorities lifted 51,972 samples of food articles for analysis out 
of 7,17,628 FBOs . Audit noted that, the lifting of samples was less t han 10 per 
cent of total licensed and registered FBO in 29 (55 per cent) of the 53 selected 
districts; out of which, in seven districts 14 the lifting of samples was below one 
per cent. Audit further noted that, five 15 of the 10 selected states did not fix any 
targets for lifting of samples. In the remaining fi ve16 states the targets were fixed 
without risk assessment for different categories of FBOs but were not achieved by 
most of the FSOs. The state Authorities attributed the non-achievement of targets 
to shortage of staff and paucity of funds. 
FSSAI (May 2017) and Ministry (June 2017) accepted the facts and stated that 
necessary steps are being taken. 
3.3.2 Violations of procedure for lifting of food s amples 
Rule 2.4.1 of FSS Rules prescribes the procedure fo r lifting of samples. Audit 
observed deficiencies in the procedure by food safe ty authorities as provided in 
the following case studies: 
Case Study 1 
Sample handling procedure 
In fifteen samples pertaining to seven districts in  Orissa, FSOs had added 
formalin to the milk samples sent for testing, with out declaring it as a 
preservative, as required under the procedure. Cons equently, the test was 
declared defective. The FSOs informed that that the y were not trained on the 
procedure of lifting, keeping and sending samples to the laboratory.  
  
                                                           
14 Deogarh and Jharsuguda (Odisha) Theni, Tirunelveli  and Trichy (Tamil Nadu); Paschim 
Medinipur and Purulia (West Bengal). 
15 Assam, Delhi, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 
16 Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu. 
 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
48 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Case Study 2 
 
Failure of DOs to monitor status of receipt of samples sent for analysis. 
 
(a) Food Analyst of CTL, Kandaghat received (June-July 2013) two food 
samples from FSO, Kullu, Himachal Pradesh, which we re found unfit for 
analysis. Though the laboratory requisitioned the s econd part of the sample 
as stipulated in sub-section 47(1)(c) of the Act, t he concerned DO failed to 
send the sample. The DO informed Audit that the let ters requisitioning the 
second part of the food samples were not received. 
 
(b) Following differences in the test findings on the f irst and second parts of 
the sample of a product (flavoured water), the thir d sample was sent 
(January 2014) to the referral laboratory in Kolkat a. DO, Theni, Tamil 
Nadu sent an email remainder to the laboratory only in February 2015, after 
the shelf life of the product had expired (June2014 ). The laboratory 
informed that records did not show that the sample had been received by 
them. DO attributed failure to issue reminder to he avy workload and 
shortage of manpower. The reply is not acceptable. Among all the states 
test checked in Audit, Tamil Nadu is in the best po sition in respect of 
manpower, with vacancies ranging only from 14 to 17  per cent in all the 
years. In 2014 and 2015, against sanctioned strengt h of 14 FSOs, DO Theni 
had 10 to 11 FSOs. 
The Ministry accepted (June 2017) the facts. 
3.3.3 Non-availability of adequate infrastructure f or sampling 
Sub-section 47(1)(c) of the Act provides that when the FSO takes a sample of 
food for analysis, he shall send one of the parts f or analysis to the Food Analyst 
and two parts to DO for keeping in safe custody. Au dit observed deficiencies in 
the required infrastructure for safe custody of sam ples such as lockable/secure 
fridge/ freezer, cold chain boxes, insulated boxes,  etc. In absence of the requisite 
infrastructure, the samples were stored in almirahs  and cupboards. Consequently, 
the samples were deteriorating/getting spoiled/dama ged and were not fit for 
analysis. In Kamrup district of Assam, for instance , two samples of milk products 
were rejected by the referral laboratory as the sam ple retained by the DO in steel 
almirahs got spoiled. Due to absence of proper stor age facilities, test checked 
districts in Assam, Himachal Pradesh did not lift samples of perishable items such 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 49 
 
as fruits and vegetables. In Tamil Nadu, samples of  tea seized from an FBO were 
sent for testing for adulteration. After sending th e first part for testing, the 
remaining three parts were retained by the DO, Then i. When the lab report 
confirmed adulteration, the DO Theni discovered tha t the remaining three parts of 
the sample (which, because of inadequate storage sp ace, was kept in the open), 
had been tampered with/damaged. Consequently, no le gal action could be taken 
against the FBO. 
The Ministry accepted (June 2017) the facts. 
 
Photograph-3.1Food samples stored in an almirah in Kangra district 
 
Photograph-3.2 & 3.3 Food samples stored in steel almirah in Kamrup (Metro) district 


Report No. 37 of 2017 
50 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
3.4 Food Safety Audit: Violation of regulations 
As per Section 44 of the Act, the Food Authority ma y recognise any organisation 
or agency for the purposes of food safety audit and  checking compliance with the 
Food Safety Management System (FSMS) required under  the Act and Rules or 
Regulations made thereunder. In terms of clause 2.1 .3 of Regulation, FBOs were 
required to furnish FSMS plan or certificate 17, if any, along with their application 
for new licenses or renewal thereof. However, citin g difficulties faced by FBOs 
during the transition period, FSSAI issued an advis ory (April 2012), making it 
optional for FBOs to furnish FSMS plan or certificate and allowed them to furnish 
an affidavit regarding compliance on a non-judicial stamp paper (later replaced by 
FSSAI in March 2015 with self-declaration by FBO).  
Audit observed that FSSAI had no authority to issue  such advisory relaxing 
provisions of the Regulation. Further, the interim measure, intended for the 
transition period of one year was made permanent. I n the meantime, FSSAI 
empaneled eight food safety audit agencies in Janua ry 2012 and further four 
agencies in October 2012. Such empanelment was irre gular, since, in terms of 
sub-section 16(2)(c) of the Act, FSSAI is required to frame Regulations 
underlying the mechanisms and guidelines for accred itation of such certification 
bodies, which had not been done. Ultimately, the ei ght irregularly empaneled 
accreditation bodies were not assigned any work, an d FSSAI also decided not to 
extend their initial term of one year. Consequently , the entire food safety audit 
system stipulated in the Act and Regulations failed to take off. 
The Ministry accepted (June 2017) the facts. 
3.5 Enforcement of Centrally Licensed FBOs 
As per sub-section 29(1) of the Act, the Food Autho rity and state food safety 
authorities are responsible for the enforcement of the Act. Audit observed that 
based on the recommendation of the Central Advisory  Committee, FSSAI, 
without the approval of the Food Authority or the M inistry, issued an advisory 
(June 2013) transferring the enforcement activities  relating to FBOs having 
central licenses, from FSSAI to state food safety c ommissioners.  Such delegation 
of powers to the state food authorities violated se ction 10(5) of the Act (which 
entrusted the CEO, FSSAI with the powers of the Com missioner of Food Safety) 
                                                           
17 Certification is the procedure by which official c ertification bodies and such officially 
recognised bodies provide written or equivalent ass urance that food or food control systems 
conform to requirements.  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 51 
 
read with sub-section 30(2) covering the duties of the Commissioners of Food 
Safety, sub-section 30(3) of the Act permitting del egation of the powers of the 
Commissioners of Food Safety only to their subordin ate officers (state food 
authorities are not subordinate to the CEO, FSSAI),  and sub-section 29(1) of the 
Act (which, inter-alia, entrusts the Food Authority with the responsibili ty for 
enforcement of the Act, in respect of food business es falling under the purview of 
the central licensing authority). 
FSSAI replied (March 2017) that it was a conscious decision to delegate the work 
of enforcement even for the centrally licensed unit s to the offices of state 
governments since they have the requisite manpower as well as easy access to 
FBOs as they have FSOs/DOs at district levels. The reply is not acceptable since 
such delegation was done without the approval of th e Ministry at that time. 
Further, even the state licensing authorities do no t have sufficient staff to 
effectively fulfill their own enforcement activitie s. Audit had also observed that 
state food authorities do not maintain or monitor t he information on the central 
licenses issued, and therefore, they are in no posi tion to enforce compliance. 
Consequently, the FSSAI was unable to ensure that c entrally licensed units fulfill 
their licensing requirements. 
The Ministry in its reply (June 2017) stated that, there was no provision for 
central or state license as per the Act, 2006 and t his bifurcation has been done 
later on, as per administrative convenience and to give separate responsibilities to 
the FSSAI and state food safety authorities based u pon certain volume/turnover 
etc., of FBOs.  The reply is not acceptable as the provisions for central and state 
licenses were incorporated in the FSS (Licensing an d Registration of Food 
Businesses) Regulations, 2011 and this was not mere ly an administrative 
bifurcation. Moreover, the state food authorities a re only responsible for the 
enforcement of state licenses, and the decision to delegate them the powers of 
enforcement of central licenses violated the Regulations. 
3.6 Lack of coordination between FSSAI and Customs Authorities 
3.6.1 Non-presence of FSSAI in ports 
The import of food products into India is controlle d by FSSAI by Section 25 of 
the Act, which stipulates that no unsafe misbranded  or substandard product is to 
be imported into India. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
52 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Audit noted that out of the total 635 entry points in India, FSSAI had its presence 
at only 21 points in six 18 ports, and for 135 points, FSSAI had appointed Cus toms 
officials by designation as Authorised Officers 19 (AO) under Section 47(5) of the 
Act. The appointment by designation is not in compl iance with the regulations, 
which required AOs/FSOs to have a degree in any of the prescribed disciplines 20 
from a recognised university. Further, the appointm ent was belated and 
inadequate, since it was done for the first time in  March 2016, a decade after the 
Act was enacted; also, there is no FSSAI presence e ither directly, or through its 
authorised representatives at the remaining point o f entries, leaving the food 
products entering through these entry points unregu lated under the Act. Further, 
FSSAI had no mechanism to monitor the functioning o f the Customs officials 
appointed as AOs. 
The Ministry accepted (June 2017) the facts. 
Good Practice 
The Customs Department, in consultation with other participating Government 
agencies including FSSAI, has now introduced a Sing le Window interface for 
Facilitating Trade (SWIFT). The integrated applicat ion is filed on SWIFT which 
performs a risk assessment for selection of samples  for testing. If sampling and 
testing is required, the application is referred to  FSSAI’s Food Import Clearance 
System (FICS). 
3.6.2 No final action taken on samples 
Clause 14 21 of the Import Regulations directs the AO to issue a No Objection 
Certificate (NOC) or Non-Conformance Report (NCR) a fter assessing the safety 
of food being imported under these regulations unde r his seal and signature for 
allowing/disallowing the import of food, and shall communicate such order in a 
specified manner to the customs and the Food Import er. Further, sub-clause 
13(2)(s)22 of the Regulations empowers the AO to seek data or  information on 
imported articles of food consignment from the customs authority. 
  
                                                           
18 Chennai, Cochin, Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Tuticorin . 
19 Term by which FSOs are addressed in respect of imp orts. 
20 Food Technology, Dairy Technology, Biotechnology, Oil Technology, Agricultural Science, 
Veterinary Sciences, Bio-Chemistry, Microbiology, Chemistry and Medicine. 
21 Clause 11 of the erstwhile draft Import Regulation s 
22 Sub-clause 10(2)(s)of the erstwhile draft Import R egulations 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 53 
 
Audit scrutiny of records pertaining to regional of fices Mumbai and Delhi during 
the period 2011-2016 revealed 9,264 cases of import s23 where, AOs who lifted 
samples for analysis, thereafter failed to issue ei ther NOC or NCR, rendering the 
fate of those consignments unknown. 
Ministry in its reply (June 2017) stated that, thou gh the sample id is generated as 
and when the payment was made, in some cases howeve r, importer do not turn up 
for subsequent follow-up/procedure i.e. for visual inspection, hence, no 
NOC/NCR was issued for such cases. Further, Customs  department does not 
share the details with FSSAI about the end result of these applications. 
The reply is not tenable as it was the duty of AOs to assess the safety of food 
being imported and issue NOC or NCR accordingly. Mo reover, FSSAI being the 
primary food import regulator should make sure that  no food product enters the 
country without NOC. Audit found nothing on record to indicate that FSSAI had 
ever requested the Customs department to share details in this regard. 
3.6.3 Failure to follow-up on NCR of imported food products 
Clause 14(7)24 of the Import regulations directs the AO, with prior approval of the 
Food Authority, to pass necessary orders for mandat ory destruction of articles of 
food against which NCR had been issued. Clause 14(8 ) states that the Customs 
shall provide a report to the AO informing all the pertinent details of the 
destruction. 
Test check of records in regional offices of FSSAI in Chennai and Kochi and 
cross-verification with the Indian Customs Electron ic Data Interchange (EDI) 
System revealed that the Customs authorities had re leased 24 food consignments 
(06 in Chennai and 18 in Kochi) despite the issue o f NCR against them. Thus the 
provisions of Regulations were not enforced. 
The Ministry in its reply (June 2017) stated that i t is for the Customs department 
to take a final decision on the imported consignmen t. The reply is not acceptable 
as it is the mandate of FSSAI to regulate the impor t of food under the Act, which 
it failed to comply within these cases while attemp ting to transfer its 
responsibilities to the Customs department.
 
                                                           
23 9,203 cases in Mumbai and 61 cases in Delhi 
24 Clause 11.3 of the erstwhile draft Import Regulati ons 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
54 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Conclusions 
FSSAI and the state food safety authorities did not  conduct required surveys for 
enforcement and administration of the Act. Periodic  extensions of the time period 
were provided to FBOs under the erstwhile Acts and Orders to get their licenses 
converted under the Act. FSSAI’s decision to issue licenses to ‘only exporting 
FBOs’ without insisting that they follow set Standa rds, Rules and Regulations, 
violated the provisions of the Act. Instances were noticed where expired licenses 
were renewed retrospectively. Neither FSSAI nor SLA s could confirm that FBOs 
whose licenses/registrations had expired, stopped a ll food business activities. 
Licenses were issued on the basis of incomplete doc umentation. Neither FSSAI 
nor the state food authorities have a documented po licy and procedures on risk 
based inspections. While the Act prescribes the per iodicity for inspection of 
registered FBOs, no such periodicity is prescribed in the case of licensed FBOs. 
FSSAI by-passed the provisions in the Act and Regul ations requiring certification 
of food business in accordance with the Food Safety  Management System 
(FSMS) and permitted FBOs to instead furnish self-c ertification. Ultimately, the 
entire food safety audit system stipulated in the A ct and Regulations failed. In 
violation of the Act, FSSAI delegated its responsib ility on enforcement of central 
licensing units to state food authorities. FSSAI ha d limited presence at import 
food entry points thereby leaving the food articles  entering into the country 
through unattended entry points as unregulated. FSS AI failed to ensure that after 
their issue of NCC/NCR, the Customs authorities tak e appropriate action to 
ensure that unsafe foods do not enter the country. 
Recommendations: 
• FSSAI and state food authorities may conduct survey s of food business 
activity under their jurisdiction to ensure a compr ehensive and reliable 
database of FBOs and to ensure better enforcement and administration of the 
Act. 
• FSSAI and state food authorities may introduce mech anisms to ensure that 
FBOs whose licenses and registrations expire submit closure reports in terms 
of the Regulations and do not conduct food business  without valid licenses/ 
registration. 
  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 55 
 
• FSSAI may frame and notify policy guidelines and pr ocedures on risk based 
inspections, including the periodicity of inspectio ns. All states may be 
persuaded to specify the periodicity of inspections  and ensure that the 
periodicity is adhered to. 
• The Ministry/FSSAI is required to devise a mechanis m to effectively monitor 
the entry of food articles in all the entry points into the country. 
• The Ministry/FSSAI is required to introduce measure s to ensure that FSSAI’s 
directives on NCR are fully complied with by the Customs authorities. 
 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
56 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Chapter-IV: Analysis of Food and Prosecution 
4.1 Introduction 
Analysis of food samples for physical, chemical and  microbiological 
contamination is important to ensure the safety and  quality of food that is 
produced domestically or imported, and to enable ap propriate action, whenever 
necessary, to be taken to protect consumers.  In te rms of section 38 of the Act, the 
Food Safety Officer is empowered (except in respect  of imported food, where the 
FSSAI will authorise an officer) to take samples and send them to the food analyst 
of the local area within which such samples have be en taken.  In terms of sub-
section 46(2) read with sub-section 43(1) of the Ac t, the food analyst shall cause 
such samples to be analysed by food laboratories an d research institutions 
accredited1 by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Ca libration 
Laboratories (NABL) 2 or any other accreditation agency. Sub-sections 43 (2) and 
(3) of the Act stipulate the notification of referr al food laboratories and the 
framing of regulations for this purpose. Paragraph 2.2.1 of the Food Safety and 
Standards (Laboratory and Sample Analysis) Regulati ons, 2011 delineates the 
functions of referral laboratories. Section 47(1)(c ) of the Act stipulates that the 
food safety officer shall send one part of the samp le to the food analyst, two parts 
to the designated officer and one part to the accre dited laboratory at the request of 
the FBO. In case of an appeal against the report of the food analyst, or if there is a 
difference in the test reports of the laboratory to  which the food analyst has sent 
the sample and the laboratory to which the sample h as been sent at the request of 
the FBO, sub-section 46(4) and proviso below sectio n 47(c)(iii) respectively 
provide for referral by the designated officer to a referral food laboratory. 
4.2 Laboratories under FSS Act 
There are 209 laboratories recognised by FSSAI for testing of food samples as of 
December 2016. These include: 
                                                           
1 Laboratory accreditation is a procedure by which a n authoritative body gives formal 
recognition of technical competence for specific te sts/measurements, based on international 
standard. 
2 NABL is an autonomous body under the Department of  Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Science and Technology, Government of India. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 57 
 
i) 72 laboratories3 functioning under the state/Union Territory govern ments (for 
primary analysis of samples by food analysts). Of t hese, only 62 are 
functioning4. 
ii) 121 NABL accredited laboratories5 notified by FSSAI. 
iii) 16 Referral Laboratories 6 under various Central Government Ministries and 
Departments7. 
4.3 Non-accreditation of state food laboratories an d referral laboratories 
Only seven8 out of 72 9 state food laboratories and only eight 10 out of 16 11 referral 
laboratories were NABL accredited as of September 2016. The Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare informed (March 2017) that under  the new scheme 
announced in October 2016, all state laboratories w ould be required to acquire 
NABL accreditation within two years. It was further  stated by the Ministry that 
NABL accreditation is not a pre-condition for notif ication of referral laboratories 
under the Act.  It is observed that FSSAI/Ministry had similarly informed the 
Rajya Sabha in July 2015, that, referral laboratori es are not mandated to be 
accredited by the NABL, and are only to be notified  by the Food Authority. 
However, para 2.2.1(5) of the FSS (laboratory and s ample analysis) Regulations, 
2011 state that referral laboratory shall maintain high standards of accuracy, 
reliability, credibility in the operations of labor atory and achieving and 
maintaining required level of accreditation and rel iability. In view of such 
regulations, it became desirable that they are accredited by NABL to establish and 
prove their accuracy, reliability and credibility.  
                                                           
3 72 state food testing laboratories functioning und er the erstwhile Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act (section 98 of the FSS Act permits such transition from earlier Acts). 
4  Non-functional laboratories: Karnataka (1 out of 4 labs), Punjab (2 out of 3 labs), Rajasthan 
(3 out of 8 labs), Tamil Nadu (1 out of 7 labs), and West Bengal (3 out of 5 labs). 
5 109 notified laboratories are private laboratories  and 12 are under Central/State Governments  
6 Four referral laboratories were notified through t he Food Safety and Standards (Laboratory and 
Sample Analysis) Regulations, 2011. Thereafter, 12 more referral laboratories were notified 
through gazette (as of December 2016). 
7 Of these, the Central Food Laboratories at Kolkata  and Ghaziabad function under FSSAI. 
8 Four in Gujarat, one each in Maharashtra, Telengan a and Uttar Pradesh 
9 Daman & Diu and Uttarakhand have no state food lab oratory; 15 states have one state food 
laboratory each; Maharashtra has the maximum number of state food laboratories (11). 
10 Andhra Pradesh (1), Karnataka (2), Kerala (1), Mah arashtra (1), Tamil Nadu (2), West Bengal (1) 
11 Andhra Pradesh (1), Gujarat (1), J&K (1), Karnatak a (2), Kerala (2), Maharashtra (2), Tamil 
Nadu (2), Telengana (2), Uttar Pradesh (2), and Wes t Bengal (1). Of these, one referral lab 
each in J&K, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Telengana were set up in 2015-16. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
58 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
The fact of non-accreditation of laboratories and testing by accredited laboratories 
for non-accredited parameters had been criticised b y the Hon’ble Bombay High 
Court12. Audit check of 183 and 374 tests performed betwee n 2011-2016 in two 
accredited state laboratories (Ahmedabad and Vadoda ra) in Gujarat revealed that, 
on average, 68 per cent  of the tests by the state laboratory in Ahmadabad,  and 
77 per cent of the tests performed by the state laboratory in Vadodara were for 
parameters where the state labs did not have NABL accreditation. 
In view of the above, the quality of testing by 65 out of the 72 state food 
laboratories and 8 of the 16 referral laboratories cannot be assured. 
Regarding the referral laboratories, the FSSAI stat ed (May 2017) that 14 are 
NABL accredited, and hence the quality and legality  of food testing is being 
maintained. The replies cannot be accepted in view of the fact that the state food 
testing laboratories and referral laboratories nece ssarily have to maintain high 
standards of accuracy, reliability and creditability. 
4.4 Notification of food testing laboratories 
Sub-section 43(1) of the Act provides for the notif ication of food laboratories to 
carry out analysis of samples by food analysts, and  notification of referral food 
laboratories. Sections 43(2) and 43(3) of the Act s tipulate that the Food Authority 
shall notify referral laboratories, and frame Regul ations specifying the functions 
of such laboratories and the local areas of their functioning. 
4.4.1 Irregular recognition/notification of food testing laboratories 
From September 2011 till March 2014, FSSAI empanell ed 67 laboratories 
through office orders (without notification), in vi olation of Section 43(1) of the 
Act. The empanelment was also without the required approval of the Food 
Authority and the Ministry.  To this audit observat ion, Ministry replied (March 
2017) that FSSAI had notified 64 food laboratories till December, 2014. The reply 
is incorrect as FSSAI had recognised 67 laboratorie s between September 2011 
and March 2014, by way of office orders and not not ification. On 02 December 
2014, FSSAI had, with the approval of the Ministry,  notified, for the first time, 
64 accredited laboratories, which included 56 labor atories empanelled earlier. 
Thus, the process for recognition through notificat ion as stipulated in the Act was 
not followed by FSSAI.  
                                                           
12 FSSAI vs Nestle India and Others Writ Petition 168 8/2015. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 59 
 
4.4.2 Irregular notification of referral laboratori es 
Clause 2.2.2 of the Regulations 13 identifies four referral laboratories, in Kolkata,  
Mysore, Pune and Ghaziabad and the distinct local a reas of their functioning. In 
light of these provisions, any change in the number , scope and area of functioning 
of referral food laboratories can only be by way of  amendment to the regulations 
by the Food Authority, through gazette notification. 
Audit observed during May 2013 to March 2016, FSSAI  had 14 referral 
laboratories notified without the approval of Food Authority. Further, the 
functional areas of laboratories were changed throu gh office orders and 
notifications. Hence the process of amendment throu gh office orders or simple 
notifications and not through amendment in regulati on has resulted in violation of 
the Act. 
The Ministry endorsed (June 2017) the view of the F SSAI (May 2017) that the 
Food Authority had full powers to notify referral f ood laboratories and the 
Chairperson approved such notification in advance s ubject to ratification by the 
Food Authority at its subsequent meeting. The repli es cannot be accepted. The 
Ministry and the FSSAI have not covered the aspect that the Act stipulates 
notification of referral laboratories and the frami ng of Regulations specifying the 
functions of such laboratories and the local areas of their functioning. Any change 
in jurisdiction can only be done through amendment in the regulation and not 
through mere office orders or notification. Further , though the FSSAI issued 
administrative orders/ notifications relating to re ferral food laboratories, the same 
were ratified by the Food Authority only on 25 May 2017 (and not in December 
2016 as wrongly stated by the FSSAI). 
4.5 Food testing at NABL accredited laboratories  
4.5.1 Failure of FSSAI to ensure sending of samples  to appropriate 
 laboratories 
Audit observed that, while FSSAI has framed Regulat ions14 containing vertical  
 
  
                                                           
13 Food Safety and Standards (Laboratory and Sample A nalysis) Regulations, 2011 notified on 
01 August 2011. 
14 FSS (Food Products Standards and Food Additives) R egulations, FSS (Prohibition and 
Restrictions on Sales) regulations, and FSS (Contaminants, Toxins and Residues) Regulations. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
60 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
and horizontal product standards 15, these standards have not been integrated, to 
permit users and stakeholders to straightaway ident ify the contaminant, toxin and 
residue standards that are applicable to specific f ood categories. FSSAI also does 
not have any mechanism to link its individual stand ards with the specific type of 
accreditation of the NABL laboratories applying for  empanelment. Such 
juxtaposition is important because, NABL accredits laboratories for specific 
disciplines (e.g., chemical testing, biological tes ting etc.), with further levels 
below them 16. There are multiple specific tests within the test ing parameters (for 
instance, the parameter for metal residue has many specific tests, e.g. cadmium, 
mercury, arsenic, lead, methyl mercury etc.) and NA BL accredited laboratories 
may have accreditation for only some of the specifi c tests. Such juxtaposition 
would provide a transparent linking of standards to the specific tests for which the 
empanelled laboratories have accreditation, enablin g FSSAI to better evaluate the 
eligibility of laboratories for empanelment, and ma king the selection of relevant 
laboratories to which the enforcement arms (designa ted officers of FSSAI and 
states, and authorised officers 17 in respect of imports) send samples for testing, 
more effective. 
FSSAI had not framed any Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for examination 
and approval of applications for empanelment. FSSAI  also does not have any 
mechanism to promptly update the status of NABL acc reditation (such updated 
status may include withdrawal of NABL accreditation  or addition/deletion of 
specific tests for which accreditation is given) of the empanelled laboratories. 
Though NABL accreditation is accorded not only for the specific discipline but 
also for the multiple tiers or levels below (as exp lained in footnote 16), FSSAI 
notifies empanelled laboratories only for two of th e broad disciplines (chemical 
and biological) without providing tier/level detail s to the enforcement arms of the 
FSSAI and the states. 
                                                           
15 Vertical standards apply to a particular food prod uct, whereas horizontal standards apply 
across the board for the entire food sector or cate gories thereof. For instance, the FSS (Food 
Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations contain vertical standards covering 
nature, composition and properties of specific cate gories of food products; and also contain 
horizontal standards covering limits of permitted a dditives/ contaminants etc., which may be 
different for different food categories (for instan ce, the permissible limits for lead are 0.5 ppm 
parts per million- for edible oils, 10 ppm for baking powder etc.). 
16 For instance, the first level, say, Level I is the  product category (e.g., Food and Agricultural 
Products); Level II is the sub-product category (e. g., Fish and Fishery Products); Level III is 
the test parameter in respect of Level II (e.g., Me tal Residue in Fish and Fishery Products); and 
Level IV is the specific test in respect of Level III (e.g., tests for mercury in fish). 
17 Appointed by CEO, FSSAI, in terms of section 47 (5 ) of the Act read with section 25 of the 
Act dealing with imports. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 61 
 
Hence, the enforcement arms sent samples to the empanelled laboratories, without 
knowing the current status of NABL accreditation of  the laboratory, or the 
specific tests that are required to be conducted on  the food product that is 
proposed to be sampled and analysed, or whether the  concerned laboratory has 
NABL accreditation for the specific food category, parameter or tests that are 
required to be conducted. 
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), the FSSAI and the 
Ministry stated that they are putting a system in place to address the issue. 
4.5.2 Testing of samples by laboratories with no ac creditation or 
 empanelment 
Audit noted that NABL accreditation of four notifie d laboratories had expired/ 
were not in the notified list of laboratories for v arying periods between January 
2014 and March 2016. Despite this, FSSAI regional o ffices in Chennai, Delhi and 
Mumbai had sent 6,845 import samples to these labor atories for testing during 
these periods when they were not accredited/notified.  
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
accepted the Audit observations.  
4.5.3 Testing of samples by laboratories without ac creditation for specific 
 parameters 
Audit test check of 1,803 import samples sent to em panelled food laboratories by 
the four regional offices (Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai) between August 
2011 and March 2016 revealed that in 264 cases (14. 64 per cent ), the private 
laboratories did not have accreditation for the par ameters (e.g. ethyl alcohol, 
reducing sugar, esters as ethyl acetate, higher alc ohol as amyl alcohol, aldehyde, 
sulphur dioxide etc.) on which it conducted tests. 
In reply, the Ministry stated (March 2017) that it may not be practically feasible 
for a laboratory to have accreditation for all the test parameters across all food 
products and that all the notified laboratories hav e been advised to upgrade their 
facilities for complete testing and NABL accreditat ion as per the requirement of 
FSS Regulations. The reply is not acceptable, since , under section 43(1) of the 
Act, the Food Authority is mandated to ensure that private laboratories test and 
report on only such parameters for which they have accreditation, so that, 
criticisms of the type contained in the Bombay High  Court judgement referred to 
in paragraph 4.3 above are avoided. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
62 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), the FSSAI and the 
Ministry stated that they are putting a system in place to address the issue. 
4.5.4 Non-testing of samples on all prescribed para meters 
The Regulations 18 specify the standards (in terms of constituents, n utrients, 
properties etc.) and permissible limits of contamin ants, toxins, additives and 
residues. Laboratories are required to test on such  parameters as applicable to 
specific foods. Audit test check of 1,309 import ca ses, however, revealed that in 
303 cases (23.15 per cent) the laboratories to whom the regional offices of FSSAI 
in Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai had sent samples did  not perform the checks on 
all the prescribed parameters applicable to the spe cified food item, despite which 
the concerned regional offices issued No Objection Certificates (NOC) for the 
import of these items. 
In reply, Ministry stated (March 2017) that for the  purpose of quick clearance of 
imported food items, tests are conducted on most co mmon and essential safety 
parameters without compromising with the risk facto rs. The reply is not 
acceptable. FSSAI has not defined which of its parameters are essential and which 
are non-essential. 
4.5.5 Ineffective monitoring of functioning of empa nelled laboratories 
Apart from NABL accreditation, FSSAI is required to ensure that the performance 
of empanelled laboratories is satisfactory. FSSAI, however, did not enter into any 
agreement with the empanelled laboratories prior to  December 2014. Resultantly, 
FSSAI had no mechanism to ensure that the empanelle d laboratories adhered to 
the conditions of empanelment. Though, clause 2.3 o f the now extant agreement 
with the laboratories requires FSSAI to monitor the  continuing conformity with 
the requirements prescribed at the time of recognit ion, and gives FSSAI the right 
to carry out additional or unscheduled assessments or investigation over and 
above the NABL assessment, FSSAI is yet to formulat e any procedure 19 till date 
for surveillance audits, periodicity of special/sup ervisory visits and suspension/ 
revocation of suspension, renewal, de-recognition, etc., of the laboratories. 
Consequently, there is no effective monitoring of t he empanelled laboratories by 
FSSAI.  
                                                           
18 Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards  and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 
and the Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and Residues) Regulations, 2011. 
19 Unlike the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), for i nstance, who have framed detailed 
guidelines in this regard. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 63 
 
The FSSAI and Ministry accepted (May 2017 and June 2017 respectively), the 
Audit observations.  
4.6 Food Analysts  
Food analysts are required, in terms of section 46 of the Act to, inter-alia, 
undertake analysis of food samples sent by the auth orised officer (in respect of 
imports) or the food safety officer (in all other c ases). Section 45 of the Act 
prescribes the appointment of food analysts through  notification, and further 
stipulates that such persons should have the qualif ications prescribed by the 
Central Government. Such qualifications have been p rescribed in paragraphs 
2.1.4(1)(i) and (ii) of FSS Rules, and are mandator y for food analysts functioning 
under the Act (except for those persons declared qu alified for appointment as 
public analysts under the erstwhile Prevention of F ood Adulteration Act and who 
had been functioning as public analysts on the date  of commencement of FSS 
Rules). Paragraph 2.1.4(1)(ii) of the Rules stipula tes that food analysts should 
have been declared qualified for appointment by a b oard appointed and notified 
by FSSAI. After the framing of FSS Rules, FSSAI has  conducted, commencing 
from February 2012, examinations for the purpose of  qualifying food analysts 
under the Act20. Consequently, 57 candidates were declared by a board constituted 
by the FSSAI to be eligible 21. Further, the agreements entered into by FSSAI 
when empanelling laboratories from December 2014 22, stipulated that the food 
laboratory should have a qualified food analyst for  testing food samples under the 
Act. 
4.6.1 Food analysts functioning in notified food la boratories without 
qualification by board 
Audit noted that FSSAI has no data on eligible pers ons who were functioning as 
public analysts under the erstwhile Prevention of F ood Adulteration Act, and who 
continued to function in the posts of public analys ts/food analysts after the 
framing of FSS Rules. Further, in response to an au dit query on the availability of 
qualified analysts in the empanelled notified food laboratories, FSSAI admitted 
(December 2016) that no such record was available. Test check in Audit, 
however, revealed that out of the 16 notified food laboratories to which the 
                                                           
20 In February 2012, January and July 2014 (covered i n the present report), and February 2017. 
21 For the period covered in audit. A further 127 can didates were declared qualified by the board 
based on the examination conducted in February 2017. 
22 As mentioned in paragraph 4.5.5 of this report, th ere was no formal agreement between FSSAI 
and the empanelled private laboratories prior to December 2014. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
64 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
authorised officers in Delhi and Mumbai sent 49193 cases of imported food 
samples for testing during 2015-16, 15 food laborat ories did not have a food 
analyst qualified by FSSAI board. It is not clear h ow many of these samples had 
been sent for testing by food analysts who are qual ified either in terms of the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act or by orders of  FSSAI board. Hence tests 
conducted by state food laboratories and empanelled  private laboratories that do 
not have food analysts with the stipulated qualific ation were in violation of the 
Rules.  
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
accepted the Audit observation and stated that now it will insist on the notified 
laboratories to appoint Food Analyst as per the Act.  
4.6.2 Non-notification of FSSAI board for qualifyin g food analysts 
Audit observed that, contrary to the stipulation in  paragraph 2.1.4(1)(ii) of FSS 
Rules, FSSAI had not notified the board for qualify ing food analysts for the 
period covered in audit 23.  Hence, during the period checked by audit, tests  on 
food were performed in laboratories by food analyst s approved by a board which 
had not been notified in accordance with the Rules.  
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
stated that the board has since been notified and i s in place now. The reply 
however, does not address the issue of Food Analyst s already declared qualified 
by the board which had not been notified. 
4.7 State Food and Referral Laboratories 
A baseline survey conducted (between September 2013  and January 2014) by 
FSSAI found that of 72 state food laboratories, onl y 62 laboratories were 
functional, with most of the functioning laboratori es not having testing facilities 
for pesticide residues, heavy metals, naturally occ urring toxic substances and 
microbiological parameters. 
Audit test check of 20 state food laboratories and one referral laboratory, Central 
Food Laboratory, Kolkata (CFLK), revealed that they  were lacking in technical 
manpower and important food testing equipment were either not available or were 
non-functional. This resulted in failure to fully/p artially analyse food samples 
received in these laboratories during 2011-16 with regard to metal contaminants, 
                                                           
23 The board that conducted the February 2017 examina tions was, however, notified. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 65 
 
crop contaminants, insecticides/pesticides, microbi ological, as stipulated in the 
regulations24. Details are discussed in the following paragraphs: 
4.7.1 Shortage of technical staff  
In test checked laboratories, shortfall of technica l staff ranged from 18 to  
30 per cent in 5 laboratories, 30 to 40 per cent in 3 laboratories and more than  
40 per cent in 10 laboratories. In CFLK there were only 29 tec hnical staff against 
the sanctioned strength of 53. This affected the pe rformance of the laboratories as 
illustrated in the case study below: 
Case Study 
Public Health Laboratory, Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC)  
The laboratory was non-functional since August 2014  due to vacant post of Food 
Analyst though all other facilities like equipment and staff were available. 
Consequently, the Food Safety Officers (FSO) in the  municipality did not lift any 
food samples between August 2014 and March 2015. Li fting of food samples 
commenced after April 2015, but were sent for analy sis to food laboratories at 
Rajkot and Bhuj. 
4.7.2 Absence of functional food testing equipment 
In five state laboratories and Central Food Laborat ory Kolkata (CFLK), 18 vital 
food testing equipment valued at ` 8.83 crore25 purchased between February 2003 
and July 2015 were non-functional due to repairs or  non-installation of 
equipment. Audit test check of the state laboratori es in the selected states 26 
revealed that they lacked facilities to test many e ssential parameters like 
microbiological, pesticide and heavy metal contamination. 
Audit verification of 4,895 27 food analysis reports of state food laboratories 
revealed that these laboratories had not tested for  mandatory pesticides and 
microbiology tests in 4,866 cases (99 per cent ) and 4,698 cases (96 per cent ) 
respectively. Some interesting findings are discussed below: 
                                                           
24 FSS (Contaminants, Toxins and Residues) Regulation s, 2011 and FSS (Food Product 
Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011. 
25 Three equipment valued at `1.26 crore were procured by CFLK between 2005 and 2007. 
26 Assam (1), Delhi (1), Gujarat (3 out of 6 state la boratories were checked), Haryana (2), 
Himachal Pradesh (1), Maharashtra (4 out of 11), Or issa (1), Tamil Nadu (2 out of 7), Uttar 
Pradesh (3) and West Bengal (2 out of 5). 
27 Milk and milk products (1,190 cases), edible oils (641 cases), packaged drinking water (114 
cases), sweets and confectionery (686 cases), spices (274 cases) and other foods (1,990 cases). 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
66 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Case study 1 
Testing of vegetables and fruits for pesticides residue in Delhi by non-
accredited and ill-equipped laboratory 
The State Grading Laboratory of the state Directora te of Agricultural Marketing 
to whom the food safety department, Delhi had sent food samples for analysis 
during 2014-15, had declared 2,676 samples as confo rming to standards. Audit 
observed, however, that the laboratory was neither accredited by NABL nor 
notified by FSSAI. Further, against 113 types of pe sticides for fruits and 
vegetables (including 53 banned pesticides), which are required to be tested in 
terms of the FSS Regulations, the laboratory was eq uipped to test only 28 type of 
pesticides (including 18 banned pesticides). Conseq uently, food products with 
possibly harmful pesticide presence (including bann ed pesticides) impacting food 
safety were declared safe for human consumption.  
Case Study 2 
Inadequate testing of milk by ill equipped state laboratory 
Out of 324 samples of milk analysed in Delhi from 5  August 2011 to 31 March 
2016, 274 samples were found ‘genuine’ by the Delhi State Laboratory though the 
laboratory did not have required equipment and manp ower to test for micro-
biological safety, metal contaminants, pesticides. Further, the laboratory did not 
test for the presence of caustic soda, refined whit e paint, refined oil, and nitrate 
arising from addition of pond water to milk. Conseq uently, food products with 
possibly harmful contaminants impacting food safety  were declared safe for 
human consumption. The Department admitted (September 2016) the facts.  
Case Study 3 
Inadequate testing of food samples by ill equipped referral laboratory 
Audit test check of 293 food samples of various pro ducts analysed by CFLK 
during the audit period revealed the following:  
(i) CFLK declared 178 samples (60.75 per cent) of the above food samples to be 
conforming to standards, even though these were not  analysed for various 
parameters like pesticides, heavy metal, metal contamination, microbiology etc.  
(ii) Against 149 types of pesticide residues requir ed to be tested in these food 
products, CFLK was equipped to analyse only 12 types of pesticide residues.  
(iii) No ‘Pesticides/Insecticides’ residue analysis  could be carried out after 
February 2015 due to breakdown and obsolete conditions of equipment.  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 67 
 
Consequently, food products with possibly harmful p esticide presence impacting 
food safety were declared safe for human consumptio n. CFLK admitted the facts 
(June 2016).  
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
accepted the Audit observation and stated that necessary steps are being taken.  
4.7.3 Delays in sending reports by food analysts 
Rule 2.4.2 of FSS Rules, 2011 provides that the rep ort of the food analyst shall be 
sent within 14 days of the receipt of the article o f food for analysis. However, no 
such time limit has been prescribed in respect of r eferral laboratories. Audit noted 
that there were considerable delays in sending the analysis report by the food 
analysts, as discussed below: 
• In four states 28, out of test checked 2,637 cases, delays 29 were noticed in 
1,638 cases (62 per cent ). The worst delays (in 95 per cent of the cases), 
were observed in Uttar Pradesh, with 558 cases (47 per cent) not reported 
even after two months; of these, in 42 cases, the r eports had not been 
received even after nine months (September 2016). 
• In 124 randomly selected referral sample cases (out  of 3,217 cases tested by 
CFLK during the audit period), in 100 cases (81 per cent), CFLK had taken 
between 14 to 210 days in sending reports. CFLK admitted the facts (August 
2016), attributing the delays to shortage of infrastructure and manpower. 
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
accepted the Audit observation and stated that this  bottleneck would be suitably 
addressed. 
4.8 Prosecution 
Section 42 of the Act stipulates that the Designate d Officer (DO), shall, after 
scrutiny of the report of Food Analyst, decide whet her the contravention is 
punishable with imprisonment or fine only, and in c ase of the former, send his 
recommendations within fourteen days to the Commiss ioner of Food Safety for 
sanctioning prosecution. In terms of FSS Rules, DOs authorise the FSOs to file an 
application with the Adjudicating Officer(s) (AOs), who, in terms of section 68 of 
the Act, is empowered to impose penalty on the FBO( s). Section 96 of the Act 
                                                           
28 Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 
29   Delay of 1 to 10 days in 337 cases, 11 to 30 day s in 407 cases, 31 to 60 days in 301 cases and 
above 60 days in 593 cases. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
68 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
further provides that if penalty imposed is not pai d, it shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue and the defaulter’s license shall be suspended till the 
penalty is paid. 
As mentioned in paragraph 3.5, the enforcement of c entral licensing cases has 
been delegated to the state food safety authorities , who do not have any 
mechanism to monitor these cases separately. Theref ore, audit has not segregated 
central licensing and state licensing prosecution c ases. Nevertheless, the findings 
relating to prosecution by state food safety authorities are given below. 
Section 42(4) of the Act permits the Commissioner o f Food Safety to decide 
whether, depending on the gravity of the offense, t he matter is to be referred to a 
Special Court (for offenses punishable with impriso nment for more than three 
years) or to a court of ordinary jurisdiction (for offenses punishable with 
imprisonment for lesser terms). Audit noted that Sp ecial Courts have been set up 
in only three States (Assam, Delhi and Uttar Prades h) out of ten test checked 
states. Audit further observed that though section 42(4)(b) of the Act permits trial 
by courts of ordinary jurisdiction where no Special  Courts exist, the state food 
safety authorities in Tamil Nadu have failed to lau nch prosecution on offenses 
punishable with imprisonment of more than three yea rs on the ground that the 
state government is yet to create the Special Court . This has given rise to an 
anomalous situation, where, FBOs charged with less grave offenses are fined/ 
prosecuted, while those accused of far more serious offenses escape unpunished. 
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
stated that these observations would be shared with  the state and UT governments 
for corrective action. 
4.9 Adjudication 
4.9.1 Delays in adjudication 
Rule 3.1.1(4) and (9) of FSS Rules state that the A djudicating Officer (AO) shall 
pass the final order within 90 days from the date o f first hearing. In test checked 
districts of the ten selected states, Audit observe d that out of 8,294 cases 
registered during the audit period (2011-16) 2,126 (26 per cent ) cases were 
pending (March 2016) with the AOs for more than 90 days from the date of first 
hearing. Maximum pendency was in Maharashtra (694 c ases or 20 per cent) and 
Uttar Pradesh (1,107 cases or 44 per cent), as on March 2016. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 69 
 
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
accepted the Audit observations, and stated that th ese observations would be 
shared with the state and UT governments for corrective action. 
4.9.2  Non-recovery of penalty from Food Business O perators 
Audit noted that a penalty of ` 12.92 crore was imposed on FBOs by concerned 
Adjudicating Officers in 10 test checked States/UTs  during 2011-2016, whereas 
penalty amounting to ` 6.83 crore was deposited by the FBOs and balance 
amount of ` 6.09 crore (47 per cent ) was yet to be recovered from FBOs. No 
further action was taken by the Department to recov er the penalty or to suspend 
the license as per provisions of the Act. 
In their replies (May 2017 and June 2017 respective ly), FSSAI and the Ministry 
stated that necessary corrective actions would be i ntroduced in the licensing 
system. 
4.10 Appellate Tribunal 
Under Section 70 of the Act, the Central/State Gove rnments, as the case may be, 
may, by notification, establish one or more tribuna ls to be known as the Food 
Safety Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals on the de cisions of the Adjudicating 
Officer. Audit observed that Food Safety Appellate Tribunals have not been 
established in two of the ten test checked states (Odisha and Tamil Nadu), leading 
to appeal cases lying unattended in these states. I n Maharashtra, Presidents of 
District Consumer Forums have been declared as Pres iding Officers of Food 
Safety Appellate Tribunals as an interim measure in April 2013. 
FSSAI and the Ministry accepted (May 2017 and June 2017 respectively) the 
Audit observation. 
Conclusions: 
Many state food laboratories and referral laborator ies to which FSSAI and state 
food safety authorities sent food samples for testi ng do not possess NABL 
accreditation. Though the Act stipulated gazette no tification of empanelled food 
laboratories, FSSAI empanelled food laboratories th rough office orders. Contrary 
to the provisions of the FSS Act, FSSAI (and not th e Food Authority), either 
through office orders or notification (and not thro ugh regulation), amended the 
number, scope and local areas of functioning of ref erral laboratories.  FSSAI has 
not integrated its vertical and horizontal food pro duct standards and linked them 
to the specific tests contained in the NABL accreditation. FSSAI failed to monitor 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
70 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
the current status of NABL accreditation of empanel led laboratories. FSSAI has 
no data on public analysts declared eligible under the erstwhile Prevention of 
Food Adulteration Act who continue to function unde r the FSS Act. FSSAI also 
has no data on whether all the notified empanelled food laboratories have 
qualified food analysts. Contrary to FSS Rules, FSS AI did not notify, till June 
2016, the board for qualifying food analysts. Short age of qualified manpower and 
functional food testing equipment in state food lab oratories and referral 
laboratories resulted in deficient testing of food samples. Special Courts for 
offenses punishable with imprisonment for more than  three years have not been 
set up in seven States.There were significant delay s in finalisation of cases by 
Adjudicating Officers and a significant portion of penalties imposed remained 
uncollected. 
Recommendations: 
• Ministry is required to ensure accreditation of all state food laboratories, and 
ensure that state food laboratories and referral la boratories are fully 
equipped and functional. 
• Ministry should ensure that the due process delinea ted in the Act stipulating 
empanelment of food laboratories through notificati on, and amendments 
relating to referral laboratories through regulatio ns are followed, and the 
process of securing the Food Authority prior approval is not bypassed. 
• FSSAI should (i) frame transparent standard operati ng procedures (SOP) for 
the empanelment of laboratories; (ii) integrate the  vertical and horizontal 
food product standards with the specific tests cont ained in NABL 
accreditation; (iii) ensure prompt communication on  change in accreditation 
status of empanelled laboratories, to its enforceme nt arms; (iv) more 
effectively monitor the performance of empanelled l aboratories; (v) maintain 
database of public analysts declared eligible under  the erstwhile Prevention 
of Food Adulteration Act who continue to function u nder the FSS Act; 
(vi) ensure that all empanelled laboratories have q ualified food analysts; and 
(vii) ensure that the board that qualifies food analysts is invariably notified. 
• FSSAI may ensure that all states establish Special Courts and Food Safety 
Appellate Tribunals and persuade the states to effe ctively monitor the 
functioning of Adjudicating Officers, food safety c ourts and appellate 
tribunals. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 71 
 
Chapter-V : Human Resources 
5.1  Introduction 
The mandate of FSSAI, which includes framing of reg ulations in respect of food 
standards, upgrading the existing public food labor atories and creating new ones, 
ensuring effective enforcement of the food safety and standards and training of all 
the stakeholders, requires diverse skill sets and k nowledge to discharge its 
functions.  The Act extends to the whole of India, requiring co-ordination with the 
state authorities for enforcement of the Act. This can only be achieved through 
optimal human resource management, which, inter-alia, requires judicious 
deployment of human resources possessing requisite technical, scientific and 
administrative skills. 
Section 9(2) of the Act stipulates that the Food Au thority may, with the approval 
of the Central Government, determine the number, na ture and categories of 
officers and employees required for its functioning . As per section 9(3) of the Act 
the salaries, allowances and other conditions of se rvice of CEO, officers and 
employees of FSSAI shall be such as may be specifie d by Regulations by the 
Food Authority with the approval of the Central Government. 
5.2 Chronic shortage of regular manpower leading to  excessive reliance 
on contractual employees 
The Ministry had sanctioned 356 posts for FSSAI at various levels. However, 
since FSSAI failed to finalise its recruitment regu lations (RPs), most of these 
posts remained unfilled in all categories 1 by regular employees.  The number of 
regular staff in FSSAI was 115 while it had appoint ed 261 contractual staff as of 
December 2016. These contractual employees manned n ine per cent of Group A 
posts, 88 per cent of Group B posts, and 89 per cent of Group C sanctioned posts 
of the FSSAI. Overall, 73 per cent of the personnel employed in FSSAI were on 
contract (Annexure-5.1). 
In their reply (May 2017), FSSAI stated that agains t 356 sanctioned posts, 327 
persons were in position, and as such there was no shortage of staff in FSSAI. 
                                                           
1 For instance, as of December 2016, out of 12 sanct ioned senior level posts, only eight 
(including CEO) were filled (33 per cent  vacancy); out of 30 posts in the scientific servic es 
category only three were filled (90 per cent vacancy); out of 74 posts in the technical service s, 
only 24 were filled (68 per cent  vacancy); and out of 87 posts in laboratories, onl y 24 were 
filled (72 per cent vacancy). 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
72 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
The reply is not acceptable since most of the regul ar posts remained unfilled. In 
the Group A cadre alone, 72 posts (52 per cent) remained vacant. 
5.3 Failure to notify recruitment regulations even after a decade 
The FSSAI (Salary, allowances and other conditions of service of Officers and 
Employees) Regulations, 2013 and Draft FSSAI (Recru itment and Appointment) 
Regulations were sent by FSSAI to the Ministry in 2 012. The FSSAI (Salary, 
allowances and other conditions of service of Offic ers and Employees) 
Regulations, 2013 got notified on 24 July 2013. How ever, the FSSAI 
(Recruitment and Appointment) Regulations are still  under finalisation and the 
draft FSSAI (Recruitment and Appointment) Regulatio ns were circulated for 
public comments on March 2016 and were yet to be finalised as of May 2017. 
Accepting the facts, the Ministry stated (June 2017 ) that the finalisation of RRs 
has been unduly delayed. It further intimated that the draft recruitment regulations 
have been recast and new recruitment regulations ha ve now been approved by the 
Food Authority. 
The fact remains that even after a decade of enactm ent of the Act the Food 
Authority has not notified its recruitment regulations. 
5.4 Unauthorised appointments on contractual basis  
FSSAI had on its rolls (as of December 2016), 261 c ontractual employees in the 
technical, scientific, administrative and general c ategories. Audit observed that 
these contractual employees were performing routine  functions, defeating the 
intention of appointing contractual employees only for specific tasks of defined 
duration. Of these, 51 contractual employees were a ppointed in 2016 alone. 
Further, 61 contractual employees have been working  in FSSAI for more than 
five years (as of December 2016) 2. Audit also observed that the FSSAI had not, 
prior to their engagement, identified the specific work, expected output and 
timeframe for completion of the work. The deficienc ies noticed during audit 
scrutiny are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
FSSAI admitted (May 2017) that the contractual staf f had been engaged for even 
more than five years and they (other than experts o n part-time basis) have been 
working like regular staff and not in any time-boun d specific activity. This 
supports the Audit observation. 
                                                           
2 Contrary to clause 17 of the draft recruitment reg ulations which stipulates that contractual 
appointments are to be limited to a maximum period of three years. 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 73 
 
The Ministry (June 2017) stated that considering th at FSSAI is not a typical 
government department, but is a professional body w ith specialised nature of 
work, some recruitments have been made on contractu al basis which are provided 
for in the Regulations. However, the fact remains t hat majority of staff was on 
contractual basis. 
In the exit conference (June 2017), FSSAI stated th at an internal committee had 
been set up to review all contractual appointments including their remuneration, 
increments and tenure. 
5.4.1 Deficiencies in appointment of technical offi cers 
Against 17 vacancies in the cadre of technical offi cers (TOs), 93 appointed on 
contractual basis were on roll as of December 2016.  Such appointments were in 
excess of sanctioned strength of TO cadre approved by the Ministry. 
FSSAI (May 2017) stated that TOs fall in the Group B cadre, and against 111 
sanctioned post in Group B, there are 115 persons, while there is a shortage of 64 
persons in Group A. Since FSSAI could not attract p eople in senior and middle 
levels, many posts are being operated at lower leve ls. This has resulted in 
significant savings for the Food Authority without compromising on the work. 
The Ministry, in its reply (June 2017) endorsed the FSSAI’s reply. 
The reply is not tenable since categories of posts under each Group are 
specifically sanctioned by the Ministry and cannot be used inter-changeably.  
5.5 Scheme for engagement of consultants (other tha n IT professionals) 
5.5.1  Deficiencies in the scheme  
The Scheme for engagement of consultants (other tha n IT professionals), 
formulated in December 2014, suffered from various defects as follows: (a) the 
regulations of the FSSAI do not include the categor y of consultants and hence 
creation of this category by the FSSAI was unauthor ised; (b) the scheme was 
approved at the level of the Chairperson FSSAI and was not referred to Food 
Authority/Ministry, as was done subsequently in the  case of scheme for 
engagement of IT professionals; (c) while the gener al conditions for engaging 
consultants (contained in clause 1 of the scheme) s pecifically state that the 
consultants would invariably be appointed on full-t ime basis, clause 5.2 of the 
scheme provides for remuneration for part-time enga gement also; these clauses 
therefore appear to be contradictory; (d) under the  scheme, part-time consultants 
who were required to work for only two weeks in a month were paid two-thirds to 
three-fourths the remuneration received by full-tim e consultants who were 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
74 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
required to work all four weeks in a month; further , while the full-time 
consultants received no transport facility, part-ti me consultants were entitled to 
return airfare. The justification for this is not o n record. Audit also observed that 
the FSSAI did not advertise the scheme, and appoint ments were made from the 
applications received from retired government serva nts and others. The scheme 
therefore violated the principles of equity, competition and transparency. 
Ministry endorsed (June 2017) the reply of FSSAI (M ay 2017) that, in view of 
deficiencies, the scheme was not in operation now. Seven retired persons were 
engaged on full-time basis and one on part-time bas is under that scheme, while it 
was in operation. The reply is not acceptable as th ere is no evidence on the 
winding-up of the scheme, and some of the retired p ersons engaged under this 
scheme are continuing in FSSAI under the same condi tions of the scheme. The 
part-time employee appointed under the scheme has n ow been transferred to a 
new scheme3 created by FSSAI in 2016. 
5.5.2 Deficiencies in the appointment of full-time contractual staff 
Under the above scheme, FSSAI engaged three full-ti me consultants in March 
2015. Audit observed that though, in terms of the s cheme, such engagements are 
temporary, to be extended on case to case basis dep ending on the specific job and 
the time frame for their completion, these consulta nts were engaged on routine or 
general tasks without specific time frames for comp letion, and their tenure was 
periodically renewed. For instance, two of the cons ultants were engaged in March 
2015 for the specific purpose of development of sta ndards and to be members of 
the Product Approval and Screening Committee (PA&SC ). The two consultants 
were not engaged in the task of the PA&SC, and in a ny case, the mechanism of 
product approval was wound up in August 2015 after the Supreme Court orders. 
The only record of the work performed by these cons ultants is with reference to 
the co-ordination of scientific panels, but this wo rk is general and routine in 
nature and cannot be classified as a specific task in terms of the scheme for 
appointment of consultants. Despite this, the tenur es of these consultants have 
been periodically extended and they continue to be engaged by the FSSAI. 
Similarly, another consultant who was engaged in Ma rch 2015 has been assigned 
the routine tasks of establishment and vigilance, w hich is contrary to the scheme 
guidelines, and he continues in that position with periodic extensions.  
                                                           
3 Scheme for empanelment of expert resources, profes sionals and individual consultants (short 
term). 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 75 
 
The Ministry endorsed (June 2017) the reply of FSSA I (May 2017) that the 
consultants were discharging specialised tasks and not those of general and 
routine nature. The replies cannot be accepted. The  task of coordinating with 
Scientific Panel and task of establishment and vigi lance cannot be called a 
specialised task. 
5.6 Deficiencies in appointment of full time consul tant outside the scheme 
A retired Joint Secretary to the Government of Indi a was appointed by FSSAI on 
single source basis, on the grounds of urgency and temporary arrangement in 
January 2016. FSSAI invoked GFR 176 for the appoint ment, which permits 
single-source selection for which full justificatio n should be recorded on file and 
approved by the competent authority. The person was  appointed against the 
vacant post of Chief Management Services Officer (C MSO). When a regular 
officer joined the post of CMSO in April 2016, the services of the consultant were 
not terminated even though the original condition o f urgency necessitating 
temporary filling up of the post no longer existed.  Instead, he was appointed as 
Head of the General Administration Division, a post  which was carved out of the 
existing post of CMSO, for which, no sanction of the Ministry was available. 
The replies of the Ministry/FSSAI were not specific to the audit observations. 
5.7 Irregular grant of higher grade to a category o f contractual employees 
In terms of sanction orders (September 2010) of the  Ministry, Assistants and 
Accounts Assistants/Administration cum Accounts Ass istants in the FSSAI are 
only entitled to grade pay of ` 4,200. However, without the approval of the Food 
Authority/Ministry, the CEO, FSSAI approved (March 2015) fixation of 
remuneration payable to contractual employees based  on the grade pay of ` 4,600 
against the post of Assistants and Accounts Assista nts/Administration cum 
Accounts Assistants. 
FSSAI (May 2017) accepted the facts and stated that  the rationale for this has not 
been found on records so far. In case, there is no good reason, this would be 
reverted to ` 4,200. 
5.8 Irregular payment to specific consultants at ra tes higher than those 
prescribed by FSSAI 
Between April and June 2016, the FSSAI appointed ni ne contractual employees 
(whom they designated as consultants) in three disc iplines, viz., (i) skill training 
and capacity building (three consultants); (ii) leg islative drafting, legal and 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
76 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
regulatory affairs (four consultants); and (iii) IT  and data analytics (two 
consultants). The appointments were made by adoptin g NITI Aayog’s scheme 
(July 2015) under the young professional programme. Audit noticed the following 
deficiencies: 
(a) The NITI Aayog’s scheme was not a general schem e and had no provision for 
adoption by any other government body. 
(b) Though NITI Aayog guidelines specified remunera tion in the range of 
` 40,000 to ` 70,000, FSSAI’s notice inviting applications (February 2016) stated 
that the upper limit for remuneration would be suit ably revised depending on 
years of relevant experience.  Reasons for deviatio n were not found available on 
records. 
(c) The job description specified that the requirem ent was to identify gaps in skill 
and capacity of available manpower oriented to the requirements of FSSAI, and to 
develop training and capacity building modules. The refore, an essential pre-
requisite for eligibility for skill and capacity bu ilding in FSSAI is experience in 
the food business. However, FSSAI specified the qua lifications of Master’s 
degree in any discipline, preferably English, and r elevant experience in 
schools/skill development with no preference being given to experience in food 
business. 
(d) There is no record of the manner in which the s election committee based its 
ranking of candidates and assignment of different r emuneration packages. To 
elaborate, while the selection committee recommende d five candidates for 
appointment and ranked them in the order of merit, the committee recommended 
remuneration of ` 70,000, ` 50,000, ` 75,000, ` 90,000, and ` 50,000 in the same 
order. Thus, the candidates ranked lower in merit w ere considered for higher 
remuneration than higher ranked candidates. 
(e) Further, the candidate ranked fourth in the order of merit was not only 
recommended more remuneration than all the higher ranked candidates without 
any justification, the candidate was eventually paid a higher monthly 
remuneration of ` 1.10 lakh on the ground that she had 20 years of experience. 
Audit noted however, that the candidate had teaching and training experience 
(required for the job) of less than six years. 
The Ministry endorsed (May 2017) the reply of FSSAI  (June 2017) that this 
category of consultants should be equated to Inform ation Technology (IT) 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006  77 
 
consultants who receive consolidated remuneration b ased on market rates and in 
each case, the amount was based on salary in previo us employment plus 15 per 
cent increase. The replies cannot be accepted, since th ey do not address the issue 
of how candidates ranked lower in the order of meri t can be recommended and 
paid remuneration higher than higher ranked candidates.  Further, the professional 
requirements of the IT field cannot be equated to t he skills related to tasks like 
skill training and capacity building, and legislati ve drafting, legal and regulatory 
affairs.  
5.9 Shortfall of Designated Officers (DOs) and Food  Safety Officers 
 (FSOs) in States 
In terms of section 36 of the Act, Designated Offic ers (DOs) under FSSAI and 
State food authorities are, inter-alia, empowered to issue or cancel licenses of 
Food Business Operators (FBOs), to prohibit sale of  food, to get analysed the 
food samples received from Food Safety Officers (FS Os), and to recommend 
sanction of prosecution under the Act. In terms of section 38 of the Act, FSOs are, 
inter-alia, empowered to lift food samples and have them inspected, to investigate 
complaints, and to maintain data bases of all FBOs within their areas. 
Following the recommendation (August 2014) of the C entral Advisory 
Committee requiring one DO for every district and o ne FSO for each block in 
rural areas and for every thousand FBOs in urban ar eas, FSSAI conducted a gap 
analysis (September 2016), and found shortfalls of DOs ranging from 5 to 80 per 
cent in 12 States; against requirement of 17,003 only 2 ,952 FSOs were available 
in all the states, with shortfalls ranging from 33 to 99 per cent in all the States, 
and with shortfall of more than 90 per cent in 12 States. Audit observed shortfalls 
of DOs ranging from 7 to 81 per cent  in six states (Assam, Delhi, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh), and sh ortfalls of FSOs ranging 
from 34 to 98 per cent in the test checked States. Such shortages severely affected 
the functioning of the State food safety authoritie s as discussed in paragraphs 3.2 
and 3.3.1 of this report. 
FSSAI/Ministry in its reply (May/June 2017) accepte d the audit observations and 
stated that corrective measures are being taken. 
  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
78 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006  
 
Conclusion: 
Failure of the Ministry/FSSAI to notify the recruit ment regulations, even after 
more than a decade, resulted in acute shortages of regular staff at various levels 
(by as much as 33 per cent  to 90 per cent  in critical posts). There were 
irregularities in appointment of contractual staff and acute shortage of Designated 
Officers and Food Safety Officers in state food safety authorities. 
Recommendation: 
• The Ministry/FSSAI may take steps to expeditiously notify the recruitment 
regulations and fill up vacancies. 
• The Ministry may also comprehensively review the en gagement of all the 
contractual employees appointed by FSSAI. 
• The Ministry and FSSAI may frame more effective mea sures to persuade the 
State food safety authorities to fill up the large number of vacancies in the 
cadres of Designated Officers and Food Safety Officers. 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 79 
 
Annexure-1.1 
(Refer para 1.2) 
Composition of Food Authority 
The Food Authority consists of a Chairperson and th e following twenty-two members out of 
whom one-third shall be women: 
a. Seven Members, not below the rank of Joint Secretar y to the Government of India, 
to be appointed by the Central Government, to respe ctively represent the Ministries 
or Departments of the Central Government dealing with: 
i. Agriculture,  
ii. Commerce,  
iii. Consumer Affairs, 
iv. Food Processing, 
v. Health, 
vi. Legislative Affairs and 
vii. Small Scale Industries,  
  who shall be Members ex officio;  
b. two representatives from food industry of which one  shall be from small scale 
industries; 
c. two representatives from consumer organisations; 
d. three eminent food technologists or scientists; 
e. five members to be appointed by rotation every three years, one each in seriatim from 
the Zones as specified in the First Schedule to rep resent the States and the Union 
territories; 
f. two persons to represent farmers’ organisations; 
g. one person to represent retailers’ organisations.  
 
  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
80 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Annexure-1.2 
(Refer para 1.3) 
Rules and Regulations notified by FSSAI (as of December 2016) 
• Food Safety and Standards Rules, 2011, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registrati on of Food Business) 
Regulation, 2011 amended in 2013 and 2016, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labelling)  Regulation, 2011 amended in 
2016, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Food Product Standards and Food Additives) Regulation, 
2011 amended from time to time, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and  Residues) Regulation, 2011 
amended from time to time, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Prohibitions and Restric tions on sales) Regulation, 2011 
amended from time to time, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Laboratory and Sample Analysis) Regulation, 2011, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Transaction of Business at its Meetings) Regulation, 
2010 amended in 2016, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Procedure for Transactio n of Business of Central 
Advisory Committee) Regulations, 2010 amended in 2015 and 2016, 
• Food Safety and Standards (Procedure of Scientific Committee and Scientific Panels) 
Regulations, 2010 amended in 2016, 
• Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (Salar y, Allowances and other 
Conditions of Service of Officers and Employees) Regulations, 2013, and 
• Food Safety and Standards (Food for Health Suppleme nts, Nutraceuticals, Foods for 
Special Dietary Uses, Foods for Special Medical pur pose, Functional Foods, and 
Novel Food) regulations, 2015. 
  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 81 
 
Annexure-1.3 
(Refer para 1.4.2 & 1.4.3) 
Sample Selection1 
(a) Details of States, UT, regional and sub regional of fices of FSSAI selected 
for audit scrutiny 
States and Union Territory 
selected 
Regional/Sub-Regional (RO/SRO) offices of the Food 
Authority 
Regional offices (RO) Sub-Regional offices (SRO)2 
Assam Delhi (UT) RO Mumbai SRO Chandigarh  
West Bengal Haryana RO Chennai SRO Lucknow 
Odisha Himachal 
Pradesh 
RO Delhi 
Maharashtra Uttar Pradesh RO Kolkata 
Gujarat Tamil Nadu RO Guwahati 
 
(b) Details of Districts selected in Audit 
State District 
No of test 
checked 
Licenses 
No. of test 
checked 
Registrations 
No. of test 
checked Food 
Samples 
Assam Dibrugarh 145 18 117 
Golaghat 148 36 87 
Jorhat 165 35 121 
Kamrup 162 42 125 
Nagaon 160 55 119 
Total 780 186 569 
Delhi East 120 30 125 
West 120 30 125 
South 120 30 125 
Total 360 90 375 
Gujarat Ahmedabad 
Municipal 
Corporation 
200 50 125 
Anand 200 50 125 
Banaskantha 160 50 125 
Dahod 191 50 125 
Junagadh 196 50 125 
Rajkot Municipal 
Corporation 
160 40 125 
                                                           
1 Districts where the number of cases available for licenses, registrations, food samples and import we re less 
than the prescribed sample sizes, the actual number of cases available were selected for the same. 
2 Status as of 31 March 2016. In April 2016, FSSAI c losed the Sub-Regional Offices at Chandigarh and 
Lucknow, transferring their work to Regional Office Delhi.  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
82 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Surat Municipal 
Corporation 
160 40 125 
Total 1267 330 875 
Haryana Ambala 164 50 122 
Faridabad 160 50 125 
Gurgaon 167 40 106 
Sonepat 160 45 125 
Total 651 185 478 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
Kangra 162 50 95 
Solan 169 40 125 
Total 331 90 220 
Maharashtra Nagpur 200 49 95 
Bhandara 200 50 77 
Aurangabad 200 50 27 
Nashik 200 50 41 
Mumbai 200 45 53 
Pune 200 50 30 
Total 1200 294 323 
Odisha Balasore 162 101 19 
Deogarh 33 5 0 
Kandhamal 106 102 15 
Kendrapara 152 103 15 
Jharsuguda 161 43 5 
Mayurbhanj 160 100 23 
Total 774 454 77 
Tamil Nadu Chennai  200 40 100 
Coimbatore 178 40 108 
Salem 160 40 113 
Theni 160 50 71 
Tirunelveli 160 50 70 
Trichy 160 50 60 
Total 1018 270 522 
Uttar Pradesh Varanasi 167 40 125 
Agra 160 40 125 
Chandauli 181 40 125 
Budaun 160 40 125 
GautamBudh Nagar 172 40 125 
Hathras 160 40 125 
Kanpur Nagar 120 30 125 
LakhimpurKheri 160 40 125 
Sitapur 160 40 125 
Rae Bareli 200 40 125 
Total 1640 390 1250 
West Bengal Darjeeling 160 100 91 
Kolkata 161 100 91 
PashimMedinipur 163 111 1 
Purulia 196 125 13 
Total 680 436 196 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 83 
 
(c) Details of State/Public Laboratories test checked in Audit 
 
Sl. No. Name of State Number of 
Lab examined Name of Labs 
1. Assam 1 State Public Health Laboratory, Guwahati  
2. Delhi 1 Combined Food & Drugs Laboratory, Delhi 
3. Gujarat 3 Food and Drugs Laboratory, Vadodara, 
Public Health Laboratory, Ahmadabad 
Public Health Laboratory, Surat 
4. Haryana 2 (i)District Food Laboratory, Civil Hospital, Karn al 
(ii) State Food, Water and Excise Laboratory, Govt of 
Haryana, Chandigarh 
5. Himachal 
Pradesh 
1 Composite Testing Laboratory, Kandaghat, Solan ,  
6. Maharashtra 4 Mumbai, Nasik, Aurgangabad, Nagpur 
7. Odisha 1 State Public Health Laboratory, Bhubaneswar 
8. Tamil Nadu 2 Madurai and Salem 
9. Uttar Pradesh 3 Regional Public Analyst Laboratory, Agra & Varanasi 
and State Laboratory, Lucknow 
10 West Bengal 2 Public Health Laboratory, Kolkata, 
Central Food Laboratory, Kolkata 
Total 20  
 
(d) Details of Ports selected for Audit 
 
Name of 
Region Name of Selected Port No. of Samples selected 
Kolkata Kolkata Sea Port, Haldia Sea Port 500 
Mumbai JNPT, Mumbai Air Cargo 409 
Delhi IGI Airport, ICD Tuglakabad 496 
Chennai Customs House Chennai, Customs House Cochin 400 
 
  

Report No. 37 of 2017 
84 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
Annexure-5.1 
(Refer para-5.2) 
Deployment of staff in FSSAI as on December 2016 is given below: 
Category Sanctioned 
Posts 
Absorbed*/Dire
ct recruitment 
Deemed 
Deputation* Deputation Contractual 
employees# 
Group A 139 20 1 36 13 
Group B 125 04 10 01 110 
Group C 92 01 42 0 82 
Total 356 25 53@ 37 205 
 
* These two categories joined FSSAI from other Mini stries in terms of section 90 of the Act. The diffe rence is that the 
latter category comprises employees who have not exercised their option to be absorbed in FSSAI  
#Applies only to contractual employees whose consoli dated salaries have been aligned to sanctioned post s. Does not 
include 18 retired government officers/ staff and 3 8 IT personnel/ ‘specialised functional domains’ al so engaged at 
different emoluments. Consequently, FSSAI has on its rolls, 261 non-regular employees. 
@ Does not include two persons appointed against temporary posts. 
 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 85 
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Term Details 
AGMARK Agricultural Produce Grading and Marking  
AO Authorised Officer 
APEDA Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
CAC Central Advisory Committee 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CFL Central Food Laboratory 
CFLK Central Food Laboratory Kolkata 
CLA Central Licensing Authority 
CMSO Chief Management Services Officer  
CPGRAMS Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
CTL Composite Testing laboratory 
DAC District Advisory Committee 
DARPG Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances 
DART Detect Adulteration with Rapid Test 
DLSC District Level Steering Committee 
DO Designated officer 
EDI Electronic Data Input System 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EOU Export Oriented Unit 
FA Food Analyst 
FAO Food & Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
FBO Food Business Operator 
FICS Food Import and Clearance System 
FLRS Food Licensing and Registration System 
FPS & FA Food Product Standards & Food Additives 
FSMS Food Safety Management System 
FSO Food Safety Officer 
FSS Food Safety and Standards 
FSSAI Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
FSSR Food Safety and Standards Rules/Regulations 
GFR General Financial Rules 
HQ Headquarters 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 

Report No. 37 of 2017 
86 Performance Audit on Implementation of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
 
 
IDEA Idea Data Analysis Software 
IE Code Import Export Code 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
IT Information Technology 
JNPT Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
MRL Maximum Residual Limit 
MT Metric Tonnes  
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
NCC Non-Conforming Certificate 
NCR Non-Confirmatory Report 
NITI National Institute for Transforming India 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
PA Product Approval 
PA & SC Product Approval and Screening Committee 
PFA Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 
PPSWOR Probability Proportional to Size Without Replacement Method 
RDA Recommended Dietary Allowances  
RO Regional Office 
RR Recruitment  Regulations 
SAC State Advisory committee 
SC Scientific Committee 
SFSC State Food Safety Commissioner 
SLA State Licensing Authority 
SLSC State Level Steering Committee 
SMC Surat Municipal Corporation 
SOP Standard Operating Procedures 
SP Scientific Panel 
SPHL State Public Health Laboratory 
SRO Sub Regional Office 
SRG Standards Review Groups  
SWIFT Single Window Interface for Facilitating Trade 
TO Technical Officers  
USD United States Dollar 
UT Union Territory  
WHO World Health Organisation 
WTO World Trade Organisation 