Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on 
 
Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project,  
Units I and II 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government  
Department of Atomic Energy  
Report No. 38 of 2017 
(Performance Audit) 

Report No. 38 of 2017 
                                            Perform ance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
i 
Table of Contents 
 
Page Nos. 
Preface               iii 
Executive Summary       v 
Chapter - I        Introduction           1 
Chapter – II          Financial Management          7 
Chapter – III        Tariff and Revenue generation       19 
Chapter - IV       Project Implementation         2 5 
Annexures              63 
List of Abbreviations            69 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 38 of 2017 
                                            Perform ance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
iii 
Preface 
 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL), a Public Sector Enterprise was formed 
on 17 September 1987 under the administrative contr ol of the Department of Atomic Energy 
(DAE), Government of India (GOI). It is responsible for design, construction, commissioning 
and operation of nuclear power reactors in India. K udankulam Nuclear Power Project 
(KKNPP) is being implemented by NPCIL at Kudankulam, Thirunelveli district, Tamil Nadu. 
Under KKNPP it was planned to set up six units of 1,000 Megawatt (MW) each, in phases, in 
collaboration with the Russian Federation. In the first phase, it was planned to construct Units 
I and II. 
The performance audit of the KKNPP Units I and II w as conducted to assess whether NPCIL 
exercised prudent financial management in the const ruction/commissioning of Units I and II  
and implemented the project in an efficient manner.  
This Report highlights a number of deficiencies in the execution and commissioning of Units 
I and II of KKNPP such as avoidable payment of inte rest on borrowings, non-transparency in 
availing loans, lapses in tariff fixation process, extending undue benefits to overseas 
collaborating partner, non-assessment of required m anpower with consequent avoidable 
expenditure, inadequate monitoring and start of com mercial operation before getting the 
required licence to operate from the competent auth ority. These, resultantly, ended up in 
significant escalation in cost of the project and s ubstantial delays in commissioning of the 
Units. 
The Audit Report has been prepared in accordance wi th the Performance Auditing 
Guidelines, 2014 and Regulations on Audit and Accou nts, 2007 of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India. 
  

Report No. 38 of 2017 
                                            Perform ance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
v 
Executive Summary 
 
Why did we select this subject for Audit? 
 
The installed capacity of nuclear power plants in I ndia was 6,780 MW as on March 2017. As 
per Draft Electricity Plan released (December 2016)  by Central Electricity Authority, 
Ministry of Power, Government of India (GoI), nucle ar power projects capacity would be 
enhanced by 2,800 MW during 2017-2022 and by anothe r 4,800 MW during 2022-2027. 
Thus, GoI estimates addition of 7,600 MW of nuclear  power by end of 2027, an increase of 
112 per cent  over the present installed capacity. This indicate s significance attached to 
nuclear power in fulfilling the energy needs of the  country. At present Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India Limited is the only company pr oducing nuclear power in India. The 
Company with Russian collaboration is setting up nu clear power plant at Kudankulam in a 
phased manner. Units I and II have already started operations and in remaining four units 
either work is in progress (Units III and IV) or yet to start (Units V and VI). 
         
The initial estimated cost of the Kudankulam Nuclea r Power Project (KKNPP) Units I and II 
was ` 13,171 crore in 2001 which gradually rose to ` 22,462 crore in 2014. There were major 
delays in start of commercial operations of Units I  and II by 86 and 101 months respectively 
due to delayed supply of equipment/working document s by overseas collaborating partner, 
changes in design, additional works, erection delay s etc. These factors not only delayed 
commercial operations of the units but also increas ed cost of the KKNPP. There were also 
concerns regarding financial management, compliance  of safety parameters, tariff fixation 
process etc. Accordingly, this Performance Audit was conducted to examine the above issues.  
 
What were our audit objectives? 
The performance audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• NPCIL exercised prudent financial management during implementation of KKNPP.  
• The tariff was fixed in accordance with applicable Regulatory Rules and Act.  
• The project was implemented in an economic and efficient manner.  
 
What did our performance audit reveal? 
The major observations pertaining to this performance audit are as below: 
Financial Management  
The scheduled date of completion was postponed from  30 October 2007 to 31 December 
2011 for Unit I and 30 October 2008 to 31 December 2012 for Unit II, inter alia  due to 
delayed completion of different activities, of whic h many were attributable to the M/s 
Atomstroyexport (ASE), a company responsible for un dertaking the Russian scope of work. 
However, there was no revision of schedule of repay ment of the Russian credit. This resulted 

Report No. 38 of 2017 
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
vi 
in start of repayment of Russian credit, before rev enue generation, causing an additional 
interest burden on NPCIL to the tune of ` 449.42 crore. 
(Para 2.1) 
NPCIL had to resort to external borrowings at a hig her interest rate due to non- provisioning 
for erection reserve supply contracts while availin g Russian credit, which was available at a 
cheaper rate. This resulted in additional interest cost amounting to ` 76.02 crore.  
(Para 2.2) 
NPCIL availed term loan of ` 1,000 crore from HDFC Bank Limited in violation of CVC’s 
guidelines on tendering.  
(Para 2.4) 
Tariff and Revenue Generation 
NPCIL, while fixing tariff for power, did not consi der two components, i.e., ‘interest on 
foreign debt’ and ‘interest on domestic borrowings’ , though these were actually incurred and 
paid. This resulted in short realization of revenue  to the tune of ` 90.63 crore during 
pre-commercialization period.  
(Para 3.1) 
NPCIL did not include a component of 1.5 paisa per KWh in tariff towards Self Insurance 
Fund of Hot Zone Assets of Atomic Power Plants in r espect of electricity generated during 
pre-commercialization period and sold to State Elec tricity Board  and had to forego revenue 
to the tune of  ` 7.04 crore.  
(Para 3.2) 
Unit I of KKNPP was shut down from 24 June 2015 to 31 January 2016 for 222 days as 
against the planned period of 60 days. This was due  to decision of NPCIL to shut down the 
plant and execute the refuelling work on its own wi thout evaluating its technical competency.  
The extended shutdown resulted in revenue loss of ` 947.99 crore to the NPCIL. 
(Para 3.4) 
Project Implementation 
Unit I and Unit II of KKNPP started commercial oper ation after a delay of 86 months and 
101 months respectively. The delays were primarily due to shifting of work from Russian 
scope to Indian scope; in execution of work and in submission of working documents/supply 
of equipment/materials by ASE; delays due to design  changes; erection delays and additional 
works. The delay in completion have also resulted i n cost overruns. NPCIL did not initiate 
any claim for recovery of additional expenses of ` 264.79 crore which were caused due to 
delayed completion of works by ASE. 
(Paras 4.1.1 and 4.1.2)  
  

Report No. 38 of 2017 
                                            Perform ance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
vii 
Russian Scope of Work 
As against the original value of USD 29 million (` 131.66 crore), NPCIL incurred an amount 
of USD 50.91 million (` 231.13 crore) for supply of same equipment in a rearranged contract 
leading to extra expenditure of ` 99.47 crore. 
(Para 4.2.1) 
No claim was raised by NPCIL, on ASE, for turbine o f Unit I which was damaged due to 
manufacturing defects and ` 12.76 crore was incurred on repairs and replacement  of turbine 
rotors. It also resulted in non- generation of electricity and consequently loss of revenue 
amounting to ` 53.73 crore. 
(Para 4.2.3) 
NPCIL neither assessed the extra payment/loss due t o non supply/defective supply of 
materials by ASE nor did it initiate any action for recovery/adjustments for the same. 
(Para 4.2.4) 
NPCIL did not raise/pursue claims for liquidated da mages worth ` 463.08 crore from ASE 
even though during the same time, it was borrowing funds and paying interest to discharge 
debt obligations including from ASE. 
(Para 4.2.5 (a)) 
Indian Scope of Work 
The work of erection and commissioning of Nuclear S team Supply System and Turbo 
Generator was shifted from the Russian scope to the  Indian scope for achieving the stated 
purpose of optimization of man power cost by way of  reduction in man-months of Russian 
specialist for supervision at the site. This was do ne without any cost-benefit analysis, which 
not only resulted in delays in completion of the pr oject but also ended up in NPCIL incurring 
an extra expenditure of  ` 706.87 crore for the work. 
(Para 4.3.1) 
NPCIL incurred an extra amount of ` 8.37 crore towards shipment charges calculated on the 
basis of improper assumption.  
NPCIL compensated a sea route transporter by reimbu rsing wharfage charges and additional 
handling charges amounting to ` 7.08 crore, which was unjustified as the terms of c ontract 
provided for such charges to be incurred by transporter himself.  
NPCIL failed to provide the minimum stipulated indu cement quantity to the transporter for 
shipment and incurred an avoidable amount of ` 11.72 crore towards dead freight.  
 {Paras 4.3.2 (a), (b) and (c)} 
NPCIL did not ensure reasonability of the rates of third party supplies {worth USD 191 
million (` 899.95 crore)}, made by ASE, for the plant. Further, an amount of USD 19 million 
(` 92.04 crore) towards 10 per cent interest free advance was paid by NPCIL to ASE for  the 

Report No. 38 of 2017 
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
viii 
third country supplies without ascertaining the exi stence of similar provisions in the sub-
contracts entered by ASE with third country suppliers. 
(Paras 4.4.1 and 4.4.2) 
NPCIL, on 31 December 2014, declared commercial operation of the Unit I of KKNPP which 
was six months before receiving the license from AERB for regular operation of the plant. 
(Para 4.6) 
What do we recommend? 
 
Financial Management 
 
1) In all cases of rescheduling of commissioning dates , the repayment schedule for 
Russian credit may also be revised accordingly. 
2) Loans from banks may be availed in a transparent an d documented manner following 
the extant rules and regulations. 
3) NPCIL should have effective monitoring/ feedback me chanism to monitor issues like 
long pending insurance claims. 
 
Tariff and Revenue Generation 
 
4) All cases of infirm tariff fixation may be processe d by NPCIL according to prefixed 
criteria to avoid discretionary adhocism in decision making for the same. 
5) For all future planned shutdowns NPCIL may do a com petency analysis by mapping 
with a structured breakdown analysis, to take timel y decision, if required, for engaging 
external consultants to avoid prolonged shutdown and consequential revenue loss. 
 
Russian Scope of Work 
6) Future delays should be avoided by sequencing the s upplies with the various stages of 
production.  
7) Interest of NPCIL should be protected in all contra ct renegotiations by ascertaining the 
quantitative benefits flowing out of such negotiations.  
8)  NPCIL should take timely action for recovery/ a djustment for non/defective supply of 
material by ASE. 
9)  Liquidated damages should be claimed in an accu rate and timely fashion. 
 
Indian Scope of Work 
 
10)  Cost benefit analysis should be invariably con ducted before agreeing to a shift in scope 
of work from Russian side to Indian side and vice versa.  
11)  Work orders should not be awarded on a single tender basis unless they qualify for the 
same as per NPCIL manual and CVC guidelines.  

Report No. 38 of 2017 
                                            Perform ance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
ix 
12)  NPCIL should award work to existing contractor s after proper rate analysis to obtain 
competitive rates.  
13) Agreements for execution of work order should i nvariably be entered into by NPCIL 
with the contractor before award of the contracts. 
14) NPCIL should prepare schedule of rates, at leas t, for the works of routine nature like 
construction of pump house, tunnel, chlorination pl ant etc with a view to have better 
estimation of rates for awarding contracts. 
  
Third Country Contracts 
 
15)  With regard to the contracts for supply of equ ipment by third country, NPCIL should 
consider participating in joint evaluation of bids,  with a view to ensure price 
reasonability of the contract(s). 
 
 
----------- 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
1 
Chapter - I 
Introduction 
 
Nuclear energy is fast emerging as an important sou rce to serve India’s growing energy 
needs. Nuclear power production in the country bega n in 1969 and has grown from an 
installed capacity of 320 Mega Watt (MW) in 1969 to  6,780 MW in 2017 and planned to be 
9,580 MW by end of 2022 and 14,380 MW by end of 202 7 1. Important organizations related 
to regulation, generation and distribution of nucle ar energy in India are the Department of 
Atomic Energy, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and N uclear Power Corporation of India. 
A brief of these three organisations is given below:  
The Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)  was set up on 3 August 1954 and is engaged in 
the design, construction and operation of nuclear p ower/research reactors and supporting 
nuclear fuel cycle technologies covering exploratio n, mining and processing of nuclear 
minerals, production of heavy water, nuclear fuel f abrication 2, fuel reprocessing and nuclear 
waste management.  
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB)  was constituted on 15 November 1983 and 
entrusted with the responsibility for laying down s afety standards and framing rules and 
regulations covering regulatory and safety functions envisaged under the Atomic Energy Act, 
1962. AERB has developed safety standards for nucle ar and radiation facilities, covering 
aspects such as siting 
3, design, construction, operation, quality assuranc e and 
decommissioning. 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL)  is a central Public Sector 
Enterprise formed on 17 September 1987 under the ad ministrative control of the Department 
of Atomic Energy (DAE),  Government of India (GoI). It is responsible for de sign, 
construction, commissioning and operation of nuclea r power reactors. NPCIL is presently 
operating 22 nuclear power plants, (twenty one owne d by NPCIL and one owned by DAE 
4), 
with an installed capacity of 6,780 MW. The reactor  fleet comprises of two Boiling Water 
Reactors (BWRs), 18 Pressurized Heavy Water Reactors (PHWRs) and two 1,000 Mega Watt 
VVER ( Voda Voda Energo Reactor - water cooled and water moderated reactor) at 
Kudankulam. In addition, NPCIL has six nuclear powe r projects under various stages of 
construction/commissioning aggregating 4,800 MW cap acity. The details are given in 
Annexure I .  
  
                                                           
1  As per draft National Electricity Plan (December 20 16) released by Central Electricity 
Authority,GoI. 
2  Nuclear Fuel fabrication is the last step in the process of turning uranium into nuclear fuel rods. 
3  The process of selecting a suitable site for a fa cility including appropriate assessment and 
definition of the  related design bases. 
4  Rajasthan Atomic Power Station, Rajasthan Unit 1.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
2 
1.1       Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project (KKNPP) 
 
KKNPP is being implemented at Kudankulam situated i n Thirunelveli district, Tamil Nadu. 
Under the KKNPP project, it was planned to set up s ix nuclear power plants each of 1,000 
MW, in phases with Pressurized Water Reactor ( Voda Voda Energo Reactor ) technology. In 
the first phase, it was planned to construct Units I and II. The project is being implemented in 
technical collaboration with Government of Russian Federation (Russian Federation). An 
Inter-Governmental Agreement (IGA) was signed betwe en the GoI and the erstwhile Union 
of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) in the year 1988 to implement the project. 
However, due to internal development in the erstwhi le USSR, the project implementation 
could not progress. After resuming negotiations wit h the Russian Federation, supplementary 
agreement to IGA, was signed in the year 1998 betwe en the Russian Federation and the GoI 
to implement the project. M/s Atomstroyexport (ASE) , a Joint Stock Company under the 
Ministry of Russian Federation for Atomic Energy (R osatom), represented the Russian side 
for setting up the Nuclear Power Station (NPS) at K udankulam. Indian side was represented 
by NPCIL in execution and implementation of KKNPP. The scope of work of the respective 
sides was as follows: 
• The Russian scope of work included project engineering and design, supply of equipment, 
special materials/spare parts from Russian Federati on, training of operations/maintenance 
personnel of Indian side, associated services like project management activities, quality 
assurance / quality control (QA/QC) activities, des igner’s supervision at all stages of 
project implementation etc.  
• The Indian scope of work included civil constructio n works, preparation of detailed 
erection procedures, erection of all mechanical, el ectrical and Instrumentation & Control 
(I&C) system equipment/ components, commissioning o f the plant under technical 
assistance of Russian side personnel and operation of the NPS units etc.  
• The third countries supplies were partly in Indian Scope and partly in Russian Scope. 
KKNPP is based on technology of pressurized water r eactor, cooled and moderated by light 
water 5. Its core containing the nuclear fuel is located i nside a pressure vessel. The reactor is 
located inside an airtight primary containment buil ding which is surrounded by a secondary 
containment. The reactor has steam generators in ea ch loop. Each Unit of KKNPP i.e. Unit I 
(1,000 MW) and Unit II (1,000 MW) consists of four Primary Coolant System loops 
transferring the heat energy from the reactor to th e Steam Generators (SGs). The steam 
produced in the SGs is fed to the Turbine Generator to generate electricity.  
1.2        Status of the project 
As against scheduled completion date of 30 October 2007 for KKNPP Unit I and 30 October 
2008 for KKNPP Unit II, the Unit I started commerci al operation on 31 December 2014 and 
the Unit II started commercial operation on 31 March 2017.  
                                                           
5  Water containing the normal proportion (or less) of deuterium oxide, i.e. about 0.02 per cent 
especially to distinguish it from heavy water. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
3 
The KKNPP Units III, IV, V and VI are also being im plemented with cooperation from 
Russian Federation. General Framework Agreement (GF A) for Units III and IV was signed 
on 10 April 2014. Works for KKNPP Units III and IV started in February 2016 and as on 
date are in progress. GFA for Units V and VI was si gned on 1 June 2017 and work is yet to 
commence (31 July 2017).  
1.3       Cost of the Project 
The cost of the project comprising Units I and II w as initially estimated / approved for 
` 13,171 crore in 2001 which was revised to ` 17,270 crore in 2013 and later to ` 22,462 
crore in 2014.  
The capitalized project cost 
6 incurred till 31 March 2017 was ` 11,523 crore and ` 10,212 
crore for Unit I and Unit II respectively.  
Photograph 1.1 Kudankulam Nuclear Power Plant- Units I and II  
 
Since start of commercial operation of Unit I on 31  December 2014, 10,573.55 million KWh 
units of nuclear energy were generated, out of whic h 9,699.74 million KWh were exported 7 
at ` 3,844.24 crore.  There is also an installed capacit y of wind power for 10 MW (8 units of 
1.25 MW each) at the KKNPP site, under which 50.09 million KWh were generated out of 
which 49.22 million KWh were exported at a value of ` 9.35 crore.  
Site Director heads the KKNPP assisted by a team co mprising of Station Director, Chief 
Superintendent, Technical Service Superintendent, D eputy General Manager (Finance) and 
other executives and officials. As on 31 March 2017, the sanctioned strength 8 of KKNPP was 
1,886, against which men-in-position was 1,010. 
  
                                                           
6  Capitalized Project cost includes all capital and r evenue expenditure incurred for the project till 
start of commercial operation of the plant.    
7  Electricity sold to State Electricity Boards. 
8  Represent permissible strength for KKNPP Units I, II, III and IV.  


Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
4 
1.4       Audit Objectives 
The performance audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• NPCIL exercised prudent financial management during implementation of KKNPP.  
• The tariff was fixed in accordance with applicable Regulatory Rules and Act.  
• The project was implemented in an economic and efficient manner. 
1.5       Scope and Methodology 
The scope of the audit was to examine project implementation of KKNPP Units I and II along 
with financial implications. 37 Russian contracts ( valuing ` 10,188.95 crore), out of 171 
contracts (valuing ` 10,482.52 crore) were selected and in respect of I ndian Contracts, 106 
(valuing ` 1,511.73 crore) out of 1,842 contracts (valuing ` 2,212.92 crore) were selected on 
the basis of Stratified Random sampling 9. 
An Entry Conference was held on 3 June 2016 with th e Management of NPCIL wherein the 
scope, objectives and methodology of audit were dis cussed and the audit criteria were agreed 
upon. The records pertaining to June 1998 to Octobe r 2016 were test checked during 
performance audit; matter relating to the period up to March 2017 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. Field audit was conducted at Ku dankulam plant, Tamil Nadu and the 
corporate office of NPCIL at Mumbai, Maharashtra. R elevant records pertaining to project 
initiation, implementation and commissioning were t est checked. Both the Units of KKNPP 
viz. Units I and II were selected.  
Inspite of various reminders, Audit was not provide d records pertaining to dates of 
completion of final safety review and submission date to AERB and details of items damaged 
during commissioning of Unit I. In absence of these  information, the scope of audit was 
limited as it could not review issues relating to these records.  
The draft Report was issued to the DAE and NPCIL on  25 May 2017. NPCIL communicated 
its response vide letter dated 28 June 2017. The DA E’s reply to the draft Report is awaited 
(August 2017).   
An Exit Conference was held with DAE and NPCIL on 7  July 2017 wherein Audit shared its 
findings and recommendations with them. The audit o bservations including 
recommendations, after suitably incorporating the r eplies of NPCIL on Financial 
Management, Tariff and Revenue Generation and Proje ct Implementation and deliberations 
which had taken place in Exit Conference, are given in subsequent chapters. 
  
                                                           
9  Stratified random sampling is a method of sampling that involves the division of a population into 
smaller groups known as strata. In stratified rando m sampling, the strata are formed based on 
members’ shared attributes or characteristics. Thes e subsets of the strata are then pooled to form 
a random sample.   

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
5 
1.6       Audit criteria  
The audit was conducted with criteria drawn from the following:  
 Inter Government Agreement between  Government of I ndia (GoI) and erstwhile 
USSR and supplementary Agreement between the Govern ment of India and 
Federation of Russia. 
 Relevant policy decisions of the GoI and Russian Federation 
 Decisions of the Board of Directors of NPCIL 
 General Framework Agreement (GFA)/ Draft Project Report 
 Program Evaluation and Review Technique Chart / Integrated Action Plan Network 
 Site Inspection Reports and related environmental reports 
1.7       Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Management of NPCIL 
at various stages of the performance audit.  
  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
7 
Chapter - II  
Financial Management 
Under the financial arrangement agreed between the Government of India and the 
Government of Russian Federation in supplement (Jun e 1998) to Inter Governmental 
Agreement (IGA) for funding of the KKNPP project, t he Russian Government was to extend 
a State credit upto United States Dollar (USD) 2,60 0 million ( ` 10,972 crore 10 ) for Units I 
and II. The State credit was given at an interest r ate of 4 per cent  per annum  to cover  
85 per cent  of the cost of Russian scope of works including co st of nuclear fuel. The balance 
15 per cent  of cost of the Russian scope of work as well as th e remaining Indian cost of the 
project was to be financed by NPCIL as equity.  
The GoI conveyed (7 December 2001) financial sancti on for the project for 
` 13,171 crore 
(USD 2,804 million) with equity funding of ` 6,755 crore and Russian credit of ` 6,416 crore 
with further option of raising domestic debt as mea ns of part funding to be explored at an 
appropriate stage. 
The funds for KKNPP Project were raised from three sources viz. equity/ internal surplus of 
NPCIL, Russian credit and market borrowing.  The or iginal and revised funding for KKNPP 
is depicted in the following table: 
Table 2.1: Sources of funds for KKNPP 
(
`` `` in crore) 
Particulars Initial Project Cost 
(December 2001) 
Revised Project Cost 
(August 2014) 
Equity/Internal Surplus 6,755  11,231  
Russian Credit 6,416  6,481  
Market Borrowing 0 4,750  
Total 13,171  22,462  
 
As is evident from Table 2.1, initially there was n o provision for market borrowing as the 
repayment of Russian credit was planned to be done from revenue generated by sale of power 
after commissioning of the Units. However, due to d elays in commissioning of the Units, 
NPCIL resorted to market borrowings to meet its funds requirement. 
The cost of the project was revised to 
` 17,270 crore in 2013 and later to ` 22,462 crore in 
2014 due to escalation in expenses towards Interest  During Construction (IDC), manpower 
costs, establishment costs and deputation of Russia n specialists at Kudankulam. Russian 
credit pay back for Units I and II is scheduled to be completed on 30 June 2021 and 30 June 
2022 respectively. Expenditure vis-à-vis  the original cost on account of various heads is 
depicted in the Table 2.2: 
 
                                                           
10   Converted on USD –Indian ` exchange rate on date of signing supplement .   

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
8 
Table 2.2: Original cost vis-à-vis  Revised cost of KKNPP 
(`` `` in crore) 
Particulars Initial Project Cost 
(December 2001) 
Revised Project Cost 
(August 2014) 
Russian Scope of Work 8,508  9,692  
Indian Scope of Work 3,910  7,734  
Interest During Construction 753  3,286  
Foreign Exchange Rate Variation 0 1,750  
Total 13,171  22,462  
 
As can be seen from the Table 2.2, there was a sign ificant increase of 
` 2,533 crore 
(336 per cent ) in revised interest cost during construction as c ompared to its initial estimates. 
Moreover, an amount of ` 1,750 crore was incurred towards foreign exchange rate variation 
whereas in the initial costing, it was estimated at  nil. For Indian scope of work, the revised 
cost was ` 7,734 crore as against the initial estimates of ` 3,910 crore, an increase of 98 per 
cent . The revised cost under Russian scope of work amou nting to ` 9,692 crore showed an 
increase of 14 per cent  against the initial estimate of ` 8,508 crore.  
Due to delays in completion of KKNPP and increase i n the cost of the project, NPCIL had to 
meet (2010 onwards) its enhanced funds requirement through term loans ( ` 3,032 crore), 
bonds ( ` 4,618 crore) and External Commercial Borrowings ( ` 476 crore). Out of ` 6,401 
crore of Russian credit utilized, ` 4,776 crore has been repaid till 31 March 2017. 
Audit observations relating to financial management  of the project are discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs: 
2.1    Avoidable additional interest cost of `` ``    449.42 crore on account of non-concomitant 
   adjustment of repayments schedule  
As per Article 7 of the supplement to the IGA, the amount of Russian credit utilized for the 
payment of expenses of the Russian organizations ex cept the expenses related to delivery of 
nuclear fuel and control assemblies shall be repaid  by NPCIL in fourteen equal annual 
installments. The annual installments were to start  12 months after the scheduled dates of the 
commissioning of the first and second power units o f the project (i.e. KKNPP) respectively. 
Fifty per cent  of the interest accrued was to be paid within the first quarter of each year 
following the year for which it has accrued and the  remaining 50 per cent  was to be 
capitalized and repaid together with the repayment of the respective principal amount in 
fourteen installments, as the case may be.  As per the initial projections, the repayments were 
to be made from the operational revenue of the Plant generated through sale of electricity. 
As per Article 7 of the supplement agreement to the  IGA, the scheduled dates of 
commissioning of KKNPP Units I and II, were to be a greed upon by ASE and NPCIL. ASE 
and NPCIL entered (6 November 2001) into a General Framework Agreement (GFA) which 
stipulated that provisional takeover of first and s econd Unit of KKNPP will be completed 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
9 
within 68 months and 80 months starting from the Ze ro Date 11  (30 March 2002) of the 
project. The Provisional takeover, therefore, worke d out to 30 October 2007 for Unit I and  
30 October 2008 for Unit II. Accordingly, in pursua nce of Article 7 of the Supplement to the 
IGA 12 , the Russian credit utilized for supply and servic es was to be repaid in  
14 installments commencing for Units 1 and II from 30 October 2008 and 30 October 2009 
respectively. 
However, the original projected schedule date for provisional takeover of Units I and II could 
not be achieved and ASE and NPCIL revised (10 April  2009) the Master Control Network of 
Time Schedule and signed Amendment No. 1 to the GFA , revising the provisional takeover 
of Units I and II to 31 December 2011 and 31 Decemb er 2012 respectively. It was noticed in 
audit that no approval was taken from the Board of NPCIL for this major revision of 
completion schedules. Eventually, Unit I started co mmercial operation on 31 December 2014 
and Unit II on 31 March 2017.  
Audit observed that though the Amendment 1 to GFA, revising the scheduled date of 
commissioning, was signed on 10 April 2009, the sch edule for repayment of the Russian 
credit and interest capitalized was not revised. As  a result, the repayments promptly started 
from October 2008 for Unit I and from October 2009 for Unit II, much before any revenue 
could be generated as the units were far from being  commissioned. Audit found that due to 
delayed start of revenue generation, NPCIL had to b orrow funds from the market amounting 
to 
` 4,126.58 crore to repay the Russian credit apart f rom ` 649.69 crore paid from internal 
resources.       
On 17 
 April 2009 the Controller of Aid, Accounts and Audi t (CAA&A), Ministry of Finance, 
GoI did take up the matter with Vnesheconombank 13 , Russia for rescheduling of repayments 
to which the Russian bank stated that the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation has 
not authorized it to accept the proposal for revisi on of the schedules of payment. Thereafter, 
there was no evidence on records that rigorous foll ow up by NPCIL was done for revision of 
schedule of repayment even though there were delays, many of which were attributable to the 
Russian side (as brought out in Chapter 4 of this report). 
An amount of ` 2,631.65 crore in respect of Unit I and ` 2,144.63 crore in respect of Unit II 
was repaid to Government of Russian Federation till  2016-17. It resulted in additional 
expenditure on account of interest on market borrow ing for repayment of Russian credit to 
the tune of ` 449.42 crore, thereby also increasing the project cost.  
The Management in its reply (28 June 2017) stated that repayments were not to be made from 
operational revenue of the Plant generated through sale of electricity as the same was not a 
fact mentioned in IGA/GFA.  It also stated that in an international treaty, the agreement and 
                                                           
11   The date on which the first pour of the raft (base foundation plate)concreting of the Reactor 
Building for the Unit I have been started. 
12   Read with clause 3.2.3 of GFA . 
13   Vnesheconombank is the Russian bank which on behalf of GoI and on behalf of the Government of 
Russia developed the technical procedure for keepin g record and for affecting repayment of 
Russian credit availed. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
10 
adherence to the time lines mentioned in the agreem ent is sacrosanct and legally binding, 
hence, to maintain international goodwill relation,  the repayment of loans on due date was 
unavoidable for compliance of agreement signed betw een two democratic governments. The 
Management further stated that due to foreign excha nge rate fluctuation, NPCIL gained to 
the tune of ` 12.92 per USD which resulted in huge saving which o ffset any additional 
borrowing cost and also that  proportionate increas e in repayment period would have had a 
financial implication of increased interest. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable as it wa s stated in GFA that the repayment of 
Russian credit was to start 12 months from schedule d date of commissioning i.e. repayment 
of Russian credit was to start after revenue genera tion. Audit examination revealed that there 
were no records to indicate that the impact of fore ign exchange fluctuations was analysed by 
NPCIL to keep the repayment schedule, as originally  planned, even after delay in 
commissioning of the Unit I and Unit II. The justif ication regarding gain to the tune of  
` 12.92 per USD is apparently an afterthought in response to the audit observation. 
As the revision of schedule date of commissioning h ad a direct bearing on repayment of 
Russian credit, NPCIL should have taken up the matt er vigorously with the proper Authority 
to take advantage of low interest rate of four per cent  available on Russian credit. There was 
no evidence on record that NPCIL conducted detailed  analysis to link the payment schedule 
to dollar/rupee exchange rate after taking into acc ount the cost of borrowings. Moreover, no 
risk mitigating measures against foreign exchange r ate fluctuations, such as hedging was 
resorted to by NPCIL. 
Audit Recommendation No. 1 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
In all cases of rescheduling of 
commissioning dates, the repayment 
schedule for Russian credit may also be 
revised accordingly. 
 
The Department accepted the 
recommendation and informed that the 
repayment of Russian credit has been 
revised to date of commissioning in the 
case of ongoing KKNPP Units III and IV 
and also in KKNPP Units V and VI. 
 
2.2    Non inclusion of provision for erection rese rve under Russian credit resulting in   
 additional interest cost of `` `` 76.02 crore 
As per supplement to IGA, Russian credit at 4 per cent  was available for covering 85 per cent  
of the expenses relating to design, deliveries (inc luding fuel cost) and services of the Russian 
organizations. Later, in a High level meeting held during 20-26 August 2001, it was decided 
to change the scope of obligations specified in the  Techno Commercial Offer (TCO) and the 
revised scope was agreed to by both the parties. Ac cording to the revised scope, the erection 
and commissioning works were shifted from Russian scope to Indian scope.  
It was noticed by Audit that in case of the existin g Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor Plants 
(PHWR) under NPCIL, five to ten per cent  of wholesome spare quantities (erection reserve) 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
11 
were procured to take care of various contingencies  like damages, replacements etc. 
However, in the case of KKNPP no such provision was  included in the supply contracts 
entered with ASE. There was no explanation on recor d as to why this deviation regarding 
procurement of erection reserve spares, from the st andard practice was done in case of 
KKNPP.  
Later NPCIL procured erection reserve of spares wor th USD 112.36 million i.e. 
` 649.60 
crore ( ` 58 per USD) from ASE during 2009-10 to 2015-16. How ever, no Russian credit  
(at 4 per cent  interest) was available for the same as it was not  part of supply contracts 
entered as per GFA and the procurement had to be do ne from the funds raised by NPCIL 
through loans, with interest rates ranging from 7.9 4 per cent  to 10.69 per cent . This led to an 
additional interest burden of ` 76.02 crore on NPCIL. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that once TCO  was finalized, the amount of credit 
available for Project was fixed from Russian side f or Supply and that the issue of utilization 
of balance credit for supply of spares was taken up with the Russians which was not accepted 
by them. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable in view of the fact that if the five to ten per cent  
of wholesome spare quantities to take care of vario us contingencies had been considered for 
inclusion in the supply contracts as is being done for PHWR plant, it would have formed an 
integral part of GFA and thus eligible for funding from Russian credit at a cheaper interest 
rate. It would have enabled NPCIL to avail the then  available cheaper Russian credit to the 
tune of USD 95.51 million (85 per cent  of USD 112.36 million) i.e. 
` 553.96 crore at  
four per cent  interest rate. However, it was not done and NPCIL had to resort to borrowings 
at much higher interest rate resulting in additiona l interest cost of ` 76.02 crore for procuring 
the erection reserve for KKNPP.  
2.3    Avoidable payment of interest of ` ` ` ` 13.22 crore due to delay in shifting outstanding 
  loan amount 
NPCIL availed ` 3,000 crore term loans from banks {Bank of India (B oI) - ` 1,500 crore, 
State Bank of India (SBI) - ` 1,250 crore and Dena Bank - ` 250 crore)} between  
31 May 2010 and 29 June 2010 linked with Benchmark Prime Lending Rate 14  (PLR). 
On 23 September 2010, SBI suggested to NPCIL for sh ifting from the existing SBI PLR 
linked interest rate to Base Rate 15 system as it would be beneficial for NPCIL in the l ong run 
as PLR linked interest rate would be higher than th e Base Rate. Further SBI Base rate is 
expected to be minimum in the long run as compared to Other Banks Base Rate. 
NPCIL estimated (22 October 2010) that in view of p revailing interest rates, no saving or 
gain would accrue to NPCIL in migrating from PLR to  Base Rate (in the first year). It also 
                                                           
14   Benchmark Prime Lending Rate (BPLR), is the reference interest rate based on which a bank lends 
to its credit worthy borrowers. As per RBI Guidelines the practice of loan linked to BPLR is 
discontinued w.e.f. 30 June 2010 and new concept of base rate was introduced.  
15   Base rate is the minimum rate set by the RBI below which banks are not allowed to lend to its 
customers. Base rate system was introduced in July 2010.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
12 
presumed that after the end of one year, if substan tial increase took place in the loan interest 
rates then NPCIL would have an option of extinguish ing existing loans by fresh borrowing at 
the prevailing revised rates from other banks.  
However, this matter was not reviewed at the end of  one year and subsequently the matter 
was taken up and discussed only after a period of t hree years in the 145 
th  Board of Directors 
meeting held on 5 July 2013. In the meeting, it was  noted that total loans amounting to  
` 4,500 crore ( ` 3,000 crore taken in 2010-11 jointly for KKNPP and other projects and 
` 1,500 crore in 2009-10 (SBI - ` 750 crore, BoI - ` 500 crore and Dena Bank- ` 250 crore) 
for projects other than KKNPP) were linked with PLR  of the concerned banks. The average 
interest rate of these loans was in the range of 10 .65 per cent  per annum  which was stated to 
be “very high in the present scenario”. As the offe red rates for resetting the interest rates of 
the term loans from existing lenders i.e. BoI and D ena Bank were not found attractive, 
NPCIL approached SBI - the main banker to offer its  best rates. SBI had offered interest rate 
of 9.80 per cent  for both their existing loans as well as for the l oans to be taken over from 
Dena Bank and the BoI. The revised rates were to be  applicable from the date of acceptance 
of their offer for the existing SBI loans and the d ate of disbursement for loan takeover. 
NPCIL decided for taking over loans of BoI ( ` 2,000 crore) and Dena Bank ( ` 500 crore) by 
SBI and reset SBI existing loans of ` 2,000 crore to a Base Rate linked interest regime.  
As the concessional rate of interest 7.94 per cent  was available only for the first year, NPCIL 
should have shifted loans from BPLR to Base Rate im mediately after completion of one year 
as no other rate could have been lower than the bas e rate in view of the applicable RBI 
guidelines. The inordinate delay in shifting the lo an from the existing BPLR linked interest 
rate to Base Rate Structure resulted in avoidable i nterest expenditure of ` 25.41 crore. The 
avoidable expenditure on interest for KKNPP based on its proportionate share ( ` 1,560 crore) 
in loan amount ( ` 3,000 crore taken jointly for KKNPP and other proj ects) works out to  
` 13.22 crore. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that initiall y the offer was made by SBI at the Base 
rate plus premium of 0.45 per cent which was negoti ated over the period of time and the 
premium was brought down to 0.10 per cent  in July 2013. Thus negotiation resulted in 
saving of 0.35 per cent per annum for balance tenur e of loan which offsets the projected loss 
of ` 13.22 crore. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable as NPCIL  could not produce any documentary 
evidence in support of its contentions about effort s made to move to the Base rate. Moreover, 
the delay was inexplicable as the offer was made suo moto  by the lending bank itself and was 
not a part of any loan restructuring deal. Eventual ly NPCIL did move belatedly to the base 
rate but by then it had lost the opportunity to ava il the benefit of lower base rate on the loan 
from SBI for the intervening period of July 2010 to June 2013.  
2.4    Availing term loan in violation of CVC’s gui delines  
The Board of Directors (BOD) of NPCIL approved (Aug ust 2014) availing term loan of 
`1,000 crore for a tenure of 15 years with staggered  repayment of five equal yearly 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
13 
installments and also authorized the Chairman and M anaging Director (CMD) and Director 
(Finance) to do all such acts, deeds, things, matte r and incur expenditure as may be necessary 
for the proposed borrowing and also to sub delegate any or all activities to principal officers. 
NPCIL called bids (15 December 2014) from its empan elled Banks (25 Public Sector 
Undertaking Banks and 12 Private Sector Banks). The Notice stated that bidders may indicate 
any other terms and conditions associated with thei r offer like foreclosure levy/ pre-payment 
charges, conversion charges for changing to fixed r ate from floating rate and vice versa and 
processing documentation charges, if any, and other  terms and conditions; whereas Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines (9 July 2003)  stipulates that whatever  
pre-qualification, evaluation/exclusion criteria, etc. the organization wants to adopt should be 
made explicit at the time of inviting tenders so th at basic concept of transparency and 
interests of equity and fairness are satisfied. 
 Sealed bids received from thirteen banks were open ed on 22 December 2014 in the presence 
of representatives of Kotak Mahindra Bank (KMB) and  Housing Development Finance 
Corporation (HDFC) Bank. Ten bids were rejected due to high rate of interest offered ranging 
between 10.15 per cent  and 11.20 per cent . One bid (I 
st  lowest) received from KMB for Term 
loan for 10 years tenure at 10 per cent was rejected as the tender was for Term loans with  
15 years tenure. One bid from State Bank of India which was the next lowest bid was rejected 
stating that the offer was conditional and the impa ct of the condition was indeterminable due 
to submission of two options by SBI viz.  
a)  “Presently 10 per cent per annum  with monthly rates, with right of reset after ever y five 
years or in the event of any dip in Earning Credit Rate (ECR) 
16  (presently AAA 17 )”. 
b)  10.10 per cent per annum  with monthly rates, with right to reset on any dip  in ECR 
(presently AAA). 
NPCIL accepted the offer of HDFC Bank of 10.09 per cent per annum  (third lowest) and 
after negotiation (12 January 2015), the Bank reduc ed the rate to 10.06 per cent . The loan of 
` 1,000 crore taken from HDFC Bank was to be utilized for KKNPP Units I and II. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in the tendering process: 
(i)  Limited tender was invited instead of open ten der, in violation of CVC guidelines. 
Moreover, the date and time of opening of tender wa s not indicated in the tender document. 
Further, communications relating to date and timing  of opening of tender were not available 
in the records of NPCIL and full documentation rela ting to the tending process were also not 
provided by NPCIL to Audit. Hence it was not clear how representatives from only two 
banks i.e. HDFC Bank and Kotak Mahindra Bank were p resent for the tender opening on  
22 December 2014. 
                                                           
16   A daily calculation of interest paid on idle funds that reduce bank service charges. A calculated 
amount is then used to pay for banking fees. Theref ore, customers with larger deposits and 
balances tend to pay lower bank fees for their accounts. 
17   ‘AAA’ is a credit rating of highest safety which has  been given by credit rating agency i.e. CRISIL 
for NPCIL Bonds.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
14 
(ii) The rate quoted by SBI at 10 per cent per annum  (option-I) was less than the rate  
(10.09 per cent per annum ) quoted by HDFC bank. However, NPCIL rejected the offer 
stating that the offer of SBI is conditional and th e impact of the condition is indeterminable. 
However, it was noticed in audit that the Notice In viting Bids clearly allowed for 
“Conversion charges (if applicable) for changing to  fixed interest rate from floating rate and 
vice versa and also allowed the tenderer to quote a ny other terms and condition.” Since the  
option of migrating from fixed rate to floating rat e of interest and vice versa and quoting of 
any other terms and condition was allowed in the No tice Inviting Bids, the outright rejection 
of the lower bid offered by SBI simply on the groun d that its impact was indeterminable 
without making an effort to obtain any clarificatio n from SBI was unwarranted as per ibid  
CVC orders. Hence the decision of the Company, to o ut rightly reject lower bid of SBI, was 
clearly against the criteria mentioned in the NIT. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the bids  were invited from all Public sector 
Banks (25 Banks) and leading Private Indian Banks ( 12 Banks) and NPCIL received most 
competitive rates in the intent spirit of CVC guide lines. Further regarding  presence of 
representative of only two Banks during opening of bids against thirteen bids received, the 
Management stated that as the bids by the two banks  were submitted at the closing time of 
bid submission, their representative were available  at the time of opening of the bids. With 
respect of rejection of bid submitted by SBI, it  stated  that the offer given by SBI under option 
1 was for five years which is not as per tender con dition, hence was not considered for 
evaluation. 
The reply of the Management is not acceptable in view of the following: 
i)   Since only limited tender was invited, it cann ot be said that rates received were most 
competitive. 
ii) The opening of tender was not in compliance wit h CVC guidelines dated 8 June 2004 
which mandates that tenders after receipt should be  opened on the pre determined stipulated 
date and time in the presence of bidders. 
iii)  Regarding bid submitted by SBI, the offer rec eived was for 15 years tenure with right to 
reset the interest rate after five years and this w as also indicated in the comparative statement 
prepared for analysis of the bid. Further interest rate offered by HDFC was also not fixed at it 
was offered at Base rate (fully floating) plus prem ium of 0.09 per cent . Thus any change in 
HDFC base rate would result in change in applicable HDFC’s interest rate to NPCIL.      
Thus, the tender process lacked transparency and was against the prescribed procedures under 
the extant CVC instructions. 
  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
15 
Audit Recommendation No. 2 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
Loans from banks may be availed in a 
transparent and documented manner 
following the extant rules and regulations. 
 
The Department accepted the 
recommendation and in turn stressed for 
compliance of the same to Director 
(Finance), NPCIL.  The Director (Finance) 
NPCIL informed that public tendering from 
scheduled commercial banks is being 
implemented. 
 
2.5      Avoidable payment on insurance premium - `` `` 3.03 crore  
The Board of Directors of NPCIL accorded permission  (2 December 2004) to KKNPP Unit 
to cover its erection risk by way of an Erection All Risk (EAR) policy from M/s. United India 
Insurance Company (UIIC). As per the terms and cond itions of the policy, the EAR Policy 
was to cover the risk only up to the date of loadin g of fuel in the reactor for all nuclear and 
non-nuclear zones.  However, from the commencement of fuel loading, cover was to cease 
within the nuclear zone. This indicated that the ri sk for KKNPP project was to be clearly 
demarcated into Nuclear and Non-Nuclear Zone from t he date of loading of fuel in the 
reactor. 
The policy covered the risk associated with the ere ction of KKNPP Units I and II Reactors 
for a period of 54 months (including testing) at a total insured sum of 
` 7,358 crore and for a 
total premium of ` 23.43 crore (all inclusive). Accordingly an EAR po licy was taken from 
UIIC for the period 5 February 2005 to 4 August 200 9 (including 4 months testing for 
individual Units). Since the Project was delayed, the EAR policy was renewed periodically. 
The EAR policy was renewed from 19 January 2012 to 18 January 2013 covering both Units 
I and II. The premium paid was ` 19.30 crore. NPCIL loaded nuclear fuel in Unit I reactor on 
19 September 2012. According to terms and condition  of EAR policy, insurance cover for 
nuclear zone assets ( ` 3,474 crore) of Unit I ceased from 19 September 20 12 though 
company had already paid the premium upto 18 Januar y 2013. This resulted in avoidable 
payment of insurance premium amounting to ` 3.03 crore for period between 19 September 
2012 and 18 January 2013.       
 The Management replied (28 June 2017) that all equi pment and systems of KKNPP Units I 
and II were segregated into Nuclear and Non- Nuclea r zone, building wise. This was 
considered during the operation and extension of EA R policy as well as Operational Policy. 
It further stated that during the period 13 October  2011 to 19 March 2012, KKNPP was 
undergoing impasse period when all site works were under hold.  It was very difficult to 
predict the date of re-opening of the project works and achievement of subsequent milestones. 
Hence while renewing the policy on 19 January 2012,  extension of the policy for one year 
was sought for full sum insured value as Nuclear Fu el was not installed in Reactor core and 
the policy was extended up to 18 January 2013. Afte r impasse period, KKNPP plant 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
16 
re-opened for construction work in March-2012 and f irst Fuel loading in Unit I was started 
in September 2012. Subsequent to 18 January 2013, p olicy was extended with reduced sum 
insured to the extent of Unit 1 non-nuclear zone it ems only and Unit II (as there was no 
nuclear fuel installed in Unit II). The Management also stated that extension of EAR policy 
was sought for Unit I non-nuclear zone up to 21 May  2014 and for Unit II up to 11 March 
2015. Standard Fire and Special Perils (SFSP) polic y was taken for Unit I Non-nuclear zone 
items only from 19 September 2014, after expiry of EAR policy. Nuclear zone items of Unit I 
were neither considered in SFSP policy nor in EAR p olicy. EAR policy was extended only for 
Unit II items because there was no nuclear fuel ins talled in Unit II and it was under 
construction phase. As such there was no excess pay ment from NPCIL side for insurance 
premium. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable as Audit  observed that the company had already 
planned for the fuel loading and criticality for Un it I during 2012-13 as it had completed hot 
run in July 2011. Hence, NPCIL was aware that after  hot run, the next stage would be fuel 
loading due to which the company renewed the EAR po licy twice for short period of  
10 days (05 December 2011 to 14 December 2011) and one month (15 December 2011 to  
14 December 2012). Hence pending fuel loading, the company should have continued to 
renew the policy for shorter period to take the advantage of reduced insurance premium in the 
event of fuel loading in Unit I and consequently ou t of insurance coverage. This would have 
avoided the payment of insurance premium 
` 3.03 crore for nuclear zone assets which was 
not covered under the policy.  
2.6      Long pending insurance claims 
NPCIL takes insurance to cover its assets against a ny accidental risk. Two main types of 
policies taken are Standard Fire and Special Perils  (SFSP) Policy and Erection All Risk 
(EAR) policy. As on 31 March 2017, NPCIL was having  eight such policies, for which it had 
paid a premium of  ` 33.97 crore during the year 2016-17. During review  of insurance 
claims, Audit noticed following deficiencies: 
a)   NPCIL had taken insurance from United India Insurance Company (UIIC) under the EAR 
Policy for Units I and II of KKNPP. In May 2010, th ere was a fire accident in the warehouse 
of Central Workshop Building at KKNPP. NPCIL raised  (31 May 2014) a fire claim of  
` 55.08 crore on UIIC. UIIC agreed to settle the clai m (September 2013) for ` 43.89 crore 
after making deductions on account of under-insuran ce, reinstatement premium, salvage and 
policy excess. 
NPCIL represented (May 2014) to the UIIC stating th at as per the policy in vogue during the 
period of the incident, the settlement of claim was  to be made considering full reinstatement 
value of damaged items and actual amount paid of th e items was to be reimbursed. However, 
the matter was not resolved till date and the amoun t of 
` 11.19 crore is still pending for 
recovery from United India Insurance Company . 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that based on  conditions of the insurance policy,  
an amount of ` 43.89 crore was paid by UIIC and a part of the clai m amounting to  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
17 
` 11.19 crore has been disallowed in spite of best ef forts put by NPCIL including engaging a 
consultant for this purpose.  
The reply of the Management is not satisfactory as no further progress has been made 
towards the realization of unrealized insurance claims. 
b)    Audit noticed that in respect of 43 cases, co vered under the EAR Policy of United India 
Insurance Company, there was non-recovery of Insura nce claims for the period from 2004 to 
2010 due to non-ascertainment of cost of damages by  NPCIL. Further there were 23 transit 
18  
Insurance claims for the period 2005 to 2014 amount ing to ` 2.27 crore which remained 
pending from New India Insurance Company.     
Such under recovery of the reimbursable amount from  insurance companies and high number 
of pending insurance claims indicated absence of pr oactive approach by the Management to 
address insurance claim related issues.   
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that recently  claim amounting to 
` one crore 
(approximately) has been settled with New India Ins urance company and efforts are on to 
realize balance claims. 
The reply from Management needs to be viewed vis-a-vis  the position that even after receipt 
of 
` one crore, an amount of ` 1.27 crore still remain unrecoverable from insuranc e 
companies.  
Audit Recommendation No. 3 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
NPCIL should have effective monitoring/ 
feedback mechanism to monitor issues like 
long pending insurance claims.  
DAE noted and accepted the 
recommendation. 
 
Conclusion 
NPCIL failed to proactively pursue with ASE to post pone the repayment schedule for 
Russian credit concomitantly with the rescheduling of the Commissioning date for Units I 
and II. As a result, the repayment of Russian credi t started much before the Units could 
generate revenue through the sale of electricity. N PCIL had to procure loans from the market 
for the repayment of Russian credit, thus increasin g the cost of the project. There were 
deficiencies such as avoidable payment of interest on borrowings and non-transparency in 
availing loan from banks. 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
18   Insurance covering supplies during transit from R ussian/ third country port upto erection point 
including transit storage at KKNPP site. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
19 
Chapter - III 
Tariff and Revenue generation 
 
Unit I of KKNPP started commercial operation on 31 December 2014. The power generated 
before the date of commissioning of the plant is te rmed “infirm power” and the power 
generated after the start of commercial operation i s termed as “firm power”. The tariff for 
selling the power generated by the Nuclear Power Stations was to be fixed by the Department 
of Atomic Energy (DAE). Pending fixation of tariff by DAE, provisional tariff was arrived at 
by NPCIL which was stated to be as per the DAE Noti fications dated 8 December 2010 and 
23 May 2013. 
The operational performance of KKNPP for the last f our years ending 31 March 2017 was as 
follows:- 
Table 3.1: Operational performance of the KKNPP 
Electricity Particulars Nuclear energy 
Infirm power  
(Units I and II) 
Firm power 
(Unit I) 
Generation  
(Units in million 
KWh) 
For the year ended 31.03.2014 1,105.62 
 --  
For the year ended 31.03.2015 2,242.59  2,087.37  
For the year ended 31.03.2016 --  2,261.22  
For the year ended 31.03.2017 2,326.57  6,224.96  
Total 5,674.78  10,573.55  
Net export 19    
(Units in million 
KWh) 
For the year ended 31.03.2014 776.96  --  
For the year ended 31.03.2015 1,837.92  1,917.12  
For the year ended 31.03.2016 --  2,056.53  
For the year ended 31.03.2017 2,083.31  5,726.09  
Total 4,698.19  9,699.74  
Net export  
(Amount in 
`` ``    crore ) 
 
For the year ended 31.03.2014 95.94  --  
For the year ended 31.03.2015 234.77  740.03  
For the year ended 31.03.2016 --  801.87  
For the year ended 31.03.2017 255.43  2,302.34  
Total 586.14  3,844.24  
  
It may be seen from the Table 3.1 that during 2013- 14 to 2016-17, 5,674.78 million KWh 
units of infirm power were generated out of which 4,698.19 million KWh units were exported 
at a value of ` 586.14 crore. Further, 10,573.55 million KWh units  of firm power  
were generated out of which 9,699.74 million KWh un its were exported at a value of  
` 3,844.24 crore.  
 
 
                                                           
19   Represents electricity sold to State Electricity Board . 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
20 
3.1     Ad-hoc fixation of tariff resulting in short revenue realisation - `` `` 90.63 crore 
The tariff for sale of electricity (firm power) by Atomic Power station to the State Electricity 
Board was to be fixed based on norms prescribed in the tariff notification of DAE  
(8 December 2010) which prescribed components to be  considered while fixing tariff for 
power to be sold by nuclear power plants. The presc ribed components are return on equity, 
interest on debt, depreciation, operation and maint enance cost, foreign exchange rate revision 
and hedging costs, fuel consumption, interest on wo rking capital, annual fuel recovery, 
provision for taxation and decommissioning levy.  
Audit observed that NPCIL, while fixing tariff for infirm power, deliberated (July 2013) that 
the DAE notification of 8 December 2010 was silent on the rate to be charged on infirm 
power generated by nuclear reactors. It was propose d by NPCIL (July 2013) for fixation of 
infirm tariff at 61.15 paisa per kilowatt hour (KWh ) considering the Operation and 
Maintenance charges and fuel cost as was the practi ce in vogue in the case of other units of 
NPCIL. Considering the rate 61.15 paisa per KWh to be too low, two additional components 
of interest on working capital and depreciation wer e considered for working out the infirm 
tariff on the ground that these two expenditures we re incurred between 22 October 2013 and 
31 December 2014. After including these components,  the rate of infirm power was fixed 
(November 2013) at 122.37 paisa per KWh. 
During the review of tariff fixation process for in firm power, Audit observed that NPCIL did 
not adopt uniform criteria for inclusion of compone nts for tariff fixation. While it considered 
two additional components i.e.,  interest on working capital and depreciation on th e ground 
that these components did get incurred, but NPCIL d id not consider two other similar 
components i.e ., interest on foreign debt and interest on domesti c borrowings which were 
also incurred during the same period between 22 Oct ober 2013 and 31 
 December 2014 and 
involved outflow of funds in the form of interest p ayments. There were no justifiable reasons 
recorded for non-consideration of these two compone nts in the tariff fixation for infirm 
power.  
Non-consideration of interest on foreign debt (19.89 paisa per KWh) and interest on domestic 
borrowings (14.77 paisa per KWh) in tariff fixation  for infirm power generated (2614.88 
million KWh) resulted in short realisation of reven ue to the tune of 
` 90.63 crore for the 
period between 22 October 2013 and 31  December 2014.  
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that there ar e no fixed components of tariff for the 
infirm power. Moreover, there is no short realisati on or loss to the corporation, as all the 
expenditure till the date of commercial operations (COD) is capitalised and is recovered 
through tariff of the firm power. Any expenditure w hich does not get reflected in the tariff 
gets capitalised and is recovered subsequently, alo ng with cost of funds, through the sale of 
firm power after COD. 
The reply of the Management is not relevant as the audit observation is not about the 
treatment of sales receipts i.e. whether to conside r as revenue receipt or as reduction in 
capital expenditure. The issue is about non-conside ration of two components of expenditures 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
21 
(i.e. interest of foreign debt and domestic borrowi ngs which involves outflow of funds) - 
while fixing tariff for infirm power, on which the reply is silent. The method adopted for 
fixation of infirm tariff was indicative of the fac t that tariff related decision having impact on 
revenue was taken by NPCIL in an ad hoc  and discretionary manner and there was no fully 
structured exercise and prefixed criteria for the same. 
Audit Recommendation No. 4 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
All cases of infirm tariff fixation may be 
processed by NPCIL according to prefixed 
criteria to avoid discretionary adhocism in 
decision making for the same. 
 
DAE informed that presently no formula has 
been fixed by GoI for arriving at infirm tariff 
rate and that infirm power sales realization is 
adjusted against project cost. Hence only 
variable cost is being taken as per policy.  
Due to considering two additional items of 
cost, than that being considered as per 
practice, has given rise to the audit 
observation.  
DAE accepted the audit recommendation and 
confirmed need for consistency in formula 
adopted.   
 
 
3.2   Non recovery of notified additional component  of tariff on sale of power -  
          `` `` 7.04 crore 
DAE, vide its notification dated  23 May 2013,  lev ied an additional component of 1.5 paisa 
per KWh in tariff on sale of power from the existin g and future atomic power stations, 
towards Self Insurance Fund 20  of Hot Zone Assets 21 of Atomic Power Plants.  As per the 
notification, these charges were fixed and were pay able with immediate effect till further 
notification. The charges were applicable for sale of power from all the atomic power stations 
irrespective of any revision or re-notification of the base tariff. 
It was observed in audit that while fixing tariff f or infirm power, NPCIL did not include the 
additional component of 1.5 paisa per KWh in tariff fixed for power generated from its Unit 1 
of KKNPP. The infirm power generated from Unit I (2,614.88 million units) and from Unit II 
(2,083.31 million units) was sold to State Electric ity Boards. NPCIL levied the component of 
1.5 paisa in tariff only from the date of commercia l operation of Units I and II.  NPCIL sold  
4,698.19 Million KWh of infirm power during October  2013 to March 2017 to the State 
Electricity Boards on which an amount of ` 7.04 crore was forgone due to non inclusion of 
levy for self insurance fund  in the tariff. 
                                                           
20   The Self-Insurance fund is being collected on the concept of building a self corpus to mitigate the 
risks not covered under the general insurance policies . 
21   Radiation and Nuclear reactors  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
22 
The Management replied that the atomic power projec t upon declaration of commercial 
operation is treated as a station and other levies such as decommissioning levies are not 
charged during the infirm power period. It further stated that even as per the accounting 
treatment, during the period from criticality of th e plant to commencement of commercial 
operation, all the revenue earned from sale of powe r (infirm) is treated as reduction of 
capital cost of the project and all the expenditure s including interest on the loan, are 
capitalised. 
The reply is not acceptable as the audit observatio n is not on the accounting treatment of 
receipt on sale of infirm power. The observation wa s on non-inclusion of additional 
component mandated by DAE for self insurance fund i n the fixation of tariff of infirm power 
resulting in under recovery and consequently loss of revenue on which the reply is silent. 
3.3  Non-recovery/ adjustment of energy charges fro m Tamil Nadu Generation and 
 Distribution Corporation Limited on account of wheeling 
NPCIL installed (2007) eight number of wind mills o f 1250 KW capacity each at its 
Kudankulam premises. The wind power generated by fi ve out of eight units installed were 
used for captive consumption and the power generate d from the remaining three units were 
sold to Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corp oration Limited 22  (TANGEDCO) for 
which necessary agreements were entered (January 2007) between NPCIL and TANGEDCO. 
The arrangement was revised in October 2009 which a lso provided for wheeling 23  and 
banking 24  of the surplus wind energy, if any generated. The electricity (wind energy) was 
being sold to TANGEDCO at ` 2.90 per unit with effect from March 2009. As per t he 
agreement, the change of utilization of wind energy  for captive to sale was permissible. 
Further, the unutilized portion of banked energy, i f any, available at the end of banking 
period i.e., 31 March every year was deemed to have  been purchased by TANGEDCO at the 
rate of 75 per cent  of the normal purchase rate of ` 2.90 per unit i.e., ` 2.175 per unit. 
Audit noticed that TANGEDCO raised bills at High Te nsion connection rates of ` 9.50 for 
Site and ` 4.50 for township against these connections for the  months of July and August 
2012 without adjusting the wind energy generated and the bills were paid by NPCIL at higher 
rates. This resulted in excess payment of ` 2.09 crore to TANGEDCO.  
The Management replied that the non adjustment of W ind Energy Generation against the 
consumption in HT 131 and HT 132 as in agreement ha d already been taken by the company 
vide letter dated 14 August 2012. Further, letter w as also written to TNEB by on 27 June 
2015; however response is awaited.   
                                                           
22   Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) was restructure d on 1 November 2010 into TNEB Limited, 
Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited (TANGEDCO) and Tamil Nadu 
Transmission Corporation Limited (TANTRANSCO) 
23   Wheeling refers to the transfer of electrical power through transmission and distribution lines from 
one utility’s service area to another’s. 
24  Banking means residual electrical energy after util ization for captive consumption out of the 
injected energy in a month into the transmission/ distribution system which will be utilized later for 
its own use or for wheeling. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
23 
Even though Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited disallowed the 
benefit for the bills of July and August 2012 and m atter has been pursued regularly with 
company, the amount still stands unadjusted. This i ndicates absence of effective monitoring 
system which is necessary to ensure that payments t o TANGEDCO are made after 
verification and as per agreed terms. 
3.4   Avoidable delay in restart after refuelling o f Unit I leading to abnormal extended 
          shutdown and consequent revenue loss of `` `` 947.99 crore 
NPCIL had planned to undertake the refueling work o f Unit I by the departmental manpower 
as well as the Indian contractor’s manpower to be e ngaged by it. Accordingly the planned 
shutdown of Unit I was for 60 days from last week o f May 2015 to third week of July 2015. 
However, Audit noticed that NPCIL belatedly realise d (July 2015) that the experience of 
departmental manpower as well as Indian vendors on various equipments supplied was 
limited and the technical assistance/advice from ma nufacturer specialist or other specialists 
from Russian as well as third countries was required during refuelling outage.   
NPCIL therefore decided to enter a new contract wit h ASE for deputation of specialists from 
Russia or third countries during refueling outage a nd for subsequent operation in case of 
exigencies. Accordingly, a new contract was signed between NPCIL and ASE on 24 August 
2015 for engaging Russian Specialists for 95 man mo nths at a contract value of USD 1.88 
million (plus applicable taxes) at the rate of USD 19,800 per man month for rendering 
consultancy services at KKNPP Unit I during refueling outage.  
It was observed that the cost of the contract award ed to ASE for engaging Russian specialist 
in August 2015 was 76 per cent  more than NPCIL’s own estimated cost of USD 1.06 m illion 
for the same. Moreover as against USD 11,220 per ma n month paid earlier to the Russian 
specialists, the amount agreed to be paid to the Ru ssian specialist in connection with 
refuelling connected work was USD 19,800 per man mo nth i.e ., 76 per cent higher. As the 
engagement of Russian specialists was considered af ter the shutdown, owing to NPCIL’s 
incorrect assessment about its own capabilities rel ating to carrying out the refuelling work on 
its own, it had no option but to accept the higher rate without any scope of significant 
negotiation in view of the stated time constraint. 
It was further noticed that as against the planned shutdown of 60 days, Unit I was actually 
shut down for 222 days from 24 June 2015 to 31 Janu ary 2016. This extended shutdown 
continued despite the engagement of Russian scienti sts for carrying out the refuelling related 
works.  NPCIL took 162 days more than the estimated  60 days for restarting of Unit I.  
NPCIL’s initial decision to shut down the plant and  execute the refuelling work on its own 
without evaluating and ensuring its technical compe tency for the same, before the shutdown, 
was not prudent.  
The extended delay in restarting the reactor caused  non generation of power for a long period 
of time and had adverse consequences on revenue gen eration. This resulted in revenue loss 
amounting to 
` 947.99 crore to NPCIL on account of non-generation of electricity for sale for 
the subject period.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
24 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the requ irement of technical assistance from 
specialist from Russia and third countries was real ised well in advance and that the higher 
rates quoted by ASE was justified as the estimate p repared was based on contract entered 
with ASE in July 2013. It further stated that the s cope of work required deputation of highly 
qualified specialist and NPCIL had no option but to  accept the negotiated rate as ASE was 
only capable of executing the work. The Management also stated that refuelling shut down 
consumed more time than expected due to unanticipat ed maintenance jobs like replacement 
of failed rope, dismantling the main mast, TV mast cable and camera, RFM with new rope, 
leak detection of 163 fuel assemblies, overhauling of four reactor coolant pump as against 
one planned etc. 
The reply of the Management clearly indicates that NPCIL did not properly assess the level 
of expertise required for refuelling before shuttin g down Unit I in June 2015 for the same. 
Moreover, the 1,500 activities planned were to be c arried out by departmental labour and 
contract manpower engaged through Indian firms and the purpose of Technical assistance/ 
advice from the Specialists was primarily to enhanc e the progress of 1,500 activities planned.  
Further, the rate finalised in contract entered in July 2013 was applicable upto 2016, hence 
the increase in rate by 76 per cent  in the contract for deputation entered in August 2 015 was 
not justified. Even though NPCIL claimed that delay  in restarting the plant was due to time 
taken for repairing various equipment, the fact rem ains that though the equipment  
were designed and supplied by ASE and despite Russi an manpower presence at site, NPCIL 
took 162 more days for restarting the Unit I which resulted in revenue loss to the tune of  
` 947.99 crore. 
Audit Recommendation No. 5 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
For all future planned shutdowns, NPCIL 
may do a competency analysis by mapping 
with a structured breakdown analysis, to 
take timely decision, if required, for 
engaging external consultants to avoid 
prolonged shutdown and consequential 
revenue loss.  
DAE informed that shutdown for refueling 
are mandatory and planned.  In the present 
case, the unplanned shut down was for 
compliance of regulatory requirements of 
AERB. DAE noted the recommendations 
for future compliance. 
  
Conclusion 
NPCIL did not have in place a firm pre fixed criter ia to avoid discretion/adhocism in tariff 
fixation of infirm power, and to ensure that releva nt cost components are considered in the 
light of applicable Regulatory Rules/Orders and pri nciples of cost recovery in infirm power 
tariff fixation process. The shutdown activity for refueling of plant also lacked proper 
planning and assessment by the NPCIL which resulted  in closure of Unit I of KKNPP for a 
longer time than estimated, resulting in substantial revenue loss.   
 
 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
25 
 
Chapter - IV 
Project Implementation 
 
In accordance with the provisions of supplement to the Inter-Governmental Agreement 
(IGA), NPCIL and ASE entered (November 2001) into a  General Framework Agreement 
(GFA). The GFA was signed to record the principal t erms of understanding arrived at in 
relation to the Project, indicating the scope of ob ligations of ASE and NPCIL respectively. 
As per GFA, the total project base cost was USD 2,5 87 million {excluding the cost of 
Detailed Project Report (DPR), Interest during Cons truction (IDC) and fuel}. The GFA also 
contained details and price ceilings of contracts t o be entered with ASE for fulfillment of 
Russian scope amounting to USD 1,535 million and fo r third countries supplies amounting to 
USD 220 million. The details are given as under: 
 
Table 4.1 Cost of works under scope of India, Russia and third countries 
 
Sl. 
No  Component 
Price submitted in the Initial 
TCO – July 2001 
Price after negotiation and 
agreed in GFA – November 
2001 
(Million USD) (`` `` in crore) (Million USD) (`` `` in crore) 
1 Russian scope of 
supplies and services 2,293 10,777 1,535 7,217 
2 Supplies and services 
from the third countries 220 1,034 220 1,034 
Sub total 2,513 11,811 1,755 8,251 
3 Indian scope of works 
with transportation 867 4,075 832 3,910 
Total base cost 3,380 15,886 2,587 12,161 
 
GoI accorded (December 2001) financial sanction for  a total project cost of USD 2,804 
million (including cost of DPR of USD 57 million an d IDC on Russian credit of USD 160 
million). The financial sanction in Indian currency comes to ` 13,171 crore.  
Russian Scope of Work 
The Russian scope included project engineering and design, supply of equipment, special 
materials/spare parts from Russian Federation, proc urement of some equipment from third 
countries, training of operations/maintenance perso nnel of Indian side, associated services 
like project management activities, quality assuran ce / quality control (QA/QC) activities, 
designer’s supervision at all stages of project imp lementation etc. Following were the 
contracts agreed under Russian scope as agreed under the GFA: 
 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
26 
Table 4.2: Contracts agreed by NPCIL with ASE under Russian Scope of Work 
( In million USD) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Contract Cost 
 
1 Elaboration of the working documentation 122  
2 Delivery of equipment with long manufacturing cyc le and first priority 
equipment and materials 
538  
3 Equipment and materials to be supplied from Russian federation 755  
4 Training of NPCIL’s operation and Maintenance per sonnel 15  
5 Deputation of contract specialists to KKNPP site 105  
                                                 Total  1,535  
 
Indian Scope of work 
The Indian scope was to  include civil construction  works, preparation of detailed erection 
procedures, erection of all mechanical, electrical and Instrumentation & Control (I&C) 
system equipment/ components, participation in proc urement of equipment from third 
countries, commissioning of the plant under technic al assistance of ASE’s personnel and 
operation of the nuclear power station (NPS) units.  NPCIL was also to carry out the overall 
Project Management including the implementation of planning and monitoring procedures by 
the parties and their sub-contractors under technic al assistance of the ASE. Following works 
were under the Indian scope as agreed under the GFA: 
 
Table 4.3: Cost break up for Indian scope of work in KKNPP  
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Details of work Original sanction 
December 2001 
1 Main plant civil building (Material and constructio n), 
cooling water intake and outfall system (Material a nd 
construction), breakwater dykes, shore reinforcement 
1,554  
2 Erection and Commissioning of Nuclear system auxi liaries, 
Turbine Generator auxiliaries, miscellaneous mechan ical 
erection, transportation and transportation insuran ce, water 
desalination plant 
440  
3 Employees salary and overheads 724  
4 Working capital margin  237  
5 Site improvement, communication and computer facili ties, 
maintenance, contingencies and insurance etc.  955  
Total  3,910  
 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
27 
Third Country Contracts 
As per TCO and negotiations carried out, the third country supply of materials was included 
partly in Indian Scope and partly in Russian Scope.  The total value of supplies under third 
country contracts was limited to USD 220 million. A ll the third country contracts were 
entered in by the Russian side (ASE). 
4.1    Time and cost overrun  
 
4.1.1      Delay in achievement of milestones 
Annexure IV of the GFA dated 6 November 2001 provid ed milestones for various stages of 
KKNPP Units I and II, as agreed between NPCIL and A SE. The scheduled completion of 
KKNPP Unit I and II and actual achievement are as under: 
Table 4.4: Delay in commercial operation in respect of Units I and II 
Final milestone Scheduled Date Actual Date Delay 
Start of Commercial operation (Unit I) 30.10.2007 31.12.2014 86 months 
Start of Commercial operation (Unit II) 30.10.2008 31.03.2017 101 months 
The finally achieved milestones against schedule da tes of completion of various stages under 
KKNPP Units I and II are indicated in the Annexure II .  
An analysis of scheduled dates of completion and actual dates of completion of various stages 
in Unit I of KKNPP revealed that delays ranging fro m 202 days to 2,619 days took place, for 
Unit I, in the following activities: 
Table 4.5: Delays in completion of various stages in Unit I 
Sl. No. Activity Scheduled 
completion 
Actual 
completion 
Delay in days 
1. Construction of primary 
containment of Reactor Building 
walls upto 43.9 metre 
31.10.2004 21.05.2005 202 
2. Construction of turbine building 
up to 36.5 metre including crane 
beam  
31.12.2004 31.08.2005 243 
3. Commissioning of polar crane  31.03.2005 April 2007 730 
4. Erection of Nuclear Steam Supply 
System equipment and pipelines 
30.06.2006 29.07.2008 760 
5. Erection of Turbine Generator 30.06.2006 30.09.2008 824 
6. Commissioning of 220 KV Gas 
Installed Switchgear    
31.01.2005 14.11.2008 1,384 
7. Pre-stressing of Reactor Building 
Inner Containment Dome  
30.09.2005 18.11.2009 1,449 
8. Commissioning of Compressors 31.12.2005 December 2010 1,795 
9. Attainment of first criticality 30.04.2007 13.07.2013 2,266 
10. Start of commercial operation 30.10.2007 31.12.2014 2,619 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
28 
Similarly, delays ranging between 95 and 3,083 days  were noticed in case of Unit II. These 
are depicted as under:  
Table 4.6: Delays in completion of various stages in Unit II 
Sl. 
No. 
Item of work Scheduled 
completion 
Actual 
completion 
Delay in 
days 
1. First pour of concrete 31.03.2002 04.07.2002 95 
2. Construction of turbine building 31.12.2005 31.0 1.2007 396 
3. Construction of emergency power 
supply and control Building 
30.04.2006 30.09.2008 884 
4. Charging of Reserve Power 
Supply System 
31.05.2005 01.09.2011 2,284 
5. Attainment of first criticality 31.01.2008 10.07.2016 3,083 
6. Start of commercial operations 30.10.2008 31.03. 2017 3,076 
Scrutiny of major contracts entered by NPCIL under Indian scope of works/contracts with 
ASE showed major reasons for delays were as follows: 
 Delay in supply -Non-sequential supplies and interfacing problems w ith the 
manufacturers led to delays in the construction and erection works.  
 Design changes - Engineering changes/ modifications suggested by t he Russian 
designers needed reworking in many areas which also affected the schedule. 
 Delays due to extra /additional works - the initial bill of quantities of Kudankulam 
Units I and II provided by the Russian side was bas ed on the Russian reference plant 
data. However, during elaboration of the Indian spe cific design several additional 
safety features were incorporated and the bills of quantities underwent upward 
revision, increasing the scope of the supplies/ works.  
 Erection delays - Delays in execution of work in 62 cases out of se lected 106 works 
involving civil, mechanical, electrical and instrum entation works which were 
ancillary to the main project.  
The delays ranged from 7 to 2,041 days in supply of materials, from 11 to 387 days in change 
in design by the Russian Federation, and from 8 to 1,564 days in mismatch of material with 
the drawing specification supplied by the Russian F ederation/execution of additional work 
due to improper assessment at preliminary stage.  
The Management in its reply (28 June 2017) stated t hat major delays were due to delay in 
supply of materials, working documents, change in design etc. by ASE. Delays contributed by 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
29 
NPCIL were due to delay in providing inputs for fin alization of design and agitation by local 
people for some period of time.    
The Management acknowledged the reasons for delay. However, no efforts were made by 
NPCIL to revise the repayment schedule in consonanc e with the revised date of 
commissioning even though the Russian side contribu ted significantly to the delays in 
commercialization of the plant (as already discusse d in Chapter-2). These not only delayed 
commercial operations of the KKNPP but also increas ed the cost of the project as discussed 
in succeeding paragraph.  
Audit Recommendation No. 6 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
Future delays should be avoided by 
sequencing the supplies with the various 
stages of production. 
DAE noted and accepted the 
recommendation. 
 
4.1.2  Increase in cost due to delay in completion and non-recovery from 
Atomstroyexport (ASE) 
In order to complete the commissioning of the proje ct within the target date, it was necessary 
to ensure timely completion of all the ancillary wo rks which were associated with the main 
project. However, during execution of work, the cos t underwent significant upward revision, 
the details of which are given as under: 
Table 4.7: Increase in cost of work in respect of Units I and II 
                                                                                                                                (`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
Components Original 
cost 
(December 
2001) 
Revised cost 
(August 2014) 
Increase in 
cost 
1 Russian Scope of work 8,508  9,692  1,184  
2 Indian Scope of work  3,910  7,734  3,824  
3 Interest During Construction 753  3,286  2,533  
4 Foreign Exchange rate variation -  1,750  1,750  
Total  13,171  22,462  9,291  
 
  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
30 
a) Analysis of the increase in the cost of the proj ect indicated that while the Russian scope of 
work was increased by ` 1,184 crore (14 per cent ), Indian scope of work was increased by  
` 3,824 crore (98 per cent ). Moreover, increase in IDC due to delays were to the extent of 
336 per cent  ( ` 2,533 crore) and foreign exchange variation amount ed to ` 1,750 crore 
further adding to the cost of the project. The incr ease in Russian scope was mainly 
attributable to additional manpower requirement at the plant site and increase in supplies 
from Russian side. The major contributor for the in crease in Indian scope of work was salary 
of employees and administrative overheads . Further, there was an increase in erection and 
commissioning expenses of Nuclear Steam Supply Syst em (NSSS) and Turbine Generator 
(TG) due to shifting of scope from Russian side to Indian side. The other factors responsible 
for cost escalation were execution of additional wo rks, payment of escalation/ under-
utilisation charges to the Indian contractors etc. The details of increase in cost under Indian 
scope of work are given in Annexure III .                 
b) Audit noticed delays in execution of work in 62 (valuing ` 1,422.79 crore) out of 106 
works (valuing ` 1,511.73 crore) (94 per cent ) test checked, involving civil, mechanical, 
electrical and Instrumentation work which were anci llary to the main project. This led to 
consequential delays such as non-providing of work front by NPCIL in time to the 
contractors 25 . Consequently NPCIL was compelled to incur additio nal expenditure towards 
the payment of escalation charges amounting to ` 184.40 crore to the contractors. Further, 
under-utilization charges amounting to ` 39.34 crore were claimed by the contractors due to  
delay in work for reasons such as supply of materia l/ work front/ design specification. 
Moreover, additional expenses were incurred during the extended period on Service tax, 
insurance premium, bank guarantee commission and ad ditional expenditure on Plant & 
Machinery, Staff & site etc. amounting to ` 41.05 crore.  
As per Clause 1.10.2 of Technical and Commercial Of fer and Article 12 of General 
conditions of the contract, in case the delay in project schedule was due to ASE, it would bear 
the responsibility for consequences of delays, such  as all additional expenses caused by the 
delay, including direct costs proved to be reasonab ly incurred by the Customer due to such 
delay as mutually agreed upon. However, no claim wa s initiated by NPCIL on ASE for 
recovery of the additional amount of ` 264.79 crore ( ` 184.40 crore + ` 39.34 crore +  
` 41.05 crore). 
                                                           
25   Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Hindustan Construction Corporation etc.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
31 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that since al l works related to Erection and 
Commissioning were undertaken by Indian side, ASE w as reduced to the role of supplier 
only. Application of Article 12 of GCC would have b een tantamount to recovery of 
consequential losses which was not the intention of  the parties as per IGA since it not likely 
to be sustained as per international contract conditions. 
The reply of the Management is untenable as the delay in supply of equipments/materials and 
working documents by ASE had resulted in consequent ial delays in completion of linked 
works by the Indian contractors. Hence the addition al expenditure incurred by NPCIL on 
account of additional payments by the Indian contra ctors from NPCIL is to be covered under 
the said general conditions of contracts clause and has to be recovered from ASE. 
Audit observations on Russian scope, Indian scope and Third Countries contracts are given in 
subsequent paragraphs. 
4.2    Russian Scope of work 
 
4.2.1 Undue benefit extended to ASE in contract for  supply of equipment at higher  
value – `` `` 99.47 crore 
 
As per GFA of November 2001, five contracts 
26  were agreed to be entered between NPCIL 
and ASE for implementing the Russian scope of work for USD 1,535 million. In addition, 
there was an arrangement agreed between ASE and NPC IL for supplying equipment and 
services from third countries to the tune of USD 220 million.  
However, after NPCIL observed that some of the equi pment to be supplied by third countries 
could be procured within the Russian scope and that  part of the obligations related with the 
deputation of the Russian Contract Specialists in I ndia could also be carried out within the 
Russian Federation (RF), it signed (August 2002) a memorandum of understanding with ASE 
for a new contract valuing USD 94 million. This was  done by reorganizing two contracts, 
viz ., ‘Deputation of contract specialists to KKNPP sit e – USD 105 million’ and ‘supplying 
other equipment by third countries – USD 220 million’ as indicated below: 
  
                                                           
26   Elaboration of the working documentation, delivery of equipment with long manufacturing cycle, 
equipment and materials to be supplied from Russian  Federation, training of NPCIL’s operation 
and maintenance personnel and deputation of Contract Specialists to Kudankulam site. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
32 
Table 4.8: Contract wise revision in cost 
                                                                                                                                      (In million USD)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Contract Cost before 
organisation 
Revised 
Cost  
Increase(+)/ 
Decrease(-)  
1 Contract for supply of equipment from 
third countries  
220  191  (-) 29 
2 Contract for deputation of Russian 
specialists to KKNPP site 
105  40  (-) 65 
3 Contract for supplies from 
Commonwealth Independent States 
(CIS) countries and functions to be 
performed by the Contractor for off-
shore supplies  
(new contract from Commonwealth 
Independent States) 
Not applicable 94*  
 
+ 94 
Total 325  325   
   * USD 50.91 million for supplies and USD 43.09 million for services. 
It could be seen from the Table 4.8 that the procur ement of equipment from third countries 
was revised to USD 191 million against its pre-revi sed value of USD 220 million. Therefore, 
the value of supply of the equipment that was to be  bought from CIS countries in the new 
contract, by ASE, should have been only USD 29 mill ion (USD 220 million less  USD 191 
million). However, Audit observed that the cost of the same equipment in the new contract 
was USD 50.91 million ( ` 231.13 crore) which was higher by USD 21.91 millio n (` 99.47 
crore) over and above the original cost of USD 29 m illion (` 131.66 crore). The reasons for 
this increase in the value of supply of equipment b y ASE were not found on the records of 
NPCIL. The Management stated that the equipment inc luded in the new contract were same 
as in the earlier contract for supplies from third countries. This shows that an amount of USD 
50.91 million was paid for the very same equipment-  when bought by ASE from CIS 
countries as against originally agreed at USD 29 million in the pre-revised arrangement.  
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that agreed v alue of Russian scope of work was 
fixed to USD 1,812 million including cost of third country contracts of USD 220 million and 
cost of detailed project report (DPR) of USD 57 mil lion. Price of the contracts agreed was a 
notional price and amount could have been adjusted within the limit specified as per General 
Framework Agreement (GFA). The price of USD 220 mil lion could have been revised only if 
some of the contracts for supplies from Third Countries were to be directly entered by NPCIL 
with Third Country suppliers. The contract for supp lies from CIS Countries at contract value 
of USD 94 million had not affected the contract str ucture between NPCIL and ASE but had 
resulted in saving for NPCIL since 85 per cent of t he value of this contract (USD 94 million) 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
33 
could have been financed from soft loan available u nder Russian State credit which 
otherwise would have entirely been paid from internal resources of NPCIL.  
The reply of the Management is not acceptable as it  was only the Russian scope of work 
valuing USD 1,535 million which was fixed as per GF A. The agreed price of USD 220 
million for supplies from third countries was infac t the upper limit. By procuring supplies 
valued at USD 29 million (old contract) at USD 50.9 1 million in the new contract, ASE 
breached the upper limit of USD 220 million of supp lies as these amounted to USD 241.91 
million and NPCIL extended undue benefit to ASE by making payment without raising an 
objection for the same. The Management’s reply rega rding availability of soft loan at the rate 
of four per  cent  is not tenable as ultimately NPCIL had to borrow a t higher interest rates 
ranging from 7.94 per cent  to 10.69 per cent  to repay the Russian credit.  
Audit Recommendation No. 7 DAE’s  reply to the Audit Recommendation  
Interest of NPCIL should be protected in 
all contract renegotiations by ascertaining 
the quantitative benefits flowing out of 
such negotiations.  
DAE noted and accepted the recommendation  
 
4.2.2   Improper planning in utilisation of Russian  specialists  
Audit observations on payment for Russian manpower are given as under:  
a)  An onshore service contract (23 August 2002) wa s entered between NPCIL and ASE for 
USD 40 million for deputation of specialists (6,053  man months 27 ) at site for Technical 
Assistance and guidance during construction, erecti on and commissioning of the plant. This 
price was full and final consideration for the prov isions and fulfillment of the services and 
was not to be subject to any variation, whatsoever.  As per Article 2.1 of the ibid contract, the 
year-wise break up of manpower deployment which was  to be utilized during the period 
2002-03 to 2008-09 could undergo adjustment dependi ng upon the progress of work and 
schedule of completion within the overall limits of manpower input and agreed provisions.   
The contract provided for 5,213 man-months on the b asis of annual protocols and 840 man-
months for commissioning and operation of the plant  totaling 6,053 man-months. However, 
these 6,053 man-months were utilized in the ninth y ear (2010-11) itself notwithstanding the 
                                                           
27   One man month is equal to deployment of one specialist (man) multiplied by one month. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
34 
fact that the commissioning of the Unit I and Unit II took place in December 2014 and March 
2017 respectively. 
Further scrutiny of records revealed that though the onshore service contract was a fixed price 
contract but due to deployment of extra manpower ir respective of the stage of construction of 
the plant, NPCIL had to increase the man-months uti lized from 6,053 to 11,567 with 
subsequent increase in contract price from USD 40 m illion to USD 76.44 million. This  
was done by signing supplementary agreements with A SE between February 2010 and  
March 2016. 
As the scheduled completion of the project was dela yed, NPCIL should have taken timely 
action to rearrange the schedule of deputation of R ussian Specialist as per the actual progress 
of work. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the requ irement for deputation of manpower of 
ASE increased due to prolongation of project implem entation period. Although deployment 
was always done judiciously, yet due to specialized  nature of work, the overlapping activities 
that could have been carried out simultaneously got  spread over due to prolongation of the 
project duration, resulting in increase in the manpower. 
The Management’s reply is not tenable because Artic le 2.1 of the contract clearly provided 
for adjustment in the deployment schedule depending  upon the progress of work and 
schedule of completion. This option of re-organizat ion of deployment schedule was not 
considered by the Management when the delays were e vident in the attainment of major 
milestones of construction work. Moreover, since th is was a fixed price contract, NPCIL 
should have utilized the man-months with prudence i n accordance with the progress of work 
to avoid idling of manpower in the initial years ra ther than later having to resort to signing of 
supplementary agreements, by incurring additional cost, to complete the delayed work.  
b)   As per the GFA entered into between NPCIL and ASE, the work of erection and 
commissioning of KKNPP Units I and II was under the  scope of NPCIL. As NPCIL did not 
have technical expertise for the work of commission ing of the primary system, specialized 
work including supply & erection of propriety equip ment, devices, sensor/ instruments etc, it 
entered into contracts with ASE for deputation of technical specialists at site.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
35 
NPCIL awarded a fixed price contract to ASE (2 Nove mber 2010) at USD 1.02 million for 
engagement of specialists at site for 91 man-months  at Unit I for commissioning of the 
primary system and specialized work including erection.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that out of 91 man-mon ths provided in the contract, only 39.1 
man-months were utilized. However, full payment of USD 1.02 million was made to ASE. 
As there was no provision in the ibid  contract for redeployment of Russian personnel fro m 
Unit I to Unit II, therefore, the remaining man months (valuing USD 0.58 million 28 ) could not 
be made use of, by NPCIL for Unit II related works. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the  Commissioning Measurement System 
(CMS) being a specialized commissioning activity required field and office/ desktop activities 
that were to be carried out by highly specialized R ussian manpower including manpower 
from scientific institutions. Since price of the co ntract was fixed on completion basis, the 
contractor in order to optimize his own costs perfo rmed desktop activities in Russian 
Federation and there was a considerable reduction i n man month deployed at Site. Therefore 
although estimation was on man month basis, the act ual work was on lump sum basis at a 
fixed price. 
The reply of the Management indicates that NPCIL di d not have a consistent policy on 
payments towards contracts for engagement of Russia n personnel. Whereas, in the first case 
the Russian side was made additional payment for co mpleting the work on the ground that 
the original man months have been exhausted while on the other hand in the second case even 
when lesser man months were used, full payment was made even for the man months not 
utilized by stating that it was a fixed price contr act. As both the contracts were fixed price, 
adopting different yardsticks for the two contracts eventually ended up benefitting ASE at the 
cost of increased expenditure by NPCIL. This was a control weakness whereby two different 
contracts for similar works were not compared to protect the financial interests of NPCIL. 
4.2.3 Avoidable expenditure of ` ` ` ` 12.76 crore on repair of damaged Turbine under 
warranty period and consequential loss of revenue of ` ` ` ` 53.73 crore 
As a part of Russian scope of work, HP Turbine roto r and stationary blades in the Unit I of 
KKNPP were supplied by M/s LMZ-Power machines, Russ ia and erected by NPCIL under 
the supervision of ASE. During operation of the pla nt (Unit I) in the month of September –
October 2014, the HP Turbine experienced high thrus t bearing temperature when the power 
                                                           
28   USD 0.58 Million=1.02/91*51.9 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
36 
was raised above 800 MW. As a result, the machine w as stopped and inspection of turbine 
internals revealed damages to diaphragms and moving  blades of rotor of first two stages on 
both the front and rear ends. It was declared as da maged on 11 October 2014. The damage 
was caused by impingement of metal plate that got d etached from the bottom inner casing of 
the HP turbine. At that time Unit I had attained th e stage of producing 100 per  cent  power 
and Unit II was ready to go for hot run. 
Unit I was shut down due to suspected damaged rotor  on 26 September 2014 and restarted on  
7 December 2014 (73 days). As noted by the Manageme nt, the non-availability of the critical 
part of turbo machinery resulted in loss of electri city production from Unit I and caused a 
revenue loss of about 
` eight crore per day. Consequently, it was decided t o remove Unit II’s 
HP turbine rotor and use it in Unit I to ensure power production from Unit I. The replacement 
was finally done on 27 October 2014. It was also de cided to send the defective turbine rotor 
of Unit 1 to Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL ), Hyderabad for correcting the defects 
and using it in Unit II after rectification. The re pair work was undertaken by BHEL, 
Hyderabad at a cost of ` 8.93 crore. In addition, an amount of ` 0.30 crore was incurred on 
transportation and packing cost and an amount of ` 3.53 crore was incurred towards 
replacement of Unit I turbine damaged components wi th Unit II and installation of repaired 
rotor in Unit II. 
As the machines were damaged due to manufacturing d efects within the warranty period, the 
repair and replacements/refitting costs of the Turb ine was to be borne by ASE. However, no 
such claim was raised by NPCIL against ASE putting an additional burden of 
` 12.76 crore 
on NPCIL for carrying out repairs and replacement o f turbine rotors. The shutdown of  
73 days also resulted in loss of electricity genera tion and consequently loss of revenue to the 
tune of ` 53.73 crore. 
The Management stated that it had already estimated  the amount of claim that was to be 
submitted to ASE for recovery on account of repair / replacement of defective components or 
on account of items procured by NPCIL on behalf of ASE.  While agreeing for final takeover 
of KKNPP Unit I, a provision of ` 40.48 crore (USD 6.03 million at the exchange rate  of  
` 67.17 per USD) had been maintained in the Performa nce Bank Guarantee of ASE towards 
claims of NPCIL which included amount towards repair of Turbine Blades.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
37 
The Management’s reply is unverifiable as NPCIL did  not provide details of adjustments of  
` 12.76 crore from the performance bank guarantee of  ASE (July 2017). Moreover the reply 
is silent regarding the revenue loss as pointed out by the Audit. 
4.2.4 No action initiated for recovery/adjustment f or non/defective supply of material  
During implementation, instances were noticed where  NPCIL had to place new orders for 
certain materials due to non/defective supply of it ems which were included in ASE’s scope. 
However, NPCIL neither assessed the extra payment/loss due to this non/defective supply nor 
did it initiate action for recovery/adjustments fro m ASE. The details are given in the 
following paragraphs: 
a)  After supply of valves was made by ASE at KKNPP , NPCIL noticed that the electric 
motors were of compact type and specialized rewindi ng contractors of NPCIL were not able 
to rewind or repair them. NPCIL then purchased spar es for motorized valves compatible 
motors from M/s Tulaelectroprivod CC FZE, Russia fo r 
` 19.20 crore (USD 3.11 million) in 
November 2014. Since the original electric motors d id not comply with the specifications of 
NPCIL, it should have got them replaced from ASE wi thout any cost. Thus purchasing 
compatible motors from M/s Tulaelectroprivod CC FZE , Russia instead of insisting on 
replacement of compact motors from ASE, led to avoidable expenditure of ` 19.20 crore. 
The Management also confirmed that the subject elec tric motor, because of its compact type, 
could not be repaired/rewound by NPCIL contractor. 
b)  ASE supplied ‘valve actuators 
29 ’ which were found to be damaged/non functional and  
beyond instant repair. NPCIL placed an order (Augus t 2014) for these items on M/s 
Tulaelectroprivod, Russia for ` 1.62 crore on a single tender basis.  However, it d id not 
assess the extra payment/loss and also did not init iate action for its recovery/adjustment from 
ASE.  
c)  According to the warranty/guarantee clause incl uded in the supply contract entered with 
ASE as per GFA, the guarantee period for supplies f or each unit under the contract was  
12 months from the date of provisional takeover of the respective unit. Further, if the defect 
or failure of the component or system was caused by  faulty design, the contractor would 
modify such design component or system in order to exclude the possibility of such defect 
and failure at his own cost. Techno Commercial offe rs (TCOs) received for requirements at 
                                                           
29   A valve actuator is the mechanical part for opening and closing a valve.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
38 
site/ components /items, which became non functiona l during commissioning of Unit I and 
additional volume of instrumentation for Unit II, r eceived from Russian side were negotiated 
and contracts were entered on 31 August 2011 and 10  September 2014 with ASE for USD 
5.33 million (` 24.53 crore) and USD 5.75 million (` 34.98 crore).  
Audit observed that majority of items under the abo ve contracts were procured for 
replacement of damaged/ faulty items supplied under  the supply contracts entered with ASE 
as per GFA. Since warranty/guarantee clause was inc luded in the supply contracts, the 
damaged/ faulty items should have been rectified/ r eplaced by ASE at their own cost. The 
procurement of damaged / faulty items resulted in e xtra expenditure. However, the quantum 
of extra expenditure could not be quantified as no separate details related to faulty items were 
available in the records of NPCIL.  The segregation  of procurement of non-functional items 
and other items was not available on record.  NPCIL  neither provided details of comparison 
with the original rate of the equipment nor with th e rate from Indian manufacturer despite 
repeated requisitions from Audit.  
d)  In another case NPCIL had to place order on M/s  Integrated Engineers & Consultants 
Private Limited for supply of ‘C Channels’ and ‘Bra ckets’, though these items were in the 
scope of ASE but were not supplied by it. NPCIL had  to incur an amount of 
` 19.82 lakh on 
this account. No action was taken by NPCIL to recover this amount from ASE.  
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that NPCIL ha d a system of recording deficiencies 
observed in the equipment while commissioning of sy stems/equipment wherein the agencies 
responsible for such deviations were also identifie d and recorded.  The four instances 
mentioned in the audit report were items damaged du ring storage/erection/commissioning 
and hence were not in the purview of warranty/obligation of ASE. 
The reply of the Management is not acceptable as in  respect of the first three observations, 
the Management could not explain why the failure co uld not be attributed to ASE, especially 
as no documents were on record to indicate that NPC IL was responsible for the 
defect/damage of items. 
Regarding the fourth observation, it relates to non  supply of items. Hence the question of 
damage on account of NPCIL does not arise and the a mount should have been recovered 
from ASE. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
39 
Audit Recommendation No. 8 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
NPCIL should take timely action for 
recovery/ adjustment for non/defective 
supply of material by ASE. 
The Department noted and accepted the 
recommendation. 
 
 
4.2.5 Liquidated Damages 
Liquidated Damages (LD) are levied by the NPCIL in case of non compliance of agreed 
terms and conditions by the Contractor (ASE). These have both a deterrent and compensatory 
effect and are important components of contracts. 
a)    Non recovery/short claim of LD - `` `` 463.08 crore 
In accordance with the GFA, NPCIL entered into four  supply contracts and one contract 
relating to elaboration of working documents falling under Russian scope.   
As per Article 23.1.1 read with 23.1.2, the total o f LD was to be levied at the rate of  
0.03 per cent  of value of each supply item or document package, restricted to five per cent  or 
two per cent  of the total price of the contract as the case may  be. Audit observations on LD 
are given as under: 
(i)  LD claims above 0.03 per cent  were limited to only two or five per cent  of individual 
item though the contracted limit was two per cent  or five per cent  of the contract price. This 
resulted in short claim of LD in respect of five co ntracts to the tune of USD 19.54 million  
(
` 126.74 crore). 
(ii)  In three contracts (including third Country supply contracts entered with ASE), the 
rate of Liquidated damages being applied by NPCIL o r ASE was two  per cent  instead of five  
per cent  as provided in TCO. The GFA signed in November 200 1 provides that TCO of July 
2001 and subsequently as agreed in Joint Coordinati on Committee (JCC) meeting held in 
July  and August 2001 will collectively referred to  as ‘revised TCO’. A review of JCC 
meetings revealed that issue of reduction of LD rat e from five per cent  to two per cent  was 
not deliberated in the meetings. Therefore, the red uction in maximum limit of LD from five  
per cent  as per TCO to two  per cent  resulted in undue benefit to ASE to the extent of USD 
29.24 million (` 186.65 crore) and consequent loss to NPCIL.  
(iii)  The schedule for submission of working documents un der a contract (No.77-
225/16200) for the year 2001-02 was mutually agreed . However, the packages were 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
40 
submitted with a delay ranging from 1 to 258 number  of days (delay calculated beyond  
30 calendar days from due date as per Article 23 fo r levy of LD) for which no claim for 
applicable LD worth USD 0.48 million (` 2.33 crore) was lodged by NPCIL.  
(iv)  Article 23.2.4 of the General Conditions of Contrac t (GCC) attached to the contract 
stated that if the LD claim is justified, the custo mer shall draw the invoice to the Contractor 
for the payment of LD subject to payment; the contractor shall pay the invoice within 30 days 
upon its receipt.  
It was however noticed in audit that though claim l etters were issued, invoice for recovery of 
LD as provided in the contract were not raised in r espect of five contracts amounting to USD 
22.72 million (
` 147.36 crore). It was further seen from records th at efforts to recover LD 
were put into abeyance as this project was stated t o be implemented through international  
co-operation as per Inter Governmental Agreement (I GA) and a decision was taken that final 
adjustment will be carried out at the completion of  the project.  However, the contract clearly 
provided that if the claim is justified, the custom er would draw the invoice to the Contractor 
for the payment of LD and the contractor shall pay the invoice within 30 days upon its 
receipt. Therefore, the decision of the Management to keep the recovery of LD from Russian 
side in abeyance even when the Company was resortin g to borrowings for repayment of the 
Russian credit was against financial interest of NPCIL. 
The Management replied that the works related to er ection and commissioning of Nuclear 
Steam Supply System and Turbine Generator as well a s operation of Nuclear Power Plant 
during guarantee was in ASE scope in the initial Techno Commercial Offer and on shifting of 
the same to NPCIL’s scope, the scope of ASE was lim ited to that of a supplier only and LD 
were, therefore, calculated in line with any supply  contract.  Further, in respect of deferring 
the decision for realization of claims towards LD,  the Management stated that  the contracts 
provided that if  at end of the project, it was established that the overall project had  not been 
delayed on account of delay in delivery of equipmen t and materials by ASE, the amount of 
LD would be refunded back to ASE. The delay analysis was to be carried out at the end of the 
project after final takeover of KKNPP Unit II for settlement of claims. 
The reply of the Management that on shifting of ere ction and commissioning of NSSS and 
TG from scope of ASE to NPCIL, the scope of ASE was limited to that of a supplier only and 
that LD were therefore calculated in line with any supply contract is not acceptable as the 
shifting of scope was agreed before entering into t he supply contracts with ASE and as such 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
41 
the terms incorporated/ signed by both the parties were legally binding on both the parties.  
Further the decision for deferring the recovery of LD is also not acceptable as NPCIL was 
aware that the delay in supply of working documents / equipment and material was affecting 
the Indian scope of work and would result in delay in completion of the Project. Hence the 
non recovery of LD till date (July 2017) even thoug h Unit I and Unit II were delayed by 
seven and nine years respectively, is not acceptabl e. Further, Management has not furnished 
reply to observations raised by Audit at sub-paras (ii) and (iii). 
b)  Non recovery of LD in respect of Erection reser ve contracts entered with ASE -  
`` `` 1.41 crore 
Audit observed that LD valuing USD 2,18,098.30 coul d not be recovered due to reasons like 
not raising the invoices, no claim for LD recovery etc. in respect of Erection reserve 
procured. Details are given below :  
Table 4.9: Non-recovery of Liquidated Damages 
 
No. of 
cases 
Contract number Observation Amount 
(USD) 
Amount  
(`` ``)) )) 
2 111200 and 97400 
Claim letter raised, 
however invoices not 
raised 
1,04,776.60  67,95,810.28  
1 90300 No clause for recovery of 
LD 
32,850.47 
 21,30,681.48  
2 1108700 and 
1202700 
Claim letter not raised 80,471.23  52,19,363.98  
Total 2,18,098.30  1,41,45,855.74  
or `` `` 1.41 crore  
 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the cont racts did not provide for direct 
deduction of LD from the invoices of the contractor  and that NPCIL is in the process of 
raising debit notes for realizing LD claims. 
Though the items have been delivered during the per iod 2009-10 to 2014-15, the debit note 
for realizing the LD is yet to be raised (July 2017 ) even after a lapse of considerable time 
ranging from two to eight years resulting in blocking of funds amounted to 
` 1.41 crore. 
  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
42 
Audit Recommendation No. 9 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
Liquidated damages should be claimed in an 
accurate and timely fashion. 
The Department accepted the 
recommendation and stated that the 
process of LD recovery has started. 
 
4.3    Indian Scope 
 
4.3.1 Shifting of Russian scope without proper cost -benefit analysis resulted in delays 
and extra expenditure of ` ` ` ` 706.87 crore  
The Russian side (ASE) submitted, after acceptance of the DPR by NPCIL (Jan 2001), a 
Techno Commercial offer (TCO) (July 2001) for const ruction of Units I and II of 
Kudankulam project indicating Russian scope and Ind ian scope. For carrying out the Russian 
scope of work, ASE had initially indicated a total amount of USD 2,293 million excluding 
the estimated price of USD 220 million for supply f rom third countries. The TCO submitted 
by ASE was negotiated by a high-level Committee con stituted by DAE and in the Joint 
Coordination Committee (JCC) meeting (July 2001), t he price of the Russian scope was 
agreed to be reduced to a fixed price of USD 1,600 million. In this meeting, the Russian side 
also made an offer that the cost of the Russian sco pe may further decrease if the work of 
erection and commissioning of Nuclear Steam Supply System (NSSS) and Turbo Generator 
(TG) was shifted to the Indian scope. Thereafter, i n the final negotiation (20-26 August 
2001), the offer was accepted by NPCIL and, the cos t of the project for Russian scope was 
reduced to a fixed price of USD 1,535 million ( ` 7,217 crore). This was to bring reduction to 
the tune of USD 65 million ( ` 305.50 crore) by way of decrease in the number of Russian 
personnel at site.   
Audit found that NPCIL incurred expenditure of ` 1,012.37 crore towards erection and 
commissioning of the NSSS and TG as against ` 305.50 crore (USD 65 million) originally 
envisaged (Russian scope). Thus NPCIL incurred an e xtra amount of ` 706.87 crore as it did 
not conduct a cost benefit analysis before agreeing  to the shifting of scope. Details are given 
below: 
a) The Indian side had indicated that it would only  be able to take any decision on shifting of 
responsibility after knowledge of cost allocated to  these obligations by the Russian side. 
However, no cost-breakup was made available by ASE to NPCIL. Thus, even though the 
figure of USD 65 million remained unverified, NPCIL  agreed to the shift in the scope of 
works.   

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
43 
b)  NPCIL incurred an expenditure of ` 295.54 crore on work contracts for erection and 
commissioning of NSSS and TG. Scrutiny of records r evealed that the responsibility of 
erection and commissioning of NSSS and TG was shift ed to Indian side for the stated 
purpose of achieving optimization by reducing the n umber of Russian technical personnel at 
site. However, the total fixed Russian man-months p rovided in the original contract (August 
2002) actually increased from 6,053 to 11,567 man-m onths and there was an increase in cost 
by USD 45.90 million ( ` 226.55 crore) for deputation of Russian technical specialists during 
erection and commissioning stage. This defeated the stated purpose of optimization desired to 
be achieved by shifting the erection and commissioning from Russian to India scope. 
c)  During erection and commissioning of Unit I, a considerable quantity of Electrical, 
Mechanical and Instrumentation and Control items an d components were damaged or 
developed faults which were replaced by using corre sponding items from Unit II, since no 
erection reserve was available. To source these equ ipment, NPCIL had to enter into various 
contracts with ASE for procurement of erection rese rve equipment/ material costing USD 
87.55 million ( ` 490.28 crore). This was done as and when requireme nt arose. Even though 
the TCO submitted in July 2001 indicated that the e quipment/services for erection were to be 
procured by the Russians from the local markets in India but the same was procured from 
ASE without doing any comparative rate analysis.  
Inspite of repeated enquiries/reminders, KKNPP Mana gement/NPCIL did not provide list of 
equipment which got damaged or developed fault duri ng erection/ commissioning of Unit I. 
In absence of this information, the scope of audit was limited as it could not examine whether 
the faults/ damages were avoidable and who was responsible for the same. 
Shifting of the work of NSSS and TG to the Indian s cope, without any cost-benefit analysis 
resulted in NPCIL incurring 
`1,012.37 crore ( ` 295.54 crore + ` 226.55 crore  + ` 490.28 
crore) on work contracts, Russian manpower costs an d procurement of items respectively, 
thus leading to an additional expenditure of ` 706.87 crore. This was one of the major reasons 
for the escalations in cost of the project. The shi fting of NSSS and TG to Indian scope also 
resulted in delays in erection of NSSS/TG (25 month s and 22 months in respect of Unit I and 
Unit II respectively) which also contributed toward s overall delay in commissioning and 
completion of project. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that NSSS and  TG form the core of Nuclear Power 
Plant and in order to learn the traits of the techn ology the same was also undertaken by the 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
44 
Indian side and that the benefit of learning, which  is not generally parted by foreign vendor, 
cannot be quantified in monetary terms.  Further, the entire amount of additional expenditure 
due to increase in deputation of Russian Specialist s and Procurement of Erection Reserves 
on account of commissioning works related to NSSS a nd TG, considered by Audit while 
calculating the additional financial implication is  not correct as deputation of Russian 
specialist was required for supervision during the entire construction and erection works and 
erection reserves were purchased for entire plant a s spares were not available for 
replacement of components found damaged during erection and commissioning.. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable. As per Clause 2.2.5.4 of the TCO submitted by 
Russian Federation, ASE (the contractor) was to pro vide for deputation at site its team of 
qualified personnel for commissioning of the plant and the operation and maintenance 
personnel were to be provided by NPCIL, who were to  be trained by the contractor for taking 
up such jobs. Moreover, given the fact that the Rus sians continue to be engaged even in the 
commissioning process of Unit II (December 2016), t he extra expenditure of ` 706.87 crore 
cannot be justified solely on the grounds of experience gained. As the entire technical support 
of Russian support upto commissioning was to be car ried out with in the original deputation 
contract, the increase in Russian man months defeat ed the stated purpose of optimization 
desired to be achieved by shifting the erection and  commissioning from Russian to India 
scope. 
Regarding remaining part of Management’s reply, as already stated above, NPCIL had to 
spend 
` 490.28 crore towards procurement of equipment from  ASE as erection reserve to 
replace damaged/faulty items during the erection/co mmissioning for the NSSS and TG. 
Despite repeated enquiries, the amount and details of materials consumed from erection 
reserve was not provided to Audit. In absence of th is information, no assurance can be 
derived whether erection reserves were actually utilised.  
Audit Recommendation No. 10 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
Cost benefit analysis should be invariably 
conducted before agreeing to a shift in 
scope of work from Russian side to Indian 
side and vice versa . 
DAE noted and accepted the 
recommendation. 
 
 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
45 
4.3.2 Avoidable expenditure on Transportation of su pplies from Sea port at Russia to 
            KKNPP Site 
 
NPCIL received considerable supplies through the se a routes. Related audit observations are 
as follows: 
a) Avoidable expenditure of ` ` ` ` 8.37 crore 
As per clause 3.2.2 of the supply contract, the con tractor (ASE) shall advise the customer 
(NPCIL), by fax, the date of supply availability of  dispatch at port, size dimension etc. The 
agreed rate for transportation was USD 75 per Freight Tons 30  (FRT). A notice of 45 days was 
to be given prior to each expected date of the vess el arrival for all consignments, except for 
over dimensional consignment for which notice perio d shall be 60 days prior to each 
expected date of the vessel arrival. As per clause 3.2, based on the above requirement, NPCIL 
shall freight the vessel and shall confirm timely arrival of the vessel at the port of shipment. 
It was noticed in audit that M/s Lee & Muirhead Ltd  (M/s L&M) raised (16 February 2005) 
the issue that actual height of packages varied bet ween 10.180 meter and 14.645 meter as 
against maximum height of packages at eight meters plus-minus 10 per cent . Further M/s 
L&M stated (21 February 2005) that at the time of l oading, substantial number of non-
stackable packages were supplied by ASE, with subst andard packing, incorrect recorded 
dimensions of the packages and cargo not being made  available three days prior to arrival of 
the vessel at port to facilitate preparation of the  proper stowage plan required to be submitted 
to Port Authorities. M/s L&M demanded compensation of USD 60 per FRT from NPCIL 
over the agreed rate of USD 75 per FRT for frequent  changes in the stowage plan and 
wastage of space due to such non stackable cargo.  
The proposal was put up to Board which approved the  proposal stating that while tendering, 
these issues could not be foreseen and ASE is hardl y in a position to exercise any control 
over stackability as it has to depend on numerous m anufacturers spread over distant locations 
and also there was no provision in the contract bet ween NPCIL and ASE to take care of last 
moment changes in the consignment being delivered a t port for shipment by ASE. 
Accordingly, Amendment No. 6 (22 March 2005) to the  contract was issued and the value of 
the contract was revised from 
` 140.87 crore to ` 168.63 crore. NPCIL assumed an 
estimation of 60 per cent  loss of cargo space. Accordingly initial rate of U SD 75 per FRT 
                                                           
30   Gross Freight tons of Cargo  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
46 
was increased by 60 per cent  and revised rate of USD 120 per FRT (USD 75 per FR T plus  
60 per cent  of USD 75 per FRT) was agreed upon. 
However it was seen from the details submitted (16 February 2005) by M/s L&M in respect 
of seven vessels that loss of space range averaged out to only 43 per cent  and therefore 
revised rate should be USD 107 per FRT (USD 75 per FRT plus 43 per cent  of USD 75 per 
FRT). Adoption of higher percentage (60  per cent ) of loss of space on an assumption basis 
during calculation of new rate resulted in extra ex penditure of ` 8.37 31  crore. Moreover, 
no claim was raised on ASE for extra expenditure on account of non-stackable consignments. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the 43 p er cent space lost due to non-stackable 
cargo was based on the calculations carried out for  seven vessels which had more dense 
cargo transported for the Project.  During later pa rt of the logistic contract however, more 
diverse cargo was schedule to be transported which was bound to have higher non-
stackability and hence average of 60 per cent non-s tackability was agreed. It further stated 
that there was no linear correlation of rates with loss of cargo space due to non stackability. 
Rates were mutually agreed with space loss of 60 per cent to avoid issues in future.  
The reply of the Management is not tenable as the a ctual average loss of space was only 
around 43  per cent based on seven vessels pertains to period 2003 to 2 005 where loss of 
space ranges from 30 per cent to 57 per cent . The assumption of higher rate on the basis of 
remaining shipments was assumed without any documen tary evidence. Resultantly, NPCIL 
incurred an extra payment of ` 8.37 crore to the contractor which remained to be r ecovered 
from ASE. 
b)      Payment of Inadmissible charges to transporters – `` `` 7.08 crore. 
For KKKNP, the Equipment and Materials were being s upplied by M/s Atomstroyexport 
(ASE) through Free on Board (FOB) 32  Sea Ports of Russian Federation (RF)/Third Countri es 
(TC). As per the agreement between NPCIL and ASE, t ransportation of these supplies from 
Sea Ports of RF/TC to Tuticorin Port and to KKNPP Site was under NPCIL scope.   
The work of Port handling, Shipping and Transportat ion of Heavy Lift (HL)/Over 
dimensional and normal consignments (Break Bulk car go) of equipment and materials 
                                                           
31   ` 77.23 crore* (USD 120 per FRT – USD 107 per FRT)/ USD 120 per FRT where `   77.23 crore 
represent amount paid to M/s L&M for transportation services. 
32   Supply of goods at the specified location as per agreement after which buyer takes responsibility of 
the goods. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
47 
through Sea route/Air route (from Russian Ports/thi rd countries ports to India and further 
inland transportation to KKNPP Site, Storage & Ware house Management and further 
transport to erection point) was awarded (December 2002) on L1 basis to M/s Lee & 
Muirhead Ltd (L&M). The award was on turnkey basis for ` 140.87 crore. The rate quoted 
by the party was inclusive of all taxes, duties, po rt charges and any other levies including 
wharfage charges. Later, vide Amendment (22 March 2 005) two additional items (shipment 
of super over dimensional consignments and shipment  of non-stackable consignments) were 
added to the contract and the value of the contract was revised to ` 168.63 crore.  
As per terms of the contract, if the mid-sea discha rge (by anchoring the vessel mid-sea near 
KKNPP site) of Over Dimensional /HL cargo and other  associated break bulk cargo was not 
possible at any occasion due to some reason or otherwise, the contractor was to transport such 
cargo by the suitable barge from Tuticorin port to KKNPP site at the same rates as quoted for 
transportation from mid-sea discharge point to KKNPP site by barge.  
In February 2004 M/s L&M communicated to NPCIL that mid sea operations at Kudankulam 
were virtually impossible excepting few vessels whe n the wind conditions as well as the 
swell would be favorable for operations. M/s L&M al so requested (11 February 2004) 
compensation for the additional wharfage charges st ating that wharfage was included as part 
of the transportation cost in the quote while assum ing that the quantities would be discharged 
as per the tender condition i.e. 40 per cent  at Tuticorin and 60  per cent  at KK anchorage with 
10  per cent  variation. The proposal for payment of differentia l cost of wharfage charges was 
put up to the Board of Directors of the company (April 2005). The Board while approving the 
proposal noted that the term for contract provided for mid-sea discharge of cargo during fair 
weather and advised that the matter be negotiated w ith the contractor so that the contractor 
shares part of the costs with NPCIL. 
Based on negotiation, a rate of 
` 575 per metric tonne (MT) for handling and transpor tation 
charges from Tuticorin Port to KKNPP Site to be bor ne by NPCIL was finally agreed upon 
(April 2005). Due to this revision, NPCIL had to in cur an avoidable additional expenditure of 
` 7.08 crore towards reimbursement of wharfage charg es ( ` 6.10 crore) and additional 
handling charges ( ` 0.98 crore). This additional payment was unwarranted as the same was to 
be borne by the contractor as per terms of the contract. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the cont ractor was ready to unload the cargo 
through mid-sea discharge at KKNPP and at no point did he refuse to do so. Had any of the 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
48 
consignment of long manufacturing cycle been lost d ue to such risky operation, schedule for 
completion of the Project would have been imperiled . NPCIL therefore instructed the 
Contractor that all consignments should be taken to  Tuticorin Port and then brought to Site 
through Barge. The payment towards reimbursement of  wharfage charges and additional 
handling charges amounting to ` 7.08 crore therefore was justified payment necessi tated due 
to NPCIL requirement which was arrived through mutu al agreement in line with contract 
conditions. Accordingly, approval of NPCIL Board was obtained. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable as the t ender terms contract with M/s L&M 
stated that if mid sea discharge is not possible, f or any reason, the contractor shall transport 
such cargo by suitable barge from Tuticorin port to  KKNPP site without any extra payment 
by the NPCIL. For errors in assumptions made by the  contractor at the time of bid 
submission, the extra costs cannot be borne by NPCI L. It was responsibility of contractor to 
familiarize itself with the terms and conditions gi ven in tender and quote the price 
accordingly at the time of tendering.  Hence the additional payment of ` 7.08 crore was not in 
order.   
c)      Avoidable expenditure of `` `` 11.72 crore on dead freight  
As per Schedule A of schedule of items, quantities and rates of work order dated 2 December 
2002, a quantity of 2.55 lakh FRT was to be transpo rted from Russian Federation/Third 
Countries to Tuticorin Port/Mid-Sea discharge at KK NPP site. According to the terms and 
conditions of the contract minimum inducement on ca rgo volume of 2,000 MT equivalent of 
5,000 FRT (higher of weight in MT volume in cubic m eters) was required to be made 
available at the notified port for each break bulk shipment to M/s L&M who was awarded the 
contract in December 2002. 
However, it was noticed in audit that NPCIL/ASE failed to provide the minimum inducement 
quantity i.e. 5,000 FRT in case of supplies from th ird countries. This resulted in payment of 
dead freight weight amounting to 
` 11.72 crore to M/s L&M, as per the ibid  provision of the 
contract; it being the difference between minimum inducement of cargo load and actual cargo 
load.   
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that while pr oviding inputs for formulation of 
Contract for Logistics Services for KKNPP Units I a nd II, ASE informed that they will be 
providing a cargo of 5,000 FRT for each Break Bulk Shipment and for obtaining competitive 
rates, a clause for minimum inducement therefore wa s accordingly built into the Contract. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
49 
Because of delay in delivery of supplies to the port by ASE, in some of the cases, the minimum 
induced quantity could not be provided and dead fre ight charges were paid to the Logistics 
Contractor. NPCIL could have waited for some more t ime for ASE to accumulate the cargo 
at port so that minimum induced quantity was availa ble and would have attracted detention, 
port storage and demurrage charges. This would have  also delayed all items already 
available at port. For delay in supplies, the contr acts with ASE provide for LD and claim in 
this respect have already been raised. 
The reply of the Management is not acceptable becau se NPCIL had claimed LD from ASE 
only in respect of delay in supplies of material an d not for dead freight charges. Due to delay 
in delivery of supplies to the port by ASE, the min imum induced quantity could not be 
provided which resulted in  avoidable expenditure of 
` 11.72 crore on account of dead freight 
charges being paid to the Logistics Contractor whic h should have also been recovered from 
ASE.  
4.3.3 Awarding work orders valuing ` ` ` ` 141.38 crore on single tender/nomination basis 
According to NPCIL Works Construction Management Ma nual, single tender can be called 
only in the following cases: 
a)  Work of proprietary nature 
b)  There is only one source of Supply/Contractor 
c)  Replacements and addition to existing equipment/structure is of a proprietary nature 
d)  Work requiring equipment, plant or process for which only one party has been developed 
by DAE/NPCIL and that is only source available 
e)  Shutdown work / emergency work where normal course of tendering process will have 
an effect on overall plan performance / construction schedule. 
f)  Work of inescapable urgency which can directly affe ct the commissioning of the Power 
Plant and the party has already established equipme nt and necessary infrastructure at the 
project site, and the normal tendering process will  cause time and cost overruns on 
project schedule. 
Further, as per CVC guidelines, award of contract on nomination basis/single  tender  is  to be 
resorted  to  only  under  exceptional  circumstances  such  as  natural  calamities  and 
emergencies or there were no bids to repeated tende rs or where only one supplier has been 
licensed  in  respect  of  goods  sought  to  be  procured and PSUs are not exempted from the 
applicability of CVC guidelines. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
50 
Audit observed during test check that in six work o rders valuing ` 141.38 crore, contract was 
awarded on single tender/nomination basis ibid  criteria prescribed in the manual and CVC 
guidelines. Out of these, five work orders valuing ` 119.58 crore were given to three Public 
Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 33 . 
At the time of approval for single tender mode/nomi nation basis, it was stated by NPCIL that 
in view of urgency of the work and due to availabil ity of experienced, familiar and skilled 
manpower competent to undertake such jobs, availabl e with only the proposed single party, 
the work may be awarded on single tender/nomination basis. 
However, Audit noticed that there were delays rangi ng from 3 to 9 months in awarding the 
work from the date of approval of work by the compe tent authority which contradicted the 
Management’s stand about urgency. Further, there wa s no justification/comparison found on 
record that only the awardees had the requisite exp erience and competent manpower. In fact, 
even for works like annual maintenance contract single tender process was resorted to.  
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that contract  / work orders as pointed by in audit 
para for Erection Reserves were for procurement of such items and spares which were of 
proprietary nature, assorted type and required in s mall quantity. There was no alternative 
other than to procure these from ASE through single  tender / nomination basis. It further 
stated that NPCIL has not violated any guidelines laid by CVC in this regard. 
The Management reply is not relevant as the contrac ts referred here related to execution of 
work by Indian contractors under Indian scope of work and not to supply of material by ASE. 
The reason for awarding these jobs by single tender  mode to Indian contractors has not been 
furnished by NPCIL (July 2017). 
Thus, awarding contracts on single tender basis not only resulted in loss of opportunity on the 
part of Company to get the benefits of competitive prices but this also was in violation of the 
extant provisions of the Work contract manual of NPCIL and CVC guidelines. 
Audit Recommendation No. 11 DAE’s  reply to the Audit Recommendation 
Work orders should not be awarded on a 
single tender basis unless they qualify for 
the same as per NPCIL manual and CVC 
guidelines. 
DAE noted and accepted the recommendation. 
 
 
 
                                                           
33   M/s BHEL, M/s ECIL and M/S Keltron 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
51 
 4.3.4   Execution of additional item / quantum of w orks valuing `` `` 159 crore  
 
For the work of erection and commissioning of KKNPP  plants the Russian federation was to 
depute its specialist at site for overall monitorin g and stage-wise supervision. However, 
despite involvement of Russian specialists and NPCI L’s scientists since the stage of 
preparation of the DPR, NPCIL failed to identify ce rtain civil, mechanical and 
instrumentation works which were required to be exe cuted as part of this project at the 
planning stage. Resultantly, works had to be done a dditionally than what was envisaged in 
the approved project documents. 
Out of 106 works, Audit noticed in eight cases wher e extra work amounting to 
` 159 crore 
was executed beyond the limit of 25 per cent 34  over and above the contracted work. The 
works i.e. beyond 125 per cent,  were not identified earlier and were awarded to th e 
contractors at their quoted rates in the already ex ecuted contracts.  It was noticed that the 
nature of extra work included welding work, erectio n and testing of smaller bore carbon steel 
pipes, supply and erection of high-density polyethy lene  pipes, fabrication of pipes, supply of 
single push button station etc. which should have b een considered for inclusion at the time of 
planning in the preparatory stages. Details of extr a work as percentage of original cost are 
given in Annexure IV . 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that since ma ny of the first of the kind system were 
there in the Nuclear Power Plant, the exact estimat ion of the work was not possible at the 
time of tendering. As and when the design evolved, the additional work wherever mandated 
had to be carried out through the existing contractors only. 
The reply is not acceptable as even though the plan t is first of its kind, however, similar civil, 
electrical and other works were done by NPCIL perso nnel in other Nuclear Power Plants. 
Justifying the additional works citing design chang es while executing the works indicates 
lack of proper planning and coordination between AS E and NPCIL in assessing the site 
conditions / requirements before the start of execution of work. 
Thus, allocation of additional work to the existing  contractors without any rate analysis 
resulted not only in increase in the cost of the pr oject by ` 159 crore but also in loss of 
opportunity to obtain competitive rates. 
 
  
                                                           
34   As was provided in general conditions of contract 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
52 
Audit Recommendation No. 12 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
NPCIL should award work to existing 
contractors after proper rate analysis to 
obtain competitive rates.  
DAE noted and accepted the 
recommendation. 
 
4.3.5    Absence of agreement for work orders valuing `` `` 79.53 crore  
Work orders were issued by NPCIL for execution of w orks, wherein both the parties – 
NPCIL and Contractor together were to execute an agreement for the respective works within 
the days specified in the work order.  
In seven test checked cases, Audit noticed that work orders valuing 
` 79.53 crore were issued 
without any agreement between the parties. Thus, fo rmal agreement containing all the 
requisite documents which needed to be signed within a reasonable time, for each work order, 
to give the contract a legal sanctity, was not entered into in these cases.  
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the agre ements with the contractors have 
invariably been entered into, sooner or later. 
The reply is unacceptable as the agreements for the  respective works were to be executed 
within the time period as specified in the work ord er and not at a later date. Further, in seven 
test checked cases, Audit noticed that these contracts worth 
` 79.53 crore were issued without 
any agreement with the parties, which was in violat ion of terms and conditions of work 
orders. This lapse could create problems by way of NPCIL not having a defined time 
schedule for deliverables or a deterrent tool (like  LD) to seek compensation in cases of 
delayed/unsatisfactory work done by the contractor( s). The interests of the company 
remained unprotected in these cases. There was no m onitoring mechanism to ensure that an 
agreement should invariably be signed between NPCIL  and contractor(s), as required under 
the respective work orders, before awarding the work. 
Audit Recommendation No. 13 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
Agreements for execution of work order 
should invariably be entered into by NPCIL 
with the contractor before award of the 
contracts. 
DAE noted and accepted the 
recommendation. 
 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
53 
4.3.6     Absence of Schedule of Rates for various works  
According to Construction Management Manual of NPCI L, in order to facilitate the 
preparation of estimates, and also to serve as a gu ide in finalizing rates during the course of 
execution of contract, a Schedule of Rates (SORs) w as to be maintained for each kind of 
work commonly executed in the units. Data base for working out rates for commonly 
executed items was to be as per norms stipulated by  Central Public Works Department, GOI. 
Further, SORs were to be prepared on the basis of t he rates prevailing in each unit and 
necessary analysis of the rates for each description of work and for varying conditions thereof 
should, so far as practicable, be recorded. 
However, Audit noticed that SORs were not updated b efore preparation of estimates for 
various works of KKNPP. In all the test checked wor k files, Audit observed that in absence 
of SORs, estimates were prepared based on the work order rates available for other units of 
NPCIL like Tarapur Atomic Power Plant in Maharashtr a and Kaiga Atomic Power plant in 
Karnataka or earlier approved rates for similar nature work at site.  
Further, for preparation of estimates CVC guideline s state that the estimates should take into 
consideration all relevant factors based on the pre vailing market price of various inputs such 
as labour, material, equipment etc. at the concerne d locations to arrive at maximum accurate 
estimates. However, it was observed that for prepar ing estimates by NPCIL, work order rates 
were arrived by assessing the similar nature of work of units located at other places.  
Moreover, as per the Manual, in cases where the ite ms included in the tender are available in 
the current schedule of rates, the amount of tender  to be accepted should not exceed more 
than 10 per cent  of the amount worked out on the basis of the curre nt schedule of rate plus  
(or minus) the enhancement (or decrease) on account  of relevant cost index. However, in 
respect of 19 test checked cases, Audit noticed var iation ranging from (-) 54  per cent  to  
(-) 26  per cent  between the value of work estimated and awarded.  
Audit also noticed that due to non-preparation of S ORs even for works of routine nature like 
construction of pump houses, tunnels, chlorination plants, sea water pipelines and discharge 
channels, the tenders awarded were for 
` 348.93 crore as against the estimated value put to 
tender i.e., ` 588 crore, that is 41 per cent  lower; this indicated that the estimation process at 
KKNPP, even for routine works was not done on a realistic basis.  
 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the esti mates for major  
Civil packages of KKNPP Units I and II were carried  out by market rate analysis  
through an engineering consultant expert in the fie ld. These estimates were adopted  
by NPCIL for preparation of respective tenders, obt aining technical sanction  
from competent authority including detailed estimat es forming part of technical sanction. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
54 
Construction manual is a guide and not a mandatory document. This method of estimation is 
also used in NPCIL. KKNPP, being in a very early st age, was not having any Schedule of 
Rates at the point of time of preparation of referr ed tenders. Schedule of rates for all civil 
works were established later and are being used for  all works as on date. This schedule of 
rates is being revised as per guidelines.  
The Management accepted that the estimates during t he initial period were prepared without 
SORs and on the basis of estimates of similar works  executed in other projects. Though 
NPCIL stated that later SORs were prepared, till th e completion of audit, neither SORs nor 
the estimates prepared on the basis of this SORs were produced to Audit. 
Absence of SORs resulted in not having a control pa rameter to monitor preparation of 
budgetary estimates. Preparation of inflated estima tes adversely affects the budgeting and 
funds arrangement processes and was avoidable. 
Audit Recommendation No. 14 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
NPCIL should prepare schedule of rates, at 
least, for the works of routine nature like 
construction of pump house, tunnel, 
chlorination plant etc with a view to have better 
estimation of rates for awarding contracts.  
DAE noted and accepted the 
recommendation. 
 
 
 
4.4    Third Country Contracts 
 
4.4.1    Third country contracts made by ASE - Non reasonability of rates 
A contract valuing USD 191 million (pre-revised USD  220 million) was entered into (August 
2002) between NPCIL and ASE for supply of equipment  and materials from third countries 
under Russian and Indian scope.  Audit examination revealed the following: 
a) As per Clause 2.2 of the contract, the prospecti ve bidders’ for third country supplies were 
to be shortlisted in consultation with NPCIL. Furth er, Clause 2.4 states that bids/offers 
received by ASE from the bidders of third countries were to be evaluated jointly by ASE with 
NPCIL and sub-contracts would be awarded by ASE with the approval/consent of NPCIL.   
It was, however, noticed that entire purchase from third countries supply was assigned to 
Russian side (ASE) and NPCIL did not participate in  any joint evaluation of bids/offers with 
ASE. Moreover, no consent/approval of NPCIL was obt ained by ASE before finalizing the 
sub-contracts to third countries. Only a list of su b-contracts entered into by ASE with various 
third countries, which were un-priced, was provided by ASE to NPCIL.  
  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
55 
b)  As per clause 2.4.2.2 of the Techno Commercial Offer (TCO) entered into by NPCIL with 
ASE, the order of accounting the difference between  the estimated and actual prices for the 
supply procured in third countries was to be detailed between the parties at the contract stage.  
However, no such clause was found included in the contract entered into by NPCIL with ASE 
for third country supplies. As a result ASE did not  furnish to NPCIL the total value of all 
contracts executed with third countries and NPCIL h ad no way to ensure that the value of all 
such contracts was indeed to the tune of the agreed  amount of USD 191 million ( ` 899.95 
crore). It was also observed that an amount of USD 19 million (` 92.04 crore) towards 10 per 
cent  interest free advance was paid by NPCIL to ASE for  third country supplies without 
ascertaining whether similar provisions existed in the sub-contracts entered by ASE with 
third country suppliers. 
NPCIL allowed ASE to make purchases without ensurin g NPCIL’s role as per terms and 
conditions of the contract. These issues were neith er recorded nor brought to the notice of 
Senior Management which also did not have a monitor ing system to ensure that the contract 
was being executed according to the extant terms and conditions. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the tota l price of USD 220 million (before 
agreed adjustment for CIS contract) was agreed as a  fixed price in case  all procurements 
from Third Countries were to be carried out through  ASE and this price is a part of total 
price of all contracts as per agreed TCO. Reasonabi lity of the rates within a fixed price 
therefore need not be ascertained. The price breaku p carried out was a notional price/ rate 
mainly for custom clearance purpose. An amount of U SD 19.05 million paid as advance 
under this Contract was in line with the contract d rafted on the basis of Inter-Governmental 
Agreement (IGA) & General Framework Agreement (GFA). 
The Management’s reply that the price of ASE scope of supplies under third country 
contracts was a fixed price is not acceptable. As p er clause 4.1 of GFA, the Russian scope of 
work was at fixed price while the supplies from third countries falling under Indian scope and 
Russian scope was not at fixed price but was only t he upper limit of the escalated cost 
estimated on the basis of FOB supply terms. Clause 2.2.1.8 of GFA and contract clause 2.4 of 
Article 2 provided that ASE will invite quotations and select the vendors jointly with NPCIL. 
Hence the Management’s contention that third countr y supply was included in Russian scope 
at fixed price, due to which reasonability of rates  need not be ascertained, is not factually 
correct and is in violation of GFA and terms of the contract. 
  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
56 
Audit Recommendation No. 15 DAE’s  reply to the Audit 
Recommendation 
With regard to the contracts for supply of 
equipment by third country, NPCIL should 
consider participating in joint evaluation 
of bids, with a view to ensure price 
reasonability of the contract(s).  
DAE noted and accepted the 
recommendation, in case order is placed by 
NPCIL directly on third Countries. 
DAE has partially accepted the 
recommendation. However, Audit is of the 
view that in order to ensure reasonability of 
rates of equipment procured, through ASE 
under third country contracts, NPCIL may 
devise a suitable mechanism for the same.  
 
4.4.2    Discrepancies in payments made against supplies of equipment and materials 
A contract was entered between NPCIL and ASE (Augus t 2002) for an amount of USD 191 
million for supply of equipment and materials from third countries. Following discrepancies 
were noticed during verification of payment procedures under the contract: 
a) As per clause 6.2.1 of contract, NPCIL had to pa y to ASE 15 per cent  of the price of the 
contract for supplies and services amounting to USD  189.80 million within 3 months from 
the date of signing of the contract against submiss ion of invoice along with signed copies of 
sub-contracts. Audit noticed that the sub-contracts  submitted along with the invoice did not 
contain details like price of the sub-contract and terms of payment from the sub-contracts and 
payment of 15  per cent  (USD 28.47 million) was released without verifying  the details of its 
sub-contracts. 
b) As per clause 3.4.3 of the NPCIL 
’s  standard general conditions of contract, governing  
supply of imported Stores, the contractor would sub mit performance Bond/ Bank Guarantee 
for an amount equal to 10  per cent  of the total value of the contract as security for satisfactory 
performance. However, it was seen that NPCIL had no t included this provision under a 
contract (Contract no. 22700, August 2002) entered with ASE for supply of equipment and 
materials under third country contracts. This was i n violation of NPCIL ’s  standard general 
conditions of contract. 
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that there wa s no obligation of ASE to involve 
NPCIL in the commercial negotiations with suppliers  from third countries. The price of ASE 
scope of supplies was a fixed price considering tha t all third country contracts were to be 
signed by ASE with third country supplier. There cannot be scope for bargain in a fixed price 
contract. The contract clauses clearly provided that only un-priced copy of sub contract shall 
be provided to NPCIL. The advance amount of 15 per cent was released after ASE fulfilled 
all the required conditions as per contract.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
57 
The Management’s reply that the price of ASE scope of supplies under third country 
contracts was at fixed price is not acceptable. As per clause 4.1 of GFA, the supplies from 
third countries falling under Indian scope and Russ ian scope was not a fixed price but was 
only the upper limit of the escalated cost estimate d on the basis of FOB supply terms. As per 
clause 6.2.1 of the contract for supply of equipmen t and materials from third countries, ASE 
was to provide a copy of the sub-contract to NPCIL.  The said clause does not contain any 
provision about the supply of un-priced copy of sub  contract. Hence, due to providing un-
priced copy of sub-contract by ASE, the payment of 15 per cent  without verifying the price 
and terms of payment of sub-contract, is therefore not in order.   
4.5 Non transfer of land ownership in the company’s  name. 
The Government of Tamil Nadu accorded sanction for acquisition of 1,225.16 hectares of 
land (February 1990) for KKNPP plant site and towns hip. The land to the extent of 1,083.42 
hectares towards plant site (929.52 hectares) and T ownship (153.90 hectares) is in the name 
of NPCIL. However, ownership for land to the extent  of 141.735 hectares (Plant site-117.435 
hectares and township-24.30 hectares) had still not  been transferred in the name of NPCIL 
even after 27 years from the date of approval notwi thstanding the fact that it was specified in 
the Government of Tamil Nadu order (February 1990) that NPCIL has to get the ownership 
of land transferred in its own name. No reasons were offered by the NPCIL for not getting the 
ownership transferred to its own name.  
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that the land  available at the plant site is sufficient 
for implementation of KKNPP Units I to VI including the facilities for spent fuel storage. 
The Management’s reply is not relevant as reasons f or non - transfer of land in the name of 
NPCIL even after 27 years have not been addressed by the company. 
4.6 Start of commercial operation of the KKNPP Unit I b y NPCIL before getting the 
            license  
The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) is respon sible for the safety, supervision of 
Nuclear Power Projects and Plants (NPPs), which is done through an elaborate safety review 
mechanism and periodic regulatory inspections. All nuclear power projects have to undergo 
an elaborate in-depth safety review during the cons enting stage which includes siting, 
construction and commissioning. Authorizations/ cle arances for siting, construction, 
commissioning and operation at rated power for NPPs  are to be issued in stages as per the 
AERB Safety Code on Regulation of Nuclear Facilitie s and procedure as described in AERB 
Safety Guide on Consenting Process for Nuclear Powe r Plants and Research Reactors. Based 
on NPCIL submissions related to various consenting stages as per AERB guide on 
consenting, AERB reviews the documents and applicat ion through in-house review groups, 
specialist groups and Advisory Committee for Project Safety Review (ACPSR). 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
58 
During review process NPCIL submits various present ations, responses, 
justification/calculation notes and reports to AERB .  On the same being in order and meeting 
the prescribed requirements, AERB issues clearance for the relevant stage of Nuclear Power 
Project (NPP) along with stipulations to be complied with (both for the current stage and next 
stage).  On compliance of the stipulations, NPCIL i s to submit compliance reports for the 
same.  
Before authorization of commissioning/operation of the plant/project is granted, AERB needs 
to be satisfied by appropriate review of - 
a)  Final design analysis report prepared by the project plant; 
b)  Commissioning reports and results thereof; and 
c)  Proposed operating procedures and operational limits and conditions that the plant/project 
can be operated without undue risk to the operating personnel and the population. 
The license to operate to any Nuclear Power Plant ( NPP) is granted upon fulfillment of 
conditions as stated above at a), b) and c) above. After satisfactory review during project 
stage, AERB issues operating licence to a NPP for a  period of up to five years. Further, 
AERB’s guidelines also stipulated that Utility has to submit application for obtaining license 
for regular power operation along with final safety  analysis report and detailed performance 
reports etc. which were reviewed at various stages of design or commissioning review 
process.  
AERB granted, in August 2014, clearance to NPCIL fo r operation of KKNPP Unit I up to 
100 per cent  full power for limited duration (Phase C3 
35  stage) till 31 December 2014; it later 
extended the date till 30 April 2015 subject to com pliance with certain stipulations 36 . AERB 
granted the licence for regular operation of the pl ant on 10 July 2015. However, it was 
noticed in audit that NPCIL declared commercial ope ration of the Unit I of KKNPP on  
31 December 2014 which was six months before receiving the license from AERB for regular 
operation of the plant. Moreover, the records perta ining to dates of completion of final safety 
review and its submission date to AERB were not pro duced to Audit despite repeated 
enquires. NPCIL also could not produce documents to  substantiate whether it complied with 
the stipulations as mentioned in the AERB’s sanction letter dated 30 August 2014. In absence 
of this information, it is not clear whether NPCIL had complied with all the stipulated safety 
and security conditions at the time of declaration of the commercial operation of the plant on 
31 December 2014. In absence of such information, t he fact that Unit I of KKNPP was put 
into commercial operation after duly fulfilling the operational safety and security of the plant, 
as required under AERB guidelines, remained unverifiable in audit.  
                                                           
35   Stage at which reactor power is raised upto 100 per cent full power  
36   Recommendation of ACPSR-LWR, Industrial and Fire Safety requirements as per Atomic Energy 
(Factories) Rules, 1996, All relevant recommendations with regard to Nuclear Security aspects. 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
59 
The Management replied that various stages during t he process followed were submission of 
Preliminary Safety Analysis Report (PSAR) as per th e framework guidelines of United States 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission which was mutually ag reed between the Indian and Russian 
sides. AERB after carefully scrutinizing and review ing these processes had given clearance 
to KKNPP Unit I  for 100 per cent full power operat ion till April 2015 which was further 
extended till Refueling Shutdown (June 2015), as NP CIL complied with all the stipulations of 
AERB. The due process was followed in getting the a pproval from CMD, NPCIL for 
commercial operation declaration. Hence declaration  of commercial operation is in no way 
violating the principles of regulatory stipulations which have been complied duly by NPCIL. 
The Management’s reply did not address to the speci fic audit observation as to how the 
commercial operation of KKNPP Unit I was started on  31 December 2014 which was six 
months before getting the license from AERB for regular operations on 10 July 2015. 
4.7  Pre service inspection of Reactor Pressure Ves sel  
Reactor vessel is one of the most crucial component s of Nuclear Plants, which houses the 
reactor core and other key reactor internals.  To a ssure the reliability of safety related 
components of nuclear plant, Pre Service Inspection is essential. 
 Initially NPCIL awarded (January 2011) the Pre-Ser vice Inspection work of Reactor 
Pressure Vessels reactor components of Unit I to a contractor - M/s VR Enterprises for an 
amount of ` 31.40 lakh. The work was to be carried out by the contractor as per the 
technical/expert advice and guidance of NPCIL offic ers and was to be completed by June 
2011. The proposal for inspection by engaging India n contractor was stated to be based on 
the previous experience of NPCIL in earlier Pressur ized Heavy Water Reactors and was an 
attempt to reduce the cost. However, NPCIL could no t guide and extend professional 
advice/expertise to the contractor for discharging its work due to its complexity and the work 
was short closed on 28 June 2011; ` 8.76 lakh was paid to the contractor for the part o f  
work executed. Later the work was awarded to M/s HRID on 29 July 2011, a Croatian firm at 
a cost of Euro 0.79 million ( ` 5.01 crore 37 ). The work was completed by M/s HRID on  
31 July 2012. 
Audit observed that NPCIL’s initial decision to exe cute the Pre Service Inspection work 
through local Indian contractor and later awarding the work to a foreign firm owing to its lack 
of expertise in guiding the contractors in carrying  out the work indicated deficient planning 
towards carrying out the pre-service inspection. Mo reover, ASE had sourced the Reactor 
Pressure Vessel from M/s HRID, hence, NPCIL should have considered the pre-service 
inspection by an independent third party to ensure independent and objective evaluation.  
                                                           
37   Based on exchange rate of ` 63.10 per Euro on the date of contract . 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
60 
The Management stated that Pre-service inspection (PSI) is carried out for collection of base 
line data for monitoring health during service life  of plant/ equipment by in-service 
inspection (ISI). HRID, being the Original Equipmen t Manufacturer were hired for 
conducting PSI, based on its experience with domestic vendor. 
The reply of the Management is not satisfactory as the reactor vessel which houses the 
reactor core is of immense safety significance. Hen ce, the pre-service inspection of pressure 
vessel by an independent third party, other than th e reactor pressure vessel manufacturer  
(M/s HRID) would have been appropriate.  
4.8 Inadequate High level Monitoring 
To ensure co operation and peaceful application of nuclear energy in all the applicable fields 
including power generation between Indian and Russi an Federation, a high level co-
ordination committee {also called Joint Coordinatio n Committee (JCC)} was set up in the 
year 2000. Audit noticed that since its constitutio n till September 2010, the committee 
periodically met and reviewed the progress of the i mplementation of KKNPP project. The 
minutes of the meetings indicated that there were d iscussions on important issues relating to 
the implementation of the project and decisions were taken for expediting the implementation 
of the project. However as per the records produced  to Audit, no such meetings of JCC were 
held after September 2010. Moreover, no specific re asons for not conducting such high level 
meetings since September 2010 were found on record.  Major cases of disagreements on 
various issues like non-pursuance of Liquidated Dam ages (LDs), manpower adjustments, 
delays in supply items etc. could have been sorted out, had JCC held its regular meetings.  
The Management replied (28 June 2017) that JCC was formed to resolve issues requiring 
high level intervention. By the year 2010, major issues were resolved and project was in final 
implementation stage with commissioning of the syst ems going on. The JCC meetings were 
therefore not held after 2010 although the concerne d authorities were apprised of 
implementation of the project on regular basis. It further stated that in 2011, the local people 
agitation started and project got delayed. However this was to be tackled at the level of 
Indian Federal/ State Governments only. 
The Management’s reply is not acceptable as holding  of regular meetings would have sorted 
out the difficulties / issues concerning delays, non-pursuance of LDs, manpower adjustments, 
delays in supply items etc which remained un-addres sed and were not sorted out in a timely 
manner. 
  

Report No. 38 of 2017 
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
61 
Conclusion 
The commercial operation of Kudankulam Nuclear Powe r Project (KKNPP)’s Units I and II 
have been delayed substantially. The delays were pr imarily due to shifting of work from 
Russian scope to Indian scope; in execution of work  and in submission of working 
documents/supply of equipment/materials by ASE; del ays due to design changes; erection 
delays and additional works. The delay in completion have also resulted in cost overruns. The 
increase in cost was mainly due to additional Russi an manpower requirement, increase in 
expenses on erection and commissioning of nuclear s ystem auxiliaries, execution of 
additional works and payment of escalation/under ut ilization charges to the Indian 
contractors. 
The project also suffered from various deficiencies  such as commercialization before getting 
the required licence to operate from the competent authority, extending undue benefits to 
Russian agency, non-assessment of manpower with con sequent avoidable expenditure and 
non recovery of liquidated damages.  
 
 
 
 
             

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
63 
Annexure I 
 
Details of operational Nuclear Power Plants in India 
 
Sl. No. Plant Unit Type Capacity 
(MW) 
Date of Commercial 
Operation 
     1. Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS), 
Maharashtra  
 
I BWR 38  160 28 October 1969 
2.   Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS), 
Maharashtra 
 
 
II BWR 160 28 October 1969 
3.   Rajasthan Atomic Power Station 
(RAPS), Rajasthan  
 
I PHWR 39  100 16 December 1973 
4.   Rajasthan Atomic Power Station 
(RAPS), Rajasthan 
 
 
II PHWR 200 1 April 1981 
5.   Madras Atomic Power Station (MAPS), 
Tamil Nadu  
 
I PHWR 220 27 January 1984 
6.   Madras Atomic Power Station (MAPS), 
Tamil Nadu  
 
II PHWR 220 21 March 1986 
7.   Narora Atomic Power Station (NAPS), 
Uttar Pradesh  
 
I PHWR 220 1 January 1991 
8.   Narora Atomic Power Station (NAPS), 
Uttar Pradesh  
 
II PHWR 220 1 July 1992 
9.   Kakrapar Atomic Power Station 
(KAPS), Gujarat  
 
I PHWR 220 6 May  1993 
10.   Kakrapar Atomic Power Station 
(KAPS), Gujarat 
 
 
II PHWR 220 1 September 1995 
11.   Kaiga Generating Station (KGS), 
Karnataka  
 
II PHWR 220 16 March  2000 
12.   Rajasthan Atomic Power Station 
(RAPS), Rajasthan 
 
 
III PHWR 220 1 June  2000 
13.   Kaiga Generating Station (KGS), 
Karnataka  
 
I PHWR 220 16 November  2000 
14.   Rajasthan Atomic Power Station 
(RAPS), Rajasthan 
 
 
IV PHWR 220 23 December 2000 
15.   Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS), 
Maharashtra  
 
IV PHWR 540 12 September 2005 
16.   Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS), 
Maharashtra 
 
 
III PHWR 540 18 August 2006 
17.   Kaiga Generating Station (KGS), 
Karnataka  
 
III PHWR 220 6 May 2007 
18.   Rajasthan Atomic Power Station 
(RAPS), Rajasthan 
 
 
V PHWR 220 4 February  2010 
19.   Rajasthan Atomic Power Station 
(RAPS), Rajasthan  
 
VI PHWR 220 31 March  2010 
                                                           
38   Boiling Water Reactor (BWR) is a type of light water nuclear reactor used for the generation of 
electrical power  
39   Pressurized Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR) is a nucle ar reactor, commonly using unenriched 
natural uranium as its fuel, that uses heavy water (deuterium oxide D 2O) as its coolant and 
neutron moderator.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
64 
20.   Kaiga Generating Station (KGS), 
Karnataka 
 
 
IV PHWR 220 20 January 2011 
21.   Kudankulam Nuclear Power Station 
(KKNPS), Tamil Nadu  
 
I VVER 40  -
1000 (PWR) 
1,000 31 December  2014 
22.   Kudankulam Nuclear Power Station 
(KKNPS), Tamil Nadu 
 
 
II VVER -1000 
(PWR) 
1,000 31 March  2017 
 
Nuclear Power Projects under Construction in India 
 
Project 
 
 
Capacity (MW) 
 
Expected Commercial Operation 
Rajasthan Atomic Power Project  2 x 700 Unit VII – Under construction 
Unit VIII – Under construction 
Kakrapar Atomic Power Project  2 x 700 Unit III – Under construction 
Unit IV – Under construction 
Kudankulam Nuclear Power Plant  2x 1000 Unit III- Under construction 
Unit IV- Under construction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
40   Voda Voda Energo Reactor- a water cooled and water moderated reactor.  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
65 
Annexure II 
(Reference: Para 4.1.1) 
Delay in achieving milestones 
 
 
 
Major Milestones 
Activity Stipulated Actual Delay (in days) 
Unit I Unit II Unit I Unit II Unit I Unit II 
First Pour of Concrete    31.03.2002 31.03.2002 31.03.2002 04.07.2002 Nil 95 
Construction up to Reactor 
Building  + 5.4 Slab 30.09.2003 30.06.2004 30.09.2003 31.12.2003 Nil Nil  
Construction of Primary 
Containment of Reactor 
Building Wall upto 43.9 metre 
31.10.2004 31.07.2005 21.05.2005 30.11.2005 202 122 
Construction of Turbine 
Building up to 36.5 meter 
Including Crane beam. 
31.12.2004 31.12.2005 31.08.2005 31.01.2007 243 396  
Commissioning of 220 KV Gas 
Insulated Switchgears System 31.01.2005 31.01.2005 14.11.2008 14.11.2008 1,384 1,384 
Commissioning of Polar Crane 31.03.2005 29.12.2005 April 2007 December 2007 730 701 
Construction of Emergency 
Power Supply and Control 
Building 
30.04.2005 30.04.2006 28.02.2006 30.09.2008 304 884 
Charging of Reserve Power 
Supply System (RPSS) 31.05.2005 31.05.2005 01.01.2009 01.09.2011 1,311 2 ,284 
Pre-stressing of Reactor 
Building Inner Containment 
(IC) Dome 
30.09.2005 30.06.2006 18.09.2009 July-2009 1,449 1,096 
Commissioning of 
Demineralisation  Plant 31.12.2005 31.12.2005 April-2009 April-2009 1,185 1 ,185 
Commissioning of Compressors 31.12.2005 NA December 2010 December 2010 1,795 NA 
Erection of NSSS (Nuclear 
Steam Supply System) 
Equipment & pipelines 
30.06.2006 30.06.2007 29.07.2008 18.04.2009 760 658  
Erection of Turbine  Generator 30.06.2006 30.03.2007 30.09.2008 31.08.2010 824 1,251 
Reactor Checkup and Assembly 
for Stage Hydraulic Test 30.09.2006 30.06.2007 31.08.2010 03.01.2014 1,431 2 ,378 
Hydro test & circular flushing 
of primary circuit 31.10.2006 31.07.2007 27.12.2010 05.07.2014 1,518 2,531 
Containment pressure boundary 
test (Phase A-2 
Commissioning) 
28.02.2007 30.11.2007 03.02.2011 10.02.2014 1,436 2 ,264 
Attainment of First Criticality 
and Low Power Tests (Phase-
B2 commissioning) 
30.04.2007 
 31.01.2008 13.07.2013 10.07.2016 2,266 3,083 
Start of Commercial Operation 30.10.2007 30.10.2008  31.12.2014 31.03.2017 2,619 3,076 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
66 
Annexure III 
(Reference: Para 4.1.2(a)) 
Project Cost break up of Indian scope of work Cost head-wise 
(`` ``in crore) 
Cost Heads Original sanction 
(December 2001) 
Revised 
(August 2014) 
Increase/ 
decrease 
Site preparation, facilities and infrastructure (Ma terial & 
construction)  
34.65 76.04 41.39 
Main plant civil building (Material & construction) , cooling water 
intake and outfall system (Material & construction) , breakwater 
dykes, shore reinforcement  
1,553.80 1,728.77 174.97 
Nuclear system auxiliaries, Turbine Generator auxil iaries, 
miscellaneous mechanical erection, transportation a nd transportation 
insurance, water desalination plant  
439.84 1,283.67 843.83 
Electrical systems (supply & installation)  108.97 292.49 183.52 
Controls and Instrumentation installation  52.84 160.76 107.92 
Access roads, field office, social buildings, wareh ouses and 
workshops, equipment for warehouses, workshops, sub station, office 
equipment, communication equipment etc.  
108.61 43.15 (-)65.46 
Engineering/design/Quality Assurance /project manag ement 
services, expenses on transportation including stre ngthening of 
Tuticorin port and roads, construction power, maint enance charges 
for office buildings, warehouses, workshops and mis cellaneous 
expenditure, staff training technology transfer and other services  
124.80 221.94 97.14 
Commissioning expenses (commissioning power and consumables)  58.67 769.28 710.61 
Site Improvement (Housing, Hostels, Central Industr ial Security 
Force (CISF) colony, Roads, drainage, Hospital, sch ools etc., 
Communication and computer facilities  
154.02 170.38 16.36 
Maintenance  125.64 429.40 303.76 
Contingencies and Insurance  160.25 214.45 54.20 
Employee’s salaries, overheads, CISF salary, Foreig n allowances, 
Moscow office expenses, expenditure on DPR review m eeting, 
Mumbai office, Public awareness and welfare activities  
723.95 1,851.50 1,127.55 
Working capital margin  237.00 237.00 0 
Expenses on Russian man power (services and income tax)  26.97 43.00 16.03 
Fukushima related tank & piping  0 25.00 25.00 
Tax on Russian contracts  0 187.00 187.00 
Total 3,910.01 7,733.83 3,823.82 
 
 
  

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
67 
Annexure IV 
(Reference: Para No. 4.3.4) 
Details of execution of additional item of works due to improper planning 
Sl. 
No. 
Work order 
/ Date 
Name of the 
contractor 
Name of the work Contract 
awarded 
cost 
(`` `` in crore) 
Extra work 
executed 
beyond 
125% of the 
awarded cost 
(`` `` in crore) 
Percentage 
of extra cost 
against the 
original cost 
1. 200045 
dated: 
25/02/2002 
M/s HCC Ltd, 
Mumbai 
Construction of Reactor Buildings and 
Reactor auxiliary & main control 
room buildings for KKNPP Units I 
and II (C-III). 
272.99 27.95 10 
2. 400040 / 
18.12.2004 
M/s L & T Ltd Handling, Transportation, Pre-
fabrication, welding, erection, 
inspection & testing of piping, 
instrument tubing and erection of 
associated equipment along with 
accessories for Nuclear Steam Supply 
Systems and Nuclear Auxiliary 
Systems for KKNPP Units I and II 
      
(M -2 Package). 
68.25 68.32 100 
3. 400041 / 
24.12.2004 
M/s L &T Ltd, 
Chennai 
Handling, Transportation, Pre-
fabrication, welding, erection, 
inspection, testing of indoor and 
outdoor and equipment of common 
service systems for KKNPP Units I 
and II (M -5 Package). 
43.04 12.54 29 
4. 400046 / 
30.12.2004 
M/s PES 
Engineering 
Pvt. Ltd, 
Hyderabad 
Handling, Transportation, Pre-
fabrication, welding, Anti – Corrosive 
Painting, Insulation, Erection, 
Inspection & Testing ducting / piping, 
Instrument tubing and Associated 
Equipment along with accessories for 
Ventilation & Air conditioning 
systems for KKNPP Units I and II 
      
(M - 7 Package) 
30.80 17.61 57 
5. 600007 / 
02.03.2005 
M/s ECIL Main Plant control and 
instrumentation works of KKNPP 
Units I and II (I-1 Package) 
32.00 30.45 95 
6. 400144 / 
17.12.2009 
M/s PSL Ltd, 
Chennai 
Coating of pipeline with Coponhycote 
for UMA-1 and 2 
1.27 0.57 45 
7. 600030 / 
04.02.2013 
M/s L & T Handling, Cleaning, fabrication, 
erection, welding and NDT and 
pneumatic / hydro testing of Process 
impulse piping jobs for Unit II 
Reactor and Auxiliary Buildings – 
regarding. 
5.69 1.29 23 
8. 800521 / 
12.07.2013 
M/s 
TatagariTerro 
Technologies 
Pvt. Ltd, 
Hyderabad 
Operation and maintenance activities 
of Auxiliary Operating plant at plant 
site 
1.36 0.27 20 
Total 455.40 159.00  
 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
                                            Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project, Units I and II 
69 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Sl. No. Term used in Report Description 
1.   ACPSR Advisory Committee for Project Safety Review 
2.   AERB Atomic Energy Regulatory Board 
3.   ASE Atomstroyexport 
4.   BHEL Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
5.   BOD Board of Directors 
6.   BoI Bank of India 
7.   CAA&A Controller of Aid, Accounts and Audit 
8.   CIS Commonwealth Independent States 
9.   CMD Chairman & Managing Director 
10.   CVC Central Vigilance Commission 
11.   DAE Department of Atomic Energy 
12.   DPR Detailed Project Report 
13.   EAR Erection All Risk 
14.   FRT Freight Tons 
15.   GCC General Conditions of Contract 
16.   GFA General Framework Agreement 
17.   GoI Government of India 
18.   HDFC Housing Development Finance Corporation 
19.   IDC Interest During Construction 
20.   IGA Inter-Governmental Agreement 
21.   JCC Joint Coordination Committee 
22.   KKNPP Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project 
23.   KMB Kotak Mahindra Bank 
24.   KWh Kilowatt  hour 
25.   LD Liquidated Damages 

Report No. 38 of 2017  
        Performance Audit Report on Kudankulam Nucl ear Power Project, Units I and II 
70 
26.   MT Metric Ton 
27.   MW Mega Watt 
28.   NPCIL Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited 
29.   NPS Nuclear Power Station 
30.   NSSS Nuclear Steam Supply System 
31.   PHWR Pressurized Heavy Water Reactor 
32.   PLR Prime Lending Rate 
33.   QA Quality Assurance 
34.   QC Quality Control 
35.   RBI Reserve Bank of India 
36.   RF Russian Federation 
37.   SBAR State Bank Approved Rate 
38.   SBI State Bank of India 
39.   SFSP Standard Fire and Special Perils 
40.   SG Steam Generator 
41.   SOR Schedule of Rates 
42.   TANGEDCO Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited  
43.   TC Third Countries 
44.   TCO Techno Commercial Offer 
45.   TG Turbo Generator 
46.   TNEB Tamil Nadu Electricity Board 
47.   UIIC United India Insurance Company 
48.   USD United States Dollar 
49.   USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
50.   VVER Voda Voda Energo  Reactor 
 